
1. FEBS Lett. 2016 Mar 22. doi: 10.1002/1873-3468.12147. [Epub ahead of print]

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 beta induces transformation and
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition.

Matsui A(1), Fujimoto J(2), Ishikawa K(2), Ito E(3), Goshima N(4), Watanabe S(3),
Semba K(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Medical Bioscience, School of Advanced Science 
and Engineering, Waseda University, 2-2 Wakamatsu-cho, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo,
162-8480, Japan. (2)Japan Biological Informatics Consortium (JBiC), 2-45 Aomi,
Koto-ku, Tokyo, 135-8073, Japan. (3)Division of Gene Expression Analysis,
Fukushima Medical University, 1 Hikarigaoka, Fukushima, 960-1295, Japan.
(4)Division of Transcriptome Analysis, Fukushima Medical University, 1
Hikarigaoka, Fukushima, 960-1295, Japan. (5)Division of Gene Function Analysis,
Translational Research Center, Fukushima Medical University, 1 Hikarigaoka,
Fukushima, 960-1295, Japan.

Gene amplification can be a cause of cancer, and driver oncogenes have been often
identified in amplified regions. However, comprehensive analysis of other genes
coamplified with an oncogene is rarely performed. We focused on the 17q12-21
amplicon, which contains ERBB2. We established a screening system for oncogenic
activity with the NMuMG epithelial cell line. We identified a homeobox gene,
HNF1B as a novel cooperative transforming gene. HNF1B induced cancerous
phenotypes, which were enhanced by coexpression of ERBB2, and induced
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and invasive phenotypes. These results
suggest that HNF1B is a novel oncogene that can work cooperatively with ERBB2.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27001343  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Oncotarget. 2016 Mar 5. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7926. [Epub ahead of print]

Systematic meta-analyses of gene-specific genetic association studies in prostate
cancer.

Hao Q(1,)(2,)(3), Wei D(2), Zhang Y(2), Chen X(2), Yang F(3), Yang Z(3), Zhu
X(3), Wang J(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100730, China.
(2)Department of Urology, Beijing Hospital, Beijing, 100730, China. (3)Key
Laboratory of Geriatrics, Beijing Hospital and Beijing Institute of Geriatrics,
Ministry of Health, Beijing, 100730, China.

In the past twenty-five years, over 700 case-control association studies on the
risk of prostate cancer have been published worldwide, but their results were
largely inconsistent. To facilitate following and explaining these findings, we
performed a systematic meta-analysis using allelic contrasts for gene-specific
SNVs from at least three independent population-based case-control studies, which
were published in the field of prostate cancer between August 1, 1990 and August 
1, 2015. Across 66 meta-analyses, a total of 20 genetic variants involving
584,100 subjects in 19 different genes (KLK3, IGFBP3, ESR1, SOD2, CAT, CYP1B1,
VDR, RFX6, HNF1B, SRD5A2, FGFR4, LEP, HOXB13, FAS, FOXP4, SLC22A3, LMTK2, EHBP1
and MSMB) exhibited significant association with prostate cancer. The average
summary OR was 1.33 (ranging from: 1.016-3.788) for risk alleles and 0.838
(ranging from: 0.757-0.896) for protective alleles. Of these positive variants,
FOXP4 rs1983891, LMTK2 rs6465657 and RFX6 rs339331 had not been previously
meta-analyzed. Further analyses with sufficient power design and investigations
of the potential biological roles of these genetic variants in prostate cancer
should be conducted.

PMID: 26967244  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Vis Exp. 2016 Mar 3;(109). doi: 10.3791/53655.

A Quick and Efficient Method for the Purification of Endoderm Cells Generated
from Human Embryonic Stem Cells.

Davenport C(1), Diekmann U(1), Naujok O(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Biochemistry, Hannover Medical School. (2)Institute of
Clinical Biochemistry, Hannover Medical School; naujok.ortwin@mh-hannover.de.

The differentiation capabilities of pluripotent stem cells such as embryonic stem
cells (ESCs) allow a potential therapeutic application for cell replacement
therapies. Terminally differentiated cell types could be used for the treatment
of various degenerative diseases. In vitro differentiation of these cells towards
tissues of the lung, liver and pancreas requires as a first step the generation
of definitive endodermal cells. This step is rate-limiting for further
differentiation towards terminally matured cell types such as insulin-producing
beta cells, hepatocytes or other endoderm-derived cell types. Cells that are
committed towards the endoderm lineage highly express a multitude of
transcription factors such as FOXA2, SOX17, HNF1B, members of the GATA family,
and the surface receptor CXCR4. However, differentiation protocols are rarely
100% efficient. Here, we describe a method for the purification of a CXCR4+ cell 
population after differentiation into the DE by using magnetic microbeads. This
purification additionally removes cells of unwanted lineages. The gentle
purification method is quick and reliable and might be used to improve downstream
applications and differentiations.

PMID: 26966833  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Nephrol. 2016 Mar 5. [Epub ahead of print]

The spectrum of renal involvement in male patients with infertility related to
excretory-system abnormalities: phenotypes, genotypes, and genetic counseling.

Mieusset R(1,)(2,)(3), Fauquet I(4), Chauveau D(3,)(5), Monteil L(6), Chassaing
N(3,)(6), Daudin M(1,)(2), Huart A(5), Isus F(1,)(2), Prouheze C(6), Calvas P(6),
Bieth E(3,)(6), Bujan L(1,)(2,)(3), Faguer S(7,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de stérilité masculine-Médecine de la Reproduction, Hôpital Paule de
Viguier, CHU de Toulouse, Toulouse, France. (2)EA 3694, Groupe de Recherche en
Fertilité Humaine, Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse III, Toulouse, France.
(3)Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse III, Toulouse, France. (4)Service de
Radiologie, Clinique Pasteur, Toulouse, France. (5)Département de Néphrologie et 
Transplantation d'organes, Centre de référence des maladies rénales rares, et
INSERM UMR1048, Hôpital Rangueil, CHU de Toulouse, 1, avenue Jean Poulhes, 31000,
Toulouse, France. (6)Service de Génétique Médicale, Hôpital Purpan, CHU de
Toulouse, Toulouse, France. (7)Université Paul Sabatier, Toulouse III, Toulouse, 
France. stanislas.faguer@gmail.com. (8)Département de Néphrologie et
Transplantation d'organes, Centre de référence des maladies rénales rares, et
INSERM UMR1048, Hôpital Rangueil, CHU de Toulouse, 1, avenue Jean Poulhes, 31000,
Toulouse, France. stanislas.faguer@gmail.com.

BACKGROUND: While reproductive technologies are increasingly used worldwide,
epidemiologic, clinical and genetic data regarding infertile men with combined
genital tract and renal abnormalities remain scarce, preventing adequate genetic 
counseling.
METHODS: In a cohort-based study, we assessed the prevalence (1995-2014) and the 
clinical characteristics of renal disorders in infertile males with genital tract
malformation. In a subset of 34 patients, we performed a detailed phenotype
analysis of renal and genital tract disorders.
RESULTS: Among the 180 patients with congenital uni- or bilateral absence of vas 
deferens (CU/BAVD), 45 (25 %) had a renal malformation. We also identified 14
infertile men with combined seminal vesicle (SV) and renal malformation but no
CU/BAVD. Among the 34 patients with detailed clinical description, renal disease 
was unknown before the assessment of the infertility in 27 (79.4 %), and 7
(20.6 %) had chronic renal failure. Four main renal phenotypes were observed:
solitary kidney (47 %); autosomal-dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD,
0.6 %); uni- or bilateral hypoplastic kidneys (20.6 %); and a complex renal
phenotype associated with a mutation of the HNF1B gene (5.8 %). Absence of SV and
azoospermia were significantly associated with the presence of a solitary kidney,
while dilatation of SV and necroasthenozoospermia were suggestive of ADPKD.
CONCLUSION: A dominantly inherited renal disease (ADPKD or HNF1B-related
nephropathy) is frequent in males with infertility and combined renal and genital
tract abnormalities (26 %). A systematic renal screening should be proposed in
infertile males with CU/BAVD or SV disorders.

PMID: 26946416  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2016 Feb 29. pii: gfv465. [Epub ahead of print]

Prenatal diagnosis of fetal multicystic dysplastic kidney via high-resolution
whole-genome array.

Fu F(1), Chen F(1), Li R(1), Zhang Y(1), Pan M(1), Li D(1), Liao C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prenatal Diagnostic Center, Guangzhou Women and Children's
Medical Centre, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.

BACKGROUND: Women with fetal multicystic dysplastic kidneys (MCDK) are commonly
referred for genetic counseling, for which identification of the correct etiology
is a prerequisite.
METHODS: A total of 72 women with fetal MCDK at Guangzhou Women and Children's
Medical Center were examined via invasive prenatal diagnosis from May 2010 to
June 2015. Standard karyotyping analysis was provided to all fetuses, and
chromosomal microarray with Affymetrix CytoSan HD arrays was offered to cases
whose DNA samples were available.
RESULTS: Abnormal karyotypes were detected in 3 of 72 (4.17%) fetuses. Of the 69 
(95.8%, 69/72) fetuses with normal karyotypes, 30 (42%, 30/69) underwent
chromosome microarray analysis (CMA) testing. The CMA identified pathogenic copy 
number variations in five fetuses, leading to a pathogenic detection rate of
16.7% (5/30). Well-known microdeletion or microduplication syndromes including
renal cysts and diabetes (RCAD) syndrome and Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS) were 
identified in three cases. Moreover, four chromosomal imbalanced regions were
also identified in our MCDK fetuses: 22q11.1 duplication, 4q35.2 deletion,
22q13.33 duplication and 1p33 duplication. Genes PEX26, ELN, HNF1B, ALG12, FRG1, 
FRG2 and CYP4A11 were possible candidates for fetal MCDK. The proportions of
variants of unknown significance before and after parental analysis were 13.3%
(4/30) and 3.3% (1/30), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present study, the frequency of chromosomal abnormalities in 
MCDK fetuses was 4.17% and all rearrangements were imbalanced aberrations. CMA
was able to increase the pathogenic detection rate to 16.7% in MCDK fetuses with 
normal karyotype. Critical regions for RCAD syndrome, WBS and copy number
variants of 22q11.1 duplication, 4q35.2 deletion, 22q13.33 duplication and 1p33
duplication were associated with fetal MCDK. Genes PEX26, ELN, HNF1B, ALG12,
FRG1, FRG2 and CYP4A11 were possible candidates for fetal MCDK.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of ERA-EDTA.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 26932690  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Oncotarget. 2016 Feb 19. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.7497. [Epub ahead of print]

Targeting FXYD2 by cardiac glycosides potently blocks tumor growth in ovarian
clear cell carcinoma.

Hsu IL(1), Chou CY(2), Wu YY(3), Wu JE(1), Liang CH(1), Tsai YT(1), Ke JY(4),
Chen YL(1,)(4), Hsu KF(2,)(3), Hong TM(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, 
College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, National Cheng Kung University
Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(3)Graduate Institute of Clinical Medicine, National Cheng Kung University
Hospital, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.
(4)Institute of Oral Medicine, National Cheng Kung University Hospital, College
of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan.

Ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC) is an aggressive neoplasm with a high
recurrence rate that frequently develops resistance to platinum-based
chemotherapy. There are few prognostic biomarkers or targeted therapies exist for
patients with OCCC. Here, we identified that FXYD2, the modulating subunit of
Na+/K+-ATPases, was highly and specifically expressed in clinical OCCC tissues.
The expression levels of FXYD2 were significantly higher in advanced-stage of
OCCC and positively correlated with patients' prognoses. Silencing of FXYD2
expression in OCCC cells inhibited Na+/K+-ATPase enzyme activity and suppressed
tumor growth via induction of autophagy-mediated cell death. We found that high
FXYD2 expression in OCCC was transcriptionally regulated by the transcriptional
factor HNF1B. Furthermore, up-regulation of FXYD2 expression significantly
increased the sensitivity of OCCC cells to cardiac glycosides, the Na+/K+-ATPase 
inhibitors. Two cardiac glycosides, digoxin and digitoxin, had a great
therapeutic efficacy in OCCC cells in vitro and in vivo. Taken together, our
results demonstrate that FXYD2 is functionally upregulated in OCCC and may serve 
as a promising prognostic biomarker and therapeutic target of cardiac glycosides 
in OCCC.

PMID: 26910837  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Pediatr Transplant. 2016 May;20(3):467-471. doi: 10.1111/petr.12690. Epub 2016
Feb 21.

New-onset diabetes after renal transplantation in a patient with a novel HNF1B
mutation.

Kanda S(1), Morisada N(2), Kaneko N(1), Yabuuchi T(1), Nawashiro Y(1), Tada N(1),
Nishiyama K(1), Miyai T(1), Sugawara N(1), Ishizuka K(1), Chikamoto H(1), Akioka 
Y(1), Iijima K(2), Hattori M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Tokyo Women's Medical University School of
Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University Graduate
School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

CAKUT are the most frequent causes of ESRD in children. Mutations in the gene
encoding HNF1B, a transcription factor involved in organ development and
maintenance, cause a multisystem disorder that includes CAKUT, diabetes, and
liver dysfunction. Here, we describe the case of a patient with renal
hypodysplasia who developed NODAT presenting with liver dysfunction. The NODAT
was initially thought to be steroid and FK related. However, based on the
patient's clinical features, including renal hypodysplasia and recurrent
elevations of transaminase, screening for an HNF1B mutation was performed. Direct
sequencing identified a novel splicing mutation of HNF1B, designated c.344 +
2T>C. Because CAKUT is the leading cause of ESRD in children and HNF1B mutations 
can cause both renal hypodysplasia and diabetes, HNF1B mutations may account for 
a portion of the cases of NODAT in pediatric patients who have undergone kidney
transplantation. NODAT is a serious and major complication of solid organ
transplantation and is associated with reduced graft survival. Therefore, for the
appropriate management of kidney transplantation, screening for HNF1B mutations
should be considered in pediatric patients with transplants caused by CAKUT who
develop NODAT and show extra-renal symptoms.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26899772  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Stem Cell Reports. 2016 Mar 8;6(3):357-67. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2016.01.007.
Epub 2016 Feb 11.

Early Developmental Perturbations in a Human Stem Cell Model of MODY5/HNF1B
Pancreatic Hypoplasia.

Teo AK(1), Lau HH(2), Valdez IA(3), Dirice E(3), Tjora E(4), Raeder H(4),
Kulkarni RN(5).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Islet Cell and Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes Center,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, One Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA;
Discovery Research Division, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis
Drive, Proteos #06-07, Singapore 138673, Singapore; School of Biological
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637551, Singapore;
Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore 117596, Singapore; Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 308232, Singapore. Electronic
address: ateo@imcb.a-star.edu.sg. (2)Discovery Research Division, Institute of
Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos #06-07, Singapore 138673, 
Singapore. (3)Section of Islet Cell and Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes
Center, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, One Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway; 
Department of Clinical Science, KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research,
University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen, Norway. (5)Section of Islet Cell and
Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, One Joslin
Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Electronic address:
rohit.kulkarni@joslin.harvard.edu.

Patients with an HNF1B(S148L/+) mutation (MODY5) typically exhibit pancreatic
hypoplasia. However, the molecular mechanisms are unknown due to inaccessibility 
of patient material and because mouse models do not fully recapitulate MODY5.
Here, we differentiated MODY5 human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) into 
pancreatic progenitors, and show that the HNF1B(S148L/+) mutation causes a
compensatory increase in several pancreatic transcription factors, and
surprisingly, a decrease in PAX6 pancreatic gene expression. The lack of
suppression of PDX1, PTF1A, GATA4, and GATA6 indicates that MODY5-mediated
pancreatic hypoplasia is mechanistically independent. Overexpression studies
demonstrate that a compensatory increase in PDX1 gene expression is due to mutant
HNF1B(S148L/+) but not wild-type HNF1B or HNF1A. Furthermore, HNF1B does not
appear to directly regulate PAX6 gene expression necessary for glucose tolerance.
Our results demonstrate compensatory mechanisms in the pancreatic transcription
factor network due to mutant HNF1B(S148L/+) protein. Thus, patients typically
develop MODY5 but not neonatal diabetes despite exhibiting pancreatic hypoplasia.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4788763
PMID: 26876668  [PubMed - in process]


9. Pathol Oncol Res. 2015 Dec 19. [Epub ahead of print]

Expression, Epigenetic and Genetic Changes of HNF1B in Endometrial Lesions.

Nemejcová K(1), Tichá I(1), Kleiblová P(2,)(3), Bártu M(4), Cibula D(5), Jirsová 
K(6), Dundr P(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Faculty of Medicine and General University
Hospital, Charles University in Prague, Studnickova 2, 2 12800, Prague, Czech
Republic. (2)Institute of Biochemistry and Experimental Oncology, First Faculty
of Medicine, General University Hospital, Charles University in Prague, Prague,
Czech Republic. (3)Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, First Faculty of
Medicine, General University Hospital in Prague, Charles University in Prague,
Prague, Czech Republic. (4)First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in
Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. (5)Gynecologic Oncology Center, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, First Faculty of Medicine and General University
Hospital, Charles University in Prague, Studnickova 2, 2 12800, Prague, Czech
Republic. (6)Bank of Biological Material, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic. (7)Department of Pathology, First
Faculty of Medicine and General University Hospital, Charles University in
Prague, Studnickova 2, 2 12800, Prague, Czech Republic. pdundr@seznam.cz.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-beta (HNF-1-beta) is a transcription factor involved 
in cancerogenesis of various tumors, including endometrioid carcinoma. We
performed comprehensive analysis of HNF-1-beta in lesions of the endometrium,
including protein expression and genetic and epigenetic changes. Expression of
HNF-1-beta was analyzed immunohistochemically in 320 cases including both tumor
and non-tumor endometrial lesions. Promoter methylation and genetic variants were
evaluated, using bisulphite and direct sequencing, in 30 (18 fresh frozen, 12
FFPE tumors) endometrioid carcinomas (ECs) and 15 ovarian clear cell carcinomas
(OCCCs) as a control group. We detected expression of HNF-1-beta in 28 % of ECs
(51/180 cases), 26 % of serous carcinoma (7/27 cases), 83 % of endometrial clear 
cell carcinoma (15/18 cases), 93 % of hyperplastic polyps with atypias (13/14
cases), 100 % of hyperplastic polyps without atypias (16/16 cases), 88 % of
hyperplasias with atypias (14/16 cases), 91 % of hyperplasias without atypias
(10/11 cases), and in =80 % of different normal endometrium samples. The control 
group of OCCCs showed HNF-1-beta expression in 95 % (18/19 cases). Methylation in
promoter region was detected in 13.3 % (4/30) of ECs, but not in corresponding
normal tissue where available, nor in OCCCs (0/15 cases). Mutation analysis
revealed truncating variant c.454C > T (p.Gln152X) in one EC and missense variant
c.848C > T (p.Ala283Val) was detected in one OCCC. In conclusion, expression of
HNF-1-beta was detected in various extents in all types of lesions analyzed,
nevertheless its strong expression was mostly limited to clear cell carcinomas.
Biological significance of genetic and epigenetic changes needs further
investigation.

PMID: 26685938  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


10. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Dec 15. pii:
/j/jpem.ahead-of-print/jpem-2015-0039/jpem-2015-0039.xml. doi:
10.1515/jpem-2015-0039. [Epub ahead of print]

Maturity onset diabetes of youth (MODY) in Turkish children: sequence analysis of
11 causative genes by next generation sequencing.

Agladioglu SY, Aycan Z, Çetinkaya S, Bas VN, Önder A, Peltek Kendirci HN, Dogan
H, Ceylaner S.

BACKGROUND: Maturity-onset diabetes of the youth (MODY), is a genetically and
clinically heterogeneous group of diseasesand is often misdiagnosed as type 1 or 
type 2 diabetes. The aim of this study is to investigate both novel and proven
mutations of 11 MODY genes in Turkish children by using targeted next generation 
sequencing.
METHODS: A panel of 11 MODY genes were screened in 43 children with MODY
diagnosed by clinical criterias. Studies of index cases was done with
MISEQ-ILLUMINA, and family screenings and confirmation studies of mutations was
done by Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: We identified 28 (65%) point mutations among 43 patients. Eighteen
patients have GCK mutations, four have HNF1A, one has HNF4A, one has HNF1B, two
have NEUROD1, one has PDX1 gene variations and one patient has both HNF1A and
HNF4A heterozygote mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study including molecular studies of 11 MODY genes
in Turkish children. GCK is the most frequent type of MODY in our study
population. Very high frequency of novel mutations (42%) in our study population,
supports that in heterogenous disorders like MODY sequence analysis provides
rapid, cost effective and accurate genetic diagnosis.

PMID: 26669242  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Exp Anim. 2015 Dec 3. [Epub ahead of print]

Immunohistochemical analyses of cell cycle progression and gene expression of
biliary epithelial cells during liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy of
the mouse.

Fukuda T(1), Fukuchi T, Yagi S, Shiojiri N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Shizuoka University.

The liver has a remarkable regeneration capacity, and, after surgical removal of 
its mass, the remaining tissue undergoes rapid regeneration through compensatory 
growth of its constituent cells. Although hepatocytes synchronously proliferate
under the control of various signaling molecules from neighboring cells, there
have been few detailed analyses on how biliary cells regenerate for their cell
population after liver resection. The present study was undertaken to clarify how
biliary cells regenerate after partial hepatectomy of mice through extensive
analyses of their cell cycle progression and gene expression using
immunohistochemical and RT-PCR techniques. When expression of PCNA, Ki67 antigen,
topoisomerase IIa and phosphorylated histone H3, which are cell cycle markers,
was immunohistochemically examined during liver regeneration, hepatocytes had a
peak of the S phase and M phase at 48-72 h after resection. By contrast, biliary 
epithelial cells had much lower proliferative activity than that of hepatocytes, 
and their peak of the S phase was delayed. Mitotic figures were rarely detectable
in biliary cells. RT-PCR analyses of gene expression of biliary markers such as
Spp1(osteopontin), Epcam and Hnf1b demonstrated that they were upregulated during
liver regeneration. Periportal hepatocytes expressed some of biliary markers,
including Spp1 mRNA and protein. Some periportal hepatocytes had downregulated
expression of HNF4a and HNF1a. Gene expression of Notch signaling molecules
responsible for cell fate decision of hepatoblasts to biliary cells during
development was upregulated during liver regeneration. Notch signaling may be
involved in biliary regeneration.

PMID: 26633692  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Oncogene. 2015 Nov 23. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.441. [Epub ahead of print]

p53 mutations cooperate with oncogenic Kras to promote adenocarcinoma from
pancreatic ductal cells.

Bailey JM(1), Hendley AM(1), Lafaro KJ(2), Pruski MA(1), Jones NC(1), Alsina
J(3), Younes M(4), Maitra A(5), McAllister F(6), Iacobuzio-Donahue CA(2), Leach
SD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and 
Nutrition, The University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX,
USA. (2)The David Rubenstein Pancreatic Cancer Research Center, Memorial Sloan
Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. (3)Department of Surgery, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA. (4)Department of
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, The University of Texas Health Science Center 
at Houston, Houston, TX, USA. (5)Departments of Pathology and Translational
Molecular Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, 
TX, USA. (6)Departments of Clinical Cancer Prevention and GI Medical Oncology,
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Pancreatic cancer is one of the most lethal malignancies, with virtually all
patients eventually succumbing to their disease. Mutations in p53 have been
documented in >50% of pancreatic cancers. Owing to the high incidence of p53
mutations in PanIN 3 lesions and pancreatic tumors, we interrogated the
comparative ability of adult pancreatic acinar and ductal cells to respond to
oncogenic Kras and mutant Tp53(R172H) using Hnf1b:CreER(T2) and Mist1:CreER(T2)
mice. These studies involved co-activation of a membrane-tethered GFP lineage
label, allowing for direct visualization and isolation of cells undergoing Kras
and mutant p53 activation. Kras activation in Mist1(+) adult acinar cells
resulted in brisk PanIN formation, whereas no evidence of pancreatic neoplasia
was observed for up to 6 months following Kras activation in Hnf1beta(+) adult
ductal cells. In contrast to the lack of response to oncogenic Kras alone,
simultaneous activation of Kras and mutant p53 in adult ductal epithelium
generated invasive PDAC in 75% of mice as early as 2.5 months after tamoxifen
administration. These data demonstrate that pancreatic ductal cells, whereas
exhibiting relative resistance to oncogenic Kras alone, can serve as an effective
cell of origin for pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma in the setting of
gain-of-function mutations in p53.Oncogene advance online publication, 23
November 2015; doi:10.1038/onc.2015.441.

PMID: 26592447  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


13. Transplantation. 2015 Nov 9. [Epub ahead of print]

Calcineurin Inhibitors Downregulate HNF-1ß and May Affect the Outcome of HNF1B
Patients After Renal Transplantation.

Faguer S(1), Esposito L, Casemayou A, Pirson Y, Decramer S, Cartery C, Hazzan M, 
Garrigue V, Roussey G, Cointault O, Ho T, Merville P, Devuyst O, Gourdy P,
Chassaing N, Bascands JL, Kamar N, Schanstra JP, Rostaing L, Chauveau D.

Author information: 
(1)1 Département de Néphrologie et Transplantation d'organes, Centre de reference
des maladies rénales rares, Hôpital Rangueil, CHU, Toulouse, France. 2 INSERM
U1048 (I2MC, équipe 12), Hôpital Rangueil, Toulouse, France. 3 Service de
Néphrologie, Cliniques Universitaires Saint-Luc, Louvain, Belgique. 4 Service de 
Néphrologie, Médecine interne, Hôpital des Enfants, CHU, Toulouse, France. 5
Service de Néphrologie-Transplantation, Hôpital Huriez, CHRU, Lille, France. 6
Service de Néphrologie-Transplantation, Hôpital Lapeyronie, CHU, Montpellier,
France. 7 Service de Néphrologie-Transplantation Pédiatrique, CHU, Hôtel-Dieu,
Nantes, France. 8 Service de Néphrologie-Transplantation, Hôpital Pellegrin, CHU,
Bordeaux, France. 9 University of Zürich, Institute of Physiology, Zürich Centre 
for Integrative Human Physiology (ZIHP), Zürich, Switzerland. 10 Service de
Diabétologie, Hôpital Rangueil, CHU Toulouse, France. 11 Service de Génétique
Médicale, Hôpital Purpan, CHU Toulouse, France.

BACKGROUND: Patients with HNF1B mutations develop progressive chronic renal
failure, diabetes mellitus (40-50%), and liver tests abnormalities (40-70%). In
HNF1B patients who reach end-stage renal disease, single kidney transplantation
(SKT) or combined kidney-pancreas transplantation can be considered.
METHODS: A retrospective multicenter study including 18 HNF1B patients receiving 
SKT or kidney-pancreas transplantation, and in vitro experiments including the
characterization of the HNF1B expression after calcineurin inhibitor (CNI)
exposure.
RESULTS: After SKT, 50% of the HNF1B patients develop early posttransplantation
diabetes mellitus, whereas 40% experience new-onset or severe worsening of
preexisting abnormalities of liver tests, including severe cholestasis. In liver 
biopsies, disorders of the cholangiocytes primary cilium and various degrees of
bile duct paucity and dysplasia were identified. In vitro studies combining CNI
exposure and siRNA-mediated inhibition of NFATc revealed that calcineurin
inhibition decreases HNF1B expression in epithelial cells but independent of
NFATc.
CONCLUSIONS: Because HNF1B-related disease is a heterozygous condition, CNIs used
to prevent rejection may induce reduced expression of the nonmutated allele of
HNF1B leading to a superimposed defect of HNF-1ß transcriptional activity. Taking
into account the specific risk of posttransplantation diabetes mellitus and liver
disorders in HNF1B patients, these findings advocate for in-depth
characterization of pathways that regulate HNF1B and plead for considering
individually tailored graft management that may include a CNI-free
immunosuppressive regimen. Interventional studies will have to confirm this
individualized approach.

PMID: 26555949  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


14. Kidney Int. 2015 Oct 21. doi: 10.1038/ki.2015.319. [Epub ahead of print]

Prioritization and burden analysis of rare variants in 208 candidate genes
suggest they do not play a major role in CAKUT.

Nicolaou N(1), Pulit SL(1), Nijman IJ(1), Monroe GR(1), Feitz WF(2), Schreuder
MF(3), van Eerde AM(1), de Jong TP(4), Giltay JC(1), van der Zwaag B(1), Havenith
MR(1), Zwakenberg S(1), van der Zanden LF(5), Poelmans G(6,)(7,)(8), Cornelissen 
EA(3), Lilien MR(9), Franke B(7,)(8), Roeleveld N(3,)(5), van Rooij IA(5), Cuppen
E(1), Bongers EM(7), Giles RH(10), Knoers NV(1), Renkema KY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Center for Molecular Medicine, University
Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands. (2)Department of Urology,
Radboudumc Amalia Children's Hospital, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Radboudumc Amalia
Children's Hospital, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. (4)Department of Urology, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands. (5)Department for Health Evidence, Radboud University
Medical Center, Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (6)Department of Molecular Animal
Physiology, Donders Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud
Institute for Molecular Life Sciences (RIMLS), Radboud University, Nijmegen, The 
Netherlands. (7)Department of Human Genetics, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (8)Department of Cognitive Neuroscience, Donders
Institute for Brain, Cognition and Behaviour, Radboud University Medical Center, 
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. (9)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Wilhelmina
Children's Hospital, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
(10)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, University Medical Center Utrecht,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The leading cause of end-stage renal disease in children is attributed to
congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT). Familial clustering
and mouse models support the presence of monogenic causes. Genetic testing is
insufficient as it mainly focuses on HNF1B and PAX2 mutations that are thought to
explain CAKUT in 5-15% of patients. To identify novel, potentially pathogenic
variants in additional genes, we designed a panel of genes identified from
studies on familial forms of isolated or syndromic CAKUT and genes suggested by
in vitro and in vivo CAKUT models. The coding exons of 208 genes were analyzed in
453 patients with CAKUT using next-generation sequencing. Rare truncating,
splice-site variants, and non-synonymous variants, predicted to be deleterious
and conserved, were prioritized as the most promising variants to have an effect 
on CAKUT. Previously reported disease-causing mutations were detected, but only
five were fully penetrant causal mutations that improved diagnosis. We
prioritized 148 candidate variants in 151 patients, found in 82 genes, for
follow-up studies. Using a burden test, no significant excess of rare variants in
any of the genes in our cohort compared with controls was found. Thus, in a study
representing the largest set of genes analyzed in CAKUT patients to date, the
contribution of previously implicated genes to CAKUT risk was significantly
smaller than expected, and the disease may be more complex than previously
assumed.Kidney International advance online publication, 21 October 2015;
doi:10.1038/ki.2015.319.

PMID: 26489027  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. J Diabetes Investig. 2015 Sep;6(5):543-7. doi: 10.1111/jdi.12334. Epub 2015 Mar
5.

Establishment of maturity-onset diabetes of the young-induced pluripotent stem
cells from a Japanese patient.

Yabe SG(1), Iwasaki N(2), Yasuda K(3), Hamazaki TS(1), Konno M(1), Fukuda S(1),
Takeda F(1), Kasuga M(4), Okochi H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regenerative Medicine, Research Institute, National Center for
Global Health and Medicine Tokyo, Japan. (2)Diabetes Center, Tokyo Women's
Medical University Tokyo, Japan. (3)Department of Metabolic Disorders, Diabetes
Research Center, National Center for Global Health and Medicine Tokyo, Japan.
(4)National Center for Global Health and Medicine Tokyo, Japan.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a heterozygous monogenic diabetes;
more than 13 disease genes have been identified. However, the pathogenesis of
MODY is not fully understood, because the pancreatic ß-cells of the patients are 
inaccessable. Therefore, we attempted to establish MODY patient-derived induced
pluripotent stem cells (MODY-iPS) cells to investigate the pathogenic mechanism
of MODY by inducing pancreatic ß-cells. We established MODY5-iPS cells from a
Japanese patient with MODY5 (R177X), and confirmed that MODY5-iPS cells possessed
the characteristics of pluripotent stem cells. In the course of differentiation
from MODY5-iPS cells into pancreatic ß-cells, we examined the disease gene, HNF1B
messenger ribonucleic acid. We found that the amount of R177X mutant transcripts 
was much less than that of wild ones, but they increased after adding
cycloheximide to the medium. These results suggest that these R177X mutant
messenger ribonucleic acids are disrupted by nonsense-mediated messenger
ribonucleic acid decay in MODY-iPS cells during the developmental stages of
pancreatic ß-cells.

PMCID: PMC4578493
PMID: 26417411  [PubMed]


16. Am J Nephrol. 2015;42(1):85-90.

Hypomagnesemia as First Clinical Manifestation of ADTKD-HNF1B: A Case Series and 
Literature Review.

van der Made CI, Hoorn EJ, de la Faille R, Karaaslan H, Knoers NV, Hoenderop JG, 
Vargas Poussou R, de Baaij JH.

BACKGROUND: Autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease subtype HNF1B
(ADTKD-HNF1B) is caused by a mutation in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 homeobox
beta (HNF1B). Although 50-60% of ADTKD-HNF1B patients develop hypomagnesemia,
HNF1B mutations are mainly identified in patients with structural kidney defects 
or diabetes.
CASES: The current case series describes 3 patients in whom hypomagnesemia proved
to be the first clinical manifestation of ADTKD-HNF1B. All patients presented
with hypomagnesemia with a high fractional excretion of Mg2+ and hypocalciuria.
Exome sequencing performed for analysis of known and candidate hypomagnesaemia
genes and subsequent multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis
revealed a large deletion at the chromosome 17q12. Follow-up analysis showed
increased blood glucose concentrations in all 3 patients and high hemoglobin A1c 
levels in 2 out of 3 patients, indicating diabetes mellitus. Although all
patients suffered from mild renal insufficiency, only 1 of the 3 patients was
shown to have renal cysts on CT.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of HNF1B mutations and the relative contribution of
hypomagnesemia to its symptoms are underestimated. Therefore, patients with
primary renal magnesium wasting should be tested for HNF1B mutations to ensure
early detection and optimal management of ADTKD-HNF1B.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 26340261  [PubMed - in process]


17. BMC Med Genet. 2015 Sep 2;16:75. doi: 10.1186/s12881-015-0219-5.

Polymorphism in microRNA-binding site in HNF1B influences the susceptibility of
type 2 diabetes mellitus: a population based case-control study.

Goda N(1), Murase H(2), Kasezawa N(3,)(4), Goda T(5), Yamakawa-Kobayashi K(6).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Genetics, School of Food and Nutritional Sciences,
Graduate School of Integrated Pharmaceutical and Nutritional Sciences, University
of Shizuoka, Shizuoka, 422-8526, Japan. s12509@u-shizuoka-ken.ac.jp.
(2)Laboratory of Human Genetics, School of Food and Nutritional Sciences,
Graduate School of Integrated Pharmaceutical and Nutritional Sciences, University
of Shizuoka, Shizuoka, 422-8526, Japan. f11123@u-shizuoka-ken.ac.jp.
(3)Department of Data Managements for Health Evaluation & Promotion, Shizuoka
Medical Center, Shizuoka, 422-8033, Japan. kasezawa@iki-iki-hp.com. (4)Present
address: Fuji iki-iki Hospital, Health Promotion Center, Temma, Fuji-shi,
Shizuoka, 419-0205, Japan. kasezawa@iki-iki-hp.com. (5)Laboratory of Nutritional 
Physiology, School of Food and Nutritional Sciences, Graduate School of
Integrated Pharmaceutical and Nutritional Sciences, University of Shizuoka,
Shizuoka, 422-8526, Japan. gouda@u-shizuoka-ken.ac.jp. (6)Laboratory of Human
Genetics, School of Food and Nutritional Sciences, Graduate School of Integrated 
Pharmaceutical and Nutritional Sciences, University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka,
422-8526, Japan. kobayasi@u-shizuoka-ken.ac.jp.

BACKGROUND: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified many
SNPs associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). However, the functional
roles for most of the SNPs have not been elucidated. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are key
regulators of gene expression involved in the development and progression of
various diseases including T2DM. In this study, we investigated whether commonly 
occurring SNPs modulate miRNA-directed regulation of gene expression, and whether
such SNPs in miRNA-binding sites are associated with the susceptibility for T2DM.
METHODS: Genotypes of eleven 3' untranslated region (UTR) SNPs of seven
susceptibility genes for T2DM were determined in 353 T2DM patients and 448
control subjects. In addition, the interactions of miRNAs with the 3'UTR in the
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1ß (HNF1B) gene were investigated using luciferase
reporter assays.
RESULTS: One 3'UTR SNP (rs2229295) in the HNF1B gene was significantly associated
with T2DM, and the frequency of an A allele (rs2229295) in T2DM patients was
decreased compared with that in controls. Luciferase reporter assays showed that 
the SNP (rs2229295) altered the binding of two miRNAs (hsa-miR-214-5p and
hsa-miR-550a-5p).
CONCLUSIONS: We have detected the interactions of hsa-miR-214-5p/hsa-miR-550a-5p 
and the 3'UTR SNP of the HNF1B gene by in vitro luciferase reporter assays, and
propose that the binding of such miRNAs regulates the expression of the HNF1B
gene and the susceptibility of T2DM.

PMCID: PMC4557749
PMID: 26329304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Kidney Int. 2015 Sep;88(3):641. doi: 10.1038/ki.2015.187.

Hypomagnesemia and progressive chronic kidney disease: thinking of HNF1B and
other genetic nephropathies.

Musetti C(1), Quaglia M(1), Stratta P(1), Giordano M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology and Kidney Transplant Unit, Department of Translational Medicine,
University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy. (2)Laboratory of Human Genetics,
Department of Health Sciences, University of Eastern Piedmont, Novara, Italy.

Comment on
    Kidney Int. 2015 Apr;87(4):820-7.

PMID: 26323081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016 Feb;27(2):345-53. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2015050544. Epub 2015
Aug 28.

Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1ß-Associated Kidney Disease: More than Renal Cysts and
Diabetes.

Verhave JC(1), Bech AP(1), Wetzels JF(1), Nijenhuis T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, Radboud University Medical Center, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands. (2)Department of Nephrology, Radboud University Medical Center,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands tom.nijenhuis@radboudumc.nl.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1ß (HNF1ß)-associated disease is a recently recognized 
clinical entity with a variable multisystem phenotype. Early reports described an
association between HNF1B mutations and maturity-onset diabetes of the young.
These patients often presented with renal cysts and renal function decline that
preceded the diabetes, hence it was initially referred to as renal cysts and
diabetes syndrome. However, it is now evident that many more symptoms occur, and 
diabetes and renal cysts are not always present. The multisystem phenotype is
probably attributable to functional promiscuity of the HNF1ß transcription
factor, involved in the development of the kidney, urogenital tract, pancreas,
liver, brain, and parathyroid gland. Nephrologists might diagnose
HNF1ß-associated kidney disease in patients referred with a suspected diagnosis
of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease, medullary cystic kidney disease,
diabetic nephropathy, or CKD of unknown cause. Associated renal or extrarenal
symptoms should alert the nephrologist to HNF1ß-associated kidney disease. A
considerable proportion of these patients display hypomagnesemia, which sometimes
mimics Gitelman syndrome. Other signs include early onset diabetes, gout and
hyperparathyroidism, elevated liver enzymes, and congenital anomalies of the
urogenital tract. Because many cases of this disease are probably undiagnosed,
this review emphasizes the clinical manifestations of HNF1ß-associated disease
for the nephrologist.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4731131 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26319241  [PubMed - in process]


20. J Biol Chem. 2015 Oct 9;290(41):24793-805. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M115.670646. Epub
2015 Aug 19.

Transcription Factor Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor-1ß (HNF-1ß) Regulates MicroRNA-200
Expression through a Long Noncoding RNA.

Hajarnis SS(1), Patel V(1), Aboudehen K(1), Attanasio M(1), Cobo-Stark P(1),
Pontoglio M(2), Igarashi P(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments of Internal Medicine and. (2)Départment de Génétique et
Développement, INSERM U1016, CNRS UMR 8104, Université Paris-Descartes. Institut 
Cochin, 75014 Paris, France. (3)From the Departments of Internal Medicine and
Pediatrics, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas,
Texas 75390 and igarashi@umn.edu.

The transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1ß (HNF-1ß) regulates
tissue-specific gene expression in the kidney and other epithelial organs.
Mutations of HNF-1ß produce kidney cysts, and previous studies have shown that
HNF-1ß regulates the transcription of cystic disease genes, including Pkd2 and
Pkhd1. Here, we combined chromatin immunoprecipitation and next-generation
sequencing (ChIP-Seq) with microarray analysis to identify microRNAs (miRNAs)
that are directly regulated by HNF-1ß in renal epithelial cells. These studies
identified members of the epithelial-specific miR-200 family (miR-200b/200a/429) 
as novel transcriptional targets of HNF-1ß. HNF-1ß binds to two evolutionarily
conserved sites located 28 kb upstream to miR-200b. Luciferase reporter assays
showed that the HNF-1ß binding sites were located within a promoter that was
active in renal epithelial cells. Mutations of the HNF-1ß binding sites abolished
promoter activity. RT-PCR analysis revealed that a long noncoding RNA (lncRNA) is
transcribed from the promoter and encodes the miR-200 cluster. Inhibition of the 
lncRNA with siRNAs decreased the levels of miR-200 but did not affect expression 
of the Ttll10 host gene. The expression of the lncRNA and miR-200 was decreased
in kidneys from HNF-1ß knock-out mice and renal epithelial cells expressing
dominant-negative mutant HNF-1ß. The expression of miR-200 targets, Zeb2 and
Pkd1, was increased in HNF-1ß knock-out kidneys and in cells expressing mutant
HNF-1ß. Overexpression of miR-200 decreased the expression of Zeb2 and Pkd1 in
HNF-1ß mutant cells. These studies reveal a novel pathway whereby HNF-1ß directly
contributes to the control of miRNAs that are involved in epithelial-mesenchymal 
transition and cystic kidney disease.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4598991 [Available on 2016-10-09]
PMID: 26292219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 19;10(8):e0135855. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135855.
eCollection 2015.

Identification and Clinical Characterization of Adult Patients with
Multigenerational Diabetes Mellitus.

Ludovico O(1), Carella M(2), Bisceglia L(2), Basile G(3), Mastroianno S(4),
Palena A(1), De Cosmo S(5), Copetti M(6), Prudente S(7), Trischitta V(8).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Clinical Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy. (2)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza,
San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. (3)Mendel Laboratory, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; Department of Experimental Medicine,
"Sapienza" University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (4)Unit of Cardiology, IRCCS Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. (5)Unit of Medicine,
IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. (6)Unit of
Biostatistics, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(7)Mendel Laboratory, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo,
Italy. (8)Mendel Laboratory, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy; Department of Experimental Medicine, "Sapienza" University of
Rome, Rome, Italy; Research Unit of Diabetes and Endocrine Diseases, IRCCS Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Some patients diagnosed as having type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
are, instead, affected by multigenerational diabetes whose clinical
characteristics are mostly undefined.
OBJECTIVE: 1. To identify among patients who had been previously defined as
affected by T2DM those, in fact, affected by multigenerational diabetes; 2. After
excluding patients carrying the most common MODY genes and mitochondrial
mutations, we compared clinical features of remaining patients with those of
patients with T2DM.
METHODS: Among 2,583 consecutive adult patients who had been defined as affected 
by T2DM, we looked for those with diabetes in =3 consecutive generations. All
probands were screened for mutations in six MODY genes (HNF4A, GCK, HNF1A, PDX1, 
HNF1B and NeuroD1) and for the A3243G mitochondrial mutation. After excluding
patients with mutations in one of such genes, we compared clinical features of
the remaining 67 patients (2.6% of the whole initial sample) affected by
multigenerational "familial diabetes of the adulthood" (FDA) and of their
diabetic relatives (n = 63) to those with T2DM (n = 1,028) by generalized
hierarchical linear models followed by pairwise comparisons.
RESULTS: Age, age at diagnosis, proportion of hypertension (all p<0.001), and
waist circumference (p<0.05) were lower in FDA than T2DM. Nonetheless, the two
groups had similar age-adjusted incidence rate of all-cause mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: Beside younger age at diagnosis, FDA patients show lower waist
circumference and reduced proportion of hypertension as compared to those with
T2DM; despite such reduced potential cardiovascular risk factors, FDA patients
did not show a reduced mortality risk than patients with T2DM.

PMCID: PMC4545999
PMID: 26287533  [PubMed - in process]


22. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Nov 1;28(11-12):1265-71. doi:
10.1515/jpem-2014-0430.

Molecular diagnosis of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) in Turkish
children by using targeted next-generation sequencing.

Anik A, Çatli G, Abaci A, Sari E, Yesilkaya E, Korkmaz HA, Demir K, Altincik A,
Tuhan HÜ, Kizildag S, Özkan B, Ceylaner S, Böber E.

AIM: To perform molecular analysis of pediatric maturity onset diabetes of the
young (MODY) patients by next-generation sequencing, which enables simultaneous
analysis of multiple genes in a single test, to determine the genetic etiology of
a group of Turkish children clinically diagnosed as MODY, and to assess
genotype-phenotype relationship.
METHODS: Forty-two children diagnosed with MODY and their parents were enrolled
in the study. Clinical and laboratory characteristics of the patients at the time
of diagnosis were obtained from hospital records. Molecular analyses of GCK,
HNF1A, HNF4A, HNF1B, PDX1, NEUROD1, KLF11, CEL, PAX4, INS, and BLK genes were
performed on genomic DNA by using next-generation sequencing. Pathogenicity for
novel mutations was assessed by bioinformatics prediction software programs and
segregation analyses.
RESULTS: A mutation in MODY genes was identified in 12 (29%) of the cases. GCK
mutations were detected in eight cases, and HNF1B, HNF1A, PDX1, and BLK mutations
in the others. We identified five novel missense mutations - three in GCK
(p.Val338Met, p.Cys252Ser, and p.Val86Ala), one in HNF1A (p.Cys241Ter), and one
in PDX1 (p.Gly55Asp), which we believe to be pathogenic.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study showed that mutations in the GCK gene are
the leading cause of MODY in our population. Moreover, genetic diagnosis could be
made in 29% of Turkish patients, and five novel mutations were identified.

PMID: 26226118  [PubMed - in process]


23. Genet Mol Res. 2015 Jul 3;14(3):7426-35. doi: 10.4238/2015.July.3.18.

Meta-analysis of the association between the HNF1B rs4430796 (A>G) polymorphism
and risk of prostate cancer based on case-control studies.

Zhao Y(1), Liang J(1), Qi JG(2), Yang N(1), Wu G(1), Lin YL(1), Cao JY(1), Wang
Q(1), Wang QC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Xuzhou Cancer Hospital, Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu 
University, Xuzhou, China. (2)Department of Urology, Xuzhou Cancer Hospital,
Affiliated Hospital of Jiangsu University, Xuzhou, China 601127797@qq.com.

Genome-wide studies have reported an association between the HNF1B rs4430796
(A>G) polymorphism and prostate cancer risk, but results have been inconsistent
and recent meta-analyses have been inadequate. This study aimed to integrate
previous results and explore the validity of this association. Electronic
searches for all relevant publications through May 18, 2014, were conducted
across several databases. Additional studies were identified manually, and only
the most recent or complete were used in this meta-analysis. Crude odds ratios
(ORs) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were used to assess the strength of the
association. Seven eligible case-control studies were identified, incorporating a
total of 14,049 patients and 12,674 controls. Overall, we found that the
rs4430796 (A>G) polymorphism had a decreased risk of prostate cancer (GG vs AA:
OR = 0.661, 95%CI = 0.615-0.710, P = 0.304; AG vs AA: OR = 0.782, 95%CI =
0.739-0.828, P = 0.435; dominant model: OR = 0.743, 95%CI = 0.704-0.784, P =
0.912; recessive model: OR = 0.764, 95%CI = 0.718-0.813, P = 0.01). Furthermore, 
in the stratified analysis, there were significantly decreased risks among
studies with population- and hospital-based controls. In the subgroup analysis by
ethnicity, significantly decreased risks were also found among Caucasians,
Americans, and Asians. Our results suggested that the HNF1B rs4430796 (A>G)
polymorphism decreased the risk of prostate cancer. In the future, additional and
larger studies on patients from across of the world might be required to validate
our findings.

PMID: 26214421  [PubMed - in process]


24. Pediatr Nephrol. 2016 May;31(5):707-14. doi: 10.1007/s00467-015-3142-2. Epub 2015
Jul 8.

HNF1B-associated clinical phenotypes: the kidney and beyond.

Bockenhauer D(1,)(2), Jaureguiberry G(3).

Author information: 
(1)UCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 3EH, UK.
d.bockenhauer@ucl.ac.uk. (2)Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children NHS
Foundation Trust, London, UK. d.bockenhauer@ucl.ac.uk. (3)UCL Institute of Child 
Health, 30 Guilford Street, London, WC1N 3EH, UK.

Mutations in HNF1B, the gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 1ß are the most
commonly identified genetic cause of renal malformations. HNF1B was first
identified as a disease gene for diabetes (MODY5) in 1997, and its involvement in
renal disease was subsequently noted through clinical observations in pedigrees
affected by MODY5. Since then, a whole spectrum of associated phenotypes have
been reported, including genital malformations, autism, epilepsy, gout,
hypomagnesaemia, primary hyperparathyroidism, liver and intestinal abnormalities 
and a rare form of kidney cancer. The most commonly identified mutation, in
approximately 50 % of patients, is an entire gene deletion occurring in the
context of a 17q12 chromosomal microdeletion that also includes several other
genes. Some of the associated phenotypes, especially the neurologic ones, appear 
to occur only in the context of this microdeletion and thus may not be directly
linked to HNF1B. Here we review the spectrum of associated phenotypes and discuss
potential implications for clinical management.

PMID: 26160100  [PubMed - in process]


25. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2016 Mar;27(3):722-9. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2014101051. Epub 2015
Jul 2.

Comprehensive PKD1 and PKD2 Mutation Analysis in Prenatal Autosomal Dominant
Polycystic Kidney Disease.

Audrézet MP(1), Corbiere C(2), Lebbah S(2), Morinière V(2), Broux F(3), Louillet 
F(3), Fischbach M(4), Zaloszyc A(4), Cloarec S(5), Merieau E(5), Baudouin V(6),
Deschênes G(6), Roussey G(7), Maestri S(1), Visconti C(2), Boyer O(8), Abel C(9),
Lahoche A(10), Randrianaivo H(11), Bessenay L(12), Mekahli D(13), Ouertani I(14),
Decramer S(15), Ryckenwaert A(16), Cornec-Le Gall E(1), Salomon R(8), Ferec C(1),
Heidet L(17).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics and Histocompatibility, University Hospital
of Brest, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, U1078,
Brest, France; (2)Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre de référence 
des Maladies Rénales Héréditaires de l'Enfant et de l'Adulte (MARHEA), Department
of Pediatric Nephrology, University Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades Paris,
France; (3)Department of Medical Pediatrics, Pediatric Nephrology and
Hemodialysis Unit, University Hospital Charles Nicolle, Rouen, France;
(4)Department of Pediatrics 1, University Hospital of Strasbourg Strasbourg,
France; (5)Department of Pediatric Nephrology and Hemodialysis, Clocheville
Hospital, University Hospital of Tours, Tours, France; (6)Assistance publique des
Hôpitaux de Paris, Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University Hospital Robert
Debré, Paris, France; (7)Pediatric Department, Nantes University Hospital,
Nantes, France; (8)Assistance Publique des Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre de référence
des Maladies Rénales Héréditaires de l'Enfant et de l'Adulte (MARHEA), Department
of Pediatric Nephrology, University Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades Paris,
France; Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U1163,
Laboratory of Hereditary Kidney Diseases, Université Paris Descartes Sorbonne
Paris Cité, Paris, France; (9)Department of Medical Genetics, Hospices Civils de 
Lyon, De la Croix Rousse Hospital Lyon, France; (10)Pediatric Nephrology Unit
Jeanne de Flandre Hospital, Regional University Hospital of Lille, Lille, France;
(11)Medical Genetics Unit, University Hospital St Pierre La Réunion, La Réunion, 
France; (12)Department of Pediatrics and Pediatric Nephrology University Hospital
Estaing, Clermont Ferrand, France; (13)Department of Pediatric Nephrology,
University Hospitals Leuven, Leuven, Belgium; (14)Department of Congenital and
Inherited Diseases Charles Nicolle Hospital, Tunis, Tunisia; (15)Department of
Pediatric Nephrology, Children Hospital Toulouse, France; and. (16)Pediatric
Department, University Hospital, Rennes, France. (17)Assistance Publique des
Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre de référence des Maladies Rénales Héréditaires de
l'Enfant et de l'Adulte (MARHEA), Department of Pediatric Nephrology, University 
Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades Paris, France; laurence.heidet@nck.aphp.fr.

Prenatal forms of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) are rare
but can be recurrent in some families, suggesting a common genetic modifying
background. Few patients have been reported carrying, in addition to the familial
mutation, variation(s) in polycystic kidney disease 1 (PKD1) or HNF1 homeobox B
(HNF1B), inherited from the unaffected parent, or biallelic polycystic kidney and
hepatic disease 1 (PKHD1) mutations. To assess the frequency of additional
variations in PKD1, PKD2, HNF1B, and PKHD1 associated with the familial PKD
mutation in early ADPKD, these four genes were screened in 42 patients with early
ADPKD in 41 families. Two patients were associated with de novo PKD1 mutations.
Forty patients occurred in 39 families with known ADPKD and were associated with 
PKD1 mutation in 36 families and with PKD2 mutation in two families (no mutation 
identified in one family). Additional PKD variation(s) (inherited from the
unaffected parent when tested) were identified in 15 of 42 patients (37.2%),
whereas these variations were observed in 25 of 174 (14.4%, P=0.001) patients
with adult ADPKD. No HNF1B variations or PKHD1 biallelic mutations were
identified. These results suggest that, at least in some patients, the severity
of the cystic disease is inversely correlated with the level of polycystin 1
function.

Copyright © 2016 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4769188 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26139440  [PubMed - in process]


26. Case Rep Obstet Gynecol. 2015;2015:690891. doi: 10.1155/2015/690891. Epub 2015
May 13.

Ovarian Seromucinous Borderline Tumor and Clear Cell Carcinoma: An Unusual
Combination.

Nakamura E(1), Sato Y(2), Moriguchi S(2), Yamashita A(1), Higo T(3), Asada Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Miyazaki, 5200 Kihara, Kiyotake,
Miyazaki 889-1692, Japan. (2)Department of Diagnostic Pathology, Miyazaki
University Hospital, University of Miyazaki, 5200 Kihara, Kiyotake, Miyazaki
889-1692, Japan. (3)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Koga Hospital,
1749-1 Sudaki, Ikeuchi, Miyazaki 880-0041, Japan.

Ovarian seromucinous borderline tumors (SMBTs) are rare. They architecturally
resemble serous borderline tumors but are much more frequently associated with
endometriosis. The coexistence of other tumors with seromucinous tumors is also
extremely rare. Here, we report an unusual combination of bilateral ovarian SMBT 
and clear cell carcinoma associated with polypoid endometriosis of the colon, in 
a 62-year-old woman. There was no transitional lesion between the two tumors.
Immunohistochemistry showed different staining patterns in tumor components.
Seromucinous tumor cells were positive for estrogen receptor (ER) and
progesterone receptor (PgR) but negative for Napsin A, p504S, and HNF1B. Clear
cell tumor cells were positive for Napsin A and p504S and focally positive for
HNF1B but negative for ER and PgR. Loss of ARID1A expression was not observed in 
SMBTs, clear cell tumors, or endometriosis. These findings suggest that these
tumors arose from separate endometriosis foci and collided within the same ovary.
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first case of this unusual combination 
of ovarian seromucinous tumor and clear cell carcinoma to be reported in the
English literature.

PMCID: PMC4444562
PMID: 26075120  [PubMed]


27. Kidney Int. 2015 Jun;87(6):1258-9. doi: 10.1038/ki.2015.49.

Simplified screening criteria for HNF1B analysis.

Raaijmakers AA(1), Mekahli D(1), Levtchenko EN(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Nephrology, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2015 Jun;87(6):1259.

Comment on
    Kidney Int. 2014 Nov;86(5):1007-15.

PMID: 26024028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Nephron. 2015;130(2):134-40. doi: 10.1159/000398819. Epub 2015 May 22.

Assessment of the HNF1B Score as a Tool to Select Patients for HNF1B Genetic
Testing.

Clissold R(1), Shields B, Ellard S, Hattersley A, Bingham C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical
School, Exeter, UK.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Diagnosing hepatocyte nuclear factor 1ß (HNF1B)-related disease 
is a challenging task due to the phenotypic variability and frequent absence of a
family history. An HNF1B score has recently been developed to help select
appropriate patients for genetic testing with a negative predictive value (NPV)
of 99%. We aimed at testing the clinical utility of this score in a large number 
of referrals for HNF1B genetic testing to the UK diagnostic testing service for
the HNF1B gene.
METHODS: An HNF1B score was assigned for 686 UK referrals for HNF1B genetic
testing using clinical information available at referral. The performance of the 
score was evaluated by receiver-operating characteristic curve analysis. The
relative discriminatory ability of different clinical features for making a
genetic diagnosis of HNF1B-related disease were estimated in the UK dataset alone
and pooled with French data.
RESULTS: The HNF1B score discriminated between patients with and without a
mutation reasonably well with an area under the curve of 0.72. Applying the
suggested cut-off score of =8 gave a NPV of 85%. In a pooled analysis, antenatal 
renal abnormalities, renal hyperechogenicity and cysts were discriminatory in
children, whereas renal hypoplasia and cysts were discriminatory in adults.
Pancreatic abnormalities were discriminatory in both, whereas other extra-renal
characteristics had a large effect size only in adults.
CONCLUSION: The HNF1B score was discriminatory for HNF1B mutations in a large
cohort of individuals tested in a single UK centre. The lower NPV (85 vs. 99%)
reduces its clinical utility in selecting patients for HNF1B genetic testing,
although validation in a prospective cohort is required.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26022541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Future Oncol. 2015;11(9):1389-405. doi: 10.2217/fon.15.45.

Molecular pathogenesis of ovarian clear cell carcinoma.

Gounaris I(1), Brenton JD.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research UK Cambridge Institute, Robinson Way, Cambridge, CB2 0RE, UK.

Ovarian clear cell carcinoma is a distinct subtype of epithelial ovarian cancer, 
characterized by an association with endometriosis, glycogen accumulation and
resistance to chemotherapy. Key driver events, including ARID1A mutations and
HNF1B overexpression, have been recently identified and their functional
characterization is ongoing. Additionally, the role of glycogen in promoting the 
malignant phenotype is coming under scrutiny. Appreciation of the notion that
ovarian clear cell carcinoma is essentially an ectopic uterine cancer will
hopefully lead to improved animal models of the disease, in turn paving the way
for effective treatments.

PMID: 25952785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Clin Invest. 2015 May;125(5):2171-8. doi: 10.1172/JCI80877. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Genomic imbalances in pediatric patients with chronic kidney disease.

Verbitsky M, Sanna-Cherchi S, Fasel DA, Levy B, Kiryluk K, Wuttke M, Abraham AG, 
Kaskel F, Köttgen A, Warady BA, Furth SL, Wong CS, Gharavi AG.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Nephrol. 2015 Jun;11(6):315.
    J Clin Invest. 2015 May;125(5):1799-800.

BACKGROUND: There is frequent uncertainty in the identification of specific
etiologies of chronic kidney disease (CKD) in children. Recent studies indicate
that chromosomal microarrays can identify rare genomic imbalances that can
clarify the etiology of neurodevelopmental and cardiac disorders in children;
however, the contribution of unsuspected genomic imbalance to the incidence of
pediatric CKD is unknown.
METHODS: We performed chromosomal microarrays to detect genomic imbalances in
children enrolled in the Chronic Kidney Disease in Children (CKiD) prospective
cohort study, a longitudinal prospective multiethnic observational study of North
American children with mild to moderate CKD. Patients with clinically detectable 
syndromic disease were excluded from evaluation. We compared 419 unrelated
children enrolled in CKiD to multiethnic cohorts of 21,575 children and adults
that had undergone microarray genotyping for studies unrelated to CKD.
RESULTS: We identified diagnostic copy number disorders in 31 children with CKD
(7.4% of the cohort). We detected 10 known pathogenic genomic disorders,
including the 17q12 deletion HNF1 homeobox B (HNF1B) and triple X syndromes in 19
of 419 unrelated CKiD cases as compared with 98 of 21,575 control individuals (OR
10.8, P = 6.1 × 10<U+207B>²°). In an additional 12 CKiD cases, we identified 12 likely
pathogenic genomic imbalances that would be considered reportable in a clinical
setting. These genomic imbalances were evenly distributed among patients
diagnosed with congenital and noncongenital forms of CKD. In the vast majority of
these cases, the genomic lesion was unsuspected based on the clinical assessment 
and either reclassified the disease or provided information that might have
triggered additional clinical care, such as evaluation for metabolic or
neuropsychiatric disease.
CONCLUSION: A substantial proportion of children with CKD have an unsuspected
genomic imbalance, suggesting genomic disorders as a risk factor for common forms
of pediatric nephropathy. Detection of pathogenic imbalances has practical
implications for personalized diagnosis and health monitoring in this population.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: ClinicalTrials.gov NCT00327860.
FUNDING: This work was supported by the NIH, the National Institutes of Diabetes 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), the National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development, and the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute.

PMCID: PMC4463214
PMID: 25893603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. BMC Cancer. 2015 Apr 7;15:229. doi: 10.1186/s12885-015-1246-5.

HNF1B polymorphism influences the prognosis of endometrial cancer patients: a
cohort study.

Mandato VD(1), Farnetti E(2), Torricelli F(3), Abrate M(4), Casali B(5), Ciarlini
G(6), Pirillo D(7), Gelli MC(8), Nicoli D(9), Grassi M(10), LA Sala GB(11,)(12), 
Palomba S(13).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Obstetrics and Gynecology, IRCCS-Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio
Emilia, Italy. dariomandato@virgilio.it. (2)Laboratory of Molecular Biology,
IRCCS-Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
enrico.farnetti@asmn.re.it. (3)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, IRCCS-Arcispedale
Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy. federica.torricelli@asmn.re.it. (4)Unit 
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, IRCCS-Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia,
Italy. martino.abrate@asmn.re.it. (5)Laboratory of Molecular Biology,
IRCCS-Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy.
bruno.casali@asmn.re.it. (6)Unit of Obstetrics and Gynecology, IRCCS-Arcispedale 
Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy. gino.ciarlini@asmn.re.it. (7)Unit of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, IRCCS-Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia,
Italy. debora.pirillo@asmn.re.it. (8)Unit of Pathology, IRCCS-Arcispedale Santa
Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy. mariacarolina.gelli@asmn.re.it. (9)Laboratory 
of Molecular Biology, IRCCS-Arcispedale Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy. 
davide.nicoli@asmn.re.it. (10)Department of Brain and Behavioral Science, Medical
and Genomics Statistics Unit, University of Pavia, Pavia, Italy.
mario.grassi@unipv.it. (11)Unit of Obstetrics and Gynecology, IRCCS-Arcispedale
Santa Maria Nuova, Reggio Emilia, Italy. giovannibattista.lasala@asmn.re.it.
(12)University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Modena, Italy.
giovannibattista.lasala@asmn.re.it. (13)Unit of Gynecologic Oncology, IRCCS-CROB,
Rionero in Vulture (Potenza), Potenza, Italy. stefanopalomba@tin.it.

BACKGROUND: HNF1B (formerly known as TCF2) gene encodes for a transcription
factor that regulates gene expression involved in normal mesodermal and
endodermal developments. A close association between rs4430796 polymorphism of
HNF1B gene and decreased endometrial cancer (EC) risk has been demonstrated. The 
aim of the current study was to test the hypothesis that rs4430796 polymorphism
can influence the prognosis of EC patients.
METHODS: Retrospective cohort study. Clinical and pathological data were
extrapolated and genotypes were assessed on formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded 
non-tumour tissues. The influence of patients' genotype on overall survival and
progression free survival were our main outcome measures.
RESULTS: A total of 191 EC patients were included in the final analysis. Overall 
survival differed significantly (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.003) among genotypes. At multivariate
analysis, a significant (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05) effect on overall survival was detected for
FIGO stage, and rs4430796 polymorphism of HNF1B gene. After grouping EC patients 
according to adjuvant treatment, rs4430796 polymorphism resulted significantly
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001) related to overall survival only in subjects who received
radiotherapy plus chemotherapy. A significant (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014) interaction between
rs4430796 polymorphism and chemo-radiotherapy was also detected. Finally, only a 
trend (P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.090) towards significance was observed for rs4430796 polymorphism
effect on progression free survival.
CONCLUSIONS: rs4430796 polymorphism of HNF1B gene influences independently the
prognosis of EC patients with a potential effect on tumor chemo-sensitivity.

PMCID: PMC4403886
PMID: 25885815  [PubMed - in process]


32. Diagn Pathol. 2015 Mar 25;10:8. doi: 10.1186/s13000-015-0245-9.

Expression of HNF-1ß in cervical carcinomas: an immunohistochemical study of 155 
cases.

Nemejcová K(1), Cibula D(2), Dundr P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, First Faculty of Medicine and General University
Hospital, Charles University in Prague, Studnickova 2, Prague 2, 12800, Czech
Republic. kristyna.nemejcova@vfn.cz. (2)Oncogynecological Centre, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, First Faculty of Medicine and General University
Hospital, Charles University in Prague, Studnickova 2, Prague 2, 12800, Czech
Republic. d_cibula@yahoo.com. (3)Department of Pathology, First Faculty of
Medicine and General University Hospital, Charles University in Prague,
Studnickova 2, Prague 2, 12800, Czech Republic. pdundr@seznam.cz.

BACKGROUND: HNF-1ß is a commonly used marker in the differential diagnosis of
clear cell carcinoma of the ovary and endometrium. Recent studies have found
HNF-1ß expression to a lesser extent in other ovarian and endometrial tumors
including endometrioid, mucinous and, rarely, serous carcinoma. Regarding
cervical carcinoma, HNF-1ß expression has been mentioned exceptionally in
mesonephric and some other types of adenocarcinoma. However, a systematic
analysis of HNF-1ß expression in cervical carcinomas has not been performed to
date.
METHODS: We analyzed HNF-1ß expression in 155 cervical carcinomas (including 56
adenocarcinomas, 85 squamous cell carcinomas and 14 undifferentiated carcinomas).
Expression of HNF-1ß was correlated with the expression of other markers
including estrogen receptors, progesterone receptors, CEA, p63, p40, p16, and
D2-40.
RESULTS: Adenocarcinomas showed expression of HNF-1ß in 42/56 cases (75%), CEA in
48/56 cases (85.7%), p63 in 4/56 cases (7.2%), p40 in 2/56 cases (3.6%), estrogen
receptors in 9/56 cases (16.1%), progesterone receptors in 5/56 cases (8.9%), p16
in 56/56 (100%) cases, and D2-40 in 0/56 cases (0%). Squamous cell carcinomas
showed expression of HNF-1ß in 2/85 cases (2.35%), CEA in 77/85 cases (90.6%),
p63 and p40 in 85/85 cases (100%), estrogen receptors in 9/85 cases (10.6%),
progesterone receptors in 1/85 cases (1.2%), p16 in 84/85 cases (98.8%), and
D2-40 in 45/84 cases (53.6%). Undifferentiated carcinomas showed expression of
HNF-1ß in 2/14 cases (14.3%), CEA in 8/14 cases (57.1%), p16 in 14/14 cases
(100%), hormone receptors in 0/13 cases (0%), p63 in 7/14 cases (50%), p40 in
5/14 cases (35.7%), and D2-40 in 1/14 cases (7.1%).
CONCLUSIONS: In cervical carcinoma, expression of HNF-1ß is mostly restricted to 
adenocarcinomas and can be used as an auxiliary adenocarcinoma marker in the
differential diagnosis of poorly differentiated cervical carcinomas. HNF-1ß as an
adenocarcinoma marker and p63/p40 and D2-40 as a squamous cell carcinoma markers 
are highly specific with variable sensitivity. Optimal results can be achieved
using these markers in a panel.
VIRTUAL SLIDES: The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1348836442160205 .

PMCID: PMC4428247
PMID: 25884453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Reprod Sci. 2015 Nov;22(11):1421-8. doi: 10.1177/1933719115580995. Epub 2015 Apr 
14.

The Impact of Genetic Variants for Different Physiological Characterization of
Type 2 Diabetes Loci on Gestational Insulin Signaling in Nondiabetic Pregnant
Chinese Women.

Liao S(1), Liu Y(2), Chen X(3), Tan Y(4), Mei J(5), Song W(6), Gan L(7), Wang
H(7), Yin S(7), Dong X(7), Chi S(6), Deng S(8).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center & Institute of Transplantation, Sichuan Provincial People's
Hospital, School of Medicine, University of Electronic Science and Technology of 
China, Chengdu, China shunyaol@yahoo.com sdeng10@yahoo.com. (2)Department of
Medical Genetics, Division of Morbid Genomics, State Key Laboratory of
Biotherapy, West China Hospital, Sichuan University, Chengdu, China. (3)Columbia 
Center for Translational Immunology, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY, USA. (4)College of Life Science, Hunan Normal
University, Changsha, Hunan, China. (5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, School of Medicine, University of
Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China. (6)Department of
Nuclear Medicine, Sichuan Provincial People's Hospital, School of Medicine,
University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China.
(7)Diabetes Center & Institute of Transplantation, Sichuan Provincial People's
Hospital, School of Medicine, University of Electronic Science and Technology of 
China, Chengdu, China. (8)Diabetes Center & Institute of Transplantation, Sichuan
Provincial People's Hospital, School of Medicine, University of Electronic
Science and Technology of China, Chengdu, China Human Islet Laboratory,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA
shunyaol@yahoo.com sdeng10@yahoo.com.

We investigate the impact of genetic variants on transiently upregulated
gestational insulin signaling. We recruited 1152 unrelated nondiabetic pregnant
Han Chinese women (age 28.5 ± 4.1 years; body mass index [BMI] 21.4 ± 2.6
kg/m(2)) and gave them oral glucose tolerance tests. Matsuda index of insulin
sensitivity, homeostatic model assessment of insulin resistance, indices of
insulin disposition, early-phase insulin release, fasting state, and 0 to 120
minute's proinsulin to insulin conversion were used to dissect insulin
physiological characterization. Several variants related to ß-cell function were 
genotyped. The genetic impacts were analyzed using logistic regression under an
additive model. By adjusting for maternal age, BMI, and the related interactions,
the genetic variants in ABCC8, CDKAL1, CDKN2A, HNF1B, KCNJ11, and MTNR1B were
detected to impact gestational insulin signaling through heterogeneous
mechanisms; however, compared with that in nonpregnant metabolism, the genetic
effects seem to be eminently and heavily influenced by maternal age and BMI,
indicating possible particular mechanisms underlying gestational metabolism and
diabetic pathogenesis.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25878199  [PubMed - in process]


34. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jul 15;24(14):4138-46. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddv129. Epub 2015 Apr
15.

Two new loci and gene sets related to sex determination and cancer progression
are associated with susceptibility to testicular germ cell tumor.

Kristiansen W(1), Karlsson R(2), Rounge TB(3), Whitington T(2), Andreassen BK(4),
Magnusson PK(2), Fosså SD(5), Adami HO(6), Turnbull C(7), Haugen TB(1), Grotmol
T(3), Wiklund F(8).

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Health Sciences, Oslo and Akershus University College of Applied
Sciences, Oslo, Norway. (2)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, 
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden. (3)Cancer Registry of Norway, Oslo,
Norway. (4)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Oslo, Oslo, Norway.
(5)Department of Oncology, Oslo University Hospital, University of Oslo, Oslo,
Norway. (6)Department of Medical Epidemiology and Biostatistics, Karolinska
Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden, Department of Epidemiology, Harvard School of
Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA and. (7)Section of Cancer Genetics,
Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, UK. (8)Department of Medical Epidemiology
and Biostatistics, Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden,
fredrik.wiklund@ki.se.

Genome-wide association (GWA) studies have reported 19 distinct susceptibility
loci for testicular germ cell tumor (TGCT). A GWA study for TGCT was performed by
genotyping 610 240 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 1326 cases and 6687 
controls from Sweden and Norway. No novel genome-wide significant associations
were observed in this discovery stage. We put forward 27 SNPs from 15 novel
regions and 12 SNPs previously reported, for replication in 710 case-parent
triads and 289 cases and 290 controls. Predefined biological pathways and
processes, in addition to a custom-built sex-determination gene set, were subject
to enrichment analyses using Meta-Analysis Gene Set Enrichment of Variant
Associations (M) and Improved Gene Set Enrichment Analysis for Genome-wide
Association Study (I). In the combined meta-analysis, we observed genome-wide
significant association for rs7501939 on chromosome 17q12 (OR = 0.78, 95% CI =
0.72-0.84, P = 1.1 × 10(-9)) and rs2195987 on chromosome 19p12 (OR = 0.76, 95%
CI: 0.69-0.84, P = 3.2 × 10(-8)). The marker rs7501939 on chromosome 17q12 is
located in an intron of the HNF1B gene, encoding a member of the
homeodomain-containing superfamily of transcription factors. The
sex-determination gene set (false discovery rate, FDRM < 0.001, FDRI < 0.001) and
pathways related to NF-<U+03BA>B, glycerophospholipid and ether lipid metabolism, as
well as cancer and apoptosis, was associated with TGCT (FDR < 0.1). In addition
to revealing two new TGCT susceptibility loci, our results continue to support
the notion that genes governing normal germ cell development in utero are
implicated in the development of TGCT.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25877299  [PubMed - in process]


35. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Aug;39(8):1061-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000436.

Immunohistochemical Comparison of Ovarian and Uterine Endometrioid Carcinoma,
Endometrioid Carcinoma With Clear Cell Change, and Clear Cell Carcinoma.

Lim D(1), Ip PP, Cheung AN, Kiyokawa T, Oliva E.

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Pathology, National University Health System, Singapore,
Singapore Department of Pathology, University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital,
Hong Kong Department of Pathology, The Jikei University School of Medicine,
Japan §Department of Pathology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA.

Accurate distinction of clear cell carcinoma (CCC) from endometrioid carcinoma
(EC) has important clinical implications, but, not infrequently, EC demonstrates 
clear cell change (EC-CC), mimicking CCC. We examined whether a panel of
immunomarkers can help distinguish between these tumors. Sixty-four CCCs (40
ovarian and 24 uterine), 34 ECs (21 ovarian and 13 uterine), and 34 EC-CCs (6
ovarian and 28 uterine) were stained for HNF1ß, BAF250a, Napsin A, ER, and PR.
Intensity and extent of immunoreactivity was assessed. Fifty-seven of 64 (89%)
CCCs, 14/34 (41%) EC-CCs, and 16/34 (47%) ECs expressed HNF1ß, and 56/64 (88%)
CCCs, 4/34 (12%) EC-CCs, and 1/34 (3%) ECs stained for Napsin A. Most CCCs
demonstrated at least moderate and diffuse staining for both markers, whereas
only focal and weak expression was identified in most EC-CC/EC. Compared to
HNF1ß, Napsin A showed increased specificity (93.0% vs. 55.9%, P<0.0001) and
similar sensitivity (87.5% vs. 89.1%) in distinguishing CCC from EC-CC/EC.
Thirteen of 64 (20%) CCCs, 6/34 (18%) EC-CCs, and 2/34 (6%) ECs showed loss of
BAF250a. ER was expressed by 10/64 (16%) CCCs, 30/34 (88%) EC-CCs, and 33/34
(97%) ECs, whereas PR positivity was identified in 9/64 (14%) CCCs, 26/34 (77%)
EC-CCs, and 33/34 (97%) ECs. The majority of EC and EC-CC demonstrated diffuse
staining for ER/PR, whereas most CCCs showed very focal positivity. There is a
statistically significant difference in HNF1ß, Napsin A, ER, and PR
immunoexpression between CCC and EC/EC-CC, with Napsin A being a more specific
marker for CCC than HNF1ß. Overall, the immunoprofile of EC-CC is more comparable
to that of EC than CCC. The use of a panel of immunostains can help distinguish
EC-CC from CCC.

PMID: 25871622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Exp Anim. 2015;64(3):231-9. doi: 10.1538/expanim.14-0089. Epub 2015 Mar 10.

Production of a mouse strain with impaired glucose tolerance by systemic
heterozygous knockout of the glucokinase gene and its feasibility as a
prediabetes model.

Saito M(1), Kaneda A, Sugiyama T, Iida R, Otokuni K, Kaburagi M, Matsuoka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Life Science, Tokyo University of Agriculture 
and Technology, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan.

Exon II of glucokinase (Gk) was deleted to produce a systemic heterozygous Gk
knockout (Gk(+/-)) mouse. The relative expression levels of Gk in the heart,
lung, liver, stomach, and pancreas in Gk(+/-) mice ranged from 0.41-0.68 versus
that in wild (Gk(+/+)) mice. On the other hand, its expression levels in the
brain, adipose tissue, and muscle ranged from 0.95-1.03, and its expression
levels in the spleen and kidney were nearly zero. Gk knockout caused no
remarkable off-target effect on the expression of 7 diabetes causing genes (Shp, 
Hnf1a, Hnf1b, Irs1, Irs2, Kir6.2, and Pdx1) in 10 organs. The glucose tolerance
test was conducted to determine the blood glucose concentrations just after
fasting for 24 h (FBG) and at 2 h after high-glucose application (GTT2h). The
FBG-GTT2h plots obtained with the wild strain fed the control diet (CD), Gk(+/-) 
strain fed the CD, and Gk(+/-) strain fed the HFD were distributed in separate
areas in the FBG-GTT2h diagram. The respective areas could be defined as the
normal state, prediabetes state, and diabetes state, respectively. Based on the
results, the criteria for prediabetes could be defined for the Gk(+/-) strain
developed in this study.

PMCID: PMC4547996
PMID: 25765873  [PubMed - in process]


37. Endokrynol Pol. 2015;66(1):15-21. doi: 10.5603/EP.2015.0004.

Atypical phenotypic features among carriers of a novel Q248X nonsense mutation in
the HNF1B gene.

Hogendorf A(1), Kosinska-Urbanska M, Borowiec M, Antosik K, Wyka K, Mlynarski W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Oncology, Haematology and Diabetology, Medical
University of Lodz, Poland. anna.hogendorf@umed.lodz.pl.

INTRODUCTION: Hepatocyte transforming factor 1B-maturity onset diabetes mellitus 
of the young (HNF1B-MODY) is an autosomal dominant type of monogenic diabetes
caused by a mutation in the gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta
(HNF-1beta). The aim of this study was to determine if a HNF1B gene mutation was 
responsible for a dominantly inherited form of diabetes mellitus among the
members of a three-generation Polish family.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The index subject was a 13-year-old boy with metabolic
syndrome, spina bifida occulta, posterior urethral valves, congenital
ureteropelvic junction obstruction, and a family history of diabetes of autosomal
dominant trait of inheritance. We performed clinical and laboratory examinations 
of his family and sequenced the HNF1B gene.
RESULTS: A novel Q248X mutation (nucleotide C to T transition at position 742 of 
the exon 3 of HNF1B gene, resulting in stop codon formation) was identified.
Phenotypes of family members sharing this mutation are highly variable, and
include previously known abnormalities of the urinary system and pancreas,
diabetes mellitus of variable onset and severity, hyperinsulinaemia, insulin
resistance, metabolic syndrome, elevated aminotransferases, hyperbilirubinemia,
hyperamylasemia, short stature and cataracts. To the best of our knowledge, spina
bifida occulta, pectus carinatum, and splenomegaly have not been previously
reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results broaden the spectrum of HNF1B gene mutations and
HNF1B-MODY-related phenotypes.

PMID: 25754277  [PubMed - in process]


38. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 Feb 28;21(8):2550-7. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i8.2550.

Hepatic phenotypes of HNF1B gene mutations: a case of neonatal cholestasis
requiring portoenterostomy and literature review.

Kotalova R(1), Dusatkova P(1), Cinek O(1), Dusatkova L(1), Dedic T(1), Seeman
T(1), Lebl J(1), Pruhova S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Radana Kotalova, Petra Dusatkova, Ondrej Cinek, Lenka Dusatkova, Tomas Dedic, 
Tomas Seeman, Jan Lebl, Stepanka Pruhova, Department of Pediatrics, 2 Faculty of 
Medicine, Charles University in Prague and University Hospital Motol, 15006
Prague, Czech Republic.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-ß (HNF1B) defects cause renal cysts and diabetes
syndrome (RCAD), or HNF1B-maturity-onset diabetes of the young. However, the
hepatic phenotype of HNF1B variants is not well studied. We present a female
neonate born small for her gestational age [birth weight 2360 g; -2.02 standard
deviations (SD) and birth length 45 cm; -2.40 SD at the 38(th) gestational week].
She developed neonatal cholestasis due to biliary atresia and required surgical
intervention (portoenterostomy) when 32-d old. Following the operation, icterus
resolved, but laboratory signs of liver dysfunction persisted. She had
hyperechogenic kidneys prenatally with bilateral renal cysts and pancreatic
hypoplasia postnatally that led to the diagnosis of an HNF1B deletion. This
represents the most severe hepatic phenotype of an HNF1B variant recognized thus 
far. A review of 12 published cases with hepatic phenotypes of HNF1B defects
allowed us to distinguish three severity levels, ranging from neonatal
cholestasis through adult-onset cholestasis to non-cholestatic liver impairment, 
all of these are associated with congenital renal cysts and mostly with diabetes 
later in life. We conclude that to detect HNF1B variants, neonates with
cholestasis should be checked for the presence of renal cysts, with special focus
on those who are born small for their gestational age. Additionally, patients
with diabetes and renal cysts at any age who develop cholestasis and/or exocrine 
pancreatic insufficiency should be tested for HNF1B variants as the true
etiological factor of all disease components. Further observations are needed to 
confirm the potential reversibility of cholestasis in infancy in HNF1B
mutation/deletion carriers.

PMCID: PMC4342936
PMID: 25741167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Cancer Cytopathol. 2015 May;123(5):298-305. doi: 10.1002/cncy.21530. Epub 2015
Mar 4.

HNF1ß and S100A1 are useful biomarkers for distinguishing renal oncocytoma and
chromophobe renal cell carcinoma in FNA and core needle biopsies.

Conner JR(1), Hirsch MS(1), Jo VY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts.

BACKGROUND: Morphologic overlap between renal oncocytoma (RO) and chromophobe
renal cell carcinoma (ChRCC) can pose diagnostic challenges, especially in biopsy
samples in which tumor quantity may be limited, architectural features are not
well represented, and gross examination is not possible. It has been demonstrated
that immunohistochemistry (IHC) for HNF1a, HNF1ß, and S100A1 are differentially
expressed in RO and ChRCC in resection specimens. We evaluated the utility of
these markers in FNA and core biopsies of RO and ChRCC.
METHODS: IHC for HNF1a, HNF1ß, and S100A1 were performed on 61 RO specimens (36
FNA biopsies and 25 core biopsies) and on 14 ChRCC specimens (10 FNA biopsies and
4 core biopsies), and results were scored semiquantitatively for staining
intensity (0-3: negative, weak, moderate, strong) and staining extent (0-4: 0%,
1-25%, 26-50%, 51-75%, 76-100%).
RESULTS: Forty-four (44) of 60 (73%) RO displayed moderate-to-strong nuclear
reactivity for HNF1ß compared to 3 of 14 (21%) ChRCC (P <<U+2009>.001). Staining was
present in >50% of tumor cells in 34 of 60 (57%) RO and in 2 of 14 (14%) ChRCC (P
=<U+2009>.004). S100A1 was moderately-to-strongly positive in 45 of 56 (80%) RO and in 1
of 13 (8%) ChRCC (P <<U+2009>.001), with 39 of 56 (70%) and 2 of 13 (15%) cases,
respectively showing positivity in >50% of tumor cells (P<<U+2009>.001). No ChRCCs were 
positive for both markers. There was no statistically significant difference in
intensity or extent of HNF1a staining between RO and ChRCC.
CONCLUSIONS: HNF1ß and S100A1 positivity was observed in a significantly greater 
proportion of RO than ChRCC. IHC for both markers can thus aid in the
differential diagnosis. Accurate distinction is of increasing importance as
tumor-ablative procedures and active surveillance become more widely adopted.

© 2015 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 25739652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Kidney Int. 2015 Oct;88(4):676-83. doi: 10.1038/ki.2015.28. Epub 2015 Mar 4.

Autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease: diagnosis, classification, 
and management--A KDIGO consensus report.

Eckardt KU(1), Alper SL(2), Antignac C(3,)(4), Bleyer AJ(5), Chauveau D(6), Dahan
K(7), Deltas C(8), Hosking A(9), Kmoch S(10), Rampoldi L(11), Wiesener M(1), Wolf
MT(12), Devuyst O(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität
Erlangen-Nürnberg (FAU), Erlangen, Germany. (2)Divisions of Nephrology and
Molecular and Vascular Medicine, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (3)INSERM U1163, Laboratory of
Hereditary Kidney Diseases, Paris, France. (4)Paris Descartes University, Imagine
Institute, Paris, France. (5)Section on Nephrology, Wake Forest School of
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA. (6)Département de Néphrologie et
Transplantation d'organes, CHU Rangueil, Toulouse, France. (7)Centre de Génétique
Humaine, Institut de Pathologie et de Génétique, Gosselies, Belgium.
(8)Department of Biological Sciences, Molecular Medicine Research Center and
Laboratory of Molecular and Medical Genetics, University of Cyprus, Nicosia,
Cyprus. (9)UKD Foundation, New York, New York, USA. (10)Institute for Inherited
Metabolic Disorders, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
(11)Molecular Genetics of Renal Disorders Unit, Division of Genetics and Cell
Biology, Dulbecco Telethon Institute c/o IRCCS San Raffaele Scientific Institute,
Milan, Italy. (12)Division of Pediatric Nephrology, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas, USA. (13)Institute of Physiology,
University of Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Rare autosomal dominant tubulointerstitial kidney disease is caused by mutations 
in the genes encoding uromodulin (UMOD), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1ß (HNF1B),
renin (REN), and mucin-1 (MUC1). Multiple names have been proposed for these
disorders, including 'Medullary Cystic Kidney Disease (MCKD) type 2', 'Familial
Juvenile Hyperuricemic Nephropathy (FJHN)', or 'Uromodulin-Associated Kidney
Disease (UAKD)' for UMOD-related diseases and 'MCKD type 1' for the disease
caused by MUC1 mutations. The multiplicity of these terms, and the fact that
cysts are not pathognomonic, creates confusion. Kidney Disease: Improving Global 
Outcomes (KDIGO) proposes adoption of a new terminology for this group of
diseases using the term 'Autosomal Dominant Tubulointerstitial Kidney Disease'
(ADTKD) appended by a gene-based subclassification, and suggests diagnostic
criteria. Implementation of these recommendations is anticipated to facilitate
recognition and characterization of these monogenic diseases. A better
understanding of these rare disorders may be relevant for the tubulointerstitial 
fibrosis component in many forms of chronic kidney disease.

PMID: 25738250  [PubMed - in process]


41. Development. 2015 Mar 1;142(5):871-82. doi: 10.1242/dev.110759.

Hnf1b controls pancreas morphogenesis and the generation of Ngn3+ endocrine
progenitors.

De Vas MG(1), Kopp JL(2), Heliot C(1), Sander M(2), Cereghini S(1), Haumaitre
C(3).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UMR7622, Institut de Biologie Paris-Seine (IBPS), Paris F-75005, France 
Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Université Paris 06, UMR7622-IBPS, Paris F-75005,
France INSERM U969, Paris F-75005, France. (2)Department of Pediatrics and
Cellular & Molecular Medicine, Pediatric Diabetes Research Center, University of 
California-San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0695, USA. (3)CNRS, UMR7622, Institut de
Biologie Paris-Seine (IBPS), Paris F-75005, France Sorbonne Universités, UPMC
Université Paris 06, UMR7622-IBPS, Paris F-75005, France INSERM U969, Paris
F-75005, France cecile.haumaitre@inserm.fr.

Heterozygous mutations in the human HNF1B gene are associated with maturity-onset
diabetes of the young type 5 (MODY5) and pancreas hypoplasia. In mouse, Hnf1b
heterozygous mutants do not exhibit any phenotype, whereas the homozygous
deletion in the entire epiblast leads to pancreas agenesis associated with
abnormal gut regionalization. Here, we examine the specific role of Hnf1b during 
pancreas development, using constitutive and inducible conditional inactivation
approaches at key developmental stages. Hnf1b early deletion leads to a reduced
pool of pancreatic multipotent progenitor cells (MPCs) due to decreased
proliferation and increased apoptosis. Lack of Hnf1b either during the first or
the secondary transitions is associated with cystic ducts. Ductal cells exhibit
aberrant polarity and decreased expression of several cystic disease genes, some 
of which we identified as novel Hnf1b targets. Notably, we show that Glis3, a
transcription factor involved in duct morphogenesis and endocrine cell
development, is downstream Hnf1b. In addition, a loss and abnormal
differentiation of acinar cells are observed. Strikingly, inactivation of Hnf1b
at different time points results in the absence of Ngn3(+) endocrine precursors
throughout embryogenesis. We further show that Hnf1b occupies novel Ngn3 putative
regulatory sequences in vivo. Thus, Hnf1b plays a crucial role in the regulatory 
networks that control pancreatic MPC expansion, acinar cell identity, duct
morphogenesis and generation of endocrine precursors. Our results uncover an
unappreciated requirement of Hnf1b in endocrine cell specification and suggest a 
mechanistic explanation of diabetes onset in individuals with MODY5.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4352981
PMID: 25715395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Genomics Inform. 2014 Dec;12(4):240-6. doi: 10.5808/GI.2014.12.4.240. Epub 2014
Dec 31.

Identification and Functional Characterization of P159L Mutation in HNF1B in a
Family with Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young 5 (MODY5).

Kim EK(1), Lee JS(2), Cheong HI(3), Chung SS(2), Kwak SH(4), Park KS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University College of
Medicine, Seoul 110-744, Korea. ; Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National
University Hospital, Seoul 110-744, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine,
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-744, Korea.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, Seoul National University Children's Hospital, Seoul
110-744, Korea. ; Research Coordination Center for Rare Diseases, Seoul National 
University Hospital, Seoul 110-744, Korea. ; Kidney Research Institute, Medical
Research Center, Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-744,
Korea. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital,
Seoul 110-744, Korea. (5)Department of Internal Medicine, Seoul National
University College of Medicine, Seoul 110-744, Korea. ; Department of Internal
Medicine, Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul 110-744, Korea. ; Department 
of Molecular Medicine and Biopharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate School of
Convergence Science and Technology, Seoul National University, Seoul 110-744,
Korea.

Mutation in HNF1B, the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1ß (HNF-1ß) gene, results in
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) 5, which is characterized by gradual 
impairment of insulin secretion. However, the functional role of HNF-1ß in
insulin secretion and glucose metabolism is not fully understood. We identified a
family with early-onset diabetes that fulfilled the criteria of MODY. Sanger
sequencing revealed that a heterozygous P159L (CCT to CTT in codon 159 in the
DNA-binding domain) mutation in HNF1B was segregated according to the affected
status. To investigate the functional consequences of this HNF1B mutation, we
generated a P159L HNF1B construct. The wild-type and mutant HNF1B constructs were
transfected into COS-7 cells in the presence of the promoter sequence of human
glucose transporter type 2 (GLUT2). The luciferase reporter assay revealed that
P159L HNF1B had decreased transcriptional activity compared to wild-type (p <
0.05). Electrophoretic mobility shift assay showed reduced DNA binding activity
of P159L HNF1B. In the MIN6 pancreatic ß-cell line, overexpression of the P159L
mutant was significantly associated with decreased mRNA levels of GLUT2 compared 
to wild-type (p < 0.05). However, INS expression was not different between the
wild-type and mutant HNF1B constructs. These findings suggests that the impaired 
insulin secretion in this family with the P159L HNF1B mutation may be related to 
altered GLUT2 expression in ß-cells rather than decreased insulin gene
expression. In conclusion, we have identified a Korean family with an HNF1B
mutation and characterized its effect on the pathogenesis of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4330261
PMID: 25705165  [PubMed]


43. Medicine (Baltimore). 2015 Feb;94(7):e469. doi: 10.1097/MD.0000000000000469.

A novel mutation of the HNF1B gene associated with hypoplastic glomerulocystic
kidney disease and neonatal renal failure: a case report and mutation update.

Alvelos MI(1), Rodrigues M, Lobo L, Medeira A, Sousa AB, Simão C, Lemos MC.

Author information: 
(1)From the CICS-UBI, Health Sciences Research Centre, Faculty of Health
Sciences, University of Beira Interior, Covilhã, Portugal (MIA, MCL); Paediatric 
Nephrology & Renal Transplantation Unit, Department of Paediatrics, Santa Maria
Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal (MR, CS); Department of Radiology, Santa Maria
Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal (LL); and Genetics Unit, Department of Paediatrics,
Santa Maria Hospital, Lisbon, Portugal (AM, ABS).

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 beta (HNF1B) plays an important role in embryonic
development, namely in the kidney, pancreas, liver, genital tract, and gut.
Heterozygous germline mutations of HNF1B are associated with the renal cysts and 
diabetes syndrome (RCAD). Affected individuals may present a variety of renal
developmental abnormalities and/or maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). A
Portuguese 19-month-old male infant was evaluated due to hypoplastic
glomerulocystic kidney disease and renal dysfunction diagnosed in the neonatal
period that progressed to stage 5 chronic renal disease during the first year of 
life. His mother was diagnosed with a solitary hypoplastic microcystic left
kidney at age 20, with stage 2 chronic renal disease established at age 35, and
presented bicornuate uterus, pancreatic atrophy, and gestational diabetes. DNA
sequence analysis of HNF1B revealed a novel germline frameshift insertion
(c.110_111insC or c.110dupC) in both the child and the mother. A review of the
literature revealed a total of 106 different HNF1B mutations, in 236
mutation-positive families, comprising gross deletions (34%), missense mutations 
(31%), frameshift deletions or insertions (15%), nonsense mutations (11%), and
splice-site mutations (8%). The study of this family with an unusual presentation
of hypoplastic glomerulocystic kidney disease with neonatal renal dysfunction
identified a previously unreported mutation of the HNF1B gene, thereby expanding 
the spectrum of known mutations associated with renal developmental disorders.

PMCID: PMC4554182
PMID: 25700310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Lipid Res. 2015 Apr;56(4):801-9. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M052969. Epub 2015 Feb 4.

Reduction of circulating PCSK9 and LDL-C levels by liver-specific knockdown of
HNF1a in normolipidemic mice.

Shende VR(1), Wu M(2), Singh AB(1), Dong B(2), Kan CF(2), Liu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304 Department 
of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305. (2)Veterans Affairs Palo
Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304.

The transcription factors hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)1a and HNF1ß can bind to
the HNF1 site on the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9)
promoter to activate transcription in HepG2 cells. However, it is unknown whether
one or both HNF1 factors are obligatory for transactivating hepatic PCSK9 gene
expression in vivo. We developed shRNA adenoviral constructs (Ad-shHNF1a and
Ad-shHNF1ß) to examine the effects of knockdown of HNF1a or HNF1ß on PCSK9
expression and its consequent impact on LDL receptor (LDLR) protein levels in
cultured hepatic cells and liver tissue. We demonstrated that infection with
Ad-shHNF1a, but not Ad-shHNF1ß, markedly reduced PCSK9 mRNA expression in HepG2
cells with a concomitant increase in LDLR protein abundance. Injecting Ad-shHNF1a
in mice fed a normal diet significantly (~ 50%) reduced liver mRNA expression and
serum concentration of PCSK9 with a concomitant increase (~ 1.9-fold) in hepatic 
LDLR protein abundance. Furthermore, we observed a modest but significant
reduction in circulating LDL cholesterol after knockdown of HNF1a in these
normolipidemic mice. Consistent with the observation that knockdown of HNF1ß did 
not affect PCSK9 mRNA or protein expression in cultured hepatic cells, Ad-shHNF1ß
infection in mice resulted in no change in the hepatic mRNA expression or serum
content of PCSK9. Altogether, our study demonstrates that HNF1a, but not HNF1ß,
is the primary positive regulator of PCSK9 transcription in mouse liver.

PMCID: PMC4373738
PMID: 25652089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Eur Radiol. 2015 May;25(5):1479-86. doi: 10.1007/s00330-014-3550-x. Epub 2015 Feb
1.

Renal involvement in children with HNF1ß mutation: early sonographic appearances 
and long-term follow-up.

Avni FE(1), Lahoche A, Langlois C, Garel C, Hall M, Vivier PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Radiology, CHRU Jeanne de Flandre Hospital, Lille,
France, Freddy.Avni@chru-lille.fr.

OBJECTIVES: The aim was to report ultrasound (US) patterns of hepatocyte nuclear 
factor (HNF1ß) mutation throughout childhood and determine whether ultrasound
could be predictive of renal failure.
METHODS: The sonographic examinations in 34 children with HNF1ß mutation were
reviewed. Their sonographic characteristics were compared with renal function.
RESULTS: At first postnatal examination renal length was normal in 44 % of the
patients, decreased in 24 %, increased in 12 % and asymmetrical in 20 %. Renal
cortex was hyperechoic in 97 %. Corticomedullary differentiation was abnormal in 
59 %. Cysts were present in 77 % of patients. Cysts were mostly subcapsular (64
%). Twenty-eight patients had follow-up examinations. A modification of the
sonographic appearance was observed in 91 % of patients. Eight patients (23 %)
had renal failure; no specific US pattern could be demonstrated.
CONCLUSIONS: At birth, HNF1ß mutation was typically associated on US with the
combination of hyperechoic, normal-sized kidneys with abnormal corticomedullary
differentiation (CMD) and multiple cortical cysts. In older children, the
appearances can be variable: kidneys may have decreased (32 %) or normal size (33
%); they are usually hyperechoic (50 %) with abnormal CMD (78 %) and
(sub)cortical cysts (71 %). No pattern appears to be associated with renal
failure.
KEY POINTS:  HNF1ß mutations determine significant anomalies of sonographic
appearances of kidneys in children.  Kidneys appear mainly hyperechoic, with or 
without CMD and with subcapsular cysts.  The US pattern may evolve throughout
childhood in the same patient.  No correlation was found between any sonographic
pattern and renal failure.

PMID: 25638216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Biol Regul Homeost Agents. 2014 Oct-Dec;28(4):659-74.

Gene expression profiles in three histologic types, clear-cell, endometrioid and 
serous ovarian carcinomas.

Pamula-Pilat J(1), Rubel T(2), Rzepecka IK(3), Olbryt M(1), Herok R(1),
Dansonka-Mieszkowska A(3), Grzybowska E(1), Kupryjanczyk J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Research and Molecular Biology of Cancer Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice
Branch, Poland. (2)Institute of Radioelectronics, Warsaw University of
Technology, Warsaw, Poland. (3)Department of Molecular Pathology, Maria
Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Gliwice,
Poland.

Ovarian carcinoma is the most lethal type of gynecologic malignancy in the
Western world. Majority of early stage ovarian cancers are asymptomatic and this 
is the main reason that more than two-thirds of patients are diagnosed with
advanced disease. Ovarian tumors are heterogeneous and the different histologic
subtypes are further classified as benign, borderline (low-grade) and malignant
(high-grade) to reflect their behavior. The aim of the study was to analyze gene 
expression profiles in three histologic types of ovarian carcinoma in an attempt 
to find the molecular differences among serous, endometrioid and clear cell
subtypes. The analysis of gene expression was performed on 57 samples of ovarian 
carcinoma. RNA was isolated from the ovarian cancer tissues. The gene expression 
changes were determined by microarray analysis and quantitative real time
polymerase chain reaction (qRT-PCR). Measurement of relative gene expression
levels was used to identify molecular differences among three histologic types of
ovarian carcinoma (clear-cell, endometrioid and serous). Unsupervised statistical
analysis revealed four biological subtypes among three histotypes under study.
The endometrioid ovarian carcinoma was divided into two molecular subtypes. The
biggest molecular differences were observed between clear-cell and serous
carcinomas (1070 genes, FDR 0.05), the smallest between endometrioid and serous
carcinomas (81 genes, FDR 0.05). The biggest group of differentially expressed
genes was involved in transport and metabolism. This finding can explain the
differences in the response to chemotherapy observed among different histologic
types of ovarian carcinomas. In conclusion, we found TCF2 (HNF1B) gene as a
suitable marker for ovarian clear cell carcinoma. Gene expression profiling also 
shed light on the molecular mechanisms of different chemoresistance among the
analyzed histotypes.

PMID: 25620176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Sci Rep. 2015 Jan 13;5:7750. doi: 10.1038/srep07750.

A novel function for Egr4 in posterior hindbrain development.

Bae CJ(1), Jeong J(2), Saint-Jeannet JP(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Basic Science &Craniofacial Biology, College of Dentistry,
New York University, New York, USA [2] Permanent address: Ministry of Food and
Drug Safety, 187 Osongsaengmyeong2(i)-ro, Osong-eup, Cheongwon-gun,
Chungcheongbuk-do 363-700, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Basic Science
&Craniofacial Biology, College of Dentistry, New York University, New York, USA.

Segmentation of the vertebrate hindbrain is an evolutionarily conserved process. 
Here, we identify the transcription factor early growth response 4 (egr4) as a
novel regulator of posterior hindbrain development in Xenopus. egr4 is
specifically and transiently expressed in rhombomeres 5 and 6 (r5/r6), and Egr4
knockdown causes a loss of mafb/kreisler and krox20/egr2 expression in r5/r6 and 
r5, respectively. This phenotype can be fully rescued by injection of frog or
mouse Egr4 mRNA. Moreover Egr4-depleted embryos exhibit a specific loss of the
neural crest stream adjacent to r5, and have inner ear defects. While the
homeodomain protein vHnf1/Hnf1b directly activates Mafb and Krox20 expression in 
the mouse hindbrain to specify r5, we show that in Xenopus this process is
indirect through the activation of Egr4. We provide evidence that rearrangements 
in the regulatory sequences around egr4 and mafb genes may account for this
difference.

PMCID: PMC4291570
PMID: 25583070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Mar;28(3-4):251-63. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2014-0384.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY): an update.

Anik A, Çatli G, Abaci A, Böber E.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a group of monogenic disorders
characterized by autosomal dominantly inherited non-insulin dependent form of
diabetes classically presenting in adolescence or young adults before the age of 
25 years. MODY is a rare cause of diabetes (1% of all cases) and is frequently
misdiagnosed as Type 1 diabetes (T1DM) or Type 2 diabetes (T2DM). A precise
molecular diagnosis is essential because it leads to optimal treatment of the
patients and allows early diagnosis for their asymptomatic family members.
Mutations in the glucokinase (GCK) (MODY 2) and hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)1A/4A (MODY 3 and MODY 1) genes are the most common causes of MODY. GCK
mutations cause a mild, asymptomatic, and stable fasting hyperglycemia usually
requiring no specific treatment. However, mutations in the HNF1A and HNF4A cause 
a progressive pancreatic ß-cell dysfunction and hyperglycemia that can result in 
microvascular complications. Sulfonylureas are effective in these patients by
acting on adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-sensitive potassium channels, although
insulin therapy may be required later in life. Mutations in the HNF1B (MODY 5) is
associated with pancreatic agenesis, renal abnormalities, genital tract
malformations, and liver dysfunction. Compared to MODY 1, 2, 3, and 5, the
remaining subtypes of MODY have a much lower prevalence. In this review, we
summarize the main clinical and laboratory characteristics of the common and
rarer causes of MODY.

PMID: 25581748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2015 Feb;11(2):102-12. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2014.232. Epub 2014
Dec 23.

HNF1B-associated renal and extra-renal disease-an expanding clinical spectrum.

Clissold RL(1), Hamilton AJ(1), Hattersley AT(1), Ellard S(1), Bingham C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical
School, Barrack Road, Exeter EX2 5DW, Devon, UK. (2)Renal Unit, Royal Devon and
Exeter Hospital, Barrack Road, Exeter EX2 5DW, Devon, UK.

Heterozygous mutations in the gene that encodes the transcription factor
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1ß (HNF1B) represent the most common known monogenic
cause of developmental kidney disease. Renal cysts are the most frequently
detected feature of HNF1B-associated kidney disease; however, other structural
abnormalities, including single kidneys and renal hypoplasia, and electrolyte
abnormalities can also occur. Extra-renal phenotypes might also be observed;
consequently, HNF1B-associated disease is considered a multi-system disorder.
Other clinical features include early-onset diabetes mellitus, pancreatic
hypoplasia, genital tract malformations, abnormal liver function and early-onset 
gout. Heterozygous mutations in the coding region or splice sites of HNF1B, and
complete gene deletion, each account for ~50% of all cases of HNF1B-associated
disease, respectively, and often arise spontaneously. There is no clear
genotype-phenotype correlation, consistent with haploinsufficiency as the disease
mechanism. Data from animal models suggest that HNF1B has an important function
during several stages of nephrogenesis; however, the precise signalling pathways 
remain to be elucidated. This Review discusses the genetics and molecular
pathways that lead to disease development, summarizes the reported renal and
extra-renal phenotypes, and identifies areas for future research in
HNF1B-associated disease.

PMID: 25536396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol. 2014 Dec;53(4):579-82. doi: 10.1016/j.tjog.2014.05.004.

Prenatal diagnosis of 17q12 duplication and deletion syndrome in two fetuses with
congenital anomalies.

Li R(1), Fu F(1), Zhang YL(1), Li DZ(1), Liao C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Prenatal Diagnostic Center, Guangzhou Women and Children's
Medical Centre, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
(2)Department of Prenatal Diagnostic Center, Guangzhou Women and Children's
Medical Centre, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, China.
Electronic address: canliao@hotmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to characterize the genetic
abnormalities in two fetuses with congenital anomalies in prenatal screening.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The mother of Fetus 1 was 26 years old and had a second
trimester serum screening that indicated the fetus was at low risk. The prenatal 
ultrasound and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) at 28 weeks of gestation showed
mild ventriculomegaly, microcephaly, and agenesis of the corpus callosum. The
mother of Fetus 2 was 25 years old and also had a second trimester serum
screening that indicated the fetus was at low risk. The prenatal ultrasound at
32 weeks of gestation showed the presence of hyperechogenic and enlarged kidneys 
with multicystic renal dysplasia bilaterally and a persistent left superior vena 
cava (PLSVC). Both pregnant women underwent cord blood samplings because of the
abnormal imaging results. Karyotype analysis revealed normal results in the two
fetuses. Chromosome microarray analysis (CMA) was then performed to provide
genetic analysis of the cord blood and parental blood samples. Ultimately, the
pregnancies were both terminated.
RESULTS: CMA detected a 1.56-Mb duplication at 17q12 in Fetus 1 and a 1.93-Mb
deletion of 17q12 in Fetus 2. Both the duplicated and deleted regions included
the HNF1B and LHX1 genes. Neither the duplication nor deletion was inherited from
the parents.
CONCLUSION: This study is the first to report the prenatal diagnosis of a 17q12
duplication syndrome. Our results further confirmed that genes in this region,
including HNF1B and LHX1, are essential for normal brain and kidney development, 
and also indicated some genes that may be associated with the cardiovascular
abnormality. Combined with imaging examination, the use of CMA will improve the
diagnosis of submicroscopic chromosomal aberrations in fetuses with congenital
anomalies.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 25510704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Am J Nephrol. 2014;40(5):458-67. doi: 10.1159/000369836. Epub 2014 Dec 6.

The role of tumor necrosis factor alpha in regulating the expression of
Tamm-Horsfall Protein (uromodulin) in thick ascending limbs during kidney injury.

Heitmeier M(1), McCracken R, Micanovic R, Khan S, El-Achkar TM.

Author information: 
(1)Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, Mo., USA.

BACKGROUND: Tamm-Horsfall Protein (THP) is a glycoprotein expressed exclusively
by cells of the thick ascending loop (TAL) of Henle. THP has a protective role in
acute kidney injury (AKI), and its expression is downregulated in the early
stages of injury. Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFa) is a cytokine endogenously
expressed by the TAL and is also induced by AKI. Therefore, we hypothesized that 
TNFa is a key regulator of THP expression.
METHODS: We used a mouse model of AKI (ischemia-reperfusion injury, IRI) and a
cell culture system of a TAL cell line (MKTAL).
RESULTS: We show that TNFa is upregulated by TAL cells early after AKI in vivo.
The expression of THP and its transcription factor Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1ß
(HNF1ß) were concomitantly decreased at the peak of injury. Furthermore,
recombinant TNFa inhibits significantly, and in a dose-dependent manner, the
expression of THP, but not HNF1ß in MKTAL cells. Interestingly, neither TNFa
neutralization nor genetic deletion of TNFa increased THP or HNF levels after
injury in vivo.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that TNFa can inhibit the expression of THP in TAL
cells via an HNF1ß-independent mechanism, but the downregulation of THP
expression in the early AKI does not depend on TNFa. We propose that TNFa
regulates THP expression in a homeostatic setting, but the impact of TNFa on THP 
during kidney injury is superseded by other factors that could inhibit
HNF1ß-mediated expression of THP.

© 2014 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25503683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2015 May;30(5):835-42. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfu370. Epub
2014 Dec 13.

Criteria for HNF1B analysis in patients with congenital abnormalities of kidney
and urinary tract.

Raaijmakers A(1), Corveleyn A(2), Devriendt K(2), van Tienoven TP(3), Allegaert
K(4), Van Dyck M(1), van den Heuvel L(1), Kuypers D(5), Claes K(6), Mekahli D(1),
Levtchenko E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (2)Department 
of Human Genetics, UZ Leuven/KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (3)Department of
Sociology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. (4)Neonatal Intensive
Care Unit, UZ Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (5)Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, KU Leuven, Leuven, Belgium. (6)Department of Nephrology, UZ Leuven,
Leuven, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Congenital anomalies of kidneys and urinary tract (CAKUT) are the
most predominant developmental disorders comprising ~20-30% of all anomalies
identified in the prenatal period. Mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-beta 
(HNF-1ß) involved in the development of kidneys, liver, pancreas and urogenital
tract are currently the most frequent monogenetic cause of CAKUT found in 10-30% 
of patients depending on screening policy and study design. We aimed to validate 
criteria for analysis of HNF1B in a prospective cohort of paediatric and adult
CAKUT patients.
METHODS: We included CAKUT patients diagnosed in our paediatric and adult
nephrology departments from January 2010 until April 2013 based on predefined
screening criteria. Subjects presenting with at least one major renal criterion
or one minor renal criterion combined with one or more extra-renal criteria in
the personal history or a familial history of renal or extra-renal manifestations
were considered eligible.
RESULTS: We prospectively screened 205 patients and detected HNF1B mutations in
10% [n = 20, 12 children, median age 4.2 (range 0-13.1) years and 8 adults,
median age 34.8 (range 16.6-62) years]. We observed that bilateral renal anomaly,
renal cysts from unknown origin, a combination of two major renal anomalies and
hypomagnesaemia were predictive for finding HNF1B mutations (P < 0.001; P <
0.001; P = 0.004; P = 0.008, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that HNF1B mutations are responsible for ~10% of
CAKUT cases, both in children and in adults. Based on our results we propose
adapted criteria for HNF1B analysis to reduce the screening costs without missing
affected patients. These criteria should be reaffirmed in a larger validation
cohort.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of ERA-EDTA.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 25500806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Dev Biol. 2015 Jan 15;397(2):175-90. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.10.022. Epub 2014 
Nov 8.

Pax8 and Pax2 are specifically required at different steps of Xenopus pronephros 
development.

Buisson I(1), Le Bouffant R(1), Futel M(1), Riou JF(1), Umbhauer M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR7622 Developmental Biology,
F-75005 Paris, France; CNRS, UMR7622 Developmental Biology, F-75005 Paris,
France. (2)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR7622 Developmental
Biology, F-75005 Paris, France; CNRS, UMR7622 Developmental Biology, F-75005
Paris, France. Electronic address: muriel.umbhauer@upmc.fr.

The respective role of Pax2 and Pax8 in early kidney development in vertebrates
is poorly understood. In this report, we have studied the roles of Pax8 and Pax2 
in Xenopus pronephros development using a loss-of-function approach. Our results 
highlight a differential requirement of these two transcription factors for
proper pronephros formation. Pax8 is necessary for the earliest steps of
pronephric development and its depletion leads to a complete absence of
pronephric tubule. Pax2 is required after the establishment of the tubule
pronephric anlage, for the expression of several terminal differentiation markers
of the pronephric tubule. Neither Pax2 nor Pax8 is essential to glomus
development. We further show that Pax8 controls hnf1b, but not lhx1 and Osr2,
expression in the kidney field as soon as the mid-neurula stage. Pax8 is also
required for cell proliferation of pronephric precursors in the kidney field. It 
may exert its action through the wnt/beta-catenin pathway since activation of
this pathway can rescue MoPax8 induced proliferation defect and Pax8 regulates
expression of the wnt pathway components, dvl1 and sfrp3. Finally, we observed
that loss of pronephros in Pax8 morphants correlates with an expanded
vascular/blood gene expression domain indicating that Pax8 function is important 
to delimit the blood/endothelial genes expression domain in the anterior part of 
the dorso-lateral plate.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25446030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Ann Hum Genet. 2015 Jan;79(1):10-9. doi: 10.1111/ahg.12093. Epub 2014 Dec 1.

Identification and molecular characterization of HNF1B gene mutations in Indian
diabetic patients with renal abnormalities.

Kanthimathi S(1), Balamurugan K, Mohan V, Shanthirani CS, Gayathri V, Radha V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Madras Diabetes Research Foundation,
Chennai, India.

Heterozygous mutations of the HNF1B gene (HNF1B-MODY or MODY5) are associated
with a wide clinical spectrum of renal and extrarenal disease without clear
genotype-phenotype correlation. In this study, we investigated the prevalence of 
HNF1B gene mutations in young Indian diabetic patients with various renal
abnormalities. Fifty unrelated young diabetic patients, who also had renal
abnormalities, were selected from the electronic records of a large diabetes
centre in Chennai, in southern India. All patients were sequenced for HNF1B gene 
mutations. The whole or partial gene deletion was analyzed by MLPA. Functional
characterization of the novel variant (Asn321Asp) was also performed using
transcriptional activation and subcellular localization assays. We identified six
different HNF1B gene mutations which included four previously reported (-67C>T,
Arg165His, IVS2nt+2insT, Met1_Trp557del) and two novel variations (Asn321Asp,
IVS3nt-4C>G). The functional study revealed that the novel variation Asn321Asp in
both the heterozygous and homozygous state showed similar transcriptional
activity, expression levels and normal transportation of protein to the nucleus
similar to wild type, suggesting that it is not likely to be pathogenic. This is 
the first major study of HNF1B-MODY from India and shows that about 10% of young 
diabetic subjects with renal abnormalities seen at a tertiary diabetes centre
harbor HNF1B gene mutations.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd/University College London.

PMID: 25441779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Br J Cancer. 2015 Jan 6;112(1):131-9. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2014.587. Epub 2014 Nov
25.

MiR-23a/-24-induced gene silencing results in mesothelial cell integration of
pancreatic cancer.

Listing H(1), Mardin WA(2), Wohlfromm S(3), Mees ST(2), Haier J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Intensive Care and Pain Medicine, University
Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany. (2)Department of General and Visceral
Surgery, University Hospital Muenster, Muenster, Germany. (3)Arrows Biomedical
Deutschland GmbH, Muenster, Germany. (4)Comprehensive Cancer Center Muenster,
University Hospital Muenster, Albert-Schweitzer-Campus 1, Muenster 48149,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Invasion of the surrounding tissue is part of the metastatic cascade.
Here, we examined the invasion of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) cells
into the mesothelial barrier and identified the related microRNA (miRNA)
expression profiles.
METHODS: The interactions between PDAC cells and mesothelial monolayers were
characterised and quantified using a specific time-lapse videomicroscopy assay.
Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma cells were further evaluated using the adhesion 
assay, and miRNA, mRNA and protein expressions were determined using microarray, 
q-RT-PCR and western blots, respectively. These data were correlated with in vivo
dissemination scores.
RESULTS: Two groups of PDAC cell lines were distinguished by their integration
capacity into the mesothelial monolayer using mean elongation factors (MEFs).
Adhesion assays showed a concordant relation between adhesive properties and
integration capacity. The distant metastases scores were reverse correlated with 
MEFs. Microarray analysis of these groups revealed that miR-23a and/or miR-24
target for FZD5, HNF1B and/or TMEM92, respectively, and that they are
significantly deregulated.
CONCLUSIONS: MiR-23a and/or miR-24 overexpression leads to gene silencing of
FZD5, TMEM92 and/or HNF1B. Their downregulation induces deregulated expression
and degradation of E-cadherin and ß-catenin causing destabilisation of the
cadherin/catenin complex, and altered the expression of Wnt-related genes. We
propose a molecular (epi)genetic mechanism by which increased EMT-like cell shape
transformation and integration into mesothelial monolayers of PDAC cells can be
observed.

PMCID: PMC4453619
PMID: 25422915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Diabetes Care. 2014 Dec;37(12):e258-60. doi: 10.2337/dc14-1788.

Low prevalence of HNF1A mutations after molecular screening of multiple MODY
genes in 58 Italian families recruited in the pediatric or adult diabetes clinic 
from a single Italian hospital.

Delvecchio M(1), Ludovico O(2), Menzaghi C(3), Di Paola R(3), Zelante L(4),
Marucci A(3), Grasso V(5), Trischitta V(6), Carella M(4), Barbetti F(7), Gallo F,
Coccioli MS, Zecchino C, Faienza MF, Cardinale G, Franzese A, Mozzillo E, Iafusco
D, Zanfardino A.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatrics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy mdelvecchio75@gmail.com fabrizio.barbetti@uniroma2.it.
(2)Endocrine Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy. (3)Research Unit of Diabetes and Endocrine Diseases, IRCCS Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. (4)Medical
Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy. (5)Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(6)Research Unit of Diabetes and Endocrine Diseases, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy Department of Experimental
Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (7)Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery,
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy mdelvecchio75@gmail.com
fabrizio.barbetti@uniroma2.it.

PMID: 25414397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2014 Nov 14. [Epub ahead of print]

Exploring the Genomic Roadmap and Molecular Phylogenetics Associated with MODY
Cascades Using Computational Biology.

Chakraborty C(1), Bandyopadhyay S, Doss CG, Agoramoorthy G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, School of Computer and Information Sciences,
Galgotias University, Noida, India.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a metabolic and genetic disorder. 
It is different from type 1 and type 2 diabetes with low occurrence level (1-2 %)
among all diabetes. This disorder is a consequence of ß-cell dysfunction. Till
date, 11 subtypes of MODY have been identified, and all of them can cause gene
mutations. However, very little is known about the gene mapping, molecular
phylogenetics, and co-expression among MODY genes and networking between
cascades. This study has used latest servers and software such as VarioWatch,
ClustalW, MUSCLE, G Blocks, Phylogeny.fr, iTOL, WebLogo, STRING, and KEGG PATHWAY
to perform comprehensive analyses of gene mapping, multiple sequences alignment, 
molecular phylogenetics, protein-protein network design, co-expression analysis
of MODY genes, and pathway development. The MODY genes are located in
chromosomes-2, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 17, and 20. Highly aligned block shows Pro,
Gly, Leu, Arg, and Pro residues are highly aligned in the positions of 296, 386, 
437, 455, 456 and 598, respectively. Alignment scores inform us that HNF1A and
HNF1B proteins have shown high sequence similarity among MODY proteins.
Protein-protein network design shows that HNF1A, HNF1B, HNF4A, NEUROD1, PDX1,
PAX4, INS, and GCK are strongly connected, and the co-expression analyses between
MODY genes also show distinct association between HNF1A and HNF4A genes. This
study has used latest tools of bioinformatics to develop a rapid method to assess
the evolutionary relationship, the network development, and the associations
among eleven MODY genes and cascades. The prediction of sequence conservation,
molecular phylogenetics, protein-protein network and the association between the 
MODY cascades enhances opportunities to get more insights into the less-known
MODY disease.

PMID: 25395195  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


58. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Mar 1;24(5):1478-92. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu552. Epub 2014 Nov
6.

Fine-mapping of the HNF1B multicancer locus identifies candidate variants that
mediate endometrial cancer risk.

Painter JN, O'Mara TA, Batra J, Cheng T, Lose FA, Dennis J, Michailidou K, Tyrer 
JP, Ahmed S, Ferguson K, Healey CS, Kaufmann S, Hillman KM, Walpole C, Moya L,
Pollock P, Jones A, Howarth K, Martin L, Gorman M, Hodgson S; National Study of
Endometrial Cancer Genetics Group (NSECG); CHIBCHA Consortium, De Polanco MM,
Sans M, Carracedo A, Castellvi-Bel S, Rojas-Martinez A, Santos E, Teixeira MR,
Carvajal-Carmona L, Shu XO, Long J, Zheng W, Xiang YB; Australian National
Endometrial Cancer Study Group (ANECS), Montgomery GW, Webb PM, Scott RJ, McEvoy 
M, Attia J, Holliday E, Martin NG, Nyholt DR, Henders AK, Fasching PA, Hein A,
Beckmann MW, Renner SP, Dörk T, Hillemanns P, Dürst M, Runnebaum I, Lambrechts D,
Coenegrachts L, Schrauwen S, Amant F, Winterhoff B, Dowdy SC, Goode EL, Teoman A,
Salvesen HB, Trovik J, Njolstad TS, Werner HM, Ashton K, Proietto T, Otton G,
Tzortzatos G, Mints M, Tham E; RENDOCAS, Hall P, Czene K, Liu J, Li J, Hopper JL,
Southey MC; Australian Ovarian Cancer Study (AOCS), Ekici AB, Ruebner M, Johnson 
N, Peto J, Burwinkel B, Marme F, Brenner H, Dieffenbach AK, Meindl A, Brauch H;
GENICA Network, Lindblom A, Depreeuw J, Moisse M, Chang-Claude J, Rudolph A,
Couch FJ, Olson JE, Giles GG, Bruinsma F, Cunningham JM, Fridley BL,
Børresen-Dale AL, Kristensen VN, Cox A, Swerdlow AJ, Orr N, Bolla MK, Wang Q,
Weber RP, Chen Z, Shah M, French JD, Pharoah PD, Dunning AM, Tomlinson I, Easton 
DF, Edwards SL, Thompson DJ, Spurdle AB.

Collaborators: Spurdle AB, Webb PM, Young J, McQuire L, Baron-Hay S, Bell D,
Bonaventura A, Brand A, Braye S, Carter J, Chan F, Dalrymple C, Ferrier A, Gard
G, Hacker N, Hogg R, Houghton R, Marsden D, McIlroy K, Otton G, Pather S,
Proietto A, Robertson G, Scurry J, Sharma R, Wain G, Wong F, Armes J, Crandon A, 
Cummings M, Land R, Nicklin J, Perrin L, Obermair A, Ward B, Davy M, Dodd T,
Miller J, Oehler M, Paramasivum S, Pierides J, Whitehead F, Blomfield P, Challis 
D, Neesham D, Pyman J, Quinn M, Rome R, Weitzer M, Brennan B, Hammond I, Leung Y,
McCartney A, Stewart C, Thompson J, O'Brien S, Moore S, Ferguson K, Walsh M,
Cicero R, Green L, Griffith J, Jackman L, Ranieri B, O'Brien M, Schultz P,
Alexander B, Baxter C, Croy H, Fitzgerald A, Herron E, Hill C, Jones M, Maidens
J, Marshall A, Martin K, Mayhew J, Minehan E, Roffe D, Shirley H, Steane H,
Stenlake A, Ward A, Webb S, White J, de Polanco M, Bohórquez ME, Prieto R,
Criollo A, Ramírez C, Estrada AP, Suárez JJ, Martinez AR, Rogatto S, Jnr SA,
Santos EM, Sans M, Colistro V, Hidalgo PC, Mut P, Carracedo A, Ponte CR, Garcia
IQ, Castellvi-Bel S, Teixeira M, de Almeida AB, Hamann U, Gilbert M, Tomlinson I,
Adams M, Al-Samarraie A, Anwar S, Athavale R, Awad S, Bali A, Barnes A, Cawdell
G, Chan S, Chin K, Cornes P, Crawford M, Cullimore J, Ghaem-Maghami S, Gornall R,
Green J, Hall M, Harvey M, Hawe J, Head A, Herod J, Hingorani M, Hocking M,
Holland C, Hollingsworth T, Hollingworth J, Ind T, Irvine R, Irwin C, Katesmark
M, Kehoe S, Kheng-Chew G, Lankester K, Linder A, Luesley D, B-Lynch C, McFarlane 
V, Naik R, Nicholas N, Nugent D, Oates S, Oladipo A, Papadopoulos A, Pearson S,
Radstone D, Raju S, Rathmell A, Redman C, Rymer M, Sarhanis P, Sparrow G, Stuart 
N, Sundar S, Thompson A, Tinkler S, Trent S, Tristram A, Walji N, Woolas R,
Lindblom A, Tzortzatos G, Mints M, Tham E, Castro O, Gemzell-Danielsson K, Baker 
H, Baynes C, Conroy D, Curzon B, Harrington P, Irvine S, Luccarini C, Mayes R,
Munday H, Perkins B, Pharoah D, Platte R, Stafford A, West J, Shu XO, Zheng W,
Long J, Cai Q, Dai Q, Cai H, Delahanty R, Li C, Xiang YB, Gao Y, Xu WH, Lu W,
Zheng Y, Gu K, Stuart-Harris R, Kirsten F, Rutovitz J, Clingan P, Glasgow A,
Proietto A, Braye S, Otton G, Shannon J, Bonaventura T, Stewart J, Begbie S,
Friedlander M, Bell D, Baron-Hay S, Ferrier A, Gard G, Nevell D, Pavlakis N,
Valmadre S, Young B, Camaris C, Crouch R, Edwards L, Hacker N, Marsden D,
Robertson G, Beale P, Beith J, Carter J, Dalrymple C, Houghton R, Russell P,
Anderson L, Links M, Grygiel J, Hill J, Brand A, Byth K, Jaworski R, Harnett P,
Sharma R, Wain G, Purdie D, Whiteman D, Ward B, Papadimos D, Crandon A, Cummings 
M, Horwood K, Obermair A, Perrin L, Wyld D, Nicklin J, Davy M, Oehler MK, Hall C,
Dodd T, Healy T, Pittman K, Henderson D, Miller J, Pierdes J, Achan A, Blomfield 
P, Challis D, McIntosh R, Parker A, Brown B, Rome R, Allen D, Grant P, Hyde S,
Robbie RL, Healy D, Jobling T, Manolitsas T, McNealage J, Rogers P, Susil B,
Sumithran E, Simpson I, Haviv I, Phillips K, Rischin D, Fox S, Johnson D, Lade S,
Waring P, Loughrey M, O'Callaghan N, Murray B, Mileshkin L, Allan P, Billson V,
Pyman J, Neesham D, Quinn M, Hamilton A, Underhill C, Bell R, Ng LF, Blum R,
Ganju V, Hammond I, McCartney A, Stewart C, Leung Y, Buck M, Zeps N, Bowtell DD, 
Green AC, Chenevix-Trench G, deFazio A, Gertig D, Webb PM, Bugert P, Arndt V,
Müller H, Stegmaier C, Lo WY, Justenhoven C, Hamann U, Brüning T, Pesch B, Ko YD,
Rabstein S, Lotz A, Baisch C, Fischer HP, Harth V.

Common variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 homeobox B (HNF1B) gene are
associated with the risk of Type II diabetes and multiple cancers. Evidence to
date indicates that cancer risk may be mediated via genetic or epigenetic effects
on HNF1B gene expression. We previously found single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) at the HNF1B locus to be associated with endometrial cancer, and now
report extensive fine-mapping and in silico and laboratory analyses of this
locus. Analysis of 1184 genotyped and imputed SNPs in 6608 Caucasian cases and 37
925 controls, and 895 Asian cases and 1968 controls, revealed the best signal of 
association for SNP rs11263763 (P = 8.4 × 10(-14), odds ratio = 0.86, 95%
confidence interval = 0.82-0.89), located within HNF1B intron 1. Haplotype
analysis and conditional analyses provide no evidence of further independent
endometrial cancer risk variants at this locus. SNP rs11263763 genotype was
associated with HNF1B mRNA expression but not with HNF1B methylation in
endometrial tumor samples from The Cancer Genome Atlas. Genetic analyses
prioritized rs11263763 and four other SNPs in high-to-moderate linkage
disequilibrium as the most likely causal SNPs. Three of these SNPs map to the
extended HNF1B promoter based on chromatin marks extending from the minimal
promoter region. Reporter assays demonstrated that this extended region reduces
activity in combination with the minimal HNF1B promoter, and that the minor
alleles of rs11263763 or rs8064454 are associated with decreased HNF1B promoter
activity. Our findings provide evidence for a single signal associated with
endometrial cancer risk at the HNF1B locus, and that risk is likely mediated via 
altered HNF1B gene expression.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4321445
PMID: 25378557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Intern Med J. 2014 Nov;44(11):1137-40. doi: 10.1111/imj.12584.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 5 in a family with diabetes and mild
kidney disease diagnosed by whole exome sequencing.

Wentworth JM(1), Lukic V, Bahlo M, Finlay M, Nguyen C, Morahan G, Harrison LC.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Division, The Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Melbourne, Victoria; Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Royal
Melbourne Hospital, Melbourne, Victoria; Department of Medical Biology, The
University of Melbourne, Melbourne, Victoria.

Exome sequencing is being increasingly used to identify disease-associated gene
mutations. We used whole exome sequencing to determine the genetic basis of a
syndrome of diabetes and renal disease affecting a mother and her son. We
identified a mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-b (HNF1B) gene that
encoded a methionine to valine amino acid change (M160V) in the HNF1B protein.
This leads us to the previously unappreciated diagnosis of maturity-onset
diabetes of the young type 5 and provided a basis for genetic counselling of
other family members.

© 2014 The Authors; Internal Medicine Journal © 2014 Royal Australasian College
of Physicians.

PMID: 25367728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Arch Dis Child. 2015 Mar;100(3):259-64. doi: 10.1136/archdischild-2014-306810.
Epub 2014 Oct 16.

Towards a new point of view on the phenotype of patients with a 17q12
microdeletion syndrome.

Laffargue F(1), Bourthoumieu S(2), Llanas B(3), Baudouin V(4), Lahoche A(5),
Morin D(6), Bessenay L(7), De Parscau L(8), Cloarec S(9), Delrue MA(10), Taupiac 
E(3), Dizier E(11), Laroche C(11), Bahans C(11), Yardin C(2), Lacombe D(10),
Guigonis V(12).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Clermont-Ferrand University Hospital,
Clermont-Ferrand, France. (2)Department of Cytogenetic, CHREC, Limoges University
Hospital, Limoges, France. (3)Department of Paediatric Nephrology, Bordeaux
University Hospital, Bordeaux, France. (4)Department of Paediatric Nephrology,
Hospital R. Debré, APHP, Paris, France. (5)Department of Paediatric Nephrology,
Lille University Hospital, Lille, France. (6)Department of Paediatric Nephrology,
Montpellier University Hospital, Montpellier, France. (7)Department of Paediatric
Nephrology, Clermont-Ferrand University Hospital, Clermont-Ferrand, France.
(8)Department of Paediatric Nephrology, Brest University Hospital, Brest, France.
(9)Department of Paediatric Nephrology, Tours University Hospital, Tours, France.
(10)Department of Medical Genetics, CHU Bordeaux, Rare Diseases Laboratory:
Genetics and Metabolism (MRGM), University of Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.
(11)Department of Paediatrics, CHREC, Limoges University Hospital, Limoges,
France. (12)Department of Paediatrics, CHREC, Limoges University Hospital,
Limoges, France CNRS UMR 7276, Limoges University, Limoges, France.

OBJECTIVE: 17q12 microdeletion syndrome involves 15 genes, including HNF1B, and
is considered to confer a high risk of neuropsychiatric disorders. Patients with 
HNF1B gene deletion diagnosed secondary to renal disorders are only very rarely
reported to have neuropsychiatric disorders. Interestingly, however, when tested,
patients with HNF1B gene deletion are found to have 17q12 deletion. This brings
into question the extent to which 17q12 deletion is genuinely associated with
severe neuropsychological disorders and in which patients. In this study, we
sought to confirm 17q12 microdeletion in kidney patients initially diagnosed with
HNF1B gene deletion and evaluate neuropsychological disorders in these patients
compared with those with HNF1B point mutation.
PATIENTS AND DESIGN: Thirty-nine children with HNF1B disorders (26 with
deletions) diagnosed secondary to renal abnormalities were included in this
prospective study and tested for 17q12 microdeletion and neuropsychological
disorders.
RESULTS: The same 17q12 microdeletion found in patients with neuropsychological
disorders was identified in all of our patients with HNF1B deletion. Neurological
examinations found no severe impairments except for one patient with autism. No
significant differences were found between patients with deletions and those with
point mutations as concerns learning abilities and schooling. Nevertheless,
patients with deletions tended to have lower developmental quotients and more
difficulties at school.
CONCLUSIONS: Complete deletion of the HNF1B gene and 17q12 microdeletion syndrome
are actually the same genetic disorder. The neuropsychological phenotype of
patients appears less severe when 17q12 deletion is diagnosed secondary to kidney
rather than neuropsychological abnormalities. These data may influence antenatal 
counselling.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25324567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Development. 2013 Feb;140(4):873-85. doi: 10.1242/dev.086538.

HNF1B controls proximal-intermediate nephron segment identity in vertebrates by
regulating Notch signalling components and Irx1/2.

Heliot C(1), Desgrange A, Buisson I, Prunskaite-Hyyryläinen R, Shan J, Vainio S, 
Umbhauer M, Cereghini S.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm Unité 969, 9 quai St Bernard Bat. C, 75005 Paris, France.

The nephron is a highly specialised segmented structure that provides essential
filtration and resorption renal functions. It arises by formation of a polarised 
renal vesicle that differentiates into a comma-shaped body and then a
regionalised S-shaped body (SSB), with the main prospective segments mapped to
discrete domains. The regulatory circuits involved in initial nephron patterning 
are poorly understood. We report here that HNF1B, a transcription factor known to
be involved in ureteric bud branching and initiation of nephrogenesis, has an
additional role in segment fate acquisition. Hnf1b conditional inactivation in
murine nephron progenitors results in rudimentary nephrons comprising a
glomerulus connected to the collecting system by a short tubule displaying distal
fates. Renal vesicles develop and polarise normally but fail to progress to
correctly patterned SSBs. Major defects are evident at late SSBs, with altered
morphology, reduction of a proximo-medial subdomain and increased apoptosis. This
is preceded by strong downregulation of the Notch pathway components Lfng, Dll1
and Jag1 and the Irx1/2 factors, which are potential regulators of proximal and
Henle's loop segment fates. Moreover, HNF1B is recruited to the regulatory
sequences of most of these genes. Overexpression of a HNF1B dominant-negative
construct in Xenopus embryos causes downregulation specifically of proximal and
intermediate pronephric segment markers. These results show that HNF1B is
required for the acquisition of a proximo-intermediate segment fate in
vertebrates, thus uncovering a previously unappreciated function of a novel SSB
subcompartment in global nephron segmentation and further differentiation.

PMID: 23362348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 22;288(8):5353-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C112.428979. Epub 2013
Jan 10.

Derivation of human induced pluripotent stem cells from patients with maturity
onset diabetes of the young.

Teo AK(1), Windmueller R, Johansson BB, Dirice E, Njolstad PR, Tjora E, Raeder H,
Kulkarni RN.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Islet Cell and Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes Center,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is an autosomal dominant disease.
Despite extensive research, the mechanism by which a mutant MODY gene results in 
monogenic diabetes is not yet clear due to the inaccessibility of patient
samples. Induced pluripotency and directed differentiation toward the pancreatic 
lineage are now viable and attractive methods to uncover the molecular mechanisms
underlying MODY. Here we report, for the first time, the derivation of human
induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) from patients with five types of MODY:
MODY1 (HNF4A), MODY2 (GCK), MODY3 (HNF1A), MODY5 (HNF1B), and MODY8 (CEL) with a 
polycistronic lentiviral vector expressing a Cre-excisable human "stem cell
cassette" containing the four reprogramming factors OCT4, KLF4, SOX2, and CMYC.
These MODY-hiPSCs morphologically resemble human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs), 
express pluripotency markers OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, SSEA-4, and TRA-1-60, give rise
to derivatives of the three germ layers in a teratoma assay, and are
karyotypically normal. Overall, our MODY-hiPSCs serve as invaluable tools to
dissect the role of MODY genes in the development of pancreas and islet cells and
to evaluate their significance in regulating beta cell function. This knowledge
will aid future attempts aimed at deriving functional mature beta cells from
hPSCs.

PMCID: PMC3581399
PMID: 23306198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e52938. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0052938. Epub 2012 Dec 31.

Association of single nucleotide polymorphisms in TCF2 with type 2 diabetes
susceptibility in a Han Chinese population.

Zhang X(1), Qiao H, Zhao Y, Wang X, Sun H, Liu A, Xu L, Sun D, Jin Y, Yu Y, Meng 
X, Bai J, Chen F, Fu S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, China.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1ß (HNF1ß), a transcription factor encoded by the
transcription factor 2 gene (TCF2), plays a critical role in pancreatic cell
formation and glucose homeostasis. It has been suggested that single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) of TCF2 are associated with susceptibility to type 2
diabetes (T2D). However, published results are inconsistent and inclusive. To
further investigate the role of these common variants, we examined the
association of TCF2 polymorphisms with the risk of T2D in a Han population in
northeastern China. We genotyped five SNPs in 624 T2D patients and 630 healthy
controls by using a SNaPshot method, and evaluated the T2D risk conferred by
individual SNPs and haplotypes. In the single-locus analysis, we found that
rs752010, rs4430796 and rs7501939 showed allelic differences between T2D patients
and healthy controls, with an OR of 1.26 (95% CI 1.08-1.51, P = 0.003), an OR of 
1.23 (95% CI 1.06-1.55, P = 0.001) and an OR of 1.28 (95% CI 1.10-1.61, P =
0.001), respectively. Genotype association analysis of each locus also revealed
that the homozygous carriers of the at-risk allele had a significant increased
T2D risk compared to homozygous carriers of the other allele (OR 1.78, 95% CI
1.20-2.64 for rs752010; OR 1.82, 95% CI 1.24-2.67 for rs4430796; OR 1.95, 95% CI 
1.31-2.90 for rs7501939), even after Bonferroni correction for multiple
comparisons. Besides, the haplotype-based analysis demonstrated that AGT in block
rs752010-rs4430796-rs7501939 was associated with about 30% increase in T2D risk
(OR 1.31, 95% CI 1.09-1.57, P = 0.01). Our findings suggested that TCF2 variants 
may be involved in T2D risk in a Han population of northeastern China. Larger
studies with ethnically diverse populations are warranted to confirm the results 
reported in this investigation.

PMCID: PMC3534126
PMID: 23300827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Genome Res. 2013 Apr;23(4):665-78. doi: 10.1101/gr.143586.112. Epub 2012 Dec 26.

ATARiS: computational quantification of gene suppression phenotypes from
multisample RNAi screens.

Shao DD(1), Tsherniak A, Gopal S, Weir BA, Tamayo P, Stransky N, Schumacher SE,
Zack TI, Beroukhim R, Garraway LA, Margolin AA, Root DE, Hahn WC, Mesirov JP.

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute of Harvard and MIT, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02142, USA.

Genome-scale RNAi libraries enable the systematic interrogation of gene function.
However, the interpretation of RNAi screens is complicated by the observation
that RNAi reagents designed to suppress the mRNA transcripts of the same gene
often produce a spectrum of phenotypic outcomes due to differential on-target
gene suppression or perturbation of off-target transcripts. Here we present a
computational method, Analytic Technique for Assessment of RNAi by Similarity
(ATARiS), that takes advantage of patterns in RNAi data across multiple samples
in order to enrich for RNAi reagents whose phenotypic effects relate to
suppression of their intended targets. By summarizing only such reagent effects
for each gene, ATARiS produces quantitative, gene-level phenotype values, which
provide an intuitive measure of the effect of gene suppression in each sample.
This method is robust for data sets that contain as few as 10 samples and can be 
used to analyze screens of any number of targeted genes. We used this analytic
approach to interrogate RNAi data derived from screening more than 100 human
cancer cell lines and identified HNF1B as a transforming oncogene required for
the survival of cancer cells that harbor HNF1B amplifications. ATARiS is publicly
available at http://broadinstitute.org/ataris.

PMCID: PMC3613583
PMID: 23269662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Eur J Med Genet. 2013 Feb;56(2):93-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2012.12.002. Epub 2012 
Dec 20.

Could FISH on buccal smears become a new method of screening in children suspect 
of HNF1B anomaly?

Laffargue F(1), Bourthoumieu S, Bellanné-Chantelot C, Guigonis V, Yardin C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology, Cytology, Cellular Biology and Cytogenetics, Hôpital 
Universitaire de la Mère et de l'Enfant (HME), Limoges, France.

HNF1B gene anomalies include renal development defects associated with cysts and 
are well known by pediatric nephrologists that ask for molecular analysis of this
gene. Two types of genomic rearrangements are reported: mutation and more
frequently deletion. Using microsatellites or CGH array the size of the deletion 
was found to be at least of 1.2 Mb including 15 genes among which HNF1B, leading 
to the diagnosis of chromosomal microdeletion. Fluorescent In Situ Hybridization 
(FISH) is a simple routinely performed technique, considered as the referring
tool to diagnose microdeletion in genetic practice. We performed interphasic FISH
on buccal smears from 6 patients known to have HNF1B deletion to valid our
technique and to determine the size of the 17q12 deletion. All the patients were 
found to present a 17q12 microdeletion. Our results showed that FISH is a rapid, 
reliable and specific technique to diagnose 17q12 microdeletion and might be
performed as non invasive sampling procedure useful in pediatric practice. In
conclusion we propose to use interphasic FISH to screen pediatric patients
presenting with renal abnormalities possibly linked to HNF1B anomaly. Molecular
analysis and MLPA (Multiplex Ligand Probe Analysis) could be performed in cases
with normal interphasic FISH to detect a point mutation of the gene or more
rarely a single exon deletion.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23261960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Liver Transpl. 2013 Mar;19(3):336-45. doi: 10.1002/lt.23584.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1ß is a novel prognostic marker independent of the
Milan criteria in transplantable hepatocellular carcinoma: a retrospective
analysis based on tissue microarrays.

Shim JH(1), Lee HC, Han S, Kang HJ, Yu E, Lee SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology (Asan Liver Center), University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We retrospectively investigated the prognostic value of hepatocyte nuclear factor
1 (HNF1) proteins in 159 liver transplant patients with hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC), including 36 (22.6%) exceeding the Milan criteria. The expression of
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), HNF1a, and HNF1ß was examined with immunohistochemistry 
on duplicate tissue microarray slides containing HCC tumor explants. The times to
recurrence and cancer death were analyzed with a Cox regression model and were
compared according to the expression of markers of interest. We compared risk
predictions with area under the receiver operator curves (AUROCs) and C
statistics. AFP, HNF1a, and HNF1ß were positive in 22.6%, 46.5%, and 61.0% of the
tumor immunoprofiles, respectively. Although several variables were associated
with the times to recurrence and cancer death in univariate Cox analyses, only
AFP expression for the time to recurrence and the Milan criteria and HNF1ß
expression for the times to recurrence and cancer death remained significant
after multivariate adjustments. The expression of HNF1ß (but not HNF1a) was
related to a serum AFP level = 200 ng/mL, microvascular invasion, and AFP
expression (P < 0.05 for all). A subgroup analysis showed that in the group
meeting the Milan criteria, recurrence and cancer death rates at 10 years in the 
HNF1ß-negative patients were approximately one-tenth of those in the
HNF1ß-positive patients, but the difference was not significant in the group
exceeding the Milan criteria. The addition of HNF1ß expression to the Milan
criteria increased the C statistics and AUROCs for both recurrence and mortality 
(P < 0.05 for all). In conclusion, the immunohistological detection of HNF1ß
predicts recurrence and HCC-specific death after transplantation and provides an 
additive benefit in comparison with the Milan selection criteria on their own.

Copyright © 2013 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 23203386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Am J Epidemiol. 2012 Dec 15;176(12):1121-9. doi: 10.1093/aje/kws191. Epub 2012
Nov 28.

Association of type 2 diabetes susceptibility variants with advanced prostate
cancer risk in the Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort Consortium.

Machiela MJ(1), Lindström S, Allen NE, Haiman CA, Albanes D, Barricarte A, Berndt
SI, Bueno-de-Mesquita HB, Chanock S, Gaziano JM, Gapstur SM, Giovannucci E,
Henderson BE, Jacobs EJ, Kolonel LN, Krogh V, Ma J, Stampfer MJ, Stevens VL,
Stram DO, Tjønneland A, Travis R, Willett WC, Hunter DJ, Le Marchand L, Kraft P.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Molecular and Genetic Epidemiology, Department of Epidemiology,
Harvard School of Public Health, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Observational studies have found an inverse association between type 2 diabetes
(T2D) and prostate cancer (PCa), and genome-wide association studies have found
common variants near 3 loci associated with both diseases. The authors examined
whether a genetic background that favors T2D is associated with risk of advanced 
PCa. Data from the National Cancer Institute's Breast and Prostate Cancer Cohort 
Consortium, a genome-wide association study of 2,782 advanced PCa cases and 4,458
controls, were used to evaluate whether individual single nucleotide
polymorphisms or aggregations of these 36 T2D susceptibility loci are associated 
with PCa. Ten T2D markers near 9 loci (NOTCH2, ADCY5, JAZF1, CDKN2A/B, TCF7L2,
KCNQ1, MTNR1B, FTO, and HNF1B) were nominally associated with PCa (P < 0.05); the
association for single nucleotide polymorphism rs757210 at the HNF1B locus was
significant when multiple comparisons were accounted for (adjusted P = 0.001).
Genetic risk scores weighted by the T2D log odds ratio and multilocus kernel
tests also indicated a significant relation between T2D variants and PCa risk. A 
mediation analysis of 9,065 PCa cases and 9,526 controls failed to produce
evidence that diabetes mediates the association of the HNF1B locus with PCa risk.
These data suggest a shared genetic component between T2D and PCa and add to the 
evidence for an interrelation between these diseases.

PMCID: PMC3571230
PMID: 23193118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Dec 7;91(6):987-97. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.10.007. Epub
2012 Nov 15.

Copy-number disorders are a common cause of congenital kidney malformations.

Sanna-Cherchi S(1), Kiryluk K, Burgess KE, Bodria M, Sampson MG, Hadley D, Nees
SN, Verbitsky M, Perry BJ, Sterken R, Lozanovski VJ, Materna-Kiryluk A,
Barlassina C, Kini A, Corbani V, Carrea A, Somenzi D, Murtas C,
Ristoska-Bojkovska N, Izzi C, Bianco B, Zaniew M, Flogelova H, Weng PL, Kacak N, 
Giberti S, Gigante M, Arapovic A, Drnasin K, Caridi G, Curioni S, Allegri F,
Ammenti A, Ferretti S, Goj V, Bernardo L, Jobanputra V, Chung WK, Lifton RP,
Sanders S, State M, Clark LN, Saraga M, Padmanabhan S, Dominiczak AF, Foroud T,
Gesualdo L, Gucev Z, Allegri L, Latos-Bielenska A, Cusi D, Scolari F, Tasic V,
Hakonarson H, Ghiggeri GM, Gharavi AG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Columbia University, New York, NY 10023, USA.

We examined the burden of large, rare, copy-number variants (CNVs) in 192
individuals with renal hypodysplasia (RHD) and replicated findings in 330 RHD
cases from two independent cohorts. CNV distribution was significantly skewed
toward larger gene-disrupting events in RHD cases compared to 4,733
ethnicity-matched controls (p = 4.8 × 10(-11)). This excess was attributable to
known and novel (i.e., not present in any database or in the literature) genomic 
disorders. All together, 55/522 (10.5%) RHD cases harbored 34 distinct known
genomic disorders, which were detected in only 0.2% of 13,839 population controls
(p = 1.2 × 10(-58)). Another 32 (6.1%) RHD cases harbored large gene-disrupting
CNVs that were absent from or extremely rare in the 13,839 population controls,
identifying 38 potential novel or rare genomic disorders for this trait.
Deletions at the HNF1B locus and the DiGeorge/velocardiofacial locus were most
frequent. However, the majority of disorders were detected in a single
individual. Genomic disorders were detected in 22.5% of individuals with multiple
malformations and 14.5% of individuals with isolated urinary-tract defects; 14
individuals harbored two or more diagnostic or rare CNVs. Strikingly, the
majority of the known CNV disorders detected in the RHD cohort have previous
associations with developmental delay or neuropsychiatric diseases. Up to 16.6%
of individuals with kidney malformations had a molecular diagnosis attributable
to a copy-number disorder, suggesting kidney malformations as a sentinel
manifestation of pathogenic genomic imbalances. A search for pathogenic CNVs
should be considered in this population for the diagnosis of their specific
genomic disorders and for the evaluation of the potential for developmental
delay.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3516596
PMID: 23159250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Duodecim. 2012;128(19):1999-2006.

[Cystic kidney disease and diabetes--an underdiagnosed monogenic developmental
disorder].

[Article in Finnish]

Merenmies J(1), Ala-Houhala M, Tuomi T.

Author information: 
(1)Helsingin yliopisto.

Heterozygous mutations in the TCF2 gene encoding the transcription factor HNF-11 
cause a dominantly inherited developmental disorder that may be associated with
various dysplastic and cystic lesions of the kidneys and renal insufficiency,
disorder of pancreatic development and insulin-deficient MODY diabetes, aberrant 
hepatic enzyme levels, gout and genital anomalies. Symptoms and findings vary in 
their degree of severity. When an isolated abnormality is detected, recognition
of the syndrome is essential in order to diagnose the other organ manifestations.
Since the mid-2000's, 10 to 20 patients have been diagnosed in Finland.

PMID: 23155751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Hepatology. 2013 Apr;57(4):1632-43. doi: 10.1002/hep.26131. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Preexisting epithelial diversity in normal human livers: a tissue-tethered
cytometric analysis in portal/periportal epithelial cells.

Isse K(1), Lesniak A, Grama K, Maier J, Specht S, Castillo-Rama M, Lunz J, Roysam
B, Michalopoulos G, Demetris AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
PA 15213, USA.

Routine light microscopy identifies two distinct epithelial cell populations in
normal human livers: hepatocytes and biliary epithelial cells (BECs).
Considerable epithelial diversity, however, arises during disease states when a
variety of hepatocyte-BEC hybrid cells appear. This has been attributed to
activation and differentiation of putative hepatic progenitor cells (HPC)
residing in the canals of Hering and/or metaplasia of preexisting mature
epithelial cells. A novel analytic approach consisting of multiplex labeling,
high-resolution whole-slide imaging (WSI), and automated image analysis was used 
to determine if more complex epithelial cell phenotypes preexist in normal adult 
human livers, which might provide an alternative explanation for disease-induced 
epithelial diversity. "Virtually digested" WSI enabled quantitative cytometric
analyses of individual cells displayed in a variety of formats (e.g.,
scatterplots) while still tethered to the WSI and tissue structure. We employed
biomarkers specifically associated with mature epithelial forms (HNF4a for
hepatocytes, CK19 and HNF1ß for BEC) and explored for the presence of cells with 
hybrid biomarker phenotypes. The results showed abundant hybrid cells in portal
bile duct BEC, canals of Hering, and immediate periportal hepatocytes. These
bipotential cells likely serve as a reservoir for the epithelial diversity of
ductular reactions, appearance of hepatocytes in bile ducts, and the rapid and
fluid transition of BEC to hepatocytes, and vice versa.CONCLUSION: Novel imaging 
and computational tools enable increased information extraction from tissue
samples and quantify the considerable preexistent hybrid epithelial diversity in 
normal human liver. This computationally enabled tissue analysis approach offers 
much broader potential beyond the results presented here.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3612393
PMID: 23150208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Hum Genet. 2013 Jan;58(1):51-3. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.118. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

HOX gene methylation status analysis in patients with hereditary breast cancer.

Pilato B(1), Pinto R, De Summa S, Lambo R, Paradiso A, Tommasi S.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Research Centre, Istituto Tumori Giovanni Paolo II, Bari,
Italy.

Cancer development is related not only to genetic alterations but also to
aberrant epigenetic changes that could lead to heritable gene patterns critical
for neoplastic initiation and progression. Knowledge of epigenetic regulation in 
cancer cells is useful for both the understanding of carcinogenesis and for the
possibility of using epigenetic drugs. HOX genes deregulation have a crucial role
in oncogenesis process and tumor suppression. In this report, the methylation of 
HOXA1, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXB13, HNF1B, OTX1, TLX1 genes have been analyzed in
patients with hereditary breast cancer. This is the first study analyzing BRCA
mutational status of patients with respect to methylation of HOX genes. HOXA10
has been found to be methylated in all patients analyzed but never in healthy
subjects. With respect to clinical pathological information, hypermethylation of 
all studied genes, with the exception of OTX1, was significantly associated with 
absence of HER2 neu expression (P<0.05). Moreover, hypermethylation of HOXB13,
HOXA10 and HOXA1 was associated with a high proliferation index (Mib1=10%,
P<0.05) and hypermethylation of HOXB13 and HOXA10 also with high expression of
estrogen and progesterone receptors. These preliminary data suggest a possible
involvement of HOX genes in familial breast cancer as marker helpful to identify 
high-risk patients.

PMID: 23051705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Curr Diab Rep. 2012 Dec;12(6):686-96. doi: 10.1007/s11892-012-0326-z.

Genetics of type 2 diabetes in East Asian populations.

Cho YS(1), Lee JY, Park KS, Nho CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Hallym University, Gangwon-do, Chuncheon,
200-702, Republic of Korea. yooncho33@hallym.ac.kr

Because type 2 diabetes (T2D) is highly familial, there has been a concentrated
effort to uncover the genetic basis of T2D worldwide over the last decade. In
East Asians, T2D is experiencing a rapidly rising prevalence that is
characterized by a relatively lower body mass index, as compared with that in
Europeans. To date, at least 15 convincing T2D loci have been identified from
large-scale genome-wide association studies and meta-analyses in East Asians.
Many of these are likely responsible for pancreatic ß cell function, as indicated
in studies from Europeans. Many T2D loci have been replicated across the ethnic
groups. There are, however, substantial interethnic differences in frequency and 
effect size of these risk alleles. Despite accumulating genetic information on
T2D, there are still limitations in our ability to explain the rapidly rising
prevalence and lean phenotype of disease observed in East Asians, suggesting that
more extensive work using diverse research strategies is needed in the future.

PMID: 22993124  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Diabetes. 2013 Jan;62(1):291-8. doi: 10.2337/db12-0454. Epub 2012 Sep 6.

A genome-wide association study identifies GRK5 and RASGRP1 as type 2 diabetes
loci in Chinese Hans.

Li H(1), Gan W, Lu L, Dong X, Han X, Hu C, Yang Z, Sun L, Bao W, Li P, He M, Sun 
L, Wang Y, Zhu J, Ning Q, Tang Y, Zhang R, Wen J, Wang D, Zhu X, Guo K, Zuo X,
Guo X, Yang H, Zhou X; DIAGRAM Consortium; AGEN-T2D Consortium, Zhang X, Qi L,
Loos RJ, Hu FB, Wu T, Liu Y, Liu L, Yang Z, Hu R, Jia W, Ji L, Li Y, Lin X.

Collaborators: Voight BF, Scott LJ, Steinthorsdottir V, Morris AP, Dina C, Welch 
RP, Zeggini E, Huth C, Aulchenko YS, Thorleifsson G, McCulloch LJ, Ferreira T,
Grallert H, Amin N, Wu G, Willer CJ, Raychaudhuri S, McCarroll SA, Langenberg C, 
Hofmann OM, Dupuis J, Qi L, Segrè AV, van Hoek M, Navarro P, Ardlie K, Balkau B, 
Benediktsson R, Bennett AJ, Blagieva R, Boerwinkle E, Bonnycastle LL, Boström KB,
Bravenboer B, Bumpstead S, Burtt NP, Charpentier G, Chines PS, Cornelis M, Couper
DJ, Crawford G, Doney AS, Elliott KS, Elliott AL, Erdos MR, Fox CS, Franklin CS, 
Ganser M, Gieger C, Grarup N, Green T, Griffin S, Groves CJ, Guiducci C, Hadjadj 
S, Hassanali N, Herder C, Isomaa B, Jackson AU, Johnson PR, Jørgensen T, Kao WH, 
Klopp N, Kong A, Kraft P, Kuusisto J, Lauritzen T, Li M, Lieverse A, Lindgren CM,
Lyssenko V, Marre M, Meitinger T, Midthjell K, Morken MA, Narisu N, Nilsson P,
Owen KR, Payne F, Perry JR, Petersen AK, Platou C, Proença C, Prokopenko I,
Rathmann W, Rayner NW, Robertson NR, Rocheleau G, Roden M, Sampson MJ, Saxena R, 
Shields BM, Shrader P, Sigurdsson G, Sparsø T, Strassburger K, Stringham HM, Sun 
Q, Swift AJ, Thorand B, Tichet J, Tuomi T, van Dam RM, van Haeften TW, van Herpt 
T, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Walters GB, Weedon MN, Wijmenga C, Witteman J,
Bergman RN, Cauchi S, Collins FS, Gloyn AL, Gyllensten U, Hansen T, Hide WA,
Hitman GA, Hofman A, Hunter DJ, Hveem K, Laakso M, Mohlke KL, Morris AD, Palmer
CN, Pramstaller PP, Rudan I, Sijbrands E, Stein LD, Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden A,
Walker M, Wareham NJ, Watanabe RM, Abecasis GR, Boehm BO, Campbell H, Daly MJ,
Hattersley AT, Hu FB, Meigs JB, Pankow JS, Pedersen O, Wichmann H-, Barroso I,
Florez JC, Frayling TM, Groop L, Sladek R, Thorsteinsdottir U, Wilson JF, Illig
T, Froguel P, van Duijn CM, Stefansson K, Altshuler D, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI,
Cho YS, Chen CH, Hu C, Long J, Ong RT, Sim X, Takeuchi F, Wu Y, Go MJ, Yamauchi
T, Chang YC, Kwak SH, Ma RC, Yamamoto K, Adair LS, Aung T, Cai Q, Chang LC, Chen 
YT, Gao Y, Hu FB, Kim HL, Kim S, Kim YJ, Lee JJ, Lee NR, Li Y, Liu JJ, Lu W,
Nakamura J, Nakashima E, Ng DP, Tay WT, Tsai FJ, Wong TY, Yokota M, Zheng W,
Zhang R, Wang C, So WY, Ohnaka K, Ikegami H, Hara K, Cho YM, Cho NH, Chang TJ,
Bao Y, Takayanagi R, Park KS, Jia W, Chuang LM, Chan JC, Maeda S, Kadowaki T, Lee
JY, Wu JY, Teo YY, Tai ES, Shu XO, Mohlke KL, Kato N, Han BG, Seielstad M.

Substantial progress has been made in identification of type 2 diabetes (T2D)
risk loci in the past few years, but our understanding of the genetic basis of
T2D in ethnically diverse populations remains limited. We performed a genome-wide
association study and a replication study in Chinese Hans comprising 8,569 T2D
case subjects and 8,923 control subjects in total, from which 10 single
nucleotide polymorphisms were selected for further follow-up in a de novo
replication sample of 3,410 T2D case and 3,412 control subjects and an in silico 
replication sample of 6,952 T2D case and 11,865 control subjects. Besides
confirming seven established T2D loci (CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, KCNQ1, CDC123, GLIS3,
HNF1B, and DUSP9) at genome-wide significance, we identified two novel T2D loci, 
including G-protein-coupled receptor kinase 5 (GRK5) (rs10886471: P = 7.1 ×
10(-9)) and RASGRP1 (rs7403531: P = 3.9 × 10(-9)), of which the association
signal at GRK5 seems to be specific to East Asians. In nondiabetic individuals,
the T2D risk-increasing allele of RASGRP1-rs7403531 was also associated with
higher HbA(1c) and lower homeostasis model assessment of ß-cell function (P =
0.03 and 0.0209, respectively), whereas the T2D risk-increasing allele of
GRK5-rs10886471 was also associated with higher fasting insulin (P = 0.0169) but 
not with fasting glucose. Our findings not only provide new insights into the
pathophysiology of T2D, but may also shed light on the ethnic differences in T2D 
susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC3526061
PMID: 22961080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Sci China Life Sci. 2012 Aug;55(8):699-708. doi: 10.1007/s11427-012-4365-0. Epub 
2012 Aug 30.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the human corticosteroid-binding globulin
promoter alter transcriptional activity.

Li Y(1), Wu L, Lei J, Zhu C, Wang H, Yu X, Lin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Basic Medical
Science, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 150081, China.

Erratum in
    Sci China Life Sci. 2012 Sep;55(9):840.

Corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG) is a high-affinity plasma protein that
transports glucocorticoids and progesterone. Others and we have reported
non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that influence CBG
production or steroid-binding activity. However, no promoter polymorphisms
affecting the transcription of human CBG gene (Cbg) have been reported. In the
present study we investigated function implications of six promoter SNPs,
including -26 C/G, -54 C/T, -144 G/C, -161 A/G, -205 C/A, and -443/-444 AG/-,
five of which are located within the first 205 base pairs of 5'-flanking region
and close to the highly conserved footprinted elements, TATA-box, or CCAAT-box.
Luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that basal activity of the promoter
carrying -54 T or -161 G was significantly enhanced. The first three
polymorphisms, -26 C/G, -54 C/T, and -144 G/C located close to the putative
hepatic nuclear factor (HNF) 1 binding elements, altered the transactivation
effect of HNF1ß. We also found a negative promoter response to
dexamethasone-activated glucocorticoid receptor (GR) a, although none of the SNPs
affected its transrepression function. Our results suggest that human Cbg -26
C/G, -54 C/T, -144 G/C, and -161 A/G promoter polymorphisms alter transcriptional
activity, and further studies are awaited to explore their association with
physiological and pathological conditions.

PMID: 22932886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Histopathology. 2012 Nov;61(5):760-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2012.04267.x. Epub
2012 Jul 2.

Utility of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1ß as a diagnostic marker in ovarian
carcinomas with clear cells.

Kao YC(1), Lin MC, Lin WC, Jeng YM, Mao TL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei,
Taiwan.

AIMS: Overexpression of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1ß (HNF-1ß) has been found in
ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC) but not in other types of ovarian carcinoma. 
The aim of this study was to clarify whether the overexpression of HNF-1ß is
specific for OCCC, and does not occur in ovarian carcinoma with clear cell
change.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Immunohistochemistry was performed on 178 ovarian carcinomas
with clear cells (80 OCCCs, 60 high-grade serous, 25 endometrioid, and 13 mixed
endometrioid and clear cell), 22 ovarian high-grade serous carcinomas without
clear cells, 41 renal cell carcinomas (RCCs) and 20 hepatocellular carcinomas
(HCCs) with clear cytoplasm. Results were evaluated using an H-score (percentage 
× intensity). Most OCCCs were diffusely and strongly positive (mean H-score
15.1). High-grade serous carcinoma and endometrioid carcinoma with clear cells
were usually negative or focally and weakly positive (mean H-scores 1.5 and 1.7, 
respectively). High-grade serous carcinoma without clear cells had a mean H-score
of 0.77. The mean H-scores of the endometrioid and clear cell components in mixed
endometrioid and clear cell carcinoma were 6.2 and 15.7, respectively. HNF-1ß was
expressed in 95.1% of RCCs and in 30% of HCCs.
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of ovarian carcinomas with clear cells can be made
with greater accuracy by using the intensity and extent of immunoreactivity for
HNF-1ß.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22747504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Hormones (Athens). 2013 Jul-Sep;12(3):466-9.

Family history in the diagnosis of monogenic diabetes "leads and misleads".

Colom C(1), Oriola J, Martínez S, Blanco-Vaca F, Casamitjana R, Corcoy R.

Author information: 
(1)Servei d' Endocrinologia i Nutrici<U+03CC>, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau,
Barcelona, Spain.

Always granting that de novo mutations are possible, family history and
biological characteristics are nonetheless crucial for the diagnosis of monogenic
diabetes. We report here the case of two patients with monogenic diabetes in
which the initial family history misled the diagnostic work-up and did not
support the diagnosis. Family history details changed substantially after the
molecular diagnosis was established.

PMID: 24121389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Jul 10;109(28):11252-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1200853109. Epub 2012 Jun 22.

Genetic and functional analyses implicate the NUDT11, HNF1B, and SLC22A3 genes in
prostate cancer pathogenesis.

Grisanzio C(1), Werner L, Takeda D, Awoyemi BC, Pomerantz MM, Yamada H,
Sooriakumaran P, Robinson BD, Leung R, Schinzel AC, Mills I, Ross-Adams H, Neal
DE, Kido M, Yamamoto T, Petrozziello G, Stack EC, Lis R, Kantoff PW, Loda M,
Sartor O, Egawa S, Tewari AK, Hahn WC, Freedman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

One of the central goals of human genetics is to discover the genes and pathways 
driving human traits. To date, most of the common risk alleles discovered through
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) map to nonprotein-coding regions. Because 
of our relatively poorer understanding of this part of the genome, the functional
consequences of trait-associated variants pose a considerable challenge. To
identify the genes through which risk loci act, we hypothesized that the risk
variants are regulatory elements. For each of 12 known risk polymorphisms, we
evaluated the correlation between risk allele status and transcript abundance for
all annotated protein-coding transcripts within a 1-Mb interval. A total of 103
transcripts were evaluated in 662 prostate tissue samples [normal (n = 407) and
tumor (n = 255)] from 483 individuals [European Americans (n = 233), Japanese (n 
= 127), and African Americans (n = 123)]. In a pooled analysis, 4 of the 12 risk 
variants were strongly associated with five transcripts (NUDT11, MSMB, NCOA4,
SLC22A3, and HNF1B) in histologically normal tissue (P = 0.001). Although
associations were also observed in tumor tissue, they tended to be more
attenuated. Previously, we showed that MSMB and NCOA4 participate in prostate
cancer pathogenesis. Suppressing the expression of NUDT11, SLC22A3, and HNF1B
influences cellular phenotypes associated with tumor-related properties in
prostate cancer cells. Taken together, the data suggest that these transcripts
contribute to prostate cancer pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3396469
PMID: 22730461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Hepatology. 2012 Sep;56(3):1178-81. doi: 10.1002/hep.25876. Epub 2012 Jul 19.

HNF1B deficiency causes ciliary defects in human cholangiocytes.

Roelandt P(1), Antoniou A, Libbrecht L, Van Steenbergen W, Laleman W, Verslype C,
Van der Merwe S, Nevens F, De Vos R, Fischer E, Pontoglio M, Lemaigre F, Cassiman
D.

Author information: 
(1)Hepatology Department, University Hospitals Leuven, Belgium.

Heterozygous deletion or mutation in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 homeobox
B/transcription factor 2 (HNF1B/TCF2) causes renal cyst and diabetes syndrome
(OMIM #137920). Mice with homozygous liver-specific deletion of Hnf1ß revealed
that a complete lack of this factor leads to ductopenia and bile duct dysplasia, 
in addition to mild hepatocyte defects. However, little is known about the
hepatic consequences of deficient HNF1B function in humans. Three patients with
heterozygous HNF1B deficiency were found to have normal bile duct formation on
radiology and routine liver pathology. Electron microscopy revealed a paucity or 
absence of normal primary cilia. Therefore, heterozygous HNF1B deficiency is
associated with ciliary anomalies in cholangiocytes, and this may cause
cholestasis.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 22706971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e38050. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038050. Epub 2012 May 25.

Exome sequencing and genetic testing for MODY.

Johansson S(1), Irgens H, Chudasama KK, Molnes J, Aerts J, Roque FS, Jonassen I, 
Levy S, Lima K, Knappskog PM, Bell GI, Molven A, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

CONTEXT: Genetic testing for monogenic diabetes is important for patient care.
Given the extensive genetic and clinical heterogeneity of diabetes, exome
sequencing might provide additional diagnostic potential when standard Sanger
sequencing-based diagnostics is inconclusive.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to examine the performance of exome
sequencing for a molecular diagnosis of MODY in patients who have undergone
conventional diagnostic sequencing of candidate genes with negative results.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We performed exome enrichment followed by
high-throughput sequencing in nine patients with suspected MODY. They were Sanger
sequencing-negative for mutations in the HNF1A, HNF4A, GCK, HNF1B and INS genes. 
We excluded common, non-coding and synonymous gene variants, and performed
in-depth analysis on filtered sequence variants in a pre-defined set of 111 genes
implicated in glucose metabolism.
RESULTS: On average, we obtained 45 X median coverage of the entire targeted
exome and found 199 rare coding variants per individual. We identified 0-4 rare
non-synonymous and nonsense variants per individual in our a priori list of 111
candidate genes. Three of the variants were considered pathogenic (in ABCC8,
HNF4A and PPARG, respectively), thus exome sequencing led to a genetic diagnosis 
in at least three of the nine patients. Approximately 91% of known heterozygous
SNPs in the target exomes were detected, but we also found low coverage in some
key diabetes genes using our current exome sequencing approach. Novel variants in
the genes ARAP1, GLIS3, MADD, NOTCH2 and WFS1 need further investigation to
reveal their possible role in diabetes.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that exome sequencing can improve molecular
diagnostics of MODY when used as a complement to Sanger sequencing. However,
improvements will be needed, especially concerning coverage, before the full
potential of exome sequencing can be realized.

PMCID: PMC3360646
PMID: 22662265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes. 2012;5:101-8. doi: 10.2147/DMSO.S23353. Epub 2012 May 
1.

Clinical features and treatment of maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY).

Gardner DS(1), Tai ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a heterogeneous group of disorders
that result in ß-cell dysfunction. It is rare, accounting for just 1%-2% of all
diabetes. It is often misdiagnosed as type 1 or type 2 diabetes, as it is often
difficult to distinguish MODY from these two forms. However, diagnosis allows
appropriate individualized care, depending on the genetic etiology, and allows
prognostication in family members. In this review, we discuss features of the
common causes of MODY, as well as the treatment and diagnosis of MODY.

PMCID: PMC3363133
PMID: 22654519  [PubMed]


141. J Nephrol. 2013 Jan-Feb;26(1):207-12. doi: 10.5301/jn.5000126.

HNF-1ß mutation affects PKD2 and SOCS3 expression causing renal cysts and
diabetes in MODY5 kindred.

Mancusi S(1), La Manna A, Bellini G, Scianguetta S, Roberti D, Casale M, Rossi F,
Della Ragione F, Perrotta S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Second University of Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Maturity onset diabetes of young (MODY) type 5 is a form of
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus associated with renal cysts. It is an
autosomal dominant disorder caused by mutations in the gene encoding hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1ß (HNF-1ß).
METHODS: We performed molecular screening of HNF-1ß in a 13-year-old patient and 
his affected father, and analyzed polycystic kidney disease 2 (PKD2) gene and
suppressor of cytokine signaling 3 (SOCS3) expression in lymphoblastoid cell
lines and lymphocytes from both patients.
RESULTS: We found a novel HNF-1ß frameshift mutation (c.C1304del) that results in
a truncated protein (p.I434IfsX1). The genetic change is localized in the
transactivated protein domain.
CONCLUSIONS: We demonstrated that this novel HNF-1ß mutation strongly influences 
the expression of both PKD2, responsible for the formation of the renal cysts,
and SOCS3, which is associated with early diabetes onset.

PMID: 22641569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Diabet Med. 2013 Jan;30(1):114-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2012.03709.x.

HNF1B deletions in patients with young-onset diabetes but no known renal disease.

Edghill EL(1), Stals K, Oram RA, Shepherd MH, Hattersley AT, Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School,
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

AIMS: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1ß (HNF1B) mutations cause a syndrome of renal
cysts and diabetes, with whole gene deletions accounting for approximately 50% of
cases. The severity of the renal phenotype is variable, from enlarged cystic
kidneys incompatible with life to normal renal development and function. We
investigated the prevalence of HNF1B deletions in patients with diabetes but no
known renal disease.
METHODS: We tested 461 patients with familial diabetes diagnosed before 45 years,
including 258 probands who met clinical criteria for maturity-onset diabetes of
the young (two generations affected and at least one family member diagnosed
under 25 years). A fluorescent polymerase chain reaction assay was used to
analyse two intragenic polymorphic HNF1B markers and identify heterozygous
patients who therefore did not have whole gene deletions. Those patients
homozygous for both markers were then tested for an HNF1B deletion using
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification.
RESULTS: Heterozygous HNF1B intragenic polymorphisms were identified in 337/461
subjects. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis showed an
HNF1B gene deletion in three of the remaining 124 probands, all of whom met the
criteria for maturity-onset diabetes of the young. Testing of their relatives
identified three additional deletion carriers and ultrasound scanning showed
renal developmental abnormalities in three of these six patients.
CONCLUSIONS: We estimate that HNF1B mutations account for < 1% of cases of
maturity-onset diabetes of the young. Although HNF1B mutations are a rare cause
of diabetes in the absence of known renal disease, a genetic diagnosis of renal
cysts and diabetes syndrome is important as it raises the possibility of
subclinical renal disease and the 50% risk of renal cysts and diabetes syndrome
in the patient's offspring.

© 2012 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2012 Diabetes UK.

PMID: 22587559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 8;109(19):7356-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1203605109. Epub 2012 Apr 23.

Mind bomb 1 is required for pancreatic ß-cell formation.

Horn S(1), Kobberup S, Jørgensen MC, Kalisz M, Klein T, Kageyama R, Gegg M,
Lickert H, Lindner J, Magnuson MA, Kong YY, Serup P, Ahnfelt-Rønne J, Jensen JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Hagedorn Research Institute, DK-2820
Gentofte, Denmark.

During early pancreatic development, Notch signaling represses differentiation of
endocrine cells and promotes proliferation of Nkx6-1(+)Ptf1a(+) multipotent
progenitor cells (MPCs). Later, antagonistic interactions between Nkx6
transcription factors and Ptf1a function to segregate MPCs into distal
Nkx6-1(-)Ptf1a(+) acinar progenitors and proximal Nkx6-1(+)Ptf1a(-) duct and
ß-cell progenitors. Distal cells are initially multipotent, but evolve into
unipotent, acinar cell progenitors. Conversely, proximal cells are bipotent and
give rise to duct cells and late-born endocrine cells, including the insulin
producing ß-cells. However, signals that regulate proximodistal (P-D) patterning 
and thus formation of ß-cell progenitors are unknown. Here we show that Mind bomb
1 (Mib1) is required for correct P-D patterning of the developing pancreas and
ß-cell formation. We found that endoderm-specific inactivation of Mib1 caused a
loss of Nkx6-1(+)Ptf1a(-) and Hnf1ß(+) cells and a corresponding loss of
Neurog3(+) endocrine progenitors and ß-cells. An accompanying increase in
Nkx6-1(-)Ptf1a(+) and amylase(+) cells, occupying the proximal domain, suggests
that proximal cells adopt a distal fate in the absence of Mib1 activity. Impeding
Notch-mediated transcriptional activation by conditional expression of dominant
negative Mastermind-like 1 (Maml1) resulted in a similarly distorted P-D
patterning and suppressed ß-cell formation, as did conditional inactivation of
the Notch target gene Hes1. Our results reveal iterative use of Notch in
pancreatic development to ensure correct P-D patterning and adequate ß-cell
formation.

PMCID: PMC3358874
PMID: 22529374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Syndromol. 2012 Jan;2(2):72-75. Epub 2011 Dec 31.

Recurrent Transmission of a 17q12 Microdeletion and a Variable Clinical Spectrum.

George AM(1), Love DR, Hayes I, Tsang B.

Author information: 
(1)Diagnostic Genetics, LabPlus, Auckland, New Zealand.

The relatively rare proximal microdeletion of 17q12 (including deletion of the
HNF1B gene) is associated with the renal cysts and diabetes syndrome. Recent
reports have suggested that there may also be an association between this
microdeletion and learning difficulties/autism. This case report describes one of
only a few reported families segregating the 17q12 microdeletion, but which
highlights the nonpenetrance and variable expressivity of multiple features of
this condition.

PMCID: PMC3326281
PMID: 22511894  [PubMed]


145. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jul 15;21(14):3143-55. doi: 10.1093/hmg/dds141. Epub 2012 Apr
17.

Hnf1b and Pax2 cooperate to control different pathways in kidney and ureter
morphogenesis.

Paces-Fessy M(1), Fabre M, Lesaulnier C, Cereghini S.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm Unité 969, 9 quai St. Bernard Bât. C, 75005 Paris, France.

The transcription factors HNF1B and Pax2, co-expressed in the Wolffian duct and
ureteric bud epithelia, play essential roles during the early steps of mouse
kidney development. In humans, heterozygous mutations in these genes display a
number of common kidney phenotypes, including hypoplasia and multicystic
hypoplastic kidneys. Moreover, a high prevalence of mutations either in HNF1B or 
PAX2 has been observed in children with renal hypodysplasia. To gain a better
understanding of Hnf1b and Pax2 interactions in vivo, we generated compound
heterozygous mice for Hnf1b and Pax2 null alleles. We show here that compound
heterozygous mutants display phenotypes similar to severe congenital anomalies of
the kidney and the urinary tract (CAKUT), including strong hypoplasia of the
kidneys, caudal ectopic aborted ureter buds, duplex kidneys, megaureters and
hydronephrosis. At a molecular level, compound mutants show a delay in nephron
segment and medullar interstitial differentiation, increased apoptosis and a
transient decrease in Lim1 and Wnt4 expression. We also observe a perturbation of
smooth muscle differentiation around the ureter associated with a local
down-regulation in transcript levels of Bmp4 and Tbx18, two key regulators
involved in ureter smooth muscle formation, thus explaining, at least in part,
megaureters. These results together uncover a novel role of Hnf1b as a modifier
of the Pax2 haplo-insufficient phenotype and show that these two transcription
factors operate in common pathways governing both kidney morphogenesis and ureter
differentiation. This mouse model should provide new insights into the pathogenic
mechanisms of human CAKUT, the most frequent developmental defect identified in
newborns.

PMID: 22511595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Jun;36(6):799-807. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31824a72c6.

Mesonephric adenocarcinomas of the uterine cervix and corpus: HPV-negative
neoplasms that are commonly PAX8, CA125, and HMGA2 positive and that may be
immunoreactive with TTF1 and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-ß.

Kenny SL(1), McBride HA, Jamison J, McCluggage WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Belfast,
Northern Ireland.

Mesonephric adenocarcinomas are rare neoplasms that most commonly arise in the
uterine cervix and exceptionally rarely in the uterine corpus. Although the
morphologic features of these neoplasms are well described, there has been
relatively limited investigation of the immunoprofile. We report a series of 8
mesonephric adenocarcinomas arising in the uterine cervix (7 cases) and corpus (1
case) and undertake a comprehensive immunohistochemical analysis. This includes
markers that have not been investigated previously in mesonephric adenocarcinomas
but that are commonly used in gynecologic pathology and may be undertaken when
other, mainly Mullerian, adenocarcinomas are considered in the differential
diagnosis. Linear array human papillomavirus (HPV) genotyping was also performed.
Our results broadly confirm the immunohistochemical profile demonstrated in
previous studies with the majority of mesonephric adenocarcinomas staining
positively with CD10 (6 of 8), epithelial membrane antigen (8 of 8), vimentin (8 
of 8), and calretinin (7 of 8). Estrogen receptor was positive in 2,
carcinoembryonic antigen in 3, and inhibin in 4 cases. p16 was positive in 5
cases (1 diffuse and strong), despite all being HPV negative (in 1 case, there
was insufficient DNA for HPV analysis). Novel findings in our study were the
demonstration of nuclear positivity with PAX8 and HMGA2 in 7 cases, CA125
immunoreactivity in all 8 cases, and TTF1 and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-ß
staining in 3 cases. As PAX8, CA125, HMGA2, and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-ß are
commonly positive in a variety of Mullerian adenocarcinomas arising in the female
genital tract, this may result in diagnostic confusion. All cases were WT1
negative.

PMID: 22456609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33522. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033522. Epub 2012 Mar 15.

Heat-shock mediated overexpression of HNF1ß mutations has differential effects on
gene expression in the Xenopus pronephric kidney.

Sauert K(1), Kahnert S, Roose M, Gull M, Brändli AW, Ryffel GU, Waldner C.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Tumorforschung, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, 
Germany.

The transcription factor HNF1B, encoded by the TCF2 gene, plays an important role
in the organogenesis of vertebrates. In humans, heterozygous mutations of HNF1B
are associated with several diseases, such as pancreatic ß-cell dysfunction
leading to maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY5), defective kidney
development, disturbed liver function, pancreas atrophy, and malformations of the
genital tract. The African claw frog Xenopus laevis is an excellent model to
study the processes involved in embryogenesis and organogenesis, as it can be
manipulated easily with a series of methods. In the present study, we
overexpressed HNF1ß mutants in the developing Xenopus embryo to assess their
roles during organogenesis, particularly in the developing pronephric kidney.
Towards this goal, we developed a heat-shock inducible binary Cre/loxP system
with activator and effector strains. Heat-shock activation of the mutant HNF1B
variants P328L329del and A263insGG resulted in malformations of various organs
and the affected larvae developed large edemas. Defects in the pronephros were
primarily confined to malformed proximal tubules. Furthermore, the expression of 
the proximal tubule marker genes tmem27 and slc3a1, both involved in amino acid
transport, was affected. Both P328L329del and A263insGG downregulated expression 
of slc3a1. In addition, P328L329del reduced tmem27 expression while A263insGG
overexpression decreased expression of the chloride channel clcnk and the
transcription factor pax2. Overexpression of two mutant HNF1B derivatives
resulted in distinct phenotypes reflected by either a reduction or an enlargement
of pronephros size. The expression of selected pronephric marker genes was
differentially affected upon overexpression of HNF1B mutations. Based on our
findings, we postulate that HNF1B mutations influence gene regulation upon
overexpression in specific and distinct manners. Furthermore, our study
demonstrates that the newly established Cre/loxP system for Xenopus embryos is an
attractive alternative to examine the gene regulatory potential of transcription 
factors in developing pronephric kidney as exemplified here for HNF1B.

PMCID: PMC3305329
PMID: 22438943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Transpl Int. 2012 May;25(5):564-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1432-2277.2012.01458.x. Epub
2012 Mar 21.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young: clinical characteristics and outcome after 
kidney and pancreas transplantation in MODY3 and RCAD patients: a single center
experience.

Poitou C(1), Francois H, Bellanne-Chantelot C, Noel C, Jacquet A, Clauin S,
Beaudreuil S, Damieri H, Hebibi H, Hammoudi Y, Benoit G, Charpentier B, Durrbach 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Néphrologie, Dialyse et Transplantation, IFRNT, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.

The diabetes and renal phenotype of patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the 
young (MODY) on a transplantation waiting list is not known; neither is their
outcome after pancreas (PT) and/or kidney transplantation (KT). Between 2002 and 
2009, we screened 50 of 150 patients referred for kidney and pancreas
transplantation to the Kremlin-Bicêtre center for HNF1B and HNF1A mutations if
one or more of the following criteria was present (i) an atypical history of
diabetes (ii) diabetes with at least one affected parent or two affected
relatives, (iii) an absence of auto-antibodies at diagnosis (iv) a persistent
secretion of fasting C peptide (v) a personal or a family history of renal cysts 
or dysplasia. Their phenotype and their outcome were analyzed. Four HNF1A (MODY3)
and eight HNF1B mutations [renal cysts and diabetes (RCAD)] were identified. All 
MODY3 patients had diabetic nephropathy, but only 50% of RCAD patients. Four
patients underwent a kidney and pancreas transplantation and two a kidney
transplant alone. After 4.1 ± 1.1 years of follow-up, 83% of patients still have 
a functioning kidney and 75% a functioning pancreas. PT can be proposed with good
results for MODY3 and RCAD patients.

© 2012 The Authors. Transplant International © 2012 European Society for Organ
Transplantation.

PMID: 22432796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Acta Diabetol. 2013 Oct;50(5):815-20. doi: 10.1007/s00592-012-0378-1. Epub 2012
Feb 19.

Cystatin C is not a good candidate biomarker for HNF1A-MODY.

Nowak N(1), Szopa M, Thanabalasingham G, McDonald TJ, Colclough K, Skupien J,
James TJ, Kiec-Wilk B, Kozek E, Mlynarski W, Hattersley AT, Owen KR, Malecki MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 15 
Kopernika Street, 31-501, Krakow, Poland.

Cystatin C is a marker of glomerular filtration rate (GFR). Its level is
influenced, among the others, by CRP whose concentration is decreased in
HNF1A-MODY. We hypothesized that cystatin C level might be altered in HNF1A-MODY.
We aimed to evaluate cystatin C in HNF1A-MODY both as a diagnostic marker and as 
a method of assessing GFR. We initially examined 51 HNF1A-MODY patients, 56
subjects with type 1 diabetes (T1DM), 39 with type 2 diabetes (T2DM) and 43
non-diabetic individuals (ND) from Poland. Subjects from two UK centres were used
as replication panels: including 215 HNF1A-MODY, 203 T2DM, 39 HNF4A-MODY, 170
GCK-MODY, 17 HNF1B-MODY and 58 T1DM patients. The data were analysed with
additive models, adjusting for gender, age, BMI and estimated GFR (creatinine).
In the Polish subjects, adjusted cystatin C level in HNF1A-MODY was lower
compared with T1DM, T2DM and ND (p < 0.05). Additionally, cystatin C-based GFR
was higher than that calculated from creatinine level (p < 0.0001) in HNF1A-MODY,
while the two GFR estimates were similar or cystatin C-based lower in the other
groups. In the UK subjects, there were no differences in cystatin C between
HNF1A-MODY and the other diabetic subgroups, except HNF1B-MODY. In UK HNF1A-MODY,
cystatin C-based GFR estimate was higher than the creatinine-based one
(p < 0.0001). Concluding, we could not confirm our hypothesis (supported by the
Polish results) that cystatin C level is altered by HNF1A mutations; thus, it
cannot be used as a biomarker for HNF1A-MODY. In HNF1A-MODY, the cystatin C-based
GFR estimate is higher than the creatinine-based one.

PMCID: PMC3898131
PMID: 22350134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. PLoS One. 2012;7(1):e30390. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0030390. Epub 2012 Jan 27.

HNF1B and endometrial cancer risk: results from the PAGE study.

Setiawan VW(1), Haessler J, Schumacher F, Cote ML, Deelman E, Fesinmeyer MD,
Henderson BE, Jackson RD, Vöckler JS, Wilkens LR, Yasmeen S, Haiman CA, Peters U,
Le Marchand L, Kooperberg C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

We examined the association between HNF1B variants identified in a recent
genome-wide association study and endometrial cancer in two large case-control
studies nested in prospective cohorts: the Multiethnic Cohort Study (MEC) and the
Women's Health Initiative (WHI) as part of the Population Architecture using
Genomics and Epidemiology (PAGE) study. A total of 1,357 incident cases of
invasive endometrial cancer and 7,609 controls were included in the analysis
(MEC: 426 cases/3,854 controls; WHI: 931 cases/3,755 controls). The majority of
women in the WHI were European American, while the MEC included sizable numbers
of African Americans, Japanese and Latinos. We estimated the odds ratios (ORs)
per allele and 95% confidence intervals (CIs) of each SNP using unconditional
logistic regression adjusting for age, body mass index, and four principal
components of ancestry informative markers. The combined ORs were estimated using
fixed effect models. Rs4430796 and rs7501939 were associated with endometrial
cancer risk in MEC and WHI with no heterogeneity observed across racial/ethnic
groups (P = 0.21) or between studies (P = 0.70). The OR(per allele) was 0.82 (95%
CI: 0.75, 0.89; P = 5.63 × 10(-6)) for rs4430796 (G allele) and 0.79 (95% CI:
0.73, 0.87; P = 3.77 × 10(-7)) for rs7501939 (A allele). The associations with
the risk of Type I and Type II tumors were similar (P = 0.19). Adjustment for
additional endometrial cancer risk factors such as parity, oral contraceptive
use, menopausal hormone use, and smoking status had little effect on the results.
In conclusion, HNF1B SNPs are associated with risk of endometrial cancer and that
the associated relative risks are similar for Type I and Type II tumors.

PMCID: PMC3267708
PMID: 22299039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Nephron Clin Pract. 2012;120(2):c71-8. doi: 10.1159/000334954. Epub 2012 Jan 21.

Expression of renal cystic genes in patients with HNF1B mutations.

Faguer S(1), Decramer S, Devuyst O, Lengelé JP, Fournié GJ, Chauveau D.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Néphrologie et Immunologie clinique, Centre de référence des
maladies rénales rares, CHU, Toulouse, France. stanislas.faguer@inserm.fr

BACKGROUND/AIMS: HNF1B nephropathy is characterized by dominantly inherited renal
hypodysplasia with few cysts, slow renal decline and hypomagnesemia. Mice with
antenatal inactivation of HNF1B are characterized by polycystic kidneys, renal
failure and a profound decrease in cystic gene (Pkhd1, Umod, Pkd2) expression.
Mice with inactivation after postnatal day 10 have no renal phenotype.
METHODS: Quantification of mRNA expression of HNF1B, six of its potential target 
genes (PKHD1, PKD1, PKD2, IFT88, TMEM27 and UMOD) and three genes involved in the
Mg(2+) renal homeostasis (ATP1A1, FXYD2 and CLDN16) in the urinary sediment of 11
individuals with mutation of HNF1B and in 9 controls (non-invasive assessment of 
the renal transcriptome).
RESULTS: As compared to controls, no difference was observed in the urinary mRNA 
amount of HNF1B and the renal cystic genes. A significant increase in the
expression of ATP1A1, which encodes the a1-subunit of the Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase, was 
identified in HNF1B patients consistent with its role in Mg(2+) homeostasis.
CONCLUSION: Assessment of mRNA expression in urinary sediment is a non-invasive
method applicable to gain insights into the pathophysiology of inherited
nephropathies in humans. HNF1B nephropathy is generally not associated with
postnatal down-expression of renal cystic genes in human, a finding consistent
with mouse models.

Copyright © 2012 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 22269832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Pediatr Diabetes. 2012 Sep;13(6):e35-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5448.2011.00842.x.
Epub 2012 Jan 20.

Childhood onset diabetes posttransplant in a girl with TCF2 mutation.

Tudorache E(1), Sellier-Leclerc AL, Lenoir M, Tubiana-Rufi N, Bensman A,
Bellanne-Chantelot C, Ulinski T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Armand-Trousseau Hospital, AP-HP, Paris,
France; University Pierre et Marie Curie (UPMC), Paris, 6, France.

Erratum in
    Pediatr Diabetes. 2013 Feb;14(1):80. Toubiana, Nadia [corrected to Tubiana-Rufi, 
Nadia].

Heterozygous mutations of TCF2 (transcription factor 2) have been associated with
maturity onset diabetes of the young, renal malformations, hyperuricemia, and
occasionally internal genital malformations in female. We report a female patient
with bilateral renal hypodysplasia and de novo heterozygous TCF2 gene mutation.
At the age of 9 yr, she developed transient ketoacidosis immediately
posttransplant, temporarily requiring insulin. During glucocorticoid tapering,
impaired glucose tolerance persisted and overt insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus developed 1 yr later. Pathogenic factors which might have played a role 
in the acceleration of diabetes were (i) switch from cyclosporine to tacrolimus, 
(ii) weight excess, and (iii) cytomegalovirus infection. TCF2 analysis might,
therefore, be of interest in patients with congenital abnormalities of the kidney
and the urinary tract in order to improve posttransplant management in terms of
steroid and tacrolimus exposure.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22260488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2012;13(12):6273-6.

Association of six susceptibility Loci with prostate cancer in northern chinese
men.

Zhang YR(1), Xu Y, Yang K, Liu M, Wei D, Zhang YG, Shi XH, Wang JY, Yang F, Wang 
X, Liang SY, Zhao CX, Wang F, Chen X, Sun L, Zhu XQ, Zhu L, Yang YG, Tang L, Jiao
HY, Huo ZH, Yang Z.

Author information: 
(1)The Key Laboratory of Geriatrics, Beijing Hospital and Beijing Institute of
Geriatrics, Ministry of Health, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND/AIM: Six prostate cancer (PCa) susceptibility loci were identified in 
a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in populations of European decent.
However, the associations of these 6 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with 
PCa has remained tobe clarified in men in Northern China. This study aimed to
explore the loci associated with PCa risk in a Northern Chinese population.
METHODS: Blood samples and clinical information of 289 PCa patients and 288
controls from Beijing and Tianjin were collected. All risk SNPs were genotyped
using polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-high resolution melting curve technology
and gene sequencing. Associations between PCa and clinical covariates (age at
diagnosis, prostate-specific antigen [PSA], Gleason score, tumor stage, and level
of aggressiveness) and frequencies of alleles and genotypes of these SNPs were
analyzed using genetic statistics.
RESULTS: Among the candidate SNPs, 11p15 (rs7127900, A) was associated with PCa
risk (P = 0.02, odds ratio [OR] = 1.64, 95% confidence interval [CI] =
1.09-2.46). Genotypes showed differences between cases and controls on 11p15
(rs7127900, A), 11q13 (rs7931342, T), and HNF1B (rs4430796, A) (P = 0.03, P =
0.01, and P = 0.04, respectively). The genotype TG on 11q13 (rs7931342, T) was
positively associated with an increased Gleason score (P = 0.04, OR = 2.15, 95%
CI = 1.02-4.55). Patients carrying TG on 17q24 (rs1859962, G) were negatively
associated with an increased body mass index (BMI) (P = 0.03, OR = 0.44, 95% CI =
0.21-0.92) while those with AG on HNF1B (rs4430796, A) were more likely to have
PSA increase (P = 0.002).
CONCLUSION: Our study suggests that 11p15 (rs7127900, A) could be a
susceptibility locus associated with PCa in Northern Chinese. Genotype TG on
11q13 (rs7931342, T) could be related to an increased Gleason score, AG on HNF1B 
(rs4430796, A) could be associated with PSA increase, and TG on 17q24 (rs1859962,
G) could be negatively associated with an increased BMI in Chinese men with PCa.

PMID: 23464444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2012 Mar;340(3):648-55. doi: 10.1124/jpet.111.187161. Epub 
2011 Dec 7.

Regulation of tissue-specific expression of renal organic anion transporters by
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 a/ß and DNA methylation.

Jin L(1), Kikuchi R, Saji T, Kusuhara H, Sugiyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacokinetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

We have reported previously that the kidney- and liver-specific expression of
transporters in mice involves the coordinated regulation by hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 (HNF1) and DNA methylation. The present study was aimed at investigating
the role of this cascade in the transcriptional regulation of renal organic anion
transporters (OATs) yet to be characterized in human and mouse. Luciferase assays
and electrophoretic mobility-shift assays demonstrated that HNF1a/ß enhances the 
promoter activity of OAT4/SLC22A11 via binding to the HNF1 motif located near the
transcriptional start site (TSS). DNA methylation profiles of human OAT1, OAT3,
OAT4, and urate transporter 1 (URAT1) were determined in human liver and kidney
cortex by bisulfite sequencing. Most of the CpG dinucleotides around the TSSs of 
OAT1 and OAT3 were highly methylated in the liver compared with kidney cortex,
being consistent with their tissue specificity, whereas the difference in the DNA
methylation status was less remarkable between the two tissues for OAT4 and
URAT1. Mouse Oat1 gene also contained CpG dinucleotides hypomethylated in the
kidney and hypermethylated in the liver downstream its TSS, whereas two of the
seven CpG dinucleotides around the TSS of mouse Oat3 were significantly
methylated in the liver compared with the kidney. Taken together, these findings 
underscored the central role of HNF1a/ß in the transcriptional regulation of OATs
and highlighted DNA methylation-dependent gene silencing as one of the mechanisms
underlying the tissue-specific transactivation by this master regulator.

PMID: 22160269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2011 Nov 29;8(3):148-59. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2011.197.

The role of pancreatic imaging in monogenic diabetes mellitus.

Haldorsen IS(1), Ræder H, Vesterhus M, Molven A, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Haukeland University Hospital, N-5021 Bergen, Norway.

In neonatal diabetes mellitus resulting from mutations in EIF2AK3, PTF1A, HNF1B, 
PDX1 or RFX6, pancreatic aplasia or hypoplasia is typical. In maturity-onset
diabetes mellitus of the young (MODY), mutations in HNF1B result in aplasia of
pancreatic body and tail, and mutations in CEL lead to lipomatosis. The pancreas 
is not readily accessible for histopathological investigations and pancreatic
imaging might, therefore, prove important for diagnosis, treatment, and research 
into these ß-cell diseases. Advanced imaging techniques can identify the
pancreatic features that are characteristic of inherited diabetes subtypes,
including alterations in organ size (diffuse atrophy and complete or partial
pancreatic agenesis), lipomatosis and calcifications. Consequently, in patients
with suspected monogenic diabetes mellitus, the results of pancreatic imaging
could help guide the molecular and genetic investigation. Imaging findings also
highlight the critical roles of specific genes in normal pancreatic development
and differentiation and provide new insight into alterations in pancreatic
structure that are relevant for ß-cell disease.

PMID: 22124438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Urol. 2012 Jan;187(1):272-8. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2011.09.036. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Genetic basis of prune belly syndrome: screening for HNF1ß gene.

Granberg CF(1), Harrison SM, Dajusta D, Zhang S, Hajarnis S, Igarashi P, Baker
LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Texas Southwestern, Dallas, Texas, USA.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2012 Jan;187(1):278.

PURPOSE: Although the cause of prune belly syndrome is unknown, familial evidence
suggests a genetic component. Recently 2 nonfamilial cases of prune belly
syndrome with chromosome 17q12 deletions encompassing the HNF1ß gene have made
this a candidate gene for prune belly syndrome. To date, there has been no
large-scale screening of patients with prune belly syndrome for HNF1ß mutations. 
We assessed the role of HNF1ß in prune belly syndrome by screening for genomic
mutations with functional characterization of any detected mutations.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We studied patients with prune belly syndrome who were
prospectively enrolled in our Pediatric Genitourinary DNA Repository since 2001. 
DNA from patient samples was amplified by polymerase chain reaction, sequenced
for coding and splice regions of the HNF1ß gene, and compared to control
databases. We performed functional assay testing of the ability of mutant HNF1ß
to activate a luciferase construct with an HNF1ß DNA binding site.
RESULTS: From 32 prune belly syndrome probands (30 males, 2 females) HNF1ß
sequencing detected a missense mutation (V61G) in 1 child with prune belly
syndrome. Absent in control databases, V61G was previously reported in 2 patients
without prune belly syndrome who had congenital genitourinary anomalies.
Functional testing showed similar luciferase activity compared to wild-type
HNF1ß, suggesting the V61G substitution does not disturb HNF1ß function.
CONCLUSIONS: One genomic HNF1ß mutation was detected in 3% of patients with prune
belly syndrome but found to be functionally normal. Thus, functionally
significant HNF1ß mutations are uncommon in prune belly syndrome, despite case
reports of HNF1ß deletions. Further genetic study is necessary, as identification
of the genetic basis of prune belly syndrome may ultimately lead to prevention
and improved treatments for this rare but severe syndrome.

Copyright © 2012 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3399512
PMID: 22114815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Urol. 2012 Jan;187(1):278. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2011.09.161. Epub 2011 Nov 23.

Editorial comment.

Mingin GC.

Comment on
    J Urol. 2012 Jan;187(1):272-8.

PMID: 22114814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Hum Hered. 2011;72(3):182-93. doi: 10.1159/000331222. Epub 2011 Nov 11.

Application of a novel score test for genetic association incorporating gene-gene
interaction suggests functionality for prostate cancer susceptibility regions.

Ciampa J(1), Yeager M, Jacobs K, Thun MJ, Gapstur S, Albanes D, Virtamo J,
Weinstein SJ, Giovannucci E, Willett WC, Cancel-Tassin G, Cussenot O, Valeri A,
Hunter D, Hoover R, Thomas G, Chanock S, Holmes C, Chatterjee N.

Author information: 
(1)Epidemiology and Biostatistics Program, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and
Genetics, Department of Health and Human Services, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20852, USA.

AIMS: We introduce an innovative multilocus test for disease association. It is
an extension of an existing score test that gains power over alternative methods 
by incorporating a parsimonious one-degree-of-freedom model for interaction. We
use our method in applications designed to detect interactions that generate
hypotheses about the functionality of prostate cancer (PRCA) susceptibility
regions.
METHODS: Our proposed score test is designed to gain additional power through the
use of a retrospective likelihood that exploits an assumption of independence
between unlinked loci in the underlying population. Its performance is validated 
through simulation. The method is used in conditional scans with data from stage 
II of the Cancer Genetic Markers of Susceptibility PRCA genome-wide association
study.
RESULTS: Our proposed method increases power to detect susceptibility loci in
diverse settings. It identified two high-ranking, biologically interesting
interactions: (1) rs748120 of NR2C2 and subregions of 8q24 that contain
independent susceptibility loci specific to PRCA and (2) rs4810671 of SULF2 and
both JAZF1 and HNF1B that are associated with PRCA and type 2 diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: Our score test is a promising multilocus tool for genetic
epidemiology. The results of our applications suggest functionality for poorly
understood PRCA susceptibility regions. They motivate replication study.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3242702
PMID: 22086326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Pediatr Diabetes. 2012 Feb;13(1):26-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5448.2011.00827.x.
Epub 2011 Nov 8.

Comprehensive molecular analysis of Japanese patients with pediatric-onset
MODY-type diabetes mellitus.

Yorifuji T(1), Fujimaru R, Hosokawa Y, Tamagawa N, Shiozaki M, Aizu K, Jinno K,
Maruo Y, Nagasaka H, Tajima T, Kobayashi K, Urakami T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Children's Medical
Center, Osaka City General Hospital, 2-13-22 Miyakojima-Hondori, Miyakojima,
Osaka 534-0021, Japan. yorif@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Erratum in
    Pediatr Diabetes. 2013 May;14(3):230.

BACKGROUND: In Asians, mutations in the known maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY) genes have been identified in only <15% of patients. These results
were obtained mostly through studies on adult patients.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the molecular basis of Japanese patients with
pediatric-onset MODY-type diabetes.
SUBJECTS: Eighty Japanese patients with pediatric-onset MODY-type diabetes.
METHODS: Mitochondrial 3243A>G mutation was first tested by the polymerase chain 
reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis for maternally
inherited families. Then, all coding exons and exon-intron boundaries of the
HNF1A, HNF1B, GCK, and HNF4A genes were amplified from genomic DNA and directly
sequenced. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis was also
performed to detect whole-exon deletions.
RESULTS: After excluding one patient with a mitochondrial 3243A>G, mutations were
identified in 38 (48.1%) patients; 18 had GCK mutations, 11 had HNF1A mutations, 
3 had HNF4A mutations, and 6 had HNF1B mutations. In patients aged <8 yr,
mutations were detected mostly in GCK at a higher frequency (63.6%). In patients 
>9 yr of age, mutations were identified less frequently (45.1%), with HNF1A
mutations being the most frequent. A large fraction of mutation-negative patients
showed elevated homeostasis model assessment (HOMA) insulin-resistance and normal
HOMA-ß indices. Most of the HNF1B mutations were large deletions, and,
interestingly, renal cysts were undetectable in two patients with whole-gene
deletion of HNF1B.
CONCLUSION: In Japanese patients with pediatric-onset MODY-type diabetes,
mutations in known genes were identified at a much higher frequency than
previously reported for adult Asians. A fraction of mutation-negative patients
presented with insulin-resistance and normal insulin-secretory capacities
resembling early-onset type 2 diabetes.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22060211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Diabetologia. 2012 Feb;55(2):349-57. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2355-6. Epub 2011
Nov 4.

Association analysis of 31 common polymorphisms with type 2 diabetes and its
related traits in Indian sib pairs.

Gupta V(1), Vinay DG, Rafiq S, Kranthikumar MV, Janipalli CS, Giambartolomei C,
Evans DM, Mani KR, Sandeep MN, Taylor AE, Kinra S, Sullivan RM, Bowen L, Timpson 
NJ, Smith GD, Dudbridge F, Prabhakaran D, Ben-Shlomo Y, Reddy KS, Ebrahim S,
Chandak GR; Indian Migration Study Group.

Collaborators: Ebrahim S, Kinra S, Reddy KS, Prabhakaran D, Patel T, Ramakrishnan
L, Gupta R, Lyngdoh T, Ahuja RC, Saran RK, Joshi P, Thakre NM, Sarma KV, Das SM, 
Jain RK, Potnis SS, Bhogadi S, Kurpad AV, Vaz M, Barathi AV, Mohan M, Yajnik CS, 
Smith GD, Ben-Shlomo Y.

Author information: 
(1)South Asia Network for Chronic Disease, Public Health Foundation of India,
C-1/52, Safdarjung Development Area, New Delhi 110016, India. udaiig@gmail.com

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Evaluation of the association of 31 common single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) with fasting glucose, fasting insulin, HOMA-beta cell
function (HOMA-ß), HOMA-insulin resistance (HOMA-IR) and type 2 diabetes in the
Indian population.
METHODS: We genotyped 3,089 sib pairs recruited in the Indian Migration Study
from four cities in India (Lucknow, Nagpur, Hyderabad and Bangalore) for 31 SNPs 
in 24 genes previously associated with type 2 diabetes in European populations.
We conducted within-sib-pair analysis for type 2 diabetes and its related
quantitative traits.
RESULTS: The risk-allele frequencies of all the SNPs were comparable with those
reported in western populations. We demonstrated significant associations of
CXCR4 (rs932206), CDKAL1 (rs7756992) and TCF7L2 (rs7903146, rs12255372) with
fasting glucose, with ß values of 0.007 (p = 0.05), 0.01 (p = 0.01), 0.007 (p =
0.05), 0.01 (p = 0.003) and 0.08 (p = 0.01), respectively. Variants in NOTCH2
(rs10923931), TCF-2 (also known as HNF1B) (rs757210), ADAM30 (rs2641348) and
CDKN2A/B (rs10811661) significantly predicted fasting insulin, with ß values of
-0.06 (p = 0.04), 0.05 (p = 0.05), -0.08 (p = 0.01) and -0.08 (p = 0.02),
respectively. For HOMA-IR, we detected associations with TCF-2, ADAM30 and
CDKN2A/B, with ß values of 0.05 (p = 0.04), -0.07 (p = 0.03) and -0.08 (p =
0.02), respectively. We also found significant associations of ADAM30 (ß = -0.05;
p = 0.01) and CDKN2A/B (ß = -0.05; p = 0.03) with HOMA-ß. THADA variant
(rs7578597) was associated with type 2 diabetes (OR 1.5; 95% CI 1.04, 2.22; p =
0.03).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We validated the association of seven established
loci with intermediate traits related to type 2 diabetes in an Indian population 
using a design resistant to population stratification.

PMCID: PMC3245821
PMID: 22052079  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2011 Oct 21;50(2):279-84. doi: 10.1515/CCLM.2011.758.

Alternative methods to a TaqMan assay to detect a tri-allelic single nucleotide
polymorphism rs757210 in the HNF1ß gene.

Swen JJ(1), Baak-Pablo RF, Guchelaar HJ, van der Straaten T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Toxicology, Leiden, University Medical
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Several studies report difficulties in genotyping HNF1ß rs757210
using TaqMan probes. This is possibly due to the tri-allelic nature of this
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP). The aim of the present research was to
develop alternative methods for genotyping rs757210.
METHODS: Pyrosequencing and high resolution melting analysis of small amplicons
(HRM) were developed and tested in panels of type 2 diabetes mellitus patients
(n=258) and healthy blood donors (n=183). Results were confirmed by Sanger
sequencing.
RESULTS: With pyrosequencing, allele frequencies for the A, G and C allele of
0.42, 0.56, 0.02 and 0.37, 0.62, 0.01 were established in the panel of type 2
diabetes mellitus patients and healthy blood donors, respectively. Similar
results were found using the more routinely available HRM method. Results for
pyrosequencing and HRM were in 99.6% concordance.
CONCLUSIONS: Pyrosequencing and HRM can be used to genotype the tri-allelic SNP
rs757210 in the HNF1ß gene and have the advantage over the commercially available
TaqMan analysis that they can determine the rare C-allele variant.

PMID: 22022982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Urology. 2011 Oct;78(4):969.e1-6. doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2011.06.045.

HNF1B polymorphism associated with development of prostate cancer in Korean
patients.

Kim HJ(1), Bae JS, Lee J, Chang IH, Kim KD, Shin HD, Han JH, Lee SY, Kim W, Myung
SC.

Author information: 
(1)Advanced Urogenital Disease Research Center, Chung-Ang University College of
Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

OBJECTIVE: To identify whether the genetic variations in HNF1B are associated
with the development of prostate cancer in Korean patients. Genome-wide
association studies have found the HNF1B gene at 17q12 to be a major causal gene 
for the risk of prostate cancer.
METHODS: We evaluated the association of 47 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in the HNF1B gene with prostate cancer risk and clinical characteristics
(Gleason score and tumor stage) in Korean men (240 case subjects and 223 control 
subjects) using unconditional logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: Of the 47 SNPs, 14 were associated with prostate cancer risk (P =
.002-.02); 9 SNPs were associated with a lower risk of prostate cancer (odds
ratio 0.67-0.71, P = .005-.05), and 5 SNPs were associated with a greater risk of
disease (odds ratio 1.49-1.51, P = .002-.02). In an analysis involving only
patients with prostate cancer, 1 SNP (rs11868513) in the HNF1B gene was more
frequent in patients with tumors with a greater stage than in those with a lower 
tumor stage. Two SNPs (rs4430796 and rs2074429) and 1 haplotype (Block3_ht1) were
more frequent in patients with Gleason score of =7 than in those with Gleason
score <6.
CONCLUSION: As in studies from other populations, our findings indicate that
HNF1B is also associated with prostate cancer risk in the Korean population.

Copyright © 2011. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 21982019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Am J Gastroenterol. 2012 Jan;107(1):126-35. doi: 10.1038/ajg.2011.305. Epub 2011 
Sep 20.

Expression and clinicopathological significance of notch signaling and cell-fate 
genes in biliary tract cancer.

Mazur PK(1), Riener MO, Jochum W, Kristiansen G, Weber A, Schmid RM, Siveke JT.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Internal Medicine, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technische
Universität München, Germany.

OBJECTIVES: Biliary tract cancer (BTC) is a fatal cancer originating from
epithelial cells of the intra- and extra-hepatic biliary duct system and the
gallbladder. Genes and pathways regulating stem and progenitor cells as well as
cell-fate decisions are increasingly recognized in tumorigenesis. We evaluated
the expression of Notch1, Notch2, and HES1 (hairy and enhancer of split 1), as
well as the biliary cell-fate regulators SOX9 (SRY (sex determining region Y)-box
9) and HNF1ß (hepatocyte nuclear factor 1ß), in BTC for correlation with
clinicopathological parameters.
METHODS: Tissue microarrays including normal bile ducts and 111 BTCs consisting
of 17 intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas, 58 extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas, and 
36 gallbladder carcinomas were analyzed using immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Lack of cytoplasmic SOX9 expression was associated with a higher tumor
grade (P=0.010) and a significantly reduced overall survival (P=0.002; median 6
months vs. 24 months) in univariate survival analysis, whereas lack of nuclear
SOX9 expression was associated with a higher tumor stage (P=0.003). Notch pathway
members showed high expression in BTC. However, no correlation was found between 
cytoplasmic or nuclear Notch1, Notch2, and HES1, as well as HNF1ß expression, and
any of the clinicopathological parameters. In multivariate analysis, cytoplasmic 
SOX9 expression was an independent prognostic factor for overall survival
(P=0.031, relative risk=0.571).
CONCLUSIONS: We show strong Notch pathway activation and identify SOX9 as a
prognostic marker in BTC. These results substantiate diagnostic and therapeutic
approaches targeting developmentally active genes and pathways.

PMID: 21931375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Am J Kidney Dis. 2011 Nov;58(5):821-5. doi: 10.1053/j.ajkd.2011.06.029. Epub 2011
Sep 8.

Autosomal dominant mutation in the signal peptide of renin in a kindred with
anemia, hyperuricemia, and CKD.

Beck BB(1), Trachtman H, Gitman M, Miller I, Sayer JA, Pannes A, Baasner A,
Hildebrandt F, Wolf MT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Homozygous or compound heterozygous mutations in renin (REN) cause renal tubular 
dysgenesis, which is characterized by death in utero due to kidney failure and
pulmonary hypoplasia. The phenotype resembles the fetopathy caused by
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor or angiotensin receptor blocker intake
during pregnancy. Recently, heterozygous REN mutations were shown to result in
early-onset hyperuricemia, anemia, and chronic kidney disease (CKD). To date,
only 3 different heterozygous REN mutations have been published. We report
mutation analysis of the REN gene in 39 kindreds with hyperuricemia and CKD who
previously tested negative for mutations in the UMOD (uromodulin) and HNF1B
(hepatocyte nuclear factor 1ß) genes. We identified one kindred with a novel
thymidine to cytosine mutation at position 28 in the REN complementary DNA,
corresponding to a tryptophan to arginine substitution at amino acid 10, which is
found within the signal sequence (c.28T>C; p.W10R). On this basis, we conclude
that REN mutations are rare events in patients with CKD. Within the kindred, we
found affected individuals over 4 generations who carried the novel REN mutation 
and were characterized by significant anemia, hyperuricemia, and CKD. Anemia was 
severe and disproportional to the degree of decreased kidney function. Because
all heterozygous REN mutations that have been described are localized in the
signal sequence, screening of the REN gene for patients with CKD with
hyperuricemia and anemia may best be focused on sequencing of exon 1, which
encodes the signal peptide.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3366501
PMID: 21903317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Feb;20(2). doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2011.158. Epub 2011 Sep 7.

Clinical utility gene card for: Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome.

Morcel K(1), Dallapiccola B, Pasquier L, Watrin T, Bernardini L, Guerrier D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, UMR 6061-IGDR, Equipe 'Génétique des Pathologies Liées au
Développement', Rennes, France.

PMCID: PMC3260917
PMID: 21897448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2011 Oct;6(10):2429-38. doi: 10.2215/CJN.01220211. Epub
2011 Aug 25.

Phenotype and outcome in hereditary tubulointerstitial nephritis secondary to
UMOD mutations.

Bollée G(1), Dahan K, Flamant M, Morinière V, Pawtowski A, Heidet L, Lacombe D,
Devuyst O, Pirson Y, Antignac C, Knebelmann B.

Author information: 
(1)Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Service de Néphrologie, Hôpital Necker 
Enfants Malades, 149 rue de Sèvres, 75015 Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: UMOD mutations cause familial juvenile hyperuricemic nephropathy
(FJHN) and medullary cystic kidney disease (MCKD), although these phenotypes are 
nonspecific.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: We reviewed cases of UMOD
mutations diagnosed in the genetic laboratories of Necker Hospital (Paris,
France) and of Université Catholique de Louvain (Brussels, Belgium). We also
analyzed patients with MCKD/FJHN but no UMOD mutation. To determine thresholds
for hyperuricemia and uric-acid excretion fraction (UAEF) according to GFR, these
parameters were analyzed in 1097 patients with various renal diseases and renal
function levels.
RESULTS: Thirty-seven distinct UMOD mutations were found in 109 patients from 45 
families, all in exon 4 or 5 except for three novel mutations in exon 8. Median
renal survival was 54 years. The type of mutation had a modest effect on renal
survival, and intrafamilial variability was high. Detailed data available in 70
patients showed renal cysts in 24 (34.3%) of nonspecific localization in most
patients. Uricemia was >75th percentile in 31 (71.4%) of 42 patients not under
dialysis or allopurinol therapy. UAEF (n = 27) was <75th percentile in 70.4%.
Among 136 probands with MCKD/FJHN phenotype, UMOD mutation was found in 24
(17.8%). Phenotype was not accurately predictive of UMOD mutation. Six probands
had HNF1B mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Hyperuricemia disproportionate to renal function represents the
hallmark of renal disease caused by UMOD mutation. Renal survival is highly
variable in patients with UMOD mutation. Our data also add novel insights into
the interpretation of uricemia and UAEF in patients with chronic kidney diseases.

PMCID: PMC3359549
PMID: 21868615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Hum Genet. 2011 Oct;56(10):695-700. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.83. Epub 2011 Aug 4.

Association of variants in genes involved in pancreatic ß-cell development and
function with type 2 diabetes in North Indians.

Chavali S(1), Mahajan A, Tabassum R, Dwivedi OP, Chauhan G, Ghosh S, Tandon N,
Bharadwaj D.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Genomics and Integrative
Biology, CSIR, Delhi, India.

Variants in genes involved in pancreatic ß-cell development and function are
known to cause monogenic forms of type 2 diabetes and are also associated with
complex form. In this study, we studied the genetic association of polymorphisms 
in such important genes with type 2 diabetes in the high-risk Indians. We
genotyped 91 polymorphisms in 19 genes (ABCC8, HNF1A, HNF1B, HNF4A, INS, INSM1,
ISL1, KCNJ11, MAFA, MNX1, NEUROD1, NEUROG3, NKX2.2, NKX6.1, PAX4, PAX6, PDX1,
USF1 and WFS1) in 2025 unrelated North Indians of Indo-European ethnicity
comprising of 1019 diabetic and 1006 non-diabetic subjects. HNF4A promoter P2
polymorphisms rs1884613 and rs2144908, which are in high linkage disequilibrium, 
showed significant association with type 2 diabetes (odds ratio (OR)=1.37 (95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.19-1.57), P=9.4 × 10(-6) for rs1884613 and OR=1.37
(95%CI 1.20-1.57), P=6.0 × 10(-6) for rs2144908), as previously shown in other
populations. We observed body mass index-dependent association of these variants 
with type 2 diabetes in normal-weight/lean subjects. Variants in USF1, ABCC8,
ISL1 and KCNJ11 showed nominal association, while haplotypes in these genes were 
significantly associated. rs3812704 upstream of NEUROG3 significantly increased
risk for type 2 diabetes in normal-weight/lean subjects (OR=1.68 (95%CI
1.25-2.24), P=4.9 × 10(-4)). Thus, pancreatic ß-cell development and function
genes contribute to susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in North Indians.

PMID: 21814221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Dev Biol. 2011 Sep 15;357(2):295-304. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.06.042. Epub 2011
Jul 18.

Identification of novel Hoxa1 downstream targets regulating hindbrain, neural
crest and inner ear development.

Makki N(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Human Genetics, UT, USA.

Hox genes play a crucial role during embryonic patterning and organogenesis. Of
the 39 Hox genes, Hoxa1 is the first to be expressed during embryogenesis and the
only anterior Hox gene linked to a human syndrome. Hoxa1 is necessary for the
proper development of the brainstem, inner ear and heart in humans and mice;
however, almost nothing is known about the molecular downstream targets through
which it exerts its function. To gain insight into the transcriptional network
regulated by this protein, we performed microarray analysis on tissue
microdissected from the prospective rhombomere 3-5 region of Hoxa1 null and wild 
type embryos. Due to the very early and transient expression of this gene,
dissections were performed on early somite stage embryos during an eight-hour
time window of development. Our array yielded a list of around 300 genes
differentially expressed between the two samples. Many of the identified genes
play a role in a specific developmental or cellular process. Some of the
validated targets regulate early neural crest induction and specification.
Interestingly, three of these genes, Zic1, Hnf1b and Foxd3, were down-regulated
in the posterior hindbrain, where cardiac neural crest cells arise, which pattern
the outflow tract of the heart. Other targets are necessary for early inner ear
development, e.g. Pax8 and Fgfr3 or are expressed in specific hindbrain neurons
regulating respiration, e.g. Lhx5. These findings allow us to propose a model
where Hoxa1 acts in a genetic cascade upstream of genes controlling specific
aspects of embryonic development, thereby providing insight into possible
mechanisms underlying the human HoxA1-syndrome.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3176680
PMID: 21784065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Kidney Int. 2011 Oct;80(7):768-76. doi: 10.1038/ki.2011.225. Epub 2011 Jul 20.

Diagnosis, management, and prognosis of HNF1B nephropathy in adulthood.

Faguer S(1), Decramer S, Chassaing N, Bellanné-Chantelot C, Calvas P, Beaufils S,
Bessenay L, Lengelé JP, Dahan K, Ronco P, Devuyst O, Chauveau D.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Néphrologie et Immunologie clinique, Hôpital Rangueil, CHU
Toulouse, France. stanislas.faguer@inserm.fr

Mutations in HNF1B are responsible for a dominantly inherited disease with renal 
and nonrenal consequences, including maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) 
type 5. While HNF1B nephropathy is typically responsible for bilateral renal
cystic hypodysplasia in childhood, the adult phenotype is poorly described. To
help define this we evaluated the clinical presentation, imaging findings,
genetic changes, and disease progression in 27 adults from 20 families with HNF1B
nephropathy. Whole-gene deletion was found in 11 families, point mutations in 9, 
and de novo mutations in half of the kindred tested. Renal involvement was
extremely heterogeneous, with a tubulointerstitial profile at presentation and
slowly progressive renal decline throughout adulthood as hallmarks of the
disease. In 24 patients tested, there were cysts (=5 per kidney) in 15, a
solitary kidney in 5, hypokalemia in 11, and hypomagnesemia in 10 of 16 tested,
all as characteristics pointing to HNF1B disease. Two patients presented with
renal Fanconi syndrome and, overall, 4 progressed to end-stage renal failure.
Extrarenal phenotypes consisted of diabetes mellitus in 13 of the 27 patients,
including 11 with MODY, abnormal liver tests in 8 of 21, diverse genital tract
abnormalities in 5 of 13 females, and infertility in 2 of 14 males. Thus, our
findings provide data that are useful for recognition and diagnosis of HNF1B
disease in adulthood and might help in renal management and genetic counseling.

PMID: 21775974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Pediatr Diabetes. 2012 Mar;13(2):e1-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5448.2011.00773.x.
Epub 2011 Jul 19.

HNF1B mutation in a Turkish child with renal and exocrine pancreas insufficiency,
diabetes and liver disease.

Gonc EN(1), Ozturk BB, Haldorsen IS, Molnes J, Immervoll H, Raeder H, Molven A,
Søvik O, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Faculty of Medicine, Hacettepe
University, Ankara 06100, Turkey. ngonc@hacettepe.edu.tr

A small-for-gestational age female infant presented with bilateral hypoplastic
kidneys at 3 months of age. She developed chronic renal insufficiency.
Insulin-requiring, non-autoimmune diabetes was documented at 6 years of age. She 
had mild steatosis and iron deposition in the liver, and mal-development of
pancreas. Genetic studies revealed a heterozygous mutation (S148L) of the HNF1B
gene, compatible with an HNF1B-MODY phenotype (MODY5). This is the first case of 
HNF1B-MODY reported from Turkey and represents a particularly severe phenotype of
the disease.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21767339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Diabetes Care. 2011 Aug;34(8):1860-2. doi: 10.2337/dc11-0323. Epub 2011 Jun 23.

High-sensitivity CRP discriminates HNF1A-MODY from other subtypes of diabetes.

McDonald TJ(1), Shields BM, Lawry J, Owen KR, Gloyn AL, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry, Peninsula NIHR Clinical
ResearchFacility, Exeter, Devon, UK. tim.mcdonald@rdeft.nhs.uk

Comment in
    Diabetes Care. 2011 Dec;34(12):e186; author reply e187.

OBJECTIVE: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) as a result of mutations
in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-a (HNF1A) is often misdiagnosed as type 1 diabetes
or type 2 diabetes. Recent work has shown that high-sensitivity C-reactive
protein (hs-CRP) levels are lower in HNF1A-MODY than type 1 diabetes, type 2
diabetes, or glucokinase (GCK)-MODY. We aim to replicate these findings in larger
numbers and other MODY subtypes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: hs-CRP levels were assessed in 750 patients (220
HNF1A, 245 GCK, 54 HNF4-a [HNF4A], 21 HNF1-ß (HNF1B), 53 type 1 diabetes, and 157
type 2 diabetes).
RESULTS: hs-CRP was lower in HNF1A-MODY (median [IQR] 0.3 [0.1-0.6] mg/L) than
type 2 diabetes (1.40 [0.60-3.45] mg/L; P < 0.001) and type 1 diabetes (1.10
[0.50-1.85] mg/L; P < 0.001), HNF4A-MODY (1.45 [0.46-2.88] mg/L; P < 0.001),
GCK-MODY (0.60 [0.30-1.80] mg/L; P < 0.001), and HNF1B-MODY (0.60 [0.10-2.8]
mg/L; P = 0.07). hs-CRP discriminated HNF1A-MODY from type 2 diabetes with hs-CRP
<0.75 mg/L showing 79% sensitivity and 70% specificity (receiver operating
characteristic area under the curve = 0.84).
CONCLUSIONS: hs-CRP levels are lower in HNF1A-MODY than other forms of diabetes
and may be used as a biomarker to select patients for diagnostic HNF1A genetic
testing.

PMCID: PMC3142017
PMID: 21700917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jul 8;410(3):608-13. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.06.036. Epub 2011 Jun 13.

Pancreatic exocrine enzyme-producing cell differentiation via embryoid bodies
from human embryonic stem cells.

Shirasawa S(1), Yoshie S, Yue F, Ichikawa H, Yokoyama T, Nagai M, Tomotsune D,
Hirayama M, Sasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Advanced Health Sciences, Bourbon Institutes of Health, Bourbon
Corporation, 4-2-14 Matsunami, Kashiwazaki, Niigata 945-8611, Japan.
shirasawa-sak@bourbon.co.jp

Mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs) can be induced to form pancreatic exocrine
enzyme-producing cells in vitro in a stepwise fashion that recapitulates the
development in vivo. However, there is no protocol for the differentiation of
pancreatic-like cells from human ESCs (hESCs). Based upon the mouse ESC model, we
have induced the in vitro formation of pancreatic exocrine enzyme-producing cells
from hESCs. The protocol took place in four stages. In Stage 1, embryoid bodies
(EBs) were formed from dissociated hESCs and then treated with the growth factor 
activin A, which promoted the expression of Foxa2 and Sox17 mRNAs, markers of
definitive endoderm. In Stage 2, the cells were treated with all-trans retinoic
acid which promoted the transition to cells that expressed gut tube endoderm mRNA
marker HNF1b. In Stage 3, the cells were treated with fibroblast growth factor 7 
(FGF7), which induced expression of Pdx1 typical of pancreatic progenitor cells. 
In Stage 4, treatment with FGF7, glucagon-like peptide 1, and nicotinamide
induced the expression amylase (AMY) mRNA, a marker for mature pancreatic
exocrine cells. Immunohistochemical staining showed the expression of AMY protein
at the edges of cell clusters. These cells also expressed other exocrine
secretory proteins including elastase, carboxypeptidase A, chymotrypsin, and
pancreatic lipase in culture. Production of these hESC-derived pancreatic
enzyme-producing cells represents a critical step in the study of pancreatic
organogenesis and in the development of a renewable source of human
pancreatic-like exocrine cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21684256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Georgian Med News. 2011 Apr;(193):55-60.

A novel hepatocyte nuclear factor-1ß (MODY 5) gene mutation in a Romanian boy
with pancreatic calcifications, renal and hepatic dysfunction.

Banin P(1), Giovannini M, Raimondi F, D'Annunzio G, Sala S, Salina A, Aloi C, De 
Sanctis V.

Author information: 
(1)Departmentes of Growth and Reproduction- Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria,
Ferrara, Italy.

We report a 12-years-old Romanian boy with a diagnosis of diabetes and renal
insufficiency. Mutations in homeodomain-containing transcription factor
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF-1ß) have been reported in association with
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY 5) and early maturity-onset diabetes, 
progressive non-diabetic renal dysfunction and bilateral renal cysts. We found a 
new heterozygous mutation in HFN-1ß located in the exon 3 (c.715 G>C; p.239R)
associated to pancreatic calcifications. The importance of molecular diagnosis of
MODY patients is reinforced and the need for a careful follow-up is stressed in
order to monitor the progression of clinical manifestations and its correlation
with the gene mutation.

PMID: 21617276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2011 May;136(21):1111-5. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1280519. Epub 
2011 May 17.

[Clinical parameters for molecular testing of Maturity Onset Diabetes of the
Young (MODY)].

[Article in German]

Datz N(1), Nestoris C, von Schütz W, Danne T, Driesel AJ, Maringa M, Kordonouri
O.

Author information: 
(1)Diabeteszentrum für Kinder und Jugendliche, Kinderkrankenhaus auf der Bult,
Hannover, Deutschland. datz@hka.de

BACKGROUND: Monogenic forms of diabetes are often diagnosed by chance, due to the
variety of clinical presentation and limited experience of the diabetologists
with this kind of diabetes. Aim of this study was to evaluate clinical parameters
for an efficient screening.
METHODS: Clinical parameters were: negative diabetes-specific antibodies at onset
of diabetes, positive family history of diabetes, and low to moderate insulin
requirements after one year of diabetes treatment. Molecular testing was
performed through sequencing of the programming regions of HNF-4alpha (MODY 1),
glucokinase (MODY 2) and HNF-1alpha/TCF1 (MODY 3) and in one patient the
HNF-1beta/TCF2 region (MODY 5). 39 of 292 patients treated with insulin were
negative for GADA and IA2A, and 8 (20.5%) patients fulfilled both other criteria.
RESULTS: Positive molecular results were found in five (63%) patients (two with
MODY 2, two with MODY 3, one with MODY 5). At diabetes onset, the mean age of the
5 patients with MODY was 10.6 ± 5.3 yrs (range 2.6-15 yrs), HbA(1c) was 8.4 ± 3.1
% (6.5-13.9%), mean diabetes duration until diagnosis of MODY was 3.3 ± 3.6 yrs
(0.8-9.6 yrs) with insulin requirements of 0.44 ± 0.17 U/kg/d (0.2-0.6 U/kg/d).
Patients with MODY 3 were changed from insulin to repaglinide, those with MODY 2 
were recommended discontinuing insulin treatment.
CONCLUSION: In patients with negative diabetes-specific antibodies at onset of
diabetes, with a positive family history, and low to moderate insulin needs a
genetic screening for MODY is indicated. Watchful consideration of these clinical
parameters may lead to an early genetic testing, and to an adequate treatment.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 21590629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Aug 15;20(16):3322-9. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr213. Epub 2011 May 
16.

Large-scale fine mapping of the HNF1B locus and prostate cancer risk.

Berndt SI(1), Sampson J, Yeager M, Jacobs KB, Wang Z, Hutchinson A, Chung C, Orr 
N, Wacholder S, Chatterjee N, Yu K, Kraft P, Feigelson HS, Thun MJ, Diver WR,
Albanes D, Virtamo J, Weinstein S, Schumacher FR, Cancel-Tassin G, Cussenot O,
Valeri A, Andriole GL, Crawford ED, Haiman C, Henderson B, Kolonel L, Le Marchand
L, Siddiq A, Riboli E, Travis RC, Kaaks R, Isaacs W, Isaacs S, Wiley KE, Gronberg
H, Wiklund F, Stattin P, Xu J, Zheng SL, Sun J, Vatten LJ, Hveem K, Njølstad I,
Gerhard DS, Tucker M, Hayes RB, Hoover RN, Fraumeni JF Jr, Hunter DJ, Thomas G,
Chanock SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, Department of Health and Human
Services, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892-7240, USA. berndts@mail.nih.gov

Previous genome-wide association studies have identified two independent variants
in HNF1B as susceptibility loci for prostate cancer risk. To fine-map common
genetic variation in this region, we genotyped 79 single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in the 17q12 region harboring HNF1B in 10 272 prostate cancer cases and
9123 controls of European ancestry from 10 case-control studies as part of the
Cancer Genetic Markers of Susceptibility (CGEMS) initiative. Ten SNPs were
significantly related to prostate cancer risk at a genome-wide significance level
of P < 5 × 10(-8) with the most significant association with rs4430796 (P = 1.62 
× 10(-24)). However, risk within this first locus was not entirely explained by
rs4430796. Although modestly correlated (r(2)= 0.64), rs7405696 was also
associated with risk (P = 9.35 × 10(-23)) even after adjustment for rs4430769 (P 
= 0.007). As expected, rs11649743 was related to prostate cancer risk (P = 3.54 ×
10(-8)); however, the association within this second locus was stronger for
rs4794758 (P = 4.95 × 10(-10)), which explained all of the risk observed with
rs11649743 when both SNPs were included in the same model (P = 0.32 for
rs11649743; P = 0.002 for rs4794758). Sequential conditional analyses indicated
that five SNPs (rs4430796, rs7405696, rs4794758, rs1016990 and rs3094509)
together comprise the best model for risk in this region. This study demonstrates
a complex relationship between variants in the HNF1B region and prostate cancer
risk. Further studies are needed to investigate the biological basis of the
association of variants in 17q12 with prostate cancer.

PMCID: PMC3140817
PMID: 21576123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Hepatology. 2011 Jun;53(6):1795-7. doi: 10.1002/hep.24404.

A new set of classifications for ductal plate malformations.

Huppert SS.

Comment on
    Hepatology. 2011 Jun;53(6):1959-66.

PMID: 21557279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Eur J Med Genet. 2011 Jul-Aug;54(4):e437-40. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2011.03.010.
Epub 2011 Apr 19.

A 17q12 chromosomal duplication associated with renal disease and esophageal
atresia.

Faguer S(1), Chassaing N, Bandin F, Prouheze C, Arveiler B, Rooryck C, Nogier MB,
Chauveau D, Calvas P, Decramer S.

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology and Immunology Department, University Hospital of Rangueil,
Toulouse, France. stanislas.faguer@inserm.fr

Chromosomal imbalance of the 17q12 region (which includes the HNF1B transcription
factor) has recently emerged as a frequent condition. 17q12 deletion was found in
patients with various renal abnormalities, diabetes mellitus (MODY type 5),
genital tract or liver test abnormalities, while 17q12 duplication was identified
in a subset of patients with autism, mental retardation, epilepsy and/or
schizophrenia but no renal disorder. We report here two first-degree relatives
carrying a 17q12 duplication and harboring various renal abnormalities (bilateral
hypoplastic kidneys with vesico-ureteric reflux or multicystic dysplatic kidney
with contralateral hyperechogenic kidney). Esophageal atresia (EA) type C was
identified at birth in one patient while none had neurological disorder. Because 
EA has already been identified in patients with 17q12 duplication or HNF1B point 
mutation, we screened HNF1B (QMPSF and direct sequencing) in nine additional
patients with EA and renal abnormalities but failed to identify any pathogenic
variant. This is the second report of HNF1B mutation associated with EA.
Moreover, we showed herein, that renal malformations may be part of the 17q12
duplication syndrome.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21540130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2011 Oct;75(4):422-6. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.04049.x.

Who should have genetic testing for maturity-onset diabetes of the young?

Naylor R(1), Philipson LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Kovler Diabetes Center, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 606037, USA.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a clinically heterogeneous group
of monogenic disorders characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance of
young-onset, non-insulin-dependent diabetes. The genes involved are important in 
beta cell development, function and regulation and lead to disorders in glucose
sensing and insulin secretion. Heterozygous GCK mutations cause impaired
glucokinase activity resulting in stable, mild hyperglycaemia that rarely
requires treatment. HNF1A mutations cause a progressive insulin secretory defect 
that is sensitive to sulphonylureas, most often resulting in improved glycaemic
control compared with other diabetes treatment. MODY owing to mutations in the
HNF4A gene results in a similar phenotype, including sensitivity to sulphonylurea
treatment. HNF1B mutations most frequently cause developmental renal disease
(particularly renal cysts) but may also cause MODY in isolation or may cause the 
renal cysts and diabetes syndrome (RCAD syndrome). Mutations in NEUROD1, PDX1
(IPF1), CEL and INS are rare causes of MODY. MODY is often misdiagnosed as type 1
or type 2 diabetes. However, a correct genetic diagnosis impacts treatment and
identifies at-risk family members. Thus, it is important to consider a diagnosis 
of MODY in appropriate individuals and to pursue genetic testing to establish a
molecular diagnosis.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21521318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Nat Genet. 2011 May;43(5):451-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.812. Epub 2011 Apr 17.

Genome-wide association study identifies a common variant associated with risk of
endometrial cancer.

Spurdle AB(1), Thompson DJ, Ahmed S, Ferguson K, Healey CS, O'Mara T, Walker LC, 
Montgomery SB, Dermitzakis ET; Australian National Endometrial Cancer Study
Group, Fahey P, Montgomery GW, Webb PM, Fasching PA, Beckmann MW, Ekici AB, Hein 
A, Lambrechts D, Coenegrachts L, Vergote I, Amant F, Salvesen HB, Trovik J,
Njolstad TS, Helland H, Scott RJ, Ashton K, Proietto T, Otton G; National Study
of Endometrial Cancer Genetics Group, Tomlinson I, Gorman M, Howarth K, Hodgson
S, Garcia-Closas M, Wentzensen N, Yang H, Chanock S, Hall P, Czene K, Liu J, Li
J, Shu XO, Zheng W, Long J, Xiang YB, Shah M, Morrison J, Michailidou K, Pharoah 
PD, Dunning AM, Easton DF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetics and Population Health, Queensland Institute of Medical
Research, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. amanda.spurdle@qimr.edu.au

Endometrial cancer is the most common malignancy of the female genital tract in
developed countries. To identify genetic variants associated with endometrial
cancer risk, we performed a genome-wide association study involving 1,265
individuals with endometrial cancer (cases) from Australia and the UK and 5,190
controls from the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium. We compared genotype
frequencies in cases and controls for 519,655 SNPs. Forty seven SNPs that showed 
evidence of association with endometrial cancer in stage 1 were genotyped in
3,957 additional cases and 6,886 controls. We identified an endometrial cancer
susceptibility locus close to HNF1B at 17q12 (rs4430796, P = 7.1 × 10(-10)) that 
is also associated with risk of prostate cancer and is inversely associated with 
risk of type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3770523
PMID: 21499250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Cell Cycle. 2011 Apr 15;10(8):1312-21. Epub 2011 Apr 15.

p53-dependent regulation of growth, epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
stemness in normal pancreatic epithelial cells.

Pinho AV(1), Rooman I, Real FX.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Patología Molecular, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Oncológicas, Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jun 1;10(11):1715.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Aug 15;10(16):2616-7.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jun 1;10(11):1717.

Pancreatic acinar cells acquire in vitro a pancreatic progenitor phenotype
associated with activation of p53, growth arrest and senescence. A similar
program is also activated in chronic pancreatitis. To assess the mechanisms
involved in this process, we cultured pancreatic acinar cells from wild-type,
p53(-/-), p16(-/-) and p21(-/-) mice. Cultures from p53(-/-) mice, but not those 
from p16(-/-) or p21(-/-) mice, display an enhanced proliferation and can be
expanded continuously for more than 20 passages. p53(-/-) cells also display
features of stemness such as enhanced sphere formation, increased expression of
pancreatic multipotent progenitor markers (Ptf1a, Pdx1, Cpa1, c-myc, Sox9 and
Hnf1b), and of the stemness regulators Bmi1 and Klf4. Upon subculture, p53(-/-)
cells undergo an epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and express high levels 
of vimentin and of the transcriptional regulators Snai1, Snai2, Twist, Zeb1 and
Zeb2. Genetic lineage tracing unequivocally demonstrates the epithelial origin of
the cells with mesenchymal phenotype. These cells express the endodermal markers 
Hhex, Pdx1, Sox9, Hnf1b, Foxa2, Gata6 and Sox17, and the stem cell markers c-myc,
Bmi1 and Klf4. Cultures from p53(+/-) mice display intermediate levels of the
transcription factors involved in EMT but do not surpass the growth arrest. Our
findings support the notion that p53 controls both growth and epithelial cell
differentiation in the pancreas. These observations have important implications
regarding the mechanisms through which p53 inactivation in tumors may be
associated with aggressive biological behavior.

PMID: 21490434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Carcinogenesis. 2011 Jul;32(7):945-54. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr056. Epub 2011 Mar 
31.

Genetic architecture of cancer and other complex diseases: lessons learned and
future directions.

Hindorff LA(1), Gillanders EM, Manolio TA.

Author information: 
(1)Office of Population Genomics, National Human Genome Research Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-9307, USA.
hindorffl@mail.nih.gov

Genome-wide association studies have broadened our understanding of the genetic
architecture of cancer to include common variants, in addition to the rare
variants previously identified by linkage analysis. We review current knowledge
on the genetic architecture of four cancers--breast, lung, prostate and
colorectal--for which the balance of common and rare alleles identified ranges
from fewer common alleles (lung cancer) to more common alleles (prostate cancer).
Although most variants are cancer specific, pleiotropy has been observed for
several variants, for example, variants at the 8q24 locus and breast, ovarian and
prostate cancers or variants in KITLG in relation to hair color and testicular
cancer. Although few studies have been adequately powered to investigate
heterogeneity among ancestry groups, effect sizes associated with common variants
have been reported to be fairly homogenous among ethnic groups. Some associations
appear to be ancestry specific, such as HNF1B, which is associated with prostate 
cancer in European Americans and Latinos but not in African-Americans. Studies of
cancer and other complex diseases suggest that a simple dichotomy between rare
and common allelic architectures may be too simplistic and that future research
is needed to characterize a fuller spectrum of allele frequency (common (>5%),
uncommon (1-5%) and rare (<<1%) alleles) and effect size. In addition, a
broadening of the concept of genetic architecture to encompass both population
architecture, which reflects differences in exposures, genetic factors and
population level risk among diverse groups of people, and genomic architecture,
which includes structural, epigenomic and somatic variation, is envisioned.

PMCID: PMC3140138
PMID: 21459759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Histopathology. 2011 May;58(6):934-43. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.03795.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 25.

Genomic profiling of papillary renal cell tumours identifies small regions of DNA
alterations: a possible role of HNF1B in tumour development.

Szponar A(1), Yusenko MV, Kuiper R, van Kessel AG, Kovacs G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Oncology, Medical Faculty, Ruprecht-Karls-University, 
Heidelberg, Germany.

AIMS: Papillary renal cell tumours (RCT) are characterized by specific trisomies.
The aim of this study was to identify small regions of duplication marking
putative tumour genes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Full-tiling path bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) array
hybridization of 20 papillary RCTs confirmed the duplication of chromosomes 7 and
17 and also displayed smaller regions of gains/amplifications of 1.3-13.1 Mb in
size. Detailed analysis showed a microamplification of BAC clones containing the 
MET at the 7q31.2 and also amplification of a DNA segment harbouring the
transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 beta (HNF1B) at chromosome
17q12. Nuclear expression of HNF1B protein was detected in 38 of 67 papillary
RCTs, in five of five mucinous tubular and spindle cell carcinomas (MTSCC) and
five of five metanephric adenomas by immunohistochemistry. Moreover, nine
nephrogenic rests containing tubular differentiated structures and all 14 and
five precursor lesions associated with papillary RCTs and MTSCCs, respectively,
showed strong nuclear positivity when compared to the expression level in
proximal tubules of the corresponding normal kidney.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate a role of HNF1B in association with the high
frequency of chromosome 17q duplication in the development of papillary RCTs and 
MTSCCs as well as in their precursor lesions.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 21438902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Diabetes. 2011 May;60(5):1608-16. doi: 10.2337/db10-1655. Epub 2011 Mar 18.

Effects of 34 risk loci for type 2 diabetes or hyperglycemia on lipoprotein
subclasses and their composition in 6,580 nondiabetic Finnish men.

Stancáková A(1), Paananen J, Soininen P, Kangas AJ, Bonnycastle LL, Morken MA,
Collins FS, Jackson AU, Boehnke ML, Kuusisto J, Ala-Korpela M, Laakso M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Eastern Finland and Kuopio University
Hospital, Kuopio, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the effects of 34 genetic risk variants for
hyperglycemia/type 2 diabetes on lipoprotein subclasses and particle composition 
in a large population-based cohort.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The study included 6,580 nondiabetic Finnish men
from the population-based Metabolic Syndrome in Men (METSIM) study (aged 57 ± 7
years; BMI 26.8 ± 3.7 kg/m(2)). Genotyping of 34 single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNPs) for hyperglycemia/type 2 diabetes was performed. Proton nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy was used to measure particle concentrations of 14
lipoprotein subclasses and their composition in native serum samples.
RESULTS: The glucose-increasing allele of rs780094 in GCKR was significantly
associated with low concentrations of VLDL particles (independently of their
size) and small LDL and was nominally associated with low concentrations of
intermediate-density lipoprotein, all LDL subclasses, and high concentrations of 
very large and large HDL particles. The glucose-increasing allele of rs174550 in 
FADS1 was significantly associated with high concentrations of very large and
large HDL particles and nominally associated with low concentrations of all VLDL 
particles. SNPs rs10923931 in NOTCH2 and rs757210 in HNF1B genes showed nominal
or significant associations with several lipoprotein traits. The genetic risk
score of 34 SNPs was not associated with any of the lipoprotein subclasses.
CONCLUSIONS: Four of the 34 risk loci for type 2 diabetes or hyperglycemia (GCKR,
FADS1, NOTCH2, and HNF1B) were significantly associated with lipoprotein traits. 
A GCKR variant predominantly affected the concentration of VLDL, and the FADS1
variant affected very large and large HDL particles. Only a limited number of
risk loci for hyperglycemia/type 2 diabetes significantly affect lipoprotein
metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3292337
PMID: 21421807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Hepatology. 2011 Jun;53(6):1959-66. doi: 10.1002/hep.24292. Epub 2011 May 2.

A classification of ductal plate malformations based on distinct pathogenic
mechanisms of biliary dysmorphogenesis.

Raynaud P(1), Tate J, Callens C, Cordi S, Vandersmissen P, Carpentier R, Sempoux 
C, Devuyst O, Pierreux CE, Courtoy P, Dahan K, Delbecque K, Lepreux S, Pontoglio 
M, Guay-Woodford LM, Lemaigre FP.

Author information: 
(1)de Duve Institute, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels, Belgium.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2011 Jun;53(6):1795-7.

Ductal plate malformations (DPMs) are developmental anomalies considered to
result from lack of ductal plate remodeling during bile duct morphogenesis. In
mice, bile duct development is initiated by the formation of primitive ductal
structures lined by two cell types, namely ductal plate cells and hepatoblasts.
During ductal plate remodeling, the primitive ductal structures mature to ducts
as a result from differentiation of the ductal plate cells and hepatoblasts to
cholangiocytes. Here, we report this process is conserved in human fetal liver.
These findings prompted us to evaluate how DPMs develop in three mouse models,
namely mice with livers deficient in hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 (HNF6), HNF1ß,
or cystin-1 (cpk [congenital polycystic kidney] mice). Human liver from a patient
with a HNF1B/TCF2 mutation, and from fetuses affected with autosomal recessive
polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) were also analyzed. Despite the epistatic
relationship between HNF6, HNF1ß, and cystin-1, the three mouse models displayed 
distinct morphogenic mechanisms of DPM. They all developed biliary cysts lined by
cells with abnormal apicobasal polarity. However, the absence of HNF6 led to an
early defect in ductal plate cell differentiation. In HNF1ß-deficient liver,
maturation of the primitive ductal structures was impaired. Normal
differentiation and maturation but abnormal duct expansion was apparent in cpk
mouse livers and in human fetal ARPKD.CONCLUSION: DPM is the common endpoint of
distinct defects initiated at distinct stages of bile duct morphogenesis. Our
observations provide a new pathogenic classification of DPM.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC4271518
PMID: 21391226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 28;6(2):e17286. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017286.

Identification of anchor genes during kidney development defines ontological
relationships, molecular subcompartments and regulatory pathways.

Thiagarajan RD(1), Georgas KM, Rumballe BA, Lesieur E, Chiu HS, Taylor D, Tang
DT, Grimmond SM, Little MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia,
Australia.

The development of the mammalian kidney is well conserved from mouse to man.
Despite considerable temporal and spatial data on gene expression in mammalian
kidney development, primarily in rodent species, there is a paucity of genes
whose expression is absolutely specific to a given anatomical compartment and/or 
developmental stage, defined here as 'anchor' genes. We previously generated an
atlas of gene expression in the developing mouse kidney using microarray analysis
of anatomical compartments collected via laser capture microdissection. Here,
this data is further analysed to identify anchor genes via stringent
bioinformatic filtering followed by high resolution section in situ hybridisation
performed on 200 transcripts selected as specific to one of 11 anatomical
compartments within the midgestation mouse kidney. A total of 37 anchor genes
were identified across 6 compartments with the early proximal tubule being the
compartment richest in anchor genes. Analysis of minimal and evolutionarily
conserved promoter regions of this set of 25 anchor genes identified enrichment
of transcription factor binding sites for Hnf4a and Hnf1b, RbpJ (Notch
signalling), PPAR<U+03B3>:RxRA and COUP-TF family transcription factors. This was
reinforced by GO analyses which also identified these anchor genes as targets in 
processes including epithelial proliferation and proximal tubular function. As
well as defining anchor genes, this large scale validation of gene expression
identified a further 92 compartment-enriched genes able to subcompartmentalise
key processes during murine renal organogenesis spatially or ontologically. This 
included a cohort of 13 ureteric epithelial genes revealing previously
unappreciated compartmentalisation of the collecting duct system and a series of 
early tubule genes suggesting that segmentation into proximal tubule, loop of
Henle and distal tubule does not occur until the onset of glomerular
vascularisation. Overall, this study serves to illuminate previously ill-defined 
stages of patterning and will enable further refinement of the lineage
relationships within mammalian kidney development.

PMCID: PMC3046260
PMID: 21386911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Pediatr Nephrol. 2011 Jun;26(6):897-903. doi: 10.1007/s00467-011-1826-9. Epub
2011 Mar 5.

HNF1B and PAX2 mutations are a common cause of renal hypodysplasia in the CKiD
cohort.

Thomas R(1), Sanna-Cherchi S, Warady BA, Furth SL, Kaskel FJ, Gharavi AG.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Nephrology, Children's Hospital at Montefiore, Bronx, NY, USA.

Malformations of the kidney and lower urinary tract are the most frequent cause
of end-stage renal disease in children. Mutations in HNF1<U+0392> and PAX2 commonly
cause syndromic urinary tract malformation. We searched for mutations in HNF1<U+0392>
and PAX2 in North American children with renal aplasia and hypodysplasia (RHD)
enrolled in the Chronic Kidney Disease in Children Cohort Study (CKiD). We
identified seven mutations in this multiethnic cohort (10% of patients). In
HNF1<U+0392>, we identified a nonsense (p.R181X), a missense (p.S148L), and a frameshift
(Y352fsX352) mutation, and one whole gene deletion. In PAX2, we identified one
splice site (IVS4-1G>T), one missense (p.G24E), and one frameshift (G24fsX28)
mutation. All mutations occurred in Caucasians, accounting for 14% of disease in 
this subgroup. The absence of mutations in other ethnicities is likely due to the
limited sample size. There were no differences in clinical parameters (age,
baseline eGFR, blood pressure, body mass index, progression) between patients
with or without HNF1B and PAX2 mutations. A significant proportion of North
American Caucasian patients with RHD carry mutations in HNF1<U+0392> or PAX2 genes.
These patients should be evaluated for complications (e.g., diabetes for HNF1<U+0392>
mutations, colobomas for PAX2) and referred for genetic counseling.

PMCID: PMC3257470
PMID: 21380624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Invest Dermatol. 2011 Jun;131(6):1291-9. doi: 10.1038/jid.2011.6. Epub 2011 Feb
24.

Inhibition of human melanoma cell growth by the dietary flavonoid fisetin is
associated with disruption of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and decreased Mitf levels.

Syed DN(1), Afaq F, Maddodi N, Johnson JJ, Sarfaraz S, Ahmad A, Setaluri V,
Mukhtar H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin
53706, USA.

Comment in
    J Invest Dermatol. 2011 Jun;131(6):1187-9.

The prognosis of advanced melanoma remains poor in spite of treatment advances,
emphasizing the importance of additional preventive measures. Flavonoids, natural
components of our diet, are being investigated for their
chemopreventive/therapeutic properties. Microphthalmia-associated transcription
factor (Mitf), downstream of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway, has become an important
prognostic marker of melanoma. In this study, we show that treatment of 451Lu
melanoma cells with the dietary flavonoid fisetin (3,7,3',4'-tetrahydroxyflavone)
resulted in decreased cell viability with G1-phase arrest and disruption of
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling. This was accompanied by a decrease in the expression of 
Wnt protein and its co-receptors, as well as by a parallel increase in the
expression of endogenous Wnt inhibitors. Fisetin-treated cells showed increased
cytosolic levels of Axin and ß-TrCP and decreased phosphorylation of glycogen
synthase kinase 3ß associated with decreased ß-catenin stabilization.
Fisetin-mediated interference with the functional cooperation between ß-catenin
and T-cell factor (TCF)-2 resulted in the downregulation of positively regulated 
TCF targets, such as c-myc, Brn-2, and Mitf. Flow-cytometric analysis of
Mitf-overexpressing cells showed that fisetin repressed Mitf-induced cell
proliferation. Finally, administration of fisetin to 451Lu-xenografted nude mice 
resulted in the inhibition of tumor development and decreased Mitf expression.
Our data suggest that fisetin can be developed as an effective agent against
melanoma because of its potential inhibitory effect on ß-catenin/Mitf signaling.

PMCID: PMC3166244
PMID: 21346776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Pediatr Gastroenterol Nutr. 2011 Mar;52(3):339-44. doi:
10.1097/MPG.0b013e3181ff2e5b.

Intrahepatic biliary anomalies in a patient with Mowat-Wilson syndrome uncover a 
role for the zinc finger homeobox gene zfhx1b in vertebrate biliary development.

Cui S(1), Erlichman J, Russo P, Haber BA, Matthews RP.

Author information: 
(1)The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia Research Institute, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA.

BACKGROUND: zfhz1b is the causative gene for Mowat-Wilson syndrome, in which
patients demonstrate developmental delay and Hirschsprung disease, as well as
other anomalies.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We identified a patient with Mowat-Wilson syndrome who
also developed cholestasis and histopathologic features consistent with biliary
atresia, suggesting that mutations involving zfhz1b may lead to biliary
developmental anomalies or injury to the biliary tract. We used the zebrafish
model system to determine whether zfhx1b has a role in vertebrate biliary
development.
RESULTS: Using zebrafish we determined that zfhx1b was expressed in the
developing liver during biliary growth and remodeling, and that morpholino
antisense oligonucleotide-mediated knockdown of zfhx1b led to defects in biliary 
development. These findings were associated with decreased expression of vhnf1, a
transcription factor known to be important in biliary development in zebrafish
and in mammals.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies underscore the importance of genetic contributions in
the etiology of infantile hepatobiliary disorders, including biliary atresia.

PMID: 21336163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. BMC Dev Biol. 2011 Jan 31;11:5. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-11-5.

The nephrogenic potential of the transcription factors osr1, osr2, hnf1b, lhx1
and pax8 assessed in Xenopus animal caps.

Drews C(1), Senkel S, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung) Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Universität Duisburg-Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55, 45122 Essen, Germany.
gerhart.ryffel@uni-due.de

BACKGROUND: The three distinct types of kidneys, pronephros, mesonephros and
metanephros, develop consecutively in vertebrates. The earliest form of embryonic
kidney, the pronephros, is derived from intermediate mesoderm and the first
expressed genes localized in the pronephros anlage are the transcription factors 
osr1, osr2, hnf1b, lhx1 and pax8, here referred to as the early nephrogenic
transcription factors. However, the pathway inducing nephrogenesis and the
network of theses factors are poorly understood. Treatment of the
undifferentiated animal pole explant (animal cap) of Xenopus with activin A and
retinoic acid induces pronephros formation providing a powerful tool to analyze
key molecular events in nephrogenesis.
RESULTS: We have investigated the expression kinetics of the early nephrogenic
transcription factors in activin A and retinoic acid treated animal caps and
their potential to induce pronephric differentiation. In treated animal caps,
expression of osr1, osr2, hnf1b and lhx1 are induced early, whereas pax8
expression occurs later implying an indirect activation. Activin A alone is able 
to induce osr2 and lhx1 after three hours treatment in animal caps while retinoic
acid fails to induce any of these nephrogenic transcription factors. The early
expression of the five transcription factors and their interference with
pronephros development when overexpressed in embryos suggest that these factors
potentially induce nephrogenesis upon expression in animal caps. But no
pronephros development is achieved by either overexpression of OSR1, by HNF1B
injection with activin A treatment, or the combined application of LHX1 and PAX8,
although they influenced the expression of several early nephrogenic
transcription factors in some cases. In an additional approach we could show that
HNF1B induces several genes important in nephrogenesis and regulates lhx1
expression by an HNF1 binding site in the lhx1 promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: The early nephrogenic transcription factors play an important role
in nephrogenesis, but have no pronephros induction potential upon overexpression 
in animal caps. They activate transcriptional cascades that partially reflect the
gene activation initiated by activin A and retinoic acid. Significantly, HNF1B
activates the lhx1 promoter directly, thus extending the known activin A
regulation of the lhx1 gene via an activin A responsive element.

PMCID: PMC3042965
PMID: 21281489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. JOP. 2011 Jan 5;12(1):6-10.

Dysregulation of Hnf1b gene expression in cultured beta-cells in response to
cytotoxic fatty acid.

Johnstone KA(1), Diakogiannaki E, Dhayal S, Morgan NG, Harries LW.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula College of Medicine
and Dentistry, University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom.

CONTEXT: Increased levels of circulating fatty acids deriving from over-nutrition
are thought to contribute to the progressive beta-cell failure associated with
type 2 diabetes. Pancreatic beta-cells in culture are sensitive to exposure to
long-chain saturated fatty acids (e.g. palmitate) which cause cytotoxicity,
whereas the monounsaturated equivalents (e.g. palmitoleate) are cytoprotective.
OBJECTIVES: In this study we sought to determine whether of members of the
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) family of transcription factors, which are
mutated in familial, young-onset, monogenic beta-cell diabetes, could play a role
in fatty acid-mediated cytotoxicity in cultured beta-cells.
DESIGN: We used real-time PCR to determine whether hepatocyte nuclear factor gene
expression was altered in response to palmitate exposure in the BRIN-BD11
beta-cell line.
RESULTS: We found that the Hnf isoforms expressed in BRIN-BD11 cells are
dysregulated by palmitate exposure. The expression of Hnf1b is specifically
reduced by exposure to palmitate, and this response is prevented by co-incubation
with palmitoleate.
CONCLUSIONS: Down-regulation of Hnf1b gene expression accompanies
palmitate-mediated cytotoxicity in cultured beta-cells.

PMID: 21206094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Gut. 2011 Jul;60(7):958-66. doi: 10.1136/gut.2010.225920. Epub 2010 Dec 30.

Adult pancreatic acinar cells dedifferentiate to an embryonic progenitor
phenotype with concomitant activation of a senescence programme that is present
in chronic pancreatitis.

Pinho AV(1), Rooman I, Reichert M, De Medts N, Bouwens L, Rustgi AK, Real FX.

Author information: 
(1)Programa de Patología Molecular, Centro Nacional de Investigaciones
Oncológicas, Melchor Fernández Almagro 3, 28029-Madrid, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: Acinar cells display plasticity in vitro and in vivo and can activate 
a variety of differentiation programmes that may contribute to pancreatic
diseases. The aims were to determine: (1) the differentiation potential of acinar
cells under conditions which favour stem cell survival, and (2) its relationship 
to the phenotypes acquired by pancreatic epithelial cells in chronic
pancreatitis.
DESIGN: Murine acinar cells were cultured in suspension and their molecular
phenotype was characterised by qRT-PCR, chromatin immunoprecipitation,
immunocytochemistry and global transcriptome analysis. These findings were
compared to the changes occurring in experimental chronic pancreatitis induced by
pancreatic duct ligation and chronic caerulein administration.
RESULTS: Acinar cells in suspension culture acquired a dedifferentiated phenotype
characteristic of pancreatic embryonic progenitors, consisting of the
co-expression of Ptf1a and Pdx1, presence of an embryonic-type PTF1
transcriptional complex, activation of the Notch pathway, and expression of
additional pancreatic progenitor cell markers such as CpA1, Sox9 and Hnf1b. A
senescence programme, associated with activation of Ras and ERK signalling,
limited the proliferative capacity of the cells. A similar progenitor-like
phenotype with activation of a senescence programme was observed in experimental 
chronic pancreatitis induced by pancreatic duct ligation or repeated caerulein
administration, with the concomitant and differential activation of proliferation
and senescence in distinct cell populations.
CONCLUSIONS: Acinar cells dedifferentiate into an embryonic progenitor-like
phenotype upon suspension culture. This is associated with the activation of a
senescence programme. Both processes take place in experimental chronic
pancreatitis where senescence may contribute to limit tumour progression.

PMID: 21193456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Acta Pharm. 2010 Dec;60(4):387-406. doi: 10.2478/v10007-010-0040-9.

Genetic polymorphisms in diabetes: influence on therapy with oral antidiabetics.

Glamoclija U(1), Jevric-Cauevic A.

Author information: 
(1)Hercegovinalijek d.o.o., Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
una.glamoclija@hercegovinalijek.ba

Due to new genetic insights, etiologic classification of diabetes is under
constant scrutiny. Hundreds, or even thousands, of genes are linked with type 2
diabetes. Three common variants (Lys23 of KCNJ11, Pro12 of PPARG, and the T
allele at rs7903146 of TCF7L2) have been shown to be predisposed to type 2
diabetes mellitus across many large studies. Individually, each of these
polymorphisms is only moderately predisposed to type 2 diabetes. On the other
hand, monogenic forms of diabetes such as MODY and neonatal diabetes are
characterized by unique clinical features and the possibility of applying a
tailored treatment.Genetic polymorphisms in drug-metabolizing enzymes,
transporters, receptors, and other drug targets have been linked to
interindividual differences in the efficacy and toxicity of a number of
medications. Mutations in genes important in drug absorption, distribution,
metabolism and excretion (ADME) play a critical role in pharmacogenetics of
diabetes.There are currently five major classes of oral pharmacological agents
available to treat type 2 diabetes: sulfonylureas, meglitinides, metformin (a
biguanide), thiazolidinediones, and a-glucosidase inhibitors. Other classes are
also mentioned in literature.In this work, different types of genetic mutations
(mutations of the gene for glucokinase, HNF 1a, HNF1ß and Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunit
of KATP channel, PPAR-<U+03B3>, OCT1 and OCT2, cytochromes, direct drug-receptor
(KCNJ11), as well as the factors that influence the development of the disease
(TCF7L2) and variants of genes that lead to hepatosteatosis caused by
thiazolidinediones) and their influence on the response to therapy with oral
antidiabetics will be reviewed.

PMID: 21169132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Am J Surg Pathol. 2011 Jan;35(1):36-44. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3181ff400e.

Morphologic spectrum of immunohistochemically characterized clear cell carcinoma 
of the ovary: a study of 155 cases.

DeLair D(1), Oliva E, Köbel M, Macias A, Gilks CB, Soslow RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, Vancouver
General Hospital, NY, USA.

Establishing a diagnosis of ovarian clear cell carcinoma (O-CCC) can be subject
to significant interobserver variation. Accurately diagnosing this tumor is
important because of its chemoresistance and reported association with Lynch
syndrome. The spectrum of the morphologic features of O-CCC has not been well
described in a series composed of immunohistochemically characterized cases. A
total of 155 cases diagnosed as O-CCC were retrieved from the files of 3
institutions to analyze architectural and cytologic features. The
immunohistochemical features of these cases have been reported earlier. A
comprehensive list of features was recorded, including, but not limited to,
architectural patterns, nuclear appearance, cytoplasmic characteristics, and
mitotic index. Between 1 and 13 slides were available for review for each case.
The cases were divided into 2 groups based on morphologic characteristics, those 
with features shared by the large majority (the first group, n=138) and those
that showed unusual characteristics (second group, n=17). Tumors in the first
group typically showed a mixture of architectural patterns, the most frequent
being papillary and tubulocystic. Papillae, usually small and round and lacking
hierarchical branching and tufting or stratification of more than 3 cells, were
present at least focally in almost 3 of 4 cases. The cell shape was predominantly
cuboidal, not columnar. Nuclear pleomorphism and prominent nucleoli were
frequently present, but never diffusely. Clear cytoplasm was found in nearly
every case and hobnail cells were common. Mitoses exhibited a range from 0 to 13 
with an average of 3 to 4 per 10 high power fields. The second group of tumors
showed numerous unusual morphologic characteristics, despite the presence of
clear cytoplasm, including those typically seen in other ovarian epithelial
tumors, such as serous and endometrioid carcinoma. Eighty-nine percent of tumors 
from the first group showed the expected "O-CCC immunophenotype" [hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF) positive, and estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor 
(PR), Wilms tumor 1 (WT1) and p53 negative], whereas 4% of tumors showed HNF
positivity along with focal ER or PR expression. Seven percent of tumors were not
immunoreactive with these markers. Twenty-nine percent of tumors in the second
group showed the O-CCC immunophenotype, whereas 24% of tumors were p53 positive, 
5% of tumors were WT1 positive, and the remaining cases were negative for all
markers. Ninety-seven percent (112 of 117) of HNF-positive tumors in this series 
were classical O-CCC. Therefore, O-CCC has characteristic morphologic features
and a specific, if not unique, immunophenotype in the vast majority of the cases.
Clear cell-rich tumors with features that depart from the classical morphologic
appearances described herein should suggest the possibility of an alternative
diagnosis.

PMID: 21164285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Chin Med J (Engl). 2010 Nov;123(22):3326-33.

Systematic review of TCF2 anomalies in renal cysts and diabetes syndrome/maturity
onset diabetes of the young type 5.

Chen YZ(1), Gao Q, Zhao XZ, Chen YZ, Bennett CL, Xiong XS, Mei CL, Shi YQ, Chen
XM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Kidney Institute and Key Lab of Chinese People's
Liberation Army, General Hospital of Chinese People's Liberation Army, Beijing
100853, China.

OBJECTIVE: There is a paucity of published works that systematically evaluate
gene anomalies or clinical features of patients with renal cysts and diabetes
syndrome (RCAD)/maturity onset diabetes of the young type 5 (MODY5). The purpose 
of this review was to systematically assess the detection rate, genetic and
phenotypic implications of heterozygous autosomal dominant TCF2 anomalies.
DATA SOURCES: MEDLINE database was searched to select articles recorded in
English from 1997 to 2008. The focus was monoallelic germline TCF2 gene
mutations/deletions. Biallelic inactivation, polymorphisms, DNA modification
(hypomethylation and hypermethylation), loci associated with cancer risk, and
somatic TCF2 anomalies were all excluded.
STUDY SELECTION: After searching the literature, 50 articles were selected.
RESULTS: The detection rate of TCF2 anomalies was 9.7% and varied considerably
among MODY (1.4%), renal structure anomalies (RSA) (21.4%) and RSA with MODY
(41.2%) subgroups. Mutations were strikingly located within the DNA binding
domain and varied among exons of the DNA binding domain: exons 2 and 4 were the
hottest spots, while mutations were sporadically distributed in exon 3. The
consistent phenotypes were RSA (89.6%) and diabetes mellitus (DM) (45.0%).
However, the concurrence of RSA and DM was relatively low (27.5%), which hinders 
the optimal performance of genetic testing and obtainment of timely diagnosis.
Other organ involvements were complementary and necessary for the early
identification of patients with TCF2 anomalies. Analysis of phenotypes of TCF2
point mutations showed significant differences in the detection rates of RSA,
impaired renal function (IRF) and DM according to mutation type but not mutation 
location.
CONCLUSION: These valuable features of TCF2 anomalies that previously did not
receive sufficient attention should not be neglected.

PMID: 21163139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Diabetologia. 2011 Mar;54(3):563-71. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1977-4. Epub 2010
Dec 12.

Association of indices of liver and adipocyte insulin resistance with 19
confirmed susceptibility loci for type 2 diabetes in 6,733 non-diabetic Finnish
men.

Vangipurapu J(1), Stancáková A, Pihlajamäki J, Kuulasmaa TM, Kuulasmaa T,
Paananen J, Kuusisto J, Ferrannini E, Laakso M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio University
Hospital, 70210, Kuopio, Finland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Of the confirmed type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci only a few 
are known to affect insulin sensitivity. We examined the association of indices
of hepatic and adipocyte insulin resistance (IR) with 19 confirmed type 2
diabetes risk loci in a large population-based study.
METHODS: Non-diabetic participants (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>8,460, age 57.3<U+2009>±<U+2009>7.0 years, BMI
26.8<U+2009>±<U+2009>3.8 kg/m(2); mean ± SD) from a population-based cohort underwent an OGTT. 
Of them, 6,733 non-diabetic men were genotyped for single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in or near PPARG2 (also known as PPARG), KCNJ11, TCF7L2,
SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, HNF1B, WFS1, JAZF1, CDC123, TSPAN8,
THADA, ADAMTS9, NOTCH2, KCNQ1, MTNR1B and SNP rs7480010. We investigated hepatic 
IR with a new index of liver IR. The adipocyte IR index was defined as a product 
of fasting NEFA and plasma insulin levels.
RESULTS: Type 2 diabetes risk SNPs in or near KCNJ11 and HHEX were significantly 
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0013), and those in or near CDKN2B, NOTCH2 and MTNR1B were nominally
(p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), associated with decreased liver IR index. The Pro12 allele of PPARG2 
was significantly associated with a high adipocyte IR index and nominally
associated with high liver IR.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The Pro12 allele of PPARG2 seems to impair insulin's 
antilipolytic effect, leading to high NEFA release in the fasting state and IR.
In addition, the type 2 diabetes risk alleles of KCNJ11 and HHEX, which are known
to impair insulin secretion, were associated with increased hepatic insulin
sensitivity.

PMID: 21153532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Mod Pathol. 2011 Apr;24(4):512-21. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2010.215. Epub 2010 Dec
3.

Calculator for ovarian carcinoma subtype prediction.

Kalloger SE(1), Köbel M, Leung S, Mehl E, Gao D, Marcon KM, Chow C, Clarke BA,
Huntsman DG, Gilks CB.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Pathology Evaluation Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

With the emerging evidence that the five major ovarian carcinoma subtypes
(high-grade serous, clear cell, endometrioid, mucinous, and low-grade serous) are
distinct disease entities, management of ovarian carcinoma will become subtype
specific in the future. In an effort to improve diagnostic accuracy, we set out
to determine if an immunohistochemical panel of molecular markers could reproduce
consensus subtype assignment. Immunohistochemical expression of 22 biomarkers
were examined on tissue microarrays constructed from 322 archival ovarian
carcinoma samples from the British Columbia Cancer Agency archives, for the
period between 1984 and 2000, and an independent set of 242 cases of ovarian
carcinoma from the Gynaecologic Tissue Bank at Vancouver General Hospital from
2001 to 2008. Nominal logistic regression was used to produce a subtype
prediction model for each of these sets of cases. These models were then
cross-validated against the other cohort, and then both models were further
validated in an independent cohort of 81 ovarian carcinoma samples from five
different centers. Starting with data for 22 markers, full model fit, backwards, 
nominal logistic regression identified the same nine markers (CDKN2A, DKK1,
HNF1B, MDM2, PGR, TFF3, TP53, VIM, WT1) as being most predictive of ovarian
carcinoma subtype in both the archival and tumor bank cohorts. These models were 
able to predict subtype in the respective cohort in which they were developed
with a high degree of sensitivity and specificity (<U+03BA> statistics of 0.88±0.02 and 
0.86±0.04, respectively). When the models were cross-validated (ie using the
model developed in one case series to predict subtype in the other series), the
prediction equation's performances were reduced (<U+03BA> statistics of 0.70±0.04 and
0.61±0.04, respectively) due to differences in frequency of expression of some
biomarkers in the two case series. Both models were then validated on the
independent series of 81 cases, with very good to excellent ability to predict
subtype (<U+03BA>=0.85±0.06 and 0.78±0.07, respectively). A nine-marker
immunohistochemical maker panel can be used to objectively support classification
into one of the five major subtypes of ovarian carcinoma.

PMID: 21131918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jan 7;404(1):284-90. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.11.108. Epub 2010 Dec 2.

HNF-1B specifically regulates the transcription of the <U+03B3>a-subunit of the
Na+/K+-ATPase.

Ferrè S(1), Veenstra GJ, Bouwmeester R, Hoenderop JG, Bindels RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, The
Netherlands.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1B (HNF-1B) is a transcription factor involved in
embryonic development and tissue-specific gene expression in several organs,
including the kidney. Recently heterozygous mutations in the HNF1B gene have been
identified in patients with hypomagnesemia due to renal Mg(2+) wasting.
Interestingly, ChIP-chip data revealed HNF-1B binding sites in the FXYD2 gene,
encoding the <U+03B3>-subunit of the Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase. The <U+03B3>-subunit has been described
as one of the molecular players in the renal Mg(2+) reabsorption in the distal
convoluted tubule (DCT). Of note, the FXYD2 gene can be alternatively transcribed
into two main variants, namely <U+03B3>a and <U+03B3>b. In the present study, we demonstrated
via two different reporter gene assays that HNF-1B specifically acts as an
activator of the <U+03B3>a-subunit, whereas the <U+03B3>b-subunit expression was not affected. 
Moreover, the HNF-1B mutations H69fsdelAC, H324S325fsdelCA, Y352finsA and K156E, 
previously identified in patients with hypomagnesemia, prevented transcription
activation of <U+03B3>a-subunit via a dominant negative effect on wild type HNF1-B. By
immunohistochemistry, it was shown that the <U+03B3>a- and <U+03B3>b-subunits colocalize at the
basolateral membrane of the DCT segment of mouse kidney. On the basis of these
data, we suggest that abnormalities involving the HNF-1B gene may impair the
relative abundance of <U+03B3>a and <U+03B3>b, thus affecting the transcellular Mg(2+)
reabsorption in the DCT.

Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21130072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Kidney Blood Press Res. 2010;33(6):456-75. doi: 10.1159/000321013. Epub 2010 Nov 
25.

Uromodulin biology and pathophysiology--an update.

Vyletal P(1), Bleyer AJ, Kmoch S.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Applied Genomics, First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in 
Prague and General University Hospital in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.

Uromodulin (UMOD) is a glycoprotein expressed on the luminal surface of the
apical membrane of renal tubular epithelial cells forming the thick ascending
limb of Henle. Here, UMOD forms filamentous structures probably ensuring water
impermeability and the countercurrent gradient. The multidomain structure,
cellular topology of UMOD and clinical consequences associated with UMOD
dysfunction, however, suggest that it may be involved in other biological
processes such as receptor-mediated endocytosis, mechanosensation of urinary
flow, Wnt-signaling, cell cycle regulation and planar cell polarity. A specific, 
but as yet unidentified, protease(s) releases UMOD into the urine, where it
probably contributes to colloid osmotic pressure, retards passage of positively
charged electrolytes, prevents urinary tract infection and modulates formation of
supersaturated salts and their crystals. UMOD expression, biosynthesis and
excretion are regulated in a complex manner, and dysregulation is found in a wide
range of pathological conditions. It is strongly reduced or absent in cases with 
mutations in UMOD, renin, HNF1B and other genetic disorders causing autosomal
dominant hyperuricemic nephropathy. In contrast, elevated UMOD excretion may be
associated with, and thus predictive of, chronic kidney disease. UMOD analysis is
therefore of importance in all conditions with renal involvement and may be
useful in the proper classification of renal diseases.

2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21109754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Development. 2011 Jan;138(1):65-74. doi: 10.1242/dev.058727. Epub 2010 Nov 23.

Cdx1 refines positional identity of the vertebrate hindbrain by directly
repressing Mafb expression.

Sturgeon K(1), Kaneko T, Biemann M, Gauthier A, Chawengsaksophak K, Cordes SP.

Author information: 
(1)Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, Mount Sinai Hospital, 600 University
Avenue, Toronto, ON M5G 1X5, Canada.

An interplay of transcription factors interprets signalling pathways to define
anteroposterior positions along the vertebrate axis. In the hindbrain, these
transcription factors prompt the position-appropriate appearance of seven to
eight segmental structures, known as rhombomeres (r1-r8). The evolutionarily
conserved Cdx caudal-type homeodomain transcription factors help specify the
vertebrate trunk and tail but have not been shown to directly regulate hindbrain 
patterning genes. Mafb (Kreisler, Krml1, valentino), a basic domain leucine
zipper transcription factor, is required for development of r5 and r6 and is the 
first gene to show restricted expression within these two segments. The
homeodomain protein vHnf1 (Hnf1b) directly activates Mafb expression. vHnf1 and
Mafb share an anterior expression limit at the r4/r5 boundary but vHnf1
expression extends beyond the posterior limit of Mafb and, therefore, cannot
establish the posterior Mafb expression boundary. Upon identifying regulatory
sequences responsible for posterior Mafb repression, we have used in situ
hybridization, immunofluorescence and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
analyses to determine that Cdx1 directly inhibits early Mafb expression in the
neural tube posterior of the r6/r7 boundary, which is the anteriormost boundary
of Cdx1 expression in the hindbrain. Cdx1 dependent repression of Mafb is
transient. After the 10-somite stage, another mechanism acts to restrict Mafb
expression in its normal r5 and r6 domain, even in the absence of Cdx1. Our
findings identify Mafb as one of the earliest direct targets of Cdx1 and show
that Cdx1 plays a direct role in early hindbrain patterning. Thus, just as Cdx2
and Cdx4 govern the trunk-to-tail transition, Cdx1 may regulate the
hindbrain-to-spinal cord transition.

PMID: 21098558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Am J Hum Genet. 2010 Nov 12;87(5):618-30. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2010.10.004. Epub
2010 Nov 4.

Deletion 17q12 is a recurrent copy number variant that confers high risk of
autism and schizophrenia.

Moreno-De-Luca D(1); SGENE Consortium, Mulle JG; Simons Simplex Collection
Genetics Consortium, Kaminsky EB, Sanders SJ; GeneSTAR, Myers SM, Adam MP, Pakula
AT, Eisenhauer NJ, Uhas K, Weik L, Guy L, Care ME, Morel CF, Boni C, Salbert BA, 
Chandrareddy A, Demmer LA, Chow EW, Surti U, Aradhya S, Pickering DL, Golden DM, 
Sanger WG, Aston E, Brothman AR, Gliem TJ, Thorland EC, Ackley T, Iyer R, Huang
S, Barber JC, Crolla JA, Warren ST, Martin CL, Ledbetter DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA. daniel.morenodeluca@emory.edu

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2011 Jan 7;88(1):121.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) and schizophrenia are neurodevelopmental
disorders for which recent evidence indicates an important etiologic role for
rare copy number variants (CNVs) and suggests common genetic mechanisms. We
performed cytogenomic array analysis in a discovery sample of patients with
neurodevelopmental disorders referred for clinical testing. We detected a
recurrent 1.4 Mb deletion at 17q12, which harbors HNF1B, the gene responsible for
renal cysts and diabetes syndrome (RCAD), in 18/15,749 patients, including
several with ASD, but 0/4,519 controls. We identified additional shared
phenotypic features among nine patients available for clinical assessment,
including macrocephaly, characteristic facial features, renal anomalies, and
neurocognitive impairments. In a large follow-up sample, the same deletion was
identified in 2/1,182 ASD/neurocognitive impairment and in 4/6,340 schizophrenia 
patients, but in 0/47,929 controls (corrected p = 7.37 × 10<U+207B>5). These data
demonstrate that deletion 17q12 is a recurrent, pathogenic CNV that confers a
very high risk for ASD and schizophrenia and show that one or more of the 15
genes in the deleted interval is dosage sensitive and essential for normal brain 
development and function. In addition, the phenotypic features of patients with
this CNV are consistent with a contiguous gene syndrome that extends beyond RCAD,
which is caused by HNF1B mutations only.

Copyright © 2010 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2978962
PMID: 21055719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Jun;20(6):1071-8. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0185. Epub 2010 Nov 
4.

A novel stepwise differentiation of functional pancreatic exocrine cells from
embryonic stem cells.

Shirasawa S(1), Yoshie S, Yokoyama T, Tomotsune D, Yue F, Sasaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Advanced Health Sciences, Bourbon Institutes of Health, BOURBON
Corporation, Kashiwazaki, Niigata, Japan. shirasawa-sak@bourbon.co.jp

Cultivation of functional pancreatic cells isolated from adult mammalian pancreas
remains difficult. We developed a differentiation protocol that gradually induced
the formation of mouse pancreatic exocrine cells from embryonic stem cells
(ESCs). This process mimicked in vivo pancreatic development by directing cells
through definitive endoderm (DE), gut tube endoderm, and pancreatic progenitor
cells to differentiated cells that expressed pancreatic exocrine enzymes. Mouse
ESCs were cultured in hanging drops to form embryoid bodies. Treatment of
embryoid bodies with activin A induced the formation of DE cells that expressed
marker mRNAs Goosecoid and Mixl1 and that were double-positive with Foxa2 and
Sox17 proteins. Subsequent treatment of the DE cells by retinoic acid induced the
formation of gut tube endoderm cells that expressed the specific marker Hnf1b.
Expression of Goosecoid and Mixl1 was downregulated during this period.
Fibroblast growth factor 7 (FGF7) promoted differentiation of PDX1-expressing
pancreatic progenitor cells that also expressed Foxa2 mRNA, an endodermal marker,
suggesting derivation from the DE cells. Exocrine cell differentiation was
induced with FGF7, glucagon-like peptide-1, and nicotinamide. The differentiated 
cells expressed mature pancreatic exocrine cell mRNAs, such as Amylase, Elastase,
and Carboxypeptidase A. Additionally, they produced pancreatic elastase, amylase,
carboxypeptidase A, and chymotrypsin proteins that were identified in cytoplasmic
granules by immunocytochemistry. Active amylase was released into the medium.
Moreover, FGF7 was associated with differentiation of pancreatic exocrine cells. 
The findings reported here offer a novel and effective process to develop
pancreatic exocrine cells from ESCs.

PMID: 20887097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Animal. 2010 Oct;4(10):1619-27. doi: 10.1017/S175173111000087X.

The Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha ( HNF1A) gene is associated with fatness
and loin muscle area in the pig.

Fan B(1), Du ZQ, Rothschild MF.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Animal Science and Center for Integrated Animal Genomics, Iowa 
State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

The significance of hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) in ß-cell development and
function has been generally recognized in humans, as evidenced by their
associations with cases of maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY). Common
Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1A), Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta
(HNF1B) and Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF4A) mutations could lead to
monogenic forms 3, 5 and 1 of diabetes mellitus, respectively, and were
characterized by MODY in humans. In this study, multiple variants were discovered
in the porcine HNF1A and HNF4A genes, and one single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) was detected in the HNF1B gene. Using the Iowa State University Berkshire ×
Yorkshire pig resource population, the HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A genes were mapped
on chromosomes 14, 12 and 17, respectively. The linkage disequilibrium (LD)
analyses indicated that most of the HNF1A variants were not in strong LD with
each other; however, nearly all of them were highly significantly (P < 0.01)
associated with loin muscle area (LMA). The SNPs c.327-19G>T and c.1768+40_23del 
were significantly (P < 0.05) associated with backfat and total lipid percentage,
and the latter was also associated with muscle glycogen metabolism measures. Four
major haplotypes were observed and the association analyses suggested that
haplotype 3 (-CGCGD-, I indicates Insertion and D indicates Deletion) was
favorable for reduced backfat, while haplotype 1 (-CACGI-) was unfavorably
associated with backfat and LMA. There was no significant interaction effect on
backfat among the SNPs c.327-19G>T, c.1768+40_23del of the HNF1A gene and
c.646C>T of the transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene. These findings
suggest that the HNF1A gene has significant effects on both fatness- and meat
production-related traits. No significant associations with production traits
with the SNPs from the HNF1B and HNF4A genes were observed in the study.

PMID: 22445113  [PubMed]


203. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2010 Sep;19(9):2115-23. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-10-0173.

Context-dependent effects of genome-wide association study genotypes and
macroenvironment on time to biochemical (prostate specific antigen) failure after
prostatectomy.

Rebbeck TR(1), Weber AL, Walker AH, Stefflova K, Tran TV, Spangler E, Chang BL,
Zeigler-Johnson CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, 217 Blockley Hall, 423 Guardian Drive, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104-6021, USA. rebbeck@mail.med.upenn.edu

BACKGROUND: Disparities in cancer defined by race, age, or gender are well
established. However, demographic metrics are surrogates for the complex
contributions of genotypes, exposures, health care, socioeconomic and
sociocultural environment, and many other factors. Macroenvironmental factors
represent novel surrogates for exposures, lifestyle, and other factors that are
difficult to measure but might influence cancer outcomes.
METHODS: We applied a "multilevel molecular epidemiology" approach using a
prospective cohort of 444 White prostate cancer cases who underwent prostatectomy
and were followed until biochemical failure (BF) or censoring without BF. We
applied Cox regression models to test for joint effects of 86 genome-wide
association study-identified genotypes and macroenvironment contextual effects
after geocoding all cases to their residential census tracts. All analyses were
adjusted for age at diagnosis and tumor aggressiveness.
RESULTS: Residents living in census tracts with a high proportion of older single
heads of household, high rates of vacant housing, or high unemployment had
shorter time until BF postsurgery after adjustment for patient age and tumor
aggressiveness. After correction for multiple testing, genotypes alone did not
predict time to BF, but interactions predicting time to BF were observed for MSMB
(rs10993994) and percentage of older single heads of households (P = 0.0004), and
for HNF1B/TCF2 (rs4430796) and census tract per capita income (P = 0.0002).
CONCLUSIONS: The context-specific macroenvironmental effects of genotype might
improve the ability to identify groups that might experience poor prostate cancer
outcomes.
IMPACT: Risk estimation and clinical translation of genotype information might
require an understanding of both individual- and macroenvironment-level context.

(c) 2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC2972664
PMID: 20826827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Fertil Steril. 2011 Apr;95(5):1589-94. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2010.07.1062.
Epub 2010 Aug 24.

Recurrent aberrations identified by array-CGH in patients with
Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser syndrome.

Ledig S(1), Schippert C, Strick R, Beckmann MW, Oppelt PG, Wieacker P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Humangenetik, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität, Münster,
Germany. sledig@uni-muenster.de

OBJECTIVE: To identify genetic causes of Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH)
syndrome.
DESIGN: Prospective laboratory study.
SETTING: University hospital.
PATIENT(S): Fifty-six patients with MRKH syndrome.
INTERVENTION(S): Identification of microdeletions and -duplications in a group of
48 MRKH patients by array-CGH. Results obtained by array-CGH were confirmed by
RT-qPCR. Sequential analysis of two candidate genes LHX1 and HNF1B in a group of 
56 MRKH patients.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Identification of chromosomal regions and genes
(recurrent and private) associated with MRKH syndrome.
RESULT(S): We could delineate three definitively relevant regions (1q21.1, 17q12,
and 22q11.21) and suggest that LHX1 und HNF1B are candidate genes for MRKH
syndrome, because we identified recurrent deletions affecting these genes and a
possible causative missense mutation in LHX1.
CONCLUSION(S): Our findings suggest that different chromosomal regions are
associated with MRKH syndrome.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20797712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Diabetologia. 2010 Nov;53(11):2334-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1861-2. Epub 2010
Aug 12.

Expression analysis of loci associated with type 2 diabetes in human tissues.

Cotsapas C(1), Prokunina-Olsson L, Welch C, Saxena R, Weaver C, Usher N, Guiducci
C, Bonakdar S, Turner N, LaCroix B, Hall JL.

Author information: 
(1)Broad Institute, Cambridge, MA, USA.

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2011 Jan;54(1):209.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Genetic mapping has identified over 20 loci contributing to
genetic risk of type 2 diabetes. The next step is to identify the genes and
mechanisms regulating the contributions of genetic risk to disease. The goal of
this study was to evaluate the effect of age, height, weight and risk alleles on 
expression of candidate genes in diabetes-associated regions in three relevant
human tissues.
METHODS: We measured transcript abundance for WFS1, KCNJ11, TCF2 (also known as
HNF1B), PPARG, HHEX, IDE, CDKAL1, CDKN2A, CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, SLC30A8 and TCF7L2 by 
quantitative RT-PCR in human pancreas (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>50), colon (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>195) and liver
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>50). Tissue samples were genotyped for single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) associated with type 2 diabetes. The effects of age, height, weight,
tissue and SNP on RNA expression were tested by linear modelling.
RESULTS: Expression of all genes exhibited tissue bias. Immunohistochemistry
confirmed the findings for HHEX, IDE and SLC30A8, which showed strongest
tissue-specific mRNA expression bias. Neither age, height nor weight were
associated with gene expression. We found no evidence that type 2
diabetes-associated SNPs affect neighbouring gene expression (cis-expression
quantitative trait loci) in colon, pancreas and liver.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This study provides new evidence that tissue-type,
but not age, height, weight or SNPs in or near candidate genes associated with
increased risk of type 2 diabetes are strong contributors to differential gene
expression in the genes and tissues examined.

PMID: 20703447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. J Hepatobiliary Pancreat Sci. 2011 Jan;18(1):1-5. doi: 10.1007/s00534-010-0307-z.

Genetic lineage tracing, a powerful tool to investigate the embryonic
organogenesis and adult organ maintenance of the pancreas.

Kawaguchi Y(1), Takaori K, Uemoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine Kyoto University, 54
Shogoin Kawara-cho, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606, Japan. yoshiyak@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Revealing the mechanism of adult organ maintenance and regeneration after injury 
is fundamental to our understanding of the pathogenesis of diseases. Considering 
the results of pulse and chase experiments using inducible insulin-Cre or
Elastase-Cre, and more recently HNF1b-Cre, adult pancreatic cells (beta, acinar, 
and duct cells) seem to be maintained by the self-duplication of the existing
cells, while there is still a dispute about whether adult beta-cells are supplied
from the duct cells. Here we describe the advantages and pitfalls of Cre-mediated
genetic lineage tracing experiments in the analysis of embryonic organogenesis
and adult organ maintenance of the pancreas. This experimental technique enables 
us to visualize the specific cells and their progeny in vivo, and the combination
of lineage tracing and other experimental procedures provides us with more
detailed information on the mechanism of organogenesis and adult organ
homeostasis.

PMID: 20668890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. PLoS One. 2010 Jul 13;5(7):e11499. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011499.

Gene expression profiles of Beta-cell enriched tissue obtained by laser capture
microdissection from subjects with type 2 diabetes.

Marselli L(1), Thorne J, Dahiya S, Sgroi DC, Sharma A, Bonner-Weir S, Marchetti
P, Weir GC.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Islet Transplantation and Cell Biology, Research Division, Joslin
Diabetes Center and the Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

BACKGROUND: Changes in gene expression in pancreatic beta-cells from type 2
diabetes (T2D) should provide insights into their abnormal insulin secretion and 
turnover.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Frozen sections were obtained from cadaver
pancreases of 10 control and 10 T2D human subjects. Beta-cell enriched samples
were obtained by laser capture microdissection (LCM). RNA was extracted,
amplified and subjected to microarray analysis. Further analysis was performed
with DNA-Chip Analyzer (dChip) and Gene Set Enrichment Analysis (GSEA) software. 
There were changes in expression of genes linked to glucotoxicity. Evidence of
oxidative stress was provided by upregulation of several metallothionein genes.
There were few changes in the major genes associated with cell cycle, apoptosis
or endoplasmic reticulum stress. There was differential expression of genes
associated with pancreatic regeneration, most notably upregulation of members of 
the regenerating islet gene (REG) family and metalloproteinase 7 (MMP7). Some of 
the genes found in GWAS studies to be related to T2D were also found to be
differentially expressed. IGF2BP2, TSPAN8, and HNF1B (TCF2) were upregulated
while JAZF1 and SLC30A8 were downregulated.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: This study made possible by LCM has identified many
novel changes in gene expression that enhance understanding of the pathogenesis
of T2D.

PMCID: PMC2903480
PMID: 20644627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2010 Oct;203(4):364.e1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2010.05.022.
Epub 2010 Jul 15.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1ß (HNF1B) gene are common with
combined uterine and renal malformations but are not found with isolated uterine 
malformations.

Oram RA(1), Edghill EL, Blackman J, Taylor MJ, Kay T, Flanagan SE, Ismail-Pratt
I, Creighton SM, Ellard S, Hattersley AT, Bingham C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, UK. richoram@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Congenital uterine abnormalities are common and may be associated with
developmental renal abnormalities. Mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1ß 
(HNF1B) gene are associated with renal and uterine abnormalities. We aimed to
study the role of HNF1B mutations in a cohort with congenital uterine
abnormalities.
STUDY DESIGN: We tested 108 probands with uterine abnormalities for HNF1B
mutations. We collected clinical information from patient records.
RESULTS: Nine of 108 women (8%) had a mutation or deletion in the HNF1B gene.
Abnormal HNF1B was found in 18% of the 50 probands who had both uterine and renal
abnormalities but in none of the 58 women with isolated uterine abnormalities.
CONCLUSION: Mutations of the HNF1B gene are found in women with both uterine and 
renal abnormalities but are rare in isolated uterine abnormalities. We suggest
that HNF1B testing should be performed in patients with both renal and uterine
abnormalities, but not in patients with isolated uterine abnormalities.

Copyright © 2010 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20633866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Curr Opin Nephrol Hypertens. 2010 Sep;19(5):456-62. doi:
10.1097/MNH.0b013e32833caf61.

Novel molecular pathways in renal Mg2+ transport: a guided tour along the
nephron.

San-Cristobal P(1), Dimke H, Hoenderop JG, Bindels RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: This review highlights recent advances in renal magnesium (Mg)
handling. The understanding of the molecular processes of epithelial Mg transport
has expanded considerably due to the identification of novel genes involved in
hypomagnesemic disorders.
RECENT FINDINGS: Mg deficiency remains one of the most common electrolyte
disorders. Detailed genetic analysis of families with inherited forms of
hypomagnesemia has led to the identification of new genes involved in Mg
homeostasis. As such, familial hypomagnesemia has been linked to mutations in the
claudin-16/19 complex located in the thick ascending limb. Moreover, the
pro-epidermal growth factor, the potassium channels Kv1.1 and Kir4.1, and the
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1B have recently been identified as causative factors
in syndromes of hereditary hypomagnesemia. These proteins play key roles in
regulating electrolyte balance within the distal convoluted tubule, either by
directly affecting the epithelial Mg channel, transient receptor potential
channel melastatin member 6, or by altering the driving force for Mg influx via
the channel.
SUMMARY: Recent genetic and molecular studies have further elucidated the
processes that govern renal Mg transport and hence systemic Mg balance. This has 
provided us with new tools to understand the molecular pathology behind
hypomagnesemia.

PMID: 20625291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010 Oct;25(10):3430-3. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfq380. Epub
2010 Jun 28.

Autism in three patients with cystic or hyperechogenic kidneys and chromosome
17q12 deletion.

Loirat C(1), Bellanné-Chantelot C, Husson I, Deschênes G, Guigonis V, Chabane N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris,
Hôpital Robert Debré, Université Paris-Diderot, Paris, France.
chantal.loirat@rdb.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: We report autism in 3 out of 53 children with cystic or
hyperechogenic kidneys and heterozygous 17q12 region deletion encompassing
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF1B).
RESULTS: They presented mental retardation, social interaction impairments,
verbal and non-verbal communication deficits and stereotyped behaviours. Deletion
size and location of breakpoints were similar to those reported in patients with 
renal disease/diabetes only.
CONCLUSION: Reciprocal genomic rearrangements of the 17q12 region, reported in
patients with mental retardation and epilepsy, could also be involved in autism. 
Nephrologists should be aware of the possibility of autism in patients with 17q12
deletion including HNF1B locus.

PMID: 20587423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Sep;299(3):G769-77. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00237.2010. Epub 2010 Jun 24.

Differential transcriptional characteristics of small and large biliary
epithelial cells derived from small and large bile ducts.

Glaser S(1), Wang M, Ueno Y, Venter J, Wang K, Chen H, Alpini G, Holterman A.

Author information: 
(1)Scott and White Digestive Disease Research Center, Temple, Texas, USA.

Biliary epithelial cells (BEC) are morphologically and functionally
heterogeneous. To investigate the molecular mechanism for their diversities, we
test the hypothesis that large and small BEC have disparity in their target gene 
response to their transcriptional regulator, the biliary cell-enriched hepatocyte
nuclear factor HNF6. The expression of the major HNF (HNF6, OC2, HNF1b, HNF1a,
HNF4a, C/EBPb, and Foxa2) and representative biliary transport target genes that 
are HNF dependent were compared between SV40-transformed BEC derived from large
(SV40LG) and small (SV40SM) ducts, before and after treatment with recombinant
adenoviral vectors expressing HNF6 (AdHNF6) or control LacZ cDNA (AdLacZ). Large 
and small BEC were isolated from mouse liver treated with growth hormone, a known
transcriptional activator of HNF6, and the effects on selected target genes were 
examined. Constitutive Foxa2, HNF1a, and HNF4a gene expression were 2.3-, 12.4-, 
and 2.6-fold, respectively, higher in SV40SM cells. This was associated with 2.7-
and 4-fold higher baseline expression of HNF1a- and HNF4a-regulated ntcp and
oatp1 genes, respectively. Following AdHNF6 infection, HNF6 gene expression was
1.4-fold higher (P = 0.02) in AdHNF6 SV40SM relative to AdHNF6 SV40LG cells, with
a corresponding higher Foxa2 (4-fold), HNF1a (15-fold), and HNF4a (6-fold) gene
expression in AdHNF6-SV40SM over AdHNF6-SV40LG. The net effects were upregulation
of HNF6 target gene glucokinase and of Foxa2, HNF1a, and HNF4a target genes
oatp1, ntcp, and mrp2 over AdLacZ control in both cells, but with higher levels
in AdH6-SV40SM over AdH6-SV40LG of glucokinase, oatp1, ntcp, and mrp2 (by 1.8-,
3.4-, 2.4-, and 2.5-fold, respectively). In vivo, growth hormone-mediated
increase in HNF6 expression was associated with similar higher upregulation of
glucokinase and mrp2 in cholangiocytes from small vs. large BEC. Small and large 
BEC have a distinct profile of hepatocyte transcription factor and cognate target
gene expression, as well as differential strength of response to transcriptional 
regulation, thus providing a potential molecular basis for their divergent
function.

PMCID: PMC2950684
PMID: 20576918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. BMC Cancer. 2010 Jun 22;10:315. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-10-315.

Alterations in LMTK2, MSMB and HNF1B gene expression are associated with the
development of prostate cancer.

Harries LW(1), Perry JR, McCullagh P, Crundwell M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Peninsula NIHR Clinical
Research Facility, University of Exeter, Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, Devon,
UK. L.W.Harries@exeter.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Genome wide association studies (GWAS) have identified several
genetic variants that are associated with prostate cancer. Most of these
variants, like other GWAS association signals, are located in non-coding regions 
of potential candidate genes, and thus could act at the level of the mRNA
transcript.
METHODS: We measured the expression and isoform usage of seven prostate cancer
candidate genes in benign and malignant prostate by real-time PCR, and correlated
these factors with cancer status and genotype at the GWAS risk variants.
RESULTS: We determined that levels of LMTK2 transcripts in prostate
adenocarcinomas were only 32% of those in benign tissues (p = 3.2 x 10(-7)), and 
that an independent effect of genotype at variant rs6465657 on LMTK2 expression
in benign (n = 39) and malignant tissues (n = 21) was also evident (P = 0.002).
We also identified that whilst HNF1B(C) and MSMB2 comprised the predominant
isoforms in benign tissues (90% and 98% of total HNF1B or MSMB expression),
HNF1B(B) and MSMB1 were predominant in malignant tissue (95% and 96% of total
HNF1B or MSMB expression; P = 1.7 x 10(-7) and 4 x 10(-4) respectively),
indicating major shifts in isoform usage.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that the amount or nature of mRNA transcripts
expressed from the LMTK2, HNF1B and MSMB candidate genes is altered in prostate
cancer, and provides further evidence for a role for these genes in this
disorder. The alterations in isoform usage we detect highlights the potential
importance of alternative mRNA processing and moderation of mRNA stability as
potentially important disease mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2908099
PMID: 20569440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2010 Sep;25(9):3116-9. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfq315. Epub
2010 Jun 13.

Growth hormone therapy-related hyperglycaemia in a boy with renal cystic
hypodysplasia and a new mutation of the HNF1 beta gene.

Giglio S(1), Contini E, Toni S, Pela I.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Section, Department of Clinical Pathophysiology, University
of Florence, Italy.

We provide a molecular and pathophysiological characterization of an 11-year-old 
male patient, with a diagnosis of renal hypodysplasia, cysts and chronic renal
failure. Although previously normoglycaemic and with a negative familial history 
for diabetes mellitus, he developed fasting hyperglycaemia within 12 months of
the start of treatment with recombinant human growth hormone (rhGH). Direct
sequencing of the HNF1 beta gene revealed a de novo heterozygous mutation in exon
2, c.535delC [Pro118LeuX7]+[=]. The appearance of fasting hyperglycaemia
following rhGH treatment in children with renal cystic hypodysplasia suggests
that investigation of the HNF1 beta gene is warranted, even when familial history
is negative for diabetes. This is particularly important in regard to genetic
counselling.

PMID: 20543213  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Urology. 2010 Aug;76(2):507.e6-11. doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2010.03.042. Epub 2010 
Jun 9.

Downregulation of HNF-1B in renal cell carcinoma is associated with tumor
progression and poor prognosis.

Buchner A(1), Castro M, Hennig A, Popp T, Assmann G, Stief CG, Zimmermann W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Medical Center of the Ludwig-Maximilians-University,
Munich, Germany. alexander.buchner@med.uni-muenchen.de

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to identify new prognostic factors in
metastatic renal cell carcinoma (RCC) based on the analysis of precisely defined 
metastatic tissue.
METHODS: Expression profiling was done on 26 snap-frozen samples of clear-cell
RCC metastases with complete follow-up (up to 116 months) using laser
microdissection and oligonucleotide microarrays (Affymetrix). A
prognosis-associated gene signature was determined using the semi-supervised
principal components analysis method. Validation was performed with quantitative 
RT-PCR on samples of normal renal tissue (n = 6), RCC primary tumor (n = 57), and
RCC metastases (n = 59). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was done to localize HNF-1B.
RESULTS: Analysis of expression data revealed a three-gene signature consisting
of HNF-1B, KIAA1919, and SYDE1, which discriminated well between 2 prognosis
groups (P < .05), independently of the TNMG classification. Expression of HNF-1B 
was analyzed in detail. HNF-1B mRNA expression correlated with malignant
transformation and progression (normal renal tissue > primary tumor > metastasis;
P < .0001). There was a significant correlation between high HNF-1B mRNA
expression in primary tumor and better prognosis (P < .05). IHC showed a specific
nuclear HNF-1B staining confined to the tumor cells of the primary tumors and of 
the metastases.
CONCLUSIONS: The level of HNF-1B mRNA expression significantly decreases with
tumor progression, and patients with high HNF-1B mRNA levels have a significantly
better prognosis. HNF-1B might be a useful prognostic factor for metastatic RCC
and also a potential therapeutic target in the future.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20538322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2010 Jun 3;130(11):1145-9. doi: 10.4045/tidsskr.09.1035.

[Progress in diabetes genetics].

[Article in Norwegian]

Njølstad PR(1), Hertel JK, Søvik O, Raeder H, Johansson S, Molven A.

Author information: 
(1)Senter for diabetesgenetikk, Barneklinikken, Haukeland universitetssykehus,
5021 Bergen, Norway. pal.njolstad@uib.no

BACKGROUND: Diabetes is classified as Type 1 diabetes, Type 2 diabetes,
gestational diabetes and other types. Our goal was to provide an overview of new 
genetic knowledge of monogenic and type 2 diabetes.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: The article is based on literature identified through a
non-systematic search in PubMed and own experience concerning research in
diabetes genetics and treatment of patients with monogenic diabetes.
RESULTS: 18 genes have been found for which one single mutation may cause
diabetes. The most common causes for such monogenic diabetes are mutations in the
genes KCNJ11, ABCC8 and INS when the condition is diagnosed at the age 0 - 6
months, and in the genes HNF1A, GCK, HNF4A and HNF1B when the diagnosis is made
later than six months of age. Genetic testing is appropriate in assessment of
monogenic diabetes, because antidiabetic tablets rather that insulin injections
can be used to treat patients with mutations in certain genes; i.e. KCNJ11,
ABCC8, HNF1A and HNF4A. Genome-wide association studies have recently identified 
about 20 genetic variants that increase the risk of Type 2 diabetes, but which
have a low predictive value for development of disease. How these genetic
variants can cause Type 2 diabetes has not been assessed and clinical relevance
remains to be shown.
INTERPRETATION: So far, genetic findings only affect diagnosis and treatment of
monogenic diabetes.

PMID: 20531501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. PLoS One. 2010 May 28;5(5):e10858. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010858.

Evaluation of association of HNF1B variants with diverse cancers: collaborative
analysis of data from 19 genome-wide association studies.

Elliott KS(1), Zeggini E, McCarthy MI, Gudmundsson J, Sulem P, Stacey SN,
Thorlacius S, Amundadottir L, Grönberg H, Xu J, Gaborieau V, Eeles RA, Neal DE,
Donovan JL, Hamdy FC, Muir K, Hwang SJ, Spitz MR, Zanke B, Carvajal-Carmona L,
Brown KM; Australian Melanoma Family Study Investigators, Hayward NK, Macgregor
S, Tomlinson IP, Lemire M, Amos CI, Murabito JM, Isaacs WB, Easton DF, Brennan P;
PanScan Consortium, Barkardottir RB, Gudbjartsson DF, Rafnar T, Hunter DJ,
Chanock SJ, Stefansson K, Ioannidis JP.

Collaborators: Mann GJ, Hopper JL, Aitken JF, Kefford RF, Giles GG, Armstrong BK,
Petersen GM, Amundadottir L, Fuchs CS, Kraft P, Stolzenberg-Solomon RZ, Jacobs
KB, Arslan AA, Bueno-de-Mesquita HB, Gallinger S, Gross M, Helzlsouer K, Holly
EA, Jacobs EJ, Klein AP, LaCroix A, Li D, Mandelson MT, Olson SH, Risch HA, Zheng
W, Albanes D, Bamlet WR, Berg CD, Boutron-Ruault MC, Buring JE, Bracci PM,
Canzian F, Clipp S, Cotterchio M, de Andrade M, Duell EJ, Gaziano JM, Giovannucci
EL, Goggins M, Hallmans G, Hankinson SE, Hassan M, Howard B, Hunter DJ,
Hutchinson A, Jenab M, Kaaks R, Kooperberg C, Krogh V, Kurtz RC, Lynch SM,
McWilliams RR, Mendelsohn JB, Michaud DS, Parikh H, Patel AV, Peeters PH,
Rajkovic A, Riboli E, Rodriguez L, Seminara D, Shu XO, Thomas G, Tjønneland A,
Tobias GS, Trichopoulos D, Van Den Eeden SK, Virtamo J, Wactawski-Wende J, Wang
Z, Wolpin BM, Yu H, Yu K, Zeleniuch-Jacquotte A, Fraumeni JF Jr, Hoover RN,
Hartge P, Chanock SJ.

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies have found type 2 diabetes-associated
variants in the HNF1B gene to exhibit reciprocal associations with prostate
cancer risk. We aimed to identify whether these variants may have an effect on
cancer risk in general versus a specific effect on prostate cancer only.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In a collaborative analysis, we collected data
from GWAS of cancer phenotypes for the frequently reported variants of HNF1B,
rs4430796 and rs7501939, which are in linkage disequilibrium (r(2) = 0.76, HapMap
CEU). Overall, the analysis included 16 datasets on rs4430796 with 19,640 cancer 
cases and 21,929 controls; and 21 datasets on rs7501939 with 26,923 cases and
49,085 controls. Malignancies other than prostate cancer included colorectal,
breast, lung and pancreatic cancers, and melanoma. Meta-analysis showed large
between-dataset heterogeneity that was driven by different effects in prostate
cancer and other cancers. The per-T2D-risk-allele odds ratios (95% confidence
intervals) for rs4430796 were 0.79 (0.76, 0.83)] per G allele for prostate cancer
(p<10(-15) for both); and 1.03 (0.99, 1.07) for all other cancers. Similarly for 
rs7501939 the per-T2D-risk-allele odds ratios (95% confidence intervals) were
0.80 (0.77, 0.83) per T allele for prostate cancer (p<10(-15) for both); and 1.00
(0.97, 1.04) for all other cancers. No malignancy other than prostate cancer had 
a nominally statistically significant association.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The examined HNF1B variants have a highly specific
effect on prostate cancer risk with no apparent association with any of the other
studied cancer types.

PMCID: PMC2878330
PMID: 20526366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Nephrol Ther. 2010 Jul;6(4):272-9. doi: 10.1016/j.nephro.2010.03.006. Epub 2010
Apr 28.

[Cystic and hyperechogenic kidneys in children].

[Article in French]

Brochard K(1), Decramer S.

Author information: 
(1)Service de néphrologie-médecine interne-hypertension pédiatrique, hôpital des 
enfants, 330, avenue de Grande-Bretagne, TSA 70034, 31059 Toulouse cedex 9,
France.

Thanks to prenatal ultrasound scan, cystic kidneys, as well as obstructive
uropathies, are the most frequent renal anomalies identified during pregnancy.
They should be recognized because of genetic and clinical implications. The most 
frequent are autosomal dominant and recessive polycystic kidney diseases,
followed by renal developmental anomalies linked to TCF2 gene. Renal cysts are
also observed in other hereditary diseases or multiple malformation syndromes
(tuberosis sclerosis, Meckel-Grubber syndrome, Oro-facial digital type 1
syndrome...). The diagnosis is based on a sonographic and morphological analysis 
of renal abnormalities, on the search for family histories and extra-renal
manifestations. A better classification of these patients allows tailor-made
follow-up and care improvement.

Copyright 2010 Association Société de néphrologie. Published by Elsevier SAS. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 20430711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Development. 2010 May;137(9):1573-82. doi: 10.1242/dev.044420.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha and beta control terminal differentiation and
cell fate commitment in the gut epithelium.

D'Angelo A(1), Bluteau O, Garcia-Gonzalez MA, Gresh L, Doyen A, Garbay S, Robine 
S, Pontoglio M.

Author information: 
(1)Expression Génique, Développement et Maladies Equipe 26/ INSERM U567/ CNRS UMR
8104 / Université Paris-Descartes Institut Cochin Dpt. Génétique et
Développement, 75014 Paris, France.

The intestinal epithelium is a complex system characterized by massive and
continuous cell renewal and differentiation. In this context, cell-type-specific 
transcription factors are thought to play a crucial role by modulating specific
transcription networks and signalling pathways. Hnf1alpha and beta are closely
related atypical homeoprotein transcription factors expressed in several
epithelia, including the gut. With the use of a conditional inactivation system, 
we generated mice in which Hnf1b is specifically inactivated in the intestinal
epithelium on a wild-type or Hnf1a(-/-) genetic background. Whereas the
inactivation of Hnf1a or Hnf1b alone did not lead to any major intestinal
dysfunction, the concomitant inactivation of both genes resulted in a lethal
phenotype. Double-mutant animals had defective differentiation and cell fate
commitment. The expression levels of markers of all the differentiated cell
types, both enterocytes and secretory cells, were affected. In addition, the
number of goblet cells was increased, whereas mature Paneth cells were missing.
At the molecular level, we show that Hnf1alpha and beta act upstream of the Notch
pathway controlling directly the expression of two crucial components: Jag1 and
Atoh1. We demonstrate that the double-mutant mice present with a defect in
intestinal water absorption and that Hnf1alpha and beta directly control the
expression of Slc26a3, a gene whose mutations are associated with chloride
diarrhoea in human patients. Our study identifies new direct target genes of the 
Hnf1 transcription factors and shows that they play crucial roles in both
defining cell fate and controlling terminal functions in the gut epithelium.

PMID: 20388655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010 May;21(5):819-32. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2009090925. Epub 2010
Apr 8.

Reduced Notch signaling leads to renal cysts and papillary microadenomas.

Surendran K(1), Selassie M, Liapis H, Krigman H, Kopan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

The formation of proximal nephron segments requires canonical Notch2 signaling,
but other functions of Notch signaling during renal development are incompletely 
understood. Here, we report that proximal tubules forming with reduced Notch
signaling, resulting from delayed conditional inactivation of Notch1 and/or
Notch2, are prone to cyst formation and tubular epithelial stratification.
Conditional inactivation of the DNA binding factor RBP-J, which mediates Notch
signaling, also resulted in multiple congenital cysts arising from the proximal
tubule. Moreover, a few stratified foci/microadenomas containing
hyperproliferative cells, resembling precursors of papillary renal cell
carcinoma, formed in these proximal tubules. Epithelial stratification correlated
neither with reduced expression of the transcriptional regulator of ciliary
proteins TCF2/HNF1beta nor with loss of apical-basal polarity. Instead, Notch
signaling helped to restrict the orientation of epithelial mitotic spindles to a 
plane parallel to the basement membrane during nephron elongation. In the absence
of Notch, random spindle orientation may explain the epithelial stratification
and cyst formation. Furthermore, post hoc analysis of human class 1 papillary
renal cell carcinoma revealed reduced Notch activity in these tumors, resulting
from abundant expression of a potent inhibitor of canonical Notch signaling,
KyoT3/FHL1B. In summary, these data suggest that canonical Notch signaling
maintains the alignment of cell division in the proximal tubules during
nephrogenesis and that perturbations in Notch signaling may lead to cystic renal 
disease and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2865744
PMID: 20378824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Clin J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010 Jun;5(6):1079-90. doi: 10.2215/CJN.06810909. Epub
2010 Apr 8.

Spectrum of HNF1B mutations in a large cohort of patients who harbor renal
diseases.

Heidet L(1), Decramer S, Pawtowski A, Morinière V, Bandin F, Knebelmann B, Lebre 
AS, Faguer S, Guigonis V, Antignac C, Salomon R.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Néphrologie Pédiatrique, Centre de Référence des Maladies Rénales
Héréditaires de l'Enfant et de l'Adulte, Paris, France.
laurence.heidet@nck.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta (HNF1beta) is a
transcription factor that is critical for the development of kidney and pancreas.
In humans, mutations in HNF1B lead to congenital anomalies of the kidney and
urinary tract, pancreas atrophy, and maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 5 
and genital malformations.
DESIGN, SETTING, PARTICIPANTS, & MEASUREMENTS: We report HNF1B screening in a
cohort of 377 unrelated cases with various kidney phenotypes (hyperechogenic
kidneys with size not more than +3 SD, multicystic kidney disease, renal
agenesis, renal hypoplasia, cystic dysplasia, or hyperuricemic tubulointerstitial
nephropathy not associated with UMOD mutation).
RESULTS: We found a heterozygous mutation in 75 (19.9%) index cases, consisting
of a deletion of the whole gene in 42, deletion of one exon in one, and small
mutations in 32. Eighteen mutations were novel. De novo mutations accounted for
66% of deletions and 40% of small mutations. In patients who carried HNF1B
mutation and for whom we were able to study prenatal ultrasonography (56
probands), isolated hyperechogenic kidneys with normal or slightly enhanced size 
were the more frequent (34 of 56) phenotype before birth. Various other prenatal 
renal phenotypes were associated with HNF1B mutations, at a lesser frequency.
Diabetes developed in four probands. Hyperuricemia and hypomagnesemia, although
not systematically investigated, were frequently associated.
CONCLUSIONS: This large series showed that the severity of the renal disease
associated with HNF1B mutations was extremely variable (from prenatal renal
failure to normal renal function in adulthood) and was not correlated with the
genotype.

PMCID: PMC2879303
PMID: 20378641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. J Nutrigenet Nutrigenomics. 2009;2(4-5):225-34. doi: 10.1159/000259341. Epub 2010
Mar 9.

Evidence of interaction between type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes and dietary 
fat intake for adiposity and glucose homeostasis-related phenotypes.

Ruchat SM(1), Elks CE, Loos RJ, Vohl MC, Weisnagel SJ, Rankinen T, Bouchard C,
Pérusse L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Laval University, Québec, Canada.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Genome-wide association studies have led to the identification
of several susceptibility genes for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The
objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that the associations between 
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in these genes and adiposity and glucose
homeostasis-related phenotypes are influenced by dietary fat intake.
METHODS: Thirty-three SNPs in 9 T2DM genes (CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, HHEX, HNF1B,
IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, SLC30A8, TCF7L2 and WFS1) were tested in a maximum of 669
subjects from the Quebec Family Study. Subjects were measured for several
adiposity indices and underwent a 75-gram oral glucose tolerance test. Total fat 
intake was estimated from a 3-day dietary record.
RESULTS: We observed 13 significant (p < or = 0.01) SNP-dietary fat interactions.
Among them, IGF2BP2 rs4402960, alone or in interaction with dietary fat intake,
influenced abdominal total fat (ATF: SNP effect, p = 0.006, interaction effect, p
= 0.009) and abdominal visceral fat (AVF: SNP effect, p = 0.007, interaction
effect, p = 0.01). Similarly, TCF7L2 rs12573128 alone or in interaction with
dietary fat intake, influenced insulin sensitivity (SNP effect and interaction
effect, p < or = 0.008) and glucose tolerance (SNP effect p < or= 0.009 and
interaction effect, p < or = 0.01).
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that gene-dietary fat interactions may
influence glucose homeostasis-related phenotypes and play an important role in
determining the increased risk of diabetes associated with the T2DM
susceptibility genes.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20215779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Hum Hered. 2010;69(3):193-201. doi: 10.1159/000289594. Epub 2010 Mar 5.

Genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes is associated with reduced prostate
cancer risk.

Pierce BL(1), Ahsan H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Studies, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637,
USA. brandonpierce@uchicago.edu

OBJECTIVE: To examine the collective effects of type 1 (T1D) and type 2 diabetes 
(T2D) risk alleles on prostate cancer (PCa) risk.
METHODS: Using data on 14 and 18 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that
effect T1D and T2D risk, respectively, we generated risk scores (a 'risk allele
count' and a 'genetic relative risk') for both T1D and T2D for 1,171 non-Hispanic
white, PSA-screened PCa cases and 1,101 matched controls from the Cancer Genetic 
Markers of Susceptibility study. Logistic regression was used to estimate odds
ratios (OR) and 95% confidence intervals (CI) for associations between the
diabetes risk scores and PCa risk.
RESULTS: Both T2D risk scores, but neither T1D score, showed an inverse
association with PCa (p < 0.01). These associations remained significant after
excluding HNF1B SNP rs4430796 (a known PCa risk factor) from the analysis. The
highest quartile of the T2D allele count (>20 risk alleles) was associated with
reduced PCa risk (OR = 0.77; CI: 0.60-0.99) compared to the lowest category (<17 
risk alleles).
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that individuals with increased genetic
susceptibility to T2D have decreased risk for PCa. This association is consistent
with the observation that individuals with T2D are at decreased risk for PCa;
however, data on T2D status was not available for this analysis.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2866577
PMID: 20203524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Pediatr Nephrol. 2010 Jun;25(6):1073-9. doi: 10.1007/s00467-010-1454-9. Epub 2010
Feb 13.

HNF1B alterations associated with congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary 
tract.

Nakayama M(1), Nozu K, Goto Y, Kamei K, Ito S, Sato H, Emi M, Nakanishi K,
Tsuchiya S, Iijima K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology, National Center for Child Health and Development,
Tokyo, Japan.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta (HNF1beta) abnormalities have been recognized to 
cause congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT), predominantly
affecting bilateral renal malformations. To further understand the spectrum of
HNF1beta related phenotypes, we performed HNF1B gene mutation and deletion
analyses in Japanese patients with renal hypodysplasia (n = 31), unilateral
multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK; n = 14) and others (n = 5). We identified
HNF1B alterations in 5 out of 50 patients (10%). De novo heterozygous complete
deletions of HNF1B were found in 3 patients with unilateral MCDK. Two of the
patients showed contralateral hypodysplasia, whereas the other patient showed a
radiologically normal contralateral kidney with normal renal function. Copy
number variation analyses showed 1.4 Mb microdeletions involving the whole HNF1B 
gene with breakpoints in flanking segmental duplications. We also identified 1
novel truncated mutation (1007insC) and another missense mutation (226G>T) in
patients with bilateral hypodysplasia. HNF1B alterations leading to
haploinsufficiency affect a diverse spectrum of CAKUT. The existence of a patient
with unilateral MCDK with normal renal function might provide genetic insight
into the etiology of these substantial populations of only unilateral MCDK. The
recurrent microdeletions encompassing HNF1B could have a significant impact on
the mechanism of HNF1B deletions.

PMID: 20155289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Am J Med Genet A. 2010 Feb;152A(2):340-6. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33194.

Pancreatic hypoplasia presenting with neonatal diabetes mellitus in association
with congenital heart defect and developmental delay.

Balasubramanian M(1), Shield JP, Acerini CL, Walker J, Ellard S, Marchand M,
Polak M, Vaxillaire M, Crolla JA, Bunyan DJ, Mackay DJ, Temple IK.

Author information: 
(1)Sheffield Clinical Genetics Service, Sheffield Children's NHS Foundation
Trust, Sheffield, UK.

Congenital pancreatic hypoplasia is a rare cause of neonatal diabetes. We report 
on a series of three patients with pancreatic agenesis and congenital heart
defects. All had abdominal scan evidence of pancreatic agenesis. In addition,
Patient 1 had a ventricular septal defect, patent ductus arteriosus and pulmonary
artery stenosis; Patient 2 had a truncus arteriosus and Patient 3 had tetralogy
of Fallot. Two of the three patients have developmental delay. All three patients
were isolated cases within the family. Investigations included sequencing of GCK,
ABCC8, IPF1, NEUROD1, PTF1A, HNF1B, INS, ISL1, NGN3, HHEX, G6PC2, TCF7L2, SOX4,
FOXP3 (Patients 1 and 2), GATA4 and KCNJ11 genes (all three patients), but no
mutations were found. Genetic investigation to exclude paternal UPD 6,
methylation aberrations and duplications of 6q24 was also negative in all three. 
22q11 deletion was excluded in all three patients. Array CGH in Patient (1)
showed a approximately 250 kb, paternally inherited duplication of chromosome 12q
[arr cgh 12q24.33 (B35:CHR12:131808577-132057649++) pat], not found in the other 
two patients. Permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus due to pancreatic hypoplasia
with congenital heart defects has been reported before and may represent a
distinct condition. We discuss this rare association and review previously
reported literature.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20082465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. BMC Med Genomics. 2009 Dec 31;2:72. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-2-72.

Prioritizing genes for follow-up from genome wide association studies using
information on gene expression in tissues relevant for type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Parikh H(1), Lyssenko V, Groop LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University, 
University Hospital Malmö, Malmö, Sweden. parikhhm@mail.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have emerged as a powerful
approach for identifying susceptibility loci associated with polygenetic diseases
such as type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). However, it is still a daunting task to 
prioritize single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from GWAS for further
replication in different population. Several recent studies have shown that
genetic variation often affects gene-expression at proximal (cis) as well as
distal (trans) genomic locations by different mechanisms such as altering rate of
transcription or splicing or transcript stability.
METHODS: To prioritize SNPs from GWAS, we combined results from two GWAS related 
to T2DM, the Diabetes Genetics Initiative (DGI) and the Wellcome Trust Case
Control Consortium (WTCCC), with genome-wide expression data from pancreas,
adipose tissue, liver and skeletal muscle of individuals with or without T2DM or 
animal models thereof to identify T2DM susceptibility loci.
RESULTS: We identified 1,170 SNPs associated with T2DM with P < 0.05 in both GWAS
and 243 genes that were located in the vicinity of these SNPs. Out of these 243
genes, we identified 115 differentially expressed in publicly available gene
expression profiling data. Notably five of them, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, NOTCH2, TCF7L2 
and TSPAN8, have subsequently been shown to be associated with T2DM in different 
populations. To provide further validation of our approach, we reversed the
approach and started with 26 known SNPs associated with T2DM and related traits. 
We could show that 12 (57%) (HHEX, HNF1B, IGF2BP2, IRS1, KCNJ11, KCNQ1, NOTCH2,
PPARG, TCF7L2, THADA, TSPAN8 and WFS1) out of 21 genes located in vicinity of
these SNPs were showing aberrant expression in T2DM from the gene expression
profiling studies.
CONCLUSIONS: Utilizing of gene expression profiling data from different tissues
of individuals with or without T2DM or animal models thereof is a powerful tool
for prioritizing SNPs from WGAS for further replication studies.

PMCID: PMC2815699
PMID: 20043853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Prostate. 2010 May 1;70(6):601-7. doi: 10.1002/pros.21094.

HNF1B and JAZF1 genes, diabetes, and prostate cancer risk.

Stevens VL(1), Ahn J, Sun J, Jacobs EJ, Moore SC, Patel AV, Berndt SI, Albanes D,
Hayes RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, American Cancer Society, Atlanta, Georgia
30303-1002, USA. victoria.stevens@cancer.org

BACKGROUND: Epidemiologic studies have shown that men with type II diabetes have 
a lower risk of prostate cancer than non-diabetic men. Recently, common variants 
in two genes, HNF1B and JAZF1, were found to be associated with both of these
diseases.
METHODS: We examined whether the relationship between HNF1B and JAZF1 variants
and decreased prostate cancer risk may potentially be mediated through diabetes
in two large prospective studies, the Cancer Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort
and the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian Cancer Screening Trial.
RESULTS: Three HNF1B SNPS, rs11649743, rs4430796, and rs7501939, were associated 
with decreased risk of prostate cancer and were also associated, with marginal
statistical significance, with increased risk of diabetes. The JAZF1 SNPs
rs6968704 and rs10486567 were associated with decreased risk of prostate cancer
but were not associated with diabetes. All five SNP-prostate cancer relationships
did not substantially differ when the analyses were stratified by diabetic status
or when diabetic status was controlled for in the model. Furthermore, the
association of diabetes with prostate cancer was not altered when the SNPs were
included in the logistic model.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that the HNF1B variants are directly
associated with both diabetes and prostate cancer, that diabetes does not mediate
these gene variant-prostate cancer relationships, and the relationship between
these diseases is not mediated through these gene variants.

PMCID: PMC3086139
PMID: 19998368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Nat Med. 2010 Jan;16(1):106-10. doi: 10.1038/nm.2068. Epub 2009 Dec 6.

A mitotic transcriptional switch in polycystic kidney disease.

Verdeguer F(1), Le Corre S, Fischer E, Callens C, Garbay S, Doyen A, Igarashi P, 
Terzi F, Pontoglio M.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Expression, Development and Disease Laboratory, Developmental Biology
Department, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) is a transcription factor required
for the expression of several renal cystic genes and whose prenatal deletion
leads to polycystic kidney disease (PKD). We show here that inactivation of Hnf1b
from postnatal day 10 onward does not elicit cystic dilations in tubules after
their proliferative morphogenetic elongation is over. Cystogenic resistance is
intrinsically linked to the quiescent state of cells. In fact, when Hnf1b
deficient quiescent cells are forced to proliferate by an ischemia-reperfusion
injury, they give rise to cysts, owing to loss of oriented cell division.
Remarkably, in quiescent cells, the transcription of crucial cystogenic target
genes is maintained even in the absence of HNF-1beta. However, their expression
is lost as soon as cells proliferate and the chromatin of target genes acquires
heterochromatin marks. These results unveil a previously undescribed aspect of
gene regulation. It is well established that transcription is shut off during the
mitotic condensation of chromatin. We propose that transcription factors such as 
HNF-1beta might be involved in reprogramming gene expression after
transcriptional silencing is induced by mitotic chromatin condensation. Notably, 
HNF-1beta remains associated with the mitotically condensed chromosomal barrels. 
This association suggests that HNF-1beta is a bookmarking factor that is
necessary for reopening the chromatin of target genes after mitotic silencing.

PMCID: PMC3062536
PMID: 19966811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2010 Jan;21(1):113-23. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2009060624. Epub 2009
Dec 3.

Whole-genome linkage and association scan in primary, nonsyndromic vesicoureteric
reflux.

Cordell HJ(1), Darlay R, Charoen P, Stewart A, Gullett AM, Lambert HJ, Malcolm S,
Feather SA, Goodship TH, Woolf AS, Kenda RB, Goodship JA; UK VUR Study Group.

Collaborators: Coulthard M, Lambert H, Hunter E, Kier M, Moghal N, Ognanovic M,
Vernon S, Storr J, Verber I, Sinha S, Fitzpatrick M, Feather S, Lewis M, Webb N, 
Bradbury M, Plant N, Postlethwaite R, O'Donoghue DJ, Hughes D, Jones C, Judd B,
Savage M, O'Connor M, Convery M, Iqbal J, Maxwell H, Beattie J, Taheri S, Cuckow 
P, Marks S, Rees L, Trompeter R, Tullus K, Van't Hoff W, Wilcox D, Woolf A,
Haycock G, Reid C, Rigdon S, Watson A, Hulton S, Milford D, Stephens S, Taylor
CM, Dudley J, Inward C, McGraw M, Tizard J, Verrier-Jones K, Scanlan J, Houtman
P, Sandford R, Rfidah E, Hodes D, Kilby A, Coad N, Jones R, Jadresic L, Griffin
N, Dossetor J, Hughes A, Jaswon M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University, International Centre for
Life, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE1 3BZ, UK.

Primary vesicoureteric reflux accounts for approximately 10% of kidney failure
requiring dialysis or transplantation, and sibling studies suggest a large
genetic component. Here, we report a whole-genome linkage and association scan in
primary, nonsyndromic vesicoureteric reflux and reflux nephropathy. We used
linkage and family-based association approaches to analyze 320 white families
(661 affected individuals, generally from families with two affected siblings)
from two populations (United Kingdom and Slovenian). We found modest evidence of 
linkage but no clear overlap with previous studies. We tested for but did not
detect association with six candidate genes (AGTR2, HNF1B, PAX2, RET, ROBO2, and 
UPK3A). Family-based analysis detected associations with one single-nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP) in the UK families, with three SNPs in the Slovenian families,
and with three SNPs in the combined families. A case-control analysis detected
associations with three additional SNPs. The results of this study, which is the 
largest to date investigating the genetics of reflux, suggest that major loci may
not exist for this common renal tract malformation within European populations.

PMCID: PMC2799286
PMID: 19959718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 16;4(11):e7855. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007855.

Species-specific differences in the expression of the HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A
genes.

Harries LW(1), Brown JE, Gloyn AL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Peninsula Medical School,
University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom. L.W.Harries@exeter.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A genes are part of an autoregulatory
network in mammalian pancreas, liver, kidney and gut. The layout of this network 
appears to be similar in rodents and humans, but inactivation of HNF1A, HNF1B or 
HNF4A genes in animal models cause divergent phenotypes to those seen in man. We 
hypothesised that some differences may arise from variation in the expression
profile of alternatively processed isoforms between species.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We measured the expression of the major isoforms 
of the HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A genes in human and rodent pancreas, islet, liver
and kidney by isoform-specific quantitative real-time PCR and compared their
expression by the comparative Ct (DeltaDeltaCt) method. We found major changes in
the expression profiles of the HNF genes between humans and rodents. The
principal difference lies in the expression of the HNF1A gene, which exists as
three isoforms in man, but as a single isoform only in rodents. More subtle
changes were to the balance of HNF1B and HNF4A isoforms between species; the
repressor isoform HNF1B(C) comprised only 6% in human islets compared with 24-26%
in rodents (p = 0.006) whereas HNF4A9 comprised 22% of HNF4A expression in human 
pancreas but only 11% in rodents (p = 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The differences we note in the isoform-specific
expression of the human and rodent HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A genes may impact on the
absolute activity of these genes, and therefore on the activity of the pancreatic
transcription factor network as a whole. We conclude that alterations to
expression of HNF isoforms may underlie some of the phenotypic variation caused
by mutations in these genes.

PMCID: PMC2773013
PMID: 19924231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Orphanet J Rare Dis. 2009 Nov 4;4:25. doi: 10.1186/1750-1172-4-25.

Recurrent microdeletion at 17q12 as a cause of Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser
(MRKH) syndrome: two case reports.

Bernardini L(1), Gimelli S, Gervasini C, Carella M, Baban A, Frontino G, Barbano 
G, Divizia MT, Fedele L, Novelli A, Béna F, Lalatta F, Miozzo M, Dallapiccola B.

Author information: 
(1)Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, IRCCS, S San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
l.bernardini@css-mendel.it

BACKGROUND: Mayer-Rokitansky-Kuster-Hauser syndrome (MRKH) consists of congenital
aplasia of the uterus and the upper part of vagina due to anomalous development
of Müllerian ducts, either isolated or associated with other congenital
malformations, including renal, skeletal, hearing and heart defects. This
disorder has an incidence of approximately 1 in 4500 newborn girls and the
aetiology is poorly understood.
METHODS AND RESULTS: we report on two patients affected by MRKH syndrome in which
array-CGH analysis disclosed an identical deletion spanning 1.5 Mb of genomic DNA
at chromosome 17q12. One patient was affected by complete absence of uterus and
vagina, with bilaterally normal ovaries, while the other displayed agenesis of
the upper part of vagina, right unicornuate uterus, non cavitating rudimentary
left horn and bilaterally multicystic kidneys. The deletion encompassed two
candidate genes, TCF2 and LHX1. Mutational screening of these genes in a selected
group of 20 MRKH females without 17q12 deletion was negative.
CONCLUSION: Deletion 17q12 is a rare albeit recurrent anomaly mediated by
segmental duplications, previously reported in subjects with developmental kidney
abnormalities and diabetes. The present two patients expand the clinical spectrum
associated with this imbalance and suggest that this region is a candidate locus 
for a subset of MRKH syndrome individuals, with or without renal defects.

PMCID: PMC2777856
PMID: 19889212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Eur J Hum Genet. 2010 Mar;18(3):278-84. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2009.174. Epub 2009 Oct
21.

Clinical spectrum associated with recurrent genomic rearrangements in chromosome 
17q12.

Nagamani SC(1), Erez A, Shen J, Li C, Roeder E, Cox S, Karaviti L, Pearson M,
Kang SH, Sahoo T, Lalani SR, Stankiewicz P, Sutton VR, Cheung SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Deletions in chromosome 17q12 encompassing the HNF1 beta gene cause cystic renal 
disease and maturity onset diabetes of the young, and have been recently
described as the first recurrent genomic deletion leading to diabetes. Earlier
reports of patients with this microdeletion syndrome have suggested an absence of
cognitive impairment, differentiating it from most other contiguous gene deletion
syndromes. The reciprocal duplication of 17q12 is rare and has been hypothesized 
to be associated with an increased risk of epilepsy and mental retardation. We
conducted a detailed clinical and molecular characterization of four patients
with a deletion and five patients with a reciprocal duplication of this region.
Our patients with deletion of 17q12 presented with cognitive impairment, cystic
renal disease, seizures, and structural abnormalities of the brain. Patients with
reciprocal duplications manifest with cognitive impairment and behavioral
abnormalities, but not with seizures. Our findings expand the phenotypic spectrum
associated with rearrangements of 17q12 and show that cognitive impairment is a
part of the phenotype of individuals with deletions of 17q12.

PMCID: PMC2987224
PMID: 19844256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Diabetes. 2010 Jan;59(1):293-301. doi: 10.2337/db09-1048. Epub 2009 Oct 15.

Gene variants in the novel type 2 diabetes loci CDC123/CAMK1D, THADA, ADAMTS9,
BCL11A, and MTNR1B affect different aspects of pancreatic beta-cell function.

Simonis-Bik AM(1), Nijpels G, van Haeften TW, Houwing-Duistermaat JJ, Boomsma DI,
Reiling E, van Hove EC, Diamant M, Kramer MH, Heine RJ, Maassen JA, Slagboom PE, 
Willemsen G, Dekker JM, Eekhoff EM, de Geus EJ, 't Hart LM.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, the Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: Recently, results from a meta-analysis of genome-wide association
studies have yielded a number of novel type 2 diabetes loci. However, conflicting
results have been published regarding their effects on insulin secretion and
insulin sensitivity. In this study we used hyperglycemic clamps with three
different stimuli to test associations between these novel loci and various
measures of beta-cell function.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: For this study, 336 participants, 180 normal glucose
tolerant and 156 impaired glucose tolerant, underwent a 2-h hyperglycemic clamp. 
In a subset we also assessed the response to glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1 and
arginine during an extended clamp (n = 123). All subjects were genotyped for gene
variants in JAZF1, CDC123/CAMK1D, TSPAN8/LGR5, THADA, ADAMTS9, NOTCH2/ADAMS30,
DCD, VEGFA, BCL11A, HNF1B, WFS1, and MTNR1B.
RESULTS: Gene variants in CDC123/CAMK1D, ADAMTS9, BCL11A, and MTNR1B affected
various aspects of the insulin response to glucose (all P < 6.9 x 10(-3)). The
THADA gene variant was associated with lower beta-cell response to GLP-1 and
arginine (both P < 1.6 x 10(-3)), suggesting lower beta-cell mass as a possible
pathogenic mechanism. Remarkably, we also noted a trend toward an increased
insulin response to GLP-1 in carriers of MTNR1B (P = 0.03), which may offer new
therapeutic possibilities. The other seven loci were not detectably associated
with beta-cell function.
CONCLUSIONS: Diabetes risk alleles in CDC123/CAMK1D, THADA, ADAMTS9, BCL11A, and 
MTNR1B are associated with various specific aspects of beta-cell function. These 
findings point to a clear diversity in the impact that these various gene
variants may have on (dys)function of pancreatic beta-cells.

PMCID: PMC2797936
PMID: 19833888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Kidney Int. 2010 Jan;77(1):17-22. doi: 10.1038/ki.2009.358.

New molecular players facilitating Mg(2+) reabsorption in the distal convoluted
tubule.

Glaudemans B(1), Knoers NV, Hoenderop JG, Bindels RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre,
Nijmegen, The Netherlands.

The renal distal convoluted tubule (DCT) has an essential role in maintaining
systemic magnesium (Mg(2+)) concentration. The DCT is the final determinant of
plasma Mg(2+) levels, as the more distal nephron segments are largely impermeable
to Mg(2+). In the past decade, positional candidate strategies in families with
inherited forms of hypomagnesemia have led to the identification of genes
involved in Mg(2+) handling. A large fraction of this resides in the DCT, namely,
(i) the transient receptor potential channel melastatin subtype 6 (TRPM6), a
divalent cation-permeable channel located at the luminal membrane of the DCT,
facilitates Mg(2+) entry from the pro-urine into the cell; (ii) the epidermal
growth factor is a novel hormone regulating active Mg(2+) transport through
TRPM6; (iii) the voltage-gated K(+) channel, Kv1.1, establishes a favorable
luminal membrane potential for TRPM6-mediated Mg(2+) transport; (iv) the
Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase gamma-subunit (gamma-Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase) was identified as
mutated protein in a family with isolated dominant hypomagnesemia. The molecular 
mechanism by which gamma-Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase is involved in DCT Mg(2+) handling
remains unknown; (v) a high percentage of patients with mutations in the renal
transcription factor HNF1B (hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 homeobox B) gene develop 
hypomagnesemia; and (vi) Gitelman and EAST/SeSAME syndrome patients suffer from a
similar tubulopathy due to mutations in NCC (NaCl cotransporter) and Kir4.1,
respectively. In these patients, decreased expression of TRPM6 is proposed to
cause hypomagnesemia. Insights into the molecular mechanisms of the identified
genes, as well as the identification of novel genes, will further improve our
knowledge about renal Mg(2+) handling.

PMID: 19812536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Histol Histopathol. 2009 Nov;24(11):1479-86.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta(HNF-1beta) in human urogenital organs: its
expression and role in embryogenesis and tumorigenesis.

Kato N(1), Motoyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Yamagata,
Japan. nkato@med.id.yamagata-u.ac.jp

Molecules responsible for embryogenesis are often involved in tumorigenesis.
Recent exhaustive cDNA microarray analyses in human neoplasms expanded knowledge 
of such molecules. Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) is a homeobox
transcription factor that functions as a homodimer or heterodimer with
HNF-1alpha. In contrast to HNF-1alpha, HNF-1beta is very weakly expressed in the 
liver and is commonly expressed in the kidneys. During human embryonic stage,
HNF-1beta plays an important role in organogenesis, especially of the urogenital 
system. In the human fetus, HNF-1beta expression is common in mesonephric duct
derivatives and metanephros (permanent kidneys). HNF-1beta germline mutations
cause malformations of these structures. Recent microarray analyses have
disclosed that HNF-1beta is aberrantly up-regulated in clear cell carcinoma of
the ovary, which is a carcinoma of müllerian nature, but which was initially
misnamed "mesonephroma". HNF-1beta is also expressed in ovarian endometriosis,
which is a probable origin of clear cell carcinoma. On the other hand, HNF-1beta 
is down-regulated in renal neoplasms, such as chromophobe cell carcinoma. In this
review, we first summarize HNF-1beta expression in the developing urogenital
system of the human embryo. Then, we describe the HNF-1beta status in human
urogenital neoplasms and discuss its role in tumorigenesis.

PMID: 19760597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Diabet Med. 2009 May;26(5):569-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2009.02705.x.

Variants in the isoform-specific coding regions of the HNF1A, HNF4A and HNF1B
genes are not a common cause of familial, young-onset diabetes or renal cysts and
diabetes (RCAD).

Locke JM, Ellard S, Norwood VF, Harries LW.

PMID: 19646202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Nat Rev Nephrol. 2009 Aug;5(8):480-4. doi: 10.1038/nrneph.2009.98.

HNF1B-related diabetes triggered by renal transplantation.

Zuber J(1), Bellanné-Chantelot C, Carette C, Canaud G, Gobrecht S, Gaha K, Mallet
V, Martinez F, Thervet E, Timsit J, Legendre C, Dubois-Laforgue D.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Transplantation Rénale Adulte, Université Paris Descartes, Paris
cedex 15, France. julien.zuber@nck.aphp.fr

BACKGROUND: A 37-year-old man developed cholestasis-associated pruritus followed 
by overt hyperglycemia (blood glucose level 23 mmol/l), necessitating insulin
treatment, within weeks of undergoing renal transplantation. He had a history of 
gout, but his fasting blood glucose and glycated hemoglobin concentrations had
been normal before transplantation.
INVESTIGATIONS: Physical examination; laboratory tests, including assessment of
glycated hemoglobin, anti-glutamic-acid-decarboxylase and anti-islet-antigen-2
antibodies, liver enzymes, renal function, tacrolimus blood trough level,
exocrine (fecal elastase) and endocrine (C-peptide) pancreatic function;
abdominal CT scan; liver biopsy; and screening of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1
homeobox B (transcription factor 2) gene, HNF1B.
DIAGNOSIS: New-onset diabetes after transplantation associated with a newly
described deletion in HNF1B.
MANAGEMENT: Minimization of tacrolimus exposure and withdrawal of steroids
considerably reduced the patient's insulin requirement, and cholestasis-related
pruritus was dramatically improved by administration of ursodeoxycholic acid.
Renal ultrasonography and screening for the HNF1B molecular abnormality were
offered to the patient's relatives.

PMID: 19639018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Arch Pediatr. 2009 Jun;16(6):700-2. doi: 10.1016/S0929-693X(09)74118-1.

[Prospective cohort studies: a custom-built follow-up].

[Article in French]

Guigonis V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Référence des Maladies Rénales Rares du Sud-Ouest (SORARE),
Département de Pédiatrie, Hôpital de la Mère et de l'Enfant, 87000 Limoges,
France. vincent-guigonis@orange.fr

PMID: 19541136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Eur J Pediatr. 2010 Feb;169(2):207-13. doi: 10.1007/s00431-009-1008-y. Epub 2009 
Jun 13.

DNA hypomethylation, transient neonatal diabetes, and prune belly sequence in one
of two identical twins.

Laborie LB(1), Mackay DJ, Temple IK, Molven A, Søvik O, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway.

One known genetic mechanism for transient neonatal diabetes is loss of
methylation at 6q24. The etiology of prune belly sequence is unknown but a
genetic defect, affecting the mesoderm from which the triad abdominal muscle
hypoplasia, urinary tract abnormalities, and cryptorchidism develop, has been
suggested. We investigated a family, including one twin, with transient neonatal 
diabetes and prune belly sequence. Autoantibody tests excluded type 1 diabetes.
Microsatellite marker analysis confirmed the twins being monozygotic. We
identified no mutations in ZFP57, KCNJ11, ABCC8, GCK, HNF1A, HNF1B, HNF3B, IPF1, 
PAX4, or ZIC3. The proband had loss of methylation at the 6q24 locus TNDM and
also at the loci IGF2R, DIRAS3, and PEG1, while the other family members,
including the healthy monozygotic twin, had normal findings. The loss of
methylation on chromosome 6q24 and elsewhere may indicate a generalized maternal 
hypomethylation syndrome, which accounts for both transient neonatal diabetes and
prune belly sequence.

PMID: 19521719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Diabetes. 2009 Sep;58(9):2129-36. doi: 10.2337/db09-0117. Epub 2009 Jun 5.

Association of 18 confirmed susceptibility loci for type 2 diabetes with indices 
of insulin release, proinsulin conversion, and insulin sensitivity in 5,327
nondiabetic Finnish men.

Stancáková A(1), Kuulasmaa T, Paananen J, Jackson AU, Bonnycastle LL, Collins FS,
Boehnke M, Kuusisto J, Laakso M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Kuopio and Kuopio University Hospital,
Kuopio, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the effects of 18 confirmed type 2 diabetes risk
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) on insulin sensitivity, insulin secretion,
and conversion of proinsulin to insulin.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 5,327 nondiabetic men (age 58 +/- 7
years, BMI 27.0 +/- 3.8 kg/m(2)) from a large population-based cohort were
included. Oral glucose tolerance tests and genotyping of SNPs in or near PPARG,
KCNJ11, TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, LOC387761, CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, CDKAL1, HNF1B, WFS1,
JAZF1, CDC123, TSPAN8, THADA, ADAMTS9, NOTCH2, KCNQ1, and MTNR1B were performed. 
HNF1B rs757210 was excluded because of failure to achieve Hardy-Weinberg
equilibrium.
RESULTS: Six SNPs (TCF7L2, SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKN2B, CDKAL1, and MTNR1B) were
significantly (P < 6.9 x 10(-4)) and two SNPs (KCNJ11 and IGF2BP2) were nominally
(P < 0.05) associated with early-phase insulin release
(InsAUC(0-30)/GluAUC(0-30)), adjusted for age, BMI, and insulin sensitivity
(Matsuda ISI). Combined effects of these eight SNPs reached -32% reduction in
InsAUC(0-30)/GluAUC(0-30) in carriers of >or=11 vs. <or=3 weighted risk alleles. 
Four SNPs (SLC30A8, HHEX, CDKAL1, and TCF7L2) were significantly or nominally
associated with indexes of proinsulin conversion. Three SNPs (KCNJ11, HHEX, and
TSPAN8) were nominally associated with Matsuda ISI (adjusted for age and BMI).
The effect of HHEX on Matsuda ISI became significant after additional adjustment 
for InsAUC(0-30)/GluAUC(0-30). Nine SNPs did not show any associations with
examined traits.
CONCLUSIONS: Eight type 2 diabetes-related loci were significantly or nominally
associated with impaired early-phase insulin release. Effects of SLC30A8, HHEX,
CDKAL1, and TCF7L2 on insulin release could be partially explained by impaired
proinsulin conversion. HHEX might influence both insulin release and insulin
sensitivity.

PMCID: PMC2731523
PMID: 19502414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Clin Invest. 2009 Jul;119(7):1888-98. doi: 10.1172/JCI37028.

The diabetes gene Pdx1 regulates the transcriptional network of pancreatic
endocrine progenitor cells in mice.

Oliver-Krasinski JM(1), Kasner MT, Yang J, Crutchlow MF, Rustgi AK, Kaestner KH, 
Stoffers DA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Diabetes, Obesity and Metabolism, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Heterozygous mutations in the gene encoding the pancreatic homeodomain
transcription factor pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1) are associated with
maturity onset diabetes of the young, type 4 (MODY4) and type 2 diabetes. Pdx1
governs the early embryonic development of the pancreas and the later
differentiation of the insulin-producing islet beta cells of the endocrine
compartment. We derived a Pdx1 hypomorphic allele that reveals a role for Pdx1 in
the specification of endocrine progenitors. Mice homozygous for this allele
displayed a selective reduction in endocrine lineages associated with decreased
numbers of endocrine progenitors and a marked reduction in levels of mRNA
encoding the proendocrine transcription factor neurogenin 3 (Ngn3). During
development, Pdx1 occupies an evolutionarily conserved enhancer region of Ngn3
and interacts with the transcription factor one cut homeobox 1 (Hnf6) to activate
this enhancer. Furthermore, mRNA levels of all 4 members of the transcription
factor network that regulates Ngn3 expression, SRY-box containing gene 9 (Sox9), 
Hnf6, Hnf1b, and forkhead box A2 (Foxa2), were decreased in homozygous mice. Pdx1
also occupied regulatory sequences in Foxa2 and Hnf1b. Thus, Pdx1 contributes to 
specification of endocrine progenitors both by regulating expression of Ngn3
directly and by participating in a cross-regulatory transcription factor network 
during early pancreas development. These results provide insights that may be
applicable to beta cell replacement strategies involving the guided
differentiation of ES cells or other progenitor cell types into the beta cell
lineage, and they suggest a molecular mechanism whereby human PDX1 mutations
cause diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2701861
PMID: 19487809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Diabetologia. 2009 Oct;52(10):2109-16. doi: 10.1007/s00125-009-1391-y. Epub 2009 
May 20.

No association of multiple type 2 diabetes loci with type 1 diabetes.

Raj SM(1), Howson JM, Walker NM, Cooper JD, Smyth DJ, Field SF, Stevens HE, Todd 
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, University of Cambridge, UK.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2009 Oct;52(10):1983-6.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We used recently confirmed type 2 diabetes gene regions to
investigate the genetic relationship between type 1 and type 2 diabetes, in an
average of 7,606 type 1 diabetic individuals and 8,218 controls, providing >80%
power to detect effects as small as an OR of 1.11 at a false-positive rate of
0.003.
METHODS: The single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with the most convincing
evidence of association in 12 type 2 diabetes-associated gene regions, PPARG,
CDKAL1, HNF1B, WFS1, SLC30A8, CDKN2A-CDKN2B, IGF2BP2, KCNJ11, TCF7L2, FTO,
HHEX-IDE and THADA, were analysed in type 1 diabetes cases and controls. PPARG
and HHEX-IDE were additionally tested for association in 3,851 type 1 diabetes
families. Tests for interaction with HLA class II genotypes, autoantibody status,
sex, and age-at-diagnosis of type 1 diabetes were performed with all 12 gene
regions.
RESULTS: Only PPARG and HHEX-IDE showed any evidence of association with type 1
diabetes cases and controls (p = 0.004 and p = 0.003, respectively; p > 0.05 for 
other SNPs). The potential association of PPARG was supported by family analyses 
(p = 0.003; p (combined) = 1.0 x 10(-4)). No SNPs showed evidence of interaction 
with any covariate (p > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We found no convincing genetic link between type 1
and type 2 diabetes. An association of PPARG (rs1801282/Pro12Ala) could be
consistent with its known function in inflammation. Hence, our results reinforce 
evidence suggesting that type 1 diabetes is a disease of the immune system,
rather than being due to inherited defects in beta cell function or regeneration 
or insulin resistance.

PMCID: PMC2738846
PMID: 19455305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2009 Aug;24(8):2595-8. doi: 10.1093/ndt/gfp211. Epub
2009 May 6.

Precocious puberty and unlicensed paediatric drugs for severe
hyperparathyroidism.

Bacchetta J(1), Plotton I, Ranchin B, Vial T, Nicolino M, Morel Y, Cochat P.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Néphrologie et Rhumatologie Pédiatriques, Centre de Référence des
Maladies Rénales Rares, Hôpital Femme Mère Enfant, Bron, France.
justine.bacchetta@chu-lyon.fr

Puberty is often delayed in children with chronic kidney disease. A 5-year-old
boy suffering from severe chronic kidney disease due to a mutation in the TCF2
gene presented with a clinical precocious peripheral puberty 3 weeks after
introducing cinacalcet and 2 months after introducing lanthanum carbonate. A
retrospective measurement of serum sexual and adrenal hormones before the
introduction of cinacalcet but after the introduction of lanthanum carbonate
revealed an asymptomatic biological underlying precocious puberty. With more than
1-year follow-up, the aetiology of this precocious puberty remains unexplained.
Cinacalcet can be responsible for hypotestosteronaemia in adults, but no case of 
precocious puberty has been described in association with cinacalcet so far.
Natural lanthanides can activate in vitro the calcium sensor receptor, but there 
are no clinical data about side effects of lanthanum carbonate on sexual
hormones. An unknown phenotype of TCF2 mutation may also be discussed. Monitoring
of plasma testosterone in patients receiving unlicensed paediatric drugs for
managing hyperparathyroidism and presenting with a change in genitals is
therefore recommended.

PMID: 19420106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Jul;94(7):2658-64. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-2189. Epub 
2009 May 5.

Expanded clinical spectrum in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1b-maturity-onset
diabetes of the young.

Raile K(1), Klopocki E, Holder M, Wessel T, Galler A, Deiss D, Müller D, Riebel
T, Horn D, Maringa M, Weber J, Ullmann R, Grüters A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Charité Campus Virchow,
13353 Berlin, Germany. klemens.raile@charite.de

AIMS: HNF1B-maturity-onset diabetes of the young is caused by abnormalities in
the HNF1B gene encoding the transcription factor HNF-1beta. We aimed to
investigate detailed clinical features and the type of HNF1B gene anomaly in five
pediatric cases with HNF1B-MODY.
METHODS: From a cohort of 995 children and adolescents with diabetes, we analyzed
the most frequent maturity-onset diabetes of the young genes (GCK, HNF1A, HNF4A) 
including HNF1B sequencing and deletion analysis by quantitative Multiplex-PCR of
Short Fluorescent Fragments (QMPSF) if patients were islet autoantibody-negative 
and had one parent with diabetes or associated extrapancreatic features or
detectable C-peptide outside honeymoon phase. Presence and size of
disease-causing chromosomal rearrangements detected by QMPSF were further
analyzed by array comparative genomic hybridization.
RESULTS: Overall, five patients had a heterozygous HNF1B deletion, presenting
renal disease, elevated liver enzymes, and diabetes. Diabetes was characterized
by insulin resistance and adolescent onset of hyperglycemia. Additionally,
clinical features in some patients were pancreas dysplasia and exocrine
insufficiency (two of five patients), genital defects (three of five), mental
retardation (two of five), and eye abnormalities (coloboma, cataract in two of
five). One case also had severe growth deficit combined with congenital
cholestasis, and another case had common variable immune deficiency. All patients
reported here had monoallelic loss of the entire HNF1B gene. Whole genome array
comparative genomic hybridization confirmed a precurrent genomic deletion of
approximately 1.3-1.7 Mb in size.
CONCLUSION: The clinical data of our cases enlarge the wide spectrum of patients 
with HNF1B anomaly. The underlying molecular defect in all cases was a 1.3- to
1.7-Mb deletion, and paired, segmental duplications along with breakpoints were
most likely involved in this recurrent chromosomal microdeletion.

PMID: 19417042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2009 May;20(5):1123-31. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2008060633. Epub 2009 
Apr 23.

HNF1B mutations associate with hypomagnesemia and renal magnesium wasting.

Adalat S(1), Woolf AS, Johnstone KA, Wirsing A, Harries LW, Long DA, Hennekam RC,
Ledermann SE, Rees L, van't Hoff W, Marks SD, Trompeter RS, Tullus K, Winyard PJ,
Cansick J, Mushtaq I, Dhillon HK, Bingham C, Edghill EL, Shroff R, Stanescu H,
Ryffel GU, Ellard S, Bockenhauer D.

Author information: 
(1)Nephrology Unit, Great Ormond Street Hospital NHS Trust, London WCIN 3JH, UK.

Mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1B (HNF1B), which is a transcription
factor expressed in tissues including renal epithelia, associate with abnormal
renal development. While studying renal phenotypes of children with HNF1B
mutations, we identified a teenager who presented with tetany and hypomagnesemia.
We retrospectively reviewed radiographic and laboratory data for all patients
from a single center who had been screened for an HNF1B mutation. We found
heterozygous mutations in 21 (23%) of 91 cases of renal malformation. All
mutation carriers had abnormal fetal renal ultrasonography. Plasma magnesium
levels were available for 66 patients with chronic kidney disease (stages 1 to
3). Striking, 44% (eight of 18) of mutation carriers had hypomagnesemia (<1.58
mg/dl) compared with 2% (one of 48) of those without mutations (P < 0.0001). The 
median plasma magnesium was significantly lower among mutation carriers than
those without mutations (1.68 versus 2.02 mg/dl; P < 0.0001). Because
hypermagnesuria and hypocalciuria accompanied the hypomagnesemia, we analyzed
genes associated with hypermagnesuria and detected highly conserved HNF1
recognition sites in FXYD2, a gene that can cause autosomal dominant
hypomagnesemia and hypocalciuria when mutated. Using a luciferase reporter assay,
we demonstrated HNF1B-mediated transactivation of FXYD2. These results extend the
phenotype of HNF1B mutations to include hypomagnesemia. HNF1B regulates
transcription of FXYD2, which participates in the tubular handling of Mg(2+),
thus describing a role for HNF1B not only in nephrogenesis but also in the
maintenance of tubular function.

PMCID: PMC2678044
PMID: 19389850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Arch Pediatr. 2009 Jul;16(7):1049-56. doi: 10.1016/j.arcped.2009.02.023. Epub
2009 Apr 9.

[Abnormalities of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1beta: biological mechanisms,
phenotypes, and clinical consequences].

[Article in French]

Ulinski T(1), Bensman A, Lescure S.

Author information: 
(1)Service de néphrologie pédiatrique, hôpital Armand-Trousseau, AP-HP,
université Pierre-et-Marie-Curie, 75012 Paris, France. tim.ulinski@trs.aphp.fr

The hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta encoded by the TCF2 gene plays a role in the 
specific regulation of gene expression in various tissues such as liver, kidney, 
intestine, and pancreatic islets and is involved in the embryonic development of 
these organs. TCF2 mutations are known to be responsible for maturity-onset
diabetes of the young type 5, associated with renal manifestations. Several
studies have shown that TCF2 mutations are involved in restricted renal
phenotypes. In a recent study, TCF2 anomalies were detected in one third of
patients with renal anomalies such as renal cysts, hyperechogenicity, hypoplasia,
or single kidneys. Most patients have a complete deletion of the TCF2 gene. With 
de novo TCF2 anomalies, deletions were the most frequent anomaly. TCF2 anomalies 
were significantly associated with bilateral renal anomalies and bilateral
cortical cysts. However, no genotype-phenotype correlation could be detected. The
prenatal phenotype of TCF2 anomalies is mainly bilateral hyperechogenic kidneys. 
Abnormal renal function, detected in about one third of patients, was independent
of the TCF2 genotype. The best parameter to predict renal outcome remains
sonographic evaluation. However, progression of the TCF2 phenotype is common. In 
conclusion, TCF2 molecular anomalies are involved in restricted renal phenotype
in childhood without alteration of glucose metabolism. Adequate metabolic
follow-up of pediatric patients with a restricted renal phenotype has not yet
been defined and consideration of prenatal diagnosis remains extremely difficult 
given the extremely large phenotypic variability within the same family.

PMID: 19361964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jul 1;18(13):2328-43. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp165. Epub 2009 Apr 
3.

Systems biology of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD):
computational identification of gene expression pathways and integrated
regulatory networks.

Song X(1), Di Giovanni V, He N, Wang K, Ingram A, Rosenblum ND, Pei Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, University Health Network, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

To elucidate the molecular pathways that modulate renal cyst growth in ADPKD, we 
performed global gene profiling on cysts of different size (<1 ml, n = 5; 10-20
ml, n = 5; >50 ml, n = 3) and minimally cystic tissue (MCT, n = 5) from five PKD1
human polycystic kidneys using Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus 2.0 arrays. We used gene
set enrichment analysis to identify overrepresented signaling pathways and key
transcription factors (TFs) between cysts and MCT. We found down-regulation of
kidney epithelial restricted genes (e.g. nephron segment-specific markers and
cilia-associated cystic genes such as HNF1B, PKHD1, IFT88 and CYS1) in the renal 
cysts. On the other hand, PKD1 cysts displayed a rich profile of gene sets
associated with renal development, mitogen-mediated proliferation, cell cycle
progression, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, hypoxia, aging and
immune/inflammatory responses. Notably, our data suggest that up-regulation of
Wnt/beta-catenin, pleiotropic growth factor/receptor tyrosine kinase (e.g.
IGF/IGF1R, FGF/FGFR, EGF/EGFR, VEGF/VEGFR), G-protein-coupled receptor (e.g.
PTGER2) signaling was associated with renal cystic growth. By integrating these
pathways with a number of dysregulated networks of TFs (e.g. SRF, MYC, E2F1,
CREB1, LEF1, TCF7, HNF1B/ HNF1A and HNF4A), our data suggest that epithelial
dedifferentiation accompanied by aberrant activation and cross-talk of specific
signaling pathways may be required for PKD1 cyst growth and disease progression. 
Pharmacological modulation of some of these signaling pathways may provide a
potential therapeutic strategy for ADPKD.

PMID: 19346236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Nephrol Ther. 2009 Jul;5(4):287-91. doi: 10.1016/j.nephro.2009.02.009. Epub 2009 
Apr 1.

[Phenotypic heterogeneity of TCF2's gene mutation coding for HNF-1 beta in a
single family].

[Article in French]

Rigothier C(1), Harambat J, Llanas B, Subra JF, Combe C.

Author information: 
(1)Services de néphrologie et de pédiatrie, centre de référence des maladies
rénales rares du Sud-Ouest, université de Bordeaux, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux,
France. claire.rigothier@chu-bordeaux.fr

TCF2 gene's mutation of autosomal dominant inheritance, encoding for the HNF-1
beta transcription factor, is associated with monogenic Mody5 diabetes, renal
structural and urogenital abnormalities, and hepatic cholestasis. We have
identified a family with HNF-1 beta gene's mutation, and very different
phenotypic expression: renal abnormalities with cysts, nephrocalcinosis,
polyuropolydipsic syndrome, Mody5 diabetes, genital malformations. Molecular
analysis identified a mutation of exon 4 of the TCF2 gene. The coexistence in the
same family of pleiomorphic renal malformations (cysts, renal agenesia or
hypoplasia, renal failure) with Mody-type diabetes, with an autosomal inheritance
must lead to the search for a mutation of TCF2, one of the most frequent genetic 
renal diseases.

PMID: 19346182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Diabetes. 2009 Jun;58(6):1411-8. doi: 10.2337/db08-1623. Epub 2009 Mar 26.

Previously associated type 2 diabetes variants may interact with physical
activity to modify the risk of impaired glucose regulation and type 2 diabetes: a
study of 16,003 Swedish adults.

Brito EC(1), Lyssenko V, Renström F, Berglund G, Nilsson PM, Groop L, Franks PW.

Author information: 
(1)Genetic Epidemiology and Clinical Research Group, Department of Public Health 
and Clinical Medicine, Section for Medicine, Umeå University Hospital, Umeå,
Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Recent advances in type 2 diabetes genetics have culminated in the
discovery and confirmation of multiple risk variants. Two important and largely
unanswered questions are whether this information can be used to identify
individuals most susceptible to the adverse consequences of sedentary behavior
and to predict their response to lifestyle intervention; such evidence would be
mechanistically informative and provide a rationale for targeting genetically
susceptible subgroups of the population.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Gene x physical activity interactions were assessed 
for 17 polymorphisms in a prospective population-based cohort of initially
nondiabetic middle-aged adults. Outcomes were 1) impaired glucose regulation
(IGR) versus normal glucose regulation determined with either fasting or 2-h
plasma glucose concentrations (n = 16,003), 2) glucose intolerance (in mmol/l, n 
= 8,860), or 3) incident type 2 diabetes (n = 2,063 events).
RESULTS: Tests of gene x physical activity interactions on IGR risk for 3 of the 
17 polymorphisms were nominally statistically significant:CDKN2A/B rs10811661
(P(interaction) = 0.015), HNF1B rs4430796 (P(interaction) = 0.026), and PPARG
rs1801282 (P(interaction) = 0.04). Consistent interactions were observed for the 
CDKN2A/B (P(interaction) = 0.013) and HNF1B (P(interaction) = 0.0009) variants on
2-h glucose concentrations. Where type 2 diabetes was the outcome, only one
statistically significant interaction effect was observed, and this was for the
HNF1B rs4430796 variant (P(interaction) = 0.0004). The interaction effects for
HNF1B on IGR risk and incident diabetes remained significant after correction for
multiple testing (P(interaction) = 0.015 and 0.0068, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Our observations suggest that the genetic predisposition to
hyperglycemia is partially dependent on a person's lifestyle.

PMCID: PMC2682680
PMID: 19324937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Anal Quant Cytol Histol. 2009 Feb;31(1):34-40.

Expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta in human urogenital tract during
the embryonic stage.

Kato N(1), Motoyama T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yamagata University School of Medicine, 2-2-2
Iida-nishi, Yamagata 990-9585, Japan. nkato@med.id.yamagata-u.ac.jp

OBJECTIVE: To investigate hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) expression 
in the human urogenital tract during the embryonic stage.
STUDY DESIGN: Twelve human fetuses (2 fetuses of undetermined sex, 5 males and 5 
females) were immunohistochemically examined for HNF-1beta expression.
RESULTS: In the metanephric kidney (metanephros), the renal tubule was
selectively positive for HNF-1beta. HNF-1beta expression was detected in
mesonephric (wolffian) duct derivatives, including the efferent duct or
epididymis, in fetuses at the 12th, 21st and 22nd gestational weeks, but not
detected in the müllerian duct derivatives, including the uterus or fallopian
tube, infetuses after the 18th gestational week. HNF-1beta was also expressed in 
remnants of the mesonephric tubule or duct lying in the mesovarium or
mesosalpinx, not only in the fetus but also in the adult female (35-82 years
old).
CONCLUSION: The present study indicates that HNF-1beta is involved in the
development of mesonephric duct derivatives and metanephros and that HNF-1beta
expression is conserved in the mesonephric duct remnants throughout life.
Uncommon HNF-1beta expression in müllerian duct derivatives implies that
involvement of HNF-1beta in the müllerian duct system is limited to a specific
embryonic period.

PMID: 19320191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev. 2009 Apr;18(4):1285-9. doi:
10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-08-1142. Epub 2009 Mar 24.

Generalizability of associations from prostate cancer genome-wide association
studies in multiple populations.

Waters KM(1), Le Marchand L, Kolonel LN, Monroe KR, Stram DO, Henderson BE,
Haiman CA.

Author information: 
(1)Harlyne Norris Research Tower, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. kwaters@usc.edu

Genome-wide association studies have identified multiple common alleles
associated with prostate cancer risk in populations of European ancestry. Testing
these variants in other populations is needed to assess the generalizability of
the associations and may guide fine-mapping efforts. We examined 13 of these risk
variants in a multiethnic sample of 2,768 incident prostate cancer cases and
2,359 controls from the Multiethnic Cohort (African Americans, European
Americans, Latinos, Japanese Americans, and Native Hawaiians). We estimated
ethnic-specific and pooled odds ratios and tested for ethnic heterogeneity of
effects using logistic regression. In ethnic-pooled analyses, 12 of the 13
variants were positively associated with risk, with statistically significant
associations (P < 0.05) noted with six variants: JAZF1, rs10486567 [odds ratio
(OR), 1.23; 95% confidence interval (95% CI, 1.12-1.35); Xp11.2, rs5945572 (OR,
1.31; 95% CI, 1.13-1.51); HNF1B, rs4430796 (OR, 1.15; 95% CI, 1.06-1.25); MSMB,
rs10993994 (OR, 1.13; 95% CI, 1.04-1.23); 11q13.2, rs7931342 (OR, 1.13; 95% CI,
1.03-1.23); 3p12.1, rs2660753 (OR, 1.11; 95% CI, 1.01-1.21); SLC22A3, rs9364554
(OR, 1.10; 95% CI, 1.00-1.21); CTBP2, rs12769019 (OR, 1.11; 95% CI, 0.99-1.25);
HNF1B, rs11649743 (OR, 1.10; 95% CI, 0.99-1.22); EHBP1, rs721048 (OR, 1.08; 95%
CI, 0.94-1.25); KLK2/3, rs2735839 (OR, 1.06; 95% CI, 0.97-1.16); 17q24.3,
rs1859962 (OR, 1.04; 95% CI, 0.96-1.13); and LMTK2, rs6465657 (OR, 0.99; 95% CI, 
0.89-1.09). Significant ethnic heterogeneity of effects was noted for four
variants (EHBP1, P(het) = 3.9 x 10(-3); 11q13, P(het) = 0.023; HNF1B (rs4430796),
P(het) = 0.026; and KLK2/3, P(het) = 2.0 x 10(-3)). Although power was limited in
some ethnic/racial groups due to variation in sample size and allele frequencies,
these findings suggest that a large fraction of prostate cancer variants
identified in populations of European ancestry are global markers of risk. For
many of these regions, fine-mapping in non-European samples may help localize
causal alleles and better determine their contribution to prostate cancer risk in
the population.

PMCID: PMC2917607
PMID: 19318432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jun;29(11):2945-59. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01389-08. Epub 2009 Mar 
16.

Hnf1alpha (MODY3) controls tissue-specific transcriptional programs and exerts
opposed effects on cell growth in pancreatic islets and liver.

Servitja JM(1), Pignatelli M, Maestro MA, Cardalda C, Boj SF, Lozano J, Blanco E,
Lafuente A, McCarthy MI, Sumoy L, Guigó R, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Programming of Beta-Cells Laboratory, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.

Heterozygous HNF1A mutations cause pancreatic-islet beta-cell dysfunction and
monogenic diabetes (MODY3). Hnf1alpha is known to regulate numerous hepatic
genes, yet knowledge of its function in pancreatic islets is more limited. We now
show that Hnf1a deficiency in mice leads to highly tissue-specific changes in the
expression of genes involved in key functions of both islets and liver. To gain
insights into the mechanisms of tissue-specific Hnf1alpha regulation, we
integrated expression studies of Hnf1a-deficient mice with identification of
direct Hnf1alpha targets. We demonstrate that Hnf1alpha can bind in a
tissue-selective manner to genes that are expressed only in liver or islets. We
also show that Hnf1alpha is essential only for the transcription of a minor
fraction of its direct-target genes. Even among genes that were expressed in both
liver and islets, the subset of targets showing functional dependence on
Hnf1alpha was highly tissue specific. This was partly explained by the
compensatory occupancy by the paralog Hnf1beta at selected genes in
Hnf1a-deficient liver. In keeping with these findings, the biological
consequences of Hnf1a deficiency were markedly different in islets and liver.
Notably, Hnf1a deficiency led to impaired large-T-antigen-induced growth and
oncogenesis in beta cells yet enhanced proliferation in hepatocytes.
Collectively, these findings show that Hnf1alpha governs broad, highly
tissue-specific genetic programs in pancreatic islets and liver and reveal key
consequences of Hnf1a deficiency relevant to the pathophysiology of monogenic
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2682018
PMID: 19289501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Breast Cancer Res. 2009;11(1):R14. doi: 10.1186/bcr2233. Epub 2009 Feb 27.

Methylation of homeobox genes is a frequent and early epigenetic event in breast 
cancer.

Tommasi S(1), Karm DL, Wu X, Yen Y, Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, 
Duarte, CA 91010, USA. stommasi@coh.org

INTRODUCTION: Aberrant methylation of CpG islands is a hallmark of cancer and
occurs at an early stage in breast tumorigenesis. However, its impact on tumor
development is not fully determined, and its potential as a diagnostic biomarker 
remains to be validated. Methylation profiling of invasive breast carcinoma has
been largely explored. Conversely, very little and sparse information is
available on early-stage breast cancer. To gain insight into the epigenetic
switches that may promote and/or contribute to the initial neoplastic events
during breast carcinogenesis, we have analyzed the DNA methylation profile of
ductal carcinoma in situ, a premalignant breast lesion with a great potential to 
progress toward invasive carcinoma.
METHODS: We have utilized a comprehensive and sensitive array-based DNA mapping
technique, the methylated-CpG island recovery assay, to profile the DNA
methylation pattern in ductal carcinoma in situ. Differential methylation of CpG 
islands was compared genome-wide in tumor DNA versus normal DNA utilizing a
statistical linear model in the LIMMA software package.
RESULTS: Using this approach, we have identified 108 significant CpG islands that
undergo aberrant DNA methylation in ductal carcinoma in situ and stage I breast
tumors, with methylation frequencies greater than or comparable with those of
more advanced invasive carcinoma (50% to 93%). A substantial fraction of these
hypermethylated CpG islands (32% of the annotated CpG islands) is associated with
several homeobox genes, such as the TLX1, HOXB13, and HNF1B genes. Fifty-three
percent of the genes hypermethylated in early-stage breast cancer overlap with
known Polycomb targets and include homeobox genes and other developmental
transcription factors.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a series of new potential methylation biomarkers 
that may help elucidate the underlying mechanisms of breast tumorigenesis. More
specifically, our results are suggestive of a critical role of homeobox gene
methylation in the insurgence and/or progression of breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC2687719
PMID: 19250546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Hum Genet. 2009 Apr;54(4):236-41. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2009.17. Epub 2009 Feb 27.

Construction of a prediction model for type 2 diabetes mellitus in the Japanese
population based on 11 genes with strong evidence of the association.

Miyake K(1), Yang W, Hara K, Yasuda K, Horikawa Y, Osawa H, Furuta H, Ng MC,
Hirota Y, Mori H, Ido K, Yamagata K, Hinokio Y, Oka Y, Iwasaki N, Iwamoto Y,
Yamada Y, Seino Y, Maegawa H, Kashiwagi A, Wang HY, Tanahashi T, Nakamura N,
Takeda J, Maeda E, Yamamoto K, Tokunaga K, Ma RC, So WY, Chan JC, Kamatani N,
Makino H, Nanjo K, Kadowaki T, Kasuga M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes, Metabolism and Endocrinology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Japan.

Prediction of the disease status is one of the most important objectives of
genetic studies. To select the genes with strong evidence of the association with
type 2 diabetes mellitus, we validated the associations of the seven candidate
loci extracted in our earlier study by genotyping the samples in two independent 
sample panels. However, except for KCNQ1, the association of none of the
remaining seven loci was replicated. We then selected 11 genes, KCNQ1, TCF7L2,
CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, SLC30A8, HHEX, GCKR, HNF1B, KCNJ11 and PPARG, whose
associations with diabetes have already been reported and replicated either in
the literature or in this study in the Japanese population. As no evidence of the
gene-gene interaction for any pair of the 11 loci was shown, we constructed a
prediction model for the disease using the logistic regression analysis by
incorporating the number of the risk alleles for the 11 genes, as well as age,
sex and body mass index as independent variables. Cumulative risk assessment
showed that the addition of one risk allele resulted in an average increase in
the odds for the disease of 1.29 (95% CI=1.25-1.33, P=5.4 x 10(-53)). The area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve, an estimate of the power of
the prediction model, was 0.72, thereby indicating that our prediction model for 
type 2 diabetes may not be so useful but has some value. Incorporation of data
from additional risk loci is most likely to increase the predictive power.

PMID: 19247372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Diabetes Care. 2009 May;32(5):873-7. doi: 10.2337/dc08-1529. Epub 2009 Feb 19.

A-beta-subtype of ketosis-prone diabetes is not predominantly a monogenic
diabetic syndrome.

Haaland WC(1), Scaduto DI, Maldonado MR, Mansouri DL, Nalini R, Iyer D, Patel S, 
Guthikonda A, Hampe CS, Balasubramanyam A, Metzker ML.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas,
USA.

OBJECTIVE: Ketosis-prone diabetes (KPD) is an emerging syndrome that encompasses 
several distinct phenotypic subgroups that share a predisposition to diabetic
ketoacidosis. We investigated whether the A-beta- subgroup of KPD, characterized 
by complete insulin dependence, absent beta-cell functional reserve, lack of
islet cell autoantibodies, and strong family history of type 2 diabetes,
represents a monogenic form of diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Over 8 years, 37 patients with an A-beta- phenotype 
were identified in our longitudinally followed cohort of KPD patients. Seven
genes, including hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A (HNF4A), glucokinase (GCK), HNF1A, 
pancreas duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1), HNF1B, neurogenic differentiation 1
(NEUROD1), and PAX4, were directly sequenced in all patients. Selected gene
regions were also sequenced in healthy, unrelated ethnically matched control
subjects, consisting of 84 African American, 96 Caucasian, and 95 Hispanic
subjects.
RESULTS: The majority (70%) of the A-beta- KPD patients had no significant causal
polymorphisms in either the proximal promoter or coding regions of the seven
genes. The combination of six potentially significant low-frequency, heterozygous
sequence variants in HNF-1 alpha (A174V or G574S), PDX1 (putative 5'-untranslated
region CCAAT box, P33T, or P239Q), or PAX4 (R133W) were found in 27% (10/37) of
patients, with one additional patient revealing two variants, PDX1 P33T and PAX4 
R133W. The A174V variant has not been previously reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite its well-circumscribed, robust, and distinctive phenotype of
severe, nonautoimmune-mediated beta-cell dysfunction, A-beta- KPD is most likely 
not a predominantly monogenic diabetic syndrome. Several A-beta- KPD patients
have low-frequency variants in HNF1A, PDX1, or PAX4 genes, which may be of
functional significance in their pathophysiology.

PMCID: PMC2671096
PMID: 19228875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Hepatology. 2009 Mar;49(3):969-78. doi: 10.1002/hep.22700.

Tbx3 promotes liver bud expansion during mouse development by suppression of
cholangiocyte differentiation.

Lüdtke TH(1), Christoffels VM, Petry M, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover,
Germany.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2010 Mar;52(3):450-1.

After specification of the hepatic endoderm, mammalian liver organogenesis
progresses through a series of morphological stages that culminate in the
migration of hepatocytes into the underlying mesenchyme to populate the hepatic
lobes. Here, we show that in the mouse the transcriptional repressor Tbx3, a
member of the T-box protein family, is required for the transition from a hepatic
diverticulum with a pseudo-stratified epithelium to a cell-emergent liver bud. In
Tbx3-deficient embryos, proliferation in the hepatic epithelium is severely
reduced, hepatoblasts fail to delaminate, and cholangiocyte rather than
hepatocyte differentiation occurs. Molecular analyses suggest that the primary
function of Tbx3 is to maintain expression of hepatocyte transcription factors,
including hepatic nuclear factor 4a (Hnf4a) and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP), alpha (Cebpa), and to repress expression of cholangiocyte transcription 
factors such as Onecut1 (Hnf6) and Hnf1b.CONCLUSION: Tbx3 controls liver bud
expansion by suppressing cholangiocyte and favoring hepatocyte differentiation in
the liver bud.

PMID: 19140222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Diabetes Care. 2008 Nov;31(11):e83. doi: 10.2337/dc08-0920.

HNF1B abnormality (mature-onset diabetes of the young 5) in children and
adolescents: high prevalence in autoantibody-negative type 1 diabetes with kidney
defects.

Raile K, Klopocki E, Wessel T, Deiss D, Horn D, Müller D, Ullmann R, Grüters A.

PMID: 18955710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Zebrafish. 2008 Sep;5(3):179-87. doi: 10.1089/zeb.2008.0534.

hnf1b genes in zebrafish hindbrain development.

Choe SK(1), Hirsch N, Zhang X, Sagerström CG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01605-2324, USA.

The Hnf1b transcription factor acts during formation of rhombomeres (r) 5 and 6
in the hindbrain. To determine if hnf1b is absolutely required in r5/r6, we
examined the hnf1b(hi2169) and hnf1b(hi1843) retroviral insertion alleles.
Hnf1b(hi2169) shows highly variable residual expression of several genes in
r5/r6, but this is not due to full-length hnf1b transcripts persisting in
hnf1b(hi2169) embryos, nor to hnf1bl, a novel hnf1 family member expressed in r5 
that we identified. Instead, we find evidence for a virus-hnf1b fusion transcript
in hnf1b(hi2169) embryos and demonstrate that morpholino-mediated knockdown of
this transcript leads to near-undetectable r5 gene expression. The hnf1b(hi1843) 
allele has a more severe phenotype with near-undetectable expression of r5/r6
genes. We next examined if hoxb1b, which functions upstream of hnf1b in r5/r6
formation, can induce expression of r5/r6 genes in hnf1b mutants. We find that
microinjected hoxb1b mRNA induces ectopic gene expression anterior to the
hindbrain in hnf1b(hi2169) and hnf1b(hi1843) embryos, but cannot restore gene
expression in r5/r6 of the mutants. We conclude that hnf1b(hi2169) is hypomorphic
to hnf1b(hi1843) and that, while hnf1b is required for r5/r6 gene expression in
the hindbrain, r5/r6 gene expression can be experimentally induced independently 
of hnf1b anterior to the hindbrain.

PMCID: PMC2761071
PMID: 18945197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Pediatr Nephrol. 2009 Jan;24(1):55-60. doi: 10.1007/s00467-008-1016-6. Epub 2008 
Oct 10.

Mutation analysis of the Uromodulin gene in 96 individuals with urinary tract
anomalies (CAKUT).

Wolf MT(1), Hoskins BE, Beck BB, Hoppe B, Tasic V, Otto EA, Hildebrandt F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Uromodulin (UMOD) mutations were described in patients with medullary cystic
kidney disease (MCKD2), familial juvenile hyperuricemic nephropathy (FJHN), and
glomerulocystic kidney disease (GCKD). UMOD transcription is activated by the
transcription factor HNF1B. Mutations in HNF1B cause a phenotype similar to
FJHN/GCKD but also congenital anomalies of the kidney and the urinary tract
(CAKUT). Moreover, we recently detected UMOD mutations in two patients with
CAKUT. As HNF1B and UMOD act in the same pathway and cause similar phenotypes, we
here examined whether UMOD mutations would be found in patients with CAKUT.
Mutation analysis of UMOD was performed in 96 individuals with CAKUT by direct
sequencing of exons 4 and 5 and by heteroduplex analysis following CEL I
digestion assay of exons 3 and 6-12. Mean patient age was 11.4 years, and in
36.4% of patients, family history was positive for CAKUT. In the CEL I assay, 12 
aberrant bands were detected in 103 of 960 polymerase chain reaction (PCR)
products and were sequenced. Six previously known and seven new single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) were detected. As no UMOD mutations were identified in these
96 patients with CAKUT, UMOD mutations do not seem to be a significant cause of
CAKUT in this cohort.

PMCID: PMC3155267
PMID: 18846391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Nat Genet. 2008 Oct;40(10):1153-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.214. Epub 2008 Aug 31.

Evidence for two independent prostate cancer risk-associated loci in the HNF1B
gene at 17q12.

Sun J(1), Zheng SL, Wiklund F, Isaacs SD, Purcell LD, Gao Z, Hsu FC, Kim ST, Liu 
W, Zhu Y, Stattin P, Adami HO, Wiley KE, Dimitrov L, Sun J, Li T, Turner AR,
Adams TS, Adolfsson J, Johansson JE, Lowey J, Trock BJ, Partin AW, Walsh PC,
Trent JM, Duggan D, Carpten J, Chang BL, Grönberg H, Isaacs WB, Xu J.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, USA.

We carried out a fine-mapping study in the HNF1B gene at 17q12 in two study
populations and identified a second locus associated with prostate cancer risk,
approximately 26 kb centromeric to the first known locus (rs4430796); these loci 
are separated by a recombination hot spot. We confirmed the association with a
SNP in the second locus (rs11649743) in five additional populations, with P = 1.7
x 10(-9) for an allelic test of the seven studies combined. The association at
each SNP remained significant after adjustment for the other SNP.

PMCID: PMC3188432
PMID: 18758462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Oct;41(4):229-38. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0080. Epub 2008 Aug 
12.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 binding element within the promoter of microsomal
triglyceride transfer protein (MTTP) gene is crucial for MTTP basal expression
and insulin responsiveness.

Au WS(1), Lu L, Yeung CM, Liu CC, Wong OG, Lai L, Kung HF, Lin MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Institute of Molecular Technology for Drug Discovery 
and Synthesis, The University of Hong Kong, Room 8N-11, Kadoorie Biological
Science Building, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China.

Insulin inhibits the transcription of the microsomal triglyceride transfer
protein (MTTP), which plays a pivotal role in lipoprotein assembly and secretion.
Here, we provide evidence that a hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 binding element
(HNF1A element) within the MTTP promoter serves as a novel negative
insulin-responsive element. Deletion/mutation mapping of the MTTP gene promoter
identified a modified HNF1A element that is crucial to the negative insulin
effect. Chimeric promoter containing this HNF1A element and minimal TEAD1
promoter also responded negatively toward insulin treatment. Gel shift assay
demonstrated that HNF1A but not HNF1B binds to this element. Enforced expression 
of HNF1A was sufficient to reconstitute the negative insulin responsiveness of
MTTP promoter in TM4SF1 myocytes that are HNF1A negative. Furthermore, replacing 
this element with consensus HNF1A element preserved the negative insulin
response, suggesting that negative insulin responsiveness is a generic
characteristic of HNF1A element. Given that many genes implicated in diabetes
contain HNF1A element, the potential regulation of these genes by insulin via
HNF1A element may provide important clues for the manifestation and treatment of 
diabetic metabolic syndromes.

PMID: 18697801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Diabetologia. 2008 Oct;51(10):1757-60. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1114-9. Epub 2008 
Aug 12.

A genetic link between type 2 diabetes and prostate cancer.

Frayling TM(1), Colhoun H, Florez JC.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Complex Traits, Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Exeter, Magdalen Road, Exeter, UK. Tim.frayling@pms.ac.uk

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2009 Feb;52(2):378-9.

Epidemiological studies suggest that men with type 2 diabetes are less likely
than non-diabetic men to develop prostate cancer. The cause of this association
is not known. Recent genetic studies have highlighted a potential genetic link
between the two diseases. Two studies have identified a version (allele) of a
variant in the HNF1B (also known as TCF2) gene that predisposes to type 2
diabetes, and one of them showed that the same allele protects men from prostate 
cancer. Other, separate, studies have identified different variants in the JAZF1 
gene, one associated with type 2 diabetes, another associated with prostate
cancer. These findings are unlikely to completely explain the epidemiological
association between the two diseases but they provide new insight into a possible
direct causal link, rather than one that is confounded or biased in some way.

PMID: 18696045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Chem Res Toxicol. 2008 Aug;21(8):1548-61. doi: 10.1021/tx800061w. Epub 2008 Jul
26.

Integrated pathway analysis of rat urine metabolic profiles and kidney
transcriptomic profiles to elucidate the systems toxicology of model
nephrotoxicants.

Xu EY(1), Perlina A, Vu H, Troth SP, Brennan RJ, Aslamkhan AG, Xu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Safety Assessment, Merck Research Laboratories, West Point,
Pennsylvania 19486, USA. ethan_xu@merck.com, qiuwei_xu@merck.com

In this study, approximately 40 endogenous metabolites were identified and
quantified by (1)H NMR in urine samples from male rats dosed with two proximal
tubule toxicants, cisplatin and gentamicin. The excreted amount of a majority of 
those metabolites in urine was found to be dose-dependent and exhibited a strong 
correlation with histopathology scores of overall proximal tubule damage.
MetaCore pathway analysis software (GeneGo Inc.) was employed to identify
nephrotoxicant-associated biochemical changes via an integrated quantitative
analysis of both urine metabolomic and kidney transcriptomic profiles.
Correlation analysis was applied to establish quantitative linkages between pairs
of individual metabolite and gene transcript profiles in both cisplatin and
gentamicin studies. This analysis revealed that cisplatin and gentamicin
treatments were strongly linked to declines in mRNA transcripts for several
luminal membrane transporters that handle each of the respective elevated urinary
metabolites, such as glucose, amino acids, and monocarboxylic acids. The
integrated pathway analysis performed on these studies indicates that cisplatin- 
or gentamicin-induced renal Fanconi-like syndromes manifested by glucosuria,
hyperaminoaciduria, lactic aciduria, and ketonuria might be better explained by
the reduction of functional proximal tubule transporters rather than by the
perturbation of metabolic pathways inside kidney cells. Furthermore, this
analysis suggests that renal transcription factors HNF1alpha, HNF1beta, and HIF-1
might be the central mediators of drug-induced kidney injury and adaptive
response pathways.

PMID: 18656965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. JOP. 2008 Jul 10;9(4):541-75.

Second Giessen International Workshop on Interactions of Exocrine and Endocrine
Pancreatic Diseases. Castle of Rauischholzhausen of the Justus-Liebig-university,
Giessen (Rauischholzhausen), Germany. March 7-8, 2008.

Andren-Sandberg A(1), Hardt PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Karolinska University Hospital, Huddige, Sweden.
ake.andren.sandberg@mail.chsa.se

The 'Second Giessen International Workshop on Interactions of Exocrine and
Endocrine Pancreatic Diseases' was organized in order to reflect and discuss
recent developments in the field, especially the progress that has been achieved 
since the first meeting in March 2005. About thirty international specialists
were invited to share their experience and thoughts covering the main topics of: 
A) pancreatic diabetes (type 3c); B) chronic inflammation of the pancreas. The
presentations of session A covered an overview about the frequency of exocrine
dysfunction in diabetes mellitus, the relation between diabetes, celiac disease
and the exocrine pancreas, the prevalence of type 3c diabetes, damage to the
pancreas caused by genes, the role of incretins in type 2 and type 3 diabetes,
the role of exocrine tissue in beta cell homeostasis, peculiarities in the
treatment of type 3c diabetes and a lecture on incretins: from concept to
treatment. Session B included presentations about the frequency of chronic
inflammation of the pancreas and therapeutical implications, the role of ACE in
the pancreas, genomics and the metabolic hypothesis of chronic pancreatitis,
nutritional aspects of pancreatic diseases, the stellate cell concept,
autoimmunity, genetic background of chronic pancreatitis and the hypothesis of
chronic obstruction induced by gallstone disease. The meeting resulted in several
new projects that will be started by the participants in the near future.

PMID: 18648151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Diabet Med. 2008 Jul;25(7):782-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2008.02460.x.

Lack of pancreatic body and tail in HNF1B mutation carriers.

Haldorsen IS(1), Vesterhus M, Raeder H, Jensen DK, Søvik O, Molven A, Njølstad
PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

Comment in
    Diabet Med. 2009 Jan;26(1):112.

AIMS: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1B (HNF1B) gene mutation carriers have a systemic
disease characterized by congenital malformations in the urogenital tract,
diabetes mellitus of maturity-onset diabetes of the young type and dysfunction of
the liver and exocrine pancreas. We aimed to investigate pancreatic structure and
exocrine function in carriers of HNF1B mutations.
METHODS: We studied five subjects from two families with the previously reported 
mutation R137_K161del and the novel mutation F148L in HNF1B. All patients
underwent computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography (MRCP). We measured faecal elastase and serum vitamins D
and E.
RESULTS: One of the mutation carriers reported abdominal symptoms. All five
subjects had faecal elastase deficiency, three had vitamin D deficiency and two
had vitamin E deficiency. Neither CT nor MRCP depicted tissue corresponding to
the pancreatic body and tail in the five mutation carriers, indicating agenesis
of the dorsal pancreas. The head of the pancreas was slightly atrophic but had
normal X-ray attenuation at CT in all patients.
CONCLUSIONS: Agenesis of the pancreatic body and tail and pancreatic exocrine
dysfunction are parts of the phenotype in HNF1B mutation carriers. This
strengthens the evidence for a critical role of HNF1B in development and
differentiation of at least the dorsal pancreas.

PMID: 18644064  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Development. 2008 Aug;135(16):2777-86. doi: 10.1242/dev.023010. Epub 2008 Jul 17.

Crucial role of vHNF1 in vertebrate hepatic specification.

Lokmane L(1), Haumaitre C, Garcia-Villalba P, Anselme I, Schneider-Maunoury S,
Cereghini S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, UMR7622 Biologie du
Developpement, 9 quai St. Bernard Bât. C, 75005 Paris, France.

Mouse liver induction occurs via the acquisition of ventral endoderm competence
to respond to inductive signals from adjacent mesoderm, followed by hepatic
specification. Little is known about the regulatory circuit involved in these
processes. Through the analysis of vHnf1 (Hnf1b)-deficient embryos, generated by 
tetraploid embryo complementation, we demonstrate that lack of vHNF1 leads to
defective hepatic bud formation and abnormal gut regionalization. Thickening of
the ventral hepatic endoderm and expression of known hepatic genes do not occur. 
At earlier stages, hepatic specification of vHnf1-/- ventral endoderm is
disrupted. More importantly, mutant ventral endoderm cultured in vitro loses its 
responsiveness to inductive FGF signals and fails to induce the
hepatic-specification genes albumin and transthyretin. Analysis of liver
induction in zebrafish indicates a conserved role of vHNF1 in vertebrates. Our
results reveal the crucial role of vHNF1 at the earliest steps of liver
induction: the acquisition of endoderm competence and the hepatic specification.

PMID: 18635606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Sep;93(9):3505-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-0340. Epub
2008 Jul 1.

Reduced pancreatic volume in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1A-maturity-onset diabetes
of the young.

Vesterhus M(1), Haldorsen IS, Raeder H, Molven A, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, N-5021 Bergen,
Norway.

CONTEXT: There are interplays between the endocrine and exocrine pancreas. We
recently reported an increased frequency of exocrine dysfunction in
HNF1A-maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3) patients, compared with
controls. Reduced pancreatic volume is seen in HNF1B-MODY (MODY5) and diabetes
types 1 and 2.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate whether HNF1A mutation
carriers have reduced pancreatic volume or abnormal pancreatic structure and
whether any changes are associated with exocrine dysfunction.
METHODS: Fifteen HNF1A mutation carriers recruited from the Norwegian MODY
Registry, 31 subjects with type 1 diabetes, 10 subjects with type 2 diabetes, and
11 controls underwent computed tomography of the pancreas. We measured pancreatic
volume and X-ray attenuation. Pancreatic volume index was defined as pancreatic
volume divided by body surface area.
RESULTS: Pancreatic volume index was reduced in subjects with HNF1A-MODY (34.5
ml/m2; P < 0.02) and type 1 diabetes (21.4 ml/m2; P < 0.001) as compared with
nondiabetic controls (45.7 ml/m2), and was reduced in subjects with diabetes in
combination with fecal elastase deficiency (P = 0.03). Subjects with type 1
diabetes had smaller pancreatic volume index, compared with HNF1A mutation
carriers (P < 0.001). Reduced pancreatic volume index was associated with
increasing duration of diabetes. Pancreatic X-ray attenuation in HNF1A mutation
carriers was not significantly different from that of nondiabetic controls.
CONCLUSIONS: HNF1A mutation carriers have reduced pancreatic volume but less
reduced than in patients with type 1 diabetes. Insulinopenia could explain both
the pancreatic volume reduction and the associated pancreatic dysfunction.

PMID: 18593771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Kidney Int. 2008 Oct;74(8):1094-9. doi: 10.1038/ki.2008.227. Epub 2008 Jun 4.

A genetic syndrome of chronic renal failure with multiple renal cysts and early
onset diabetes.

Thomas CP(1), Erlandson JC, Edghill EL, Hattersley AT, Stolpen AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Iowa College of Medicine, Iowa 
City, Iowa 52242, USA. christie-thomas@uiowa.edu

PMID: 18528323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Diabetes. 2008 Jul;57(7):1983-6. doi: 10.2337/db08-0270. Epub 2008 Apr 21.

Association analysis of type 2 diabetes Loci in type 1 diabetes.

Qu HQ(1), Grant SF, Bradfield JP, Kim C, Frackelton E, Hakonarson H,
Polychronakos C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Human Genetics, McGill University, Montreal,
Québec, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To search for a possible association of type 1 diabetes with 10
validated type 2 diabetes loci, i.e., PPARG, KCNJ11, WFS1, HNF1B, IDE/HHEX,
SLC30A8, CDKAL1, CDKN2A/B, IGF2BP2, and FTO/RPGRIP1L.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Two European population samples were studied: 1) one
case-control cohort of 514 type 1 diabetic subjects and 2,027 control subjects
and 2) one family cohort of 483 complete type 1 diabetic case-parent trios (total
997 affected). A total of 13 tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from the 
10 type 2 diabetes loci were analyzed for type 1 diabetes association.
RESULTS: No association of type 1 diabetes was found with any of the 10 type 2
diabetes loci, and no age-at-onset effect was detected. By combined analysis
using the Wellcome Trust Case-Control Consortium type 1 diabetes data, SNP
rs1412829 in the CDKN2A/B locus bordered on significance (P = 0.039) (odds ratio 
0.929 [95% CI 0.867-0.995]), which did not reach the statistical significance
threshold adjusted for 13 tests (alpha = 0.00385).
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that the type 2 diabetes loci do not play any
obvious role in type 1 diabetes genetic susceptibility. The distinct molecular
mechanisms of the two diseases highlighted the importance of differentiation
diagnosis and different treatment principles.

PMCID: PMC2453613
PMID: 18426861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Kidney Int. 2008 Jul;74(2):210-7. doi: 10.1038/ki.2008.149. Epub 2008 Apr 16.

Transcription factor HNF1beta and novel partners affect nephrogenesis.

Dudziak K(1), Mottalebi N, Senkel S, Edghill EL, Rosengarten S, Roose M, Bingham 
C, Ellard S, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie Tumorforschung, Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Universität Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2008 Jul;74(2):145-7.

Heterozygous mutations of the tissue-specific transcription factor hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)1beta, cause maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY5) and
kidney anomalies including agenesis, hypoplasia, dysplasia and cysts. Because of 
these renal anomalies, HNF1beta is classified as a CAKUT (congenital anomalies of
the kidney and urinary tract) gene. We searched for human fetal kidney proteins
interacting with the N-terminal region of HNF1beta using a bacterial two-hybrid
system and identified five novel proteins along with the known partner DCoH. The 
interactions were confirmed for four of these proteins by GST pull-down assays.
Overexpression of two proteins, E4F1 and ZFP36L1, in Xenopus embryos interfered
with pronephros formation. Further, in situ hybridization showed overlapping
expression of HNF1beta, E4F1 and ZFP36L1 in the developing pronephros. HNF1beta
is present largely in the nucleus where it colocalized with E4F1. However,
ZFP36L1 was located predominantly in the cytoplasm. A nuclear function for
ZFP36L1 was shown as it was able to reduce HNF1beta transactivation in a
luciferase reporter system. Our studies show novel proteins may cooperate with
HNF1beta in human metanephric development and propose that E4F1 and ZFP36L1 are
CAKUT genes. We searched for mutations in the open reading frame of the ZFP36L1
gene in 58 patients with renal anomalies but found none.

PMID: 18418350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Nat Genet. 2008 Mar;40(3):310-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.91. Epub 2008 Feb 10.

Multiple loci identified in a genome-wide association study of prostate cancer.

Thomas G(1), Jacobs KB, Yeager M, Kraft P, Wacholder S, Orr N, Yu K, Chatterjee
N, Welch R, Hutchinson A, Crenshaw A, Cancel-Tassin G, Staats BJ, Wang Z,
Gonzalez-Bosquet J, Fang J, Deng X, Berndt SI, Calle EE, Feigelson HS, Thun MJ,
Rodriguez C, Albanes D, Virtamo J, Weinstein S, Schumacher FR, Giovannucci E,
Willett WC, Cussenot O, Valeri A, Andriole GL, Crawford ED, Tucker M, Gerhard DS,
Fraumeni JF Jr, Hoover R, Hayes RB, Hunter DJ, Chanock SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

We followed our initial genome-wide association study (GWAS) of 527,869 SNPs on
1,172 individuals with prostate cancer and 1,157 controls of European
origin-nested in the Prostate, Lung, Colorectal, and Ovarian (PLCO) Cancer
Screening Trial prospective study-by testing 26,958 SNPs in four independent
studies (total of 3,941 cases and 3,964 controls). In the combined joint
analysis, we confirmed three previously reported loci (two independent SNPs at
8q24 and one in HNF1B (formerly known as TCF2 on 17q); P < 10(-10)). In addition,
loci on chromosomes 7, 10 (two loci) and 11 were highly significant (between P < 
7.31 x 10(-13) and P < 2.14 x 10(-6)). Loci on chromosome 10 include MSMB, which 
encodes beta-microseminoprotein, a primary constituent of semen and a proposed
prostate cancer biomarker, and CTBP2, a gene with antiapoptotic activity; the
locus on chromosome 7 is at JAZF1, a transcriptional repressor that is fused by
chromosome translocation to SUZ12 in endometrial cancer. Of the nine loci that
showed highly suggestive associations (P < 2.5 x 10(-5)), four best fit a
recessive model and included candidate susceptibility genes: CPNE3, IL16 and
CDH13. Our findings point to multiple loci with moderate effects associated with 
susceptibility to prostate cancer that, taken together, in the future may predict
high risk in select individuals.

PMID: 18264096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Metabolism. 2008 Mar;57(3):416-20. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2007.11.001.

Phenotype of a patient with a de novo mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor
1beta/maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 5 gene.

Mayer C(1), Böttcher Y, Kovacs P, Halbritter J, Stumvoll M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Leipzig, Department of Internal Medicine III, 04103 Leipzig,
Germany.

Mutations in the gene encoding the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF) 1beta cause various phenotypes including maturity-onset diabetes of the
young type 5 (MODY5) and kidney disease. We provide molecular and
pathophysiologic characterization of a 23-year-old male patient with clinical
presentation typical for MODY5 with renal involvement. Clinical studies
(including intravenous glucose tolerance test and magnetic resonance imaging) of 
the patient and 5 family members in comparison with unrelated control subjects
and molecular analysis of the HNF-1beta gene (direct sequencing, paternity
testing, and restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis for parental
mosaicism) were performed. The patient was born with low birth weight (2250 g),
whereas his dizygotic twin sister was of normal weight (3500 g) and healthy. He
had cystic renal dysplasia with progressive renal failure and pancreas atrophy
with beta-cell dysfunction and early-onset diabetes mellitus but no family
history of diabetes. Intravenous glucose tolerance test showed a markedly reduced
but not absent acute insulin response compared with controls (n = 6). A mutation 
in the HNF-1beta gene S148L (C443T) in exon 2 within the pseudo-POU domain was
identified. All other family members and the control group (n = 255) did not have
the mutation, suggesting that we described a de novo mutation in HNF-1beta.
Paternity was confirmed, and no signs of mosaicism in DNA analysis of both
parents could be detected. Of note, the low birth weight of the patient in
contrast to his healthy twin sister provides interesting support for the fetal
insulin hypothesis for reduced birth weight.

PMID: 18249217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Oncol Rep. 2008 Jan;19(1):157-63.

Loss of ONECUT1 expression in human pancreatic cancer cells.

Jiang X(1), Zhang W, Kayed H, Zheng P, Giese NA, Friess H, Kleeff J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Technische Universität München, 81675 Munich, Germany.

ONECUT1 (HNF-6) is the prototype of a new class of homeodomain transcription
factors, that controls the development of pancreatic ducts during mouse
development. In the present study, the role of ONECUT1 and its targeted genes
TCF2, PKHD1 and CYS1 was analyzed in human pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(PDAC). mRNA levels of ONECUT1, TCF2, PKHD1 and CYS1 were measured in pancreatic 
tissues and pancreatic cancer cell lines by quantitative reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction (QRT-PCR). Protein expression of ONECUT1 and TCF2 was
assessed in pancreatic tissues by immunohistochemistry. ONECUT1 was transfected
into Panc-1 and T3M4 pancreatic cancer cells and its effects on
anchorage-dependent and -independent growth as well as invasion and adhesion were
analyzed. Median mRNA levels of ONECUT1, TCF2, PKHD1 and CYS1 were 7.7-, 2.0-,
5.7- and 3.8-fold higher in normal tissues than in PDAC tissues. ONECUT1 protein 
was expressed in normal acinar and ductal cells, but neither in the cancer cells 
of PDAC tissues nor in 7 of 8 cultured pancreatic cancer cell lines. There was a 
significant positive correlation between ONECUT1 and TCF2, CYS1, and PKHD1 mRNA
levels in PDAC tissues. Transfection of ONECUT1 into pancreatic cancer cells
resulted in up-regulation of the target gene TCF2, a reduction in invasiveness,
but no change in adhesion or growth. In conclusion, ONECUT1 expression is lost in
pancreatic cancer cells, suggesting a tumor suppressor function in this
malignancy.

PMID: 18097590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2008 Feb;23(2):777-9. Epub 2007 Dec 8.

Missense mutations in EYA1 and TCF2 are a rare cause of urinary tract
malformations.

Hoskins BE, Cramer CH 2nd, Tasic V, Kehinde EO, Ashraf S, Bogdanovic R, Hoefele
J, Pohl M, Hildebrandt F.

PMID: 18065799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Semin Fetal Neonatal Med. 2008 Jun;13(3):142-51. Epub 2007 Dec 11.

Dysplastic kidneys.

Winyard P(1), Chitty LS.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Child Health, University College London, 30 Guilford Street,
London, UK. pwinyard@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Dysplastic kidneys are common malformations affecting up to 1 in 1000 of the
general population. They are part of the spectrum of Congenital Abnormalities of 
the Kidney and Urinary Tract (CAKUT) and an increasing number of children are
being diagnosed on antenatal ultrasound. In the past, these patients may not have
been detected until adulthood following investigation for other illness, or even 
as incidental findings at post mortem, unless there was severe bilateral
dysplasia leading to Potter's sequence or renal failure in childhood. Excluding
syndromic cases with defects in other organ systems, features linked to worse
prognosis at presentation are: (1) bilateral disease; (2) decreased functional
renal mass (which encompasses not just small kidneys but also large ones where
cysts replace normal architecture); (3) lower urinary tract obstruction; and (4) 
anhydramnios or severe oligohydramnios. Dysplasia and renal function are dynamic 
and can evolve during pregnancy, so repeated assessment is necessary when
pathology is expected. Worsening dimensions or decreasing amniotic fluid levels
imply poorer prognosis, but there are no proven therapies during pregnancy,
though vesicoamniotic shunting may be indicated with obstruction. Postnatal
investigations aim to define the anatomy, which helps to estimate risks of
infection and kidney function. Management might then involve observation,
prophylactic antibiotics, surgery and/or renal support. Risks of renal malignancy
and hypertension are low during childhood, but longer-term follow-up is needed,
particularly to determine blood pressure and renal function in adulthood and
pregnancy. Around 10% of cases have a family history of significant renal/urinary
tract malformation. Monogenic causes include mutations in individual genes, such 
as TCF2/hepatocyte nuclear factor 1ss (HNF1beta), PAX2 and uroplakins, but there 
are also recent reports of children with compound heterozygote mutations in
several renal/urinary tract developmental genes. Effective genetic screening in
future may require gene chip or other techniques to assess multiple genes
concurrently, but this should not replace a multidisciplinary approach to these
often difficult cases.

PMID: 18065301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. J Biol Chem. 2007 Dec 21;282(51):36837-44. Epub 2007 Oct 9.

Negative regulation of inducible nitric-oxide synthase expression mediated
through transforming growth factor-beta-dependent modulation of transcription
factor TCF11.

Berg DT(1), Gupta A, Richardson MA, O'Brien LA, Calnek D, Grinnell BW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology Discovery Research, Lilly Research Laboratories,
Lilly Corporate Center, Indianapolis, Indiana 46285-0444, USA.

Inducible nitric-oxide synthase (iNOS) plays a central role in the regulation of 
vascular function and response to injury. A central mediator controlling iNOS
expression is transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta), which represses its
expression through a mechanism that is poorly understood. We have identified a
binding site in the iNOS promoter that interacts with the nuclear heterodimer
TCF11/MafG using chromatin immunoprecipitation and mutation analyses. We
demonstrate that binding at this site acts to repress the induction of iNOS gene 
expression by cytokines. We show that this repressor is induced by TGF-beta1 and 
by Smad6-short, which enhances TGF-beta signaling. In contrast, the up-regulation
of TCF11/MafG binding could be suppressed by overexpression of the TGF-beta
inhibitor Smad7, and a small interfering RNA to TCF11 blocked the suppression of 
iNOS by TGF-beta. The binding of TCF11/MafG to the iNOS promoter could be
enhanced by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate and suppressed by the protein kinase 
C inhibitor staurosporine. Moreover, the induction of TCF11/MafG binding by
TGF-beta and Smad6-short could be blocked by staurosporine, and the effect of
TGF-beta was blocked by the selective protein kinase C inhibitor calphostin C.
Consistent with the in vitro data, we found suppression of TCF11 coincident with 
iNOS up-regulation in a rat model of endotoxemia, and we observed a highly
significant negative correlation between TCF11 and nitric oxide production.
Furthermore, treatment with activated protein C, a serine protease effective in
septic shock, blocked the down-regulation of TCF11 and suppressed
endotoxin-induced iNOS. Overall, our results demonstrate a novel mechanism by
which iNOS expression is regulated in the context of inflammatory activation.

PMID: 17928287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Biochemistry. 2007 Oct 30;46(43):12071-80. Epub 2007 Oct 9.

Structural basis of disease-causing mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta.

Lu P(1), Rha GB, Chi YI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Center for Structural
Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

HNF1beta is an atypical POU transcription factor that participates in a
hierarchical network of transcription factors controlling the development and
proper function of vital organs such as liver, pancreas, and kidney. Many
inheritable mutations on HNF1beta are the monogenic causes of diabetes and
several kidney diseases. To elucidate the molecular mechanism of its function and
the structural basis of mutations, we have determined the crystal structure of
human HNF1beta DNA binding domain in complex with a high-affinity promoter.
Disease-causing mutations have been mapped to our structure, and their predicted 
effects have been tested by a set of biochemical/ functional studies. These
findings together with earlier findings with a homologous protein HNF1alpha, help
us to understand the structural basis of promoter recognition by these atypical
POU transcription factors and the site-specific functional disruption by
disease-causing mutations.

PMCID: PMC2367142
PMID: 17924661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Endocr J. 2007 Dec;54(5):757-64. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

In vitro and pathological investigations of MODY5 with the R276X-HNF1beta (TCF2) 
mutation.

Fujimoto K(1), Sasaki T, Hiki Y, Nemoto M, Utsunomiya Y, Yokoo T, Nakai N, Ohashi
T, Hosoya T, Eto Y, Tajima N.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes, Metabolism and Endocrinology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Jikei University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 5 (MODY5) is caused by mutation of
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta (HNF1 beta) (TCF2) gene, resulting in a wide
range of phenotypes including diabetes and renal abnormalities, but little is
known about the pathogenesis of the clinical spectrum. We describe a 27-year-old 
Japanese male with the MODY phenotype including an atrophic kidney and multiple
renal cysts. Genetic analysis revealed the patient to be heterozygous for a
nonsense mutation in codon 276 of the HNF1beta gene (CGA or Arginine to TGA or
stop codon; R276X). To clarify the pathophysiological relevance of this mutation,
we conducted an in vitro study monitoring human C-peptide secretion after
transfecting both the HNF1beta mutant cDNA and preproinsulin cDNA into a murine
beta cell line, MIN6. Functional studies of the transformed MIN6 cells indicated 
that expression of the R276X caused a significant decrease in glucose-stimulated 
insulin secretion but no change in either KCl-stimulated or basal insulin
secretion. These results suggest that the R276X functions in a negative manner in
regard to metabolic responses of insulin secretion in beta cells. Analysis with
light and electron microscopy on biopsied kidney specimens suggested that the
origin of the cysts might be glomeruli but the primary lesion could be tubules.

PMID: 17878605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Diabetologia. 2007 Nov;50(11):2313-7. Epub 2007 Sep 8.

Partial and whole gene deletion mutations of the GCK and HNF1A genes in
maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Ellard S(1), Thomas K, Edghill EL, Owens M, Ambye L, Cropper J, Little J,
Strachan M, Stride A, Ersoy B, Eiberg H, Pedersen O, Shepherd MH, Hansen T,
Harries LW, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Science and Clinical Medicine, Peninsula Medical
School, Exeter, UK. Sian.Ellard@rdeft.nhs.uk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Heterozygous mutations of glucokinase (GCK) and hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1A; also known as hepatic transcription factor 1
[TCF1]) genes are the most common cause of MODY. Genomic deletions of the HNF1B
(also known as TCF2) gene have recently been shown to account for one third of
mutations causing renal cysts and diabetes syndrome. We investigated the
prevalence of partial and whole gene deletions in UK patients meeting clinical
criteria for GCK or HNF-1alpha/-4alpha MODY and in whom no mutation had been
identified by sequence analysis.
METHODS: A multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) assay was
developed using synthetic oligonucleotide probes for 30 exons of the GCK, HNF1A
and HNF4A genes.
RESULTS: Partial or whole gene deletions were identified in 1/29 (3.5%) probands 
using the GCK MLPA assay and 4/60 (6.7%) of probands using the HNF1A/-4A MLPA
assay. Four different deletions were detected: GCK exon 2, HNF1A exon 1, HNF1A
exons 2 to 10 and HNF1A exons 1 to 10. An additional Danish pedigree with
evidence of linkage to HNF1A had a deletion of exons 2 to 10. Testing other
family members confirmed co-segregation of the deletion mutations with diabetes
in the pedigrees.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Large deletions encompassing whole exons can cause
GCK or HNF-1alpha MODY and will not be detected by sequencing. Gene dosage
assays, such as MLPA, are a useful adjunct to sequence analysis when a diagnosis 
of MODY is strongly suspected.

PMID: 17828387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Dev Biol. 2007 Sep 15;309(2):344-57. Epub 2007 Jul 10.

Direct regulation of vHnf1 by retinoic acid signaling and MAF-related factors in 
the neural tube.

Pouilhe M(1), Gilardi-Hebenstreit P, Desmarquet-Trin Dinh C, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U784, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

The homeodomain transcription factor vHNF1 plays an essential role in the
patterning of the caudal segmented hindbrain, where it participates in the
definition of the boundary between rhombomeres (r) 4 and 5 and in the
specification of the identity of r5 and r6. Understanding the molecular basis of 
vHnf1 own expression therefore constitutes an important issue to decipher the
regulatory network governing hindbrain patterning. We have identified a highly
conserved 800-bp enhancer element located in the fourth intron of vHnf1 and whose
activity recapitulates vHnf1 neural expression in transgenic mice. Functional
analysis of this enhancer revealed that it contains two types of essential
motifs, a retinoic acid response element and two half T-MARE sites, indicating
that it integrates direct inputs from the retinoic acid signaling cascade and
MAF-related factors. Our data suggest that MAFB, which is itself regulated by
vHNF1, acts as a positive modulator of vHnf1 in r5 and r6, whereas another
MAF-related factor is absolutely required for the expression of vHnf1 in both the
hindbrain and the spinal cord. We propose a model accounting for the initiation
and maintenance phases of vHnf1 expression and for the establishment of the r4/r5
boundary, based on cooperative contributions of Maf factors and retinoic acid
signaling.

PMID: 17669392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Nat Genet. 2007 Aug;39(8):977-83. Epub 2007 Jul 1.

Two variants on chromosome 17 confer prostate cancer risk, and the one in TCF2
protects against type 2 diabetes.

Gudmundsson J(1), Sulem P, Steinthorsdottir V, Bergthorsson JT, Thorleifsson G,
Manolescu A, Rafnar T, Gudbjartsson D, Agnarsson BA, Baker A, Sigurdsson A,
Benediktsdottir KR, Jakobsdottir M, Blondal T, Stacey SN, Helgason A,
Gunnarsdottir S, Olafsdottir A, Kristinsson KT, Birgisdottir B, Ghosh S,
Thorlacius S, Magnusdottir D, Stefansdottir G, Kristjansson K, Bagger Y, Wilensky
RL, Reilly MP, Morris AD, Kimber CH, Adeyemo A, Chen Y, Zhou J, So WY, Tong PC,
Ng MC, Hansen T, Andersen G, Borch-Johnsen K, Jorgensen T, Tres A, Fuertes F,
Ruiz-Echarri M, Asin L, Saez B, van Boven E, Klaver S, Swinkels DW, Aben KK,
Graif T, Cashy J, Suarez BK, van Vierssen Trip O, Frigge ML, Ober C, Hofker MH,
Wijmenga C, Christiansen C, Rader DJ, Palmer CN, Rotimi C, Chan JC, Pedersen O,
Sigurdsson G, Benediktsson R, Jonsson E, Einarsson GV, Mayordomo JI, Catalona WJ,
Kiemeney LA, Barkardottir RB, Gulcher JR, Thorsteinsdottir U, Kong A, Stefansson 
K.

Author information: 
(1)deCODE genetics, Sturlugata 8, 101 Reykjavik, Iceland.
julius.gudmundsson@decode.is

We performed a genome-wide association scan to search for sequence variants
conferring risk of prostate cancer using 1,501 Icelandic men with prostate cancer
and 11,290 controls. Follow-up studies involving three additional case-control
groups replicated an association of two variants on chromosome 17 with the
disease. These two variants, 33 Mb apart, fall within a region previously
implicated by family-based linkage studies on prostate cancer. The risks
conferred by these variants are moderate individually (allele odds ratio of about
1.20), but because they are common, their joint population attributable risk is
substantial. One of the variants is in TCF2 (HNF1beta), a gene known to be
mutated in individuals with maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 5. Results 
from eight case-control groups, including one West African and one Chinese,
demonstrate that this variant confers protection against type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 17603485  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Am J Pathol. 2007 Aug;171(2):641-53. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

Analysis of liver repair mechanisms in Alagille syndrome and biliary atresia
reveals a role for notch signaling.

Fabris L(1), Cadamuro M, Guido M, Spirli C, Fiorotto R, Colledan M, Torre G,
Alberti D, Sonzogni A, Okolicsanyi L, Strazzabosco M.

Author information: 
(1)CeLiveR, Gastroenterology and Liver Transplant Unit, Ospedali Riuniti di
Bergamo, Bergamo, Italy.

Patients with Alagille syndrome (AGS), a genetic disorder of Notch signaling,
suffer from severe ductopenia and cholestasis, but progression to biliary
cirrhosis is rare. Instead, in biliary atresia (BA) severe cholestasis is
associated with a pronounced "ductular reaction" and rapid progression to biliary
cirrhosis. Given the role of Notch in biliary development, we hypothesized that
defective Notch signaling would influence the reparative mechanisms in
cholestatic cholangiopathies. Thus we compared phenotype and relative abundance
of the epithelial components of the hepatic reparative complex in AGS (n = 10)
and BA (n = 30) using immunohistochemistry and computer-assisted morphometry. BA 
was characterized by an increase in reactive ductular and hepatic progenitor
cells, whereas in AGS, a striking increase in intermediate hepatobiliary cells
contrasted with the near absence of reactive ductular cells and hepatic
progenitor cells. Hepatocellular mitoinhibition index (p21(waf1)/Ki67) was
similar in AGS and BA. Fibrosis was more severe in BA, where portal septa
thickness positively correlated with reactive ductular cells and hepatic
progenitor cells. AGS hepatobiliary cells failed to express hepatic nuclear
factor (HNF) 1beta, a biliary-specific transcription factor. These data indicate 
that Notch signaling plays a role in liver repair mechanisms in postnatal life:
its defect results in absent reactive ductular cells and accumulation of
hepatobiliary cells lacking HNF1beta, thus being unable to switch to a biliary
phenotype.

PMCID: PMC1934520
PMID: 17600123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Genome Inform. 2006;17(2):184-93.

Biomarkers for epithelial ovarian cancers.

Mahata P(1).

Author information: 
(1)School of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, University of
Newcastle, University Drive Callaghan, Newcastle, NSW 2308, Australia.
Pritha.Mahata@newcastle.edu.au

Epithelial carcinoma of the ovary is one of the most common gynecological
malignancies and the fifth most frequent cause of cancer death in women.
Currently blood test of advanced epithelial tumors are reflected in a high level 
of CA 125 antigen. However, it is not a good marker for early stage tumors, and
may yield false positives. Clearly, there is a need for better understanding of
the molecular pathogenesis of epithelial ovarian cancer, so that new drug targets
or biomarkers that facilitate early detection can be identified. This work
concentrates on finding genetic markers for three epithelial ovarian tumors,
using a simple computational method. We give a small set of genetic markers which
are able to distinguish clear cell and mucinous ovarian cancers (13 and 26 genes 
respectively) from other epithelial ovarian tumors with 100% accuracy. We obtain 
the genes HNF1-beta (TCF2) and GGT1 as the best markers for the clear cell and
CEACAM6 (NCA) as the best marker for mucinous ovarian tumors. We employ a feature
selection technique based on minimum probability of error for this purpose. We
give a ranking of the important genes responsible for these tumors and validate
the results using the leave-one-out cross-validation technique. Using this
method, we also agree with the common notion that WT1 is one of the best genes to
separate serous ovarian tumors from other epithelial ovarian tumors.

PMID: 17503391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Jul;92(7):2844-7. Epub 2007 Apr 17.

Exonic duplication of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta gene (transcription
factor 2, hepatic) as a cause of maturity onset diabetes of the young type 5.

Carette C(1), Vaury C, Barthélémy A, Clauin S, Grünfeld JP, Timsit J,
Bellanné-Chantelot C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Diabetology, Université René Descartes Paris 5,
AP-HP Hôpital Cochin, F-75014 Paris, France. claire.carette@cch.aphp.fr

CONTEXT: Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) type 5 has been described as
the association of early-onset diabetes and renal disease. Actually, MODY5
encompasses multiple phenotypes, including nondiabetic progressive renal failure,
kidney and genital tract malformations, atypical familial hyperuricemic
nephropathy, pancreas atrophy, and liver test abnormalities. The occurrence of
MODY5 has been associated with various molecular abnormalities of TCF2, including
missense, nonsense, small insertion/deletions, and splice site mutations, as well
as large genomic deletions or single exonic deletion of TCF2.
DESIGN: Using quantitative multiplex PCR amplification of short fluorescent
fragments, we have analyzed the TCF2 gene in a French family of which three
relatives presented a MODY5 phenotype. The proband had an extended clinical
phenotype, including hyperuricemic nephropathy and early gout, chronic renal
failure, renal morphological abnormalities, abnormal liver tests, and diabetes.
His son had almost no clinical expression of the disease, whereas his grandson
had a restricted but severe renal phenotype present from birth.
RESULTS: We show that a duplication of the exon 5 of TCF2 is responsible for the 
MODY5 phenotypes in this family.
CONCLUSIONS: Thus, we describe a novel molecular mechanism that may be
responsible for MODY5, and we emphasize the wide intrafamilial variability of
MODY5 expressivity. These observations suggest that the diagnosis of MODY5 may be
raised even in subjects with partial phenotypes. They also confirm that
quantitative multiplex PCR amplification of short fluorescent fragments analysis 
should be the first step of genetic screening in patients with a MODY5 phenotype.

PMID: 17440011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Diabetes. 2007 Mar;56(3):685-93.

Evaluation of common variants in the six known maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY) genes for association with type 2 diabetes.

Winckler W(1), Weedon MN, Graham RR, McCarroll SA, Purcell S, Almgren P, Tuomi T,
Gaudet D, Boström KB, Walker M, Hitman G, Hattersley AT, McCarthy MI, Ardlie KG, 
Hirschhorn JN, Daly MJ, Frayling TM, Groop L, Altshuler D.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard and
MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

An important question in human genetics is the extent to which genes causing
monogenic forms of disease harbor common variants that may contribute to the more
typical form of that disease. We aimed to comprehensively evaluate the extent to 
which common variation in the six known maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) genes, which cause a monogenic form of type 2 diabetes, is associated with
type 2 diabetes. Specifically, we determined patterns of common sequence
variation in the genes encoding Gck, Ipf1, Tcf2, and NeuroD1 (MODY2 and
MODY4-MODY6, respectively), selected a comprehensive set of 107 tag single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that captured common variation, and genotyped
each in 4,206 patients and control subjects from Sweden, Finland, and Canada
(including family-based studies and unrelated case-control subjects). All SNPs
with a nominal P value <0.1 for association to type 2 diabetes in this initial
screen were then genotyped in an additional 4,470 subjects from North America and
Poland. Of 30 nominally significant SNPs from the initial sample, 8 achieved
consistent results in the replication sample. We found the strongest effect at
rs757210 in intron 2 of TCF2, with corrected P values <0.01 for an odds ratio
(OR) of 1.13. This association was observed again in an independent sample of
5,891 unrelated case and control subjects and 500 families from the U.K., for an 
overall OR of 1.12 and a P value <10(-6) in >15,000 samples. We combined these
results with our previous studies on HNF4alpha and TCF1 and explicitly tested for
gene-gene interactions among these variants and with several known type 2
diabetes susceptibility loci, and we found no genetic interactions between these 
six genes. We conclude that although rare variants in these six genes explain
most cases of MODY, common variants in these same genes contribute very modestly,
if at all, to the common form of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 17327436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2007 Feb;52(2):133-8.

[Transcription factors regulate various processes of liver development].

[Article in Japanese]

Yokouchi Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)yokouchi@kaiju.medic.kumamoto-u.ac.jp

PMID: 17297866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2007 Mar;18(3):923-33. Epub 2007 Jan 31.

Anomalies of the TCF2 gene are the main cause of fetal bilateral hyperechogenic
kidneys.

Decramer S(1), Parant O, Beaufils S, Clauin S, Guillou C, Kessler S, Aziza J,
Bandin F, Schanstra JP, Bellanné-Chantelot C.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U858, BP 84225, F-3142, Paris, France. decramer.s@chu-toulouse.fr

Prenatal discovery of fetal bilateral hyperechogenic kidneys is very stressful
for pregnant women and their family, and accurate diagnosis of the cause of the
moderate forms of this pathology is very difficult. Hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1beta that is encoded by the TCF2 gene is involved in the embryonic
development of the kidneys. Sixty-two pregnancies with fetal bilateral
hyperechogenic kidneys including 25 fetuses with inaccurate diagnosis were
studied. TCF2 gene anomalies were detected in 18 (29%) of these 62 patients, and 
15 of these 18 patients presented a complete heterozygous deletion of the TCF2
gene. Family screening revealed de novo TCF2 anomalies in more than half of the
patients. TCF2 anomalies were associated with normal amniotic fluid volume and
normal-sized kidneys between -2 and +2 SD in all patients except for two sisters.
Antenatal cysts were detected in 11 of 18 patients, unilaterally in eight of 11. 
After birth, cysts appeared during the first year (17 of 18), and in patients
with antenatal cysts, the number increased and developed bilaterally with
decreased renal growth. In these 18 patients, the GFR decreased with longer
follow-up and was lower in patients with solitary functioning dysplastic kidney. 
Heterozygous deletion of the TCF2 gene is an important cause of fetal
hyperechogenic kidneys in this study and showed to be linked with early disease
expression. The renal phenotype and the postnatal evolution were extremely
variable and need a prospective long-term follow-up. Extrarenal manifestations
are frequent in TCF2-linked pathologies. Therefore, prenatal counseling and
follow-up should be multidisciplinary.

PMID: 17267738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Development. 2006 Nov;133(21):4233-43. Epub 2006 Oct 4.

Suppression of C/EBPalpha expression in periportal hepatoblasts may stimulate
biliary cell differentiation through increased Hnf6 and Hnf1b expression.

Yamasaki H(1), Sada A, Iwata T, Niwa T, Tomizawa M, Xanthopoulos KG, Koike T,
Shiojiri N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Shizuoka University, 836 Oya,
Surugaku, Shizuoka City, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan.

The expression of C/EBPalpha, which may govern transcription of mature hepatocyte
marker genes, was suppressed in periportal hepatoblasts in mouse liver
development, leading to biliary cell differentiation. This study was undertaken
to analyze how inactivation of the Cebpa gene affects biliary cell
differentiation and gene expression of the regulatory genes for that
differentiation, including Hnf1b and Hnf6. In the knockout mouse liver at
midgestation stages, pseudoglandular structures were abundantly induced in the
parenchyma with elevated expression of Hnf6 and Hnf1b mRNAs. The wild-type liver 
parenchyma expressed mRNAs of these transcription factors at low levels, though
periportal biliary progenitors had strong expression of them. These results
suggest that expression of Hnf6 and Hnf1b is downstream of C/EBPalpha action in
fetal liver development, and that the suppression of C/EBPalpha expression in
periportal hepatoblasts may lead to expression of Hnf6 and Hnf1b mRNAs.
Immunohistochemical studies with biliary cell markers in knockout livers
demonstrated that differentiated biliary epithelial cells were confined to around
the portal veins. The suppression of C/EBPalpha expression may result in
upregulation of Hnf6 and Hnf1b gene expression, but be insufficient for biliary
cell differentiation. When liver fragments of Cebpa-knockout fetuses, in which
hepatoblasts were contained as an endodermal component, were transplanted in the 
testis of Scid (Prkdc) male mice, almost all hepatoblasts gave rise to biliary
epithelial cells. Wild-type hepatoblasts constructed mature hepatic tissue
accompanied by biliary cell differentiation. These results also demonstrate that 
the suppression of C/EBPalpha expression may stimulate biliary cell
differentiation.

PMID: 17021047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006 Oct;17(10):2864-70. Epub 2006 Sep 13.

Prevalence of mutations in renal developmental genes in children with renal
hypodysplasia: results of the ESCAPE study.

Weber S(1), Moriniere V, Knüppel T, Charbit M, Dusek J, Ghiggeri GM, Jankauskiené
A, Mir S, Montini G, Peco-Antic A, Wühl E, Zurowska AM, Mehls O, Antignac C,
Schaefer F, Salomon R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Université
René Descartes, 147 Rue de Sèvres, 75015 Paris, France.

Comment in
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006 Oct;17(10):2647-9.

Renal hypodysplasia (RHD) is characterized by a reduced nephron number, small
kidney size, and disorganized renal tissue. A hereditary basis has been
established for a subset of affected patients, suggesting a major role of
developmental genes that are involved in early kidney organogenesis. Gene
mutations that have dominant inheritance and cause RHD, urinary tract anomalies, 
and defined extrarenal symptoms have been identified in TCF2 (renal cysts and
diabetes syndrome), PAX2 (renal-coloboma syndrome), EYA1 and SIX1
(branchio-oto-renal syndrome), and SALL1 (Townes-Brocks syndrome). For estimation
of the prevalence of these events, an unselected cohort of 99 unrelated patients 
with RHD that was associated with chronic renal insufficiency were screened for
mutations in TCF2, PAX2, EYA1, SIX1, and SALL1. Mutations or variants in the
genes of interest were detected in 17 (17%) unrelated families: One mutation, two
variants, and four deletions of TCF2 in eight unrelated patients; four different 
PAX2 mutations in six families; one EYA1 mutation and one deletion in two
patients with branchio-oto-renal syndrome; and one SALL1 mutation in a patient
with isolated RHD. Of a total of 27 patients with renal cysts, six (22%) carried 
a mutation in TCF2. It is interesting that a SIX1 sequence variant was identified
in two siblings with renal-coloboma syndrome as a result of a PAX2 mutation,
suggesting an oligogenic inheritance. Careful clinical reevaluation that focused 
on discrete extrarenal symptoms and thorough family analysis revealed
syndrome-specific features in nine of the 17 patients. In conclusion, 15% of
patients with RHD show mutations in TCF2 or PAX2, whereas abnormalities in EYA1, 
SALL1, and SIX1 are less frequent.

PMID: 16971658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006 Oct;17(10):2647-9. Epub 2006 Sep 7.

Renal hypoplasia and dysplasia: starting to put the puzzle together.

Woolf AS.

Comment on
    J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006 Oct;17(10):2864-70.

PMID: 16959822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Biol Chem. 2006 Nov 3;281(44):33066-77. Epub 2006 Aug 31.

Coordinate transcriptional repression of liver fatty acid-binding protein and
microsomal triglyceride transfer protein blocks hepatic very low density
lipoprotein secretion without hepatosteatosis.

Spann NJ(1), Kang S, Li AC, Chen AZ, Newberry EP, Davidson NO, Hui ST, Davis RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, The Heart Institute, San Diego State University,
California 92182-4614, USA.

Unlike the livers of humans and mice, and most hepatoma cells, which accumulate
triglycerides when treated with microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP)
inhibitors, L35 rat hepatoma cells do not express MTP and cannot secrete very low
density lipoprotein (VLDL), yet they do not accumulate triglyceride. In these
studies we show that transcriptional co-repression of the two lipid transfer
proteins, liver fatty acid-binding protein (L-FABP) and MTP, which cooperatively 
shunt fatty acids into de novo synthesized glycerolipids and the transfer of
lipids into VLDL, respectively, act together to maintain hepatic lipid
homeostasis. FAO rat hepatoma cells express L-FABP and MTP and demonstrate the
ability to assemble and secrete VLDL. In contrast, L35 cells, derived as a single
cell clone from FAO cells, do not express L-FABP or MTP nor do they assemble and 
secrete VLDL. We used these hepatoma cells to elucidate how a conserved DR1
promoter element present in the promoters of L-FABP and MTP affects
transcription, expression, and VLDL production. In FAO cells, the DR1 elements of
both L-FABP and MTP promoters are occupied by peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor alpha-retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRalpha), with which PGC-1beta
activates transcription. In contrast, in L35 cells the DR1 elements of both
L-FABP and MTP promoters are occupied by chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter
transcription factor II, and transcription is diminished. The combined findings
indicate that peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha-RXRalpha and
PGC-1beta coordinately up-regulate L-FABP and MTP expression, by competing with
chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor II for the DR1 sites in 
the proximal promoters of each gene. Additional studies show that ablation of
L-FABP prevents hepatic steatosis caused by treating mice with an MTP inhibitor. 
Our findings show that reducing both L-FABP and MTP is an effective means to
reduce VLDL secretion without causing hepatic steatosis.

PMID: 16950764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Diabetes. 2006 Sep;55(9):2534-40.

Common variants in maturity-onset diabetes of the young genes contribute to risk 
of type 2 diabetes in Finns.

Bonnycastle LL(1), Willer CJ, Conneely KN, Jackson AU, Burrill CP, Watanabe RM,
Chines PS, Narisu N, Scott LJ, Enloe ST, Swift AJ, Duren WL, Stringham HM, Erdos 
MR, Riebow NL, Buchanan TA, Valle TT, Tuomilehto J, Bergman RN, Mohlke KL,
Boehnke M, Collins FS.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-2152, USA.

Prior reports have suggested that variants in the genes for maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) may confer susceptibility to type 2 diabetes, but
results have been conflicting and coverage of the MODY genes has been incomplete.
To complement our previous studies of HNF4A, we examined the other five known
MODY genes for association with type 2 diabetes in Finnish individuals. For each 
of the five genes, we selected 1) nonredundant single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) (r(2)< 0.8 with other SNPs) from the HapMap database or another linkage
disequilibrium map, 2) SNPs with previously reported type 2 diabetes association,
and 3) nonsynonymous coding SNPs. We tested 128 SNPs for association with type 2 
diabetes in 786 index cases from type 2 diabetic families and 619 normal
glucose-tolerant control subjects. We followed up 35 of the most significant SNPs
by genotyping them on another 384 case subjects and 366 control subjects from
Finland. We also supplemented our previous HNF4A results by genotyping 12 SNPs on
additional Finnish samples. After correcting for testing multiple correlated SNPs
within a gene, we find evidence of type 2 diabetes association with SNPs in five 
of the six known MODY genes: GCK, HNF1A, HNF1B, NEUROD1, and HNF4A. Our data
suggest that common variants in several MODY genes play a modest role in type 2
diabetes susceptibility.

PMID: 16936201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Nat Clin Pract Nephrol. 2005 Dec;1(2):115-9.

Cystic kidney disease, chromophobe renal cell carcinoma and TCF2 (HNF1 beta)
mutations.

Lebrun G(1), Vasiliu V, Bellanné-Chantelot C, Bensman A, Ulinski T, Chrétien Y,
Grünfeld JP.

Author information: 
(1)Université Paris-Descartes, Faculté de Médecine, AP-HP, Hôpital Necker-Enfants
Malades, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: The proband, a 33-year-old woman, presented with renal cysts, mild
renal failure and a renal tumor. One of the proband's two sons had hyperechogenic
kidneys and the other had renal cortical microcysts. Her 71-year-old mother had
mild renal failure and small renal cysts.
INVESTIGATIONS: Ultrasonography, blood and urine analysis, MRI, CT scan, and
genetic investigations focusing on the transcription factor 2 (TCF2) gene which
encodes hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 beta.
DIAGNOSIS: The proband was diagnosed with cystic kidney disease and chromophobe
renal cell carcinoma, characterized by a 46delC germline mutation of TCF2 and a
complete somatic deletion of TCF2 in the renal tumor. The germline TCF2 mutation 
was also present in the proband's sons and mother. Pancreas atrophy was detected 
in the proband and her mother.
MANAGEMENT: Tumorectomy followed by radical nephrectomy of the left kidney 4
years later. Lisinopril (5 mg/day) and lifelong follow-up. The patient's sons
will be regularly screened for progressive renal disease, diabetes mellitus and
chromophobe renal cell carcinoma.

PMID: 16932376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Hum Mutat. 2006 Sep;27(9):854-69.

Mutations in the genes encoding the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 alpha (HNF1A) and 4 alpha (HNF4A) in maturity-onset diabetes of the
young.

Ellard S(1), Colclough K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation Trust,
Exeter, United Kingdom. S.Ellard@exeter.ac.uk

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes
mellitus characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, early age of onset
(often <25 years of age), and pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. MODY is both
clinically and genetically heterogeneous, with six different genes identified to 
date; glucokinase (GCK), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1A, or TCF1),
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF4A), insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF1 or
PDX1), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta (HNF1B or TCF2), and neurogenic
differentiation 1 (NEUROD1). Mutations in the HNF1A gene are a common cause of
MODY in the majority of populations studied. A total of 193 different mutations
have been described in 373 families. The most common mutation is Pro291fs
(P291fsinsC) in the polycytosine (poly C) tract of exon 4, which has been
reported in 65 families. HNF4A mutations are rarer; 31 mutations reported in 40
families. Sensitivity to treatment with sulfonylurea tablets is a feature of both
HNF1A and HNF4A mutations. The identification of an HNF1A or 4A gene mutation
confirms a diagnosis of MODY and has important implications for clinical
management.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16917892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Kidney Int. 2006 Nov;70(9):1656-60. Epub 2006 Aug 16.

A complex phenotype with cystic renal disease.

Müller D(1), Klopocki E, Neumann LM, Mundlos S, Taupitz M, Schulze I, Ropers HH, 
Querfeld U, Ullmann R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, Charité Campus Virchow, Berlin, Germany.
dominik.mueller@charite.de

PMID: 16912708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Aug 1;15(15):2363-75. Epub 2006 Jun 26.

Severe pancreas hypoplasia and multicystic renal dysplasia in two human fetuses
carrying novel HNF1beta/MODY5 mutations.

Haumaitre C(1), Fabre M, Cormier S, Baumann C, Delezoide AL, Cereghini S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie du développement, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7622,
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Université Pierre et Marie Curie,
Paris, France.

Heterozygous mutations in the HNF1beta/vHNF1/TCF2 gene cause maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY5), associated with severe renal disease and abnormal 
genital tract. Here, we characterize two fetuses, a 27-week male and a 31.5-week 
female, carrying novel mutations in exons 2 and 7 of HNF1beta, respectively.
Although these mutations were predicted to have different functional
consequences, both fetuses displayed highly similar phenotypes. They presented
one of the most severe phenotypes described in HNF1beta carriers: bilateral
enlarged polycystic kidneys, severe pancreas hypoplasia and abnormal genital
tract. Consistent with this, we detected high levels of HNF1beta transcripts in
8-week human embryos in the mesonephros and metanephric kidney and in the
epithelium of pancreas. Renal histology and immunohistochemistry analyses of
mutant fetuses revealed cysts derived from all nephron segments with multilayered
epithelia and dysplastic regions, accompanied by a marked increase in the
expression of beta-catenin and E-cadherin. A significant proportion of cysts
still expressed the cystic renal disease proteins, polycystin-1, polycystin-2,
fibrocystin and uromodulin, implying that cyst formation may result from a
deregulation of cell-cell adhesion and/or the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway.
Both fetuses exhibited a severe pancreatic hypoplasia with underdeveloped and
disorganized acini, together with an absence of ventral pancreatic-derived
tissue. beta-catenin and E-cadherin were strongly downregulated in the exocrine
and endocrine compartments, and the islets lacked the transporter essential for
glucose-sensing GLUT2, indicating a beta-cell maturation defect. This study
provides evidence of differential gene-dosage requirements for HNF1beta in normal
human kidney and pancreas differentiation and increases our understanding of the 
etiology of MODY5 disorder.

PMID: 16801329  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Feb;64 Suppl 2:18-22.

[Genes that participate in the renal structure and functions].

[Article in Japanese]

Matsui I(1), Ito T, Imai E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine.

PMID: 16523853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Development. 2006 Apr;133(7):1253-62. Epub 2006 Feb 22.

Krox20 hindbrain cis-regulatory landscape: interplay between multiple long-range 
initiation and autoregulatory elements.

Chomette D(1), Frain M, Cereghini S, Charnay P, Ghislain J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U784, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05,
France.

The vertebrate hindbrain is subject to a transient segmentation process leading
to the formation of seven or eight metameric territories termed rhombomeres (r). 
This segmentation provides the basis for the subsequent establishment of
hindbrain neuronal organization and participates in the patterning of the neural 
crest involved in craniofacial development. The zinc-finger gene Krox20 is
expressed in r3 and r5, and encodes a transcription factor that plays a key role 
in hindbrain segmentation, coordinating segment formation, specification of odd- 
and even-numbered rhombomeres, and cell segregation between adjacent segments,
through the regulation of numerous downstream genes. In order to further
elucidate the genetic network underlying hindbrain segmentation, we have
undertaken the analysis of the cis-regulatory sequences governing Krox20
expression. We have found that the control of Krox20 transcription relies on
three very long-range (200 kb) enhancer elements (A, B and C) that are conserved 
between chick, mouse and human genomes. Elements B and C are activated at the
earliest stage of Krox20 expression in r5 and r3-r5, respectively, and do not
require the Krox20 protein. These elements are likely to function as initiators
of Krox20 expression. Element B contains a binding site for the transcription
factor vHNF1, the mutation of which abolishes its activity, suggesting that vHNF1
is a direct initiator of Krox20 expression in r5. Element A contains
Krox20-binding sites, which are required, together with the Krox20 protein, for
its activity. This element therefore allows the establishment of a direct
positive autoregulatory loop, which takes the relay of the initiator elements and
maintains Krox20 expression. Together, our studies provide a basis for a model of
the molecular mechanisms controlling Krox20 expression in the developing
hindbrain and neural crest.

PMID: 16495311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Br J Cancer. 2006 Mar 27;94(6):914-21.

Epigenetic inactivation of TCF2 in ovarian cancer and various cancer cell lines.

Terasawa K(1), Toyota M, Sagae S, Ogi K, Suzuki H, Sonoda T, Akino K, Maruyama R,
Nishikawa N, Imai K, Shinomura Y, Saito T, Tokino T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Sapporo Medical University, Sapporo
060-8543, Japan.

Transcription factor 2 gene (TCF2) encodes hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta
(HNF1beta), a transcription factor associated with development and metabolism.
Mutation of TCF2 has been observed in renal cell cancer, and by screening
aberrantly methylated genes, we have now identified TCF2 as a target for
epigenetic inactivation in ovarian cancer. TCF2 was methylated in 53% of ovarian 
cancer cell lines and 26% of primary ovarian cancers, resulting in loss of the
gene's expression. TCF2 expression was restored by treating cells with a
methyltransferase inhibitor, 5-aza-2'deoxycitidine (5-aza-dC). In addition,
chromatin immunoprecipitation showed deacetylation of histone H3 in methylated
cells and, when combined with 5-aza-dC, the histone deacetylase inhibitor
trichostatin A synergistically induced TCF2 expression. Epigenetic inactivation
of TCF2 was also seen in colorectal, gastric and pancreatic cell lines,
suggesting general involvement of epigenetic inactivation of TCF2 in
tumorigenesis. Restoration of TCF2 expression induced expression of HNF4alpha, a 
transcriptional target of HNF1beta, indicating that epigenetic silencing of TCF2 
leads to alteration of the hepatocyte nuclear factor network in tumours. These
results suggest that TCF2 is involved in the development of ovarian cancers and
may represent a useful target for their detection and treatment.

PMCID: PMC2361363
PMID: 16479257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Diabetes. 2006 Jan;55(1):61-9.

A vHNF1/TCF2-HNF6 cascade regulates the transcription factor network that
controls generation of pancreatic precursor cells.

Poll AV(1), Pierreux CE, Lokmane L, Haumaitre C, Achouri Y, Jacquemin P, Rousseau
GG, Cereghini S, Lemaigre FP.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone and Metabolic Research Unit, Université Catholique de Louvain and
Institute of Cellular Pathology, Avenue Hippocrate 75/7529, B-1200 Brussels,
Belgium.

Generation of pancreatic precursor cells in the endoderm is controlled by a
network of transcription factors. Hepatocyte nuclear factor-6 (HNF6) is a key
player in this network, because it controls the initiation of the expression of
pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 (Pdx1), the earliest marker of pancreatic
precursor cells. To further characterize this network, we have investigated how
the expression of HNF6 is controlled in mouse endoderm, by using in vitro and in 
vivo protein-DNA interaction techniques combined with endoderm electroporation,
transgenesis, and gene inactivation in embryos. We delineated Hnf6 regulatory
regions that confer expression of a reporter gene in the embryonic endoderm but
not in extraembryonic visceral endoderm. HNF6 expression in the embryonic
endoderm was found to depend on an intronic enhancer. This enhancer contains
functional binding sites for the tissue-specific factors of the forkhead box A
and HNF1 families. Among the latter, variant HNF1 (vHNF1)/TCF2, which is
expressed before HNF6 in the endoderm, was found to be critical for HNF6
expression. Therefore, the sequential activation of vHNF1, HNF6, and Pdx1 in the 
endoderm appears to control the generation of pancreatic precursors. This cascade
may be used to benchmark in vitro differentiation of pancreatic precursor cells
from embryonic stem cells, for cell therapy of diabetes.

PMID: 16380477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Kidney Int. 2006 Jan;69(1):190-3.

Unilateral multicystic dysplastic kidney.

Woolf AS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Nephro-Urology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London,
London, UK. a.woolf@ich.ucl.ac.uk

PMID: 16374443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2006 Feb;17(2):497-503. Epub 2005 Dec 21.

Renal phenotypes related to hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (TCF2) mutations in a
pediatric cohort.

Ulinski T(1), Lescure S, Beaufils S, Guigonis V, Decramer S, Morin D, Clauin S,
Deschênes G, Bouissou F, Bensman A, Bellanné-Chantelot C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Nephrology, AP-HP, Hôpital Armand Trousseau, 26 Avenue
du Docteur Netter, Paris 75571, France. tim.ulinski@trs.ap-hop-paris.fr

The hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta encoded by the TCF2 gene plays a role for the
specific regulation of gene expression in various tissues such as liver, kidney, 
intestine, and pancreatic islets and is involved in the embryonic development of 
these organs. TCF2 mutations are known to be responsible for the maturity-onset
diabetes of the young type 5 associated with renal manifestations. Several
observations have suggested that TCF2 mutations may be involved in restricted
renal phenotypes. Eighty children (median age at diagnosis 0.2 yr) with renal
cysts, hyperechogenicity, hypoplasia, or single kidneys were studied.
Quantitative multiplex PCR amplification of short fluorescence fragments for the 
search of large genomic rearrangements and sequencing for the detection of point 
mutations were performed. TCF2 anomalies were detected in one third of patients
(25 of 80). The main alteration was the complete deletion of the TCF2 gene
detected in 16 patients. Family screening revealed de novo TCF2 anomalies in nine
of 17 probands with a high prevalence of deletions (seven of nine). TCF2
anomalies were associated with bilateral renal anomalies (P < 0.001) and
bilateral cortical cysts (P < 0.001). However, abnormal renal function, detected 
in 40% of patients, was independent of the TCF2 genotype. No difference in renal 
function or severity of renal morphologic lesions was observed between patients
with a TCF2 deletion and those with point mutations. In conclusion, TCF2
molecular anomalies are involved in restricted renal phenotype in childhood
without alteration of glucose metabolism. These findings have important
implications in the diagnosis of patients with renal dysplasia with cysts and
their follow-up.

PMID: 16371430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Dec 20;1731(3):179-90. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

Identification of target genes of the transcription factor HNF1beta and HNF1alpha
in a human embryonic kidney cell line.

Senkel S(1), Lucas B, Klein-Hitpass L, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
D-45122 Essen, Germany.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta (HNF1beta, TCF2) is a tissue-specific
transcription factor whose mutation in humans leads to renal cysts, genital
malformations, pancreas atrophy and maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY5).
Furthermore, HNF1beta overexpression has been observed in clear cell cancer of
the ovary. To identify potential HNF1beta target genes whose activity may be
deregulated in human patients, we established a human embryonic kidney cell line 
(HEK293) expressing HNF1beta conditionally. Using Flp recombinase, we introduced 
wild type or mutated HNF1beta at a defined chromosomal position allowing a most
reproducible induction of the HNF1beta derivatives upon tetracycline addition. By
oligonucleotide microarrays we identified 25 HNF1beta-regulated genes. By an
identical approach, we identified that the related transcription factor HNF1alpha
(TCF1) affects only nine genes in HEK293 cells and thus is a less efficient
factor in these kidney cells. The HNF1beta target genes dipeptidyl peptidase 4
(DPP4), angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and osteopontin (SPP1) are most
likely direct target genes, as they contain functional HNF1 binding sites in
their promoter region. Since nine of the potential HNF1beta target genes are
deregulated in clear cell carcinoma of the ovary, we propose that HNF1beta
overexpression in the ovarian cancer participates in the altered expression
pattern.

PMID: 16297991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Diabetes. 2005 Nov;54(11):3126-32.

Large genomic rearrangements in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (TCF2) gene
are the most frequent cause of maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 5.

Bellanné-Chantelot C(1), Clauin S, Chauveau D, Collin P, Daumont M, Douillard C, 
Dubois-Laforgue D, Dusselier L, Gautier JF, Jadoul M, Laloi-Michelin M,
Jacquesson L, Larger E, Louis J, Nicolino M, Subra JF, Wilhem JM, Young J, Velho 
G, Timsit J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cytogenetics and Molecular Biology, Hôpital Saint-Antoine,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Paris, France.
christine.bellanne@sat.ap-hop-paris.fr

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) 5 is caused by mutations in the TCF2 
gene encoding the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta. However, 
in 60% of the patients with a phenotype suggesting MODY5, no point mutation is
detected in TCF2. We have hypothesized that large genomic rearrangements of TCF2 
that are missed by conventional screening methods may account for this
observation. In 40 unrelated patients presenting with MODY5 phenotype, TCF2 was
screened for mutations by sequencing. Patients without mutations were then
screened for TCF2 rearrangements by the quantitative multiplex PCR of short
fluorescent fragments (QMPSF). Among the 40 patients, the overall detection rate 
was 70%: 18 had point mutations, 9 had whole-gene deletions, and 1 had a deletion
of a single exon. Similar phenotypes were observed in patients with mutations and
in subjects with large deletions. These results suggest that MODY5 is more
prevalent than previously reported, with one-third of the cases resulting from
large deletions of TCF2. Because QMPSF is more rapid and cost effective than
sequencing, we propose that patients whose phenotype is consistent with MODY5
should be screened first with the QMPSF assay. In addition, other MODY genes
should be screened for large genomic rearrangements.

PMID: 16249435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Oct;90(10):5906-7.

Letter Re: Neonatal diabetes mellitus and mutation in the HNF-1beta gene.

D'Amato E, Lorini R.

Comment on
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Dec;89(12):6105-11.

PMID: 16207896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Sep 27;102(39):13974-9. Epub 2005 Sep 20.

Regulation of TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand on primary CD4+ T cells by
HIV-1: role of type I IFN-producing plasmacytoid dendritic cells.

Herbeuval JP(1), Hardy AW, Boasso A, Anderson SA, Dolan MJ, Dy M, Shearer GM.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), a member of the TNF superfamily,
was suggested to contribute to HIV-1 pathogenesis by inducing CD4+ T cell death
characteristic of AIDS. We previously reported HIV-1-mediated, TRAIL-induced
apoptosis in primary CD4+ T cells in vitro and observed elevated levels of plasma
TRAIL in HIV-1-infected patients. The present study elucidates the unresolved
mechanism by which HIV-1 induces TRAIL expression on primary CD4+ T cells. We
demonstrate that the expression of TRAIL by primary CD4+ T cells is regulated by 
IFN-alpha that is produced by HIV-1-stimulated plasmacytoid dendritic cells
(pDCs). We also found that IFN-induced TRAIL is mediated by signal transducers
and activators of transcription 1 and 2. We show that IFN-alpha production by
HIV-1-activated pDCs is blocked by an early viral entry inhibitor of CD4-gp120
binding, but not by inhibitors of viral coreceptor binding. Our in vitro data are
supported by the demonstration that anti-IFN-alpha and -beta Abs inhibit
apoptosis and TRAIL expression in CD4+ T cells from HIV-1-infected patients. Our 
findings suggest a potential unique role of pDCs in the immunopathogenesis of
HIV-1 infection by inducing the death molecule TRAIL.

PMCID: PMC1224361
PMID: 16174727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Neuroscience. 2005;134(3):907-19.

Cell type-specific and sexually dimorphic expression of transcription factor AP-2
in the adult mouse brain.

Coelho DJ(1), Sims DJ, Ruegg PJ, Minn I, Muench AR, Mitchell PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 201 Life Sciences Building, 
Pennsylvania State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA.

Expression of transcription factor AP-2 family genes in adult mouse brain regions
was examined at RNA and protein levels and in tissue sections. AP-2 family RNA
transcripts, nuclear AP-2 DNA binding activity, and AP-2 immunoreactivity were
greatest in hindbrain and midbrain regions. Cells expressing AP-2 were
predominantly differentiated neurons and were abundant in the solitary tract
nucleus, hypoglossal nucleus, locus coeruleus, cerebellar molecular layer,
superior colliculus, mitral cell layers of the main and accessory olfactory
bulbs, and in some divisions of the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis. Sexually
dimorphic expression of AP-2 was seen in the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis,
a forebrain region required for regulation of gender-specific reproductive and
social behaviors. In males, AP-2 expressing neurons were present in
supracapsular, lateral ventral, and medial ventral divisions of the bed nucleus
of the stria terminalis. In contrast, females had AP-2 expressing neurons in the 
lateral ventral division, but not the supracapsular division, and AP-2 expression
in medial ventral division neurons oscillated during the estrus cycle. With the
exception of the bed nucleus of the stria terminalis, forebrain regions generally
lacked cells with high levels of AP-2. However, a small population of cells
co-expressing low levels of AP-2 and Notch1 was sparsely distributed in the
cerebral cortex and hippocampal dentate gyrus subgranular zone. Based on their
variable levels of NeuN, a marker for differentiated neurons, these cells may
include nascent neurons. A subset of cerebellar Purkinje cells also co-expressed 
low levels of AP-2 and Notch1. Together, the adult brain regions with AP-2
expressing neurons are notable for their importance in pathways that integrate
sensory and neuroendocrine information for regulation of reproductive, social,
and feeding behaviors. Our data suggest that AP-2 transcription factors
contribute at multiple levels to adult brain function including regulation of
gender-specific behavior.

PMID: 16009501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Lipid Res. 2005 Sep;46(9):1868-76. Epub 2005 Jun 16.

Control of ACAT2 liver expression by HNF1.

Pramfalk C(1), Davis MA, Eriksson M, Rudel LL, Parini P.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Unit, Center for Metabolism and Endocrinology, NOVUM, Karolinska
Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital in Huddinge, S-141 86 Stockholm,
Sweden.

ACAT catalyzes the formation of cholesteryl esters from cholesterol and
long-chain fatty acids. There are two known genes encoding the two ACAT enzymes, 
ACAT1 and ACAT2 (also known as Soat1 and Soat2). In adult humans, ACAT1 is
present in most tissues, whereas ACAT2 is localized to enterocytes and
hepatocytes. In this report, we elucidate the mechanisms that control the
liver-specific expression of the human ACAT2 gene. We identified hepatic nuclear 
factor 1 (HNF1) as an important liver-specific trans-acting element for the human
ACAT2 gene using the human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines HuH7 and HepG2.
Targeted deletion of the HNF1 binding site in the DNA sequence abolished not only
the basal promoter function in HepG2 and HuH7 cells but also the induction of the
ACAT2 promoter by HNF1. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated that the transcription factors HNF1alpha
and HNF1beta interact with this region in the human ACAT2 gene in vitro and in
vivo. These data indicate that a) the identified HNF1 binding site serves as a
positive regulator sequence, b) the binding site is functionally active both in
vivo and in vitro, and c) the transcription factors HNF1alpha and HNF1beta, which
bind to this site, play an important part in the regulation of the human ACAT2
promoter.

PMID: 15961790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2005 Feb 1;102(5):1490-5. Epub 2005 Jan 24.

Lack of TCF2/vHNF1 in mice leads to pancreas agenesis.

Haumaitre C(1), Barbacci E, Jenny M, Ott MO, Gradwohl G, Cereghini S.

Author information: 
(1)Biologie du Développement, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7622, Centre National de
la Recherche Scientifique, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 9 Quai St. Bernard
Bat C, 75005 Paris, France.

Heterozygous mutations in the human POU-homeobox TCF2 (vHNF1, HNF1beta) gene are 
associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 5, and abnormal
urogenital tract development. Recently, pancreas atrophies have been reported in 
several maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 5 patients, suggesting that
TCF2 is required not only for adult pancreas function but also for its normal
development. Tcf2-deficient mice die before gastrulation because of defective
visceral endoderm formation. To investigate the role of this factor in pancreas
development, we rescued this early lethality by tetraploid aggregation. We show
that TCF2 has an essential function in the first steps of pancreas development,
correlated with its expression domain that demarcates the entire pancreatic buds 
from the earliest stages. Lack of TCF2 results in pancreas agenesis by embryonic 
day 13.5. At earlier stages, only a dorsal bud rudiment forms transiently and
expresses the transcription factors Ipf1 and Hlxb9 but lacks the key
transcription factor involved in the acquisition of a pancreatic fate, Ptf1a, as 
well as all endocrine precursor cells. Regional specification of the gut also is 
perturbed in Tcf2-/- embryos as manifested by ectopic expression of Shh and lack 
of Ihh and Ipf1 in the posterior stomach and duodenum. Our results highlight the 
requirement of Tcf2 for ensuring both accurate expression of key regulator
molecules in the stomach-duodenal epithelium and proper acquisition of the
pancreatic fate. This study provides further insights into early molecular events
controlling pancreas development and may contribute to the development of
cell-replacement strategies for diabetes.

PMCID: PMC547822
PMID: 15668393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Acta Diabetol. 2004 Dec;41(4):137-45.

Scanning for MODY5 gene mutations in Chinese early onset or multiple affected
diabetes pedigrees.

Wang C(1), Fang Q, Zhang R, Lin X, Xiang K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Diabetes Institute,
Shanghai No. 6 People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 600 Yishan Road,
Shanghai 200233, China.

Mutation of HNF-1beta gene has been reported in early onset diabetes or MODY
families and this gene has been defined as MODY5 gene. The aim of our study was
to examine whether HNF-1beta mutation contribute to early onset or multiple
affected diabetes pedigrees in Chinese. Molecular scanning of HNF-1beta gene
promoter region, nine exons and flanking introns was performed in 154 unrelated
probands from early onset and multiple affected diabetes Chinese pedigrees. The
family members of probands with mutations or variants and 58 nondiabetics were
also examined. Clinical examinations of renal morphology, renal function and
beta-cell function were performed in the HNF-1beta gene mutation carriers and
family members. Mutation of HNF-1beta gene causing the substitution S36F was
found in two subjects of an early onset diabetic family. One carrier has early
onset diabetes, renal function impairment and renal cyst, while the other has
impaired glucose tolerance only. This is the first case of MODY5 gene mutation
diabetes found in the Chinese. Three HNF-1beta variants were identified and no
significant differences in allele frequencies for these variants were detected
between the nondiabetic and diabetic groups. Nucleotide 66 of intron 8 of
HNF-1beta gene was G in the Chinese population rather than A as noted in the
GenBank sequence. These results suggest that HNF-1beta gene mutations may be
associated with nondiabetic renal dysfunction and diabetes in Chinese, but they
are responsible for only a small percentage of early onset or multiple affected
diabetes pedigrees including MODY.

PMID: 15660195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Mar 1;14(5):603-14. Epub 2005 Jan 13.

Germline hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha and 1beta mutations in renal cell
carcinomas.

Rebouissou S(1), Vasiliu V, Thomas C, Bellanné-Chantelot C, Bui H, Chrétien Y,
Timsit J, Rosty C, Laurent-Puig P, Chauveau D, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U674, CEPH, IUH Saint-Louis, Paris, France.

Mutations in one copy of the hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF) 1alpha and 1beta
homeodomain containing transcription factors predispose the carrier to
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) types 3 and 5, respectively.
Moreover, previous identification of biallelic inactivation of HNF1alpha in
hepatocellular adenoma identified its tumor suppressor function in
hepatocarcinogenesis. The seminal observation of an ovarian carcinoma in a MODY5 
patient who subsequently developed a chromophobe renal cell carcinoma, prompted
us to screen for HNF1beta and HNF1alpha inactivation in a series of 20 ovarian
and 35 renal neoplasms. Biallelic HNF1beta inactivation was found in two of 12
chromophobe renal carcinomas by association of a germline mutation and a somatic 
gene deletion. In these cases, the expression of PKHD1 (polycystic kidney and
hepatic disease 1) and UMOD (Uromodulin), two genes regulated by HNF1beta, was
turned off. Interestingly, in two of 13 clear cell renal carcinomas, we found a
monoallelic germline mutation of HNF1alpha with no associated suppression of
target mRNA expression. In normal and tumor renal tissues, we showed the
existence of a network of transcription factors differentially regulated in tumor
subtypes. We identified two related clusters of co-regulated genes associating
HNF1beta, PKHD1 and UMOD in the first group and HNF1alpha, HNF4alpha, FABP1 and
UGT2B7 in the second group. Finally, these results suggest that germline
mutations of HNF1beta and HNF1alpha may predispose to renal tumors. Furthermore, 
we suggest that HNF1beta functions as a tumor suppressor gene in chromophobe
renal cell carcinogenesis through a PKHD1 expression control.

PMID: 15649945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Treat Endocrinol. 2005;4(1):9-18.

Diagnosis and management of maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Timsit J(1), Bellanné-Chantelot C, Dubois-Laforgue D, Velho G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Diabetology, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.
jose.timsit@cch.ap-hop-paris.fr

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a dominantly inherited form of
non-ketotic diabetes mellitus. It results from a primary defect of insulin
secretion, and usually develops at childhood, adolescence, or young adulthood.
MODY is a heterogeneous disease with regard to genetic, metabolic, and clinical
features. All MODY genes have not been identified, but heterozygous mutations in 
six genes cause the majority of the MODY cases. By far MODY2 (due to mutations of
the glucokinase gene) and MODY3 (due to mutations in hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha) are the most frequent. As with MODY3, all the other MODY subtypes 
are associated with mutations in transcription factors. The clinical
presentations of the different MODY subtypes differ, particularly in the severity
and the course of the insulin secretion defect, the risk of microvascular
complications of diabetes, and the defects associated with diabetes. Patients
with MODY2 have mild, asymptomatic, and stable hyperglycemia that is present from
birth. They rarely develop microvascular disease, and seldom require
pharmacologic treatment of hyperglycemia. In patients with MODY3, severe
hyperglycemia usually occurs after puberty, and may lead to the diagnosis of type
1 diabetes. Despite the progression of insulin defects, sensitivity to
sulfonylureas may be retained in MODY3 patients. Diabetic retinopathy and
nephropathy frequently occur in patients with MODY3, making frequent follow-up
mandatory. By contrast, other risk factors are not present in patients with MODY 
and the frequency of cardiovascular disease is not increased. The clinical
spectrum of MODY is wider than initially described, and might include multi-organ
involvement in addition to diabetes. In patients with MODY5, due to mutations in 
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta, diabetes is associated with pancreatic atrophy, 
renal morphologic and functional abnormalities, and genital tract and liver test 
abnormalities. Although MODY is dominantly inherited, penetrance or expression of
the disease may vary and a family history of diabetes is not always present.
Thus, the diagnosis of MODY should be raised in various clinical circumstances.
Molecular diagnosis has important consequences in terms of prognosis, family
screening, and therapy.

PMID: 15649097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 18;280(11):10578-86. Epub 2005 Jan 12.

Role of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) C-terminal domain in
Pkhd1 (ARPKD) gene transcription and renal cystogenesis.

Hiesberger T(1), Shao X, Gourley E, Reimann A, Pontoglio M, Igarashi P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas Southwestern Medical
Center, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd., Dallas, Texas 75390-8856, USA.
Thomas.Hiesberger@UTSouthwestern.edu

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) is a homeodomain-containing
transcription factor that regulates tissue-specific gene expression in the kidney
and other epithelial organs. Mutations of HNF-1beta produce congenital cystic
abnormalities of the kidney, and previous studies showed that HNF-1beta regulates
the expression of the autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) gene,
Pkhd1. Here we show that the C-terminal region of HNF-1beta contains an
activation domain that is functional when fused to a heterologous DNA-binding
domain. An HNF-1beta deletion mutant lacking the C-terminal domain interacts with
wild-type HNF-1beta, binds DNA, and functions as a dominant-negative inhibitor of
a chromosomally integrated Pkhd1 promoter. The activation of the Pkhd1 promoter
by wild-type HNF-1beta is stimulated by sodium butyrate or coactivators CREB
(cAMP-response element)-binding protein (CBP) and P/CAF. The interaction with CBP
and P/CAF requires the C-terminal domain. Expression of an HNF-1beta C-terminal
deletion mutant in transgenic mice produces renal cysts, increased cell
proliferation, and dilatation of the ureter similar to mice with kidney-specific 
inactivation of HNF-1beta. Pkhd1 expression is inhibited in cystic collecting
ducts but not in non-cystic proximal tubules, despite transgene expression in
this nephron segment. We conclude that the C-terminal domain of HNF-1beta is
required for the activation of the Pkhd1 promoter. Deletion mutants lacking the
C-terminal domain function as dominant-negative mutants, possibly by preventing
the recruitment of histone acetylases to the promoter. Cyst formation correlates 
with inhibition of Pkhd1 expression, which argues that mutations of HNF-1beta
produce kidney cysts by down-regulating the ARPKD gene, Pkhd1. Expression of
HNF-1alpha in proximal tubules may protect against cystogenesis.

PMID: 15647252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Dec 3;325(1):308-13.

Effect of mutations in HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta on the transcriptional regulation
of human sucrase-isomaltase in Caco-2 cells.

Gu N(1), Suzuki N, Takeda J, Adachi T, Tsujimoto G, Aoki N, Ishihara A, Tsuda K, 
Yasuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry, Kyoto University Graduate School of Human and
Environmental Studies, Kyoto, Japan.

Mutations in transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF)-1alpha and
HNF-1beta cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) types 3 and 5,
respectively. HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta mutations are well studied in some
tissues, but the mechanism by which HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta mutations affect
sucrase-isomaltase (SI) transcription in the small intestine is unclear. We
studied the effects of 13 HNF-1alpha mutants and 2 HNF-1beta mutants on human SI 
gene transcription, which were identified in subjects with MODY3 and MODY5,
respectively. Transactivation activity of 11 HNF-1alpha and 2 HNF-1beta mutants
was significantly lower than that of wild (wt)-HNF-1alpha and wt-HNF-1beta.
Furthermore, in co-expression studies with mutant (mu)-HNF-1alpha/ wt-HNF-1beta
and wt-HNF-1alpha/mu-HNF-1beta, the combination of mu-HNF-1alpha (P379fsdelCT and
T539fsdelC)/wt-HNF-1beta impaired SI transcription, but the others were not
remarkably different from wt-HNF-1alpha/wt-HNF-1beta. Although wt-HNF-1beta
inhibited the transactivation activity of wt-HNF-1alpha on SI transcription, the 
inhibitory effect was reduced by 2 HNF-1beta mutants. These results suggest that 
SI transcription might tend to be unchanged or lower in MODY3, while occurring
more in MODY5.

PMID: 15522234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Nov 1;32(19):e150.

Pattern of genes influenced by conditional expression of the transcription
factors HNF6, HNF4alpha and HNF1beta in a pancreatic beta-cell line.

Thomas H(1), Senkel S, Erdmann S, Arndt T, Turan G, Klein-Hitpass L, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
D-45122 Essen, Germany.

Using the rat insulinoma cell line INS-1 we generated beta-cell clones that are
most efficient for gene transfer, as they contain an FRT site for Flp
recombinase-mediated, site-directed integration of a single copy transgene.
Therefore, the gene-of-interest can be introduced by DNA transfection without the
need to select individual cell clones. Additionally, the clones contain the
tetracycline repressor allowing tetracycline induction of the transgene. By
oligonucleotide microarray we define the beta-cell specific phenotype of the
Flp-In T-REx cell clones. Using a clone expressing the HNF6, HNF4alpha and
HNF1beta transcription factors at a limited level, we introduced the expression
vectors encoding these factors. We show efficient tetracycline induction of these
transcription factors by western blots and immunocytochemistry. Microarrays
reveal that these three factors affect a similar number of genes with only few
genes regulated in common. Statistical analysis reveals that the three
transcription factors affect genes categorized to different biological processes.
Furthermore, we document the usefulness of these Flp-In T-REx cells for the
functional analysis of mutated HNF1beta transcription factors found in human
MODY5 patients. We show that the expression of the mutant P328L329del and
A263insGG affects only very few transcripts and these are predominantly distinct 
from those induced by wild-type HNF1beta.

PMCID: PMC528820
PMID: 15520459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Hum Mol Genet. 2004 Dec 15;13(24):3139-49. Epub 2004 Oct 27.

HNF1beta/TCF2 mutations impair transactivation potential through altered
co-regulator recruitment.

Barbacci E(1), Chalkiadaki A, Masdeu C, Haumaitre C, Lokmane L, Loirat C, Cloarec
S, Talianidis I, Bellanne-Chantelot C, Cereghini S.

Author information: 
(1)Biologie du Développement, UMR 7622, CNRS, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 9
quai St Bernard, 75005 Paris, France.

Mutations in the HNF1beta gene, encoding the dimeric POU-homeodomain
transcription factor HNF1beta (TCF2 or vHNF1), cause various phenotypes including
maturity onset diabetes of the young 5 (MODY5), and abnormalities in kidney,
pancreas and genital tract development. To gain insight into the molecular
mechanisms underlying these phenotypes and into the structure of HNF1beta, we
functionally characterized eight disease-causing mutations predicted to produce
protein truncations, amino acids substitutions or frameshift deletions in
different domains of the protein. Truncated mutations, retaining the dimerization
domain, displayed defective nuclear localization and weak dominant-negative
activity when co-expressed with the wild-type protein. A frameshift mutation
located within the C-terminal QSP-rich domain partially reduced transcriptional
activity, whereas selective deletion of this domain abolished transactivation.
All five missense mutations, which concern POU-specific and homeodomain residues,
were correctly expressed and localized to the nucleus. Although having different 
effects on DNA-binding capacity, which ranged from complete loss to a mild
reduction, these mutations exhibited a severe reduction in their transactivation 
capacity. The transcriptional impairment of those mutants, whose DNA-binding
activity was weakly or not affected, correlated with the loss of association with
one of the histone-acetyltransferases CBP or PCAF. In contrast to wild-type
HNF1beta, whose transactivation potential depends on the synergistic action of
CBP and PCAF, the activity of these mutants was not increased by the synergistic 
action of these two coactivators or by treatment with the specific
histone-deacetylase inhibitor TSA. Our findings suggest that the complex syndrome
associated with HNF1beta-MODY5 mutations arise from either defective DNA-binding 
or transactivation function through impaired coactivator recruitment.

PMID: 15509593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2004 Nov;19(11):2703-8.

Renal cysts and diabetes syndrome resulting from mutations in hepatocyte nuclear 
factor-1beta.

Bingham C, Hattersley AT.

Comment in
    Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2004 Nov;19(11):2700-2.

PMID: 15496559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2004 Nov;19(11):2700-2.

Cystic kidney diseases: learning from animal models.

Fischer E, Gresh L, Reimann A, Pontoglio M.

Comment on
    Nephrol Dial Transplant. 2004 Nov;19(11):2703-8.

PMID: 15496558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Feb;19(2):527-39. Epub 2004 Oct 14.

Activation of nicotinamide N-methyltransferase gene promoter by hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1beta in human papillary thyroid cancer cells.

Xu J(1), Capezzone M, Xu X, Hershman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Diabetes Division, Veterans Affairs Greater Los Angeles
Healthcare System, 11301 Wilshire Boulevard, Los Angeles, California 90073, USA.

We previously demonstrated that the human nicotinamide N-methytransferase (NNMT) 
gene was highly expressed in many papillary thyroid cancers and cell lines. The
expression in other papillary and follicular cancers or cell lines and normal
thyroid cells was low or undetectable. To gain an understanding of the molecular 
mechanism of this cell-specific expression, the NNMT promoter was cloned and
studied by luciferase reporter gene assay. The promoter construct was expressed
highly in papillary cancer cell lines, including those with higher (e.g. BHP 2-7)
and lower (e.g. BHP 14-9) NNMT gene expression, and expressed weakly in
follicular thyroid cancer cell lines. Further study with 5'-deletion promoter
construct suggested that the NNMT promoter was regulated differently in BHP 2-7
and BHP 14-9 cells. In BHP 2-7 cells, promoter activity was dependent on an
upstream sequence. In BHP 14-9 cells, sequence in the basal promoter region
contributed notably to the overall promoter activity. RT-PCR or Western blot
analysis indicated that hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) was expressed
in only papillary cancer cell lines with high NNMT gene expression. HNF-1beta was
not expressed or expressed very weakly in other papillary, follicular, and
Hurthle cancer cell lines and primary cultures of normal thyroid cells and benign
thyroid conditions. A HNF-1 binding site was identified in the NNMT basal
promoter region. Mutations in this site decreased NNMT promoter activity in the
HNF-1beta-positive BHP 2-7 cells, but not in the HNF-1beta-negative BHP 14-9
cells. HNF-1beta bound to the HNF-1 site specifically as a homodimer as
determined by gel retardation assays with HNF-1beta-specific antibody.
Cotransfection of a HNF-1beta expression plasmid increased NNMT promoter activity
significantly in both HNF-1beta-positive and -negative thyroid cancer cell lines 
and Hep G2 liver cancer cells. Furthermore, transient expression of HNF-1beta in 
BHP 14-9 cells increased endogenous NNMT protein levels. In summary, HNF-1beta
functions as a transcription activator for NNMT gene expression in some papillary
thyroid cancer cells.

PMID: 15486044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Dev Biol. 2004 Oct 15;274(2):245-59.

The zebrafish onecut gene hnf-6 functions in an evolutionarily conserved genetic 
pathway that regulates vertebrate biliary development.

Matthews RP(1), Lorent K, Russo P, Pack M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia and Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, 19104, USA.

Targeted disruption of the onecut transcription factor, hnf-6, alters mammalian
biliary system development. We have identified a related zebrafish cDNA expressed
in the developing liver that is a functional ortholog of mammalian hnf-6.
Antisense-mediated knockdown of zebrafish hnf-6 perturbs development of the
intrahepatic biliary system. Knockdown of zebrafish hnf-6 alters expression of
vhnf1 and the zebrafish orthologs of other mammalian genes regulated by hnf-6.
Coinjection of mRNA encoding zebrafish vhnf1 rescues the biliary phenotype of
hnf-6 morphants. These experiments strongly suggest that hnf-6 and vhnf1 function
within an evolutionarily conserved pathway that regulates biliary development.
Forced expression of either hnf-6 or vhnf1 also produces biliary phenotypes.
Altered bile duct development in both loss- and gain-of-function experiments
suggests that zebrafish biliary cells are sensitive to the dosage of
hnf-6-mediated gene transcription.

PMID: 15385156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Eur J Biochem. 2004 Sep;271(18):3715-28.

The HNF1beta transcription factor has several domains involved in nephrogenesis
and partially rescues Pax8/lim1-induced kidney malformations.

Wu G(1), Bohn S, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Germany.

The tissue-specific transcription factors HNF1alpha and HNF1beta are closely
related homeodomain proteins conserved in vertebrate evolution. Heterozygous
mutations in human HNF1beta but not in HNF1alpha genes are associated with kidney
malformations. Overexpression of HNF1beta in Xenopus embryos leads to defective
pronephros development, while HNF1alpha has no effect. We have defined the
regions responsible for this functional difference between HNF1beta and HNF1alpha
in transfected HeLa cells as well as in injected Xenopus embryos. Using domain
swapping experiments, we located a nuclear localization signal in the POUH domain
of HNF1beta, and showed that the POUS and POUH domains of HNF1beta mediate a high
transactivation potential in transfected cells. In injected Xenopus embryos three
HNF1beta domains are involved in nephrogenesis. These include the dimerization
domain, the 26 amino acid segment specific for splice variant A as well as the
POUH domain. As HNF1beta together with Pax8 and lim1 constitute the earliest
regulators in the pronephric anlage, it is possible that they cooperate during
early nephrogenesis. We have shown here that HNF1beta can overcome the
enlargement and the induction of an ectopic pronephros mediated by overexpression
of Pax8 and lim1. However, the phenotype induced by Pax8 and lim1 overexpression 
and characterized by cyst-like structures and thickening of the pronephric
tubules was not altered by HNF1beta overexpression. Taken together, HNF1beta acts
antagonistically to Pax8 and lim1 in only some processes during nephrogenesis,
and a simple antagonistic relationship does not completely describe the functions
of these genes. We conclude that HNF1beta has some distinct morphogenetic
properties during nephrogenesis.

Copyright 2004 FEBS

PMID: 15355349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Mol Pharmacol. 2004 Sep;66(3):694-701.

Role of liver-enriched transcription factors in the down-regulation of organic
anion transporting polypeptide 4 (oatp4; oatplb2; slc21a10) by
lipopolysaccharide.

Li N(1), Klaassen CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) administration is a model of cholestasis. Organic anion 
transporting polypeptide 4 (Oatp4; Slc21a10) is almost exclusively expressed in
liver. Therefore, it was hypothesized that LPS would down-regulate mouse Oatp4
and that this action is due to a decrease in nuclear binding activity of one or
more liver-enriched transcription factors to mouse Oatp4 promoter. The present
study indicates a time-dependent decrease in mouse Oatp4 mRNA levels by LPS.
Moreover, LPS produced a rapid and profound decrease in nuclear binding activity 
to the mouse Oatp4 putative response elements for hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)
1, CAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP), HNF3, and heterodimers of retinoid X
receptor (RXR) and retinoic acid receptor (RAR). Maximal decrease in nuclear
binding activity to these response elements preceded a significant reduction of
Oatp4 mRNA levels. HNF1alpha bound to the Oatp4 HNF1 response element as a
homodimer. Multiple copies of the Oatp4 HNF1alpha response element, inserted
upstream of a minimal promoter, were sufficient to mediate reporter activity and 
responded to the coexpression of HNF1alpha in mouse hepatoma cells. Moreover,
HNF1alpha dose dependently activated the Oatp4 promoter (-4.8 kilo-bases to +30
bp). Therefore, HNF1alpha is a potent trans-activator of the mouse Oatp4
promoter. In addition, Oatp4 mRNA levels were markedly decreased (95%) in
HNF1alpha-null mice as compared with wild-type mice, suggesting that HNF1alpha
levels are critical for the constitutive expression of the Oatp4 gene. Taken
together, these findings suggest that the LPS-induced down-regulation of Oatp4 is
likely due to reduction in the binding of HNF1alpha, C/EBP, HNF3, and RXR:RAR to 
the Oatp4 promoter.

PMID: 15322262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. J Cell Sci. 2004 Jul 1;117(Pt 15):3165-74.

Notch signaling controls hepatoblast differentiation by altering the expression
of liver-enriched transcription factors.

Tanimizu N(1), Miyajima A.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Regulation, Kanagawa Academy of Science and Technology, Teikyo
University Biotechnology Research Center, 907 Nogawa, Kawasaki, 216-0001, Japan.

Hepatoblasts give rise to both mature hepatocytes and cholangiocytes. While Notch
signaling has been implicated in the formation of bile ducts composed of
cholangiocytes, little is known about the mechanism of lineage commitment of
hepatoblasts. Here we describe the role of the Notch pathway in hepatoblast
differentiation. Immunohistochemical analysis showed that Jagged1 was expressed
in the cells surrounding the portal veins and Notch2 was expressed in most
hepatic cells at mid gestation when ductal plates are formed surrounding the
portal veins. Interestingly, the Jagged1+ cells were adjacent to ductal plates,
suggesting that the Notch signaling is activated in hepatoblasts that undergo
differentiation into cholangiocytes. In fact, expression of the Notch
intracellular domain in Dlk+ hepatoblasts inhibited hepatic differentiation and
significantly reduced the expression of albumin, a marker of both hepatoblasts
and hepatocytes. Furthermore, the addition of Matrigel to the hepatoblast culture
upregulated the expression of cytokeratin 7 and 19, integrin beta4, and HNF1beta,
which are known to be expressed in cholangiocytes. By contrast, downregulation of
the Notch signaling by siRNA specific for Notch2 mRNA as well as by the
gamma-secretase inhibitor L-685,458 promoted the hepatic differentiation.
Consistent with the previous finding that mature cholangiocytes strongly express 
HNF1beta, but barely express HNF1alpha, HNF4, and C/EBPalpha, activation of the
Notch signaling upregulated HNF1beta expression, whereas it downregulated the
expression of HNF1alpha, HNF4, and C/EBPalpha. These results suggest that the
Notch signaling contributes to form a network of these transcription factors
suitable for cholangiocyte differentiation.

PMID: 15226394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jun;89(6):2905-8.

Neonatal diabetes mellitus and neonatal polycystic, dysplastic kidneys:
Phenotypically discordant recurrence of a mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1beta gene due to germline mosaicism.

Yorifuji T(1), Kurokawa K, Mamada M, Imai T, Kawai M, Nishi Y, Shishido S,
Hasegawa Y, Nakahata T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyoto University Hospital, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
yorif@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Oct;90(10):5906.

Mutations in the gene coding for hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) have
been known to cause a form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY5), which
is usually characterized by dominantly inherited adolescence-onset diabetes
mellitus associated with renal cysts. This report, however, describes recurrence 
of a novel missense mutation in the HNF-1beta gene, S148W (C443G), in two sibs,
one with neonatal diabetes mellitus and the other with neonatal polycystic,
dysplastic kidneys leading to early renal failure. The former patient had only a 
few small renal cysts with normal renal functions, and the latter had only a
transient episode of hyperglycemia, which resolved spontaneously. Interestingly, 
both parents were clinically unaffected, and PCR restriction fragment length
polymorphism analysis showed that the mother was a low-level mosaic of normal and
mutant HNF-1beta, which suggested that the recurrence was caused by germline
mosaicism. This is the first report of permanent neonatal diabetes mellitus
caused by a mutation of the HNF-1beta gene as well as the first report of
germline mosaicism of this gene. In addition, the two cases described here show
that additional factors, genetic or environmental, can have a significant
influence on the phenotypic expression of HNF-1beta mutations.

PMID: 15181075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Diabetologia. 2004 Jun;47(6):1128-9. Epub 2004 May 28.

Identification of a new case of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta mutation with
highly varied phenotypes.

Shihara N, Horikawa Y, Onishi T, Ono M, Kashimada K, Takeda J.

PMID: 15168014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 May 17;32(9):2740-50. Print 2004.

Comprehensive search for HNF-1beta-regulated genes in mouse hepatoma cells
perturbed by transcription regulatory factor-targeted RNAi.

Tanaka T(1), Tomaru Y, Nomura Y, Miura H, Suzuki M, Hayashizaki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genomics, Science of Biological Supramolecular Systems, Graduate
School of Integrated Science, Yokohama City University, 1-7-29 Suehiro-Cho,
Tusurumi-Ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

Erratum in
    Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Jun 29;32(11):3511.

The identification of genes targeted by a specific transcription regulatory
factor (TRF) is essential to our understanding of the regulatory mechanism of
gene expression. We constructed a system for the comprehensive identification of 
genes directly regulated by a TRF. It includes a combination of perturbation of
gene expression by RNA interference (RNAi) of the TRF, cDNA microarray analysis, 
computer searches for the putative TRF recognition sequences, and in vivo and in 
vitro TRF-DNA binding assays. Endogenous hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta
(HNF-1beta) mRNA was efficiently degraded by transfection of mouse hepatoma cells
with short interfering RNAs. Expression profile analysis with 20 K mouse cDNA
microarrays detected 243 genes whose expression levels were decreased by >50%
upon RNAi of HNF-1beta. The upstream regions of the top 26 downregulated genes
were searched for the HNF-1beta consensus recognition sequences leading to the
extraction of 13 candidate genes. Finally, TRF-DNA binding assays identified five
novel as well as three known HNF-1beta-regulated genes. In combination with
quantitative real-time RT-PCR, the present system revealed the existence of a
more expanded regulatory network among seven HNF family members, demonstrating
its practicability to identify the TRF network as well as genes directly
regulated by a specific TRF.

PMCID: PMC419602
PMID: 15148361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Endocrinology. 2004 Aug;145(8):3941-9. Epub 2004 May 13.

Selective deletion of the Hnf1beta (MODY5) gene in beta-cells leads to altered
gene expression and defective insulin release.

Wang L(1), Coffinier C, Thomas MK, Gresh L, Eddu G, Manor T, Levitsky LL, Yaniv
M, Rhoads DB.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrine Unit, MassGeneral Hospital for Children, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114-2696, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) and HNF1beta (or vHNF1) are closely 
related transcription factors expressed in liver, kidney, gut, and pancreatic
beta-cells. Many HNF1 target genes are involved in carbohydrate metabolism. Human
mutations in HNF1alpha or HNF1beta lead to maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY3 and MODY5, respectively), and patients present with impaired
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. The underlying defect in MODY5 is not
known. Analysis of HNF1beta deficiency in mice has not been possible because
HNF1beta null mice die in utero. To examine the role of HNF1beta in glucose
homeostasis, viable mice deleted for HNF1beta selectively in beta-cells
(beta/H1beta-KO mice) were generated using a Cre-LoxP strategy. beta/H1beta-KO
mice had normal growth, fertility, fed or fasted plasma glucose and insulin
levels, pancreatic insulin content, and insulin sensitivity. However,
beta/H1beta-KO mice exhibited impaired glucose tolerance with reduced insulin
secretion compared with wild-type mice but preserved a normal insulin secretory
response to arginine. Moreover, beta/H1beta-KO islets had increased HNF1alpha and
Pdx-1, decreased HNF4 mRNA levels, and reduced glucose-stimulated insulin
release. These results indicate that HNF1beta is involved in regulating the
beta-cell transcription factor network and is necessary for glucose sensing or
glycolytic signaling.

PMID: 15142986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Diabetes Care. 2004 May;27(5):1102-7.

Contrasting diabetes phenotypes associated with hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha 
and -1beta mutations.

Pearson ER(1), Badman MK, Lockwood CR, Clark PM, Ellard S, Bingham C, Hattersley 
AT.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Mutations in the highly homologous transcription factors hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and -1beta cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young
types 3 and 5, respectively. Diabetes due to HNF-1alpha mutations is well
characterized. However, physiological assessment of the HNF-1beta phenotype is
limited. We aimed to test the hypothesis that the diabetes phenotype due to
HNF-1beta mutations is similar to that in HNF-1alpha.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Fasting biochemistry and a tolbutamide-modified
intravenous glucose tolerance test (IVGTT) were compared in matched HNF-1beta,
HNF-1alpha, type 2 diabetic, and control subjects. Homeostasis model assessment
indexes were determined from fasting insulin and glucose. The peak measures for
the insulin increment after tolbutamide and for the insulin increment after
glucose were determined from the IVGTT.
RESULTS: The HNF-1beta patients showed a 2.4-fold reduction in insulin
sensitivity compared with the HNF-1alpha patients (P = 0.001) with fasting
insulin concentrations 2.7-fold higher (P = 0.004). HNF-1beta patients had lower 
HDL cholesterol (1.17 vs. 1.46 mmol/l; P = 0.009) and higher triglyceride (2.2
vs. 1.35 mmol/l; P = 0.015) levels than HNF-1alpha patients. The HNF-1beta
patients had similar beta-cell responses to tolbutamide and glucose as the type 2
diabetic patients, but in the HNF-1alpha patients, the tolbutamide response was
considerably increased relative to the response to glucose (P = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: HNF-1beta patients have a different diabetes phenotype than
HNF-1alpha patients. Those with HNF-1beta mutations have hyperinsulinemia and
associated dyslipidemia consistent with insulin resistance and may have a
different beta-cell defect. This suggests that despite considerable homology and 
a shared binding site, HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta have a different role in
maintaining normal glucose homeostasis. This result suggests a new etiological
pathway for insulin resistance involving HNF-1beta.

PMID: 15111528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Diabetologia. 2004 May;47(5):937-42. Epub 2004 Apr 15.

Abnormal splicing of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta in the renal cysts and
diabetes syndrome.

Harries LW(1), Ellard S, Jones RW, Hattersley AT, Bingham C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics, Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula
Medical School, Exeter, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta ( HNF-1 beta) 
gene result in disorders of renal development, typically involving renal cysts
and early-onset diabetes (the RCAD syndrome/ MODY5). Sixteen mutations have been 
reported, including three splicing mutations of the intron 2 splice donor site.
Because tissues showing abundant expression (kidney, liver, pancreas, gut, lung
and gonads) are not easily accessible for analysis in living subjects, it has
previously proven difficult to determine the effect of HNF-1 beta mutations at
the mRNA level. This is the aim of the present study.
METHODS: We have developed a nested RT-PCR assay that exploits the presence of
ectopic HNF-1 beta transcripts in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-transformed
lymphoblastoid cell lines derived from subjects carrying HNF-1 beta splice site
mutations.
RESULTS: We report a fourth mutation of the intron 2 splice donor site,
IVS2nt+2insT. Sequence analysis of ectopic HNF-1 beta transcripts showed that
both IVS2nt+2insT and IVS2nt+1G>T result in the deletion of exon 2 and are
predicted to result in premature termination of the HNF-1 beta protein. Mutant
transcripts were less abundant than the normal transcripts but there was no
evidence of nonsense-mediated decay.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This is the first study to define the pathogenic
consequences of mutations within the HNF-1 beta gene by mRNA analysis. This type 
of approach is a useful and important tool to define mutational mechanisms and
determine pathogenicity.

PMID: 15085338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Ann Intern Med. 2004 Apr 6;140(7):I42.

Summaries for patients. Maturity onset diabetes of the young 5.

[No authors listed]

Comment on
    Ann Intern Med. 2004 Apr 6;140(7):510-7.

PMID: 15069003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Ann Intern Med. 2004 Apr 6;140(7):510-7.

Clinical spectrum associated with hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta mutations.

Bellanné-Chantelot C(1), Chauveau D, Gautier JF, Dubois-Laforgue D, Clauin S,
Beaufils S, Wilhelm JM, Boitard C, Noël LH, Velho G, Timsit J.

Author information: 
(1)Fédération des Services de Biochimie, Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire,
Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France. christine.bellanne@sat.ap-hop-paris.fr

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2004 Apr 6;140(7):I42.

BACKGROUND: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 5 (MODY5), a type of
dominantly inherited diabetes mellitus and nephropathy, has been associated with 
mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) gene, mostly
generating truncated protein. Various phenotypes, including urogenital
malformations, are related to HNF-1beta mutations.
OBJECTIVE: To describe clinical and genetic findings in 13 patients with 8 novel 
HNF-1beta mutations.
DESIGN: Multicenter, descriptive study.
SETTING: 2 departments of diabetes, 1 department of internal medicine, and 1
department of nephrology.
PARTICIPANTS: 8 probands with diabetes diagnosed before 40 years of age and
nondiabetic kidney disease who were selected independent of their family history 
of diabetes, and 5 offspring.
MEASUREMENTS: Characteristics of diabetes, renal function and structure, genital 
tract abnormalities, pancreas structure, insulin secretion, exocrine pancreas
function, and liver test results.
RESULTS: All mutations, including 5 missense changes, were found in the
DNA-binding domain. Cosegregation of the mutation and MODY5 phenotype was
observed in 4 families. Occurrence of a de novo mutation was demonstrated in 2
families. Diabetes was present in 10 of 13 mutation carriers. It was clinically
overt in 5 participants and found by screening at age 19 to 38 years in 5
participants. Pancreas atrophy was observed in 5 of 6 probands, and pancreas
exocrine insufficiency was observed in 6 of 7 probands. Renal involvement,
consisting of structural changes and slowly progressive renal failure, was
recognized in 9 patients at 18 to 41 years of age. Dysplastic kidneys were found 
by ultrasonography in 3 fetuses who subsequently showed transient neonatal renal 
failure. Genital tract abnormalities were present in 5 probands and liver enzyme 
levels were abnormal in 11 of 13 patients.
LIMITATIONS: Since the study was small and not population-based, it could not
estimate the prevalence of MODY5. Other phenotypes might be associated with
HNF-1beta mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 5 encompasses a wide
clinical spectrum. Analysis for mutations of HNF-1beta is warranted, even without
a family history of diabetes, in nonobese patients with diabetes and slowly
progressive nondiabetic nephropathy, particularly when pancreatic atrophy or
genital abnormalities are present.

PMID: 15068978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Clin Invest. 2004 Mar;113(6):814-25.

Mutation of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta inhibits Pkhd1 gene expression and
produces renal cysts in mice.

Hiesberger T(1), Bai Y, Shao X, McNally BT, Sinclair AM, Tian X, Somlo S,
Igarashi P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) is a Pit-1, Oct-1/2, UNC-86
(POU)/homeodomain-containing transcription factor that regulates tissue-specific 
gene expression in the liver, kidney, and other organs. Humans with autosomal
dominant mutations of HNF-1beta develop maturity-onset diabetes of the young type
5 (MODY5) and congenital cystic abnormalities of the kidney. Autosomal recessive 
polycystic kidney disease (ARPKD) is an inherited cystic disorder that produces
renal failure in infants and children and is caused by mutations of PKHD1. The
proximal promoter of the mouse Pkhd1 gene contains an evolutionarily conserved
HNF-1-binding site that is located near a region of deoxyribonuclease
hypersensitivity. HNF-1beta and the structurally related HNF-1alpha bind
specifically to the Pkhd1 promoter and stimulate gene transcription. Mutations of
the HNF-1 site or expression of a dominant-negative HNF-1beta mutant inhibit
Pkhd1 promoter activity in transfected cells. Transgenic mice expressing a
dominant-negative HNF-1beta mutant under the control of a kidney-specific
promoter develop renal cysts, similarly to humans with MODY5. Pkhd1 transcripts
are absent in the cells lining the cysts but are present in morphologically
normal surrounding tubules. These studies identify a link between two cystic
disease genes, HNF1beta (MODY5) and PKHD1 (ARPKD). HNF-1beta directly regulates
the transcription of Pkhd1, and inhibition of PKHD1 gene expression may
contribute to the formation of renal cysts in humans with MODY5.

PMCID: PMC362119
PMID: 15067314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Hepatology. 2004 Apr;39(4):1038-47.

Progression of HCC in mice is associated with a downregulation in the expression 
of hepatocyte nuclear factors.

Lazarevich NL(1), Cheremnova OA, Varga EV, Ovchinnikov DA, Kudrjavtseva EI,
Morozova OV, Fleishman DI, Engelhardt NV, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunochemistry, Institute of Carcinogenesis, N.N. Blokhin
Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Russia.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF) play a critical role in development of the
liver. Their roles during liver tumorigenesis and progression of hepatocellular
carcinomas (HCC) are, however, poorly understood. To address the role of HNFs in 
tumor progression, we generated a new experimental model in which a highly
differentiated slow-growing transplantable mouse HCC (sgHCC) rapidly gives rise
in vivo to a highly invasive fast-growing dedifferentiated variant (fgHCC). This 
in vivo model has allowed us to investigate the fundamental mechanisms underlying
HCC progression. A complete loss of cell polarity, a decrease in cell-cell and
cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion, elevation of telomerase activity, and
extinction of liver-specific gene expression accompanies tumor progression.
Moreover, cells isolated from fgHCCs acquired the ability to proliferate rapidly 
in culture. These alterations were coupled with a reduced expression of several
liver transcription factors including HNF4, a factor essential for hepatocyte
differentiation. Forced re-expression of HNF4alpha1 in cultured fgHCC cells
reversed the progressive phenotype and induced fgHCC cells to re-establish an
epithelium and reform cell-ECM contacts. Moreover, fgHCC cells that expressed
HNF4alpha1 also re-established expression of the profile of liver transcription
factors and hepatic genes that are associated with a differentiated hepatocyte
phenotype. Importantly, re-expression of HNF4alpha1 in fgHCC reduced the
proliferation rate in vitro and diminished tumor formation in congenic recipient 
mice. In conclusion, loss of HNF4 expression is an important determinant of HCC
progression. Forced expression of this factor can promote reversion of tumors
toward a less invasive highly differentiated slow-growing phenotype.

PMID: 15057908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. EMBO J. 2004 Apr 21;23(8):1825-33. Epub 2004 Apr 1.

Hindgut defects and transformation of the gastro-intestinal tract in
Tcf4(-/-)/Tcf1(-/-) embryos.

Gregorieff A(1), Grosschedl R, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology and Center for Biomedical
Genetics, Hubrecht Laboratory, Uppsalalaan, CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Wnt signalling plays a critical role in both initiating and patterning of the
anterior-posterior axis during development. Wnts exert their biological effects, 
in part, by activating specific target genes through members of the TCF/LEF
family of transcription factors. To gain new insight into the role of T-cell
factors (or Tcf's) during development, we analysed Tcf4 and Tcf1 compound null
embryos. These mutants showed severe caudal truncations, as well as duplications 
of the neural tube. Unlike other mutations affecting Wnt signalling, paraxial
mesoderm formation was not impaired and early caudal markers, such as T, were
unaffected. Analysis of endodermal markers uncovered early and specific defects
in hindgut expansion, and later an anterior transformation of the
gastro-intestinal tract. Our results reveal a novel role for Wnt signalling in
early gut morphogenesis and suggest that specific Wnt-driven patterning events
are determined by the unique tissue distribution of Tcf/Lef family members.

PMCID: PMC394245
PMID: 15057272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Mol Pharmacol. 2004 Apr;65(4):953-63.

Coordinate regulation of the human UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A8, 1A9, and 1A10
genes by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha and the caudal-related homeodomain
protein 2.

Gregory PA(1), Lewinsky RH, Gardner-Stephen DA, Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park,
South Australia 5042, Australia.

The human UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) -1A8 and -1A10 are exclusively
expressed in extrahepatic tissues and primarily in the gastrointestinal tract,
whereas UGT1A9 is expressed mainly in the liver and kidneys. We have demonstrated
previously that the UGT1A8 and UGT1A10 genes, in contrast to the UGT1A9 gene, are
regulated via an initiator-like element in their proximal promoters. To determine
the elements that contribute to the gastrointestinal expression of UGT1A8 and
-1A10, we conducted deletion analysis of the UGT1A8, -1A9, and -1A10 promoters in
the colon-derived cell line Caco2. DNA elements contributing significantly to
UGT1A8, -1A9, and -1A10 promoter activity were found to reside primarily within
140 base pairs of the transcription start site. Within this region, putative
binding sites for the intestine-specific transcription factor, caudal-related
homeodomain protein 2 (Cdx2), and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) were
identified. Using gel shift and functional assays, HNF1alpha was demonstrated to 
bind to and activate the UGT1A8, -1A9, and -1A10 promoters. In contrast, Cdx2
bound to and activated the UGT1A8 and -1A10 promoters but could not activate the 
UGT1A9 promoter. A single base pair difference between the UGT1A8 and -1A10
promoters, three base pairs downstream of the consensus Cdx2 site, contributed to
the observed difference in Cdx2 binding and Cdx2-mediated promoter activation of 
these two promoters. In addition, Cdx2 was shown to cooperate with HNF1alpha to
synergistically activate the UGT1A8, -1A9, and -1A10 promoters. These studies
provide insight into the mechanisms controlling the extrahepatic expression of
the UGT1A8, -1A9, and -1A10 genes.

PMID: 15044625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. EMBO J. 2004 Apr 7;23(7):1657-68. Epub 2004 Mar 18.

A transcriptional network in polycystic kidney disease.

Gresh L(1), Fischer E, Reimann A, Tanguy M, Garbay S, Shao X, Hiesberger T,
Fiette L, Igarashi P, Yaniv M, Pontoglio M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Expression Génétique et Maladies/CNRS URA 1644, Département de Biologie 
du Développement, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Mutations in cystic kidney disease genes represent a major genetic cause of
end-stage renal disease. However, the molecular cascades controlling the
expression of these genes are still poorly understood. Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 
1beta (HNF1beta) is a homeoprotein predominantly expressed in renal, pancreatic
and hepatic epithelia. We report here that mice with renal-specific inactivation 
of HNF1beta develop polycystic kidney disease. We show that renal cyst formation 
is accompanied by a drastic defect in the transcriptional activation of Umod,
Pkhd1 and Pkd2 genes, whose mutations are responsible for distinct cystic kidney 
syndromes. In vivo chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that
HNF1beta binds to several DNA elements in murine Umod, Pkhd1, Pkd2 and
Tg737/Polaris genomic sequences. Our results uncover a direct transcriptional
hierarchy between HNF1beta and cystic disease genes. Interestingly, most of the
identified HNF1beta target gene products colocalize to the primary cilium, a
crucial organelle that plays an important role in controlling the proliferation
of tubular cells. This may explain the increased proliferation of cystic cells in
MODY5 patients carrying autosomal dominant mutations in HNF1beta.

PMCID: PMC391068
PMID: 15029248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Mar;89(3):1476-80.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha gene inactivation: cosegregation between liver 
adenomatosis and diabetes phenotypes in two maturity-onset diabetes of the young 
(MODY)3 families.

Reznik Y(1), Dao T, Coutant R, Chiche L, Jeannot E, Clauin S, Rousselot P, Fabre 
M, Oberti F, Fatome A, Zucman-Rossi J, Bellanne-Chantelot C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire of Caen, 14033
Cannes, France. reznik-y@chu-caen.fr

Heterozygous germline mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha
are associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)3. Recently, the
biallelic inactivation of the HNF-1 alpha gene was reported in liver adenomas. We
show the occurrence of liver adenomatosis in six MODY3-affected patients from two
unrelated and large families. Liver adenomatosis was characterized by the
presence of numerous adenomas within a normal hepatic parenchyma. The HNF-1 alpha
hot-spot germline mutation P291fs was identified in the two probands and in 16
relatives from the two families. The six patients affected by liver adenomatosis 
and diabetes exhibited the mutation. The analysis of liver-cell tumors from two
affected patients evidenced the biallelic inactivation of HNF-1 alpha. The
familial screening confirmed the clinical heterogeneity of the liver phenotype,
from silent liver adenomatosis to fatal hemorrhage. These observations warrant
the systematic screening for liver adenomatosis in MODY3 families to prevent its 
potentially deadly complications. Moreover, such screening may help to determine 
if a particular mutational spectrum of HNF-1 alpha is associated with liver
adenomatosis and to establish its prevalence in this frequent form of diabetes in
the young adult.

PMID: 15001650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Mar;89(3):1369-78.

Promoter-specific repression of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 beta and HNF-1 
alpha transcriptional activity by an HNF-1 beta missense mutant associated with
Type 5 maturity-onset diabetes of the young with hepatic and biliary
manifestations.

Kitanaka S(1), Miki Y, Hayashi Y, Igarashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. sachi-tky@umin.ac.jp

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 beta lead to type 5
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY5). HNF-1 beta forms a homodimer or a
heterodimer with HNF-1 alpha and regulates various target genes. HNF-1 beta
mutations are rare, and no functional analysis has been performed in conjunction 
with HNF-1 alpha. HNF-1 beta is expressed in the liver and biliary system and
controls liver-specific and bile acid-related genes. Moreover, liver-specific
Hnf-1 beta knockout mice present with severe jaundice. However, no patients with 
HNF-1 beta mutations have biliary manifestations. In this report, we found a
novel missense mutation in the HNF-1 beta gene in a patient with neonatal
cholestasis and liver dysfunction together with the common features of MODY5.
Functional analysis revealed that the mutant HNF-1 beta had diminished
transcriptional activity by loss of the DNA binding activity. The mutant had a
promoter-specific dominant-negative transcriptional effect on wild-type HNF- and 
inhibited its DNA binding. Moreover, the mutant had a promoter- and cell-specific
transcriptional repressive effect on HNF-1 alpha and a promoter-specific
inhibitory effect on HNF-1 alpha DNA binding. From these results, we considered
that the different phenotype of patients with HNF-1 beta mutations might be
caused by the different HNF-1 beta activity in conjunction with the different
repression of HNF-1 alpha activity in selected promoters and tissues.

PMID: 15001636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2004 Mar;52(2):60-2.

[Genetic alterations in hepatocellular adenomas].

[Article in French]

Zucman-Rossi J.

PMID: 15001232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Science. 2004 Feb 27;303(5662):1378-81.

Control of pancreas and liver gene expression by HNF transcription factors.

Odom DT(1), Zizlsperger N, Gordon DB, Bell GW, Rinaldi NJ, Murray HL, Volkert TL,
Schreiber J, Rolfe PA, Gifford DK, Fraenkel E, Bell GI, Young RA.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2004 Feb 27;303(5662):1311-2.

The transcriptional regulatory networks that specify and maintain human tissue
diversity are largely uncharted. To gain insight into this circuitry, we used
chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with promoter microarrays to identify
systematically the genes occupied by the transcriptional regulators HNF1alpha,
HNF4alpha, and HNF6, together with RNA polymerase II, in human liver and
pancreatic islets. We identified tissue-specific regulatory circuits formed by
HNF1alpha, HNF4alpha, and HNF6 with other transcription factors, revealing how
these factors function as master regulators of hepatocyte and islet
transcription. Our results suggest how misregulation of HNF4alpha can contribute 
to type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3012624
PMID: 14988562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Science. 2004 Feb 27;303(5662):1311-2.

Molecular biology. HNFs--linking the liver and pancreatic islets in diabetes.

Kulkarni RN(1), Kahn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. rohit.kulkarni@joslin.harvard.edu

Comment on
    Science. 2004 Feb 27;303(5662):1378-81.

PMID: 14988544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Feb 11;32(3):1113-21. Print 2004.

The inhibition of the human cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase gene (CYP7A1) promoter
by fibrates in cultured cells is mediated via the liver x receptor alpha and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha heterodimer.

Gbaguidi GF(1), Agellon LB.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Institutes of Health Research Group in Molecular and Cell Biology of 
Lipids and Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta
T6G 2S2, Canada.

In previous work, we showed that the binding of the liver x receptor
alpha:peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (LXRalpha:PPARalpha)
heterodimer to the murine Cyp7a1 gene promoter antagonizes the stimulatory effect
of their respective ligands. In this study, we determined if LXRalpha:PPARalpha
can also regulate human CYP7A1 gene promoter activity. Co-expression of LXRalpha 
and PPARalpha in McArdle RH7777 hepatoma cells decreased the activity of the
human CYP7A1 gene promoter in response to fibrates and 25-hydroxycholesterol. In 
vitro, the human CYP7A1 Site I bound LXRalpha:PPARalpha, although with
substantially less affinity compared with the murine Cyp7a1 Site I. The binding
of LXRalpha:PPARalpha to human CYP7A1 Site I was increased in the presence of
either LXRalpha or PPARalpha ligands. In HepG2 hepatoblastoma cells, fibrates and
25-hydroxycholesterol inhibited the expression of the endogenous CYP7A1 gene as
well as the human CYP7A1 gene promoter when co-transfected with plasmids encoding
LXRalpha and PPARalpha. However, a derivative of the human CYP7A1 gene promoter
that contains a mutant form of Site I that does not bind LXRalpha:PPARalpha was
not inhibited by WY 14,643 or 25-hydroxycholesterol in both McArdle RH7777 and
HepG2 cells. The ligand-dependent recruitment of LXRalpha:PPARalpha heterodimer
onto the human CYP7A1 Site I can explain the inhibition of the human CYP7A1 gene 
promoter in response to fibrates and 25-hydroxycholesterol.

PMCID: PMC373396
PMID: 14960721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Diabetes. 2004 Feb;53(2):500-4.

Messenger RNA transcripts of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene containing
premature termination codons are subject to nonsense-mediated decay.

Harries LW(1), Hattersley AT, Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, U.K.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1a) gene cause
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). Approximately 30% of these mutations
generate mRNA transcripts harboring premature termination codons (PTCs).
Degradation of such transcripts by the nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) pathway has 
been reported for many genes. To determine whether PTC mutant transcripts of the 
HNF-1alpha gene elicit NMD, we have developed a novel quantitative RT-PCR assay. 
We performed quantification of ectopically expressed mutant transcripts relative 
to normal transcripts in lymphoblastoid cell lines using a coding single
nucleotide polymorphism (cSNP) as a marker. The nonsense mutations R171X,
I414G415ATCG-->CCA, and P291fsinsC showed reduced mutant mRNA expression to 40%
(P = 0.009), <0.01% (P </= 0.0001), and 6% (P = 0.001), respectively, of the
normal allele. Transcript levels were restored using the translation inhibitor
cycloheximide, indicating that the instability arises from NMD. The missense
mutations G207D and R229P did not show NMD although R229P exhibited moderate RNA 
instability. This study provides the first evidence that HNF-1alpha PTC mutations
may be subject to NMD. Mutations that result in significant reduction of protein 
levels due to NMD will not have dominant-negative activity in vivo.
Haploinsufficiency is therefore likely to be the most important mutational
mechanism of HNF-1alpha mutations causing MODY.

PMID: 14747304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Cell Res. 2003 Dec;13(6):451-8.

LRH-1/hB1F and HNF1 synergistically up-regulate hepatitis B virus gene
transcription and DNA replication.

Cai YN(1), Zhou Q, Kong YY, Li M, Viollet B, Xie YH, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Enhancer II (ENII) is one of the critical cis-elements in the Hepatitis B Virus
(HBV) genome for the hepatic viral gene transcription and DNA replication. The
liver-specific activity of ENII is regulated by multiple liver-enriched
transcription factors, including LRH-1/hB1F, HNF1, HNF3b, HNF4 and C/EBP.
Knowledge on the interplay of these important factors is still limited. In this
study, we demonstrate a functional synergism between the orphan nuclear receptor 
LRH-1/hB1F and the homeoprotein HNF1 in up-regulating the liver-specific activity
of ENII. This synergism is sufficient for initiating the viral gene transcription
and DNA replication in non-hepatic cells. We have defined the activation domains 
in hB1F and HNF1 that contribute to the synergism. We further show that hB1F and 
HNF1 can interact directly in vitro and have mapped the domains required for this
interaction.

PMID: 14728801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jan 30;314(1):131-7.

Targeting of therapeutic gene expression to the liver by using liver-type
pyruvate kinase proximal promoter and the SV40 viral enhancer active in multiple 
cell types.

Park CW(1), Park YM, Lee GT, Lee Y, Woo S, Cha JY, Ahn CW, Cha BS, Kim KS, Ahn
YH, Lee HC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Endocrine Research, College of Medicine, Yonsei University,
Seoul, South Korea.

To achieve the liver-directed expression in sufficient amounts of therapeutic
genes for successful and safe gene therapy, natural liver-specific promoters can 
be used to direct the expression of therapeutic genes in the liver, whereas
strong viral enhancers were used to obtain sufficient amounts of expressed
therapeutic gene products. However, very often use of either the former or the
latter does not guarantee both potent and liver-specific therapeutic gene
expression. Here we conglomerate them and thus create a potent tissue-specific
promoter by characterizing and using the liver-type pyruvate kinase proximal
promoter (LPKPP) harboring its TATA box and a HNF-1alpha binding site. Alone it
hardly activated its reporter gene expression in non-hepatocytes or hepatocytes. 
However, in the presence of the SV40 viral enhancer (SV40VE), which is active in 
multiple cell types, it was able to potently activate its reporter gene
expression specifically in hepatocytes. The tissue-specific activation of the
LPKPP by the viral enhancer was attributed to HNF-1alpha binding to the LPKPP.
Taken together, these results support the idea that the constitutively active
SV40VE could be used to activate the LPKPP in a tissue-specific manner in the
presence of HNF-1alpha. To our knowledge, this is the first study to utilize
HNF-1alpha and its binding site, in the context of the LPKPP, to generate a basal
promoter that is transcriptionally activated potently in a tissue-specific manner
by a viral enhancer that is active in multiple cell types.

PMID: 14715256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004 May;286(5):G752-61. Epub 2003 Dec
30.

Role of liver-enriched transcription factors and nuclear receptors in regulating 
the human, mouse, and rat NTCP gene.

Jung D(1), Hagenbuch B, Fried M, Meier PJ, Kullak-Ublick GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Dept. of Internal Medicine, Univ.
Hospital, CH-8091 Zurich, Switzerland.

Hepatic uptake of bile acids is mediated by the Na(+)-taurocholate cotransporting
polypeptide (NTCP; SLC10A1) of the basolateral hepatocyte membrane. Several
cis-acting elements in the rat Ntcp gene promoter have been characterized.
However, little is known about the mechanisms that control the expression of the 
human or mouse NTCP/Ntcp. We, therefore, compared the transcriptional regulation 
of the human and mouse NTCP/Ntcp gene with that of the rat. By computer
alignment, a sequence in the 5'-regulatory region that is conserved between
species was identified near the transcription start site. Huh7 cells were
transfected with luciferase constructs containing the conserved region from each 
species. The hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF)1alpha and -4alpha and the retinoid 
X receptor/retinoic acid receptor dimer (RXRalpha/RARalpha) bound and
transactivated the rat but not the human or mouse NTCP/Ntcp promoters. In
contrast, activation by the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-beta was specific for 
human and mouse NTCP/Ntcp. The only consensus motif present in all three species 
was HNF3beta. HNF3beta formed a specific DNA-protein complex in electrophoretic
mobility shift assays and inhibited NTCP/Ntcp promoter activity in cotransfection
assays. Finally, a minor repressive effect of bile acids was only found for rat
Ntcp. The transcriptional repressor small heterodimer partner (SHP) did not
affect NTCP/Ntcp promoter activity. We conclude that 1) the transcriptional
regulation of the conserved NTCP/Ntcp 5'-regulatory region differs considerably
among human, mouse, and rat; and 2) the conserved NTCP/Ntcp regulatory region is 
not directly regulated by SHP. Bile acids may regulate NTCP/Ntcp indirectly by
modulating the capacity of nuclear factors to activate gene expression.

PMID: 14701722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Gastroenterology. 2004 Jan;126(1):308-17.

Hereditary persistence of alpha-fetoprotein is due to both proximal and distal
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 site mutations.

Alj Y(1), Georgiakaki M, Savouret JF, Mal F, Attali P, Pelletier G, Fourré C,
Milgrom E, Buffet C, Guiochon-Mantel A, Perlemuter G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U135 Hormones, Hôpital Bicêtre, Cedex, France.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2004 Aug;127(2):687; author reply 688.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The molecular mechanism of hereditary persistence of
alpha-fetoprotein (HPAFP) has been previously described in a large Scottish
family, consisting of a -119G>A substitution in the distal hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 (HNF-1) binding site of the alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene promoter. We
report here the molecular mechanisms of HPAFP in 2 new unrelated families.
METHODS: Family 1 was of Bengali origin, and family 2 was Italian. Four of 5
subjects (family 1) and 3 of 9 (family 2) showed HPAFP. The AFP gene promoter was
studied in all available family members.
RESULTS: All subjects with high AFP levels had mutated promoter sequences. Family
1 showed the reported -119G>A substitution. Family 2 showed -55C>A and -65C>T
substitutions in the proximal putative HNF-1 binding region of the promoter. The 
-55C>A mutation increased the similarity of the proximal HNF-1 binding region to 
a consensus binding region. Gel shift assays confirmed its increased affinity
toward HNF-1, and transfection experiments revealed an increased level of gene
transcription. The -65C>T substitution theoretically created a CCAAT box.
However, gel shift and transfection experiments failed to show any biological
effect of this substitution that is associated with the -55C>A mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: Two different mutations localized in either HNF-1 binding sites of
the AFP gene promoter may result in HPAFP. This highlights the importance of
HNF-1 in AFP gene expression. Unexplained persistent AFP should lead to family
study and/or AFP gene promoter sequencing to avoid inappropriate explorations and
treatment decisions.

PMID: 14699509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Hepatology. 2003 Dec;38(6):1331-47.

Transcription factors in liver development, differentiation, and regeneration.

Costa RH(1), Kalinichenko VV, Holterman AX, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA. Robcosta@uic.edu

PMID: 14647040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Gene. 2003 Dec 11;322:145-56.

Common carp insulin-like growth factor-I gene: complete nucleotide sequence and
functional characterization of the 5'-flanking region.

Vong QP(1), Chan KM, Leung K, Cheng CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T.,
Hong Kong, China.

Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) plays an important role in the growth and
development of fish. To understand the molecular mechanism which controls the
transcription of the IGF-I gene in common carp, we have cloned and completely
sequenced the IGF-I gene and the 5'-flanking region from a local tropical fish,
the common carp (Cyprinus carpio), and characterized its promoter activity by
transfection into human embryonic kidney (293GHR) cells which express the human
growth hormone (GH) receptor. The common carp gene is the smallest IGF-I gene
known so far, spanning approximately 13 kb, and is consisted of five exons and
four introns. The sequence of the gene is consistent with the single type of
IGF-I cDNA that we have isolated previously from a common carp liver cDNA
library. The expression pattern of IGF-I is similar between juvenile carp and
adult carp. While liver was found to be the major site of IGF-I gene expression
in common carp, the expression levels in other tissues are relatively low. Like
many other IGF-I gene promoters, there are no apparent TATA box and CCAAT box
upstream of the transcription initiation site. However, sequence analysis of the 
common carp IGF-I promoter region identified several consensus liver-enriched
transcription factor binding sites, including HNF-1alpha, HNF-3beta, C/EBP, and
one STAT5. We have analyzed the promoter activity of the 5'-flanking region of
the common carp IGF-I gene by performing luciferase reporter assays in
transfected 293GHR cells. Addition of human GH to the transfected cells led to an
increased expression of the reporter gene, indicating that the cloned genomic
fragment possessed promoter activity. This was confirmed by the lack of promoter 
activity of a construct in which the putative promoter was cloned in a reverse
orientation upstream of the reporter gene. The liver-specific transcription
factor, hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, was also found to be involved in the
regulation of the common carp IGF-I transcription. Transfection results from a
set of deletion mutants helped to map the locations of the responsive elements on
the promoter responsible for the GH effect and for the interaction with
HNF-1alpha. These observations provide information for delineating the
transcriptional regulation of IGF-I gene expression in common carp.

PMID: 14644506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Diabetes. 2003 Dec;52(12):2989-95.

Regulation of apolipoprotein M gene expression by MODY3 gene hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha: haploinsufficiency is associated with reduced serum apolipoprotein
M levels.

Richter S(1), Shih DQ, Pearson ER, Wolfrum C, Fajans SS, Hattersley AT, Stoffel
M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, Rockefeller University, New York, New York
10021, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a (HNF-1alpha) is a transcription factor that plays an
important role in regulation of gene expression in pancreatic beta-cells,
intestine, kidney, and liver. Heterozygous mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene are
responsible for maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3), which is
characterized by pancreatic beta-cell-deficient insulin secretion. HNF-1alpha is 
a major transcriptional regulator of many genes expressed in the liver. However, 
no liver defect has been identified in individuals with HNF-1alpha mutations. In 
this study, we show that Hnf-1alpha is a potent transcriptional activator of the 
gene encoding apolipoprotein M (apoM), a lipoprotein that is associated with the 
HDL particle. Mutant Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice completely lack expression of apoM in
the liver and the kidney. Serum apoM levels in Hnf-1alpha(+/-) mice are reduced
approximately 50% compared with wild-type animals and are absent in the HDL and
HDLc fractions of Hnf-1alpha(-/-). We analyzed the apoM promoter and identified a
conserved HNF-1 binding site. We show that Hnf-1alpha is a potent activator of
the apoM promoter, that a specific mutation in the HNF-1 binding site abolished
transcriptional activation of the apoM gene, and that Hnf-1alpha protein can bind
to the Hnf-1 binding site of the apoM promoter in vitro. To investigate whether
patients with mutations in HNF-1alpha mutations (MODY3) have reduced serum apoM
levels, we measured apoM levels in the serum of nine HNF-1alpha/MODY3 patients,
nine normal matched control subjects (HNF-1alpha(+/+)), and nine HNF-4alpha/MODY1
subjects. Serum levels of apoM were decreased in HNF-1alpha/MODY3 subjects when
compared with control subjects (P < 0.02) as well as with HNF-4alpha/MODY1
subjects, indicating that HNF-1alpha haploinsufficiency rather than hyperglycemia
is the primary cause of decreased serum apoM protein concentrations. This study
demonstrates that HNF-1alpha is required for apoM expression in vivo and that
heterozygous HNF-1alpha mutations lead to an HNF-1alpha-dependent impairment of
apoM expression. ApoM levels may be a useful serum marker for the identification 
of MODY3 patients.

PMID: 14633861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Am J Pathol. 2003 Dec;163(6):2503-12.

Expression profiling in ovarian clear cell carcinoma: identification of
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta as a molecular marker and a possible molecular
target for therapy of ovarian clear cell carcinoma.

Tsuchiya A(1), Sakamoto M, Yasuda J, Chuma M, Ohta T, Ohki M, Yasugi T, Taketani 
Y, Hirohashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

Of all of the epithelial ovarian cancers, clear cell carcinoma (CCC) of the ovary
has the worst prognosis. We applied the oligonucleotide array technique to
identify genes generally involved in CCC. Of the approximately 12,600 genes that 
were analyzed, 28 were expressed significantly differently between four CCC and
seven non-CCC cell lines. Among 16 up-regulated genes in CCC, we further
investigated a transcription factor, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta (HNF-1
beta). We validated up-regulation of HNF-1 beta in CCC in terms of both mRNA and 
protein level using real-time quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction and immunoblotting. Immunohistochemical analysis of 83 surgically
resected ovarian cancers showed that almost all CCC specimens (21 of 22 cases)
had nuclear staining for HNF-1 beta, whereas most non-CCC specimens (60 of 61
cases) showed no immunostaining or only focal and faint staining in the nucleus. 
Furthermore, we investigated the significance of HNF-1 beta expression in CCC
using RNA interference. The reduction of HNF-1 beta expression by RNA
interference induced apoptotic cell death in ovarian CCC cells, which was
confirmed by terminal dUTP nick-end labeling and fluorescence-activated
cell-sorting analyses. Our results suggest that HNF-1 beta is not only an
excellent CCC-specific molecular marker but also a molecular target for therapy
of ovarian CCC.

PMCID: PMC1892387
PMID: 14633622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Endocrinology. 2004 Feb;145(2):650-8. Epub 2003 Nov 14.

A potential role for fructose-2,6-bisphosphate in the stimulation of hepatic
glucokinase gene expression.

Wu C(1), Okar DA, Stoeckman AK, Peng LJ, Herrera AH, Herrera JE, Towle HC, Lange 
AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of
Minnesota Medical School, 321 Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

The effects of fructose-2,6-bisphosphate (F-2,6-P(2)) on hepatic glucokinase (GK)
and glucose-6-phosphatase (G-6-Pase) gene expression were investigated in
streptozotocin-treated mice, which exhibited undetectable levels of insulin.
Hepatic F-2,6-P(2) levels were manipulated by adenovirus-mediated overexpression 
of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase. Streptozotocin treatment
alone or with infusion of control adenovirus leads to a dramatic decrease in
hepatic F-2,6-P(2) content compared with normal nondiabetic mice. This is
accompanied by a 14-fold decrease in GK and a 3-fold increase in G-6-Pase protein
levels, consistent with a diabetic phenotype. Streptozotocin-treated mice that
were infused with adenovirus-overexpressing an engineered
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase with high kinase activity
and little bisphosphatase activity showed high levels of hepatic F-2,6-P(2).
Surprisingly, these mice had a 13-fold increase in GK protein and a 2-fold
decrease in G-6-Pase protein compared with diabetic controls. The restoration of 
GK is associated with increases in the phosphorylation of Akt upon increasing
hepatic F-2,6-P(2) content. Moreover, the changes in levels of F-2,6-P(2) and Akt
phosphorylation revealed a pattern similar to that of streptozotocin mice treated
with insulin, indicating that increasing hepatic content of F-2,6-P(2) mimics the
action of insulin. Because G-6-Pase gene expression was down-regulated only after
the restoration of euglycemia, the effect of F-2,6-P(2) was indirect. Also, the
lowering of blood glucose by high F-2,6-P(2) was associated with an increase in
hepatic nuclear factor 1-alpha protein, a transcription factor involved in
G-6-Pase gene expression. In conclusion, F-2,6-P(2) can stimulate hepatic GK gene
expression in an insulin-independent manner and can secondarily affect G-6-Pase
gene expression by lowering the level of plasma glucose.

PMID: 14617577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Endocr J. 2003 Oct;50(5):491-9.

Regulation of pancreatic beta-cell function by the HNF transcription network:
lessons from maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY).

Yamagata K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Japan.

PMID: 14614204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Biochem Pharmacol. 2003 Nov 15;66(10):2011-20.

Hepatic expression of cytochrome P450s in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-alpha
(HNF1alpha)-deficient mice.

Cheung C(1), Akiyama TE, Kudo G, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1alpha) is a liver enriched
homeodomain-containing transcription factor that has been shown to transactivate 
the promoters of several cytochrome P450 (CYP) genes, including CYP2E1, CYP1A2,
CYP7A1, and CYP27, in vitro. In humans, mutations in HNF1alpha are linked to the 
occurrence of maturity onset diabetes of the young type 3, an autosomal dominant 
form of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in which afflicted subjects
generally develop hyperglycemia before 25 years of age. Mice lacking HNF1alpha
also develop similar phenotypes reminiscent of non-insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus. To investigate a potential role for HNF1alpha in the regulation of CYPs
in vivo, the expression of major CYP genes from each family was examined in the
livers of mice lacking HNF1alpha. Analysis of CYP gene expression revealed marked
reductions in expression of Cyp1a2, Cyp2c29 and Cyp2e1, and a moderate reduction 
of Cyp3a11. In contrast Cyp2a5, Cyp2b10 and Cyp2d9 expression were elevated.
There are also significant changes in the expression of genes encoding CYPs
involved in fatty acid and bile acid metabolism characterized by a reduction in
the expression of Cyp7b1, and Cyp27 as well as elevations in Cyp4a1/3, Cyp7a1,
Cyp8b1, and Cyp39a1 expression. These results point to a critical role for
HNF1alpha in the regulation of CYPs in vivo and suggest that this transcription
factor may have an important influence on drug metabolism as well as lipid and
bile acid homeostasis in maturity onset diabetes of the young type 3 diabetics.

PMID: 14599559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Gastroenterology. 2003 Nov;125(5):1470-5.

Familial liver adenomatosis associated with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
inactivation.

Bacq Y(1), Jacquemin E, Balabaud C, Jeannot E, Scotto B, Branchereau S, Laurent
C, Bourlier P, Pariente D, de Muret A, Fabre M, Bioulac-Sage P, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatogastroenterology, Centre Hospitalier de Tours, Hôpital
Trousseau, 37044 Tours Cedex, France. bacq@med.univ-tours.fr

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Germline mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
(TCF1/HNF-1alpha) are associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3
(MODY3), and somatic biallelic inactivations of the gene are found in
hepatocellular adenomas and liver adenomatosis. This study investigated
cosegregation of HNF-1alpha germline mutations with diabetes and liver
adenomatosis in 2 families.
METHODS: Two unrelated patients with liver adenomatosis and harboring HNF-1alpha 
germline and somatic mutations were studied. Subsequently, we screened 9
relatives in the 2 independent families for diabetes, hepatocellular adenomas,
and HNF-1alpha germline mutations.
RESULTS: In family A, a father and his son presented with an intraperitoneal
hemorrhagic rupture of a liver adenomatosis without diabetes. A heterozygous
R229X germline mutation was identified in HNF-1alpha in the father and his son
and also in his second 27-year-old son without hepatocellular adenomas. In family
B, a diagnosis of liver adenomatosis was made fortuitously in a 14-year-old girl.
A heterozygous G55fsX57 germline mutation in HNF-1alpha was identified in this
patient, her diabetic father, and her 2 sisters. Systematic exploration showed
liver adenomatosis in the 2 sisters. Somatic inactivation of the second
HNF-1alpha allele was found in liver tumors in both families.
CONCLUSIONS: This study describes familial liver adenomatosis and shows the
association with germline HNF-1alpha mutations in adults and children. It also
highlights the importance of screening for hepatocellular adenomas, diabetes, and
HNF-1alpha germline mutations in relatives of patients with liver adenomatosis.
Finally, prevalence of liver adenomatosis remains to be evaluated in MODY3
subjects.

PMID: 14598263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Gene. 2003 Nov 13;319:177-87.

Characterization of the mouse lysosomal sialidase promoter.

Champigny MJ(1), Johnson M, Igdoura SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Lysosomal sialidase is required for the catabolism of sialoglycoconjugates such
as gangliosides and deficiency in this enzyme results in the autosomal recessive 
disease sialidosis. Furthermore, we have shown that overexpression of human
sialidase is sufficient to clear accumulated ganglioside in Tay-Sachs neuroglia
[Hum. Mol. Genet. 8 (1999) 1111]. In this paper, we have characterized the 5'
regulatory region of the mouse lysosomal sialidase gene in order to understand
the molecular mechanisms regulating its expression. We used bioinformatic
approaches to identify a transcriptional initiation site at -45 bp relative to
the ATG and significant sequence homology with the rat and human promoters.
Expression by the promoter was found to be cell-type restricted and required at
least 750 bp upstream of the ATG for high-level expression. DNAse I footprinting 
analysis and reporter gene assays indicated that the promoter is responsive to
Sp-1. We discovered a CCAAT box and four E-boxes within the mouse upstream region
and demonstrated that CCAAT displacement protein as well as the muscle regulatory
factors MyoD and Myf-5 influence sialidase expression. Taken together, these
results identify cis- and trans-acting factors involved in the regulation of
sialidase and point to mechanisms of gene upregulation.

PMID: 14597183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Med Sci (Paris). 2003 Aug-Sep;19(8-9):854-9.

[MODY, a model of genotype/phenotype interactions in type 2 diabetes].

[Article in French]

Velho G(1), Bellanné-Chantelot C, Timsit J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U.561, 82, avenue Denfert-Rochereau, 75014 Paris, France.
gvelho@infobiogen.fr

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a subtype of familial diabetes
mellitus characterised by early onset, autosomal dominant inheritance and primary
defects of insulin secretion. Mutations in six known genes (the enzyme
glucokinase and five transcription factors expressed in pancreatic beta-cells)
cause most of the MODY cases. This genetic heterogeneity is associated with
metabolic and clinical heterogeneity making MODY an interesting model of
genotype/phenotype interaction in diabetes.

PMID: 14593617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Gene. 2003 Oct 30;318:177-84.

The transcriptional regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene in the
kidney requires the HNF-1 binding site of the gene.

Cassuto H(1), Olswang Y, Heinemann S, Sabbagh K, Hanson RW, Reshef L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biochemistry, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical
School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

The transcription of the cytosolic form of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
(PEPCK-C) gene is differentially regulated in each of the several
PEPCK-C-expressing tissues. In the kidney, it is regulated by glucocorticoids and
acidosis. Previously, we reported that in LLC-PK1 and derived kidney cell lines, 
mutation of the hepatic nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1) binding site in PEPCK-C gene
promoter markedly reduced both the basal activity of the gene promoter and its
response to acidic pH. Using the same kidney cell line, we now report that
nuclear receptors robustly stimulate transcription from the PEPCK-C gene
promoter. This stimulation is markedly reduced by mutation of the accessory
factor 1 (AF1) site in the glucocorticoid responsive unit (GRU) residing within
the glucocorticoid-responsive domain. The stimulation is likewise reduced by
mutation of the HNF-1 site, residing outside the nuclear receptor-responsive
domain of the PEPCK-C gene promoter. There is no binding similarity between HNF-1
and AF1 binding sites, as is evident from gel shift assays showing a lack of
competition of either site for the binding of renal nuclear proteins to the
other. We further assessed that the regulation of PEPCK-C gene transcription by
acidosis is not mediated by nuclear receptors. This became evident from studies
of transgenic mice harboring a rat PEPCK-C transgene driven by truncated 5'
flanking region of the gene, which contains the HNF-1 site but lacks the
glucocorticoid responsive domain. The full transcriptional response of this
transgene to acidosis establishes that the truncated 5' flanking region (362 bp) 
of the PEPCK-C gene contains the information required for the acidosis-mediated
regulation independent of the glucocorticoid domain. Taking together the previous
and present results, it appears that acidosis and nuclear receptors regulate the 
renal transcription of the PEPCK-C gene via two independent domains in the 5'
flanking region of the gene. These two modulations, as well as the basal activity
of the gene, require intact HNF-1 binding site in the gene promoter.

PMID: 14585510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Diabetes Complications. 2003 Nov-Dec;17(6):369-73.

Genetic variants of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta in Chinese young-onset
diabetic patients with nephropathy.

So WY(1), Ng MC, Horikawa Y, Njølstad PR, Li JK, Ma RC, Bell GI, Chan JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, SAR, Hong Kong, China. wingyeeso@cuhk.edu.hk

In Hong Kong, the prevalence of diabetes is estimated to be 2% in the young
population. In the diabetic population, 30% of patients have diagnosis before the
age of 40 years. Besides, 30% of young diabetic patients have varying degrees of 
albuminuria. Mutations in the gene encoding the hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-1beta are associated with a subtype of maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY 5) characterized by urogenital abnormalities. We examined 74 unrelated
Chinese subjects with young-onset diabetes complicated by nephropathy for
variants in this gene. The HNF-1beta gene was screened by direct sequencing and
the functional properties of wild-type and mutant proteins were analyzed by
transactivation analysis.A novel variant in exon 3 (E260D) was found in one
patient. Extended family analysis revealed four other siblings carrying this
variant. One subject had diabetes and another had impaired glucose tolerance.
Another sibling had microalbuminuria but normal glucose tolerance. Transfection
studies showed insignificant differences in transactivation ability between
wild-type and mutated HNF-1beta. A silent polymorphism Q378Q was identified in
another unrelated subject. These results suggest genetic variants in HNF-1beta
are not a common cause of young-onset diabetes or diabetic nephropathy in
Chinese, but may modify disease manifestation and progression. Other potential
candidate genes should be looked for to account for the high prevalence of
young-onset diabetes and nephropathy in this population.

PMID: 14583183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Lancet. 2003 Oct 18;362(9392):1275-81.

Genetic cause of hyperglycaemia and response to treatment in diabetes.

Pearson ER(1), Starkey BJ, Powell RJ, Gribble FM, Clark PM, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, UK.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes shows evidence of underlying heterogeneity. No
studies have assessed whether different causes for diabetes change the response
to oral hypoglycaemic therapy. In a few cases, patients with diabetes caused by
mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene have been
described as sensitive to the hypoglycaemic effects of sulphonylureas. We aimed
to see whether the glycaemic response to the sulphonylurea gliclazide and the
biguanide metformin differed in HNF-1alpha diabetes and type 2 diabetes, and to
investigate the mechanism for differences in sulphonylurea sensitivity.
METHODS: We did a randomised crossover trial of glicazide and metformin in 36
patients, either with diabetes caused by HNF-1alpha mutations or type 2 diabetes,
who were matched for body-mass index and fasting plasma glucose. The primary
outcome was reduction in fasting plasma glucose. Analysis was by intention to
treat. We assessed possible mechanisms for sulphonylurea sensitivity through
insulin sensitivity, insulin secretory response to glucose and tolbutamide, and
tolbutamide clearance.
FINDINGS: Patients with HNF-1alpha diabetes had a 5.2-fold greater response to
gliclazide than to metformin (fasting plasma glucose reduction 4.7 vs 0.9 mmol/L,
p=0.0007) and 3.9-fold greater response to gliclazide than those with type 2
diabetes (p=0.002). Patients with HNF-1alpha diabetes had a strong insulin
secretory response to intravenous tolbutamide despite a small response to
intravenous glucose, and were more insulin sensitive than those with type 2
diabetes. Sulphonylurea metabolism was similar in both patient groups.
INTERPRETATION: The cause of hyperglycaemia changes the response to hypoglycaemic
drugs; HNF-1alpha diabetes has marked sulphonylurea sensitivity. This
pharmacogenetic effect is consistent with models of HNF-1alpha deficiency, which 
show that the beta-cell defect is upstream of the sulphonylurea receptor.
Definition of the genetic basis of hyperglycaemia has implications for patient
management.

PMID: 14575972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Nov 7;311(1):233-40.

HNF1alpha upregulates the human AE2 anion exchanger gene (SLC4A2) from an
alternate promoter.

Malumbres R(1), Lecanda J, Melero S, Ciesielczyk P, Prieto J, Medina JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Division of Hepatology and Gene Therapy,
CIMA, University Clinic and Medical School, University of Navarra, E-31008
Pamplona, Spain.

The human AE2 gene (SLC4A2) is transcribed in a widespread fashion from the
upstream promoter, the resultant full-length transcript AE2a being encountered in
most tissues. Moreover, alternate promoter sequences within intron 2 may drive
tissue-restricted expression of variants AE2b(1) and AE2b(2), mainly in liver and
kidney. AE2b(2) proximal promoter sequences are highly active in transfected
liver-derived HepG2 cells and contain an HNF1 motif. Mutation-disruption of this 
motif dramatically decreased alternate promoter activity in HepG2 cells but not
in prostate-derived PC-3 cells. Electromobility shift and supershift assays
indicated that HNF1alpha from HepG2 nuclear extracts binds the HNF1 sequence.
Transactivation studies in PC-3 cells showed enhanced activity of the wild-type
construct upon cotransfection with an HNF1alpha expression plasmid, while
activity of the HNF1-mutated construct remained unaffected. Since liver AE2 is
putatively involved in the biliary secretion of bicarbonate, HNF1alpha may have a
role in increasing bicarbonate secretion in response to certain stimuli.

PMID: 14575719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Hum Mol Genet. 2003 Dec 15;12(24):3307-14. Epub 2003 Oct 21.

Hnf6 and Tcf2 (MODY5) are linked in a gene network operating in a precursor cell 
domain of the embryonic pancreas.

Maestro MA(1), Boj SF, Luco RF, Pierreux CE, Cabedo J, Servitja JM, German MS,
Rousseau GG, Lemaigre FP, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology, Hospital Clínic, Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August
Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain.

During pancreatic organogenesis endocrine cells arise from non self-renewing
progenitors that express Ngn3. The precursors that give rise to Ngn3+ cells are
presumably located within duct-like structures. However, the nature of such
precursors is poorly understood. We show that, at E13-E18, the embryonic stage
during which the major burst of beta-cell neogenesis takes place, pancreatic duct
cells express Hnf1beta, the product of the maturity-onset diabetes of the young
type 5 (MODY5) gene. Ngn3+ cells at this stage invariably cluster with
mitotically competent Hnf1beta+ cells, and are often intercalated with these
cells in the epithelium that lines the lumen of primitive ducts. We present
several observations that collectively indicate that Hnf1beta+ cells are the
immediate precursors of Ngn3+ cells. We furthermore show that Hnf1beta expression
is markedly reduced in early pancreatic epithelial cells of Hnf6-deficient mice, 
in which formation of Ngn3+ cells is defective. These findings define a precursor
cellular stage of the embryonic pancreas and place Hnf1beta in a genetic
hierarchy that regulates the generation of pancreatic endocrine cells.

PMID: 14570708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Hepatol. 2003 Nov;39(5):686-92.

Hepatic artery malformations associated with a primary defect in intrahepatic
bile duct development.

Clotman F(1), Libbrecht L, Gresh L, Yaniv M, Roskams T, Rousseau GG, Lemaigre FP.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone and Metabolic Research Unit, Université catholique de Louvain and
Institute of Cellular Pathology, Avenue Hippocrate 75, box 7529, B-1200 Brussels,
Belgium. frederic.clotman@horm.ucl.ac.be

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The portal tracts contain bile ducts associated with branches of
the portal vein and of the hepatic artery. Hepatic artery malformations are found
in diseases in which fetal biliary structures persist after birth (ductal plate
malformations). Here we investigated how hepatic artery malformations relate to
abnormal bile duct development.
METHODS: Hepatic artery and biliary development was analyzed in fetuses with
Jeune syndrome or Meckel syndrome, which show ductal plate malformations. We also
analyzed hepatic artery development in transgenic mice which exhibit biliary
anomalies following inactivation of the genes for hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-6 or HNF-1beta, two transcription factors expressed in biliary cells, but
not in arteries.
RESULTS: We show that arterial anomalies occurred in fetuses with Jeune syndrome 
or Meckel syndrome. We provide the first description of hepatic artery branch
development in the mouse and show that inactivation of the Hnf6 or Hnf1beta gene 
results in anomalies of the hepatic artery branches. In the transgenic mice and
in the human syndromes, the biliary anomalies preceded the arterial anomalies.
CONCLUSIONS: A primary defect in biliary epithelial cells is associated with
hepatic artery malformations in mice. Our data provide a model to interpret and
study hepatic artery anomalies in humans.

PMID: 14568248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Oct;88(10):4897-903.

The pathophysiology of diabetes involves a defective amplification of the
late-phase insulin response to glucose by glucose-dependent insulinotropic
polypeptide-regardless of etiology and phenotype.

Vilsbøll T(1), Knop FK, Krarup T, Johansen A, Madsbad S, Larsen S, Hansen T,
Pedersen O, Holst JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine F, Gentofte Hospital, DK-2900 Hellerup,
Denmark. tivi@gentoftehosp.kbhamt.dk

The effect of the insulinotropic incretin hormone, glucagon-like peptide-1
(GLP-1), is preserved in typical middle-aged, obese, insulin-resistant type 2
diabetic patients, whereas a defective amplification of the so-called late-phase 
plasma insulin response (20-120 min) to glucose by the other incretin hormone,
glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), is seen in these patients.
The aim of the present investigation was to evaluate plasma insulin and C-peptide
responses to GLP-1 and GIP in five groups of diabetic patients with etiology and 
phenotype distinct from the obese type 2 diabetic patients. We studied (six in
each group): 1) patients with diabetes mellitus secondary to chronic
pancreatitis; 2) lean type 2 diabetic patients (body mass index < 25 kg/m(2)); 3)
patients with latent autoimmune diabetes in adults; 4) diabetic patients with
mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene [maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)3]; 
and 5) newly diagnosed type 1 diabetic patients. All participants underwent three
hyperglycemic clamps (2 h, 15 mM) with continuous infusion of saline, 1 pmol
GLP-1 (7-36)amide/kg body weight.min or 4 pmol GIP pmol/kg body weight.min. The
early-phase (0-20 min) plasma insulin response tended to be enhanced by both GIP 
and GLP-1, compared with glucose alone, in all five groups. In contrast, the
late-phase (20-120 min) plasma insulin response to GIP was attenuated, compared
with the plasma insulin response to GLP-1, in all five groups. Significantly
higher glucose infusion rates were required during the late phase of the GLP-1
stimulation, compared with the GIP stimulation. In conclusion, lack of GIP
amplification of the late-phase plasma insulin response to glucose seems to be a 
consequence of diabetes mellitus, characterizing most, if not all, forms of
diabetes.

PMID: 14557471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Mol Cell. 2003 Aug;12(2):509-16.

Transcription within a functional human centromere.

Saffery R(1), Sumer H, Hassan S, Wong LH, Craig JM, Todokoro K, Anderson M,
Stafford A, Choo KH.

Author information: 
(1)The Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital,
Flemington Road, Melbourne, 3052, Australia.

Recent data in yeast and Drosophila suggest a domain-like centromere structure
with a modified chromatin core and flanking regions of heterochromatin. We have
analyzed a functional human centromere and defined a region of increased
chromosome scaffold/matrix attachment that overlaps three other distinct and
nonoverlapping domains for constitutive centromere proteins CENP-A and CENP-H,
and heterochromatin protein HP1. Transcriptional competency is intact throughout 
the S/MAR-enriched region and within the CENP-A- and CENP-H-associated chromatin.
These results provide insights into the relationship between centromeric
chromatin and transcriptional competency in vivo, highlighting the permissibility
of transcription within the constitutively modified, nonheterochromatic chromatin
of a functional eukaryotic centromere.

PMID: 14536089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Pediatr Int. 2003 Oct;45(5):610-6.

Genetic disorders of human congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract
(CAKUT).

Nakanishi K(1), Yoshikawa N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Wakayama Medical University, Wakayama, Japan.
knakanis@wakayama-med.ac.jp

Congenital abnormalities of the kidney and urinary tract, CAKUT are common in
humans, occurring at a frequency of approximately 1 in 500 fetal ultrasound
examinations. CAKUT are major causes of chronic renal failure in infants and
young children, but little is known about the molecular pathogenesis of these
disorders. To date, several gene mutations have been identified as a cause of
human CAKUT: these include PAX2, KAL, EYA1, AGTR2 and HNF-1beta. At present,
there is only limited information regarding how mutations alter gene expression
during development to cause some CAKUT. The most convincing information comes
from the multiorgan malformation syndromes with specific gene mutations. However,
these syndromes are relatively rare, and most CAKUT appear to occur in isolation.
The goal of this review is to provide an overview of these genetic disorders for 
CAKUT. An understanding of the genetic aspects of human CAKUT will help to
unravel the pathogenesis of these disorders and may facilitate the design of
genetic screening tests for early diagnosis and appropriate genetic counseling.
Moreover, a deeper insight into the relationship between abnormal genes and the
pathogenesis of abnormalities of CAKUT will provide an etiological classification
of CAKUT. In addition, the importance of developing a registry of patients with
various forms of CAKUT is discussed. This information will allow us to combine
molecular biology and classical epidemiologic methods, and to continue expanding 
our knowledge regarding CAKUT.

PMID: 14521546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Rev Invest Clin. 2003 May-Jun;55(3):305-7.

[Early-onset diabetes in the Mexican population: prevalence, genetic and
metabolic features].

[Article in Spanish]

Lerman Garber I(1).

Author information: 
(1)lerman@netservice.com.mx

PMID: 14515676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Cancer Sci. 2003 Sep;94(9):757-63.

Expression of HNFs and C/EBP alpha is correlated with immunocytochemical
differentiation of cell lines derived from human hepatocellular carcinomas,
hepatoblastomas and immortalized hepatocytes.

Ishiyama T(1), Kano J, Minami Y, Iijima T, Morishita Y, Noguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki-shi, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

Objective assessment of the differentiation grade of hepatocellular carcinomas
(HCCs) is important for evaluation of the pathological diagnosis, prognosis and
therapeutic treatment. Differentiation of hepatocytes is reflected by their
expression of hepatic functional proteins in the mouse embryo, and liver-enriched
transcription factors (LETFs) have been shown to regulate hepatic functional
genes strictly. Previous reports demonstrated that the level of LETF expression
is altered in HCC or preneoplastic nodules compared with noncancerous tissues.
Therefore, LETF expression levels might be useful as a measure of HCC maturation.
In this study, to clarify the correlation between the expression of LETFs and the
differentiation grade of HCCs, we performed a quantitative analysis of the mRNA
expressions of HNFs and C/EBP alpha using real-time reverse-transcription PCR and
immunocytochemical analysis for hepatic functional proteins in twelve cell lines.
Furthermore, we examined orthotopic transplantations of the HCC cell lines in
C.B-17/Icrj-scid/scid mice and characterized the histologic and cytologic
differentiation of the tumors that developed. Our results showed that
comprehensive expressions of HNF-3beta, HNF-4 alpha, HNF-1 alpha, and C/EBP alpha
were specific to HCCs with well-differentiated function and morphology.
Furthermore, among these four transcription factors, HNF-4 alpha and HNF-1 alpha 
expressions showed synchronism and had a close relation with HCC differentiation.
These in vitro results were confirmed in tumors developed in SCID mice in vivo.
These findings suggested that HNF-4 alpha and HNF-1 alpha are useful markers to
assess the degree of HCC differentiation, which we suggest could be evaluated
objectively by the quantitative analysis of HNFs and C/EBP alpha in HCCs.

PMID: 12967472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2003 Sep 1;191(2):156-66.

Differential regulation of alternate UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A6 gene
promoters by hepatic nuclear factor-1.

Auyeung DJ(1), Kessler FK, Ritter JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Virginia Campus 
of Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A6 (UGT1A6) is a major UGT contributing to the
glucuronidation of small phenolic compounds. The gene for rat 1A6 is expressed
using two promoters, a distal promoter P1 and a proximal promoter P2. Transcripts
from P2 are high in liver, gastrointestinal tract, and kidney, whereas P1
transcripts predominate in other tissues. Here we report evidence for primary
control of the P2 promoter by hepatic nuclear factor 1 (HNF1). Transient
transfection of a P2 reporter plasmid, p(-1354/+65) 1A6P2-luc, resulted in
enhanced luciferase activity in HepG2 but not Hepa1 cells compared to cells
transfected with pGL3-Basic control vector. A truncated reporter under the
control of -224 to +65 exhibited comparable activity. Footprint analysis of the
-224/+65 fragment revealed specific binding by rat liver nuclear protein to a
region between bases -60 and -37. The binding activity was also observed with
HepG2 cell but not Hepa1 cell extract. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were
consistent with the presence of HNF1 in the binding complexes. The functionality 
of an HNF1-binding site at -51/-37 is also supported by (1) marked decreases in
the activity of P2 reporter plasmids containing a three-base substitution in the 
proposed HNF1 binding site and (2) the enhancement of P2 reporter activity
following cotransfection of an HNF1alpha expression plasmid. The UGT1A6 P1
promoter lacks an HNF1 binding site in the analogous position and showed little
response to HNF1 overexpression. Although these data do not strictly rule out an 
interaction between the P1 promoter and HNF1 bound to -51/-37 of P2, the results 
suggest a mechanism for the more abundant expression of P2-derived UGT1A6
transcripts in liver and other HNF1-enriched tissues.

PMID: 12946651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. J Thromb Haemost. 2003 Aug;1(8):1688-98.

Functional characterization of transcription factor binding sites for HNF1-alpha,
HNF3-beta (FOXA2), HNF4-alpha, Sp1 and Sp3 in the human prothrombin gene
enhancer.

Ceelie H(1), Spaargaren-Van Riel CC, De Jong M, Bertina RM, Vos HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the
Netherlands. hceelie@lumc.nl

BACKGROUND: Prothrombin is a key component in blood coagulation. Overexpression
of prothrombin leads to an increased risk of venous thrombosis. Therefore, the
study of the transcriptional regulation of the prothrombin gene may help to
identify mechanisms of overexpression.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of our study was to localize the regions within the
prothrombin enhancer responsible for its activity, to identify the proteins
binding to these regions, and to establish their functional importance.
METHODS: We constructed a set of prothrombin promoter 5' deletion constructs
containing the firefly luciferase reporter gene, which were transiently
transfected in HepG2, HuH7 and HeLa cells. Putative transcription factor (TF)
binding sites were evaluated by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. The
functional importance of each TF binding site was evaluated by site directed
mutagenesis and transient transfection of the mutant constructs.
RESULTS: We confirmed the major contribution of the enhancer region to the
transcriptional activity of the prothrombin promoter. Analysis of this region
revealed putative binding sites for hepatocyte nuclear factor HNF4, HNF3-beta and
specificity protein(Sp)1. We identified six different TFs binding to three
evolutionary conserved sites in the enhancer: HNF4-alpha (site 1), HNF1-alpha,
HNF3-beta and an as yet unidentified TF (site 2) and the ubiquitously expressed
TFs Sp1 and Sp3 (site 3). Mutagenesis studies showed that loss of binding of
HNF3-beta resulted in a considerable decrease of enhancer activity, whereas loss 
of HNF4-alpha or Sp1/Sp3 resulted in milder reductions.
CONCLUSIONS: The prothrombin enhancer plays a major role in regulation of
prothrombin expression. Six different TFs are able to bind to this region. At
least three of these TFs, HNF4-alpha, HNF3-beta and Sp1/Sp3, are important in
regulation of prothrombin expression.

PMID: 12911579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Kidney Int. 2003 Sep;64(3):793-800.

Enlarged nephrons and severe nondiabetic nephropathy in hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) mutation carriers.

Sagen JV(1), Bostad L, Njølstad PR, Søvik O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Bergen, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.
Jorn.Sagen@pedi.uib.no

BACKGROUND: Mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) lead to a
syndrome with diabetes and urogenital malformations [maturity onset of diabetes
of the young, type 5 (MODY5)]. The aim of this study was to perform a
clinicopathologic investigation of the renal disease in members of a Norwegian
family with the HNF-1beta mutation R137-K161del.
METHODS: The study was based on long-term clinical observations of five mutation 
carriers, combined with renal biopsies from four of these. The biopsies were
examined by light microscopy, immunohistochemistry, and transmission electron
microscopy. The diameter of the glomerulus, proximal and distal tubules, in
addition to thickness of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM), were measured in
light microscopic slides and transmission electron micrographs. The results were 
compared with biopsies from adult patients with diabetic glomerulopathy,
glomerulonephritis, and/or benign nephrosclerosis, and children with
minimal-change glomerulopathy or glomerulonephritis, respectively.
RESULTS: Clinically, there was a wide intrafamilial variation from stable or
slightly increasing serum creatinine to progressive renal failure and end-stage
renal disease (ESRD). In all cases, the kidney disease was diagnosed prior to
diabetes. Hypertrophy of the proximal and distal tubules as well as enlarged
glomeruli were found in three of four mutation carriers. Essentially normal
nephrons were found in the 10-year-old boy. The thickness of the GBM was
considered near normal in all mutation carriers. Oligomeganephronia was found in 
one patient.
CONCLUSION: Histopathologic and morphometric studies of kidney biopsies from four
carriers of an HNF-1beta mutation revealed enlarged glomeruli and tubular
structures. Long-term clinical follow-up demonstrated that the renal disease
developed prior to and independently of diabetes. Finally, there is a wide
phenotypic variation of the renal disease caused by HNF-1beta mutations.

PMID: 12911528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 2003 Jul;78(4):339-47.

[Studies of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha, HNF-4 alpha and HNF-1 beta
genes in juvenile onset diabetes mellitus without obesity].

[Article in Japanese]

Kagami M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

PMID: 12911009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2003 Jun;64(3 Suppl):S17-21.

[MODY in clinical practice. When and why to consider it?].

[Article in French]

Velho G(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U. 561, Hôpital Saint-Vincent-de-Paul F-75674 PARIS Cedex 14.
gvelho@infobiogen.fr

It is important to consider in clinical practice the diagnosis of MODY and to
characterise the MODY sub-type. Indeed, evolution, clinical consequences and
treatment of these forms of diabetes will be different according to the genetic
origin of MODY. The main characteristics and consequences in clinical practice of
these genetic abnormalities are briefly described, with a particular emphasis on 
the two most frequent sub-types, MODY-2 and MODY-3, caused by mutations of the
enzyme glucokinase and of the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
alpha (HNF-1a) respectively.

PMID: 12910054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2003 Jun;64(3 Suppl):S12-6.

[Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY): the history of its dismemberment].

[Article in French]

Froguel P(1).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UPRESA 8090, Institut Pasteur F-59019 LILLE Cedex.
froguel@mail-good.pasteur-lille.fr

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a complex multifactorial disease. Genetic susceptibility
is clearly needed, but in most cases, is not sufficient to induce T2D.
Environmental factors are determinant in most patients to develop T2D. Monogenic 
forms of diabetes such as the maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)
represent a model to study the genetic basis of T2D. Studies in MODY individuals 
and families lead to a genetic definition of MODY subtypes with profound
implications for our understanding of gene mutations involved in the development 
of T2D through our understanding on the major role of these genes and on their
transcriptional activity on b-cell development and function; and on the
regulation of glucose and insulin metabolism. Our current knowledge on the
heterogeneity of MODY diabetes and contribution to our comprehension of the
molecular mechanisms involved in T2D are described.

PMID: 12910053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Pancreas. 2003 Aug;27(2):e23-8.

New insulin sensitivity adjusted beta cell indices: validation according to a
genetic study.

Chiu KC(1), Martinez DS, Lee NP, Saad MF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Hypertension, University of
California, Los Angeles, School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California, USA.
kchiu@mednet.ucla.edu

PURPOSE: The role of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF1alpha) in the
maturity-onset diabetes of the young 3 (MODY3) is well established. A common
polymorphism, I27L that is not linked to MODY3, has been demonstrated to affect
beta cell function. To facilitate the identification of subjects with a low beta 
cell reserve, we developed beta cell indices and validated according to a genetic
study.
METHODS: Insulin sensitivity index (ISI), 1st phase insulin response (1stIR), and
2nd phase insulin response (2ndIR) were assessed in 60 glucose tolerant subjects 
using hyperglycemic clamps. Delta1stIR and delta2ndIR were defined as differences
between 1stIR (or 2ndIR) and the ISI-adjusted 1stIR (or 2ndIR). The genotypes
were determined from genomic DNA.
RESULTS: Delta1stIR (P = 0.0130) and delta2ndIR (P = 0.0482) differed among the 3
genotypic groups. Multivariate analysis confirmed the independent influence of
the I27L polymorphism on delta1stIR (P = 0.0130) and delta2ndIR (P = 0.0369).
Within the LL group, 75% and 63% of the subjects were within the lowest quartile 
of delta1stIR (P = 0.0011) and delta2ndIR (P = 0.0277), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: With new beta cell indices, we demonstrated the independent impact
of the I27L polymorphism on beta cell function. The new beta cell indices will
facilitate the identification of glucose tolerant subjects with reduced beta cell
reserve.

PMID: 12883275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Diabetes. 2003 Aug;52(8):2182-6.

Genetic modifiers of the age at diagnosis of diabetes (MODY3) in carriers of
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha mutations map to chromosomes 5p15, 9q22, and
14q24.

Kim SH(1), Ma X, Klupa T, Powers C, Pezzolesi M, Warram JH, Rich SS, Krolewski
AS, Doria A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha (MODY3) account for the
largest proportion of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) cases in the
U.S. This form of diabetes is characterized by impaired insulin secretion in
response to glucose, but wide variability exists in the severity of hyperglycemia
and in the age at which it becomes clinically manifest. We have previously shown 
that the age at onset of diabetes in MODY3 families is influenced by familial
factors (including modifying genes) and exposure to diabetes in utero. To
identify genes influencing the onset of MODY3, we conducted a genome scan in 13
extended MODY families in which diabetes segregates with an HNF-1alpha mutation. 
Linkage with age at onset of diabetes was assessed by genetic variance component 
analysis using SOLAR. The locus with the strongest evidence of linkage was on
chromosome 14q24 (D14S588; logarithm of odds [LOD] = 2.58, P = 0.0004). This
location overlaps with IDDM11 and includes SEL1L, a negative regulator of the
Notch pathway that may control islet development. Linkage evidence also supported
loci on 5p15 (D5S817; LOD = 2.44, P = 0.0004) and 9q22 (D9S910; LOD = 2.02, P =
0.0018). The latter matches a region linked to 2-h insulin levels in Pima
Indians. Less strong linkage evidence was observed at three other regions:
chromosomes 3p24 (LOD = 1.44), 7q21 (1.20), and 16q23 (1.51). Our data are
consistent with the existence of multiple loci that contribute to the expression 
of the MODY3 phenotype. Identification of these genes will offer new insights
into the pathophysiology of MODY that may, in turn, increase our understanding of
the cellular events underlying more common forms of diabetes.

PMID: 12882939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Aug 8;307(4):1070-4.

Transcriptional regulation of human beta-galactoside alpha2,6-sialyltransferase
(hST6Gal I) gene in colon adenocarcinoma cell line.

Xu L(1), Kurusu Y, Takizawa K, Tanaka J, Matsumoto K, Taniguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Bionic Materials Technology Group, Biomaterials Center, National Institute for
Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan.

Previous studies have shown that hST6Gal I mRNA is overexpressed in colorectal
cancer tissues compared with non-malignant or benign tissue. Moreover, Form 1
(hepatic form) mRNA isoform had a marked tendency to accumulate in colon cancer
[Int. J. Cancer 88 (2000) 58-65]. These findings suggest that the transcriptional
regulation of Form 1 is altered during malignant transformation. We report here
transcriptional regulation of the hST6Gal I gene in colon adenocarcinoma cell
lines. We characterized P1 promoter region, which regulates Form 1 mRNA
expression, using luciferase assays. The result indicates that the nt-156 to -1
region is important for transcriptional activity of hST6Gal I gene in colon
adenocarcinoma cell lines. The nt-156 to -1 region contains HNF1 recognition
element. Mutation of the HNF1 site reduced luciferase activity by about 80%
compared with the wild-type construct, suggesting that HNF1 site is involved in
the transcription of Form 1 mRNA in colon cancer cells.

PMID: 12878221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2003 Aug;14(8):2033-41.

Distinct molecular and morphogenetic properties of mutations in the human
HNF1beta gene that lead to defective kidney development.

Bohn S(1), Thomas H, Turan G, Ellard S, Bingham C, Hattersley AT, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen, Germany.

The homeobox transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta (HNF1beta) is a
tissue-specific regulator that plays an essential role in early vertebrate
development. In humans, heterozygous mutations in the HNF1beta gene are
associated with young-onset diabetes as well as a variety of disorders of renal
development with cysts as the most consistent feature. This report compares and
classifies nine different HNF1beta mutations that lead in humans to distinct
renal diseases, including solitary functioning kidney, renal dysplasia,
glomerulocystic kidney disease, and oligomeganephronia. Analysis of these mutants
in vitro identifies mutants that either retain or lack DNA binding. Investigation
of the transactivation potential in transfected cell lines reveals a strict
correlation between DNA binding and transactivation. Introduction of these
mutants into developing Xenopus embryos shows that these mutants interfere with
pronephros development, the first kidney form in amphibian. Whereas three mutants
lead in Xenopus to a reduction or agenesis of the pronephric tubules and the
anterior part of the duct, six mutants generate an enlargement of the pronephric 
structures. The differential morphogenetic potential in the developing embryo
does not strictly correlate with the properties observed in vitro or in
transfected cell lines. This suggests that the functional test in the developing 
embryo defines features of the HNF1beta protein that cannot be assessed in cell
cultures. The distinct properties observed in the various HNF1beta mutants may
guide the classification of the phenotypes observed in patients with a mutated
HNF1beta gene.

PMID: 12874457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 17;278(42):40933-42. Epub 2003 Jul 14.

Functions of HNF1 family members in differentiation of the visceral endoderm cell
lineage.

Haumaitre C(1), Reber M, Cereghini S.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 423 INSERM, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 149 Rue de Sèvres, 75015
Paris, France.

The two members of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) transcription factor
family, HNF1 and variant HNF1 (vHNF1), show a strong homology in their atypical
POU-homeodomain and dimerization domain but differ in their transactivation
domains. Moreover, two vHNF1 isoforms generated by alternative splicing are
present in all tissues expressing this gene. vHnf1-deficient mouse embryos die
soon after implantation due to defective visceral endoderm formation, an
extraembryonic tissue essential for development and survival of the embryo
proper. In contrast, invalidation of Hnf1, which is expressed at later
developmental stages than vHnf1, does not lead to embryonic lethality or
developmental defects. To examine the specific or potential equivalent functions 
of vHNF1 isoforms and HNF1 during the process of visceral endoderm
differentiation, we stably reexpressed these factors in vHnf1-deficient embryonic
stem cells. Analysis of these embryonic stem cells upon differentiation into
embryoid bodies shows that vHNF1 isoforms exhibit specific behaviors depending on
particular target genes and cooperate in the establishment of a functional
visceral endoderm. Furthermore, forced expression of HNF1 in vHnf1-deficient
embryonic stem cells fully restores the formation of a mature visceral endoderm
with the correct expression profile of early and late markers of this lineage.
Thus, in this context, HNF1 functionally replaces both vHNF1 isoforms, suggesting
that the different developmental functions of these transcription factors are
mainly due to the acquisition of novel expression patterns.

PMID: 12860991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 19;278(38):36611-20. Epub 2003 Jul 10.

Lewis type 1 antigen synthase (beta3Gal-T5) is transcriptionally regulated by
homeoproteins.

Isshiki S(1), Kudo T, Nishihara S, Ikehara Y, Togayachi A, Furuya A, Shitara K,
Kubota T, Watanabe M, Kitajima M, Narimatsu H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Institute of Life Science, Soka University,
Tangi-cho, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-8577, Japan.

The type 1 carbohydrate chain, Galbeta1-3GlcNAc, is synthesized by
UDP-galactose:beta-N-acetylglucosamine beta1,3-galactosyltransferase
(beta3Gal-T). Among six beta3Gal-Ts cloned to date, beta3Gal-T5 is an essential
enzyme for the synthesis of type 1 chain in epithelium of digestive tracts or
pancreatic tissue. It forms the type 1 structure on glycoproteins produced from
such tissues. In the present study, we found that the transcriptional regulation 
of the beta3Gal-T5 gene is controlled by homeoproteins, i.e. members of
caudal-related homeobox protein (Cdx) and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)
families. We found an important region (-151 to -121 from the transcription
initiation site), named the beta3Gal-T5 control element (GCE), for the promoter
activity. GCE contained the consensus sequences for members of the Cdx and HNF
families. Mutations introduced into this sequence abolished the transcriptional
activity. Four factors, Cdx1, Cdx2, HNF1alpha, and HNF1beta, could bind to GCE
and transcriptionally activate the beta3Gal-T5 gene. Transcriptional regulation
of the beta3Gal-T5 gene was consistent with that of members of the Cdx and HNF1
families in two in vivo systems. 1) During in vitro differentiation of Caco-2
cells, transcriptional up-regulation of beta3Gal-T5 was observed in correlation
with the increase in transcripts for Cdx2 and HNF1alpha. 2) Both transcript and
protein levels of beta3Gal-T5 were determined to be significantly reduced in
colon cancer. This down-regulation was correlated with the decrease of Cdx1 and
HNF1beta expression in cancer tissue. This is the first finding that a
glycosyltransferase gene is transcriptionally regulated under the control of
homeoproteins in a tissue-specific manner. beta3Gal-T5, controlled by the
intestinal homeoproteins, may play an important role in the specific function of 
intestinal cells by modifying the carbohydrate structure of glycoproteins.

PMID: 12855703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Int J Oncol. 2003 Aug;23(2):469-76.

Difference in responsiveness of human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma lines to
epidermal growth factor for MMP-7 expression.

Xu H(1), Tanimoto A, Murata Y, Kimura S, Wang KY, Sasaguri Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational Environmental Health, Kitakyushu 807-8555, Japan.

Expression of MMP-7 in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma lines (TE-9 and
-10) was investigated. Under normal culture conditions, immunocytochemical
staining and enzymography demonstrated the production of MMP-7 in their cytoplasm
and its gelatinolytic activity in the medium of TE-9 and -10 cell cultures. When 
EGF was added to the cultures, Western blotting and RT-PCR analysis showed a
dose-dependent increase in the amount of MMP-7 synthesized in the TE-9 cells,
whereas in TE-10 cells, EGF failed to stimulate MMP-7 production. For luciferase 
reporter analysis of MMP-7 transcription, pMMP7LucWI (1132-bp) and pMMP7LucWII
(334-bp) were cloned in the luciferase pGL3-basic vector. The promoter activity
was enhanced from 1.5- to 2-fold by the addition of EGF to TE-9 cells transfected
with pMMP7LucWI or WII, even though the response was low as compared with that of
12-O-tetra-decanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate (TPA); and in TE-10 cells, only TPA
enhanced the promoter activity of MMP-7. Luciferase promoter analysis using a
pMMP7WII mutant series revealed that the AP-1 site was essential for
transcription of the MMP-7 gene in TE-9 cells, and Tcf-I was also an important
site, and that to a lesser degree, Tcf-II and PEA3s participated in the
transcription of the MMP-7 gene in these cells. Unlike the results with TE-9
cells, in TE-10 cells, EGF failed to stimulate transcription of the MMP-7 gene;
and up-regulation of the promoter activity by TPA was dependent on the AP-1 site 
and to lesser degree, on Tcf-I and Tcf-II. These results suggest that EGF plays
also an important role in MMP-7 production of TE-9 cells and that there is a
difference not only in EGF-intracellular signaling system but also in regulation 
mechanisms of MMP-7 transcription by beta-catenin-Tcf and/or PEA3 system between 
these 2 carcinoma lines.

PMID: 12851697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 3;278(40):38254-9. Epub 2003 Jul 1.

Neurogenin3 and hepatic nuclear factor 1 cooperate in activating pancreatic
expression of Pax4.

Smith SB(1), Gasa R, Watada H, Wang J, Griffen SC, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California 94143, USA.

During fetal development, paired/homeodomain transcription factor Pax4 controls
the formation of the insulin-producing beta cells and the somatostatin-producing 
delta cells in the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas. Targeting of Pax4
expression to the islet lineage in the fetal pancreas depends on a short sequence
located approximately 2 kb upstream of the transcription initiation site of the
PAX4 gene. This short sequence contains binding sites for homeodomain
transcription factors PDX1 and hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)1, nuclear receptor
HNF4alpha, and basic helix-loop-helix factor Neurogenin3. In the current study we
demonstrate that the HNF1alpha and Neurogenin3 binding sites are critical for
activity of the region through synergy between the two proteins. Synergy involves
a physical interaction between the factors and requires the activation domains of
both factors. Furthermore, exogenous expression of Neurogenin3 is sufficient to
induce expression of the endogenous pax4 gene in the mouse pancreatic ductal cell
line mPAC, which already expresses HNF1alpha, whereas expression of both
Neurogenin3 and HNF1alpha are necessary to activate the pax4 gene in the
fibroblast cell line NIH3T3. These data demonstrate how Neurogenin3 and HNF1alpha
activate the pax4 gene during the cascade of gene expression events that control 
pancreatic endocrine cell development.

PMID: 12837760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Development. 2003 Aug;130(16):3821-9.

vhnf1 and Fgf signals synergize to specify rhombomere identity in the zebrafish
hindbrain.

Wiellette EL(1), Sive H.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge,
MA 02142, USA.

Vertebrate hindbrain segmentation is a highly conserved process but the mechanism
of rhombomere determination is not well understood. Recent work in the zebrafish 
has shown a requirement for fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) signaling and for the 
transcription factor variant hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (vhnf1) in specification
of rhombomeres 5 and 6 (r5+r6). We show here that vhnf1 functions in two ways to 
subdivide the zebrafish caudal hindbrain domain (r4-r7) into individual
rhombomeres. First, vhnf1 promotes r5+r6 identity through an obligate synergy
with Fgf signals to activate valentino and krox20 expression. Second, vhnf1
functions independently of Fgf signals to repress hoxb1a expression. Although
vhnf1 is expressed in a broad posterior domain during gastrulation, it promotes
the specification of individual rhombomeres. This is achieved in part because
vhnf1 gives cellular competence to respond to Fgf signals in a caudal
hindbrain-specific manner.

PMID: 12835397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Diabetes Care. 2003 Jul;26(7):2088-93.

Etiological investigation of diabetes in young adults presenting with apparent
type 2 diabetes.

Owen KR(1), Stride A, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine,
Exeter, Devon, UK. k.r.owen@exeter.ac.uk

Comment in
    Diabetes Care. 2003 Dec;26(12):3358-9.

OBJECTIVE: Young adults with newly diagnosed apparent type 2 diabetes present the
clinician with a wide differential diagnosis of possible etiology, including
autoimmune and genetic causes as well as young-onset type 2 diabetes (YT2D). The 
characteristics of these groups have been described, but it is not known in which
subjects investigation for etiology may be beneficial.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 268 unselected U.K. Caucasian subjects
diagnosed at ages 18-45 years and not treated with permanent insulin for < or =6 
months were studied. All subjects underwent clinical assessment and screening for
GAD antibodies (GADA) and tyrosine phosphatase IA-2 antibodies (IA-2A). Screening
for a common mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) gene
and the common mitochondrial mutation was performed in the antibody-negative
subjects. Subjects without insulin resistance were selected for sequencing of the
HNF-1 alpha gene.
RESULTS: A specific etiology was defined in 11.6% of the 268 subjects and in
24.7% of the lean subjects. Twenty-six subjects (9.7%) were positive for a
beta-cell antibody, one subject had familial partial lipodystrophy and the lamin 
A/C mutation R482W, and two subjects had the mitochondrial mutation A3243G. Two
of 15 selected subjects had HNF-1 alpha mutations, the novel missense mutation
A501T, and the previously reported R583Q.
CONCLUSIONS: This unselected series shows that there is considerable
heterogeneity in apparent YT2D. beta-Cell autoantibodies should be performed in
all those presenting at ages 18-45 years. Genetic investigations can be targeted 
to phenotypically defined subjects. The finding of a specific etiology will allow
individualization of management and give patients valuable information about
their condition.

PMID: 12832318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Rev Invest Clin. 2003 Mar-Apr;55(2):172-6.

Genetic defects of beta cell function: (MODY) application of molecular biology to
clinical medicine.

Gómez-Pérez FJ(1), Mehta R.

Author information: 
(1)fgomezp@prodigy.net.mx

PMID: 12827922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Dev Dyn. 2003 Jul;227(3):347-56.

435-bp liver regulatory sequence in the liver fatty acid binding protein (L-FABP)
gene is sufficient to modulate liver regional expression in transgenic zebrafish.

Her GM(1), Yeh YH, Wu JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Marine Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Liver fatty acid binding protein (L-FABP) is a small protein that is thought to
play an important role in the intracellular binding and trafficking of long chain
fatty acids in the liver. Expression of the gene encoding the zebrafish liver
fatty acid binding protein is regulated by a 435-bp distal region (-1944 to
-1510) of the L-FABP promoter. The 435-bp sequence is sufficient for gene
activation in the liver primordia (or bud) and continues to be active in the
adult liver when positioned adjacent to the SV40 basal promoter and linked
directly to green fluorescent protein. The 435-bp sequence region has two
distinct liver regulatory elements, A (-1944 to -1623) and B (-1622 to -1510),
and contains multiple putative consensus binding sites. The element A sequence
includes two consensus HFH and one HNF-1alpha site and the element B sequence
includes one consensus HNF-3beta site. Deletion of an internal 435-bp fragment
(-1944 to -1510) including the A and B elements totally ablated the
liver-specific activity of the zebrafish L-FABP gene promoter. Deletion of either
of the two elements reduces the liver activity. Mutation of the HNF-1alpha site
or either of the two HFH sites in the A element or the HNF-3beta site in the B
element significantly altered specificity in the liver primordia of transient
expression embryos. The importance of the HNF-1alpha consensus binding site in
the A element and the HNF-3beta consensus binding site in the B element within
the 435-bp distal region of the L-FABP promoter region suggests that
combinatorial interactions between multiple regulatory factors are responsible
for the gene expression of L-FABP in the liver.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12815620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Immunol. 2003 Jun 15;170(12):6048-56.

Hepatocyte NF-1 and STAT6 cooperate with additional DNA-binding factors to
activate transcription of the human polymeric Ig receptor gene in response to
IL-4.

Schjerven H(1), Brandtzaeg P, Johansen FE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Immunohistochemistry and Immunopathology, Institute of
Pathology, University of Oslo, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway.

Secretory IgA and IgM, which protect the mucosal surfaces, are generated by
selective transport of locally produced polymeric (p)Igs through the epithelial
barrier by the pIgR. The expression of this receptor, and hence the generation of
secretory Igs, is modulated by numerous extracellular factors. We have previously
identified a STAT6 site in intron 1 of the human pIgR gene that is required for
the slow and de novo protein synthesis-dependent IL-4-mediated transcriptional
activation of the gene. In this study, we show that this intronic IL-4-responsive
enhancer is confined to a 250-bp region that is highly conserved in the murine
pIgR gene. The enhancer was dependent on the cooperation between the STAT6 site
and at least four additional DNA elements. EMSA experiments demonstrated binding 
by hepatocyte NF-1 to one of these DNA elements. Extensive overlap in the tissue 
distribution of hepatocyte NF-1 and pIgR suggests that this transcription factor 
contributes to tissue-specific pIgR expression. Changing the helical phase
between the STAT6 site and downstream DNA elements greatly reduced the strength
of the IL-4 response, suggesting that the precise organization of this enhancer
is important for its proper function. Thus, several transcription factors
cooperate in this enhanceosome to mediate IL-4 responsiveness in HT-29 epithelial
cells.

PMID: 12794133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Jun;88(6):2548-51.

Association of I27L polymorphism of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha gene with
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol level.

Babaya N(1), Ikegami H, Fujisawa T, Nojima K, Itoi-Babaya M, Inoue K, Nakura J,
Abe M, Yamamoto M, Jin JJ, Wu Z, Miki T, Fukuda M, Ogihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The serum level of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-c), which protects
against the development of atherosclerosis, is under genetic control. However,
the genetic components responsible for the serum HDL-c level are yet to be
determined. A recent knockout mouse study demonstrated that hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) is an essential transcriptional regulator of HDL-c
metabolism. In this study, the association of an HNF-1 alpha gene polymorphism,
isoleucine (Ile) 27 leucine (Leu), with lipid parameters, in particular with
serum HDL-c level, was studied in 356 unrelated Japanese men. Though no
significant difference was observed in total cholesterol and triglyceride levels 
among the three genotypes, the serum HDL-c level was significantly associated
with the genotype (P < 0.01, trend test). Subjects with the Ile/Ile genotype had 
low serum HDL-c levels, and those with the Leu/Leu genotype had high serum HDL-c 
levels. These results demonstrate that the HNF-1 alpha gene locus is associated
with serum HDL-c level and suggest that the Ile27 allele is a risk marker for
atherosclerosis.

PMID: 12788852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Eur J Endocrinol. 2003 Jun;148(6):641-7.

Comparison of the impact of the I27L polymorphism of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha on estimated and measured beta cell indices.

Chiu KC(1), Chuang LM, Chu A, Yoon C, Wang M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Hypertension, University of
California-Los Angeles School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
kchiu@mednet.ucla.edu

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the impact of the I27L polymorphism of the hepatocyte 
nuclear factor-1alpha gene on measured and estimated beta cell indices. We also
examined the conservation of this amino acid among different species.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Estimated first and second phase insulin responses (1stPH(S) 
and 2ndPH(S)) were estimated from oral glucose tolerance tests in 78 glucose
tolerant subjects. Among these subjects, first and second phase insulin responses
(1stIR and 2ndIR) were measured in 60 subjects. The I27L genotypes were
determined from genomic DNA. We also reviewed the published peptide sequence data
on this polymorphism.
RESULTS: The estimated beta cell indices correlated well with the measured
indices. Although the impact of this polymorphism was noted in the measured
indices (P<0.01 for 1stIR and P=0.04 for 2ndIR) from 60 subjects, the differences
in the estimated indices were only noted in the extended sample set with 78
subjects (P=0.05 for 1stPH(S) and P=0.04 for 2ndPH(S)). This polymorphism occurs 
in the dimerization domain, which is completely conserved within human, rat,
mouse and hamster. This amino acid is also conserved in chicken and zebrafish,
but not in the frog. This conservation suggests a possible biological importance 
of this amino acid.
CONCLUSIONS: By increasing the sample size, we demonstrated the role of the I27L 
polymorphism in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes by using estimated beta cell 
indices. The conservation among species suggests a possible biological importance
of this amino acid. Analysis of the published data confirms a modest role of this
polymorphism in type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 12773136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. In Silico Biol. 2003;3(1-2):57-70. Epub 2002 Dec 25.

Combining genome and mouse knockout expression data to highlight binding sites
for the transcription factor HNF1alpha.

Lockwood CR(1), Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Peninsular Medical School,
University of Exeter, Barrack Rd, Exeter EX2 5AX, United Kingdom.
lockwood@bioinf.man.ac.uk

The identification of regulatory elements in silico is an important method for
inferring function from sequence data, but it is uncertain which methods are
best. We used a novel combination of expression data from a TCF1 knockout mouse
(TCF1 codes for the transcription factor HNF1a), and human and mouse genome
sequences, to search 2kb upstream of 28 genes downregulated in TCF1 null mice
compared to wild type mice. We wrote software (http://www.BindGene.org) to search
for and assign p-values to potential binding sites. This identified 8 genes as
candidates for being directly regulated by HNF1a: LIPC, CRP, F13B, PRODH2,
HSD17B2, SCL7A9, SLC16A7, PAH. There was evidence for conservation between human 
and mouse for all these regions identified as containing putative binding sites. 
For three of the genes identified there was experimental evidence for an HNF1a
binding site. For comparison we also examined 25 genes up-regulated in TCF1 null 
mice; only one gene was selected and there was little evidence for conservation
of this putative binding site between human and mouse. This result was consistent
with HNF1a being a gene transcription activator. Another 6 up-regulated genes had
unexpectedly high p-values, suggesting that possibly HNF1a sites have been
suppressed from these genes. In conclusion, gene expression data from transgenic 
animals lacking a transcription factor can be used to identify DNA binding sites 
for that factor.

PMID: 12762846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Diabetologia. 2003 May;46(5):728-9. Epub 2003 May 13.

The polymorphism Gly574Ser in the transcription factor HNF-1alpha is not a marker
of adult-onset ketosis-prone atypical diabetes in Afro-Caribbean patients.

Mauvais-Jarvis F, Boudou P, Sobngwi E, Riveline JP, Kevorkian JP, Villette JM,
Porcher R, Vexiau P, Gautier JF.

PMID: 12743700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Gastroenterology. 2003 May;124(5):1311-4.

Frequent mutations of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 in colorectal cancer with
microsatellite instability.

Laurent-Puig P(1), Plomteux O, Bluteau O, Zinzindohoué F, Jeannot E, Dahan K,
Kartheuser A, Chapusot C, Cugnenc PH, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 434, CEPH Fondation Jean Dausset, Paris.
pierre.laurent-puig@biomedicale.univ-paris5.fr

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The TCF1 gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha
(HNF1), a transcription factor germline mutated in patients with maturity-onset
diabetes of the young type 3, was recently found to be frequently inactivated by 
biallelic alterations in liver adenoma and in rare hepatocellular carcinomas. The
impact of HNF1 in colorectal carcinogenesis has not been studied until now.
Colorectal cancer is characterized by the existence of different molecular
mechanisms known as microsatellite stable or unstable tumors.
METHODS: At first, a series of 10 adenomas and 29 colon cancers regardless of
microsatellite instability status were screened for TCF1 mutations on the entire 
coding sequence.
RESULTS: Three mutations in microsatellite instability high (MSI-H) tumors were
found in the exon 4 polymorphic poly-cytosin (C)(8) or (C)(9) tract and consisted
of a cytosin deletion at position 291. To further characterize the prevalence of 
TCF1 mutations in the subgroup of MSI-H tumors, 52 additional MSI-H samples were 
screened for exon 4 alterations; 23% of MSI-H tumors (95% confidence interval,
14%-36%) were found to harbor frameshift at the poly-cytosin tract. The (C)(9)
allele was significantly more frequently mutated than the (C)(8) allele (22% vs. 
8%; P = 0.03), showing a higher instability of the longer repetition.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show a role for HNF1 in MSI-H colorectal
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 12730871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Clin Biochem. 2003 May;36(3):163-70.

Genes, environment and Oji-Cree type 2 diabetes.

Hegele RA(1), Zinman B, Hanley AJ, Harris SB, Barrett PH, Cao H.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute (RAH, HC), London, ON, Canada. hegele@robarts.ca

The prevalence of type 2 diabetes in Canadian Oji-Cree is among the highest in
the world. Our research has uncovered genetic determinants of Oji-Cree type 2
diabetes and related metabolic traits. The most important genetic discovery by
far was the private G319S mutation in transcription factor HNF-1alpha, encoded by
the HNF1A gene. HNF1A G319S was discovered by candidate gene sequencing and would
have been missed using the currently favored strategy of genome-wide scanning.
G319S was associated with increased odds of having type 2 diabetes across the
whole study sample and in all subgroups, including adolescent Oji-Cree.
Furthermore, G319S had specificity and positive predictive value of 97% and 95%, 
respectively, for developing type 2 diabetes by age 50. The protein bearing the
G319S mutation had impaired function in vitro. Sigmoidal modeling showed that
each dose of the G319S allele accelerated the median age of diabetes onset by
about 7 yr. This approach also showed that environment more strongly accelerated 
the median age-of-onset of Oji-Cree diabetes onset than did G319S, which could
have implications for intervention strategies to reduce the burden of this
epidemic. There is also evidence for genetic determination of related metabolic
traits in the Oji-Cree.

PMID: 12726923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Diabetologia. 2003 May;46(5):721-7. Epub 2003 Apr 24.

Identification and functional characterization of a novel mutation of hepatocyte 
nuclear factor-1alpha gene in a Korean family with MODY3.

Kim KA(1), Kang K, Chi YI, Chang I, Lee MK, Kim KW, Shoelson SE, Lee MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, Irwon-dong 50, Kangnam-ku, Seoul 135-710, Korea.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: After screening 16 Korean families with early onset Type 2
diabetes in search for hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) -1alpha gene mutation, we 
identified a novel missense mutation (R263L) associated with MODY phenotype. We
studied the biological characteristics of the mutation and the potential
functional consequences based on the crystallographic structure of HNF-1alpha in 
complex with DNA.
METHODS: DNA from subjects with a familial form of early onset diabetes was
isolated and HNF-1alpha was sequenced. The R263L substitution was generated by
PCR-based sited-directed mutagenesis. Functional and biochemical studies were
conducted by reporter assay using glucose-transporter type 2 (GLUT2) or insulin
promoters and electrophoretic mobility shift assay, respectively.
RESULTS: Transfection of wild-type HNF-1alpha increased the reporter activities
of GLUT2 and insulin promoters in NIH3T3 and SK-Hep1 cells, while R263L mutant
was defective in transactivation of those promoters. Both wild-type HNF-1alpha
and R263L mutant could not transactivate GLUT2 and insulin promoters in MIN6N8
insulinoma cells. R263L mutant had a defective cooperation with its heterodimeric
partner HNF-1beta or coactivator p300. R263L mutant protein displayed greatly
reduced DNA binding ability, despite its comparable protein stability to the
wild-type HNF-1alpha.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: These results suggest that the mutation of HNF-1alpha 
at codon 263 from arginine to leucine leads to the development of MODY3 through
decreased insulin production and defective glucose sensing. These findings are in
good agreement with the crystal structure in which R263 makes hydrogen bonds with
phosphorus atoms of DNA backbone to mediate the stable binding of HNF-1alpha
homeodomain to the promoter.

PMID: 12712243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Kidney Int. 2003 May;63(5):1645-51.

Atypical familial juvenile hyperuricemic nephropathy associated with a hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1beta gene mutation.

Bingham C(1), Ellard S, van't Hoff WG, Simmonds HA, Marinaki AM, Badman MK,
Winocour PH, Stride A, Lockwood CR, Nicholls AJ, Owen KR, Spyer G, Pearson ER,
Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, United
Kingdom. C.Bingham@exeter.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Familial juvenile hyperuricemic nephropathy (FJHN) is a dominantly
inherited condition characterized by young-onset hyperuricemia, gout, and renal
disease. The etiologic genes are unknown, although a locus on chromosome 16 has
been identified in some kindreds. Mutations in the gene encoding hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1beta have been associated with dominant inheritance of a
variety of disorders of renal development, particularly renal cystic disease and 
early onset diabetes; hyperuricemia has been reported in some kindreds.
METHODS: To assess a possible role for the HNF-1beta gene in some FJHN kindreds
we sequenced the HNF-1beta gene in subjects from three unrelated FJHN families
with atypical features of renal cysts or abnormalities of renal development. We
also compared serum urate levels in subjects with HNF-1beta mutations with
populations of controls, type 2 diabetic subjects, and subjects with mild chronic
renal failure without HNF-1beta mutations.
RESULTS: A splice-site mutation in intron 2, designated IVS2+1G>T, showed
complete co-segregation with FJHN in one family with diabetes. Serum urate levels
were significantly higher in the HNF-1beta subjects compared with the normal
control subjects (384 micromol/L vs. 264 micromol/L, P = 0.002) and the type 2
diabetic subjects (397 micromol/L vs. 271 micromol/L, P = 0.01). Comparison of
serum urate levels in the HNF-1beta subjects with gender-matched subjects with
renal impairment of other causes did not reach significance (402 micromol/L vs.
352 micromol/L, P = 0.2).
CONCLUSION: Hyperuricemia and young-onset gout are consistent features of the
phenotype associated with HNF-1beta mutations, but the mechanism is uncertain.
Families with HNF-1beta mutations may fit diagnostic criteria for FJHN.
Identification of HNF-1beta patients by recognizing the features of diabetes and 
disorders of renal development is important in resolving the genetic
heterogeneity in FJHN.

PMID: 12675839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Diabetes Care. 2003 Apr;26(4):1295-6.

Intrauterine hyperglycemia modifying the development of (monogenic) diabetes?

Tuomi T(1), Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland. tiinamaija.tuomi@hus.fi

PMID: 12663611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2003 Jul;285(1):G62-72. Epub 2003 Mar
19.

HNF-1alpha and endodermal transcription factors cooperatively activate Fabpl:
MODY3 mutations abrogate cooperativity.

Divine JK(1), McCaul SP, Simon TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha plays a central role in intestinal and
hepatic gene regulation and is required for hepatic expression of the liver fatty
acid binding protein gene (Fabpl). An Fabpl transgene was directly activated
through cognate sites by HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta, as well as five other
endodermal factors: CDX-1, C/EBPbeta, GATA-4, FoxA2, and HNF-4alpha. HNF-1alpha
activated the Fabpl transgene by as much as 60-fold greater in the presence of
the other five endodermal factors than in their absence, accounting for up to
one-half the total transgene activation by the group of six factors. This degree 
of synergistic interaction suggests that multifactor cooperativity is a critical 
determinant of endodermal gene activation by HNF-1alpha. Mutations in HNF-1alpha 
that result in maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY3) provide evidence for 
the in vivo significance of these synergistic interactions. An R131Q HNF-1alpha
MODY3 mutant exhibits complete loss of synergistic activation in concert with the
other endodermal transcription factors despite wild-type transactivation ability 
in their absence. Furthermore, whereas wild-type HNF-1alpha exhibited pairwise
cooperative synergy with each of the other five factors, the R131Q mutant could
synergize only with GATA-4 and C/EBPbeta. Selective loss of synergy with other
endodermal transcription factors accompanied by retention of native
transactivation ability in an HNF-1alpha MODY mutant suggests in vivo
significance for cooperative synergy.

PMID: 12646418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Diabetologia. 2003 Feb;46(2):291-5. Epub 2003 Jan 8.

Genetic epidemiology of MODY in the Czech republic: new mutations in the MODY
genes HNF-4alpha, GCK and HNF-1alpha.

Pruhova S(1), Ek J, Lebl J, Sumnik Z, Saudek F, Andel M, Pedersen O, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University,
Vinohradska 159, 100-81 Prague 10, Czech Republic.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The aim of this study was to examine the prevalence and nature
of mutations in HNF4alpha/MODY1, GCK/MODY2 and HNF-1alpha/MODY3 genes in Czech
subjects with clinical diagnosis of MODY.
METHODS: We studied 61 unrelated index probands of Czech origin (28 males, 33
females) with a clinical diagnosis of MODY and 202 family members. The mean age
of probands was 22.7+/-12.0 years (range, 6-62) and the mean age at the first
recognition of hyperglycaemia was 14.7+/-6.0 years (range, 1-25). The promotor
and coding regions inclusive intron exon boundaries of the HNF-4alpha, GCK and
HNF-1alpha genes were examined by PCR-dHPLC (HNF-1alpha and GCK) and direct
sequencing.
RESULTS: We identified 20 different mutations in the HNF-4alpha, GCK and
HNF-1alpha in 29 families (48% of all families studied), giving a relative
prevalence of 5% of MODY1, 31% of MODY2 and 11.5% of MODY3 among the Czech
kindred with MODY. Three of 3, 10 of 11 and 1 of 6 of the mutations identified in
HNF-4alpha, GCK and HNF-1alpha respectively, were new.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Of the families 48% carried mutations in the MODY1-3
genes and of the identified mutations 70% were new. In 52% of Czech families with
clinical characteristics of MODY, no mutations were found in the analysed genes. 
This finding shows that the majority of MODY mutations in a central European
population are local and that other MODY genes could be responsible for autosomal
dominant transmission of diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 12627330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2003 Mar;4(1):43-51.

Newly defined genetic diabetes syndromes: maturity onset diabetes of the young.

Winter WE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida, Box 100275, Gainesville, FL 32610-0275, USA. winter@pathology.ufl.edu

PMID: 12618559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Mol Genet Metab. 2003 Feb;78(2):145-51.

In silico searching of human and mouse genome data identifies known and unknown
HNF1 binding sites upstream of beta-cell genes.

Lockwood CR(1), Bingham C, Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Peninsular Medical School, Exeter, UK.

HNF1-alpha is a transcription factor present in beta-cells. Mutations in the
HNF1-alpha gene cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), but the exact 
mechanism is not known. Several studies have highlighted genes down-regulated in 
beta-cells lacking this gene, but it is not clear if these are directly regulated
by HNF1-alpha. To better understand this, we used human and mouse genome data to 
examine 29 genes expressed in the beta-cell. Using an in silico approach (with
software available at www.BindGene.org) we examined 2kb upstream of each gene for
possible HNF1 binding sequences. In five genes we also examined 100kb upstream of
each gene, but only the portions strongly conserved between humans and mice. We
identified nine putative HNF1 binding sites upstream of seven genes (p<0.1 and
good alignment between species or p<0.05). Six of these nine sites had some
experimental corroboratory evidence and included the recently identified sites 6 
and 45kb upstream of HNF4-alpha. Three novel sites were identified. These were
92bp upstream of SLC3A1, 52bp upstream of PCBD (DCOH), and 42202bp upstream of
TCF2(HNF1-beta). In conclusion, our computer search identified some known HNF1
sites, and suggested three novel sites indicating these genes are very likely to 
be directly activated by HNF1. This should help in designing experiments to
discover the mechanisms of beta-cell dysfunction due to HNF1 disruption.

PMID: 12618086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Diabetes. 2003 Mar;52(3):872-81.

A genome-wide scan in families with maturity-onset diabetes of the young:
evidence for further genetic heterogeneity.

Frayling TM(1), Lindgren CM, Chevre JC, Menzel S, Wishart M, Benmezroua Y, Brown 
A, Evans JC, Rao PS, Dina C, Lecoeur C, Kanninen T, Almgren P, Bulman MP, Wang Y,
Mills J, Wright-Pascoe R, Mahtani MM, Prisco F, Costa A, Cognet I, Hansen T,
Pedersen O, Ellard S, Tuomi T, Groop LC, Froguel P, Hattersley AT, Vaxillaire M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Postgraduate School of Medicine 
and Health Science, University of Exeter, Exeter, U.K.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a heterogeneous single gene
disorder characterized by non-insulin-dependent diabetes, an early onset and
autosomal dominant inheritance. Mutations in six genes have been shown to cause
MODY. Approximately 15-20% of families fitting MODY criteria do not have
mutations in any of the known genes. These families provide a rich resource for
the identification of new MODY genes. This will potentially enable further
dissection of clinical heterogeneity and bring new insights into mechanisms of
beta-cell dysfunction. To facilitate the identification of novel MODY loci, we
combined the results from three genome-wide scans on a total of 23 families
fitting MODY criteria. We used both a strict parametric model of inheritance with
heterogeneity and a model-free analysis. We did not identify any single novel
locus but provided putative evidence for linkage to chromosomes 6 (nonparametric 
linkage [NPL]score 2.12 at 71 cM) and 10 (NPL score 1.88 at 169-175 cM), and to
chromosomes 3 (heterogeneity LOD [HLOD] score 1.27 at 124 cM) and 5 (HLOD score
1.22 at 175 cM) in 14 more strictly defined families. Our results provide
evidence for further heterogeneity in MODY.

PMID: 12606533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Med Clin (Barc). 2003 Feb 8;120(4):121-4.

[Clinical, metabolic, immunologic and genotypic characteristics in non-pediatric 
patients with type 1A diabetes mellitus. Onset and short-term prognosis].

[Article in Spanish]

Aguilera E(1), Recasens M, Morínigo RA, Casamitjana R, Oriola J, Ercilla G,
Conget I.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Endocrinología y Diabetes. Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques
August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS). Hospital Clínic i Universitari. Barcelona. Spain.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Around 50% of new cases of type 1 diabetes mellitus
(DM1) are seen in subjects aged above 15 years. It is of particular interest the 
characterization of such a population.
THE AIMS OF OUR STUDY WERE: a) to characterize a group of non-pediatric subjects 
with DM1 at the onset of the disease; b) to evaluate the prognosis of the disease
under conventional intensive insulin therapy, and c) to investigate the presence 
of mutations in the HNF-1* gene in those subjects who did not display pancreatic 
autoimmune markers.
SUBJECTS AND METHOD: All subjects with an age >= 15 and 35 years recently
diagnosed DM1 (1998-2001) were included in the study. Pancreatic cell function
was assessed by glucagon test (at onset and at 12 months). The presence of
pancreatic autoantibodies, GAD, IA2 and IAA was evaluated. HLA class II genes and
the 10 exons of HNF-1* gene were analyzed from genomic DNA.
RESULTS: We studied 86 subjects (32 women, 23.9 [5.3] year-old). Eighty percent
of subjects were positive for any of the studied autoantibodies. Alone or in
combination, GAD was positive in 68.6% of subjects, IA2 in 45.3% and IAA in 27.9%
of them. Most frequent haplotype was DRB1*0301-DQA1*0501-DQB*0201. There were no 
differences with regard to clinical, metabolic or genetic characteristics among
those subjects with or without presence of pancreatic autoantibodies (at onset
and at 12 months). We did not find mutations in the HNF-1* gene in any of the
subjects included in our study. After 12 months of follow-up, cell function
remained unaltered in comparison with that observed at the onset of the disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical, immunological and HLA characteristics of a non-pediatric
DM1 population are in agreement with expected results. The absence of pancreatic 
autoimmune markers neither rules out the existence of type 1A diabetes mellitus
nor is associated with mutations in the MODY-3 gene. A therapeutic programme
using conventional intensified insulin treatment prevents the impairment of
insulin secretory capacity for a short-term follow-up.

PMID: 12605834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Hepatology. 2003 Mar;37(3):622-31.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha: a key mediator of the effect of bile acids on 
gene expression.

Jung D(1), Kullak-Ublick GA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital, 
Zurich, Switzerland.

Bile acids regulate the expression of genes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. 
They are ligands of the farnesoid X receptor, which induces small heterodimer
partner (SHP)-1, a transcriptional repressor of bile acid synthetic enzymes. In
cholestatic liver disease, hepatic bile acid concentrations are elevated and
expression of the major Na+-independent bile acid uptake system, organic anion
transporting polypeptide (OATP)-C (solute carrier gene family SLC21A6), is
markedly decreased. Because the OATP-C gene is transcriptionally dependent on the
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1 alpha, we hypothesized that bile acids decrease
OATP-C expression through direct repression of HNF1 alpha. To test this
hypothesis, we studied the regulation of the human HNF1 alpha gene by bile acids.
HNF1 alpha expression in cultured hepatoma cells was decreased approximately 50% 
after 12 hours' exposure to 100 micromol/L chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA).
Characterization of the human HNF1 alpha gene promoter identified a consensus
bile acid response element that binds and is activated by HNF4 alpha. Mutagenesis
of the HNF4 alpha site abolished baseline HNF1 alpha promoter activity. The
central mechanism by which bile acids repress HNF1 alpha is decreased activation 
by HNF4 alpha. SHP directly inhibits HNF4 alpha-mediated transactivation of the
HNF1 alpha promoter in cotransfection assays. In addition, HNF4 alpha nuclear
binding activity is decreased by CDCA and the human HNF4 alpha gene promoter is
repressed by CDCA through an SHP-independent mechanism. In conclusion, we show
that repression of HNF1 alpha is an important new mechanism by which bile acids
regulate the expression of HNF1 alpha-dependent genes in man. This explains the
suppressive effect of bile acids on the OATP-C gene promoter, leading to
decreased expression in cholestatic liver disease.

PMID: 12601360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Gene. 2003 Feb 13;305(1):101-11.

An enhancer activates the pig lactase phlorizin hydrolase promoter in intestinal 
cells.

Troelsen JT(1), Mitchelmore C, Olsen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Biochemical Laboratory C, The
Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 N Copenhagen,
Denmark. troelsen@imbg.ku.dk

Lactase phlorizin hydrolase is a small intestinal-specific brush border protein
commonly used as a specific marker of differentiated enterocytes. A number of
transcription factors involved in the enterocyte-specific expression of lactase
phlorizin hydrolase have been identified. An upstream regulatory region, which we
have named the "LPH enhancer", located at position -894 to -798 in the porcine
lactase phlorizin hydrolase gene, is necessary for high differentiation-dependent
LPH expression in intestinal cells. The LPH enhancer was studied by mutation
analysis, transfection experiments and electrophoretical mobility shift assays.
The LPH enhancer is active in intestinal cells (Caco-2) and not in non-intestinal
cells (HeLa). The LPH enhancer is only able to enhance expression when it is
located in front of an intestinal-specific promoter such as the lactase phlorizin
hydrolase promoter or the sucrase-isomaltase promoter. In front of an
SV40-derived promoter the LPH enhancer has no stimulatory effect. In addition to 
the lack of promoter-promiscuity, the LPH enhancer is not a classical enhancer in
the sense that it is not orientation-independent and it cannot function when
located 3' of a reporter gene. The LPH enhancer contains at least three
cis-elements (at -894 to -880, -880 to -875 and -833 to -814) with functional
importance for the LPH enhancer activity.

PMID: 12594046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Feb;88(2):920-31.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha gene mutations and diabetes in Norway.

Bjørkhaug L(1), Sagen JV, Thorsby P, Søvik O, Molven A, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University
Hospital, N-5021 Bergen, Norway.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha gene cause
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), type 3. To estimate the prevalence
of MODY3 in Norwegian diabetic pedigrees, we screened a total of 130 families for
HNF-1 alpha mutations; 42 families with clinical MODY, 75 with suspected MODY,
and 13 pedigrees with multiplex type 1 diabetes. Twenty-two families with
clinical MODY, 15 families with suspected MODY, and one family with type 1
diabetes multiplex harbored HNF-1 alpha mutations. Thus, in about half of
Norwegian families with clinical MODY, mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene could be
detected. Eight of the 18 different mutations identified were novel (G47E,
T196fsdelCCAA, IVS3-1G>A, S256T, A276D, S445fsdelAG, M522V, and S531T).
Haplotypes were determined for recurrent mutations, indicating a founder effect
in Norway for the hot-spot mutation P291fsinsC and possibly also for P112L and
R131W. To examine the molecular mechanisms underlying MODY3, we investigated the 
functional properties of 13 HNF-1 alpha mutations. Two mutant HNF-1 alpha
proteins (R171X, R263C) were unable to bind DNA and at least five mutants (R131W,
R171X, P379fsdelCT, S445fsdelAG, and Q466X) showed defective nuclear
translocation. Transcriptional activation was reduced for most of the
MODY3-associated mutants. Accordingly, the functional studies of HNF-1 alpha
mutants indicate that beta-cell dysfunction in MODY3 is caused by
loss-of-function mechanisms like reduced DNA binding, impaired transcriptional
activation, and defects in subcellular localization.

PMID: 12574234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Feb 17;1619(3):223-34.

Regulation of P450 genes by liver-enriched transcription factors and nuclear
receptors.

Akiyama TE(1), Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Cytochrome P450s (P450s) constitute a superfamily of heme-proteins that play an
important role in the activation of chemical carcinogens, detoxification of
numerous xenobiotics as well as in the oxidative metabolism of endogenous
compounds such as steroids, fatty acids, prostaglandins, and leukotrienes. In
addition, some P450s have important roles in physiological processes, such as
steroidogenesis and the maintenance of bile acid and cholesterol homeostasis.
Given their importance, the molecular mechanisms of P450 gene regulation have
been intensely studied. Direct interactions between transcription factors,
including nuclear receptors, with the promoters of P450 genes represent one of
the primary means by which the expression of these genes is controlled. In this
review, several liver-enriched transcription factors that play a role in the
tissue-specific, developmental, and temporal regulation of P450s are discussed.
In addition, the nuclear receptors that play a role in the fine control of
cholesterol and bile acid homeostasis, in part, through their modulation of
specific P450s, are discussed.

PMID: 12573481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Cancer Res. 2003 Feb 1;63(3):696-704.

The variant hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 activates the P1 promoter of the human
alpha-folate receptor gene in ovarian carcinoma.

Tomassetti A(1), Mangiarotti F, Mazzi M, Sforzini S, Miotti S, Galmozzi E, Elwood
PC, Canevari S.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Therapies, Department of Experimental Oncology, Istituto
Nazionale Tumori, 20133 Milan, Italy. antonella.tomassetti@istitutotumori.mi.it

The alpha folate receptor (alpha FR) is a membrane glycoprotein that binds
folates, and mediates their uptake and that of antifolate drugs. alpha FR is
absent on ovarian surface epithelium (OSE) but is detectable during early
transforming events in this epithelium, with increasing expression levels in
association with tumor progression. Analysis of transcriptional regulation of the
alpha FR gene have revealed two promoter regions, P1 and P4, flanking exons 1 and
4, respectively, and a requirement for three SP1 sites and an INR element for
optimal P4 activity. Here, we focused on the P1 transcription regulation in
ovarian carcinoma cells. RNase protection assay indicated that the
5'-untranslated region is heterogeneous because of different start sites and
alternative splicing of exon 3. A core region of the P1 promoter was sufficient
for maximal promoter activity in ovarian carcinoma cell lines but not in OSE
cells or in alpha FR-nonexpressing cell lines. Deletion and mutation analysis of 
this core promoter identified a cis-regulatory element at position +27 to +33 of 
the untranslated exon 1, which is responsible for maximum P1 activity. This
element formed an abundant DNA-protein complex with nuclear proteins from ovarian
cancer cells but not from other cell lines or OSE cells. Competition experiments 
and supershift assays demonstrated binding of the P1 cis-regulatory element by a 
transcription factor involved in embryonic development, the variant hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 (vHNF1). Analysis of RNA from various cell lines and surgical
specimens confirmed that vHNF1 is expressed in ovarian carcinomas. Thus, vHNF1
regulates tissue-specific transcription in ovarian carcinoma.

PMID: 12566316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Feb 7;301(2):610-6.

In situ and in vitro evidence for DCoH/HNF-1 alpha transcription of tyrosinase in
human skin melanocytes.

Schallreuter KU(1), Kothari S, Hasse S, Kauser S, Lindsey NJ, Gibbons NC,
Hibberts N, Wood JM.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Experimental Dermatology, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Bradford, Bradford, West Yorkshire BD7 1DP, UK.
K.Schallreuter@bradford.ac.uk

Human epidermal melanocytes hold the full capacity for autocrine de novo
synthesis/regulation/recycling of the essential cofactor 6-tetrahydrobiopterin
(6BH(4)) for conversion of L-phenylalanine via phenylalanine hydroxylase to
L-tyrosine and for production of L-Dopa via tyrosine hydroxylase to initiate both
pigmentation and catecholamine synthesis in these neural crest-derived cells.
Earlier we have demonstrated pterin-4a-carbinolamine dehydratase (PCD) mRNA and
enzyme activities in epidermal melanocytes and keratinocytes. This protein
dimerises also the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1),
leading to activation of multiple genes. This study demonstrates for the first
time DCoH/HNF-1 alpha expression and transcriptional activity in human epidermal 
melanocytes in vitro and in situ and identified tyrosinase, the key enzyme for
pigmentation, as a new transcriptional target. Specific binding of DCoH/HNF-1
complex to the human tyrosinase promoter was confirmed by gel shift analysis.
These results provide a novel mechanism in the regulation of skin pigmentation.

PMID: 12565907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Shock. 2003 Jan;19(1):45-9.

Transcription factors C/EBP-alpha and HNF-1alpha are associated with decreased
expression of liver-specific genes in sepsis.

Haaxma CA(1), Kim PK, Andrejko KM, Raj NR, Deutschman CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Previous studies have demonstrated sepsis-specific changes in the transcription
of key hepatic genes. However, the role of hepatic transcription factors in
sepsis-associated organ dysfunction has not been well established. We hypothesize
that the binding activities of C/EBPalpha and beta, HNF-1alpha, and HNF-3
transiently decrease during mild sepsis but persistently decrease after fulminant
sepsis, and that the decrease in this binding activity correlates in time and
severity with previously described decreases in the transcription of key hepatic 
genes. Male C57/BL6 mice had nonlethal sepsis induced by cecal ligation and
single puncture (CLP) and fulminant sepsis via cecal ligation and double puncture
(2CLP). Sham-operated and unoperated animals served as controls. Transcription
factor binding activity was assessed with electrophoretic mobility shift assays. 
C/EBP-a and HNF-1alpha binding activity decreased transiently after CLP and
persistently after 2CLP. Binding activity of both C/EBP-beta and HNF-3 were
unchanged. The decrease in C/EBP-a and HNF-1alpha binding activities correlated
in time and magnitude with the decreased hepatic gene transcription previously
observed in sepsis. Furthermore, the loss of activity after 2CLP correlated in
time with outcome. Sepsis decreases DNA binding activities of C/EBPalpha and
HNF-1alpha, two key hepatocyte transcription factors, in a time course consistent
with down-regulation of their target hepatic genes. Therefore, alterations in
transcription factor binding are likely important in the transcriptional
modulation that is characteristic of hepatic dysfunction in sepsis.

PMID: 12558143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Diabetes Care. 2003 Feb;26(2):333-7.

Identifying hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha mutations in children and young adults 
with a clinical diagnosis of type 1 diabetes.

Lambert AP(1), Ellard S, Allen LI, Gallen IW, Gillespie KM, Bingley PJ,
Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolism, Division of Medicine, University of
Bristol, UK. a.p.Lambert@bristol.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: HNF-1alpha gene mutations (MODY3) present with marked hyperglycemia in
lean young adults and may, therefore, be mistaken for type 1 diabetes, with
implications for individual treatment and risk of diabetes in other family
members. We examined the prevalence of HNF-1alpha mutations in families with
three generations of diabetes identified in a population-based study of childhood
diabetes, representing a subpopulation in which misclassification was likely.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: In a study population of 1,470 families, 36 families
(2.4%) with three affected generations were identified. In the 18 families in
whom DNA samples were available, islet autoantibody testing, HLA class II
genotyping, and HNF-1alpha sequencing were performed.
RESULTS: At least one islet autoantibody was found in 13 of 14 probands, and
diabetes-associated HLA class II haplotypes were found in 17 of 18. One proband, 
who had no islet autoantibodies and was homozygous for the protective HLA
haplotype DRB1*02-DQB1*0602, had a novel HNF-1alpha heterozygous nonsense
mutation (R54X). This mutation cosegregated with diabetes in the family. The
proband, his brother, mother, and maternal grandmother were diagnosed with type 1
diabetes aged 14-18 years and treated with insulin (0.39-0.74 units/kg) from
diagnosis. The mother has since been successfully transferred to sulfonylurea
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Family history alone is of limited value in identification of
individuals with HNF-1alpha mutations, and we propose a stepwise approach that
restricts sequencing of the HNF-1alpha gene to those with a family history of
diabetes who also test negative for islet autoantibodies.

PMID: 12547858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Pharmacogenetics. 2003 Jan;13(1):49-53.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha/gamma and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha as 
causal factors of interindividual difference in the expression of human
dihydrodiol dehydrogenase 4 mRNA in human livers.

Ozeki T(1), Takahashi Y, Nakayama K, Funayama M, Nagashima K, Kodama T, Kamataki 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism, Division of Pharmacobio-dynamics, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
ozeki-tky@umin.ac.jp

Human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (DD) catalyses the oxidation of
trans-dihydrodiols of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and the reduction of
several ketone-containing drugs. About 40-fold interindividual difference in DD
activities has been noted. Recently, we found that transcriptional factors,
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha, HNF-4 alpha and HNF-4 gamma were
essential for the expression of DD4 mRNA, which is a major form of DDs. Thus, to 
clarify a possible mechanism(s) underlying the interindividual difference in DD
activities, we investigated the sequences of genes and the expression levels of
mRNA for DD4 and HNFs in human livers. We found no clear relationship between the
genotypes of DD4 and HNF genes and the expression levels of DD4 mRNA in the
subjects. The expression level of DD4 mRNA significantly correlated with that of 
HNF-1 alpha, HNF-4 alpha or HNF-4 gamma. These results suggest that the
expression level of DD4 mRNA is cooperatively regulated by the amounts of HNF-1
alpha, HNF-4 alpha and HNF-4 gamma.

PMID: 12544512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Biol Chem. 2002 Nov;383(11):1691-700.

Evidence for haploinsufficiency of the human HNF1alpha gene revealed by
functional characterization of MODY3-associated mutations.

Thomas H(1), Badenberg B, Bulman M, Lemm I, Lausen J, Kind L, Roosen S, Ellard S,
Hattersley AT, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Essen, Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung),
Hufelandstrasse 55, D-45122 Essen, Germany.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1alpha is a homeo-domain-containing transcription 
factor participating in the regulation of gene expression in liver, kidney, gut
and pancreas of vertebrates. In humans mutations in the HNF1 gene are responsible
for one form of maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY3). To define the
molecular mechanism underlying MODY3 we investigated the functional properties of
seven MODY3-associated mutations representing the spectrum of different kinds of 
mutations affecting all functional domains of the protein. The mutations
introduced into an expression vector encoding human HNF1alpha include in-frame
deletion (AN127), nonsense (Q7X, R171X), frameshift (P291fsinsC) and missense
(R229Q, P447L, T6201) mutations. Gel retardation and reporter gene assays showed 
that the functional properties of these mutants differ dramatically, but none of 
these mutants act in a dominant negative manner. Moreover, the mRNA stability of 
the mutants AN127, R171X, P291fsinsC and T547E548fsdelTG is impaired compared to 
the wild-type sequence in transfected cells. This decreased RNA stability is
independent of the presence of an intron in the expression vector and thus
differs from mechanisms known to be involved in nonsense-mediated decay (NMD).
Our results suggest that haploinsufficiency of HNF1alpha is responsible for the
pathogenesis of MODY3.

PMID: 12530534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;23(3):923-32.

Liver-specific reactivation of the inactivated Hnf-1alpha gene: elimination of
liver dysfunction to establish a mouse MODY3 model.

Lee YH(1), Magnuson MA, Muppala V, Chen SS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia
Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan. mbying@ccvax.sinica.edu.tw

Mice deficient in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1alpha) develop
dwarfism, liver dysfunction, and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Liver dysfunction in
HNF-1alpha-null mice includes severe hepatic glycogen accumulation and
dyslipidemia. The liver dysfunction may appear as soon as 2 weeks after birth.
Since the HNF-1alpha-null mice become diabetic 2 weeks after birth, the early
onset of the liver dysfunction is unlikely to be due to the diabetic status of
the mice. More likely, it is due directly to the deficiency of HNF-1alpha in
liver. Although the HNF-1alpha-null mice have an average life span of 1 year, the
severe liver phenotype has thwarted attempts to study the pathogenesis of
maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) and to examine therapeutic
strategies for diabetes prevention and treatment in these mice. To circumvent
this problem, we have generated a new Hnf-1alpha mutant mouse line,
Hnf-1alpha(kin/kin), using gene targeting to inactivate the Hnf-1alpha gene and
at the same time, to incorporate the Cre-loxP DNA recombination system into the
locus for later revival of the Hnf-1alpha gene in tissues by tissue-specifically 
expressed Cre recombinase. The Hnf-1alpha(kin/kin) mice in which the expression
of HNF-1alpha was inactivated in germ line cells were indistinguishable from the 
HNF-1alpha-null mice with regard to both the diabetes and liver phenotypes.
Intriguingly, when the inactivated Hnf-1alpha gene was revived in liver (hepatic 
Hnf-1alpha revived) by the Cre recombinase driven by an albumin promoter, the
Hnf-1alpha(kin/kin) mice, although severely diabetic, grew normally and did not
develop any of the liver dysfunctions. In addition, we showed that the expression
of numerous genes in pancreas, including a marker gene for pancreas injury, was
affected by liver dysfunction but not by the deficiency of HNF-1alpha in
pancreas. Thus, our hepatic-Hnf-1alpha-revived mice may serve as a useful mouse
model to study the human MODY3 disorder.

PMCID: PMC140695
PMID: 12529398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Diabetologia. 2002 Dec;45(12):1713-8. Epub 2002 Nov 12.

Identification of three new mutations of the HNF-1 alpha gene in Japanese MODY
families.

Ikema T(1), Shimajiri Y, Komiya I, Tawata M, Sunakawa S, Yogi H, Shimabukuro M,
Takasu N.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, University of the Ryukyus School of
Medicine, Nishihara, Okinawa, Japan.

AIM/HYPOTHESIS: We analysed Japanese MODY patients for mutations in the HNF-1
alpha gene.
METHODS: Fifty unrelated Japanese patients with early-onset diabetes (diagnosed
at 25 years of age or younger) or with a strong family history of diabetes were
screened for mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene. Functional studies of the mutant 
HNF-1alpha were carried out.
RESULTS: We identified three new mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene in the
families with a strong family history for diabetes. One mutation (L518P519fsTCC
--> A) was identified in three unrelated families, while the other two mutations 
(T521I and V617I) were identified in one family. We also identified the A site of
the promoter (+102G-to-C), which was reported previously. We examined the
functional properties of the mutant HNF-1alpha. By increasing the amount of
L518P519fsTCC-->A-HNF-1alpha, increasing inhibition of the transcription of human
transthyretin (TTR) was observed (up to 61% of the control). Increasing amounts
of T521I-HNF-1alpha or V617I-HNF-1alpha mutant proteins increased TTR promoter
transcription up to 4.3-fold and 2.4-fold, respectively, whereas both increased
transcription up to 12.4-fold of the control.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The L518P519fsTCC --> A was identified for the first
time and this mutation might be a common cause of Japanese MODY3 in Okinawa area.
In addition, both the T521I and V617I mutations were present in two patients in
the same family. Since the prevalence of these mutations is relatively high (10%,
5/50), the HNF-1 alpha gene needs to be screened for mutations in patients either
with early-onset diabetes or with a strong family history for diabetes.

PMID: 12488962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Diabetologia. 2002 Dec;45(12):1709-12. Epub 2002 Nov 16.

High frequency of mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene in non-obese patients with
diabetes of youth in Japanese and identification of a case of digenic
inheritance.

Tonooka N(1), Tomura H, Takahashi Y, Onigata K, Kikuchi N, Horikawa Y, Mori M,
Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Gunma University, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: There is an emerging epidemic of Type II (non-insulin-dependent)
diabetes mellitus of youth in Japan and in many other developed countries. The
aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of mutations in the hepatocyte 
nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha gene (TCF1) in a large group of Japanese patients
with early-onset non-Type I (insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus. Since
approximately 20% of Caucasian patients with HNF-1alpha mutations have been shown
to be obese or overweight, we also examined the association of genetic variations
in TCF1 with body weight in Japanese subjects.
METHODS: We examined 203 patients with non-Type 1 diabetes who had been diagnosed
before they reached 15 years of age. Ten exons and flanking introns of TCF1 of
these patients were directly sequenced for mutations.
RESULTS: We found 14 different mutations in 18 patients (8.9%), including one
that was found to be de novo. The patients with the mutations had lower BMI
(20.1+/-3.0 kg/m(2)) at diagnosis than the patients without them (24.5+/-6.0
kg/m(2)) (p=0.0024). All of the patients with the mutations, except for one,
Y120, had normal body weight (BMI<25 kg/m(2)); the frequency of HNF-1alpha
mutations in the non-obese patients of this study was 17% (17/101). Patient Y120,
who had atypical symptoms of mild obesity and insulin resistance at diagnosis,
was found to have inherited an additional mutation in an obesity-related gene.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: A considerable number of non-obese Japanese patients
with non-Type 1 diabetes of youth have HNF-1alpha-deficient diabetes. Lack of
obesity could well be a characteristic feature of this form of diabetes.

PMID: 12488961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Diabetologia. 2002 Dec;45(12):1703-8. Epub 2002 Oct 19.

Characterization of a naturally occurring mutation (L107I) in the HNF1 alpha
(MODY3) gene.

Cervin C(1), Orho-Melander M, Ridderstråle M, Lehto M, Barg S, Groop L, Cilio CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Wallenberg Laboratory, Malmö University Hospital,
Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Maturity onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) is a
monogenic form of diabetes mellitus caused by mutations in the gene encoding for 
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha, HNF1 alpha. In this study we have examined the
in vivo and in vitro effects of a mutation (L107I) outside the DNA binding and
dimerization domains in the N terminal part of the HNF1 alpha gene.
METHODS: Beta-cell function of the affected family members was assessed by an
oral glucose tolerance test. Functional tests were carried out to explain the
role of the mutation in vitro by transcriptional activity assay, Western
blotting, DNA-binding assays and subcellular localization experiments.
RESULTS: Affected family members showed an 86% decreased insulin response to
glucose when compared to age-matched healthy control subjects. In vitro the
mutation showed a 79% decrease in transcriptional activity as compared to wild
type HNF1 alpha in HeLa cells lacking HNF1 alpha. The transcriptional activity
was not suppressed when the mutant was co-expressed with wild type HNF1 alpha
suggesting that the decreased activity was not mediated by a dominant negative
mechanism. The L107I/HNF1alpha protein showed normal nuclear targeting but
impaired binding to an HNF1 alpha consensus sequence.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that the L107I substitution
represents a MODY3 mutation which impairs beta-cell function by a
loss-of-function mechanism.

PMID: 12488960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Pediatr Nephrol. 2002 Dec;17(12):1021-6. Epub 2002 Nov 14.

De novo HNF-1 beta gene mutation in familial hypoplastic glomerulocystic kidney
disease.

Mache CJ(1), Preisegger KH, Kopp S, Ratschek M, Ring E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graz University Medical School, Auenbruggerplatz 30,
8036 Graz, Styria, Austria. Christoph.mache@kfunigraz.ac.at

Mutations in the gene encoding the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-1 beta are associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (type V),
non-diabetic renal disease, and occasionally genital malformations in females.
Recently, familial hypoplastic glomerulocystic kidney disease (GCKD) has been
added to the clinical spectrum of HNF-1 beta gene mutations. Familial hypoplastic
GCKD is a rare, dominantly inherited disorder characterized by small kidneys
containing glomerular cysts, abnormal pelvicalyceal anatomy, and chronic renal
failure. A family with hypoplastic GCKD occurring in the father and the daughter 
was screened for mutations in the HNF-1 beta gene. The sequence of exon 4 of the 
HNF-1 beta gene revealed a C insertion at codon 334 resulting in a frameshift
mutation (P334fsinsC) in two family members. The P334fsinsC allele co-segregated 
with hypoplastic GCKD in the family. Oral glucose tolerance testing was normal in
the 11-year-old girl. In her 38-year-old father, impaired glucose tolerance was
detected. These studies provide further evidence that familial hypoplastic GCKD
is associated with HNF-1 beta gene mutations. HNF-1 beta gene mutation screening 
may prove useful in patients with small cystic kidneys and chronic renal failure,
in whom a definite renal diagnosis could otherwise only be established by renal
biopsy.

PMID: 12478351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Diabetes. 2002 Dec;51 Suppl 3:S343-8.

Decreased glibenclamide uptake in hepatocytes of hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha-deficient mice: a mechanism for hypersensitivity to sulfonylurea
therapy in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 3 (MODY3).

Boileau P(1), Wolfrum C, Shih DQ, Yang TA, Wolkoff AW, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, the Rockefeller University, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Diabetes in subjects with hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha gene mutations
(maturity-onset diabetes of the young [MODY]-3) is characterized by impaired
insulin secretion. Surprisingly, MODY3 patients exhibit hypersensitivity to the
hypoglycemic actions of sulfonylurea therapy. To study the pharmacogenetic
mechanism(s), we have investigated glibenclamide-induced insulin secretion,
glibenclamide clearance from the blood, and glibenclamide metabolism in wild-type
and Hnf-1alpha-deficient mice. We show that despite a profound defect in
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, diabetic Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice have a robust
glibenclamide-induced insulin secretory response. We demonstrate that the
half-life (t(1/2)) of glibenclamide in the blood is increased in Hnf-1alpha(-/-) 
mice compared with wild-type littermates (3.9 +/- 1.3 vs. 1.5 +/- 1.8 min, P <or=
0.05). The clearance of glibenclamide from the blood during the first hours after
intravenous administration was reduced approximately fourfold in Hnf-1alpha(-/-) 
mice compared with Hnf-1alpha(+/+) littermates. Glibenclamide uptake into
hepatocytes was dramatically decreased in vivo and in vitro. To study the
metabolism of glibenclamide in Hnf-1alpha(-/-) animals, we analyzed liver
extracts from [(3)H]glibenclamide-injected animals by reverse-phase
chromatography. We found that the ratio of the concentrations of glibenclamide
and its metabolites was moderately increased in livers of Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice,
suggesting that hepatic glibenclamide metabolism was not impaired in animals with
Hnf-1alpha deficiency. Our data demonstrate that high serum glibenclamide
concentrations and an increased t(1/2) of glibenclamide in the blood of
Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice are caused by a defect in hepatic uptake of glibenclamide.
This suggests that hypersensitivity to sulfonylureas in MODY3 patients may be due
to impaired hepatic clearance and elevated plasma concentrations of the drug.

PMID: 12475773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Diabetes. 2002 Dec;51 Suppl 3:S333-42.

Experimental models of transcription factor-associated maturity-onset diabetes of
the young.

Wang H(1), Hagenfeldt-Johansson K, Otten LA, Gauthier BR, Herrera PL, Wollheim
CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Clinical Biochemistry, University
Medical Centre, Geneva, Switzerland.

Six monogenic forms of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) have been
identified to date. Except for MODY2 (glucokinase), all other MODY subtypes have 
been linked to transcription factors. We have established a MODY3 transgenic
model through the beta-cell-targeted expression of dominant-negative HNF-1alpha
either constitutively (rat insulin II promoter) or conditionally (Tet-On system).
The animals display either overt diabetes or glucose intolerance. Decreased
insulin secretion and reduced pancreatic insulin content contribute to the
hyperglycemic state. The conditional approach in INS-1 cells helped to define new
molecular targets of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha. In the cellular
system, nutrient-induced insulin secretion was abolished because of impaired
glucose metabolism. Conditional suppression of HNF-4alpha, the MODY1 gene, showed
a similar phenotype in INS-1 cells to HNF-1alpha. The existence of a regulatory
circuit between HNF-4alpha and HNF-1alpha is confirmed in these cell models. The 
MODY4 gene, IPF-1 (insulin promoter factor-1)/PDX-1 (pancreas duodenum
homeobox-1), controls not only the transcription of insulin but also expression
of enzymes involved in its processing. Suppression of Pdx-1 function in INS-1
cells does not alter glucose metabolism but rather inhibits insulin release by
impairing steps distal to the generation of mitochondrial coupling factors. The
presented experimental models are important tools for the elucidation of the
beta-cell pathogenesis in MODY syndromes.

PMID: 12475772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Am J Kidney Dis. 2002 Dec;40(6):1325-30.

Severe hyperglycemia after renal transplantation in a pediatric patient with a
mutation of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta gene.

Waller SC(1), Rees L, Woolf AS, Ellard S, Pearson ER, Hattersley AT, Bingham C.

Author information: 
(1)Nephro-Urology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London and 
the Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medicine
and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, England. s.waller@ich.ucl.ac.uk

After renal transplantation for congenital cystic kidney disease of unknown
origin, a 14-year-old boy, who was previously normoglycemic, had
"steroid-induced" diabetes mellitus, which was treated with insulin. Transplant
failure from chronic rejection and subsequent transplant nephrectomy allowed
discontinuation of corticosteroids, the gradual withdrawal of insulin and
normoglycemia. The recent description of renal cysts and diabetes (RCAD) syndrome
and a strong paternal family history of early-onset diabetes mellitus prompted
genetic screening of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta gene. A novel
heterozygous frameshift mutation in exon 1 was identified, adding to the 12
kindreds thus far described. This case highlights the unmasking of the
hyperglycemic component of the RCAD syndrome in the immediate postoperative
period after renal transplantation and emphasizes the pleiotropic manifestations 
of this important genetic kidney disease.

Copyright 2002 by the National Kidney Foundation, Inc.

PMID: 12460054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Diabetes Care. 2002 Dec;25(12):2292-301.

Determinants of the development of diabetes (maturity-onset diabetes of the
young-3) in carriers of HNF-1alpha mutations: evidence for parent-of-origin
effect.

Klupa T(1), Warram JH, Antonellis A, Pezzolesi M, Nam M, Malecki MT, Doria A,
Rich SS, Krolewski AS.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the distribution of the age at onset of diabetes
(maturity-onset diabetes of the young-3 [MODY3]) and to identify determinants of 
the onset of diabetes in carriers of HNF-1alpha mutations.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Extended families (n = 104) with type 2 diabetes
inherited in a dominant pattern were recruited and screened for diabetes-causing 
mutations in HNF-1alpha.
RESULTS: HNF-1alpha mutations cosegregated with diabetes in only 13 families, all
with a mean age at onset <35 years. Insulin secretion was diminished or absent in
mutation carriers (n = 101), and diabetes developed in 65% by age 25 years and in
100% by age 50 years. If the mutation was inherited from the mother, diabetes
onset was very young in those exposed to diabetes in utero; 57 +/- 8% were
affected by age 15 years as compared with 0.0% in those not exposed (P < 7 x
10(-6)). By age 25 years, the difference was reduced (85 +/- 6 and 55 +/- 12%,
respectively; P = 0.02). If the mutation was inherited from the father, diabetes 
developed in 52 +/- 8% by age 25 years. Age at diagnosis was shown to be highly
heritable (h(2) = 0.47, P = 0.003). When parent of origin was included in the
analyses, the magnitude of genetic contribution increased markedly (h(2) = 0.91).
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in HNF-1alpha accounts for diabetes in a small proportion 
of families with a dominant pattern of inheritance. Age at onset of diabetes in
MODY3 families varied widely and was influenced by familial factors (including
modifying genes) and parent of origin (whether a mutation carrier was exposed to 
diabetes in utero).

PMID: 12453976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Diabetes Care. 2002 Dec;25(12):2287-91.

Intrauterine hyperglycemia is associated with an earlier diagnosis of diabetes in
HNF-1alpha gene mutation carriers.

Stride A(1), Shepherd M, Frayling TM, Bulman MP, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, University of Exeter, Devon, UK.

OBJECTIVE: In animals, experimentally induced maternal hyperglycemia during
pregnancy results in hyperglycemic offspring. Similarly, Pima Indian offspring
with mothers who are diabetic at the time of pregnancy have increased risk of
early-onset diabetes. We hypothesized that exposure to hyperglycemia in utero
would decrease the age at diagnosis of diabetes in patients with maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) due to a mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed the affect of maternal diabetes on age
at diagnosis of diabetes in 150 HNF-1alpha gene mutation carriers from 55
families.
RESULTS: Age at diagnosis in HNF-1alpha mutation carriers was younger when the
mother was diagnosed before pregnancy compared with when the mother was diagnosed
after pregnancy (15.5 +/- 5.4 vs. 27.5 +/- 13.1 years, P < 0.0001). This is
unlikely to represent a generalized familial decrease in age at diagnosis due to 
a more severe mutation, because no difference was seen in age of the offspring at
diagnosis of diabetes when the father was diagnosed at a young age, and a similar
trend was seen when only the single common mutation, P291fsinsC, was analyzed.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that maternal hyperglycemia during pregnancy probably
increases the penetrance of HNF-1alpha mutations. The potential role of exposure 
to hyperglycemia in utero in a monogenic diabetic subgroup warrants prospective
study.

PMID: 12453975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Diabetes Care. 2002 Dec;25(12):2202-6.

The prevalence of the HNF-1alpha G319S mutation in Canadian aboriginal youth with
type 2 diabetes.

Sellers EA(1), Triggs-Raine B, Rockman-Greenberg C, Dean HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Canada. esellers@exchange.hsc.mb.ca

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the prevalence of the unique HNF-1alpha G319S mutation 
in a population of aboriginal youth with type 2 diabetes and to describe the
relationship between clinical and historical characteristics and the presence or 
absence of the HNF-1alpha G319S mutation.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Participating youth were genotyped for the G319S
mutation of the HNF-1alpha gene. Clinical, laboratory, and historical data were
collected via chart review (blinded to genotype results). Comparison data were
derived from another study involving young nondiabetic pregnant aboriginal women.
RESULTS: A total of 51 youth seen sequentially in a type 2 diabetes clinic
participated in this study. Of these, 21 (41.2%) had at least one copy of the
mutant allele. The allele frequency in the study population was 0.29 (95% CI
0.20-0.38), which was significantly different from the allele frequency of 0.13
in the comparison population (chi(2) = 6.78, P = 0.009). The frequency of the
homozygous mutation (S319/S319) was 0.18. Mean BMI was significantly lower (P =
0.002), mean HbA(1c) was significantly higher (P = 0.02), and acanthosis
nigricans was significantly less frequent (P = 0.004) in those with the mutation 
compared with the wild type. Mean insulin levels were lower and insulin
sensitivity (assessed by homeostasis model assessment [HOMA]) was greater in the 
homozygote group compared with the wild-type group (P = 0.002 and P = 0.0007,
respectively). A dose-dependent gradient was observed for these characteristics.
CONCLUSIONS: These data support the association between the HNF-1alpha G319S
mutation and early-onset type 2 diabetes in this population. Those with the
mutation lacked clinical characteristics of insulin resistance (e.g., obesity and
acanthosis nigricans) and had lower insulin levels, suggesting that an
insulin-secretory and/or -production defect plays an important role in the
development of diabetes in this group. Further investigation of the
pathophysiology of the S319 homo- and heterozygote is needed because it may
impact treatment and/or prevention of this disease.

PMID: 12453961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Mol Cell. 2002 Nov;10(5):1129-37.

Diabetes mutations delineate an atypical POU domain in HNF-1alpha.

Chi YI(1), Frantz JD, Oh BC, Hansen L, Dhe-Paganon S, Shoelson SE.

Author information: 
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Mutations in Hnf-1alpha are the most common Mendelian cause of diabetes mellitus.
To elucidate the molecular function of a mutational hotspot, we cocrystallized
human HNF-1alpha 83-279 with a high-affinity promoter and solved the structure of
the complex. Two identical protein molecules are bound to the promoter. Each
contains a homeodomain and a second domain structurally similar to POU-specific
domains that was not predicted on the basis of amino acid sequence. Atypical
elements in both domains create a stable interface that further distinguishes
HNF-1alpha from other flexible POU-homeodomain proteins. The numerous
diabetes-causing mutations in HNF-1alpha thus identified a previously
unrecognized POU domain which was used as a search model to identify additional
POU domain proteins in sequence databases.

PMID: 12453420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Ai Zheng. 2002 Apr;21(4):369-72.

[Matrine affects early expression of proto-oncogenes in K562 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

He YJ(1), Jiang JK, Ou YH, Liu BZ, Liu XS, Zhang Y, Ma LD, Tu ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Bio-chemistry, Chongqing University of Medical
Sciences, Chongqing 400016, P. R. China. hyj2753@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: It has been reported that matrine had the anti-tumor
activity, and our previous study have provided that matrine had the effects of
inhibiting proliferation and inducing differentiation in K562 cell line, but its 
molecular mechanism is unknown yet.
METHOD: The expression of several proto-oncogenes(c-myc, c-jun, H-ras, p21, and
HNF-1 alpha) in K562 cell line treated by 0.2 mg/ml matrine were measured by
RT-PCR.
RESULT: The c-myc, c-jun, and HNF-1 alpha mRNA of K562 cells treated by 0.2 mg/ml
matrine were dramatically decreased at the early stage (3 h), while the H-ras and
p21 mRNA were increased obviously at the same time.
CONCLUSION: The changes of several proto-oncogenes in K562 cells treated by 0.2
mg/ml matrine may be related to inhibiting proliferation and inducing
differentiation.

PMID: 12452013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Biochem J. 2003 Mar 15;370(Pt 3):771-84.

Genomic organization and transcriptional analysis of the human l-glutaminase
gene.

Pérez-Gómez C(1), Matés JM, Gómez-Fabre PM, del Castillo-Olivares A, Alonso FJ,
Márquez J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Bioquímica, Laboratorio de Química de
Proteínas, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Málaga, 29071 Málaga, Spain.

In mammals, glutaminase (GA) is expressed in most tissues, but the regulation of 
organ-specific expression is largely unknown. Therefore, as an essential step
towards studying the regulation of GA expression, the human liver-type GA (hLGA) 
gene has been characterized. LGA genomic sequences were isolated using the genome
walking technique. Analysis and comparison of these sequences with two LGA cDNA
clones and the Human Genome Project database, allowed the determination of the
genomic organization of the LGA gene. The gene has 18 exons and is approx. 18 kb 
long. All exon/intron junction sequences conform to the GT/AG rule. Progressive
deletion analysis of LGA promoter-luciferase constructs indicated that the core
promoter is located between nt -141 and +410, with several potential regulatory
elements: CAAT, GC, TATA-like, Ras-responsive element binding protein and
specificity protein 1 (Sp1) sites. The minimal promoter was mapped within +107
and +410, where only an Sp1 binding site is present. Mutation experiments
suggested that two CAAT recognition elements near the transcription-initiation
site (-138 and -87), play a crucial role for optimal promoter activity.
Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays confirmed the importance of CAAT- and
TATA-like boxes to enhance basal transcription, and demonstrated that HNF-1 motif
is a significant distal element for transcriptional regulation of the hLGA gene.

PMCID: PMC1223212
PMID: 12444921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Hum Mutat. 2002 Dec;20(6):478-9.

GCK and HNF1A mutations in Canadian families with maturity onset diabetes of the 
young (MODY).

Cao H(1), Shorey S, Robinson J, Metzger DL, Stewart L, Cummings E, Hegele RA.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically heterogeneous form
of type 2 diabetes that is characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, onset
in early adulthood and a primary defect in insulin secretion. Mutations in at
least six genes have been shown to underlie MODY, including mutations in GCK
(encoding glucokinase, also called MODY2) and mutations in HNF1A (encoding
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha, also called MODY3). We sequenced genomic DNA
from probands of seven Canadian MODY families. In four probands, we detected four
novel GCK mutations, namely IVS2-7G>A, G72R, T206R and S263P. In three other
probands, we detected three HNF1A mutations, of which two were novel, namely
1051delCA and Q250X, and one had been previously reported, namely R131Q. The
novel mutations expand the spectrum of MODY mutations. In addition, knowledge of 
the specific defect can be used to pre-symptomatically identify family members at
risk for developing MODY.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12442280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2002 Nov 15;407(2):160-7.

Positive regulation of connexin32 transcription by hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha.

Koffler LD(1), Fernstrom MJ, Akiyama TE, Gonzalez FJ, Ruch RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical College of Ohio, 3055 Arlington Avenue,
Toledo, OH 43614, USA.

Connexin32 (Cx32) encodes the predominant gap junction protein expressed by
hepatocytes. We investigated the transcriptional control of Cx32 in expressing
and nonexpressing rat liver cell lines and hypothesized that a putative
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) binding site (centered at mp -187) in the
liver-active, P1 promoter is essential for transcription of Cx32. HNF-1alpha was 
expressed by Cx32-expressing rat liver cell lines and bound the promoter at the
-187 site, but was not expressed by non-Cx32-expressing hepatic lines. Stable
transfection of non-Cx32-expressing WB-F344 rat liver epithelial cells with
HNF-1alpha stimulated a transfected Cx32 promoter element (mp -244 to -33),
binding of HNF-1alpha to the -187 site, and expression of endogenous Cx32.
Site-directed mutagenesis of this HNF-1 binding site abolished HNF-1alpha binding
and proximal promoter activity. Hepatic Cx32 expression was also significantly
decreased in HNF-1alpha(-/-) mice. These data indicate that HNF-1alpha is a
positive regulator of Cx32 expression in hepatic cells.

PMID: 12413486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2001;105 Suppl:351-5.

[MODY diabetes: differences in the clinical picture caused by genetic
heterogeneity in clinical practice].

[Article in Polish]

Malecki MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Klinika Chorób Metabolicznych, Collegium Medicum UJ, Kraków.

PMID: 12412267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Mol Ther. 2002 Nov;6(5):653-63.

Long-term and tight control of gene expression in mouse skeletal muscle by a new 
hybrid human transcription factor.

Roscilli G(1), Rinaudo CD, Cimino M, Sporeno E, Lamartina S, Ciliberto G,
Toniatti C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Istituto di Ricerche di Biologia
Molecolare, I.R.B.M.-P. Angeletti, Pomezia, Roma, Italy.

Diseases requiring frequent and lifelong injections of recombinant proteins would
be more efficaciously treated by intramuscular delivery of genes encoding
secretable proteins. However, the success of this approach largely depends on our
capability to temporally regulate transcription of delivered genes. Therefore, we
sought to generate a humanized transcription factor to regulate transgene
expression in muscle. A novel 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT)-dependent
transcriptional regulator (called HEA-3) was constructed by fusing in-frame the
DNA binding domain of the human hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF1alpha),
which is not expressed in muscle cells, a G(521)R mutant of the ligand binding
domain of human estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha), and the activation domain
derived from human nuclear factor-kappaB p65 subunit (NF-kappaB p65). We
demonstrate that an artificial promoter containing multimeric HNF1alpha binding
sites is silent in muscles and in cell lines that lack endogenous HNF1alpha.
HEA-3 stimulated transcription from this target promoter in a stringent
4-OHT-dependent manner. The dynamic range of transgene regulation was high,
because of the low basal activity and high inducibility of the system. Ex vivo,
HEA-3 increased expression of the transfected reporter gene by more than
1000-fold in a ligand-dependent manner. In vivo, HEA-3 stimulated by more than
100-fold, the expression of secreted alkaline phosphatase after delivery as
plasmid DNA into mouse muscles. Moreover, long-term modulation of the expression 
of intramuscularly delivered mouse erythropoietin was achieved in immunocompetent
mice.

PMID: 12409264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Drug Metab Dispos. 2002 Nov;30(11):1186-93.

Down-regulation of alpha class glutathione S-transferase by interleukin-1beta in 
human intestinal epithelial cells (Caco-2) in culture.

Romero L(1), Higgins MA, Gilmore J, Boudreau K, Maslen A, Barker HJ, Kirby GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.

The influence of pro-inflammatory cytokines on alpha class glutathione
S-transferase A1 and A2 (GSTA1/A2) expression was examined in human colonic
epithelial cells (Caco-2) in culture. Dose-dependent reductions in GSTA1/A2 mRNA,
protein, and activity levels occurred in Caco-2 cells cultured in conditioned
medium (CM) from lipopolysaccharide-stimulated murine monocyte-macrophage cells
(RAW 264.7). Neutralizing anti-interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) antibodies attenuated
this repression of GSTA1/A2 expression by CM. Moreover, recombinant human
IL-1beta reduced GSTalpha expression at the mRNA, protein, and activity levels in
a dose-related fashion. Reduction of GSTA1/A2 mRNA levels by IL-1beta was
attenuated by pretreatment with IL-1 receptor antagonist. GSTA1/A2 mRNA
half-lives were similar in control and IL-1beta-treated cells, indicating that
IL-1beta has no effect on mRNA stability. In reporter gene studies, IL-1beta
caused a dose-related reduction of luciferase activity in Caco-2 cells
transfected with the full-length GSTA1 promoter-luciferase construct. Using
truncated constructs, IL-1beta responsiveness was mapped to a region 286 base
pairs upstream to the coding region. Deletion of a hepatic nuclear factor 1
(HNF-1) site in this region abrogated the IL-1beta-mediated repression of GSTA1
promoter activity. These results demonstrate that IL-1beta down-regulates
GSTA1/A2 expression in cultured human enterocytes by a transcriptional mechanism 
involving an HNF-1 site.

PMID: 12386123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Diabetologia. 2002 Oct;45(10):1463-7. Epub 2002 Sep 11.

Abnormal splicing of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha in maturity-onset diabetes
of the young.

Bulman MP(1), Harries LW, Hansen T, Shepherd M, Kelly WF, Hattersley AT, Ellard
S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Genetics, School of Postgraduate Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter EX2 5AX, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene result in maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY); an early-onset, dominantly inherited form of
diabetes caused by pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. Splice site mutations
represent approximately 10% of reported HNF-1 alpha mutations. No studies to date
have investigated the effect of splice site mutations on mRNA processing because 
the tissues with abundant HNF-1alpha expression (liver, pancreas, kidney and gut)
are not easily accessible for analysis. This study aimed to define the pathogenic
mechanism in three novel splice site mutations by analysing illegitimate
transcripts.
METHODS: To assess the consequence of potential HNF-1 alpha splice site mutations
we developed a nested reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) assay for the
amplification of illegitimate HNF-1 alpha transcripts in Epstein Barr virus
transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines.
RESULTS: Sequencing the illegitimate HNF-1 alpha transcripts showed that the
splice donor site mutation IVS8nt+1G>A leads to complete skipping of exon 8, the 
splice acceptor site mutation IVS4nt-2A>G causes skipping of exon 5 with the
recruitment of a cryptic splice acceptor site within intron 5 and the cryptic
splice acceptor site mutation (IVS7nt-6G>A) resulted in the skipping of exon 7.
All three changes are predicted to result in premature termination of the
HNF-1alpha protein, providing further evidence for their role as pathogenic
mutations.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: We conclude that the sequencing of illegitimate
transcripts from lymphoblastoid cell lines is helpful in the assessment of
intronic variation in HNF-1 alpha that could alter splicing. This analysis of the
mRNA is required to define mutational mechanisms and confirm pathogenic status.

PMID: 12378390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Mol Biol. 2002 Oct 4;322(5):929-41.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha controls renal expression of the Npt1-Npt4
anionic transporter locus.

Cheret C(1), Doyen A, Yaniv M, Pontoglio M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Expression Génétique et Maladies, Unité de Recherche Associée 1644 du
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Département de Biologie du
Développement, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1alpha) is a transcription factor that is
expressed in liver, pancreas, kidney and intestine. Mice lacking HNF1alpha are
born normally but suffer from several defects including hyperphenylalaninemia,
defective bile acid and cholesterol metabolism, an insulin secretion defect and
renal Fanconi syndrome. The renal phenotype involves a defect in renal proximal
tubule reabsorption, leading to polyuria, glucosuria, aminoaciduria and
phosphaturia. We investigated the expression of genes encoding members of the
sodium/phosphate cotransporter (Na(+)/Pi) family (namely Npt1, Npt2, Npt4 and
Ram1). We show that Npt1 and Npt4 genes were expressed at reduced levels in the
kidneys of HNF1alpha -/- mice, whereas the expression of Npt2, the major renal
phosphate transporter, was not affected. Analysis of the Npt1 genomic sequence
revealed the existence of several alternative promoters activated in liver and/or
in kidney. All of these were down-regulated in the kidneys of HNF1alpha -/-
animals. Several HNF1alpha binding sites (BS) play an important role in the
transcriptional control of this locus, including low-affinity HNF1 BSs localised 
in a DNase I hypersensitivity site (HSS3). Transient transfection experiments
confirmed that HNF1alpha directly transactivates the Npt1 promoter and that the
HSS3 region contributes to this activation.

PMID: 12367519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Mol Genet Metab. 2002 Sep-Oct;77(1-2):35-43.

The role of transcription factors in maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Mitchell SM(1), Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, University of Exeter, Barrack
Road, EX2 5AX, Exeter, UK. s.m.s.mitchell@exeter.ac.uk

The study of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), an autosomal dominant
form of early-onset diabetes mellitus characterised by defective insulin
secretion has been extremely successful in two ways. Firstly it has enabled
definitive diagnosis for patients. This allows more accurate prediction of
disease and treatment requirements. Secondly it has facilitated an increased
understanding of the genes and pathways that are crucial for normal beta-cell
function. Five of the six MODY genes, TCF1 (encoding HNF-1alpha), TCF2 (encoding 
HNF-1beta) HNF4A, insulin promoter factor (IPF)1, and NEUROD1, are transcription 
factors that operate in a complex network of gene regulation. Several genes have 
been shown to be regulated by the MODY transcription factors in a beta-cell
specific manner. This includes the co-regulation of HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha by 
each other. The exact mechanism of how mutations in these transcription factors
result in diabetes in humans remains unknown. However, current opinion favours
pleiotropic adverse effects on many genes; extensive in vitro and in vivo studies
of these genes has highlighted their importance in both glucose sensing-insulin
secretion coupling and maintaining the fully differentiated beta-cell phenotype.

PMID: 12359128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Nihon Rinsho. 2002 Aug;60 Suppl 8:290-2.

[Gateway to analysis of diabetogenic genes].

[Article in Japanese]

Oka Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Metabolism and Diabetes, Department of Internal
Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine.

PMID: 12355761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Nat Genet. 2002 Oct;32(2):312-5. Epub 2002 Sep 23.

Bi-allelic inactivation of TCF1 in hepatic adenomas.

Bluteau O(1), Jeannot E, Bioulac-Sage P, Marqués JM, Blanc JF, Bui H, Beaudoin
JC, Franco D, Balabaud C, Laurent-Puig P, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U434, Fondation Jean Dausset, 27 rue Juliette Dodu, 75010 Paris,
France.

Liver adenomas are benign tumors at risk of malignant transformation. In a
genome-wide search for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) associated with liver
adenomas, we found a deletion in chromosome 12q in five of ten adenomas. In most 
cases, LOH at 12q was the only recurrent genetic alteration observed, suggesting 
the presence of a tumor-suppressor gene in that region. A minimal common region
of deletion was defined in 12q24 that included the gene TCF1 (transcription
factor 1), encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1; refs 1,2). Heterozygous
germline mutations of TCF1 have been identified in individuals affected with
maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3; ref. 3). Bi-allelic
inactivation of TCF1 was found in 10 of 16 screened adenomas, and heterozygous
germline mutation were present in three affected individuals. Furthermore, 2
well-differentiated hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) occurring in normal liver
contained somatic bi-allelic mutations of 30 screened HCCs. These results
indicate that inactivation of TCF1, whether sporadic or associated with MODY3, is
an important genetic event in the occurrence of human liver adenoma, and may be
an early step in the development of some HCCs.

PMID: 12355088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Hepatology. 2002 Oct;36(4 Pt 1):794-804.

Inducible differentiation and morphogenesis of bipotential liver cell lines from 
wild-type mouse embryos.

Strick-Marchand H(1), Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, FRE 2364 du CNRS, Institut Pasteur, 
Paris, France.

This work shows that hepatic cell lines reproducibly can be derived from E14
embryos of many mouse inbred strains. These bipotential mouse embryonic liver
(BMEL) cell lines present a mixed morphology, containing both epithelial and
palmate-like cells, and an uncoupled phenotype, expressing hepatocyte
transcription factors (HNF1alpha, HNF4alpha, GATA4) but not functions
(apolipoproteins, albumin). BMEL cells are bipotential: under inducing conditions
they express hepatocyte and bile duct functions. In addition, they can undergo
morphogenesis in Matrigel culture to form bile duct units. When returned to basal
culture conditions, the differentiated cells revert, within a few days, to an
undifferentiated state. The ensemble of markers expressed by BMEL cells implies
that they originate from hepatoblasts, the endodermal precursors of the liver. In
conclusion, the establishment of a simple and reproducible method to isolate from
any mouse embryo bipotential hepatic cell lines that exhibit the properties of
transit stem cells provides a novel paradigm for investigation of hepatic cell
lineage relationships.

PMID: 12297826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Mol Biol. 2002 Sep 27;322(4):697-706.

Searching for DNA-protein interactions by lambda phage display.

Cicchini C(1), Ansuini H, Amicone L, Alonzi T, Nicosia A, Cortese R, Tripodi M,
Luzzago A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Cellulari ed Ematologia, Sezione di Genetica
Molecolare, Fondazione Istituto Pasteur-Cenci Bolognetti, Università La Sapienza,
00161, Rome, Italy.

We applied phage display technology to DNA-protein interaction studies. A cDNA
expression library displayed on the surface of bacteriophage lambda was generated
from the highly differentiated MMH E14 murine hepatic cell line. Selection of
this library using the promoter sequence of the liver-enriched transcription
factor HNF1alpha gene as ligate identified DNA-binding domains specifically
interacting with different regions of this regulatory sequence. One of the
selected phage showed 100% identity to a DNA-binding domain shared by
differentiation specific element-binding protein, vasoactive intestinal peptide
receptor-repressor protein and replication factor C and was further investigated.
Specific binding of the selected protein domain was confirmed in a
phage-independent context. By combining ELISA and South-Western assays using the 
selected phage and a bacterially expressed glutathione-S-transferase protein
fused to the encoded DNA-binding domain, an array of multiple adjacent
DNA-binding sites sharing a common consensus motif was identified. The strategy
described represents a powerful tool to identify proteins that bind to DNA
regulatory elements.

PMID: 12270707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Nihon Rinsho. 2002 Jul;60 Suppl 7:648-52.

[MODY genes].

[Article in Japanese]

Okada T(1), Ito Y, Yasuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Disorder, Research Institute, International Medical
Center of Japan.

PMID: 12238113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Nihon Rinsho. 2002 Jul;60 Suppl 7:159-64.

[The regulation of insulin gene transcription by transcription factors].

[Article in Japanese]

Inada A(1), Seino Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolism and Clinical Nutrition, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University.

PMID: 12238042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Clin Invest. 2002 Sep;110(6):827-33.

Genetic evidence that HNF-1alpha-dependent transcriptional control of HNF-4alpha 
is essential for human pancreatic beta cell function.

Hansen SK(1), Párrizas M, Jensen ML, Pruhova S, Ek J, Boj SF, Johansen A, Maestro
MA, Rivera F, Eiberg H, Andel M, Lebl J, Pedersen O, Ferrer J, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark.
toha@dadlnet.dk

Mutations in the genes encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha) and
HNF-1alpha impair insulin secretion and cause maturity onset diabetes of the
young (MODY). HNF-4alpha is known to be an essential positive regulator of
HNF-1alpha. More recent data demonstrates that HNF-4alpha expression is dependent
on HNF-1alpha in mouse pancreatic islets and exocrine cells. This effect is
mediated by binding of HNF-1alpha to a tissue-specific promoter (P2) located 45.6
kb upstream from the previously characterized Hnf4alpha promoter (P1). Here we
report that the expression of HNF-4alpha in human islets and exocrine cells is
primarily mediated by the P2 promoter. Furthermore, we describe a G --> A
mutation in a conserved nucleotide position of the HNF-1alpha binding site of the
P2 promoter, which cosegregates with MODY. The mutation results in decreased
affinity for HNF-1alpha, and consequently in reduced HNF-1alpha-dependent
activation. These findings provide genetic evidence that HNF-1alpha serves as an 
upstream regulator of HNF-4alpha and interacts directly with the P2 promoter in
human pancreatic cells. Furthermore, they indicate that this regulation is
essential to maintain normal pancreatic function.

PMCID: PMC151122
PMID: 12235114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2002 Sep 15;405(2):185-90.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4 alpha/gamma, HNF-1 alpha, and vHNF-1 regulate
the cell-specific expression of the human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (DD)4/AKR1C4 
gene.

Ozeki T(1), Takahashi Y, Nakayama K, Kamataki T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, 060-0812, Hokkaido, Japan. ozeki-tky@umin.ac.jp

Recently, we found a region A (a hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4-binding site
from nucleotides -701 to -684) and a region B (an HNF-1-binding site from
nucleotides -682 to -666) as cis-acting elements necessary for the
transcriptional activation of the human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (DD)4 gene in
human hepatoblastoma HepG2 cells, which express DD4 mRNA. Thus, to investigate
the mechanism(s) responsible for the cell-type-specific expression of DD4 mRNA,
we constructed a reporter plasmid, pDD4 Foot A+B: -95/+28, in which regions A and
B were linked to the human DD4 minimal promoter (-95 to +28) fused to the
luciferase gene. The luciferase activity was detectable in HepG2 cells but not in
human renal adenocarcinoma ACHN cells transfected with the pDD4 Foot A+B:
-95/+28, which do not express DD4 mRNA. A supershift assay using antibodies to
HNF-4 alpha, -4 gamma, -1 alpha, or valiant HNF (vHNF)-1 revealed that HNF-4
alpha, -4 gamma, and -1 alpha recognized regions A and B in HepG2 cells and that 
only vHNF-1 bound to regions A and B in ACHN cells. Semiquantitative
reverse-transcribed polymerase chain reaction showed that a large amount of
vHNF-1-C, which lacked transcriptional activation domain, was expressed in ACHN
cells. Transfection of ACHN cells with an expression plasmid of vHNF-1-C did not 
activate the pDD4 Foot A+B: -95/+28 reporter gene. Taken together, we conclude
that the cell-type-specific expression of DD4 mRNA is regulated by vHNF-1-C.

PMID: 12220531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2002 Oct;283(4):F839-51.

Regulation of kidney-specific Ksp-cadherin gene promoter by hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1beta.

Bai Y(1), Pontoglio M, Hiesberger T, Sinclair AM, Igarashi P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, 75390, USA.

Kidney-specific cadherin (Ksp-cadherin) is a tissue-specific member of the
cadherin family that is expressed exclusively in the kidney and developing
genitourinary tract. Recent studies have shown that the proximal 250 bp of the
Ksp-cadherin gene promoter are sufficient to direct tissue-specific gene
expression in vivo and in vitro. The proximal 120 bp of the promoter are
evolutionarily conserved between mouse and human and contain a DNase I
hypersensitive site that is kidney cell specific. At position -55, the promoter
contains a consensus recognition site for hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1).
Mutations of the consensus HNF-1 site and downstream GC-boxes inhibit promoter
activity in transfected cells. HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta bind specifically to the 
-55 site, and both proteins transactivate the promoter directly. Expression of
Ksp-cadherin is not altered in the kidneys of HNF-1alpha-deficient mice. However,
expression of a gain-of-function HNF-1beta mutant stimulates Ksp-cadherin
promoter activity in transfected cells, whereas expression of a dominant-negative
mutant inhibits activity. These studies identify Ksp-cadherin as the first
kidney-specific promoter that has been shown to be regulated by HNF-1beta.
Mutations of HNF-1beta, as occur in humans with inherited renal cysts and
diabetes, may cause dysregulated Ksp-cadherin promoter activity.

PMID: 12217876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Diabet Med. 2002 Sep;19(9):758-61.

Heterogeneity in young adult onset diabetes: aetiology alters clinical
characteristics.

Owen KR(1), Shepherd M, Stride A, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Genetics, School of Postgraduate Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK. K.R.Owen@exeter.ac.uk

AIMS: To describe the characteristics of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1 alpha 
mutation carriers diagnosed with diabetes after 25 years and compare them with
young-onset Type 2 diabetic patients (YT2D) diagnosed at the same age.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We studied 44 (21 male, 23 female) patients with HNF-1
alpha mutations diagnosed with diabetes at ages 25-45 years and 44 YT2D subjects 
matched for sex and age of diagnosis.
RESULTS: Median age of onset of diabetes was 35 years in both groups. The HNF-1
alpha group demonstrated: lower body mass index (25.1 vs. 30.7 kg/m2; P < 0.001) 
and lower fasting triglycerides (1.37 vs. 2.96 mmol/l; P = 0.001) with similar
fasting cholesterol level. They had lower glycated haemoglobin A1c (7.3 vs. 8.5%;
P = 0.015) despite greater duration of diabetes (24 vs. 16 years; P = 0.02) and
less frequent treatment with insulin (21% vs. 55%; P = 0.002). They were less
likely to be treated for hypertension (13.3% vs. 56.3%; P = 0.009). Importantly, 
no difference was observed in reported parental history of diabetes between the
two groups (65.9% vs. 63.6%; P = 0.92). Logistic regression showed that
triglyceride levels and presence of anti-hypertensive treatment were the most
important independent variables.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with HNF-1 alpha mutations may present with diabetes as
young adults between the ages of 25-45 years. In this age range a wide
differential diagnosis of diabetes is observed. Conventional criteria of age of
onset and family history will not differentiate HNF-1 alpha mutation carriers
from YT2D subjects in this age range, but features of the metabolic syndrome, in 
particular fasting triglycerides and hypertension, are helpful. In patients
diagnosed before 45 years without features of insulin resistance the diagnosis of
HNF-1 alpha should be considered.

PMID: 12207813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Diabetologia. 2002 Aug;45(8):1142-53. Epub 2002 Jun 28.

Expression profile of MODY3/HNF-1alpha protein in the developing mouse pancreas.

Nammo T(1), Yamagata K, Hamaoka R, Zhu Q, Akiyama TE, Gonzalez FJ, Miyagawa J,
Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: One subtype of MODY (MODY3) results from the heterozygous
mutation of a hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha. The pattern of HNF-1alpha
expression in the normal pancreas has not been determined. This study aimed to
clarify the profile of HNF-1alpha protein expression in the developing mouse
pancreas.
METHODS: Double immunofluorescence staining was carried out for HNF-1alpha and
pancreatic hormones or transcription factors (PDX-1, Pax6, Isl1, and Nkx2.2). The
expression of these transcription factors was also studied in the beta cells of
HNF-1 alpha mutant mice.
RESULTS: HNF-1alpha was expressed by both endocrine and exocrine cells of the
pancreas. Double immunofluorescence staining showed that HNF-1alpha was expressed
in the nuclei of alpha cells, beta cells, delta cells, and pancreatic polypeptide
(PP) cells. HNF-1alpha was first detected in most pancreatic epithelial cells on 
embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5), and hormone-positive endocrine cells and
amylase-positive cells expressed HNF-1alpha on E15.5. Most of the Pax6-, Isl1-,
or PDX-1-positive cells showed co-expression of HNF-1alpha. However, HNF-1alpha
immunoreactivity was not observed in 36.0% of Nkx2.2-positive cells. Expression
of Nkx2.2, Isl1 and Pax6 seemed to be normal in the beta cells of transgenic mice
with dominant negative overexpression of HNF-1alpha. Expression of PDX-1 did not 
change in the beta cells of pre-diabetic HNF-1 alpha (-/-) mice, but expression
was markedly decreased in the diabetic stage.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: HNF-1alpha is expressed by both endocrine cells and
exocrine cells of the pancreas from the foetal stage along with other
transcription factors, so HNF-1alpha might play a role during development.

PMID: 12189445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Inflammation. 2002 Aug;26(4):183-91.

Normal transcription of the C1 inhibitor gene is dependent upon a
polypurine-polypyrimidine region within the promoter.

Zahedi K(1), Prada AE, Mulligan A, Prada JA, Davis AE 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. zahek0@chmcc.org

Analysis of the transcriptional activity of C1 inhibitor (CIINH) promoter
reporter constructs with mutations in the R-Y region indicate that triplex
formation by this region is not a predictor of transcriptional activity and that 
normal promoter function depends on the interaction of trans acting factors with 
specific elements within this region. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)
of Hep3B nuclear extracts using the wild type promoter probe (nucleotides -98 to 
-9) yielded four major bands. Incubation of the same extracts with probes lacking
the HNF-1 site resulted in the disappearance of one band. Supershift assays
indicate that HNF-1alpha is the only previously identified protein that is
present in the EMSA bands. Southwestern blot analysis detected four bands (M(r)s 
-130, 75, 65 and 20 kDa). These data suggest that the -98 to -9 region of the
C1INH promoter interacts with at least four proteins, one of which is HNF-1alpha.

PMID: 12184632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Ann Med. 2002;34(3):207-16.

Different genes, different diabetes: lessons from maturity-onset diabetes of the 
young.

Stride A(1), Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, University of Exeter, Devon, UK.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetic subgroup of diabetes
characterised by an autosomal dominant inheritance and early onset, non-insulin
dependent diabetes. This results from a monogenic defect causing beta-cell
dysfunction. The defining of five genes in which mutations cause MODY has allowed
us to understand the clinical heterogeneity seen in this condition and can guide 
clinical management. Mutations in the glucokinase gene lead to stable
hyperglycaemia, complications are unusual and treatment is rarely needed.
Glucokinase patients are often detected during screening in pregnancy. While
maternal mutations increase birth weight by increasing maternal glycaemia, fetal 
mutations reduce birth weight by reducing fetal insulin secretion. Patients with 
mutation in genes encoding the transcription factors, hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)- 1alpha, HNF-4alpha, HNF-1beta and insulin promoter factor 1 (IPF-1) have a
common progressive beta-cell failure resulting in increasing hyperglycaemia and
treatment requirements. These patients are at risk of developing microvascular
complications. They show a pharmacogenetic effect with a specific sensitivity to 
sulphonylureas. Patients with transcription factor mutations have a range of
discrete extra-pancreatic phenotypes including a low renal threshold for glucose 
with HNF-1alpha mutations, altered lipids and lipoproteins with HNF-4alpha
mutations and a variety of cystic renal diseases and uterine and genital
developmental disorders with HNF-1beta mutations. Molecular genetic testing is
now available in routine clinical practice. This allows confirmation of a
diagnosis of MODYand defines the subgroup. Differences in prognosis and treatment
strongly support the increased use of molecular genetic testing in diabetes.

PMID: 12173691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Aug;87(8):3859-63.

Nonsense and missense mutations in the human hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta
gene (TCF2) and their relation to type 2 diabetes in Japanese.

Furuta H(1), Furuta M, Sanke T, Ekawa K, Hanabusa T, Nishi M, Sasaki H, Nanjo K.

Author information: 
(1)The First Department of Medicine, Wakayama University of Medical Science,
Wakayama 641-8509, Japan.

Mutations in transcription factors expressed in the pancreatic beta-cell are a
major cause of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). They have also been
found in patients diagnosed with type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus, which may
highlight the difficulty in diagnosing these forms of diabetes or perhaps
indicate a direct role in the development of multiple forms of diabetes. We have 
screened the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta (HNF-1 beta/MODY5) gene for
mutations in a group of 126 unrelated Japanese patients with type 2 diabetes and 
a family history of at least one first degree relative with diabetes. We
identified one patient with a nonsense mutation (R276X) and another with a
missense mutation (S465R). These mutations were present in the heterozygous state
and were not found in 132 nondiabetic subjects (264 normal alleles). We
identified a second patient with the S465R mutation on screening a second group
of 272 randomly selected type 2 diabetic patients but not in another 122
nondiabetic subjects. Functional studies indicated that R276X-HNF-1 beta was
inactive and S465R-HNF-1 beta exhibited a 22% reduction in activity compared with
the wild-type protein. The S465R mutation may function in a dominant-negative
manner. The subject with the R276X mutation had MODY5 misdiagnosed as common type
2 diabetes. He was diagnosed with diabetes at 13 yr of age and also had small
kidneys with multiple bilateral renal cysts and decreased urinary concentrating
ability. The two subjects with the S465R mutation had typical late-onset type 2
diabetes and no evidence of kidney disease. We have identified two novel
mutations in human HNF-1 beta gene. The prevalence of MODY5 among our population 
of Japanese diabetes patients with a strong positive family of disease is 0.8%.
The S465R mutation was found in 0.5% of our patients with common type 2 diabetes 
and thus may be a rare genetic risk factor contributing to the development of
type 2 diabetes rather than MODY5.

PMID: 12161522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Am J Kidney Dis. 2002 Aug;40(2):397-402.

Renal cysts and diabetes syndrome linked to mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 beta gene: description of a new family with associated liver
involvement.

Montoli A(1), Colussi G, Massa O, Caccia R, Rizzoni G, Civati G, Barbetti F.

Author information: 
(1)Renal Unit, Niguarda-Ca' Granda Hospital, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1beta gene (TCF2)
are responsible for a syndrome characterized by maturity-onset diabetes of the
young, a nondiabetic renal disease, genital malformations, and liver dysfunction.
METHODS: The HNF-1beta gene was screened for mutations in four members of an
Italian family with early-onset, nonketotic diabetes or a familiar, nondiabetic
renal disease and nonprogressive liver disorder.
RESULTS: The genetic analysis revealed an already described nonsense mutation in 
codon 177 of HNF-1beta gene (R177X) in the four related subjects. Clinical
features included diabetes in three of four patients, monolateral renal
hypoplasia with cysts in the controlateral kidney in two patients, and
bilaterally small hyperechoic kidneys without cysts in the other two patients.
Renal function impairment was severe in one patient, requiring dialysis
treatment, and mild in three. Three patients had nonprogressive liver
dysfunction, with long-lasting enzyme alterations but no liver insufficiency or
jaundice.
CONCLUSION: HNF-1beta gene mutations are associated with a wide variability in
severity and pattern of clinical symptoms within the same kindred regarding
diabetes and renal impairment. Moderate liver dysfunction may be a so far
overlooked component of the syndrome.

PMID: 12148114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Diabet Med. 2002 Aug;19(8):697-8.

Reduced prevalence of late-diabetic complications in MODY3 with early diagnosis.

Sagen JV, Njølstad PR, Søvik O.

Comment on
    Diabet Med. 2001 Nov;18(11):889-94.
    Diabet Med. 2001 Oct;18(10):811-5.

PMID: 12147154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Diabetes. 2002 Aug;51(8):2355-62.

A genetic switch in pancreatic beta-cells: implications for differentiation and
haploinsufficiency.

Ferrer J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Clínic i Universitari, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain.
jferrer@medicina.ub.es

Heterozygous mutations in the genes encoding transcriptional regulators
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and HNF-4alpha cause a form of diabetes
known as maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). Haploinsufficiency of
HNF-1alpha or HNF-4alpha results in MODY because of defective function of
pancreatic islet cells. In contrast, homozygous null mutations in mouse models
lead to widespread and profound gene expression defects in multiple cell types.
Thus, it is not surprising that HNF-1alpha function is now known to have distinct
properties in pancreatic beta-cells. It controls a complex tissue-selective
genetic network that is activated when pancreatic cells differentiate, and allows
these cells to maintain critical specialized functions. The network contains an
indispensable core component formed by a positive cross-regulatory feedback
circuit between HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha. This type of circuit configuration can
exhibit a switch-like behavior with two stable states. In the default active
state, it can serve to perpetuate network activity in differentiated beta-cells. 
However, the loss of one HNF-1alpha or HNF-4alpha allele can increase the
probability that the feedback circuit is permanently switched off, resulting in
decreased expression of all four alleles selectively in beta-cells. Such a model 
can serve to rationalize key aspects of the pathogenic mechanism in MODY.

PMID: 12145145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Diabetologia. 2002 May;45(5):747.

Why is the ADA classification of diabetes mellitus not always applied?

Prisco F, Iafusco D.

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2001 Oct;44(10):1326-9.

PMID: 12120622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Diabetologia. 2002 May;45(5):744-6. Epub 2002 Apr 3.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in Chinese MODY families: 
prevalence and functional analysis.

Xu JY(1), Chan V, Zhang WY, Wat NM, Lam KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, China.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young is an autosomal dominant
form of diabetes characterised by an early age of onset (usually <25 years). We
investigated the prevalence and trans-activating activity of hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF) -1 alpha mutations in southern Chinese families with MODY.
METHODS: We screened for mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene in 50 unrelated
southern Chinese families, which fulfilled the minimum criteria for MODY.
Functional properties of the mutant proteins were investigated using
site-directed mutagenesis and luciferase reporter assay.
RESULTS: Five of the 50 (10%) families were found to have mutations in the coding
region, including a new nonsense mutation Q176X and four reported mutations
(frameshift mutation P379fsdelCT, nonsense mutation R171X, missense mutations
G20R and P112L). These mutations had decreased trans-activating activity on the
human insulin gene promoter. We also detected a new intronic sequence variation
IVS7nt-6 G-->A, which co-segregated with diabetes. The intronic variation creates
a potential splice acceptor site and might alter the splicing of the HNF-1 alpha 
mRNA.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene seem to be an
important cause of MODY in southern Chinese. The mutations could affect normal
islet function by altering the expression of target genes.

PMID: 12107757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Mol Pharmacol. 2002 Jul;62(1):154-61.

The homeodomain Pbx2-Prep1 complex modulates hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha-mediated activation of the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2B17 gene.

Gregory PA(1), Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University School of Medicine,
Flinders Medical Centre, Adelaide, Australia.

UDP glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) are expressed in a wide range of tissues in
which their levels of expression and distribution are dependent on cell-type
specific regulatory mechanisms. The presence of a hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)
1 binding site in the proximal promoters of several UGT2B genes has been shown to
contribute to their expression in liver cells and possibly other HNF1-containing 
cell types. In some of these UGT2B genes, a putative pre-B cell homeobox (Pbx)
transcription factor binding site is found directly adjacent to the functional
HNF1 site. To determine whether this putative Pbx site contributes to the
regulation of UGT2B expression, we chose the UGT2B17 gene and investigated the
capacity of its Pbx site to bind specific transcription factors and alter
promoter activity. The UGT2B17 Pbx site matches a consensus Pbx site known to
bind members of the Pbx, Hox, Meis, and Prep1 families of homeodomain-containing 
proteins and has previously been shown to bind nuclear proteins in DNaseI
footprint assays. In this study, we used gel shift and functional assays to show 
that a Pbx2-Prep1 heterodimer can bind to the UGT2B17 Pbx site and interfere with
the binding of HNF1alpha to its site adjacent to the Pbx site. This interaction
of Pbx2-Prep1 and HNF1alpha results in down-regulation of HNF1alpha-mediated
activation of the UGT2B17 promoter. Modulation of transcription by restricting
the binding of transcriptional effectors to their target site is a novel role for
Pbx2-Prep1 complexes.

PMID: 12065766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 30;277(35):31909-17. Epub 2002 Jun 11.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha, GATA-4, and caudal related homeodomain protein
Cdx2 interact functionally to modulate intestinal gene transcription. Implication
for the developmental regulation of the sucrase-isomaltase gene.

Boudreau F(1), Rings EH, van Wering HM, Kim RK, Swain GP, Krasinski SD, Moffett
J, Grand RJ, Suh ER, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Sucrase-isomaltase (SI), an intestine-specific gene, is induced in the
differentiated small intestinal villous epithelium during the suckling-weaning
transition in mice. We have previously identified cis-acting elements within a
short evolutionarily conserved SI promoter. However, the nature and profile of
expression of the interacting proteins have not been fully characterized during
this developmental transition. Herein, we show that hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
alpha (HNF-1 alpha), GATA-4, and caudal related homeodomain proteins Cdx2 and
Cdx1 are the primary transcription factors from the adult mouse intestinal
epithelium to interact with the SIF3, GATA, and SIF1 elements of the SI promoter.
We wanted to study whether HNF-1 alpha, GATA-4, and Cdx2 can cooperate in the
regulation of SI gene expression. Immunolocalization experiments revealed that
HNF-1 alpha is detected in rare epithelial cells of suckling mice and becomes
progressively more expressed in the villous epithelial cells during the
suckling-weaning transition. GATA-4 protein is expressed exclusively in villous
differentiated epithelial cells of the proximal small intestine, decreases in
expression in the ileum, and becomes undetectable in the colon. HNF-1 alpha,
GATA-4, and Cdx2 interact in vitro and in vivo. These factors activate SI
promoter activity in cotransfection experiments where GATA-4 requires the
presence of both HNF-1 alpha and Cdx2. These findings imply a combinatory role of
HNF-1 alpha, Cdx2, and GATA-4 for the time- and position-dependent regulation of 
SI transcription during development.

PMID: 12060663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 23;277(34):30559-66. Epub 2002 Jun 7.

Human apical sodium-dependent bile salt transporter gene (SLC10A2) is regulated
by the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha.

Jung D(1), Fried M, Kullak-Ublick GA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Division of Clinical 
Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Hospital, CH-8091 Zurich, Switzerland.

The apical sodium-dependent bile salt transporter (ASBT/SLC10A2), also called the
ileal bile acid transporter, mediates the intestinal absorption of bile salts.
The efficiency of this transport process is a determinant of hepatic bile salt
synthesis from cholesterol and of serum triglyceride levels. Our aim was to
characterize the human ASBT gene promoter with respect to regulatory mechanisms
that coordinately affect ASBT expression and hepatic lipid and bile salt
metabolism. The minimal construct that confers full promoter activity contains
three functional hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) recognition sites, 
explaining the dependence of ASBT gene expression upon HNF1alpha. A nuclear
receptor binding site arranged as a direct hexanucleotide repeat (DR1 motif) is
localized approximately 1.6 kb upstream of the transcription initiation site.
Constructs containing this element were transactivated by WY14643 and
ciprofibrate, ligands of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha
(PPARalpha), in Caco2 cells. The DR1 element was shown to bind the
PPARalpha/9-cis-retinoic acid receptor heterodimer, and targeted mutagenesis of
the DR1 motif abolished PPARalpha responsiveness. Ciprofibrate treatment of
SK-ChA cholangiocytes increased ASBT mRNA levels, suggesting a physiologic role
for PPARalpha-mediated ASBT gene regulation. This study identifies PPARalpha as a
novel link between ileal bile salt absorption and hepatic lipid metabolism.

PMID: 12055195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jun;87(6):2532-9.

Nine novel mutations in maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) candidate
genes in 22 Spanish families.

Barrio R(1), Bellanné-Chantelot C, Moreno JC, Morel V, Calle H, Alonso M,
Mustieles C.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Diabetes Unit, Ramón y Cajal Hospital, University of Alcalá,
Carretera Comenar Viejo Km. 9.4, 28034 Madrid, Spain. rbarrio@hrc.insalud.es

The aims of this study were to estimate the prevalence of major maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) subtypes in Spanish MODY families and to analyze
genotype-phenotype correlations. Twenty-two unrelated pediatric MODY patients and
97 relatives were screened for mutations in the coding region of the glucokinase 
(GCK), hepatic nuclear factor- HNF-1alpha and HNF4alpha genes using PCR-single
strand conformation polymorphism and/or direct sequencing. In families carrying
GCK mutations, the influence of genetic defects on fetal growth was investigated 
by comparing the birth weights of 32 offspring discordant for the mutations.
Mutations in MODY genes were identified in 64% of the families. GCK/MODY2
mutations were the most frequently found, in 41%: seven novel (R369P, S411F,
M298K, C252Y, Y108C, A188E, and S383L) and 2 already described mutations. Four
pedigrees (18%) harbored mutations in the HNF-1alpha/MODY3 gene, including a
previously unreported change (R271G). One family (4%) carried a novel mutation in
the HNF-4alpha gene (IVS5-2delA), representing the first report of a MODY1
pedigree in the Spanish population. The age at diagnosis was prepubertal in MODY2
index patients and pubertal in MODY3 patients. Overt diabetes was rare in MODY2
and was invariably present in MODY3 index patients. Chronic complications of
diabetes were absent in the MODY2 population and were present in more than 40% of
all relatives of MODY3. Birth weight was lower in the presence of a GCK fetal
mutation when the mutation was of paternal origin. The MODY1 patient was
diagnosed at 15 yr of age. She developed intermittent microalbuminuria despite
good metabolic control, and severe late-onset complications were common within
her family. Mutations in the GCK/MODY2 gene are the most common cause of MODY in 
our population as recruited from pediatric and adolescent index patients. The
inheritance of GCK defects by the fetus results in a reduction of birth weight.
Clinical expression of MODY3 and MODY1 mutations, the second and third groups of 
defects found, was more severe, including the frequent development of chronic
complications.

PMID: 12050210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Diabetes. 2002 Jun;51(6):1785-92.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha modulates pancreatic beta-cell growth by
regulating the expression of insulin-like growth factor-1 in INS-1 cells.

Yang Q(1), Yamagata K, Fukui K, Cao Y, Nammo T, Iwahashi H, Wang H, Matsumura I, 
Hanafusa T, Bucala R, Wollheim CB, Miyagawa J, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Biomedical Research
Center, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) is characterized by impaired 
insulin secretion. Heterozygous mutations in the gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-1alpha are the cause of MODY3. Transgenic mice overexpressing
dominant-negative HNF-1alpha mutant in pancreatic beta-cells and HNF-1alpha
knockout mice are animal models of MODY3. These mice exhibit defective
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and have reduced beta-cell mass and
beta-cell proliferation rate. Here we examined the effect of HNF-1alpha on
beta-cell proliferation by overexpressing a human naturally occurring dominant-
negative mutation P291fsinsC in INS-1 cells under the control of
doxycycline-induction system. INS-1 cells overexpressing P291fsinsC showed
apparent growth impairment. The proliferation rate estimated by [(3)H]thymidine
incorporation was significantly reduced in P291fsinsC-expressing INS-1 cells
compared with noninduced or wild-type HNF-1alpha-overexpressing INS-1 cells.
Growth inhibition occurred at the transition from G1 to S cell cycle phase, with 
reduced expression of cyclin E and upregulation of p27. cDNA array analysis
revealed that the expression levels of IGF-1, a major growth factor for
beta-cells, and macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), a cytokine
expressed in pancreatic beta-cells, were reduced in
P291fsinsC-HNF-1alpha-expressing INS-1 cells. Although MIF seemed to have
proliferative function, blockade of MIF action by anti-MIF antibody stimulated
INS-1 cell proliferation, excluding its direct role in the growth impairment.
However, addition of IGF-1 to P291fsinsC-expressing INS-1 cells rescued the
growth inhibition. Our data suggest that HNF-1alpha is critical for modulating
pancreatic beta-cell growth by regulating IGF-1 expression. IGF-1 might be a
potential therapeutic target for the treatment of MODY3.

PMID: 12031966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Drug Metab Dispos. 2002 Jun;30(6):613-5.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha is a causal factor responsible for
interindividual differences in the expression of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2B7 
mRNA in human livers.

Toide K(1), Takahashi Y, Yamazaki H, Terauchi Y, Fujii T, Parkinson A, Kamataki
T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 2B7 is one of the most important UGT isozymes
expressed in human livers. This enzyme is reported to show more than 10-fold
interindividual differences in its enzyme activities. Thus, the amounts of UGT2B7
mRNA in 12 human livers were quantified by quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. The amounts of UGT2B7 mRNA in the
subjects ranged from 0.22 to 2.63 copies/10(3) copies of beta-actin. A novel
point mutation (-253G to A) found in this study did not affect the level of
UGT2B7 mRNA in the subjects. To clarify a causal factor(s) determining the
expression level of UGT2B7 mRNA, we examined the correlation between the amounts 
of mRNAs for UGT2B7 and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, which regulates
the expression of UGT2B7 gene. HNF-1alpha mRNA was expressed at a level ranging
from 2.99 to 24.76 copies/10(6) copies of beta-actin in the subjects. The amounts
of mRNAs for UGT2B7 expressed in these individual liver samples were highly
associated with the amount of mRNA for HNF-1alpha (r = 0.786, p = 0.002),
suggesting that HNF-1alpha is a factor limiting the expression of UGT2B7 mRNA and
a causal factor responsible for an interindividual difference in human livers.

PMID: 12019184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. J Virol. 2002 Jun;76(12):5875-81.

Regulation of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 activity by wild-type and mutant
hepatitis B virus X proteins.

Li J(1), Xu Z, Zheng Y, Johnson DL, Ou JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

The hepatitis B virus (HBV) core promoter regulates the transcription of two
related RNA products named precore RNA and core RNA. Previous studies indicate
that a double-nucleotide mutation that occurs frequently during chronic HBV
infection converts a nuclear receptor binding site in the core promoter to the
binding site of the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) and 
specifically suppresses the transcription of the precore RNA. This mutation also 
changes two codons in the overlapping X protein coding sequence. In this report, 
we demonstrate that the X protein and its mutant X(mt) can physically bind to
HNF-1 both in vitro and in vivo. Further analyses indicate that both X and X(mt) 
can enhance the gene transactivation and the DNA binding activities of HNF-1.
This finding demonstrates for the first time that the X protein can stimulate the
DNA binding activity of a homeodomain transcription factor. Interestingly, while 
both X and X(mt) can stimulate the HNF-1 activities, they differ in their
effects: a smaller amount of X(mt) is needed to generate greater transactivation 
and DNA binding activities of HNF-1. This functional difference between X and
X(mt) may have important implications in HBV pathogenesis and is apparently why
they have different effects on the core promoter bearing the HNF-1 binding site.

PMCID: PMC136206
PMID: 12021320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2002 May;110(3):145-7.

Mutations and intronic variants in the HNF-1 beta gene in a group of German and
Czech Caucasians with type 2 diabetes mellitus and progressive diabetic
nephropathy.

Selisko T(1), Vcelák J, Bendlová B, Graessler J, Schwarz PE, Schulze J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Clinic Carl Gustav Carus of
the Technical University Dresden, Germany. selisko@rcs.urz.tu-dresden.de

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor - 1 beta (HNF-1 beta) gene cause
maturity onset diabetes of the young type 5 (MODY 5). A clinical feature of the
resulting phenotype besides impaired glucose tolerance is a variety of renal
abnormalities, ranging from renal cysts to end-stage renal failure. Using a
candidate gene approach we investigated the prevalence of mutations in the HNF-1 
beta gene in a group of 63 patients from two different European populations (33
Germans, 30 Czechs) with type 2 diabetes mellitus and diabetic nephropathy
diagnosed by increased albuminuria (39 patients) or end-stage renal failure (24
patients). No mutations were found in any of the 9 exons or in a minimal promoter
region. Three intronic variants (single nucleotide polymorphisms - SNPs) were
detected. The frequencies of these variants showed no difference between the two 
studied populations and were comparable to data reported from healthy subjects.
No association between SNPs or formed haplotypes and any clinical parameters
(like age of disease onset, BMI and severity of renal failure) was found. The
results confirm that the genetic variations in the HNF-1 beta gene would be a
very uncommon cause of progressive nephropathy in patients with type 2 diabetes
mellitus.

PMID: 12012276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 9;277(32):28884-91. Epub 2002 May 13.

Hyperphenylalaninemia and impaired glucose tolerance in mice lacking the
bifunctional DCoH gene.

Bayle JH(1), Randazzo F, Johnen G, Kaufman S, Nagy A, Rossant J, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Department Pathology, Beckman Center
for Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California
94305, USA.

The bifunctional protein DCoH (Dimerizing Cofactor for HNF1) acts as an enzyme in
intermediary metabolism and as a binding partner of the HNF1 family of
transcriptional activators. HNF1 proteins direct the expression of a variety of
genes in the liver, kidney, pancreas, and gut and are critical to the regulation 
of glucose homeostasis. Mutations of the HNF1alpha gene underlie maturity onset
diabetes of the young (MODY3) in humans. DCoH acts as a cofactor for HNF1 that
stabilizes the dimeric HNF1 complex. DCoH also catalyzes the recycling of
tetrahydrobiopterin, a cofactor of aromatic amino acid hydroxylases. To examine
the roles of DCoH, a targeted deletion allele of the murine DCoH gene was
created. Mice lacking DCoH are viable and fertile but display
hyperphenylalaninemia and a predisposition to cataract formation. Surprisingly,
HNF1 function in DCoH null mice is only slightly impaired, and mice are mildly
glucose-intolerant in contrast to HNF1alpha null mice, which are diabetic. DCoH
function as it pertains to HNF1 activity appears to be partially complemented by 
a newly identified homolog, DCoH2.

PMID: 12011081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 2;277(31):27659-67. Epub 2002 May 14.

Physical interaction between GATA-5 and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha results 
in synergistic activation of the human lactase-phlorizin hydrolase promoter.

van Wering HM(1), Huibregtse IL, van der Zwan SM, de Bie MS, Dowling LN, Boudreau
F, Rings EH, Grand RJ, Krasinski SD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Children's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

GATA-4, -5, and -6 zinc finger and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) 
homeodomain transcription factors are expressed in the intestinal epithelium and 
synergistically activate the promoter of intestinal genes. Here, we demonstrate
that GATA-5 and HNF-1alpha physically associate both in vivo and in vitro and
that this interaction is necessary for cooperative activation of the
lactase-phlorizin hydrolase promoter. Furthermore, physical association is
mediated by the C-terminal zinc finger of GATA factors and the homeodomain of
HNF-1alpha. Deletion of HNF-1alpha activation domains or interruption of
HNF-1-binding sites in the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase promoter resulted in a
complete loss of cooperativity, whereas deletion of GATA-5 activation domains or 
interruption of GATA-binding sites resulted in a reduction, but not an
elimination, of cooperativity. We hypothesize that GATA/HNF-1alpha cooperativity 
is mediated by HNF-1alpha through its activation domains, which are oriented for 
high levels of activation through binding to DNA and physical association with
GATA factors. These data suggest a paradigm whereby intestine-specific gene
expression is regulated by unique interactions among tissue-restricted
transcription factors coexpressed in the intestine. Parallel mechanisms in other 
tissues as well as in Drosophila suggest that zinc finger/homeodomain
interactions are an efficient pathway of cooperative activation of gene
transcription that has been conserved throughout evolution.

PMID: 12011060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Science. 2002 May 10;296(5570):1034-5.

Transcription. Chromatin control--a place for E2F and Myc to meet.

La Thangue NB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical and
Life Sciences, Davidson Building, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.
n.lathangue@bio.gla.ac.uk

Comment on
    Science. 2002 May 10;296(5570):1132-6.

PMID: 12004105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25040-6. Epub 2002 Apr 29.

Mirk protein kinase is activated by MKK3 and functions as a transcriptional
activator of HNF1alpha.

Lim S(1), Jin K, Friedman E.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York 13210,
USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 6;279(6):5047.

Mirk/Dyrk1B is an arginine-directed serine/threonine protein kinase that is
expressed at low levels in most normal tissues but at elevated levels in many
tumor cell lines and in normal skeletal muscle. Colon carcinoma cell lines stably
overexpressing Mirk proliferated in serum-free medium, but the mechanism of Mirk 
action is unknown. DCoHm (dimerization cofactor of hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha ( HNF1alpha) from muscle), a novel gene of the DCoH family with 78% amino 
acid identity to DCoH, was identified as a Mirk-binding protein by yeast
two-hybrid analysis and cloned. Mirk co-immunoprecipitated with DCoHm and bound
to DCoHm in glutathione S-transferase pull-down assays. DCoH stabilizes HNF1alpha
as a dimer and enhances its transcriptional activity on the beta-fibrinogen
promoter reporter, and DCoHm had similar activity. Mirk enhanced HNF1alpha
transcriptional activity in a dose-dependent manner, whereas two kinase-inactive 
Mirk mutants and a Mirk N-terminal deletion mutant did not. Mirk, DCoHm, and
HNF1alpha formed a complex. Mirk bound to a specific region within the
CREB-binding protein-binding region of HNF1alpha and phosphorylated HNF1alpha at 
a site adjacent to the Mirk-binding region. Conversely, the HNF1alpha binding
domain was located within the first five conserved kinase subdomains of Mirk.
Mirk co-immunoprecipitated with the MAPK kinase MKK3, an upstream activator of
p38. MKK3 enhanced Mirk kinase activity and the transcriptional activation of
HNF1alpha by Mirk, suggesting that Mirk, like p38, is activated by certain
environmental stress agents. The Mirk-binding protein DCoH has been shown to be
selectively expressed in colon carcinomas but not in normal tissue. Mirk may
function as an HNF1alpha transcriptional activator in response to an
MKK3-mediated stress signal, and the selective expression of DCoH could restrict 
the Mirk response to carcinoma cells.

PMID: 11980910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2002 Apr 13;146(15):726-9.

[High sensitivity to sulphonylurea treatment in 2 patients with maturity-onset
diabetes of the young type 3].

[Article in Dutch]

Bosselaar M(1), Hattersley AT, Tack CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Universitair Medisch Centrum St Radboud, afd. Algemeen Interne Geneeskunde,
Postbus 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen.

In 2 patients, a 26-year-old woman and a 47-year-old man, diabetes mellitus was
diagnosed during their teens, although they had (almost) no symptoms at the time.
Since then, the disease was well controlled in both patients with the use of
tolbutamide at a low dose. Diabetes occurred in at least 3 generations of both
patients' families, inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. Genetic screening
in both individuals revealed two separate mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene,
confirming maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY-3). MODY-3 patients 
are unusually sensitive to the hypoglycaemic effects of sulphonylureas. These
agents remain effective in these patients for years, even at low doses.

PMID: 11980375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Diabetes. 2002 May;51(5):1409-18.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha recruits the transcriptional co-activator p300
on the GLUT2 gene promoter.

Ban N(1), Yamada Y, Someya Y, Miyawaki K, Ihara Y, Hosokawa M, Toyokuni S, Tsuda 
K, Seino Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolism and Clinical Nutrition, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Japan.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha gene have been linked to 
subtype 3 of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), a disease characterized
by a primary defect in insulin secretion. Here we show that the human GLUT2 gene 
is closely regulated by HNF-1alpha via sequences downstream of the
transcriptional start site by interaction with transcriptional co-activator p300.
The promoter region of the human GLUT2 gene was subcloned into luciferase
expression plasmids that were transfected together with HNF-1alpha expression
plasmid into a pancreatic beta-cell line, HIT-T15, to evaluate transcriptional
activities. HNF-1alpha enhanced human GLUT2 promoter activity sixfold.
Site-direct mutagenesis and footprint analyses showed that the HNF-1alpha binding
site (+200 to +218) is critical in human GLUT2 gene expression. Furthermore,
mammalian two-hybrid and immunoprecipitation studies revealed the transactivation
domain of HNF-1alpha (amino acids 391-540) to interact with both the
NH(2)-terminal region (amino acids 180-662) and the COOH-terminal region (amino
acids 1,818-2,079) of p300. These findings demonstrated that HNF-1alpha binds to 
the 5'-untranslated region of GLUT2 and that p300 acts as a transcriptional
co-activator for HNF-1alpha. In addition, these results provided new insight into
the regulatory function of HNF-1alpha by suggesting a molecular basis for human
GLUT2 gene expression.

PMID: 11978637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Pediatr Nephrol. 2002 Apr;17(4):229-35.

Recent insights into kidney diseases associated with glomerular cysts.

Woolf AS(1), Feather SA, Bingham C.

Author information: 
(1)Nephro-Urology Unit, Room 219, Institute of Child Health, University College
London, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK. a.woolf@ich.ucl.ac.uk

Glomerular cysts can exist in the context of several different kidney diseases.
Advances in the last few years have begun to unravel the genetic bases and
pathogenesis of some of these entities, many of which have an origin in abnormal 
development. In this review, we highlight recent insights into three types of
disease associated with glomerular cysts: (1) mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1beta (HNF-1beta)in the recently described renal cysts and diabetes
syndrome, (2) mutations of OFD1in the oral facial digital syndrome type 1 and (3)
the role of fetal urinary tract obstruction.

PMID: 11956871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Diabetologia. 2002 Feb;45(2):286-7; author reply 287-8.

To: Lindner T, Cockburn BN, Bell GI (1999). Molecular genetics of MODY in
Germany. Diabetologia 42: 121-123.

Ziemssen F, Bellanné-Chantelot C, Osterhoff M, Schatz H, Pfeiffer AF.

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 1999 Jan;42(1):121-3.

PMID: 11942313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Diabetes Metab. 2002 Feb;28(1):39-44.

Prevalence of the missense mutation Gly574Ser in the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha in Africans with diabetes.

Collet C(1), Ducorps M, Mayaudon H, Dupuy O, Ceppa F, Boutin P, Froguel P,
Bauduceau B.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Endocrinologie, Hôpital d'Instruction des Armées Bégin, 94160 Saint 
Mandé, France.

BACKGROUND: Clinical presentation and natural history of diabetes are somewhat
different in Black Africans compared to Caucasians. This peculiar disease course 
could be at least partly related to a specific genetic profile that has not been 
studied in this population.
METHODS: Medical backgrounds, anthropometric and biologic parameters were
obtained from 69 diabetic subjects in Dakar, Senegal, in 1998. Blood anti GAD and
Islet Cell Antibodies were studied, using RIA and immunofluorescence assay. The
HNF-1alpha gene was sequenced searching the Gly574Ser mutation, previously
described in MODY 3.
RESULTS: Among these 69 diabetic patients, 11 (16%) were found to have the G574S 
mutation affecting the HNF-1alpha. These 11 patients carrying the mutation were
compared respectively with the 58 non carriers. Mean age (57.5 yr. +/- 11 vs 51.1
yr. +/- 15) and duration of diabetes (11.9 vs 6.7 yr), were similar in the two
groups. BMI was not different in patients with the mutation (26.3 vs 23.3,
p=0.06). Metabolic control (Glycosylated hemoglobin) was poor in the two groups
(9.5% vs 9.2%). Chronic complications were equally found in the patients, but no 
mutation carrier had macroangiopathy. None of the anti GAD positive or ICA
positive patients had the mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: The HNF-1alpha Gly574Ser mutation was found in 16% of cases in a 69 
diabetic patients group in Senegal. Diabetes was as severe as in non carriers of 
mutation. This mutation has been implicated in atypical diabetes of Afro-American
children. The study confirms its prevalence in Africans with diabetes.

PMID: 11938027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 14;277(24):21361-70. Epub 2002 Apr 4.

Cloning of the human claudin-2 5'-flanking region revealed a TATA-less promoter
with conserved binding sites in mouse and human for caudal-related homeodomain
proteins and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha.

Sakaguchi T(1), Gu X, Golden HM, Suh E, Rhoads DB, Reinecker HC.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Department of Medicine, Center for the Study of
Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital & Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Claudin-2 is a structural component of tight junctions in the kidneys, liver, and
intestine, but the mechanisms regulating its expression have not been defined.
The 5'-flanking region of the claudin-2 gene contains binding sites for
intestine-specific Cdx homeodomain proteins and hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-1, which are conserved in human and mouse. Both Cdx1 and Cdx2 activated the
claudin-2 promoter in the human intestinal epithelial cell line Caco-2.
HNF-1alpha augmented the Cdx2-induced but not Cdx1-induced transcriptional
activation of the human claudin-2 promoter. In mice, HNF-1alpha was required for 
claudin-2 expression in the villus epithelium of the ileum and within the liver
but not in the kidneys, indicating an organ-specific function of HNF-1alpha in
the regulation of claudin-2 gene expression. Tight junction structural
components, which determine epithelial polarization and intestinal barrier
function, can be regulated by homeodomain proteins that control the
differentiation of the intestinal epithelium.

PMID: 11934881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Development. 2002 Apr;129(8):1829-38.

Bile system morphogenesis defects and liver dysfunction upon targeted deletion of
HNF1beta.

Coffinier C(1), Gresh L, Fiette L, Tronche F, Schütz G, Babinet C, Pontoglio M,
Yaniv M, Barra J.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes-CNRS URA 1644, Institut Pasteur, 25, rue du Docteur 
Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

The inactivation of the Hnf1beta gene identified an essential role in epithelial 
differentiation of the visceral endoderm and resulted in early embryonic death.
In the present study, we have specifically inactivated this gene in hepatocytes
and bile duct cells using the Cre/loxP system. Mutant animals exhibited severe
jaundice caused by abnormalities of the gallbladder and intrahepatic bile ducts
(IHBD). The paucity of small IHBD was linked to a failure in the organization of 
duct structures during liver organogenesis, suggesting an essential function of
Hnf1b in bile duct morphogenesis. Mutant mice also lacked interlobular arteries. 
As HNF1beta is not expressed in these cells, it further emphasizes the link
between arterial and biliary formation. Hepatocyte metabolism was also affected
and we identified hepatocyte-specific HNF1beta target genes involved in bile
acids sensing and in fatty acid oxidation.

PMID: 11934849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Development. 2002 Apr;129(8):1819-28.

The onecut transcription factor HNF6 is required for normal development of the
biliary tract.

Clotman F(1), Lannoy VJ, Reber M, Cereghini S, Cassiman D, Jacquemin P, Roskams
T, Rousseau GG, Lemaigre FP.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone and Metabolic Research Unit, Institute of Cellular Pathology and
Université catholique de Louvain, Avenue Hippocrate 75, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2003 Jan;124(1):263-4.

During liver development, hepatoblasts differentiate into hepatocytes or biliary 
epithelial cells (BEC). The BEC delineate the intrahepatic and extrahepatic bile 
ducts, and the gallbladder. The transcription factors that control the
development of the biliary tract are unknown. Previous work has shown that the
onecut transcription factor HNF6 is expressed in hepatoblasts and in the
gallbladder primordium. We now show that HNF6 is also expressed in the BEC of the
developing intrahepatic bile ducts, and investigate its involvement in biliary
tract development by analyzing the phenotype of Hnf6(-/-) mice. In these mice,
the gallbladder was absent, the extrahepatic bile ducts were abnormal and the
development of the intrahepatic bile ducts was perturbed in the prenatal period. 
The morphology of the intrahepatic bile ducts was identical to that seen in mice 
whose Hnf1beta gene has been conditionally inactivated in the liver. HNF1beta
expression was downregulated in the intrahepatic bile ducts of Hnf6(-/-) mice
during development. Furthermore, we found that HNF6 can stimulate the Hnf1beta
promoter. We conclude that HNF6 is essential for differentiation and
morphogenesis of the biliary tract and that intrahepatic bile duct development is
controlled by a HNF6-->HNF1beta cascade.

PMID: 11934848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Kidney Int. 2002 Apr;61(4):1243-51.

Solitary functioning kidney and diverse genital tract malformations associated
with hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta mutations.

Bingham C(1), Ellard S, Cole TR, Jones KE, Allen LI, Goodship JA, Goodship TH,
Bakalinova-Pugh D, Russell GI, Woolf AS, Nicholls AJ, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine and Diabetes Research, School of Postgraduate 
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, Devon, United Kingdom.
c.bingham@exeter.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Renal tract malformations are, on occasion, associated with uterine
malformations. The transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1beta is 
expressed from the earliest stages of development of the Wolffian duct, the
mesonephros and metanephros, and the Müllerian ducts in the mouse. In adult mice 
HNF-1beta is expressed in the kidney tubules, collecting ducts, and in the
oviducts and uterus in the female (Müllerian duct derivatives) and in the
epididymis, vas deferens and seminal vesicles (Wolffian duct derivatives) in the 
male. HNF-1beta mutations have been reported in two families where affected
members have renal abnormalities, female genital tract malformations and
early-onset diabetes. Renal and uterine abnormalities have not been described in 
families without early-onset diabetes.
METHODS: We sequenced the HNF-1beta gene in nine subjects with renal
abnormalities and a personal or family history of female genital tract
malformations, but no history of diabetes.
RESULTS: Two families were identified with novel HNF-1beta mutations: a missense 
mutation in exon 2 with conversion of serine to proline at codon 151 (S151P) and 
a frameshift mutation in exon 3 with a 1 base pair deletion at codon 243
(Q243fsdelC). The S151P mutation proband has cystic kidneys and uterus didelphys.
Her affected second son has renal cysts and hypospadias. The Q243fsdelC proband
has a single functioning kidney and her two children have renal dysplasia.
Histology in one child shows cystic dysplasia with a lack of glomeruli. The
proband's sister is a mutation carrier and has a bicornuate uterus. Diabetes is
not a feature in either family.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms an association between HNF-1beta mutations and
renal and Müllerian anomalies. The hypospadias may be coincidental. This study
describes the first HNF-1beta mutations that are associated with a single
functioning kidney and the absence of diabetes. This study further reinforces the
variability of the renal and non-renal phenotypes associated with HNF-1beta
mutations.

PMID: 11918730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Diabetologia. 2002 Mar;45(3):427-35.

The genetic abnormality in the beta cell determines the response to an oral
glucose load.

Stride A(1), Vaxillaire M, Tuomi T, Barbetti F, Njølstad PR, Hansen T, Costa A,
Conget I, Pedersen O, Søvik O, Lorini R, Groop L, Froguel P, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Postgraduate School of Medicine 
and Health Science, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We assessed how the role of genes genetic causation in causing
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) alters the response to an oral
glucose tolerance test (OGTT).
METHODS: We studied OGTT in 362 MODY subjects, from seven European centres; 245
had glucokinase gene mutations and 117 had Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor -1 alpha (
HNF-1alpha) gene mutations.
RESULTS: BMI and age were similar in the genetically defined groups. Fasting
plasma glucose (FPG) was less than 5.5 mmol/l in 2 % glucokinase subjects and 46 
% HNF-1 alpha subjects ( p < 0.0001). Glucokinase subjects had a higher FPG than 
HNF-1 alpha subjects ([means +/- SD] 6.8 +/- 0.8 vs 6.0 +/- 1.9 mmol/l, p <
0.0001), a lower 2-h value (8.9 +/- 2.3 vs 11.2 +/- 5.2 mmol/l, p < 0.0001) and a
lower OGTT increment (2-h - fasting) (2.1 +/- 2.3 vs 5.2 +/- 3.9 mmol/l, p <
0.0001). The relative proportions classified as diabetic depended on whether
fasting (38 % vs 22 %, glucokinase vs HNF-1 alpha) or 2-h values (19 % vs 44 %)
were used. Fasting and 2-h glucose values were not correlated in the glucokinase 
subjects ( r = -0.047, p = 0.65) but were strongly correlated in HNF-1 alpha
subjects ( r = 0.8, p < 0.001). Insulin concentrations were higher in the
glucokinase subjects throughout the OGTT.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The genetic cause of the beta-cell defect results in
clear differences in both the fasting glucose and the response to an oral glucose
load and this can help diagnostic genetic testing in MODY. OGTT results reflect
not only the degree of hyperglycaemia but also the underlying cause.

PMID: 11914749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2002 Feb 25;188(1-2):99-109.

Stimulation of the alpha-fetoprotein promoter by unliganded thyroid hormone
receptor in association with protein deacetylation.

Van Reeth T(1), Gabant P, Szpirer C, Szpirer J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement, Dept. de Biologie Moleculaire, IBMM,
Université Libre de Bruxelles,Rue Profs. Jeener & Brachet 12, B-6041 Gosselies,
Belgium.

alpha-Fetoprotein (AFP) is a serum protein expressed during fetal life, the
expression of which is shut off after birth. The activity of the mouse Afp gene
promoter region comprised between -80 and -38 bp is regulated by the thyroid
hormone receptor (T3R): negatively in the presence of T3 and positively in the
absence of T3. The stimulating effect of unliganded T3R is, unexpectedly,
antagonized by cofactors that have histone-acetyl-transferase activity, or by
sodium butyrate, which inhibits histone acetylases (HDACs). The unliganded T3R
stimulating activity effect is thus associated with protein deacetylation,
contrary to the usual situation. In combination with previous results, our
observations suggest that T3-mediated down regulation of the Afp promoter is due 
to T3-induced protein acetylation leading to loss of a nucleosomal structure
(required for promoter activity) and chromatin opening.

PMID: 11911950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Mar 19;99(6):3818-23.

Profound defects in pancreatic beta-cell function in mice with combined
heterozygous mutations in Pdx-1, Hnf-1alpha, and Hnf-3beta.

Shih DQ(1), Heimesaat M, Kuwajima S, Stein R, Wright CV, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Defects in pancreatic beta-cell function contribute to the development of type 2 
diabetes, a polygenic disease that is characterized by insulin resistance and
compromised insulin secretion. Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) -1alpha, -3beta,
-4alpha, and Pdx-1 contribute in the complex transcriptional circuits within the 
pancreas that are involved in beta-cell development and function. In mice, a
heterozygous mutation in Pdx-1 alone, but not Hnf-1alpha(+/-), Hnf-3beta(+/-), or
Hnf-4alpha(+/-), causes impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in mice. To
investigate the possible functional relationships between these transcription
factors on beta-cell activity in vivo, we generated mice with the following
combined heterozygous mutations: Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-),
Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-), Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-4alpha(+/-),
Hnf-1alpha(+/-)/Hnf-4alpha(+/-), and Hnf-3beta(+/-)/Hnf-4alpha(+/-). The greatest
loss in function was in combined heterozygous null alleles of Pdx-1 and
Hnf-1alpha (Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-)), or Pdx-1 and Hnf-3beta
(Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-)). Both double mutants develop progressively impaired
glucose tolerance and acquire a compromised first- and second-phase insulin
secretion profile in response to glucose compared with Pdx-1(+/-) mice alone. The
loss in beta-cell function in Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-) mice was associated with 
decreased expression of Nkx-6.1, glucokinase (Gck), aldolase B (aldo-B), and
insulin, whereas Nkx2.2, Nkx-6.1, Glut-2, Gck, aldo-B, the liver isoform of
pyruvate kinase, and insulin expression was reduced in Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-)
mice. The islet cell architecture was also abnormal in Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-) 
and Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-) mice, with glucagon-expressing cells scattered
throughout the islet, a defect that may be connected to decreased E-cadherin
expression. Our data suggest that functional interactions between key islet
regulatory factors play an important role in maintaining islet architecture and
beta-cell function. These studies also established polygenic mouse models for
investigating the mechanisms contributing to beta-cell dysfunction in diabetes.

PMCID: PMC122607
PMID: 11904435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 2;99(7):4614-9. Epub 2002 Mar 19.

HNF-1alpha G319S, a transactivation-deficient mutant, is associated with altered 
dynamics of diabetes onset in an Oji-Cree community.

Triggs-Raine BL(1), Kirkpatrick RD, Kelly SL, Norquay LD, Cattini PA, Yamagata K,
Hanley AJ, Zinman B, Harris SB, Barrett PH, Hegele RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada R3E 0W3.

The prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus in the Oji-Cree of northwestern
Ontario is the third highest in the world. A private mutation, G319S, in HNF1A,
which encodes hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha), was associated with
Oji-Cree type 2 diabetes and was found in approximately 40% of affected subjects.
The G319S mutation reduced the in vitro ability of HNF-1alpha to activate
transcription by approximately 50%, with no effect on DNA binding or protein
stability. There was no evidence of a dominant negative effect of the mutant
protein. The impact of the G319S mutation at the population level was assessed by
classifying subjects with type 2 diabetes according to HNF1A genotype and
plotting the cumulative age of onset of diabetes. Disease onset was modeled
satisfactorily by two-parameter sigmoidal functions for all diabetic subjects and
all three HNF1A genotypes. Pairwise statistical comparisons showed significant
between-genotype differences in t50 (all P < 0.00001), corresponding to the age
at which half the subjects had become diabetic. Each dose of G319S accelerated
median disease onset by approximately 7 years. Thus, the
transactivation-deficient HNF1A G319S mutation affects the dynamics of disease
onset. The demonstration of a functional consequence for HNF1A G319S provides a
mechanistic basis for its strong association with Oji-Cree type 2 diabetes and
its unparalleled specificity for diabetes prediction in these people, in whom
diabetes presents a significant public health dilemma. The findings also show
that HNF1A mutations can be associated with typical adult-onset insulin-resistant
obesity-related diabetes in addition to maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

PMCID: PMC123696
PMID: 11904371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2002 Apr;282(4):L757-65.

Cell-specific involvement of HNF-1beta in alpha(1)-antitrypsin gene expression in
human respiratory epithelial cells.

Hu C(1), Perlmutter DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

The synergistic action of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and HNF-4 plays 
an important role in expression of the alpha(1)-antitrypsin (alpha(1)-AT) gene in
human hepatic and intestinal epithelial cells. Recent studies have indicated that
the alpha(1)-AT gene is also expressed in human pulmonary alveolar epithelial
cells, a potentially important local site of the lung antiprotease defense. In
this study, we examined the possibility that alpha(1)-AT gene expression in a
human pulmonary epithelial cell line H441 was also directed by the synergistic
action of HNF-1alpha and HNF-4 and/or by the action of HNF-3, which has been
shown to play a dominant role in gene expression in H441 cells. The results show 
that alpha(1)-AT gene expression in H441 cells is predominantly driven by
HNF-1beta, even though HNF-1beta has no effect on alpha(1)-AT gene expression in 
human hepatic Hep G2 and human intestinal epithelial Caco-2 cell lines.
Expression of alpha(1)-AT and HNF-1beta was also demonstrated in primary cultures
of human respiratory epithelial cells. HNF-4 has no effect on alpha(1)-AT gene
expression in H441 cells, even when it is cotransfected with HNF-1beta or
HNF-1alpha. HNF-3 by itself has little effect on alpha(1)-AT gene expression in
H441, Hep G2, or Caco-2 cells but tends to have an upregulating effect when
cotransfected with HNF-1 in Hep G2 and Caco-2 cells. These results indicate the
unique involvement of HNF-1beta in alpha(1)-AT gene expression in a cell line and
primary cultures derived from human respiratory epithelium.

PMID: 11880302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 17;277(20):17564-70. Epub 2002 Mar 1.

Foxa2 (HNF3beta ) controls multiple genes implicated in metabolism-secretion
coupling of glucose-induced insulin release.

Wang H(1), Gauthier BR, Hagenfeldt-Johansson KA, Iezzi M, Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Biochemistry, Department of Internal Medicine, University
Medical Center, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Haiyan.Wang@medicine.unige.ch

The transcription factor Foxa2 is implicated in blood glucose homeostasis.
Conditional expression of Foxa2 or its dominant-negative mutant DN-Foxa2 in INS-1
cells reveals that Foxa2 regulates the expression of genes important for glucose 
sensing in pancreatic beta-cells. Overexpression of Foxa2 results in blunted
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, whereas induction of DN-Foxa2 causes a left
shift of glucose-induced insulin release. The mRNA levels of GLUT2 and
glucokinase are drastically decreased after induction of Foxa2. In contrast, loss
of Foxa2 function leads to up-regulation of hexokinase (HK) I and II and
glucokinase (HK-IV) mRNA expression. The glucokinase and the low K(m) hexokinase 
activities as well as glycolysis are increased proportionally. In addition,
induction of DN-Foxa2 also reduces the expression of beta-cell K(ATP) channel
subunits Sur1 and Kir6.2 by 70%. Furthermore, in contrast to previous reports,
induction of Foxa2 causes pronounced decreases in the HNF4alpha and HNF1alpha
mRNA levels. Foxa2 fails to regulate the expression of Pdx1 transcripts. The
expression of insulin and islet amyloid polypeptide is markedly suppressed after 
induction of Foxa2, while the glucagon mRNA levels are significantly increased.
Conversely, Foxa2 is required for glucagon expression in these INS-1-derived
cells. These results suggest that Foxa2 is a vital transcription factor evolved
to control the expression of genes essential for maintaining beta-cell glucose
sensing and glucose homeostasis.

PMID: 11875061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Diabetologia. 2002 Jan;45(1):154-5.

Identification of a gain-of-function mutation in the HNF-1beta gene in a Japanese
family with MODY.

Yoshiuchi I, Yamagata K, Zhu Q, Tamada I, Takahashi Y, Onigata K, Takeda J,
Miyagawa J, Matsuzawa Y.

PMID: 11845238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Diabetologia. 2002 Jan;45(1):153-4.

A novel hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (MODY-5) gene mutation in an Italian
family with renal dysfunctions and early-onset diabetes.

Carbone I, Cotellessa M, Barella C, Minetti C, Ghiggeri GM, Caridi G, Perfumo F, 
Lorini R.

PMID: 11845237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Acta Diabetol. 2001;38(3):123-7.

Mutation in hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha is not a common cause of MODY and
early-onset type 2 diabetes in Korea.

Lee HJ(1), Ahn CW, Kim SJ, Song YD, Lim SK, Kim KR, Lee HC, Huh KB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Sudaemungu, Seoul, Korea.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)-3 with a mutation in hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha has been identified in most races, but the prevalence
of Korean MODY and early-onset type 2 diabetes with a mutation in this gene is
unknown. To determine the prevalence of MODY and early-onset type 2 diabetes with
the mutation of HNF-1alpha gene in Korea, we analyzed this gene in 69 Korean
early-onset type 2 diabetics and in 35 healthy persons using the single-strand
conformation polymorphism (SSCP) technique and direct sequencing. We identified
one mutation in exon 4 (C900A) in only one of the 69 Korean subjects with
early-onset type 2 diabetes; this mutation was silent and did not change the
amino acid (Pro300). Additionally, we identified four polymorphisms: S487N,
AAC-->AGC, intron 2 (nt -23), intron 7: (nt +7) and intron 9 (nt -24). However,
there was no significant difference in frequencies of the four polymorphisms
between the type 2 diabetes and control groups. Among type 2 diabetics, codon 487
variant showed no relationship to age at onset, body mass index, fasting blood
glucose, HbA1c, lipid profile, basal C-peptide and 2 hour C-peptide. We concluded
that this genetic mutation in HNF-1alpha gene may not be a common contributor to 
MODY and early-onset type 2 diabetes susceptibility in Korea.

PMID: 11827432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Mol Genet Genomics. 2002 Jan;266(5):832-7. Epub 2001 Nov 7.

A role for HNF-3 in the regulation of the HNF-1 gene of the Atlantic salmon.

Stenson-Cox C(1), McNair A, Curley M, Smith T, Gannon F.

Author information: 
(1)National Diagnostics Centre/BioResearch Ireland, National University of
Ireland, Galway. catherine.m.stenson@nuigalway.ie

Hepatocyte nuclear factors -1 (HNF-1) and -3 (HNF-3) are hepatocyte-enriched
transcription factors that are central to the establishment and maintenance of
the liver phenotype in vertebrates. In the present study we demonstrate that, in 
the Atlantic salmon, asHNF-3 regulates the expression of the gene for asHNF-1.
Multiple putative binding sites for asHNF-3 were identified within the 5'
flanking region of the HNF-1 gene using a computer-based algorithm, and these
were confirmed to be functional by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. In
transient transfection assays it was shown that co-expression of asHNF-3 leads to
a decrease in the promoter activity of the 5' flanking region of the asHNF-1
gene.

PMID: 11810258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Diabetes Nutr Metab. 2001 Oct;14(5):288-91.

Identification of a new mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in 
a Polish family with early-onset type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Malecki MT(1), Klupa T, Frey J, Cyganek K, Galicka-Stankowska D, Wanic K,
Sieradzki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Medical College, Jagiellonian University,
Krakow, Poland.

Recently, several genes associated with early-onset, autosomal dominant Type 2
diabetes (MODY) have been identified. Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 
(HNF)-1alpha gene seem to account for a substantial proportion of this type of
diabetes in several populations. However, it is still of interest to estimate the
frequency of HNF-1alpha mutations in various ethnic groups. The aim of our study 
was to determine the contribution of the HNF-1alpha gene to the development of
MODY in a Polish population. We selected 15 families with MODY for this project. 
The 10 exons and promoter region of the gene were screened for sequence
differences by direct sequencing of probands DNA. We detected 7 previously
described polymorphisms that were not associated with diabetes. However, one
sequence difference, a deletion of a cytosine in codon 225 in exon 3 (designated 
S225fdelC), was a new mutation resulting in a frame shift and synthesis of a
nonsense peptide from amino acid 225 to 232 followed by the stop codon. Thus, the
S225fdelC mutation effectively caused the loss of a part of the DNA binding
domain and the entire transactivation domain. This mutation was present in 4
affected members of the family. They developed diabetes at an early age (mean age
at diagnosis 23 yr) and were characterized by severely impaired insulin
secretion. In addition, one family member who was not a carrier of the S225fdelC 
mutation was diagnosed with diabetes. Thus, he represents an example of
phenocopy. In conclusion, we have identified a new HNF-1alpha variant that
represents the first MODY mutation described in a Polish population. MODY3
mutations, including those in the exon 4 "hot spot", do not appear to be a very
common cause of MODY in the Polish population.

PMID: 11806470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. J Hepatol. 2002 Jan;36(1):142-5.

HNF-1 alpha: have bile acid transport genes found their "master"?

Arrese M(1), Karpen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Catholic University of Chile School of
Medicine, Santiago, Chile.

PMID: 11804680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Diabetes. 2002 Jan;51(1):114-23.

Overexpression of dominant-negative mutant hepatocyte nuclear fctor-1 alpha in
pancreatic beta-cells causes abnormal islet architecture with decreased
expression of E-cadherin, reduced beta-cell proliferation, and diabetes.

Yamagata K(1), Nammo T, Moriwaki M, Ihara A, Iizuka K, Yang Q, Satoh T, Li M,
Uenaka R, Okita K, Iwahashi H, Zhu Q, Cao Y, Imagawa A, Tochino Y, Hanafusa T,
Miyagawa J, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan. kazu@imed2.osaka-u.ac.jp

One subtype of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)-3 results from
mutations in the gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha. We
generated transgenic mice expressing a naturally occurring dominant-negative form
of human HNF-1 alpha (P291fsinsC) in pancreatic beta-cells. A progressive
hyperglycemia with age was seen in these transgenic mice, and the mice developed 
diabetes with impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. The pancreatic
islets exhibited abnormal architecture with reduced expression of glucose
transporter (GLUT2) and E-cadherin. Blockade of E-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion
in pancreatic islets abolished the glucose-stimulated increases in intracellular 
Ca(2+) levels and insulin secretion, suggesting that loss of E-cadherin in
beta-cells is associated with impaired insulin secretion. There was also a
reduction in beta-cell number (50%), proliferation rate (15%), and pancreatic
insulin content (45%) in 2-day-old transgenic mice and a further reduction in
4-week-old animals. Our findings suggest various roles for HNF-1 alpha in normal 
glucose metabolism, including the regulation of glucose transport, beta-cell
growth, and beta-cell-to-beta-cell communication.

PMID: 11756330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Exp Med. 2001 Dec 3;194(11):1683-9.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha controls the expression of terminal complement
genes.

Pontoglio M(1), Pausa M, Doyen A, Viollet B, Yaniv M, Tedesco F.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique URA
1644, Département de Biotechnologie, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris cedex 15,
France. marcop@pasteur.fr

The terminal components of the complement system contribute to host defense by
forming the multiprotein membrane attack complex (MAC) which is responsible for
cell lysis and several noncytotoxic effects. Most of the complement proteins are 
synthesized in the liver, but the mechanisms controlling their tissue-specific
expression have not been elucidated. In this study we show that mice lacking the 
hepatic transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) fail to
transcribe C5 and C8A complement genes. In addition, mRNAs encoding for several
other terminal complement components or subunits are expressed at lower levels,
including C8beta, C8gamma, and C9. We next used a reconstitution assay involving 
human sera with selective complement deficiencies to assess mouse complement
activity. Sera from HNF1alpha-deficient mice showed negligible hemolytic activity
of both C5 and C8alpha-gamma subunits. The activity of C8beta was severely
affected despite only a 50% reduction in C8beta mRNA levels in the liver. This is
reminiscent of C8alpha-gamma-deficient patients who accumulate extremely low
levels of the C8beta subunit. Our results demonstrate that HNF1alpha plays a key 
role in the expression of C5 and C8A genes, two terminal complement component
genes that are essential for the assembly of MAC as a result of complement
activation.

PMCID: PMC2193531
PMID: 11733582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 4;98(25):14189-91.

Dissecting the transcriptional network of pancreatic islets during development
and differentiation.

Shih DQ(1), Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 4;98(25):14481-6.

PMCID: PMC64655
PMID: 11734636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Genes Dev. 2001 Dec 1;15(23):3217-29.

vhnf1, the MODY5 and familial GCKD-associated gene, regulates regional
specification of the zebrafish gut, pronephros, and hindbrain.

Sun Z(1), Hopkins N.

Author information: 
(1)Biology Department and Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Mutations in the homeobox gene vHnf1 are associated with human diseases MODY5
(maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type V) and familial GCKD (glomerulocystic
kidney disease). In an insertional mutagenesis screen in zebrafish, we isolated
mutant alleles of vhnf1. Phenotypes of these mutants include formation of kidney 
cysts, underdevelopment of the pancreas and the liver, and reduction in size of
the otic vesicles. We show that these abnormalities arise from patterning defects
during development. We further provide evidence that vhnf1 regulates the
expression of key patterning genes for these organs. vhnf1 is required for the
proper expression of pdx1 and shh (sonic hedgehog) in the gut endoderm, pax2 and 
wt1 in the pronephric primordial, and valentino (val) in the hindbrain.
Complementary to the loss-of-function phenotypes, overexpression of vhnf1 induces
expansion of the val expression domain in the hindbrain. We propose that vhnf1
controls development of multiple organs through regulating regional specification
of organ primordia. The similarity between vhnf1-associated fish phenotypes and
human symptoms suggests a correlation between developmental functions of vhnf1
and the molecular etiology of MODY5 and GCKD.

PMCID: PMC312837
PMID: 11731484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Chin Med J (Engl). 2001 Nov;114(11):1147-50.

An automated fluorescent single strand conformation polymorphism technique for
high throughput mutation screening.

Weng J(1), Lehto M, Berglund A, Groop LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yet-San
University of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou 510080, China.
gzwengjp@public.guangzhou.gd.cn

OBJECTIVE: To develop a high throughput mutational detection method by multiple
fluorescence-labeled polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products.
METHODS: A total of 27 known mutations including 22 substitutions, 3 insertions
(1, 2 and 7 bp) and 2 deletions (1 and 2 bp) in the hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-4 alpha, glucokinase and HNF-1 alpha genes were tested. During nested PCR, 
amplified fragments were labeled with three fluorescent dyes. PCR products were
visualized with an ABI-377 fluorescence sequencer using 5% glycerol or 10%
sucrose in non-denaturing gel conditions.
RESULTS: Twenty-five of 27 variants (93%) could be detected by combining 5%
glycerol and 10% sucrose gel matrix conditions. Twenty-two of 27 (82%) and 18 of 
27 (67%) variants were identified using 5% glycerol and 10% sucrose conditions,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: This fluorescence-based PCR single strand conformation polymorphism
technique represents a simple, non-hazardous, time-saving and sensitive method
for high throughput mutation detection.

PMID: 11729508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 22;277(8):6413-21. Epub 2001 Nov 27.

Dominant-negative suppression of HNF-1 alpha results in mitochondrial
dysfunction, INS-1 cell apoptosis, and increased sensitivity to ceramide-, but
not to high glucose-induced cell death.

Wobser H(1), Düssmann H, Kögel D, Wang H, Reimertz C, Wollheim CB, Byrne MM,
Prehn JH.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research (IZKF), Research Group
Apoptosis and Cell Death, Westphalian Wilhelms-University, D-48149 Münster,
Germany.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) 3 is a monogenic form of diabetes
caused by mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1
alpha. We investigated the involvement of apoptotic events in INS-1 insulinoma
cells overexpressing wild-type HNF-1 alpha (WT-HNF-1 alpha) or a
dominant-negative mutant (DN-HNF-1 alpha) under control of a
doxycycline-dependent transcriptional activator. Forty-eight h after induction of
DN-HNF-1 alpha, INS-1 cells activated caspase-3 and underwent apoptotic cell
death, while cells overexpressing WT-HNF-1 alpha remained viable. Mitochondrial
cytochrome c release and activation of caspase-9 accompanied DN-HNF-1
alpha-induced apoptosis, suggesting the involvement of the mitochondrial
apoptosis pathway. Activation of caspases was preceded by mitochondrial
hyperpolarization and decreased expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-xL. 
Transient overexpression of Bcl-xL was sufficient to rescue INS-1 cells from
DN-HNF-1 alpha-induced apoptosis. Both WT- and DN-HNF-1 alpha-expressing cells
demonstrated similar increases in apoptosis when cultured at high glucose (25
mm). In contrast, induction of DN-HNF-1 alpha highly sensitized cells to ceramide
toxicity. In cells cultured at low glucose, DN-HNF-1 alpha induction also caused 
up-regulation of the cell cycle inhibitor p27(KIP1). Therefore, our data indicate
that increased sensitivity to the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway and decreased
cell proliferation may account for the progressive loss of beta-cell function
seen in MODY 3 subjects.

PMID: 11724785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 Dec;60(6):1421-30.

Regulation of flavin-containing monooxygenase 1 expression by ying yang 1 and
hepatic nuclear factors 1 and 4.

Luo Z(1), Hines RN.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Pharmacology and Toxicology, Birth Defects
Research Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226-4801,
USA.

The flavin-containing monooxygenases (FMOs) are important for the oxidation of a 
variety of environmental toxicants, natural products, and therapeutics.
Consisting of six family members (FMO1-5), these enzymes exhibit distinct but
broad and overlapping substrate specificity and are expressed in a highly tissue-
and species-selective manner. Corresponding to previously identified regulatory
domains, a YY1 binding site was identified at the major rabbit FMO1 promoter,
position -8 to -2, two overlapping HNF1alpha sites, position -132 to -105, and
two HNF4alpha sites, position -467 to -454 and -195 to -182. Cotransfection
studies with HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha expression vectors demonstrated a major role
for each of these factors in enhancing FMO1 promoter activity. In contrast, YY1
was shown by site-directed mutagenesis to be dispensable for basal promoter
activity but suppressed the ability of the upstream domains to enhance
transcription. Finally, comparisons between rabbit and human FMO1 demonstrated
conservation of each of these regulatory elements. With the exception of the most
distal HNF4alpha site, each of the orthologous human sequences also was able to
compete with rabbit FMO1 cis-elements for specific protein binding. These data
are consistent with these same elements being important for regulating human FMO1
developmental- and tissue-specific expression.

PMID: 11723251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Diabetologia. 2001 Nov;44(11):2098-103.

MODY in Iceland is associated with mutations in HNF-1alpha and a novel mutation
in NeuroD1.

Kristinsson SY(1), Thorolfsdottir ET, Talseth B, Steingrimsson E, Thorsson AV,
Helgason T, Hreidarsson AB, Arngrimsson R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland,
Reykjavik, Iceland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Five different types of maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) have been identified until now but mutation screening suggests that more
MODY genes exist. Mutations in genes encoding transcription factors essential for
normal development and function of pancreatic beta cells has recently become
important in studying the genetics of Type II (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes
mellitus. Patients with MODY and their families in Iceland were screened for
mutations in the transcription factor genes.
METHODS: Clinical and biochemical information on individuals with MODY was
collected and their family trees constructed. Linkage analysis was carried out on
chromosomal regions known to harbour genes previously shown to be associated with
MODY. Mutations were identified by direct sequencing.
RESULTS: Three families were identified. Two of these showed linkage to
chromosome 12 and carried mutations in exon 4 of the HNF-1alpha gene (290fsdelC
and R272C). However, the third family showed no linkage to the previously
described MODY genes but shared a novel mutation in the NeuroD1 gene on
chromosome 2q32. This mutation, a glutamate to lysine substitution at codon 110, 
resides in the basic domain of the protein.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Mutations in MODY subjects have been identified in the
Icelandic population. In addition this study identified the NeuroD1 gene as the
gene responsible for the sixth type of MODY.

PMID: 11719843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 4;98(25):14481-6. Epub 2001 Nov 20.

A transcription factor regulatory circuit in differentiated pancreatic cells.

Boj SF(1), Parrizas M, Maestro MA, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Hormonal Biochemistry Units, Hospital Clinic Universitari,
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Villarroel 170, 08036
Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 4;98(25):14189-91.

Mutations in the human genes encoding hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF) 1alpha,
1beta, 4alpha, and IPF1(PDX1/IDX1/STF1) result in pancreatic beta cell
dysfunction and diabetes mellitus. In hepatocytes, hnf4alpha controls the
transcription of hnf1alpha, suggesting that this same interaction may operate in 
beta cells and thus account for the common diabetic phenotype. We show that, in
pancreatic islet and exocrine cells, hnf4alpha expression unexpectedly depends on
hnf1alpha. This effect is tissue-specific and mediated through direct occupation 
by hnf1alpha of an alternate promoter located 45.6 kb from the previously
characterized hnf4alpha promoter. Hnf1alpha also exerts direct control of
pancreatic-specific expression of hnf4gamma and hnf3gamma. Hnf1alpha dependence
of hnf4alpha, hnf4gamma, hnf3gamma, and two previously characterized distal
targets (glut2 and pklr) is established only after differentiated cells arise
during pancreatic embryonic development. These studies define an unexpected
hierarchical regulatory relationship between two genes involved in human
monogenic diabetes in the cells, which are relevant to its pathophysiology.
Furthermore, they indicate that hnf1alpha is an essential component of a
transcription factor circuit whose role may be to maintain differentiated
functions of pancreatic cells.

PMCID: PMC64707
PMID: 11717395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Diabetes Nutr Metab. 2001 Aug;14(4):220-4.

Lack of association between hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta gene and common forms
of type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population.

Babaya N(1), Ikegami H, Fujisawa T, Hotta M, Ueda H, Shintani M, Nojima K,
Kawabata Y, Ono M, Nishino M, Itoi-Babaya M, Taniguchi H, Noso S, Horiki M,
Yamada K, Kawaguchi Y, Fukuda M, Ogihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita, Japan.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) gene have been shown
to be a cause of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). We studied the
contribution of the HNF-1beta gene to susceptibility to common forms of Type 2
diabetes in the genetically homogeneous Japanese population, by investigating the
allelic association of Type 2 diabetes with two markers in the HNF-1beta region. 
The frequency of a nonsense mutation, R177X, which was previously reported in a
Japanese family, was also studied by the polymerase chain reaction-restriction
fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) method using a mismatch primer. A total
of 200 subjects were studied. There was no significant difference in allele
frequencies of either of the two polymorphisms studied between patients with Type
2 diabetes and control subjects, or between subgroups of patients subdivided by
the presence of mild or severe diabetic nephropathy. None of the subjects studied
had R177X mutation, giving a frequency of less than 1.1% in common forms of Type 
2 diabetes in Japan. These results suggest that mutations in the HNF-1beta gene
derived from a limited number of founders are not a major cause of common forms
of Type 2 diabetes, even in the genetically homogeneous Japanese population.

PMID: 11716293  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Endocrinology. 2001 Dec;142(12):5311-20.

Beta-cell-targeted expression of a dominant-negative hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 
alpha induces a maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)3-like phenotype in
transgenic mice.

Hagenfeldt-Johansson KA(1), Herrera PL, Wang H, Gjinovci A, Ishihara H, Wollheim 
CB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Biochemistry, Department of Internal Medicine, University
Medical Center, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1
alpha) cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young 3, a severe form of diabetes
characterized by pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. We have used targeted
expression of a dominant-negative mutant of HNF-1 alpha to specifically suppress 
HNF-1 alpha function in beta-cells of transgenic mice. We show that males
expressing the mutant protein became overtly diabetic within 6 wk of age, whereas
females displayed glucose intolerance. Transgenic males exhibited impaired
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, detected both in vivo and in the perfused
pancreas. Pancreatic insulin content was markedly decreased in diabetic animals, 
whereas the glucagon content was increased. Postnatal islet development was
altered, with an increased alpha-cell to beta-cell ratio. beta-Cell
ultrastructure showed signs of severe beta-cell damage, including mitochondrial
swelling. This animal model of maturity-onset diabetes of the young 3 should be
useful for the further elucidation of the mechanism by which HNF-1 alpha
deficiency causes beta-cell dysfunction in this disease.

PMID: 11713231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2001 Dec;281(6):F1082-91.

Murine and human type I Na-phosphate cotransporter genes: structure and promoter 
activity.

Soumounou Y(1), Gauthier C, Tenenhouse HS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University-Montreal Children's Hospital Research Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3Z 2Z3.

Na-phosphate (P(i)) cotransporters in the apical membrane of renal proximal
tubular cells play a major role in the maintenance of P(i) homeostasis. Although 
two such cotransporters, Npt1 and Npt2, have been identified, little is known
about the function and regulation of Npt1. We cloned and characterized the murine
(Npt1) and human (NPT1) genes, isolated the 5'-flanking region of Npt1, and
analyzed its promoter activity. Npt1 is approximately 29 kb with 12 exons,
whereas NPT1 is approximately 49 kb with one additional exon. The Npt1 promoter
has a TATA-like box but no CAAT box, and the transcription start site was
identified by primer extension and 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends.
Transfection of opossum kidney cells with Npt1 promoter-reporter gene constructs 
demonstrated significant activity in a 570-bp fragment that was completely
inhibited by cotransfection with the transcription factor, hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-3 beta. Deletion of 200 bp from the 3'-end of the 570-bp fragment
abrogated its promoter activity. In addition, promoter activity of a 4.5-kb
fragment, but not the 570-bp fragment, was stimulated fourfold by cotransfection 
with HNF-1 alpha. Other well-characterized cis-acting elements were identified in
the Npt1 promoter. We suggest that Npt1 expression is transcriptionally regulated
and provide a basis for the investigation of Npt1 function by targeted
mutagenesis.

PMID: 11704559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Diabetologia. 2001 Oct;44(10):1326-9.

Early-onset Type II diabetes mellitus in Italian families due to mutations in the
genes encoding hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha and glucokinase.

Gragnoli C(1), Cockburn BN, Chiaramonte F, Gorini A, Marietti G, Marozzi G,
Signorini AM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology and Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
cgragnoli@partners.org

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2002 May;45(5):748.
    Diabetologia. 2002 May;45(5):747.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Maturity-onset-diabetes of the young (MODY) is caused by
mutations in at least five different genes. Our aim was to determine the
prevalence of the most common MODY genes in Italian families with early-onset
Type II (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: We screened 28 Italian early-onset Type II diabetic families (diagnosis 
< 35 years) for mutations in the hepatic nuclear factor-4 alpha, (MODY1),
glucokinase (MODY2) and hepatic nuclear factor-1 alpha (MODY3). Both strands of
exons, flanking introns and minimal promoter regions of the above-mentioned genes
were amplified using polymerase chain reaction and were sequenced directly.
RESULTS: We identified four different mutations, three of which are not
described, (W113X, G42P43fsCC --> A, H514R) and four new polymorphisms (G184G,
T513T, IVS3-nt47delG, IVS1- nt53C --> G) in the hepatic nuclear factor-1 alpha
gene, two new potential mutations (G44S, IVS4nt + 7C --> T) and three new
polymorphisms (promoter-nt84C --> G, IVS9 + nt8C --> T, IVS9 + nt49G --> A) in
the glucokinase gene, and a new polymorphism (IVS1c-nt11T --> G) in the hepatic
nuclear factor-4 alpha gene.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Mutations in the hepatic nuclear factor-1 alpha and
glucokinase are associated with Type II diabetes in 14 % and 7 % of Italian
families, respectively. Our findings provide an impetus for screening Italian
MODY and early-non Type II diabetic families for mutations in the above mentioned
genes to identify relatives at risk who could benefit from primary prevention
care. [

PMID: 11692182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Nov 9;288(4):833-40.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors-1alpha, -1beta, and -3beta expressed in the gonad of
tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus).

Huang WT(1), Gong HY, Lin CJ, Weng CF, Chen MH, Wu JL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Zoology, Academia Sinica, Nankang, Taipei, Taiwan, 11529,
Republic of China.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) are upstream regulators of many liver-specific 
genes and are involved in many cellular functions in the body, but their
existence, expression, and function in gonads are still poorly understood. Here
we report on the first cloning of partial cDNAs of HNF-1alpha and -1beta and full
HNF-3beta cDNA from a tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus) liver cDNA library. The
deduced amino acid sequence of tilapia HNF-3beta has a 90 to 96% identity with
those of other fishes (dwarf gourami, medaka, and zebrafish), 74% with mammals
(human, rat, and mouse), and 82% with Xenopus. RT-PCR detected IGF-I and -II and 
HNF-1alpha, -1beta, and -3beta in both liver and gonads and the identity of the
PCR fragments was confirmed by PCR hybridization. Immunoprecipitation and Western
blotting also detected all three HNF proteins in both liver and gonads.
Expression of HNFs in the gonads of the tilapia suggests that multi-HNFs may form
a cascade to regulate gonadal physiology in the bony fish.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11688983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Diabetes. 2001 Nov;50(11):2472-80.

Loss of HNF-1alpha function in mice leads to abnormal expression of genes
involved in pancreatic islet development and metabolism.

Shih DQ(1), Screenan S, Munoz KN, Philipson L, Pontoglio M, Yaniv M, Polonsky KS,
Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, the Rockefeller University, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF-1alpha) lead to maturity-onset
diabetes of the young type 3 as a result of impaired insulin secretory response
in pancreatic beta-cells. The expression of 50 genes essential for normal
beta-cell function was studied to better define the molecular mechanism
underlying the insulin secretion defect in Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice. We found
decreased steady-state mRNA levels of genes encoding glucose transporter 2
(Glut2), neutral and basic amino acid transporter, liver pyruvate kinase (L-Pk), 
and insulin in Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice. In addition, we determined that the
expression of several islet-enriched transcription factors, including Pdx-1,
Hnf-4alpha, and Neuro-D1/Beta-2, was reduced in Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice. These
changes in pancreatic islet mRNA levels were already apparent in newborn animals,
suggesting that loss of Hnf-1alpha function rather than chronic hyperglycemia is 
the primary cause of the altered gene expression. This expression profile was
pancreatic islet-specific and distinct from hepatocytes, where we found normal
expression of Glut2, L-Pk, and Hnf-4alpha in the liver of Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice.
The expression of small heterodimer partner (Shp-1), an orphan receptor that can 
heterodimerize with Hnf-4alpha and inhibit its transcriptional activity, was also
reduced in Hnf-1alpha(-/-) islets. We characterized a 0.58-kb Shp-1 promoter and 
determined that the decreased expression of Shp-1 may be indirectly mediated by a
downregulation of Hnf-4alpha. We further showed that Shp-1 can repress its own
transcriptional activation by inhibiting Hnf-4alpha function, thereby
establishing a feedback autoregulatory loop. Our results indicate that loss of
Hnf-1alpha function leads to altered expression of genes involved in
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, insulin synthesis, and beta-cell
differentiation.

PMID: 11679424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Gene. 2001 Aug 22;274(1-2):283-91.

Conserved as well as divergent regulatory elements account for expression of the 
human and rodent phenylalanine hydroxylase genes.

Bristeau A(1), Catherin A, Weiss MC, Faust DM.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, FRE 2364, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, 25
rue du Docteur Roux, 75724 Paris, France.

We have uncovered a fundamental difference in the regulation of the rodent and
the human phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genes: expression of human PAH is
independent of glucocorticoids and/or cAMP in contrast to the mouse gene which is
not only highly inducible but dependent upon hormones for expression.
Nevertheless, the two genes do exhibit similarities: DNaseI hypersensitive sites 
are identically located in the regulatory regions, and the sequences around these
sites are partially conserved and associated with regulatory elements sharing
similar function. In transient transfections, the human proximal promoter is
tissue-specific and presents significant activity compared to the extremely low
and ubiquitous activity of the mouse promoter. DNA fragments corresponding to the
two upstream hypersensitive sites of both genes have enhancer activity that
depends upon the liver-enriched transcription factor binding sites for hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF) 1 and/or CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP). While
expression of the rodent gene relies upon two modules in the HSIII enhancer, one 
activated by HNF1 and C/EBP and the other required for the hormone response, the 
human equivalent has conserved only the liver-specific transcription factor
binding module. Even though the more proximal enhancer is not necessary for full 
reporter gene activity in transient transfection assays in Pah-expressing
hepatoma cells, this enhancer could be required in both species for activation
during development.

PMID: 11675021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Hum Mutat. 2001 Oct;18(4):356-7.

Studies of the variability of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta /
TCF2) and the dimerization cofactor of HNF-1 (DcoH / PCBD) genes in relation to
type 2 diabetes mellitus and beta-cell function.

Ek J(1), Grarup N, Urhammer SA, Gaede PH, Drivsholm T, Borch-Johnsen K, Hansen T,
Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Mutations in the homeodomain-containing transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) are known to cause a rare subtype of maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY5), which is associated with early-onset progressive
non-diabetic renal dysfunction. To investigate whether mutations in HNF-1 are
implicated in the pathogenesis of MODY or late-onset diabetes with and without
nephropathy in Danish Caucasians we examined the HNF-1beta (TCF2) and the
dimerization cofactor of HNF-1 (DCoH, PCBD) genes for mutations in 11 MODY
probands, 28 type 2 diabetic patients with nephropathy, and 46 type 2 diabetic
patients with an impaired beta-cell function by combined single-strand
conformation polymorphism (SSCP) and heteroduplex analysis. Analysis of the
promoter and nine exons including intron-exon boundaries of the HNF-1beta gene
revealed one novel silent polymorphism and three previously reported intronic
variants. The silent polymorphism (I91I) was found in one patient with late-onset
type 2 diabetes. One of the intronic variant (IVS6+26T-->C) was examined further.
Among 584 type 2 diabetic patients the allelic frequency was 13.1% (11.2-15.0%)
compared to 11.6% (8.6-14.5%) in 229 glucose tolerant control subjects (NS). No
difference in insulin secretion during an OGTT was seen between carriers of the
different IVS6+26T-->C genotypes among the 229 middle-aged control subjects, nor 
among 302 glucose tolerant 60-year-old Danish Caucasians. Mutation analysis of
the four exons comprising the DCoH gene revealed a previously described A-->G
polymorphism located in the 3' untranslated region, which was not investigated
further. In conclusion, mutations in HNF-1beta and DCoH are not a major cause of 
MODY or late onset type 2 diabetes in Danish Caucasian subjects.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11668623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Hum Mutat. 2001 Oct;18(4):345-51.

Analysis of a non-functional HNF-1alpha (TCF1) mutation in Japanese subjects with
familial type 1 diabetes.

Yoshiuchi I(1), Yamagata K, Yoshimoto M, Zhu Q, Yang Q, Nammo T, Uenaka R,
Kinoshita E, Hanafusa T, Miyagawa Ji, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha; gene symbol TCF1) cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 
(MODY3), a form of diabetes mellitus characterized by autosomal dominant
inheritance, early onset, and pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. Recent genetic
studies, however, also found mutations in patients diagnosed with idiopathic
(non-autoimmune based) type 1 diabetes. We identified a novel frameshift mutation
(142delG) in the TCF1 gene in a family with a strong family history of type 1
diabetes and examined the functional properties of the mutant HNF 1alpha. The
expression of the mutant protein was not detected in COS-7 cells by Western blot 
analysis after transfection of the mutant cDNA. This is the first case of an
unstable mutant HNF-1alpha protein. Reporter gene analysis indicated that the
mutant HNF-1alpha had no transactivation activity in HeLa and MIN6 cells.
Haploinsufficiency for HNF-1alpha may lead to severe forms of diabetes like type 
1 diabetes.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11668618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Int J Mol Med. 2001 Nov;8(5):481-7.

Reactivation of liver-specific gene expression in an immortalized human
hepatocyte cell line by introduction of the human HNF4alpha2 gene.

Inoue Y(1), Miyazaki M, Tsuji T, Sakaguchi M, Fukaya K, Huh NH, Namba M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Okayama University Medical School, 2-5-1 Shikata, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

An immortalized human hepatocyte cell line (OUMS-29) was established from fetal
liver by transfection with the SV-40 large T antigen gene that has certain
liver-specific functions such as albumin production and enzyme activities of
CYP1A1, 1A2, and 2E1. To make OUMS-29 cells express other liver-specific
functions, the human hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha2 (HNF4alpha2) gene was
introduced into the cells, because this gene was found to be markedly
down-regulated. The transduced HNF4alpha2 was overexpressed in the nuclei of the 
transfected cells, and its DNA-binding activity was also detected. The
liver-specific genes such as apolipoprotein AI, CII, CIII, blood coagulation
factor X, alpha1-antitrypsin, and HNF1alpha were up-regulated. Thus, this cell
line is expected to be a useful tool for studying the differentiated human
hepatocyte functions.

PMID: 11605014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Gene. 2001 Oct 17;277(1-2):121-7.

HNF-1 regulates the liver-specific transcription of the chipmunk HP-20 gene.

Ono M(1), Hosoe Y, Azuma S, Shoji M, Nara K, Kondo N, Shiba T, Takamatsu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, School of Science, Kitasato University, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan.

The chipmunk hibernation-specific protein HP-20 is a component of the 140 kDa
complex that drastically decreases in the blood during hibernation, and its gene 
is expressed specifically in the liver. To reveal molecular mechanisms underlying
the liver-specific transcription of the HP-20 gene, we isolated chipmunk HP-20
genomic clones. The HP-20 gene spans approximately 6 kb, and consists of three
exons. The transcription start site, as determined by 5' RACE-PCR analysis, was
found to be 160 bp upstream of the translation initiation codon. Transient
transfection studies in HepG2 cells revealed that the 57 bp 5' flanking sequence 
was sufficient for the liver-specific promoter activity. A database search
revealed that this region contains a potential binding site for hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1). In a gel retardation assay, in vitro-synthesized HNF-1 
bound to the 5' flanking sequence from -52 to -26. A similar shifted band was
also observed with HepG2 nuclear extracts, and this complex was super-shifted by 
an anti-(HNF-1) Ig. When transfected into COS-7 cells, HNF-1 transactivated
transcription from the HP-20 gene promoter, and this activity was abolished by a 
mutation of the HNF-1 binding site, indicating that HNF-1 plays an important role
in HP-20 gene expression.

PMID: 11602349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 21;276(51):47775-84. Epub 2001 Oct 5.

The role of hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha and PDX-1 in transcriptional
regulation of the pdx-1 gene.

Gerrish K(1), Cissell MA, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37215, USA.

The PDX-1 homeodomain transcription factor regulates pancreatic development and
adult islet beta cell function. Expression of the pdx-1 gene is almost
exclusively localized to beta cells within the adult endocrine pancreas. Islet
beta cell-selective transcription is controlled by evolutionarily conserved
subdomain sequences (termed Areas I (-2839 to -2520 base pairs (bp)), II (-2252
to -2023 bp), and III (-1939 to -1664 bp)) found within the 5'-flanking region of
the pdx-1 gene. Areas I and II are independently capable of directing beta
cell-selective reporter gene activity in transfection assays, with Area
I-mediated stimulation dependent upon binding of hepatic nuclear factor 3 beta
(HNF3 beta), a key regulator of islet beta cell function. To identify other
transactivators of Area I, highly conserved sequence segments within this
subdomain were mutagenized, and their effect on activation was determined.
Several of the sensitive sites were found by transcription factor data base
analysis to potentially bind endodermally expressed transcription factors,
including HNF1 alpha (-2758 to -2746 bp, Segment 2), HNF4 (-2742 to -2730 bp,
Segment 4; -2683 to -2671 bp, Segment 7-8), and HNF6 (-2727 to -2715 bp, Segment 
5). HNF1 alpha, but not HNF4 and HNF6, binds specifically to Area I sequences in 
vitro. HNF1 alpha was also shown to specifically activate Area I-driven
transcription through Segment 2. In addition, PDX-1 itself was found to stimulate
Area I activation. The chromatin immunoprecipitation assay performed with PDX-1
antisera also demonstrated that this factor bound to Area I within the endogenous
pdx-1 gene in beta cells. Our results indicate that regulatory factors binding to
Area I conserved sequences contribute to the selective transcription pattern of
the pdx-1 gene and that control is mediated by endodermal regulators like HNF1
alpha, HNF3 beta, and PDX-1.

PMID: 11590182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Somat Cell Mol Genet. 1999 Jul;25(4):207-21.

Partial activation of gene activity and chromatin remodeling of the human 14q32.1
serpin gene cluster by HNF-1 alpha and HNF-4 in fibroblast microcell hybrids.

Rollini P(1), Xu L, Fournier RE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109-1024, USA.

The genes encoding alpha 1-antitrypsin (alpha 1AT, gene symbol P I) and
corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG) are part of a cluster of serine protease
inhibitor (serpin) genes on human chromosome 14q32.1. Both genes are highly
expressed in the liver and in cultured hepatoma cells, and the approximately
100-kb region around these genes contains an extensive array of
expression-associated DNase I-hypersensitive sites (DHSs). Activation of human
alpha 1AT and CBG transcription occurred when human chromosome 14 was transferred
from nonexpressing cells to rat hepatoma cells. This activation event was
accompanied by long-range chromatin reorganization of the entire region and the
de novo formation of 17 expression-associated DHSs. Both gene activation and
chromatin remodeling in hepatic cells required the liver-enriched transactivators
hepatocyte nuclear factors-1 alpha and -4 (HNF-1 alpha and HNF-4). In this study,
we tested whether ectopic expression of HNF-1 alpha and HNF-4 in nonexpressing
cells could activate alpha 1AT and/or CBG transcription, and we monitored the
chromatin structure of the locus in stably transfected fibroblasts. We report
that both alpha 1AT and CBG mRNAs were expressed in fibroblast transfectants that
stably expressed HNF-1 alpha and HNF-4, but expression was only approximately
1-10% of that observed in hepatic cells. Gene activation in these cells was
accompanied by partial chromatin remodeling, as 6 of 17 expression-associated
DHSs were formed. The potential implications of these results are discussed.

PMID: 11586788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Journ Annu Diabetol Hotel Dieu. 2001:151-8.

[Management of the MODY type diabetes].

[Article in French]

Timsit J(1), Velho G.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Diabétologie, Service d'Immunologie Clinique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants 
Malades, 161 rue de Sèvres, 75015 Paris.

PMID: 11565457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2001 Oct;12(10):2175-80.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta: a new kindred with renal cysts and diabetes and 
gene expression in normal human development.

Kolatsi-Joannou M(1), Bingham C, Ellard S, Bulman MP, Allen LI, Hattersley AT,
Woolf AS.

Author information: 
(1)Nephro-Urology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London, 30 
Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) transcription factor controls
endoderm development. Human mutations cause early-onset diabetes mellitus and
have recently been associated with dysplastic, hypoplastic, and glomerulocystic
kidneys. A new kindred with this "renal cysts and diabetes" syndrome is
described, and nephrogenic HNF-1beta expression is defined. The proband had
congenital cystic kidneys: over the next 12 yr, his renal function was impaired, 
but he was normoglycemic. His mother developed diabetes during pregnancy: renal
ultrasonography at age 24 yr was normal, but she subsequently developed cysts.
Both subjects have a heterozygous frameshift mutation in HNF-1beta that results
from a 1-bp insertion in exon 5 (Y352fsinsA). When reverse-transcription PCR and 
in situ hybridization were used, HNF-1beta mRNA was detected in normal human
metanephroi, with the highest levels of transcripts localized to fetal medullary 
and cortical collecting ducts and low levels of expression in nephrogenic cortex 
mesenchyme, primitive nephron tubules, and immature glomeruli. These results
constitute the first demonstration of HNF-1beta expression during human
nephrogenesis and emphasize a disease spectrum associated with HNF-1beta
mutation.

PMID: 11562418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Sep;15(3):309-23.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young: from clinical description to molecular
genetic characterization.

Owen K(1), Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Genetics, School of Postgraduate Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Exeter, Barrack Road, Exeter, EX2 5AX, UK.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young is a heterogeneous group of autosomal
dominantly inherited, young-onset beta-cell disorders. At least two consecutive
generations are affected with a family member diagnosed before 25 years of age.
Diabetes is caused either by mutations in the glucokinase gene (glucokinase MODY)
or by mutations in transcription factors (transcription factor MODY). Glucokinase
maturity-onset diabetes of the young is a mild, non-progressive hyperglycaemia
caused by a resetting of the pancreatic glucose sensor. It is treated with diet, 
and complications are rare. Pregnancies affected by glucokinase mutations have
specific management strategies and prognosis. Transcription factor maturity-onset
diabetes of the young, caused by mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor genes
HNF-1alpha, HNF-4alpha and HNF-1beta, and in insulin promoter factor-1 results in
a progressive beta-cell defect with increasing treatment requirements and
diabetic complications. Cystic renal disease is a prominent feature of HNF-1beta 
mutations. Further maturity-onset diabetes of the young genes remain to be
identified. MODY is part of the differential diagnosis of diabetes presenting in 
the first to third decades of life. Diagnostic molecular genetic testing is
available for the more common genes involved.

Copyright 2001 Harcourt Publishers Ltd.

PMID: 11554773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Tumour Biol. 2001 Sep-Oct;22(5):310-7.

Severe hypoxia specifically downregulates hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 gene
expression in HepG2 human hepatoma cells.

Mazure NM(1), Nguyen TL, Danan JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche sur l'Endocrinologie Moléculaire et le Développement
CNRS-UPR 9078, Meudon-Bellevue, France.

The liver is one of the organs in which hypoxia helps to regulate gene expression
under normal physiological conditions and in diseases such as cirrhosis and
cancer. We postulated that the expression/activity of some of the
'liver-enriched' transcription factors, which control liver-specific genes, was
sensitive to hypoxia. We tested hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), HNF-3 and
HNF-4, which play key roles in differentiation, development and hepatic gene
expression, using HepG2 human hepatoma cells cultured under hypoxic conditions.
Severe hypoxia/anoxia downregulated HNF-4 DNA-binding activity while DNA-binding 
activity of HNF-1 and HNF-3 remained unaffected. These hypoxic conditions also
strongly and specifically decreased cell contents of HNF-4 protein, indicating
that the decrease in HNF-4 DNA-binding activity was due to the lower amount of
protein and not to decreased DNA-binding affinity. Northern analysis indicated
that the expression of the hnf-4 gene was also downregulated in HepG2 cells
cultured under hypoxic conditions. These results provide evidence that hypoxic
stress triggers a cascade of events that inhibits the transactivation potential
of HNF-4 in HepG2 cells. This step may be crucial in modulating the expression of
a subset of liver genes that are targets for this nuclear receptor. This
relationship provides a new route for the investigation of the effects of hypoxia
on the liver cell.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11553861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Sep 1;29(17):3495-505.

An enhancer element 6 kb upstream of the mouse HNF4alpha1 promoter is activated
by glucocorticoids and liver-enriched transcription factors.

Bailly A(1), Torres-Padilla ME, Tinel AP, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, FRE 2364 du CNRS, Institut Pasteur, 
25 Rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

We have characterized a 700 bp enhancer element around -6 kb relative to the
HNF4alpha1 transcription start. This element increases activity and confers
glucocorticoid induction to a heterologous as well as the homologous promoters in
differentiated hepatoma cells and is transactivated by HNF4alpha1, HNF4alpha7,
HNF1alpha and HNF1beta in dedifferentiated hepatoma cells. A 240 bp sub-region
conserves basal and hormone-induced enhancer activity. It contains HNF1, HNF4,
HNF3 and C/EBP binding sites as shown by DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays using nuclear extracts and/or recombinant HNF1alpha and
HNF4alpha1. Mutation analyses showed that the HNF1 site is essential for
HNF1alpha transactivation and is required for full basal enhancer activity, as is
the C/EBP site. Glucocorticoid response element consensus sites which overlap the
C/EBP, HNF4 and HNF3 sites are crucial for optimal hormonal induction. We present
a model that accounts for weak expression of HNF4alpha1 in the embryonic liver
and strong expression in the newborn/adult liver via the binding sites identified
in the enhancer.

PMCID: PMC55877
PMID: 11522818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Diabetes. 2001 Sep;50(9):2047-52.

The generalized aminoaciduria seen in patients with hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha mutations is a feature of all patients with diabetes and is
associated with glucosuria.

Bingham C(1), Ellard S, Nicholls AJ, Pennock CA, Allen J, James AJ, Satchell SC, 
Salzmann MB, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine and Diabetes Research, School of Postgraduate 
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, Devon, UK.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) mutations are the most common cause
of maturity-onset diabetes of the young. HNF-1alpha homozygous knockout mice
exhibit a renal Fanconi syndrome with glucosuria and generalized aminoaciduria in
addition to diabetes. We investigated glucosuria and aminoaciduria in patients
with HNF-1alpha mutations. Sixteen amino acids were measured in urine samples
from patients with HNF-1alpha mutations, age-matched nondiabetic control
subjects, and age-matched type 1 diabetic patients, type 2 diabetic patients, and
patients with diabetes and chronic renal failure. The HNF-1alpha patients had
glucosuria at lower glycemic control (as shown by HbA1c) than type 1 and type 2
diabetic patients, consistent with a lower renal glucose threshold. The
HNF-1alpha patients had a generalized aminoaciduria with elevated levels of 14 of
16 amino acids and an increased mean Z score for all amino acids compared with
control subjects (0.66 vs. 0.00; P < 0.0005). Generalized aminoaciduria was also 
present in type 1 diabetic (Z score, 0.80; P < 0.0001), type 2 diabetic (Z score,
0.71; P < 0.0002), and chronic renal failure (Z score, 0.65; P < 0.01) patients. 
Aminoaciduria was not associated with microalbuminuria or proteinuria but was
associated with glucosuria (1.00 glucosuria vs. 0.19 no glucosuria; P = 0.002).
In type 1 diabetic patients, urine samples taken on the same day showed
significantly more aminoaciduria when glucosuria was present compared with when
it was absent (P < 0.01). In conclusion, HNF-1alpha mutation carriers have a
mutation-specific defect of proximal tubular glucose transport, resulting in
increased glucosuria. In contrast, the generalized aminoaciduria seen in patients
with HNF-1alpha mutations is a general feature of patients with diabetes and
glucosuria. Glucose may depolarize and dissipate the electrical gradient of the
sodium-dependent amino acid transporters in the proximal renal tubule, causing a 
reduction in amino acid resorption.

PMID: 11522670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Aug 31;286(4):673-7.

Sphingosine kinase regulates hepatoma cell differentiation: roles of hepatocyte
nuclear factor and retinoid receptor.

Osawa Y(1), Nagaki M, Banno Y, Nozawa Y, Moriwaki H, Nakashima S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Gifu University School of Medicine,
Tsukasamachi-40, Gifu 500-8705, Japan.

In hepatoma Huh-7 cells, inhibition of sphingosine kinase (SphK) activity by
N,N-dimethylsphingosine (DMS) resulted in up-regulated production of
liver-specific serum proteins including albumin and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). The 
changes in these protein levels coincided well with those of two liver-enriched
transcription factors, hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 and -4, which regulate a
number of liver-specific genes at the transcriptional level. Moreover, DMS
induced the expression of retinoic acid receptor-alpha and retinoid X
receptor-alpha. In DMS-treated cells, 9-cis retinoic acid (RA) further enhanced
HNF-4alpha and albumin expression but it inhibited AFP accumulation. These
results suggest that activation of SphK disengages cells from their
liver-specific phenotype, and that 9-cis RA further induces differentiation of
hepatoma cells when SphK activity is inhibited.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11520048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 5;276(40):37206-14. Epub 2001 Aug 1.

Characterization of the human OATP-C (SLC21A6) gene promoter and regulation of
liver-specific OATP genes by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha.

Jung D(1), Hagenbuch B, Gresh L, Pontoglio M, Meier PJ, Kullak-Ublick GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Hospital, CH-8091
Zurich, Switzerland .

OATP-C (SLC21A6) is the predominant Na(+)-independent uptake system for bile
salts and bilirubin of human liver and is expressed exclusively at the
basolateral (sinusoidal) hepatocyte membrane. To investigate the basis of
liver-specific expression of OATP-C, we studied promoter function in the two
hepatocyte-derived cell lines HepG2 and Huh7 and in nonhepatic HeLa cells. OATP-C
promoter constructs containing from 66 to 950 nucleotides of 5'-regulatory
sequence were active in HepG2 and Huh7 but not HeLa cells, indicating that
determinants of hepatocyte-specific expression reside within the minimal
promoter. Deoxyribonuclease I footprint analysis revealed a single region that
was protected by HepG2 and Huh7 but not HeLa cell nuclear extracts. The
liver-enriched transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1
alpha) was shown by mobility shift assays to bind within this footprint.
Coexpression of HNF1 alpha stimulated OATP-C promoter activity 30-fold in HepG2
and 49-fold in HeLa cells. Mutation of the HNF1 site abolished promoter function,
indicating that HNF1 alpha is critical for hepatocyte-specific OATP-C gene
expression. The human OATP8 (SLC21A8) and mouse Oatp4 (Slc21a6) promoters were
also responsive to HNF1 alpha coexpression in HepG2 cells. These data support a
role for HNF1 alpha as a global regulator of liver-specific bile salt and organic
anion transporter genes.

PMID: 11483603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Immunol. 2001 Aug 1;167(3):1654-62.

CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBP beta) activates CCR5 promoter:
increased C/EBP beta and CCR5 in T lymphocytes from HIV-1-infected individuals.

Rosati M(1), Valentin A, Patenaude DJ, Pavlakis GN.

Author information: 
(1)Human Retrovirus Section, Basic Research Laboratory, National Cancer
Institute-Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

C/EBPbeta is a member of a family of leucine zipper transcription factors that
are involved in regulating the expression of several cytokines, including IL-1,
IL-6, IL-8, TNF, and macrophage-inflammatory protein-1alpha. We identified
multiple C/EBPbeta binding sites within the gene for CCR5, suggesting that
C/EBPbeta may be involved in its regulation. Transient transfection experiments
in both myeloid and lymphoid cells showed an increase in CCR5 promoter-driven
green fluorescent protein production in the presence of C/EBPbeta. Deletion
analysis identified two C/EBPbeta-responsive regions in the CCR5 gene, one in the
promoter region and one at the 3' part of the intron. We provide evidence that,
in myeloid cells (U937), C/EBPbeta independently activates CCR5 expression
through sites located either in the promoter region or in the intron of the CCR5 
gene. In contrast, in lymphoid cells (Jurkat) the presence of the intronic
cis-regulatory regions is required for C/EBPbeta-mediated activation. In
agreement with the functional data, EMSA demonstrated that in both myeloid and
lymphoid cells C/EBPbeta binds specifically to sites present in the intron,
whereas interaction with the sites located in the promoter was cell type specific
and was detected only in myeloid cells. Analysis of C/EBPbeta in primary PBMCs
obtained from HIV-1-infected individuals revealed a significant increase in
C/EBPbeta expression. The enhanced C/EBPbeta activity correlated with a higher
frequency of circulating CCR5(+) lymphocytes in AIDS patients and with a decline 
in CD4 lymphocyte numbers. Taken together, these results suggest that C/EBPbeta
is an important regulator of CCR5 expression and may play a relevant role in the 
pathogenesis of HIV disease.

PMID: 11466389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Aug;27(1):11-29.

Mutations in the human genes encoding the transcription factors of the hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)1 and HNF4 families: functional and pathological
consequences.

Ryffel GU(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Essen, Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung),
Hufelandstrasse 55, D-45122 Essen, Germany. gerhart.ryffel@uni-essen.de

Mutations in the human genes encoding the tissue-specific transcription factors
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1alpha, HNF1beta and HNF4alpha are responsible for
maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY), a monogenic dominant inherited form 
of diabetes mellitus characterized by defective insulin secretion of the
pancreatic beta-cells. In addition, the mutated HNF1beta gene causes defective
development of the kidney and genital malformation. This review summarizes the
main features of these transcription factors and discusses potential events
leading to the specific disease phenotypes.

PMID: 11463573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Exp Mol Med. 2001 Jun 30;33(2):59-63.

HNF1 and/or HNF3 may contribute to the tissue specific expression of glucokinase 
gene.

Cha JY(1), Kim HI, Im SS, Li TZ, Ahn YH.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Institute of Genetic
Science, College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

A possible role of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) or HNF3, a predominant
trans-acting factors of hepatic or pancreatic beta-cells, was examined on the
tissue specific interdependent expression of glucokinase (GK) in liver, H4IIE,
HepG2, HIT-T15 and MIN6 cell line. The tissues or cell lines known to express GK 
showed abundant levels of HNF1 and HNF3 mRNA as observed in liver, H4IIE, HepG2, 
HIT-T15 and MIN6 cells, whereas they were not detected in brain, heart, NIH 3T3, 
HeLa cells. The promoter of glucokinase contains several HNF3 consensus sequences
and are well conserved in human, mouse and rat. Transfection of the glucokinase
promotor linked with luciferase reporter to liver or pancreatic beta cell lines
showed high interacting activities with HNF1 and HNF3, whereas minimal activities
were detected in the cells expressing very low levels of HNFs. The binding of
HNF1 or HNF3 to the GK promoter genes was confirmed by electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA). From these data, we propose that the expression of HNF1
and/or HNF3 may, in part, contribute to the tissue specific expression of GK

PMID: 11460882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Endocr J. 2001 Apr;48(2):241-7.

Sequence analysis of candidate genes for common susceptibility to type 1 and type
2 diabetes in mice.

Yamada K(1), Ikegami H, Kawaguchi Y, Fujisawa T, Hotta M, Ueda H, Shintani M,
Nojima K, Kawabata Y, Ono M, Nishino M, Itoi M, Babaya N, Shibata M, Makino S,
Ogihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Japan.

Although type 1 and type 2 diabetes are regarded as clinically distinct diseases,
several lines of evidence have suggested common genetic factors between the two
types of diabetes. The non-obese diabetic (NOD) mouse, an animal model of type 1 
diabetes, and the Nagoya-Shibata-Yasuda (NSY) mouse, a model of type 2 diabetes, 
are derived from the same outbred colony, Jcl:HCR, suggesting a shared
susceptibility between the two types of diabetes in mice. Genetic as well as
functional studies have supported the possibility that Tcf2, which encodes the
transcription factor, hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta (HNF-1beta), is a candidate
gene for the common susceptibility between NSY and NOD mice. Txn, encoding
thioredoxin which is a redox (reduction/oxidation)-active protein, is also a
positional and functional candidate for a common susceptibility gene. To
investigate whether either of these two genes is a common susceptibility gene,
the coding nucleotide sequences of these two genes were compared among the NSY,
NOD and control C3H strains. The coding sequence of Tcf2 of the NOD mouse was
identical to that of the C3H mouse, but was different from that of the NSY mouse.
The coding sequence of Txn was identical in the three strains. These data suggest
that neither of the two genes is a common susceptiblity gene between type 1 and
type 2 diabetes in mice.

PMID: 11456274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Diabetologia. 2001 Jun;44(6):775-8.

Routine mutation screening of HNF-1alpha and GCK genes in MODY diagnosis: how
effective are the techniques of DHPLC and direct sequencing used in combination?

Boutin P(1), Vasseur F, Samson C, Wahl C, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics-CNRS UPRES, CHRU, Pasteur Institute, Lille,
France.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and
glucokinase (GCK) genes are the major causes of monogenic forms of Type II
(non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus (Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young
subtypes, MODY). We evaluated the effectiveness of fluorescent single-strand
conformation polymorphism (F-SSCP), denaturing high-performance liquid
chromatography (DHPLC) and sequencing based mutation detection in the molecular
diagnosis of MODY. Our goal is to identify a rapid, efficient and cost effective 
mutation detection method for the molecular diagnosis of MODY and other human
genetic disorders.
METHODS: We evaluated the accuracy of DHPLC in screening for MODY 2 and 3
mutations. In addition, we compared the sensitivity, specificity, cost, handling 
time and analysis time of fluorescent single-strand conformation polymorphism,
denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography and direct sequencing screening
methods.
RESULTS: Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography is a recently
developed method for mutation detection. It is cost effective, powerful and
reliable and quite suitable for 22 out of the 24 fragments required for MODY 2
and 3 testing. However, exons 1 and 7 of the HNF-1alpha gene are very polymorphic
and so direct sequencing is faster as well as more efficient and reliable.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that combining denaturing
high-performance liquid chromatography and direct sequencing is a good approach
for the routine detection of HNF-1alpha and GCK mutations in MODY families.
Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography appears to be a powerful tool
in genetic testing and the method could be applied to the molecular diagnosis of 
other human genetic diseases.

PMID: 11440371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Endocr Res. 2001 Feb-May;27(1-2):63-74.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha inhibits insulin promoter factor 1-dependent
transactivation of the human insulin gene.

Yamakawa K(1), Yamasaki H, Ozaki M, Yamauchi MD, Fujita N, Abe T, Miyazoe H, Sera
Y, Uotani S, Kawasaki E, Takino H, Yamaguchi Y, Eguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki University School of Medicine,
Sakamoto, Japan.

To investigate the regulational interaction of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha) and insulin promoter factor 1 (IPF1) on insulin gene expression,
either or both of the expression vectors carrying each transcription factor were 
transiently transfected into HeLa cells, RINm5F cells and MIN6 cells together
with the luciferase reporter construct driven by a human preproinsulin gene
promoter (-1998 to +237) designated as, pINS-1998/luc. IPF1-transfection into
HeLa cells strongly stimulated the luciferase activity to 725 fold that of the
basal level. In contrast, HNF-1alpha-transfection resulted in only a 6.7 fold
increase. In co-transfection experiments, increasing the amount of HNF-1alpha
resulted in an 84.5% and 74.4% decrease in IPF1-stimulated luciferase activity in
HeLa and RINm5F cells, respectively. Deletion constructs designated as
pINS-248/luc, pINS-213/luc and pINS-185/luc were transfected into RINm5F cells to
determine the role of the A3 element and its 5' flanking sequence in the
inhibitory effect of HNF-1alpha. The results showed that the inhibiting effects
of HNF-1alpha with pINS-213/luc and pINS-185/luc were significantly smaller than 
those with both pINS-1998/luc and pINS-248/luc. Transfection into MN6 cells with 
pINS-1998/luc in the absence of IPF1 resulted in constitutional transactivation
of the insulin gene, and this transactivation was abolished by the
co-transfection with HNF-1alpha. The present data indicate that IPF1 rather than 
HNF-1alpha predominantly transactivates the insulin gene, and that HNF-1alpha
inhibits IPF1-dependent insulin gene transactivation mediated through the 5'
flanking sequence of the A3 element. It is suggested that HNF-1alpha may be
involved in insulin gene expression as a negative regulator.

PMID: 11428722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Dan Med Bull. 2001 May;48(2):49-76.

Studies of the molecular genetics of impaired insulin secretion and obesity. Two 
intermediary phenotypes predisposing to type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Urhammer S.

PMID: 11414121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2001 Jul;281(1):G69-84.

Differential activation of intestinal gene promoters: functional interactions
between GATA-5 and HNF-1 alpha.

Krasinski SD(1), Van Wering HM, Tannemaat MR, Grand RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of
Pediatrics, The Floating Hospital for Children, New England Medical Center, and
Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

The effects of GATA-4, -5, and -6, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1
alpha) and -beta, and Cdx-2 on the rat and human lactase-phlorizin hydrolase
(LPH) and human sucrase-isomaltase (SI) promoters were studied using transient
cotransfection assays in Caco-2 cells. GATA factors and HNF-1 alpha were strong
activators of the LPH promoters, whereas HNF-1 alpha and Cdx-2 were strong
activators of the SI promoter, although GATA factors were also necessary for
maximal activation of the SI gene. Cotransfection of GATA-5 and HNF-1 alpha
together resulted in a higher activation of all three promoters than the sum of
the activation by either factor alone, demonstrating functional cooperativity. In
the human LPH promoter, an intact HNF-1 binding site was required for functional 
synergy. This study is the first to demonstrate 1) differential activation of the
LPH and SI promoters by multiple transcription factors cotransfected singly and
in combination and 2) that GATA and HNF-1 transcription factors cooperatively
activate intestinal gene promoters. Synergistic activation is a mechanism by
which higher levels of tissue-specific expression might be attained by
overlapping expression of specific transcription factors.

PMID: 11408257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 10;276(32):30118-26. Epub 2001 Jun 13.

In vivo and in vitro regulation of sterol 27-hydroxylase in the liver during the 
acute phase response. potential role of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1.

Memon RA(1), Moser AH, Shigenaga JK, Grunfeld C, Feingold KR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco and the
Metabolism Section, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco,
California 94121, USA. rmemon@itsa.ucsf.edu

The host response to infection is associated with several alterations in lipid
metabolism that promote lipoprotein production. These changes can be reproduced
by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) administration. LPS stimulates hepatic cholesterol
synthesis and suppresses the conversion of cholesterol to bile acids. LPS
down-regulates hepatic cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme
in the classic pathway of bile acid synthesis. We now demonstrate that LPS
markedly decreases the activity of sterol 27-hydroxylase, the rate-limiting
enzyme in the alternate pathway of bile acid synthesis, in the liver of Syrian
hamsters. Moreover, LPS progressively decreases hepatic sterol 27-hydroxylase
mRNA levels by 75% compared with controls over a 24-h treatment period. LPS also 
decreases oxysterol 7alpha-hydroxylase mRNA levels in mouse liver. In vitro
studies in HepG2 cells demonstrate that tumor necrosis factor and interleukin
(IL)-1 decrease sterol 27-hydroxylase mRNA levels by 48 and 80%, respectively,
whereas IL-6 has no such effect. The IL-1-induced decrease in sterol
27-hydroxylase mRNA expression occurs early, is sustained for 48 h, and requires 
very low doses. In vivo IL-1 treatment also lowers hepatic sterol 27-hydroxylase 
mRNA levels in Syrian hamsters. Studies investigating the molecular mechanisms of
LPS-induced decrease in sterol 27-hydroxylase show that LPS markedly decreases
mRNA and protein levels of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), a transcription
factor that regulates sterol 27-hydroxylase, in the liver. Moreover, LPS
decreases the binding activity of HNF-1 by 70% in nuclear extracts in hamster
liver, suggesting that LPS may down-regulate sterol 27-hydroxylase by decreasing 
the binding of HNF-1 to its promoter. Coupled with our earlier studies on
cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase, these data indicate that LPS suppresses both the 
classic and alternate pathways of bile acid synthesis. A decrease in bile acid
synthesis in liver would reduce cholesterol catabolism and thereby contribute to 
the increase in hepatic lipoprotein production that is induced by LPS and
cytokines.

PMID: 11406622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2001 Aug;53(2):67-71.

Mapping and promoter sequencing of HNF-1beta gene in diabetes-prone and
-resistant mice.

Ueda H(1), Ikegami H, Kawaguchi Y, Fujisawa T, Nojima K, Babaya N, Yamada K,
Shibata M, Yamato E, Ogihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, 2-2
Yamadaoka, Suita, 565-0871, Osaka, Japan.

By using a novel single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the coding sequence, the
chromosomal location of Tcf2, encoding hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-1beta, was
determined in F2 intercrosses between Nagoya-Shibata-Yasuda (NSY) mice, an animal
model of type 2 diabetes, and control C3H/He mice. The promoter region of Tcf2
gene was sequenced in NSY, non-obese diabetic (NOD) and control C3H/He mice. Tcf2
was mapped between genetic markers D11MIT320 and D11MIT195 with the following
distances: D11MIT320-(7.3 cM)-Tcf2-(0.5 cM)-D11MIT195. A variant with insertion
of C between -205 and -204 in the promoter region of Tcf2 was identified in NSY
mice, but not NOD and C3H/He mice.

PMID: 11403854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 24;276(34):32122-8. Epub 2001 Jun 6.

Sucrase-isomaltase gene transcription requires the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
(HNF-1) regulatory element and is regulated by the ratio of HNF-1 alpha to HNF-1 
beta.

Boudreau F(1), Zhu Y, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The mouse sucrase-isomaltase (SI) gene is an enterocyte-specific gene expressed
in a complex developmental pattern. We previously reported that a short,
evolutionarily conserved gene promoter regulates developmental expression of SI
in mouse small intestine. Herein, we investigated the role of a hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) cis-acting element to regulate SI gene expression in
vivo. Transgenic SI gene constructs with a mutated HNF-1 element (SIF3) revealed 
a strong reduction in promoter activity in comparison with a wild-type construct 
in mice and during Caco-2 cell differentiation. Nuclear proteins isolated from
enterocytes showed increased binding of the HNF-1 alpha complex with a
concomitant decrease in the HNF-1 beta-containing complex to the SIF3 element
both during the suckling-weaning developmental transition and Caco-2 cell
differentiation. These changes coincided with a strong induction of SI gene
transcription. In transfection experiments, HNF-1 alpha activated the SI promoter
via the SIF3 element, and co-expression of HNF-1 beta impaired this
transcriptional activation. These findings demonstrate the essential role of the 
HNF-1 regulatory element to support SI gene transcription in vivo and suggest
that the ratio of HNF-1 alpha to HNF-1 beta plays a role in the transcriptional
activity of this gene during intestinal development.

PMID: 11395488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2001;14 Suppl 1:611-7.

Diagnosis of MODY in the offspring of parents with insulin-dependent and
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.

Guazzarotti L(1), Fumelli P, Testa I, Pecora R, Panicari F, Bellanné-Chantelot C,
Bartolotta E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, S. Lucia Hospital, Recanati, MC, Italy.
guazza@yahoo.com

Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) is an autosomal dominant monogenic
form of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) representing 5% of youth-onset DM in the
Caucasian population. In young adults the disease can be present as either
non-insulin dependent or insulin-dependent DM. The diagnosis of this genetic
disorder in children and adolescents is rare because of the mild glucose
metabolism disorder at this time. We performed a metabolic, autoimmune and
genetic study in 40 offspring of young parents affected by insulin-dependent DM
(Group A) and in 35 offspring of young parents affected by early-onset
non-insulin-dependent DM (Group B). Two children of Group A (5%) were found to be
affected by fasting hyperglycemia and carry a GCK gene mutation that in one case 
was present also in the diabetic father. Eighteen offspring of Group B (51%) were
positive for GCK or HNF-1alpha gene mutations present in the affected parents.
All but two of these young patients had impaired fasting glucose (IFG) or
impaired glucose tolerance (IGT). Eleven of them were younger than 16 years. We
conclude that screening for DM in youth should be extended to MODY in young
families with both non-insulin-dependent and insulin-dependent DM. The
sensitivity of the metabolic tests will precede the genetic diagnosis.

PMID: 11393552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jun;21(11):3662-70.

Embryonic but not postnatal reexpression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
(HNF1alpha) can reactivate the silent phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in
HNF1alpha-deficient hepatocytes.

Viollet B(1), Yaniv M, Pontoglio M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, CNRS URA 1644, Département des Biotechnologies,
Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris cedex 15, France.

The failure to transcribe the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene in the liver
of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha)-deficient mice correlated with
DNA hypermethylation and the presence of an inactive chromatin structure (M.
Pontoglio, D. M. Faust, A. Doyen, M. Yaniv, and M. C. Weiss, Mol. Cell. Biol.
17:4948-4956, 1997). To evaluate the precise role played by HNF1alpha, DNA
methylation, or histone acetylation in PAH gene silencing, we examined conditions
that could restore PAH gene expression in HNF1alpha-deficient hepatocytes. We
show that reactivation of PAH transcription can be achieved by reexpression of
HNF1alpha in embryonic (i.e., embryonic day 12.5 [e12.5] to e13.5) hepatocytes
but not in fetal (e17.5), newborn, and adult HNF1alpha-deficient hepatocytes.
This defines a temporal competence window during which HNF1alpha can act to
(re)program PAH gene transcription. We also show that PAH gene silencing can be
partially relieved in HNF1alpha-deficient hepatocytes by treatment with the
demethylating agent 5-azacytidine, even in the absence of HNF1alpha. Treatment
using 5-azacytidine combined with trichostatin, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, 
resulted in a synergistic reactivation of the silenced PAH gene in adult
hepatocytes, but this activity was not further increased by HNF1alpha
reexpression. These results suggest that the HNF1alpha homeoprotein is involved
in stage-specific developmental control of the methylation state and chromatin
remodeling of the PAH gene.

PMCID: PMC86995
PMID: 11340160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Diabetes. 2001 May;50(5):928-36.

Regulation of the pancreatic pro-endocrine gene neurogenin3.

Lee JC(1), Smith SB, Watada H, Lin J, Scheel D, Wang J, Mirmira RG, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of
California, San Francisco 94143, USA.

Erratum in
    Diabetes 2001 Jun;50(6):1512.

Neurogenin3 (ngn3), a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor,
functions as a pro-endocrine factor in the developing pancreas: by itself, it is 
sufficient to force undifferentiated pancreatic epithelial cells to become islet 
cells. Because ngn3 expression determines which precursor cells will
differentiate into islet cells, the signals that regulate ngn3 expression control
islet cell formation. To investigate the factors that control ngn3 gene
expression, we mapped the human and mouse ngn3 promoters and delineated
transcriptionally active sequences within the human promoter. Surprisingly, the
human ngn3 promoter drives transcription in all cell lines tested, including
fibroblast cell lines. In contrast, in transgenic animals the promoter drives
expression specifically in regions of ngn3 expression in the developing pancreas 
and gut; and the addition of distal sequences greatly enhances transgene
expression. Within the distal enhancer, binding sites for several pancreatic
transcription factors, including hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 and HNF-3,
form a tight cluster. HES1, an inhibitory bHLH factor activated by Notch
signaling, binds to the proximal promoter and specifically blocks promoter
activity. Together with previous genetic data, these results suggest a model in
which the ngn3 gene is activated by the coordinated activities of several
pancreatic transcription factors and inhibited by Notch signaling through HES1.

PMID: 11334435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Diabetologia. 2001 Mar;44(3):387-8.

Splice site mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta gene, IVS2nt + 1G > 
A, associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young, renal dysplasia and
bicornuate uterus.

Iwasaki N, Okabe I, Momoi MY, Ohashi H, Ogata M, Iwamoto Y.

PMID: 11317673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Diabetes Care. 2001 Apr;24(4):663-71.

Familial early-onset type 2 diabetes in Chinese patients: obesity and genetics
have more significant roles than autoimmunity.

Ng MC(1), Lee SC, Ko GT, Li JK, So WY, Hashim Y, Barnett AH, Mackay IR, Critchley
JA, Cockram CS, Chan JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, SAR. maggieng@cuhk.edu.hk

OBJECTIVE: We examined the prevalence of different forms of diabetes in Hong Kong
Chinese patients with familial early-onset type 2 diabetes and compared their
clinical features with patients with familial late-onset type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 145 young patients with early-onset
diabetes (age and age at diagnosis < or = 40 years) and a family history of
diabetes were studied. They were screened for mutations in the genes encoding
glucokinase, hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha, and HNF-1alpha. The
mitochondrial DNA A-->G at nucleotide 3243 (mt3243) and amyLin S20G mutations
were studied, and antibodies to GAD (anti-GADs) were also examined.
RESULTS: The prevalence of putative diabetogenic gene mutations and autoimmune
markers were 4% for glucokinase, 0% for HNF-4alpha, 5% for HNF-1alpha, 3% for
mt3243, 2% for amylin 520G, and 4% for anti-GAD. Compared with late-onset
patients, the patients with early-onset diabetes had a higher prevalence of a
parental history of diabetes and were generally more obese. When classified by
obesity indexes (BMI and waist circumference), the obese patients, especially
those with early-onset diabetes, had a clustering of cardiovascular risk factors 
and increased rates of retinopathy and albuminuria. CONCLUSIONS; Genetic factors 
(up to 14%) and obesity (55%) play more significant roles than autoimmunity (4%) 
in familial type 2 diabetes in young Chinese patients. The significance of
obesity-related genes and other gene-gene and gene-environment interactions in
these young patients remains to be determined.

PMID: 11315828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Cancer Res. 2001 Apr 1;61(7):3176-81.

Expression profiling suggested a regulatory role of liver-enriched transcription 
factors in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xu L(1), Hui L, Wang S, Gong J, Jin Y, Wang Y, Ji Y, Wu X, Han Z, Hu G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai.

By using a cDNA array representing 14,000 cDNA clusters, we studied the
expression profiles in paired clinical hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) samples and
the distal nontumorous liver tissues from the same patients. Despite the
significant heterogeneity among the clinical samples, 72 genes (including 30
novel genes) were down-regulated and 84 genes (including 48 novel genes) were
up-regulated in >50% of the cancer samples that were identified. The alterations 
in gene expression levels were confirmed by Northern blot and
reverse-transcription PCR in all of 4 randomly selected genes. It was conspicuous
that 21 of 38 hepatocarcinoma (HCC) down-regulated genes studied previously were 
reportedly regulated by a group of liver-enriched transcription factors (LETFs), 
and 12 of 36 HCC up-regulated genes studied previously were involved in protein
translation. Reexamination of the cDNA array data further revealed that most of
the genes known to be regulated by LETFs were down-regulated in at least a
portion of the HCC samples. Among the LETFs, the expression level of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) alpha was down-regulated in cancer,
whereas hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1), HNF-3beta, HNF-4alpha, and
HNF-4gamma were up-regulated. The expression profiling thus suggested multiple
regulatory pathways involved in HCC, especially that related to LETFs.

PMID: 11306505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 2000 Dec;93 Spec No 4:7-12.

[Genetics of type II diabetes].

[Article in French]

Froguel P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de biologie-CNRS 8090, institut Pasteur de Lille, 1, rue du
Professeur-Calmette, BP 245, 59019 Lille.

Type 2 diabetes is a multifactorial disease composed of subtypes strongly
associated with environmental factors at one end of the spectrum and highly
genetic forms at the other hand. The former forms have been largely elucidated in
the last years by the identification of the 5 genes responsible for the autosomal
dominant MODY subtype: glucokinase, and 4 transcription factors which play a key 
role in the development of the endocrine pancreas or in the expression of glucose
metabolism genes. Apart from the monogenic forms of type 2 diabetes little is
known about the nature of the genetic factors involved. Minor contributors
include insulin, sulfamide receptor and some others. Genome scans of diabetic
families have revealed susceptibility loci on chromosome 1q, 2p, 2q (where the
gene calpain 10 was recently cloned), 3q, 12q and 20. The identification of
diabetes susceptibility gene is the first step to define targets of new drugs
against diabetes.

PMID: 11296466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. EMBO J. 2001 Apr 17;20(8):1984-92.

Transcription factor-dependent regulation of CBP and P/CAF histone
acetyltransferase activity.

Soutoglou E(1), Viollet B, Vaxillaire M, Yaniv M, Pontoglio M, Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology Hellas, PO Box 1527, 711 10 Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

CREB-binding protein (CBP) and CBP-associated factor (P/CAF) are coactivators
possessing an intrinsic histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity. They are
positioned at promoter regions via association with sequence-specific DNA-binding
factors and stimulate transcription in a gene-specific manner. The current view
suggests that coactivator function depends mainly on the strength and specificity
of transcription factor-coactivator interactions. Here we show that two
dominant-negative mutants of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha), P447L
and P519L, occurring in maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY3) patients,
exhibit paradoxically stronger interactions than the wild-type protein with
either CBP or P/CAF. However, CBP and P/CAF recruited by these mutants lack HAT
activity. In contrast, wild-type HNF-1alpha and other transcription factors, such
as Sp1 or HNF-4, stimulated the HAT activity of CBP. The results suggest a more
dynamic role for DNA-binding proteins in the transcription process than was
considered previously. They are not only required for the recruitment of
coactivators to the promoter but they may also modulate their enzymatic activity.

PMCID: PMC125231
PMID: 11296231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Przegl Lek. 2000;57 Suppl 3:13-8.

[Molecular background and clinical characteristics of autosomal dominant type 2
diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Polish]

Malecki M(1), Krolewski AS.

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Klinika Chorób Metabolicznych, Collegium Medicum Uniwersytetu
Jagiellonskiego w Krakowie.

Type 2 diabetes is a complex disease and genetic as well as environmental factors
play a role in its pathogenesis. Six different genes have been identified so far 
to be responsible for rare forms of autosomal dominant, early onset type 2
diabetes mellitus. All but one are transcription factors which influence
expression of the other genes through the regulation of mRNA synthesis. These are
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4 alpha, HNF-1 alpha, insulin promoter factor
(IPF)-1 and HNF-1 beta, which are associated with MODY1, 3, 4, 5 respectively.
MODY1 is a relatively rare and usually severe form of diabetes. It is associated 
with progressive hyperglycemia and frequent chronic complications. The HNF-4
alpha gene is localized on chromosome 20q. Similar clinical characteristics apply
to the MODY3 form, however the latter is much more frequent among early onset,
autosomal dominant type 2 diabetes (20-40%). HNF-1 alpha gene is localized on
chromosome 12q. HNF-1 beta (MODY5 locus on chromosome 17q) is a protein which
forms heterodimers with HNF-1 alpha. This rare form of diabetes has a clinical
picture similar to MODY1 and MODY3. It is sometimes accompanied by symptoms of
early kidney damage which are independent from diabetes. The other two
transcription factors responsible for the development of autosomal dominant type 
2 diabetes are proteins which bind directly to the insulin promoter. MODY4
(IPF-1, chromosome 13q) is a rare form and of a typical middle and late onset
type 2 diabetes. BETA 2/Neurod1 has been recently associated with MODY by Dr
Krolewski's group from Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA, USA. BETA 2 is
responsible for about 2% of autosomal dominant type 2 diabetes. The clinical
characteristics depend on the localization of the mutations in the specific
functional domains of the protein. Mutations identified in the glucokinase gene
are associated with the MODY2 form. Glucokinase is an enzyme involved in the
first level of glucose metabolism in b-cells-enzymatic phosphorylation. MODY2 is 
a modest form of diabetes. It is characterized by mild hyper-glycemia, mainly
fasting, and the chronic complications are very rare. Glucokinase gene is
localized on chromosome 7p. It is expected that in the nearest future more type 2
susceptibility genes will be identified.

PMID: 11293229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Diabetes Care. 2001 Mar;24(3):472-8.

Role of common sequence variants in insulin secretion in familial type 2 diabetic
kindreds: the sulfonylurea receptor, glucokinase, and hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha genes.

Elbein SC(1), Sun J, Scroggin E, Teng K, Hasstedt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System and
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, USA.
elbeinstevenc@exchange.uams.edu

OBJECTIVE: We have demonstrated high heritability of insulin secretion measured
as acute insulin response to glucose times insulin sensitivity (disposition
index). Furthermore, we showed that obese normoglycemic family members of a type 
2 diabetic proband failed to compensate for the insulin resistance of obesity by 
increasing insulin secretion. In this study, we tested the primary hypotheses
that previously described variants in the pancreatic sulfonylurea receptor gene
(SUR1 or ABCC8), glucokinase (GCK) gene, or hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
(TCF1 or HNF1alpha) gene contribute to the inherited deficiencies of insulin
secretion and beta-cell compensation to insulin resistance, as well as the
secondary hypotheses that these variants altered insulin sensitivity.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We typed 124 nondiabetic members of 26 familial type
2 diabetic kindreds who had undergone tolbutamide-modified intravenous glucose
tolerance tests for two variants of the ABCC8 (sulfonylurea) gene, two variants
of the GCK gene, and one common amino acid variant in the TCF1 (HNF1alpha) gene. 
All family members were classified as normal or having impaired glucose tolerance
based on oral glucose tolerance testing. We used minimal model analysis to
calculate the insulin sensitivity index (S1) and glucose effectiveness (SG), and 
acute insulin response to glucose was calculated as the mean insulin excursion
above baseline during the first 10 min after the glucose bolus. Disposition index
(DI), a measure of beta-cell compensation for insulin sensitivity, was calculated
as insulin sensitivity times acute insulin response. Effects of polymorphisms
were determined using mixed effects models that incorporated family membership
and by a likelihood analysis that accounted for family structure through
polygenic inheritance.
RESULTS: An intronic variant of the ABCC8 gene just upstream of exon 16 was a
significant determinant of both DI and an analogous index based on acute insulin 
response to tolbutamide. Surprisingly, heterozygous individuals showed the lowest
indexes, whereas the DI in the two homozygous states did not differ
significantly. Neither the exon 18 variant nor the variants in the GCK and TCF1
genes were significant in this model. However, combined genotypes of ABCC8 exon
16 and 18 variants again significantly predicted both indexes of glucose and
tolbutamide-stimulated insulin secretion. Unexpectedly, a variant in the 3'
untranslated region of the GCK gene interacted significantly with BMI to predict 
insulin sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: The exon 16 variant of the ABCC8 gene reduced beta-cell compensation
to the decreased insulin sensitivity in the heterozygous state. This may explain 
the observation from several groups of an association of the ABCC8 variants in
diabetes and is consistent with other studies showing a role of ABCC8 variants in
pancreatic beta-cell function. However, our study focused on individuals from
relatively few families. Ascertainment bias, family structure, and other
interacting genes might have influenced our unexpected result. Additional studies
are needed to replicate our observed deficit in beta-cell compensation in
individuals heterozygous for ABCC8 variants. Likewise, the role of the GCK 3'
variant in the reduced insulin sensitivity of obesity will require further study.

PMID: 11289470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 May;21(9):3234-43.

Hepatic nuclear factor 1-alpha directs nucleosomal hyperacetylation to its
tissue-specific transcriptional targets.

Párrizas M(1), Maestro MA, Boj SF, Paniagua A, Casamitjana R, Gomis R, Rivera F, 
Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Hormonal Biochemistry units, Hospital Clínic, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain 08036.

Mutations in the gene encoding hepatic nuclear factor 1-alpha (HNF1-alpha) cause 
a subtype of human diabetes resulting from selective pancreatic beta-cell
dysfunction. We have analyzed mice lacking HNF1-alpha to study how this protein
controls beta-cell-specific transcription in vivo. We show that HNF1-alpha is
essential for the expression of glut2 glucose transporter and L-type pyruvate
kinase (pklr) genes in pancreatic insulin-producing cells, whereas in liver,
kidney, or duodenum tissue, glut2 and pklr expression is maintained in the
absence of HNF1-alpha. HNF1-alpha nevertheless occupies the endogenous glut2 and 
pklr promoters in both pancreatic islet and liver cells. However, it is
indispensable for hyperacetylation of histones in glut2 and pklr promoter
nucleosomes in pancreatic islets but not in liver cells, where glut2 and pklr
chromatin remains hyperacetylated in the absence of HNF1-alpha. In contrast, the 
phenylalanine hydroxylase promoter requires HNF1-alpha for transcriptional
activity and localized histone hyperacetylation only in liver tissue. Thus,
different HNF1-alpha target genes have distinct requirements for HNF1-alpha in
either pancreatic beta-cells or liver cells. The results indicate that HNF1-alpha
occupies target gene promoters in diverse tissues but plays an obligate role in
transcriptional activation only in cellular- and promoter-specific contexts in
which it is required to recruit histone acetylase activity. These findings
provide genetic evidence based on a live mammalian system to establish that a
single activator can be essential to direct nucleosomal hyperacetylation to
transcriptional targets.

PMCID: PMC86965
PMID: 11287626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Biochem J. 2001 Apr 15;355(Pt 2):537-44.

Co-operative regulation of the transcription of human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase
(DD)4/aldo-keto reductase (AKR)1C4 gene by hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-4alpha/gamma and HNF-1alpha.

Ozeki T(1), Takahashi Y, Kume T, Nakayama K, Yokoi T, Nunoya K, Hara A, Kamataki 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0812, Japan.

Human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (DD) 4/aldo-keto reductase (AKR) 1C4 is a major
isoform of hepatic DD that oxidizes trans-dihydrodiols of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons to reactive and redox-active o-quinones and that reduces several
ketone-containing drugs. To investigate the mechanism of transcriptional
regulation of the human DD4 gene, the 5'-flanking region of the gene was fused to
the luciferase gene. The results of luciferase assays using HepG2 cells and of
1,10-phenanthroline-copper footprinting indicated that two positive regulatory
regions were located in regions from -701 to -684 and from -682 to -666. The
former region contained a putative hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4 binding
motif, and the latter region contained an HNF-1 consensus binding sequence. DNA
fragments of the HNF-4 or HNF-1 motif gave a shifted band in a gel-shift assay
with nuclear extracts from HepG2 cells. The formation of the DNA-protein complex 
was inhibited by the HNF-4 or HNF-1 motif of the alpha(1)-antitrypsin gene. A
supershift assay using antibodies to human HNF-4alpha, HNF-4gamma and HNF-1alpha 
showed that HNF-4alpha and HNF-4gamma bound to the HNF-4 motif, and that
HNF-1alpha interacted with the HNF-1 motif. Introduction of mutations into the
HNF-4 or HNF-1 motif lowered the luciferase activity to 10 or 8% respectively of 
that seen with the intact human DD4 gene. These results indicate that HNF-4alpha,
HNF-4gamma and HNF-1alpha regulate co-operatively the transcription of the human 
DD4 gene in HepG2 cells.

PMCID: PMC1221767
PMID: 11284743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 18;276(20):17533-40. Epub 2001 Feb 5.

A pancreatic beta -cell-specific enhancer in the human PDX-1 gene is regulated by
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta (HNF-3beta ), HNF-1alpha, and SPs transcription
factors.

Ben-Shushan E(1), Marshak S, Shoshkes M, Cerasi E, Melloul D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical
Center, 91120 Jerusalem, Israel.

The PDX-1 transcription factor plays a key role in pancreas development. Although
expressed in all cells at the early stages, in the adult it is mainly restricted 
to the beta-cell. To characterize the regulatory elements and potential
transcription factors necessary for human PDX-1 gene expression in beta-cells, we
constructed a series of 5' and 3' deletion fragments of the 5'-flanking region of
the gene, fused to the luciferase reporter gene. In this report, we identify by
transient transfections in beta- and non-beta-cells a novel beta-cell-specific
distal enhancer element located between -3.7 and -3.45 kilobases. DNase I
footprinting analysis revealed two protected regions, one binding the
transcription factors SP1 and SP3 and the other hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta
(HNF-3beta) and HNF-1alpha. Cotransfection experiments suggest that HNF-3beta,
HNF-1alpha, and SP1 are positive regulators of the herein-described human PDX-1
enhancer element. Furthermore, mutations within each motif abolished the binding 
of the corresponding factor(s) and dramatically impaired the enhancer activity,
therefore suggesting cooperativity between these factors.

PMID: 11278466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Diabetes. 2001 Feb;50 Suppl 1:S94-100.

beta-cell genes and diabetes: molecular and clinical characterization of
mutations in transcription factors.

Frayling TM(1), Evans JC, Bulman MP, Pearson E, Allen L, Owen K, Bingham C,
Hannemann M, Shepherd M, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Genetics, School of Postgraduate Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Exeter, Devon, UK. t.m.frayling@exeter.ac.uk

beta-Cell transcription factor genes are important in the pathophysiology of the 
beta-cell, with mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, HNF-4alpha, 
insulin promoter factor (IPF)-1, HNF-1beta, and NeuroD1/BETA2, all resulting in
early-onset type 2 diabetes. We assessed the relative contribution of these genes
to early-onset type 2 diabetes using linkage and sequencing analysis in a cohort 
of 101 families (95% U.K. Caucasian). The relative distribution of the 90
families fitting maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) criteria was 63%
HNF-1alpha, 2% HNF-4alpha, 0% IPF-1, 1% HNF-1beta, 0% NeuroD1/ BETA2, and 20%
glucokinase. We report the molecular genetic and clinical characteristics of
these patients including 29 new families and 8 novel HNF-1alpha gene mutations.
Mutations in the transactivation domain are more likely to be protein truncating 
rather than result in amino acid substitutions, suggesting that a relatively
severe disruption of this domain is necessary to result in diabetes. Mutations in
the different transcription factors result in clinical heterogeneity. IPF-1
mutations are associated with a higher age at diagnosis (42.7 years) than
HNF-1alpha (20.4 years), HNF-1beta (24.2 years), or HNF-4alpha (26.3 years) gene 
mutations. Subjects with HNF-1beta mutations, in contrast to the other
transcription factors, frequently present with renal disease. A comparison of age
at diagnosis between subjects with different types and locations of HNF-1alpha
mutations did not reveal genotype-phenotype correlations. In conclusion,
mutations in transcription factors expressed in the beta-cell are the major cause
of MODY, and the phenotype clearly varies with the gene that is mutated. There is
little evidence to indicate that different mutations within the same gene have
different phenotypes.

PMID: 11272211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Diabetes. 2001 Feb;50 Suppl 1:S101-7.

beta-cell genes and diabetes: quantitative and qualitative differences in the
pathophysiology of hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha and glucokinase mutations.

Pearson ER(1), Velho G, Clark P, Stride A, Shepherd M, Frayling TM, Bulman MP,
Ellard S, Froguel P, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine and Diabetes Research, School of Postgraduate 
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, Devon, UK.

Mutations in the beta-cell genes encoding the glycolytic enzyme glucokinase (GCK)
and the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha are the most 
common causes of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). Studying patients
with mutations in these genes gives insights into the functions of these two
critical beta-cell genes in humans. We studied 178 U.K. and French MODY family
members, including 45 GCK mutation carriers and 40 HNF-1alpha mutation carriers. 
Homeostasis model assessment of fasting insulin and glucose showed reduced
beta-cell function in both GCK (48% controls, P<0.0001) and HNF-1alpha (42%
controls, P<0.0001). Insulin sensitivity was similar to that of control subjects 
in the GCK subjects (93% controls, P = 0.78) but increased in the HNF-1alpha
subjects (134.5% controls, P = 0.005). The GCK patients showed a similar
phenotype between and within families with mild lifelong fasting hyperglycemia
(fasting plasma glucose [FPG] 5.5-9.2 mmol/l, interquartile [IQ] range 6.6-7.4), 
which declined slightly with age (0.017 mmol/l per year) and rarely required
pharmacological treatment (17% oral hypoglycemic agents, 4% insulin). HNF-1alpha 
patients showed far greater variation in fasting glucose both between and within 
families (FPG 4.1-18.5 mmol/l, IQ range 5.45-10.4), with a marked deterioration
with age (0.06 mmol/l per year), and 59% of patients required treatment with
tablets or insulin. Proinsulin-to-insulin ratios are increased in HNF-1alpha
subjects (29.5%) but not in GCK (18.5%) subjects. In an oral glucose tolerance
test, the 0- to 120-min glucose increment was small in GCK patients (2.4+/-1.8
mmol/l) but large in HNF-1alpha patients (8.5+/-3.0 mmol/l, P< 0.0001). This
comparison shows that the clear clinical differences in these two genetic
subgroups of diabetes reflect the quantitative and qualitative differences in
beta-cell dysfunction. The defect in GCK is a stable defect of glucose sensing,
whereas the HNF-1alpha mutation causes a progressive defect that alters beta-cell
insulin secretion directly rather than the sensing of glucose.

PMID: 11272165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. EMBO Rep. 2000 Oct;1(4):359-65.

HNF1alpha controls renal glucose reabsorption in mouse and man.

Pontoglio M(1), Prié D, Cheret C, Doyen A, Leroy C, Froguel P, Velho G, Yaniv M, 
Friedlander G.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, URA 1644 CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies,
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. marcop@pasteur.fr

Recently it has been shown that dominant mutations in the human hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) gene, encoding for a homeoprotein that is
expressed in liver, kidney, pancreas and intestine, result in maturity onset
diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3). HNF1alpha-null mice are diabetic, but at
the same time suffer from a renal Fanconi syndrome characterized by urinary
glucose loss. Here we show that MODY3 patients are also characterized by a
reduced tubular reabsorption of glucose. The renal murine defect is due to
reduced expression of the low affinity/high capacity glucose cotransporter
(SGLT2). Our results show that HNF1alpha directly controls SGLT2 gene expression.
Together these data indicate that HNF1alpha plays a key role in glucose
homeostasis in mammals.

PMCID: PMC1083745
PMID: 11269503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Nature. 2001 Mar 1;410(6824):116-20.

Methylation of histone H3 lysine 9 creates a binding site for HP1 proteins.

Lachner M(1), O'Carroll D, Rea S, Mechtler K, Jenuwein T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, The Vienna Biocenter, Vienna,
Austria.

Distinct modifications of histone amino termini, such as acetylation,
phosphorylation and methylation, have been proposed to underlie a chromatin-based
regulatory mechanism that modulates the accessibility of genetic information. In 
addition to histone modifications that facilitate gene activity, it is of similar
importance to restrict inappropriate gene expression if cellular and
developmental programmes are to proceed unperturbed. Here we show that mammalian 
methyltransferases that selectively methylate histone H3 on lysine 9 (Suv39h
HMTases) generate a binding site for HP1 proteins--a family of heterochromatic
adaptor molecules implicated in both gene silencing and supra-nucleosomal
chromatin structure. High-affinity in vitro recognition of a methylated histone
H3 peptide by HP1 requires a functional chromo domain; thus, the HP1 chromo
domain is a specific interaction motif for the methyl epitope on lysine9 of
histone H3. In vivo, heterochromatin association of HP1 proteins is lost in
Suv39h double-null primary mouse fibroblasts but is restored after the
re-introduction of a catalytically active SWUV39H1 HMTase. Our data define a
molecular mechanism through which the SUV39H-HP1 methylation system can
contribute to the propagation of heterochromatic subdomains in native chromatin.

PMID: 11242053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Biochem J. 2001 Mar 15;354(Pt 3):645-53.

Differential expression of chicken dimerization cofactor of hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 (DcoH) and its novel counterpart, DcoHalpha.

Kim H(1), You S, Foster LK, Farris J, Choi YJ, Foster DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108,
USA.

We have used differential display PCR to study altered gene expression in
immortalized chicken embryo fibroblasts (CEFs) that have been established in our 
laboratory. This technique resulted in the cloning of a novel counterpart of the 
previously cloned chicken dimerization cofactor of hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-1 (cDcoH), which was identified as cDcoHalpha. The steady-state mRNA levels
of cDcoHalpha were up-regulated in all immortal CEFs tested compared with primary
CEF cells. cDcoH and cDcoHalpha showed opposite patterns of mRNA expression due
to differential regulation of transcription rates, but not mRNA half-lives, in
primary and immortal CEFs. Expression of cDcoHalpha increased in the late G1 and 
early S phases of the cell cycle, while cDcoH mRNA increased in the late S and
G2/M phases. In contrast with consistent expression of both genes in primary
quiescent cells, cDcoH mRNA, but not cDcoHalpha mRNA, was dramatically decreased 
in primary senescent cells. The highest levels of cDcoHalpha mRNA were found in
the kidney, liver, heart and ovarian follicles, while the major tissues
expressing cDcoH were hypothalamus, kidney and liver. cDcoH and cDcoHalpha probes
did not cross-hybridize to human hepatocyte mRNA. When transfected into human
HepG2 cells, both cDcoH and cDcoHalpha showed similar functional activity as
measured by increased expression of a reporter gene, as well as alpha-fetoprotein
and albumin genes that both contain HNF-1 binding elements in their promoters.
Our results suggest that the novel chicken DcoHalpha might function as a
transcriptional cofactor for HNF-1 in specific cellular-environmental states.

PMCID: PMC1221696
PMID: 11237869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Jan;86(1):220-6.

Early-onset type 2 diabetes: metabolic and genetic characterization in the
mexican population.

Aguilar-Salinas CA(1), Reyes-Rodríguez E, Ordóñez-Sánchez ML, Torres MA,
Ramírez-Jiménez S, Domínguez-López A, Martínez-Francois JR, Velasco-Pérez ML,
Alpizar M, García-García E, Gómez-Pérez F, Rull J, Tusié-Luna MT.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Medicina y Unidad de Genética de la Nutrición del Instituto de 
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico.
caas@aztlan.innsz.mx

The objective of this study was to investigate possible defects in the insulin
sensitivity and/or the acute insulin response in a group of Mexican patients
displaying early-onset type 2 diabetes and to evaluate the contribution of
mutations in three of the genes linked to maturity-onset diabetes of the young.
We studied 40 Mexican patients with an age of diagnosis between 20 and 40 yr in
which the insulin sensitivity as well as the insulin secretory response were
measured using the minimal model approach. A partial screening for possible
mutations in 3 of the 5 genes linked to maturity-onset diabetes of the young was 
carried out by PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism analysis. A low
insulin secretory capacity (AIRg = 68.5 +/- 5 muU/mL.min) and a near-normal
insulin sensitivity (3.43 +/- 0.2 min/muU.mL x 10(4)) were found in these
patients. Among this group we found two individuals carrying missense mutations
in exon 4 of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-4alpha) gene
(Asp(126)-->His/Tyr and Arg(154)-->Gln, respectively) and one carrying a nonsense
mutation in exon 7 of the HNF-1alpha gene (Gln(486)-->stop codon); 7.5% had
positive titers for glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies. Thirty-five percent
of cases had insulin resistance; these subjects had the lipid abnormalities seen 
in the metabolic syndrome. A defect in insulin secretion is the hallmark in
Mexican diabetic patients diagnosed between 20 and 40 yr of age. Mutations in
either the HNF-1alpha or the HNF-4alpha genes are present among the individuals
who develop early-onset diabetes in our population. These particular sequence
changes have not been previously reported and therefore represent putative new
mutations. Even in the absence of endogenous hyperinsulinemia, insulin resistance
is associated with an adverse lipid profile.

PMID: 11232004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. J Cell Sci. 2001 Mar;114(Pt 6):1205-12.

A common regulatory locus affects both HNF4/HNF1alpha pathway activation and
sensitivity to LPS-mediated apoptosis in rat hepatoma cells.

Bulla GA(1), Givens E, Brown S, Oladiran B, Kraus D.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Research Institute, St Louis University Health Sciences Center, and 
Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital, Pediatric Research Institute, St Louis, MO 
63110, USA. bullaga@slu.ed

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) has been shown to protect certain cultured mammalian
cells from undergoing programmed cell death (apoptosis) when exposed to tumor
necrosis factor (TNF). However, LPS has also been reported to induce apoptosis in
cultured endothelial cells, suggesting that apoptotic response mechanisms may be 
dependent upon cell type. In order to understand the influence of tissue-specific
gene expression on apoptosis, we compared LPS-induced apoptosis in hepatoma cells
with dedifferentiated hepatoma variant cells that have been selected for the loss
of the liver-enriched HNF4/HNF1alpha transcriptional activation pathway. We
report here that while human, rat and mouse hepatoma cell lines are resistant to 
LPS-mediated cell death, the HNF4-/HNF1alpha- rat hepatoma variant cells undergo 
rapid apoptosis (as determined by morphological analysis, DNA laddering and the
TUNEL assay) upon exposure to LPS. Genetic rescue experiments show that
restoration of the HNF4/HNF1alpha pathway via chromosome transfer render the
hepatoma variant cells resistant to LPS-mediated apoptosis. However, the
introduction of HNF1alpha alone failed to alter the apoptotic phenotype,
suggesting that the defect(s) in the hepatoma variant cells that influence
apoptotic responses lies upstream of HNF4/HNF1alpha expression. This study
provides for the first time direct evidence of a common regulatory locus involved
in activation of hepatic gene expression and sensitivity to LPS-mediated
apoptosis.

PMID: 11228163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Virol. 2001 Mar;75(6):2900-11.

Nuclear covalently closed circular viral genomic DNA in the liver of hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 alpha-null hepatitis B virus transgenic mice.

Raney AK(1), Eggers CM, Kline EF, Guidotti LG, Pontoglio M, Yaniv M, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

The role of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1 alpha) in the regulation of
hepatitis B virus (HBV) transcription and replication in vivo was investigated
using a HNF1 alpha-null HBV transgenic mouse model. HBV transcription was not
measurably affected by the absence of the HNF1 alpha transcription factor.
However, intracellular viral replication intermediates were increased two- to
fourfold in mice lacking functional HNF1 alpha protein. The increase in
encapsidated cytoplasmic replication intermediates in HNF1 alpha-null HBV
transgenic mice was associated with the appearance of nonencapsidated nuclear
covalently closed circular (CCC) viral genomic DNA. Viral CCC DNA was not readily
detected in HNF1 alpha-expressing HBV transgenic mice. This indicates the
synthesis of nuclear HBV CCC DNA, the proposed viral transcriptional template
found in natural infection, is regulated either by subtle alterations in the
levels of viral transcripts or by changes in the physiological state of the
hepatocyte in this in vivo model of HBV replication.

PMCID: PMC115916
PMID: 11222715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Diabetologia. 2001 Jan;44(1):127-8.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (MODY5) gene are not a major
factor contributing to end-stage renal disease in Japanese people with diabetes
mellitus.

Iwasaki N, Babazono T, Tomonaga O, Ogata M, Yokokawa H, Iwamoto Y.

PMID: 11206404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2000;13 Suppl 6:1411-7.

Diagnosis of maturity-onset diabetes of the young in the pediatric diabetes
clinic.

Hattersley AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medicine 
and Health Sciences, Exeter, UK. A.T.Hattersley@exeter.ac.uk

The diagnosis of pediatric diabetes mellitus (DM) traditionally is not considered
a diagnostic specialty. However, considerable heterogeneity in the etiology of DM
is seen among children and adolescents, making the recognition of discrete
subgroups of DM very important for determining prognosis and appropriate
treatment. The subgroups that result in non-insulin-dependent DM in children are 
as follows: the 'honeymoon' phase of type 1 DM, type 2 DM, genetic syndromes
accompanied by DM, and maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). The relative 
prevalence of these different subgroups depends on the population being studied. 
In the UK, in pediatric clinics where most patients are Caucasian, MODY is over
10 times more prevalent than type 2 DM. However, type 2 DM would predominate in a
clinic where most children are from populations with a high prevalence of this
condition (e.g. Asian Indians). It should be emphasized that MODY comprises two
discrete clinical syndromes: glucokinase diabetes and transcription factor
diabetes, the latter of which results from mutations in the genes encoding
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, HNF-1beta, HNF-4alpha and insulin
promoter factor-1.

PMID: 11202217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Pharmacogenetics. 2000 Dec;10(9):809-20.

Tissue specific differences in the regulation of the UDP glucuronosyltransferase 
2B17 gene promoter.

Gregory PA(1), Hansen AJ, Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University School of Medicine,
Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park, SA, Australia.

The human UDP glucuronosyltransferase UGT2B17, glucuronidates androgens and is
expressed in the liver and the prostate. Although evidence suggests that
variations in UGT2B17 expression between tissues may be a critical determinant of
androgen response, the factors that regulate UGT2B17 expression in the liver and 
prostate are unknown. In this study, we have isolated a 596 bp promoter of the
UGT2B17 gene and studied its regulation in the liver cell line, HepG2 and the
prostate cell line, LNCaP. The transcription start site of UGT2B17 was mapped and
proteins that bound to the proximal promoter were detected by DNase1 footprint
analysis. A region (-40 to -52 bp) which resembled a hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 
(HNF1) binding site bound proteins in nuclear extracts from HepG2 cells, but did 
not bind proteins from LNCaP nuclear extracts. In HepG2 cells, HNF1alpha bound to
this region and activated the UGT2B17 promoter, as assessed by functional and gel
shift assays. HNF1alpha activation of the promoter was prevented by mutation or
deletion of the putative HNF1 site. The related transcription factor HNF1beta,
which is present in HepG2 cells, did not activate the promoter. The UGT2B17
promoter could also be activated by exogenous HNF1alpha in LNCaP cells. However, 
because these cells do not contain HNF1alpha, other transcription factors must
regulate the UGT2B17 promoter. Cotransfection experiments showed that HNF1beta,
elevates promoter activity in LNCaP cells. This activation did not involve the
putative HNF1 region (-40 to -52 bp) since mutation of this region did not affect
promoter activation by HNF1beta. These results suggest that the UGT2B17 promoter 
is regulated by different factors in liver-derived HepG2 and prostate-derived
LNCaP cells.

PMID: 11191885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Eur J Endocrinol. 2001 Jan;144(1):45-9.

Counterregulatory responses to hypoglycemia in patients with maturity-onset
diabetes of the young caused by HNF-1alpha gene mutations (MODY3).

Guenat E(1), Seematter G, Philippe J, Temler E, Jéquier E, Tappy L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Physiologie, Université de Lausanne, Switzerland.

Mutations of HNF-1alpha lead to severe beta cell dysfunction, resulting in
decreased glucose-induced insulin secretion. HNF-1alpha is also expressed in
liver, kidney and pancreatic alpha cells, but the functional consequences of
HNF-1alpha mutations in these organs remain unknown. We therefore assessed the
counterregulatory responses to hypoglycemia in six patients with HNF-1alpha
mutations (MODY3), five patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
(NIDDM) and in nine healthy controls. Plasma glucagon concentrations and
endogenous glucose production were measured every 15 min during a
hyperinsulinemic clamp with progressive hypoglycemia. Plasma glucagon
concentrations were similar at basal glycemia (73+/-6, 69+/-5 and 69+/-7 ng/l)
and reached peak values of 88+/-9, 88+/-11 and 89+/-7 ng/l at a glycemia of 3.6
mmol/l in MODY3 patients, patients with NIDDM and controls respectively (NS).
Suppression of endogenous glucose production by insulin was blunted in MODY3
patients (3.3+/-1.2 micromol/kg per min) and in patients with NIDDM (4.4+/-0.6
micromol/kg per min) compared with controls (1.7+/-0.5 micromol/kg per min,
P<0.05 compared with both MODY3 patients and patients with NIDDM). During
hypoglycemia, endogenous glucose production increased to 8.6+/-2.1, 8.8+/-0.7 and
7.0+/-1.0 micromol/kg per min in MODY3 patients, patients with NIDDM and controls
respectively (all NS). These data indicate that mutations of HNF-1alpha in MODY3 
do not result in a decreased glucagon secretion or alterations of glucose
production during hypoglycemia.

PMID: 11174836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Biochem J. 2001 Mar 1;354(Pt 2):301-8.

Activity of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta 
isoforms is differently affected by the inhibition of protein phosphatases 1/2A.

Carrière V(1), Lacasa M, Rousset M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U505, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 15 rue de l'école de Médecine, 
75006 Paris, France. veronique.carriere-u505@bhdc.jussieu.fr

Phosphorylation/dephosphorylation processes are known to control the activity of 
several transcription factors. The nutrition-dependent expression of
sucrase-isomaltase and Na+/glucose co-transporter 1, two proteins implicated in
the intestinal absorption of glucose, has been shown to be closely related to
modifications of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) activity. This study was
conducted to determine whether phosphorylation/dephosphorylation processes could 
control HNF1 activity. We show that expression of the gene encoding
sucrase-isomaltase is inhibited in the enterocytic Caco-2 clone TC7 by okadaic
acid at a concentration that is known to inhibit protein phosphatases 1/2A and
that does not affect cell viability. At the same concentration, phosphorylation
of the HNF1alpha and HNF1beta isoforms is greatly enhanced and their DNA-binding 
capacity is decreased. The phosphorylation state of HNF1beta isoforms directly
affects their DNA-binding capacity. In contrast, the decreased DNA-binding
activity of the HNF1alpha isoforms, which was observed after the inhibition of
protein phosphatases 1/2A, is due to a net decrease in their total cellular and
nuclear amounts. Such an effect results from a decrease in both the HNF1alpha
mRNA levels and the half-life of the protein. This is the first evidence for the 
implication of protein phosphatases 1/2A in the control of the activity of HNF1
isoforms. Moreover, these results emphasize a physiological role for the balance 
between phosphatases and kinases in the nutrition-dependent regulation of
HNF1-controlled genes.

PMCID: PMC1221656
PMID: 11171107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Dec 29;279(3):792-8.

MODY associated with two novel hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha loss-of-function 
mutations (P112L and Q466X).

Bjørkhaug L(1), Ye H, Horikawa Y, Søvik O, Molven A, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Bergen,
Bergen, N-5021, Norway.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is an autosomal dominant form of
diabetes characterized by early onset of pancreatic dysfunction. MODY type 3 is
caused by mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha. During a
screening of Norwegian patients with suspected MODY we identified two novel
HNF-1alpha mutations, P112L and Q466X. The molecular mechanisms underlying the
disease were studied by analyzing the DNA binding properties, transcriptional
activation, and subcellular localization of HNF-1alpha P112L and Q466X compared
to wild type HNF-1alpha. P112L had reduced ability to bind an HNF1 consensus
sequence and to activate transcription. Q466X did not differ from wild type
HNF-1alpha in DNA binding activity. Transactivation, however, was markedly
reduced. When both mutants were coexpressed with wild type HNF-1alpha in HeLa
cells, transcriptional activity appeared unaffected, suggesting that a
dominant-negative mechanism was not present. Immunolocalization experiments
showed that P112L HNF-1alpha was correctly targeted to nuclei in HeLa cells. In
contrast, some Q466X HNF-1alpha protein was retained in the cytoplasm, which
indicated that the mechanism for nuclear localization was disturbed. Thus, the
HNF-1alpha mutations P112L and Q466X both seem to impair pancreatic beta-cell
function by loss-of-function mechanisms; P112L by reduced DNA binding and reduced
ability to transactivate, and Q466X by reduced transactivation and incomplete
nuclear targeting.

PMID: 11162430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 20;276(16):13136-44. Epub 2001 Jan 5.

The mouse fetoprotein transcription factor (FTF) gene promoter is regulated by
three GATA elements with tandem E box and Nkx motifs, and FTF in turn activates
the Hnf3beta, Hnf4alpha, and Hnf1alpha gene promoters.

Pare JF(1), Roy S, Galarneau L, Belanger L.

Author information: 
(1)Le Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, L'Hôtel-Dieu de 
Québec, Département de Biologie Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Québec G1R 2J6,
Canada.

Fetoprotein transcription factor (FTF) is an orphan nuclear receptor that
activates the alpha(1)-fetoprotein gene during early liver developmental growth. 
Here we sought to define better the position of FTF in transcriptional cascades
leading to hepatic differentiation. The mouse FTF gene was isolated and assigned 
to chromosome 1 band E4 (one mFTF pseudogene was also found). Exon/intron mapping
shows an mFTF gene structure similar to that of its close homologue SF1, with two
more N-terminal exons in the mFTF gene; exon mapping also delimits several FTF
mRNA 5'- and 3'-splice variants. The mFTF transcription initiation site was
located in adult liver at 238 nucleotides from the first translation initiator
codon, with six canonical GATA, E box, and Nkx motifs clustered between -50/-140 
base pairs (bp) from the cap site; DNA/protein binding assays also pinpointed an 
HNF4-binding element at +36 bp and an FTF-binding element at -257 bp.
Transfection assays and point mutations showed that the mFTF promoter is
activated by GATA, HNF4alpha, FTF, Nkx, and basic helix-loop-helix factors, with 
marked cooperativity between GATA and HNF4alpha. A tandem GATA/E box activatory
motif in the proximal mFTF promoter is strikingly similar to a composite motif
coactivated by differentiation inducers in the hematopoietic lineage; a tandem
GATA-Nkx motif in the distal mFTF promoter is also similar to a composite motif
transducing differentiation signals from transforming growth factor-beta-like
receptors in the cardiogenic lineage. Three genes encoding transcription factors 
critical to early hepatic differentiation, Hnf3beta, Hnf4alpha, and Hnf1alpha,
each contain dual FTF-binding elements in their proximal promoters, and all three
promoters are activated by FTF in transfection assays. Direct DNA binding action 
and cooperativity was demonstrated between FTF and HNF3beta on the Hnf3beta
promoter and between FTF and HNF4alpha on the Hnf1alpha promoter. These combined 
results suggest that FTF is an early intermediary between endodermal
specification signals and downstream genes that establish and amplify the hepatic
phenotype.

PMID: 11145965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Diabetologia. 2000 Dec;43(12):1476-83.

Insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity in diabetic subgroups: studies in the
prediabetic and diabetic state.

Tripathy D(1), Carlsson AL, Lehto M, Isomaa B, Tuomi T, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Wallenberg Laboratory, Department of Endocrinology, Lund University, Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: To evaluate insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion in
prediabetic and diabetic subjects with mutations in MODY1 (HNF-4 alpha) and MODY3
(HNF-1 alpha) genes, in subjects with GAD antibodies, latent autoimmune diabetes 
in adults and in subjects with the common form of Type II (non-insulin-dependent)
diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: Insulin secretion was measured as the incremental 30-min insulin (I30)
and insulin glucose ratio (I:G30) during OGTT whereas insulin sensitivity was
measured as the insulin sensitivity index during OGTT in 131 carriers of MODY
mutations [NGT = 38, IFG/IGT = 21, diabetes mellitus (DM) = 72], in 293 subjects 
with GADA (NGT = 47, IFG/IGT = 29, DM = 217) and in 2961 subjects with a family
history of the common form of Type II diabetes but without MODY mutations or GADA
(NGT = 1360, IFG/IGT = 857, DM = 744). A subgroup of the subjects underwent a
euglycaemic clamp (n = 210) and intravenous glucose tolerance test (n = 337) for 
the estimation of insulin sensitivity and first-phase insulin secretion.
RESULTS: Non-diabetic subjects with MODY mutations had pronounced impaired
insulin secretion (I30, I:G30) compared with the two other groups (p = 0.005).
Normal or non-diabetic glucose tolerance was maintained by enhanced insulin
sensitivity compared with the other two groups (p < 0.05 and p < 0.005). In
contrast to patients with Type II diabetes and with adult latent autoimmune
diabetes, MODY patients showed only a modest deterioration in insulin sensitivity
at onset of diabetes. The 2-h glucose values inversely correlated with insulin
sensitivity in subjects with GADA (r = -0.447, p < 0.001) and subjects from Type 
II diabetic families (r = -0.426, p < 0.001), whereas no such relation was
observed in subjects with MODY mutations (r = 0.151, p = NS). There were no
statistically significant differences in insulin secretion or insulin sensitivity
between subjects with GADA or subjects with a family history of Type II diabetes,
either at the NGT or the IFG/IGT stage.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Glucose-tolerant carriers of MODY mutations are
characterised by a severe impairment in insulin secretion. Enhanced insulin
sensitivity is the most likely explanation for the normal glucose tolerance.
Whereas subjects with positive GADA or Type II diabetes have impaired insulin
sensitivity with increasing glucose concentrations, MODY mutation carriers seem
to be protected from the effect of glucose toxicity.

PMID: 11151756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Hum Genet. 2000 Nov;107(5):458-65.

Identification of an intronic regulatory element in the human protein C (PROC)
gene.

Shamsher MK(1), Chuzhanova NA, Friedman B, Scopes DA, Alhaq A, Millar DS, Cooper 
DN, Berg LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mt Sinai School of Medicine, New York, USA.

Regulatory DNA elements responsible for human protein C (PROC) gene expression
have previously been identified in the upstream promoter region and first
(untranslated) exon of the gene. Here we show that an additional sequence element
located more than 500 bp downstream of the core promoter within intron 1 further 
enhances PROC promoter-driven reporter gene expression in human hepatoma cells.
In common with core promoter constructs used in previous studies, the activity of
this 3'-extended regulatory region is diminished by a naturally occurring
promoter mutation. However, in contrast to constructs lacking intronic sequence, 
the promoter/intron regulatory region is repressed rather than activated by the
transcription factor HNF-1. Using both conventional alignment procedures and
complexity analysis to study the human and canine PROC sequences, we identified
two conserved intronic regions, which were tested for their involvement in gene
regulation. High-level gene expression from the intron-coupled promoter was
dependent upon the integrity of a 142 bp sequence element, a duplicate copy of
which is located in an upstream region of the PROC gene that possesses enhancer
activity. These findings emphasise the potential importance of intragenic
sequences for gene regulation and serve to illustrate that the results of PROC
promoter/reporter gene experiments are critically dependent upon the sequence
context. The identification of such intragenic elements is relevant to the
analysis of human genetic disease since it will facilitate the detection and
functional evaluation of regulatory mutations and polymorphisms.

PMID: 11140943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jan;21(2):414-24.

Interleukin-6-induced STAT3 and AP-1 amplify hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-mediated
transactivation of hepatic genes, an adaptive response to liver injury.

Leu JI(1), Crissey MA, Leu JP, Ciliberto G, Taub R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Following hepatic injury or stress, gluconeogenic and acute-phase response genes 
are rapidly upregulated to restore metabolic homeostasis and limit tissue damage.
Regulation of the liver-restricted insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1
(IGFBP-1) gene is dramatically altered by changes in the metabolic state and
hepatectomy, and thus it provided an appropriate reporter to assess the
transcriptional milieu in the liver during repair and regeneration. The cytokine 
interleukin-6 (IL-6) is required for liver regeneration and repair, and it
transcriptionally upregulates a vast array of genes during liver growth by
unknown mechanisms. Evidence for a biologic role of IL-6 in IGFBP-1 upregulation 
was demonstrated by increased expression of hepatic IGFBP-1 in IL-6 transgenic
and following injection of IL-6 into nonfasting animals and its reduced
expression in IL-6(-/-) livers posthepatectomy. In both hepatic and nonhepatic
cells, IL-6 -mediated IGFBP-1 promoter activation was via an intact hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1) site and was dependent on the presence of endogenous
liver factor HNF-1 and induced factors STAT3 and AP-1 (c-Fos/c-Jun). IL-6 acted
through the STAT3 pathway, as dominant negative STAT3 completely blocked
IL-6-mediated stimulation of the IGFBP-1 promoter via the HNF-1 site. HNF-1/c-Fos
and HNF-1/STAT3 protein complexes were detected in mouse livers and in hepatic
and nonhepatic cell lines overexpressing STAT3/c-Fos/HNF-1. Similar regulation
was demonstrated using glucose-6-phosphatase and alpha-fibrinogen promoters,
indicating that HNF-1/IL-6/STAT3/AP-1-mediated transactivation of hepatic gene
expression is a general phenomenon after liver injury. These results demonstrate 
that the two classes of transcription factors, growth induced (STAT3 and AP-1)
and tissue specific (HNF-1), can interact as an adaptive response to liver injury
to amplify expression of hepatic genes important for the homeostatic response
during organ repair.

PMCID: PMC86585
PMID: 11134330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 16;276(11):7963-7. Epub 2000 Dec 19.

A molecular link between the common phenotypes of type 1 glycogen storage disease
and HNF1alpha-null mice.

Hiraiwa H(1), Pan CJ, Lin B, Akiyama TE, Gonzalez FJ, Chou JY.

Author information: 
(1)Heritable Disorders Branch, NICHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

The clinical manifestations of type 1 glycogen storage disease (GSD-1) in
patients deficient in the glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) system (e.g. growth
retardation, hepatomegaly, hyperlipidemia, and renal dysfunction) are shared by
Hnf1alpha(-/-) mice deficient of a transcriptional activator, hepatocyte nuclear 
factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha). However, the molecular mechanism is unknown. The
G6Pase system, essential for the maintenance of glucose homeostasis, is comprised
of glucose 6-phosphate transporter (G6PT) and G6Pase. G6PT translocates G6P from 
the cytoplasm to the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum where it is metabolized
by G6Pase to glucose and phosphate. Deficiencies in G6Pase and G6PT cause GSD-1a 
and GSD-1b, respectively. Hnf1alpha(-/-) mice also develop noninsulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus caused by defective insulin secretion. In this study, we sought
to determine whether there is a molecular link between HNF1alpha deficiency and
function of the G6Pase system. Transactivation studies revealed that HNF1alpha is
required for transcription of the G6PT gene. Hepatic G6PT mRNA levels and
microsomal G6P transport activity are also markedly reduced in Hnf1alpha(-/-)
mice as compared with Hnf1alpha(+/+) and Hnf1alpha(+/-) littermates. On the other
hand, hepatic G6Pase mRNA expression and activity are up-regulated in
Hnf1alpha(-/-) mice, consistent with observations that G6Pase expression is
increased in diabetic animals. Taken together, the results strongly suggest that 
metabolic abnormalities in HNF1alpha-null mice are caused in part by G6PT
deficiency and by perturbations of the G6Pase system.

PMID: 11121425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Mech Dev. 2001 Jan;100(1):75-8.

Variant hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 expression in the mouse genital tract.

Reber M(1), Cereghini S.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 423, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 75743 Paris, Cedex 15,
France.

Variant Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 (vHNF1/HNF1beta) is a homeodomain-containing 
transcription factor first expressed in the primitive endoderm and its
derivatives, the visceral and parietal endoderm. It is subsequently expressed in 
epithelial cells of different organs, including the primitive gut and derivatives
(liver, pancreas, lung), the kidney, and transiently, in the neural tube. We
report here new data concerning vHnf1 expression in the mouse genital tract,
using both RNA analyses and our vHnf1 heterozygous mutant mouse line, in which
the first coding exon of the vHnf1 gene is replaced by the NLSLacZ reporter gene.
Both beta-galactosidase activity and vHnf1 transcripts are detected in
epididymus, vas deferens, seminal vesicle, prostate, uterus and oviduct. RNA
analysis and in situ hybridization studies demonstrate that vHnf1 transcripts are
restricted to the germinal cells of the testis. Unexpectedly, no
beta-galactosidase activity is detected in the testis. We further show that, in
addition to the somatic transcript, two more abundant vHnf1 transcript variants, 
which lack exons 1-4, appear in this organ after meiosis.

PMID: 11118887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biochem J. 2000 Dec 1;352 Pt 2:557-64.

Synergistic activation of the Atlantic salmon hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1
promoter by the orphan nuclear receptors HNF4 and chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter transcription factor I (COUP-TFI).

McNair A(1), Cereghini S, Brand H, Smith T, Breillat C, Gannon F.

Author information: 
(1)National Diagnostics Centre, University College Galway, Ireland.
Alan.Mcnair@unifr.ch

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) is a liver-enriched transcription factor that 
plays an important role in transcriptional networks involved in liver function.
The promoters of mammalian HNF1 genes contains a single binding site for another 
liver-enriched transcription factor, the nuclear hormone receptor HNF4. A
transcriptional hierarchy involving HNF4-mediated activation of the HNF1 promoter
has been proposed to be of crucial importance in maintaining the differentiated
hepatocyte phenotype. Here we present evidence that the Atlantic salmon HNF1
promoter contains three nuclear-hormone-receptor-binding sequences. Gel-shift
assays showed that these motifs are recognized with different affinities by HNF4 
and the orphan nuclear receptors chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter
transcription factors COUP-TFI and COUP-TFII. In hepatoma cells, the site showing
highest affinity for HNF4 appears to be crucial for promoter activity.
Transfection experiments in non-hepatic cells indicated that the salmon HNF1
promoter was activated by both HNF4 and COUP-TFs. We also identified a promoter
fragment encompassing the two more distal nuclear-hormone-binding sites that was 
activated by HNF4, unaffected by COUP-TF and showed a strong synergistic
activation by HNF4/COUP-TF. Results are presented detailing these interactions in
relation to the salmon HNF1 promoter architecture.

PMCID: PMC1221489
PMID: 11085951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Am J Hum Genet. 2001 Jan;68(1):219-24. Epub 2000 Nov 20.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta gene are associated with
familial hypoplastic glomerulocystic kidney disease.

Bingham C(1), Bulman MP, Ellard S, Allen LI, Lipkin GW, Hoff WG, Woolf AS,
Rizzoni G, Novelli G, Nicholls AJ, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine and Diabetes Research, School of Postgraduate 
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, EX2 5AX, Devon,
United Kingdom.

Familial glomerulocystic kidney disease (GCKD) is a dominantly inherited
condition characterized by glomerular cysts and variable renal size and function;
the molecular genetic etiology is unknown. Mutations in the gene encoding
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1beta have been associated with early-onset
diabetes and nondiabetic renal disease-particularly renal cystic disease. We
investigated a possible role for the HNF-1beta gene in four unrelated GCKD
families and identified mutations in two families: a nonsense mutation in exon 1 
(E101X) and a frameshift mutation in exon 2 (P159fsdelT). The family members with
HNF-1beta gene mutations had hypoplastic GCKD and early-onset diabetes or
impaired glucose tolerance. We conclude that there is genetic heterogeneity in
familial GCKD and that the hypoplastic subtype is a part of the clinical spectrum
of the renal cysts and diabetes syndrome that is associated with HNF-1beta
mutations.

PMCID: PMC1234916
PMID: 11085914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2000 Nov;11 Suppl 16:S140-3.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1, a transcription factor at the crossroads of glucose 
homeostasis.

Pontoglio M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oncogenic Virus Unit, CNRS URA 1644, Biotechnology Department, Pasteur
Institute, Paris, France. marcop@pasteur.fr

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) is a transcription factor involved in the
regulation of a large set of hepatic genes, including albumin, beta-fibrinogen,
and alpha1-antitrypsin. HNF1 is expressed in the liver, digestive tract,
pancreas, and kidney. Mice lacking HNF1 exhibit hepatic, pancreatic, and renal
dysfunctions. HNF1-deficient mice fail to express the hepatic phenylalanine
hydroxylase gene, giving rise to hyperphenylalaninemia. Renal proximal tubular
reabsorption of glucose, phosphate, arginine, and other metabolites is affected, 
producing severe renal glucosuria, phosphaturia, and amino aciduria. Homozygous
mutant mice also exhibit a dramatic insulin secretion defect. This dysfunction
resembles that exhibited by patients with maturity-onset diabetes mellitus of the
young type 3, who carry mutations in the human HNF1 gene in the heterozygous
state. These data show that HNF1 is a major regulator of glucose homeostasis,
regulating the expression of genes that are expressed in the liver, kidney, and
pancreas.

PMID: 11065346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Hum Mutat. 2000 Nov;16(5):377-85.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) mutations in maturity-onset
diabetes of the young.

Ellard S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine and Diabetes Research, School of Postgraduate 
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.
S.Ellard@exeter.ac.uk

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes
mellitus characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, early age of onset (<25
years) and pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. MODY is genetically heterogeneous
with five different genes identified to date: hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha
(HNF-4 alpha) [MODY1]; glucokinase [MODY2]; hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha
(HNF-1 alpha) [MODY3]; insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF-1) [MODY4]; and hepatocyte 
nuclear factor-1 beta (HNF-1 beta) [MODY5]. Mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene
represent a common cause of MODY in the majority of populations studied.
Sixty-five different mutations have been described in a total of 116 families.
The most common mutation is a C-insertion (P291fsinsC) in the polyC tract of exon
4, which has been reported in 22 families. The identification of an HNF-1 alpha
gene mutation in a patient with type 2 diabetes confirms the diagnosis of MODY
and has important implications for clinical management.

PMID: 11058894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Oct 5;276(3):837-42.

Identification of retinoic acid-responsive elements on the HNF1alpha and
HNF4alpha genes.

Qian A(1), Cai Y, Magee TR, Wan YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California,
90509, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) and HNF4alpha are liver-selective
transcription factors and are essential for hepatocyte differentiation. This
study demonstrates that HNF1alpha as well as HNF4alpha genes contain a direct
repeat with a space of one nucleotide (DR1)-retinoic acid (RA) response element
that can be bound and regulated by RA and retinoid x receptor alpha (RXRalpha)
complex. Transient transfection experiments showed that RA increased the promoter
activity of the HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha genes in Hep3B cells. Overexpression of
RXRalpha further enhanced the activities of both genes. Two putative RXRalpha
binding sites on the HNF1alpha (-295 to -276) and HNF4alpha (-418 to -399) genes 
have been characterized. By transient transfection, both sites positively
responded to RA, and overexpression of RXRalpha in Hep3B cells increased the
regulatory effect. Gel mobility shift assay demonstrated that these two DR-1
sites could be bound by RXRalpha specifically. These data suggest that the
differentiation effect of RA on hepatocyte may be due to direct interaction of
RXRalpha with the RA-responsive elements on the HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha genes.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11027556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Diabetes Care. 2000 Oct;23(10):1533-8.

Variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha and -4alpha genes in Finnish and
Chinese subjects with late-onset type 2 diabetes.

Rissanen J(1), Wang H, Miettinen R, Kärkkäinen P, Kekäläinen P, Mykkänen L,
Kuusisto J, Karhapää P, Niskanen L, Uusitupa M, Laakso M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Kuopio, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the role of the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha
and HNF-4alpha genes in the etiology of late-onset type 2 diabetes in Finnish and
Chinese subjects.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The whole coding regions of the genes encoding for
HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha, including approximately 800 bp of the HNF-1alpha
promoter, were investigated in 40 Finnish subjects (fasting C-peptide 50-570
pmol/l) and 47 Chinese subjects with type 2 diabetes by single-strand
conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. Frequencies of the variants of these
genes were analyzed by restriction fragment-length polymorphism analysis in
additional samples of 100 Finnish diabetic patients and 82 Finnish control
subjects and in 58 Chinese diabetic patients and 51 Chinese control subjects.
RESULTS: No previously reported gene defects were detected, but one novel
functionally silent GCC-->GCG variant (nucleotide 73, exon 10) was observed in
the HNF-4alpha gene in a Chinese diabetic patient. Interestingly, the Ala98Val
substitution of the HNF-1alpha gene occurred at a significantly higher frequency 
in 140 Finnish diabetic patients compared with 82 control subjects (P = 0.014).
The Ala98Val variant was not, however, associated with abnormalities in insulin
secretion evaluated by oral and intravenous glucose tolerance tests in subjects
with normal (n = 295) or impaired (n = 38) glucose tolerance.
CONCLUSIONS: Variants in the HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha genes are unlikely to play
a major role in the pathogenesis of late-onset type 2 diabetes in Finnish and
Chinese subjects. However, the association of the Ala98Val variant of the
HNF-1alpha gene with type 2 diabetes in Finnish subjects may indicate a
diabetogenic locus close to the HNF-1alpha gene.

PMID: 11023148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Cell Sci. 2000 Oct;113 ( Pt 20):3639-47.

Inhibition of MMH (Met murine hepatocyte) cell differentiation by TGF(beta) is
abrogated by pre-treatment with the heritable differentiation effector FGF1.

Spagnoli FM(1), Cicchini C, Tripodi M, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, URA 1773 du CNRS, Institut Pasteur, 
75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

MMH (Met murine hepatocyte) liver cells derived from transgenic mice expressing a
truncated constitutively active form of human c-Met are non-transformed
immortalized cell lines. We have previously shown that they harbor: (1)
epithelial cells that express the liver-enriched transcription factors HNF4 and
HNF1(alpha), and that can be stably induced by FGF1 to express liver functions,
and (2) fibroblast-like bi-potential palmate cells that can differentiate into
bile duct-like structures in Matrigel cultures, or into epithelial cells
competent to express hepatic functions. Low concentrations of TGF(beta) have been
found to inhibit growth and differentiation of MMH cells. The factor stabilized
the palmate cell phenotype, and it provoked epithelial cells to acquire
palmate-like morphological characteristics, in parallel with down-regulation of
expression of HNF4 and HNF1(alpha) and activation of Snail transcripts. The
effects of TGF(beta) were dominant if it was added with FGF1, but the effects on 
differentiation were abrogated if cells had been pre-treated with FGF1. This work
identifies TGF(beta) as a factor that could be implicated in maintaining
bi-potential precursor cells in the liver, FGF1 as one that could over-ride the
TGF(beta) effects and Snail as a candidate for mediation of the signal.

PMID: 11017879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Horm Metab Res. 2000 Sep;32(9):373-7.

A novel dominant-negative mutation of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene
in Japanese early-onset type 2 diabetes.

Tanaka S(1), Kobayashi T, Tomura H, Okubo M, Nakanishi K, Takeda J, Murase T.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Toranomon Hospital, and Okinaka
Memorial Institute for Medical Research, Tokyo, Japan. tetsuro@po.sphere.ne.jp

We investigated the presence and the function of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha) mutations in 26 Japanese subjects with type 2 diabetes. The subjects
were between 20 and 39 years of age on diagnosis and had diabetic first-degree
relatives. Two different frameshift mutations were found in 2 subjects (8 %). One
novel mutation, T539fsdelC (deletion of C in codon 539 for Thr), is predicted to 
generate a protein of normal 539 residues at the N-terminus followed by an
abnormal 119 amino acid protein. The mutation, P291fsinsC (insertion of C in
codon 291 for Pro) should lead to production of a truncated protein of 315 amino 
acids. Transfection reporter assay using MIN6 and HepG2 cells revealed both
mutations to have null function in the transactivation of reporter gene
expression. When transfected with wild-type gene, these mutations behaved as
dominant-negative regulators in both cells. An equimolar amount of T539fsdelC
reduced wild-type activity by approximately 80% in MIN6 cells, while the same
concentration of P291fsinsc reduced it by 30%. The sequences responsible for the 
transactivation activity of HNF-1alpha are confined largely to amino acids
547-628, so that the T539fsdelC mutation, which affects this entire region,
replacing amino acids 540-631 with an abnormal 119 amino acid protein, may
acquire a potent dominant-negative function.

PMID: 11014387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Hum Mutat. 2000 Sep;16(3):273.

Proposed mechanism for a novel insertion/deletion frameshift mutation
(I414G415ATCG-->CCA) in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) gene 
which causes maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY).

Ellard S(1), Bulman MP, Frayling TM, Shepherd M, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine and Diabetes Research, School of Postgraduate 
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, UK.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic subgroup of
non-insulin dependent diabetes (NIDDM) characterized by an early age of diagnosis
(usually < 25 years) and an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. Mutations in 
the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1alpha) [MODY3] gene represent the
most common cause of MODY in the UK and a common cause of MODY in many other
populations. Sixty-three different mutations have been described in a total of
112 families worldwide. This report describes two families, not known to be
related, who carry a novel insertion/deletion mutation (I414G415ATCG-->CCA) and a
6bp intronic deletion of the HNF-1alpha gene in cis. We propose that the
insertion/deletion mutation has arisen by formation of a hairpin loop due to the 
presence of a quasi-palindromic sequence, followed by insertion of CC and
deletion of TCG resulting in the increased stability of the hairpin loop.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10980542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 1;275(48):37604-11.

An alternative, human SRC promoter and its regulation by hepatic nuclear
factor-1alpha.

Bonham K(1), Ritchie SA, Dehm SM, Snyder K, Boyd FM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Unit, Health Research Division, Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and
the Division of Oncology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,
S7N 4H4, Canada. kbonham@scf.sk.ca

The SRC gene encodes the proto-oncogene pp60(c-)(src), a tyrosine kinase
implicated in numerous signal transduction pathways. In addition, the SRC gene is
differentially expressed, developmentally regulated, and frequently overexpressed
in human neoplasia. However, the mechanisms regulating its expression have not
been completely explored. Here we describe the isolation of a new distal SRC
promoter and associated exon, designated 1alpha, which we mapped to a position
1.0 kilobase upstream of the previously described SRC1A housekeeping promoter.
Differential use of these promoters and their associated exons coupled with
subsequent splicing to a common downstream exon results in c-Src transcripts with
different 5' ends but identical coding regions. Promoter analysis following
transient transfections into HepG2 cells mapped the minimal 1alpha promoter to a 
region 145 bp upstream of the major transcription start site. This region
contained a consensus binding site for hepatic nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), a
liver-enriched transcription factor implicated in the regulation of a number of
genes in liver, kidney, stomach, intestine, and pancreas. Subsequent mobility
shift assays confirmed that HNF-1alpha isoform was the predominant factor
interacting with this region of the promoter. Mutation of the HNF-1 site resulted
in a dramatic reduction in SRC promoter activity. Cotransfection studies
demonstrated the promoter could be strongly transactivated by the HNF-1alpha
isoform but not by the related HNF-1beta factor. Consistent with these results,
we demonstrated that transcripts originating from the SRC1alpha promoter display 
a tissue restricted pattern of expression with highest levels present in stomach,
kidney, and pancreas. These results indicate that SRC transcriptional regulation 
is much more complex than previously realized and implicates HNF-1 in both the
tissue-specific regulation of the SRC gene in normal tissues and the
overexpression of c-Src in certain human cancers.

PMID: 10978326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Diabet Med. 2000 Jul;17(7):543-5.

Sensitivity to sulphonylureas in patients with hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
gene mutations: evidence for pharmacogenetics in diabetes.

Pearson ER(1), Liddell WG, Shepherd M, Corrall RJ, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medicine 
and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is characterized by
autosomal dominantly inherited, early-onset, non-insulin-dependent diabetes.
Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha gene are the commonest
cause of MODY. Individual patients with HNF-1alpha mutations have been reported
as being unusually sensitive to the hypoglycaemic effects of sulphonylurea
therapy. We report three patients, attending a single clinic, with HNF-1alpha
mutations that show marked hypersensitivity to sulphonylureas.
CASE REPORTS: In cases 1 and 2 there were marked changes in HbA1c on cessation
(4.4% and 5.8%, respectively) and reintroduction (5.0% and 2.6%) of
sulphonylureas. Case 3 had severe hypoglycaemic symptoms on the introduction of
sulphonylureas despite poor glycaemic control and was shown with a test dose of
2.5 mg glibenclamide to have symptomatic hypoglycaemia (blood glucose 2 mmol/l)
after 4 h despite eating.
CONCLUSIONS: HNF-1alpha MODY diabetic subjects are more sensitive to
sulphonylureas than Type 2 diabetic subjects and this is seen in different
families, with different mutations and may continue up to 13 years from
diagnosis. This is an example of pharmacogenetics, with the underlying
aetiological genetic defect altering the pharmacological response to treatment.
The present cases suggest that in HNF-1alpha MODY patients: (i) sulphonylureas
can dramatically improve glycaemic control and should be considered as initial
treatment for patients with poor glycaemic control on an appropriate diet; (ii)
hypoglycaemia may complicate the introduction of sulphonylureas and therefore
very low doses of short acting sulphonylureas should be used initially; and (iii)
cessation of sulphonylureas should be undertaken cautiously as there may be
marked deterioration in glycaemic control.

PMID: 10972586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Nat Struct Biol. 2000 Sep;7(9):744-8.

Structural basis of dimerization, coactivator recognition and MODY3 mutations in 
HNF-1alpha.

Rose RB(1), Bayle JH, Endrizzi JA, Cronk JD, Crabtree GR, Alber T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California 94720-3206, USA.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) results from mutations in the
transcriptional activator hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha). Several 
MODY3 mutations target the HNF-1alpha dimerization domain (HNF-p1), which binds
the coactivator, dimerization cofactor of HNF-1 (DCoH). To define the mechanism
of coactivator recognition and the basis for the MODY3 phenotype, we determined
the cocrystal structure of the DCoH-HNF-p1 complex and characterized
biochemically the effects of MODY3 mutations in HNF-p1. The DCoH-HNF-p1 complex
comprises a dimer of dimers in which HNF-p1 forms a unique four-helix bundle.
Through rearrangements of interfacial side chains, a single, bifunctional
interface in the DCoH dimer mediates both HNF-1alpha binding and formation of a
competing, transcriptionally inactive DCoH homotetramer. Consistent with the
structure, MODY3 mutations in HNF-p1 reduce activator function by two distinct
mechanisms.

PMID: 10966642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2000 Aug;24(8):1062-4.

Gender, obesity, hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha G319S and the age-of-onset of type
2 diabetes in Canadian Oji-Cree.

Hegele RA(1), Cao H, Harris SB, Zinman B, Hanley AJ, Anderson CM.

Author information: 
(1)John P Robarts Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada.
robert.hegele@rri.on.ca

Among the Oji-Cree of northern Ontario, women have both a higher prevalence and
an earlier onset of type 2 diabetes compared to men. We studied the relationship 
between HNF1A S319 and both the presence of and the age-of-onset of type 2
diabetes in women and men separately. We found that: 1) in women, there was a
significant difference in the mean age-of-onset of type 2 diabetes according to
HNF1A genotype; and 2) in men, there was no difference in the mean age-of-onset
of type 2 diabetes according to HNF1A genotype. The findings indicate that HNF1A 
S319 is associated with increased susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in both men
and women, but with earlier age-of-onset in women only. One factor that might
account for the gender difference in the onset of HNF1A S319-associated type 2
diabetes is the greater prevalence and severity, and earlier onset of, obesity
among female Oji-Cree.

PMID: 10951547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Aug;85(8):2951-3.

Variability of the insulin receptor substrate-1, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha), HNF-4alpha, and HNF-6 genes and size at birth in a population-based
sample of young Danish subjects.

Rasmussen SK(1), Urhammer SA, Hansen T, Almind K, Møller AM, Borch-Johnsen K,
Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark.

Reduced size at birth has been proposed to be a risk factor for insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes. It is, however, not known whether this
association is explained by unfavorable intrauterine environment or by specific
susceptibility genotypes predisposing for both reduced fetal growth and insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes. The present study was performed to evaluate
whether previously identified amino acid polymorphisms of genes that from animal 
models have been suggested to play important roles during fetal development are
associated with alterations in size at birth. The study population comprised 380 
subjects randomly recruited from a population of young Danish Caucasian
individuals, aged 18-32 yr. The original data of birth length and weight for 331 
of 380 subjects were obtained from the midwife records. The Gly/Arg972 of insulin
receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), the Thr/Ile130 of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha), the Pro/Ala75 of HNF-6, and the Ile/Leu27, Ala/Val93,
and Ser/Asn4s7 polymorphisms of the HNF-lalpha gene were examined for association
with birth weight and length and the ponderal index. Using a generalized linear
model, including gender and the genotype as fixed variables, and applying
Bonferroni correction for multiple testing, we could not demonstrate any
significant differences in these estimates among wild-type, heterozygous, and
homozygous carriers with respect to any of the gene variants. In conclusion,
common variability in the genes encoding the IRS-1, HNF-lalpha, HNF-4alpha, and
HNF-6 proteins can be excluded as major factors influencing size at birth among
Danish Caucasian subjects.

PMID: 10946909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. EMBO J. 2000 Aug 15;19(16):4257-64.

Molecular targets of a human HNF1 alpha mutation responsible for pancreatic
beta-cell dysfunction.

Wang H(1), Antinozzi PA, Hagenfeldt KA, Maechler P, Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Division de Biochimie Clinique et de Diabétologie Expérimentale, Départment de
Médecine interne, Centre Médical Universitaire, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

The reverse tetracycline-dependent transactivator system was employed in
insulinoma INS-1 cells to achieve controlled inducible expression of hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1 alpha)-P291fsinsC, the most common mutation
associated with subtype 3 of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3).
Nuclear localized HNF1 alpha-P291fsinsC protein exerts its dominant-negative
effects by competing with endogenous HNF1 alpha for the cognate DNA-binding site.
HNF1 alpha controls multiple genes implicated in pancreatic beta-cell function
and notably in metabolism- secretion coupling. In addition to reduced expression 
of the genes encoding insulin, glucose transporter-2, L-pyruvate kinase, aldolase
B and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase, induction of HNF1
alpha-P291fsinsC also significantly inhibits expression of mitochondrial
2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH) E1 subunit mRNA and protein. OGDH enzyme
activity and [(14)C]pyruvate oxidation were also reduced. In contrast, the mRNA
and protein levels of mitochondrial uncoupling protein-2 were dramatically
increased by HNF1 alpha-P291fsinsC induction. As predicted from this altered gene
expression profile, HNF1 alpha-P291fsinsC also inhibits insulin secretory
responses to glucose and leucine, correlated with impaired nutrient-evoked
mitochondrial ATP production and mitochondrial membrane hyperpolarization. These 
unprecedented results suggest the molecular mechanism of HNF1 alpha-P291fsinsC
causing beta-cell dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC302029
PMID: 10944108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Diabetologia. 2000 Jun;43(6):818-9.

A simple test for the high-frequency P291fsinsC mutation in the HNF1 alpha/MODY3 
gene.

Bjørkhaug L, Søvik O, Bell GI, Njølstad PR, Molven A.

PMID: 10907131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Diabetologia. 2000 Jun;43(6):816-8.

Nature or nurture: an insightful illustration from a Chinese family with
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha diabetes (MODY3)

Ng MC, Li JK, So WY, Critchley JA, Cockram CS, Bell GI, Chan JC.

PMID: 10907130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Diabet Med. 2000 May;17(5):390-3.

A novel mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha/MODY3 gene in Chinese
subjects with early-onset Type 2 diabetes mellitus in Taiwan.

Jap TS(1), Wu YC, Chiou JY, Kwok CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Veterans General
Hospital-Taipei, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, ROC. tsjap@vghtpe.gov.tw

AIMS: The goal of this study was to determine the frequency of mutation in
hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, a gene recently implicated as causing
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and to analyse the respective
clinical presentations in an ethnically Chinese population.
METHODS: Fifteen unrelated subjects (nine females and six males) aged less than
35 years who had early-onset diabetes were analysed to test the possibility that 
mutation of the HNF-1alpha gene was responsible for this disorder. Genomic DNA
extraction, polymerase chain reaction and DNA sequence analysis were performed
accordingly.
RESULTS: One patient with MODY had a novel missense mutation in exon 3 of the
HNF-1alpha gene (Y218C) in a region of the protein that corresponds to a
predicted DNA binding domain.
CONCLUSIONS: A Y218C mutation in HNF-1alpha gene was identified in one family in 
Taiwan.

PMID: 10872540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 25;275(34):26649-60.

The nuclear matrix protein CDP represses hepatic transcription of the human
cholesterol-7alpha hydroxylase gene.

Antes TJ(1), Chen J, Cooper AD, Levy-Wilson B.

Author information: 
(1)Palo Alto Medical Foundation Research Institute, Palo Alto, California 94301, 
USA.

To date, the molecular mechanisms that govern hepatic-specific transcription of
the human cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) gene are poorly understood. We 
recently reported that the region extending from -1888 to +46, which includes the
promoter, is not capable of conferring expression to human CYP7A1 promoter lacZ
transgenes in the livers of mice, but that expression is observed with transgenes
containing the entire structural gene. To locate liver-specific elements in other
segments of the human gene, DNase I hypersensitivity studies were performed with 
transcriptionally active, liver-derived HepG2 cells and with transcriptionally
inactive HeLa cells. Three DNase I hypersensitivity sites were detected within
the first intron of the human CYP7A1 gene, but only in HepG2 cells. Transient
transfection experiments with HepG2 cells revealed a transcriptional repressor
within intron 1. Five binding sites for the CAAT displacement protein (CDP) were 
detected within intron 1. Since CDP is a nuclear matrix protein, two methods were
employed to localize nuclear matrix attachment sites within intron 1 of the human
CYP7A1 gene. A matrix attachment site was found throughout the entirety of intron
1. Gel retardation experiments and cell transfection studies provided evidence
for the repression mechanism. Repression is achieved by displacement by CDP of
two hepatic activators, namely HNF-1alpha and C/EBPalpha, that bind to three
different sites within intron 1. Additionally, CDP represses transactivation
mediated by these two activators.

PMID: 10869351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Diabetes Care. 2000 Mar;23(3):424-5.

A severe clinical phenotype results from the co-inheritance of type 2
susceptibility genes and a hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha mutation.

Tack CJ, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

PMID: 10868881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Diabetes Care. 2000 Mar;23(3):302-4.

Mutations in the genes for hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, -4alpha,
-1beta, and -3beta; the dimerization cofactor of HNF-1; and insulin promoter
factor 1 are not common causes of early-onset type 2 diabetes in Pima Indians.

Baier LJ(1), Permana PA, Traurig M, Dobberfuhl A, Wiedrich C, Sutherland J,
Thuillez P, Luczy-Bachman G, Hara M, Horikawa Y, Hinokio Y, Hanson RL, Bogardus
C.

Author information: 
(1)Phoenix Epidemiology and Clinical Research Branch, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Arizona 85016, USA. lbaier@phx.niddk.nih.gov

OBJECTIVE: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically
heterogeneous subtype of type 2 diabetes characterized by an early age at onset
and autosomal dominant inheritance. MODY can result from heterozygous mutations
in at least five genes. The purpose of this study was to determine whether
alterations in known MODY genes and two MODY candidate genes contribute to the
development of early-onset type 2 diabetes in Pima Indians.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The coding regions of the known MODY genes
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, HNF-4alpha, HNF-1beta, and insulin
promoter factor 1 and the coding regions of two MODY candidate genes, HNF-3beta
and the dimerization cofactor of HNF-1, were sequenced in genomic DNA from Pima
Indians. The primary "affected" study population consisted of 46 Pima Indians
whose age at onset of type 2 diabetes was < or =20 years. DNA sequence variants
identified in the affected group were then analyzed in a group of 80 "unaffected"
Pima Indians who were at least 40 years old and had normal glucose tolerance.
RESULTS: A total of 11 polymorphisms were detected in these genes. However, none 
of the polymorphisms differed in frequency among Pima Indians with an early age
at onset of diabetes compared with older Pima Indians with normal glucose
tolerance.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in these known MODY or MODY candidate genes are not a
common cause of early-onset diabetes in Pima Indians.

PMID: 10868855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 1;275(35):27117-22.

Regulation of the liver fatty acid-binding protein gene by hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha). Alterations in fatty acid homeostasis in
HNF1alpha-deficient mice.

Akiyama TE(1), Ward JM, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha)-null mice have enlarged fatty livers
and alterations in the expression of genes encoding enzymes involved in the
synthesis, catabolism, and transport of fatty acids. Elevations in the expression
of genes encoding fatty acid synthetic enzymes (fatty acid synthase and acyl-CoA 
carboxylase) and peroxisomal beta-oxidation enzymes (CYP4A3, bifunctional enzyme,
and thiolase) were observed in the livers of HNF1alpha-null mice, whereas hepatic
mitochondrial beta-oxidation gene (medium and short chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase)
expression levels remain unchanged relative to HNF1alpha-heterozygous controls.
An elevation in the levels of fatty acid transporter gene expression was also
observed. In contrast, there was a marked reduction of liver fatty acid-binding
protein (l-FABP) gene expression in the livers of HNF1alpha-null mice. Isolation 
and sequence analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the mouse l-FABP gene revealed
the presence of two HNF1alpha regulatory elements. The results of transient
transfection studies indicate that HNF1alpha is required to trans-activate the
expression of the l-FABP promoter. Taken together, these data define a critical
role for HNF1alpha in the pathogenesis of a phenotype marked by fatty
infiltration of the liver and in the regulation of the l-FABP gene, the
expression of which may have a direct impact on the maintenance of fatty acid
homeostasis.

PMID: 10852923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Jun;85(6):2178-83.

The I27L amino acid polymorphism of hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha is associated
with insulin resistance.

Chiu KC(1), Chuang LM, Ryu JM, Tsai GP, Saad MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California School of Medicine, Los
Angeles 90095, USA. kchiu@mednet.ucla.edu

Mutations of the hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene have been found 
in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young. We examined the relation
between the I27L polymorphism of HNF-1alpha and insulin sensitivity and beta-cell
function assessed by a hyperglycemic clamp. This study included 52 healthy
glucose-tolerant and normotensive subjects (age, 19-40 yr; body mass index,
17.58-35.61 kg/m2; waist/hip ratio, 0.65-1.03). We identified 19 LL subjects, 24 
IL, and 9 II subjects. No difference was noted in the demographic features among 
the three genotypes. The LL group had the highest postchallenge insulin levels at
30 and 90 min (P = 0.038 and P = 0.015, respectively) and also the highest
insulin area under curve (P = 0.009) among the three genotypes. The LL group was 
more insulin resistant than the IL and II groups (P = 0.042 for insulin
sensitivity index). After adjusting for age, gender, obesity, and ethnicity, the 
I27L polymorphism was an independent determinant of the insulin sensitivity index
(P = 0.001). However, it had no impact on either the first or second phase
insulin response. Therefore, we conclude that the I27L polymorphism is associated
with insulin resistance, but not beta-cell function. The mechanism of this
association is unclear, but HNF-1alpha may play a role in regulating hepatic
glucose metabolism.

PMID: 10852449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 May;85(5):2014-9.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma2 P12A and type 2 diabetes in
Canadian Oji-Cree.

Hegele RA(1), Cao H, Harris SB, Zinman B, Hanley AJ, Anderson CM.

Author information: 
(1)Blackburn Cardiovascular Genetics Laboratory, John P. Robarts Research
Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada. robert.hegele@rri.on.ca

Among the Oji-Cree of northern Ontario, we previously identified a novel variant 
in the HNF1A gene, namely G319S, that was strongly associated with type 2
diabetes. However, the majority of subjects with diabetes did not have the HNF1A 
S319 variant, suggesting that there might be other genetic determinants of
diabetes susceptibility. In the course of sequencing candidate genes in diabetic 
subjects who were homozygous for HNF1A G319/G319, we found that some of them had 
the PPARG A12 variant. After genotyping PPARG in the entire adult Oji-Cree
population, we found that: 1) PPARG A12 was strongly associated with type 2
diabetes in women, but not men; 2) among women, the odds of being affected for
carriers of PPARG A12 compared with noncarriers was 2.3 (95% confidence interval,
1.4-3.8); and 3) among women, affected carriers of PPARG A12 had a significantly 
earlier age-of-onset and/or age-at-diagnosis compared with noncarriers. When
taken together with the previously reported association of diabetes with HNF1A in
both men and women, the gender-specific association with PPARG A12 confirms that 
type 2 diabetes is etiologically complex in the Oji-Cree and that at least two
genes are involved in determining susceptibility to the disease in these people.

PMID: 10843190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Diabetes Care. 2000 Jun;23(6):775-8.

Clinical utility of HNF1A genotyping for diabetes in aboriginal Canadians.

Hegele RA(1), Cao H, Hanley AJ, Zinman B, Harris SB, Anderson CM.

Author information: 
(1)John P. Robarts Research Institute, and Department of Medicine, University of 
Western Ontario, London, Canada. robert.hegele@rri.on.ca

OBJECTIVE: To determine the diagnostic performance characteristics of HNF1A
genotyping for diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) in Canadian Oji-Cree
Indians.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We studied all Oji-Cree subjects > or = 50 years of 
age (96 subjects) who had participated in a community-wide prevalence survey for 
type 2 diabetes. Subjects were classified either as having "disease," which
included type 2 diabetes and IGT, or not. All subjects were genotyped for the
HNF1A G319S mutation.
RESULTS: The prevalence of disease in this group was 65.7%, of whom 71.4% had
type 2 diabetes. For a carrier of HNF1A S319, the specificity, sensitivity, and
positive and negative predictive values were 97.0, 30.1, 95.0, and 42.1%,
respectively. When the pretest disease prevalence was accounted for, the
probability of disease after a positive test was 97.2%, and the probability of
disease after a negative test was 42.2%. The values were very similar for the
subgroup of subjects with type 2 diabetes alone.
CONCLUSIONS: The HNF1A genotype appears to be the most specific genetic test yet 
reported for the prediction of a common multifactorial disease by applying
present-day standards of clinical epidemiology in molecular genetics. A positive 
test result had particular diagnostic value in the Oji-Cree: a subject with HNF1A
S319 was virtually certain of having diabetes or IGT by 50 years of age. In
contrast, a subject without HNF1A S319 had a reduced risk compared with the
age-specific prevalence but was not totally risk-free. Because HNF1A S319 was not
the only predisposing factor for diabetes in the Oji-Cree, subjects without HNF1A
S319 were still at some risk for diabetes or IGT.

PMID: 10840995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2000 Apr;48(1):67-70.

Follow up of a HNF-1alpha mutant carrier with a severely impaired beta cell
function.

Costa A, Rodriguez C, Gomis R, Conget I, Casamitjana R, Bescos M.

PMID: 10798892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Jun;66(6):1871-81. Epub 2000 May 2.

Genomewide search for type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes in four American
populations.

Ehm MG(1), Karnoub MC, Sakul H, Gottschalk K, Holt DC, Weber JL, Vaske D, Briley 
D, Briley L, Kopf J, McMillen P, Nguyen Q, Reisman M, Lai EH, Joslyn G, Shepherd 
NS, Bell C, Wagner MJ, Burns DK; American Diabetes Association GENNID Study
Group. Genetics of NIDDM.

Author information: 
(1)Glaxo Wellcome, Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
mge37216@glaxowellcome.com

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet 2002 Jan;70(1):284.

Type 2 diabetes is a serious, genetically influenced disease for which no fully
effective treatments are available. Identification of biochemical or regulatory
pathways involved in the disease syndrome could lead to innovative therapeutic
interventions. One way to identify such pathways is the genetic analysis of
families with multiple affected members where disease predisposing genes are
likely to be segregating. We undertook a genomewide screen (389-395
microsatellite markers) in samples of 835 white, 591 Mexican American, 229 black,
and 128 Japanese American individuals collected as part of the American Diabetes 
Association's GENNID study. Multipoint nonparametric linkage analyses were
performed with diabetes, and diabetes or impaired glucose homeostasis (IH).
Linkage to diabetes or IH was detected near markers D5S1404 (map position 77 cM, 
LOD = 2.80), D12S853 (map position 82 cM, LOD = 2.81) and GATA172D05
(X-chromosome map position 130 cM, LOD = 2.99) in whites, near marker D3S2432
(map position 51 cM, LOD = 3.91) in Mexican Americans, and near marker D10S1412
(map position 14 cM, LOD = 2.39) in African Americans mainly collected in phase 1
of the study. Further analyses showed evidence for interactions between the
chromosome 5 locus and region on chromosome 12 containing the MODY 3 gene (map
position 132 cM) and between the X-chromosome locus and region near D12S853 (map 
position 82 cM) in whites. Although these results were not replicated in samples 
collected in phase 2 of the GENNID study, the region on chromosome 12 was
replicated in samples from whites described by Bektas et al. (1999).

PMCID: PMC1378057
PMID: 10793009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Pharmacol. 2000 May;57(5):940-7.

Octamer transcription factor-1 enhances hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha-mediated
activation of the human UDP glucuronosyltransferase 2B7 promoter.

Ishii Y(1), Hansen AJ, Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park,
South Australia, Australia.

The human UDP glucuronosyltransferase, UGT2B7, is expressed in the liver and
gastrointestinal tract, where it catalyzes the glucuronidation of steroids and
bile acids. In this study, the UGT2B7 gene was isolated and its proximal promoter
was analyzed. The UGT2B7 gene consists of 6 exons and extends over 16 kilobases
(kb). It does not contain a canonical TATA box but has a region (-2 to -40)
adjacent to the transcription start site that binds nuclear proteins. This region
contains a consensus hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF1alpha)-binding site and
an overlapping AT-rich segment. Varying lengths of the UGT2B7 gene promoter, with
and without these sites, were fused to the firefly luciferase reporter gene and
transfected into HepG2 cells. UGT2B7 promoter activity with the HNF1/AT-rich
element was stimulated by cotransfection with HNF1alpha. Additional activation
was observed when HNF1alpha and octamer transcription factor-1 (Oct-1) were
cotransfected simultaneously. However, Oct-1 alone did not stimulate promoter
activity and did not bind to the promoter in the absence of HNF1alpha. Deletion
of the HNF1/AT-rich region, or mutations in this region, abolished UGT2B7 gene
promoter activity and prevented HNF1alpha-mediated increases in promoter
activity. The presence of HNF1alpha and octamer transcription factor-1 (Oct-1) in
the protein complex that bound to the HNF1/AT-rich region was demonstrated by gel
shift analyses with antibodies specific to HNF1alpha and Oct-1 protein. These
results strongly suggest that the liver-enriched factor HNF1alpha binds to, and
activates, the UGT2B7 gene promoter and that the ubiquitous transcription factor,
Oct-1, enhances this activation by directly interacting with HNF1alpha. This
interaction between HNF1alpha and Oct-1 may fine-tune UGT2B7 expression.

PMID: 10779377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2000 Apr 28;275(17):12515-20.

Transcriptional activation by hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 requires synergism
between multiple coactivator proteins.

Soutoglou E(1), Papafotiou G, Katrakili N, Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology Hellas, 711 10 Herakleion Crete, Greece.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) plays an important role in the regulation of 
a large number of genes expressed in the liver, kidney, and pancreatic
beta-cells. In exploring the molecular mechanism involved in HNF-1-dependent gene
activation in the in vivo chromatin context, we found that HNF-1 can physically
interact with the histone acetyltransferases (HATs) CREB-binding protein (CBP),
p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF), Src-1, and RAC3. The transcriptional
activation potential of HNF-1 on a genome integrated promoter was strictly
dependent on the synergistic action of CBP and P/CAF, which can independently
interact with the N-terminal and C-terminal domain of HNF-1, respectively.
Moreover, the HAT activity of both coactivators was important, as opposed to the 
selective requirement for the HAT activity of P/CAF in activation from a
transiently transfected reporter. Interaction of CBP with the N-terminal domain
of HNF-1 greatly increased the binding affinity for P/CAF with the C-terminal
activation domain, which may represent the molecular basis for the observed
functional synergism. The results support a model that involves the combined
action of multiple coactivators recruited by HNF-1, which activate transcription 
by coupling nucleosome modification and recruitment of the general transcription 
machinery.

PMID: 10777539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Biol Chem. 2000 Apr 21;275(16):12108-18.

Differential role of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 in the regulation of
glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit gene transcription by cAMP in liver- and 
kidney-derived cell lines.

Streeper RS(1), Svitek CA, Goldman JK, O'Brien RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

In liver and kidney, the terminal step in gluconeogenesis is catalyzed by
glucose-6-phosphatase. To examine the effect of the cAMP signal transduction
pathway on transcription of the gene encoding the catalytic subunit of
glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase), G6Pase-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT)
fusion genes were transiently transfected into either the liver-derived HepG2 or 
kidney-derived LLC-PK cell line. Co-transfection of an expression vector encoding
the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) markedly stimulated 
G6Pase-CAT fusion gene expression, and mutational analysis of the G6Pase promoter
revealed that multiple regions are required for this PKA response in both the
HepG2 and LLC-PK cell lines. A sequence in the G6Pase promoter that resembles a
cAMP response element is required for the full PKA response in both HepG2 and
LLC-PK cells. However, in LLC-PK cells, but not in HepG2 cells, a hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) binding site was critical for the full induction of
G6Pase-CAT expression by PKA. Changing this HNF-1 motif to that for the yeast
transcription factor GAL4 reduces the PKA response in LLC-PK cells to the same
degree as deleting the HNF-1 site. However, co-transfection of this mutated
construct with chimeric proteins comprising the GAL4-DNA binding domain ligated
to the coding sequence for HNF-1alpha, HNF-1beta, HNF-3, or HNF-4 completely
restored the PKA response. Thus, we hypothesize that, in LLC-PK cells, HNF-1 is
acting as an accessory factor to enhance PKA signaling through the cAMP response 
element by altering G6Pase promoter conformation or accessibility rather than
specifically affecting some component of the PKA signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 10766845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2000 Apr;278(4):G591-603.

Regulation of the human Na(+)-glucose cotransporter gene, SGLT1, by HNF-1 and
Sp1.

Martín MG(1), Wang J, Solorzano-Vargas RS, Lam JT, Turk E, Wright EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, UCLA School of
Medicine, Los Angeles 90095-1751, USA. mmartin@mednet.ucla.edu

The Na(+)-glucose cotransporter (SGLT1) is expressed primarily by small
intestinal epithelial cells and transports the monosaccharides glucose and
galactose across the apical membrane. Here we describe the isolation and
characterization of 5.3 kb of the 5'-flanking region of the SGLT1 gene by
transiently transfecting reporter constructs into a variety of epithelial cell
lines. A fragment (nt -235 to +22) of the promoter showed strong activity in the 
intestinal cell line Caco-2 but was inactive in a nonintestinal epithelial cell
line (Chinese hamster ovary). Within this region, three cis-elements, a
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) and two GC box sites are critical for
maintaining the gene's basal level of expression. The two GC boxes bind to
several members of the Sp1 family of transcription factors and, in the presence
of HNF-1, synergistically upregulate transactivation of the promoter. A novel
16-bp element just downstream of one GC box was also shown to influence the
interaction of Sp1 to its binding site. In summary, we report the identification 
and characterization of the human SGLT1 minimal promoter and the critical role
that HNF-1 and Sp1-multigene members have in enhancing the basal level of its
transcription in Caco-2 cells.

PMID: 10762614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Apr 25;97(9):4695-700.

The mutated human gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta inhibits kidney
formation in developing Xenopus embryos.

Wild W(1), Pogge von Strandmann E, Nastos A, Senkel S, Lingott-Frieg A, Bulman M,
Bingham C, Ellard S, Hattersley AT, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen, Essen,
Germany.

The transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta (HNF1beta) is a
tissue-specific regulator that also plays an essential role in early development 
of vertebrates. In humans, four heterozygous mutations in the HNF1beta gene have 
been identified that lead to early onset of diabetes and severe primary renal
defects. The degree and type of renal defects seem to depend on the specific
mutation. We show that the frameshift mutant P328L329fsdelCCTCT associated with
nephron agenesis retains its DNA-binding properties and acts as a
gain-of-function mutation with increased transactivation potential in
transfection experiments. Expression of this mutated factor in the Xenopus embryo
leads to defective development and agenesis of the pronephros, the first kidney
form of amphibians. Very similar defects are generated by overexpressing in
Xenopus the wild-type HNF1beta, which is consistent with the gain-of-function
property of the mutant. In contrast, introduction of the human HNF1beta mutant
R137-K161del, which is associated with a reduced number of nephrons with
hypertrophy of the remaining ones and which has an impaired DNA binding, shows
only a minor effect on pronephros development in Xenopus. Thus, the
overexpression of both human mutants has a different effect on renal development 
in Xenopus, reflecting the variation in renal phenotype seen with these
mutations. We conclude that mutations in human HNF1beta can be functionally
characterized in Xenopus. Our findings imply that HNF1beta not only is an early
marker of kidney development but also is functionally involved in morphogenetic
events, and these processes can be investigated in lower vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC18295
PMID: 10758154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Eur J Endocrinol. 2000 Apr;142(4):380-6.

Genetic and clinical characterisation of maturity-onset diabetes of the young in 
Spanish families.

Costa A(1), Bescós M, Velho G, Chêvre J, Vidal J, Sesmilo G, Bellanné-Chantelot
C, Froguel P, Casamitjana R, Rivera-Fillat F, Gomis R, Conget I.

Author information: 
(1)Servei d'Endocrinologia i Diabetis, IDIBAPS, Hospital Clínic, Facultat de
Medicina, Universitat de Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the frequencies of the major maturity-onset diabetes of
the young (MODY) subtypes in a panel of Spanish families and to assess phenotypic
differences in patients with the different subtypes of MODY.
METHODS: Forty-eight subjects from twenty families with clinical diagnosis of
MODY were studied. They underwent a standardised clinical examination and a 75-g 
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) was performed. Estimations of insulin
sensitivity (%S) and insulin secretion capacity (%B) were calculated by the
computer-solved homeostasis model assessment (HOMA). Mutations in the coding
regions of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha/MODY1, glucokinase (GCK/MODY2) 
and HNF-1alpha/MODY3 genes were investigated by single strand comformation
polymorphism and sequencing analysis.
RESULTS: Mutations in the GCK and HNF-1alpha genes were observed in 5 (25%) and 7
(35%) families respectively. Novel mutations included R385X, M238fsdelT,
V226fsdelTinsAA and S418-7del11 in the GCK gene, and S121fsdelC, V133M, R159Q and
V259D in the HNF-1alpha gene. No MODY1 families were found. Subjects which were
neither MODY2 nor MODY3 (MODY-X) had a higher fasting glucose than subjects in
the other groups. Insulin secretion capacity was similar in the three groups and 
the insulin sensitivity was decreased in MODY-X subjects. Glucose levels were
significantly higher and insulin levels significantly lower, throughout the OGTT,
in MODY3 compared with MODY2 subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in the GCK/MODY2 and HNF-1alpha/MODY3 genes account for
the majority of cases in a panel of Spanish MODY families, with MODY3 being the
most frequent subtype. The relative frequencies and the clinical characteristics 
of these MODY subtypes are in agreement with data previously reported in other
European populations. MODY-X patients seem to present a heterogeneous clinical
profile.

PMID: 10754480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 16;275(24):18358-65.

Identification of transacting factors responsible for the tissue-specific
expression of human glucose transporter type 2 isoform gene. Cooperative role of 
hepatocyte nuclear factors 1alpha and 3beta.

Cha JY(1), Kim H, Kim KS, Hur MW, Ahn Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Institute of Genetic 
Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 134 Shinchon-dong, Seodaemun-gu, 
Seoul 120-752, South Korea.

We investigated transacting factors binding to the cis-element important in
tissue-specific expression of the human glucose transporter type 2 isoform
(GLUT2) gene. By transient transfection assay, we determined that the 227-base
pair fragment upstream of the ATG start site contained promoter activity and that
the region from +87 to +132 (site C) was responsible for tissue-specific
expression. DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
indicated that site C contained one binding site for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 
(HNF1) and two binding sites for HNF3. The mutations at positions +101 and +103, 
which are considered to be critical in binding HNF1 and HNF3, resulted in a 53%
decrease in promoter activity, whereas the mutation of the proximal HNF3 binding 
site (+115 and +117) reduced promoter activity by 28%. The mutations of these
four sites resulted in marked decrease (70%) in promoter activity as well as
diminished bindings of HNF1 and HNF3. A to G mutation, which causes conversion of
the HNF1 and HNF3 binding sequence to the NF-Y binding site, resulted in a 22%
decrease in promoter activity. We identified that both HNF1 and HNF3 function as 
transcriptional activators in GLUT2 gene expression. Coexpression of the pGL+74
(+74 to +301) construct with the HNF1alpha and HNF3beta expression vectors in NIH
3T3 cells showed the synergistic effect on GLUT2 promoter activity compared with 
the expression of HNF1alpha, HNF3beta, or a combination of HNF1beta and HNF3beta.
These data suggest that HNF1alpha and HNF3beta may be the most important players 
in the tissue-specific expression of the human GLUT2 gene.

PMID: 10748140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Apr 2;270(1):235-9.

Role of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha and 1beta in the transcriptional
regulation of human dipeptidyl peptidase IV during differentiation of Caco-2
cells.

Erickson RH(1), Lai RS, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Research Laboratory, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, San Francisco, California 94121, USA. neko@itsa.ucsf.edu

Caco-2 cells undergo differentiation to an enterocytic-like cell when maintained 
in a post-confluent state for 1-2 weeks. During this period Caco-2 cells begin to
express high levels brush border membrane associated enzymes such as dipeptidyl
peptidase IV. Using the dipeptidyl peptidase IV gene promoter in electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays, we have shown for the first time that levels of hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1alpha increase three- to fourfold during Caco-2 cell
differentiation. Transient cotransfection experiments with 3T3 cells using
dipeptidyl peptidase IV promoter constructs and expression vectors containing
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha and beta show that the ratio of alpha and beta
modulates reporter gene expression. These results suggest that the increase in
levels of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha that occur during intestinal cell
differentiation, are important for expression of dipeptidyl peptidase IV and
other intestinal proteins.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10733933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Biochem J. 2000 Mar 1;346 Pt 2:529-35.

Interaction between the homeodomain proteins Cdx2 and HNF1alpha mediates
expression of the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase gene.

Mitchelmore C(1), Troelsen JT, Spodsberg N, Sjöström H, Norén O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Biochemical Laboratory C, The
Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 Copenhagen N,
Denmark. mitch@imbg.ku.dk

Lactase-phlorizin hydrolase is a brush-border enzyme which is specifically
expressed in the small intestine where it hydrolyses lactose, the main
carbohydrate found in milk. We have previously demonstrated in transgenic mice
that the tissue-specific and developmental expression of lactase is controlled by
a 1 kb upstream region of the pig lactase gene. Two homeodomain transcription
factors, caudal-related homeodomain protein (Cdx2) and hepatic nuclear factor
1alpha (HNF1alpha), are known to bind to regulatory cis elements in the promoters
for several intestine-specific genes, including lactase, and are present in
mammalian intestinal epithelia from an early stage in development. In the present
study, we examined whether Cdx2 and HNF1alpha physically interact and
co-operatively activate transcription from the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase
promoter. We show that the presence of both factors leads to a much higher level 
of transcription than the sum of the activation by either factor alone. The
N-terminal activation domain of Cdx2 is required for maximal synergy with
HNF1alpha. With the use of pull-down assays, we demonstrate a direct
protein-protein interaction between Cdx2 and HNF1alpha. The interaction domain
includes the homeodomain region of both proteins. This is the first demonstration
of a functional interaction between two transcription factors involved in the
activation of a number of intestine-specific genes. Synergistic interaction
between tissue-restricted factors is likely to be an important mechanism for
reinforcing developmental and tissue-specific gene expression within the
intestine.

PMCID: PMC1220882
PMID: 10677375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Hum Genet. 2000;45(2):98-9.

Human hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta (HNF1B) 1968A/G polymorphism.

Cao H(1), Hegele RA.

Author information: 
(1)Blackburn Cardiovascular Genetics Laboratory, John P. Robarts Research
Institute, London, Ontario, Canada.

We found a novel A-->G change at nucleotide 1968 within the 3'-untranslated
region of the HNF1B gene encoding the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta. The HNF1B
1968A/G polymorphism could be detected by digestion with endonuclease MspI. The
frequency of the HNF1B 1968G allele was 0.060 in Caucasians and 0.129 in Canadian
Oji-Cree. Because of the importance of the HNF1B gene product in the regulation
of transcription of several hepatic proteins, this polymorphism may be useful in 
the study of associations with metabolic phenotypes such as diabetes.

PMID: 10721673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Kidney Int. 2000 Mar;57(3):1202-3.

Diabetes, genes, and kidney development.

Woolf AS.

Comment on
    Kidney Int. 2000 Mar;57(3):898-907.

PMID: 10720973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Kidney Int. 2000 Mar;57(3):898-907.

Abnormal nephron development associated with a frameshift mutation in the
transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta.

Bingham C(1), Ellard S, Allen L, Bulman M, Shepherd M, Frayling T, Berry PJ,
Clark PM, Lindner T, Bell GI, Ryffel GU, Nicholls AJ, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine and Diabetes Research, School of Postgraduate 
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, England, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2000 Mar;57(3):1202-3.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 beta
functions as a homodimer or as a heterodimer with the structurally related
protein HNF-1 alpha. Both are expressed sequentially in rat kidney development,
with HNF-1 beta being detected from the earliest inductory phases. HNF-1 beta
gene mutations are associated with a unique disorder characterized by
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and early-onset and progressive
nondiabetic renal dysfunction, which may lead to chronic renal failure.
METHODS: The HNF-1 beta gene was screened for mutations in six subjects with
early-onset diabetes and a history of renal dysfunction in the subjects or their 
families.
RESULTS: A novel frameshift mutation in exon 4 of the HNF-1 beta gene and a
deletion of CCTCT at codons 328 to 329 were detected in one subject. She was
diagnosed as diabetic at the age of 21 in her second pregnancy. Glucose tolerance
rapidly deteriorated over 18 months as a result of beta-cell dysfunction. The
HNF-1 beta mutation arose de novo on a paternal chromosome and cosegregated with 
renal abnormalities in her family. The proband had bilateral small cysts in
normal-sized kidneys and a reduced creatinine clearance of 66 mL/min (NR 80-120).
Her first pregnancy was terminated at 17 weeks following an ultrasound diagnosis 
of bilateral, nonfunctioning cystic kidneys. Her first-born child had a small
multicystic, dysplastic right kidney and a dysplastic left kidney with a reduced 
creatinine clearance (40 mL/min per 1.73 m2). Histologic examination of the large
(5.8 vs. 1.4 g), polycystic fetal kidneys showed no normal nephrogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies indicate that HNF-1 beta plays a central role in
normal kidney development and pancreatic beta-cell function, and suggest that one
mechanism by which HNF-1 beta gene mutations may cause renal dysfunction are by
their effects on nephron development.

PMID: 10720943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Feb 29;97(5):1999-2004.

Diabetes-associated mutations in a beta-cell transcription factor destabilize an 
antiparallel "mini-zipper" in a dimerization interface.

Hua QX(1), Zhao M, Narayana N, Nakagawa SH, Jia W, Weiss MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid
Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4935, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001 Nov 6;98(23):13472.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young, a monogenic form of Type II diabetes
mellitus, is most commonly caused by mutations in hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha
(HNF-1alpha). Here, the dimerization motif of HNF-1alpha is shown to form an
intermolecular four-helix bundle. One face contains an antiparallel coiled coil
whereas the other contains splayed alpha-helices. The "mini-zipper" is
complementary in structure and symmetry to the top surface of a transcriptional
coactivator (dimerization cofactor of homeodomains). The bundle is destabilized
by a subset of mutations associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young.
Impaired dimerization of a beta-cell transcription factor thus provides a
molecular mechanism of metabolic deregulation in diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC15743
PMID: 10696112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Metabolism. 2000 Feb;49(2):280-4.

Molecular scanning analysis of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (TCF1) gene in
typical familial type 2 diabetes in African Americans.

Elbein SC(1), Teng K, Eddings K, Hargrove D, Scroggin E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Central Arkansas Veterans Health System and
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, USA.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is strongly inherited, but the major genes for
this disease have been elusive. In contrast, early-onset, autosomal-dominant
diabetes results from at least 5 loci, of which hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a
(HNF1alpha or TCF1) is the most common cause. Mutations in HNF1alpha also cause
later-onset diabetes in some Caucasian populations, but the role of these
mutations has not been tested in African American populations. We used a variety 
of screening methods, including both single-strand conformation polymorphism
(SSCP) analysis and dideoxy fingerprint analysis, to search for mutations in 51
African American subjects with onset of diabetes before age 50 years. Potential
mutations were confirmed by direct sequencing. We identified 21 different
variants, of which 11 were unique to African Americans. Four mutations either
altered the amino acid sequence (Gly52Ala and Gly574Ser) or were close to a
splice site (intron 1 and intron 10). A 5-nucleotide insertion in intron 1 was
present in both diabetic members of a small family, but Gly52Ala, Gly574Ser, and 
the intron 10 mutation did not segregate with diabetes. Gly574Ser was present in 
2 large families and 5% of controls, all of which appeared to share the same
common HNF1alpha haplotype. Surprisingly, radioactive SSCP analysis under 2
room-temperature conditions performed as well as methods using fluorescent
labeling that were expected to be more sensitive. We conclude that in African
American individuals under age 50, variation in the HNF1a gene is common but
unlikely to be a significant cause of T2DM.

PMID: 10690959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Feb;85(2):853-7.

No evidence for linkage at candidate type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci on
chromosomes 12 and 20 in United Kingdom Caucasians.

Frayling TM(1), McCarthy MI, Walker M, Levy JC, O'Rahilly S, Hitman GA, Rao PV,
Bennett AJ, Jones EC, Menzel S, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medicine 
and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, United Kingdom.
t.m.frayling@exeter.ac.uk

Several studies have identified evidence for linkage between type 2 diabetes and 
the regions on chromosomes 12 and 20 containing the maturity-onset diabetes of
the young (MODY) genes, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) and
HNF-4alpha. Two studies examining the HNF-1alpha region have demonstrated
evidence for linkage at genome-wide levels of significance, whereas four studies 
examining the HNF-4alpha locus have resulted in evidence for linkage at more
suggestive levels of significance. The demonstration of linkage to these regions 
in additional patient series will strengthen the evidence that susceptibility
alleles exist at these loci. We therefore assessed the evidence for linkage to
these regions using a large cohort of United Kingdom Caucasian type 2
diabetes-affected sibling pairs. A maximum total of 315 affected full sibling
pairs were typed for microsatellite markers across the MODY regions and, in a
subset of families, for markers spanning the whole of chromosome 20. Evidence for
linkage was assessed using a multipoint, mode of inheritance-free method. Linkage
analysis did not reveal any significant evidence for excess allele sharing at any
of the regions studied. Loci contributing sibling recurrence risks, relative to
the general population risk, of 1.75 and 1.25 could be excluded for the
HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha regions, respectively. We have not confirmed in United 
Kingdom Caucasians the evidence for linkage previously reported on 12q and 20q.
Our results highlight further the problems of replicating previous positive
linkage results across different ethnic groups.

PMID: 10690901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Diabetologia. 2000 Jan;43(1):131-2.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta (MODY5) gene mutations in Scandinavian families 
with early-onset diabetes or kidney disease or both.

Weng JP, Lehto M, Forsblom C, Huang X, Li H, Groop LC.

PMID: 10672455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Hum Mutat. 2000;15(2):201-3.

Big Dye terminator cycle sequencing chemistry: accuracy of the dilution process
and application for screening mutations in the TCF1 and GCK genes.

Boutin P, Wahl C, Samson C, Vasseur F, Laget F, Froguel P.

PMID: 10649499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Hum Mutat. 2000;15(2):173-80.

Identification of seven novel nucleotide variants in the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (TCF1) promoter region in MODY patients.

Godart F(1), Bellanné-Chantelot C, Clauin S, Gragnoli C, Abderrahmani A, Blanché 
H, Boutin P, Chèvre JC, Froguel P, Bailleul B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie de Lille, Lille, France.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a heterogeneous subtype of type II
diabetes mellitus. To date, five MODY genes have been identified. Mutations in
the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene are associated with MODY3.
In the present work, we implemented the HNF-1alpha promoter region in the
screening of MODY-suspect patients and identified seven variants not detected in 
control subjects. The family was available for the -119delG variant, and
segregration between MODY and the variant is observed. Most of these variants are
located in highly conserved regions and may alter HNF-1alpha expression through
binding alteration of nuclear factors or other mechanisms. We demonstrate by
functional studies that the transcriptional activity of the -283A>C and -218T>C
variant promoters were 30% and 70% of the wild type activity, respectively. These
data suggest that HNF-1alpha promoter variants could be diabetogenic mutations,
and emphasize that the accurate HNF-1alpha expression is important for the
maintenance of normal pancreatic beta cell function.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10649494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2000 Jan;20(1):217-22.

The private hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha G319S variant is associated with
plasma lipoprotein variation in Canadian Oji-Cree.

Hegele RA(1), Cao H, Harris SB, Hanley AJ, Zinman B, Connelly PW.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute, London, UK. robert.hegele@rri.on.ca

We previously showed an extremely strong association between type 2 diabetes and 
a private polymorphism, namely G319S, in the hepatocyte nuclear transcription
factor (HNF)-1alpha. Because HNF-1alpha is involved in the transcription of
several apolipoprotein genes, we tested for an association between the private
HNF1A G319S variant and plasma lipoproteins in a sample of 55 unrelated Oji-Cree 
subjects with type 2 diabetes and 175 unrelated Oji-Cree subjects without type 2 
diabetes. In Oji-Cree subjects with type 2 diabetes, we found that the HNF1A
G319S genotype was significantly associated with lower plasma concentrations of
total cholesterol, low density lipoprotein cholesterol, and apolipoprotein (apo) 
B. In Oji-Cree subjects without type 2 diabetes, we found that the HNF1A G319S
genotype was significantly associated with higher plasma concentrations of high
density lipoprotein cholesterol and apo AI. There were no associations with
plasma triglycerides or lipoprotein(a). Regression analysis indicated that the
HNF1A genotype accounted for approximately 10% of the variation in the apo
B-related traits in the diabetic subjects and for approximately 5% of the
variation in the apo AI-related traits in the nondiabetic subjects. Furthermore, 
the regression model indicated that the HNF1A S319 allele affected these traits
in a dominant manner in subjects with and without type 2 diabetes. These findings
provide the first evidence that a rare variant in a nuclear transcription factor 
is associated with variation in plasma lipoprotein traits.

PMID: 10634821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Jan;85(1):331-5.

Identification and functional analysis of mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha gene in anti-islet autoantibody-negative Japanese patients with
type 1 diabetes.

Kawasaki E(1), Sera Y, Yamakawa K, Abe T, Ozaki M, Uotani S, Ohtsu N, Takino H,
Yamasaki H, Yamaguchi Y, Matsuura N, Eguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki University School of Medicine,
Japan. f1196@cc.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene are the cause
of maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY 3), which is characterized
by a severe impairment of insulin secretion and early onset of the disease.
Although the majority of patients with type 1 diabetes have type 1A,
immune-mediated diabetes, there is a significant percentage of the patients who
have no evidence of an autoimmune disorder at the onset of disease. The aim of
this study was to estimate the prevalence of MODY 3 in antiislet autoantibody
negative patients with type 1 diabetes. From a large population-based sample of
unrelated Japanese patients with type 1 diabetes, 28 patients who lacked
autoantibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase, islet cell antigen
512/insulinoma-associated antigen-2, phogrin (phosphate homolog of granules of
insulinoma)/insulinoma-associated antigen-2beta, and insulin at the onset of type
1 diabetes were examined by PCR-based direct sequencing of the 10 exons, flanking
introns, and the promoter region of the HNF-1alpha gene. Two (7.1%) of 28
autoantibody-negative patients with type 1 diabetes were identified as carrying
mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene. One patient carried a frameshift mutation
(Pro379fsdelCT) in exon 6, and another patient carried a novel 2-bp substitution 
at nucleotides +45 (G to A) and +46 (C to A) from the transcriptional site of the
promoter region. These mutations were identified in heterozygous form and were
not identified in 64 unrelated healthy control subjects or 54 unrelated islet
autoantibody-positive patients with type 1 diabetes. Functional analysis of the
mutant HNF-1alpha gene indicated that the Pro379fsdelCT mutation had no
transcriptional trans-activation activity and acted in a dominant negative
manner. The +45/46 GC to AA mutation in the promoter region showed reduced
promoter activity by 10-20% compared to the wild-type sequence. In conclusion,
about 7% of Japanese diabetic patients lacking antiislet autoantibodies initially
classified as having type 1 diabetes could have diabetes caused by mutations in
the HNF-1alpha gene.

PMID: 10634407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Mol Pharmacol. 2000 Jan;57(1):93-100.

The role of HNF-1alpha in controlling hepatic catalase activity.

Muppala V(1), Lin CS, Lee YH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Mice deficient in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF-1alpha) develop Laron
dwarfism and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (Lee et al., 1998).
Oxidative stress was present in the diabetic HNF-1alpha-null mice. To understand 
the mechanism underlying the oxidative stress in HNF-1alpha-null mice, we
examined whether HNF-1alpha deficiency affects the integrity of the cellular
defense system against oxidative stress. The glutathione level and activities of 
superoxide dismutase and glutathione reductase in liver and other tissues
examined were not affected by HNF-1alpha deficiency. However, activities of
cytosolic glutathione peroxidase and catalase, two enzymes responsible for
detoxification of hydrogen peroxide within cells, were reduced specifically in
liver of HNF-1alpha-null mice. The mRNA and protein levels of hepatic catalase in
HNF-1alpha-null mice did not differ from those in normal mice. The loss of
hepatic catalase activity in HNF-1alpha-null mice is probably caused by an
insufficient heme pool in liver cells, because the mRNA level of ferrochelatase, 
the enzyme that catalyzes the last step of heme biosynthesis, was significantly
reduced in liver, and the daily hemin treatment restored partial catalase
activity in liver of HNF-1alpha-null mice. Furthermore, our results of cell
transfection and luciferase reporter assay indicated that the mouse
ferrochelatase promoter could be trans-activated directly by HNF-1alpha.

PMID: 10617683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Mol Med Today. 1999 Oct;5(10):425-7.

In Orvieto: new insights into liver biopsy and disease therapy. 8th Biennial
International Congress on Liver Development, Gene Regulation and Disease.
Orvieto, Italy, 2-5 June 1999.

Taub R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia 
19104, USA. taubra@mail.med.upenn.edu

PMID: 10610199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Eur J Endocrinol. 1999 Dec;141(6):609-18.

Insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity in diabetic and non-diabetic subjects
with hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha (maturity-onset diabetes of the young-3)
mutations.

Vaxillaire M(1), Pueyo ME, Clément K, Fiet J, Timsit J, Philippe J, Robert JJ,
Tappy L, Froguel P, Velho G.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS EP-10, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate insulin secretion and sensitivity in affected (diabetes
mellitus or impaired glucose tolerance; n=7) and in unaffected (normal glucose
tolerance; n=3) carriers of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (maturity-onset
diabetes of the young-3 (MODY3)) gene mutations.
METHODS: Insulin secretion was assessed by an i.v. glucose tolerance test
(IVGTT), hyperglycemic clamp and arginine test, and insulin sensitivity by an
euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp. Results were compared with those of diabetic
MODY2 (glucokinase-deficient) and control subjects.
RESULTS: The amount of insulin secreted during an IVGTT was decreased in affected
MODY3 subjects (46+/-24 (s.d.) pmol/kg body weight (BW)) as compared with values 
in MODY2 (120+/-49pmol/kg BW) and control (173+/-37pmol/kg BW; P=0.0004)
subjects. The amount of insulin secreted during a 10mmol/l glucose clamp was
decreased in affected MODY3 subjects (171+/-78pmol/kg BW) and MODY2 subjects
(302+/-104pmol/kg BW) as compared with control subjects (770+/-199pmol/kg BW;
P=0.0001). Insulin secretion in response to arginine was decreased in affected
MODY3 subjects. Milder and heterogeneous defects were observed in the unaffected 
MODY3 subjects; the amount of insulin secreted during the hyperglycemic clamp was
40-79% of that of controls. The response to arginine was abnormally delayed.
Insulin sensitivity was decreased in diabetic but not in non-diabetic MODY3
subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Beta-cell dysfunction in response to glucose and arginine is
observed in affected and unaffected MODY3 subjects. The MODY3 and MODY2 subtypes 
present different insulin secretion profiles. Secondary insulin resistance might 
contribute to the chronic hyperglycemia of MODY3 patients and modulate their
glucose tolerance.

PMID: 10601964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jan 15;28(2):430-7.

Naturally occurring mutations in the human HNF4alpha gene impair the function of 
the transcription factor to a varying degree.

Lausen J(1), Thomas H, Lemm I, Bulman M, Borgschulze M, Lingott A, Hattersley AT,
Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55,
D-45122 Essen, Germany.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)4alpha, a member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily, regulates genes that play a critical role in embryogenesis and
metabolism. Recent studies have shown that mutations in the human HNF4alpha gene 
cause a rare form of type 2 diabetes, maturity onset diabetes of the young
(MODY1). To investigate the properties of these naturally occurring HNF4alpha
mutations we analysed five MODY1 mutations (R154X, R127W, V255M, Q268X and E276Q)
and one other mutation (D69A), which we found in HepG2 hepatoma cells. Activation
of reporter genes in transfection assays and DNA binding studies showed that the 
MODY1-associated mutations result in a variable reduction in function, whereas
the D69A mutation showed an increased activity on some promoters. None of the
MODY mutants acted in a dominant negative manner, thus excluding inactivation of 
the wild-type factor as a critical event in MODY development. A MODY3-associated 
mutation in the HNF1alpha gene, a well-known target gene of HNF4alpha, results in
a dramatic loss of the HNF4 binding site in the promoter, indicating that
mutations in the HNF4alpha gene might cause MODY through impaired HNF1alpha gene 
function. Based on these data we propose a two-hit model for MODY development.

PMCID: PMC102517
PMID: 10606640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Diabet Med. 1999 Nov;16(11):956-63.

Molecular genetics of diabetes mellitus in Chinese subjects: identification of
mutations in glucokinase and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha genes in patients
with early-onset type 2 diabetes mellitus/MODY.

Ng MC(1), Cockburn BN, Lindner TH, Yeung VT, Chow CC, So WY, Li JK, Lo YM, Lee
ZS, Cockram CS, Critchley JA, Bell GI, Chan JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales
Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong. b770727@mailserv.cuhk.edu.hk

AIMS: To examine the prevalence of identified MODY-related genes in Chinese
subjects with early onset Type 2 diabetes mellitus and a positive family history 
of diabetes and to look for possible associations between the gene mutations and 
the development of diabetes.
METHODS: Ninety-two unrelated Chinese subjects with diabetes diagnosed before the
age of 40 years who had a positive family history of diabetes were screened for
mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha) and
glucokinase genes by direct sequencing. The family members of patients with
mutations and 100 healthy controls were also examined.
RESULTS: Mutations in the HNF-1alpha and the glucokinase genes were found in 5%
and 3% of the diabetic subjects, respectively but no mutations were found in the 
coding region of the HNF-4alpha gene. Three mutations found in the glucokinase
gene were novel missense mutations (I110T, A119D and G385V). The mutations in the
HNF-1alpha gene were also new and included four missense mutations (G20R, R203H, 
S432C, I618M) and one splice acceptor site mutation (IVS2nt-1G-->A). Patients
with mutations in these genes were clinically heterogeneous with respect to
phenotype and basal pancreatic beta cell function.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic factors such as mutations in the HNF-1alpha and glucokinase 
genes may be important in the development of diabetes in Chinese people,
especially when the disease is of early onset.

PMID: 10588527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 10;274(50):35639-46.

Anatomy of a homeoprotein revealed by the analysis of human MODY3 mutations.

Vaxillaire M(1), Abderrahmani A, Boutin P, Bailleul B, Froguel P, Yaniv M,
Pontoglio M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, Unité de Recherche Associée 1644, Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, 
25 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) is an atypical dimeric
homeodomain-containing protein that is expressed in liver, intestine, stomach,
kidney, and pancreas. Mutations in the HNF1alpha gene are associated with an
autosomal dominant form of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus called
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3). More than 80 different mutations
have been identified so far, many of which involve highly conserved amino acid
residues among vertebrate HNF1alpha. In the present work, we investigated the
molecular mechanisms by which MODY3 mutations could affect HNF1alpha function.
For this purpose, we analyzed the properties of 10 mutants resulting in amino
acid substitutions or protein truncation. Some mutants have a reduced protein
stability, whereas others are either defective in the DNA binding or impaired in 
their intrinsic trans-activation potential. Three mutants, characterized by a
complete loss of trans-activation, behave as dominant negatives when transfected 
with the wild-type protein. These data define a clear causative relationship
between MODY3 mutations and functional defects in HNF1alpha trans-activation. In 
addition, our analysis sheds new light on the structure of a homeoprotein playing
a key role in pancreatic beta cell function.

PMID: 10585442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Dec 9;266(1):196-202.

Structure/function studies of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha, a
diabetes-associated transcription factor.

Yang Q(1), Yamagata K, Yamamoto K, Miyagawa J, Takeda J, Iwasaki N, Iwahashi H,
Yoshiuchi I, Namba M, Miyazaki J, Hanafusa T, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

Mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha) cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3), a form of
diabetes mellitus characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, early onset,
and pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. We have examined the effects of five
diabetes-associated mutations (L12H, G191D, R263C, P379fsdelCT, and
L584S585fsinsTC) on HNF-1alpha function including DNA binding ability,
intracellular localization, and transactivation activity. L12H, P379fsdelCT, and 
L584S585fsinsTC mutations were found in patients with a clinical diagnosis of
MODY, while G191D and R263C mutations were identified in patients diagnosed with 
type 2 diabetes. These mutations had diverse effects on the functional properties
of HNF-1alpha. Comparison of the functional data with clinical information
suggested that transactivation activity of mutant HNF-1alpha in beta cells like
MIN6 may be the primary determinants of the phenotypic differences observed among
diabetic patients with HNF-1alpha mutations.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10581189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 1999 Apr-May;9(3-4):82-5.

Type-I protein-C deficiency caused by disruption of a hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-6/HNF-1 binding site in the human protein-C gene promoter.

Spek A(1), Reitsma P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

The level and tissue specificity of eukaryotic gene transcription is determined
by the binding of specific transcription factors to DNA sequence elements located
around the transcription start site. The availability and activity of specific
transcription factors depends on a variety of developmental and environmental
cues and, therefore, varies from cell type to cell type. For instance, liver
tissue, the principal site of expression of the coagulation inhibitor protein C, 
expresses a heterogeneous group of transcription factors called hepatocyte
nuclear factors (HNFs). Some of these HNFs are essential players in protein-C
gene expression. This review discusses the significance of HNF-1 and HNF-6 in
regulating the transcription of the protein-C gene and gives directions for
future research.

PMID: 10578522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Mech Dev. 1999 Dec;89(1-2):211-3.

Expression of the vHNF1/HNF1beta homeoprotein gene during mouse organogenesis.

Coffinier C(1), Barra J, Babinet C, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, CNRS URA 1644, Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr Roux,
F-75724, Paris, France.

Formation of tubular structures from an epithelial tissue is a process common to 
many morphogenetic events during organogenesis. We report here new data
concerning the expression pattern of the vHNF1/HNF1beta gene during this process 
in the mouse. vHNF1 (variant Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1) is a member of the HNF1
homeoprotein family. Its expression domain includes organs such as the liver, the
kidney, the lung and the pancreas, but is restricted to the epithelial cells of
these organs. To follow vHNF1 expression during organogenesis, we have introduced
a NLS-lacZ gene under the control of vHNF1 regulatory regions by homologous
recombination. Detection of the beta-galactosidase activity in heterozygous mice 
demonstrates that this gene is expressed in numerous tubular epitheliums as soon 
as they appear and all along development.

PMID: 10559500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Exp Nephrol. 1999 Sep-Dec;7(5-6):407-12.

Renal tubular cells cultured from genetically modified animals.

Friedlander G(1), Runembert I, Vrtovsnik F, Terzi F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 426 and Department of Physiology, Faculté de Médecine Xavier-Bichat, 
Université Denis-Diderot, Paris, France.

The culture of renal tubular cells from genetically modified animals opens the
opportunity of biochemical, cell biology and physiological studies under strictly
controlled conditions. Either primary cultures or cell lines can be used. Through
two examples of primary cultures of proximal tubular cells obtained from
knock-out mice, important information about the function of proteins were
obtained. Mice lacking vimentin, an intermediate filament normally reexpressed in
tubular cells during regeneration and culture, have a normal tubular function
under basal conditions. Proximal cells grown from these animals exhibit a defect 
in sodium-glucose cotransport activity, most likely related to alterations in the
dimer/monomer ratio of the transporter in the apical membranes. These alterations
may be important in terms of tubular function during the recovery phase following
acute tubular necrosis. The situation is strikingly different with regard to mice
lacking HNF-1, a transactivator involved in the transcription of multiple genes. 
These animals suffer from severe Fanconi syndrome related to decreased expression
of proximal transporters including isoforms of sodium-glucose (SGLT2) and
sodium-phosphate (NPT1) cotransporters. Whereas transport defects are observed in
isolated tubules, they are no longer apparent in cultured proximal cells because 
the expression of these isoforms is suppressed under culture conditions. These
observations illustrate the interest and limits of the in vitro models for
studying renal function in transgenic animals.

Copyright 1999 S. Karger AG,Basel

PMID: 10559638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Nihon Ika Daigaku Zasshi. 1999 Oct;66(5):329-31.

[Maturity-onset diabetes of the young associated with mutations in
HNF-transcription factors].

[Article in Japanese]

Takeda J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Gunma University.

PMID: 10548003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Oct 28;1447(2-3):160-74.

Functional activity of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 is specifically decreased in
amino acid-limited hepatoma cells.

Marten NW(1), Hsiang CH, Yu L, Stollenwerk NS, Straus DS.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Division and Biology Department, University of California,
Riverside, CA 92521-0121, USA.

Limitation of cultured rat hepatoma cells for an essential amino acid results in 
a specific decrease in expression of several genes that are preferentially
expressed in the liver, including the serum albumin and transthyretin genes. In
the work presented here, we examined whether the coordinate repression of these
genes is caused by decreased activity of one or more of the liver-enriched
transcription factors, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), HNF-3, HNF-4 or
C/EBP. To address this question, HepG2 human hepatoma cells were transiently
transfected with luciferase reporter constructs containing multiple copies of
individual transcription factor binding sites. Limitation for an essential amino 
acid resulted in specific repression of a construct in which luciferase
expression was directed by HNF-1. A single HNF-1 binding site located adjacent to
the TATA box plays a major role in transcription directed by the serum albumin
promoter in transient transfection assays. Amino acid limitation of cells
transfected with an albumin promoter/luciferase reporter construct resulted in
specific repression of promoter activity. In addition, bacterial methylation or
site-directed mutagenesis of the HNF-1 binding site in the albumin proximal
promoter region eliminated the regulation of an albumin promoter-luciferase
reporter construct under conditions of amino acid limitation. These results
demonstrated that the HNF-1 binding site played a major role in regulation of the
albumin promoter by amino acid availability. Deletion analysis of the albumin
promoter confirmed regulation through the HNF-1 binding site and also identified 
a second amino acid regulatory element in the upstream region of the albumin
promoter, which has been shown previously to contain a functional binding site
for HNF-3. The repression of albumin promoter and HNF-1 reporter constructs in
amino acid-limited cells occurred without a change in the DNA binding activity of
HNF-1. Moreover, HNF-3 DNA binding activity was also not decreased in amino
acid-limited cells. These results suggest that the regulation of transcription by
amino acids occurs at the level of transcriptional activation by HNF-1 and HNF-3,
rather than by alteration of the DNA binding activity of either factor.

PMID: 10542313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Oct 29;1424(2-3):M23-37.

TCF transcription factors: molecular switches in carcinogenesis.

Roose J(1), Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Center for Biomedical Genetics, University Medical
Center Utrecht, 3508 GA, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Although originally cloned as lymphoid transcription factors, members of the
T-cell factor (Tcf) family are now well recognized as key activators/repressors
in many developmental processes. Transcriptionally inert Tcf factors become
potent transactivators upon interaction with the Wnt signaling product
beta-catenin or its Drosophila counterpart Armadillo. In contrast, Tcf proteins
mediate repression when bound to members of the Groucho family of transcriptional
repressors, CBP and CtBP. Recently, Tcf factors have been reported as tumor
inducers, aberrantly activating their target genes as a result of elevated
beta-catenin levels in many types of cancer. These abnormal beta-catenin levels
are usually caused by stabilizing mutations in beta-catenin itself or truncating 
mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene. In this 
review, we will give a chronological overview of the Tcf factors and the
phenotypes of Tcf mutant mice, as well as Tcf-binding partners. We will discuss
Tcf signaling upon interaction with different partners, resulting in activator
and repressor roles of Tcf factors in the light of carcinogenic events.

PMID: 10528152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Development. 1999 Nov;126(21):4795-805.

Variant hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 is required for visceral endoderm
specification.

Barbacci E(1), Reber M, Ott MO, Breillat C, Huetz F, Cereghini S.

Author information: 
(1)U423 INSERM, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, France U257 INSERM, ICGM, France.
cereghin@necker.fr.

Genetic and molecular evidence indicates that visceral endoderm, an
extraembryonic cell lineage, is required for gastrulation, early anterior neural 
patterning, cell death and specification of posterior mesodermal cell fates. We
show that variant Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 (vHNF1), a homeodomain-containing
transcription factor first expressed in the primitive endoderm, is required for
the specification of visceral endoderm. vHnf1-deficient mouse embryos develop
normally to the blastocyst stage, start implantation, but die soon afterwards,
with abnormal or absent extraembryonic region, poorly organised ectoderm and no
discernible visceral or parietal endoderm. However, immunostaining analysis of
E5.5 nullizygous mutant embryos revealed the presence of parietal endoderm-like
cells lying on an abnormal basal membrane. Homozygous mutant blastocyst
outgrowths or differentiated embryonic stem cells do not express early or late
visceral endoderm markers. In addition, in vHnf1 null embryoid bodies there is no
activation of the transcription factors HNF-4alpha1, HNF1alpha and HNF-3gamma.
Aggregation of vHnf1-deficient embryonic stem cells with wild-type tetraploid
embryos, which contribute exclusively to extraembryonic tissues, rescues
periimplantation lethality and allows development to progress to early
organogenesis. Our results place vHNF1 in a preeminent position in the regulatory
network that specifies the visceral endoderm and highlight the importance of this
cell lineage for proper growth and differentiation of primitive ectoderm in
pregastrulating embryos.

PMID: 10518496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Development. 1999 Nov;126(21):4785-94.

Essential role for the homeoprotein vHNF1/HNF1beta in visceral endoderm
differentiation.

Coffinier C(1), Thépot D, Babinet C, Yaniv M, Barra J.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, CNRS URA 1644, and Unité de Biologie du
Développement, CNRS URA 1960, Institut Pasteur, F-75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.
yaniv@pasteur.fr.

vHNF1/HNF1beta, a member of the divergent HNF1/vHNF1 homeoprotein family, is
expressed in polarized epithelia of several adult organs and may participate in
controlling the transcription of specific genes. In addition to this late
requirement, vHNF1 may play earlier roles during development, as it is first
expressed in the visceral endoderm at the onset of gastrulation. In order to shed
light on its function during embryogenesis, we have inactivated the murine gene
by homologous recombination. The homozygous mutation results in embryonic
lethality by day 7.5 of development and vHNF1(-)(/)(-) embryos display a
disorganized visceral endoderm and a significantly reduced size. Studies of ES
cell differentiation and aggregation with tetraploid morulae establish that vHNF1
expression is essential for visceral endoderm differentiation, both in vitro and 
in vivo. Analysis of differentiation markers confirms that vHNF1 is part of a
genetic network that directs the expression of HNF4 and downstream endodermal
genes. Furthermore, the complementation of the mutant embryos with wild-type
visceral endoderm rescues the day 7.5 lethality and reveals an additional
phenotype linked to vHNF1 later expression. The examination of chimeric embryos
suggests that vHNF1 expression might be cell-autonomously required in the gut for
the proper morphogenesis of the embryo.

PMID: 10518495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Diabet Med. 1999 Sep;16(9):788-91.

Can molecular genetics help in the clinic?

Hattersley A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medicine and
Health Sciences, University of Exeter, UK.

PMID: 10510959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Diabet Med. 1999 Sep;16(9):731-5.

Impaired maximum microvascular hyperaemia in patients with MODY 3 (hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1alpha gene mutations).

Lee BC(1), Appleton M, Shore AC, Tooke JE, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine, Postgraduate Medical School, University of
Exeter, UK.

AIMS: Functional abnormalities of blood flow and capillary pressure may be
involved in the pathogenesis of diabetic microangiopathy. Important differences
in microvascular behaviour are observed between Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes
mellitus, raising the possibility that the pathogenesis of microangiopathy may
differ between these. MODY3 patients have hyperglycaemia as a result of genetic
defect of beta-cell function rather than increased insulin resistance and are
susceptible to microvascular complications and offer an opportunity to examine
microvascular behaviour in this setting.
METHODS: The maximum microvascular hyperaemic response to local heating of the
skin was studied in 12 MODY3 patients and age and sex-matched control subjects
using laser Doppler fluximetry.
RESULTS: Maximum hyperaemia was reduced in MODY3 patients (median 1.17 (range
0.88-1.92)V vs. 1.70 (1.07-2.19)V normal control subjects; P=0.03) and thus was
negatively associated with duration of diabetes (r(s)=-0.79; P = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that the duration of diabetes is a determinant
of impaired microvascular hyperaemia in MODY3 patients. The pattern of
vasodilatory impairment is similar to that observed in Type 1 diabetes mellitus
and differs from that seen in Type 2 diabetes. This provides support for the
concept that beta cell dysfunction and insulin resistance may have differing
effects on microvascular behaviour.

PMID: 10510948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Sep 24;263(2):566-9.

Human insulin gene is a target gene of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha) and HNF-1beta.

Okita K(1), Yang Q, Yamagata K, Hangenfeldt KA, Miyagawa J, Kajimoto Y, Nakajima 
H, Namba M, Wollheim CB, Hanafusa T, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Osaka University,
Osaka, Japan.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes
characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, early-onset, and impaired
insulin secretion. The type 3 and type 5 forms of MODY result from mutations in
the genes encoding the transcription factor, hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-1alpha and HNF-1beta, respectively. The mechanism by which mutations in one
allele of the HNF-1 gene impair pancreatic beta cell function is unclear. We
studied the effects of wild-type and four mutant (L12H, R263C, P379fsdelCT, and
L584S585fsinsTC) HNF-1alpha, which were identified in Japanese subjects with
MODY3 on human insulin gene transcription. Both wild-type (WT) HNF-1alpha and
HNF-1beta bound to the oligonucleotide containing the A3 element sequence in the 
human insulin promoter and transactivated the insulin-luciferase reporter gene by
30- and 31-fold, respectively. In contrast, binding of L12H, R263C and
L584S585fsinsTC-HNF-1alpha to the probe was impaired. Transactivation activity by
the four mutant HNF-1alpha was reduced (4.3 to 43.3% of WT). These data suggest
that the insulin gene is a candidate target gene of HNF-1alpha/HNF-1beta and the 
impairment of insulin gene transcription by mutations in the HNF-1 gene might be 
involved in the pathogenesis of MODY.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10491332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Hum Mol Genet. 1999 Oct;8(11):2001-8.

A novel syndrome of diabetes mellitus, renal dysfunction and genital malformation
associated with a partial deletion of the pseudo-POU domain of hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1beta.

Lindner TH(1), Njolstad PR, Horikawa Y, Bostad L, Bell GI, Sovik O.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Medicine, Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology and Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA,

Mutations in the homeodomain-containing transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-1beta are the cause of one form of maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY), type 5 (MODY5). We have studied a Norwegian family, N5, with a
syndrome of mild diabetes, progressive non-diabetic renal disease and severe
genital malformations. The sequence of the HNF-1beta gene ( TCF2 ) revealed a 75 
bp deletion in exon 2 (409-483del) which would result in the synthesis of a
protein lacking amino acids Arg137 to Lys161 (R137-K161del). This deletion is
located in the pseudo-POU region of HNF-1beta, a region implicated in the
specificity of DNA binding. Functional studies of R137-K161del HNF-1beta revealed
that it could not bind an HNF-1 target sequence or stimulate transcription of a
reporter gene indicating that this is a loss-of-function mutation. The
R137-K161del allele co-segregated with diabetes and renal disease in pedigree N5.
In addition, two of four female carriers with this mutation had vaginal aplasia
and rudimentary uterus (Müllerian aplasia). These studies strongly suggest that
heterozygous mutations in the HNF-1beta gene are associated with a syndrome
characterized by MODY and severe, non-diabetic renal disease. Moreover, the
presence of internal genital malformations in two females suggests that
additional clinical features may be associated with HNF-1beta mutations.

PMID: 10484768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Eur J Hum Genet. 1999 Sep;7(6):729-32.

Non-penetrance in a MODY 3 family with a mutation in the hepatic nuclear factor
1alpha gene: implications for predictive testing.

Miedzybrodzka Z(1), Hattersley AT, Ellard S, Pearson D, de Silva D, Harvey R,
Haites N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, University of Aberdeen Medical School, Scotland, UK.
zosia@abdn.ac.uk

The most common cause of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a
mutation in the hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) gene (MODY3). We
describe a family in which a missense mutation causing a Thr-Ile substitution at 
codon 620 has been found in all affected members. The mutation is not fully
penetrant as two family members aged 87 and 46 have the mutation but do not have 
diabetes. The severity and age of diagnosis of diabetes varies widely within the 
family, and most presented over the age of 25. HNF1alpha mutation screening
should be considered in any family with autosomal dominant inheritance of
diabetes where one member has presented with diabetes before the age of 25.
Predictive testing is now possible within the majority of MODY families, and is
of clinical benefit, but the possibility of non-penetrance should be addressed
during counselling and interpretation of results.

PMID: 10482964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Anticancer Res. 1999 May-Jun;19(3A):2105-10.

Loss of function of the tissue specific transcription factor HNF1 alpha in renal 
cell carcinoma and clinical prognosis.

Anastasiadis AG(1), Lemm I, Radzewitz A, Lingott A, Ebert T, Ackermann R, Ryffel 
GU, Schulz WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
anastasi@uni-duesseldorf.de

BACKGROUND: Human renal cell carcinogenesis is associated with loss of expression
of tissue-specific genes and loss of function of tissue-specific transcription
factors such as HNF(hepatic nuclear factor)1 alpha.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study HNF1 alpha DNA-binding activities and
protein amounts were determined by gel retardation assay and Western blot
analysis, respectively, in 42 non-metastasized renal cell carcinomas and paired
normal tissues.
RESULTS: 36 tumors out of 42 (86%) showed diminished binding activity of HNF1
alpha. In most cases (26 out of 42) this appeared to be due to decreased amounts 
of HNF1 alpha protein, but 10 tumors contained equal or even higher amounts of
HNF1 alpha, in spite of reduced binding to DNA. Only 6 tumors out of 42 had
unaltered HNF1 alpha binding activity. A clinical follow-up was obtained for 40
patients. Over an average follow-up period of 39 months no significant
differences in the survival rate were observed between patients having lost or
retained HNF1 alpha function. However, since most of the patients with retained
function are still alive, long-term follow-up might be warranted.
CONCLUSIONS: The very high incidence of loss of HNF1 alpha function indicates the
important biological role of this change in renal cell carcinoma.

PMID: 10470156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Aug 31;96(18):10308-13.

The HNF-4/HNF-1alpha transactivation cascade regulates gene activity and
chromatin structure of the human serine protease inhibitor gene cluster at
14q32.1.

Rollini P(1), Fournier RE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA 98109, USA.

Hepatocyte-specific expression of the alpha1-antitrypsin (alpha1AT) gene requires
the activities of two liver-enriched transactivators, hepatocyte nuclear factors 
1alpha and 4 (HNF-1alpha and HNF-4). The alpha1AT gene maps to a region of human 
chromosome 14q32.1 that includes a related serine protease inhibitor (serpin)
gene encoding corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG), and the chromatin
organization of this approximately 130-kb region, as defined by DNase
I-hypersensitive sites, has been described. Microcell transfer of human
chromosome 14 from fibroblasts to rat hepatoma cells results in activation of
alpha1AT and CBG transcription and chromatin reorganization of the entire locus. 
To assess the roles of HNF-1alpha and HNF-4 in gene activation and chromatin
remodeling, we transferred human chromosome 14 from fibroblasts to rat hepatoma
cell variants that are deficient in expression of HNF-1alpha and HNF-4. The
variant cells failed to activate either alpha1AT or CBG transcription, and
chromatin remodeling failed to occur. However, alpha1AT and CBG transcription
could be rescued by transfecting the cells with expression plasmids encoding
HNF-1alpha or HNF-4. In these transfectants, the chromatin structure of the
entire alpha1AT/CBG locus was reorganized to an expressing cell-typical state.
Thus, HNF-1alpha and HNF-4 control both chromatin structure and gene activity of 
two cell-specific genes within the serpin gene cluster at 14q32.1.

PMCID: PMC17884
PMID: 10468604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Mol Pharmacol. 1999 Sep;56(3):526-36.

Activation of the mouse TATA-less and human TATA-containing
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 promoters by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1.

Bernard P(1), Goudonnet H, Artur Y, Desvergne B, Wahli W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Animale, Bâtiment de Biologie, Université de Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A1 (UGT1A1) catalyzes the glucuronidation of
bilirubin in liver. Among all UGT isoforms identified to date, it is the only
relevant bilirubin-glucuronidating enzyme in human. Because glucuronoconjugation 
is the major route of bilirubin elimination, any genetic alteration that affects 
bilirubin glucuronosyltransferase activity may result in a more or less severe
hyperbilirubinemia. In this study, we report the cloning and characterization of 
the transcriptional regulation of the mouse UGT1A1 gene. Primary-structure
analysis of the mouse Thymidine Adevice promoter revealed marked differences with
its human homolog. First, the mouse promoter lacks the highly polymorphic
thymidine/adenine repeat occurring in the human promoter, which has been
associated with some forms of hyperbilirubinemia. Second, an L1 transposon
element, which is absent in the human promoter, is found 480 bp upstream of the
transcription start site in mouse. Using the electromobility shift and DNase I
footprinting experiments, we have identified a hepatocyte nuclear factor
1-binding site in the mouse UGT1A1 promoter that confers responsiveness to both
factors HNF1alpha and HNF1beta in HEK293 cells. Furthermore, we show that this
element, which is conserved in the human promoter, also confers strong HNF1
responsiveness to the human UGT1A1 gene. Together, these results provide evidence
for a major regulatory function of this liver-enriched transcription factor in
UGT1A1 activity in both rodents and human.

PMID: 10462540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Diabetologia. 1999 Sep;42(9):1131-7.

High frequency of mutations in MODY and mitochondrial genes in Scandinavian
patients with familial early-onset diabetes.

Lehto M(1), Wipemo C, Ivarsson SA, Lindgren C, Lipsanen-Nyman M, Weng J, Wibell
L, Widén E, Tuomi T, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital MAS, University of Lund,
Malmö, Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: To investigate the contribution of mutations in maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) and mitochondrial genes to early-onset diabetes with
a strong family history of diabetes in a cohort with a high prevalence of Type I 
(insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: Screening for sequence variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-4alpha (MODY1), glucokinase (MODY2), HNF-1alpha (MODY3) genes and
mitochondrial DNA was carried out in 115 Finnish and Swedish patients with
early-onset ( </= 40 years) diabetes using the single strand conformation
polymorphism (SSCP) technique and direct sequencing. Allele frequencies were
compared with 118 patients with onset of diabetes Type II (non-insulin-dependent)
diabetes mellitus after the age of 40 and 92 non-diabetic control subjects
without a family history of diabetes.
RESULTS: In total 52 sequence variants were found in the HNF-1alpha, HNF-4alpha
and glucokinase genes, 12 of which were considered as MODY mutations. Three
families had the A3243G mutation in the mitochondrial tRNA(Leu) gene, which
resulted in an overall prevalence of these mutations of 13 %.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Among 115 Scandinavian families, mutations in the
HNF-1alpha gene represented the most common cause of familial early-onset ( </=
40 years) diabetes: MODY3 (5.2 %) more than MODY2 (3.5 %) more than MIDD (2.6 %) 
more than MODY1 (1.7 %).

PMID: 10447526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Diabetologia. 1999 Jul;42(7):887-91.

Overexpression of dominant negative mutant hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha
inhibits arginine-induced insulin secretion in MIN6 cells.

Tanizawa Y(1), Ohta Y, Nomiyama J, Matsuda K, Tanabe K, Inoue H, Matsutani A,
Okuya S, Oka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Yamaguchi University, School of
Medicine, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: To explain the mechanisms whereby mutations in the HNF-1alpha
gene cause insulin secretory defects.
METHODS: A truncated mutant HNF-1alpha (HNF-1alpha288t) was overexpressed in
hepatoma cells (HepG2) and murine insulinoma cells (MIN6) using a recombinant
adenovirus system and expression of the HNF-1alpha target genes and insulin
secretion were examined.
RESULTS: Expression of phenylalanine hydroxylase and alpha1-antitrypsin genes,
the target genes of HNF-1alpha, was suppressed in HepG2 cells by overexpression
of HNF-1alpha288t. In MIN6 cells, overexpression of HNF-1alpha288t did not change
insulin secretion stimulated by glucose (5 mmol/l and 25 mmol/l) or leucine (20
mmol/l). Potentiation of insulin secretion by arginine (20 mmol/l, in the
presence of 5 mmol/l or 25mmol/l glucose) was, however, reduced (p < 0.0001 and p
= 0.027, respectively). Similarly reduced responses were observed when stimulated
with homoarginine. Expression of the cationic amino acid transporter-2 was not
reduced and insulin secretory response to membrane depolarization by 50 mmol/l
KCl was intact.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The HNF-1alpha288 t, which is structurally similar to 
the mutant HNF-1alpha expressed from the common MODY3 allele, P291fsinsC, exerts 
a dominant negative effect. Suppression of HNF-1alpha in MIN6 cells severely
impaired potentiation of insulin secretion by arginine, whereas
glucose-stimulated and leucine-stimulated insulin secretion was intact. Our
findings delineate the complex nature of beta-cell failure in patients with
MODY3. This cell model will be useful for further investigation of the mechanism 
of insulin secretory defects in these patients.

PMID: 10440133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Jul-Aug;12(4):487-97.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY): a new challenge for pediatric
diabetologists.

Guazzarotti L(1), Bartolotta E, Chiarelli F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, S. Lucia Hospital, Recanati, MC, Italy.

The differential diagnosis of hyperglycemia in childhood and adolescence has to
take into consideration early-onset non-insulin-dependent diabetes, defined as
maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY). To date, mutations in genes of five 
proteins have been shown to cause MODY: glucokinase (MODY2), hepatic nuclear
factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) (MODY3), hepatic nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF-4
alpha) (MODY1), insulin promoter factor 1 (IPF-1) (MODY4) and hepatic nuclear
factor-1 beta (HNF-1 beta) (MODY5), but other MODY genes still await elucidation.
Clinical and metabolic heterogeneity of these subtypes of type 2 diabetes need to
be defined, as deficiency of each factor has its own phenotype. Pediatric
diabetologists should be aware of the increasing importance of MODY as a possible
cause of hyperglycemia in children and adolescents. This will allow for the early
diagnosis of these metabolic conditions and for the appropriate follow-up and
treatment.

PMID: 10417964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Jul 14;260(3):829-34.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 binds to and transactivates the human but not the rat
CYP7A1 promoter.

Chen J(1), Cooper AD, Levy-Wilson B.

Author information: 
(1)Palo Alto Medical Foundation Research Institute, Palo Alto, California, 94301,
USA.

Cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1), a liver-specific enzyme, catalyzes the
rate-limiting step in the degradation pathway of cholesterol to bile acids, and
thus plays a key role in cholesterol homeostasis. To elucidate the mechanisms
that control hepatic expression of the human CYP7A1 gene, we are studying the
promoter region. Initially, we observed that up to 40% of the overall
transcriptional activity of the promoter in HepG2 cells was associated with DNA
sequences from -65 to -1 of the human gene. Within this region, a binding site
for the liver-enriched transcription factor HNF-1 (-56 to -49) has been
identified. Binding of HNF-1 to this site leads to transcriptional activation of 
the human promoter. The corresponding segment from the rat CYP7A1 gene does not
bind HNF-1; instead, it is bound by the orphan receptors ARP-1 (COUP-TFII) and
LXRalpha, that are implicated in dietary regulation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10403849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Diabetes Care. 1999 Feb;22(2):253-61.

Phenotypic characteristics of early-onset autosomal-dominant type 2 diabetes
unlinked to known maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) genes.

Doria A(1), Yang Y, Malecki M, Scotti S, Dreyfus J, O'Keeffe C, Orban T, Warram
JH, Krolewski AS.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Genetics, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
adoria@joslin.harvard.edu

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether there are forms of early-onset
autosomal-dominant type 2 diabetes that are distinct from typical maturity-onset 
diabetes of the young (MODY) and to characterize their phenotypic
characteristics.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The study included 220 affected subjects from 29
families in which early-onset type 2 diabetes occurred in multiple generations
and was not linked to known MODY genes (MODY gene-negative families). All
individuals underwent an oral glucose tolerance test and other clinical
measurements aimed at investigating the underlying metabolic defect and the
presence of diabetic complications. For comparison, 79 affected carriers of MODY3
(hepatocyte nuclear factor [HNF]-1 alpha) mutations were similarly examined.
RESULTS: Subjects from MODY gene-negative pedigrees were diagnosed with diabetes 
at an older age (36 +/- 17 vs. 21 +/- 10 years, P = 0.0001) and were more
frequently obese (52 vs. 18%, P = 0.0001) than MODY3 individuals. MODY
gene-negative patients who were insulin treated required more exogenous insulin
than did MODY3 subjects (0.7 +/- 0.4 vs. 0.45 +/- 0.2 U.kg-1.day-1, P = 0.04),
despite similar C-peptide levels. Among subjects not treated with insulin, MODY
gene-negative subjects had significantly higher serum insulin levels, both
fasting (16.5 +/- 15 vs. 6.5 +/- 5 microU/ml, P = 0.027) and 2 h after a glucose 
load (53 +/- 44 vs. 11 +/- 10, P = 0.002). They also had higher serum
triglycerides (P = 0.02), higher cholesterol levels (P = 0.02), more hypertension
(P = 0.0001), and more nephropathy (P = 0.001). Differences persisted when
families were matched for age at diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate the existence of forms of early-onset
autosomal-dominant type 2 diabetes that are distinct from MODY and are frequently
characterized by insulin resistance, similar to later-onset type 2 diabetes.
Because of the Mendelian pattern of inheritance, the goal of identifying the
genes involved in these forms of diabetes appears to be particularly feasible.

PMID: 10333942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Diabetologia. 1999 May;42(5):621-6.

Three new mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in Japanese
subjects with diabetes mellitus: clinical features and functional
characterization.

Yoshiuchi I(1), Yamagata K, Yang Q, Iwahashi H, Okita K, Yamamoto K, Oue T,
Imagawa A, Hamaguchi T, Yamasaki T, Horikawa Y, Satoh T, Nakajima H, Miyazaki J, 
Higashiyama S, Miyagawa J, Namba M, Hanafusa T, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene are a
common cause of the type 3 form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young. We
examined the clinical features and molecular basis of hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) diabetes.
METHODS: Thirty-seven Japanese subjects with early onset Type II
(non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus and 45 with Type I (insulin-dependent) 
diabetes mellitus were screened for mutations in this gene. Functional properties
of mutant HNF-1alpha were also investigated.
RESULTS: Three new mutations [G415R, R272C and A site of the promoter (+
102G-to-C)] were found. Insulin secretion was impaired in the three subjects.
Insulin and glucagon secretory responses to arginine in the subject with the
R272C mutation were also diminished. Molecular biological studies indicated that 
the G415R mutation generated a protein with about 50% of the activity of
wild-type HNF-1alpha. The R272C mutation had no transactivating or DNA binding
activity and acted in a dominant negative manner. The + 102 G-to-C mutation in
the A site of the promoter activity was associated with an increase in promoter
activity and it had 42-75% more activity than the wild-type sequence.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene may affect the normal
islet function by different molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 10333057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Diabetes Care. 1999 May;22(5):867-8.

A case of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha diabetes/MODY3 masquerading as type 1
diabetes in a Mexican-American adolescent and responsive to a low dose of
sulfonylurea.

Hathout EH, Cockburn BN, Mace JW, Sharkey J, Chen-Daniel J, Bell GI.

PMID: 10332709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Diabetes. 1999 May;48(5):1168-74.

Genetic analysis of late-onset type 2 diabetes in a mouse model of human complex 
trait.

Ueda H(1), Ikegami H, Kawaguchi Y, Fujisawa T, Yamato E, Shibata M, Ogihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, Suita,
Japan.

Type 2 diabetes is a complex trait with both genes and environmental factors
contributing to susceptibility. Except for rare subtypes with monogenic
inheritance, the genetic basis of type 2 diabetes is unknown because of the
complex and heterogeneous nature of the disease. By using the NSY mouse, an
inbred mouse model of type 2 diabetes, we genetically dissected late-onset type 2
diabetes and demonstrated age-dependent changes in the genetic control of type 2 
diabetes as well as polygenic inheritance. Three major loci (Nidd1nsy, Nidd2nsy, 
Nidd3nsy) were mapped on mouse chromosomes (Chr) 11, 14, and 6, respectively. The
existence of a fourth locus (Nidd4nsy) with an age-dependent effect was suggested
by longitudinal, but not cross-sectional, analysis of linkage data. Nidd1nsy and 
Nidd4nsy appear to affect insulin secretion, whereas Nidd2nsy and Nidd3nsy appear
to affect insulin sensitivity. A locus on Chr 6 was significantly linked to
epididymal fat weight. A candidate disease gene (Tcf2) on Chr 11, encoding
hepatic nuclear factor-1beta, was shown to have a rare sequence variant in the
DNA binding domain in the model. The mouse model we used will serve as a useful
model for future studies on the etiology of late-onset polygenic type 2 diabetes 
in humans.

PMID: 10331425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Diabetes. 1999 May;48(5):1162-7.

Functional study of the E276Q mutant hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha found in
type 1 maturity-onset diabetes of the young: impaired synergy with chicken
ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor II on the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 promoter.

Suaud L(1), Hemimou Y, Formstecher P, Laine B.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 459 INSERM, Laboratory of Cell Biology, University of Medicine H.
Warembourg, Lille, France.

Seven mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha gene have been
shown to correlate with type 1 maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY 1), a
monogenic form of type 2 diabetes. Up to now, only the functional properties of
two MODY 1 HNF-4alpha mutants, Q268X and V393I, have been investigated to address
how the mutations in the HNF-4alpha gene, found by genetic studies, can give rise
to impaired activities of mutated HNF-4alpha proteins and can cause this disease.
The E276Q mutation results in a nonconservative substitution occurring in the
HNF-4alpha E domain, which is involved in dimerization and transactivation
activities as well as in protein-protein interactions with other transcription
factors or coactivators. Using the mutated human HNF-4alpha2, we have found that,
in the absence of chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor II
(COUP TFII), the E276Q substitution does not significantly affect the
dimerization and transactivating activities of HNF-4alpha, at least on the
promoters studied herein. On the other hand, in the presence of COUP TFII, the
substitution impairs the enhancement of HNF-4-mediated activation of HNF-1
promoter. The impaired synergy between COUP TFII and HNF-4 on the HNF-1 promoter 
results from an alteration of their interaction. HNF-1 expression plays a crucial
role in transactivation of insulin promoter and of numerous genes coding for
enzymes involved in glucose homeostasis. Therefore, its downregulation resulting 
from the E276Q mutation in HNF-4alpha gene most probably impairs the function of 
pancreatic beta-cells.

PMID: 10331424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Am J Physiol. 1999 May;276(5 Pt 1):G1181-94.

Regulation of alpha1-antitrypsin gene expression in human intestinal epithelial
cell line caco-2 by HNF-1alpha and HNF-4.

Hu C(1), Perlmutter DH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Cell Biology, and Physiology, Washington University
School of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, St. Louis
Children's Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

There is still relatively limited information about mechanisms of gene expression
in enterocytes and mechanisms by which gene expression is regulated during
enterocyte differentiation. Using the human intestinal epithelial cell line
Caco-2, which spontaneously differentiates from a cryptlike to a villouslike
enterocyte, we have previously shown that there is a marked increase in
transcription of the well-characterized alpha1-antitrypsin (alpha1-AT) gene
during enterocyte differentiation. In this study we examined the possibility of
identifying the cis-acting elements and trans-acting DNA-binding proteins
responsible for expression of the alpha1-AT gene in Caco-2 cells during
differentiation. Footprint analysis and electrophoretic mobility shift assays
showed that hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha), HNF-1beta, and HNF-4
from nuclear extracts of Caco-2 cells specifically bound to two regions in the
proximal promoter of the alpha1-AT gene. Cotransfection studies showed that
HNF-1alpha and HNF-4 had a synergistic effect on alpha1-AT gene expression. RNA
blot analysis showed that HNF-1alpha and HNF-4 mRNA levels and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays showed that HNF-1alpha binding activity increase
coordinately with alpha1-AT mRNA levels during differentiation of Caco-2 cells.
Finally, overexpression of antisense ribozymes for HNF-1alpha in Caco-2 cells
resulted in a selective decrease in endogenous alpha1-AT gene expression.
Together, these results provide evidence that HNF-1alpha and HNF-4 play a role in
the mechanism by which the alpha1-AT gene is upregulated during enterocyte
differentiation in the model Caco-2 cell system.

PMID: 10330009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mol Carcinog. 1999 Apr;24(4):305-14.

Loss of HNF1alpha function in human renal cell carcinoma: frequent mutations in
the VHL gene but not the HNF1alpha gene.

Lemm I(1), Lingott A, Pogge v Strandmann E, Zoidl C, Bulman MP, Hattersley AT,
Schulz WA, Ebert T, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Germany.

Human renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is a common malignant disease of the kidney
characterized by dedifferentiation of renal epithelial cells. Our previous
experiments showed that most RCCs have a loss of function of the tissue-specific 
transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1alpha. Detailed analyses of
the 10 exons encoding HNF1alpha in 32 human RCCs by single-strand conformation
polymorphism analysis and direct DNA sequencing revealed no tumor-associated
mutation, whereas with the same probes we frequently found mutations in the von
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene. No mutation leading to loss of HNF1alpha
function was detected by analyzing the integrity of the HNF1alpha transcripts in 
the RNA derived from RCCs by the protein truncation test. Investigating human RCC
cell lines by western blotting and gel retardation assays showed a dramatic loss 
in the expression of the tissue-specific transcription factor HNF1alpha in eight 
of 10 cell lines. As the HNF1alpha-related transcription factor HNF1beta was
expressed in all these tumor cell lines, the loss of HNF1alpha expression was a
specific event and was maintained in RCC cell lines. The loss of HNF1alpha
expression in RCC cell lines on the RNA level was confirmed by reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction. We propose that tumor-associated
mutations in the HNF1alpha gene do not occur in human RCC and that the loss of
function is partially due to a transcriptional inactivation of the HNF1alpha
gene.

PMID: 10326868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Nephrologie. 1999;20(2):59-63.

[What have we learned thanks to genetics in type II diabetes and its
complications?].

[Article in French]

Froguel P.

Genetic and environmental factors contribute to the development of type 2
diabetes. However, type 2 diabetes appears to be an heterogeneous syndrome
composed of sub-types strongly associated with environmental factors at one end
of the spectrum, and highly genetic forms at the other end. Therefore, a first
approach has been to differentiate the potential monogenic forms of diabetes, as 
a paradigm for genetic studies, such as maturity onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) which is characterized by an early age of onset and autosomal dominant
inheritance. Recent studies have shown mutations in four transcription factors,
members of the hepatocyte nuclear factor family. Furthermore, some data suggest
that non-MODY monofactorial forms of late-onset NIDDM, due to islet transcription
factors defects exist. The positional cloning of type 2 diabetes susceptibility
genes is in progress, and will help to understand the molecular basis of
diabetes, first step to identify targets of new drugs that will provide a better 
care to diabetic patients.

PMID: 10227025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Biol Chem. 1999 May 7;274(19):12975-8.

Loss-of-function and dominant-negative mechanisms associated with hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1beta mutations in familial type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Tomura H(1), Nishigori H, Sho K, Yamagata K, Inoue I, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Department of Cell Biology, Institute for
Molecular and Cellular Regulation, Gunma University, Gunma 371-8512, Japan.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1beta, a homeodomain-containing transcription
factor, regulates gene expression in a dimerized form in pancreas, liver, and
some other tissues. Recent genetic studies have identified two HNF-1beta
mutations, R177X and A263fsinsGG, in subjects with a monogenic form of type 2
diabetes. Despite the defects being in the same gene, diverse severities of
disease are observed in the affected subjects. To investigate the molecular
mechanism by which mutations might cause various phenotypic features, wild type
and mutant proteins were transiently expressed in insulin-producing (MIN6) and
hepatic (HepG2) cells. Luciferase reporter assay showed that both mutations
resulted in a marked reduction of transactivation activity. Because their
dimerization activity was found to be intact by the yeast two-hybrid system, it
was possible that they were dominant-negative to wild type activity. When
co-expressed with wild type, both of the mutants significantly decreased wild
type activity in HepG2 cells. In contrast, although A263fsinsGG functioned
similarly in MIN6 cells, R177X failed to affect wild type activity in this cell
line. Immunohistochemical analysis of the mutants suggests that this functional
divergence might be generated by the modification of nuclear localization. These 
results suggest that HNF-1beta mutations may impair pancreatic beta-cell function
by loss-of-function and dominant-negative mechanisms.

PMID: 10224045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Apr 13;257(2):533-7.

Isolation and characterization of a genomic region upstream from the ovine
Na+/d-glucose cotransporter (SGLT1) cDNA.

Wood IS(1), Allison GG, Shirazi-Beechey SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Preclinical Sciences, University of Liverpool,
Brownlow Hill, L69 3BX, United Kingdom.

d-Glucose and non-metabolisable analogues of D-glucose regulate the expression of
intestinal SGLT1 at both transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. In
order to investigate the molecular mechanisms involved in the transcriptional
regulation of the ovine intestinal SGLT1 gene, we have isolated an upstream
element of about 1 kb in size. This DNA fragment contains a TATA box motif, 48 bp
upstream of the transcriptional start site and includes transcription factor
binding sites for HNF-1 and AP-2. We have shown that the ovine SGLT1 promoter
fragment can drive the transcription of a reporter gene when transfected into the
epithelial cell lines STC-1 and LLC-PK1, which endogenously express SGLT1.
Deletion analyses of the promoter indicate that -66/+21 bp proximal sequence
directs the highest level of reporter gene activity. There are one and possibly
two sites of transcriptional suppression.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10198246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Diabetes. 1999 Apr;48(4):921-3.

Allelic drop-out in exon 2 of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene hinders
the identification of mutations in three families with maturity-onset diabetes of
the young.

Ellard S(1), Bulman MP, Frayling TM, Allen LI, Dronsfield MJ, Tack CJ, Hattersley
AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medicine 
and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, UK. s.ellard@exeter.ac.uk

PMID: 10102714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Diabetes Care. 1999 Mar;22(3):524.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha G319S. A private mutation in Oji-Cree
associated with type 2 diabetes.

Hegele RA, Cao H, Harris SB, Hanley AJ, Zinman B.

PMID: 10097940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Diabetologia. 1999 Mar;42(3):380-1.

Missense mutation Gly574Ser in the transcription factor HNF-1alpha is a marker of
atypical diabetes mellitus in African-American children.

Boutin P, Gresh L, Cisse A, Hara M, Bell G, Babu S, Eisenbarth G, Froguel P.

PMID: 10096793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Gastroenterology. 1999 Apr;116(4):842-54.

Transcriptional regulation of pig lactase-phlorizin hydrolase: involvement of
HNF-1 and FREACs.

Spodsberg N(1), Troelsen JT, Carlsson P, Enerbäck S, Sjöström H, Norén O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Biochemical Laboratory C, The
Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: One-kilobase sequence of the upstream fragment of the pig
lactase-phlorizin hydrolase gene has been shown to control small
intestinal-specific expression and postweaning decline of lactase-phlorizin
hydrolase in transgenic mice. The aim of this study was to identify the
regulatory DNA elements and transcription factors controlling lactase-phlorizin
hydrolase expression.
METHODS: The activity of different lactase-phlorizin hydrolase promoter fragments
was investigated by transfection experiments using Caco-2 cells. Electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays and supershift analyses were used to characterize the
interaction between intestinal transcription factors and the identified
regulatory elements.
RESULTS: Functional analysis revealed three previously undescribed regulatory
regions in the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase promoter: a putative enhancer between 
-894 and -798 binding hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 at position -894 to -880;
a repressor-binding element between -278 to -264 to which an HNF-3-like factor is
able to bind; and an element between -178 to -164 that binds an activating
transcription factor.
CONCLUSIONS: Identification of three new regulatory regions and HNF-1 and
HNF-3-like transcription factor as players in the regulation of lactase-phlorizin
hydrolase gene transcription has an impact on the understanding of the molecular 
mechanisms behind age-dependent, tissue-specific, differentiation-dependent, and 
regional regulation of expression in the intestine.

PMID: 10092306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Mar;84(3):1077-82.

The hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha G319S variant is associated with early-onset
type 2 diabetes in Canadian Oji-Cree.

Hegele RA(1), Cao H, Harris SB, Hanley AJ, Zinman B.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.
robert.hegele@rri.on.ca

Mutations in the gene encoding hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) have
been found in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young. We identified a
new variant in the HNF-1alpha gene, namely G319S, in Ontario Oji-Cree with type 2
diabetes. G319S is within the proline II-rich domain of the trans-activation site
of HNF-1alpha and alters a glycine residue that is conserved throughout
evolution. S319 was absent from 990 alleles taken from subjects representing six 
other ethnic groups, suggesting that it is private for Oji-Cree. We found that 1)
the S319 allele was significantly more prevalent in diabetic than nondiabetic
Oji-Cree (0.209 vs. 0.087; P = 0.000001); 2) S319/S319 homozygotes and S319/G319 
heterozygotes, respectively, had odds ratios for type 2 diabetes of 4.00 (95%
confidence interval, 2.65-6.03) and 1.97 (95% confidence interval, 1.44-2.70)
compared with G319/G319 homozygotes; 3) there was a significant difference in the
mean age of onset of type 2 diabetes, with G319/G319, S319/G319, and S319/S319
subjects affected in the fifth, fourth, and third decades of life, respectively. 
In subjects with type 2 diabetes, we also found significantly lower body mass
index and significantly higher post-challenge plasma glucose in S319/S319 and
S319/G319 compared with G319/G319 subjects. Finally, among nondiabetic subjects, 
S319/G319 heterozygotes had significantly lower plasma insulin than G319/G319
homozygotes. The presence of the private HNF-1alpha G319S variant in a large
number of Oji-Cree with type 2 diabetes and its strong association with type 2
diabetes susceptibility are unique among human populations. Also, G319S is
associated with a distinct form of type 2 diabetes, characterized by onset at an 
earlier age, lower body mass, and a higher postchallenge plasma glucose.

PMID: 10084598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Diabetes. 1999 Mar;48(3):645-8.

Identification of mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in
Japanese subjects with early-onset NIDDM and functional analysis of the mutant
proteins.

Yamada S(1), Tomura H, Nishigori H, Sho K, Mabe H, Iwatani N, Takumi T, Kito Y,
Moriya N, Muroya K, Ogata T, Onigata K, Morikawa A, Inoue I, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Regulation,
Gunma University, Maebashi, Japan.

PMID: 10078571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Diabetologia. 1999 Jan;42(1):120-1.

UKPDS 31: Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (the MODY3 gene) mutations in late
onset Type II diabetic patients in the United Kingdom. United Kingdom prospective
diabetes study.

Cox RD, Southam L, Hashim Y, Horton V, Mehta Z, Taghavi J, Lathrop M, Turner R.

PMID: 10027593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Biochem J. 1999 Feb 15;338 ( Pt 1):91-7.

Regulation of the gene for human dipeptidyl peptidase IV by hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 alpha.

Erickson RH(1), Gum JR, Lotterman CD, Hicks JW, Lai RS, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Research Laboratory, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 was identified as the transcription factor binding to
a 20 bp (-150 to -131) region of the gene for human dipeptidyl peptidase IV,
which has been shown to be important for the expression of dipeptidyl peptidase
IV in the human intestinal and hepatic epithelial cell lines Caco-2 and HepG2.
Functional analysis of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 site was performed with
two minimal dipeptidyl peptidase IV promoter constructs (-250 to -41, and -150 to
-41) with and without a 3 bp mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1
sequence, and used in transient transfection experiments with Caco-2 cells. The
results show that the mutated constructs were able to drive transcription at only
5-10% of the activity of the non-mutated controls. Co-transfection of 3T3 cells
with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (alpha or beta) and dipeptidyl peptidase IV
promoter constructs (-250 to -41 or -150 to -41) resulted in a 2.5-6-fold
increase in transcription over controls with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha
but not with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 beta. The results of this study show
that hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 binds to the -150 to -131 region of the human
dipeptidyl peptidase IV promoter and is necessary for transcriptional activation 
of the gene for dipeptidyl peptidase IV.

PMCID: PMC1220029
PMID: 9931303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Feb 15;27(4):1190-7.

Extinction of alpha1-antitrypsin expression in cell hybrids is independent of
HNF1alpha and HNF4 and involves both promoter and internal DNA sequences.

Bulla GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Research Institute, St Louis University Health Sciences Center and
Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital, Pediatric Research Institute, St Louis, MO 
63110, USA. bullaga@slu.edu

In rat hepatoma x fibroblast somatic cell hybrids, extinction of rat
alpha1-antitrypsin (alpha1AT) gene expression is accompanied by the loss of
liver-enriched transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1alpha) and 
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4). Previous analysis showed that forced
expression of functional HNF1alpha failed to prevent extinction of the rat
alpha1AT locus in cell hybrids. Here I show that ectopic co-expression of
HNF1alpha plus HNF4 fails to prevent extinction of either rat or human alpha1AT
genes in cell hybrids. A 40 kb human alpha1AT minilocus integrated into the rat
genome is fully silenced in cell hybrids in the presence of transacting factors. 
The integrated alpha1AT promoter, but not a viral or ubiquitously active
promoter, is repressed 35-fold in the cell hybrids. In addition, position effects
also contributed to extinction of many integrated transgenes in a cell
type-dependent manner. Finally, internal DNA sequences within the human alpha1AT 
gene contributed dramatically to the extinction phenotype, resulting in a further
10- to 30-fold reduction in alpha1AT gene expression in cell hybrids. Thus,
multiple mechanisms contribute to silencing of tissue-specific gene expression of
the alpha1AT gene in cell hybrids.

PMCID: PMC148302
PMID: 9927755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Pathol Biol (Paris). 1998 Nov;46(9):713-4.

The genetics of complex traits: from diabetes mellitus to obesity.

[Article in English, French]

Froguel P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Génétique Humaine, Institut de Biologie de Lille-CNRS, France.

PMID: 9885827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Virol. 1999 Feb;73(2):1239-44.

Mechanism of suppression of hepatitis B virus precore RNA transcription by a
frequent double mutation.

Li J(1), Buckwold VE, Hon MW, Ou JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Southern
California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California, USA.

A double mutation which converts nucleotide 1765 from A to T and nucleotide 1767 
from G to A is frequently found in the hepatitis B virus (HBV) genome isolated
from HBV patients with chronic hepatitis symptoms. This double mutation is
located in the core promoter that controls the transcription of the precore RNA
and the core RNA. In addition, this double mutation also resides in the X protein
coding sequence, converting codon 130 from Lys to Met and codon 131 from Val to
Ile. Previous studies indicate that this double mutation removes a nuclear
receptor binding site in the core promoter, suppresses specifically precore RNA
transcription, and enhances viral replication. In this study, we further
investigated how this double mutation suppresses precore RNA transcription. We
found that this double mutation not only removed the nuclear receptor binding
site but also created an HNF1 transcription factor binding site. Further
transfection studies using Huh7 hepatoma cells indicate that the removal of the
nuclear receptor binding site has no effect on the transcription of HBV RNAs, the
two-codon change in the X protein sequence suppresses the transcription of both
precore and core RNAs, and the creation of the HNF1 binding site restores the
core RNA level. Hence, the specific suppression of precore RNA transcription by
this frequent double-nucleotide mutation is the combined result of multiple
factors.

PMCID: PMC103946
PMID: 9882327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Genomics. 1998 Dec 15;54(3):398-407.

Rescue of the HNF4 --> HNF1alpha pathway in hepatoma variant cells containing
human chromosome 12.

Bulla GA(1), Batanian JR, Young HM, Bradley N, Kazi N, Haddad BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Research Institute, St. Louis University
Health Sciences Center and Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital, St. Louis,
Missouri, 63110, USA. bullaga@slu.edu

Expression of liver-enriched trans-acting hepatocyte nuclear factors 1alpha
(HNF1alpha) and 4 (HNF4) is correlated with the hepatic phenotype in cultured rat
hepatoma cells. We have used a hepatoma variant cell line, H11, that specifically
lacks the HNF4 --> HNF1alpha pathway as a model to understand mechanisms
controlling hepatic gene expression. We have introduced randomly marked human
chromosomes into H11 cells and have isolated a number of microcell hybrids that
have rescued hepatic gene expression, including HNF4, HNF1alpha, and
alpha1-antitrypsin. Chromosomal analysis of cell hybrids showed that the rescued 
hepatic phenotype correlated closely with the presence of human chromosome 12p
sequences. Although the gene encoding HNF1alpha is located on chromosome 12q24,
its retention was not required to rescue the hepatic phenotype. Thus, we suggest 
that a locus on human chromosome 12p plays an important role in maintenance of
hepatic gene expression through activation of the HNF4 --> HNF1alpha pathway.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9878242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Diabetologia. 1998 Dec;41(12):1528-31.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in Caucasian families
originally classified as having Type I diabetes.

Møller AM(1), Dalgaard LT, Pociot F, Nerup J, Hansen T, Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene are the cause
of maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3), which is characterised by
a severe impairment of insulin secretion and an early onset of the disease. Also 
at onset of diabetes some MODY patients show similar clinical symptoms and signs 
as patients with Type I (insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus. The objective of
this study was to estimate the prevalence of MODY3 patients misclassified as Type
I diabetic patients. From a large population-based sample of unrelated Danish
Caucasian Type I diabetic patients with an affected first degree relative, 39
patients (6.7%) who did not carry any high-risk HLA-haplotypes, i.e. DR3 or DR4
or both were examined by single-strand conformational polymorphism scanning and
direct sequencing of the coding region and the minimal promoter of the HNF-1alpha
gene. Four of the 39 Type I diabetic patients (10%) were identified as carrying
mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene. One patient carried a missense mutation
(Glu48Lys) in exon 1, two patients carried a missense mutation (Cys241Gly) in
exon 4 and one patient carried a frameshift mutation (Pro291fsdelA) in exon 4.
The mutations were all identified in heterozygous form, segregated with diabetes,
and were not identified in 84 unrelated, healthy subjects. Furthermore, family
history in three of the four families showed diabetes in four consecutive
generations, suggestive of an autosomal dominant inheritance. In conclusion,
about 10% of Danish diabetic patients without a high-risk HLA-haplotype,
originally classified as having Type I diabetes could have diabetes caused by
mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene. Clinical awareness of family history of
diabetes and mode of inheritance might help to identify and reclassify these
diabetic subjects as MODY3 patients.

PMID: 9867222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998 Dec;83(12):4506-9.

The Ala/Val98 polymorphism of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene
contributes to the interindividual variation in serum C-peptide response during
an oral glucose tolerance test: evidence from studies of 231 glucose-tolerant
first degree relatives of type 2 diabetic probands.

Urhammer SA(1), Hansen T, Ekstrøm CT, Eiberg H, Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Department of Medical
Genetics, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

The third form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young is caused by mutations in 
the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene. Recently, we demonstrated an
association between a prevalent polymorphism at codon 98, Ala/Val98, of this gene
and a 20% decreased insulin release during an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) 
in middle-aged glucose-tolerant Danish Caucasian subjects. The major objective of
the present study was to replicate this finding among glucose-tolerant first
degree relatives of type 2 diabetic patients of the same ethnic origin. All
participants, 231 glucose-tolerant offspring of 62 type 2 diabetic probands,
underwent an OGTT with measurements of plasma glucose, serum insulin, and serum C
peptide during the test. Thirty-three heterozygous carriers of the Ala/Val
variant were identified, whereas no subjects had the variant in its homozygous
form. Ala/Val carriers had a 20% reduction in serum C peptide at 30 min during
the OGTT (1225+/-636 vs. 1507+/-624 pmol/L; P=0.02) compared to wild-type
carriers. No significant differences in serum insulin levels during the OGTT were
observed between carriers of the variant and Ala/Ala homozygotes. In conclusion, 
among Danish glucose-tolerant first degree relatives of type 2 diabetic patients 
the Ala/Val98 polymorphism of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene is
associated with a decreased serum C-peptide secretion during an OGTT. This
finding confirms our previously reported observation of the functional importance
of the variant to insulin secretion during an OGTT among middle-aged healthy
subjects.

PMID: 9851800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Acta Diabetol. 1998 Oct;35(3):150-3.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
in the Japanese population.

Babaya N(1), Ikegami H, Kawaguchi Y, Fujisawa T, Nakagawa Y, Hamada Y, Hotta M,
Ueda H, Shintani M, Nojima K, Kawabata Y, Ono M, Yamada K, Shen GQ, Fukuda M,
Ogihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, Suita,
Japan.

Recently, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha(HNF-1alpha, which is encoded by the
TCF1 gene) mutations were reported in a subset of patients with maturity onset
diabetes of the young (MODY3). We studied the contribution of TCF1 to genetic
susceptibility to common non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (type 2) in
Japanese subjects by investigating allelic association with type 2 diabetes use
of three markers. We also studied the frequency of the G191D mutation, the only
mutation of TCF1 reported so far in late-onset type 2 diabetes. A total of 356
subjects were studied. There were no significant differences in allele frequency 
of the three markers between patients with type 2 diabetes and control subjects. 
A G191D mutation was not found in the subjects studied, giving a frequency of
less than 0.4% in common type 2 diabetes. The lack of association of type 2
diabetes with three markers in and near TCF1 suggests that mutations in TCF1
derived from a limited number of founders are not a major cause of common type 2 
diabetes even in the genetically homogeneous Japanese population. The data also
indicate that the G191D mutation in TCF1 plays little, if any, role in
susceptibility to common type 2 diabetes in the Japanese.

PMID: 9840451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Diabetes Care. 1998 Dec;21(12):2144-8.

Liver and kidney function in Japanese patients with maturity-onset diabetes of
the young.

Iwasaki N(1), Ogata M, Tomonaga O, Kuroki H, Kasahara T, Yano N, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Heterozygous mutations in the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta, and HNF-4 alpha are associated with
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and are believed to cause this form
of diabetes by impairing pancreatic beta-cell function. The HNFs also play a
central role in the tissue-specific regulation of gene expression in liver and
kidney, suggesting that patients with MODY due to a mutation in HNF-1 alpha,
HNF-1 beta, or HNF-4 alpha may exhibit abnormal liver or kidney function. Here,
we have examined liver and kidney function in a series of Japanese patients with 
HNF-4 alpha/MODY1, HNF-1 alpha/MODY3, and HNF-1 beta/MODY5 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Clinical and biochemical data were obtained from
Japanese subjects with HNF-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta, and HNF-4 alpha diabetes. The
clinical data included information on BMI, age at diagnosis, current treatment,
and the presence and nature of any complications. The biochemical studies
examined liver and kidney function and included measures of alanine and aspartate
aminotransferase, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine,
uric acid, total and HDL cholesterol, triglycerides, and 17 serum proteins.
RESULTS: The present age and duration of diabetes were similar in patients with
HNF-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta, or HNF-4 alpha diabetes, as was the age at diagnosis of 
diabetes in the youngest generation. All subjects were lean. Of the subjects with
HNF-1 alpha and HNF-4 alpha diabetes, 50% were treated with insulin, as were all 
three subjects with HNF-1 beta diabetes. Retinopathy was present in patients with
each form of diabetes. None of the subjects with HNF-4 alpha diabetes had
evidence of nephropathy, whereas 36% of the patients with HNF-1 alpha diabetes
and 100% of those with HNF-1 beta diabetes showed diminished kidney function. The
three subjects with HNF-1 beta diabetes also had abnormally high serum
creatinine, uric acid, and blood urea nitrogen levels, which are consistent with 
impaired kidney function, and one of seven subjects with HNF-1 alpha diabetes had
a mild elevation in creatinine and blood urea nitrogen levels. These values were 
within the normal range in the three patients with HNF-4 alpha diabetes. Although
the HNFs play a role in regulating the expression of the genes for most, if not
all, serum proteins, there was no decrease in the levels of any of the 17 serum
proteins examined, and most were within or slightly above the normal range.
Lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] levels were elevated in the three patients with HNF-4
alpha diabetes and in one patient with HNF-1 beta diabetes, and in a second
patient with HNF-1 beta diabetes, Lp(a) was at the upper limit of normal.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that as in white patients, MODY resulting from 
mutations in the HNF-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta, and HNF-4 alpha genes in Japanese
patients may be a severe disease similar to classic type 2 diabetes. In addition,
they suggest that patients with HNF-1 beta diabetes may be characterized by
diminished kidney function and perhaps abnormal liver function. Further studies
are needed to determine whether tests of liver and kidney function will be useful
in the diagnosis and subclassification of MODY.

PMID: 9839108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. EMBO J. 1998 Nov 16;17(22):6701-13.

Dominant-negative suppression of HNF-1alpha function results in defective insulin
gene transcription and impaired metabolism-secretion coupling in a pancreatic
beta-cell line.

Wang H(1), Maechler P, Hagenfeldt KA, Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Division de Biochimie Clinique et de Diabétologie Expérimentale, Centre
Médical Universitaire, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) have been linked
to subtype 3 of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3), which is
characterized by a primary defect in insulin secretion. The role of HNF-1alpha in
the regulation of pancreatic beta-cell function was investigated. Gene
manipulation allowed graded overexpression of HNF-1alpha and controlled
dominant-negative suppression of HNF-1alpha function in insulinoma INS-1 cells.
We show that HNF-1alpha is essential for insulin gene transcription, as
demonstrated by a pronounced decrease in insulin mRNA expression and in insulin
promoter activity under dominant-negative conditions. The expression of genes
involved in glucose transport and metabolism including glucose transporter-2 and 
L-type pyruvate kinase is also regulated by HNF-1alpha. Loss of HNF-1alpha
function leads to severe defects in insulin secretory responses to glucose and
leucine, resulting from impaired glucose utilization and mitochondrial oxidation.
The nutrient-evoked ATP production and subsequent changes in plasma membrane
potential and intracellular Ca2+ were diminished by suppression of HNF-1alpha
function. These results suggest that HNF-1alpha function is essential for
maintaining insulin storage and nutrient-evoked release. The defective
mitochondrial oxidation of metabolic substrates causes impaired insulin
secretion, indicating a molecular basis for the diabetic phenotype of MODY3
patients.

PMCID: PMC1171015
PMID: 9822613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998 Nov;83(11):3992-5.

The effect of two frequent amino acid variants of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha gene on estimates of the pancreatic beta-cell function in Caucasian
glucose-tolerant first-degree relatives of type 2 diabetic patients.

Urhammer SA(1), Møller AM, Nyholm B, Ekstrøm CT, Eiberg H, Clausen JO, Hansen T, 
Pedersen O, Schmitz O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark.

The objective of the present study was to investigate whether the frequent amino 
acid polymorphisms, Ile/Leu27 and Ser/Asn487, of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha gene were associated with alterations in glucose-induced serum
C-peptide and serum insulin responses among glucose-tolerant first-degree
relatives of type 2 diabetic patients. The study comprised 2 independent Danish
cohorts. Among 74 unrelated type 2 diabetic relatives, 12 homozygous carriers of 
the Ile/Leu27 polymorphism had a 32% decrease in the 30-min serum C-peptide level
(P = 0.01), as well as a 39% decrease in the 30-min serum insulin level (P =
0.02) during an oral glucose tolerance test. Ten homozygous carriers of the
Ile/Leu27 variant did, however, not differ from wild-type carriers, with respect 
to the acute circulating insulin and serum C-peptide responses during an i.v.
glucose tolerance test in the same study cohort. In a larger (more than 3-fold)
study group of 230 glucose tolerant offspring of 62 type 2 diabetic probands, 33 
homozygous carriers of the Ile/Leu27 variant did not differ, with respect to
either serum insulin and serum C-peptide levels during an oral glucose tolerance 
test or acute serum insulin and serum C-peptide responses during an i.v. glucose 
tolerance test. We therefore consider the former positive finding as a
statistical type I error. There were no differences in the above mentioned
variables between carriers of the Ser/Asn487 polymorphism and wild-type carriers 
within any of the 2 study populations. Nor did carriers of combined genotypes,
i.e. carriers of both the Ile/Leu27 and the Ser/Asn487 variants, show any
associations with the examined variables. In conclusion, the Ile/Leu27 and Ser/
Asn487 polymorphisms of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene have apparently
no major impact on the pancreatic beta-cell function, after an oral and i.v.
glucose challenge, in Caucasian first-degree relatives of type 2 diabetic
patients.

PMID: 9814481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Nov 9;252(1):269-73.

Stable transfection of retinoblastoma gene promotes contact inhibition of cell
growth and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1-mediated transcription in human hepatoma
cells.

Awazu S(1), Nakata K, Hida D, Sakamoto T, Nagata K, Ishii N, Kanematsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, Nagasaki,
852-8501, Japan.

The retinoblastoma (Rb) gene is a key factor involved in cell cycle regulation.
In the present study, alterations in cell growth and expression of the
alpha-fetoprotein and albumin genes by the stable transfection of the Rb gene
were analyzed in HuH-7 human hepatoma cells. Cell growth was almost similar in
the Rb gene-transfected and nontransfected cells at the sparse cell density.
However, under a confluent condition, contact inhibition of cell growth was
stimulated by the Rb gene transfection. By Northern blotting, the levels of the
alpha-fetoprotein and albumin mRNA as well as the transcript of hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), a liver-specific transcriptional factor regulating both
genes, were apparently elevated in the Rb gene-transfected cells, compared with
the nontransfected cells. These results suggest that the Rb gene transduction
promotes contact growth inhibition in conjunction with the enhanced
HNF-1-mediated liver-specific gene transcription in human hepatoma cells.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9813181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Biochem J. 1998 Nov 15;336 ( Pt 1):115-23.

Two HNF-1 binding sites govern the glucose repression of the human
sucrase-isomaltase promoter.

Rodolosse A(1), Carriere V, Rousset M, Lacasa M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U178, Unité de Recherches sur la Différenciation Cellulaire
Intestinale, 16 avenue Paul-Vaillant-Couturier, 94807 Villejuif cedex, France.

We have previously shown, using the Caco-2 clone PF11, that glucose represses
transcription of the human sucrase-isomaltase (SI) gene and that the -370/+30
fragment of the SI gene conferred glucose-regulated expression on a heterologous 
gene. Different fragments beginning at the already characterized SI footprint
(SIF) 1 (-53/-37), SIFR (-153/-129) or SIF3 (-176/-156) elements [Wu, Chen,
Forslund and Traber (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 17080-17085] were tested, in
comparison with the -370/+30 fragment, for their capacity to inhibit reporter
gene expression under high-glucose (25 mM) conditions. Unlike SIF1 and SIFR, the 
addition of the HNF (hepatocyte nuclear factor)-1-binding element SIF3 to the
promoter fragment was required for repression under high-glucose conditions. This
effect was enhanced when the SI promoter was extended to position -370,
indicating that the -370/-176 region contains elements that may co-operate with
SIF3 to increase the metabolic control of the SI promoter. We have characterized 
an additional HNF-1-binding site near to and upstream from SIF3; SIF4. By
mutagenesis of the three HNF-1-binding elements we show that the two distal
HNF-1-recognition sites are the most important for the glucose regulation of the 
SI gene. Moreover, this glucose regulation was abolished in PF11 cells
overexpressing vHNF-1C (variant HNF, an isoform of the HNF-1 family). We thus
propose that the differential binding of HNF-1-family proteins to their DNA
targets on the SI promoter constitutes the molecular mechanism that controls the 
glucose regulation of the SI gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC1219849
PMID: 9806892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Diabet Med. 1998 Oct;15(10):816-20.

A low renal threshold for glucose in diabetic patients with a mutation in the
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene.

Menzel R(1), Kaisaki PJ, Rjasanowski I, Heinke P, Kerner W, Menzel S.

Author information: 
(1)Klinikum Karlsburg, Germany. ruth.menzel@greifswald.netsurf.de

One form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young, Type 3 (MODY3), results from
mutations in the gene coding for hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha), a
transcription factor first described in the liver. MODY3 is characterized by a
defective glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Earlier observations of
glycosuria with normal blood glucose levels in some MODY families suggest an
additional renal manifestation of the respective genetic defect. We measured the 
renal threshold for glucose in five diabetic carriers of a missense mutation (Arg
272 His) in HNF-1alpha and, for comparison, in eight Type 1 diabetic patients,
applying a non-invasive protocol of frequent parallel blood and urine sampling
during a slow shift in blood glucose levels. We found that the mean renal
threshold for glucose was lowered in the HNF-1alpha diabetic patients compared to
those with Type 1 diabetes (6.5 +/- 0.9 mmol l(-1) vs 10.7 +/- 0.5 mmol l(-1); p 
< 0.01). This lowered glucose threshold might be an indication of an
extra-pancreatic effect of HNF-1alpha gene mutations in humans. Defects in
HNF-1alpha may lead to an altered tubular glucose reabsorption, possibly due to
decreased expression of the renal glucose transporter proteins involved in
reabsorption of glucose from the urine.

PMID: 9796880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 6;273(45):30024-32.

Retinoic acid mediates down-regulation of the alpha-fetoprotein gene through
decreased expression of hepatocyte nuclear factors.

Magee TR(1), Cai Y, El-Houseini ME, Locker J, Wan YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California
90509, USA.

alpha-Fetoprotein (AFP), a protein highly induced during fetal liver development,
is down-regulated by retinoids in the human hepatoma cell line Hep3B, in contrast
to up-regulation observed in other cell types. Previously, we have documented
that such up-regulation involves direct effects through cis-retinoid X
receptor-binding sites in the AFP enhancer. In this report, we show a distinctive
effect of all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) in Hep3B cells. RA caused a marked
decrease in AFP transcripts. Deletion analysis of the upstream regulatory region 
of the AFP gene revealed that cis-acting sites required for down-regulation
resided near the promoter. Gel mobility shift assays for factors binding to key
elements in the AFP promoter region demonstrated that hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF) 1 binding was diminished in nuclear extracts from RA-treated cells. In
addition, HNF4, which is not known to bind to the AFP promoter but does regulate 
HNF1, was also diminished. The levels of HNF1 and HNF4 mRNA were also decreased
following RA treatment. AFP promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase transient 
transfection assays demonstrated that the level of HNF1 had a direct impact on
basal transcription as well as RA-mediated down-regulation of the AFP gene, and
that co-transfection of HNF1 and HNF4, but not transfection of either factor
alone, reversed the RA-mediated inhibition. Taken together these data point to an
interaction among the RA, HNF1, and HNF4 signals, which is reflected in decreased
expression of AFP.

PMID: 9792724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Diabetes. 1998 Nov;47(11):1793-6.

Novel susceptibility gene for late-onset NIDDM is localized to human chromosome
12q.

Shaw JT(1), Lovelock PK, Kesting JB, Cardinal J, Duffy D, Wainwright B, Cameron
DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Princess Alexandra Hospital,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

NIDDM has a substantial genetic component, but the nature of the genetic
susceptibility is largely unknown. Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is
a genetically heterogeneous monogenic form of NIDDM characterized by an early age
of onset and autosomal dominant inheritance, and linkage studies have identified 
genes that are mutated in different MODY pedigrees on chromosome 20 (MODY1 locus,
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha [HNF-4alpha] gene), chromosome 7 (MODY2 locus,
glucokinase gene), and chromosome 12 (MODY3 locus, HNF-1alpha gene). We studied
an extended pedigree in which multiple members are affected by late-onset NIDDM
associated with insulin resistance and performed linkage analysis with four
microsatellite markers in the MODY3 region of chromosome 12q. We found
significant evidence for linkage between NIDDM and the MODY3 locus (logarithm of 
odds score 3.65 at theta = 0.008 telomeric to marker D12S321), but sequencing of 
the 10 exons and promoter of HNF-1alpha did not identify any causative mutation
in this gene. Our results indicate that the region of chromosome 12q close to
MODY3 harbors a novel susceptibility gene or genes for NIDDM.

PMID: 9792550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Nihon Rinsho. 1998 Sep;56(9):2419-26.

[Mutations in the genes of the HNF-family cause maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY)].

[Article in Japanese]

Takeda J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Gunma University.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) characterized by an early age of 
onset, often in childhood or adolescence and usually < 25 years of age, and
autosomal dominant inheritance. Clinical characterization of patients with MODY
indicates that impaired insulin secretion is the primary defect responsible for
the hyperglycemia in these patients. Genetic studies have thus far identified
five MODY susceptibility genes, four of which encode transcription factors; HNF
(hepatocyte nuclear factor)-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta, HNF-4 alpha, and IPF1. The
association of mutations in the genes for these transcription factors with
early-onset familial diabetes indicates the importance of the HNF-regulatory
network in determining pancreatic beta-cell function.

PMID: 9780731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Diabetologia. 1998 Sep;41(9):1017-23.

Mutation screening in 18 Caucasian families suggest the existence of other MODY
genes.

Chèvre JC(1), Hani EH, Boutin P, Vaxillaire M, Blanché H, Vionnet N, Pardini VC, 
Timsit J, Larger E, Charpentier G, Beckers D, Maes M, Bellanné-Chantelot C, Velho
G, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie de Lille, CNRS EP-10, France.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a heterogeneous subtype of
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus characterised by early onset, autosomal
dominant inheritance and a primary defect in insulin secretion. To date five MODY
genes have been identified: hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha
(HNF-4alpha/MODY1/TCF14) on chromosome 20q, glucokinase (GCK/MODY2) on chromosome
7p, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1alpha/MODY3/TCF1) on chromosome 12q, 
insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF1/MODY4) on chromosome 13q and hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 beta (HNF-1beta/MODY5/TCF2) on chromosome 17cen-q. We have screened the 
HNF-4alpha, HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta genes in members of 18 MODY kindreds who
tested negative for glucokinase mutations. Five missense (G31D, R159W, A161T,
R200W, R271W), one substitution at the splice donor site of intron 5 (IVS5nt +
2T-->A) and one deletion mutation (P379fsdelT) were found in the HNF-1alpha gene,
but no MODY-associated mutations were found in the HNF-4alpha and HNF-1beta
genes. Of 67 French MODY families that we have now studied, 42 (63%) have
mutations in the glucokinase gene, 14 (21%) have mutations in the HNF-1alpha
gene, and 11 (16%) have no mutations in the HNF-4alpha, IPF1 and HNF-1beta genes.
Eleven families do not have mutations in the five known MODY genes suggesting
that there is at least one additional locus that can cause MODY.

PMID: 9754819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 18;273(38):24457-64.

Defective pancreatic beta-cell glycolytic signaling in hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha-deficient mice.

Dukes ID(1), Sreenan S, Roe MW, Levisetti M, Zhou YP, Ostrega D, Bell GI,
Pontoglio M, Yaniv M, Philipson L, Polonsky KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, Glaxo Wellcome Research Institute,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene cause
maturity onset diabetes of the young type 3, a form of type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
In mice lacking the HNF-1alpha gene, insulin secretion and intracellular calcium 
([Ca2+]i) responses were impaired following stimulation with nutrient
secretagogues such as glucose and glyceraldehyde but normal with non-nutrient
stimuli such as potassium chloride. Patch clamp recordings revealed ATP-sensitive
K+ currents (KATP) in beta-cells that were insensitive to suppression by glucose 
but normally sensitive to ATP. Exposure to mitochondrial substrates suppressed
KATP, elevated [Ca2+]i, and corrected the insulin secretion defect. NAD(P)H
responses to glucose were substantially reduced, and inhibitors of glycolytic
NADH generation reproduced the mutant phenotype in normal islets. Flux of glucose
through glycolysis in islets from mutant mice was reduced, as a result of which
ATP generation in response to glucose was impaired. We conclude that hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1alpha diabetes results from defective beta-cell glycolytic
signaling, which is potentially correctable using substrates that bypass the
defect.

PMID: 9733737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Diabetes Care. 1998 Sep;21(9):1569-71.

A novel missense mutation in the homeodomain of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha/maturity-onset diabetes of the young 3 in a Japanese early-onset
type 2 diabetic patient and time-course of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion.

Awata T, Kurihara S, Inoue K, Inoue I, Takei S, Ishii C, Negishi K, Namai K,
Kanazawa Y, Kuzuya T, Katayama S.

PMID: 9727913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Diabetes. 1998 Sep;47(9):1459-63.

Glucose utilization and production in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of
the young caused by a mutation of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene.

Surmely JF(1), Guenat E, Philippe J, Dussoix P, Schneiter P, Temler E, Vaxillaire
M, Froguel P, Jéquier E, Tappy L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Lausanne, Switzerland.

Mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha gene cause impaired
insulin secretion and hyperglycemia in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of
the young (MODY)3. Whether these mutations also affect glucose metabolism in
tissues other than the beta-cell has not yet been documented. We therefore
assessed, in five MODY3 patients and a dozen healthy control subjects, insulin
secretion, oxidative and nonoxidative glucose disposal, and glucose production
during a two-step hyperglycemic clamp and a euglycemic hyperinsulinemic (0.4 mU x
kg(-1) x min(-1)) clamp. Compared with healthy control subjects, MODY3 patients
had higher fasting plasma glucose (+100%) but similar rates of fasting glucose
production and oxidation. Both the early and late phases of insulin secretion
were virtually abolished during the hyperglycemic clamp, and glucose production
was suppressed by only 43% in MODY3 patients vs. 100% in healthy control
subjects. The rate of glucose infusion required to produce a 5 mmol/l increase
above basal glycemia was reduced by 30%, net nonoxidative glucose disposal (which
is equal to net glycogen deposition) was inhibited by 39%, and net carbohydrate
oxidation during hyperglycemia was 25% lower in MODY3 patients compared with
control subjects. Insulin-stimulated glucose utilization and oxidation measured
during the hyperinsulinemic clamp (at approximately 200 pmol/l insulin) were
identical in MODY3 patients and in healthy control subjects, indicating that
peripheral insulin sensitivity was not altered. Suppression of endogenous glucose
production was, however, mildly impaired. It is concluded that MODY3 patients
have severely depressed glucose-induced insulin secretion. The development of
hyperglycemia in these patients appears to be caused by a decreased stimulation
of glucose utilization, oxidation, and nonoxidative glucose disposal as well as
by a blunted suppression of endogenous glucose output. These phenomena are
essentially secondary to insulinopenia, whereas insulin sensitivity remains
intact.

PMID: 9726235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 21;273(34):21856-66.

Tissue-specific and androgen-repressible regulation of the rat
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfotransferase gene promoter.

Song CS(1), Jung MH, Kim SC, Hassan T, Roy AK, Chatterjee B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, The University of Texas Health 
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78284-7762, USA.

Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfotransferase (Std) catalyzes sulfonation of androgenic
steroids and certain aromatic procarcinogens. In rats, this enzyme is selectively
expressed in the liver, and its expression is strongly repressed by androgens.
DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift analyses revealed two
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF1), three CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP),
and one consensus palindromic thyroid hormone response elements within the first 
215 base pairs (bp) of the promoter sequence of rat Std. This promoter is
normally inactive in fibroblast-derived NIH 3T3 cells. However, overexpression of
HNF1 and C/EBP resulted in synergistic activation of the Std promoter in this
cell type, indicating essential roles of these two trans-regulators in
liver-selective expression of the rat Std gene. On the other hand, point
mutations at any one of five cis elements proximal to the -215 bp region markedly
reduced reporter gene expression, suggesting that all of these sites are
important for overall promoter function. Androgenic repression of the Std gene in
rat liver can be recapitulated in androgen receptor (AR)-negative HepG2 hepatoma 
cells after cotransfection with an AR expression plasmid. Functional assay of a
nested set of 5'-deleted promoters mapped the negative androgen response region
between positions -235 and -310. Antibody supershift and oligonucleotide
competition identified three OCT-1 and two C/EBP elements between bp -231 and
-292. An additional OCT-1 site was found to overlap with a C/EBP element at the
-262/-252 position. Mutational inactivation of any one of five cis elements
within the -231/-292 region abolished negative androgen response. However, none
of these cis elements showed DNase I protection by recombinant AR in footprinting
assay, suggesting the absence of a direct AR-DNA interaction. Thus, these studies
on rat Std promoter function indicate that (i) HNF1 and C/EBP are responsible for
liver specificity of the rat Std gene; (ii) androgenic repression of the gene
requires the presence of all of the OCT-1 and C/EBP elements between positions
-231 and -292; and (iii) AR may exert its negative regulatory effect indirectly
through transcriptional interference of OCT-1 and C/EBP rather than through a
direct DNA-AR interaction.

PMID: 9705324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Diabetes. 1998 Aug;47(8):1354-5.

Frameshift mutation, A263fsinsGG, in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta gene
associated with diabetes and renal dysfunction.

Nishigori H(1), Yamada S, Kohama T, Tomura H, Sho K, Horikawa Y, Bell GI,
Takeuchi T, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Recognition, 
Gunma University School of Medicine, Gunma University, Maebashi, Japan.

PMID: 9703339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Diabetes. 1998 Aug;47(8):1231-5.

Mutation P291fsinsC in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha 
is dominant negative.

Yamagata K(1), Yang Q, Yamamoto K, Iwahashi H, Miyagawa J, Okita K, Yoshiuchi I, 
Miyazaki J, Noguchi T, Nakajima H, Namba M, Hanafusa T, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Osaka University Medical School,
Suita, Japan. kazu@imed2.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

The type 3 form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3) results from
mutations in the gene encoding the transcription factor, hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha). The mechanism by which mutations in only one allele
of the HNF-1alpha gene impair pancreatic beta-cell function is unclear. The
functional form of HNF-1alpha is a dimer--either a homodimer or a heterodimer
with the structurally related protein HNF-1beta--that binds to and activates
transcription of the genes whose expression it regulates. HNF-1alpha is composed 
of three functional domains: an amino-terminal dimerization domain (amino acids
1-32), a DNA-binding domain with POU-like and homeodomain-like motifs (amino
acids 150-280), and a COOH-terminal transactivation domain (amino acids 281-631).
Because the dimerization domain is intact in many of the mutant forms of
HNF-1alpha found in MODY subjects, these mutant proteins may impair pancreatic
beta-cell function by forming nonproductive dimers with wild-type protein,
thereby inhibiting its activity; that is, they are dominant-negative mutations.
This hypothesis was tested by comparing the functional properties of the
frameshift mutation P291fsinsC, the most common mutation identified to date in
MODY3 patients, and wild-type HNF-1alpha. P291fsinsC-HNF-1alpha showed no
transcriptional transactivation activity in HeLa cells, which lack endogenous
HNF-1alpha. Overexpression of P291fsinsC-HNF-1alpha in MIN6 cells, a mouse
beta-cell line, resulted in an approximately 40% inhibition of the endogenous
HNF-1alpha activity in a dosage-dependent manner. Furthermore, heterodimer
formation between wild-type and P291fsinsC mutant proteins were observed by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. These data suggest that the P291fsinsC
mutation in HNF-1alpha functions as a dominant-negative mutation. However, other 
mutations, such as those in the promoter region and dimerization domain, may
represent loss of function mutations. Thus mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene may
lead to beta-cell dysfunction by two different mechanisms.

PMID: 9703322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Aug 4;95(16):9208-13.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 acts as an accessory factor to enhance the inhibitory
action of insulin on mouse glucose-6-phosphatase gene transcription.

Streeper RS(1), Eaton EM, Ebert DH, Chapman SC, Svitek CA, O'Brien RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Glucose-6-phosphatase catalyzes the terminal step in the gluconeogenic and
glycogenolytic pathways. Transcription of the gene encoding the
glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit (G6Pase) is stimulated by cAMP and
glucocorticoids whereas insulin strongly inhibits both this induction and basal
G6Pase gene transcription. Previously, we have demonstrated that the maximum
repression of basal G6Pase gene transcription by insulin requires two distinct
promoter regions, designated A (from -271 to -199) and B (from -198 to -159).
Region B contains an insulin response sequence because it can confer an
inhibitory effect of insulin on the expression of a heterologous fusion gene. By 
contrast, region A fails to mediate an insulin response in a heterologous
context, and the mutation of region B within an otherwise intact promoter almost 
completely abolishes the effect of insulin on basal G6Pase gene transcription.
Therefore, region A is acting as an accessory element to enhance the effect of
insulin, mediated through region B, on G6Pase gene transcription. Such an
arrangement is a common feature of cAMP and glucocorticoid-regulated genes but
has not been previously described for insulin. A combination of fusion gene and
protein-binding analyses revealed that the accessory factor binding region A is
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1. Thus, despite the usually antagonistic effects of
cAMP/glucocorticoids and insulin, all three agents are able to use the same
factor to enhance their action on gene transcription. The potential role of
G6Pase overexpression in the pathophysiology of MODY3 and 5, rare forms of
diabetes caused by hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 mutations, is discussed.

PMCID: PMC21317
PMID: 9689059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Science. 1998 Jul 31;281(5377):692-5.

Regulation of a transcription factor network required for differentiation and
metabolism.

Duncan SA(1), Navas MA, Dufort D, Rossant J, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Molecular Cell Biology and Metabolic Diseases, Rockefeller
University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) are a heterogeneous class of evolutionarily
conserved transcription factors that are required for cellular differentiation
and metabolism. Mutations in HNF-1alphaand HNF-4alpha genes impair insulin
secretion and cause type 2 diabetes. Regulation of HNF-4/HNF-1 expression by
HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta was studied in embryoid bodies in which one or both
HNF-3alpha or HNF-3beta alleles were inactivated. HNF-3beta positively regulated 
the expression of HNF-4alpha/HNF-1alpha and their downstream targets, implicating
a role in diabetes. HNF-3beta was also necessary for expression of HNF-3alpha. In
contrast, HNF-3alpha acts as a negative regulator of HNF-4alpha/HNF-1alpha
demonstrating that HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta have antagonistic transcriptional
regulatory functions in vivo. HNF-3alpha does not appear to act as a classic
biochemical repressor but rather exerts its negative effect by competing for
HNF-3 binding sites with the more efficient activator HNF-3beta. In addition, the
HNF-3alpha/HNF-3beta ratio is modulated by the presence of insulin, providing
evidence that the HNF network may have important roles in mediating the action of
insulin.

PMID: 9685261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Cell Sci. 1998 Aug;111 ( Pt 16):2411-21.

Phenotypic effects of the forced expression of HNF4 and HNF1alpha are conditioned
by properties of the recipient cell.

Bailly A(1), Späth G, Bender V, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, URA 1773 du CNRS, Institut Pasteur, 
75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

Tagged versions of HNF4 or HNF1alpha cDNAs in expression vectors have been
introduced by transient and stable transfection into three cell lines of hepatic 
origin that all fail to express these two liver-enriched transcription factors
and hepatic functions. C2 and H5 cells are dedifferentiated rat hepatoma variants
and WIF12-E cells are human fibroblast-rat hepatoma hybrids with a reduced
complement of human chromosomes. Transfectants were analyzed for the expression
state of the endogenous genes coding for these transcription factors and for
hepatic functions. Each cell line showed a different response to the forced
expression of the transcription factors. In C2 cells, no measurable effect was
observed, either upon transitory or stable expression. H5 cells reexpressed the
endogenous HNF4 gene only upon transient HNF1alpha transfection, and the
endogenous HNF1alpha gene only in stable HNF4 transfectants. WIF12-E cells
responded to the forced transient or stable expression of either HNF1alpha or
HNF4 by cross-activation of the corresponding endogenous gene. In addition, the
stable transfectants reexpress HNF3alpha and C/EBPalpha, as well as all of the
hepatic functions examined. Hybrid cells similar to WIF12-E had previously been
observed to show pleiotropic reexpression of the hepatic phenotype in parallel
with loss of human chromosome 2. For the stable WIF12-E transfectants, it was
verified that reexpression of the hepatic phenotype was not due to loss of human 
chromosome 2. The demonstration of reciprocal cross-regulation between HNF4 and
HNF1alpha in transient as well as stable transfectants implies that direct
effects are involved.

PMID: 9683635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jul 20;248(2):432-5.

Human white blood cells and hair follicles are good sources of mRNA for the
pterin carbinolamine dehydratase/dimerization cofactor of HNF1 for mutation
detection.

Lei XD(1), Kaufman S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland, 20892, USA.

Pterin carbinolamine dehydratase/dimerization cofactor of HNF1 (PCD/DCoH) is a
protein that has a dual function. It is a pterin 4alpha-carbinolamine dehydratase
that is involved in the regeneration of the cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin during
the phenylalanine hydroxylase- catalyzed hydroxylation of phenylalanine. In
addition, it is the dimerization cofactor of HNF1 that is able to activate the
transcriptional activity of HNF1. Deficiencies in the gene for this dual
functional protein result in hyperphenylalaninemia. Here we report for the first 
time that the PCD/DCoH mRNA is present in human white blood cells and hair
follicles. Taking advantage of this finding, a sensitive, rapid and convenient
method for screening mutations occurring in the coding region of this gene has
been described.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9675155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Aug;18(8):4698-706.

Role of tissue-specific transcription factor LFB3 in a cyclic AMP-responsive
enhancer of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator gene in LLC-PK1 cells.

Soubt MK(1), Marksitzer R, Menoud PA, Nagamine Y.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

A cyclic AMP (cAMP)-inducible enhancer in the pig urokinase-type plasminogen
activator gene located 3.4 kb upstream of the transcription initiation site is
composed of three protein-binding domains, A, B, and C. Domains A and B each
contain a CRE (cAMP response element)-like sequence but require the adjoining C
domain for full cAMP responsiveness. A tissue-specific transcription factor,
LFB3/HNF1beta/vHNF1, binds to the C domain. Mutation analyses suggest that the
imperfect CRE and LFB3-binding sequences are required for tight coupling of
hormonal and tissue-specific regulation. CREB and ATF1 bind to domains A and B,
and this binding is enhanced upon phosphorylation by cAMP-dependent protein
kinase (protein kinase A [PKA]). Analysis in a mammalian two-hybrid system
revealed that CREB/ATF1 and LFB3 interact and that transactivation potential is
enhanced by PKA activation. Interestingly, however, phosphorylation of CREB at
Ser-133 does not contribute to its interaction with LFB3. The region of LFB3
involved in its interaction with CREB/ATF1 lies, at least partly, between amino
acids 400 and 450. Deletion of this region removed the ability of LFB3 to mediate
cAMP induction of the ABC enhancer but did not impair its basal transactivation
activity on the albumin promoter. Thus, the two activities are distinct functions
of LFB3.

PMCID: PMC109056
PMID: 9671480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Virol. 1998 Aug;72(8):6608-13.

In vivo effects of mutations in woodchuck hepatitis virus enhancer II.

Wei Y(1), Tennant B, Ganem D.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHV) enhancer II (EnII) is located upstream of the
major pregenomic RNA promoter and is thought to play an important role in the
insertional activation of the N-myc2 gene during WHV hepatocarcinogenesis. WHV
EnII is recognized by at least three host transcription factors: HNF-1, HNF-4,
and Oct-1. Here, the roles of these EnII-binding factors in viral transcription
and replication have been further examined. In HepG2 cells transiently
transfected with a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene whose expression 
is dependent upon EnII, mutations in either the HNF-1 or the HNF-4 site strongly 
reduced CAT activity, while ablation of the Oct-1 site decreased CAT expression
only twofold. Mutations in more than one site completely abolished reporter
expression. These same mutations were also tested in an overlength WHV genome for
their impact on viral replication and gene expression. In transfected HepG2
cells, lesions in the HNF-1 site inactivated pregenomic RNA expression and viral 
reverse transcription, with only minimal effects on the expression of other viral
mRNAs. By contrast, Oct-1 site lesions had no effect on either viral RNA
synthesis or DNA replication, and HNF-4 site lesions produced a modest reduction 
of pregenomic RNA but had no impact on viral DNA synthesis. Testing of the
mutants in susceptible woodchucks revealed that, as expected, viruses with
lesions in the HNF-1 site were nearly noninfectious, while mutants with lesions
at the Oct-1 site were fully replication competent. HNF-4 site mutants were
replication competent but may display reduced levels of replication in the intact
animal host. We conclude that (i) EnII is primarily devoted to the regulation of 
pregenomic RNA in WHV, (ii) HNF-1 is essential for EnII function in vivo, and
(iii) HNF-4 plays a demonstrable but adjunctive role in EnII function.

PMCID: PMC109844
PMID: 9658106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Diabetes. 1998 Jul;47(7):1152-4.

Mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta are not a common cause of
maturity-onset diabetes of the young in the U.K.

Beards F(1), Frayling T, Bulman M, Horikawa Y, Allen L, Appleton M, Bell GI,
Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Clinical Science, University of
Exeter, Devon, UK.

PMID: 9648841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Diabetologia. 1998 May;41(5):607-8.

Hyperexcitability to sulphonylurea in MODY3.

Søvik O, Njølstad P, Følling I, Sagen J, Cockburn BN, Bell GI.

PMID: 9628283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998 Jun;83(6):2059-65.

Linkage and molecular scanning analyses of MODY3/hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
alpha gene in typical familial type 2 diabetes: evidence for novel mutations in
exons 8 and 10.

Elbein SC(1), Teng K, Yount P, Scroggin E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, John L. McClellan Memorial Veterans 
Hospital, Little Rock, Arkansas 72205, USA. sce@nidgene1.uams.edu

Mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1 alpha) gene are an
important cause of autosomal dominant diabetes with onset before age 25 yr
[maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)], and some regions of the HNF1 alpha
gene appear to be hot spots for mutations. To evaluate the role of HNF1 alpha in 
the more common familial type 2 diabetes, we studied 62 families of Northern
European origin by linkage analysis and molecular screening. Linkage was rejected
under dominant models consistent with either late-onset type 2 diabetes or
early-onset dominant diabetes. We used single strand conformation polymorphism
analysis to screen 53 diabetic members of 36 families who reported diabetes
diagnosed before age 40 yr, 9 members of 2 Utah families with typical MODY, and
24 additional members of families with possible linkage. One MODY family showed
the previously reported frameshift mutation (P291fsinsC) in exon 4. Among the
individuals with more typical type 2 diabetes, we identified the previously
reported common polymorphisms, a new intronic polymorphism, and 3 common amino
acid variants. We also identified 2 novel missense mutations that segregated with
type 2 diabetes in 1 family each: lysine for glutamic acid substitution at codon 
619 in exon 10 (E619K), and an arginine for threonine substitution at codon 537
in exon 8 (R537T) in a second family. The exon 8 mutation showed relatively low
penetrance, and the role in this family remains uncertain. No coding mutations
were identified in the family members screened on the basis of linkage but
without early-onset diabetes. Although HNF1 alpha mutations are not a common
cause of familial type 2 diabetes, they may account for 5% of families in which
at least 1 member has onset of type 2 diabetes before age 40 yr. Incomplete
penetrance and a high sporadic frequency make linkage an inefficient screening
tool.

PMID: 9626139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Hum Genet. 1998;43(2):107-10.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha gene (MODY3) are not a major
cause of early-onset non-insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes mellitus in
Japanese.

Nishigori H(1), Yamada S, Kohama T, Utsugi T, Shimizu H, Takeuchi T, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Gunma University, Japan.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3), a monogenic subtype of
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) with an early age of onset, is
characterized by a primary defect in insulin secretion. Recently, it has been
shown that mutations of the gene encoding the transcription factor hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) cause MODY3. Since NIDDM in Japanese is
characterized by insulin secretory defects due to primary beta-cell dysfunction, 
we screened 60 Japanese nonobese subjects with early-onset NIDDM for mutations in
this gene, 45 of whom had a first-degree relative with NIDDM. Direct sequencing
of the ten exons and flanking introns of the gene in these subjects identified
eight nucleotide substitutions including two amino acid changes, Ile-27-Leu and
Ser-487-Asn, the frequencies of which were not significantly different in
subjects with early-onset NIDDM and nondiabetic subjects. These results suggest
that mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene are not a major cause of early-onset NIDDM
in Japanese.

PMID: 9621514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Pathol. 1998 Mar;184(3):272-8.

Expression of HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta in various histological differentiations
of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Wang W(1), Hayashi Y, Ninomiya T, Ohta K, Nakabayashi H, Tamaoki T, Itoh H.

Author information: 
(1)First Division of Pathology, Kobe University School of Medicine, Japan.

Hepatic nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1) regulates genes in a hepatocyte-specific manner.
It has been previously reported that the ratio of HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta mRNA
is related to histological differentiation hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In
this study, the expression levels of the HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta proteins were
analysed relatively and quantitatively in various histologically differentiated
HCC and surrounding non-cancerous tissues, and HNF-1 alpha binding activity for
the AT element of the B domain of the human alpha-fetoprotein enhancer was
examined. Western blot analysis demonstrated that HNF-1 alpha protein was
expressed at a higher level in well-differentiated HCC tissues than in the
surrounding non-HCC tissues; on the other hand, the HNF-1 alpha protein was
expressed at lower levels in moderately and poorly differentiated HCCs than in
the surrounding non-HCC tissues. The levels of HNF-1 beta expression in
well-differentiated and poorly differentiated HCCs were similar to and higher
than those found in the respective surrounding non-cancerous portions. In binding
assays, HNF-1 binding activity was high in well-differentiated HCC and lower in
moderately and poorly differentiated HCCs. Most well-differentiated HCC cases
showed immunohistochemical expression of HNF-1 alpha. These findings show that
poor histological differentiation of HCC correlates with decreases in the level
and activity of HNF-1 alpha proteins.

PMID: 9614379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Diabetes. 1998 Jun;47(6):967-9.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha coding mutations are an uncommon contributor to 
early-onset type 2 diabetes in Ashkenazi Jews.

Behn PS(1), Wasson J, Chayen S, Smolovitch I, Thomas J, Glaser B, Permutt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and Diabetes, Washington University
Medical School, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

PMID: 9604876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 24;273(17):10168-73.

Type I protein C deficiency caused by disruption of a hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-6/HNF-1 binding site in the human protein C gene promoter.

Spek CA(1), Lannoy VJ, Lemaigre FP, Rousseau GG, Bertina RM, Reitsma PH.

Author information: 
(1)Hemostasis and Thrombosis Research Center, Department of Hematology,
University Hospital, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands. C.A.SPEK@AMC.UVA.NL

Protein C is a vitamin K-dependent zymogen of a serine protease that inhibits
blood coagulation by proteolytic inactivation of factors Va and VIIIa.
Individuals affected by protein C deficiency are at risk for venous thrombosis.
One such affected individual was shown earlier to carry a -14 T --> C mutation in
the promoter region of the protein C gene. It is shown here that the region
around this mutation corresponds to a binding site for the transcription factor
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-6 and that this site completely overlaps an HNF-1
binding site. HNF-6 and HNF-1 bound in a mutually exclusive manner. The -14 T -->
C mutation reduced HNF-6 binding. In transient transfection experiments, HNF-6
transactivated the wild-type protein C promoter and introduction of the mutation 
abolished transactivation by HNF-6. Similar experiments showed that wild-type
protein C promoter activity was reduced by cotransfection of an HNF-1 expression 
vector. This inhibiting effect of HNF-1 was reversed to a stimulatory effect when
promoter sequences either upstream or downstream of the HNF-6/HNF-1 site were
deleted. It is concluded that HNF-6 is a major determinant of protein C gene
activity. Moreover, this is the first report describing the putative involvement 
of HNF-6 and of an HNF-6 binding site in human pathology.

PMID: 9553065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Res Virol. 1998 Mar-Apr;149(2):99-108.

HNF1 is critical for the liver-specific function of HBV enhancer II.

Wang WX(1), Li M, Wu X, Wang Y, Li ZP.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry, Academia Sinica, China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a hepatotropic virus and its gene expression is highly
liver-specific. It has been reported that the function of enhancer II (ENII) and 
the core and the core promoter (Cp) of HBV has a hepatocyte preference. To
understand the effects of liver-specific nuclear factors on ENII, in this report,
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) was investigated for its possible action on
ENII function. It was found that HNF1 transactivates ENII/Cp in HeLa cells, and
antisense HNF1 suppresses it in HepG2 cells. Deletion analysis revealed that the 
B element of ENII is the target region responsible for the regulation of HNF1.
Sequence alignment suggested the presence of the potential HNF1 binding sites in 
the B element of ENII. The results of electrophoresis mobility shift assay
indicated that the B2 region could specifically bind a GST-HNF1 fusion protein
and could compete with binding of HNF1 to the consensus motif in the rat
beta-fibrinogen promoter, suggesting that the major binding site of HNF1 is
located in the B2 region. Our results demonstrate that HNF1 is one of the
important regulatory factors for the liver-specific function of HBV and that it
transregulates ENII activity via direct binding to B2.

PMID: 9602504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. J Clin Invest. 1998 May 15;101(10):2215-22.

Defective insulin secretion in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha-deficient mice.

Pontoglio M(1), Sreenan S, Roe M, Pugh W, Ostrega D, Doyen A, Pick AJ, Baldwin A,
Velho G, Froguel P, Levisetti M, Bonner-Weir S, Bell GI, Yaniv M, Polonsky KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department des Biotechnologies, Unité de Recherche Associée 1644 du Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris, France.

Mutations in the gene for the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF) 1alpha cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) 3, a form of
diabetes that results from defects in insulin secretion. Since the nature of
these defects has not been defined, we compared insulin secretory function in
heterozygous [HNF-1alpha (+/-)] or homozygous [HNF-1alpha (-/-)] mice with null
mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene with their wild-type littermates [HNF-1alpha
(+/+)]. Blood glucose concentrations were similar in HNF-1alpha (+/+) and (+/-)
mice (7.8+/-0.2 and 7.9+/-0.3 mM), but were significantly higher in the
HNF-1alpha (-/-) mice (13.1+/-0.7 mM, P < 0.001). Insulin secretory responses to 
glucose and arginine in the perfused pancreas and perifused islets from
HNF-1alpha (-/-) mice were < 15% of the values in the other two groups and were
associated with similar reductions in intracellular Ca2+ responses. These defects
were not due to a decrease in glucokinase or insulin gene transcription. beta
cell mass adjusted for body weight was not reduced in the (-/-) animals, although
pancreatic insulin content adjusted for pancreas weight was slightly lower
(0.06+/-0.01 vs. 0.10+/-0.01 microg/mg, P < 0.01) than in the (+/+) animals. In
summary, a null mutation in the HNF-1alpha gene in homozygous mice leads to
diabetes due to alterations in the pathways that regulate beta cell responses to 
secretagogues including glucose and arginine. These results provide further
evidence in support of a key role for HNF-1alpha in the maintenance of normal
beta cell function.

PMCID: PMC508809
PMID: 9593777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 22;273(21):13297-306.

The HOXC11 homeodomain protein interacts with the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase
promoter and stimulates HNF1alpha-dependent transcription.

Mitchelmore C(1), Troelsen JT, Sjöström H, Norén O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Biochemical Laboratory C, The
Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 Copenhagen N,
Denmark. mitch@biobase.dk

The lactase-phlorizin hydrolase (LPH) gene is expressed specifically in the
enterocytes of the small intestine. LPH levels are high in newborn mammals, but
decrease after weaning. We have previously suggested that the promoter element
CE-LPH1, located at -40 to -54, plays an important role in this down-regulation, 
because the DNA binding activity of a nuclear factor that binds to this site is
present specifically in small intestinal extracts and is down-regulated after
weaning. In an effort to clone CE-LPH1-binding factors, a yeast one-hybrid
genetic selection was used, resulting in the isolation of a partial cDNA encoding
the human homeodomain protein HOXC11. The full-length HOXC11 sequence was
obtained by rapid amplification of cDNA ends. It was shown in a yeast assay and
by electrophoretic mobility shift assay that HOXC11 binds to the CE-LPH1 element 
with similar specificity to the endogenous intestinal factor. Two HOXC11
transcript sizes were identified by Northern blot analysis. The larger transcript
(2.1 kilobase pairs) is likely to contain a translational start site in good
context and is present in HeLa cells. The shorter 1.7-kilobase pair transcript,
present in HeLa and Caco-2 cells, probably encodes a protein lacking 114 amino
acids at the N-terminal end. Both forms of HOXC11 potentiate transcriptional
activation of the LPH promoter by HNF1alpha. The expression of HOXC11 mRNA in
human fetal intestine suggests a role in early intestinal development.

PMID: 9582375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 17;273(16):9510-6.

Circadian periodicity of intestinal Na+/glucose cotransporter 1 mRNA levels is
transcriptionally regulated.

Rhoads DB(1), Rosenbaum DH, Unsal H, Isselbacher KJ, Levitsky LL.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, USA. rhoads@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

Intestinal expression of the high affinity Na+/glucose cotransporter 1 (SGLT1),
which absorbs dietary glucose and galactose, exhibits both circadian periodicity 
in its activity and induction by dietary carbohydrate. Because the daily
variation in SGLT1 activity is established by the feeding schedule (whether ad
libitum or imposed) and persists in the absence of food, this variation has been 
described as anticipatory. To delineate the mechanisms regulating SGLT1, its
expression was examined in rats maintained in a 12-h photoperiod with free access
to chow. SGLT1 mRNA levels varied significantly, with the maximum abundance
occurring near the onset of dark and the minimum near the onset of light. The
SGLT1 transcription rate was 7-fold higher in the morning (1000-1100 h) than in
the afternoon (1600-1700 h). An element for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1)
was identified in the SGLT1 promoter that formed different complexes with small
intestinal nuclear extracts, depending on the time when the source animal was
killed. Serological tests indicated that HNF-1alpha was present in complexes
throughout the day, while HNF-1beta binding exhibited circadian periodicity. We
propose that exchange of HNF-1 dimerization partners contributes to circadian
changes in SGLT1 transcription. Because SGLT1 mRNA levels also varied in rhesus
monkeys (offset by approximately one-half day from rats), a similar mechanism
appears to be present in primates.

PMID: 9545279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 May;18(5):3059-68.

Laron dwarfism and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in the Hnf-1alpha
knockout mouse.

Lee YH(1), Sauer B, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. mbying@ccvax.sinica.edu.tw

Mice deficient in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1alpha) were produced by
use of the Cre-loxP recombination system. HNF-1alpha-null mice are viable but
sterile and exhibit a phenotype reminiscent of both Laron-type dwarfism and
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM). In contrast to an earlier
HNF-1alpha-null mouse line that had been produced by use of standard gene
disruption methodology (M. Pontoglio, J. Barra, M. Hadchouel, A. Doyen, C. Kress,
J. P. Bach, C. Babinet, and M. Yaniv, Cell 84:575-585, 1996), these mice
exhibited no increased mortality and only minimal renal dysfunction during the
first 6 months of development. Both dwarfism and NIDDM are most likely due to the
loss of expression of insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and lower levels of
insulin, resulting in stunted growth and elevated serum glucose levels,
respectively. These results confirm the functional significance of the HNF-1alpha
regulatory elements that had previously been shown to reside in the promoter
regions of both the IGF-I and the insulin genes.

PMCID: PMC110684
PMID: 9566924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Diabetologia. 1998 Apr;41(4):467-73.

Chronic diabetic complications in patients with MODY3 diabetes.

Isomaa B(1), Henricsson M, Lehto M, Forsblom C, Karanko S, Sarelin L, Häggblom M,
Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Jakobstad Hospital, Finland.

MODY3 diabetes, which is caused by a mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha gene (HNF-1alpha) on chromosome 12, represents a relatively common 
monogenic form of diabetes in Finland. Age at onset of the disease can vary from 
10 to 60 years, but little is known about the natural course of the disease,
particularly the development of diabetes-related chronic complications. The
availability of genetic markers now allows description of the clinical course of 
the disease. In order to examine the prevalence of chronic diabetic complications
in MODY3, we examined 57 carriers with HNF-1alpha mutations for the presence of
micro- and macrovascular complications. Thirty-four percent of the MODY patients 
had mild and 13% had severe non-proliferative or proliferative retinopathy; this 
figure did not differ from the figures in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
(IDDM) and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) patients matched for
duration and glycaemic control but not for age. Neither did the prevalence of
microalbuminuria differ between MODY3 and IDDM or NIDDM patients (19 vs 24 and
23%). Neuropathy was observed with the same frequency as previously reported in
IDDM. Hypertension was less frequent in MODY3 and IDDM than in NIDDM (24.5 and 19
vs 53.7%; p < 0.001). Coronary heart disease was more common in MODY3 than in
IDDM (16 vs 4.5%; p < 0.02) but less common than in the older NIDDM patients
(33.3%; p < 0.02). In a multiple logistic regression analysis, poor glycaemic
control was an independent risk factor for retinopathy (p = 0.03),
microalbuminuria (p < 0.04) and neuropathy (p = 0.03). In conclusion,
microangiopathic complications are observed with the same frequency in patients
with MODY3 diabetes as in IDDM and NIDDM and are strongly related to poor
glycaemic control.

PMID: 9562352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Eur J Endocrinol. 1998 Mar;138(3):233-9.

Genetic, metabolic and clinical characteristics of maturity onset diabetes of the
young.

Velho G(1), Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-342, Hôpital Saint Vincent de Paul, Paris, France.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically and clinically
heterogeneous subtype of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM)
characterised by early onset, autosomal dominant inheritance and a primary defect
in insulin secretion. To date, three MODY genes have been identified on
chromosomes 20q (MODY1/hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha), 7p
(MODY2/glucokinase) and 12q (MODY3/HNF-1alpha). Mutations in MODY2/glucokinase
result in mild chronic hyperglycaemia as a result of reduced pancreatic beta-cell
responsiveness to glucose, and decreased net accumulation of hepatic glycogen and
increased hepatic gluconeogenesis after meals. In contrast, MODY1 and MODY3 are
characterised by severe insulin secretory defects, and by major hyperglycaemia
associated with microvascular complications. The role of the three known MODY
genes in susceptibility to the more common late-onset NIDDM remain uncertain.
Genetic studies seem to exclude a role as major susceptibility genes, but leave
unresolved whether they may have a minor role in a polygenic context or an
important role in particular populations.

PMID: 9539292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Biochimie. 1997 Dec;79(12):707-15.

A set of polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies reveals major differences in
post-translational modification of the rat HNF1 and vHNF1 homeoproteins.

Chouard T(1), Jeannequin O, Rey-Campos J, Yaniv M, Traincard F.

Author information: 
(1)URA 1644 du CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies, Paris, France.

The related homeodomain-containing transcription factors HNF1 (HNF1 alpha) and
vHNF1 (HNF1 beta) recognise common target DNA sequences in the regulatory regions
of many genes and are expressed in several parenchymal cell types, predominantly 
in liver, kidney, intestine and pancreas. HNF1-null mutant mice, with a wild-type
vHNF1 gene, develop normally, but die within a few weeks of birth with severe
liver and kidney failure. Humans with a mutation in the HNF1 alpha gene develop
non-insulin dependent diabetes on maturity (MODY 3). To determine distinctive
roles for each of these proteins we produced a set of polyclonal sera and
monoclonal antibodies, directed against different parts of the rat HNF1 and vHNF1
proteins. These antibodies reveal that HNF1 is present in vivo as a heterogeneous
mixture of 92-98 kDa molecular mass polypeptides, a mass higher than that
expected from its amino acid sequence. vHNF1 is present in the form of two
isoforms of roughly the expected molecular masses, 65 and 68 kDa. In addition,
some antibodies prepared against bacterially-produced HNF1 recognise vHNF1 but
not HNF1, in liver and kidney extracts. Hence, we present the first evidence for 
differential post-translational modification of HNF1 and vHNF1 proteins.

PMID: 9523012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Nihon Rinsho. 1998 Jan;56 Suppl 3:566-72.

[MODY (maturity-on-set diabetes of the young)].

[Article in Japanese]

Yasuda K(1), Kadowaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Diabetes Care and Research, Asahi Life Foundation.

PMID: 9513479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Feb 17;95(4):1500-4.

Identification of hepatic nuclear factor 1 binding sites in the 5' flanking
region of the human phenylalanine hydroxylase gene: implication of a dual
function of phenylalanine hydroxylase stimulator in the phenylalanine
hydroxylation system.

Lei XD(1), Kaufman S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry, National Institute of Mental Health, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Phenylalanine hydroxylase stimulator (PHS) is a component of the phenylalanine
hydroxylation system that is involved in the regeneration of the cofactor
tetrahydrobiopterin. It is also identical to the dimerization cofactor of
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) (DCoH) that is able to enhance the
transcriptional activity of HNF1. Moreover, it has the structural potential for
binding macromolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids, consistent with its
involvement in gene expression. We investigated whether PHS/DCoH could enhance
the expression of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). Cotransfection assays showed
that DCoH itself could not transactivate the 9-kb human PAH 5' flanking fragment.
However, this 9-kb fragment was transactivated by HNF1 in a dose-dependent manner
with a maximum of nearly 8-fold activation; DCoH potentiated this transactivation
by another 1.6-fold. The HNF1 binding sites were located at -3.5 kb in a region
that is 77.5% identical to the mouse liver-specific hormone-inducible PAH gene
enhancer. This study suggests a possible dual function of PHS in vivo in the
human phenylalanine hydroxylation system: it is involved in the regeneration of
the cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin and can also enhance the expression of the human
PAH gene.

PMCID: PMC19063
PMID: 9465044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. J Clin Invest. 1998 Feb 1;101(3):521-6.

A missense mutation in hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha, resulting in a reduced 
transactivation activity, in human late-onset non-insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus.

Hani EH(1), Suaud L, Boutin P, Chèvre JC, Durand E, Philippi A, Demenais F,
Vionnet N, Furuta H, Velho G, Bell GI, Laine B, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) EP10-Institute of Biology,
Pasteur Institute of Lille & CHRU-Lille, 59019 Lille, France.

Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) is a heterogeneous disorder
characterized by hyperglycemia resulting from defects in insulin secretion and
action. Recent studies have found mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4
alpha gene (HNF-4alpha) in families with maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY), an autosomal dominant form of diabetes characterized by early age at
onset and a defect in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. During the course of 
our search for susceptibility genes contributing to the more common late-onset
NIDDM forms, we observed nominal evidence for linkage between NIDDM and markers
in the region of the HNF-4alpha/MODY1 locus in a subset of French families with
NIDDM diagnosed before 45 yr of age. Thus, we screened these families for
mutations in the HNF-4alpha gene. We found a missense mutation, resulting in a
valine-to-isoleucine substitution at codon 393 in a single family. This mutation 
cosegregated with diabetes and impaired insulin secretion, and was not present in
119 control subjects. Expression studies showed that this conservative
substitution is associated with a marked reduction of transactivation activity, a
result consistent with this mutation contributing to the insulin secretory defect
observed in this family.

PMCID: PMC508593
PMID: 9449683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 1997 Nov;38(2):139-41.

A case of type-1 diabetes mellitus formerly diagnosed as maturity-onset diabetes 
of the young (MODY) carrying suggestive MODY3 gene.

Miura J, Sanaka M, Ikeda Y, Watanabe C, Nakagami T, Iwasaki N, Uchigata Y,
Takahashi C, Omori Y, Iwamoto Y.

PMID: 9483378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Diabet Med. 1998 Jan;15(1):15-24.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young: clinical heterogeneity explained by genetic
heterogeneity.

Hattersley AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine (Diabetes Research), Postgraduate Medical
School, Exeter, UK.

Erratum in
    Diabet Med 1998 May;15(5):437.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) can be defined by the clinical
characteristics of early-onset Type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes and
autosomal dominant inheritance. Mutations in four genes have been shown to cause 
MODY: glucokinase, hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1alpha), hepatic nuclear
factor 4 alpha (HNF4alpha) and insulin promoter [corrected] factor 1 (IPF1). In
white Caucasians it is now possible to define the gene in most patients with a
clinical diagnosis of MODY. Each gene involved in MODY has its own specific
clinical and physiological characteristics. Patients with mutations of the
glucokinase gene have mild fasting hyperglycaemia throughout life, and rarely
require medication or develop microvascular complications. The principle
pathophysiology is stable beta-cell dysfunction characterized by reduced sensing 
of glucose by the pancreas. Patients with mutations in HNF1alpha have normal
glucose tolerance in early childhood and usually present with symptomatic
diabetes in their late teens or early adulthood. They show increasing
hyperglycaemia and treatment requirements with frequent microvascular
complications. The underlying defect is progressive beta-cell failure, with the
early lesion characterized by failure to increase insulin secretion with
increasing glucose levels. Patients with HNF4alpha and IPF1 mutations show a
similar clinical picture to HNF1alpha although diabetes may be diagnosed later.
There are other patients with MODY in whom the genetic defect is still unknown.
Molecular genetic testing in patients with diabetes offers the possibility of
making a firm diagnosis of MODY and allows prediction of the future clinical
course. The role of predictive testing in non-diabetic subjects within families
is uncertain at present. Preliminary evidence suggests that maintaining insulin
sensitivity by avoiding obesity and regular physical exercise may help delay the 
onset of diabetes.

PMID: 9472859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Hum Genet. 1997 Dec;101(3):351-4.

A rapid screening method for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha frameshift
mutations; prevalence in maturity-onset diabetes of the young and late-onset
non-insulin dependent diabetes.

Frayling TM(1), Bulman MP, Appleton M, Hattersley AT, Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, University of Exeter, UK.

Non-insulin dependent diabetes (NIDDM) is a polygenic heterogeneous disorder of
glucose homeostasis. Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic
subtype of NIDDM characterised by early-onset (< 25 years) and autosomal dominant
inheritance. Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha)
gene have recently been shown to cause MODY. The incidence of mutations in this
gene in MODY and late-onset NIDDM is not known. We have developed a rapid
specific polymerase chain reaction test for HNF-1 alpha mutations; this test
involves the use of fluorescently labelled forward primers and modified reverse
primers to detect length polymorphisms resulting from frameshift mutations. With 
this method, we have screened 102 MODY probands, viz. 60 defined according to
strict diagnostic criteria (autosomal dominant inheritance and at least one
member diagnosed age < 25 years) and 95 late-onset NIDDM probands (diagnosed
35-70 years with > or = 1 affected relative), for the presence of 9 known HNF-1
alpha frameshift mutations, including 6 that occur at two sites for recurring
mutation (residues 291/292 and 379). Mutations were detected in 11 of the
strictly defined MODY probands and one mutation was also found in a single
subject with early-onset NIDDM but no family history of the disease. The HNF-1
alpha frameshift mutations were not detected in any late-onset NIDDM subjects,
suggesting these mutations do not have a major role in the pathogenesis of NIDDM.
Our results indicate that the prevalence of the nine frameshift mutations in
strictly defined UK MODY is 18%, with the P291fsinsC mutation alone having a
frequency of 13%.

PMID: 9439666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Nihon Rinsho. 1997 Nov;55 Suppl:362-8.

[Development of prediction for NIDDM from a view point of genetics].

[Article in Japanese]

Sanke T(1).

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Wakayama University of Medical Science.

PMID: 9434495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;16(12):1419-28.

Comparison of intestinal phospholipase A/lysophospholipase and sucrase-isomaltase
genes suggest a common structure for enterocyte-specific promoters.

Taylor JK(1), Boll W, Levy T, Suh E, Siang S, Mantei N, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.

Intestinal phospholipase A/lysophospholipase (IPAL) is an intestine-specific
brush-border enzyme expressed during development and along the intestinal
crypt-villus axis in a pattern similar to another well characterized brush-border
enzyme, sucrase-isomaltase (SI). A tissue-specific DNase I hypersensitive site
was identified in chromatin from intestinal nuclei immediately upstream from the 
transcriptional start site of the IPAL gene. Footprinting analysis showed that
two DNA elements within the IPAL promoter were protected by intestinal nuclear
proteins. The IPAL-FP1 element was shown to be a monomer binding site for Cdx1
and Cdx2, intestine-specific homeobox proteins. Moreover, this site was important
for transcriptional activation of the promoter in intestinal cell lines via
interaction with Cdx proteins. Nuclear proteins from both liver and intestine
interacted with the IPAL-FP2 element, forming a complex consistent with binding
to HNF1. Cdx and HNF1 binding sites have also been shown to be the two major
regulatory elements responsible for transcriptional activation of the SI gene
promoter, which directs intestine-specific transcription in transgenic mice.
These findings suggest that enterocyte genes that are expressed in similar
developmental patterns may be regulated by the interaction of common DNA elements
and their associated transcription factors.

PMID: 9428790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;16(12):1407-18.

Liver-enriched transcription factors, HNF-1, HNF-3, and C/EBP, are major
contributors to the strong activity of the chicken CYP2H1 promoter in chick
embryo hepatocytes.

Dogra SC(1), May BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Adelaide, South Australia.

Chicken CYP2H1 promoter constructs express strongly in chick embryo hepatocytes
at a level comparable with that of Rous sarcoma viral promoter. We have
identified the transcription factors responsible for the active CYP2H1 promoter. 
Binding sites for transcription factors were located within the first 160 bp of
promoter sequence using promoter deletion experiments and DNase I footprint
analysis. Sequence analysis revealed characteristic sites for the liver-enriched 
transcription factors of the HNF-1, HNF-3, and C/EBP families and for the
ubiquitous factor, USF. Protein binding to these sites was established by gel
mobility shift assays. Mutagenesis and transient transfection experiments
demonstrated that these sites, in combination, were responsible for the strong
promoter activity with a substantial contribution from HNF-1 and HNF-3. The
promoter was also active in mammalian HepG2 and COS-1 cell lines where expression
was dependent on the identified transcription factor binding sites but promoter
activity in the HeLa cells was low. Transactivation experiments revealed that
promoter expression could be activated through the appropriate binding sites by
exogenously expressed rat HNF-1alpha or HNF-1beta, rat HNF-3alpha or HNF-3beta
and chicken C/EBP alpha. Transcriptional synergism between HNF-1 and C/EBP was
observed in these transactivation experiments. A Barbie box-like sequence
overlapped the USF element but was not functional. The results demonstrate that
liver-enriched transcription factors and USF direct strong expression of the
CYP2H1 promoter in transiently transfected cells. By comparison, in vivo
expression of this gene in uninduced chick embryo hepatocytes is low but markedly
increased by phenobarbital. Drug induction may therefore substantially reflect
derepression of this inherently active promoter.

PMID: 9428789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Biochemistry. 1997 Nov 18;36(46):14096-106.

The role of HNF1alpha, HNF3gamma, and cyclic AMP in glucose-6-phosphatase gene
activation.

Lin B(1), Morris DW, Chou JY.

Author information: 
(1)Heritable Disorders Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The gene for glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase), the key enzyme in glucose
homeostasis, is expressed in a tissue-specific manner in the liver and kidney. To
understand the molecular mechanisms regulating liver-specific expression of the
G6Pase gene, we characterized G6Pase promoter activity by transient expression
assays. The G6Pase promoter is active in HepG2 hepatoma cells, but inactive in
JEG3 choriocarcinoma or 3T3 cells. DNA elements essential for optimal and
liver-specific expression of the G6Pase gene were contained within nucleotides
-234 to +3. Deletion analysis revealed that the G6Pase promoter contained three
activation elements (AEs) at nucleotides -234 to -212 (AE-I), -146 to -125
(AE-II), and -124 to -71 (AE-III). AE-I contains binding sites for hepatocyte
nuclear factors (HNF) 1 and 4. Electromobility shift and cotransfection assays
demonstrated that HNF1alpha, but not HNF4, bound to its cognate site and
transactivated G6Pase gene expression. The G6Pase promoter contained five HNF3
motifs, 1 (-180/-174), 2 (-139/-133), 3 (-91/-85), 4 (-81/-75), and 5 (-72/-66), 
and all five sites bound HNF3gamma with high affinity. Transient expression and
cotransfection assays showed that HNF3 site 1 is not required for basal promoter 
activity, but is essential for HNF3gamma-activated transcription from the G6Pase 
promoter. We further showed that HNF3 sites 3, 4, and 5 were essential for basal 
G6Pase promoter activity and transactivation by HNF3gamma. AE-II contains, in
addition to a HNF3 motif, a cAMP-response element (CRE) and a C/EBP half-site.
The G6Pase(-146/-116) DNA containing AE-II formed multiple protein-DNA complexes 
with HepG2 nuclear extracts, including HNF3gamma, CRE-binding protein (CREB),
C/EBPalpha, and C/EBPbeta. We showed that AE-II mediated transcription activation
of the G6Pase gene by cAMP.

PMID: 9369482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Nat Genet. 1997 Dec;17(4):384-5.

Mutation in hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta gene (TCF2) associated with MODY.

Horikawa Y, Iwasaki N, Hara M, Furuta H, Hinokio Y, Cockburn BN, Lindner T,
Yamagata K, Ogata M, Tomonaga O, Kuroki H, Kasahara T, Iwamoto Y, Bell GI.

PMID: 9398836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Diabetes. 1997 Dec;46(12):2108-9.

An automated fluorescent single-strand conformation polymorphism technique for
screening mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene (maturity-onset 
diabetes of the young).

Boutin P(1), Chèvre JC, Hani EH, Gomis R, Pardini VC, Guillausseau PJ, Vaxillaire
M, Velho G, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National Recherche Scientifique, EP10, Institut Pasteur de Lille and
CHU, France.

PMID: 9392505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Am J Physiol. 1997 Oct;273(4 Pt 1):G833-41.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha regulates transcription of the guanylin gene.

Hochman JA(1), Sciaky D, Whitaker TL, Hawkins JA, Cohen MB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Children's Hospital
Medical Center and the University of Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

To study the molecular mechanisms controlling guanylin expression, we have cloned
the mouse guanylin gene, including 2.7 kb of upstream sequence. We show that the 
first 133 base pairs (bp) of the upstream guanylin promoter are sufficient to
drive near maximal (6-fold over basal) luciferase reporter gene expression in
Caco-2 intestinal cells; at least 300 bp of upstream promoter are required for
reporter gene expression in HT-29 intestinal cell lines. Using electromobility
shift assays, we demonstrate that nuclear proteins bind to the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 (HNF-1) consensus sequence in the guanylin promoter. The HNF-1 consensus
sequence, located in the immediate 5' flanking region, is required for
transcriptional activation of the guanylin gene in both intestinal cell lines.
Mutagenesis of the HNF-1 consensus sequence abolishes transcriptional activation 
of guanylin promoter-luciferase reporter gene constructs. Cotransfection of these
constructs with HNF-1alpha augments transcriptional initiation of the reporter
gene. In contrast, HNF-1beta has no significant effect on transcription of the
reporter gene. These experiments demonstrate that HNF-1alpha is an important
regulatory element in the transcriptional activation of guanylin.

PMID: 9357824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Diabetes. 1997 Oct;46(10):1648-51.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young due to a mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear 
factor-4 alpha binding site in the promoter of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
alpha gene.

Gragnoli C(1), Lindner T, Cockburn BN, Kaisaki PJ, Gragnoli F, Marozzi G, Bell
GI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Recent studies have shown that mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha are the cause of one form of maturity-onset diabetes
of the young (MODY3). These studies have identified mutations in the mRNA and
protein coding regions of this gene that result in the synthesis of an abnormal
mRNA or protein. Here, we report an Italian family in which an A-->C substitution
at nucleotide-58 of the promoter region of the HNF-1 alpha gene cosegregates with
MODY. This mutation is located in a highly conserved region of the promoter and
disrupts the binding site for the transcription factor HNF-4 alpha, mutations in 
the gene encoding HNF-4 alpha being another cause of MODY (MODY1). This result
demonstrates that decreased levels of HNF-1 alpha per se can cause MODY.
Moreover, it indicates that both the promoter and coding regions of the HNF-1
alpha gene should be screened for mutations in subjects thought to have MODY
because of mutations in this gene.

PMID: 9313764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Diabetes. 1997 Oct;46(10):1643-7.

Identification of mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha gene
in Japanese subjects with IDDM.

Yamada S(1), Nishigori H, Onda H, Utsugi T, Yanagawa T, Maruyama T, Onigata K,
Nagashima K, Nagai R, Morikawa A, Takeuchi T, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, Gunma University,
Maebashi, Japan.

One form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young, MODY3, is characterized by a
severe insulin secretory defect, compared with MODY2, a glucokinase-deficient
diabetes. It has recently been shown that mutations of the gene encoding the
transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha cause MODY3. Because
of the rapid progress to overt diabetes and the high prevalence of required
insulin treatment in patients with MODY3, we screened the HNF-1 alpha gene for
mutations in Japanese subjects with IDDM. Ten exons and flanking introns of the
HNF-1 alpha gene in these subjects were amplified by polymerase chain reaction
and direct sequencing of the products. Mutations were identified in three (5.5%) 
of the 55 unrelated subjects with IDDM. A missense mutation of R272H (replacement
of Arg by His in codon 272) in the DNA binding domain of HNF-1 alpha was found in
a subject who developed IDDM 1 year after diagnosis of NIDDM at 8 years of age. A
frameshift mutation of P291 fsinsC (insertion of a C in a polyC tract around
codon 291 for Pro), which would generate a mutant truncated protein of 340 amino 
acids, was found in a subject who started insulin treatment when hyperglycemia
and ketonuria were noticed at 13 years of age. A missense mutation of R583G
(replacement of Arg by Gly in codon 583) in the transactivation domain of HNF-1
alpha was found in a subject with sudden-onset IDDM at 20 years of age. None of
these mutations were present in 100 nondiabetic subjects (200 normal
chromosomes). These results indicate that the HNF-1 alpha gene defects could lead
to the development of not only early-onset NIDDM but also IDDM, implicating the
importance of subclassification of HNF-1 alpha-deficient IDDM from a classical
type of autoimmune-based IDDM in Japanese.

PMID: 9313763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Diabetes. 1997 Sep;46(9):1512-3.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene (MODY3) are not a major
cause of late-onset NIDDM in Japanese subjects.

Yamada S(1), Nishigori H, Onda H, Takahashi K, Kitano N, Morikawa A, Takeuchi T, 
Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute for Molecular and Cellular
Regulation, Gunma University, Maebashi, Japan.

PMID: 9287055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Diabetes. 1997 Sep;46(9):1504-8.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha/MODY3 gene in Japanese subjects
with early- and late-onset NIDDM.

Iwasaki N(1), Oda N, Ogata M, Hara M, Hinokio Y, Oda Y, Yamagata K, Kanematsu S, 
Ohgawara H, Omori Y, Bell GI.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, Tokyo Women's Medical College, Japan.

Recent studies have shown that mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-1alpha gene are the cause of maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3
(MODY3). We have screened 193 unrelated Japanese subjects with NIDDM for
mutations in this gene: 83 with early-onset NIDDM (diagnosis at <30 years of age)
and 110 with late-onset NIDDM (diagnosis > or = 30 years of age). All of the
members of the latter group also had at least one sibling with NIDDM. The 10
exons, flanking introns, and promoter region were amplified using polymerase
chain reaction and were sequenced directly. Mutations were found in 7 of the 83
(8%) unrelated subjects with early-onset NIDDM. The mutations were each different
and included four missense mutations (L12H, R131Q, K205Q, and R263C) and three
frameshift mutations (P379fsdelCT, T392fsdelA, and L584S585fsinsTC). One of the
110 subjects with late-onset NIDDM was heterozygous for the missense mutation
G191D. This subject, who was diagnosed with NIDDM at 64 years of age, also had a 
brother with NIDDM (age at diagnosis, 54 years) who carried the same mutation,
suggesting that this mutation contributed to the development of NIDDM in these
two siblings. None of these mutations were present in 50 unrelated subjects with 
normal glucose tolerance (100 normal chromosomes). Mutations in the HNF-1alpha
gene occur in Japanese subjects with NIDDM and appear to be an important cause of
early-onset NIDDM in this population. In addition, they are present in about 1%
of subjects with late-onset NIDDM.

PMID: 9287053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):4948-56.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha gene inactivation impairs chromatin remodeling
and demethylation of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene.

Pontoglio M(1), Faust DM, Doyen A, Yaniv M, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, URA 1644 du Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1alpha) is a homeoprotein that is expressed
in the liver, kidney, pancreas, and digestive tract. Its inactivation in mouse
resulted in decreased transcription of known target genes such as albumin and
alpha1-antitrypsin. In contrast, the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene was
totally silent and unresponsive to normal inducers like glucocorticoids and
cyclic AMP in the liver. DNase I and micrococcal nuclease digestion of liver
nuclei showed that HNF1alpha inactivation had drastic effects on the chromatin
structure of the PAH regulatory regions. Three DNase I-hypersensitive sites
(HSSI, HSSII, and HSSIII), typical of the actively transcribed PAH gene, were
undetectable in liver from HNF1alpha-deficient animals. Both HSSII and HSSIII
elements harbor HNF1 sites, but only the latter has detectable enhancer activity 
in transient-transfection assays. In addition, the PAH promoter in livers of
HNF1alpha-deficient animals was methylated. These results suggest that HNF1alpha 
could activate transcription through two mechanisms. One implies participation in
the recruitment of the general transcription machinery to the promoter, and the
second involves the remodeling of chromatin structure and demethylation that
would allow transcription factors to interact with their cognate cis-acting
elements.

PMCID: PMC232346
PMID: 9271373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Gene. 1997 Aug 22;195(2):121-6.

Cloning and characterization of the human mitochondrial
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA synthase gene.

Boukaftane Y(1), Mitchell GA.

Author information: 
(1)Service de génétique médicale, Hôpital Ste-Justine, Université de Montréal,
Québec, Canada.

We report the characterization of lambda and P1 phage clones containing the
entire human mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA synthase (mHS) gene.
The human mHS locus (HMGCS2) on chromosome 1p12-13 spans 25 kb and contains 10
exons. Exon 1 contains most of the mitochondrial leader, consistent with a recent
hypothesis of the evolution of the ketogenic pathway. By primer extension and
cDNA amplification (RACE-PCR) we localized the transcription start point (tsp) to
60 bp upstream of the initiation codon. Nine blocks of conserved sequence were
identified by comparing the 5' flanking regions of the mHS genes of human and
rat. The 5' flanking region contains potential binding sites for TATA-binding
protein, Sp1, nuclear factor 1 (NF1), CAAT-box binding protein (C/EBP),
hepatocyte nuclear factors 1 and 5 (HNF1, HNF5) and activator proteins 1 and 2
(AP1, AP2).

PMID: 9305755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Diabetes. 1997 Aug;46(8):1364-7.

Pancreatic islet expression studies and polymorphic DNA markers in the genes
encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4gamma, and -6.

Vaisse C(1), Kim J, Espinosa R 3rd, Le Beau MM, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, Rockefeller University, New York, New York
10021, USA.

The genes encoding the functionally related hepatocyte nuclear factors HNF-1alpha
and HNF-4alpha play a critical role in normal pancreatic beta-cell function.
Mutations in these liver-enriched transcription factors result in two forms of
early-onset type 2 diabetes (maturity-onset diabetes of the young [MODY]), MODY3 
and MODY1, which are characterized by impaired glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion, early disease onset, and autosomal dominant inheritance. The
transcriptional hierarchy of HNFs suggests that other proteins of the regulatory 
cascade might be responsible for other forms of MODY and/or late-onset type 2
diabetes. In this study, we show that HNF-3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4gamma, and
-6 are expressed in pancreatic beta-cells. We report the identification and
characterization of simple tandem repeat DNA polymorphisms in the genes encoding 
HNF-3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4gamma, and -6 and the mapping of HNF-6 to
chromosome bands 15q21.1-21.2 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. These
markers will be useful to study the role of genetic variation in these genes in
the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 9231664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Science. 1997 Jul 4;277(5322):109-12.

Modulation of hepatic gene expression by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1.

Ktistaki E(1), Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology-Hellas, Post Office Box 1527, 711 10 Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1 and 4 (HNF-1 and HNF-4) are liver-enriched
transcription factors that function in the regulation of several liver-specific
genes. HNF-1 activates genes containing promoters with HNF-1 binding sites.
However, this factor negatively regulates its own expression and that of other
HNF-4-dependent genes that lack HNF-1 binding sites in their promoter region.
This repression is exerted by a direct interaction of HNF-1 with AF2, the main
activation domain of HNF-4. The dual functions of gene activation and repression 
suggest that HNF-1 is a global regulator of the transcriptional network involved 
in the maintenance of hepatocyte-specific phenotype.

PMID: 9204893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Jul 1;247(1):148-59.

Structural and functional analysis of the promoter of the hepatic lipase gene.

Chang SF(1), Scharf JG, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der
Universität Hamburg, Germany.

Hepatic lipase (HL) gene transcription is almost exclusively limited to
hepatocytes. Here we have studied sequences and transcription factors regulating 
basal and hepatocyte-restricted HL promoter activity. Sequencing of a cloned
3.4-kb HL promoter fragment revealed three Alu repeat sequences and a consensus
hepatocyte-enriched nuclear transcription factor 1 (HNF1) binding site located
upstream of one major and one minor transcription initiation site. By
transfection of cell lines of hepatic and non-hepatic origin and of primary
hepatocyte cultures, sequences controlling basic HL promoter activity and
negative elements located downstream and upstream thereof which extinguish or
enhance this activity were defined. Some HL-promoter fragments with internal
deletions were active only in primary hepatocyte cultures. Human HNF1 protein was
shown to bind to the HL-specific HNF1 response element and the activity of a
heterologous promoter was enhanced by HL-HNF1 in rat primary hepatocyte cultures 
but not in the context of the authentic 3.4-kb HL promoter sequences. In cell
lines the presence of HNF4 but not of HNF1 and vHNF1 mRNA was found to correlate 
with HL gene expression although no perfect consensus HNF4 binding motif was
detected in the promoter region tested. Taken together, these data indicate that 
hepatocyte-specific HL gene transcription is controlled by positive and negative 
transcription regulatory proteins which bind to sequence motifs within and
outside of the proximal 3.4-kb promoter fragment studied. For the elucidation of 
the control of HL promoter activity in vivo the use of primary hepatocyte
cultures is essential.

PMID: 9249021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. EMBO J. 1997 Jul 1;16(13):3995-4006.

Transcriptional regulation in endoderm development: characterization of an
enhancer controlling Hnf3g expression by transgenesis and targeted mutagenesis.

Hiemisch H(1), Schütz G, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology of the Cell I Division, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

The hepatic nuclear factor 3gamma (Hnf3g) is a member of the winged helix gene
family of transcription factors and is thought to be involved in
anterior-posterior regionalization of the primitive gut. In this study,
cis-regulatory elements essential for the expression of Hnf3g in vivo have been
characterized. To this end, a 170 kb yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) carrying
the entire Hnf3g locus was isolated and modified with a lacZ reporter gene. The
two mouse lines carrying the unfragmented Hnf3g-lacZ YAC showed tissue-specific, 
copy number-dependent and position-independent expression, proving that 170 kb of
the Hnf3g locus contain all elements important in the regulation of Hnf3g.
Cis-regulatory elements necessary for expression of Hnf3g were identified in a
three-step procedure. First, DNase I hypersensitive site mapping was used to
delineate important chromatin regions around the gene required for
tissue-specific activation of Hnf3g. Second, plasmid-derived transgenes and gene 
targeting of the endogenous Hnf3g gene locus were used to demonstrate that the
3'-flanking region of the gene is necessary and sufficient to direct reporter
gene expression in liver, pancreas, stomach and small intestine. Third, a binding
site for HNF-1alpha and beta, factors expressed in organs derived from the
endoderm such as liver, gut and pancreas, was identified in this 3'-enhancer and 
shown to be crucial for enhancer function in vitro. Based on its expression
pattern we inferred that HNF-1beta is a likely candidate for directly activating 
Hnf3g gene expression during development.

PMCID: PMC1170023
PMID: 9233809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Jun 27;235(3):820-5.

mRNA expression of HNF-4 isoforms and of HNF-1alpha/HNF-1beta variants and
differentiation of human cell lines that mimic highly specialized phenotypes of
intestinal epithelium.

Suaud L(1), Joseph B, Formstecher P, Laine B.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 459 INSERM, Laboratoire de Biochimie Structurale, Faculté de Médecine de
Lille, France.

The mRNA expression of HNF-4 isoforms and the ratio of HNF-1alpha/HNF-1beta
variants in cell lines representing highly specialized phenotypes of human
intestinal epithelium were studied by RT-PCR. A strong rise in expression of
HNF-4 isoforms alpha2, alpha4 and gamma correlates with commitment into highly
differentiated enterocyte-like phenotype of Caco-2 cells which best mimic
enterocytes, whereas only isoform alpha4 expression is high in the less
differentiated HT-29 G- cells. These increased expressions are not encountered in
the highly differentiated mucous-secreting HT-29 MTX cells. Differentiation into 
highly specialized enterocyte-like Caco-2 cells and mucous-secreting HT-29 MTX
cells is accompanied by a moderate rise in HNF-1 without change in the ratio of
its variants. Our data corroborate those of Spath et al. (Mol. Cell. Biol., 1997,
17, 1913) in hepatoma cells and suggest that HNF-4 isoforms alpha2, alpha4 and
gamma play a major role in the differentiation of enterocytes.

PMID: 9207245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Jun 15;25(12):2501-8.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 prevents silencing of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
expression in hepatoma x fibroblast cell hybrids.

Bulla GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Research Institute, St Louis University Health Sciences Center and
Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital, 3662 Park Avenue, St Louis, MO 63110, USA. 
bullaga@sluvca.slu.edu

Hepatocyte nuclear factors-1alpha (HNF1alpha) and -4 (HNF4) are components of a
liver-enriched transcription activation pathway which is thought to play a
critical role in hepatocyte-specific gene expression, including activation of
alpha1-antitrypsin gene expression. HNF1alpha, HNF4 and alpha1-antitrypsin
(alpha1AT) genes are extinguished in hepatoma/fibroblast somatic cell hybrids,
suggesting that fibroblasts contain a repressor-like activity. To determine the
molecular basis for silencing of these genes in cell hybrids, ectopic expression 
of HNF1alpha and HNF4 was used. Results show that constitutive expression of HNF4
prevents extinction of HNF1alpha gene expression in hepatoma/fibroblast hybrids. 
In contrast, forced HNF1alpha expression failed to prevent extinction of the HNF4
locus in cell hybrids. Likewise, the alpha1AT gene remained silent in the
presence of both HNF1alpha and HNF4. These results suggest that extinction of
HNF1alpha is a simple lack-of-activation phenotype, whereas extinction of HNF4
andalpha1AT loci is more complex, perhaps involving negative regulation.

PMCID: PMC146744
PMID: 9171105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Jun;16(6):725-36.

Regulation of the hepatic CYP 2E1 gene during chronic alcohol exposure: lack of
an ethanol response element in the proximal 5'-flanking sequence.

McGehee RE Jr(1), Ronis MJ, Badger TM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Arkansas Children's Hospital
Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Little Rock 72205, USA.

Chronic exposure to ethanol is known to cause a dramatic increase in the level of
CYP 2E1 apoprotein. More recently it has been demonstrated that under certain
conditions the mRNA encoding cytochrome P450 2E1(CYP 2E1) is inducible; however, 
the mechanisms by which these increases occur are not well understood. In the
current study, DNase I footprinting assays performed on the first kilobase of the
CYP 2E1 5'-flanking sequences resulted in the identification of 13
sequence-specific protected regions using rat liver nuclear extracts isolated
from either control or ethanol-treated animals. No differences were observed in
the DNase I footprint patterns produced by the two different nuclear extracts. In
addition, analysis by electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) revealed that 
with one exception, there were no differences in the level of binding complexes
between the two extracts. However, EMSA analysis with an oligonucleotide to one
footprint site (designated Site C) revealed that in nuclear extracts isolated
from ethanol-treated animals there was a 2.9-fold increase in this binding
complex when compared to control nuclear extracts. This site was previously shown
to contain an HNF-1alpha binding site, and here we demonstrate that bacterially
expressed HNF-1alpha in footprint assays bind Site C sequences and that
HNF-1alpha transactivates the CYP 2E1 promoter in co-transfection experiments
with HNF-1alpha expression plasmid and plasmids containing CYP 2E1 promoter
sequences coupled to the chloramphenicol acetyl transferase gene. Furthermore, in
contrast to the increase observed by EMSA in Site C binding, no increase was
detected in the CYP 2E1 transcriptional rate supported by nuclear extracts from
ethanol-treated animals over controls using in vitro transcription assays,
suggesting that the increase by ethanol in CYP 2E1 transcription is not mediated 
through the HNF-1alpha site.

PMID: 9212166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Hepatology. 1997 Jun;25(6):1507-15.

A hepatitis B virus mutant with a new hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 binding site
emerging in transplant-transmitted fulminant hepatitis B.

Pult I(1), Chouard T, Wieland S, Klemenz R, Yaniv M, Blum HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA was cloned from serum of a heart transplant recipient
who died from fulminant hepatitis B transmitted by the donor. Restriction enzyme 
analyses of the clones obtained by conventional cloning yielded six HBV variants:
a major species (pF-1) representing 88% and five minor species (pF-2 to pF-6),
each representing 2% to 4% of the clones. The complete nucleotide sequence of
these six variants revealed that five of the six viral genomes, including pF-1,
carried a novel 11 base pair (bp) insertion in the core promoter region as well
as an 18 bp and an 108 bp in-frame deletion in the pre-S1 region not present in
the donor. One genome was identical to the sequence of the donor. Functional
analyses of HBV clones generated by in vitro mutagenesis and cassette exchange
showed that the 11 bp insertion is a strong binding site for hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 (HNF-1). In transient transfection experiments, the novel HNF-1 sequence
motif was shown to result in enhanced viral replication. Immunohistochemical
analyses revealed high levels of cytoplasmic and nuclear hepatitis B core antigen
(HBcAg) and only scattered hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) expression in the 
liver. The data in our immunosuppressed patient showed that HBV variants can
rapidly accumulate in severe hepatitis B and suggest that the novel HNF-1 binding
site may have contributed to the fulminant clinical course, possibly via enhanced
viral replication.

PMID: 9185776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Diabetes. 1997 Jun;46(6):1081-6.

Novel mutations and a mutational hotspot in the MODY3 gene.

Glucksmann MA(1), Lehto M, Tayber O, Scotti S, Berkemeier L, Pulido JC, Wu Y, Nir
WJ, Fang L, Markel P, Munnelly KD, Goranson J, Orho M, Young BM, Whitacre JL,
McMenimen C, Wantman M, Tuomi T, Warram J, Forsblom CM, Carlsson M, Rosenzweig J,
Kennedy G, Duyk GM, Thomas JD, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young 3 (MODY3) is a type of NIDDM caused by
mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha) located on chromosome 12q. We have identified four novel HNF-1alpha 
missense mutations in MODY3 families. In four additional and unrelated families, 
we observed an identical insertion mutation that had occurred in a polycytidine
tract in exon 4. Among those families, one exhibited a de novo mutation at this
location. We propose that instability of this sequence represents a general
mutational mechanism in MODY3. We observed no HNF-1alpha mutations among 86
unrelated late-onset diabetic patients with relative insulin deficiency. Hence
mutations in this gene appear to be most strongly associated with early-onset
diabetes.

PMID: 9166684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jun;17(6):3013-20.

Distinct retinoid X receptor-retinoic acid receptor heterodimers are
differentially involved in the control of expression of retinoid target genes in 
F9 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Chiba H(1), Clifford J, Metzger D, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Illkirch, France.

The F9 murine embryonal carcinoma cell line represents a well-established system 
for the study of retinoid signaling in vivo. We have investigated the functional 
specificity of different retinoid X receptor (RXR)-retinoic acid (RA) receptor
(RAR) isotype pairs for the control of expression of endogenous RA-responsive
genes, by using wild-type (WT), RXR alpha(-/-), RAR alpha(-/-), RAR gamma(-/-),
RXR alpha(-/-)-RAR alpha(-/-), and RXR alpha(-/-)-RAR gamma(-/-) F9 cells, as
well as panRXR and RAR isotype (alpha, beta, and gamma)-selective retinoids. We
show that in these cells the control of expression of different sets of
RA-responsive genes is preferentially mediated by distinct RXR-RAR isotype
combinations. Our data support the conclusion that RXR-RAR heterodimers are the
functional units transducing the retinoid signal and indicate in addition that
these heterodimers exert both specific and redundant functions on the expression 
of particular sets of RA-responsive genes. We also show that the presence of a
given receptor isotype can hinder the activity of another isotype and therefore
that functional redundancy between retinoid receptor isotypes can be
artifactually generated by gene knockouts.

PMCID: PMC232153
PMID: 9154799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Somat Cell Mol Genet. 1997 May;23(3):185-201.

Selective loss of the hepatic phenotype due to the absence of a transcriptional
activation pathway.

Bulla GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, St. Louis University Health Sciences Center,
Missouri, USA.

Liver-enriched trans-acting factors hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1
alpha) and -4 (HNF4) are components of a transcriptional activation pathway that 
is thought to play a major role in hepatic gene activation. We previously
described the isolation and characterization of distinct classes of hepatoma
variants which lack the HNF4-->HNF1 alpha pathway (1). In order to determine the 
influence of the HNF4-->HNF1 alpha pathway on hepatic gene expression, genetic
rescue experiments were done using hepatoma variant line H11 as a model system.
Results suggest that this pathway is required for basal expression of a number of
endogenous hepatocyte-specific genes. Complementation groups were established by 
fusion of H11 cells with other variant lines. Lastly, introduction of human
chromosome 20 (containing the HNF4 locus) or randomly-marked human chromosomes
into H11 cells failed to rescue the hepatic phenotype, suggesting that what
appears to be a 'simple' defect may involve multiple genetic loci.

PMID: 9330630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Eur J Endocrinol. 1997 May;136(5):469-70.

Transcription factors in the pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus.

Hussain MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston 02114, USA.

PMID: 9186265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Diabetes. 1997 May;46(5):912-6.

A prevalent amino acid polymorphism at codon 98 in the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha gene is associated with reduced serum C-peptide and insulin
responses to an oral glucose challenge.

Urhammer SA(1), Fridberg M, Hansen T, Rasmussen SK, Møller AM, Clausen JO,
Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene cause the
type 3 form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3), which is
characterized by a severe impairment of insulin secretion. In addition to
disease-associated mutations, three common amino acid polymorphisms have been
identified in the HNF-1alpha gene: Ile/Leu27, Ala/Val 98, and Ser/Asn487. We have
addressed the question of whether these variants of the HNF-1alpha gene are
associated with altered glucose-induced C-peptide and insulin responses or
late-onset NIDDM. Among 245 NIDDM patients, the allelic frequency of the Val 98
variant was 3.7% (95% CI 2.0-5.4%) vs. 4.4% (2.6-6.2%) among 240 glucose tolerant
control subjects (NS). Studies of genotype-phenotype interactions in 240
middle-aged control subjects showed, however, that heterozygous subjects (i.e.,
genotype Ala/Val 98) had an 18% decrease in 30-min serum C-peptide level (P =
0.004) as well as a 23% decrease in 30-min serum insulin level (P = 0.03) during 
an oral glucose tolerance test. One Val 98 homozygote subject had a more severe
reduction in stimulated insulin and C-peptide levels. The impact of the
homozygous carrier status was similar in a study of 377 healthy young subjects.
In contrast, the Ile/Leu27 and Ser/Asn487 polymorphisms were not associated with 
altered C-peptide and insulin release or NIDDM. In conclusion, 8% of white
subjects of Danish ancestry are heterozygous for the Ala/Val 98 polymorphism in
the HNF-1alpha gene, which in middle-aged subjects is associated with a
approximately 20% reduction in serum C-peptide and insulin responses 30 min after
an oral glucose challenge. Val 98 homozygotes may exhibit a more severe defect in
the early glucose-induced insulin response.

PMID: 9133564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 May;17(5):2790-7.

Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factors act as auxiliary
cofactors for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 and enhance hepatic gene expression.

Ktistaki E(1), Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology Hellas, Herakleion, Crete, Greece.

Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factors (COUP-TFs) strongly
inhibit transcriptional activation mediated by nuclear hormone receptors,
including hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF-4). COUP-TFs repress HNF-4-dependent
gene expression by competition with HNF-4 for common binding sites found in
several regulatory regions. Here we show that promoters, such as the HNF-1
promoter, which are recognized by HNF-4 but not by COUP-TFs are activated by
COUP-TFI and COUP-TFII in conjunction with HNF-4 more than 100-fold above basal
levels, as opposed to about 8-fold activation by HNF-4 alone. This enhancement
was strictly dependent on an intact HNF-4 E domain. In vitro and in vivo evidence
suggests that COUP-TFs enhance HNF-4 activity by a mechanism that involves their 
physical interaction with the amino acid 227 to 271 region of HNF-4. Our results 
indicate that in certain promoters, COUP-TFs act as auxiliary cofactors for
HNF-4, orienting the HNF-4 activation domain in a more efficient configuration to
achieve enhanced transcriptional activity. These findings provide new insights
into the regulatory functions of COUP-TFs, suggesting their involvement in the
initial activation and subsequent high-level expression of hepatic regulators, as
well as in the positive and negative modulation of downstream target genes.

PMCID: PMC232130
PMID: 9111350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Apr 28;233(3):631-6.

Extrahepatic expression of NAD(P)H:menadione oxidoreductase, UDP
glucuronosyltransferase-1A6, microsomal aldehyde dehydrogenase, and hepatic
nuclear factor-1 alpha mRNAs in ch/ch and 14CoS/14CoS mice.

Vasiliou V(1), Reuter SF, Nebert DW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Genetics, University of Cincinnati Medical Center,
Ohio 45267-0056, USA.

Oxidative stress-induced gene expression in liver of the untreated newborn
c14CoS/c14CoS mouse, as compared with that in the cch/cch wild-type mouse,
appears to be caused by homozygous loss of the fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase
(Fah) gene on Chr 7 and absence of the FAH enzyme, which leads to increased
levels of endogenous reactive oxygenated metabolites (ROMs) formed in the
tyrosine degradative pathway. In these mice almost all studies to date have been 
carried out in liver. We have examined the extrahepatic expression of four genes.
Two genes are members of the [Ah] battery and induced by ROM-mediated oxidative
stress: NAD(P)H:menadione oxidoreductase (Nmo1) and UDP
glucuronosyltransferase-1A6 (Ugt1a6). The other two genes are decreased in the
livers of 14CoS/ 14CoS mice as compared with that in ch/ch mice: microsomal
aldehyde dehydrogenase (Ahd3) and hepatocyte-specific nuclear factor-1 alpha
HNF-1 alpha (Hnf1 alpha). In liver plus nine extrahepatic tissues of untreated
newborn 14CoS/14CoS mutant and ch/ch wild-type mice, we compared NMO1, UGT1A6,
AHD3 and HNF-1 alpha mRNA levels. Our results show a wide variation in
extrahepatic tissue-specific expression of all four transcripts and indicate that
numerous differences exist in the extrahepatic expression of these genes between 
14CoS/14CoS and ch/ch mice.

PMID: 9168903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Apr 15;25(8):1476-84.

The bifunctional DCOH protein binds to HNF1 independently of its
4-alpha-carbinolamine dehydratase activity.

Sourdive DJ(1), Transy C, Garbay S, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, URA 1644 du CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies, 
U163 INSERM, Institut Pasteur, 25, rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris cedex 15, France.

HNF1 is a liver enriched atypical homeoprotein isolated from vertebrates which is
involved in the transcriptional activation of liver, kidney, intestine and
pancreas specific genes. HNF1 contains an N-terminal dimerisation and a POU-like 
domain both essential together with the homeodomain for DNA specific recognition.
Using the yeast two-hybrid system we searched for proteins interacting with HNF1.
We repeatedly obtained cDNA clones encoding DCOH/4-alpha-carbinolamine
dehydratase, an enzyme involved in the oxidation of aromatic amino acids that was
shown to bind to and stabilise HNF1 dimers. Using the yeast system, we show that 
the enzymatic activity of DCOH is not essential for HNF1 binding and that the
HNF1 dimerisation domain is sufficient for DCOH binding. Furthermore we
demonstrate that both proteins co-localise in co-transfected cells.

PMCID: PMC146627
PMID: 9092652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Diabetologia. 1997 Apr;40(4):473-5.

Genetic variation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha gene in Danish
Caucasians with late-onset NIDDM.

Urhammer SA(1), Rasmussen SK, Kaisaki PJ, Oda N, Yamagata K, Møller AM, Fridberg 
M, Hansen L, Hansen T, Bell GI, Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) is a phenotypically and
genetically heterogeneous disorder. A recent random genome mapping study has
localized a locus termed NIDDM2 that maps to the region of chromosome 12 that
includes MODY3, one of the three genes responsible for maturity-onset diabetes of
the young, a monogenic form of NIDDM characterized by early age of onset and
autosomal dominant inheritance. These findings suggest that NIDDM2 and MODY3 may 
represent different alleles of the same gene. MODY3 has recently been shown to be
the gene encoding the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha
(HNF-1 alpha) thereby allowing us to determine whether mutations in the HNF-1
alpha gene are present in subjects with late-onset NIDDM. We screened 84 white
NIDDM patients of Danish ancestry and found four nucleotide substitutions that
changed the sequence of HNF-1 alpha, Ile27-->Leu, Ala98-->Val, Ser487-->Asn and
Arg583-->Gln, five nucleotide substitutions that were silent and did not change
the amino acid, Leu17, Gly288, Leu459 and Thr515, and five substitutions in the
intron regions. The frequencies of the codon 27, 98 and 487 amino acid variants
were similar in 245 unrelated NIDDM patients and 242 age-matched control
subjects. The Arg583-->Gln mutation was found in 2 of 245 NIDDM patients and in
none of the control subjects. Thus, genetic variation in the HNF-1 alpha gene is 
not a common factor contributing to NIDDM susceptibility in white subjects of
Danish ancestry.

PMID: 9112026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Hum Mol Genet. 1997 Apr;6(4):583-6.

Identification of nine novel mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha
gene associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3).

Vaxillaire M(1), Rouard M, Yamagata K, Oda N, Kaisaki PJ, Boriraj VV, Chevre JC, 
Boccio V, Cox RD, Lathrop GM, Dussoix P, Philippe J, Timsit J, Charpentier G,
Velho G, Bell GI, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS EP10, Institut Pasteur de Lille & CHU de Lille, France.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically heterogeneous
subtype of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) characterised by early
onset, autosomal dominant inheritance and a primary defect in insulin secretion. 
Recent studies have shown that mutations in the two functionally related
transcription factors, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF-4alpha) and
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1alpha) are associated with the MODY1 and 
MODY3 forms of diabetes respectively, whereas mutations in the enzyme glucokinase
are the cause of the MODY2 form. We have examined 10 unrelated Caucasian families
in which MODY/NIDDM co-segregated with markers for MODY3 for mutations in the
HNF-1alpha gene (TCF1). Ten different mutations were observed in these families, 
all of which co-segregated with diabetes. There were no obvious relationships
between the nature of the mutations observed (i.e. frameshift, nonsense, or
missense) or their location in the gene with clinical features of diabetes (age
at onset, severity) in these families. The mechanisms by which mutations in the
HNF-1alpha gene cause diabetes mellitus are unclear but might include abnormal
pancreatic islet development during foetal life thereby limiting their later
function, as well as impaired transcriptional regulation of genes that play a key
role in normal pancreatic beta cell function.

PMID: 9097962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Diabetes. 1997 Apr;46(4):726-30.

Novel MODY3 mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene: evidence for 
a hyperexcitability of pancreatic beta-cells to intravenous secretagogues in a
glucose-tolerant carrier of a P447L mutation.

Hansen T(1), Eiberg H, Rouard M, Vaxillaire M, Møller AM, Rasmussen SK, Fridberg 
M, Urhammer SA, Holst JJ, Almind K, Echwald SM, Hansen L, Bell GI, Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagendorn Research Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark.

One form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3) results from mutations
in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha gene, located on chromosome
12q24.2. The primary objective of the present study was to search for genetic
variation in the HNF-1alpha gene in nine nonrelated Danish Caucasian subjects
with MODY. Direct sequencing of the coding region and intron-exon boundaries of
the HNF-1alpha gene revealed 2 novel and 1 previously reported missense mutations
and 2 novel frameshift mutations in five of nine MODY subjects. These five
mutations were found in neither 84 NIDDM patients nor 84 control subjects. One
glucose-tolerant lean male with a P447L missense mutation, which in his relatives
caused MODY, underwent an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), a tolbutamide
modified frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance test, and a glucagon
test to examine for a possible early beta-cell abnormality. He had a low insulin 
secretion rate during an OGTT, but a twofold increase in pancreatic beta-cell
response after intravenous glucose and a 2.5- to 4-fold increase in beta-cell
response after either intravenous tolbutamide or intravenous glucagon loads. In
conclusion, 1) mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene are common in Danish Caucasian
MODY patients, and 2) early stages in the pathogenesis of MODY3 caused by the
P447L mutation may be characterized by a hyperexcitability of beta-cells to
intravenous secretagogues.

PMID: 9075819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Diabetes. 1997 Apr;46(4):720-5.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene are a common cause of
maturity-onset diabetes of the young in the U.K.

Frayling TM(1), Bulamn MP, Ellard S, Appleton M, Dronsfield MJ, Mackie AD, Baird 
JD, Kaisaki PJ, Yamagata K, Bell GI, Bain SC, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Science, University of Exeter, Devon, U.K.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF1alpha) gene have recently 
been shown to cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). We have examined
15 U.K. MODY families for mutations in the coding region of the HNF-1alpha gene. 
Eight different mutations, three frameshift (P291fsinsC, P379fsdelCT, and
A443fsdelCA) and five missense mutations (P129T, R131W, R159W, P519L, and T620I),
were identified in eleven families (73%). The previously reported mutation
P291fsinsC was found in four pedigrees. A screen of a further 32 probands with
early onset (<40 years of age) NIDDM showed the mutation in two additional
families. This common mutation was present on at least three different
haplotypes, suggesting that its high frequency is due to recurrent mutation
rather than a founder effect. We have demonstrated that mutations in the
HNF-1alpha gene are a common cause of MODY in U.K. families and result in early
onset NIDDM with a progressive clinical course. Mutation-based genetic counseling
can now be considered for the majority of patients with MODY.

PMID: 9075818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Diabetes Metab. 1997 Mar;23 Suppl 2:34-7.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), MODY genes and non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus.

Velho G(1), Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-358, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France. gvelho@infobiogen.fr

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically and clinically
heterogeneous subtype of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM)
characterised by early onset, autosomal dominant inheritance and a primary defect
in insulin secretion. To date, three MODY genes have been identified on
chromosomes 20q [hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF-4 alpha)/MODY1], 7p
(glucokinase/MODY2) and 12q (HNF-1 alpha/MODY3). Mutations in glucokinase/MODY2
result in mild chronic hyperglycaemia due to reduced pancreatic beta-cell
responsiveness to glucose as well as decreased net accumulation of hepatic
glycogen and increased hepatic gluconeogenesis following meals. In contrast,
MODY1 and MODY3 are characterised by severe insulin secretory defects and major
hyperglycaemia associated with microvascular complications. The role of the three
known MODY genes in susceptibility to the more common late-onset from of NIDDM
remains uncertain. Genetic studies seem to exclude any function as major
susceptibility genes, although they may play a minor role in a polygenic context 
or a major role in particular populations.

PMID: 9162575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Diabetes. 1997 Mar;46(3):528-35.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in MODY and early-onset
NIDDM: evidence for a mutational hotspot in exon 4.

Kaisaki PJ(1), Menzel S, Lindner T, Oda N, Rjasanowski I, Sahm J, Meincke G,
Schulze J, Schmechel H, Petzold C, Ledermann HM, Sachse G, Boriraj VV, Menzel R, 
Kerner W, Turner RC, Yamagata K, Bell GI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Erratum in
    Diabetes 1997 Jul;46(7):1239.

We have recently shown that mutations in the gene encoding the transcription
factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha are the cause of one form of
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3). Here, we report the exon-intron
organization and partial sequence of the human HNF-1alpha gene. In addition, we
have screened the ten exons and flanking introns of this gene for mutations in a 
group of 25 unrelated white subjects from Germany who presented with NIDDM before
35 years of age and had a first-degree relative with NIDDM. Mutations were
identified in nine of these individuals, suggesting that mutations in the
HNF-1alpha gene are a common cause of diabetes in German subjects with
early-onset NIDDM and a family history of diabetes. Thus, screening for mutations
in this gene may be indicated in subjects with early-onset NIDDM. Interestingly, 
three of the nine mutations occurred at the same site in exon 4 with insertion of
a C in a polyC tract, centered around codon 290 (designated Pro291fsinsC),
thereby resulting in a frameshift during translation and premature termination.
Analyses of linked DNA polymorphisms in the HNF-1alpha gene indicated that the
Pro291fsinsC mutation was present on a different haplotype in each subject,
implying that the polyC tract represents a mutational hot spot. We have also
identified the mutation in the HNF-1alpha gene in the Jutland pedigree, one of
the original MODY pedigrees reported in the literature, as being a T-->G
substitution in codon 241, resulting in the replacement of a conserved Cys by Gly
(C241G). The information on the sequence of the HNF-1alpha gene and its promoter 
region will facilitate the search for mutations in other subjects and studies of 
the role of the gene in determining normal beta-cell functions.

PMID: 9032114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Mol Biol. 1997 Feb 21;266(2):231-45.

Analysis of the distribution of binding sites for a tissue-specific transcription
factor in the vertebrate genome.

Tronche F(1), Ringeisen F, Blumenfeld M, Yaniv M, Pontoglio M.

Author information: 
(1)Unite des virus Oncogenes, URA 1644 du CNRS, Departement des Biotechnologies, 
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) is a dimeric homeoprotein expressed in
hepatocytes and in a few other epithelial cells where it helps regulate the
expression of a specific subset of genes. In an attempt to identify novel target 
genes for HNF1 and to assess the distribution of its target sites within the
vertebrate genome, we performed a computer-assisted search within the available
databases using a weighted matrix. Several hundred potential target sequences
were identified within the GenBank and EMBL data banks. DNA binding assays
demonstrated that more than 95%, of the new sites tested (52 sites among 54)
bound HNF1. Surprisingly many HNF1 target sites were found in genes that are
transcribed in cell types that do not contain the protein. On the other hand
these sites are 2.5 to five times more frequent in hepatic genes than expected.
It seems that the presence of HNF1 sites in liver-specific genes was favoured,
but that no counter-selection occurred within the rest of the genome. HNF1
binding sites in liver genes are more often associated in clusters with sites for
other transcription factors and the enrichment is more pronounced in promoter
regions. We identified more than 100 liver specific genes that are potentially
regulated by HNF1.

PMID: 9047360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1997 Feb 15;338(2):220-6.

Identification of positive and negative regulatory elements of the human
cytochrome P4501A2 (CYP1A2) gene.

Chung I(1), Bresnick E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Toxicology, University of
Massachusetts Medical Center, Worcester, Massachusetts, 01655, USA.

We previously demonstrated an enhancer-like positive regulatory element within a 
259-bp sequence (-2352 to -2094 bp) of the human CYP1A2 gene in HepG2 cells.
Three protein binding sites were identified by DNase I footprinting analyses
within the 259-bp sequence: protected region A PRA; -2283 to -2243 bp), PRB
(-2218 to -2187 bp), and PRC (-2124 to -2098 bp) (I. Chung and E. Bresnick, Mol. 
Pharmacol. 47, 677-685, 1995). In the present study, the functional significance 
of those protected regions was examined. Transfection experiments with deletion
and substitution mutants defined the PRB and PRC as containing positive and
negative regulatory elements, respectively. Human breast carcinoma MCF-7 cells
were cotransfected with a hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) expression vector
and CYP1A2 promoter- or thymidine kinase promoter-luciferase reporter gene
constructs. HNF-1, which contributes to the liver specificity of genes, enhanced 
reporter gene activity in a PRC sequence-dependent manner. These results
suggested that PRC could exist bound to a repressor which was displaceable by
other transcription factors such as HNF-1. Results obtained by transfection of
HepG2 hepatoma cells with various PRB substitution mutant-luciferase gene fusion 
constructs indicated that the entire sequence of PRB was necessary for promoter
activity. Consequently, the regulation of CYP1A2 expression is very complex,
requiring a number of both positive and negative regulatory factors.

PMID: 9028875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Feb;16(2):207-14.

HNF1 alpha activates the rat UDP glucuronosyltransferase UGT2B1 gene promoter.

Hansen AJ(1), Lee YH, Gonzalez FJ, Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park,
South Australia.

The rat UDP glucuronosyltransferase UGT2B1 is expressed mainly in the liver where
it glucuronidates steroids and environmental toxins and carcinogens. A region
between -42 and -55 bp upstream from the UGT2B1 gene transcription start site was
previously identified as sharing sequence similarity with the hepatocyte nuclear 
factor 1 (HNF1) consensus binding site. In this study, the importance of this
region in the regulation of the UGT2B1 gene was confirmed by functional and DNA
binding assays. A minimal UGT2B1 gene promoter containing the putative HNF1
binding site was fused to the CAT reporter gene and transfected into HepG2 cells.
Only low levels of CAT activity were detected. This activity was increased
50-fold when an HNF1 alpha expression vector was co-transfected with the UGT2B1
promoter CAT construct but was not altered when a HNF1 beta expression vector was
used. A UGT2B1 promoter construct with the HNF1-like region deleted was not
activated by either co-transfected HNF1 expression vector. DNase 1 footprinting
and gel-shift analysis demonstrated that nuclear proteins present in both HepG2
cells and rat liver bind to the HNF1-like element. The presence of HNF1 alpha in 
these nuclear proteins that bind to the HNF1-like element was confirmed by
supershift analysis with antisera to HNF1 alpha. Specific binding of nuclear
proteins to the HNF1-like element was not seen in extracts from three cell lines 
derived from nonhepatic tissues. These data strongly suggest that the
liver-enriched factor HNF1 alpha binds to, and activates, the UGT2B1 gene
promoter

PMID: 9052741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Cell Growth Differ. 1997 Feb;8(2):165-78.

Inactivation of retinoblastoma family proteins by SV40 T antigen results in
creation of a hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor autocrine loop associated
with an epithelial-fibroblastoid conversion and invasiveness.

Martel C(1), Harper F, Cereghini S, Noë V, Mareel M, Crémisi C.

Author information: 
(1)Université René Descartes, Paris, France.

SV40 T antigen (LT) is an oncoprotein that inactivates nuclear regulators such as
retinoblastoma (RB) family proteins and p53. We recently reported that in
Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) epithelial cells the binding of LT to RB family 
proteins results in a massive apoptosis and a concomitant down-regulation of
c-myc. Here, we show that LT causes loss of epithelial differentiation and
induces invasiveness. MDCK cells expressing wild-type LT, but not mutants unable 
to bind RB, exhibit a fibroblast-like morphology, show a strong down-regulation
of the vHNF1 transcription factor and acquire invasive properties. The stable
retransformation of MDCK(LT) with a RB and/or c-myc-expressing vector restores
the expression of epithelial characteristics. Our data therefore suggest an
important role for RB and c-myc in modulating the epithelial phenotype both
during normal tissue development and in invasive processes. In addition, when
grown in collagen gels, the MDCK(LT) cells form branching tubules, and their
conditioned media produce the scattering of monolayer cultured MDCK cells. These 
last properties are reminiscent of those induced by hepatocyte growth
factor/scatter factor (HGF/SF). Moreover, the HGF/SF protein was detected by
Western blotting in the MDCK(LT)-conditioned medium. The production of HGF/SF is 
specifically induced by LT-RB inactivation, because Ras transformation of MDCK
cells fails to induce the production of this factor. These results demonstrate
that inactivation of RB family proteins in these cells is at the origin of a
HGF/SF autocrine loop.

PMID: 9040938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Mol Biol. 1997 Jan 10;265(1):20-9.

The bifunctional protein DCoH modulates interactions of the homeodomain
transcription factor HNF1 with nucleic acids.

Rhee KH(1), Stier G, Becker PB, Suck D, Sandaltzopoulos R.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Programme, EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF1) is a homeodomain transcription factor that
binds DNA as a dimer. HNF1 dimers associate with two molecules of DCoH, a
bifunctional protein that also has an enzymatic function in the
tetrahydrobiopterin regeneration, to form stable heterotetramers also capable of 
DNA binding. Employing purified, recombinant HNF1, HNF1/DCoH heterotetramers and 
DCoH homotetramers we investigated whether DCoH affects interactions of HNF1 with
nucleic acids. Although we detected no direct binding of DCoH to DNA or RNA, DCoH
stabilized HNF1/DNA complexes and promoted interactions with sub-optimal DNA
target sequences such as the human alpha1-antitrypsin TATA box region.
Importantly, we also observed interactions of HNF1 with RNA, but these
interactions were completely abolished when HNF1 was complexed with DCoH.
Interestingly, DCoH retains its enzymatic activity while complexed with HNF1. Our
results document intermolecular regulation of HNF1 binding to nucleic acids by
DCoH.

PMID: 8995521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. J Biochem. 1997 Jan;121(1):172-7.

Suppressed expression of the urea cycle enzyme genes in the liver of
carnitine-deficient juvenile visceral steatosis (JVS) mice in infancy and during 
starvation in adulthood.

Tomomura M(1), Tomomura A, Musa DA, Horiuchi M, Takiguchi M, Mori M, Saheki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Kagoshima University.

Systemic carnitine-deficient juvenile visceral steatosis (JVS) mice exhibit
decreased expression of some liver-selective genes including those for the urea
cycle enzymes during the infantile period. At 25 days, carbamoylphosphate
synthetase (CPS) mRNA level was remarkably low in the liver of JVS mice, and the 
HNF-4 and C/EBP-alpha mRNA contents were also reduced. HNF-3 alpha and C/EBP-beta
mRNAs were slightly higher in the liver of JVS mice, and HNF-1 mRNA remained
normal. These results, together with the developmental changes of these
transcription factor mRNA levels, suggest that HNF-4 and C/EBP-alpha are involved
in the suppression of CPS expression. If JVS mice survived the crisis at 4-5
weeks, their body weight caught up with that of control mice around 7 weeks. The 
steady-state levels of CPS and argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS) mRNAs in the
liver of JVS mice were normalized by no later than 8 weeks. Starvation for 48 h
caused an increase of about twofold in CPS and ASS mRNA levels in the liver of
control mice, while the same treatment failed to increase their levels in the
liver of JVS mice. The starvation similarly caused increases in HNF-4 and
C/EBP-beta mRNA levels in the liver of both control and JVS mice, but the
increases were significantly less in JVS mice than in control mice. Thus, the
lack of induction of CPS and ASS mRNAs during development and under starvation in
JVS mice correlated with the lower induction of HNF-4 and C/EBP-alpha mRNAs, and 
of HNF-4 and C/ EBP-beta mRNAs, respectively. Furthermore, all these changes
seemed to correlate with the presence of fatty liver and the high serum free
fatty acid levels, suggesting that disturbance of fatty acid metabolism affects
nitrogen metabolism at least in part via altered gene expression of transcription
factors such as HNF-4, C/EBP-alpha, and C/EBP-beta.

PMID: 9058209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):458-60.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha gene in maturity-onset diabetes
of the young (MODY1)

Yamagata K(1), Furuta H, Oda N, Kaisaki PJ, Menzel S, Cox NJ, Fajans SS,
Signorini S, Stoffel M, Bell GI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The University of Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):407-8.

The disease maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically
heterogeneous monogenic form of non-insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes mellitus 
(NIDDM), characterized by early onset, usually before 25 years of age and often
in adolescence or childhood, and by autosomal dominant inheritance. It has been
estimated that 2-5% of patients with NIDDM may have this form of diabetes
mellitus. Clinical studies have shown that prediabetic MODY subjects have normal 
insulin sensitivity but suffer from a defect in glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion, suggesting that pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction rather than insulin
resistance is the primary defect in this disorder. Linkage studies have localized
the genes that are mutated in MODY on human chromosomes 20 (MODY1), 7 (MODY2) and
12 (MODY3), with MODY2 and MODY3 being allelic with the genes encoding
glucokinase, a key regulator of insulin secretion, and hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha), a transcription factor involved in tissue-specific
regulation of liver genes but also expressed in pancreatic islets, insulinoma
cells and other tissues. Here we show that MODY1 is the gene encoding HNF-4alpha 
(gene symbol, TCF14), a member of the steroid/thyroid hormone receptor
superfamily and an upstream regulator of HNF-1alpha expression.

PMID: 8945471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):455-8.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in maturity-onset diabetes
of the young (MODY3)

Yamagata K(1), Oda N, Kaisaki PJ, Menzel S, Furuta H, Vaxillaire M, Southam L,
Cox RD, Lathrop GM, Boriraj VV, Chen X, Cox NJ, Oda Y, Yano H, Le Beau MM, Yamada
S, Nishigori H, Takeda J, Fajans SS, Hattersley AT, Iwasaki N, Hansen T, Pedersen
O, Polonsky KS, Bell GI, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The University of Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):407-8.

The disease non-insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) is
characterized by abnormally high blood glucose resulting from a relative
deficiency of insulin. It affects about 2% of the world's population and
treatment of diabetes and its complications are an increasing health-care burden.
Genetic factors are important in the aetiology of NIDDM, and linkage studies are 
starting to localize some of the genes that influence the development of this
disorder. Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), a single-gene disorder
responsible for 2-5% of NIDDM, is characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance
and an age of onset of 25 years or younger. MODY genes have been localized to
chromosomes 7, 12 and 20 (refs 5, 7, 8) and clinical studies indicate that
mutations in these genes are associated with abnormal patterns of
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. The gene on chromosome 7 (MODY2) encodes
the glycolytic enzyme glucokinases which plays a key role in generating the
metabolic signal for insulin secretion and in integrating hepatic glucose uptake.
Here we show that subjects with the MODY3-form of NIDDM have mutations in the
gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha, which is encoded by
the gene TCF1). HNF-1alpha is a transcription factor that helps in the
tissue-specific regulation of the expression of several liver genes and also
functions as a weak transactivator of the rat insulin-I gene.

PMID: 8945470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):407-8.

Transcribing diabetes.

Todd JA.

Comment on
    Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):455-8.
    Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):458-60.

PMID: 8945461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. J Virol. 1996 Dec;70(12):8571-83.

The HNF1/HNF4-dependent We2 element of woodchuck hepatitis virus controls viral
replication and can activate the N-myc2 promoter.

Fourel G(1), Ringeisen F, Flajolet M, Tronche F, Pontoglio M, Tiollais P, Buendia
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique, INSERM U163, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, France.

Transcriptional activation of myc family proto-oncogenes through the insertion of
viral sequences is the predominant mechanism by which woodchuck hepatitis virus
(WHV) induces liver tumors in chronically infected animals. The main target is
N-myc2, a functional retroposon of the N-myc gene, but c-myc and N-myc are also
marginally involved. Here we identify a major, liver-specific regulatory element 
in the WHV genome (We2) which efficiently activates the N-myc2 promoter in
cultured hepatoma cells. In the context of the episomal viral genome, We2 governs
the production of pregenomic RNA and thus plays a central role in the control of 
viral replication. We2 activity is primarily controlled by the liver-enriched
HNF1 and HNF4 transcription factors, although NF1 and Oct proteins were also
shown to bind in a central region. The expression of HNF1 and HNF4 appears to be 
maintained in woodchuck tumors. Thus, We2 is a prime candidate for controlling
myc gene cis activation during WHV-induced hepatocarcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC190950
PMID: 8970982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. J Virol. 1996 Dec;70(12):8318-31.

Type, prevalence, and significance of core promoter/enhancer II mutations in
hepatitis B viruses from immunosuppressed patients with severe liver disease.

Günther S(1), Piwon N, Iwanska A, Schilling R, Meisel H, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für Experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der
Universität Hamburg, Federal Republic of Germany.

Little is known about the functional significance of hepatitis B virus (HBV)
sequence heterogeneity. Here we analyzed the type, frequency, and function of
mutations in the core promoter/enhancer II region of HBV in immunosuppressed
patients. The major HBV population in immunosuppressed patients with severe liver
disease had deletions, insertions, and/or base changes in this region. Such
mutations were not found in immunosuppressed patients with mild disease. Except
for two mutations, all created a hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) binding site 
or a potential HNF3 binding site. Occasionally, known binding sites for C/EBP and
HNF4 were additionally duplicated. Eleven mutated core promoter prototype
sequences were functionally tested in the context of a wild-type genome by
transfection in Huh7 cells. Despite the diversity of mutations tested, all
decreased steady-state levels of pre-C mRNA drastically and increased those of
the C mRNA/ pregenomic RNA. This correlated with reduced levels of secreted
hepatitis B e antigen and increased intracellular levels of core and Pol proteins
and replicative HBV DNA intermediates. The levels of secreted HBV DNA-containing 
particles were also increased although most of the mutations reduced the levels
of pre-S/S mRNA and pre-S1, and pre-S2 proteins as well as secretion of hepatitis
B surface antigen. These data reveal a novel class of HBV variants with HNF1
binding sites in the core promoter which are characterized by a defect in
hepatitis B e antigen expression, enhanced replication, and altered protein
levels, all probably mediated by altered transcription factor binding. The
phenotype of these variants and their prevalence only in immunosuppressed
patients with severe liver disease may indicate that they play a role in
pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC190919
PMID: 8970951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Exp Cell Res. 1996 Nov 25;229(1):27-34.

Endoderm-specific gene expression in embryonic stem cells differentiated to
embryoid bodies.

Abe K(1), Niwa H, Iwase K, Takiguchi M, Mori M, Abé SI, Abe K, Yamamura KI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Department of Developmental
Genetics, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, Japan.

Mouse embryonic stem cells can differentiate into various cell types within cell 
aggregates called embryoid bodies (EBs). This structure consists of ectodermal,
mesodermal, and endodermal tissues, which resemble the embryo of egg-cylinder
stage. After 8-10 days in culture, about half of the EBs expand into large cystic
structures homologous to visceral yolk sac of postimplantation embryos. To study 
endoderm differentiation at molecular level, we examined expression of endoderm
marker genes during the processes of EB development. alpha-Fetoprotein (AFP) and 
transthyretin (TTR) transcripts increased at the stage when embryoid bodies began
to form yolk-sac-like structures and were expressed strongly thereafter.
Expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4, a variant form of HNF1 (also
called HNF1beta), and HNF3beta started before the onset of AFP and TTR
expression. HNF1 (also called HNF1alpha) expression began a few days after the
onset of the expression of the transcription factors described above. Serum
albumin (ALB) transcript was only found in late large cystic EBs. Also, AFP gene 
expression preceded ALB gene expression. These results suggest that the patterns 
of endoderm gene expression during EB development reflect the order found during 
mouse development in vivo, and EB formation may serve as an in vitro system to
study the differentiation process.

PMID: 8940246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Hepatol. 1996 Oct;25(4):445-53.

Expression ratio of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 to variant hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 in differentiation of hepatocellular carcinoma and hepatoblastoma.

Ninomiya T(1), Hayashi Y, Saijoh K, Ohta K, Yoon S, Nakabayashi H, Tamaoki T,
Kasuga M, Itoh H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology, Kobe University School of Medicine, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Liver-specific protein genes have multiple cis-/trans-acting
elements, but those accountable for hepatocytic differentiation are unclear. An
AT-rich core sequence (AT motif) is essential as a cis-acting element for the
hepatic transcription. Homologous proteins hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1)
and variant HNF-1 (vHNF-1) bind to this motif. The ratio of HNF-1 to vHNF-1 mRNA 
was examined in various liver tissues with respect to their differentiation.
METHODS: The competitive reverse transcriptional polymerase chain reaction was
employed to amplify HNF-1 and vHNF-1 mRNA simultaneously and to examine their
expression ratio in total RNA extracted from frozen liver tissues of 37 patients 
with hepatocellular carcinoma, five patients with hepatoblastoma, and 15
non-neoplastic liver tissues.
RESULTS: The ratio of HNF-1 to vHNF-1 mRNA was higher in well-differentiated
cases than in poorly-differentiated and undifferentiated cases, except that one
poorly-differentiated hepatoblastoma displayed a high ratio. Non-neoplastic liver
tissues had low ratios similar to poorly-differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma,
the reason for which remained unknown. However, chronic hepatitis and liver
cirrhosis cases also demonstrated low ratios, and hence degenerative changes
themselves displayed no obvious influence on such ratios. Thus, the gene
expression of HNF-1 and vHNF-1 seemed to be differentially regulated in
neoplastic and non-neoplastic hepatocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggested that the ratio of HNF-1 to vHNF-1 mRNA
correlated with histological differentiation of HCC and hepatoblastoma.

PMID: 8912143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Trends Genet. 1996 Aug;12(8):323.

It's a knockout!

Anagnostopoulos AV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
anna@gdb.org

PMID: 8783944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Biochemistry. 1996 Jul 16;35(28):9060-8.

Regulation of human C-reactive protein gene expression by two synergistic IL-6
responsive elements.

Li SP(1), Goldman ND.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergenic Products and Parasitology, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Rockville, Maryland
20852-1448, USA.

To study the mechanism of interleukin-6 (IL-6) induction of human C-reactive
protein (CRP) gene expression, we have utilized a human hepatoma (PLC/PRF/5) cell
culture system to analyze the trans-acting factors which bind to the 300 bp
5'-flanking region of human CRP gene. In vitro gel mobility shift analyses and
methylation interference assays demonstrated that NFIL-6 alpha interacted with
two IL-6 responsive elements, and HNF-1 alpha and HNF-3/Octamer-like factors
interacted with the downstream IL-6 responsive element in the human CRP promoter.
In vivo functional analysis by transient transfection of plasmid constructs
containing site-specific mutations in one or two IL-6 responsive elements in the 
CRP promoter fused to a reporter gene, chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT), 
demonstrated that the binding of NFIL-6 alpha to two IL-6 responsive elements
resulted in synergistic induction of the gene. When HNF-1 alpha or
HNF-3/Octamer-like factors were independently bound to their corresponding sites,
they had either a positive or negative effect, respectively, on IL-6 inducible
transcriptional activity.

PMID: 8703909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. J Virol. 1996 Jul;70(7):4714-23.

Cellular factors controlling the activity of woodchuck hepatitis virus enhancer
II.

Ueda K(1), Wei Y, Ganem D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Howard Medical Institute,
University of California Medical Center, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHV) efficiently induces hepatocellular carcinoma in
chronically infected hosts. A key step in hepatocarcinogenesis by WHV is
insertional activation of the cellular N-myc gene by integrated viral DNA. WHV
enhancer II (En II) is the major cis-acting element involved in this activation. 
Here we characterize this viral enhancer element and define the cellular factors 
involved in its activity. WHV En II activity is strongly liver specific and maps 
to an 88-nucleotide DNA segment (nucleotides 1772 to 1859) located 5' to the
pregenomic RNA start site. Genetic analyses and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays indicate that the enhancer contains three subregions important to its
activity. The core elements of the enhancer are recognition sites for the
liver-enriched factors HNF1 and HNF4; together, these signals account for the
bulk of En II activity as well as its strong liver specificity. Multimerization
of either recognition site produced strong activity even in the absence of other 
En II sequences. 5' to these elements is a binding site for the ubiquitous Oct-1 
transcription factor, which further augments enhancer activity ca. twofold.

PMCID: PMC190408
PMID: 8676498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. FEBS Lett. 1996 Jun 24;389(1):35-9.

Structure and function of PCD/DCoH, an enzyme with regulatory properties.

Suck D(1), Ficner R.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural Biology Programme,
Heidelberg, Germany.

The bifunctional protein PCD/DCoH is both an enzyme involved in the phenylalanine
hydroxylation system and a transcription coactivator forming a 2:2
heterotetrameric complex with the nuclear transcription factor HNF1. The
discovery of a bacterial homologue and the expression pattern during Xenopus
embryogenesis suggest a regulatory function not only restricted to HNF1. The
crystal structures of the tetrameric rat and the dimeric bacterial PCD/DCoH have 
led to the proposal of substrate and HNF1 binding sites. The saddle-shaped
beta-sheet surfaces of the DCoH dimers likely represent binding sites for as yet 
unknown macromolecular interaction partners. Possible mechanisms for DCoH-induced
transcriptional regulation are discussed in the light of the three-dimensional
structures.

PMID: 8682201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Jun 1;238(2):400-9.

trans-Acting factors, detoxication enzymes and hepatitis B virus replication in a
novel set of human hepatoma cell lines.

Le Jossic C(1), Glaise D, Corcos L, Diot C, Dezier JF, Fautrel A,
Guguen-Guillouzo C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U49, Hôpital Pontchaillou, Rennes, France.

A panel of four novel human hepatoma cell lines was isolated from a single tumor 
from a male individual. BC1, B16 and B16A2 lines were well differentiated, while 
cells of the B9 line were only poorly differentiated, being essentially negative 
for the functions analyzed. These cell lines have been surveyed for expression of
a large set of plasma proteins, accumulation of liver-specific mRNAs and
DNA-binding activity of ubiquitous and liver-enriched transcription factors. BC1 
cells expressed the highest levels of albumin mRNA, whereas B16 and B16A2 cells
accumulated the largest amounts of haptoglobin mRNA. In addition, B16 and B16A2
cells were unique in that they expressed CYP2E1 mRNA, a species absent from the
available human liver cells, including HepG2 hepatoma cells, and
3-methylcholanthrene-inducible CYP1A2 mRNA. The activities of genes encoding
transcription factors were evidenced in all four cell lines which expressed mRNAs
for nuclear factor interleukin 6 and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF) together
with the DNA-binding activity of NFY and AP1 nuclear proteins. Strikingly, HNF-1 
and HNF-4-like DNA-binding activities were restricted to BC1, B16 and B16A2
cells, supporting the idea of the potential role of these (or closely related)
factors in the maintenance and/or in the establishment of the differentiated
phenotype. B9 cells contained variant HNF1-like DNA-binding activity, similar to 
dedifferentiated rat hepatoma cells of the H5 line. CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein and HNF-3-like activities were found in all cell lines, although at a
lower level and/or activity in B9 cells. Finally, transfection experiments of
plasmids containing the whole hepatitis-B virus genome demonstrated that B16
cells, but not B9 cells, were able to support hepatitis-B virus replication and
virion production, in agreement with the notion that HNF-1 activity is necessary 
for viral replication. We believe that the specific complement of transcription
factors expressed in the differentiated BC1, B16 and B16A2 cells, and in the
poorly differentiated B9 cells, will allow studies on the regulation of hepatic
gene expression in these human lines, and will also aid the analysis of
xenobiotic metabolism and the biology of hepatitis-B virus replication.

PMID: 8681951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 May;16(5):1936-45.

Role of the liver-enriched transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 in
transcriptional regulation of the factor V111 gene.

McGlynn LK(1), Mueller CR, Begbie M, Notley CR, Lillicrap D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

Coagulation factor VIII is an essential cofactor required for normal hemostatic
function. A deficiency in factor VIII results in the bleeding disorder hemophilia
A. Despite the fact that the factor VIII gene was cloned a decade ago, the
mechanisms which control its transcription remain unresolved. In our studies, we 
have characterized 12 protein binding sites within the factor VIII promoter by
DNase I protection assays performed with rat liver nuclear extracts. Three of
these elements (sites 1 to 3) are situated within the 5' untranslated region of
the gene, while three other sites (sites 4 to 6) lie within the first 100 bp
upstream of the transcriptional start site. We have identified an additional site
(site 7) approximately 300 bp upstream from site 6, as well as a cluster of five 
sites in a 250-bp region which terminates approximately 1 kb from the
transcriptional start site. Seven of these binding sites (sites 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9,
and 10) bind members of the C/EBP family of transcription factors. DBP also binds
to five of these sites (sites 3, 4, 6, 7, and 9). Utilizing transient
transfection studies in HepG2 cells, we have shown that deletion of the factor
VIII promoter sequences distal to nucleotide -44 results in a significant but
small increase in promoter activity. The activity of each of the various 5'
deletion constructs is significantly enhanced by cotransfection of C/EBPalpha and
D-site-binding protein expression plasmids, while cotransfection of both
C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta plasmids resulted in a further enhancement of
transactivation. These studies also provide evidence of a repressor element
located between nucleotides -740 and -1002. Since the minimal promoter sequence
(-44 to +148) maintains the transcriptional activity of the full-length promoter 
sequence, we proceeded to identify additional factors binding to sites 1 to 4.
Competition studies revealed that a ubiquitous transcription factor, NF-Y, binds 
to site 4, while the liver-enriched transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear
factor I (HNF-1) binds to site 1. Mutation analysis of the minimal promoter
demonstrated that HNF-1 is critical for activating transcription of the factor
VIII gene in vitro. Our results also suggest that the multiple upstream elements 
that we have identified may act as a backup regulatory region in the event of
disruption of the HNF-1 element in the 5' untranslated region.

PMCID: PMC231181
PMID: 8628260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Cancer Lett. 1996 Mar 29;101(2):205-10.

Human renal cell carcinogenesis is accompanied by a coordinate loss of the tissue
specific transcription factors HNF4 alpha and HNF1 alpha.

Sel S(1), Ebert T, Ryffel GU, Drewes T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Germany.

Human renal cell carcinogenesis is usually accompanied by dedifferentiation
processes including the loss of expression of tissue specifically expressed
genes. Based on the hypothesis that these dedifferentiation processes might be
attributed to a functional change in tissue specific transcription factors, we
have analyzed the expression and function of the tissue specific transcription
factor HNF4 alpha in human renal cell carcinomas. By Western blot analysis and
gel retardation assay using HNF4 alpha specific antibodies, we observed that in
most cases the amount as well as the binding activity of HNF4 is reduced in the
tumor samples compared to the corresponding normal tissues. Furthermore, we found
a clear correlation between the HNF4 alpha binding activity and the amount of
another transcription factor (HNF1 alpha), which is thought to be
transcriptionally activated by HNF4 alpha. We therefore speculate that disruption
of the HNF4 alpha/HNF1 alpha pathway of kidney specific gene expression might be 
an important molecular mechanism in renal cell carcinogenesis.

PMID: 8620471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Carcinogenesis. 1996 Mar;17(3):609-12.

Expression of hepatocyte-enriched nuclear transcription factors in mouse liver
tumours.

Kalkuhl A(1), Kaestner K, Buchmann A, Schwarz M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, University of Tübingen, Germany.

Preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions in rodent liver show alterations in the
expression of various enzymes which can be used for their identification. To
address the question whether these enzymatic alterations result from specific
changes in the levels of hepatocyte-enriched nuclear factors (HNF), we analysed
the mRNA levels of six different HNFs (HNF-1alpha, beta, HNF-3alpha, beta, gamma,
and HNF-4) by RNase protection assay in chemically induced liver tumours and
corresponding normal liver tissue from mice of three different strains. When
compared with the normal liver tissue, HNF-1beta, HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta showed
unchanged expression levels in the various liver tumours, which HNF-1alpha and
HNF-4 mRNAs were lowered by 20-30%, and HNF-3gamma mRNA was increased by 50%.
There were no significant differences in HNF-expression between tumours
harbouring point mutations at codon 61 of the Ha-ras protooncogene and tumours
without detectable Ha-ras mutations.

PMID: 8631153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Mar;16(3):778-91.

Positive regulation of the vHNF1 promoter by the orphan receptors COUP-TF1/Ear3
and COUP-TFII/Arp1.

Power SC(1), Cereghini S.

Author information: 
(1)URA Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

vHNF1 (also termed HNF1 beta) is a member of the hepatocyte nuclear fa ctor 1
(HNF1; also termed HNF1 alpha) family of homeodomain-containing transcription
factors that interact with a sequence motif found in the regulatory regions of a 
large number of genes expressed mainly in the liver. It has been suggested that
vHNF1 plays a role in early differentiation of specialized epithelia of several
endoderm- and mesoderm-derived organs, with HNF1 playing a role in later stages. 
In support of this idea, expression of vHNF1 but not HNF1 is induced upon
treatment of the embryonal carcinoma cell line F9 with retinoic acid. We have
cloned and analyzed the vHNF1 promoter to gain a better understanding of the
regulation of vHNF1 expression and how it relates to the expression of HNF1. We
have identified five sites of DNA-protein interaction within the first 260 bp
upstream of the transcription start site, which involve at least three different 
families of transcription factors. Two sites, a distal DR-1 motif and a proximal 
octamer motif, are the most important for promoter activity. The DR-1 motif
interacts with several members of the steroid hormone receptor superfamily
including HNF4, COUP-TFI/Ear3, COUP-TFII/Arp1, and RAR alpha/RXR alpha
heterodimers. The vHNF1 promoter is transactivated by COUP-TFI/Ear3 and
COUP-TFII/Arp1 and, unlike the HNF1 promoter, is virtually unaffected by HNF4.
Interestingly, the proximal octamer site and not the DR-1 site is required for
COUP-TFI/Ear3 and COUP-TFII/Arp1 transactivation of the vHNF1 promoter.
COUP-TFI/Ear3 does not bind directly to this proximal octamer site. We present
evidence of an interaction between COUP-TFI/Ear3 and the octamer-binding proteins
in vitro and in the cell, suggesting that COUP-TFI and COUP-TFII activate the
vHNF1 promoter via an indirect mechanism.

PMCID: PMC231058
PMID: 8622679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Mar 1;236(2):373-82.

Motifs resembling hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 and activator protein 3 mediate the
tissue specificity of the human plasminogen gene.

Meroni G(1), Buraggi G, Mantovani R, Taramelli R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e di Biologia dei Microrganismi, Milan, Italy.

Plasminogen is one of the key elements in the fibrinolytic process. Like most of 
the gene products that participate in such reactions and which interact with
plasminogen, the site of its synthesis is mainly confined to the hepatocyte.
Plasminogen RNA has additionally been detected in kidney and very low amounts
also in testes. Deletional analysis has indicated that two 5' sequences located
within 2.5 kb of the first ATG are responsible for the transcriptional activation
and the tissue specificity of the expression of the gene. By DNase protection and
gel mobility shift assays with HepG2 nuclear extracts, the two sequences were
localized and found to be the recognition sites for the widely known hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1) a trans-acting factor, and a nuclear factor like
activator protein 3 (AP-3). The first one lies in a rather unusual position, i.e.
within the 5'-untranslated region. The latter is located further upstream in a
region between --2200 and --2100 from the plasminogen mRNA cap site. Moreover,
site-directed mutagenesis coupled by functional experiments in HepG2 cells has
demonstrated a synergism between these two positively acting elements in
controlling the transcription of the human plasminogen gene.

PMID: 8612605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Biol Chem. 1996 Feb 23;271(8):4528-38.

Tissue-specific expression of the nonneuronal promoter of the aromatic L-amino
acid decarboxylase gene is regulated by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1.

Aguanno A(1), Afar R, Albert VR.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Institute of Molecular Biology, Nutley, New Jersey 07110, USA.

The rat aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) gene contains alternative
promoters which direct expression of neuronal and nonneuronal mRNAs that differ
only in their 5'-untranslated regions (UTRs). We have analyzed the expression of 
the nonneuronal promoter of the rat AADC gene in the kidney epithelial cell line 
LLC-PK1 and in cells which do not express the nonneuronal form of AADC by
transient transfection. These studies revealed that the first 1.1 kilobases of
the nonneuronal promoter, including the nonneuronal-specific 5'-UTR (Exon 1),
contains sufficient information to direct tissue-specific expression. Serial
deletions of this promoter localized the cis-active element to a region between
-52 and -28 base pairs upstream of the nonneuronal transcription start site. An
A/T-rich sequence, within this region which we have termed KL-1, was found to
bind a kidney and liver-specific factor by DNase footprint analysis and was
capable of directing tissue-specific expression from a heterologous promoter.
Moreover, when the KL-1 sequence was mutated in the context of the entire
promoter sequence, all transcriptional activity was abolished. DNA sequence
comparison revealed that the KL-1 fragment is highly homologous to the binding
site for hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1). Mobility shift studies utilizing an
antibody to HNF-1 demonstrated binding of HNF-1 to the KL-1 fragment and
cotransfection of HNF-1 cDNA into cells which do not express the nonneuronal form
of AADC resulted in activation of transfected AADC nonneuronal promoter
constructs. These results strongly suggest that the transcription factor which
regulates the tissue-specific expression of the nonneuronal form of AADC mRNA is 
HNF-1.

PMID: 8626808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Cell. 1996 Feb 23;84(4):575-85.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 inactivation results in hepatic dysfunction,
phenylketonuria, and renal Fanconi syndrome.

Pontoglio M(1), Barra J, Hadchouel M, Doyen A, Kress C, Bach JP, Babinet C, Yaniv
M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, Département des Biotechnologies, InstitutPasteur,
Paris, France.

HNF1 is a transcriptional activator of many hepatic genes including albumin,
alpha1-antitrypsin, and alpha- and beta-fibrinogen. It is related to the homeobox
gene family and is predominantly expressed in liver and kidney. Mice lacking HNF1
fail to thrive and die around weaning after a progressive wasting syndrome with a
marked liver enlargement. The transcription rate of genes like albumin and
alpha1-antitrypsin is reduced, while the gene coding for phenylalanine
hydroxylase is totally silent, giving rise to phenylketonuria. Mutant mice also
suffer from severe Fanconi syndrome caused by renal proximal tubular dysfunction.
The resulting massive urinary glucose loss leads to energy and water wasting.
HNF1-deficient mice may provide a model for human renal Fanconi syndrome.

PMID: 8598044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. FASEB J. 1996 Feb;10(2):267-82.

Liver-enriched transcription factors and hepatocyte differentiation.

Cereghini S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Liver-specific gene expression in adult hepatocytes relies on four families of
evolutionary conserved transcription factors that are liver-enriched but not
restricted to this tissue. These factors function in unique combinations, often
synergistically, to stimulate cell-specific transcription. Each family is
composed of several members displaying similar, if not identical, DNA recognition
properties and sharing structural homology in their DNA binding domains. The
homo- and heterodimerization between members of a particular transcription factor
family adds an additional level of complexity in gene regulation. The
consequences of inactivating different family members in the mouse by homologous 
recombination, together with recent studies of their regulation, suggest a model 
for liver differentiation involving a regulatory network rather than a completely
hierarchical genetic circuitry. These studies also indicate that individual
regulators appear to serve multiple developmental functions. Their possible role 
in the progression through different stages of hepatic cell commitment and
differentiation is discussed.

PMID: 8641560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. J Biol Chem. 1995 Nov 24;270(47):28342-9.

Characterization of the 5'-flanking region of the gene for the alpha chain of
human fibrinogen.

Hu CH(1), Harris JE, Davie EW, Chung DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle 98195-7350, USA.

The 5'-flanking region of the gene coding for the alpha chain of human fibrinogen
was isolated, sequenced, and characterized. The principal site of transcription
initiation was determined by primer extension analysis and the RNase protection
assay and shown to be at an adenine residue located 55 nucleotides upstream from 
the initiator methionine codon, or 13,399 nucleotides down-stream from the
polyadenylation site of the gene coding for the gamma chain. Transient expression
of constructs containing sequentially deleted 5'-flanking sequences of the alpha 
chain gene fused to the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene showed
that the promoter was liver-specific and inducible by interleukin 6 (IL-6). The
shortest DNA fragment with significant promoter activity and full response to
IL-6 stimulation encompassed the region from -217 to +1 base pairs (bp). Although
six potential IL-6 responsive sequences homologous to the type II IL-6 responsive
element were present, a single sequence of CTGGGA localized from -122 to -127 bp 
was shown to be a functional element in IL-6 induction. A hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 (HNF-1) binding site, present from -47 to -59 bp, in combination with
other upstream elements, was essential for liver-specific expression of the gene.
A functional CCAAT/enhancer binding protein site (C/EBP, -134 to -142 bp) was
also identified within 217 bp from the transcription initiation site. An
additional positive element (-1393 to -1133 bp) and a negative element (-1133 to 
-749 bp) were also found in the upstream region of the alpha-fibrinogen gene.

PMID: 7499335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mol Endocrinol. 1995 Nov;9(11):1488-99.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha activates promoter 1 of the human insulin-like 
growth factor I gene via two distinct binding sites.

Nolten LA(1), Steenbergh PH, Sussenbach JS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

Expression of the human insulin-like growth factor I (hIGF-I) gene is regulated
in a tissue- and developmental stage-specific manner. The hIGF-I gene has two
promoters, P1 and P2. P1 is the more active promoter by far in adult liver, the
main endocrine source of IGF-I. Recently, we described the involvement of the
CAAT/enhancer binding protein family of liver-enriched transcription factors in
the regulation of the expression of IGF-I in adult liver. In this study we report
on the role of another family of liver-enriched transcription factors in the
regulation of IGF-I expression. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha)
is shown to transactivate IGF-I P1 in transient transfection experiments
performed in Hep3B cells. Bandshift experiments reveal that two distinct regions 
in P1, located 119 and 282 nucleotides upstream of the transcription start site, 
can bind HNF-1 alpha with relatively high affinity. Both HNF-1-binding sites are 
evolutionary well conserved, emphasizing the importance of HNF-1 in the
regulation of the IGF-I gene expression. Mutational analysis of the binding sites
indicates that both sites are essential for maximal stimulation of P1 by HNF-1
alpha, although the largest contribution stems from the more downstream of the
two HNF-1-binding sites. The latter site completely overlaps the previously
described CAAT/enhancer binding protein binding site in P1. The colocalization of
the binding sites, to which binding of the respective factors seems to be
mutually exclusive, is suggestive of a regulatory hotspot to which members of
different transcription factor families may bind depending on developmental stage
and nutritional status.

PMID: 8584026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Virology. 1995 Oct 20;213(1):231-40.

Interplay between a new HNF3 and the HNF1 transcriptional factors in the duck
hepatitis B virus enhancer.

Crescenzo-Chaigne B(1), Pillot J, Lilienbaum A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

We identified a new hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) binding site in the DHBV
enhancer. This site is close to the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) binding
site, responsible for most of the enhancing activity. No differences in the
migrating properties were found between this new site and the two other HNF3
sites recently described in this enhancer. Factor HNF1 strongly inhibits binding 
of the HNF3 factor in this newly characterized site. The two factors were never
detected simultaneously on the DNA fragment, even when their respective
concentrations were modified. Competition persisted after enlarging by 5 and 10
nucleotides the space between the two sites. On the contrary, when the HNF3
binding site was changed into the perfect consensus site, binding of the HNF3
factor was not inhibited any longer by HNF1 and a supershift, corresponding to
the binding of both factors, was observed. Thus a limited mismatching appears to 
modulate the interaction between transcriptional proteins and DNA and allows a
second transcriptional protein to interplay with the former one.

PMID: 7483267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Biol Chem. 1995 Sep 15;270(37):21833-8.

Role of LFB3 in cell-specific cAMP induction of the urokinase-type plasminogen
activator gene.

Marksitzer R(1), Stief A, Menoud PA, Nagamine Y.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

In previous work we suggested that a kidney-specific transcription factor LFB3
cooperates with cAMP-response element (CRE)-binding proteins within a cAMP
regulatory unit comprised of three protein-binding domains and located 3.4
kilobase pairs upstream of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator (uPA) gene in
LLC-PK1 cells (Menoud, P.-A., Matthies, R., Hofsteenge, J., and Nagamine, Y.
(1993) Nucleic Acids Res. 21, 1845-1852). The two domains contain a CRE-like
sequence, and the third domain is recognized by LFB3. The absolute requirement of
LFB3 as well as the cooperation among the three domains for cAMP regulation were 
confirmed by transient transfection assays in F9 teratocarcinoma cells, in which 
the level of LFB3 was negligible. Suspecting a possible feedback regulation of
LFB3 mRNA expression during cAMP-dependent uPA gene induction in LLC-PK1 cells,
we measured LFB3 mRNA levels after cAMP treatment and found a strong reduction.
This reduction was not due to a change in template activity of the LFB3 gene
because run-on transcription showed no significant change in LFB3 gene
transcription. RNA synthesis inhibitor-chase experiments indicated that the
down-regulation was post-transcriptional. Interestingly, when the inhibitor was
added at the same time as cAMP, the cAMP-induced decrease in LFB3 mRNA levels was
abrogated, suggesting that ongoing RNA synthesis is required for the decrease.
Similar effects on LFB3 mRNA metabolism were observed with all agents that induce
uPA mRNA in LLC-PK1 cells, including 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate,
okadaic acid, colchicine, and cytochalasin. We discuss the significance of this
regulation in uPA gene expression.

PMID: 7665606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Bull Cancer. 1995 Jul;82(7):541-50.

[Several transcription factors participate in the functioning of the
alpha-fetoprotein gene promoter].

[Article in French]

Bois-Joyeux B(1), Thomassin H, Richard F, Ikonomova R, Denissenko M, Danan JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche sur l'endocrinologie moléculaire et le développement,
CNRS, UPR 1511 Meudon, France.

The oncodevelopmentally regulated alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene offers a very good
model system to better understand the molecular mechanisms which dictate the
specificity of gene expression in liver and control its tight modulation in the
course of development and carcinogenesis. Transcription factors of the
CCAAT/enhance-binding protein (C/EBP), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), and
nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) families can bind in vitro to the promoter of the rat AFP
gene, which makes the expression of the AFP gene specific to the liver. We have
evaluated the influence of some of these factors on the activity of the AFP
promoter by transfection of HepG2 hepatoma cells with the appropriate expression 
vector plus a CAT plasmid under the control of the AFP promoter. A similar
plasmid bearing the rat albumin promoter was used as a control. C/EBP alpha, and 
C/EBP beta acted as transactivators on the AFP promoter, while LIP, a truncated
form of C/EBP beta, was a potent negative regulator of the promoter.
Interestingly, HNF-1 beta was found to be more potent than HNF-1 alpha in
activating the AFP promoter in the HepG2 cells. This effect was highly promoter
and cell specific since it did not occur with the rat albumin promoter or in
Chinese hamster ovary cells. HNF-1 beta, which is produced earlier than HNF-1
alpha during liver development, would thus have the greater influence on the AFP 
promoter in early development. Our results pointed to a key role that NF1 might
play in the functioning of the AFP promoter. Indeed, overexpression of NF1
induced a specific decrease in the activity of the AFP promoter. Competition
between NF1 and HNF-1 for binding to their overlapping binding sites on the AFP
promoter would be critical for modulating its activity.

PMID: 7549116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Biochem J. 1995 Jun 1;308 ( Pt 2):613-21.

Expression of the human gene coding for the alpha-chain of C4b-binding protein,
C4BPA, is controlled by an HNF1-dependent hepatic-specific promoter.

Arenzana N(1), Rodríguez de Córdoba S, Rey-Campos J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Inmunología, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, CSIC,
Madrid, Spain.

C4b-binding protein (C4BP) is an abundant oligomeric plasma glycoprotein which
controls the activation of the complement cascade through the classical pathway. 
In humans, the majority form of C4BP is composed of seven alpha-chains and one
beta-chain, covalently linked by their C-termini. C4BP is mainly expressed in the
liver. We have previously cloned and characterized the structure of the genes
encoding the alpha and beta chains, C4BPA and C4BPB, respectively. Here we
addressed the characterization of the mechanisms controlling the hepatic
restricted expression of the C4BPA gene. We found that the C4BPA promoter is
contained within the first 369 bp upstream of the transcription start site. The
activity of this promoter is restricted to hepatic cells in transfection
experiments. The hepatic transcription factor HNF1 interacts with a region of
this promoter at -38 bp. This region is absolutely required for the activity of
this promoter, suggesting that HNF1 is essential for the hepatic activity of the 
C4BPA promoter. We speculate that this extreme requirement of HNF1 for the
activity of the human C4BPA promoter is related to the fact that this promoter
lacks a TATA box.

PMCID: PMC1136970
PMID: 7772049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. EMBO J. 1995 May 1;14(9):2034-42.

Three-dimensional structure of the bifunctional protein PCD/DCoH, a cytoplasmic
enzyme interacting with transcription factor HNF1.

Ficner R(1), Sauer UH, Stier G, Suck D.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Structural Biology Programme, Heidelberg, Germany.

The bifunctional protein pterin-4a-carbinolamine dehydratase (PCD)/dimerization
cofactor of HNF1 (DCoH) is a cytoplasmic enzyme involved in the
tetrahydrobiopterin regeneration and is found in complex with the transcription
factor HNF1 in liver cell nuclei. An atypical hyperphenylalaninemia and the
depigmentation disorder vitiligo are related to a deficiency of PCD/DCoH
activity. The crystal structure of PCD/DCoH was solved by multiple isomorphous
replacement and refined to a crystallographic R-factor of 20.5% at 2.7 A
resolution. The single domain monomer comprises three alpha-helices packed
against one side of a four-stranded, antiparallel beta-sheet. The functional
enzyme is a homo-tetramer of 222 symmetry where each of the monomers contributes 
one helix to a central four helix bundle. In the tetramer two monomers form an
eight-stranded, antiparallel beta-sheet with six helices packing against it from 
one side. The concave, hydrophobic surface of the eight-stranded beta-sheet with 
its two protruding loops at either end is reminiscent of the saddle-like shape
seen in the TATA-box binding protein. PCD/DCoH binds as a dimer to the helical
dimerization domain of dimeric HNF1 forming a hetero-tetramer possibly through a 
mixed four helix bundle.

PMCID: PMC398303
PMID: 7744010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. DNA Cell Biol. 1995 Apr;14(4):285-93.

Role of the liver-enriched transcription factor HNF-1 alpha in expression of the 
CYP2E1 gene.

Liu SY(1), Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The role of the trans-acting factor HNF-1 alpha in activating CYP2E1 gene
expression was confirmed by transient co-transfection of an HNF-1 alpha
expression plasmid and the CYP2E1 promoter fused to the chloramphenicol acetyl
transferase (CAT) reporter gene. Only HNF-1 alpha, and not HNF-1 beta, HNF-4,
C/EBP alpha, C/EBP beta, or DBP, was able to activate the CYP2E1 promoter. The
extent of activation was proportional to the number of copies of the HNF-1
binding sequence upstream of the promoter. Removal or mutation of the HNF-1
binding sequence led to inactivation of the promoter in response to HNF-1 alpha. 
Gel-shift Western blot analysis using a synthetic HNF-1 binding sequence derived 
from CYP2E1 and rat liver nuclear extract revealed that the protein-DNA complex
obtained with adult rat liver nuclear extract consisted of both HNF-1 alpha and
HNF-1 beta proteins. The shifted bands produced by nuclear extracts from adult,
where the endogenous CYP2E1 gene is active, and fetal rat liver, where the gene
is inactive, were found to migrate differently, suggesting that the population of
factors, possibly including different ratios of HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta
proteins, may change during development. However, the co-transfection study did
not show cooperativity between the two factors. Elements upstream of the HNF-1
binding site were found to affect the activity of the promoter negatively in the 
transfection assay. DNase I hypersensitive site mapping revealed a hypersensitive
site in this inhibiting element in the adult rat liver sample but not in liver
from newborn animals.

PMID: 7710685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Feb 11;23(3):395-404.

Hierarchy and positive/negative interplays of the hepatocyte nuclear factors
HNF-1, -3 and -4 in the liver-specific enhancer for the human
alpha-1-microglobulin/bikunin precursor.

Rouet P(1), Raguenez G, Tronche F, Mfou'ou V, Salier JP.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 78, Boisguillaume, France.

Alpha-1-microglobulin and bikunin are two plasma glycoproteins encoded by an
alpha-1-microglobulin/bikunin precursor (AMBP) gene. The strict liver-specific
expression of the AMBP gene is controlled by a potent enhancer made of six
clustered boxes numbered 1-6 that have been reported to be proven or potential
binding sites for the hepatocyte-enriched nuclear factors HNF-1, -4, -3, -1, -3, 
-4, respectively. In the present study, electromobility shift assays of wild-type
or mutated probes demonstrated that the boxes 1-5 have a binding capacity for
their cognate HNF protein. Box 5 is also a target for another, as yet
unidentified, factor. A functional analysis of the wild-type or mutated enhancer,
driving its homologous promoter and a reporter CAT gene in the HepG2 hepatoma
cell line, demonstrated that all six boxes participate in the enhancer activity, 
with the primary influence of box 4 (HNF-1) and box 2 (HNF-4). A similar analysis
in the HNF-free CHO cell line co-transfected with one or several HNF factors
further demonstrated various interplays between boxes: box 3 (HNF-3 alpha and
beta) has a negative influence over the major HNF-4 box 2 as well as a positive
influence over the major HNF-1 box 4.

PMCID: PMC306689
PMID: 7533900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jan 20;270(3):1068-73.

The promoter of the salmon insulin-like growth factor I gene is activated by
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1.

Kulik VP(1), Kavsan VM, van Schaik FM, Nolten LA, Steenbergh PH, Sussenbach JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosynthesis of Nucleic Acids, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences,
Kiev.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1) was found to have a potent stimulatory action
on the activity of the promoter of the salmon insulin-like growth factor I
(IGF-I) gene in transient transfection experiments. This liver-enriched
transcription factor was shown to bind to an element in the proximal region of
the promoter with distinct nucleotide sequence homology to the HNF-1 consensus
binding sequence. Mutating this sequence to a variant no longer capable of HNF-1 
binding resulted in the loss of the stimulatory effect. Since the sequence of the
HNF-1 binding site is conserved in all mammalian, avian, and amphibian species
from which the IGF-I promoter sequences have been derived to date, we propose
that HNF-1 may be an important regulator of IGF-I gene expression in all of these
species.

PMID: 7836361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Hum Mol Genet. 1994 Dec;3(12):2147-52.

Disruption of a binding site for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 in the protein C
gene promoter is associated with hereditary thrombophilia.

Berg LP(1), Scopes DA, Alhaq A, Kakkar VV, Cooper DN.

Author information: 
(1)Charter Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Thrombosis Research Institute, London, 
UK.

A heterozygous T-->C transition was detected in the putative promoter region of
the protein C (PROC) gene in a patient with type I protein C deficiency and a
history of recurrent venous thrombosis. This mutation occurred 14 bp upstream of 
the transcription initiation site and within a sequence strongly homologous to
the consensus binding site for the liver-enriched transcription factor,
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1). Transfection experiments demonstrated that a
CAT reporter gene construct containing 626 bp of the putative PROC gene promoter 
was capable of driving CAT expression in HepG2 hepatoma cells. Levels of CAT
expression from constructs bearing the mutation were found to be drastically
reduced by comparison with the wild-type, consistent with the reduced plasma
protein C antigen levels observed in the patient. Gel retardation and
cotransfection experiments demonstrated that the mutation abolished both the
binding and the transactivating ability of HNF-1 observed with the wild-type PROC
gene promoter. Further, the ability of the mutation to disrupt HNF-1 binding
appears to be a function not only of the nature of the nucleotide substitution
and its position within the recognition sequence, but also of the relative
affinity of the wild-type binding site for HNF-1. This analysis is therefore
indicative of a vital role for HNF-1 in the expression of the PROC gene in vivo. 
Taken together with the identification of a human hepatoma cell line which
contains HNF-1 but which does not express protein C, these findings are
consistent with the view that HNF-1 is necessary although not sufficient for PROC
gene expression in the liver.

PMID: 7881411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Nov;14(11):7124-33.

Transcriptional regulation of the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene by
cooperation between hepatic nuclear factors.

Yanuka-Kashles O(1), Cohen H, Trus M, Aran A, Benvenisty N, Reshef L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biochemistry, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical
School, Jerusalem, Israel.

To study the transcriptional regulation of the liver gluconeogenic phenotype, the
underdifferentiated mouse Hepa-1c1c7 (Hepa) hepatoma cell line was used. These
cells mimicked the fetal liver by appreciably expressing the alpha-fetoprotein
and albumin genes but not the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) gene.
Unlike the fetal liver, however, Hepa cells failed to express the early-expressed
factors hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) and HNF-4 and the
late-expressed factor C/EBP alpha, thereby providing a suitable system for
examining possible cooperation between these factors in the transcriptional
regulation of the PEPCK gene. Transient transfection assays of a chimeric
PEPCK-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase construct showed a residual PEPCK
promoter activity in the Hepa cell line, which was slightly stimulated by
cotransfection with a single transcription factor from either the C/EBP family or
HNF-1 alpha but not at all affected by cotransfection of HNF-4. In contrast,
cotransfection of the PEPCK construct with members from the C/EBP family plus
HNF-1 alpha resulted in a synergistic stimulation of the PEPCK promoter activity.
This synergistic effect depended on the presence in the PEPCK promoter region of 
the HNF-1 recognition sequence and on the presence of two C/EBP recognition
sequences. The results demonstrate a requirement for coexistence and cooperation 
between early and late liver-enriched transcription factors in the
transcriptional regulation of the PEPCK gene. In addition, the results suggest
redundancy between members of the C/EBP family of transcription factors in the
regulation of PEPCK gene expression.

PMCID: PMC359246
PMID: 7935427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Nov;14(11):7086-94.

Genetic analysis of a transcriptional activation pathway by using hepatoma cell
variants.

Bulla GA(1), Fournier RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington 98104, USA.

A hierarchy of liver-enriched transcription factors plays an important role in
activating expression of many hepatic genes. In particular, hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4 (HNF-4) is a major activator of the gene encoding HNF-1, and HNF-1
itself activates expression of more than 20 liver genes. To dissect this
activation pathway genetically, we prepared somatic cell variants that were
deficient in expression of the liver-specific alpha 1-antitrypsin (alpha 1AT)
gene, which requires both HNF-1 and HNF-4 for high-level gene activity. This was 
accomplished in two steps. First, hepatoma transfectants that stably expressed
two selectable markers under alpha 1AT promoter control were prepared; second,
variant sublines that could no longer express either transgene were isolated by
direct selection. In this report, we demonstrate that the variants contain
defects in the HNF-4/HNF-1 activation pathway. These defects functioned in trans,
as expression of many liver genes was affected, but the variant phenotypes were
recessive to wild type in somatic cell hybrids. Three different variant classes
could be discriminated by their phenotypic responses to ectopic expression of
either HNF-4 or HNF-1. Two variant clones appeared specifically deficient in
HNF-4 expression, as transfection with an HNF-4 expression cassette fully
restored their hepatic phenotypes. Another line activated HNF-1 in response to
forced HNF-4 expression, but activation of downstream genes failed to occur. One 
clone was unresponsive to either HNF-1 or HNF-4. Using the variants, we
demonstrate further that the chromosomal genes encoding alpha 1AT, aldolase B,
and alpha-fibrinogen display strict requirements for HNF-1 activation in vivo,
while other liver genes were unaffected by the presence or absence of HNF-1 or
HNF-4. We also provide evidence for the existence of an autoregulatory loop in
which HNF-1 regulates its own expression through activation of HNF-4.

PMCID: PMC359242
PMID: 7935424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Oct 11;22(20):4284-90.

LFB1/HNF1 acts as a repressor of its own transcription.

Piaggio G(1), Tomei L, Toniatti C, De Francesco R, Gerstner J, Cortese R.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Regina Elena Centro Ricerca Sperimentale, Laboratorio Oncogenesi
Molecolare, Rome, Italy.

LFB1/HNF1 is a hepatocyte-enriched trans-activator involved in the regulation of 
many liver-specific genes. We report the cloning and characterization of a rat
genomic DNA fragment containing about 3.5 kb of the LFB1/HNF1 gene 5'-flanking
region. This DNA segment is capable of directing the liver-specific expression of
a reporter gene in transfection assays. More interestingly, the basal activity of
the LFB1/HNF1 promoter in cultured hepatoma cell lines is down-regulated by
exogenously added LFB1/HNF1 protein itself. The ability to repress transcription 
starting from its own promoter requires the integrity of the N-terminal LFB1/HNF1
DNA-binding domain. Contrary to the expectations, in vitro binding experiments
failed to demonstrate any specific and functional interaction of purified
LFB1/HNF1 with the -3.5 kb promoter sequence. In addition to the DNA-binding
domain, a 60 aa region contained in the C-terminus of the protein and distinct
from the previously characterized activation domains, is also required for the
repressing function.

PMCID: PMC331944
PMID: 7937157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Gen Virol. 1994 Oct;75 ( Pt 10):2671-9.

Characterization of the minimal elements of the hepatitis B virus large surface
antigen promoter.

Raney AK(1), Easton AJ, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Scripps Research Institute,
La Jolla, California 92037.

It has been demonstrated that the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) binding site
is critical for the majority of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) large surface antigen
promoter activity in differentiated hepatoma cell lines. Examination of a series 
of clustered point mutations in the minimal large surface antigen promoter
demonstrated that the HNF1 and TATA box binding sites are the major regulatory
elements required for transcription from this promoter. Synthetic promoter
constructs containing the large surface antigen promoter HNF1 binding site and
TATA box element upstream of the luciferase open reading frame were tested for
their transcriptional activities in HepG2. 1 cells in the absence or presence of 
an HNF1 expression vector. These synthetic promoter constructs displayed a
similar level of transcriptional activity and induction by HNF1 in comparison
with the full-length large surface antigen promoter, suggesting that additional
HBV sequences are dispensable for full transcriptional activity. The distance
between the HNF1 binding site and TATA box element in the synthetic promoter
constructs appeared to influence the transcriptional activity modestly and in a
periodic manner.

PMID: 7931153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Aug 16;91(17):7985-9.

Regulation in vitro of an L-CAM enhancer by homeobox genes HoxD9 and HNF-1.

Goomer RS(1), Holst BD, Wood IC, Jones FS, Edelman GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037.

Previous studies have shown that in vitro expression of the neural cell adhesion 
molecule (N-CAM) can be regulated by the products of homeobox genes HoxB9, -B8,
and -C6. N-CAM is a Ca(2+)-independent immunoglobulin-related CAM that plays an
important role in neural development. In the present study, we investigated
whether the liver cell adhesion molecule (L-CAM) a member of the Ca(2+)-dependent
CAM family (cadherins) is also regulated by homeobox-containing genes. In
transient cotransfection experiments of NIH 3T3 cells, we observed that both
HoxD9 and liver-enriched POU-homeodomain transcription factor, HNF-1, activated
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene reporter constructs containing the L-CAM
promoter and an enhancer present in the second intron of the chicken L-CAM gene. 
Using electrophoretic mobility-shift assays, we found that components of cell
extracts from NIH 3T3 cells transfected with HoxD9 bound to a small region of the
L-CAM enhancer having a consensus sequence that is a putative binding site for
HNF-1. Components of extracts from the chicken hepatoma cell line LMH that had
been transfected with an HNF-1 expression vector also bound to this same site. In
nuclear run-on experiments with nuclei from LMH cells that were transfected with 
expression vectors for HoxD9 or HNF-1, L-CAM RNA levels were increased 33-fold
and 4-fold respectively. Using the same run-on procedure, it was confirmed that
nuclei prepared from normal embryonic chicken liver cells expressed the RNAs for 
HoxD9, HNF-1, and L-CAM. Taken together with previous observations, these data
raise the possibility that homeobox-containing genes will have a widespread role 
in the place-dependent expression of CAMs belonging both to
immunoglobulin-related and to cadherin families.

PMCID: PMC44529
PMID: 7914699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 1994 Aug 5;269(31):19757-65.

Apolipoprotein(a) gene transcription is regulated by liver-enriched trans-acting 
factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha.

Wade DP(1), Lindahl GE, Lawn RM.

Author information: 
(1)Falk Cardiovascular Research Center, Stanford University Medical School,
California 94305.

Elevated levels of lipoprotein(a) (Lp(a)) in the plasma are a risk factor for
coronary artery disease and stroke. Plasma Lp(a) concentrations are highly
heritable and predominantly determined by the liver-specific apolipoprotein(a)
(apo(a)) gene. In this report we show by deletion analysis that sequences from
-98 to +130 of the apo(a) gene are sufficient to direct liver-specific
transcription. DNase I protection analysis of this region using HepG2 nuclear
extracts revealed six major protein-binding sites, designated A to F. A mutation 
within footprint C, situated in the 5'-untranslated region of the gene, resulted 
in a marked reduction of luciferase expression from a reporter construct to 12%
of wild type. This was not due to a decrease in mRNA stability. Gel mobility
shift assays demonstrated that site C binds hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha
(HNF-1 alpha), and overexpression of HNF-1 alpha in HepG2 cells resulted in a
significant stimulation of transcription from this promoter fragment. Mutation of
footprint B resulted in a 2-fold enhancement of transcription. These results show
that positive regulation of transcription of the apo(a) gene is dependent on the 
binding of HNF-1 alpha to a regulatory element situated downstream of the mRNA
start site, and suggest that an as yet unidentified protein may negatively
regulate apo(a) transcription by binding to a discrete sequence within the
5'-untranslated region.

PMID: 8051057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Surgery. 1994 Aug;116(2):285-92; discussion 292-3.

Rapid modulation of liver-specific transcription factors after injury.

Burke PA(1), Drotar M, Luo M, Yaffe M, Forse RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, New England Deaconess Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02215.

BACKGROUND: The reaction to injury is a well-orchestrated physiologic response
involving the coordinated actions of multiple integrated systems. It initially
occurs at the molecular level and involves changes in gene transcription. We
hypothesized that the molecular mechanisms regulating the generation of an
inflammatory response are similar to those orchestrating developmental and
tissue-specific expression of proteins and, in the case of the acute phase
response, occur through manipulation of liver-specific transcription factors and 
their binding activity.
METHODS: Female BALB/c mice, 7 to 8 weeks old, were subjected to a 15% body
surface area burn. Total and polyadenylated liver RNA was isolated, and Northern 
blot analysis was performed to determine the kinetics of the acute phase proteins
albumin and fibrinogen and the liver-specific transcriptional factors
CCAAT-enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) alpha, hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1
alpha, and HNF-4.
RESULTS: Induction of the injury response was shown by an increase in fibrinogen 
messenger RNA levels and a decrease in albumin mRNA levels. The liver-specific
transcription factor C/EBP alpha decreased after injury and remained
significantly lower than control at 3 hours. HNF-4 mRNA levels fell more slowly, 
reaching significantly lower levels at 6 hours and remaining suppressed at 34
hours. HNF-1 alpha showed the most rapid fall in mRNA levels at 30 minutes after 
injury and remained significantly below control levels at 34 hours.
CONCLUSIONS: The minimal burn injury model leads to the molecular induction of
the acute phase response and induces significant and rapid changes in the
liver-specific transcription factors C/EBP alpha, HNF-1 alpha, and HNF-4. These
changes may represent a mechanism through which the organ-specific response to
injury is mediated.

PMID: 8047996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Mol Carcinog. 1994 Jul;10(3):151-8.

Positive and negative regulations of albumin gene expression by retinoids in
human hepatoma cell lines.

Yamada Y(1), Shidoji Y, Fukutomi Y, Ishikawa T, Kaneko T, Nakagama H, Imawari M, 
Moriwaki H, Muto Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Gifu University School of Medicine,
Japan.

All-trans-3,7,11,15-tetramethyl-2,4,6,10,14-hexadecapentaenoic acid (designated
"acyclic retinoid") induced upregulation of the albumin gene expression at its
transcriptional level, whereas all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) induced
downregulation of the expression in both PLC/PRF/5 and HuH7 human hepatoma cell
lines. These up- and down regulations of the albumin gene expression coordinated 
with high and low levels of mRNA for hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), which
is one of the most potent transcription factors for the albumin gene, implying
that retinoids may regulate albumin gene expression through HNF-1 expression in
opposite ways. The PLC/PRF/5 and HuH7 hepatoma cell lines expressed retinoid X
receptor-alpha (RXR alpha) mRNA, whose expression was constitutive. Acyclic
retinoid and all-trans-RA both induced upregulation of retinoic acid
receptor-beta (RAR beta), and both suppressed cell proliferation-related
phenotypic expressions by the alpha-fetoprotein gene and the c-myc oncogene.
9-cis-RA, whose receptor is known to be RXR alpha, also induced upregulation of
albumin and HNF-1 expression. These results suggest that acyclic retinoid may act
through both RXR alpha and RAR beta, whereas all-trans-RA conveys only RAR
beta-mediated functions, at least in these two hepatoma cell lines.

PMID: 7519016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Biochem J. 1994 Jul 1;301 ( Pt 1):49-55.

Members of the CAAT/enhancer-binding protein, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 and
nuclear factor-1 families can differentially modulate the activities of the rat
alpha-fetoprotein promoter and enhancer.

Bois-Joyeux B(1), Danan JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche sur l'Endocrinologie Moléculaire et le Développement, CNRS
UPR 1511, Meudon, France.

The promoter of the rat alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene, which makes the expression 
of the developmentally regulated AFP gene specific to the liver, is a putative
target for transcription factors of the CAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP),
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) and nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) families. We have
evaluated the influence of these factors on the activity of the AFP promoter by
transfection of HepG2 hepatoma cells with the appropriate expression vector plus 
a CAT plasmid under the control of the AFP promoter. A similar plasmid bearing
the rat albumin promoter was used as a control. C/EBP alpha, C/EBP beta and
D-binding protein (DBP) acted as trans-activators on the AFP promoter, whereas
liver inhibitory protein (LIP), a truncated form of C/EBP beta, was a potent
negative regulator of the promoter. C/EBP alpha also bound to and stimulated the 
activity of the AFP enhancer at -2.5 kb. Interestingly, HNF-1 beta was found to
be more potent than HNF-1 alpha in activating the AFP promoter. This effect was
specific, as it did not occur with the rat albumin promoter. HNF-1 beta, which is
produced earlier than HNF-1 alpha during liver development, would thus have the
greater influence on the AFP promoter in early development. Both HNF-1s allowed
expression of the AFP promoter in cells of nonhepatic origin. Overexpression of
NF-1 induced a specific decrease in the activity of the AFP promoter. This
strongly suggests that competition between NF-1 and HNF-1 for binding to their
overlapping binding sites on the AFP promoter is critical for modulating its
activity. Thus changing combinations of these trans-acting factors may tightly
modulate the AFP promoter activity in the course of liver development and
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1137141
PMID: 7518671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jun 24;269(25):17080-5.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) and HNF-1 beta regulate
transcription via two elements in an intestine-specific promoter.

Wu GD(1), Chen L, Forslund K, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Medical School,
Philadelphia 19104-6144.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) and HNF-1 beta are transcription 
factors that contain a divergent homeodomain, bind to DNA as homo- or
heterodimers, and act to regulate transcription of many genes that are expressed 
primarily in liver. We show that HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta act as regulatory
factors for transcription of sucrase-isomaltase (SI), the gene for which is
expressed exclusively in absorptive enterocytes of the small intestine. HNF-1
alpha and HNF-1 beta bind to two evolutionarily conserved sites in the SI
promoter, previously named SIF2 and SIF3, with different relative affinities.
HNF-1 alpha binds to the SIF3 element with greater affinity than to the SIF2
element, whereas HNF-1 beta binds to both elements equally. Co-transfection
experiments demonstrated that HNF-1 alpha is able to increase transcriptional
initiation from a minimal SI intestine-specific promoter. In contrast, HNF-1 beta
has no functional effect on transcription of the SI promoter. The functional and 
DNA binding differences of HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta on elements in the SI
promoter suggest that these transcription factors may play a role in the complex 
spatial patterns of SI gene expression in the intestine.

PMID: 8006012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. FEBS Lett. 1994 Apr 11;342(3):325-8.

HNF1 alpha activates the aminopeptidase N promoter in intestinal (Caco-2) cells.

Olsen J(1), Laustsen L, Troelsen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen,
Denmark.

The importance of HNF1 binding proteins for intestinal aminopeptidase N
expression was investigated using the Caco-2 cell-line. Aminopeptidase N promoter
activity in Caco-2 cells depends on the HNF1 element (positions -85 to -58) and
co-transfection with an HNF1 alpha expression vector demonstrates a direct
activation of the promoter by HNF1 alpha through this element. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays using nuclear extracts from Caco-2 cells show the presence 
of high amounts of HNF1 binding proteins irrespective of their state of
differentiation.

PMID: 7908650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Cancer Res. 1994 Mar 1;54(5):1319-23.

Lowered amounts of the tissue-specific transcription factor LFB1 (HNF1) correlate
with decreased levels of glutathione S-transferase alpha messenger RNA in human
renal cell carcinoma.

Clairmont A(1), Ebert T, Weber H, Zoidl C, Eickelmann P, Schulz WA, Sies H,
Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Germany.

Human renal cell carcinoma is characterized by the loss of differentiation
markers such as glutathione S-transferase alpha (GST-alpha). In this paper we
show that the promoter of a GST-alpha gene contains a functional binding site for
the cell-specific transcription factor LFB1 (HNF1). To investigate the potential 
role of LFB1 in the down-regulation of GST-alpha expression, we have compared the
amount and the binding activity of the LFB1 protein between normal kidney and
tumor tissue. By Western analysis and gel retardation assay using a monoclonal
antibody specific for LFB1 we show that in 11 of 14 carcinomas the amount of LFB1
is clearly reduced compared to the corresponding normal tissue and that in all 14
renal carcinomas LFB1 binding activity is diminished. As in the same samples the 
abundance of GST-alpha mRNA is lower than in the normal tissue, we postulate that
the loss of LFB1 binding activity might be responsible for the decreased
expression of the GST-alpha gene in renal cell carcinoma.

PMID: 8118822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Feb;14(2):1395-401.

ATBF1, a multiple-homeodomain zinc finger protein, selectively down-regulates
AT-rich elements of the human alpha-fetoprotein gene.

Yasuda H(1), Mizuno A, Tamaoki T, Morinaga T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Life Science, Snow Brand Milk Products Co. Ltd, Tochigi,
Japan.

ATBF1 is a 306-kDa protein containing four homeodomains, 17 zinc finger motifs,
and several segments potentially involved in transcriptional regulation (T.
Morinaga, H. Yasuda, T. Hashimoto, K. Higashio, and T. Tamaoki, Mol. Cell. Biol. 
11:6041-6049, 1991). At least one of the homeodomains of ATBF1 binds to an
AT-rich element in the human alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) enhancer (enhancer AT
motif). In the present work, we analyzed the transcriptional regulatory activity 
of ATBF1 with respect to the enhancer AT motif and similar AT-rich elements in
the human AFP promoter and the human albumin promoter and enhancer. Gel
retardation assays showed that ATBF1 binds to the AFP enhancer AT motif
efficiently; however, it binds weakly or not at all to other AT-rich elements in 
the AFP and albumin regulatory regions studied. Alterations of the enhancer AT
motif by site-specific mutagenesis resulted in the loss of binding of ATBF1.
Cotransfection experiments with an ATBF1 expression plasmid and the
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene fused to AFP promoter or enhancer
fragments showed that ATBF1 suppressed the activity of AFP enhancer and promoter 
regions containing AT-rich elements. This suppression was reduced when the
mutated AT motifs with low affinity to ATBF1 were linked to the CAT gene. The
ATBF1 suppression of AFP promoter and enhancer activities appeared to be due, at 
least in part, to competition between ATBF1 and HNF1 for the same binding site.
In contrast to the AFP promoter and enhancer, the albumin promoter and enhancer
were not affected by ATBF1, although they contain homologous AT-rich elements.
These results show that ATBF1 is able to distinguish AFP and albumin AT-rich
elements, leading to selective suppression of the AFP promoter and enhancer
activities.

PMCID: PMC358494
PMID: 7507206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jan 14;269(2):1177-82.

The transcription factor HNF1 acts with C/EBP alpha to synergistically activate
the human albumin promoter through a novel domain.

Wu KJ(1), Wilson DR, Shih C, Darlington GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

HNF1 and C/EBP alpha are transcription factors that bind to and trans-activate
the human albumin gene proximal promoter. Various 5' deletions of the human
albumin promoter were coupled to a luciferase reporter gene (alb-luc constructs) 
and co-electroporated with HNF1 and/or C/EBP alpha expression vectors into HeLa
cells. Luciferase activities from co-electroporation of the HNF1 and C/EBP alpha 
expression vectors with the alb-luc constructs were approximately 10-fold greater
than the sum of the activities achieved with HNF1 and C/EBP alpha alone. Analysis
of COOH-terminal or internal deletions of the HNF1 expression vector revealed
that the domain important for collaborative interaction with C/EBP alpha could be
localized to a 157 amino acid region not previously described. This domain is
proline and glutamine-rich and is highly homologous (66%) to a portion of vHNF1, 
an evolutionarily related gene first identified in dedifferentiated hepatoma
cells. A construct linking the negatively charged activation domain of herpes
simplex virus protein VP16 to the DNA-binding domain of HNF1 showed that it could
also synergize with C/EBP alpha to trans-activate the human albumin gene
promoter. Our studies delineate a domain in HNF1 important for synergistic
activation with C/EBP alpha.

PMID: 8288579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jan 4;91(1):182-6.

Homeostatic regulation of hepatocyte nuclear transcription factor 1 expression in
cultured hepatoma cells.

Pietrangelo A(1), Shafritz DA.

Author information: 
(1)Marion Bessin Liver Research Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, NY 10461.

Serum colloid osmotic pressure is believed to control the hepatic output of
plasma proteins, including albumin. The present study was aimed at identifying
the molecular basis for feedback control of albumin gene expression in highly
differentiated hepatoma cells. The steady-state level of albumin mRNA and the
activity of a 282-bp albumin promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter 
gene in cells incubated in the presence of increasing amounts of serum albumin or
dextran were significantly and selectively decreased. When nuclear extracts from 
cells exposed to 5% (wt/vol) serum albumin were tested in a gel-retardation assay
with six oligonucleotide probes containing DNA elements of the albumin promoter, 
only the element B-retarded band, which contains the nucleotide recognition
sequence for hepatocyte nuclear transcription factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha), was
consistently decreased as compared to nuclear extract from cells not exposed to
serum albumin. Moreover, the activity of a reporter gene with a basal
TATA-promoter driven by multiple HNF-1 alpha recognition elements was selectively
inhibited in cells incubated in the presence of 5% serum albumin. A reduction of 
HNF-1 alpha mRNA appears to be responsible for this response to a change in the
level of macromolecules in the incubation medium. These results indicate that
activity of a dominant liver transcription factor, HNF-1 alpha, controlling the
transcription of several liver-specific genes, is modulated by a fluctuation in
the level of oncotically active macromolecules.

PMCID: PMC42910
PMID: 8278361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Dec 25;21(25):5882-9.

An indirect negative autoregulatory mechanism involved in hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 gene expression.

Kritis AA(1), Ktistaki E, Barda D, Zannis VI, Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology, Crete, Greece.

Recent studies have revealed that hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF-4) is an
essential positive regulator of another liver enriched transcription factor
HNF-1, defining a transcriptional hierarchy between the two factors operating in 
hepatocytes. To assess the possible autoregulation of the HNF-1 gene we have
examined the effect of HNF-1 on its own transcription. In transient transfection 
assays, HNF-1 strongly down-regulated transcription driven by its own promoter in
HepG2 cells. In addition HNF-1 also repressed the activity of HNF-4 dependent
ApoCIII and ApoAI promoters. The same effect was observed using vHNF-1, a
distinct but highly related protein to HNF-1. Both HNF-1 and vHNF-1 downregulated
HNF-4 activated transcription from intact and chimeric promoter constructs
carrying various HNF-4 binding sites implying that they act by impeding HNF-4
binding or activity. DNA binding and cell free transcription experiments however 
failed to demonstrate any direct or indirect interaction of HNF-1 and vHNF-1 with
the above regulatory regions. Both factors repressed HNF-4 induced transcription 
of the ApoCIII and HNF-1 genes in HeLa cells, arguing against the requirement of 
a hepatocyte specific function. These findings define an indirect negative
autoregulatory mechanism involved in HNF-1 gene expression, which in turn may
affect HNF-4 dependent transcription of other liver specific genes.

PMCID: PMC310469
PMID: 8290348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Biol Chem. 1993 Dec 5;268(34):25706-11.

The transactivation potential of variant hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 is modified 
by alternative splicing.

Ringeisen F(1), Rey-Campos J, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, UA 1644 du CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies,
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Two forms of the transcription factor vHNF1 (HNF1 beta or LFB3) have been
previously described, derived by alternative splicing from a common premessenger 
RNA, and have been called vHNF1-A and vHNF1-B. vHNF1 proteins share a homologous 
homeo-related DNA-binding domain with the HNF1 protein, initially characterized
as a liver-restricted transcription factor, and bind to a similar sequence motif.
Here we demonstrate that vHNF1-A is a stronger transactivator than vHNF1-B when
assayed in transient transfections using two different promoters. vHNF1-A also
binds DNA with a higher affinity suggesting that a region of the protein located 
immediately upstream of the homeodomain can modulate the protein/DNA interaction 
and transactivation. Both vHNF1 transcripts were found at a constant ratio in
every tissue where vHNF1 expression could be detected, using a quantitative
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.

PMID: 8245006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Exp Cell Res. 1993 Dec;209(2):307-16.

Influence of the content in transcription factors on the phenotype of mouse
hepatocyte-like cell lines (mhAT).

Levrat F(1), Vallet V, Berbar T, Miquerol L, Kahn A, Antoine B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, INSERM U129, CHU Cochin, Paris,
France.

We have described new well-differentiated mouse hepatocyte-like cell lines (mhAT)
derived from transgenic mice expressing simian virus 40 large T antigen under the
control of antithrombin III gene promoter (Exp. Cell Res. (1992) 200, 175-185).
In an attempt to understand the phenotypic variations of the different cell
lines, we analyzed their content in liver-specific transcription factors at the
level of both the proteins, by gel shift analysis, and the mRNA, by quantitative 
reverse-transcription PCR. Moreover, the transactivating ability of endogenous
HNF1 alpha and C/EBP alpha was also evaluated by measuring the activity of
transfected synthetic promoters consisting of DNA element homopolymers upstream
of a TATA box. High levels of HNF1, HNF3, and HNF4 transcription factors were
maintained in mhAT cells. In contrast, C/EBP alpha was much more variable between
the different cell lines and was less abundant than it was in vivo, in the liver.
We investigated the influence of HNF1 alpha and C/EBP alpha on the activity of
transfected liver-specific promoters. HNF1 alpha was not limiting for the
activity of transfected liver-type pyruvate kinase and albumin promoters. In
contrast, the activity of the albumin promoter in the different lines was clearly
dependent on the C/EBP alpha content, which seems, therefore, to be an essential 
factor modulating the expression of this gene in HNF1 alpha-containing cells.
This work shows that the correlations between promoter activities and transacting
factor contents in a panel of well-differentiated cultured cells can be used to
determine the respective role of transcription factors on the strength of some
promoters.

PMID: 8262148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Biochemistry. 1993 Nov 2;32(43):11627-37.

Transcriptional regulation of the Xenopus laevis B beta fibrinogen subunit gene
by glucocorticoids and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1: analysis by transfection into
primary liver cells.

Roberts LR(1), Nichols LA, Holland LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Missouri School of Medicine, Columbia 
65212.

The blood-clotting protein fibrinogen is composed of three subunits, designated A
alpha, B beta, and gamma, which are encoded by a family of related genes. As part
of the acute-phase response, expression of the fibrinogen genes is coordinately
regulated in the liver by glucocorticoids. To understand the factors underlying
this hormonal response, we have examined control of transcription from fibrinogen
gene fragments transfected into hepatocytes from the frog Xenopus laevis. This
analysis is the first in any species to define transcriptional regulatory
elements for the fibrinogen genes by transfection into primary liver cells,
rather than liver-derived cell lines. A transfection vector was constructed
containing the Xenopus B beta gene transcription start site and 1293 bp of the 5'
flanking sequence linked to the firefly luciferase gene. When this construct was 
transfected into primary liver parenchymal cells, luciferase expression was
induced approximately 14-fold by glucocorticoids, an increase similar to the
transcriptional stimulation of the endogenous B beta subunit gene. DNA fragments 
with as little as 284 bases of upstream sequence retained full hormone
responsiveness. This region contains a sequence resembling the canonical
glucocorticoid response element (GRE) at bases -148 to -162. Deletions or
specific point mutations eliminating this putative GRE led to complete loss of
glucocorticoid inducibility. Physical association of the steroid hormone receptor
with this functional GRE was demonstrated with a truncated form of the rat
glucocorticoid receptor containing the DNA-binding domain. A second possible GRE 
at positions -526 to -540 was not hormone-responsive, in either the presence or
the absence of the more proximal GRE. The regulatory region also has a sequence
similar to the binding site for a liver-specific transcription factor, hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1), at positions -120 to -132. Specific point mutations in 
the HNF-1-binding site, in a construct containing a wild-type GRE, reduced
promoter activity by a factor of 10, while stimulation by glucocorticoids was
retained. Binding studies confirmed specific interaction between this site and
the transcription factor HNF-1 alpha from mouse. Thus, we have identified a GRE
sufficient to account for full glucocorticoid inducibility and an HNF-1 site
close to the promoter that are major determinants of transcriptional control of
the Xenopus fibrinogen B beta subunit gene in cells from normal liver tissue.

PMID: 8218230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. EMBO J. 1993 Nov;12(11):4229-42.

More potent transcriptional activators or a transdominant inhibitor of the HNF1
homeoprotein family are generated by alternative RNA processing.

Bach I(1), Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, UA 1644 du CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies,
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Erratum in
    EMBO J 1994 Jan 15;13(2):492.

We report the isolation of cDNAs from human liver encoding several isoforms of
the hepatocyte nuclear factor homeoproteins HNF1 and vHNF1 generated by the
differential use of polyadenylation sites and by alternative splicing. In the
novel isoforms intron sequences that are excised in the previously described
forms are translated in the same frame as exon sequences until the first
termination codon is encountered. Hence, the newly found isoforms all contain
different C-terminal domains. For HNF1 it has been shown that its C-terminal
region is responsible for the activation of transcription. In transient
transfection assays the two novel HNF1 isoforms, HNF1-B and -C, transactivate
5-fold better than the previously described HNF1 protein (HNF1-A). The newly
isolated isoform of vHNF1, designated vHNF1-C, is unable to transactivate and
behaves as a transdominant repressor when cotransfected with HNF1-A, -B or -C.
All of the different isoforms of HNF1 and vHNF1 can form homo- and heterodimers
and their mRNAs are differentially expressed in fetal and adult human liver,
kidney and intestine, suggesting distinct roles during development. Our studies
show that the transactivation domain of the members of the HNF1 homeoprotein
family is organized in modules which can be exchanged to generate either more
potent transcriptional activators or a transdominant repressor.

PMCID: PMC413717
PMID: 7900999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Biochem J. 1993 Oct 15;295 ( Pt 2):379-86.

Cloning and tissue-specific expression of the gene for mouse C-reactive protein.

Ku NO(1), Mortensen RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ohio State University, Columbus 43210-1292.

C-reactive protein is a serum acute-phase reactant that increases several
thousand-fold in concentration during inflammation in most mammals. However,
mouse C-reactive protein is considered to be a minor acute-phase reactant, since 
its blood level increases only from approx. 0.1 to 1-2 micrograms/ml. A mouse
genomic clone of approximately 5 kb was obtained to determine the molecular basis
for the regulation of the expression of mouse C-reactive protein. Several
cis-acting elements in the 5' flanking region that potentially regulate
transcription were identified: two glucocorticoid-responsive elements, two
CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein C (C/EBP) consensus elements that are required for
the interleukin-1 responsiveness of some acute-phase reactant genes, an
interleukin-6-responsive element, two hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1)
elements and a single heat-shock element. Transfection of the hepatoma cell line 
Hep 3B.2 with a pCAT expression vector containing the 5' flanking sequence from
-1083 to -3 bp from the transcriptional start site, and truncations of this
sequence, localized elements that control the tissue-specific expression of mouse
C-reactive protein to the two HNF-1 elements and a C/EBP,
interleukin-1-responsive element located between -220 and -153, and -90 and -50
bp from the transcriptional start site. A constitutive nuclear protein from
mouse-liver hepatocytes specifically binds to the HNF-1 elements. These findings 
explain the tissue-specific expression of the gene, as well as its limited
expression during the acute-phase response.

PMCID: PMC1134892
PMID: 7916620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Oct 15;196(1):480-6.

Interplay of the liver-enriched trans-acting factors, DBP and HNF1, in the
transactivation of human IGFBP-1 promoter.

Babajko S(1), Groyer A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherches sur la Régulation de la Croissance, Institut National de
la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U.142, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France.

In the liver, expression of insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1
(IGFBP-1) is regulated essentially at the transcriptional level, at least in part
by HNF1. In this study, the functional role of DBP and C/EBP (which have several 
potential binding sites on the IGFBP-1 proximal promoter) have been investigated.
Transient co-transfection of the reporter plasmid, pBP-1341 and eukaryotic
expression vectors which code for DBP and C/EBP in human cell lines Hep3B, HepG2 
and C33 showed that IGFBP-1 promoter activity was unchanged by C/EBP, but
increased between 2 and 7 times by DBP (depending on the cell line). In addition,
DBP and HNF1 were capable of functional co-operation in activating the IGFBP-1
promoter. Our results support the notion of DBP being involved in limited tissue 
specificity of IGFBP-1 expression.

PMID: 7692852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Oct;13(10):6416-26.

Elements and factors involved in tissue-specific and embryonic expression of the 
liver transcription factor LFB1 in Xenopus laevis.

Zapp D(1), Bartkowski S, Holewa B, Zoidl C, Klein-Hitpass L, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Germany.

LFB1 (HNF1) is a tissue-specific transcription factor found in the livers,
stomachs, intestines, and kidneys of vertebrates. By analyzing the promoter of
the Xenopus LFB1 gene, we identified potential autoregulation by LFB1 and
regulation by HNF4, a transcription factor with a tissue distribution similar to 
that of LFB1. Injection of LFB1 promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
constructs into Xenopus eggs revealed embryonic activation that is restricted to 
the region of the developing larvae expressing endogeneous LFB1. Proper embryonic
activation was also observed with a rat LFB1 promoter. Deletion analysis of the
Xenopus and rat promoters revealed that in both promoters embryonic activation is
absolutely dependnet on the presence of an element that contains CCNCTCTC as the 
core consensus sequence. Since this element is recognized by the maternal factor 
OZ-1 previously described by N. Ovsenek, A. M. Zorn, and P. A. Krieg (Development
115:649-655, 1992), we might have identified the main constituents of a hierarchy
that leads via LFB1 to the activation of tissue-specific genes during
embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC364700
PMID: 8413240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Am J Hum Genet. 1993 Sep;53(3):768-74.

Mutation in the 4a-carbinolamine dehydratase gene leads to mild
hyperphenylalaninemia with defective cofactor metabolism.

Citron BA(1), Kaufman S, Milstien S, Naylor EW, Greene CL, Davis MD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry, National Institute of Mental Health, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Hyperphenylalaninemias represent a major class of inherited metabolic disorders. 
They are most often caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene
and, less frequently but with usually more serious consequences, in genes
necessary for the synthesis and regeneration of the cofactor,
tetrahydrobiopterin. This cofactor is absolutely required for all aromatic amino 
acid hydroxylations, and, recently, nitric oxide production from L-arginine has
also been found to be dependent on tetrahydrobiopterin. Phenylalanine hydroxylase
catalyzes a coupled reaction in which phenylalanine is converted to tyrosine and 
in which tetrahydrobiopterin is converted to the unstable carbinolamine,
4a-hydroxytetrahydrobiopterin. The enzyme, carbinolamine dehydratase, catalyzes
the dehydration of the carbinolamine to quinonoid dihydropterin. A decreased rate
of dehydration of this compound has been hypothesized to be responsible for the
production of 7-biopterin found in certain mildly hyperphenylalaninemic
individuals. We have now identified nonsense and missense mutations in the
4a-carbinolamine dehydratase gene in a hyperphenylalaninemic child who excretes
large amounts of 7-biopterin. This finding is consistent with the role of the
carbinolamine dehydratase in the phenylalanine hydroxylation reaction. Together
with previously identified inherited disorders in phenylalanine hydroxylase and
dihydropteridine reductase, there are now identified mutations in the three
enzymes involved in the phenylalanine hydroxylation system. In addition, the
genetics of this system may have broader implications, since the product of the
dehydratase gene has previously been shown to play an additional role (as
dimerization cofactor for hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha) in the regulation of
transcription, through interaction with hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha.

PMCID: PMC1682436
PMID: 8352282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Exp Cell Res. 1993 Sep;208(1):241-7.

Activation of albumin and other liver-specific gene expression in
fibroblast-pancreatic cell hybrids: different roles of transcription factors.

Wu KJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

HNF1 and C/EBP-related proteins are transcription factors important for the
activation of albumin gene expression. Fusion of mouse fibroblast (L) cells with 
rat pancreatic cells (AR42J) unexpectedly activated mouse albumin gene expression
in the hybrid cells. In addition, several liver-specific genes such as tyrosine
amino-transferase (TAT) and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxy-kinase (PEPCK) were also 
activated in the fibroblast-pancreatic hybrids. RNase protection assays using rat
HNF1 riboprobes showed that AR42J cells and fibroblast-pancreatic hybrids
expressed rat HNF1 transcripts. However, mouse or rat C/EBP alpha transcripts
were not expressed in the fibroblast-pancreatic hybrids by RNase protection
assays. Transfection of HNF1 expression vector alone was able to activate an
albumin promoter (-1 kb, 5' flanking) promoted GPT construct in L cells, but not 
in HeLa cells, suggesting that different factors in L cells might interact with
HNF1 to mediate activation. These results showed the global activation of
liver-specific genes (including albumin, TAT, and PEPCK) in somatic cell hybrids.
The presence of HNF1 in the hybrids may play a causal role. The absence of C/EBP 
alpha in the hybrids suggested its non-essential role in the activation of
liver-specific gene expression. The other mechanisms responsible for the
activation were also discussed.

PMID: 8102976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Mol Endocrinol. 1993 Aug;7(8):1049-60.

Human thyroxine-binding globulin gene: complete sequence and transcriptional
regulation.

Hayashi Y(1), Mori Y, Janssen OE, Sunthornthepvarakul T, Weiss RE, Takeda K,
Weinberg M, Seo H, Bell GI, Refetoff S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637-1470.

T4-binding globulin (TBG) is a glycoprotein of hepatic origin which transports
thyroid hormone in serum. To characterize the human TBG (hTBG) gene, we studied
its genomic organization, promoter activity, and regulation. To this purpose, we 
isolated from liver a complete hTBG cDNA clone containing the 5'-untranslated
region and localized the transcription start site (TSS). The analysis of genomic 
clones revealed that the hTBG gene consists of five exons and that its
exon-intron organization is similar to that of other members of the serine
protease inhibitor family. The first exon (exon 0) is a short noncoding sequence 
located 1.62 kilobase pairs (kbp) upstream from exon 1. Potential cis-acting
transcriptional regulatory elements including a TATA box, a CAAT box, and a
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 binding motif were identified in the upstream region.
A reporter gene in which 3.2 kbp of the 5'-flanking region, including exon 0, was
inserted upstream of the bacterial chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene showed 
significant activity when transfected into a hepatblastoma-derived (HepG2) cell
line. The phorbol ester, 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, down-regulated the
promoter activity by more than 80% and completely inhibited hTBG synthesis,
whereas thyroid hormone, glucocorticoid, estrogen, and nicotinic acid had little,
if any, effect. A series of 5'-deletions revealed that the fragment -218 to +4
from the TSS had the highest promoter activity, nearly 1000-fold greater than the
promoterless chloramphenicol acetyltransferase construct. When
nonhepatocyte-derived cell lines (CV-1 and CHO) were tested, promoter activity
was reduced by a factor of 100, showing that the promoter works in liver-specific
manner. The region -218 to -102 contains liver-specific enhancer elements, since 
deletion to nucleotide -101 resulted in a profound reduction of the promoter
activity in HepG2 cells but not in CV-1 or CHO cells. On the other hand,
mutational disruption of the putative hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 site (located
65 bp upstream of the TSS) completely abolished the promoter activity in all cell
lines, indicating that this site is absolutely required for the transcription of 
the hTBG gene.

PMID: 8232304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Jul 25;21(15):3405-11.

Ex vivo regulation of specific gene expression by nanomolar concentration of
double-stranded dumbbell oligonucleotides.

Clusel C(1), Ugarte E, Enjolras N, Vasseur M, Blumenfeld M.

Author information: 
(1)GENSET, Paris, France.

Inhibition of specific transcriptional regulatory proteins is a new approach to
control gene expression. Transcriptional activity of DNA-binding proteins can be 
inhibited by the use of double-stranded (ds) oligodeoxynucleotides that compete
for the binding to their specific target sequences in promoters and enhancers. As
a model, we used phosphodiester dumbbell oligonucleotides containing a binding
site for the liver-enriched transcription factor HNF-1 (Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor
1). Binding affinity of HNF-1 to dumbbell oligonucleotides was the same as that
to ds oligonucleotides, as determined by gel retardation assays. HNF-1 dumbbells 
specifically inhibited in vitro transcription driven by the albumin promoter by
more than 90%. HNF-1-dependent activation of a CAT reporter plasmid was
specifically inhibited when the HNF-1 dumbbell oligonucleotide was added at nM
concentration to transiently transfected C33 cells. On the contrary, HNF-1 ds
oligonucleotides, which displayed the same activity as the dumbbell
oligonucleotides in the in vitro assays, were no more effective in the ex vivo
experiments. These results might reflect the increased stability of the circular 
dumbbell oligonucleotides towards cellular nuclease degradation, as shown in
vitro with nucleolytic enzymes. Dumbbell oligonucleotides containing unmodified
phosphodiester bonds may efficiently compete for binding of specific
transcription factors within cells, then providing a potential therapeutic tool
to control disease-causing genes.

PMCID: PMC331438
PMID: 7688452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Cell Biol. 1993 May;121(4):887-98.

HNF4 and HNF1 as well as a panel of hepatic functions are extinguished and
reexpressed in parallel in chromosomally reduced rat hepatoma-human fibroblast
hybrids.

Griffo G(1), Hamon-Benais C, Angrand PO, Fox M, West L, Lecoq O, Povey S, Cassio 
D, Weiss M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, URA Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique 1149, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Rat hepatoma-human fibroblast hybrids of two independent lineages containing only
8-11 human chromosomes show pleiotropic extinction of thirteen out of fifteen
hepatic functions examined. Reexpression of the entire group of functions most
often occurs in a block, and except for one discordant subclone, correlates with 
loss of human chromosome 2. The extinguished cells and their reexpressing
derivatives have been examined for the expression of seven liver-enriched
transcription factors. C/EBP, LAP, DBP, HNF3, and vHNF1 expression are not
systematically extinguished in parallel with the hepatic functions. However, HNF1
and HNF4 show a perfect correlation with phenotype: these factors are expressed
only in the cells showing pleiotropic reexpression. Since recent evidence
indicates that HNF4 controls HNF1 expression, it can be proposed that the HNF4
gene is the primary target of the pleiotropic extinguisher.

PMCID: PMC2119800
PMID: 8491780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. DNA Cell Biol. 1993 May;12(4):283-9.

HNF1 activates transcription of the human gene for insulin-like growth factor
binding protein-1.

Powell DR(1), Suwanichkul A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030.

Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) is expressed primarily in 
the liver, kidney, and uterus. Basal IGFBP-1 promoter activity in human HEP G2
hepatoma cells is dependent upon a proximal promoter element that binds hepatic
nuclear factor 1 (HNF1), a protein that is likely to be an important factor
regulating the expression of many genes in liver and kidney. To test whether HNF1
activates IGFBP-1 transcription, HEP G2 cells and HeLa cells were cotransfected
transiently with HNF1 expression vectors and with IGFBP-1
promoter/chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene constructs. HNF1
increased IGFBP-1 promoter activity in both HEP G2 and HeLa cells. Gel
mobility-shift assays and additional transfections in HeLa cells showed that
expressed full-length and carboxy-terminal truncated forms of HNF1 could each
bind the HNF1 cis element of the IGFBP-1 promoter; however, significant
trans-activation only occurred in the presence of the full-length HNF1 protein,
similar to past experience with these two HNF1 forms and the albumin promoter.
Further studies showed that IGFBP-1 promoter constructs containing mutations with
high or low affinity for HNF1 responded to HNF1 expression with increased or
decreased activity, respectively, relative to the native promoter. These studies 
suggest that HNF1 and/or related proteins play a role in hepatic, and perhaps
also renal, expression of IGFBP-1.

PMID: 7684229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1993 Apr;3(2):246-53.

Regulation of the HNF-1 homeodomain proteins by DCoH.

Hansen LP(1), Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Beckman Center for Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Stanford University Medical
School, CA 94305.

The pattern of expression of homeodomain proteins often exceeds their apparent
domain of activity. Tissue-specific proteins that modulate the in vivo activity
of homeodomain proteins have been proposed to account for this functional
restriction. The first identified example of such an accessory protein is DCoH,
which confers transcriptional activity to the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 and
provides a model of how other accessory factors might modulate the function of
homeodomain proteins.

PMID: 8504250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. DNA Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;12(3):199-208.

A bipartite activation domain is responsible for the activity of transcription
factor HNF1/LFB1 in cells of hepatic and nonhepatic origin.

Toniatti C(1), Monaci P, Nicosia A, Cortese R, Ciliberto G.

Author information: 
(1)I.R.B.M.-Istituto di Ricerche di Biologia Molecolare P. Angeletti, Rome,
Italy.

HNF1/LFB1 is a transcription factor that controls the expression of several
liver-specific genes. Previous in vitro experiments allowed us to identify two
different regions in the carboxy-terminal portion of the protein responsible for 
most of the transcription activation potential: the first, ADI, between amino
acids 546 and 628 and the second, ADII, between amino acids 281 and 318. To
characterize the molecular anatomy of HNF1/LFB1 better, we have analyzed its
trans-activating properties in vivo. Several HNF1/LFB1 deletion mutants were
tested for their ability to induce transcription from HNF1/LFB1-dependent
synthetic promoters in cells of hepatic and nonhepatic origin. These last
recipient cells provide an HNF1/LFB1-deficient environment that is useful for a
precise quantification of the recombinant protein. Our results confirm the
importance of ADI and indicate that no activating property can be assigned to
ADII in vivo. Moreover, a novel glutamine/proline-rich activation domain (ADIII) 
has been identified between amino acids 440 and 506. These findings are confirmed
by domain-swapping experiments, carried out with the heterologous GAL4
DNA-binding domain, which also show that the activity of each individual
activation domain is influenced by combining adjacent HNF1/LFB1 sequences. The
data presented indicate that HNF1/LFB1 transcription activating potential relies 
on a complex structure and also provide important clues to understanding the
different functions exerted by transcription factors of this family.

PMID: 8466643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Eur J Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;60(2):376-82.

Immunological characterization of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 protein: appearance
of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 protein in developing mouse embryos.

Miura N(1), Iwai K, Miyamoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

PMID: 8330635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Growth Regul. 1993 Mar;3(1):17-20.

Characterization of cis-acting elements and transacting factors involved in the
tissue-specific and developmental regulation of IGFBP-1 gene expression.

Babajko S(1), Binoux M, Groyer A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherches sur la Régulation de la Croissance, INSERM U142, Hôpital
Saint Antoine, Paris.

The liver-specificity of insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1)
gene promoter activity has been studied by transient transfection in rat hepatoma
cell lines, rat fibroblasts and human cervical carcinoma cells, and shown to be
dependent on HNF1. Regulation of IGFBP-1 gene expression has also been studied in
rat liver by Northern blot and run-on assays during development, specifically
during the perinatal period. The results suggest (1) that the increases in mRNA
at birth and +1 day post-natally result from increased transcription and (2) that
no decrease in transcription activity accompanies the rapid IGFBP-1 mRNA decay
during the neonatal period, arguing for post-transcriptional regulation. Support 
for transcriptional regulation during the neonatal period was obtained from in
vitro footprinting experiments and gel shift data. Three trans-acting factors
interact with the h-IGFBP-1 promoter between nt -265 and -305. Two of these, Pc
and PHS, were expressed throughout development, as well as during adulthood, and 
interacted with cis-elements spanning nt -295 to -305 and -265 to -285,
respectively. The third, Pa, was expressed only when IGFBP-1 gene expression was 
high, and interacted with cis-elements spanning nt -285 to -295.

PMID: 7683517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Feb 25;21(4):897-903.

Competition between transcription factors HNF1 and HNF3, and alternative
cell-specific activation by DBP and C/EBP contribute to the regulation of the
liver-specific aldolase B promoter.

Gregori C(1), Kahn A, Pichard AL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Genetique Moleculaire, U. 129 de l'INSERM, ICGM CHU Cochin,
Paris, France.

The aldolase B proximal promoter is controlled by at least five elements spanning
from -190 to -103 bp with respect to the start site of transcription. From 5' to 
3', we found: a negative DE element, an activating C/EBP-DBP binding site, a
CCAAT box binding NFY that seems to play a negative role, and an activating
element consisting of two overlapping binding sites for HNF-1 and HNF-3.
Contransfection experiments of aldolase B/CAT constructs and of expression
vectors for different transcription factors were carried out in human hepatoma
Hep G2 cells. We found that DBP and HNF-1 are strong transactivators of the
aldolase B promoter while C/EBP and vHNF-1 are only weak activators and HNF-3
alone does not modify such activity. Deletion of the distal negative element
results in a similar transactivation by C/EBP and DBP, enhanced for the former
and reduced for the latter. In hepatocytes in primary culture, the strong
transactivator is C/EBP while DBP is essentially inactive. This
tissue-specificity of C/EBP and DBP action could depend on interaction with
tissue-specific proteins bound to a neighbouring site, probably DE. Finally, HNF3
behaves as a very strong anti-activator of the aldolase B promoter. It
competitively antagonizes transactivation by HNF-1 and non-competitively
transactivation by DBP. This negative effect of HNF-3 and tissue-specificity of
the transactivation potential of DBP and C/EBP are unique features of the
aldolase B promoter.

PMCID: PMC309222
PMID: 8383844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Feb;13(2):1183-93.

The human beta fibrinogen promoter contains a hepatocyte nuclear factor
1-dependent interleukin-6-responsive element.

Dalmon J(1), Laurent M, Courtois G.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire et Structurale, INSERM Unité 217,
Grenoble, France.

Acute-phase reactants are liver proteins whose synthesis is positively or
negatively regulated during inflammation. The main mediators of this phenomenon
are glucocorticoids and interleukin-6 (IL-6), a pleiotropic cytokine that also
controls hematopoiesis. Functional analysis of several acute-phase reactant
promoter regions has identified two major DNA motifs used by IL-6-regulated
genes. The first one corresponds to a CTGG(G/A)AA sequence, and the other is a
binding site for members of the C/EBP family of nuclear proteins. We have
previously shown that the human beta fibrinogen (beta Fg) promoter contains an
IL-6-responsive region, located between bp -150 and -67 (P. Huber, M. Laurent,
and J. Dalmon, J. Biol. Chem. 265:5695-5701, 1990). In this study, using DNase I 
footprinting, mobility shift assays, and mutagenesis, we demonstrate that at
least three subdomains of this region are necessary to observe a full response to
IL-6. The most distal contains a CTGGGAA motif, and its mutation inhibits IL-6
stimulation. Another, which is able to interact with several distinct nuclear
proteins, among them members of the C/EBP family, is dispensable for IL-6
induction but plays an important role in the constitutive expression of beta Fg. 
Finally, a proximal hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 binding site, already described
as the major determinant of beta Fg tissue-specific expression, is also required 
for IL-6 stimulation. These results indicate a complex interplay between nuclear 
proteins within the beta Fg IL-6-responsive region and suggest a tight functional
coupling between the tissue-specific and inducible elements.

PMCID: PMC359003
PMID: 8423785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mol Biol Cell. 1993 Jan;4(1):59-69.

Regulation of albumin gene expression in hepatoma cells of fetal phenotype:
dominant inhibition of HNF1 function and role of ubiquitous transcription
factors.

Rollier A(1), DiPersio CM, Cereghini S, Stevens K, Tronche F, Zaret K, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, URA CNRS 1149, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, France.

Two widely used hepatoma cell lines, mouse BW1J and human HepG2, express gene
products characteristic of fetal hepatocytes, including serum albumin, whereas
reporter genes driven by the albumin promoter are expressed at very low levels
compared with highly differentiated hepatoma cells. We have investigated the low 
albumin promoter activity in BW1J cells to understand differences in liver gene
regulation between fetal and adult cells. Addition of the albumin upstream
enhancer, or any other fragment of the albumin gene, failed to modify expression 
of the transfected promoter in BW1J cells. Analysis of cis elements of the
albumin promoter showed that, in contrast to highly differentiated H4II cells, in
BW1J cells the activity largely depends on ubiquitous transcription factors. Both
BW1J and HepG2 cells produce the liver-enriched transcription factor HNF1;
dimerization and DNA binding properties are identical to those of liver HNF1, yet
the protein fails to show the anticipated transcriptional stimulatory activity. A
transfected HNF1 expression vector strongly trans-activates the albumin promoter 
in HepG2 but only weakly in BW1J cells, and in hybrids (BW1J x Fao), inefficient 
HNF1 function is dominant. We conclude that hepatoma cells of the fetal phenotype
are deficient in the use of HNF1 to drive transcription of the albumin gene and
that they harbor a dominant modulator of HNF1 function.

PMCID: PMC300900
PMID: 8443410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. C R Acad Sci III. 1993;316(4):385-94.

The HNF1 C-terminal domain contributes to transcriptional activity and modulates 
nuclear localisation.

Sourdive DJ(1), Chouard T, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UA 1644, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

HNF1 is a homeoprotein that regulates the expression of a large number of liver
specific genes. By performing transient expression assays with a series of
C-terminal deletion mutants and with a LexA-HNF1 fusion protein, we show that the
C-terminal half of HNF1 is necessary and sufficient for in vivo transcriptional
activity, and we map the residues essential for this activity. However, since our
data for some mutants showed discrepancies with previous in vitro studies, we
undertook a more careful analysis of the mutant proteins using gel retardation
assays and immunoblots made with nuclear extracts from transfected cells. We show
that progressive C-terminal deletions drastically increase the amount of protein 
that accumulates in transfected cells. Immunofluorescence microscopy reveals that
mutants containing between 348 and 416 residues accumulate outside the nuclear
membrane, while longer mutants are nuclear like the 628 amino acid long wild type
HNF1. A mutant with 289 residues is predominantly nuclear. Since the only obvious
candidate for a nuclear localisation signal is located within this last mutant,
we suggest that certain C-terminal deletions expose a sequence that blocks
nuclear transport.

PMID: 8402264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1993;338:97-102.

The isolation and characterization of clones of 4a-hydroxytetrahydrobiopterin
dehydratase.

Kaufman S(1), Citron BA, Davis M, Milstien S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry, National Institute of Mental Health, Betheada,
MD 20892.

PMID: 8304232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1993;338:103-6.

Molecular cloning and recombinant expression of the human liver phenylalanine
hydroxylase stimulating factor revealed structural and functional identity to the
dimerization cofactor for the nuclear transcription factor HNF-1 alpha.

Thöny B(1), Neuheiser F, Hauer CR, Heizmann CW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Chemistry, University Children's Hospital, Zürich,
Switzerland.

PMID: 8304090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Jan 1;90(1):272-6.

Liver-specific expression of human insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1: 
functional role of transcription factor HNF1 in vivo.

Babajko S(1), Tronche F, Groyer A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherches sur la Régulation de la Croissance, Institut National de
la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U.142, Hôpital Saint Antoine, Paris, France.

Tissue-specific expression of insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1
(IGFBP-1) in the liver has been studied using differentiated (H4II and C2Rev7)
and dedifferentiated (H5 and C2) rat hepatoma cell lines. Northern blot analysis 
showed that endogenous IGFBP-1 mRNA was expressed only in the differentiated cell
lines. The first 341 base pairs 5' to the transcription initiation site of the
human IGFBP-1 gene were inserted upstream of the chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase reporter gene (pBP-1(341)). Expression of this gene from the
human IGFBP-1 promoter was 10-16 times more efficient in the H4II line than in
the other hepatoma cell lines and 40 and approximately 12 times more so than in
rat fibroblasts (FR3T3) and a human cervical carcinoma cell line (C33),
respectively. Cotransfection of pBP-1(341) and pRSV-HNF1 and/or pRSV-v-HNF1
(eukaryotic expression vectors that drive the synthesis of the liver-enriched
trans-acting factor HNF1 or of v-HNF1, a related form) in C33 recipient cells
yielded a 6-fold increase in IGFBP-1 promoter activity by HNF1 and a 2-fold
increase by v-HNF1. These increases were dependent on the integrity of an HNF1
binding site located 58-74 nucleotides upstream of the cap site. Stimulation of
promoter activity by cotransfection of both HNF1 and v-HNF1 fell between these
values. Our results indicate that HNF1 is instrumental in human IGFBP-1 promoter 
activity in vivo and that v-HNF1 modulates this functional role.

PMCID: PMC45642
PMID: 7678342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Biochemistry. 1992 Dec 15;31(49):12469-76.

The human prothrombin gene: transcriptional regulation in HepG2 cells.

Bancroft JD(1), McDowell SA, Degen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Science Research, Children's Hospital Research Foundation,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229.

The human prothrombin gene is expressed predominantly in hepatocytes. Previous
work indicated that this tissue specificity is transcriptionally regulated. In
order to identify the cis-acting regulatory elements in the 5' flanking region of
the human prothrombin gene which may direct the expression of prothrombin in
hepatocytes, a series of hybrid plasmids were constructed linking portions of the
5' flanking region of the human prothrombin gene to the bacterial chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase gene. Expression of these hybrid plasmids was examined in
calcium phosphate-mediated transient transfections of HepG2 cells, a human
hepatoblastoma cell line which expresses prothrombin, and HeLa cells, an
adenocarcinoma cell line which does not express detectable amounts of
prothrombin. Both the prothrombin promoter and an upstream regulatory region
containing sequence homologous to the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1) binding
site (nucleotides -919 to -790 relative to the prothrombin transcription
initiation site) were required for expression in HepG2 cells. The upstream region
also exhibited non-tissue-specific enhancer activity. Gel mobility shift assays
confirmed cell-type-specific differences in the protein-DNA interactions between 
proteins in HepG2 or HeLa nuclear extracts and either the promoter region or the 
upstream regulatory region of the gene.

PMID: 1463733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Oct 25;20(20):5321-8.

Trans-dominant inhibition of transcription activator LFB1.

Nicosia A(1), Tafi R, Monaci P.

Author information: 
(1)IRBM, Istituto di Ricerche di Biologia Molecolare P. Angeletti, Pomezia, Rome,
Italy.

Liver-enriched factor LFB1 (also named HNF1) is a dimeric transcription activator
which is essential for the expression of many hepatocyte-specific genes. Here we 
demonstrate that LFB1 mutants in the POU A-like or in the homeo domains inhibit
wild-type DNA binding by forming inactive heterodimeric complexes.
Co-transfection of one of these mutants with wild-type LFB1 in HeLa cells
eliminated LFB1 DNA binding and transcriptional activities through a
trans-dominant mechanism. Expression of the same dominant negative mutant in
human hepatoma HepG2 cells only partially inhibited endogenous LFB1 activity, due
to stabilization of LFB1 dimers in these cells. Dimer stabilization in hepatoma
cells is mediated by a heat-labile association with an 11kD polypeptide,
analogous to the DCoH cofactor identified in rat liver by Mendel et al. (1). The 
property of stabilizing LFB1 dimers is also shared by HeLa cells which produce a 
HeLa homolog of DCoH. These results demonstrate that LFB1 dimer stabilization as 
well as the synthesis of 'stabilizing factors' are not restricted to cells
expressing LFB1 or other members of its family.

PMCID: PMC334337
PMID: 1331985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Bioessays. 1992 Sep;14(9):579-87.

HNF1, a homeoprotein member of the hepatic transcription regulatory network.

Tronche F(1), Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, France.

Numerous liver specific genes are transcriptionally activated by the binding to
their promoter or enhancer of Hepatic Nuclear Factor 1 (HNF1). HNF1 contains a
variant homeo-domain and binds to DNA as either a homodimer or a heterodimer with
the vHNF1 protein. Surprisingly, HNF1 is not restricted to hepatocytes but is
expressed in epithelial cells of several endoderm derived organs and in mesoderm 
derived kidney tubules. Hence, HNF1 alone can not account for the differentiated 
state of the hepatic cells. In fact, several other liver-enriched transcription
factors have been cloned. The hepatic phenotype could result from the
combinatorial expression of these regulators. Possible involvement of these
trans-acting factors in liver organogenesis and hepatic differentiation is
discussed.

PMID: 1365913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Biol Chem. 1992 Aug 25;267(24):17375-83.

Transcriptional regulation of the human insulin receptor promoter.

Cameron KE(1), Resnik J, Webster NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093.

The ability of the human insulin receptor promoter to direct expression of a
linked chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene was assessed in transient
transfections into HepG2 and Hela cells. A 5'-deletional analysis of the promoter
showed that regions between -646 and -489 were important for the activity of the 
proximal promoter. In addition, a possible negative regulatory element was
identified between -1311 and -877 and a positive element between -1823 and -1311.
DNase I footprint and gel retardation analysis showed that multiple factors bind 
to the human insulin receptor promoter. In particular, DNase I protection
patterns were observed over the Sp1 sites at -620 to -599 and -438 to -392, a TC 
box at -533, four homopyrimidine/homopurine sites clustered around -1150, and a
site at -1420 that contains the motif TGGCCC which has been shown to bind the
liver-specific transcription factor LF-A1.

PMID: 1324934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Aug 15;89(16):7300-4.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha is expressed in a hamster insulinoma line and
transactivates the rat insulin I gene.

Emens LA(1), Landers DW, Moss LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030.

Systematic mutational analysis previously identified two primary regulatory
elements within a minienhancer (-247 to -198) of the rat insulin I promoter that 
are critical for transcriptional activity. The Far box (-241 to -232) and the
FLAT element (-222 to -208) synergistically upregulate transcription and,
together, are sufficient to confer tissue-specific and glucose-responsive
transcriptional activity on a heterologous promoter. Detailed analysis of the
FLAT element further revealed that, in addition to the positive regulatory
activity it mediates in tandem with the Far box, it is a site for negative
regulatory control. A portion of the FLAT element bears considerable sequence
similarity to the consensus binding site for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha
(HNF1 alpha; LF-B1) a liver-enriched homeodomain-containing transcription factor.
Here we show that the HNF1-like site within the FLAT element exhibited positive
transcriptional activity in both HepG2 and HIT cells and bound similar, but
distinguishable, nuclear protein complexes in the respective nuclear extracts.
Screening of a hamster insulinoma cDNA library with a PCR-derived probe
encompassing the DNA-binding domain of rat HNF1 alpha resulted in isolation of a 
hamster HNF1 alpha (hHNF1 alpha) cDNA homolog. Specific antiserum identified the 
HNF1 alpha protein as one component of a specific FLAT-binding complex in HIT
nuclear extracts. Expression of the hHNF1 alpha cDNA in COS cells resulted in
transactivation of reporter constructs containing multimerized segments of the
rat insulin I minienhancer. Thus, HNF1 alpha, one component of a DNA-binding
complex involved in transcriptional regulation of the rat insulin I gene, may
play a significant role in nonhepatic as well as hepatic gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC49697
PMID: 1380153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Mol Endocrinol. 1992 Aug;9(1):19-29.

The function of conserved elements in the promoter of the mouse angiotensinogen
gene.

Congiu M(1), Clouston WM, Fernley RT, Richards RI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Florey Institute of Experimental Physiology and Medicine, University of
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The angiotensinogen gene encodes the precursor protein for the potent
vasoconstrictor angiotensin II. Although the gene is expressed in several
tissues, the liver is the major source of circulating protein. In previous
in-vivo studies we have found that a mini-gene containing 750 bp of 5'-flanking
sequence is transcribed in a manner which largely parallels the expression of the
endogenous gene. In this report, we characterized conserved elements in the
promoter region, in order to determine their role in the transcription of the
angiotensinogen gene. Constructs fused to the chloramphenicol acetyl transferase 
(CAT) reporter gene were transfected into hepatocarcinoma Hep G2 cells as well as
into nonhepatic cell lines. We found that 5'-deletion mutant constructs,
containing sequences from +25 to -90 bp and -321 to -750 bp, were each able to
activate transcription. These constructs contain the TATA box and core promoter
sequences, including an Sp1-binding site, and two glucocorticoid responsive
elements respectively. In the non-hepatic cell lines, HeLa and Jeg-3, we found
that the constructs were transcribed at a much lower rate when compared with the 
expression of a plasmid containing the Rous sarcoma virus long terminal repeat
fused to the CAT gene. Constructs which included sequence 5' to -244 were
oestrogen inducible. An element which is conserved between rodent and human
angiotensinogen promoters is contained within a sequence which is oestrogen
responsive, while another binds the liver-enriched transcriptional activator
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1. However, the role of this transactivator in the
transcription of angiotensinogen remains uncertain.

PMID: 1515023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Jul;12(7):3023-31.

Temporal expression of the human alcohol dehydrogenase gene family during liver
development correlates with differential promoter activation by hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha, liver activator protein, 
and D-element-binding protein.

van Ooij C(1), Snyder RC, Paeper BW, Duester G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Colorado State University, Fort Collins 80523.

The human class I alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) gene family consists of ADH1, ADH2,
and ADH3, which are sequentially activated in early fetal, late fetal, and
postnatal liver, respectively. Analysis of ADH promoters revealed differential
activation by several factors previously shown to control liver transcription. In
cotransfection assays, the ADH1 promoter, but not the ADH2 or ADH3 promoter, was 
shown to respond to hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1), which has previously
been shown to regulate transcription in early liver development. The ADH2
promoter, but not the ADH1 or ADH3 promoter, was shown to respond to
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBP alpha), a transcription factor
particularly active during late fetal liver and early postnatal liver
development. The ADH1, ADH2, and ADH3 promoters all responded to the liver
transcription factors liver activator protein (LAP) and D-element-binding protein
(DBP), which are most active in postnatal liver. For all three promoters, the
activation by LAP or DBP was higher than that seen by HNF-1 or C/EBP alpha, and a
significant synergism between C/EBP alpha and LAP was noticed for the ADH2 and
ADH3 promoters when both factors were simultaneously cotransfected. A hierarchy
of ADH promoter responsiveness to C/EBP alpha and LAP homo- and heterodimers is
suggested. In all three ADH genes, LAP bound to the same four sites previously
reported for C/EBP alpha (i.e., -160, -120, -40, and -20 bp), but DBP bound
strongly only to the site located at -40 bp relative to the transcriptional
start. Mutational analysis of ADH2 indicated that the -40 bp element accounts for
most of the promoter regulation by the bZIP factors analyzed. These studies
suggest that HNF-1 and C/EBP alpha help establish ADH gene family transcription
in fetal liver and that LAP and DBP help maintain high-level ADH gene family
transcription in postnatal liver.

PMCID: PMC364516
PMID: 1620113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Genomics. 1992 Jun;13(2):293-300.

Chromosomal localization in man and rat of the genes encoding the liver-enriched 
transcription factors C/EBP, DBP, and HNF1/LFB-1 (CEBP, DBP, and transcription
factor 1, TCF1, respectively) and of the hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor 
gene (HGF).

Szpirer C(1), Riviere M, Cortese R, Nakamura T, Islam MQ, Levan G, Szpirer J.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Rhode-St-Genèse, Belgium.

By means of somatic cell hybrids segregating either human or rat chromosomes, we 
determined the chromosome localization of three genes encoding transcription
factors expressed in hepatocytes, namely, C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer binding protein),
DBP (D site of albumin promoter binding protein), and HNF1/LFB-1 (designated
transcription factor 1, gene symbol: TCF1), and of the hepatocyte growth factor
gene, which is identical to the mitogenic and chemotactic factor designated
scatter factor (gene symbol:HGF). The CEBP and DBP genes, encoding two related
transcription factors, were found to be syntenic both on human chromosome 19 and 
on rat chromosome 1. These results provide further evidence for conservation of
synteny on these two chromosomes (and on mouse chromosome 7). The TCF1 gene was
found to be located on chromosome 12 in both man and rat, thereby defining a new 
segment of homology between these two species (and a segment of mouse chromosome 
5). The HGF gene was mapped to rat chromosome 4, confirming homology between this
chromosome and human chromosome 7, which carries the human HGF gene.

PMID: 1535333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Mar;12(3):1134-48.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 and C/EBP are essential for the activity of the human
apolipoprotein B gene second-intron enhancer.

Brooks AR(1), Levy-Wilson B.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Cardiovascular Research
Institute, San Francisco, California.

The tissue-specific transcriptional enhancer of the human apolipoprotein B gene
contains multiple protein-binding sites spanning 718 bp. Most of the enhancer
activity is found in a 443-bp fragment (+621 to +1064) that is located entirely
within the second intron of the gene. Within this fragment, a 147-bp region (+806
to +952) containing a single 97-bp DNase I footprint exhibits significant
enhancer activity. We now report that this footprint contains four distinct
protein-binding sites that have the potential to bind nine distinct liver nuclear
proteins. One of these proteins was identified as hepatocyte nuclear factor 1
(HNF-1), which binds with relatively low affinity to the 5' half of a 20-bp
palindrome located at the 5' end of the large footprint. A binding site for C/EBP
(or one of the related proteins that recognize similar sequences) was identified 
in the center of the 97-bp footprint. This binding site is coincident or overlaps
with the binding sites for five other proteins, two of which appear to be
distinct from the C/EBP-related family of proteins. The binding site for a
nuclear factor designated protein I is located between the HNF-1 and C/EBP
binding sites. Finally, the 3'-most 15 bp of the footprinted sequence contain a
binding site for another nuclear protein, which we have called protein II.
Mutations that abolish the binding of either HNF-1, protein II, or the
C/EBP-related proteins severely reduce enhancer activity. However, deletion
experiments demonstrated that neither the HNF-1-binding site alone, nor the
combination of binding sites for HNF-1, protein I, and C/EBP, nor the
C/EBP-binding site plus the protein II-binding site is sufficient to enhance
transcription from a strong apolipoprotein B promoter. Rather, HNF-1 and C/EBP
act synergistically with protein II to enhance transcription of the
apolipoprotein B gene.

PMCID: PMC369545
PMID: 1545795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Nature. 1992 Jan 30;355(6359):457-61.

A transcriptional hierarchy involved in mammalian cell-type specification.

Kuo CJ(1), Conley PB, Chen L, Sladek FM, Darnell JE Jr, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine,
California 94305-5425.

Although transcriptional hierarchies have been extensively studied in
invertebrates, their involvement in mammalian cell-type specification is poorly
understood. Here we report a hepatocyte transcriptional cascade suggested by the 
expression patterns of hepatic transcription factors in dedifferentiated
hepatomas and hepatocyte: fibroblast hybrids in which the liver phenotype was
extinguished. These results indicated that the homeoprotein hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha), and HNF-4, a member of the steroid hormone receptor
superfamily, were regulated coordinately or in a hierarchy by a higher-order
locus, independently of other hepatic transactivators. HNF-4 was implicated as an
essential positive regulator of HNF-1 alpha, as deletion of an HNF-4 binding site
in the HNF-1 alpha promoter abolished promoter activity, and HNF-4 potently
transactivated the HNF-1 alpha promoter in cotransfection assays. Moreover,
genetic complementation of dedifferentiated hepatomas with HNF-4 complementary
DNA rescued expression of endogenous HNF-1 alpha messenger RNA and DNA-binding
activity. Our studies therefore define an HNF-4----HNF-1 alpha (4----1 alpha)
transcriptional hierarchy operative in differentiated hepatocytes but selectively
inhibited by an extinguishing locus and somatic mutations which antagonize the
liver phenotype.

PMID: 1734282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Mamm Genome. 1992;3(3):184-5.

The gene coding for variant hepatic nuclear factor 1 (Tcf-2), maps between the
Edp-1 and Erba genes on mouse chromosome 11.

Karolyi IJ(1), Guénet JL, Rey-Campos J, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor
48109-0618.

PMID: 1352161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Science. 1991 Dec 20;254(5039):1762-7.

Characterization of a cofactor that regulates dimerization of a mammalian
homeodomain protein.

Mendel DB(1), Khavari PA, Conley PB, Graves MK, Hansen LP, Admon A, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, CA 94305.

Dimerization among transcription factors has become a recurrent theme in the
regulation of eukaryotic gene expression. Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha
(HNF-1 alpha) is a homeodomain-containing protein that functions as a dimer. A
dimerization cofactor of HNF-1 alpha (DCoH) was identified that displayed a
restricted tissue distribution and did not bind to DNA, but, rather, selectively 
stabilized HNF-1 alpha dimers. The formation of a stable tetrameric DCoH-HNF-1
alpha complex, which required the dimerization domain of HNF-1 alpha, did not
change the DNA binding characteristics of HNF-1 alpha, but enhanced its
transcriptional activity. However, DCoH did not confer transcriptional activation
to the GAL4 DNA binding domain. These results indicate that DCoH regulates
formation of transcriptionally active tetrameric complexes and may contribute to 
the developmental specificity of the complex.

PMID: 1763325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Mech Dev. 1991 Dec;36(1-2):47-58.

vHNF1 is expressed in epithelial cells of distinct embryonic origin during
development and precedes HNF1 expression.

Ott MO(1), Rey-Campos J, Cereghini S, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

HNF1 (Hepatic Nuclear Factor 1) and vHNF1 are transcriptional regulators
containing a highly divergent homeodomain. The first was initially found in liver
nuclear extracts and is crucial for the transcription of albumin and many other
hepatocyte specific genes, while the second was found in dedifferentiated
hepatoma cells. Both recognize the same DNA binding site and can form homo and
heterodimers in vitro and in vivo. In situ hybridization analyses have been
performed to delineate the spatial and temporal pattern of expression of vHNF1
relative to HNF1 during mouse embryogenesis. The results show that accumulation
of vHNF1 mRNAs expression is detected in several tissues of the embryo of both
endodermal and mesodermal origin. Expression occurs in the yolk sac, the
primitive gut, the liver primordium, and at different stages of kidney
development in polarized epithelial structures and usually precedes that of HNF1.
vHNF1 expression seems particularly prevalent with morphogenetic events in the
kidney and may be a marker for certain polarized epithelium.

PMID: 1685890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. EMBO J. 1991 Nov;10(11):3177-82.

Disruption of the LF-A1 and LF-B1 binding sites in the human alpha-1-antitrypsin 
gene has a differential effect during development in transgenic mice.

Tripodi M(1), Abbott C, Vivian N, Cortese R, Lovell-Badge R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biopatologia umana, Università la Sapienza, Policlinico Umbert
I, Roma, Italy.

Previous work in transfected cell lines and in nuclear extracts has led to the
identification of two cis-acting elements important for transcription of the
human alpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT) gene, which bind to two liver specific
trans-acting factors, LF-A1 and LF-B1. Mutations EM3 and PM1, which abolish the
binding of LF-A1 and LF-B1 respectively, drastically reduce transcription
activity of the A1AT gene in vitro and in cell culture. The same mutants have now
been introduced in a larger DNA context and their effect has been tested in
transgenic mice. A stretch of DNA was constructed which carries two
transcriptional units: 18 kb of the human retinol binding protein (RBP) gene,
driving the expression of the bacterial chloramphenicol acetyl transferase,
linked to 17.5 kb containing the entire A1AT coding sequence with additional 5'
and 3' flanking sequences. Transcription from the RBP promoter was shown to
predominate in liver, and could be used as an internal marker of 'active copy
number'. Mutations in the A1AT gene promoter were introduced by homologous
recombination in bacterial cells. The results show that base pair substitutions
in the binding site for LF-A1 and LF-B1 drastically reduce transcription in
non-hepatic adult tissues, yolk sac, and fetal liver, whereas only LF-B1 binding 
site mutations have a marked, albeit variable, effect in adult liver.

PMCID: PMC453040
PMID: 1717262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. J Virol. 1991 Nov;65(11):5774-81.

Promoter-specific transactivation of hepatitis B virus transcription by a
glutamine- and proline-rich domain of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1.

Raney AK(1), Easton AJ, Milich DR, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Research Institute of
Scripps Clinic, La Jolla, California 92037.

The cloned transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) transactivates
transcription from the hepatitis B virus (HBV) large surface antigen promoter but
does not influence the transcriptional activities of the other three HBV
promoters. This indicates that this transcription factor can differentially
influence the activities of the HBV promoter. By using a transient-transfection
system, the major domain of the HNF1 polypeptide involved in transcriptional
activation of the large surface antigen promoter in the human hepatoma cell line 
HepG2.1 has been mapped to a region that is rich in glutamine and proline
residues (9 of 18) and is different from the previously identified regions of
this factor responsible for in vitro transcriptional activation of a promoter
containing human albumin promoter HNF1 binding sites. The human albumin promoter 
HNF1 binding site mediates transcriptional activation through the same HNF1
polypeptide domain as the HBV large surface antigen promoter HNF1 binding site in
transient-transfection assays with HepG2.1 cells, suggesting that HNF1 may
possess multiple transcriptional activation domains.

PMCID: PMC250238
PMID: 1656070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Biochem. 1991 Oct;110(4):559-65.

Genetic polymorphisms in the 5'-flanking region change transcriptional regulation
of the human cytochrome P450IIE1 gene.

Hayashi S(1), Watanabe J, Kawajiri K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Cancer Center Research Institute.

We identified genetic polymorphisms in the 5'-flanking region of the human
cytochrome P450IIE1 gene and investigated the effect of these polymorphisms on
the transcriptional regulation of the gene. PCR direct sequencing of the two
homozygous alleles [types A (c1/c1) and C (c2/c2)] revealed the existence of
several point mutations in the distal 5'-flanking region of the gene, but no
differences in the proximal promoter region. The DNA segment (-1372 to -960)
placed upstream of SV40 promoter and the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) 
gene enhanced the expression of the gene, and the enhancement of expression by
type C DNA was about 10 times that by its type A counterpart. DNase I
footprinting analysis showed at least one protected region in which one of the
polymorphic loci (RsaI polymorphism) was located. The DNase I sensitivities and
protection profiles of the two genotypes were different. The protected region had
high homology to the consensus sequence of the binding region of liver specific
transcription factor HNF1 (LF-B1), and this was confirmed by gel retardation
assay. These results indicate that genetic polymorphisms in the 5'-flanking
region of the human P450IIE1 gene affect its binding of trans-acting factor and
change its transcriptional regulation. This may lead to inter-individual
differences of microsomal drug oxidation activity.

PMID: 1778977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Development. 1991 Oct;113(2):589-99.

Hepatic nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) shows a wider distribution than products of its
known target genes in developing mouse.

Blumenfeld M(1), Maury M, Chouard T, Yaniv M, Condamine H.

Author information: 
(1)UA 1149 du CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

Hepatic nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) is a highly diverged homeoprotein that is crucial
for transcription of many liver-specific genes including albumin. In particular, 
a minimal promoter, consisting of an HNF1-binding-site and a TATA box, is highly 
active only in hepatoma cell lines. The expression of the HNF1 and albumin genes 
has been examined in mouse embryos by in situ hybridization. At 10.5 days of
gestation, the HNF1 mRNA was detected in both the hepatic primordia and visceral 
endoderm of the yolk sac whereas the albumin transcript was present only in the
nascent liver. At later stages of development, HNF1 was detected in liver, in the
epithelial cells of most of the digestive tract and in the cortex of the kidney, 
whereas albumin was again found only in the liver. The presence of HNF1 protein
in adult kidney was demonstrated by immunodetection in gel-retardation assays and
western blot analysis. These experiments show that, even though the HNF1
homeo-protein is essential for expression of many liver-specific genes, it
cannot, by itself, force high expression levels of these genes, in non-hepatic
tissues.

PMID: 1685988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Aug 11;19(15):4139-45.

Site-directed mutagenesis of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) binding sites in the
mouse transthyretin (TTR) promoter reveal synergistic interactions with its
enhancer region.

Costa RH(1), Grayson DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry (M/C 536), University of Illinois, College of
Medicine, Chicago 60612.

The transthyretin (TTR) gene is regulated by two DNA regions which elicit
hepatocyte-specific expression: a proximal promoter and distal enhancer. The TTR 
promoter and enhancer are composed of at least eight DNA binding sites for three 
different hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF), CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP), and AP-1/cJun. Site directed mutations within each of the HNF binding
sites in the TTR promoter were introduced to evaluate their contribution to
transcriptional activity in hepatoma cells. The data indicate that the strong
affinity HNF-3-S binding site (-106 to -94) is absolutely required for TTR
promoter activity since several mutations in this site eliminate TTR expression
in the context of its enhancer. Conversion of a second weak affinity HNF3-W site 
(-140 to -131) in the TTR promoter to a high affinity site resulted in higher
levels of expression. TTR mutations that disrupted several weak affinity sites
(HNF1, HNF3-W, and HNF4) only slightly diminished expression levels in the
presence of the TTR enhancer. In contrast, when we deleted the TTR enhancer from 
these HNF mutant constructs, TTR expression decreased to undetectable levels.
This result suggests cooperation between the factors binding to the TTR promoter 
and enhancer regions. These results also demonstrate that the HNF3-S site alone
is not sufficient to activate TTR transcription, but rather requires the
participation of three cell-specific factors to elicit minimal promoter activity.
The complexity of this promoter design and the requirement for a minimal number
of cell-specific factors to achieve transcription allows us to propose a model
which may explain the maintenance of tissue-specific expression of TTR.

PMCID: PMC328553
PMID: 1870969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Jul 11;19(13):3553-9.

Two members of an HNF1 homeoprotein family are expressed in human liver.

Bach I(1), Mattei MG, Cereghini S, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)UA 041149 du CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

HNF1 is a transcriptional activator, required for the liver-specific expression
of a variety of genes, that binds to DNA as a dimer via the most diverged
homeodomain known so far. We were interested to examine whether HNF1 is a unique 
homeoprotein example or whether it is the prototype of a new subfamily of
homeodomain containing proteins. In this work we describe the isolation of a cDNA
clone from a human liver library encoding a protein, highly homologous to HNF1 in
three regions, including the homeo- and dimerization domains. We show that this
protein can heterodimerize with human HNF1 in vitro. Sequence comparison of our
clone with a rat variant HNF1 (vHNF1) clone, isolated in parallel in our
laboratory from the dedifferentiated H5 hepatoma cell line, identified our cDNA
as human vHNF1. vHNF1 is a nuclear protein recognizing the same binding site as
HNF1 and previously thought to occur only in dedifferentiated hepatoma cells that
fail to express most liver specific genes. Nevertheless, we show by Northern blot
analysis that vHNF1 transcripts are present in differentiated human HepG2
hepatoma cells as well as in rat liver and that this transcript level is 10-20
fold lower than that of HNF1. We assigned the vHNF-1 gene to human chromosome 17 
and murine chromosome 11. These chromosomal localizations differ from that of the
HNF-1 gene indicating that both genes are not clustered on the genome.

PMCID: PMC328379
PMID: 1677179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Genes Dev. 1991 Jun;5(6):1042-56.

HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta (vHNF-1) share dimerization and homeo domains, but not
activation domains, and form heterodimers in vitro.

Mendel DB(1), Hansen LP, Graves MK, Conley PB, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Beckman Center for Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Stanford University Medical School, California 94305.

HNF-1 alpha (previously referred to as HNF-1, LPB1, and APF) is a vertebrate
transcription factor that contains a divergent homeo domain and plays a prominent
role in regulating genes that have the common characteristic of being expressed
in hepatocytes and a complex group of endodermally and mesodermally derived
tissues. HNF-1 alpha is unique among the vertebrate homeo domain-containing
proteins in that it dimerizes in the absence of its DNA recognition sequence,
suggesting the possibility that the function of HNF-1 alpha may be diversified by
forming heterodimers with other related proteins. We report the initial
characterization of HNF-1 beta, which is closely related to HNF-1 alpha and is
able to form heterodimers with HNF-1 alpha in vitro. Although HNF-1 alpha, but
not HNF-1 beta, is expressed in the liver, HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta are
coexpressed in the murine Hepa1A cell line and in the mammalian kidney where a
subset of hepatocyte genes are expressed. In contrast, exclusive expression of
HNF-1 beta is associated with repression of a subset of hepatocyte-specific genes
in the dedifferentiated hepatocyte cell line C2, differentiated F9 cells, in
somatic hybrids between hepatocytes and fibroblasts, and in the lung. The extent 
of heterodimerization may be regulated in a tissue-specific way because freely
exchangeable heterodimers are formed in Jurkat T cells transfected with HNF-1
alpha and HNF-1 beta, whereas in liver cells stable homodimers are present. These
studies define a pair of homeo domain proteins that have the potential to
interact to produce an embryologically complex pattern of gene expression.

PMID: 2044952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. EMBO J. 1991 Jun;10(6):1445-57.

vHNF1 is a homeoprotein that activates transcription and forms heterodimers with 
HNF1.

Rey-Campos J(1), Chouard T, Yaniv M, Cereghini S.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, UA 1149 du CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies,
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

vHNF1 and HNF1 are two nuclear proteins that bind to an essential element in the 
promoter proximal sequences of albumin and of many other liver-specific genes.
HNF1 predominates in hepatocytes but is absent in dedifferentiated hepatoma
cells. These cells contain vHNF1 but fail to express most of the liver traits. In
the present work we have isolated cDNA clones for vHNF1 and found that it is a
homeoprotein homologous to HNF1 in regions important for DNA binding.
Unexpectedly, vHNF1 transactivated the albumin promoter in transfection
experiments. Like the HNF1 mRNA, the vHNF1 message was found in kidney, liver and
intestine although in different proportions. The fact that vHNF1 and HNF1 readily
form heterodimers in vitro and the biochemical characterization of vHNF1/HNF1
heterodimers in nuclear extracts of kidney, liver and several cell lines,
strongly argue that such heterodimers exist in vivo. Our results raise the
possibility that heterodimerization between homeoproteins could be a common
phenomenon in higher eukaryotes, which may have implications in the regulatory
network sustained between these factors.

PMCID: PMC452807
PMID: 1673926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. EMBO J. 1991 Jun;10(6):1435-43.

LFB3, a heterodimer-forming homeoprotein of the LFB1 family, is expressed in
specialized epithelia.

De Simone V(1), De Magistris L, Lazzaro D, Gerstner J, Monaci P, Nicosia A,
Cortese R.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, FRG.

We have cloned and characterized a mouse cDNA coding for LFB3, a DNA binding
protein containing an extra-large homeodomain. The first 315 amino acids of LFB3 
are highly homologous to the DNA binding domain of LFB1, a regulatory protein
involved in the expression of several liver-specific genes. LFB3 is a
transcriptional activator which binds to DNA as a dimer and forms heterodimers
with LFB1 both in vitro and in vivo. However, LFB3 expression seems not to be
directly correlated with the liver-specific phenotype, since it is detected in
dedifferentiated hepatoma cell lines which express neither LFB1 nor several
liver-specific genes. LFB3 expression starts before that of LFB1 during mouse and
rat development, and is strongly increased upon retinoic acid induced
differentiation of F9 embryonic carcinoma cells. LFB3 and LFB1 are expressed in
the epithelial component of many organs of endodermal and mesodermal origin,
suggesting that they may play a more general role associated with the
differentiation of specialized epithelia.

PMCID: PMC452805
PMID: 1673925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Mar;11(3):1353-9.

The ubiquitous transcription factor Oct-1 and the liver-specific factor HNF-1 are
both required to activate transcription of a hepatitis B virus promoter.

Zhou DX(1), Yen TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California School of Medicine, San
Francisco 94143-0506.

The liver-specific transcription factor HNF-1 activates transcription of several 
mammalian hepatocyte-specific genes. The hepatitis B virus preS1 promoter shows
hepatocyte specificity, which has been ascribed to binding of HNF-1 to a cognate 
DNA sequence upstream of the TATA box. We show here that there is an adjacent
site that binds the ubiquitous transcription factor Oct-1. Both the Oct-1 and
HNF-1 sites are necessary for liver-specific transcription of the preS1 promoter,
but neither site alone activates transcription. The Oct-1 site is also necessary 
for activation of the preS1 promoter in HeLa cells, expressing transfected HNF-1.
Our results show that while Oct-1 is not restricted to hepatocytes, it
nevertheless can play a critical role in the expression of a liver-specific gene.

PMCID: PMC369406
PMID: 1996097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Feb;11(2):773-84.

Extracellular signals that regulate liver transcription factors during hepatic
differentiation in vitro.

Liu JK(1), DiPersio CM, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biochemistry, Box G, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island
02912.

A complex cell culture environment has been shown to maintain the differentiated 
state of hepatocytes, yet the mechanisms by which environmental cues selectively 
maintain liver-specific gene transcription have been unknown. In this paper we
show that the hepatic environment regulates the activities of at least three
liver-enriched transcription factors, eE-TF, eG-TF/HNF3, and eH-TF, that activate
the mouse serum albumin enhancer. eE-TF is a heat-stable factor that has a
DNA-binding specificity similar to that of the liver transcription factor C/EBP, 
but is a distinct protein. eG-TF/HNF3 contributes to the liver-specific
transcription of several other serum protein genes. eH-TF binds to a TGTTTGC
sequence that occurs at regulatory sites of the albumin promoter, the hepatitis B
virus enhancer, and other hepatic genes. eE-TF, eG-TF/HNF3, and eH-TF are
regulated by different combinations of the following cell culture conditions: a
hormonally defined serum-free medium; an extracellular matrix gel; and a
transformation-competent simian virus 40 large T antigen. We propose a regulatory
network model to explain how cues from the cell lineage and the extracellular
environment coordinately help maintain the activities of transcription factors
involved in hepatocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC359729
PMID: 1990282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Biol Chem. 1991 Jan 15;266(2):677-80.

HNF-1, a member of a novel class of dimerizing homeodomain proteins.

Mendel DB(1), Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Beckman Center for Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Howard Hughes Institute,
Stanford University 94305.

PMID: 1985954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Science. 1990 Dec 21;250(4988):1732-5.

Dominant negative regulation of the mouse alpha-fetoprotein gene in adult liver.

Vacher J(1), Tilghman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biology, Princeton University, 
NJ 08544.

Transcription of the mouse alpha-fetoprotein gene is activated in the developing 
fetal liver and gut and repressed in both tissues shortly after birth. With
germline transformation in mice, a cis-acting element was identified upstream of 
the transcription initiation site of the alpha-fetoprotein gene that was
responsible for repression of the gene in adult liver. This negative element acts
as a repressor in a position-dependent manner.

PMID: 1702902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Biol Chem. 1990 Dec 5;265(34):21185-93.

The promoter of the human gene for insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1. 
Basal promoter activity in HEP G2 cells depends upon liver factor B1.

Suwanichkul A(1), Cubbage ML, Powell DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77054.

Characterization of the human insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1
(IGFBP-1) promoter was initiated to facilitate study of developmental and
hormonal factors regulating IGFBP-1 production. The region immediately 5' to the 
IGFBP-1 mRNA capsite is typical of a eukaryotic promoter, with a TATA sequence
beginning 28 base pairs (bp) and a CCAAT promoter element beginning 72 bp
upstream from this capsite. A 1.3-kilobase insert containing the IGFBP-1 capsite 
and 1205 bp of this putative IGFBP-1 promoter region directs expression of the
reporter gene chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) in an orientation-specific 
manner in transfected HEP G2 cells, and the capsite identified for the CAT mRNA
is identical to that identified for native IGFBP-1 mRNA. These observations
suggest that the 1.3-kilobase insert contains the IGFBP-1 promoter. This promoter
was further characterized by deletion analysis, site-directed mutagenesis, gel
mobility shift assays, and DNaseI protection assays. These studies identify the
CCAAT box region as the major cis element involved in basal IGFBP-1 promoter
activity in HEP G2 cells, demonstrate that increased basal promoter activity is
associated with the binding of at least one HEP G2 nuclear factor to the CCAAT
box region, and indicate that the DNA binding factor(s) responsible for increased
basal promoter activity is related to liver factor B1. These observations suggest
that liver B1 is the major trans-acting factor stimulating basal IGFBP-1 promoter
activity in HEP G2 cells.

PMID: 1701175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. EMBO J. 1990 Dec;9(13):4467-75.

Synergistic trans-activation of the human C-reactive protein promoter by
transcription factor HNF-1 binding at two distinct sites.

Toniatti C(1), Demartis A, Monaci P, Nicosia A, Ciliberto G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartmento di Biochimica e Biotecnologie Mediche, II Facoltà di Medicina e
Chirurgia, Napoli, Italy.

The promoter region of the human C-reactive protein (CRP) gene comprises two
distinct regions (APREs, for Acute Phase Responsive Elements) each one containing
information necessary and sufficient for liver specific and IL-6 inducible
expression in human hepatoma Hep3B cells. In this paper we show that both APREs
contain a low affinity binding site for the liver specific transcription factor
HNF-1/LF-B1. The two sites are separated by approximately 80 bp. Mutations in
either of the two sites abolish inducible expression. The same effect is
specifically obtained in cotransfection competition experiments when the human
albumin HNF-1 site is used as competitor. However, HNF-1 is not the intranuclear 
mediator of IL-6 because synthetic promoters formed by multimerized copies of
different HNF-1 binding sites are not transcriptionally activated by this
cytokine. An expression vector encoding full length HNF-1 is capable of
trans-activating transcription from the wild-type CRP promoter but not from
mutants which have lost the ability to bind HNF-1. Moreover, the level of
trans-activation observed with the natural promoter containing both HNF-1 binding
sites is far greater than the level of mutated variants containing only one of
the two sites. This result strongly suggests that two HNF-1 molecules bound
simultaneously to sites distant from each other can act synergistically to
activate gene expression.

PMCID: PMC552239
PMID: 2265613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Genomics. 1990 Sep;8(1):165-7.

Mapping of the gene TCF2 coding for the transcription factor LFB3 to human
chromosome 17 by polymerase chain reaction.

Abbott C(1), Piaggio G, Ammendola R, Solomon E, Povey S, Gounari F, De Simone V, 
Cortese R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Biometry, University College London, United
Kingdom.

A human clone corresponding to the gene for the DNA-binding factor LFB3, a
protein highly homologous to the liver-specific transcription factor LFB1, has
been isolated and partially sequenced. This gene is designated TCF2.
Oligonucleotide primers have been designed for LFB3 and used to amplify
specifically the human gene in human/rodent somatic cell hybrids using the
polymerase chain reaction. By this means, the human LFB3 gene has been mapped to 
the long arm of chromosome 17, between the centromere and the APL breakpoint.

PMID: 2081590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Genomics. 1990 Sep;8(1):155-64.

Cloning of human hepatic nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) and chromosomal localization of 
its gene in man and mouse.

Bach I(1), Galcheva-Gargova Z, Mattei MG, Simon-Chazottes D, Guénet JL, Cereghini
S, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)UA 041149 du CNRS, Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Paris, France.

HNF1 is a transcription factor that is required for hepatocyte-specific
expression of several genes, including albumin and fibrinogen. Rat HNF1-encoding 
cDNAs have recently been cloned, revealing that this factor is a distant member
of the homeoprotein family. We have now isolated HNF1 clones from a human liver
cDNA library by using a rat HNF1 cDNA-derived probe. The longest clone, HCL20,
contains a sequence corresponding to the intact rat HNF1-coding region followed
by a 3' nontranslated region and a poly(A) tail, hence representing an almost
full-length HNF1 cDNA. Alignment of the human and rat sequences shows that HNF1
is highly conserved between the two species. The HNF1 gene was mapped by in situ 
hybridization and by RFLP analysis of interspecific mouse backcrosses to
chromosomes 12q24.3 and 5F in human and mouse, respectively, establishing a new
segmental homology between these two chromosomes.

PMID: 1707031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Virol. 1990 May;64(5):2360-8.

Differentiation-specific transcriptional regulation of the hepatitis B virus
large surface antigen gene in human hepatoma cell lines.

Raney AK(1), Milich DR, Easton AJ, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Research Institute of
Scripps Clinic, La Jolla, California 92037.

The transcriptional activities of the four hepatitis B virus promoters were
compared in three differentiated hepatoma cell lines, HepG2, Hep3B, and
PLC/PRF/5; a dedifferentiated subline of HepG2, HepG2.1; a human cervical
carcinoma cell line, HeLa S3; and a mouse fibroblast cell line, NIH 3T3. The
plasmid constructs, which contain the complete hepatitis B virus genome directing
the expression of the luciferase reporter gene, were analyzed by transient
transfection assays. The relative orders of the levels of the transcriptional
activities of the four promoters were similar in each of the cell lines. The
major surface antigen and X-gene promoters displayed the highest activity levels,
the core promoter activity level was less than or similar to the activity levels 
of these two promoters, and the large surface antigen promoter had the lowest
activity level in all of the cell lines examined. The core promoter demonstrated 
an approximately 2- to 20-fold higher relative level of expression in the
differentiated hepatoma cell lines, suggesting that this promoter might be
preferentially active in these cells. The relative level of activity of the large
surface antigen promoter in the differentiated hepatoma cell lines was
approximately 5 to 90 times greater than that observed in the other cell lines,
indicating that the activity of this promoter is highly specific for
differentiation state and cell type. Deletion analysis of the large surface
antigen promoter demonstrated that the sequence element responsible for the
differentiation state-specific expression from this promoter is located between
nucleotides 2719 and 2733 (-90 and -76). Within this sequence element is a
binding site (GTTAATCATTACT) for the liver-specific transcription factor
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1). This indicates that the preferential
expression from the large surface antigen promoter in the differentiated hepatoma
cell lines is probably mediated by HNF1 or an HNF1-related transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC249397
PMID: 2157890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Princess Takamatsu Symp. 1990;21:157-64.

Transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation of CYP2E1, an
N-nitrosodimethylamine demethylase.

Gonzalez FJ(1), Gelboin HV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

CYP2E1 is a cytochrome P-450 that is well conserved in many species and carries
out oxidation of both endogenous and numerous foreign chemicals. This enzyme is
the primary component of the methylglyoxal and propandiol pathways of
gluconeogenesis. It is also the principal P-450 involved in metabolism of many
small molecular weight chemicals that are found in solvents and in the
environment. Among important drugs metabolized by CYP2E1 are anesthetic agents
such as halothane, the analgesic acetaminophen, and the muscle relaxant
chlorzoxazone. Most importantly CYP2E1 is capable of converting certain
procarcinogenic nitrosamines to their active DNA-binding metabolites. The CYP2E1 
gene becomes transcriptionally active in the liver soon after birth. Although the
physiological stimulus for this increase is still unknown, the molecular basis of
CYP2E1 gene activation is becoming clear. Transcription of the CYP2E1 gene is
primarily due to the binding of the hepatocyte-specific transcription factor
HNF-1 to a segment of DNA just upstream of the start site for RNA synthesis. In
adult animals, CYP2E1 is posttranscriptionally regulated through mRNA and protein
stabilization. Stabilization of CYP2E1 protein is due to interaction of the
enzyme with its own substrate.

PMID: 2134674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Cell Growth Differ. 1990 Jan;1(1):47-52.

Transcriptional activators in hepatocytes.

Johnson PF(1).

Author information: 
(1)NCI-Frederick Cancer Research Facility BRI-Basic Research Program, Maryland
21701.

PMID: 2078499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


