
1. PLoS One. 2016 Mar 22;11(3):e0152022. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0152022.
eCollection 2016.

Proteomic Profiling of Mouse Liver following Acute Toxoplasma gondii Infection.

He JJ(1), Ma J(1,)(2), Elsheikha HM(3), Song HQ(1), Zhou DH(1), Zhu XQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Veterinary Etiological Biology, Key Laboratory of
Veterinary Parasitology of Gansu Province, Lanzhou Veterinary Research Institute,
Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences, Lanzhou, Gansu Province 730046, PR
China. (2)College of Veterinary Medicine, Hunan Agricultural University,
Changsha, Hunan Province 410128, PR China. (3)Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine and Science, University of Nottingham,
Sutton Bonington Campus, Loughborough, LE12 5RD, United Kingdom.

Toxoplasma gondii remains a global public health problem. However, its
pathophysiology is still not-completely understood particularly the impact of
infection on host liver metabolism. We performed iTRAQ-based proteomic analysis
to evaluate early liver protein responses in BALB/c mice following infection with
T. gondii PYS strain (genotype ToxoDB#9) infection. Our data revealed
modification of protein expression in key metabolic pathways, as indicated by the
upregulation of immune response and downregulation of mitochondrial respiratory
chain, and the metabolism of fatty acids, lipids and xenobiotics. T. gondii seems
to hijack host PPAR signaling pathway to downregulate the metabolism of fatty
acids, lipids and energy in the liver. The metabolism of over 400 substances was 
affected by the downregulation of genes involved in xenobiotic metabolism. The
top 10 transcription factors used by upregulated genes were Stat2, Stat1, Irf2,
Irf1, Sp2, Egr1, Stat3, Klf4, Elf1 and Gabpa, while the top 10 transcription
factors of downregulated genes were Hnf4A, Ewsr1, Fli1, Hnf4g, Nr2f1, Pparg,
Rxra, Hnf1A, Foxa1 and Foxo1. These findings indicate global reprogramming of the
metabolism of the mouse liver after acute T. gondii infection. Functional
characterization of the altered proteins may enhance understanding of the host
responses to T. gondii infection and lead to the identification of new
therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4803215
PMID: 27003162  [PubMed - in process]


2. Hum Pathol. 2016 Apr;50:135-9. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2015.12.002. Epub 2015 Dec 
18.

Expression of liver fatty acid binding protein in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Cho SJ(1), Ferrell LD(1), Gill RM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143.
Electronic address: ryan.gill@ucsf.edu.

Loss of expression of liver fatty acid binding protein (LFABP) by
immunohistochemistry has been shown to be characteristic of a subset of
hepatocellular adenomas (HCAs) in which HNF1A is inactivated. Transformation to
hepatocellular carcinoma is thought to be a very rare phenomenon in the
HNF1A-inactivated variant of HCA. However, we recently observed 2 cases at our
institution, 1 definite hepatocellular carcinoma and 1 possible hepatocellular
carcinoma, with loss of LFABP staining, raising the possibility that LFABP
down-regulation may be associated with hepatocellular carcinogenesis. Our aim was
to evaluate hepatocellular carcinomas arising in various backgrounds and with
varying degrees of differentiation for loss of LFABP staining. Twenty total cases
of hepatocellular carcinoma were examined. Thirteen cases arose in a background
of cirrhosis due to hepatitis C (n = 8) or steatohepatitis (n = 5); 7 cases arose
in a noncirrhotic background, with 2 cases arising within HNF1A-inactivated
variant HCA and 2 cases arising within inflammatory variant HCA. Complete loss of
expression of LFABP was seen in 6 of 20 cases, including 2 cases of
hepatocellular carcinoma arising within HNF1A-inactivated variant HCA. Thus, loss
of staining for LFABP appears to be common in hepatocellular carcinoma and may be
seen in well-differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma. Therefore, LFABP loss
should not be interpreted as evidence for hepatocellular adenoma over carcinoma, 
when other features support a diagnosis of hepatocellular carcinoma. The findings
raise consideration for a role of HNF1A inactivation in hepatocellular
carcinogenesis, particularly in less differentiated tumors.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26997447  [PubMed - in process]


3. J Diabetes Res. 2016;2016:3582616. doi: 10.1155/2016/3582616. Epub 2016 Feb 11.

Identification of HNF4A Mutation p.T130I and HNF1A Mutations p.I27L and p.S487N
in a Han Chinese Family with Early-Onset Maternally Inherited Type 2 Diabetes.

Yang Y(1), Zhou TC(2), Liu YY(3), Li X(4), Wang WX(5), Irwin DM(6), Zhang YP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The Second People's Hospital of Yunnan Province, 
Kunming, Yunnan 650021, China; Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of
Bio-Resources, Yunnan University, Kunming, Yunnan 650091, China. (2)Department of
Endocrinology, The Second People's Hospital of Yunnan Province, Kunming, Yunnan
650021, China; Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of Bio-Resources,
Yunnan University, Kunming, Yunnan 650091, China; The Central Laboratory of the
Second People's Hospital of Yunnan Province, Kunming, Yunnan 650021, China.
(3)Department of Endocrinology, The Second People's Hospital of Yunnan Province, 
Kunming, Yunnan 650021, China. (4)The Central Laboratory of the Second People's
Hospital of Yunnan Province, Kunming, Yunnan 650021, China. (5)Laboratory of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Yunnan University, Kunming, Yunnan 650091,
China. (6)State Key Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming
Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China;
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology, University of Toronto,
Toronto, ON, Canada M5S 2E8. (7)Laboratory for Conservation and Utilization of
Bio-Resources, Yunnan University, Kunming, Yunnan 650091, China; State Key
Laboratory of Genetic Resources and Evolution, Kunming Institute of Zoology,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Kunming, Yunnan 650223, China.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is characterized by the onset of
diabetes before the age of 25 years, positive family history, high genetic
predisposition, monogenic mutations, and an autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance. Here, we aimed to investigate the mutations and to characterize the 
phenotypes of a Han Chinese family with early-onset maternally inherited type 2
diabetes. Detailed clinical assessments and genetic screening for mutations in
the HNF4a, GCK, HNF-1a, IPF-1, HNF1ß, and NEUROD1 genes were carried out in this 
family. One HNF4A mutation (p.T130I) and two HNF1A polymorphisms (p.I27L and
p.S487N) were identified. Mutation p.T130I was associated with both early-onset
and late-onset diabetes and caused downregulated HNF4A expression, whereas HNF1A 
polymorphisms p.I27L and p.S487N were associated with the age of diagnosis of
diabetes. We demonstrated that mutation p.T130I in HNF4A was pathogenic as were
the predicted polymorphisms p.I27L and p.S487N in HNF1A by genetic and functional
analysis. Our results show that mutations in HNF4A and HNF1A genes might account 
for this early-onset inherited type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4766352
PMID: 26981542  [PubMed - in process]


4. Liver Int. 2016 Mar 11. doi: 10.1111/liv.13113. [Epub ahead of print]

Liver biopsy for diagnosis of presumed benign hepatocellular lesions lacking MRI 
diagnostic features of focal nodular hyperplasia.

Sannier A(1), Cazejust J(2), Lequoy M(3), Cervera P(1,)(4), Scatton O(5,)(4),
Rosmorduc O(3,)(4), Wendum D(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie pathologique, AP-HP, Hôpital St Antoine, F-75012, Paris,
France. (2)Service d'Imagerie, AP-HP, Hôpital St Antoine, F-75012, Paris, France.
(3)Service d'Hépatologie, AP-HP, Hôpital St Antoine, F-75012, Paris, France.
(4)Sorbonne Universités, UPMC Univ Paris 06, F-75005, Paris, France. (5)Service
de Chirurgie Hépato-biliaire, AP-HP, Hôpital St Antoine, F-75012, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND&AIMS: The contribution of liver biopsy for the diagnosis of presumed
benign hepatocellular lesions lacking the diagnostic features of focal nodular
hyperplasia (FNH) on magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is unknown. We evaluated
liver biopsy and MRI performances in this setting. .
METHODS: MRI and slides of liver biopsies performed for a presumed benign
hepatocellular lesion (2006-2013) without the typical features of FNH on MRI were
blindly reviewed (n=45). Eighteen lesions were surgically removed and also
analyzed. The final diagnosis was the diagnosis established after surgery or on
the biopsy in the absence of surgery.
RESULTS: The final diagnosis was FNH (n=19), hepatocellular adenoma (HCA, n=15), 
hepatocellular carcinoma (n=3), indefinite (n=4). Four lesions corresponded to
non hepatocellular lesions. FNH, HNF1A mutated and inflammatory HCA were
diagnosed accurately on the biopsy in 95%, 67% and 100% of the cases
respectively. Diagnostic performance of liver biopsy for HNF1A mutated HCA was
lower because of the lack of non-tumoral tissue. Diagnosis based on morphological
analysis was certain and correct in 27 cases. Immunostaining allowed a definite
diagnosis in 12 additionnal cases. Radiological diagnosis was in agreement with
the histological diagnosis in 75.6% of the cases, with a very high sensitivity
(97%) and specificity (100%) for the diagnosis of HNF1A mutated HCA.
CONCLUSIONS: Liver biopsy has a good diagnostic performance particularly for FNH 
and inflammatory HCA and sampling of non-lesional tissue is highly recommended. A
biopsy does not seem necessary if H-HCA is diagnosed on MRI. This article is
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26969817  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Diagn Pathol. 2016 Mar 9;11(1):27. doi: 10.1186/s13000-016-0475-5.

Hepatocellular adenoma classification: a comparative evaluation of
immunohistochemistry and targeted mutational analysis.

Margolskee E(1), Bao F(2), de Gonzalez AK(3), Moreira RK(4), Lagana S(5), Sireci 
AN(6), Sepulveda AR(7), Remotti H(8), Lefkowitch JH(9), Salomao M(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, 
630 W 168th Street, VC14-238, New York, NY, 10032, USA. bethmargolskee@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pathology, Scripps Clinic, La Jolla, CA, USA. fbao03@gmail.com. 
(3)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, 
630 W 168th Street, VC14-238, New York, NY, 10032, USA. ak3304@cumc.columbia.edu.
(4)Department of Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.
Moreira.roger@mayo.edu. (5)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia
University Medical Center, 630 W 168th Street, VC14-238, New York, NY, 10032,
USA. sml2179@cumc.columbia.edu. (6)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology,
Columbia University Medical Center, 630 W 168th Street, VC14-238, New York, NY,
10032, USA. ans2133@cumc.columbia.edu. (7)Department of Pathology and Cell
Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, 630 W 168th Street, VC14-238, New
York, NY, 10032, USA. as4400@cumc.columbia.edu. (8)Department of Pathology and
Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, 630 W 168th Street, VC14-238,
New York, NY, 10032, USA. her2007@cumc.columbia.edu. (9)Department of Pathology
and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, 630 W 168th Street,
VC14-238, New York, NY, 10032, USA. jhl3@cumc.columbia.edu. (10)Department of
Pathology and Cell Biology, Columbia University Medical Center, 630 W 168th
Street, VC14-238, New York, NY, 10032, USA. marcelafa@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Four subtypes of hepatocellular adenomas (HCA) are recognized:
hepatocyte-nuclear-factor-1a mutated (H-HCA), ß-catenin-mutated type with
upregulation of glutamine synthetase (b-HCA), inflammatory type (IHCA) with
serum-amyloid-A overexpression, and unclassified type. Subtyping may be useful
since b-HCA appear to have higher risk of malignant transformation. We sought to 
apply subtype analysis and assess histological atypia, correlating these with
next-generation sequencing analysis.
METHODS: Twenty-six HCA were stained with serum amyloid A (SAA), liver fatty
acid-binding protein (LFABP), glutamine synthetase (GS), and ß-catenin IHC,
followed by analysis with a targeted multiplex sequencing panel.
RESULTS: By IHC, 4 HCA (15.4 %) were classified as b-HCA, 11 (42.3 %) as IHCA, 9 
(34.6 %) as H-HCA, and two (7.7 %) unclassifiable. Eight HCA (30.8 %) showed
atypia (3 b-HCA, 4 IHCA and 1 H-HCA). Targeted sequencing confirmed HNF1A
mutations in all H-HCA, confirming reliability of LFABP IHC in identifying these 
lesions. CTNNB1 mutations were detected in 1 of 4 (25 %) of GS/ß-catenin-positive
cases, suggesting that positive GS stain does not always correlate with CTNNB1
mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunohistochemistry does not consistently identify b-HCA.
Mutational analysis improves the diagnostic accuracy of ß-catenin-mutated HCA and
is an important tool to assess risk of malignancy in HCA.

PMCID: PMC4784347
PMID: 26961851  [PubMed - in process]


6. Adv Med. 2016;2016:4243784. doi: 10.1155/2016/4243784. Epub 2016 Jan 28.

Assessment of Newly Proposed Clinical Criteria to Identify HNF1A MODY in Patients
with an Initial Diagnosis of Type 1 or Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus.

Grzanka M(1), Matejko B(1), Szopa M(1), Kiec-Wilk B(1), Malecki MT(1), Klupa
T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University Medical College,
Jagiellonian University, 15 Kopernika Street, 31-501 Krakow, Poland.

The most common form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is caused by 
mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1A (HNF1A) gene. However, most HNF1A
mutation-carriers are initially misdiagnosed with type 1 (T1DM) or type 2 (T2DM) 
diabetes mellitus; hence, they often receive nonoptimal treatment. The aim of our
study was to test newly proposed clinical criteria for the identification of
HNF1A MODY in patients with a diagnosis of T1DM or T2DM. To achieve this, the
following criteria to preselect patients for screening were used: for T1DM: TDIR 
(total daily insulin requirement) > 0.3<U+2009>IU of insulin/kg and the percentage of
basal insulin > 30% of TDIR; for T2DM: sulphonylurea- (SU-) based oral treatment 
(monotherapy or combined with Metformin) > 15 years and BMI < 30<U+2009>kg/m(2). We
reviewed the clinical data of 140 patients with T1DM and 524 clinically diagnosed
with T2DM. On the basis of these criteria, we found a HNF1A mutation in 1 out of 
2 individuals with a diagnosis of T1DM and 1 out of 11 selected individuals with 
a diagnosis of T2DM. We believe that the simplicity of the proposed criteria
might prove useful in clinical practice, as an alternative to more time-consuming
classical diagnostic techniques.

PMCID: PMC4749764
PMID: 26942212  [PubMed]


7. Cell Stem Cell. 2016 Feb 25. pii: S1934-5909(16)00011-4. doi:
10.1016/j.stem.2016.01.010. [Epub ahead of print]

Direct Reprogramming of Hepatic Myofibroblasts into Hepatocytes In Vivo
Attenuates Liver Fibrosis.

Song G(1), Pacher M(2), Balakrishnan A(2), Yuan Q(2), Tsay HC(3), Yang D(4),
Reetz J(5), Brandes S(2), Dai Z(4), Pützer BM(5), Araúzo-Bravo MJ(6), Steinemann 
D(7), Luedde T(8), Schwabe RF(9), Manns MP(10), Schöler HR(11), Schambach A(12), 
Cantz T(13), Ott M(14), Sharma AD(15).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany; Junior Research Group MicroRNA in Liver 
Regeneration, Cluster of Excellence REBIRTH, Hannover Medical School, Hannover
30625, Germany; Translational Hepatology and Stem Cell Biology, Cluster of
Excellence REBIRTH, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany.
(2)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany; Twincore Centre for Experimental and
Clinical Infection Research, Hannover 30625, Germany. (3)Department of
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover 30625, Germany; Junior Research Group MicroRNA in Liver Regeneration,
Cluster of Excellence REBIRTH, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany; 
Twincore Centre for Experimental and Clinical Infection Research, Hannover 30625,
Germany. (4)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology,
Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany; Junior Research Group MicroRNA 
in Liver Regeneration, Cluster of Excellence REBIRTH, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover 30625, Germany. (5)Institute for Experimental Gene Therapy and Cancer
Research, Rostock University Medical Center, Rostock 18057, Germany. (6)Group of 
Computational Biology and Systems Biomedicine, Biodonostia Health Research
Institute, San Sebastián 20014, Spain; IKERBASQUE, Basque Foundation for Science,
Bilbao 48013, Spain. (7)Institute of Human Genetics, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover 30625, Germany. (8)Division of Hepatobiliary Oncology, Department of
Medicine III, University Hospital RWTH, Aachen 52074, Germany. (9)Department of
Medicine, Columbia University, New York, NY 10032, USA. (10)Department of
Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover 30625, Germany. (11)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Max
Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine, Münster 48149, Germany. (12)Institute
for Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany.
(13)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany; Translational Hepatology and Stem Cell
Biology, Cluster of Excellence REBIRTH, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, 
Germany. (14)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology,
Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany; Twincore Centre for
Experimental and Clinical Infection Research, Hannover 30625, Germany. Electronic
address: ott.michael@mh-hannover.de. (15)Department of Gastroenterology,
Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany; 
Junior Research Group MicroRNA in Liver Regeneration, Cluster of Excellence
REBIRTH, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany. Electronic address:
sharma.amar@mh-hannover.de.

Direct induction of induced hepatocytes (iHeps) from fibroblasts holds potential 
as a strategy for regenerative medicine but until now has only been shown in
culture settings. Here, we describe in vivo iHep formation using transcription
factor induction and genetic fate tracing in mouse models of chronic liver
disease. We show that ectopic expression of the transcription factors FOXA3,
GATA4, HNF1A, and HNF4A from a polycistronic lentiviral vector converts mouse
myofibroblasts into cells with a hepatocyte phenotype. In vivo expression of the 
same set of transcription factors from a p75 neurotrophin receptor peptide
(p75NTRp)-tagged adenovirus enabled the generation of hepatocyte-like cells from 
myofibroblasts in fibrotic mouse livers and reduced liver fibrosis. We have
therefore been able to convert pro-fibrogenic myofibroblasts in the liver into
hepatocyte-like cells with positive functional benefits. This direct in vivo
reprogramming approach may open new avenues for the treatment of chronic liver
disease.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26923201  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Mar;101(3):815-26. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-3651. Epub 
2016 Feb 23.

Perspective on the Genetics and Diagnosis of Congenital Hyperinsulinism
Disorders.

Stanley CA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Department
of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania Perelman School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104.

CONTEXT: Congenital hyperinsulinism (HI) is the most common cause of hypoglycemia
in children. The risk of permanent brain injury in infants with HI continues to
be as high as 25-50% due to delays in diagnosis and inadequate treatment.
Congenital HI has been described since the birth of the JCEM under various terms,
including "idiopathic hypoglycemia of infancy," "leucine-sensitive hypoglycemia,"
or "nesidioblastosis."
EVIDENCE ACQUISITION: In the past 20 years, it has become apparent that HI is
caused by genetic defects in the pathways that regulate pancreatic ß-cell insulin
secretion.
EVIDENCE SYNTHESIS: There are now 11 genes associated with monogenic forms of HI 
(ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK, HADH1, UCP2, MCT1, HNF4A, HNF1A, HK1, PGM1), as well 
as several syndromic genetic forms of HI (eg, Beckwith-Wiedemann, Kabuki, and
Turner syndromes). HI is also the cause of hypoglycemia in transitional neonatal 
hypoglycemia and in persistent hypoglycemia in various groups of high-risk
neonates (such as birth asphyxia, small for gestational age birthweight, infant
of diabetic mother). Management of HI is one of the most difficult problems faced
by pediatric endocrinologists and frequently requires difficult choices, such as 
near-total pancreatectomy and/or highly intensive care with continuous tube
feedings. For 50 years, diazoxide, a KATP channel agonist, has been the primary
drug for infants with HI; however, it is ineffective in most cases with mutations
of ABCC8 or KCNJ11, which constitute the majority of infants with monogenic HI.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic mutation testing has become standard of care for infants
with HI and has proven to be useful not only in projecting prognosis and family
counseling, but also in diagnosing infants with surgically curable focal HI
lesions. (18)F-fluoro-L-dihydroxyphenylalanine ((18)F-DOPA) PET scans have been
found to be highly accurate for localizing such focal lesions preoperatively. New
drugs under investigation provide hope for improving the outcomes of children
with HI.

PMID: 26908106  [PubMed - in process]


9. Sci Rep. 2016 Feb 24;6:21783. doi: 10.1038/srep21783.

Repair of liver mediated by adult mouse liver neuro-glia antigen 2-positive
progenitor cell transplantation in a mouse model of cirrhosis.

Zhang H(1), Siegel CT(2), Shuai L(1), Lai J(1), Zeng L(1), Zhang Y(1), Lai X(1), 
Bie P(1), Bai L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hepatobiliary Institute, Southwestern Hospital, No. 30 Gaotanyan, ShapingBa
Distract, Chongqing 400038, China. (2)Department of Surgery, Division of
Hepatobiliary and Abdominal Organ Transplantation, Case Western Reserve
University Hospital, Cleveland OH 44106, USA.

NG2-expressing cells are a population of periportal vascular stem/progenitors
(MLpvNG2(+) cells) that were isolated from healthy adult mouse liver by using a
"Percoll-Plate-Wait" procedure. We demonstrated that isolated cells are able to
restore liver function after transplantation into a cirrhotic liver, and
co-localized with the pericyte marker (immunohistochemistry: PDGFR-ß) and CK19.
Cells were positive for: stem cell (Sca-1, CD133, Dlk) and liver stem cell
markers (EpCAM, CD14, CD24, CD49f); and negative for: hematopoietic (CD34, CD45) 
and endothelial markers (CD31, vWf, von Willebrand factor). Cells were
transplanted (1<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(6) cells) in mice with diethylnitrosamine-induced cirrhosis 
at week 6. Cells showed increased hepatic associated gene expression of
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), Albumin (Alb), Glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pc), SRY (sex
determining region Y)-box 9 (Sox9), hepatic nuclear factors (HNF1a, HNF1ß, HNF3ß,
HNF4a, HNF6, Epithelial cell adhesion molecule (EpCAM), Leucine-rich
repeated-containing G-protein coupled receptor 5-positive (Lgr5) and Tyrosine
aminotransferase (TAT). Cells showed decreased fibrogenesis, hepatic stellate
cell infiltration, Kupffer cells and inflammatory cytokines. Liver function
markers improved. In a cirrhotic liver environment, cells could differentiate
into hepatic lineages. In addition, grafted MLpvNG2(+) cells could mobilize
endogenous stem/progenitors to participate in liver repair. These results suggest
that MLpvNG2(+) cells may be novel adult liver progenitors that participate in
liver regeneration.

PMCID: PMC4764864
PMID: 26905303  [PubMed - in process]


10. Stem Cell Reports. 2016 Mar 8;6(3):357-67. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2016.01.007.
Epub 2016 Feb 11.

Early Developmental Perturbations in a Human Stem Cell Model of MODY5/HNF1B
Pancreatic Hypoplasia.

Teo AK(1), Lau HH(2), Valdez IA(3), Dirice E(3), Tjora E(4), Raeder H(4),
Kulkarni RN(5).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Islet Cell and Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes Center,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, One Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA;
Discovery Research Division, Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis
Drive, Proteos #06-07, Singapore 138673, Singapore; School of Biological
Sciences, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 637551, Singapore;
Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University 
of Singapore, Singapore 117596, Singapore; Lee Kong Chian School of Medicine,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore 308232, Singapore. Electronic
address: ateo@imcb.a-star.edu.sg. (2)Discovery Research Division, Institute of
Molecular and Cell Biology, 61 Biopolis Drive, Proteos #06-07, Singapore 138673, 
Singapore. (3)Section of Islet Cell and Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes
Center, Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell
Institute, Harvard Medical School, One Joslin Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway; 
Department of Clinical Science, KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research,
University of Bergen, 5021 Bergen, Norway. (5)Section of Islet Cell and
Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, One Joslin
Place, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Electronic address:
rohit.kulkarni@joslin.harvard.edu.

Patients with an HNF1B(S148L/+) mutation (MODY5) typically exhibit pancreatic
hypoplasia. However, the molecular mechanisms are unknown due to inaccessibility 
of patient material and because mouse models do not fully recapitulate MODY5.
Here, we differentiated MODY5 human-induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) into 
pancreatic progenitors, and show that the HNF1B(S148L/+) mutation causes a
compensatory increase in several pancreatic transcription factors, and
surprisingly, a decrease in PAX6 pancreatic gene expression. The lack of
suppression of PDX1, PTF1A, GATA4, and GATA6 indicates that MODY5-mediated
pancreatic hypoplasia is mechanistically independent. Overexpression studies
demonstrate that a compensatory increase in PDX1 gene expression is due to mutant
HNF1B(S148L/+) but not wild-type HNF1B or HNF1A. Furthermore, HNF1B does not
appear to directly regulate PAX6 gene expression necessary for glucose tolerance.
Our results demonstrate compensatory mechanisms in the pancreatic transcription
factor network due to mutant HNF1B(S148L/+) protein. Thus, patients typically
develop MODY5 but not neonatal diabetes despite exhibiting pancreatic hypoplasia.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4788763
PMID: 26876668  [PubMed - in process]


11. Hepatology. 2016 Feb 9. doi: 10.1002/hep.28495. [Epub ahead of print]

Genome-wide Association Study in Mice Identifies Loci Affecting Liver-related
Phenotypes Including Sel1l Influencing Serum Bile Acids.

Wu W(1,)(2), Patel A(1), Kyöstilä K(3,)(4,)(5), Lohi H(3,)(4,)(5), Mladkova N(1),
Kiryluk K(1), Sun X(6), Lefkowitch JH(2), Worman HJ(1,)(2), Gharavi AG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY. (2)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, College of
Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia University, New York, NY. (3)Department of
Medical Genetics, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (4)Department of
Veterinary Biosciences, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland. (5)Department 
of Molecular Genetics, Folkhälsan Institute of Genetics, Helsinki, Finland. (6)JP
Sulzberger Columbia Genome Center, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia
University, New York, NY.

Using publicly available data from inbred mouse strains, we conducted a
genome-wide association study to identify loci that accounted for liver-related
phenotypes between C57BL/6J and A/J fed a Paigen diet. We confirmed genome-wide
significant associations for hepatic cholesterol (chromosome 10A2) and serum
total bile acid concentration (chromosome 12E) and identified a new locus for
liver inflammation (chromosome 7C). Analysis of consomic mice confirmed that
chromosome 12 A/J alleles accounted for the variance in serum total bile acid
concentrations and also had pleiotropic effects on liver mass, serum cholesterol 
and serum alanine aminotransferase activity. Using an affected-only haplotype
analysis among strains, we refined the chromosome 12E signal to a 1.95 Mb linkage
disequilibrium block containing only one gene, Sel1l. RNA-seq and immunoblotting 
demonstrated that the risk allele locally conferred reduced expression of SEL1L
in liver and distantly downregulates pathways associated with HNF1 homeobox A
(Hnf1a) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A (Hnf4a), known modifiers of bile acid
transporters and metabolic traits. Consistent with these data, knockdown of SEL1L
in HepG2 cells resulted in reduced HFN1A and HNF4A and increased bile acids in
culture media; it further captured multiple molecular signatures observed in
consomic mouse livers with reduced SEL1L. Finally, dogs harboring a SEL1L
mutation and Sel1l(+/-) mice fed a Paigen diet had significantly increased serum 
total bile acid concentrations, providing independent confirmation linking SEL1L 
to bile acid metabolism.CONCLUSION: Genetic analyses of inbred mouse strains
identified loci affecting different liver-related traits and implicated Sel1l as 
a significant determinant of serum bile acid concentration. This article is
protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

© 2016 by the American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 26857093  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. Nat Med. 2016 Mar;22(3):278-87. doi: 10.1038/nm.4038. Epub 2016 Feb 8.

CYP3A5 mediates basal and acquired therapy resistance in different subtypes of
pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma.

Noll EM(1,)(2), Eisen C(1,)(2), Stenzinger A(3,)(4), Espinet E(1,)(2),
Muckenhuber A(3), Klein C(1), Vogel V(1), Klaus B(5), Nadler W(1,)(2), Rösli
C(1), Lutz C(6), Kulke M(6), Engelhardt J(1,)(2), Zickgraf FM(1,)(2), Espinosa
O(7), Schlesner M(7), Jiang X(8), Kopp-Schneider A(8), Neuhaus P(9), Bahra M(9), 
Sinn BV(10), Eils R(7,)(11,)(12), Giese NA(13), Hackert T(13), Strobel O(13),
Werner J(13), Büchler MW(13,)(14), Weichert W(3,)(4,)(14), Trumpp A(1,)(2,)(14), 
Sprick MR(1,)(2,)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Heidelberg Institute for Stem Cell Technology and Experimental Medicine
(HI-STEM), Heidelberg, Germany. (2)Divison of Stem Cells and Cancer, German
Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Department of Pathology,
University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (4)National Center for Tumor
Diseases (NCT), Heidelberg, Germany. (5)Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular
Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Heidelberg, Germany. (6)Heidelberg Pharma GmbH,
Ladenburg, Germany. (7)Division of Theoretical Bioinformatics, German Cancer
Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany. (8)Division of Biostatistics, German
Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. (9)Department of General, Visceral
and Transplantation Surgery, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
(10)Institute of Pathology, Charité-Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin, Germany. 
(11)Institute of Pharmacy and Molecular Biotechnology, Bioquant, University of
Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany. (12)Heidelberg Center for Personalized Oncology 
(DKFZ-HIPO), German Cancer Research Center, Heidelberg, Germany. (13)Department
of General and Visceral Surgery, University Hospital Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany. (14)German Cancer Consortium (DKTK), Heidelberg, Germany.

Although subtypes of pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) have been described,
this malignancy is clinically still treated as a single disease. Here we present 
patient-derived models representing the full spectrum of previously identified
quasi-mesenchymal (QM-PDA), classical and exocrine-like PDAC subtypes, and
identify two markers-HNF1A and KRT81-that enable stratification of tumors into
different subtypes by using immunohistochemistry. Individuals with tumors of
these subtypes showed substantial differences in overall survival, and their
tumors differed in drug sensitivity, with the exocrine-like subtype being
resistant to tyrosine kinase inhibitors and paclitaxel. Cytochrome P450 3A5
(CYP3A5) metabolizes these compounds in tumors of the exocrine-like subtype, and 
pharmacological or short hairpin RNA (shRNA)-mediated CYP3A5 inhibition
sensitizes tumor cells to these drugs. Whereas hepatocyte nuclear factor 4, alpha
(HNF4A) controls basal expression of CYP3A5, drug-induced CYP3A5 upregulation is 
mediated by the nuclear receptor NR1I2. CYP3A5 also contributes to acquired drug 
resistance in QM-PDA and classical PDAC, and it is highly expressed in several
additional malignancies. These findings designate CYP3A5 as a predictor of
therapy response and as a tumor cell-autonomous detoxification mechanism that
must be overcome to prevent drug resistance.

PMCID: PMC4780258 [Available on 2016-09-01]
PMID: 26855150  [PubMed - in process]


13. J BUON. 2015 Nov-Dec;20(6):1565-75.

Genome-wide pathway analysis in pancreatic cancer.

Lee YH(1), Gyu Song G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Korea University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to identify candidate single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) that might play a role in susceptibility to pancreatic
cancer, elucidate their potential mechanisms, and generate SNP-to-gene-to-pathway
hypotheses.
METHODS: A genome-wide association study (GWAS) dataset of pancreatic cancer that
included 496,959 SNPs from 3,851 pancreatic cancer patients and 3,934 control
subjects of European descent was used in this study. The Identify candidate
Causal SNPs and Pathways (ICSNPathway) method was applied to the GWAS dataset.
RESULTS: ICSNPathway analysis identified 18 candidate SNPs, 11 genes (including
HNF1A and HNF4G), and 30 pathways, which revealed 11 hypothetical biological
mechanisms. The strongest hypothetical biological mechanism was one wherein
rs2230739 alters the role of ADCY9 in various pathways and processes, including
cyclase activity, phosphorus oxygen lyase activity, hsa04912, hsa04540, hsa04020,
and hsa00230 (0.010 = p < 0.001; 0.038 = false discovery rate (FDR) = 0.016). The
second strongest mechanism was that rs16859886 modulates ADCY10 to affect its
role in pathways including cyclase activity, phosphorus oxygen lyase activity,
nucleobase, nucleoside, and nucleotide metabolic processing, and hsa00230 (0.010 
= p < 0.001; 0.038 = FDR = 0.016).
CONCLUSIONS: By using the ICSNPathway to analyze pancreatic cancer GWAS data, 18 
candidate SNPs, 11 genes (including ADCY9, ADCY10, HNF1A, and HNF4G), and 30
pathways were identified that might contribute to the susceptibility of patients 
to pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 26854454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Clin Genet. 2016 Feb 8. doi: 10.1111/cge.12757. [Epub ahead of print]

Structure - Function studies of HNF1A (MODY3) gene mutations in South Indian
patients with monogenic diabetes.

Balamurugan K(1), Bjørkhaug L(2,)(3), Mahajan S(4), Kanthimathi S(1), Njølstad
PR(2,)(5), Srinivasan N(4), Mohan V(1), Radha V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular genetics, Madras Diabetes Research Foundation, ICMR
Advanced Centre for Genomics of Type 2 Diabetes and Dr. Mohan's Diabetes
Specialities Centre, WHO Collaborating Centre for Non Communicable Diseases
Prevention & Control, IDF Centre of Education, Gopalapuram, Chennai, 600086,
India. (2)KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Clinical Science,
University of Bergen, N-5020, Bergen, Norway. (3)Department of Biomedicine,
University of Bergen, N-5020, Bergen, Norway. (4)Molecular Biophysics Unit,
Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, 560012, India. (5)Department of
Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, N-5021, Bergen, Norway.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically heterogeneous
monogenic form of diabetes characterized by onset of diabetes below 25 years of
age, autosomal dominant mode of inheritance and primary defect in insulin
secretion. Mutations in the gene (HNF1A) encoding transcription factor Hepatocyte
Nuclear Factor 1A (HNF-1A) results in one of the most common forms of MODY
(MODY3). HNF-1A is mainly enriched in pancreatic ß-cells and hepatocytes and
important for organ development and normal pancreatic function. We here report on
the functional interrogation of eight missense HNF1A mutations associated with
MODY3 in south Indian subjects, and the contributing effect of common variant
(S487N) within HNF1A. Of the eight mutations, three mutations (p.R171G, p.G245R
and p.R263H), in particular, affected HNF-1A function in transfected HeLa cells
by reducing both transcriptional activity and nuclear localization, possibly due 
to disruption of the integrity of the three dimensional structure. The common
variant S487N contributed further to the loss of function of p.R271Q
(p.R271Q+p.S487N double mutant), in vitro, on both activity and localization. Our
data on the first functional study of HNF1A mutations in south India subjects
confers that the defect of the HNF-1A mutant proteins are responsible for MODY3
diabetes in these patients.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26853433  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2016 Jan 16. pii: S0168-8227(16)00064-4. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2016.01.015. [Epub ahead of print]

Successful switch from insulin to oral sulfonylurea therapy in HNF1A-MODY
Tunisian patient with the P291fsinsC mutation.

Khelifa SB(1), Dendana A(2), Barboura I(3), Khochtali I(4), Chahed H(5),
Ferchichi S(6), Miled A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry Laboratory, CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse 4000, Tunisia. Electronic
address: souhaira24@yahoo.fr. (2)Biochemistry Laboratory, CHU Farhat Hached,
Sousse 4000, Tunisia. Electronic address: azzadendana@yahoo.fr. (3)Biochemistry
Laboratory, CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse 4000, Tunisia. Electronic address:
ilhembarboura@yahoo.fr. (4)Endocrinology Unit, University Hospital of Monastir,
Monastir 5000, Tunisia. Electronic address: ineskhoc@yahoo.fr. (5)Biochemistry
Laboratory, CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse 4000, Tunisia. Electronic address:
hindachahed@yahoo.fr. (6)Biochemistry Laboratory, CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse 4000,
Tunisia. Electronic address: trimechesaly@yahoo.fr. (7)Biochemistry Laboratory,
CHU Farhat Hached, Sousse 4000, Tunisia. Electronic address: MILED.A@rns.tn.

The hot spot mutation P291fsinsC was identified for the first time in a 26 years 
old Tunisian woman. The low serum level of high C-reactive protein was helpful to
target the HNF1A gene. Due to the molecular diagnosis, the change from insulin to
sulfonylurea therapy was performed successfully.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26822262  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


16. Diagn Pathol. 2016 Jan 27;11(1):13. doi: 10.1186/s13000-016-0455-9.

Case Report: Next generation sequencing identifies a NAB2-STAT6 fusion in
Glioblastoma.

Diamandis P(1,)(2), Ferrer-Luna R(3,)(4), Huang RY(5), Folkerth RD(6,)(7,)(8),
Ligon AH(9,)(10), Wen PY(11), Beroukhim R(12,)(13), Ligon
KL(14,)(15,)(16,)(17,)(18), Ramkissoon SH(19,)(20,)(21,)(22).

Author information: 
(1)Neuropathology Program, Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathobiology,
University of Toronto, 27 King's College Circle, Toronto, ON, M5S, Canada.
p.diamandis@mail.utoronto.ca. (2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
p.diamandis@mail.utoronto.ca. (3)Cancer Program, Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, 415 Main St, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA. rferrer@broadinstitute.org.
(4)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline
Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. rferrer@broadinstitute.org. (5)Department of
Radiology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA, 02115,
USA. ryhuang@partners.org. (6)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. rfolkerth@partners.org.
(7)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston,
MA, 02115, USA. rfolkerth@partners.org. (8)Department of Pathology, Boston
Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
rfolkerth@partners.org. (9)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
75 Francis Street, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. aligon@partners.org. (10)Department of
Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
aligon@partners.org. (11)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, 450 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
Patrick_Wen@dfci.harvard.edu. (12)Cancer Program, Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, 415 Main St, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA.
Rameen_Beroukhim@dfci.harvard.edu. (13)Department of Cancer Biology, Dana-Farber 
Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
Rameen_Beroukhim@dfci.harvard.edu. (14)Department of Pathology, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
Keith_Ligon@dfci.harvard.edu. (15)Cancer Program, Broad Institute of MIT and
Harvard, 415 Main St, Cambridge, MA, 02142, USA. Keith_Ligon@dfci.harvard.edu.
(16)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston, 
MA, 02115, USA. Keith_Ligon@dfci.harvard.edu. (17)Department of Pathology, Boston
Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
Keith_Ligon@dfci.harvard.edu. (18)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber
Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
Keith_Ligon@dfci.harvard.edu. (19)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, 75 Francis Street, Boston, MA, 02115, USA. sramkissoon@partners.org.
(20)Department of Pathology, Harvard Medical School, 25 Shattuck Street, Boston, 
MA, 02115, USA. sramkissoon@partners.org. (21)Department of Pathology, Boston
Children's Hospital, 300 Longwood Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
sramkissoon@partners.org. (22)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer 
Institute, 450 Brookline Avenue, Boston, MA, 02115, USA.
sramkissoon@partners.org.

BACKGROUND: Molecular profiling has uncovered genetic subtypes of glioblastoma
(GBM), including tumors with IDH1 mutations that confer increase survival and
improved response to standard-of-care therapies.  By mapping the genetic
landscape of brain tumors in routine clinical practice, we enable rapid
identification of targetable genetic alterations.
CASE PRESENTATION: A 29-year-old male presented with new onset seizures prompting
neuroimaging studies, which revealed an enhancing 5 cm intra-axial lesion
involving the right parietal lobe. He underwent a subtotal resection and
pathologic examination revealed glioblastoma with mitoses, microvascular
proliferation and necrosis. Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis showed diffuse
expression of GFAP, OLIG2 and SOX2 consistent with a tumor of glial lineage.
Tumor cells were positive for IDH1(R132H) and negative for ATRX. Clinical
targeted-exome sequencing (DFBWCC Oncopanel) identified multiple functional
variants including IDH1 (p.R132H), TP53 (p.Y126_splice), ATRX (p.R1302fs*), HNF1A
(p.R263H) and NF1 (p.H2592del) variants and a NAB2-STAT6 gene fusion event
involving NAB2 exon 3 and STAT6 exon 18. Array comparative genomic hybridization 
(aCGH) further revealed a focal amplification of NAB2 and STAT6.  IHC analysis
demonstrated strong heterogenous STAT6 nuclear localization (in 20 % of tumor
cells).
CONCLUSIONS: While NAB2:STAT6 fusions are common in solitary fibrous tumors
(SFT), we report this event for the first time in a newly diagnosed,
secondary-type GBM or any other non-SFT. Our study further highlights the value
of comprehensive genomic analyses in identifying patient-specific targetable
mutations and rearrangements.

PMCID: PMC4729030
PMID: 26817999  [PubMed - in process]


17. Diabet Med. 2016 Jan 23. doi: 10.1111/dme.13075. [Epub ahead of print]

Personalized medicine in diabetes: the role of 'omics' and biomarkers.

Pearson E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cardiovascular and Diabetes Medicine, Medical Research Institute, 
University of Dundee, Dundee, UK.

Personalized medicine, otherwise called stratified or precision medicine, aims to
better target intervention to the individual to maximize benefit and minimize
harm. This review discusses how diabetes aetiology, pathophysiology and patient
genotype influence response to or side effects of the commonly used diabetes
treatments. C-peptide is a useful biomarker that is underused to guide treatment 
choice, severe insulin deficiency predicts non-response to glucagon-like
peptide-1 receptor agonists, and thiazolidinediones are more effective in
insulin-resistant patients. The field of pharmacogenetics is now yielding
clinically important results, with three examples outlined: sulphonylurea
sensitivity in patients with HNF1A maturity-onset diabetes of the young;
sulphonylurea sensitivity in patients with Type 2 diabetes with reduced function 
alleles at CYP2C9, resulting in reduced metabolism of sulphonylureas; and severe 
metformin intolerance associated with reduced function organic cation transporter
1 (OCT1) variants, exacerbated by drugs that also inhibit OCT1. Genome-wide
approaches and the potential of other 'omics', including metagenomics and
metabolomics, are then outlined, highlighting the complex interacting networks
that we need to understand before we can truly personalize diabetes treatments.
This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26802434  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. J Immunol. 2016 Feb 15;196(4):1655-65. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500897. Epub 2016
Jan 22.

Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1A Is a Cell-Intrinsic Transcription Factor Required
for B Cell Differentiation and Development in Mice.

von Wnuck Lipinski K(1), Sattler K(1), Peters S(1), Weske S(1), Keul P(1), Klump 
H(2), Heusch G(1), Göthert JR(3), Levkau B(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Pathophysiology, West German Heart and Vascular Center,
University Hospital Essen, 45122 Essen, Germany; (2)Institute for Transfusion
Medicine, University Hospital Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, 45122 Essen,
Germany; and. (3)Department of Hematology, University Hospital Essen, University 
of Duisburg-Essen, 45122 Essen, Germany. (4)Institute for Pathophysiology, West
German Heart and Vascular Center, University Hospital Essen, 45122 Essen,
Germany; bodo.levkau@uni-due.de.

The hepatocyte NF (HNF) family of transcription factors regulates the complex
gene networks involved in lipid, carbohydrate, and protein metabolism. In humans,
HNF1A mutations cause maturity onset of diabetes in the young type 3, whereas
murine HNF6 participates in fetal liver B lymphopoiesis. In this study, we have
identified a crucial role for the prototypical member of the family HNF1A in
adult bone marrow B lymphopoiesis. HNF1A(-/-) mice exhibited a clear reduction in
total blood and splenic B cells and a further pronounced one in transitional B
cells. In HNF1A(-/-) bone marrow, all B cell progenitors-from pre-pro-/early
pro-B cells to immature B cells-were dramatically reduced and their proliferation
rate suppressed. IL-7 administration in vivo failed to boost B cell development
in HNF1A(-/-) mice, whereas IL-7 stimulation of HNF1A(-/-) B cell progenitors in 
vitro revealed a marked impairment in STAT5 phosphorylation. The B cell
differentiation potential of HNF1A(-/-) common lymphoid progenitors was severely 
impaired in vitro, and the expression of the B lymphopoiesis-promoting
transcription factors E2A, EBF1, Pax5, and Bach2 was reduced in B cell
progenitors in vivo. HNF1A(-/-) bone marrow chimera featured a dramatic defect in
B lymphopoiesis recapitulating that of global HNF1A deficiency. The HNF1A(-/-)
lymphopoiesis defect was confined to B cells as T lymphopoiesis was unaffected,
and bone marrow common lymphoid progenitors and hematopoietic stem cells were
even increased. Our data demonstrate that HNF1A is an important cell-intrinsic
transcription factor in adult B lymphopoiesis and suggest the IL-7R/STAT5 module 
to be causally involved in mediating its function.

Copyright © 2016 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26800876  [PubMed - in process]


19. Eur J Med Genet. 2016 Feb;59(2):75-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejmg.2016.01.002. Epub 2016 
Jan 8.

A family with the Arg103Pro mutation in the NEUROD1 gene detected by
next-generation sequencing - Clinical characteristics of mutation carriers.

Szopa M(1), Ludwig-Galezowska AH(2), Radkowski P(3), Skupien J(2), Machlowska
J(3), Klupa T(1), Wolkow P(3), Borowiec M(4), Mlynarski W(5), Malecki MT(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University, Medical College,
Krakow, Poland; University Hospital, Krakow, Poland. (2)Department of Metabolic
Diseases, Jagiellonian University, Medical College, Krakow, Poland; Center for
Medical Genomics OMICRON, Poland. (3)Center for Medical Genomics OMICRON, Poland.
(4)Department of Clinical Genetics and Laboratory Medical University, Lodz,
Poland. (5)Department of Pediatrics, Oncology, Hematology and Diabetology,
Medical University of Lodz, Poland. (6)Department of Metabolic Diseases,
Jagiellonian University, Medical College, Krakow, Poland; University Hospital,
Krakow, Poland. Electronic address: maciej.malecki@uj.edu.pl.

Until now only a few families with early onset autosomal diabetes due to the
NEUROD1 gene mutations have been identified. Moreover, only some of them meet
strict MODY (maturity-onset diabetes of the young) criteria. Next-generation
sequencing (NGS) provides an opportunity to detect more pathogenic mutations in
this gene. Here, we evaluated the segregation of the Arg103Pro mutation in the
NEUROD1 gene in a pedigree in which it was detected, and described the clinical
characteristics of the mutation carriers.METHODS: We included 156 diabetic
probands of MODY families, among them 52 patients earlier tested for GCK-MODY
and/or HNF1A-MODY by Sanger sequencing with negative results. Genetic testing was
performed by targeted NGS sequencing using a panel of 28 monogenic diabetes
genes.
RESULTS: As detected by NGS, one patient had the missense Arg103Pro (CGC/CCC)
mutation in the gene NEUROD1 changing the amino-acid structure of the DNA binding
domain of this transcription factor. We confirmed this sequence difference by
Sanger sequencing. This family had previously been tested with negative results
for HNF1A gene mutations. 17 additional members of this family were invited for
further testing. We confirmed the presence of the mutation in 11 subjects. Seven 
adult mutation carriers (all but one) from three generations had been already
diagnosed with diabetes. There were 3 individuals with the Arg103Pro mutation
diagnosed before the age of 30 years in the family. The range of age of the four 
unaffected mutation carriers (3 minors and 1 adult) was 3-48 years.
Interestingly, one mutation carrier had a history of transient neonatal
hypoglycemia, of which the clinical course resembled episodes typical for
HNF4A-MODY.
CONCLUSIONS: We report a family with autosomal dominant diabetes related to a new
NEUROD1 mutation, one of very few meeting MODY criteria. The use of the NGS
method will facilitate identification of more families with rare forms of MODY.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26773576  [PubMed - in process]


20. Cancer Biomark. 2016 Feb 23;16(2):291-300. doi: 10.3233/CBM-150567.

Long non-coding RNA HNF1A-AS is upregulated and promotes cell proliferation and
metastasis in nasopharyngeal carcinoma.

Zhuang K(1,)(2), Wu Q(2), Jin CS(1), Yuan HJ(2), Cheng JZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery, the Second Hospital of
Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin, China. (2)Department of Otolaryngology, Head 
and Neck Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University,
Harbin, Heilongjiang, China.

BACKGROUND: Nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) is a common head and neck cancer with 
an incidence of 10-30 cases per 100,000 in southern China. Although primary
treatment includes radiation therapy, prognosis is still unsatisfactory.
OBJECTIVE: In this study, we examined the role of HNF1A-AS in NPC progression in 
vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: Relative levels of long non-coding RNA (LncRNA), HNF1A-AS, were
evaluated in tumor tissues from 20 patients with NPC as well as from cultured NPC
cell lines. Lentivirus-mediated HNF1A-AS knockdown was conducted in NPC cell
lines, CNE-2 and SUNE-1. Cell migration and invasion abilities were estimated in 
vitro by colony-formation, wound-healing, and transwell assays. Cell cycle
analysis was used to further examine the role of HNF1A-AS in cell proliferation. 
The tumor size of 24 male mice with or without HNF1A-AS knockdown was monitored
once a week. The underlying mechanism of HNF1A-AS-mediated cell proliferation was
studied by western blot analysis.
RESULTS: Lentivirus-mediated HNF1A-AS knockdown suppressed cell proliferation and
migration abilities. In mice injected with CNE-2 and SUNE-1, depletion of
HNF1A-AS caused inhibition of tumor growth, whereas cell cycle analysis showed
that HNF1A-AS-knockdown resulted in cell accumulation in the G0/G1 phase.
Moreover, HNF1A-AS was found to be associated with epithelial to mesenchymal
transition.
CONCLUSIONS: Overall, our results suggest that LncRNA, HNF1A-AS potentially
regulates NPC tumorigenesis. This could help in development of new strategies for
NPC diagnosis and treatment.

PMID: 26756620  [PubMed - in process]


21. Mol Med Rep. 2016 Feb;13(2):1487-94. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4743. Epub 2015 Dec
30.

Caveolin-1 is essential in the differentiation of human adipose-derived stem
cells into hepatocyte-like cells via an MAPK pathway-dependent mechanism.

Guan X(1), Wang N(1), Cui F(2), Liu Y(1), Liu P(1), Zhao J(1), Han C(1), Li X(1),
Leng Z(1), Li Y(1), Ji X(1), Zou W(2), Liu J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Regenerative Medicine Centre, The First Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical 
University, Dalian, Liaoning 116011, P.R. China. (2)Liaoning Key Laboratories of 
Biotechnology and Molecular Drug Research and Development, College of Life
Science, Liaoning Normal University, Dalian, Liaoning 116029, P.R. China.

Human adipose-derived stem cells (hADSCs), widely present in the adult human
body, are an emerging and attractive tool for the establishment of stem
cell-based therapies for the treatment of liver disease. However, the mechanism
underlying hADSCs hepatic differentiation remains to be elucidated. Caveolin-1
(Cav-1), a 21-24 kDa membrane structural protein, is important in liver
regeneration and development. In the present study, fluorescence
immunocytochemistry and western blotting were used to analyze the expression
levels of Cav-1 and evaluate its effects on the hepatic differentiation of
hADSCs. The results revealed that primary hADSCs preserved the ability to
proliferate and differentiate into hepatocyte-like cells. As demonstrated by
semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction,
hepatocyte-inducing factors significantly increased the expression of Cav-1 in a 
time-dependent manner, as indicated by increased expression levels of the albumin
(ALB) and a-fetoprotein (AFP) markers. In addition the expression levels of ALB
and HNF1A significantly decreased following small interfering RNA-mediated
knockdown of Cav-1. The mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) signaling pathway
was activated during hepatic differentiation and inhibited following Cav-1
knockdown. These results suggested that Cav-1 may regulate the hepatocyte-like
differentiation of hADSCs by modulating mitogen-activated protein kinase
kinase/MAPK signaling. The results of the present study will provide experimental
and theoretical basis for further clinical studies on stem cell transplantation
in the treatment of liver disease.

PMCID: PMC4732856
PMID: 26717806  [PubMed - in process]


22. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Dec 15. pii:
/j/jpem.ahead-of-print/jpem-2015-0039/jpem-2015-0039.xml. doi:
10.1515/jpem-2015-0039. [Epub ahead of print]

Maturity onset diabetes of youth (MODY) in Turkish children: sequence analysis of
11 causative genes by next generation sequencing.

Agladioglu SY, Aycan Z, Çetinkaya S, Bas VN, Önder A, Peltek Kendirci HN, Dogan
H, Ceylaner S.

BACKGROUND: Maturity-onset diabetes of the youth (MODY), is a genetically and
clinically heterogeneous group of diseasesand is often misdiagnosed as type 1 or 
type 2 diabetes. The aim of this study is to investigate both novel and proven
mutations of 11 MODY genes in Turkish children by using targeted next generation 
sequencing.
METHODS: A panel of 11 MODY genes were screened in 43 children with MODY
diagnosed by clinical criterias. Studies of index cases was done with
MISEQ-ILLUMINA, and family screenings and confirmation studies of mutations was
done by Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: We identified 28 (65%) point mutations among 43 patients. Eighteen
patients have GCK mutations, four have HNF1A, one has HNF4A, one has HNF1B, two
have NEUROD1, one has PDX1 gene variations and one patient has both HNF1A and
HNF4A heterozygote mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first study including molecular studies of 11 MODY genes
in Turkish children. GCK is the most frequent type of MODY in our study
population. Very high frequency of novel mutations (42%) in our study population,
supports that in heterogenous disorders like MODY sequence analysis provides
rapid, cost effective and accurate genetic diagnosis.

PMID: 26669242  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


23. Br J Cancer. 2015 Dec 22;113(12):1704-11. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2015.397. Epub 2015
Dec 8.

Mutational analysis of pulmonary tumours with neuroendocrine features using
targeted massive parallel sequencing: a comparison of a neglected tumour group.

Vollbrecht C(1), Werner R(2), Walter RF(2,)(3), Christoph DC(4), Heukamp LC(1),
Peifer M(5), Hirsch B(6), Burbat L(6), Mairinger T(7), Kurt Werner S(2),
Wohlschlaeger J(2), Mairinger FD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Cologne, Cologne, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (3)Ruhrlandklinik, West German Lung Centre,
University Hospital Essen, University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.
(4)Department of Oncology, University Hospital Essen, University of
Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany. (5)Department of Translational Genomics, Cologne 
Center of Genomics, University of Cologne, Cologne, Germany. (6)Institute of
Pathology, Molecular Diagnostics, Charité Universitätsmedizin Berlin, Berlin,
Germany. (7)Institute of Pathology, Helios Klinikum Emil von Behring, Berlin,
Germany.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. 
The typical and atypical carcinoid (TC and AC), the large-cell neuroendocrine
carcinoma (LCNEC) and the small-cell lung cancers (SCLC) are subgroups of
pulmonary tumours that show neuroendocrine differentiations. With the rising
impact of molecular pathology in routine diagnostics the interest for reliable
biomarkers, which can help to differentiate these subgroups and may enable a more
personalised treatment of patients, grows.
METHODS: A collective of 70 formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded (FFPE) pulmonary
neuroendocrine tumours (17 TCs, 17 ACs, 19 LCNECs and 17 SCLCs) was used to
identify biomarkers by high-throughput sequencing. Using the Illumina TruSeq
Amplicon-Cancer Panel on the MiSeq instrument, the samples were screened for
alterations in 221 mutation hot spots of 48 tumour-relevant genes.
RESULTS: After filtering >26<U+2009>000 detected variants by applying strict algorithms,
a total of 130 mutations were found in 29 genes and 49 patients. Mutations in
JAK3, NRAS, RB1 and VHL1 were exclusively found in SCLCs, whereas the FGFR2
mutation was detected in LCNEC only. KIT, PTEN, HNF1A and SMO were altered in
ACs. The SMAD4 mutation corresponded to the TC subtype. We prove that the
frequency of mutations increased with the malignancy of tumour type.
Interestingly, four out of five ATM-mutated patients showed an additional
alteration in TP53, which was by far the most frequently altered gene (28 out of 
130; 22%). We found correlations between tumour type and IASLC grade for ATM-
(P=0.022; P=0.008) and TP53-mutated patients (P<0.001). Both mutated genes were
also associated with lymph node invasion and distant metastasis (P<U+2A7D>0.005).
Furthermore, PIK3CA-mutated patients with high-grade tumours showed a reduced
overall survival (P=0.040) and the mutation frequency of APC and ATM in
high-grade neuroendocrine lung cancer patients was associated with
progression-free survival (PFS) (P=0.020).
CONCLUSIONS: The implementation of high-throughput sequencing for the analysis of
the neuroendocrine lung tumours has revealed that, even if these tumours
encompass several subtypes with varying clinical aggressiveness, they share a
number of molecular features. An improved understanding of the biology of
neuroendocrine tumours will offer the opportunity for novel approaches in
clinical management, resulting in a better prognosis and prediction of
therapeutic response.

PMCID: PMC4701994 [Available on 2016-12-22]
PMID: 26645239  [PubMed - in process]


24. Diabet Med. 2015 Dec 7. doi: 10.1111/dme.13043. [Epub ahead of print]

Substantial proportion of MODY among multiplex families participating in a Type 1
diabetes prediction programme.

Petruzelkova L(1), Dusatkova P(1), Cinek O(1), Sumnik Z(1), Pruhova S(1), Hradsky
O(1), Vcelakova J(1), Lebl J(1), Kolouskova S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, University Hospital Motol and 2nd Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.

AIMS: Patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) might be
over-represented in families with histories of Type 1 diabetes. Our aim was to
re-evaluate families participating in the Czech T1D Prediction Programme
(PREDIA.CZ) with at least two members affected with diabetes to assess the
proportion of MODY among these families and determine its most significant
clinical predictors.
METHODS: Of the 557 families followed up by the PREDIA.CZ, 53 (9.5%) had two or
more family members with diabetes. One proband with diabetes from these families 
was chosen for direct sequencing of the GCK, HNF1A, HNF4A and INS genes.
Non-parametric tests and a linear logistic regression model were used to evaluate
differences between MODY and non-MODY families.
RESULTS: MODY was genetically diagnosed in 24 of the 53 families with multiple
occurrences of diabetes (45%). Mutations were detected most frequently in GCK
(58%), followed by HNF1A (38%) and INS (4%). MODY families were more likely to
have a parent with diabetes and had a higher proportion of females than non-MODY 
families<comment> Author: Do you mean 'had a higher proportion of females with
diabetes than non-MODY families'? Please clarify </comment>. Higher age
(P < 0.001), a lower level of HbA1c (P < 0.001) at clinical onset and at least
two generations affected by diabetes were the variables most predictive for
probands of MODY families already presenting with diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: A prediction programme for Type 1 diabetes would provide a useful
new source of patients with MODY most likely to benefit from an accurate
diagnosis. This identification has implications for patient treatment and disease
prognosis. This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26641800  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. Cell Biosci. 2015 Dec 4;5:66. doi: 10.1186/s13578-015-0059-1. eCollection 2015.

Identification of acetyltransferase genes (HAT1 and KAT8) regulating HBV
replication by RNAi screening.

Wang H(1), Liu K(1), Fang BA(2), Wu H(3), Li F(1), Xiang X(1), Tang W(1), Zhao
G(1), Lin L(1), Bao S(4), Xie Q(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Diseases, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China. (2)Discipline of Pathology,
School of Medical Sciences and The Bosch Institute, Charles Perkins Centre, The
University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006 Australia ; Central Clinical School,
Sydney Medical School, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006 Australia.
(3)Department of Infectious Diseases, Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China ; Department of Cardiology,
Shanghai First People's Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China. (4)Department of Infectious Diseases, Ruijin
Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China ;
Discipline of Pathology, School of Medical Sciences and The Bosch Institute,
Charles Perkins Centre, The University of Sydney, Sydney, NSW 2006 Australia.

BACKGROUND: The initiation of hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication involves the
formation of covalently closed circular DNA (cccDNA) and its transcription into
pregenomic RNA (pgRNA) in hepatocyte nuclei. The regulatory mechanism of HBV
replication by acetyltransferase is thus far not well understood, but human
acetyltransferase has been reported as being involved in the regulation of HBV
replication.
RESULTS: Depletion of KAT8 or HAT1 via RNA interference (RNAi) markedly
down-regulated HBV-DNA and pgRNA levels in HepG2.2.15 cells, with KAT8 knockdown 
reducing both HBsAg and HBeAg more than HAT1 knockdown. Consistent with these
observations, HBV replication regulators hepatocyte nuclear factor-4-a (HNF4a)
and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator- (PPARGC-) 1-a
were decreased following knockdown of HAT1 or KAT8.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that KAT8 or HAT1 regulate HBV replication and
may be potential drug targets of anti-HBV therapy.

PMCID: PMC4669656
PMID: 26640654  [PubMed]


26. Exp Mol Pathol. 2016 Feb;100(1):8-12. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2015.11.026. Epub 2015
Nov 25.

Genetic alterations in endometrial cancer by targeted next-generation sequencing.

Chang YS(1), Huang HD(2), Yeh KT(3), Chang JG(4).

Author information: 
(1)Epigenome Research Center, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung,
Taiwan; Department of Laboratory Medicine, China Medical University Hospital,
Taichung, Taiwan. (2)Department of Biological Science and Technology, National
Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan; Institute of Bioinformatics and Systems
Biology, National Chiao Tung University, Hsinchu, Taiwan. (3)Department of
Pathology, Changhua Christian Hospital, Changhua, Taiwan. (4)Epigenome Research
Center, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan; Department of
Laboratory Medicine, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan; School 
of Medicine, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan. Electronic address:
d6781@mail.cmuh.org.tw.

Many genetic factors play important roles in the development of endometrial
cancer. The aim of this study was to investigate genetic alterations in the
Taiwanese population with endometrial cancer. DNA was extracted from 10 cases of 
fresh-frozen endometrial cancer tissue. The exomes of cancer-related genes were
captured using the NimbleGen Comprehensive Cancer Panel (578 cancer-related
genes) and sequenced using the Illumina Genomic Sequencing Platform. Our results 
revealed 120 variants in 99 genes, 21 of which were included in the Oncomine
Cancer Research Panel used in the National Cancer Institute Match Trial. The 21
genes comprised 8 tumor suppressor candidates (ATM, MSH2, PIK3R1, PTCH1, PTEN,
TET2, TP53, and TSC1) and 13 oncogene candidates (ALK, BCL9, CTNNB1, ERBB2,
FGFR2, FLT3, HNF1A, KIT, MTOR, PDGFRA, PPP2R1A, PTPN11, and SF3B1). We identified
a high frequency of mutations in PTEN (50%) and genes involved in the endometrial
cancer-related molecular pathway, which involves the IL-7 signaling pathway
(PIK3R1, n=1; AKT2, n=1; FOXO1, n=1). We report the mutational landscape of
endometrial cancer in the Taiwanese population. We believe that this study will
shed new light on fundamental aspects for understanding the molecular
pathogenesis of endometrial cancer and may aid in the development of new targeted
therapies.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26626801  [PubMed - in process]


27. Pathol Res Pract. 2015 Dec;211(12):918-24. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2015.09.003. Epub
2015 Sep 7.

Unique genetic alterations and clinicopathological features of hepatocellular
adenoma in Chinese population.

Liu HP(1), Zhao Q(1), Jin GZ(1), Qian YW(1), Gu YJ(1), Dong H(1), Lu XY(1), Cong 
WM(2), Wu MC(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, The Second
Military Medical University, Shanghai 200438, China. (2)Department of Pathology, 
Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, The Second Military Medical University,
Shanghai 200438, China. Electronic address: wmcong@smmu.edu.cn. (3)Department of 
Surgery, Eastern Hepatobiliary Surgery Hospital, The Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200438, China.

Hepatocellular adenoma (HCA) is a benign hepatocyte-derived tumor commonly seen
in reproductive-aged women with long-term use of oral contraceptives (OCs) in
European and North American countries. Accordingly, HCA is currently classified
into four molecular subtypes as adopted by the World Health Organization. The
present study was firstly to characterize and determine the genetic alterations
and clinicopathological features of the largest series of HCAs in China. We
reviewed 189 patients with HCA who underwent hepatectomies at our liver center
from January 1984 to January 2012, among which 36 HCAs were randomly selected for
the sequencing of HNF1a, ß-catenin and gp130 genes, and 60 HCAs were randomly
selected for detecting microsatellite instability (MSI). Compared with Western
studies, our data showed distinctive findings including male (69.8%) and
overweight/obese (50.3%) predominance. Only 3.5% of female patients had a
documented history of OCs use for 2-4 years. All 36 sequenced HCAs showed HNF1a
mutations (72% missense, 28% synonymous), 2 hotspot polymorphisms of HNF1a (I27L:
rs1169288 and S487N: rs2464196) were seen in 17 (47%) and 10 (27.8%) cases,
respectively, and a novel single nucleotide polymorphism site (rs1169304) in
intron 9 of HNF1a was detected in 32 (88%) cases, but no ß-catenin or gp130 gene 
mutation was detected, and no nuclear ß-catenin staining was detected by
immunohistochemistry. The frequency of MSI was 75% for D12S1398 (HNF1a
inactivated pathway) and 78.5% for D6S1064 (HIPPO signaling pathway) in 34
overweight/obese patients with HCA. Our results firstly indicate that patients
with HCA in China frequently occur in male overweigh and obese adult population, 
lack an association with OCs use and exhibit unique genetic alterations. Taken
together, these observations suggest that alternative pathogenetic pathways
involve in HCA tumorigenesis in Chinese patients.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26608415  [PubMed - in process]


28. J Proteome Res. 2015 Dec 4;14(12):5007-16. doi: 10.1021/acs.jproteome.5b00544.
Epub 2015 Nov 19.

Proteogenomic Study beyond Chromosome 9: New Insight into Expressed Variant
Proteome and Transcriptome in Human Lung Adenocarcinoma Tissues.

Kim YI(1), Lee J(2), Choi YJ(1,)(3), Seo J(1), Park J(4), Lee SY(2,)(5), Cho
JY(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, BK21 PLUS Program for Creative Veterinary Science 
Research and Research Institute for Veterinary Science, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Seoul National University , Seoul 08826, South Korea. (2)Department of 
Laboratory Medicine & Genetics, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine , Seoul 06351, South Korea. (3)ProtAnBio , Seoul 08826, South 
Korea. (4)Samsung Biomedical Research Institute, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine , Seoul 06351, South Korea.
(5)Department of Clinical Pharmacology & Therapeutics, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine , Seoul 06351, South Korea.

This is a report of a human proteome project (HPP) related to chromosome 9 (Chr
9). To reveal missing proteins and undiscovered features in proteogenomes, both
LC-MS/MS analysis and next-generation RNA sequencing (RNA-seq)-based
identification and characterization were conducted on five pairs of lung
adenocarcinoma tumors and adjacent nontumor tissues. Before our previous
Chromosome-Centric Human Proteome Project (C-HPP) special issue, there were 170
remaining missing proteins on Chr 9 (neXtProt 2013.09.26 rel.); 133 remain at
present (neXtProt 2015.04.28 rel.). In the proteomics study, we found two missing
protein candidates that require follow-up work and one unrevealed protein across 
all chromosomes. RNA-seq analysis detected RNA expression for four nonsynonymous 
(NS) single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (in CDH17, HIST1H1T, SAPCD2, and
ZNF695) and three synonymous SNPs (in CDH17, CST1, and HNF1A) in all five tumor
tissues but not in any of the adjacent normal tissues. By constructing a cancer
patient sample-specific protein database based on individual RNA-seq data and by 
searching the proteomics data from the same sample, we identified four missense
mutations in four genes (LTF, HDLBP, TF, and HBD). Two of these mutations were
found in tumor samples but not in paired normal tissues. In summary, our
proteogenomic study of human primary lung tumor tissues detected additional and
revealed novel missense mutations and synonymous SNP signatures, some of which
are specific to lung cancers. Data from mass spectrometry have been deposited in 
the ProteomeXchange with the identifier PXD002523.

PMID: 26584007  [PubMed - in process]


29. Acta Pharm Sin B. 2015 Mar;5(2):129-34. doi: 10.1016/j.apsb.2015.01.001. Epub
2015 Feb 20.

Metabolic effects of intestinal absorption and enterohepatic cycling of bile
acids.

Ferrebee CB(1), Dawson PA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and
Nutrition, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA ; Molecular Medicine Graduate
Program, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem, NC 27153, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and
Nutrition, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

The classical functions of bile acids include acting as detergents to facilitate 
the digestion and absorption of nutrients in the gut. In addition, bile acids
also act as signaling molecules to regulate glucose homeostasis, lipid metabolism
and energy expenditure. The signaling potential of bile acids in compartments
such as the systemic circulation is regulated in part by an efficient
enterohepatic circulation that functions to conserve and channel the pool of bile
acids within the intestinal and hepatobiliary compartments. Changes in
hepatobiliary and intestinal bile acid transport can alter the composition, size,
and distribution of the bile acid pool. These alterations in turn can have
significant effects on bile acid signaling and their downstream metabolic
targets. This review discusses recent advances in our understanding of the
inter-relationship between the enterohepatic cycling of bile acids and the
metabolic consequences of signaling via bile acid-activated receptors, such as
farnesoid X nuclear receptor (FXR) and the G-protein-coupled bile acid receptor
(TGR5).

PMCID: PMC4629214
PMID: 26579438  [PubMed]


30. Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2015;125(11):845-51. Epub 2015 Nov 9.

Genetic testing for monogenic diabetes using targeted next-generation sequencing 
in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Szopa M, Ludwig-Galezowska A, Radkowski P, Skupien J, Zapala B, Platek T, Klupa
T, Kiec-Wilk B, Borowiec M, Mlynarski W, Wolkow P, Malecki MT.

INTRODUCTION: Molecular diagnosis of monogenic diabetes mellitus is important for
individualized patient care. Next-generation sequencing (NGS) enables a
simultaneous analysis of multiple genes in a single test.
OBJECTIVES: We aimed to assess the feasibility of using NGS for detecting
mutations in a set of known monogenic diabetes gene mutations in a cohort of
Polish patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) with earlier
negative Sanger sequencing results for HNF1A-MODY or GCK-MODY.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We selected a panel of 28 chromosomal genes in which
mutations have been reported to cause monogenic diabetes. The MiSeq platform was 
used for NGS. An exon-capture assay was designed to include coding regions and
splice sites. A total of 54 patients with existing negative Sanger sequencing
screening results for HNF1A or GCK gene mutations were selected for the study.
RESULTS: NGS results were generated for all 54 patients and 9 positive controls
with previously identified HNF1A or GCK gene mutation. All selected positive
controls were confirmed by NGS. Among 28 genes, mutations were detected in 16.
The type of the analyzed genetic changes was described in the NGS study as high
(n = 3) or moderate (n = 76). Among the detected mutations, there were 4 known
GCK gene mutations that had been previously missed in Sanger sequencing. So far, 
Sanger sequencing allowed us to confirm 21 gene mutations detected by NGS, and
segregation with diabetes in 14 pedigrees.
CONCLUSIONS: Our pilot study using NGS for monogenic diabetes screening in the
MODY cohort confirmed that it improves the detection of diabetes-related sequence
differences. The screening with NGS should also include diabetic patients for
whom Sanger-based screening for particular subtypes of MODY provided negative
results.

PMID: 26552609  [PubMed - in process]


31. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Dec 4-11;468(1-2):14-20. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.11.007. Epub 2015 Nov 6.

Repression of HNF1a-mediated transcription by amino-terminal enhancer of split
(AES).

Han EH(1), Gorman AA(2), Singh P(1), Chi YI(3).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Structural Biology, Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota,
Austin, MN 55912, USA. (2)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry,
University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA. (3)Section of Structural
Biology, Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota, Austin, MN 55912, USA.
Electronic address: ychi@hi.umn.edu.

HNF1a (Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1a) is one of the master regulators in
pancreatic beta-cell development and function, and the mutations in Hnf1a are the
most common monogenic causes of diabetes mellitus. As a member of the POU
transcription factor family, HNF1a exerts its gene regulatory function through
various molecular interactions; however, there is a paucity of knowledge in their
functional complex formation. In this study, we identified the Groucho protein
AES (Amino-terminal Enhancer of Split) as a HNF1a-specific physical binding
partner and functional repressor of HNF1a-mediated transcription, which has a
direct link to glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in beta-cells that is
impaired in the HNF1a mutation-driven diabetes.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26549228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2016 Feb;26(2):53-65. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0000000000000185.

A candidate-gene association study of topiramate-induced weight loss in obese
patients with and without type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Li QS(1), Lenhard JM, Zhan Y, Konvicka K, Athanasiou MC, Strauss RS, Francke S.

Author information: 
(1)aNeuroscience Therapeutic Area, Janssen Research & Development, LLC,
Titusville, New Jersey bCVM Therapeutic Area, Janssen Research & Development,
LLC, Spring House, Pennsylvania cPerlegen Sciences, Mountain View, California
dAthanasiou Consulting, LLC, Fond du Lac, Wisconsin, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Clinical response to topiramate can vary greatly in obese patients.
Identifying genetic variants associated with treatment response could help gain
insight into the mechanism of action of topiramate. Little is known about the
relationship between genetic variability and topiramate treatment response. We
performed a large-scale candidate-gene study to identify genetic risk factors
predictive of topiramate-induced weight loss.
METHODS: We collected DNA samples from patients who had previously participated
in clinical trials to assess the efficacy of topiramate for the treatment of
obesity. A custom chip containing single nucleotide polymorphisms from ~480
candidate genes was utilized to genotype a discovery cohort of 445 obese patients
from a clinical study. Variants predictive of topiramate-induced weight loss were
identified and further tested in an independent replication cohort of drug-naive,
obese patients with type 2 diabetes (N=139).
RESULTS: We identified a haplotype in INSR that may contribute to differential
topiramate-induced weight loss. Carriers and noncarriers of an INSR haplotype
lost 9.1 and 7.0% of body weight, respectively (P=6.5×10, Padj=0.001). This
finding was replicated, with carriers and noncarriers losing 9.5 and 7.3% of body
weight, respectively (PBonf=0.02), in the independent replication cohort. We also
identified an SNP in HNF1A that may be associated with topiramate response and an
SNP in GRIA3 that may be associated with nonpharmacologic treatment response.
CONCLUSION: According to our preliminary findings, genetic variation in the INSR 
and HNF1A genes may differentially affect weight loss in obese individuals
treated with topiramate and genes related to insulin action are implicated in
modulating topiramate response. However, these findings need to be further
replicated in additional larger samples.

PMID: 26524290  [PubMed - in process]


33. Mod Pathol. 2016 Jan;29(1):43-50. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2015.119. Epub 2015 Oct 
30.

Inflammatory hepatocellular adenomas developed in the setting of chronic liver
disease and cirrhosis.

Calderaro J(1,)(2,)(3), Nault JC(3,)(4,)(5,)(6), Balabaud C(7), Couchy G(3,)(4), 
Saint-Paul MC(8), Azoulay D(9), Mehdaoui D(1), Luciani A(10), Zafrani ES(1),
Bioulac-Sage P(7,)(11), Zucman-Rossi J(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pathologie, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre
Hospitalier Universitaire Henri Mondor, Créteil, France. (2)Université Paris Est 
Créteil, Créteil, France. (3)Inserm, UMR-1162, Génomique fonctionnelle des
Tumeurs solides, Equipe Labellisée Ligue Contre le Cancer, Paris, France.
(4)Université Paris Descartes, Labex Immuno-Oncology, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
Faculté de Médecine, Paris, France. (5)Université Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cité, 
Unité de Formation et de Recherche Santé, Médecine, Biologie humaine, Bobigny,
France. (6)Liver Unit, Hôpital Jean Verdier, Hôpitaux Universitaires
Paris-Seine-Saint-Denis, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Bondy, France.
(7)Inserm, UMR-1053, Université Bordeaux Segalen, Bordeaux, France. (8)Department
of Pathology, CHU Pasteur, Nice, France. (9)Department of Digestive and
Hepatobiliary Surgery, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire Henri Mondor, Créteil, France. (10)Department of Medical Imaging,
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire Henri
Mondor, Créteil, France. (11)Department of Pathology, Pellegrin Hospital, Centre 
Hospitalier Universitaire de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.

Hepatocellular adenoma is considered to occur exclusively in non-fibrotic livers.
It is a heterogeneous entity and a molecular classification is now widely
accepted. The most frequent hepatocellular adenoma subtype, namely inflammatory
adenoma, harbor somatic activating mutations of genes involved in the
interleukin-6 pathway that lead to high C-reactive protein and serum amyloid A
expression. The aim of our study was to investigate a series of benign
hepatocellular neoplasms developed on cirrhotic livers and characterized by an
unequivocal histological diagnosis. We performed a clinical, pathological, and
molecular study of 10 benign hepatocellular neoplasms developed in three patients
with cirrhosis. Markers allowing hepatocellular adenoma classification were
assessed by quantitative real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry. Samples were
sequenced for CTNNB1, HNF1A, IL6ST, GNAS, STAT3, and TERT (promoter) mutations. A
control series of 32 classical macronodules developed in cirrhosis related to
various etiologies was screened by immunohistochemistry and gene sequencing. The 
three patients had cirrhosis related to metabolic syndrome and/or alcohol intake;
two had a single tumor, while the third developed more than 30 lesions.
Microscopic examination showed well-differentiated neoplasms sharing features
with inflammatory adenoma including inflammatory infiltrates, sinusoidal
dilatation, and dystrophic vessels. Sequencing revealed classical hotspot somatic
mutations (IL6ST, n=8; STAT3, n=1; and GNAS, n=1) known to be responsible for
IL-6/JAK/STAT pathway activation. Two classical high-grade macronodules
demonstrated high serum amyloid A and/or C-reactive protein expression, without
gene mutations. Altogether, our findings support the existence of rare
inflammatory adenoma developed in cirrhosis.

PMID: 26516697  [PubMed - in process]


34. Sci Rep. 2015 Oct 27;5:15706. doi: 10.1038/srep15706.

Generation of integration-free induced hepatocyte-like cells from mouse
fibroblasts.

Kim J(1), Kim KP(2), Lim KT(1), Lee SC(1), Yoon J(2), Song G(3), Hwang SI(1),
Schöler HR(2,)(4), Cantz T(2,)(3), Han DW(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, School of Medicine, Konkuk University, 1
Hwayang-dong, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of
Cell and Developmental Biology, Max Planck Institute for Molecular Biomedicine,
Röntgenstrasse 20, 48149 Münster, Germany. (3)REBIRTH Cluster of Excellence,
Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625, Germany. (4)University of Münster,
Medical Faculty, Domagkstrasse 3, 48149 Münster, Germany. (5)KU Open-Innovation
Center, Institute of Biomedical Science &Technology, Konkuk University, 1
Hwayang-dong, Gwangjin-gu, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea.

The ability to generate integration-free induced hepatocyte-like cells (iHeps)
from somatic fibroblasts has the potential to advance their clinical application.
Here, we have generated integration-free, functional, and expandable iHeps from
mouse somatic fibroblasts. To elicit this direct conversion, we took advantage of
an oriP/EBNA1-based episomal system to deliver a set of transcription factors,
Gata4, Hnf1a, and Foxa3, to the fibroblasts. The established iHeps exhibit
similar morphology, marker expression, and functional properties to primary
hepatocytes. Furthermore, integration-free iHeps prolong the survival of
fumarylacetoacetate-hydrolase-deficient (Fah(-/-)) mice after cell
transplantation. Our study provides a novel concept for generating functional and
expandable iHeps using a non-viral, non-integrating, plasmid-based system that
could facilitate their pharmaceutical and biomedical application.

PMCID: PMC4621602
PMID: 26503743  [PubMed - in process]


35. Mol Immunol. 2015 Dec;68(2 Pt B):484-9. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2015.09.017. Epub
2015 Oct 17.

Cell-autonomous requirement for TCF1 and LEF1 in the development of Natural
Killer T cells.

Berga-Bolaños R(1), Zhu WS(1), Steinke FC(2), Xue HH(2), Sen JM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Immune Cells and Inflammation Section, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, United States. (2)Department of
Microbiology, Interdisciplinary Immunology Graduate Program, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, IA 52242, United States. (3)Immune Cells and Inflammation Section,
National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, 
United States; Department of Medicine, The Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21287, United States. Electronic address:
Jyoti-Sen@nih.gov.

Natural killer T (NKT) cells develop from common CD4(+) CD8(+) thymocyte
precursors. Transcriptional programs that regulate the development of NKT cells
in the thymus development remain to be fully delineated. Here, we demonstrate a
cell-intrinsic requirement for transcription factors TCF1 and LEF1 for the
development of all subsets of NKT cells. Conditional deletion of TCF1 alone
results in a substantial reduction in NKT cells. The remaining NKT cells are
eliminated when TCF1 and LEF1 are both deleted. These data reveal an essential
role for TCF1 and LEF1 in development of NKT cells.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4636915 [Available on 2016-12-01]
PMID: 26490636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Acta Naturae. 2015 Jul-Sep;7(3):89-99.

Genomic Study of Cardiovascular Continuum Comorbidity.

Makeeva OA(1), Sleptsov AA(2), Kulish EV(2), Barbarash OL(3), Mazur AM(4),
Prokhorchuk EB(4), Chekanov NN(4), Stepanov VA(2), Puzyrev VP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Nab. Ushayki, 10, Tomsk, 634050,
Russia ; Research Institute for Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases,
Sosnovy Blvd., 6, Kemerovo, 650000, Russia. (2)Research Institute of Medical
Genetics, Nab. Ushayki, 10, Tomsk, 634050, Russia. (3)Research Institute for
Complex Issues of Cardiovascular Diseases, Sosnovy Blvd., 6, Kemerovo, 650000,
Russia. (4)Genoanalitika, Leninskie Gory, 1/77, Off. 102, Moscow, 119234, Russia.
(5)Research Institute of Medical Genetics, Nab. Ushayki, 10, Tomsk, 634050,
Russia ; Siberian State Medical University, Moskovskiy Trakt, 2, Tomsk, 634050,
Russia.

Comorbidity or a combination of several diseases in the same individual is a
common and widely investigated phenomenon. However, the genetic background for
non-random disease combinations is not fully understood. Modern technologies and 
approaches to genomic data analysis enable the investigation of the genetic
profile of patients burdened with several diseases (polypathia, disease
conglomerates) and its comparison with the profiles of patients with single
diseases. An association study featuring three groups of patients with various
combinations of cardiovascular disorders and a control group of relatively
healthy individuals was conducted. Patients were selected as follows: presence of
only one disease, ischemic heart disease (IHD); a combination of two diseases,
IHD and arterial hypertension (AH); and a combination of several diseases,
including IHD, AH, type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), and hypercholesterolemia
(HC). Genotyping was performed using the "My Gene" genomic service
(www.i-gene.ru). An analysis of 1,400 polymorphic genetic variants and their
associations with the studied phenotypes are presented. A total of 14 polymorphic
variants were associated with the phenotype "IHD only," including those in the
APOB, CD226, NKX2-5, TLR2, DPP6, KLRB1, VDR, SCARB1, NEDD4L, and SREBF2 genes,
and intragenic variants rs12487066, rs7807268, rs10896449, and rs944289. A total 
of 13 genetic markers were associated with the "IHD and AH" phenotype, including 
variants in the BTNL2, EGFR, CNTNAP2, SCARB1, and HNF1A genes, and intragenic
polymorphisms rs801114, rs10499194, rs13207033, rs2398162, rs6501455, and
rs1160312. A total of 14 genetic variants were associated with a combination of
several diseases of cardiovascular continuum (CVC), including those in the
TAS2R38, SEZ6L, APOA2, KLF7, CETP, ITGA4, RAD54B, LDLR, and MTAP genes, along
with intragenic variants rs1333048, rs1333049, and rs6501455. One common genetic 
marker was identified for the "IHD only" and "IHD and AH" phenotypes: rs4765623
in the SCARB1 gene; two common genetic markers, rs663048 in SEZ6L and intragenic 
rs6501455, were identified for the "IHD and AH" phenotype and a combination of
several diseases (syntropy); there were no common genetic markers for the
"syntropy" and "IHD only" phenotypes. Classificatory analysis of the
relationships between the associated genes and metabolic pathways revealed that
lipid-metabolizing genes are involved in the development of all three CVC
variants, whereas immunity-response genes are specific to the "IHD only"
phenotype. The study demonstrated that comorbidity presents additional challenges
in association studies of disease predisposition, since the genetic profile of
combined forms of pathology can be markedly different from those for isolated
"single" forms of a disease.

PMCID: PMC4610169
PMID: 26483964  [PubMed]


37. Diabet Med. 2015 Oct 19. doi: 10.1111/dme.12992. [Epub ahead of print]

Successful maintenance on sulfonylurea therapy and low diabetes complication
rates in a HNF1A-MODY cohort.

Bacon S(1), Kyithar MP(1), Rizvi SR(1), Donnelly E(1), McCarthy A(1), Burke M(1),
Colclough K(2), Ellard S(2,)(3), Byrne MM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes & Endocrinology, Mater Misericordiae University
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (2)Department of Molecular Genetics, Royal Devon &
Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, UK. (3)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical 
Science, University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, UK.

AIMS: HNF1A gene mutations are the most common cause of maturity-onset diabetes
of the young (MODY) in the UK. Persons with HNF1A-MODY display sensitivity to
sulfonylurea therapy; however, the long-term efficacy is not established. There
is limited literature as to the prevalence of micro- and macrovascular
complications in this unique cohort. The aim of this study was to determine the
natural progression and clinical management of HNF1A-MODY diabetes in a dedicated
MODY clinic.
METHODS: Sixty patients with HNF1A-MODY and a cohort of 60 BMI-, age-, ethnicity-
and diabetes duration-matched patients with Type 1 diabetes mellitus participated
in the study. All patients were phenotyped in detail. Clinical follow-up of the
HNF1A-MODY cohort occurred on a bi-annual basis.
RESULTS: Following a genetic diagnosis of MODY, the majority of the cohort
treated with sulfonylurea therapy remained insulin independent at 84-month
follow-up (80%). The HbA1c in the HNF1A-MODY group treated with sulfonylurea
therapy alone improved significantly over the study period [from 49
(44-63) mmol/mol, 6.6 (6.2-7.9)% to 41 (31-50) mmol/mol, 5.9 (5-6.7)%;
P = 0.003]. The rate of retinopathy was significantly lower than that noted in
the Type 1 diabetes mellitus group (13.6 vs. 50%; P = 0.0001).There was also a
lower rate of microalbuminuria and cardiovascular disease in the HNF1A-MODY group
compared with the Type 1 diabetes mellitus group.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that the majority of patients with
HNF1A-MODY can be maintained successfully on sulfonylurea therapy with good
glycaemic control. We note a significantly lower rate of micro- and macrovascular
complications than reported previously. The use of appropriate therapy at early
stages of the disorder may decrease the incidence of complications.

This article is protected by copyright. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26479152  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


38. World J Surg Oncol. 2015 Oct 15;13:302. doi: 10.1186/s12957-015-0706-3.

Expression and clinical significance of long non-coding RNA HNF1A-AS1 in human
gastric cancer.

Dang Y(1), Lan F(2), Ouyang X(3), Wang K(4), Lin Y(5), Yu Y(6), Wang L(7), Wang
Y(8), Huang Q(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, Fuzhou General Hospital (Dongfang
Hospital), 156 North Xi-er Huan Road, Fuzhou City, Fujian Province, 350025,
China. dangyuan830307@hotmail.com. (2)Department of Experimental Medicine, Fuzhou
General Hospital (Dongfang Hospital), 156 North Xi-er Huan Road, Fuzhou City,
Fujian Province, 350025, China. fhlan@mail.fjmu.edu.cn. (3)Department of
Experimental Medicine, Fuzhou General Hospital (Dongfang Hospital), 156 North
Xi-er Huan Road, Fuzhou City, Fujian Province, 350025, China. 798951352@qq.com.
(4)Department of Experimental Medicine, Fuzhou General Hospital (Dongfang
Hospital), 156 North Xi-er Huan Road, Fuzhou City, Fujian Province, 350025,
China. posuly@sina.com. (5)Department of Experimental Medicine, Fuzhou General
Hospital (Dongfang Hospital), 156 North Xi-er Huan Road, Fuzhou City, Fujian
Province, 350025, China. 2444734512@qq.com. (6)Department of Pathology, Fuzhou
General Hospital (Dongfang Hospital), 156 North Xi-er Huan Road, Fuzhou City,
Fujian Province, 350025, China. yuyinghao0808@126.com. (7)Department of General
Surgery, Fuzhou General Hospital (Dongfang Hospital), 156 North Xi-er Huan Road, 
Fuzhou City, Fujian Province, 350025, China. fzptwk@xmu.edu.cn. (8)Department of 
General Surgery, Fuzhou General Hospital (Dongfang Hospital), 156 North Xi-er
Huan Road, Fuzhou City, Fujian Province, 350025, China. flyfishwang@hotmail.com. 
(9)Department of Experimental Medicine, Fuzhou General Hospital (Dongfang
Hospital), 156 North Xi-er Huan Road, Fuzhou City, Fujian Province, 350025,
China. huangqj100@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Increasing evidence has demonstrated that long non-coding RNAs
(lncRNAs) play essential roles in the occurrence and development of human
cancers, including gastric cancer (GC). However, the functional and clinical
significance of lncRNAs are still poorly understood.
METHODS: In this study, the expression of LncRNA HNF1A antisense RNA 1
(HNF1A-AS1) was first examined by lncRNAs microarray analysis in 6 GC tissues,
and was then further verified by real-time quantitative reverse transcription PCR
(qRT-PCR) both in 3 GC cell lines and 161 cases of GC tissues. We also evaluated 
the association between HNF1A-AS1 expression and clinicopathological features of 
patients with GC.
RESULTS: LncRNAs microarray analysis results exhibited that HNF1A-AS1 was
downregulated in GCs tissues (mean fold change 2.06, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05), which was further
confirmed by qRT-PCR. The results from qRT-PCR showed that the expression of
HNF1A-AS1 was not only downregulated in three GC cell lines (AGS, BGC-823, and
MKN-45) relative to that in a normal gastric mucosal epithelial cell line
(GES-1), but also decreased in GC tissues relative to that in paired adjacent
non-neoplastic tissues (low expression, 94 of 161; low expression rate, 58.38%). 
Furthermore, low HNF1A-AS1 expression was associated with tumor size/diameter
(p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.005, multivariate analysis), levels of serum carcinoembryonic antigen
(CEA), and carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9), and RRM1 expression in tissue
samples (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.028, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.009, and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.006, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: Taken together, our data indicate that lncRNA HNF1A-AS1 may be a
regulator of GC, and thus, it may have potential as a novel biomarker and
treatment target for this type of cancer.

PMCID: PMC4608159
PMID: 26472090  [PubMed - in process]


39. J Cell Biol. 2015 Oct 12;211(1):39-51. doi: 10.1083/jcb.201503017.

Inhibition of ß-catenin-TCF1 interaction delays differentiation of mouse
embryonic stem cells.

Chatterjee SS(1), Saj A(2), Gocha T(1), Murphy M(1), Gonsalves FC(1), Zhang X(2),
Hayward P(3), Akgöl Oksuz B(4), Shen SS(4), Madar A(5), Martinez Arias A(3),
DasGupta R(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University
Cancer Institute, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016.
(2)Cancer Therapeutics and Stratified Oncology, Genome Institute of Singapore,
Singapore 138672. (3)Department of Genetics, University of Cambridge, Cambridge
CB2 3EH, England, UK. (4)Bioinformatics Core, New York University Langone Medical
Center, New York, NY 10016. (5)Department of Biological Statistics and
Computational Biology, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY 14853. (6)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, New York University Cancer Institute,
New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, NY 10016 Cancer
Therapeutics and Stratified Oncology, Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore
138672.

The ability of mouse embryonic stem cells (mESCs) to self-renew or differentiate 
into various cell lineages is regulated by signaling pathways and a core
pluripotency transcriptional network (PTN) comprising Nanog, Oct4, and Sox2. The 
Wnt/ß-catenin pathway promotes pluripotency by alleviating T cell factor
TCF3-mediated repression of the PTN. However, it has remained unclear how
ß-catenin's function as a transcriptional activator with TCF1 influences mESC
fate. Here, we show that TCF1-mediated transcription is up-regulated in
differentiating mESCs and that chemical inhibition of ß-catenin/TCF1 interaction 
improves long-term self-renewal and enhances functional pluripotency. Genetic
loss of TCF1 inhibited differentiation by delaying exit from pluripotency and
conferred a transcriptional profile strikingly reminiscent of self-renewing mESCs
with high Nanog expression. Together, our data suggest that ß-catenin's function 
in regulating mESCs is highly context specific and that its interaction with TCF1
promotes differentiation, further highlighting the need for understanding how its
individual protein-protein interactions drive stem cell fate.

© 2015 Chatterjee et al.

PMCID: PMC4602028 [Available on 2016-04-12]
PMID: 26459597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Curr Pharm Des. 2015;21(39):5736-48.

Half-Life of Sulfonylureas in HNF1A and HNF4A Human MODY Patients is not
Prolonged as Suggested by the Mouse Hnf1a(-/-) Model.

Urbanova J, Andel M, Potockova J, Klima J, Macek J, Ptacek P, Mat'oska V,
Kumstyrova T, Heneberg P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research in Diabetes, Metabolism and Nutrition, 2nd Department of
Internal Medicine, Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Ruska
87, CZ-100 00 Prague, Czech Republic. petr.heneberg@lf3.cuni.cz.

OBJECTIVES: Sulfonylurea derivatives are widely used for clinical treatment of
human subjects with Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) caused by
mutations in HNF-1a or HNF-4a despite the mechanism leading to their
hypersensitivity is incompletely understood. In Hnf1a(-/-) mice, serum
concentrations and half-life of sulfonylurea derivatives are strongly increased. 
We thus hypothesized that reduced sulfonylurea derivatives clearance stands
behind their therapeutic potential in human HNF1A/HNF4A MODY subjects.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Single doses of 3 mg glipizide and 5 mg
glibenclamide/glyburide were administered sequentially to seven HNF1A/HNF4A MODY 
subjects and six control individuals matched for their age, BMI and CYP2C9
genotype. Pharmacokinetic (plasma concentration levels, Cmax, tmax, t1/2, AUC)
and pharmacodynamic parameters (glycemia, C-peptide and insulin plasma levels)
were followed for 24 hours after drug administration.
RESULTS: We provide the first evidence on the pharmacokinetics and
pharmacodynamics of sulfonylurea derivatives in human MODY subjects. The
half-life of glipizide did not change, and reached 3.8±0.7 and 3.7±1.8 h in the
MODY and control subjects, respectively. The half-life of glibenclamide was
increased only in some MODY subjects (t1/2 9.5±6.7 and 5.0±1.4 h, respectively). 
Importantly, the intra- individual responses of MODY (but control) subjects to
glipizide and glibenclamide treatment were highly correlated. With regards to
pharmacodynamics, we observed a differential response of control but not MODY
subjects to the doses of glipizide and glibenclamide applied.
CONCLUSIONS: We rejected the hypothesis that all human MODY-associated mutations 
in HNF1A / HNF4A induce changes in the pharmacokinetics of sulfonylureas in
humans analogically to the Hnf1a(-/-) mouse model.

PMID: 26446475  [PubMed - in process]


41. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Dec;100(12):E1540-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-2763.
Epub 2015 Oct 2.

High Incidence of Heterozygous ABCC8 and HNF1A Mutations in Czech Patients With
Congenital Hyperinsulinism.

Rozenkova K(1), Malikova J(1), Nessa A(1), Dusatkova L(1), Bjørkhaug L(1),
Obermannova B(1), Dusatkova P(1), Kytnarova J(1), Aukrust I(1), Najmi LA(1),
Rypackova B(1), Sumnik Z(1), Lebl J(1), Njølstad PR(1), Hussain K(1), Pruhova
S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Second Faculty of Medicine (K.R., J.M., L.D., B.O.,
P.D., Z.S., J.L., S.P.), Charles University in Prague and University Hospital in 
Motol, Prague 150 06, Czech Republic; Genetics and Epigenetics in Health and
Disease, Genetics and Genomic Medicine Programme (A.N., K.H.), Institute of Child
Health, University College London, London WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom; KG Jebsen
Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Clinical Science (L.B., I.A., L.A.N.,
P.R.N.), University of Bergen, Bergen N-5021, Norway; Department of Biomedicine
(L.B.), University of Bergen, Bergen N-5021, Norway; Department of Paediatrics,
First Faculty of Medicine (J.K.), Charles University in Prague and the General
University Hospital in Prague, Prague 121 08, Czech Republic; Center for Medical 
Genetics and Molecular Medicine (I.A., L.A.N.), Haukeland University Hospital,
Bergen N-5021, Norway; Center for Research of Diabetes, Metabolism and Nutrition 
and Second Department of Internal Medicine FNKV, Third Faculty of Medicine
(B.R.), Charles University in Prague, Prague 100 00, Czech Republic; Department
of Pediatrics (P.R.N.), Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, N-5020 Norway; and
Department of Paediatric Endocrinology (K.H.), Great Ormond Street Hospital for
Children NHS Trust, London WC1N 3JH, United Kingdom.

CONTEXT: Congenital hyperinsulinism of infancy (CHI) represents a group of
heterogeneous disorders characterized by oversecretion of insulin from pancreatic
ß-cells causing severe hypoglycemia.
OBJECTIVE: We studied the distribution of genetic causes of CHI in a Czech
population.
METHODS: Countrywide collection of patients with CHI included 40 subjects (12
females, median age of diagnosis, 1 wk [interquartile range, 1-612 wk]). We
sequenced the ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK, HADH, UCP2, SLC16A1, HNF4A, and HNF1A
genes and investigated structural changes in the ABCC8 gene. We functionally
tested novel variants in the ABCC8 gene by Rb(86+) efflux assay and novel
variants in the HNF1A gene by transcriptional activation and DNA-binding tests.
RESULTS: We found causal mutations in 20 subjects (50%): 19 carried a
heterozygous mutation while one patient was homozygous for mutation in the ABCC8 
gene. Specifically, we detected 11 mutations (seven novel) in ABCC8, one novel
mutation in KCNJ11, five mutations (two novel) in HNF1A, two novel mutations in
HNF4A, and one in GCK. We showed a decrease of activation by diazoxide in mutant 
KATP channels with novel ABCC8 variants by 41-91% (median, 82%) compared with
wild-type (WT) channels and reduced transcriptional activity of mutant HNF1A
proteins (2.9% for p.Asn62Lysfs93* and 22% for p.Leu254Gln) accompanied by no
DNA-binding ability compared with WT HNF1A.
CONCLUSION: We detected a higher proportion of heterozygous mutations causing CHI
compared with other cohorts probably due to lack of consanguinity and inclusion
of milder CHI forms. Interestingly, HNF1A gene mutations represented the second
most frequent genetic cause of CHI in the Czech Republic. Based on our results we
present a genetic testing strategy specific for similar populations.

PMID: 26431509  [PubMed - in process]


42. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2015;135(10):1141-6. doi: 10.1248/yakushi.15-00194.

[Establishment of a Method of Hepatocyte Differentiation from Human Pluripotent
Stem Cells for Innovative Drug Development].

[Article in Japanese]

Takayama K(1).

Author information: 
(1)iPS Cell-based Research Project on Hepatic Toxicity and Metabolism, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University.

Hepatocyte-like cells differentiated from human pluripotent stem cells (such as
human embryonic stem (ES) cells and induced pluripotent stem (iPS) cells) are
expected to be utilized in drug screening. However, the hepatocyte
differentiation efficiency and hepatic functions of hepatocyte-like cells were
not sufficient to perform ES/iPS cell-based drug discovery. Therefore, we decided
to improve the method of hepatocyte differentiation from human ES/iPS cells. To
enhance this hepatocyte differentiation efficiency, hepatocyte-related
transcription factors, such as forkhead box protein A2 (FOXA2) and hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1a), were overexpressed during the hepatocyte
differentiation process. In addition, to enhance the functions of hepatocyte-like
cells, these cells were cultured in three dimensional (3D) conditions using a
Nanopillar plate. By FOXA2 and HNF1a overexpression, human ES/iPS cells could
efficiently (more than 80%) differentiate into albumin-positive hepatocyte-like
cells. Various hepatic functions, including albumin secretion and drug metabolism
capacities, of the hepatocyte-like cells were significantly enhanced by
performing 3D cell culture. These results suggest that the method of hepatocyte
differentiation could be improved by using gene transfer and 3D cell culture
technologies. We believe that these new hepatocyte-like cells would be useful
tools in drug development.

PMID: 26423870  [PubMed - in process]


43. J Ark Med Soc. 2015 Sep;112(5):58-9.

Personalized Medicine: Monogenic Diabetes.

Goulden PA, Vengoechea J, McKelvey K.

Personalized medicine in diabetes is a topic which has gained significant
momentum in recent years (Raz et al. 2013). A rapid rise in the number and
combinations of diabetes therapies coupled with an unprecedented rise in diabetes
prevalence rates has necessitated diabetes guidelines which emphasize the need
for personalized patient-centered care (ADA 2014). There are many questions
regarding the role genetics may be able to play in guiding therapy. Recent
pharmacogenetic research has revealed polymorphisms that may impact patient
response to metformin (Dong et al 2011) and glucagon-like-polypeptide-1 therapies
(Smushkin et al. 2012). This may hold promise for helping identify patients who
will better respond to specific agents and in the longer-term may help ensure a
smooth journey along the therapeutic pathway. Monogenic or "single-gene" diabetes
comprises nearly 2% of all cases of type 2 diabetes and provides a model for
individualizing care. This review will discuss the diagnosis and treatment of
this condition.

PMID: 26390534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2015 Nov;35(11):2432-42. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.115.306132. Epub 2015 Sep 17.

Vitamin D Protects Against Atherosclerosis via Regulation of Cholesterol Efflux
and Macrophage Polarization in Hypercholesterolemic Swine.

Yin K(1), You Y(1), Swier V(1), Tang L(1), Radwan MM(1), Pandya AN(1), Agrawal
DK(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Center for Clinical & Translational Science, Creighton University
School of Medicine, Omaha, NE. (2)From the Center for Clinical & Translational
Science, Creighton University School of Medicine, Omaha, NE. dkagr@creighton.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Prevalence of vitamin D (VD) deficiency and its association with the
risk of cardiovascular disease prompted us to evaluate the effect of VD status on
lipid metabolism and atherosclerosis in hypercholesterolemic microswine.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: Yucatan microswine were fed with VD-deficient (0 IU/d),
VD-sufficient (1000 IU/d), or VD-supplemented (3000 IU/d) high-cholesterol diet
for 48 weeks. Serum lipids and 25(OH)-cholecalciferol levels were measured
biweekly. Histology and biochemical parameters of liver and arteries were
analyzed. Effect of 1,25(OH)2D3 on cholesterol metabolism was examined in human
hepatocyte carcinoma cell line (HepG2) and human monocytic cell line (THP-1)
macrophage-derived foam cells. VD deficiency decreased plasma high-density
lipoprotein levels, expression of liver X receptors, ATP-binding membrane
cassette transporter A1, and ATP-binding membrane cassette transporter G1 and
promoted cholesterol accumulation and atherosclerosis in hypercholesterolemic
microswine. VD promoted nascent high-density lipoprotein formation in HepG2 cells
via ATP-binding membrane cassette transporter A1-mediated cholesterol efflux.
Cytochrome P450 (CYP)27B1 and VD receptor were predominantly present in the
CD206(+) M2 macrophage foam cell-accumulated cores in coronary artery plaques.
1,25(OH)2D3 increased the expression of liver X receptors, ATP-binding membrane
cassette transporter A1, and ATP-binding membrane cassette transporter G1 and
promoted cholesterol efflux in THP-1 macrophage-derived foam cells. 1,25(OH)2D3
decreased intracellular free cholesterol and polarized macrophages to M2
phenotype with decreased expression of tumor necrosis factor-a, interleukin-1ß,
interleukin-6 under lipopolysaccharide stimulation. 1,25(OH)2D3 markedly induced 
CYP27A1 expression via a VD receptor-dependent c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) 1/2 
signaling pathway and increased 27-hydroxycholesterol levels, which induced liver
X receptors, ATP-binding membrane cassette transporter A1, and ATP-binding
membrane cassette transporter G1 expression and stimulated cholesterol efflux
that was inhibited by VD receptor antagonist and JNK1/2 signaling inhibitor in
THP-1 macrophage-derived foam cell.
CONCLUSIONS: VD protects against atherosclerosis in hypercholesterolemic swine
via controlling cholesterol efflux and macrophage polarization via increased
CYP27A1 activation.

© 2015 The Authors.

PMCID: PMC4618721 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26381871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Diabetes Res. 2015;2015:183094. doi: 10.1155/2015/183094. Epub 2015 Aug 10.

Comparison of Glomerular Filtration Rate Estimation from Serum Creatinine and
Cystatin C in HNF1A-MODY and Other Types of Diabetes.

Szopa M(1), Kapusta M(2), Matejko B(3), Klupa T(1), Koblik T(4), Kiec-Wilk B(1), 
Borowiec M(5), Malecki MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 15 
Kopernika Street, 31-501 Krakow, Poland ; University Hospital, Krakow, Poland.
(2)Department of Diagnostics, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow,
Poland. (3)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University Medical
College, 15 Kopernika Street, 31-501 Krakow, Poland. (4)University Hospital,
Krakow, Poland. (5)Department of Clinical Genetics, Medical University of Lodz,
Lodz, Poland.

INTRODUCTION: We previously showed that in HNF1A-MODY the cystatin C-based
glomerular filtration rate (GFR) estimate is higher than the creatinine-based
estimate. Currently, we aimed to replicate this finding and verify its clinical
significance.
METHODS: The study included 72 patients with HNF1A-MODY, 72 with GCK-MODY, 53
with type 1 diabetes (T1DM), 70 with type 2 diabetes (T2DM), and 65 controls.
Serum creatinine and cystatin C levels were measured. GFR was calculated from
creatinine and cystatin C using the CKD-EPI creatinine equation (eGRF-cr) and
CKD-EPI cystatin C equation (eGFR-cys), respectively.
RESULTS: Cystatin C levels were lower (p < 0.001) in the control (0.70 ±
0.13<U+2009>mg/L), HNF1A (0.75 ± 0.21), and GCK (0.72 ± 0.16<U+2009>mg/L) groups in comparison 
to those with either T1DM (0.87 ± 0.15<U+2009>mg/L) or T2DM (0.9 ± 0.23<U+2009>mg/L). Moreover,
eGFR-cys was higher than eGRF-cr in HNF1A-MODY, GCK-MODY, and the controls (p =
0.004; p = 0.003; p < 0.0001). This corresponded to 8.9<U+2009>mL/min/1.73<U+2009>m2,
9.7<U+2009>mL/min/1.73<U+2009>m2, and 16.9<U+2009>mL/min/1.73<U+2009>m2 of difference. Additionally, T1DM
patients had higher eGFR-cr than eGFR-cys (11.6<U+2009>mL/min/1.73<U+2009>m(2); p = 0.0004); no
difference occurred in T2DM (p = 0.91).
CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed that eGFR-cys values in HNF1A-MODY patients are higher 
compared to eGFR-cr. Some other differences were also described in diabetic
groups. However, none of them appears to be clinically relevant.

PMCID: PMC4546972
PMID: 26347889  [PubMed - in process]


46. J Immunol. 2015 Oct 1;195(7):3058-70. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500821. Epub 2015
Aug 31.

Transcription Factor 7 Limits Regulatory T Cell Generation in the Thymus.

Barra MM(1), Richards DM(1), Hansson J(2), Hofer AC(1), Delacher M(1), Hettinger 
J(1), Krijgsveld J(2), Feuerer M(3).

Author information: 
(1)Immune Tolerance, Tumor Immunology Program, German Cancer Research Center,
69120 Heidelberg, Germany; and. (2)Genome Biology Unit, European Molecular
Biology Laboratory, 69117 Heidelberg, Germany. (3)Immune Tolerance, Tumor
Immunology Program, German Cancer Research Center, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany; and
m.feuerer@dkfz-heidelberg.de.

Regulatory T cells (Tregs) differentiate in the thymus, but the mechanisms that
control this process are not fully understood. We generated a comprehensive
quantitative and differential proteome of murine Tregs and conventional T cells. 
We identified 5225 proteins, 164 of which were differentially expressed in Tregs.
Together with the comparative analysis of proteome and gene expression data, we
identified TCF7 as a promising candidate. Genetic elimination of transcription
factor 7 (TCF7) led to increased fractions of Tregs in the thymus. Reduced levels
of TCF7, found in the heterozygote, resulted in a greater potential for Treg
precursors to differentiate into the Treg lineage. In contrast, activation of
TCF7 through ß-catenin had the opposite effect. TCF7 levels influenced the
required TCR signaling strength of Treg precursors, and TCF7 deficiency broadened
the repertoire and allowed lower TCR affinities to be recruited into the Treg
lineage. FOXP3 was able to repress TCF7 protein expression. In summary, we
propose a regulatory role for TCF7 in limiting access to the Treg lineage.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 26324778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Dan Med J. 2015 Sep;62(9). pii: B4860.

Incretin hormones and maturity onset diabetes of the young--pathophysiological
implications and anti-diabetic treatment potential.

Østoft SH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Center, Medical Department, Gentofte Hospital, Niels
Andersens Vej 65, 2900 Hellerup, Denmark. s.ostoft@dadlnet.dk.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) designates monogenic forms of
non-autoimmune diabetes characterised by autosomal dominant inheritance,
non-insulin dependent diabetes at onset and diagnosis often before 25 years of
age. MODY constitutes genetically and clinically heterogeneous forms of diabetes.
More than 8 different genes are known to cause MODY, among which hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1A) (MODY3) and glucokinase (GCK) (MODY2) mutations
are the most common. Both forms of MODY are characterised by specific beta cell
dysfunction, with patients with HNF1A-diabetes having a reduced insulin secretory
capacity, while patients with GCK-diabetes have a glucose-sensing defect, but
preserved insulin secretory capacity. Patients with MODY are effectively treated 
with sulphonylurea (SU) due to very high sensitivity to these drugs, but they are
also prone to develop hypoglycaemia. The objectives of this thesis were to study 
the pathophysiology of GCK-diabetes and HNF1A-diabetes by investigating the
incretin effect, the physiological response to food ingestion and to estimate the
treatment potential of a glucagon-like peptide-1 receptor agonist (GLP-1RA) in
patients with HNF1A-diabetes. In Study I we investigated the incretin effect and 
the responses of islet hormones and incretin hormones to oral glucose tolerance
test (OGTT) and isoglycaemic IV glucose infusion (IIGI) in patients with
GCK-diabetes, in patients with HNF1A-diabetes, and in BMI and age matched healthy
individuals (CTRLs). In Study II we investigated responses of islet hormones and 
incretin hormones to a more physiological stimulus consisting of a standardised
meal test in patients with GCK-diabetes, in patients with HNF1A--diabetes, and in
BMI and age matched CTRLs. In Study III we conducted a randomised, double-blind, 
crossover trial investigating the glucose lowering effect and risk of
hypoglycaemia during 6 weeks of treatment with the GLP-1RA, liraglutide compared 
to the SU, glimepiride in 16 patients with HNF1A-diabetes. At baseline and at the
end of each treatment period a standardised meal test followed by a light
bicycling test was performed. The results of the studies showed that patients
with HNF1A-diabetes were less glucose tolerant than patients with GCK-diabetes,
but both groups were more glucose intolerant than CTRLs. In spite of glucose
intolerance patients with GCK-diabetes showed normal incretin effect, whereas
patients with HNF1A-diabetes showed an impaired incretin effect. Patients with
HNF1A-diabetes were also characterised by an inappropriate insulin response.
Normal insulin sensitivity was found in both groups of diabetes patients. In the 
prospective intervention trial a glucose lowering effect on fasting plasma
glucose (FPG) was demonstrated with both treatments without significant
difference between the treatments. The postprandial plasma glucose responses were
also lower with both glimepiride and liraglutide compared to baseline without
significant difference between treatments. In spite of these findings glimepiride
seems to have superior glucose lowering effects according to both FPG and
postprandial glucose responses. Hypoglycaemic events (plasma glucose = 3.9 mM)
occurred 18 times during glimepiride treatment and once during liraglutide
treatment. No differences between treatments were demonstrated according to
insulin and glucagon responses and gastric emptying, and counter-regulatory
responses were preserved during both treatments. No effect of either treatment
was seen on fructosamine or HbA1c. In conclusion, patients with GCK-diabetes show
normal incretin and glucagon physiology, thus resembling healthy individuals, in 
spite of fasting hyperglycaemia and subtle glucose intolerance. In contrast,
patients with HNF1A-diabetes exhibited noticeable glucose intolerance, beta cell 
dysfunction, impaired incretin effect, and inappropriate glucagon response to
oral stimuli, hence resembling patients with type 2 diabetes. However, normal
responses of incretin hormones and normal insulin sensitivity were found in
patients with HNF1A-diabetes. Six weeks of treatment with glimepiride or
liraglutide demonstrated glucose lowering effects. This effect was greater with
glimepiride, although insignificant, but at the expense of a higher risk of
hypoglycaemia (predominantly mild). GLP-1RAs may have a place in treatment of
patients with HNF1A-diabetes, especially when hypoglycaemia is a problem. Future 
studies are required to clarify this.

PMID: 26324089  [PubMed - in process]


48. Endokrynol Pol. 2015;66(4):344-54. doi: 10.5603/EP.2015.0044.

Noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycaemia in adults--a spotlight on its
genetics.

Gilis-Januszewska A(1), Piatkowski J, Skalniak A, Piwonska-Solska B, Nazim J,
Pach D, Przybylik-Mazurek E, Sowa-Staszczak A, Starzyk J, Hubalewska-Dydejczyk A.

Author information: 
(1)Chair and Department of Endocrinology Jagiellonian University, Medical
College. myjanusz@cyfronet.pl.

Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia (HH) is also classically referred to as
"nesidioblastosis". Heterogeneous clinical manifestation of the disease causes
risk of late diagnosis or even misdiagnosis. In infants and children, it can lead
to serious and permanent damage to the central nervous system, which leads to the
manifesting mental retardation. HH is characterised by unregulated insulin
secretion from pancreatic ß-cells. This effect has been correlated with nine
genes: ABCC8, KCNJ11, GCK, GLUD-1, HADH1, SLC16A1, HNF4A, HNF1A, and UCP2.
Mutations in these genes were found in approximately 48% of cases. The genetic
background of the remaining cases is unknown. Understanding the genetic basis of 
familial hyperinsulinism has changed the early look at the disease. It has
allowed for the differentiation of specific types of the disease. Depending on
which of the nine disease-associated loci bears a pathogenic mutation, they
differ in phenotype and pattern of inheritance. This review provides a brief
overview of the genetic mechanisms of HH and its possible clinical presentations.

PMID: 26323472  [PubMed - in process]


49. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2015 Jun;7(2):86-97. doi: 10.4274/jcrpe.1891.

The Diagnosis and Management of Hyperinsulinaemic Hypoglycaemia.

Roenková K, Güemes M, Shah P, Hussain K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, UCL Institute of Child Health,
Genetics and Epigenetics in Health and Disease, Genetics and Genomic Medicine
Programme, London, UK Phone: +44 2079052128 E-mail: khalid.hussain@ucl.ac.uk.

Insulin secretion from pancreatic ß-cells is tightly regulated to keep fasting
blood glucose concentrations within the normal range (3.5-5.5 mmol/L).
Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia (HH) is a heterozygous condition in which insulin
secretion becomes unregulated and its production persists despite low blood
glucose levels. It is the most common cause of severe and persistent
hypoglycaemia in neonates and children. The most severe and permanent forms are
due to congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI). Recent advances in genetics have linked 
CHI to mutations in 9 genes that play a key role in regulating insulin secretion 
(ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK, HADH, SLC16A1, UCP2, HNF4A and HNF1A).
Histologically, CHI can be divided into 3 types; diffuse, focal and atypical.
Given the biochemical nature of HH (non-ketotic), a delay in the diagnosis and
management can result in irreversible brain damage. Therefore, it is essential to
diagnose and treat HH promptly. Advances in molecular genetics, imaging methods
(18F-DOPA PET-CT), medical therapy and surgical approach (laparoscopic surgery)
have completely changed the management and improved the outcome of these
children. This review provides an overview of the genetic and molecular
mechanisms leading to development of HH in children. The article summarizes the
current diagnostic methods and management strategies for the different types of
CHI.

PMCID: PMC4563192
PMID: 26316429  [PubMed - in process]


50. J Hepatol. 2015 Nov;63(5):1295-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2015.08.005. Epub 2015 Aug 
22.

A novel phenotype of a hepatocyte nuclear factor homeobox A (HNF1A) gene
mutation, presenting with neonatal cholestasis.

de Vries AG(1), Bakker-van Waarde WM(1), Dassel AC(2), Losekoot M(3), Duiker
EW(4), Gouw AS(4), Bodewes FA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University Medical
Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Deventer Hospital, Deventer, The Netherlands.
(3)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, Leiden, The
Netherlands. (4)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University
Medical Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.
(5)Department of Pediatrics, Beatrix Children's Hospital, University Medical
Centre Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic
address: f.a.j.a.bodewes@umcg.nl.

PMID: 26307397  [PubMed - in process]


51. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 19;10(8):e0135855. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135855.
eCollection 2015.

Identification and Clinical Characterization of Adult Patients with
Multigenerational Diabetes Mellitus.

Ludovico O(1), Carella M(2), Bisceglia L(2), Basile G(3), Mastroianno S(4),
Palena A(1), De Cosmo S(5), Copetti M(6), Prudente S(7), Trischitta V(8).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Clinical Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy. (2)Medical Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza,
San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. (3)Mendel Laboratory, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; Department of Experimental Medicine,
"Sapienza" University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (4)Unit of Cardiology, IRCCS Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. (5)Unit of Medicine,
IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. (6)Unit of
Biostatistics, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.
(7)Mendel Laboratory, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo,
Italy. (8)Mendel Laboratory, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy; Department of Experimental Medicine, "Sapienza" University of
Rome, Rome, Italy; Research Unit of Diabetes and Endocrine Diseases, IRCCS Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Some patients diagnosed as having type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
are, instead, affected by multigenerational diabetes whose clinical
characteristics are mostly undefined.
OBJECTIVE: 1. To identify among patients who had been previously defined as
affected by T2DM those, in fact, affected by multigenerational diabetes; 2. After
excluding patients carrying the most common MODY genes and mitochondrial
mutations, we compared clinical features of remaining patients with those of
patients with T2DM.
METHODS: Among 2,583 consecutive adult patients who had been defined as affected 
by T2DM, we looked for those with diabetes in =3 consecutive generations. All
probands were screened for mutations in six MODY genes (HNF4A, GCK, HNF1A, PDX1, 
HNF1B and NeuroD1) and for the A3243G mitochondrial mutation. After excluding
patients with mutations in one of such genes, we compared clinical features of
the remaining 67 patients (2.6% of the whole initial sample) affected by
multigenerational "familial diabetes of the adulthood" (FDA) and of their
diabetic relatives (n = 63) to those with T2DM (n = 1,028) by generalized
hierarchical linear models followed by pairwise comparisons.
RESULTS: Age, age at diagnosis, proportion of hypertension (all p<0.001), and
waist circumference (p<0.05) were lower in FDA than T2DM. Nonetheless, the two
groups had similar age-adjusted incidence rate of all-cause mortality.
CONCLUSIONS: Beside younger age at diagnosis, FDA patients show lower waist
circumference and reduced proportion of hypertension as compared to those with
T2DM; despite such reduced potential cardiovascular risk factors, FDA patients
did not show a reduced mortality risk than patients with T2DM.

PMCID: PMC4545999
PMID: 26287533  [PubMed - in process]


52. Am J Transl Res. 2015 Jun 15;7(6):995-1008. eCollection 2015.

Pancreatic and duodenal homeobox gene 1 (Pdx1) down-regulates hepatic
transcription factor 1 alpha (HNF1a) expression during reprogramming of human
hepatic cells into insulin-producing cells.

Donelan W(1), Li S(1), Wang H(1), Lu S(1), Xie C(1), Tang D(1), Chang LJ(2), Yang
LJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology & Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida College of Medicine Gainesville, Florida 32610. (2)Department of
Molecular Genetics & Microbiology, University of Florida College of Medicine
Gainesville, Florida 32610.

Ectopic expression of Pdx1 triggers rapid hepatocyte dedifferentiation by
down-regulating liver-enriched transcription factors and liver-specific
functional genes such as hepatic nuclear factor-1a (HNF1a), albumin, and AAT.
However, the links between Pdx1 over-expression and hepatic gene down-regulation 
are incompletely understood. HNF1a and HNF4a are important transcription factors 
that establish and maintain the hepatocyte phenotype. The human HNF4a gene
contains two promoters (P1 and P2) that drive expression of P1-(HNF4a 1-6) or
P2-(HNF4a 7-9)-derived isoforms, which are used in different tissues and at
different times during development. We hypothesized that the relative expression 
of HNF1a and HNF4a following ectopic Pdx1 expression may promote hepatic cell
dedifferentiation and transdifferentiation toward pancreatic beta-cells. We
produced lentiviruses expressing Pdx1, Pdx1-VP16, and Ngn3, along with dual-color
reporter genes to indicate hepatic and pancreatic beta-cell phenotype changes.
Using these PTF alone or in combinations, we demonstrated that Pdx1 not only
activates specific beta-cell genes but down-regulates HNF1a. Pdx1-mediated
reduction of HNF1a is accompanied by altered expression of its major activator,
HNF4a isoforms, down-regulating hepatic genes ALB and AAT. Pdx1 up-regulates
HNF4a via the P2 promoter. These P2-driven isoforms compete with P1-driven
isoforms to suppress target gene transcription. In Huh7 cells, the AF-1
activation domain is more important for transactivation, whereas in INS1 cells,
the F inhibitory domain is more important. The loss and gain of functional
activity strongly suggests that Pdx1 plays a central role in reprogramming
hepatocytes into beta-cells by suppressing the hepatic phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4532734
PMID: 26279745  [PubMed]


53. Am J Surg Pathol. 2015 Sep;39(9):1296-300. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0000000000000477.

Simultaneous occurrence of focal nodular hyperplasia and HNF1A-inactivated
hepatocellular adenoma: a collision tumor simulating a composite FNH-HCA.

Shih A(1), Lauwers GY, Balabaud C, Bioulac-Sage P, Misdraji J.

Author information: 
(1)*James Homer Wright Pathology Laboratories, Massachusetts General Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA Inserm U1053, Université de Bordeaux
Pathology Department, Pellegrin Hospital, CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France.

Mixed focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) and hepatocellular adenoma (HCA) within a
single tumor mass is rarely reported, and most of these cases are examples of
tumors with features intermediate between FNH and HCA. Although a few reported
cases are probably examples of true mixed tumors, none was evaluated
immunohistochemically or confirmed by molecular analysis. We report a mixed FNH
and HCA arising in a woman with several HNF1A-inactivated adenomas. Our case is
the first case of mixed FNH and HNF1A-inactivated HCA documented by
immunohistochemistry.

PMID: 26274031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. BMC Res Notes. 2015 Aug 13;8:350. doi: 10.1186/s13104-015-1319-1.

Genotype and phenotype correlations in Iranian patients with hyperinsulinaemic
hypoglycaemia.

Senniappan S(1), Sadeghizadeh A(2), Flanagan SE(3), Ellard S(4), Hashemipour
M(5), Hosseinzadeh M(6), Salehi M(7), Hussain K(8,)(9).

Author information: 
(1)Alder Hey Children's Hospital, Liverpool, UK. senthilkss@yahoo.co.uk.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Child Growth and Development Research Center,
Isfahan University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. a.sadeghizadeh@gmail.com. 
(3)Institute Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical
School, Exeter, EX2 5DW, UK. s.flanagan@exeter.ac.uk. (4)Institute Biomedical and
Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, EX2 5DW, UK.
sian.ellard@nhs.net. (5)Endocrinology and Metabolism Research Center, Isfahan
University of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. hashemipour@med.mui.ac.ir.
(6)Medical Genetics Laboratory, Alzahra University Hospital, Isfahan University
of Medical Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. a.sadeghizadeh@gmail.com. (7)Pediatric
Inherited Disease Research Center (PIDRC), Isfahan University of Medical
Sciences, Isfahan, Iran. a.sadeghizadeh@gmail.com. (8)Developmental Endocrinology
Research Group, Clinical and Molecular Genetics Unit, Institute of Child Health, 
University College London, London, UK. khalid.hussain@ucl.ac.uk. (9)Department of
Paediatric Endocrinology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children, London, UK. 
khalid.hussain@ucl.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia (HH) is a group of clinically and
genetically heterogeneous disorders characterized by unregulated insulin
secretion. Abnormalities in nine different genes (ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK,
HADH, SLC16A1, HNF4A, UCP2 and HNF1A) have been reported in HH, the most common
being ABCC8 and KCNJ11. We describe the genetic aetiology and phenotype of
Iranian patients with HH.
METHODS: Retrospective clinical, biochemical and genetic information was
collected on 23 patients with biochemically confirmed HH. Mutation analysis was
carried out for the ATP-sensitive potassium (K(ATP)) channel genes (ABCC8 and
KCNJ11), GLUD1, GCK, HADH and HNF4A.
RESULTS: 78% of the patients were identified to have a genetic cause for HH. 48% 
of patients had mutation in HADH, whilst ABCC8/KCNJ11 mutations were identified
in 30% of patients. Among the diazoxide-responsive patients (18/23), mutations
were identified in 72%. These include two novel homozygous ABCC8 mutations. Of
the five patients with diazoxide-unresponsive HH, three had homozygous ABCC8
mutation, one had heterozygous ABCC8 mutation inherited from an unaffected father
and one had homozygous KCNJ11 mutation. 52% of children in our cohort were born
to consanguineous parents. Patients with ABCC8/KCNJ11 mutations were noted to be 
significantly heavier than those with HADH mutation (p = 0.002). Our results
revealed neurodevelopmental deficits in 30% and epilepsy in 52% of all patients.
CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study of its kind in
Iran. We found disease-causing mutations in 78% of HH patients. The predominance 
of HADH mutation might be due to a high incidence of consanguineous marriage in
this population. Further research involving a larger cohort of HH patients is
required in Iranian population.

PMCID: PMC4535259
PMID: 26268944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. PLoS One. 2015 Aug 7;10(8):e0135145. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0135145.
eCollection 2015.

Genetic Variants Associated with Lipid Profiles in Chinese Patients with Type 2
Diabetes.

Kong X(1), Zhao Q(2), Xing X(1), Zhang B(1), Zhang X(1), Hong J(1), Yang W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, China. 
(2)Department of Epidemiology, Tulane School of Public Health and Tropical
Medicine, New Orleans, Louisiana, United States of America.

Dyslipidemia is a strong risk factor for cardiovascular disease among patients
with type 2 diabetes (T2D). The aim of this study was to identify lipid-related
genetic variants in T2D patients of Han Chinese ancestry. Among 4,908 Chinese T2D
patients who were not taking lipid-lowering medications, single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in seven genes previously found to be associated with lipid 
traits in genome-wide association studies conducted in populations of European
ancestry (ABCA1, GCKR, BAZ1B, TOMM40, DOCK7, HNF1A, and HNF4A) were genotyped.
After adjusting for multiple covariates, SNPs in ABCA1, GCKR, BAZ1B, TOMM40, and 
HNF1A were identified as significantly associated with triglyceride levels in T2D
patients (P < 0.05). The associations between the SNPs in ABCA1 (rs3890182), GCKR
(rs780094), and BAZ1B (rs2240466) remained significant even after correction for 
multiple testing (P = 8.85×10(-3), 7.88×10(-7), and 2.03×10(-6), respectively).
BAZ1B (rs2240466) also was associated with the total cholesterol level (P =
4.75×10(-2)). In addition, SNP rs157580 in TOMM40 was associated with the
low-density lipoprotein cholesterol level (P = 6.94×10(-3)). Our findings confirm
that lipid-related genetic loci are associated with lipid profiles in Chinese
patients with type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4529182
PMID: 26252223  [PubMed - in process]


56. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2015 Oct;123(9):524-8. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1559605.
Epub 2015 Aug 4.

Prevalence of Retinopathy in Adult Patients with GCK-MODY and HNF1A-MODY.

Szopa M(1), Wolkow J(1), Matejko B(1), Skupien J(1), Klupa T(1), Wybranska I(2), 
Trznadel-Morawska I(1), Kiec-Wilk B(1), Borowiec M(3), Malecki MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University Medical College,
Krakow, Poland. (2)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Jagiellonian University
Medical College, Krakow, Poland. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Oncology,
Hematology and Diabetology, Medical University of Lodz, Poland.

We aimed to assess the prevalence of diabetic retinopathy (DR) in adult patients 
with GCK-MODY and HNF1A-MODY in Poland and to identify biochemical and clinical
risk factors associated with its occurrence.We examined 74 GCK mutation carriers,
51 with diabetes and 23 with prediabetes, respectively, and 63 patients with
HNF1A-MODY. Retinal photographs, 12 for each patient, were done by a fundus
camera. Signs of DR were graded according to the DR disease severity scale.
Statistical tests were performed to assess differences between the groups and
logistic regression was done for the association with DR.The mean age at
examination was 34.5±14.8 and 39.9±15.2 in the GCK-MODY and HNF1A-MODY groups,
respectively. Mild nonproliferative DR (NPDR) was found in one patient with the
GCK mutation and likely concomitant type 1 diabetes, whereas DR was diagnosed in 
15 HNF1A-MODY patients: 9 with proliferative, 3 with moderate NPDR and 2 with
mild NPDR. In univariate logistic regression analysis in the HNF1A-MODY group,
significant results were found for diabetes duration, fasting glycemia, HbA1c,
arterial hypertension, age at the examination, and eGFR. The strongest
independent predictors of DR in HNF1A-MODY were markers of glucose control: HbA1c
(OR: 2.05, CL%95: 1.2-3.83, p=0.01) and glucose (p=0.006, OR: 1.40, CL%95:
1.12-1.83) analyzed in 2 separated models. Additionally, arterial hypertension
independently predicted DR (OR: 9.06, CL%95: 1.19-98.99, p=0.04) in the model
with HbA1c as glycaemic control marker.In conclusion, DR of any degree was not
present in our GCK-MODY group, while in spite of young age almost every fourth
subject with HNF1A-MODY showed signs of this complication.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 26240958  [PubMed - in process]


57. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Oct;35(20):3471-90. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00030-15. Epub 2015 Aug 
3.

Differential Effects of Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4a Isoforms on Tumor Growth and
T-Cell Factor 4/AP-1 Interactions in Human Colorectal Cancer Cells.

Vuong LM(1), Chellappa K(1), Dhahbi JM(2), Deans JR(1), Fang B(1), Bolotin E(1), 
Titova NV(1), Hoverter NP(3), Spindler SR(2), Waterman ML(3), Sladek FM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of California,
Riverside, Riverside, California, USA. (2)Department of Biochemistry, University 
of California, Riverside, Riverside, California, USA. (3)Department of
Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine,
California, USA. (4)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of
California, Riverside, Riverside, California, USA frances.sladek@ucr.edu.

The nuclear receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) is tumor suppressive in
the liver but amplified in colon cancer, suggesting that it also might be
oncogenic. To investigate whether this discrepancy is due to different HNF4a
isoforms derived from its two promoters (P1 and P2), we generated
Tet-On-inducible human colon cancer (HCT116) cell lines that express either the
P1-driven (HNF4a2) or P2-driven (HNF4a8) isoform and analyzed them for tumor
growth and global changes in gene expression (transcriptome sequencing [RNA-seq] 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing [ChIP-seq]). The results show that
while HNF4a2 acts as a tumor suppressor in the HCT116 tumor xenograft model,
HNF4a8 does not. Each isoform regulates the expression of distinct sets of genes 
and recruits, colocalizes, and competes in a distinct fashion with the
Wnt/ß-catenin mediator T-cell factor 4 (TCF4) at CTTTG motifs as well as at AP-1 
motifs (TGAXTCA). Protein binding microarrays (PBMs) show that HNF4a and TCF4
share some but not all binding motifs and that single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in sites bound by both HNF4a and TCF4 can alter binding affinity in vitro,
suggesting that they could play a role in cancer susceptibility in vivo. Thus,
the HNF4a isoforms play distinct roles in colon cancer, which could be due to
differential interactions with the Wnt/ß-catenin/TCF4 and AP-1 pathways.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4573706
PMID: 26240283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Nov 1;28(11-12):1265-71. doi:
10.1515/jpem-2014-0430.

Molecular diagnosis of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) in Turkish
children by using targeted next-generation sequencing.

Anik A, Çatli G, Abaci A, Sari E, Yesilkaya E, Korkmaz HA, Demir K, Altincik A,
Tuhan HÜ, Kizildag S, Özkan B, Ceylaner S, Böber E.

AIM: To perform molecular analysis of pediatric maturity onset diabetes of the
young (MODY) patients by next-generation sequencing, which enables simultaneous
analysis of multiple genes in a single test, to determine the genetic etiology of
a group of Turkish children clinically diagnosed as MODY, and to assess
genotype-phenotype relationship.
METHODS: Forty-two children diagnosed with MODY and their parents were enrolled
in the study. Clinical and laboratory characteristics of the patients at the time
of diagnosis were obtained from hospital records. Molecular analyses of GCK,
HNF1A, HNF4A, HNF1B, PDX1, NEUROD1, KLF11, CEL, PAX4, INS, and BLK genes were
performed on genomic DNA by using next-generation sequencing. Pathogenicity for
novel mutations was assessed by bioinformatics prediction software programs and
segregation analyses.
RESULTS: A mutation in MODY genes was identified in 12 (29%) of the cases. GCK
mutations were detected in eight cases, and HNF1B, HNF1A, PDX1, and BLK mutations
in the others. We identified five novel missense mutations - three in GCK
(p.Val338Met, p.Cys252Ser, and p.Val86Ala), one in HNF1A (p.Cys241Ter), and one
in PDX1 (p.Gly55Asp), which we believe to be pathogenic.
CONCLUSION: The results of this study showed that mutations in the GCK gene are
the leading cause of MODY in our population. Moreover, genetic diagnosis could be
made in 29% of Turkish patients, and five novel mutations were identified.

PMID: 26226118  [PubMed - in process]


59. Toxicology. 2015 Oct 2;336:99-112. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2015.07.005. Epub 2015 Jul 
26.

Screening a mouse liver gene expression compendium identifies modulators of the
aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR).

Oshida K(1), Vasani N(1), Thomas RS(2), Applegate D(3), Gonzalez FJ(4), Aleksunes
LM(5), Klaassen CD(6), Corton JC(7).

Author information: 
(1)NHEERL, US-EPA, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, United States. (2)The Hamner
Institutes for Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, United States. 
(3)RegeneMed, San Diego, CA 92121, United States. (4)National Cancer Institute,
NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States. (5)Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ
08854, United States. (6)University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, KS
66160, United States. (7)NHEERL, US-EPA, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, United
States. Electronic address: corton.chris@epa.gov.

The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated transcription factor
that mediates the biological and toxic effects of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD), dioxin-like compounds (DLC) as well
as some drugs and endogenous tryptophan metabolites. Short-term activation of AhR
can lead to hepatocellular steatosis, and chronic activation can lead to liver
cancer in mice and rats. Analytical approaches were developed to identify biosets
in a genomic database in which AhR activity was altered. A set of 63 genes was
identified (the AhR gene expression biomarker) that was dependent on AhR for
regulation after exposure to TCDD or benzo[a]pyrene and includes the known AhR
targets Cyp1a1 and Cyp1b1. A fold-change rank-based test (Running Fisher's test; 
p-value = 10(-4)) was used to evaluate the similarity between the AhR biomarker
and a test set of 37 and 41 biosets positive or negative, respectively for AhR
activation. The test resulted in a balanced accuracy of 95%. The rank-based test 
was used to identify factors that activate or suppress AhR in an annotated mouse 
liver/mouse primary hepatocyte gene expression database of ~ 1850 comparisons. In
addition to the expected activation of AhR by TCDD and DLC, AhR was activated by 
AP20189 and phenformin. AhR was suppressed by phenobarbital and
1,4-Bis[2-(3,5-dichloropyridyloxy)] benzene (TCPOBOP) in a constitutive activated
receptor (CAR)-dependent manner and pregnenolone-16a-carbonitrile in a pregnane X
receptor (PXR)-dependent manner. Inactivation of individual genes in nullizygous 
models led to AhR activation (Pxr, Ghrhr, Taf10) or suppression (Ahr, Ilst6st,
Hnf1a). This study describes a novel screening strategy for identifying factors
in mouse liver that perturb AhR in a gene expression compendium.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26215100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Nat Immunol. 2015 Sep;16(9):980-90. doi: 10.1038/ni.3226. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

LEF-1 and TCF-1 orchestrate T(FH) differentiation by regulating differentiation
circuits upstream of the transcriptional repressor Bcl6.

Choi YS(1), Gullicksrud JA(2), Xing S(3), Zeng Z(4), Shan Q(3), Li F(3), Love
PE(5), Peng W(4), Xue HH(2), Crotty S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Vaccine Discovery, La Jolla Institute for Allergy and Immunology, 
La Jolla, California, USA. (2)1] Department of Microbiology, University of Iowa, 
Iowa City, Iowa, USA. [2] Interdisciplinary Immunology Graduate Program, Carver
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA. (3)Department of
Microbiology, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA. (4)Department of Physics,
The George Washington University, Washington, DC, USA. (5)Section on Cellular and
Developmental Biology, NICHD, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Follicular helper T cells (T(FH) cells) are specialized effector CD4(+) T cells
that help B cells develop germinal centers (GCs) and memory. However, the
transcription factors that regulate the differentiation of T(FH) cells remain
incompletely understood. Here we report that selective loss of Lef1 or Tcf7
(which encode the transcription factor LEF-1 or TCF-1, respectively) resulted in 
T(FH) cell defects, while deletion of both Lef1 and Tcf7 severely impaired the
differentiation of T(FH) cells and the formation of GCs. Forced expression of
LEF-1 enhanced T(FH) differentiation. LEF-1 and TCF-1 coordinated such
differentiation by two general mechanisms. First, they established the
responsiveness of naive CD4(+) T cells to T(FH) cell signals. Second, they
promoted early T(FH) differentiation via the multipronged approach of sustaining 
expression of the cytokine receptors IL-6Ra and gp130, enhancing expression of
the costimulatory receptor ICOS and promoting expression of the transcriptional
repressor Bcl6.

PMCID: PMC4545301
PMID: 26214741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Nat Immunol. 2015 Sep;16(9):991-9. doi: 10.1038/ni.3229. Epub 2015 Jul 27.

The transcription factor TCF-1 initiates the differentiation of T(FH) cells
during acute viral infection.

Xu L(1), Cao Y(1), Xie Z(1), Huang Q(1), Bai Q(1), Yang X(1), He R(1), Hao Y(1), 
Wang H(1), Zhao T(1), Fan Z(2), Qin A(2), Ye J(2), Zhou X(1), Ye L(1), Wu Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Immunology, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing, China. 
(2)1] Ministry of Education Key Laboratory for Avian Preventive Medicine,
Yangzhou University, Yangzhou, China. [2] Jiangsu Co-innovation Center for
Prevention and Control of Important Animal Infectious Diseases and Zoonoses,
Yangzhou, China.

Induction of the transcriptional repressor Bcl-6 in CD4(+) T cells is critical
for the differentiation of follicular helper T cells (T(FH) cells), which are
essential for B cell-mediated immunity. In contrast, the transcription factor
Blimp1 (encoded by Prdm1) inhibits T(FH) differentiation by antagonizing Bcl-6.
Here we found that the transcription factor TCF-1 was essential for both the
initiation of T(FH) differentiation and the effector function of differentiated
T(FH) cells during acute viral infection. Mechanistically, TCF-1 bound directly
to the Bcl6 promoter and Prdm1 5' regulatory regions, which promoted Bcl-6
expression but repressed Blimp1 expression. TCF-1-null T(FH) cells upregulated
genes associated with non-T(FH) cell lineages. Thus, TCF-1 functions as an
important hub upstream of the Bcl-6-Blimp1 axis to initiate and secure the
differentiation of T(FH) cells during acute viral infection.

PMID: 26214740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Lipids Health Dis. 2015 Jul 25;14:80. doi: 10.1186/s12944-015-0079-1.

Associations of lipid levels susceptibility loci with coronary artery disease in 
Chinese population.

Wang XB(1), Han YD(1), Cui NH(2), Gao JJ(1), Yang J(1), Huang ZL(1), Zhu Q(3),
Zheng F(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Diagnosis, Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan,
430071, Hubei, China. (2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Children's Hospital
of Zhengzhou, Zhengzhou, 450053, Henan, China. (3)Department of
Gasteroenterology, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, 
250021, Shandong, China. zhuqiangdr@163.com. (4)Center for Gene Diagnosis,
Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, 430071, Hubei, China.
zhengfang@whu.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified several
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that were associated with blood lipid
levels in Caucasians. This study investigated whether these loci influenced lipid
levels and whether they were associated with the risk of coronary artery disease 
(CAD) and its angiographic severity in Chinese population.
METHODS: Six SNPs were genotyped in 1100 CAD cases and 1069 controls using the
high-resolution melting (HRM) method. Coronary atherosclerosis severity was
assessed by the vessel scores and the Gensini scoring system.
RESULTS: Among the 6 SNPs and the genetic risks scores (GRS), the minor alleles
of HNF1A rs1169288 (odd ratio (OR)<U+2009>= 1.18, 95% confidence interval (CI)
1.05-1.33, P = 0.006) and MADD-FOLH1 rs7395662 (OR = 1.20, 95% CI 1.07-1.36, P = 
0.002) as well as the GRS (P = 1.06 × 10(-5)) were significantly associated with 
increased risk of CAD after false discovery rate (FDR) correction. The vessel (P 
= 0.013) and Gensini scores (ß = 0.113, P = 0.002) differed among CAD patients
with different SNP rs1169288 C > T genotypes. The multiple linear regression
analyses using an additive model revealed that the minor allele C of SNP
rs1169288 (ß = 0.060, P = 0.001) and the GRS (ß = 0.033, P = 3.59 × 10(-4)) were 
significantly associated with increased total cholesterol (TC) levels, the minor 
allele A of SNP rs7395662 (ß =<U+2009>-0.024, P = 0.007) and the GRS (ß =<U+2009>-0.013, P =
0.004) were significantly associated with decreased high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol (HDL-c) levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study demonstrated that SNPs rs1169288, rs7395662 and
the GRS were significantly associated with lipid levels and the risk of CAD in
Chinese population. Furthermore, the allele C of SNP rs1169288 increased the odds
of coronary atherosclerosis severity.

PMCID: PMC4514971
PMID: 26209006  [PubMed - in process]


63. Diabetes. 2015 Nov;64(11):3659-69. doi: 10.2337/db14-1924. Epub 2015 Jul 20.

Elevated Hepatic miR-22-3p Expression Impairs Gluconeogenesis by Silencing the
Wnt-Responsive Transcription Factor Tcf7.

Kaur K(1), Vig S(2), Srivastava R(3), Mishra A(3), Singh VP(1), Srivastava AK(3),
Datta M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Council of Scientific and Industrial Research-Institute of Genomics and
Integrative Biology, New Delhi, India. (2)Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi, India Academy 
of Scientific and Innovative Research, Training and Development Complex, Council 
of Scientific and Industrial Research Campus, Taramani, Chennai, India.
(3)Council of Scientific and Industrial Research-Central Drug Research Institute,
Jankipuram Extension, Lucknow, India. (4)Council of Scientific and Industrial
Research-Institute of Genomics and Integrative Biology, New Delhi, India Academy 
of Scientific and Innovative Research, Training and Development Complex, Council 
of Scientific and Industrial Research Campus, Taramani, Chennai, India
mdatta@igib.res.in.

Levels of miR-22-3p, a highly abundant hepatic microRNA, are abnormally increased
in mouse models of insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes, yet its contribution
to deregulated hepatic metabolism under diseased states is not well understood.
Here, we unravel a novel link between elevated hepatic miR-22-3p expression and
impaired gluconeogenesis in diabetic db/db mice via the regulation of Tcf7
(transcription factor 7). Our data demonstrate that miR-22-3p binds to the 3'
untranslated region of TCF7 and downregulates it, and this microRNA-mediated
regulation of TCF7 increases the expression of enzymes of the gluconeogenic
pathway in HepG2 cells. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of TCF7 in HepG2
cells also causes similar upregulation of gluconeogenic genes. Furthermore, in
vivo silencing of miR-22-3p by antagomiR administration lowered random as well as
fasting glucose levels in diabetic mice. miR-22-3p antagonism improved glucose
tolerance and insulin sensitivity. Importantly, the hepatic Tcf7 levels were
restored along with reduced hepatic glucose output, which was also reflected by
the decreased expression of gluconeogenic genes. Our results support a critical
role for miR-22-3p and its target, Tcf7, in the pathogenesis of diabetes by
upregulating gluconeogenesis. Moreover, targeting the miR-22/Tcf7/Wnt axis might 
hold therapeutic potential for the treatment of altered hepatic physiology during
insulin resistance and type 2 diabetes.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 26193896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2015;36(5):1767-77.

Up-Regulation Mttp and Apob Gene Expression in Rat Liver is Related to
Post-Lipectomy Hypertriglyceridemia.

Dettlaff-Pokora A, Sledzinski T, Swierczynski J.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The aim of this study was to explain the molecular basis for
elevated concentrations of circulating triglycerides (TAGs) after partial
surgical removal of adipose tissue (lipectomy) in rats.
METHODS: The levels of mRNA and protein: a) involved in synthesis of fatty acids 
and TAGs; b) participating in TAG-rich lipoproteins assembly and secretion; and
c) transcription factors essential for maintaining TAG homeostasis were
determined by RT-PCR and Western Blot in the livers of control and lipectomized
rats.
RESULTS: Partial lipectomy was associated with increase: a) in serum and liver
concentration of TAGs, and b) in the liver levels of mRNA of microsomal TAG
transfer protein (MTP) and apolipoprotein B-100 (ApoB- 100). These changes were
tightly associated with up-regulation of Hnf1a and Hnf4a gene expression in the
liver. Lipectomy was also reflected by a significant increase in the expression
of genes encoding: a) fatty acid synthase (FASN), b) glycerol 3-phosphate
acyltransferase 1 (GPAT1), diacylglycerol acyltransferases 1 and 2 (DGAT1 and
DGAT2), c) spot 14 protein (S14) and SREBP-1 in the liver.
CONCLUSION: Coordinated up-regulation of Mttp, Apob, Hnf1a, Hnf4a, Fasn, Gpam and
Dgat (1 and 2) gene expressions may contribute to the increase in circulating and
liver concentrations of TAGs after lipectomy in an experimental rat model.

Copyright © 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 26184122  [PubMed - in process]


65. Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 May 6:1-8. [Epub ahead of print]

Exploring the role of the HNF-1aG319S polymorphism in ß cell failure and
youth-onset type 2 diabetes: Lessons from MODY and Hnf-1a-deficient animal
models.

Jonasson ME(1), Wicklow BA(2,)(1), Sellers EA(2,)(1), Dolinsky VW(3,)(1),
Doucette CA(4,)(1).

Author information: 
(1)d Children's Hospital Research Institute of Manitoba, 715 McDermot Avenue,
Winnipeg MB R3E 3P4, Canada. (2)b Department of Pediatrics and Child Health,
University of Manitoba, CE-208 Childrens Hospital, 840 Sherbrook Street, Health
Sciences Centre, Winnipeg, MB R3A 1S1, Canada. (3)c Department of Pharmacology
and Therapeutics, A203 Chown Bldg., 753 McDermot Avenue, University of Manitoba, 
Winnipeg, MB R3E 0T6, Canada. (4)a College of Medicine, Faculty of Health
Sciences, Department of Physiology & Pathophysiology, 432 Basic Medical Sciences 
Building, 745 Bannatyne Avenue, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, MB R3E 0J9,
Canada.

The prevalence of youth-onset type 2 diabetes (T2D) is rapidly increasing
worldwide, disproportionately affecting Indigenous youth with Oji-Cree heritage
from central Canada. Candidate gene screening has uncovered a novel and private
polymorphism in the Oji-Cree population in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha 
(HNF-1a) gene, where a highly conserved glycine residue at position 319 is
changed to a serine (termed HNF-1aG319S or simply G319S). Oji-Cree youth who
carry one or two copies of the "S-allele" present at diagnosis with less obesity,
reduced indicators of insulin resistance, and lower plasma insulin levels at
diagnosis, suggestive of a primary defect in the insulin-secreting ß cells. Few
studies on the impact of the HNF-1aG319S variant on ß cell function have been
performed to date; however, much can be learned from other clinical phenotypes of
HNF-1a-deficiency, including HNF-1a mutations that cause maturity-onset diabetes 
of the young 3 (MODY3). In addition, evaluation of Hnf-1a-deficient murine models
reveals that HNF-1a plays a central role in the regulation of insulin secretion
by regulating the expression of key genes involved in ß cell glucose-sensing,
mitochondrial function, and the maintenance of the ß cell phenotype in
differentiated ß cells. The overall goal of this minireview is to explore the
impact of HNF-1a-deficiency on the ß cell to better inform future research into
the mechanisms of ß cell dysfunction in Oji-Cree youth with T2D.

PMID: 26176428  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


66. Nat Commun. 2015 Jul 15;6:7754. doi: 10.1038/ncomms8754.

Three missense variants of metabolic syndrome-related genes are associated with
alpha-1 antitrypsin levels.

Setoh K(1), Terao C(1), Muro S(2), Kawaguchi T(1), Tabara Y(1), Takahashi M(1),
Nakayama T(3), Kosugi S(4), Sekine A(5), Yamada R(6), Mishima M(2), Matsuda F(7).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomic Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Shogoinkawaramachi 53, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (2)Department of
Respiratory Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Shogoinkawaramachi 54, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (3)Department of Health
Informatics, Kyoto University School of Public Health, Yoshidakonoemachi,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan. (4)Department of Medical Ethics and Medical
Genetics, Kyoto University School of Public Health, Yoshidakonoemachi, Sakyo-ku
Kyoto, 606-8501, Japan. (5)EBM Research Center, Kyoto University Graduate School 
of Medicine, Shogoinkawaramachi 54, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.
(6)Statistical Genetics, Center for Genomic Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate
School of Medicine, Shogoinkawaramachi 53, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. (7)1]
Center for Genomic Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Shogoinkawaramachi 53, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan. [2] Statistical Genetics,
Center for Genomic Medicine, Kyoto University Graduate School of Medicine,
Shogoinkawaramachi 53, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8507, Japan.

Alpha-1 antitrypsin (AAT) encoded by SERPINA1 is an acute-phase inflammation
marker, and AAT deficiency (AATD) is known as one of the common genetic disorders
in European populations. However, no genetic determinants to AAT levels apart
from the SERPINA gene clusters have been identified to date. Here we perform a
genome-wide association study of serum AAT levels followed by a two-staged
replication study recruiting a total of 9,359 Japanese community-dwelling
population. Three missense variants of metabolic syndrome-related genes, namely, 
rs671 in ALDH2, rs1169288 in HNF1A and rs1260326 in GCKR, significantly associate
with AAT levels (P=1.5 × 10(-12)). Previous reports have shown the functional
relevance of ALDH2 and HNF1A to AAT. We observe a significant interaction of
rs671 and alcohol consumption on AAT levels. We confirm the association between
AAT and rs2896268 in SERPINA1, which is independent of known causative variants
of AATD. These findings would support various AAT functions including metabolic
processes.

PMCID: PMC4518310
PMID: 26174136  [PubMed - in process]


67. Genes (Basel). 2015 Jun 23;6(2):399-416. doi: 10.3390/genes6020399.

MicroRNA-224 is Readily Detectable in Urine of Individuals with Diabetes Mellitus
and is a Potential Indicator of Beta-Cell Demise.

Bacon S(1), Engelbrecht B(2), Schmid J(3,)(4), Pfeiffer S(5), Gallagher R(6),
McCarthy A(7), Burke M(8), Concannon C(9,)(10), Prehn JH(11,)(12), Byrne
MM(8,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Eccles
Street, Dublin 7, Ireland. siobhanbacon@gmail.com. (2)Departments of Physiology
and Medical Physics, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's
Green, Dublin 2, Ireland. brittaengelbrecht@gmx.de. (3)Departments of Physiology 
and Medical Physics, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's
Green, Dublin 2, Ireland. jasmin.schmid@gmail.com. (4)Centre for Systems
Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2,
Ireland. jasmin.schmid@gmail.com. (5)Departments of Physiology and Medical
Physics, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, 
Ireland. shonapfeiffer@rcsi.ie. (6)Departments of Physiology and Medical Physics,
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland. 
rossgallagher@rcsi.ie. (7)Department of Endocrinology, Mater Misericordiae
University Hospital, Eccles Street, Dublin 7, Ireland. ailbhe.mccarthy@gmail.com.
(8)Department of Endocrinology, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Eccles
Street, Dublin 7, Ireland. mbyrne@mater.ie. (9)Departments of Physiology and
Medical Physics, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green,
Dublin 2, Ireland. cconcannon@rcsi.ie. (10)Centre for Systems Medicine, Royal
College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland.
cconcannon@rcsi.ie. (11)Departments of Physiology and Medical Physics, Royal
College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland.
prehn@rcsi.ie. (12)Centre for Systems Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in
Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland. prehn@rcsi.ie. (13)Centre for
Systems Medicine, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green,
Dublin 2, Ireland. mbyrne@mater.ie.

MicroRNA (miRNA) are a class of non-coding, 19-25 nucleotide RNA critical for
network-level regulation of gene expression. miRNA serve as paracrine signaling
molecules. Using an unbiased array approach, we previously identified elevated
levels of miR-224 and miR-103 to be associated with a monogenic form of diabetes;
HNF1A-MODY. miR-224 is a novel miRNA in the field of diabetes. We sought to
explore the role of miR-224 as a potential biomarker in diabetes, and whether
such diabetes-associated-miRNA can also be detected in the urine of patients.
Absolute levels of miR-224 and miR-103 were determined in the urine of n = 144
individuals including carriers of a HNF1A mutation, participants with type 1
diabetes mellitus (T1DM), type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and normal controls.
Expression levels were correlated with clinical and biochemical parameters.
miR-224 was significantly elevated in the urine of carriers of a HNF1A mutation
and participants with T1DM. miR-103 was highly expressed in urine across all
diabetes cohorts when compared to controls. For both miR-224 and-103, we found a 
significant correlation between serum and urine levels (p < 0.01). We demonstrate
that miRNA can be readily detected in the urine independent of clinical indices
of renal dysfunction. We surmise that the differential expression levels of
miR-224 in both HNF1A-MODY mutation carriers and T1DM may be an attempt to
compensate for beta-cell demise.

PMCID: PMC4488671
PMID: 26110317  [PubMed]


68. Front Immunol. 2015 Apr 8;6:165. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2015.00165. eCollection 2015.

Application of Comparative Transcriptional Genomics to Identify Molecular Targets
for Pediatric IBD.

Fang K(1), Grisham MB(2), Kevil CG(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive Diseases, Inflammatory Bowel Disease Center, David
Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA , Los Angeles, CA , USA. (2)Department of
Immunology and Molecular Microbiology, Texas Tech University Health Sciences
Center , Lubbock, TX , USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Louisiana State
University Health Sciences Center , Shreveport, LA , USA ; Department of
Molecular and Cellular Physiology, Louisiana State University Health Sciences
Center , Shreveport, LA , USA.

Experimental models of colitis in mice have been used extensively for analyzing
the molecular events that occur during inflammatory bowel disease (IBD)
development. However, it is uncertain to what extent the experimental models
reproduce features of human IBD. This is largely due to the lack of precise
methods for direct and comprehensive comparison of mouse and human inflamed colon
tissue at the molecular level. Here, we use global gene expression patterns of
two sets of pediatric IBD and two mouse models of colitis to obtain a direct
comparison of the genome signatures of mouse and human IBD. By comparing the two 
sets of pediatric IBD microarray data, we found 83 genes were differentially
expressed in a similar manner between pediatric Crohn's disease and ulcerative
colitis. Up-regulation of the chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2 (CCL2) gene that
maps to 17q12, a confirmed IBD susceptibility loci, indicates that our comparison
study can reveal known genetic associations with IBD. In comparing pediatric IBD 
and experimental colitis microarray data, we found common signatures amongst them
including: (1) up-regulation of CXCL9 and S100A8; (2) cytokine-cytokine receptor 
pathway dysregulation; and (3) over-represented IRF1 and IRF2 transcription
binding sites in the promoter region of up-regulated genes, and HNF1A and Lhx3
binding sites were over-represented in the promoter region of the down-regulated 
genes. In summary, this study provides a comprehensive view of transcriptome
changes between different pediatric IBD populations in comparison with different 
colitis models. These findings reveal several new molecular targets for further
study in the regulation of colitis.

PMCID: PMC4457140
PMID: 26085826  [PubMed]


69. J Immunol. 2015 Aug 1;195(3):1071-81. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1402402. Epub 2015
Jun 17.

Cell-Intrinsic gp130 Signaling on CD4+ T Cells Shapes Long-Lasting Antiviral
Immunity.

Harker JA(1), Wong KA(2), Dolgoter A(2), Zuniga EI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Molecular Biology, Division of Biological Sciences, University of
California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093 j.harker@imperial.ac.uk
eizuniga@ucsd.edu. (2)Section of Molecular Biology, Division of Biological
Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093.

The IL-6 cytokine family utilizes the common signal transduction molecule gp130, 
which can mediate a diverse range of outcomes. To clarify the role of gp130
signaling in vivo during acute viral infection, we infected Cd4-cre Il6st(fl/fl) 
mice, in which gp130 is conditionally ablated in T cells, with acute lymphocytic 
choriomeningitis virus. We found that by day 12, but not at day 8, after
infection the number of virus-specific CD4(+) T cells was reduced in the absence 
of gp130, and this was sustained for up to 2 mo postinfection. Additionally,
gp130-deficient T follicular helper cells had lower expression of Maf, IL-21, and
ICOS, and this was accompanied by a reduction in the proportion of germinal
center B cells and plasmablasts. Remarkably, at 2 mo postinfection the proportion
of IgG2a/c(+) memory B cells and the systemic levels of lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus-specific IgG2 Abs were dramatically decreased, whereas
there was a corresponding increase in IgG1(+) memory B cells and virus-specific
IgG1 Abs. In the same animals gp130-deficient virus-specific CD8(+) T cells
showed a reduced proportion of memory cells, which expressed lower levels of
Tcf7, and displayed diminished recall responses on secondary infection. Mixed
bone marrow chimeras revealed that the aforementioned gp130 effects on CD4(+) T
cells were cell intrinsic. Overall, our data show that gp130 signaling in T cells
influences the quantity and quality of long-lasting CD4(+) T cell responses as
well as CD8(+) T cell- and Ab-mediated immunity after acute viral infection.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4506854
PMID: 26085685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 1;75(17):3446-55. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-3051. Epub
2015 Jun 9.

Correlation between Density of CD8+ T-cell Infiltrate in Microsatellite Unstable 
Colorectal Cancers and Frameshift Mutations: A Rationale for Personalized
Immunotherapy.

Maby P(1), Tougeron D(2), Hamieh M(1), Mlecnik B(3), Kora H(1), Bindea G(3),
Angell HK(4), Fredriksen T(3), Elie N(5), Fauquembergue E(1), Drouet A(1),
Leprince J(6), Benichou J(7), Mauillon J(8), Le Pessot F(9), Sesboüé R(1), Tuech 
JJ(10), Sabourin JC(11), Michel P(12), Frébourg T(13), Galon J(3), Latouche
JB(14).

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U1079, Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB),
Rouen, France. (2)Inserm U1079, Institute for Research and Innovation in
Biomedicine (IRIB), Rouen, France. Department of Gastroenterology, Poitiers
University Hospital, Poitiers, France. Laboratoire Inflammation Tissus
Epithéliaux et Cytokines, Poitiers University, Poitiers, France. (3)Inserm U1138,
Laboratory of Integrative Cancer Immunology, Paris, France. Université Paris
Descartes, Paris, France. Cordeliers Research Centre, Université Pierre et Marie 
Curie, Paris 6, Paris, France. (4)Inserm U1138, Laboratory of Integrative Cancer 
Immunology, Paris, France. Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France. Cordeliers 
Research Centre, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris 6, Paris, France.
AstraZeneca Pharmaceuticals, Alderley Park, Cheshire, United Kingdom. (5)Imaging 
Core Facility, CMABIO, Caen University Hospital, Caen, France. (6)Inserm U982,
Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB), Rouen University,
France. (7)Biostatistics Unit, Inserm U657, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen
University, Rouen, France. (8)Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, 
Rouen, France. Department of Gastroenterology, Le Havre Hospital, Le Havre,
France. (9)Department of Pathology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(10)Department of Digestive Surgery, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(11)Inserm U1079, Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB),
Rouen, France. Department of Pathology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(12)Department of Gastroenterology, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France.
(13)Inserm U1079, Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB),
Rouen, France. Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France. 
(14)Inserm U1079, Institute for Research and Innovation in Biomedicine (IRIB),
Rouen, France. Department of Genetics, Rouen University Hospital, Rouen, France. 
jean-baptiste.latouche@chu-rouen.fr.

Colorectal cancers with microsatellite instability (MSI) represent 15% of all
colorectal cancers, including Lynch syndrome as the most frequent hereditary form
of this disease. Notably, MSI colorectal cancers have a higher density of
tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes (TIL) than other colorectal cancers. This feature 
is thought to reflect the accumulation of frameshift mutations in sequences that 
are repeated within gene coding regions, thereby leading to the synthesis of
neoantigens recognized by CD8(+) T cells. However, there has yet to be a clear
link established between CD8(+) TIL density and frameshift mutations in
colorectal cancer. In this study, we examined this link in 103 MSI colorectal
cancers from two independent cohorts where frameshift mutations in 19 genes were 
analyzed and CD3(+), CD8(+), and FOXP3(+) TIL densities were quantitated. We
found that CD8(+) TIL density correlated positively with the total number of
frameshift mutations. TIL densities increased when frameshift mutations were
present within the ASTE1, HNF1A, or TCF7L2 genes, increasing even further when at
least one of these frameshift mutations was present in all tumor cells. Through
in vitro assays using engineered antigen-presenting cells, we were able to
stimulate peripheral cytotoxic T cells obtained from colorectal cancer patients
with peptides derived from frameshift mutations found in their tumors. Taken
together, our results highlight the importance of a CD8(+) T cell immune response
against MSI colorectal cancer-specific neoantigens, establishing a preclinical
rationale to target them as a personalized cellular immunotherapy strategy, an
especially appealing goal for patients with Lynch syndrome.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26060019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Pediatr Diabetes. 2015 Jun 8. doi: 10.1111/pedi.12289. [Epub ahead of print]

Characteristics of maturity onset diabetes of the young in a large diabetes
center.

Chambers C(1), Fouts A(1), Dong F(1), Colclough K(2), Wang Z(3), Batish SD(3),
Jaremko M(3), Ellard S(2), Hattersley AT(2), Klingensmith G(1), Steck AK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Barbara Davis Center for Childhood Diabetes, University of Colorado Denver,
Aurora, CO, USA. (2)Department of Genetics, Institute of Biomedical and Clinical 
Science, University of Exeter Medical School, Exeter, UK. (3)Athena Diagnostics, 
Worcester, MA, USA.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes
caused by a mutation in a single gene, often not requiring insulin. The aim of
this study was to estimate the frequency and clinical characteristics of MODY at 
the Barbara Davis Center. A total of 97 subjects with diabetes onset before age
25, a random C-peptide =0.1<U+2009>ng/mL, and negative for all diabetes autoantibodies
(GADA, IA-2, ZnT8, and IAA) were enrolled, after excluding 21 subjects with
secondary diabetes or refusal to participate. Genetic testing for MODY 1-5 was
performed through Athena Diagnostics, and all variants of unknown significance
were further analyzed at Exeter, UK. A total of 22 subjects [20 (21%) when
excluding two siblings] were found to have a mutation in hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4A (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>4), glucokinase (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>8), or hepatocyte nuclear factor 1A (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10).
Of these 22 subjects, 13 had mutations known to be pathogenic and 9 (41%) had
novel mutations, predicted to be pathogenic. Only 1 of the 22 subjects had been
given the appropriate MODY diagnosis prior to testing. Compared with
MODY-negative subjects, the MODY-positive subjects had lower hemoglobin A1c level
and no diabetic ketoacidosis at onset; however, these characteristics are not
specific for MODY. In summary, this study found a high frequency of MODY
mutations with the majority of subjects clinically misdiagnosed. Clinicians
should have a high index of suspicion for MODY in youth with antibody-negative
diabetes.

© 2015 The Authors. Pediatric Diabetes published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26059258  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


72. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2015 Aug;109(2):e5-7. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2015.05.026. Epub 2015 May 15.

A novel nonsense mutation of the HNF1a in maturity-onset diabetes of the young
type 3 in Asian population.

Fang C(1), Huang J(2), Huang Y(1), Chen L(3), Chen X(3), Hu J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou 215004, China. (2)School of Basic Medicine and Biological Sciences,
Medical College of Soochow University, Suzhou 215123, China. (3)Department of
Endocrinology, Children's Hospital of Soochow University, Suzhou 215003, China.
(4)Department of Endocrinology, 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Soochow University,
Suzhou 215004, China. Electronic address: huji@suda.edu.cn.

We reported a novel nonsense mutation, R54X of the hepatic nuclear factor 1a
(HNF1a) gene in a Chinese family. The mutation was identified in a 47 years old
woman and her 19 years old daughter within a five-family members tested. Both the
two patients were sensitive to insulin and glibenclamide treatments.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26050565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Endocrine. 2015 Dec;50(3):643-9. doi: 10.1007/s12020-015-0627-5. Epub 2015 May
19.

Circulating ghrelin level is higher in HNF1A-MODY and GCK-MODY than in polygenic 
forms of diabetes mellitus.

Nowak N(1,)(2), Hohendorff J(1,)(3), Solecka I(3), Szopa M(1,)(3), Skupien
J(1,)(3), Kiec-Wilk B(1,)(3), Mlynarski W(4), Malecki MT(5,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 15 
Kopernika Street, 31-501, Krakow, Poland. (2)Section on Genetics and
Epidemiology, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA, USA. (3)University Hospital,
Krakow, Poland. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Oncology, Hematology and
Diabetology, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland. (5)Department of Metabolic
Diseases, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 15 Kopernika Street, 31-501,
Krakow, Poland. malecki_malecki@yahoo.com. (6)University Hospital, Krakow,
Poland. malecki_malecki@yahoo.com.

Ghrelin is a hormone that regulates appetite. It is likely to be involved in the 
pathophysiology of varying forms of diabetes. In animal studies, the ghrelin
expression was regulated by the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1A).
Mutations of the HNF1A gene cause maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY). We
aimed to assess the circulating ghrelin levels in HNF1A-MODY and in other types
of diabetes and to evaluate its association with HNF1A mutation status. Our
cohort included 46 diabetic HNF1A gene mutation carriers, 55 type 2 diabetes
(T2DM) subjects, 42 type 1 diabetes (T1DM) patients, and 31 glucokinase (GCK)
gene mutation carriers with diabetes as well as 51 healthy controls. Plasma
ghrelin concentration was measured using the immunoenzymatic assay with
polyclonal antibody against the C-terminal fragment of its acylated and
desacylated forms. Ghrelin concentrations were 0.75 ± 0.32, 0.70 ± 0.21, 0.50 ±
0.20, and 0.40 ± 0.16 ng/ml in patients with HNF1A-MODY, GCK-MODY, T1DM, and
T2DM, respectively. The ghrelin levels were higher in HNF1A-MODY and GCK-MODY
than in T1DM and T2DM (p < 0.001 for all comparisons) but lower than in
non-diabetic controls (1.02 ± 0.29 ng/ml, p < 0.001 for both comparisons). In the
multivariate linear model, the differences between both MODY groups and common
diabetes types remained significant. Analysis by a HNF1A mutation type indicated 
that ghrelin concentration is similar in patients with different types of
sequence differences. Plasma ghrelin level is higher in HNF1A-MODY and GCK-MODY
than in the common polygenic forms of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4662709
PMID: 25987348  [PubMed - in process]


74. Diabetes. 2015 Sep;64(9):3314-20. doi: 10.2337/db15-0124. Epub 2015 May 15.

Ghrelin Inhibition Restores Glucose Homeostasis in Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor-1a
(MODY3)-Deficient Mice.

Brial F(1), Lussier CR(1), Belleville K(2), Sarret P(2), Boudreau F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Université de Sherbrooke, Quebec,
Canada. (2)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada. (3)Department of
Anatomy and Cell Biology, Université de Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada
francois.boudreau@usherbrooke.ca.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a (HNF1a) is a transcription factor expressed in
tissues of endoderm origin. Mutations in HNF1A are associated with maturity-onset
diabetes of the young 3 (MODY3). Mice deficient for Hnf1a are hyperglycemic, with
their pancreatic ß-cells being defective in glucose-sensing insulin secretion.
The specific mechanisms involved in this defect are unclear. Gut hormones control
glucose homeostasis. Our objective was to explore whether changes in these
hormones play a role in glucose homeostasis in the absence of Hnf1a. An increase 
in ghrelin gene transcript and a decrease in glucose-dependent insulinotropic
polypeptide (GIP) gene transcripts were observed in the gut of Hnf1a-null mice.
These changes correlated with an increase of ghrelin and a decrease of
GIP-labeled cells. Ghrelin serological levels were significantly induced in
Hnf1a-null mice. Paradoxically, GIP levels were also induced in these mice.
Treatment of Hnf1a-null mice with a ghrelin antagonist led to a recovery of the
diabetic symptoms. We conclude that upregulation of ghrelin in the absence of
Hnf1a impairs insulin secretion and can be reversed by pharmacological inhibition
of ghrelin/GHS-R interaction. These observations open up on future strategies to 
counteract ghrelin action in a program that could become beneficial in
controlling non-insulin-dependent diabetes.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 25979074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. J Gen Virol. 2015 Aug;96(8):2200-5. doi: 10.1099/vir.0.000179. Epub 2015 May 8.

A single-amino-acid mutation in hepatitis C virus NS5A disrupts physical and
functional interaction with the transcription factor HNF-1a.

Matsui C(1), Rosalyn Sianipar I(2), Minami N(1), Deng L(1), Hotta H(1), Shoji
I(1).

Author information: 
(1)1<U+200B>Division of Microbiology, Center for Infectious Diseases, Kobe University
Graduate School of Medicine, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan. (2)1<U+200B>Division of Microbiology,
Center for Infectious Diseases, Kobe University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kobe, Hyogo, Japan 2<U+200B>Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, Universitas
Indonesia, Jakarta, Indonesia.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection often causes extrahepatic manifestations, such 
as type 2 diabetes. We previously reported that HCV infection induces the
lysosomal degradation of the transcription factor HNF-1a via an interaction with 
viral NS5A, thereby suppressing GLUT2 gene expression. However, the molecular
mechanism of NS5A-induced degradation of HNF-1a is largely unknown. We aimed to
identify the determinants necessary for the degradation of HNF-1a induced by
NS5A. Coimmunoprecipitation analysis revealed that the POU specific (POUs) domain
spanning from aa 91 to 181 of HNF-1a is responsible for the interaction of NS5A. 
We also found that the region from aa 121 to 126 of NS5A, which is known as the
binding motif of the HCV replication factor FKBP8, is important for the
degradation of HNF-1a. A NS5A V121A mutation disrupted the NS5A-HNF-1a
interaction as well as the degradation of HNF-1a. Our findings suggest that NS5A 
Val121 is crucial for viral pathogenesis.

PMID: 25957097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Eur J Endocrinol. 2015 Aug;173(2):205-15. doi: 10.1530/EJE-15-0070. Epub 2015 May
7.

Postprandial incretin and islet hormone responses and dipeptidyl-peptidase 4
enzymatic activity in patients with maturity onset diabetes of the young.

Østoft SH(1), Bagger JI(2), Hansen T(3), Hartmann B(3), Pedersen O(4), Holst
JJ(3), Knop FK(2), Vilsbøll T(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Diabetes ResearchGentofte Hospital, University of Copenhagen,
Kildegårdsvej 28, DK-2900 Hellerup, DenmarkDepartment of Biomedical
SciencesFaculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
DenmarkNNF Center for Basic Metabolic ResearchUniversity of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, DenmarkFaculty of Health SciencesUniversity of Southern Denmark,
Odense, Denmark Center for Diabetes ResearchGentofte Hospital, University of
Copenhagen, Kildegårdsvej 28, DK-2900 Hellerup, DenmarkDepartment of Biomedical
SciencesFaculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
DenmarkNNF Center for Basic Metabolic ResearchUniversity of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, DenmarkFaculty of Health SciencesUniversity of Southern Denmark,
Odense, Denmark Center for Diabetes ResearchGentofte Hospital, University of
Copenhagen, Kildegårdsvej 28, DK-2900 Hellerup, DenmarkDepartment of Biomedical
SciencesFaculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
DenmarkNNF Center for Basic Metabolic ResearchUniversity of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, DenmarkFaculty of Health SciencesUniversity of Southern Denmark,
Odense, Denmark s.ostoft@dadlnet.dk. (2)Center for Diabetes ResearchGentofte
Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Kildegårdsvej 28, DK-2900 Hellerup,
DenmarkDepartment of Biomedical SciencesFaculty of Health Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkNNF Center for Basic Metabolic ResearchUniversity 
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkFaculty of Health SciencesUniversity of
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark Center for Diabetes ResearchGentofte Hospital, 
University of Copenhagen, Kildegårdsvej 28, DK-2900 Hellerup, DenmarkDepartment
of Biomedical SciencesFaculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, DenmarkNNF Center for Basic Metabolic ResearchUniversity of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkFaculty of Health SciencesUniversity of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark Center for Diabetes ResearchGentofte Hospital,
University of Copenhagen, Kildegårdsvej 28, DK-2900 Hellerup, DenmarkDepartment
of Biomedical SciencesFaculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, DenmarkNNF Center for Basic Metabolic ResearchUniversity of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkFaculty of Health SciencesUniversity of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark. (3)Center for Diabetes ResearchGentofte Hospital,
University of Copenhagen, Kildegårdsvej 28, DK-2900 Hellerup, DenmarkDepartment
of Biomedical SciencesFaculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, DenmarkNNF Center for Basic Metabolic ResearchUniversity of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkFaculty of Health SciencesUniversity of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark Center for Diabetes ResearchGentofte Hospital,
University of Copenhagen, Kildegårdsvej 28, DK-2900 Hellerup, DenmarkDepartment
of Biomedical SciencesFaculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, DenmarkNNF Center for Basic Metabolic ResearchUniversity of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkFaculty of Health SciencesUniversity of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark. (4)Center for Diabetes ResearchGentofte Hospital,
University of Copenhagen, Kildegårdsvej 28, DK-2900 Hellerup, DenmarkDepartment
of Biomedical SciencesFaculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, DenmarkNNF Center for Basic Metabolic ResearchUniversity of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkFaculty of Health SciencesUniversity of Southern
Denmark, Odense, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: The role of the incretin hormones in the pathophysiology of maturity
onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is unclear.
DESIGN: We studied the postprandial plasma responses of glucagon, incretin
hormones (glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic
polypeptide (GIP)) and dipeptidyl-peptidase 4 (DPP4) enzymatic activity in
patients with glucokinase (GCK) diabetes (MODY2) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a
(HNF1A) diabetes (MODY3) as well as in matched healthy individuals (CTRLs).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: Ten patients with MODY2 (mean age ± S.E.M. 43 ± 5 years;
BMI 24 ± 2 kg/m(2); fasting plasma glucose (FPG) 7.1 ± 0.3 mmol/l: HbA1c 6.6 ±
0.2%), ten patients with MODY3 (age 31 ± 3 years; BMI 24 ± 1 kg/m(2); FPG 8.9 ±
0.8 mmol/l; HbA1c 7.0 ± 0.3%) and ten CTRLs (age 40 ± 5 years; BMI 24 ± 1
kg/m(2); FPG 5.1 ± 0.1 mmol/l; HbA1c 5.3 ± 0.1%) were examined with a liquid test
meal.
RESULTS: All of the groups exhibited similar baseline values of glucagon (MODY2: 
7 ± 1 pmol/l; MODY3: 6 ± 1 pmol/l; CTRLs: 8 ± 2 pmol/l, P=0.787), but patients
with MODY3 exhibited postprandial hyperglucagonaemia (area under the curve (AUC) 
838 ± 108 min × pmol/l) as compared to CTRLs (182 ± 176 min × pmol/l, P=0.005)
and tended to have a greater response than did patients with MODY2 (410 ± 154 min
× pmol/l, P=0.063). Similar peak concentrations and AUCs for plasma GIP and
plasma GLP1 were observed across the groups. Increased fasting DPP4 activity was 
seen in patients with MODY3 (17.7 ± 1.2 mU/ml) vs CTRLs (13.6 ± 0.8 mU/ml,
P=0.011), but the amount of activity was similar to that in patients with MODY2
(15.0 ± 0.7 mU/ml, P=0.133).
CONCLUSION: The pathophysiology of MODY3 includes exaggerated postprandial
glucagon responses and increased fasting DPP4 enzymatic activity but normal
postprandial incretin responses both in patients with MODY2 and in patients with 
MODY3.

© 2015 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 25953829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Hematol Oncol. 2015 May 8;8:46. doi: 10.1186/s13045-015-0143-3.

Azacytidine sensitizes acute myeloid leukemia cells to arsenic trioxide by
up-regulating the arsenic transporter aquaglyceroporin 9.

Chau D(1), Ng K(2), Chan TS(3), Cheng YY(4,)(5), Fong B(6), Tam S(7), Kwong
YL(8), Tse E(9).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Haematology, Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, The
University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. dhwchau@gmail.com.
(2)Division of Haematology, Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, The
University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. karen.nmt@gmail.com.
(3)Division of Haematology, Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, The
University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong, Hong Kong.
thomas28@netvigator.com. (4)Division of Haematology, Department of Medicine,
Queen Mary Hospital, The University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong, Hong
Kong. yuen_yee@yahoo.com. (5)Asbestos Diseases Research Institute, ADRI Bernie
Banton Centre, University of Sydney, Concord Hospital, Sydney, Australia.
yuen_yee@yahoo.com. (6)Department of Pathology and Clinical Biochemistry, Queen
Mary Hospital, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong, Hong Kong. fongmw@ha.org.hk. (7)Department 
of Pathology and Clinical Biochemistry, Queen Mary Hospital, Pok Fu Lam, Hong
Kong, Hong Kong. sidneytam@hku.hk. (8)Division of Haematology, Department of
Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, The University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong
Kong, Hong Kong. ylkwong@hku.hk. (9)Division of Haematology, Department of
Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, The University of Hong Kong, Pok Fu Lam, Hong
Kong, Hong Kong. ewctse@hku.hk.

BACKGROUND: The therapeutic efficacy of arsenic trioxide (As2O3) in acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) is modest, which is partly related to its limited intracellular
uptake into the leukemic cells. As2O3 enters cells via the transmembrane protein 
aquaglyceroporin 9 (AQP9). Azacytidine, a demethylating agent that is approved
for the treatment of AML, has been shown to have synergistic effect with As2O3.
We tested the hypothesis that azacytidine might up-regulate AQP9 and enhances
As2O3-mediated cytotoxicity in AML.
METHODS: Arsenic-induced cytotoxicity, the expression of AQP9, and the
intracellular uptake of As2O3 were determined in AML cell lines and primary AML
cells with or without azacytidine pre-treatment. The mechanism of AQP9
up-regulation was then investigated by examining the expression of transcription 
factors for AQP9 gene and the methylation status of their gene promoters.
RESULTS: As2O3-induced cytotoxicity in AML cell lines was significantly enhanced 
after azacytidine pre-treatment as a result of AQP9 up-regulation, leading to
increased arsenic uptake and hence intracellular concentration. Blocking
AQP9-mediated As2O3 uptake with mercury chloride abrogated the sensitization
effect of azacytidine. AQP9 promoter does not contain CpG islands. Instead,
azacytidine pre-treatment led to increased expression of HNF1A, a transcription
activator of AQP9, through demethylation of HNF1A promoter. HNF1 knockdown
abrogated azacytidine-induced AQP9 up-regulation and almost completely blocked
intracellular As2O3 entry, confirming that azacytidine enhanced As2O3-mediated
cell death via up-regulation of HNF1A and hence increased AQP9 and As2O3
intracellular concentration. Azacytidine sensitization to As2O3 treatment was
re-capitulated also in primary AML samples. Finally, azacytidine did not enhance 
arsenic toxicity in a liver cell line, where HNF1A was largely unmethylated.
CONCLUSIONS: Azacytidine sensitizes AML cells to As2O3 treatment, and our results
provide proof-of-principle evidence that pharmacological up-regulation of AQP9
potentially expands the therapeutic spectrum of As2O3. Further clinical trial
should evaluate the efficacy of azacytidine in combination with As2O3 in the
treatment of AML.

PMCID: PMC4431177
PMID: 25953102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2015 Aug;213(2):236.e1-7. doi: 10.1016/j.ajog.2015.04.037.
Epub 2015 Apr 30.

The clinical management of hyperglycemia in pregnancy complicated by
maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Bacon S(1), Schmid J(2), McCarthy A(3), Edwards J(4), Fleming A(4), Kinsley B(5),
Firth R(6), Byrne B(7), Gavin C(8), Byrne MM(9).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Day Center, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland;
Rotunda Maternity Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (2)Center for Systems Medicine and
Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, Royal College of Surgeons in
Ireland, Dublin, Ireland. (3)Diabetes Day Center, Mater Misericordiae University 
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (4)Rotunda Maternity Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(5)Diabetes Day Center, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland;
Coombe Women and Infants University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (6)National
Maternity Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (7)Coombe Women and Infants University
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. (8)Diabetes Day Center, Mater Misericordiae University
Hospital, Dublin, Ireland; National Maternity Hospital, Dublin, Ireland.
(9)Diabetes Day Center, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Dublin, Ireland;
Rotunda Maternity Hospital, Dublin, Ireland. Electronic address: mbyrne@mater.ie.

OBJECTIVE: Women with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) are often first
identified and diagnosed with diabetes during pregnancy. Genetics and
hyperglycemia play an important role in determining fetal size in MODY
pregnancies. The principal objective of the current study is to determine the
outcomes and clinical management of hyperglycemia in pregnancies complicated by
glucokinase gene (GCK) and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1a MODY mutations.
STUDY DESIGN: A retrospective chart review of 37 women with a GCK/HNF-1a mutation
was conducted. Data on variables such as birthweight, mode of delivery, and the
treatment of hyperglycemia were available on 89 pregnancies.
RESULTS: The birthweight in unaffected GCK offspring was significantly higher
than in the affected GCK offspring (4.8 [4.1-5.2] kg vs 3.2 [3.1-3.7] kg; P =
.01). Seven-point home blood glucose monitoring over a 7-day period in each
trimester demonstrated higher fasting and postprandial glycemic excursions in the
first trimester of GCK pregnancies when compared to HNF-1a pregnancies (fasting
104 [90-115] mg/dL vs 84 [77-88] mg/dL; P = .01 and postprandial 154 [135-196]
mg/dL vs 111 [100-131] mg/dL; P = .04) despite insulin treatment. There was a
higher percentage of miscarriages in the GCK group when compared to the HNF-1a
MODY group (33.3% vs 14%; P = .07), which was similar to the background
population. Insulin initiated at an early gestation appeared to lower the
incidence of macrosomia in GCK unaffected offspring.
CONCLUSION: Hyperglycemia in HNF-1a pregnancies is easily managed with current
insulin protocols; in contrast, glycemic excursions are difficult to manage in
GCK pregnancies. There was an increased percentage of miscarriages in GCK
pregnancies highlighting the importance of a diagnosis of GCK-MODY in women prior
to conception and the necessity for preconception care.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25935773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Mol Cancer. 2015 Apr 25;14:94. doi: 10.1186/s12943-015-0358-5.

Next-generation sequencing reveals novel differentially regulated mRNAs, lncRNAs,
miRNAs, sdRNAs and a piRNA in pancreatic cancer.

Müller S(1,)(2,)(3), Raulefs S(4), Bruns P(5), Afonso-Grunz F(6,)(7), Plötner
A(8), Thermann R(9), Jäger C(10), Schlitter AM(11), Kong B(12), Regel I(13), Roth
WK(14), Rotter B(15), Hoffmeier K(16), Kahl G(17), Koch I(18), Theis FJ(19,)(20),
Kleeff J(21), Winter P(22), Michalski CW(23).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular BioSciences, Goethe University, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
s.mueller@bio.uni-frankfurt.de. (2)GenXPro GmbH, Frankfurt Biotechnology
Innovation Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. s.mueller@bio.uni-frankfurt.de.
(3)Molecular Bioinformatics Group, Institute of Computer Science, Cluster of
Excellence Frankfurt 'Macromolecular Complexes' Faculty of Computer Science and
Mathematics, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. s.mueller@bio.uni-frankfurt.de.
(4)Department of Surgery, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, Munich, Germany. susanne.raulefs@tum.de. (5)Department of Surgery,
Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.
philipp.bruns@helmholtz-muenchen.de. (6)Molecular BioSciences, Goethe University,
Frankfurt am Main, Germany. fgrunz@stud.uni-frankfurt.de. (7)GenXPro GmbH,
Frankfurt Biotechnology Innovation Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
fgrunz@stud.uni-frankfurt.de. (8)GenXPro GmbH, Frankfurt Biotechnology Innovation
Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. ploetner@genxpro.de. (9)GFE Blut mbH,
Frankfurt Biotechnology Innovation Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
rolf.thermann@gfeblut.de. (10)Department of Surgery, Klinikum Rechts der Isar,
Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.
Carsten.Jaeger@lrz.tu-muenchen.de. (11)Department of Pathology, Klinikum Rechts
der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.
melissa.schlitter@lrz.tu-muenchen.de. (12)Department of Surgery, Klinikum Rechts 
der Isar, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany. kongbo81@hotmail.com. 
(13)Department of Surgery, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, Munich, Germany. ivonne.regel@lrz.tum.de. (14)GFE Blut mbH, Frankfurt
Biotechnology Innovation Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
kurt.roth@gfeblut.de. (15)GenXPro GmbH, Frankfurt Biotechnology Innovation
Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. rotter@genxpro.de. (16)GenXPro GmbH,
Frankfurt Biotechnology Innovation Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.
hoffmeier@genxpro.de. (17)Molecular BioSciences, Goethe University, Frankfurt am 
Main, Germany. kahl@em.uni-frankfurt.de. (18)Molecular Bioinformatics Group,
Institute of Computer Science, Cluster of Excellence Frankfurt 'Macromolecular
Complexes' Faculty of Computer Science and Mathematics, Frankfurt am Main,
Germany. ina.koch@bioinformatik.uni-frankfurt.de. (19)Institute of Computational 
Biology, Helmholtz Zentrum Munich, Neuherberg, Germany.
fabian.theis@helmholtz-muenchen.de. (20)Department of Mathematics, TU Munich,
Boltzmannstrasse 3, Garching, Germany. fabian.theis@helmholtz-muenchen.de.
(21)Department of Surgery, Klinikum Rechts der Isar, Technische Universität
München, Munich, Germany. kleeff@tum.de. (22)GenXPro GmbH, Frankfurt
Biotechnology Innovation Center, Frankfurt am Main, Germany. pwinter@genxpro.de. 
(23)Department of Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.
cwmichalski@gmail.com.

Erratum in
    Mol Cancer. 2015;14:144.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies identified microRNAs (miRNAs) and messenger RNAs
with significantly different expression between normal pancreas and pancreatic
cancer (PDAC) tissues. Due to technological limitations of microarrays and
real-time PCR systems these studies focused on a fixed set of targets. Expression
of other RNA classes such as long intergenic non-coding RNAs or sno-derived RNAs 
has rarely been examined in pancreatic cancer. Here, we analysed the coding and
non-coding transcriptome of six PDAC and five control tissues using
next-generation sequencing.
RESULTS: Besides the confirmation of several deregulated mRNAs and miRNAs, miRNAs
without previous implication in PDAC were detected: miR-802, miR-2114 or miR-561.
SnoRNA-derived RNAs (e.g. sno-HBII-296B) and piR-017061, a piwi-interacting RNA, 
were found to be differentially expressed between PDAC and control tissues. In
silico target analysis of miR-802 revealed potential binding sites in the 3' UTR 
of TCF4, encoding a transcription factor that controls Wnt signalling genes.
Overexpression of miR-802 in MiaPaCa pancreatic cancer cells reduced TCF4 protein
levels. Using Massive Analysis of cDNA Ends (MACE) we identified differential
expression of 43 lincRNAs, long intergenic non-coding RNAs, e.g. LINC00261 and
LINC00152 as well as several natural antisense transcripts like HNF1A-AS1 and
AFAP1-AS1. Differential expression was confirmed by qPCR on the
mRNA/miRNA/lincRNA level and by immunohistochemistry on the protein level.
CONCLUSIONS: Here, we report a novel lncRNA, sncRNA and mRNA signature of PDAC.
In silico prediction of ncRNA targets allowed for assigning potential functions
to differentially regulated RNAs.

PMCID: PMC4417536
PMID: 25910082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2015;166(3):189-98. doi: 10.1159/000380853. Epub 2015
Apr 18.

Low Frequencies of Autoimmunity-Associated PTPN22 Polymorphisms in MODY Patients,
Including Those Transiently Expressing Islet Cell Autoantibodies.

Heneberg P(1), Malá M, Yorifuji T, Gat-Yablonski G, Lebenthal Y, Tajima T,
Nogaroto V, Rypácková B, Kocková L, Urbanová J, Andel M.

Author information: 
(1)Third Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech
Republic.

BACKGROUND: The protein tyrosine phosphatase nonreceptor type 22 (PTPN22) gene
encodes lymphoid tyrosine phosphatase (LYP), which is expressed primarily in
lymphoid tissues. The functional but geographically highly variable PTPN22
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), particularly c.1858C>T, contribute to the
onset and progression of autoimmunity-associated diseases and facilitate the
expression of disease-associated autoantibodies. In Central Europe, 17-25% of
patients with monogenic diabetes (maturity-onset diabetes of the young, MODY)
transiently express islet cell autoantibodies.
METHODS: We addressed the links between the functional and geographically
variable PTPN22 SNPs with MODY manifestation and the expression of islet cell
autoantibodies in 276 MODY patients who originated from four regions (the Czech
Republic, Israel, Japan and Brazil).
RESULTS: The frequency of PTPN22 polymorphisms in the MODY patients was similar
to those in geographically matched healthy populations, with the exception of
c.788G>A, the minor allele frequency of which was significantly elevated in the
Czech hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-a (HNF1A) MODY patients [odds ratio (OR) 4.8,
95% confidence interval (CI) 2.2-10.7] and the Brazilian MODY patients (OR 8.4,
95% CI 1.8-39.1). A barely significant increase in the c.788G>A minor allele was 
also detected in the islet cell autoantibody-positive Czech MODY patients.
However, c.788A behaves as a loss-of-function mutant in T cells, and thus
protects against autoimmunity.
CONCLUSIONS: MODY patients (including islet cell autoantibody-positive cases) do 
not display any increase in autoimmunity-associated PTPN22 alleles. The absence
of autoimmunity-associated PTPN22 alleles was also demonstrated in latent
autoimmune diabetes in adults, which suggests that the slow kinetics of the onset
of autoantibodies is subject to a regulation that is different from that
experienced in type 1 diabetes and other autoimmune disorders.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25896041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Transl Med. 2015 Mar 14;13:87. doi: 10.1186/s12967-015-0452-x.

Impacts of ezetimibe on PCSK9 in rats: study on the expression in different
organs and the potential mechanisms.

Xu RX(1), Liu J(2), Li XL(3), Li S(4), Zhang Y(5), Jia YJ(6), Sun J(7), Li JJ(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dyslipidemia, State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease,
FuWai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Disease, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100037, China.
ruixiaxu@sina.com. (2)Division of Dyslipidemia, State Key Laboratory of
Cardiovascular Disease, FuWai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular
Disease, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, 100037, China. liujunemail1@163.com. (3)Division of Dyslipidemia, State 
Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, FuWai Hospital, National Center for
Cardiovascular Disease, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing, 100037, China. lixiaolin@ymail.com. (4)Division of
Dyslipidemia, State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, FuWai Hospital,
National Center for Cardiovascular Disease, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100037, China. 517833481@qq.com.
(5)Division of Dyslipidemia, State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease,
FuWai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Disease, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100037, China.
18910162571@163.com. (6)Division of Dyslipidemia, State Key Laboratory of
Cardiovascular Disease, FuWai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular
Disease, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College,
Beijing, 100037, China. yanjun1123@hotmail.com. (7)Division of Dyslipidemia,
State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, FuWai Hospital, National Center
for Cardiovascular Disease, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union 
Medical College, Beijing, 100037, China. fw8839@126.com. (8)Division of
Dyslipidemia, State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, FuWai Hospital,
National Center for Cardiovascular Disease, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, 100037, China. lijianjun938@126.com.

BACKGROUND: Previous studies including our group have indicated the effects of
ezetimibe on increased plasma proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9
(PCSK9) concentration, while the rapid expression in different organs and the
potential molecular mechanisms for this impact have not been carefully evaluated.
METHODS: Thirty rats were randomly divided into two groups (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>15 for each),
which were orally administrated with ezetimibe (10 mg/kg/day) or normal saline.
Blood samples were obtained at day 3 after orally administration, and the PCSK9
levels were determined by ELISA. We further analyzed the mRNA expression of
PCSK9, low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR), sterol regulator element-binding 
protein 2 (SREBP2), and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1a) by real-time
PCR, as well as the protein expression by western blot, in liver, intestine and
kidney respectively.
RESULTS: Ezetimibe significantly increased plasma PCSK9 levels compared with
control group, while there was no significant difference between the two groups
with regard to lipid profile at day 3. Moreover, ezetimibe remarkably increased
the expression of PCSK9, LDLR, SREBP2 and HNF-1a in liver. Enhanced expression of
PCSK9, LDLR and SREBP2 protein were found in intestine and kidney, while no
changes in the expression of HNF-1a were observed in intestine and kidney of rats
with ezetimibe treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The data demonstrated that ezetimibe increased PCSK9 expression
through the SREBP2 and HNF-1a pathways in different organs, subsequently
resulting in elevated plasma PCSK9 levels prior to the alterations of lipid
profile in rats.

PMCID: PMC4365528
PMID: 25889684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 20;6(11):9160-72.

The long non-coding RNA HNF1A-AS1 regulates proliferation and metastasis in lung 
adenocarcinoma.

Wu Y(1), Liu H(1), Shi X(1), Yao Y(1), Yang W(1), Song Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Respiratory Medicine, Jinling Hospital, Nanjing University
School of Medicine, Nanjing, China.

Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) have emerged as key regulators of tumor development
and progression. The lncRNA HNF1A-antisense 1 (HNF1A-AS1) is a 2455-bp transcript
on chromosome 12 with a potential oncogenic role in esophageal adenocarcinoma.
Nevertheless, current understanding of the involvement of HNF1A-AS1 in lung
adenocarcinoma tumorigenesis remains limited. In this study, we analyzed the
roles of HNF1A-AS1 in 40 lung adenocarcinoma tissues and five lung cancer cell
lines. Our results showed that HNF1A-AS1 was significantly up-regulated in lung
adenocarcinoma tissues compared with corresponding non-tumor tissues, and its
expression level was significantly correlated with TNM stage, tumor size, and
lymph node metastasis. The UCSC Cancer Genomics Browser's Kaplan-Meier plot
suggested that patients in the high HNF1A-AS1 expression subgroup experienced
worse overall survival compared to the low expression subgroup. Moreover,
HNF1A-AS1 was determined to promote tumor proliferation and metastasis, both in
vitro and in vivo, by regulating cyclin D1, E-cadherin, N-cadherin and ß-catenin 
expression. In addition, the binding of HNF1A-AS1 to DNMT1 may explain its
regulation of E-cadherin. In conclusions, we demonstrated that increased
HNF1A-AS1 expression could regulate cell proliferation and metastasis and
identified it as a poor prognostic biomarker in lung adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4496209
PMID: 25863539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Clin Chim Acta. 2015 Jun 15;446:21-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2015.03.038. Epub 2015
Apr 7.

Apolipoprotein M.

Ren K(1), Tang ZL(1), Jiang Y(1), Tan YM(1), Yi GH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Key Lab for Arteriosclerology of Hunan
Province, University of South China, Hengyang City 421001 Hunan Province, China. 
(2)Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Key Lab for Arteriosclerology of Hunan
Province, University of South China, Hengyang City 421001 Hunan Province, China. 
Electronic address: ghyi6108@163.com.

Apolipoprotein M (ApoM) is a novel apolipoprotein that was discovered in 1999 and
is bound primarily to high-density lipoproteins (HDLs) in the plasma. Multiple
factors may influence its expression at both the post-transcriptional and the
transcriptional levels both in vivo and ex vivo as follows: hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1a, 4a (HNF-1a, 4a), liver receptor homolog-1 (LRH-1), forkhead box A2
(Foxa2) and platelet activating factor (PAF) upregulate its expression; liver X
receptor (LXR), retinoid X receptor (RXR), farnesoid X receptor (FXR), small
heterodimer partner (SHP) and the majority of cytokines downregulate its
expression. However, mechanisms underlying these processes remain unknown.
Structurally, there exists a characterized hydrophobic binding pocket within the 
apoM protein, which enables it to bind functional lipids such as
Sphingosine-1-Phosphate (S1P). Functionally, it facilitates the formation of
preß-HDL and enhances an avalanche of atheroprotective effects exerted by HDL.
Moreover, in patients with diabetes, the levels of plasma apoM may decrease,
whereas the augmentation of apoM decreases plasma glucose levels and magnifies
the secretion of insulin. This article offers a panorama of the progress made in 
the research regarding the characteristics of apoM, particularly the regulation
of its expression and its functions.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25858547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. BMJ Case Rep. 2015 Apr 2;2015. pii: bcr2014209163. doi: 10.1136/bcr-2014-209163.

Diabetic ketoacidosis in the setting of HNF1A-maturity onset diabetes of the
young.

Egan AM(1), Cunningham A(1), Jafar-Mohammadi B(2), Dunne FP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus, Galway Diabetes Research
Centre, Galway, Ireland. (2)Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus,
Galway Diabetes Research Centre, Galway, Ireland King's College Hospital, London,
UK.

A female patient was treated for type 1 diabetes following presentation at 12
years of age with hyperglycaemia, polydipsia and weight loss. Eleven years later,
while screening relatives attending a genetic diabetes clinic, she was identified
as potentially harbouring a mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1A (HNF1A) 
gene. Biochemical testing supported the diagnosis of HNF1A-maturity onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) and genetic screening was positive for a
heterozygous mutation in the HNF1A gene. The patient transitioned from insulin to
sulfonylurea therapy. Three years later, in the setting of poor metabolic
control, the patient presented to the emergency department with a history of
nausea, vomiting and palpitations. A diagnosis of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) was
confirmed and successfully treated. Although a diagnosis of HNF1A-MODY is rarely 
considered in a patient with a history of DKA, we demonstrate that DKA is
possible in the setting of non-compliance with sulfonylurea therapy.

2015 BMJ Publishing Group Ltd.

PMID: 25837654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 20;10(3):e0121082. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121082.
eCollection 2015.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1A (HNF1A) as a possible tumor suppressor in pancreatic
cancer.

Luo Z(1), Li Y(1), Wang H(2), Fleming J(3), Li M(4), Kang Y(3), Zhang R(3), Li
D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (2)Department
of Pathology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, 
United States of America. (3)Department of Surgical Oncology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (4)The
Vivian L. Smith Department of Neurosurgery, The University of Texas Medical
School, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: HNF1A (Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha) is a transcription factor
that is known to regulate pancreatic differentiation and maintain homeostasis of 
endocrine pancreas. Recently, genome-wide association studies have implicated
HNF1A as a susceptibility gene for pancreatic cancer. However, the functional
significance and molecular mechanism of HNF1A in pancreatic carcinogenesis
remains unclear.
METHODS: Using RT-PCR, Western blot and immunohistochemistry methods, we examined
HNF1A gene expression in eight pancreatic carcinoma cell lines and in paired
tumor and normal tissue samples from patients with resected pancreatic ductal
adenocarcinoma. We knocked down the HNF1A gene expression in two cancer cell
lines using three siRNA sequences. The impacts on cell proliferation, apoptosis, 
and cell cycle as well as the phosphorylation of Akt signaling transduction
proteins were examined using ATP assay, flow cytometry and Western blot.
RESULTS: HNF1A was expressed in three out of eight pancreatic adenocarcinoma cell
lines and the level of HNF1A mRNA and protein expression was significantly lower 
in tumors than in normal adjacent tissues by both RT-PCR and Western Blot
analyses. Immunohistochemistry revealed that the level of HNF1A expression was
significantly lower in tumor tissues than in non-tumor tissues. Selective
blocking of HNF1A by specific siRNA conferred a 2-fold higher rate of cell
proliferation, 20% increased S phase and G2 phase cells, and 30-40% reduced
apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cell lines. We further demonstrated that HNF1A
knockdown activated Akt and its downstream target, the mammalian target of
rapamycin (mTOR) in pancreatic cancer cells.
CONCLUSION: These observations provide experimental evidence supporting a
possible tumor suppressor role of HNF1A in pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC4368635
PMID: 25793983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. J Clin Invest. 2015 Apr;125(4):1533-44. doi: 10.1172/JCI73137. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

Resetting the transcription factor network reverses terminal chronic hepatic
failure.

Nishikawa T, Bell A, Brooks JM, Setoyama K, Melis M, Han B, Fukumitsu K, Handa K,
Tian J, Kaestner KH, Vodovotz Y, Locker J, Soto-Gutierrez A, Fox IJ.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015 May;12(5):250.

The cause of organ failure is enigmatic for many degenerative diseases, including
end-stage liver disease. Here, using a CCl4-induced rat model of irreversible and
fatal hepatic failure, which also exhibits terminal changes in the extracellular 
matrix, we demonstrated that chronic injury stably reprograms the critical
balance of transcription factors and that diseased and dedifferentiated cells can
be returned to normal function by re-expression of critical transcription
factors, a process similar to the type of reprogramming that induces somatic
cells to become pluripotent or to change their cell lineage. Forced re-expression
of the transcription factor HNF4a induced expression of the other
hepatocyte-expressed transcription factors; restored functionality in terminally 
diseased hepatocytes isolated from CCl4-treated rats; and rapidly reversed fatal 
liver failure in CCl4-treated animals by restoring diseased hepatocytes rather
than replacing them with new hepatocytes or stem cells. Together, the results of 
our study indicate that disruption of the transcription factor network and
cellular dedifferentiation likely mediate terminal liver failure and suggest
reinstatement of this network has therapeutic potential for correcting organ
failure without cell replacement.

PMCID: PMC4396487
PMID: 25774505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Diabet Med. 2015 Apr;32(4):429-30. doi: 10.1111/dme.12721.

Monogenic diabetes: the treatment options.

Owen KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, UK.

Comment on
    Diabet Med. 2015 Apr;32(4):526-30.

PMID: 25773279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 13;10(3):e0118859. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118859.
eCollection 2015.

Pleiotropy among common genetic loci identified for cardiometabolic disorders and
C-reactive protein.

Ligthart S(1), de Vries PS(1), Uitterlinden AG(2), Hofman A(1); CHARGE
Inflammation working group, Franco OH(1), Chasman DI(3), Dehghan A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands. (2)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (3)Division of Preventive Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States of America.

Pleiotropic genetic variants have independent effects on different phenotypes.
C-reactive protein (CRP) is associated with several cardiometabolic phenotypes.
Shared genetic backgrounds may partially underlie these associations. We
conducted a genome-wide analysis to identify the shared genetic background of
inflammation and cardiometabolic phenotypes using published genome-wide
association studies (GWAS). We also evaluated whether the pleiotropic effects of 
such loci were biological or mediated in nature. First, we examined whether 283
common variants identified for 10 cardiometabolic phenotypes in GWAS are
associated with CRP level. Second, we tested whether 18 variants identified for
serum CRP are associated with 10 cardiometabolic phenotypes. We used a Bonferroni
corrected p-value of 1.1×10-04 (0.05/463) as a threshold of significance. We
evaluated the independent pleiotropic effect on both phenotypes using individual 
level data from the Women Genome Health Study. Evaluating the genetic overlap
between inflammation and cardiometabolic phenotypes, we found 13 pleiotropic
regions. Additional analyses showed that 6 regions (APOC1, HNF1A, IL6R, PPP1R3B, 
HNF4A and IL1F10) appeared to have a pleiotropic effect on CRP independent of the
effects on the cardiometabolic phenotypes. These included loci where individuals 
carrying the risk allele for CRP encounter higher lipid levels and risk of type 2
diabetes. In addition, 5 regions (GCKR, PABPC4, BCL7B, FTO and TMEM18) had an
effect on CRP largely mediated through the cardiometabolic phenotypes. In
conclusion, our results show genetic pleiotropy among inflammation and
cardiometabolic phenotypes. In addition to reverse causation, our data suggests
that pleiotropic genetic variants partially underlie the association between CRP 
and cardiometabolic phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC4358943
PMID: 25768928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Exp Anim. 2015;64(3):231-9. doi: 10.1538/expanim.14-0089. Epub 2015 Mar 10.

Production of a mouse strain with impaired glucose tolerance by systemic
heterozygous knockout of the glucokinase gene and its feasibility as a
prediabetes model.

Saito M(1), Kaneda A, Sugiyama T, Iida R, Otokuni K, Kaburagi M, Matsuoka H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Life Science, Tokyo University of Agriculture 
and Technology, Koganei, Tokyo 184-8588, Japan.

Exon II of glucokinase (Gk) was deleted to produce a systemic heterozygous Gk
knockout (Gk(+/-)) mouse. The relative expression levels of Gk in the heart,
lung, liver, stomach, and pancreas in Gk(+/-) mice ranged from 0.41-0.68 versus
that in wild (Gk(+/+)) mice. On the other hand, its expression levels in the
brain, adipose tissue, and muscle ranged from 0.95-1.03, and its expression
levels in the spleen and kidney were nearly zero. Gk knockout caused no
remarkable off-target effect on the expression of 7 diabetes causing genes (Shp, 
Hnf1a, Hnf1b, Irs1, Irs2, Kir6.2, and Pdx1) in 10 organs. The glucose tolerance
test was conducted to determine the blood glucose concentrations just after
fasting for 24 h (FBG) and at 2 h after high-glucose application (GTT2h). The
FBG-GTT2h plots obtained with the wild strain fed the control diet (CD), Gk(+/-) 
strain fed the CD, and Gk(+/-) strain fed the HFD were distributed in separate
areas in the FBG-GTT2h diagram. The respective areas could be defined as the
normal state, prediabetes state, and diabetes state, respectively. Based on the
results, the criteria for prediabetes could be defined for the Gk(+/-) strain
developed in this study.

PMCID: PMC4547996
PMID: 25765873  [PubMed - in process]


90. Diabetes Metab. 2016 Feb;42(1):33-7. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2015.02.001. Epub 2015
Mar 6.

High-sensitivity C-reactive protein does not improve the differential diagnosis
of HNF1A-MODY and familial young-onset type 2 diabetes: A grey zone analysis.

Bellanné-Chantelot C(1), Coste J(2), Ciangura C(3), Fonfrède M(4), Saint-Martin
C(5), Bouché C(6), Sonnet E(7), Valéro R(8), Lévy DJ(9), Dubois-Laforgue D(9),
Timsit J(9); Monogenic Diabetes Study Group of the Société Francophone du Diabète
(SFD).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié-Salpétrière, Université
Pierre-et-Marie-Curie, 47-83, boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75013 Paris, France.
Electronic address: christine.bellanne-chantelot@psl.aphp.fr. (2)Unit of
Biostatistics and Epidemiology, AP-HP, Hôtel Dieu; Unit Research APEMAC, EA 4360,
Université Paris-Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, Lorraine Université, 75004
Paris, France. (3)Department of Diabetology, AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié-Salpétrière,
Université Pierre-et-Marie-Curie, 75013 Paris, France. (4)Department of Medical
Biochemistry, AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié-Salpétrière, 75013 Paris, France.
(5)Department of Genetics, AP-HP, Hôpital Pitié-Salpétrière, Université
Pierre-et-Marie-Curie, 47-83, boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75013 Paris, France.
(6)Department of Diabetology, AP-HP, Hôpital Lariboisière, 75010 Paris, France.
(7)Department of Endocrinology, CHU de Brest, 29609 Brest, France. (8)Department 
of Nutrition, Metabolic diseases, Endocrinology, AP-HM, Hôpital de la Timone,
Aix-Marseille Université, 13385 Marseille, France. (9)Department of Diabetology, 
AP-HP, Hôpital Cochin, Université Paris-Descartes, 75014 Paris, France.

AIM: Low plasma levels of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) have been 
suggested to differentiate hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha-maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (HNF1A-MODY) from type 2 diabetes (T2D). Yet, differential 
diagnosis of HNF1A-MODY and familial young-onset type 2 diabetes (F-YT2D) remains
a difficult challenge. Thus, this study assessed the added value of hs-CRP to
distinguish between the two conditions.
METHODS: This prospective multicentre study included 143 HNF1A-MODY patients, 310
patients with a clinical history suggestive of HNF1A-MODY, but not confirmed
genetically (F-YT2D), and 215 patients with T2D. The ability of models, including
clinical characteristics and hs-CRP to predict HNF1A-MODY was analyzed, using the
area of the receiver operating characteristic (AUROC) curve, and a grey zone
approach was used to evaluate these models in clinical practice.
RESULTS: Median hs-CRP values were lower in HNF1A-MODY (0.25mg/L) than in F-YT2D 
(1.14mg/L) and T2D (1.70mg/L) patients. Clinical parameters were sufficient to
differentiate HNF1A-MODY from classical T2D (AUROC: 0.99). AUROC analyses to
distinguish HNF1A-MODY from F-YT2D were 0.82 for clinical features and 0.87 after
including hs-CRP. For the grey zone analysis, the lower boundary was set to
miss<1.5% of true positives in non-tested subjects, while the upper boundary was 
set to perform 50% of genetic tests in individuals with no HNF1A mutation. On
comparing HNF1A-MODY with F-YT2D, 65% of patients were classified in between
these categories - in the zone of diagnostic uncertainty - even after adding
hs-CRP to clinical parameters.
CONCLUSION: hs-CRP does not improve the differential diagnosis of HNF1A-MODY and 
F-YT2D.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25753245  [PubMed - in process]


91. J Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Apr;54(2):R119-29. doi: 10.1530/JME-15-0016. Epub 2015 Mar
2.

Molecular mechanisms of congenital hyperinsulinism.

Rahman SA(1), Nessa A(1), Hussain K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Genomic MedicineUCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford
Street, London WC1N 1EH, UKDepartment of Paediatric EndocrinologyGreat Ormond
Street Hospital for Children NHS, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.
(2)Genetics and Genomic MedicineUCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford
Street, London WC1N 1EH, UKDepartment of Paediatric EndocrinologyGreat Ormond
Street Hospital for Children NHS, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK
Genetics and Genomic MedicineUCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street,
London WC1N 1EH, UKDepartment of Paediatric EndocrinologyGreat Ormond Street
Hospital for Children NHS, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK
Khalid.Hussain@ucl.ac.uk.

Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is a complex heterogeneous condition in which
insulin secretion from pancreatic ß-cells is unregulated and inappropriate for
the level of blood glucose. The inappropriate insulin secretion drives glucose
into the insulin-sensitive tissues, such as the muscle, liver and adipose tissue,
leading to severe hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia (HH). At a molecular level,
genetic abnormalities in nine different genes (ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK, HNF4A, 
HNF1A, SLC16A1, UCP2 and HADH) have been identified which cause CHI. Autosomal
recessive and dominant mutations in ABCC8/KCNJ11 are the commonest cause of
medically unresponsive CHI. Mutations in GLUD1 and HADH lead to leucine-induced
HH, and these two genes encode the key enzymes glutamate dehydrogenase and short 
chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase which play a key role in amino acid and
fatty acid regulation of insulin secretion respectively. Genetic abnormalities in
HNF4A and HNF1A lead to a dual phenotype of HH in the newborn period and maturity
onset-diabetes later in life. This state of the art review provides an update on 
the molecular basis of CHI.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25733449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Oxid Med Cell Longev. 2015;2015:607271. doi: 10.1155/2015/607271. Epub 2015 Feb
4.

A novel antioxidant multitarget iron chelator M30 protects hepatocytes against
ethanol-induced injury.

Xiao J(1), Lv Y(2), Lin B(3), Tipoe GL(3), Youdim MB(4), Xing F(2), Liu Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)National Key Disciplines for Infectious Diseases, Shenzhen Third People's
Hospital, Shenzhen 518112, China ; Department of Immunobiology, Institute of
Tissue Transplantation and Immunology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China 
; Department of Anatomy, The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.
(2)Department of Immunobiology, Institute of Tissue Transplantation and
Immunology, Jinan University, Guangzhou 510632, China. (3)Department of Anatomy, 
The University of Hong Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong. (4)Eve Topf Centers of
Excellence, Technion, Rappaport Family Faculty of Medicine and Department of
Pharmacology, 31096 Haifa, Israel. (5)National Key Disciplines for Infectious
Diseases, Shenzhen Third People's Hospital, Shenzhen 518112, China.

The multitarget iron chelator, M30, is a novel antioxidant and protective agent
against oxidative stress in a spectrum of diseases. However, there is no report
regarding its role in liver diseases. Since oxidative stress is one of the major 
pathological events during the progression of alcoholic liver diseases, the
protective effects and mechanisms of M30 on ethanol-induced hepatocyte injury
were investigated in this study. Rat hepatocyte line BRL-3A was pretreated with
M30 prior to ethanol treatment. Cell death, apoptosis, oxidative stress, and
inflammation were examined. Specific antagonists and agonists were applied to
determine the involvements of hypoxia inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1a) and its
upstream adenylate cyclase (AC)/cyclic AMP (cAMP)/protein kinase A
(PKA)/HIF-1a/NOD-like receptor 3 (NLRP3) inflammasome pathway. We found that M30 
significantly attenuated ethanol-induced cellular death, apoptosis, production of
reactive oxygen species (ROS), and secretion of inflammatory cytokines and
inhibited activation of the AC/cAMP/PKA/HIF-1a/NLRP3 inflammasome pathway.
Inhibition and activation of the AC/cAMP/PKA/HIF-1a pathway mimicked and
abolished the effects of M30, respectively. In conclusion, inhibition of the
AC/cAMP/PKA/HIF-1a/NLRP3 inflammasome pathway by M30 partially contributes to its
attenuation of hepatocyte injury caused by ethanol exposure.

PMCID: PMC4334871
PMID: 25722794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Sci Rep. 2015 Feb 26;5:8597. doi: 10.1038/srep08597.

Induced pluripotent stem cells as a model for diabetes investigation.

Stepniewski J(1), Kachamakova-Trojanowska N(1), Ogrocki D(1), Szopa M(2), Matlok 
M(3), Beilharz M(1), Dyduch G(4), Malecki MT(2), Jozkowicz A(1), Dulak J(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biochemistry, Biophysics and
Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland. (2)1] Clinic of Metabolic
Diseases, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, Poland [2] University 
Hospital Krakow Poland. (3)II Clinic of General Surgery, Collegium Medicum,
Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland. (4)Department of Clinical and
Experimental Pathomorphology, Jagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow,
Poland. (5)1] Department of Medical Biotechnology, Faculty of Biochemistry,
Biophysics and Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Krakow, Poland [2]
Malopolska Centre of Biotechnology, Jagiellonian University, Poland.

Mouse and human induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) may represent a novel
approach for modeling diabetes. Taking this into consideration, the aim of this
study was to generate and evaluate differentiation potential of iPSCs from
lep(db/db) (db/db) mice, the model of diabetes type 2 as well as from patients
with Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young 3 (HNF1A MODY). Murine iPSC colonies
from both wild type and db/db mice were positive for markers of pluripotency:
Oct3/4A, Nanog, SSEA1, CDy1 and alkaline phosphatase and differentiated in vitro 
and in vivo into cells originating from three germ layers. However, our results
suggest impaired differentiation of db/db cells into endothelial progenitor-like 
cells expressing CD34 and Tie2 markers and their reduced angiogenic potential.
Human control and HNF1A MODY reprogrammed cells also expressed pluripotency
markers: OCT3/4A, SSEA4, TRA-1-60, TRA-1-81, formed embryoid bodies (EBs) and
differentiated into cells of three germ layers. Additionally, insulin expressing 
cells were obtained from those partially reprogrammed cells with direct as well
as EB-mediated differentiation method. Our findings indicate that
disease-specific iPSCs may help to better understand the mechanisms responsible
for defective insulin production or vascular dysfunction upon differentiation
toward cell types affected by diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4341212
PMID: 25716801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Sci Rep. 2015 Feb 6;5:8109. doi: 10.1038/srep08109.

A common genetic variation of melanoma inhibitory activity-2 labels a subtype of 
pancreatic adenocarcinoma with high endoplasmic reticulum stress levels.

Kong B(1), Wu W(1), Valkovska N(1), Jäger C(1), Hong X(1), Nitsche U(1), Friess
H(1), Esposito I(2), Erkan M(3), Kleeff J(1), Michalski CW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(2)Institute of Pathology, Technische Universität München, Munich, Germany.
(3)Department of Surgery, Koc School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey. (4)Department
of Surgery, University of Heidelberg, Germany.

HNF1 homeobox A (HNF1A)-mediated gene expression constitutes an essential
component of the secretory pathway in the exocrine pancreas. Melanoma inhibitory 
activity 2 (MIA2), a protein facilitating protein secretion, is an HNF1A target. 
Protein secretion is precisely coordinated by the endoplasmic reticulum (ER)
stress/unfolded protein response (UPR) system. Here, we demonstrate that HNFA and
MIA2 are expressed in a subset of human PDAC tissues and that HNF1A induced MIA2 
in vitro. We identified a common germline variant of MIA2 (c.A617G: p.I141M)
associated with a secretory defect of the MIA2 protein in PDAC cells. Patients
carrying MIA2(I141M) survived longer after tumor resection but the survival
benefit was restricted to those patients who received adjuvant chemotherapy. The 
MIA2(I141M) variant was associated with high expression of ER stress/UPR
genes--in particular those of the ERN1/XBP arm--in human PDAC samples.
Accordingly, PDAC cell lines expressing the MIA2(I141M) variant expressed high
levels of ERN1 and were more sensitive to gemcitabine. These findings define an
interaction between the common MIA2(I141M) variant and the ER stress/UPR system
and specify a subgroup of PDAC patients who are more likely to benefit from
adjuvant chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4319175
PMID: 25657029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2015 Apr;108(1):e3-4. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2015.01.033. Epub 2015 Jan 24.

Pitfalls in the diagnosis of frameshift mutations in the glucokinase (GCK) gene
and the contribution of an additional cloning sequencing tool.

Weinert LS(1), Giuffrida FM(2), Silveiro SP(1), Bulcão C(3), Kunii IS(4),
Dias-da-Silva MR(4), Reis AF(5).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Unit, Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Postgraduate
Fellowship Program in Endocrinology, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul
(UFRGS), Porto Alegre, Brazil. (2)Centro de Endocrinologia do Estado da Bahia
(CEDEBA), Salvador, Brazil; Universidade do Estado da Bahia (UNEB), Salvador,
Brazil. (3)Centro de Endocrinologia do Estado da Bahia (CEDEBA), Salvador,
Brazil. (4)Laboratory of Molecular and Translacional Endocrinology, Universidade 
Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), Brazil. (5)Laboratory of Molecular and
Translacional Endocrinology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), Brazil;
Diabetes Center, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), Brazil. Electronic 
address: andrefreis@terra.com.br.

Comment on
    Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2014 Nov;106(2):e44-8.

PMID: 25656763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Lipid Res. 2015 Apr;56(4):801-9. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M052969. Epub 2015 Feb 4.

Reduction of circulating PCSK9 and LDL-C levels by liver-specific knockdown of
HNF1a in normolipidemic mice.

Shende VR(1), Wu M(2), Singh AB(1), Dong B(2), Kan CF(2), Liu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304 Department 
of Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305. (2)Veterans Affairs Palo
Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA 94304.

The transcription factors hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)1a and HNF1ß can bind to
the HNF1 site on the proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9)
promoter to activate transcription in HepG2 cells. However, it is unknown whether
one or both HNF1 factors are obligatory for transactivating hepatic PCSK9 gene
expression in vivo. We developed shRNA adenoviral constructs (Ad-shHNF1a and
Ad-shHNF1ß) to examine the effects of knockdown of HNF1a or HNF1ß on PCSK9
expression and its consequent impact on LDL receptor (LDLR) protein levels in
cultured hepatic cells and liver tissue. We demonstrated that infection with
Ad-shHNF1a, but not Ad-shHNF1ß, markedly reduced PCSK9 mRNA expression in HepG2
cells with a concomitant increase in LDLR protein abundance. Injecting Ad-shHNF1a
in mice fed a normal diet significantly (~ 50%) reduced liver mRNA expression and
serum concentration of PCSK9 with a concomitant increase (~ 1.9-fold) in hepatic 
LDLR protein abundance. Furthermore, we observed a modest but significant
reduction in circulating LDL cholesterol after knockdown of HNF1a in these
normolipidemic mice. Consistent with the observation that knockdown of HNF1ß did 
not affect PCSK9 mRNA or protein expression in cultured hepatic cells, Ad-shHNF1ß
infection in mice resulted in no change in the hepatic mRNA expression or serum
content of PCSK9. Altogether, our study demonstrates that HNF1a, but not HNF1ß,
is the primary positive regulator of PCSK9 transcription in mouse liver.

PMCID: PMC4373738
PMID: 25652089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Mol Cancer. 2015 Jan 21;14:3. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-14-3.

Identification of the long non-coding RNA POU3F3 in plasma as a novel biomarker
for diagnosis of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Tong YS(1), Wang XW(2), Zhou XL(3), Liu ZH(4), Yang TX(5), Shi WH(6), Xie HW(7), 
Lv J(8), Wu QQ(9), Cao XF(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Oncology, Nanjing Frist Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. tongyusuo@163.com. (2)Department of Medical 
Oncology, Huai'an First People's Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical
University, Huai'an, Jiangsu, China. wxw7354@sina.com. (3)Department of Radiation
Oncology, Huai'an First People's Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical
University, Huai'an, Jiangsu, China. zhouxilei1226@163.com. (4)Department of
Surgical Oncology, Nanjing Frist Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
Jiangsu, China. lzh5664@126.com. (5)Department of Surgical Oncology, Nanjing
Frist Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
823947824@qq.com. (6)Department of Surgical Oncology, Nanjing Frist Hospital,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. shiweihong9@yahoo.com.cn.
(7)Department of Surgical Oncology, Nanjing Frist Hospital, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China. xhw8502@163.com. (8)Department of Surgical
Oncology, Nanjing Frist Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu,
China. lvjin1978@sina.com. (9)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Huai'an First
People's Hospital Affiliated to Nanjing Medical University, Huai'an, Jiangsu,
China. wqq1120@sina.com. (10)Department of Surgical Oncology, Nanjing Frist
Hospital, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, China.
cxf551101@sina.com.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have demonstrated that long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) 
were present in the blood of cancer patients and have shown great potential as
powerful and non-invasive tumor markers. However, little is known about the value
of lncRNAs in the diagnosis of esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC). We
hypothesized that ESCC-related lncRNAs might be released into the circulation
during tumor initiation and could be utilized to detect and monitor ESCC.
METHODS: Ten lncRNAs (HOTAIR, AFAP1-AS1, POU3F3, HNF1A-AS1, 91H, PlncRNA1,
SPRY4-IT1, ENST00000435885.1, XLOC_013104 and ENST00000547963.1) which previously
found to be differently expressed in esophageal cancer were selected as candidate
targets for subsequent circulating lncRNA assay. A four-stage exploratory study
was conducted to test the hypothesis: (1) optimization of detected method to
accurately and reproducibly measure ESCC-related lncRNAs in plasma and serum; (2)
evaluation of the stability of circulating lncRNAs in human plasma or serum; (3) 
exploration the origin of ESCC-related lncRNAs in vitro and in vivo; (4)
evaluation the diagnostic power of circulating lncRNAs for ESCC.
RESULTS: ESCC-related lncRNAs were detectable and stable in plasma of cancer
patients, and derived largely from ESCC tumor cells. Furthermore, plasma levels
of POU3F3, HNF1A-AS1 and SPRY4-IT1 were significantly higher in ESCC patients
compared with normal controls. By receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC)
analysis, among the three lncRNAs investigated, plasma POU3F3 provided the
highest diagnostic performance for detection of ESCC (the area under the ROC
curve (AUC), 0.842; p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001; sensitivity, 72.8%; specificity, 89.4%). Moreover,
use of POU3F3 and SCCA in combination could provide a more effective diagnosis
performance (AUC, 0.926, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001, sensitivity, 85.7%; specificity, 81.4%). Most
importantly, this combination was effective to detect ESCC at an early stage
(80.8%).
CONCLUSIONS: Plasma POU3F3 could serve as a potential biomarker for diagnosis of 
ESCC, and the combination of POU3F3 and SCCA was more efficient for ESCC
detection, in particular for early tumor screening.

PMCID: PMC4631113
PMID: 25608466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Apr;100(4):E664-71. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-3677. Epub
2015 Jan 19.

Discovery of coding genetic variants influencing diabetes-related serum
biomarkers and their impact on risk of type 2 diabetes.

Ahluwalia TS(1), Allin KH, Sandholt CH, Sparsø TH, Jørgensen ME, Rowe M,
Christensen C, Brandslund I, Lauritzen T, Linneberg A, Husemoen LL, Jørgensen T, 
Hansen T, Grarup N, Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research (T.S.A., K.H.A.,
C.H.S., T.H.A., T.H., N.G., O.P.), Section of Metabolic Genetics, Faculty of
Health and Medical Sciences, Department of Clinical Medicine (A.L.), Faculty of
Health and Medical Sciences, and Institute of Public Health (T.J.), University of
Copenhagen, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark; Copenhagen Prospective Studies on Asthma in
Childhood (T.S.A.), Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, 2820 Copenhagen, Denmark; The Danish Paediatric Asthma Center
(T.S.A.), Gentofte Hospital, The Capital Region, 2820 Copenhagen, Denmark; Steno 
Diabetes Center (E.J.), 2820 Gentofte, Denmark; Tethys Bioscience Inc (M.R.),
Emeryville, California 94608; Departments of Internal Medicine and Endocrinology 
(C.C.) and Clinical Biochemistry (I.B.), Vejle Hospital, 7100 Vejle, Denmark;
Institute of Regional Health Research (I.B.), and Faculty of Health Sciences
(T.H.), University of Southern Denmark, 5230 Odense, Denmark; Department of
General Practice (T.L.), Aarhus University, 8000 C Aarhus, Denmark; Research
Centre for Prevention and Health (A.L., L.L.H., T.J.), The Capital Region of
Denmark, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Clinical Experimental Research
(A.L.), Glostrup University Hospital, 2600 Glostrup, Denmark; and Faculty of
Medicine (T.J.), University of Aalborg, 9220 Aalborg, Denmark.

CONTEXT: Type 2 diabetes (T2D) prevalence is spiraling globally, and knowledge of
its pathophysiological signatures is crucial for a better understanding and
treatment of the disease.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed to discover underlying coding genetic variants influencing
fasting serum levels of nine biomarkers associated with T2D: adiponectin,
C-reactive protein, ferritin, heat shock 70-kDa protein 1B, IGF binding protein 1
and IGF binding protein 2, IL-18, IL-2 receptor-a, and leptin.
DESIGN AND PARTICIPANTS: A population-based sample of 6215 adult Danes was
genotyped for 16 340 coding single-nucleotide polymorphisms and were tested for
association with each biomarker. Identified loci were tested for association with
T2D through a large-scale meta-analysis involving up to 17 024 T2D cases and up
to 64 186 controls.
RESULTS: We discovered 11 associations between single-nucleotide polymorphisms
and five distinct biomarkers at a study-wide P < 3.4 × 10(-7). Nine associations 
were novel: IL18: BIRC6, RAD17, MARVELD2; ferritin: F5; IGF binding protein 1:
SERPING1, KLKB, GCKR, CELSR2, and heat shock 70-kDa protein 1B: CFH. Three of the
identified loci (CELSR2, HNF1A, and GCKR) were significantly associated with T2D,
of which the association with the CELSR2 locus has not been shown previously.
CONCLUSION: The identified loci influence processes related to insulin signaling,
cell communication, immune function, apoptosis, DNA repair, and oxidative stress,
all of which could provide a rationale for novel diabetes therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 25599387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Mar;28(3-4):251-63. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2014-0384.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY): an update.

Anik A, Çatli G, Abaci A, Böber E.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a group of monogenic disorders
characterized by autosomal dominantly inherited non-insulin dependent form of
diabetes classically presenting in adolescence or young adults before the age of 
25 years. MODY is a rare cause of diabetes (1% of all cases) and is frequently
misdiagnosed as Type 1 diabetes (T1DM) or Type 2 diabetes (T2DM). A precise
molecular diagnosis is essential because it leads to optimal treatment of the
patients and allows early diagnosis for their asymptomatic family members.
Mutations in the glucokinase (GCK) (MODY 2) and hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)1A/4A (MODY 3 and MODY 1) genes are the most common causes of MODY. GCK
mutations cause a mild, asymptomatic, and stable fasting hyperglycemia usually
requiring no specific treatment. However, mutations in the HNF1A and HNF4A cause 
a progressive pancreatic ß-cell dysfunction and hyperglycemia that can result in 
microvascular complications. Sulfonylureas are effective in these patients by
acting on adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-sensitive potassium channels, although
insulin therapy may be required later in life. Mutations in the HNF1B (MODY 5) is
associated with pancreatic agenesis, renal abnormalities, genital tract
malformations, and liver dysfunction. Compared to MODY 1, 2, 3, and 5, the
remaining subtypes of MODY have a much lower prevalence. In this review, we
summarize the main clinical and laboratory characteristics of the common and
rarer causes of MODY.

PMID: 25581748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. J Nepal Health Res Counc. 2014 May-Aug;12(27):116-8.

Occurrence of amino acid mutation (Ala98Val) of HNF1a in association with type II
diabetes.

Shakya P(1), Aryal S(1), Aryal R(1), Mazgaeen L(1), Shah A(1), Joshi B(2).

Author information: 
(1)SANN International College, Kathmandu, Nepal. (2)Annapurna Neurological
Institute and Allied Sciences, Kathmandu, Nepal.

BACKGROUND: Maturity onset diabetes of the young type 3 is a monogenic form of
diabetes. Gene defects in the Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor -1 alpha (HNF1a) causes
MODY3. HNF1a gene located in the chromosome (12q24.2) codes for a transcription
factor which helps in signalling of insulin exocytosis in pancreatic Beta cells. 
A prevalent amino acid polymorphism at codon 98-Ala98Val (exon 1) of the HNF1a
was shown to be associated with diabetes in the South Indian population. Since
Nepal shares the ancestral origin with India and people have been sharing similar
lifestyles for a long period of life it was relevant to check the occurrence of
same mutation in diabetic population of Nepal as well. The study was carried out 
to identify the occurrence of amino acid mutation (Ala98Val) of HNF 1 alpha in
association with type 2 diabetes in diabetic population of Kathmandu.
METHODS: DNA samples were randomly collected from 12 non-diabetic and 56 diabetic
patients. The DNA samples were amplified using Polymerase Chain Reaction (PCR).
Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism (RFLP) was carried out to identify the
occurrence of the mutation.
RESULTS: During the study, out of 12 non-diabetic samples, nine were normal while
three samples showed heterozygous Ala98Val mutation. Whereas, eight diabetic
patients were found to have Ala98Val mutation and rest 48 had normal genotype.
The study thus showed 16.17% occurence of Ala98Val mutation among 68 samples.
CONCLUSIONS: The study showed the occurrence of Ala98Val amino acid mutation in
diabetic samples that were taken under study.

PMID: 25575005  [PubMed - in process]


101. Genet Med. 2015 Oct;17(10):831-5. doi: 10.1038/gim.2014.189. Epub 2015 Jan 8.

Identifying gene disruptions in novel balanced de novo constitutional
translocations in childhood cancer patients by whole-genome sequencing.

Ritter DI(1), Haines K(2,)(3), Cheung H(3), Davis CF(1), Lau CC(3,)(4), Berg
JS(5), Brown CW(2,)(3), Thompson PA(3), Gibbs R(1,)(2,)(4), Wheeler
DA(1,)(2,)(4), Plon SE(1,)(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas,
USA. (2)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Texas Children's Cancer Center,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. (4)Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, USA. (5)Department of Genetics,
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

PURPOSE: We applied whole-genome sequencing (WGS) to children diagnosed with
neoplasms and found to carry apparently balanced constitutional translocations to
discover novel genic disruptions.
METHODS: We applied the structural variation (SV) calling programs CREST,
BreakDancer, SV-STAT, and CGAP-CNV, and we developed an annotative filtering
strategy to achieve nucleotide resolution at the translocations.
RESULTS: We identified the breakpoints for t(6;12)(p21.1;q24.31), disrupting
HNF1A in a patient diagnosed with hepatic adenomas and maturity-onset diabetes of
the young (MODY). Translocation as the disruptive event of HNF1A, a gene known to
be involved in MODY3, has not been previously reported. In a subject with Hodgkin
lymphoma and subsequent low-grade glioma, we identified t(5;18)(q35.1;q21.2),
disrupting both SLIT3 and DCC, genes previously implicated in both glioma and
lymphoma.
CONCLUSION: These examples suggest that implementing clinical WGS in the
diagnostic workup of patients with novel but apparently balanced translocations
may reveal unanticipated disruption of disease-associated genes and aid in
prediction of the clinical phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4496310
PMID: 25569436  [PubMed - in process]


102. Mol Genet Metab. 2015 Mar;114(3):451-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.12.304. Epub
2014 Dec 20.

Molecular genetic testing of patients with monogenic diabetes and
hyperinsulinism.

Bennett JT(1), Vasta V(1), Zhang M(1), Narayanan J(1), Gerrits P(2), Hahn SH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle
Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA 98105, USA. (2)Department of Pediatric
Endocrinology, Beaumont Children's Hospital, Royal Oak, MI 48073, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle
Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA 98105, USA. Electronic address: sihahn@uw.edu.

Genetic sequencing has become a critical part of the diagnosis of certain forms
of pancreatic beta cell dysfunction. Despite great advances in the speed and cost
of DNA sequencing, determining the pathogenicity of variants remains a challenge,
and requires sharing of sequence and phenotypic data between laboratories. We
reviewed all diabetes and hyperinsulinism-associated molecular testing done at
the Seattle Children's Molecular Genetics Laboratory from 2009 to 2013. 331
probands were referred to us for molecular genetic sequencing for Neonatal
Diabetes (NDM), Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY), or Congenital
Hyperinsulinism (CHI) during this period. Reportable variants were identified in 
115 (35%) patients with 91 variants in one of 6 genes: HNF1A, GCK, HNF4A, ABCC8, 
KCNJ11, or INS. In addition to identifying 23 novel variants, we identified
unusual mechanisms of inheritance, including mosaic and digenic MODY
presentations. Re-analysis of all reported variants using more recently available
databases led to a change in variant interpretation from the original report in
30% of cases. These results represent a resource for molecular testing of
monogenic forms of diabetes and hyperinsulinism, providing a mutation spectrum
for these disorders in a large North American cohort. In addition, they highlight
the importance of periodic review of molecular testing results.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25555642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2015 Feb 13;290(7):4047-58. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.597229. Epub 2014 
Dec 24.

Inhibition of PCSK9 transcription by berberine involves down-regulation of
hepatic HNF1a protein expression through the ubiquitin-proteasome degradation
pathway.

Dong B(1), Li H(1), Singh AB(1), Cao A(1), Liu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo
Alto, California 94304. (2)From the Department of Veterans Affairs Palo Alto
Health Care System, Palo Alto, California 94304 Jingwen.Liu@va.gov.

Our previous in vitro studies have identified hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a
(HNF1a) as an obligated trans-activator for PCSK9 gene expression and
demonstrated its functional involvement in the suppression of PCSK9 expression by
berberine (BBR), a natural cholesterol-lowering compound. In this study, we
investigated the mechanism underlying the inhibitory effect of BBR on
HNF1a-mediated PCSK9 transcription. Administration of BBR to hyperlipidemic mice 
and hamsters lowered circulating PCSK9 concentrations and hepatic PCSK9 mRNA
levels without affecting the gene expression of HNF1a. However, hepatic HNF1a
protein levels were markedly reduced in BBR-treated animals as compared with the 
control. Using HepG2 cells as a model system, we obtained evidence that BBR
treatment let to accelerated degradation of HNF1a protein. By applying inhibitors
to selectively block the ubiquitin proteasome system (UPS) and
autophagy-lysosomal pathway, we show that HNF1a protein content in HepG2 cells
was not affected by bafilomycin A1 treatment, but it was dose-dependently
increased by UPS inhibitors bortezomib and MG132. Bortezomib treatment elevated
HNF1a and PCSK9 cellular levels with concomitant reductions of LDL receptor
protein. Moreover, HNF1a protein displayed a multiubiquitination ladder pattern
in cells treated with BBR or overexpressing ubiquitin. By expressing GFP-HNF1a
fusion protein in cells, we observed that blocking UPS resulted in accumulation
of GFP-HNF1a in cytoplasm. Importantly, we show that the BBR reducing effects on 
HNF1a protein and PCSK9 gene transcription can be eradicated by proteasome
inhibitors. Altogether, our studies using BBR as a probe uncovered a new aspect
of PCSK9 regulation by ubiquitin-induced proteasomal degradation of HNF1a.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4326815
PMID: 25540198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Oncogene. 2015 Sep 17;34(38):4939-51. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.415. Epub 2014 Dec
22.

Anoikis of colon carcinoma cells triggered by ß-catenin loss can be enhanced by
tumor necrosis factor receptor 1 antagonists.

Yoo BH(1), Masson O(1), Li Y(1), Khan IA(1), Gowda PS(1), Rosen KV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Dalhousie
University, Haifax, NS, Canada.

Detachment of non-malignant epithelial cells from the extracellular matrix causes
their apoptosis, a phenomenon called anoikis. By contrast, carcinoma cells are
anoikis-resistant, and this resistance is thought to be critical for tumor
progression. Many oncogenes trigger not only anti- but also pr-apoptotic signals.
The proapoptotic events represent an aspect of a phenomenon called oncogenic
stress, which acts as a safeguard mechanism blocking tumor initiation. In cells
that become malignant, oncogene-induced antiapoptotic signals outbalance the
proapoptotic ones. It is now thought that treatments blocking the antiapoptotic
events but preserving the proapoptotic signals can be particularly effective in
killing tumor cells. Whether or not oncogenes induce any proanoikis signals that 
can be used for enhancing the efficiency of approaches aimed at triggering
anoikis of cancer cells has never been explored. ß-Catenin is a major oncoprotein
that is often activated in colorectal cancer and promotes tumor progression via
mechanisms that are understood only in part. We found here that ß-catenin
triggers both anti- and proanoikis signals in colon cancer cells. We observed
that the antianoikis signals prevail and the cells become anoikis-resistant. We
further established that one proanoikis signal in these cells is triggered by
ß-catenin-induced downregulation of an apoptosis inhibitor tumor necrosis factor 
receptor 1 (TNFR1) and subsequent reduction of the activity of a transcription
factor NF-<U+03BA>B (nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B), a mediator of TNFR1 signaling. We also found
that the effect of ß-catenin on TNFR1 requires the presence of transcription
factor TCF1, a ß-catenin effector. We demonstrated that ablation of ß-catenin in 
colon cancer cells triggers their anoikis and that this anoikis is enhanced even 
further if low TNFR1 or NF-<U+03BA>B activity is artificially preserved in the
ß-catenin-deprived cells. Thus, inhibition of TNFR1 or NF-<U+03BA>B activity can be
expected to enhance the efficiency of approaches aimed at blocking
ß-catenin-driven anoikis resistance of colon carcinoma cells.

PMID: 25531320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. BMC Cardiovasc Disord. 2014 Dec 17;14:192. doi: 10.1186/1471-2261-14-192.

Proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 expression is transiently
up-regulated in the acute period of myocardial infarction in rat.

Zhang Y, Liu J, Li S, Xu RX, Sun J, Tang Y(1), Li JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Dyslipidemia, State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease,
FuWai Hospital, National Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences, Peking Union Medical College, BeiLiShi Road 167, Beijing
100037, China. tangyue1226@vip.sina.com.

BACKGROUND: The proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) has been
confirmed as a major factor regulating cholesterol homeostasis and has
low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR) independent effects. In addition, the
pathogenesis of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) involves lipids alteration and 
other acute phase responses. It remains unknown whether the PCSK9 expression is
influenced by the impact of AMI. The present study aimed to investigate the
changes of PCSK9 concentration using AMI rat model.
METHODS: AMI (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>6-8 at each time point) or sham operated (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>6) adult male
rats model were used. Whole blood and liver tissue were collected at 1, 3, 6, 9, 
12, 24, 48, and 96 hour (h) post infarction. The plasma PCSK9 concentration was
measured by ELISA and lipid profiles were measured by enzymatic assay. The liver 
mRNA levels of PCSK9, LDLR, sterol response element binding protein-2 (SREBP-2)
and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a (HNF1a) were measured by quantitative real-time 
PCR.
RESULTS: The plasma PCSK9 concentration was increased from 12 h to 96 h (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05
vs. control). Paralleled with the enhanced plasma PCSK9 concentration, the
hepatic PCSK9 mRNA expression was up-regulated by 2.2-fold at 12 h and 4.1-fold
at 24 h. Hepatic mRNA levels of LDLR, SREBP-2 and HNF1a were all increased and
lipid profiles underwent great changes at this acute period.
CONCLUSIONS: We firstly demonstrated that PCSK9 was transiently up-regulated in
the acute period of AMI, which is also driven by transcriptional factors, SREBP-2
and HNF1a, suggesting that the role of PCSK9 in myocardial injury may be needed
further study.

PMCID: PMC4279995
PMID: 25519174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Dec 14;20(46):17541-51. doi:
10.3748/wjg.v20.i46.17541.

Significance of downregulation of liver fatty acid-binding protein in
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Inoue M(1), Takahashi Y(1), Fujii T(1), Kitagawa M(1), Fukusato T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Masafumi Inoue, Takeshi Fujii, Department of Pathology, Toranomon Hospital,
Tokyo 105-8470, Japan.

AIM: To investigate the significance of downregulation of liver fatty
acid-binding protein (L-FABP) expression in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: Tissue microarrays of 146 cases of HCC were used to perform
immunohistochemical staining for L-FABP. For each L-FABP-negative HCC, further
immunohistochemical staining was performed using a representative whole-tissue
section to confirm the downregulation of L-FABP expression and to assess the
intratumoral heterogeneity of the staining pattern. Clinical data were retrieved 
from the clinical files, and histological slides were reviewed.
Immunohistochemical staining for cytokeratin (CK) 7, CK 19, ß-catenin, glutamine 
synthetase (GS), and serum amyloid A were also performed on the tissue
microarrays. Clinicopathological features of the L-FABP-negative and
L-FABP-positive HCC cases were compared. Furthermore, L-FABP and GS gene
expression in HCC and cholangiocarcinoma cell lines were analyzed using real-time
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. Mutation analysis of HNF1A
[encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1)a] was performed for L-FABP-negative 
HCC cases.
RESULTS: Sixteen (10.9%) of the 146 cases of HCC stained negative for L-FABP.
When we examined the correlation between the downregulation pattern of L-FABP and
tumor size, most cases of smaller HCC (= 2 cm in diameter) exhibited focal
downregulation, while most cases of larger HCC (> 2 cm in diameter) exhibited
diffuse downregulation. The correlation was statistically significant (P =
0.036). When the HCC was smaller, the L-FABP-negative area often corresponded to 
a "nodule-in-nodule" appearance. Among the small HCC cases, tumor differentiation
was significantly lower, and the frequency of intratumoral inflammation was
significantly lower in L-FABP-negative cases than in L-FABP-positive cases (P =
0.032 and P = 0.009, respectively). The frequency of positivity for ß-catenin and
GS staining was significantly higher in L-FABP-negative cases of small HCC than
in L-FABP-positive cases of small HCC (P = 0.009 and P = 0.000, respectively).
Among six HCC cell lines examined, four showed higher expression of L-FABP, and
the remaining two cell lines showed lower or no expression of L-FABP. Two of the 
16 L-FABP-negative HCC cases possessed a mutation in exon 4 of HNF1A.
CONCLUSION: In smaller HCC, L-FABP downregulation probably occurs because of
phenotypic changes during tumor progression. Moreover, this downregulation
correlated with tumor differentiation and intratumoral inflammation.

PMCID: PMC4265616
PMID: 25516669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 12;9(12):e114868. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114868.
eCollection 2014.

Moderate hypoxia induces ß-cell dysfunction with HIF-1-independent gene
expression changes.

Sato Y(1), Inoue M(2), Yoshizawa T(1), Yamagata K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Osaka Medical Center 
for Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka, Japan.

Pancreatic ß-cell failure is central to the development and progression of type 2
diabetes. We recently demonstrated that ß-cells become hypoxic under high glucose
conditions due to increased oxygen consumption and that the pancreatic islets of 
diabetic mice but not those of control mice are moderately hypoxic. However, the 
impact of moderate hypoxia on ß-cell number and function is unknown. In the
present study, moderate hypoxia induced a hypoxic response in MIN6 cells, as
evidenced by increased levels of HIF-1a protein and target genes. Under these
conditions, a selective downregulation of Mafa, Pdx1, Slc2a2, Ndufa5, Kcnj11,
Ins1, Wfs1, Foxa2, and Neurod1, which play important roles in ß-cells, was also
observed in both MIN6 cells and isolated pancreatic islets. Consistent with the
altered expression of these genes, abnormal insulin secretion was detected in
hypoxic MIN6 cells. Most of the hypoxia-induced gene downregulation in MIN6 cells
was not affected by the suppression of HIF-1a, suggesting a HIF-1-independent
mechanism. Moderate hypoxia also induced apoptosis in MIN6 cells. These results
suggest that hypoxia is a novel stressor of ß-cells and that hypoxic stress may
play a role in the deterioration of ß-cell function.

PMCID: PMC4264765
PMID: 25503986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Eur J Endocrinol. 2015 Mar;172(3):277-83. doi: 10.1530/EJE-14-0713. Epub 2014 Dec
10.

Intima-media thickness and endothelial dysfunction in GCK and HNF1A-MODY
patients.

Szopa M(1), Osmenda G(2), Wilk G(2), Matejko B(2), Skupien J(2), Zapala B(2),
Mlynarski W(2), Guzik T(2), Malecki MT(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic DiseasesJagiellonian University Medical College, 15
Kopernika Street, Krakow 31-501, PolandUniversity HospitalKrakow,
PolandTranslational Medicine LaboratoryDepartment of Internal MedicineDepartment 
of Clinical BiochemistryJagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow,
PolandDepartment of PediatricsOncology, Hematology and Diabetology, Medical
University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland Department of Metabolic DiseasesJagiellonian
University Medical College, 15 Kopernika Street, Krakow 31-501, PolandUniversity 
HospitalKrakow, PolandTranslational Medicine LaboratoryDepartment of Internal
MedicineDepartment of Clinical BiochemistryJagiellonian University Medical
College, Krakow, PolandDepartment of PediatricsOncology, Hematology and
Diabetology, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland. (2)Department of Metabolic
DiseasesJagiellonian University Medical College, 15 Kopernika Street, Krakow
31-501, PolandUniversity HospitalKrakow, PolandTranslational Medicine
LaboratoryDepartment of Internal MedicineDepartment of Clinical
BiochemistryJagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow, PolandDepartment of 
PediatricsOncology, Hematology and Diabetology, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz,
Poland. (3)Department of Metabolic DiseasesJagiellonian University Medical
College, 15 Kopernika Street, Krakow 31-501, PolandUniversity HospitalKrakow,
PolandTranslational Medicine LaboratoryDepartment of Internal MedicineDepartment 
of Clinical BiochemistryJagiellonian University Medical College, Krakow,
PolandDepartment of PediatricsOncology, Hematology and Diabetology, Medical
University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland Department of Metabolic DiseasesJagiellonian
University Medical College, 15 Kopernika Street, Krakow 31-501, PolandUniversity 
HospitalKrakow, PolandTranslational Medicine LaboratoryDepartment of Internal
MedicineDepartment of Clinical BiochemistryJagiellonian University Medical
College, Krakow, PolandDepartment of PediatricsOncology, Hematology and
Diabetology, Medical University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland malecki_malecki@yahoo.com
maciej.malecki@uj.edu.pl.

OBJECTIVE: Mutations in the glucokinase (GCK) gene, along with hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1A (HNF1A) gene mutations, are the most frequent cause of maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY). GCK-MODY patients are typically characterized by a 
moderate fasting hyperglycemia; however, little is known about atherosclerosis
and intermediate-related phenotypes in these subjects.
DESIGN: To examine carotid artery intima-media thickness (IMT) and endothelial
function assessed by brachial artery flow-mediated dilatation (FMD) in GCK gene
mutations carriers and HNF1A-MODY.
METHODS: A total of 64 subjects with GCK gene mutations, and 52 HNF1A gene
mutation carriers as well as 53 nondiabetic controls were examined. IMT and FMD
were assessed by ultrasonography. Appropriate statistical tests were performed to
assess differences between the groups, and multivariate linear regression was
done for the association with IMT and FMD.
RESULTS: The clinical characteristics of all groups were similar with the mean
age at examination of 35.1, 41.1, and 39.5 years for GCK, HNF1A and the control
group respectively. The highest mean IMT value was in the HNF1A-MODY group:
7.0±1.4<U+200A>mm, whereas it reached 6.3±1.4<U+200A>mm in GCK mutation carriers and 6.3±1.3<U+200A>mm
in controls (P=0.008). After adjustment for possible clinical and biochemical
cofounders, IMT remained higher in HNF1A-MODY patients as compared with GCK-MODY 
patients (P=0.02) and controls (P=0.0003). FMD was significantly lower in HNF1A
(9.9±4.6%) and GCK-MODY (11.1±4.6%) patients in comparison with controls
(13.9±4.7%; P=0.0001). After adjustment, FMD remained lower in HNF1A-MODY
(P=0.0005) and GCK-MODY patients (P=0.01) as compared with controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Both examined MODY groups demonstrated evidence of endothelial
dysfunction. In addition, HNF1-MODY patients seem to be more prone to an early
atherosclerotic phenotype.

© 2015 European Society of Endocrinology.

PMID: 25501962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Diabet Med. 2015 Apr;32(4):526-30. doi: 10.1111/dme.12662. Epub 2014 Dec 30.

Treatment of young patients with HNF1A mutations (HNF1A-MODY).

Raile K(1), Schober E, Konrad K, Thon A, Grulich-Henn J, Meissner T, Wölfle J,
Scheuing N, Holl RW; DPV Initiative the German BMBF Competence Network Diabetes
Mellitus.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charité, Berlin, Germany.

Comment in
    Diabet Med. 2015 Apr;32(4):429-30.

AIM: Children and adolescents with a molecular diagnosis of HNF1A-MODY should be 
treated with oral sulfonylurea according to current International Society for
Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes (ISPAD) guidelines.
METHODS: We surveyed the German-Austrian DPV database of 50 043 people and
included 114 patients with a confirmed molecular-genetic diagnosis of HNF1A
mutation and diabetes onset at below age 18 years. We analysed hypoglycaemic
episodes, metabolic control (HbA1c ) and other clinical variables according to
treatment groups.
RESULTS: People with HNF1A-MODY were included and analysed according to treatment
with insulin alone (n = 34), sulfonylurea (n = 30), meglitinides (n = 22) or
lifestyle (n = 28). In those receiving any drug treatment (n = 86), severe
hypoglycaemia did not occur with meglitinide and was highest (at 3.6 events per
100 patient-years) with insulin. HbA1c was highest with insulin treatment
(insulin = 58 mmol/mol, 7.5%; sulfonylurea = 55 mmol/mol, 7.2%; meglitinides = 52
mmol/mol, 6.9%; P = 0.008), whereas weight (BMI SD score), serum lipids and blood
pressure were not different.
CONCLUSIONS: Of note, 40% of people with HNF1A-MODY and medical treatment were
receiving insulin alone and thus were not being treated in line with up-to-date
International Society for Pediatric and Adolescent Diabetes/International
Diabetes Federation guidelines, despite insulin treatment being associated with
worse metabolic control and the risk of hypoglycaemia. The unlicensed use of oral
drugs in patients below age 18 years and adherence by both doctors and patients
to the initial insulin treatment might contribute to this finding.

© 2014 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2014 Diabetes UK.

PMID: 25483937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Life Sci. 2014 Dec 5;119(1-2):34-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2014.10.009. Epub 2014 Oct
30.

Competitive regulation of human intestinal ß-carotene 15,15'-monooxygenase 1
(BCMO1) gene expression by hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1a and HNF-4a.

Yamaguchi N(1), Sunto A(2), Goda T(2), Suruga K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nutritional Physiology, Graduate School of Human Health
Sciences, University of Nagasaki Siebold, Nagasaki 851-2195, Japan. (2)Laboratory
of Nutritional Physiology, Graduate School of Nutritional and Environmental
Sciences and Global COE, University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Nutritional Physiology, Graduate School of Human Health
Sciences, University of Nagasaki Siebold, Nagasaki 851-2195, Japan. Electronic
address: suruga@sun.ac.jp.

AIM: Among the pro-vitamin A carotenoids, ß-carotene is an excellent source of
vitamin A. ß-Carotene 15,15'-monooxygenase 1 (BCMO1) is a critical enzyme
involved in the conversion of ß-carotene into vitamin A (retinal) in the small
intestine of many vertebrates. In the present study, we investigated the
regulation of human BCMO1 gene expression using human intestinal Caco-2 BBe
cells.
MAIN METHODS: We performed electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays to investigate the binding properties of hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1a and HNF-4a to the proximal promoter of the human BCMO1
gene. Caco-2 BBe cells were also transfected with HNF-1a and HNF-4a siRNAs, and
BCMO1 gene expression levels and promoter activity were analyzed by real-time
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and luciferase reporter assays,
respectively.
KEY FINDINGS: We identified overlapping binding sites for HNF-1a and HNF-4a in
the human BCMO1 gene proximal promoter. Endogenous nuclear HNF-1a and HNF-4a
proteins competitively bound these sites in Caco-2 BBe cells. BCMO1 gene
expression levels and promoter activity were significantly decreased in HNF-1a
siRNA-transfected Caco-2 BBe cells. In contrast, HNF-4a siRNA-transfected cells
exhibited a significant increase in BCMO1 gene expression and promoter activity. 
Mutation of these overlapping binding sites dramatically decreased BCMO1 promoter
activity.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our study indicates that the competitive actions of HNF-1a and
HNF-4a on their overlapping binding sites in the human BCMO1 gene promoter
oppositely regulate BCMO1 gene expression in the human small intestine.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2015 Apr;39(2):180-7. doi:
10.1016/j.clinre.2014.10.003. Epub 2014 Nov 26.

Hepatocellular adenoma management: call for shared guidelines and
multidisciplinary approach.

Blanc JF(1), Frulio N(2), Chiche L(3), Sempoux C(4), Annet L(5), Hubert C(6),
Gouw AS(7), de Jong KP(8), Bioulac-Sage P(9), Balabaud C(10).

Author information: 
(1)Service d'hépato-gastroentérologie, hôpital Saint-André, CHU de Bordeaux,
Inserm UMR 1053, université de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. Electronic address:
Jean-frederic.blanc@chu-bordeaux.fr. (2)Service de radiologie, hôpital
Saint-André, CHU de Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. Electronic address:
nora.frulio@chu-bordeaux.fr. (3)Service hépatobiliaire et pancréatique, maison du
Haut-Lévèque, CHU de Bordeaux, 33604 Pessac cedex, France. Electronic address:
laurence.chiche@chu-bordeaux.fr. (4)Service d'anatomie pathologique, cliniques
universitaires Saint-Luc, université catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels,
Belgium. Electronic address: christine.sempoux@chuv.ch. (5)Service de radiologie,
cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, université catholique de Louvain, 1200
Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address: laurence.annet@uclouvain.be. (6)Service de
chirurgie digestive, cliniques universitaires Saint-Luc, université catholique de
Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium. Electronic address:
catherine.hubert@uclouvain.be. (7)Department of Pathology and Medical Biology,
University Medical Center Groningen, 9700 Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic 
address: a.s.h.gouw@umcg.nl. (8)Department of Hepato-Pancreato-Biliary Surgery & 
Liver Transplantation, University Medical Center Groningen, 9700 Groningen, The
Netherlands. Electronic address: k.p.de.jong@umcg.nl. (9)Inserm UMR 1053,
université de Bordeaux, service de pathologie, hôpital Pellegrin, CHU de
Bordeaux, 33075 Bordeaux cedex, France. Electronic address:
paulette.bioulac-sage@u-bordeaux2.fr. (10)Inserm UMR 1053, université de
Bordeaux, 146, rue Léo-Saignat, 33076 Bordeaux cedex, France. Electronic address:
charles.balabaud@u-bordeaux2.fr.

Hepatocellular adenomas are rare benign nodules developed mainly in women taking 
oral contraceptives. They are solitary or multiple. Their size is highly
variable. There is no consensus in the literature for their management except
that once their size exceeds 5 cm nodules are taken out to prevent 2 major
complications: bleeding and malignant transformation. There are exceptions
particularly in men where it is recommended to remove smaller nodules. Since the 
beginning of this century, major scientific contributions have unveiled the
heterogeneity of the disease. HCA are composed of four major subtypes. HNF1A
(coding for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a) inactivating mutations (H-HCA);
inflammatory adenomas (IHCA); the ß-catenin-mutated HCAs (ß-HCA) and unclassified
HCA (UHCA) occurring in 30-40%, 40-50%, 10-15% and 10% of all HCA, respectively. 
Half of ß-HCAs are also inflammatory (ß-IHCA). Importantly, ß-catenin mutations
are associated with a high risk of malignant transformation. HCA subtypes can be 
identified on liver tissue, including biopsies using specific immunomarkers with 
a good correspondence with molecular data. Recent data has shown that TERT
promoter mutation was a late event in the malignant transformation of ß-HCA,
ß-IHCA. Furthermore, in addition to ß-catenin exon 3 mutations, other mutations
do exist (exon 7 and 8) with a lower risk of malignant transformation. With these
new scientific informations, we have the tools to better know the natural history
of the different subtypes, in terms of growth, disappearance, bleeding, malignant
transformation and to investigate HCA in diseased livers (vascular diseases,
alcoholic cirrhosis). A better knowledge of HCA should lead to a more rational
management of HCA. This can be done only if the different subspecialties,
including hepatologists, liver pathologists, radiologists and surgeons work
altogether in close relationship with molecular biologists. It is a long way to
go.

Copyright © 2014. Published by Elsevier Masson SAS.

PMID: 25434466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Zhonghua Zhong Liu Za Zhi. 2014 Aug;36(8):587-91.

[Expression of ß-catenin and HNF-1a and their influence on prognosis in human
hepatocellular carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Shi J(1), Yin F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, the Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical
University, Shijiazhuang 050035, China. (2)Department of Gastroenterology, the
Fourth Hospital of Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang 050035, China.Email:
yinfei_4y@sina.com.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expressions of ß-catenin in hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) tissue, adjacent cirrhotic liver tissue and hemangioma-surrounding liver
tissue to understand whether their difference in expression will influence on the
prognosis and to study the relationship between Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway
and HNF-1a expression.
METHODS: 50 specimens of HCC, 50 specimens of adjacent cirrhotic liver tissue and
7 specimens of hemangioma-surrounding liver tissue were used to detect the
differences in the expression of ß-catenin and HNF-1a in them by
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The expression rate of ß-catenin was 74.0% (37/50) in the HCC tissue,
18.0% (9/50) in cirrhotic liver tissue, and 14.3% (1/7) in hemangioma-surrounding
liver tissue. The expression rate of ß-catenin in HCC tissue was significantly
higher than that in the hemangioma-surrounding liver tissue (P = 0.002) and
cirrhotic liver tissue (P < 0.001). The patients with abnormal expression had
worse prognosis. Among the 50 HCC cases, the expression of HNF-1a was negative in
20.0% (10/50), weak positive in 40.0% (20/50), moderately positive in 26.0%
(13/50), and strong positive in 14.0% (7/50). Among the 50 adjacent cirrhotic
liver tissues, the expression of HNF-1a was negative in 12.0% (6/50), weak
positive in 20.0% (10/50), moderately positive in 52.0% (26/50) and strong
positive in 16.0% (8/50). In the 7 cases of hemangioma-surrounding liver tissue, 
the expression of HNF-1a was negative in 0(0/7), weak positive in 14.3% (1/7),
moderately positive in 28.6% (2/7) and strong positive in 57.1% (4/7). The
positive expression rate of HNF-1a in the HCC tissue was significantly lower than
that in the hemangioma-surrounding liver tissues (P = 0.029) and adjacent
cirrhotic liver tissues (P = 0.008). The patients with positive HNF-1a expression
had a better prognosis. The abnormal expression of ß-catenin was negatively
correlated with positive HNF-1a expression (r = -0.673, P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The occurrence and development of HCC is related to the abnormal
ß-catenin expression. There is a negative correlation between Wnt/ß-catenin
signaling pathway and HNF-1a expression.

PMID: 25430024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Am J Med Genet A. 2015 Jan;167A(1):169-73. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.36730. Epub 2014
Nov 25.

A 12q24.31 interstitial deletion in an adult male with MODY3: neuropsychiatric
and neuropsychological characteristics.

Verhoeven WM(1), Egger JI, van den Bergh JP, van Beek R, Kleefstra T, de Leeuw N.

Author information: 
(1)Vincent van Gogh Institute for Psychiatry, Centre of Excellence for
Neuropsychiatry, Venray, The Netherlands; Erasmus University Medical Centre,
Department of Psychiatry, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

A 39-year-old male patient with a disharmonic intelligence profile and juvenile
diabetes mellitus is described. At 14 months of age, minor facial dysmorphisms
were noticed. He had delayed motor development, obesity at early age, and a
diagnosis of insulin-dependent diabetes at the age of 10 years. He successfully
completed secondary education and has been engaged in unskilled work activities, 
living independently. Upon examination, no psychiatric symptoms were present and 
his neuropsychological profile showed normal, although disharmonic, intellectual 
capacities and suboptimal social cognition. Genome wide array analysis identified
an interstitial 12q24.31 deletion of 1.67<U+2009>Mb encompassing hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1-alpha gene (HNF1A), supporting a diagnosis of maturity-onset diabetes of
the young. Results are discussed in relation to the few identified or published
overlapping deletions. This is the first patient with normal intelligence in whom
the presence of subtle facial dysmorphisms were decisive for introducing genetic 
analysis that, in turn, disclosed a rare form of diabetes necessitating
modifications in treatment regimen. Clinicians, including those involved in
psychiatry, should be aware of the diagnostic and prognostic value of atypical
physical features in patients with a long history of complicated glucose
regulation.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 25425063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Diabetes Care. 2014 Dec;37(12):e258-60. doi: 10.2337/dc14-1788.

Low prevalence of HNF1A mutations after molecular screening of multiple MODY
genes in 58 Italian families recruited in the pediatric or adult diabetes clinic 
from a single Italian hospital.

Delvecchio M(1), Ludovico O(2), Menzaghi C(3), Di Paola R(3), Zelante L(4),
Marucci A(3), Grasso V(5), Trischitta V(6), Carella M(4), Barbetti F(7), Gallo F,
Coccioli MS, Zecchino C, Faienza MF, Cardinale G, Franzese A, Mozzillo E, Iafusco
D, Zanfardino A.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatrics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy mdelvecchio75@gmail.com fabrizio.barbetti@uniroma2.it.
(2)Endocrine Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy. (3)Research Unit of Diabetes and Endocrine Diseases, IRCCS Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. (4)Medical
Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy. (5)Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(6)Research Unit of Diabetes and Endocrine Diseases, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy Department of Experimental
Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (7)Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery,
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy mdelvecchio75@gmail.com
fabrizio.barbetti@uniroma2.it.

PMID: 25414397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Dec 16;42(22):13615-32. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1186. Epub
2014 Nov 20.

The TCF C-clamp DNA binding domain expands the Wnt transcriptome via alternative 
target recognition.

Hoverter NP(1), Zeller MD(2), McQuade MM(1), Garibaldi A(1), Busch A(1), Selwan
EM(1), Hertel KJ(1), Baldi P(2), Waterman ML(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. (2)Department of Information and Computer Science,
University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA 92697, USA. (3)Department of
Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California, Irvine, Irvine, CA
92697, USA marian.waterman@uci.edu.

LEF/TCFs direct the final step in Wnt/ß-catenin signalling by recruiting
ß-catenin to genes for activation of transcription. Ancient, non-vertebrate TCFs 
contain two DNA binding domains, a High Mobility Group box for recognition of the
Wnt Response Element (WRE; 5'-CTTTGWWS-3') and the C-clamp domain for recognition
of the GC-rich Helper motif (5'-RCCGCC-3'). Two vertebrate TCFs (TCF-1/TCF7 and
TCF-4/TCF7L2) use the C-clamp as an alternatively spliced domain to regulate
cell-cycle progression, but how the C-clamp influences TCF binding and activity
genome-wide is not known. Here, we used a doxycycline inducible system with
ChIP-seq to assess how the C-clamp influences human TCF1 binding genome-wide.
Metabolic pulse-labeling of nascent RNA with 4'Thiouridine was used with RNA-seq 
to connect binding to the Wnt transcriptome. We find that the C-clamp enables
targeting to a greater number of gene loci for stronger occupancy and
transcription regulation. The C-clamp uses Helper sites concurrently with WREs
for gene targeting, but it also targets TCF1 to sites that do not have readily
identifiable canonical WREs. The coupled ChIP-seq/4'Thiouridine-seq analysis
identified new Wnt target genes, including additional regulators of cell
proliferation. Thus, C-clamp containing isoforms of TCFs are potent
transcriptional regulators with an expanded transcriptome directed by
C-clamp-Helper site interactions.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4267635
PMID: 25414359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Diabetes Investig. 2014 Sep;5(5):513-6. doi: 10.1111/jdi.12237. Epub 2014 Apr
10.

Low serum level of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein in a Japanese patient with
maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3).

Ohki T(1), Utsu Y(2), Morita S(2), Karim MF(3), Sato Y(3), Yoshizawa T(3),
Yamamura K(4), Yamada K(5), Kasayama S(2), Yamagata K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry Faculty of Life Sciences Institute of
Resource Development and Analysis Kumamoto University Kumamoto Japan ; Division
of Endocrinology and Metabolism Kurume University School of Medicine Kurume
Japan. (2)Department of Medicine Nissay Hospital Osaka Japan. (3)Department of
Medical Biochemistry Faculty of Life Sciences Institute of Resource Development
and Analysis Kumamoto University Kumamoto Japan. (4)Division of Developmental
Genetics Center for Animal Resources and Development Institute of Resource
Development and Analysis Kumamoto University Kumamoto Japan. (5)Division of
Endocrinology and Metabolism Kurume University School of Medicine Kurume Japan.

High-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) levels in European populations are
lower in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) than
in those with type 2 diabetes. hs-CRP levels have been suggested to be useful for
discriminating MODY3 from type 2 diabetes. As hs-CRP levels are influenced by
various factors including race and body mass index, it is worthwhile to examine
whether hs-CRP can serve as a biomarker for MODY3 in Japanese. Here we describe
the case of a Japanese MODY3 patient with a nonsense mutation in the HNF1A gene. 
Two measurements showed consistently lower hs-CRP levels (<0.05 and 0.09 mg/L)
than in Japanese patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Hepatic expression of 
Crp messenger ribonucleic acid was significantly decreased in Hnf1a knockout
mice. The hs-CRP level might be a useful biomarker for MODY3 in both Japanese and
European populations.

PMCID: PMC4188108
PMID: 25411618  [PubMed]


117. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2014 Nov 14. [Epub ahead of print]

Exploring the Genomic Roadmap and Molecular Phylogenetics Associated with MODY
Cascades Using Computational Biology.

Chakraborty C(1), Bandyopadhyay S, Doss CG, Agoramoorthy G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, School of Computer and Information Sciences,
Galgotias University, Noida, India.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a metabolic and genetic disorder. 
It is different from type 1 and type 2 diabetes with low occurrence level (1-2 %)
among all diabetes. This disorder is a consequence of ß-cell dysfunction. Till
date, 11 subtypes of MODY have been identified, and all of them can cause gene
mutations. However, very little is known about the gene mapping, molecular
phylogenetics, and co-expression among MODY genes and networking between
cascades. This study has used latest servers and software such as VarioWatch,
ClustalW, MUSCLE, G Blocks, Phylogeny.fr, iTOL, WebLogo, STRING, and KEGG PATHWAY
to perform comprehensive analyses of gene mapping, multiple sequences alignment, 
molecular phylogenetics, protein-protein network design, co-expression analysis
of MODY genes, and pathway development. The MODY genes are located in
chromosomes-2, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 17, and 20. Highly aligned block shows Pro,
Gly, Leu, Arg, and Pro residues are highly aligned in the positions of 296, 386, 
437, 455, 456 and 598, respectively. Alignment scores inform us that HNF1A and
HNF1B proteins have shown high sequence similarity among MODY proteins.
Protein-protein network design shows that HNF1A, HNF1B, HNF4A, NEUROD1, PDX1,
PAX4, INS, and GCK are strongly connected, and the co-expression analyses between
MODY genes also show distinct association between HNF1A and HNF4A genes. This
study has used latest tools of bioinformatics to develop a rapid method to assess
the evolutionary relationship, the network development, and the associations
among eleven MODY genes and cascades. The prediction of sequence conservation,
molecular phylogenetics, protein-protein network and the association between the 
MODY cascades enhances opportunities to get more insights into the less-known
MODY disease.

PMID: 25395195  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


118. J Investig Med. 2014 Dec;62(8):968-74. doi: 10.1097/JIM.0000000000000114.

Early-onset type 2 diabetes mellitus is associated to HNF4A T130I polymorphism in
families of central Spain.

Cieza-Borrella C(1), Díaz-Soto G, Martínez-Pino I, Puig-Domingo M,
González-Sarmiento R.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Unidad de Medicina Molecular, Departamento de Medicina, IBSAL and
IBMCC, Universidad de Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca; Servicio de Endocrinología, U. 
Diabetes, Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, IEN-UVa, Valladolid;
Centro Nacional de Epidemiología, ISCIII, CIBERESP, Madrid; and §Servicio de
Endocrinología y Nutrición, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain.

PURPOSE: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (type 2 DM) and maturity-onset diabetes of the 
young present some similar clinical and biochemical characteristics that make
them difficult to differentiate. Currently, the polymorphism T130I (rs1800961) in
the HNF4A (hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A) gene has been described as a risk factor
to type 2 DM and shows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern associated to
ß-cell function decrease. The aim of the present work was to characterize the
phenotypic profile of the T130I carrier and noncarrier relatives included in 3
unrelated families.
METHODS: We studied GCK, HNF1A, and HNF4A genes by polymerase chain reaction and 
sequencing in 3 unrelated subjects from Valladolid, Spain, in which
maturity-onset diabetes of the young was suspected. We collected genetic,
clinical, and biochemical data from these subjects and their relatives in order
to check the presence of the T130I polymorphism.
RESULTS: The heterozygous T130I mutation was the unique functional gene variation
that could explain diabetes phenotype. We observed significant differences in
glucose metabolism, lipid profile, and Homeostasis Model Assessment index when we
compared T130I mutation carriers and noncarriers. Diabetes diagnosed in T130I
mutation carriers was related to stressful situations in an earlier age and
tightly associated with gestational diabetes. Fasting plasma glucose and HbA(1c) 
levels increased with age in all carriers (r = 0.69 and r = 0.66, P < 0.01),
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study supports the T130I variant in HNF4A as a major
susceptibility genotype associated with early-onset type 2 DM. Healthy carriers
of this mutation require a stricter control in the population of central Spain.

PMID: 25361053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Immunol. 2014 Dec 1;193(11):5480-7. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1303417. Epub 2014
Oct 29.

T Cell factor 1 represses CD8+ effector T cell formation and function.

Tiemessen MM(1), Baert MR(1), Kok L(1), van Eggermond MC(1), van den Elsen PJ(1),
Arens R(1), Staal FJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, 2300 RC/Leiden, the Netherlands. (2)Department of
Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University Medical Center, 2300
RC/Leiden, the Netherlands f.j.t.staal@lumc.nl.

The Wnt-responsive transcription factor T cell factor 1 (Tcf1) is well known for 
its role in thymic T cell development and the formation of memory CD8(+) T cells.
However, its role in the initial phases of CD8(+) T effector cell formation has
remained unexplored. We report that high levels of Wnt signaling and Tcf1 are
operational in naive and memory CD8(+) T cells, whereas Wnt signaling and Tcf1
were low in effector CD8(+) T cells. CD8(+) T cells deficient in Tcf1 produce
IFN-<U+03B3> more rapidly, coinciding with increased demethylation of the IFN-<U+03B3> enhancer
and higher expression of the transcription factors Tbet and Blimp1. Moreover,
virus-specific Tcf1(-/-) CD8(+) T cells show accelerated expansion in acute
infection, which is associated with increased IFN-<U+03B3> and TNF production and lower 
viral load. Genetic complementation experiments with various Tcf1 isoforms
indicate that Tcf1 dosage and protein stability are critical in suppressing IFN-<U+03B3>
production. Isoforms lacking the ß-catenin binding domain are equally effective
in inhibiting CD8(+) effector T cell formation. Thus, Tcf1 functions as a
repressor of CD8(+) effector T cell formation in a ß-catenin/Wnt-independent
manner.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25355919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Eur J Clin Pharmacol. 2015 Jan;71(1):59-63. doi: 10.1007/s00228-014-1774-y. Epub 
2014 Oct 21.

A pharmacogenetic association between a variation in calpain 10 (CAPN10) gene and
the response to metformin treatment in patients with type 2 diabetes.

Tkác I(1), Javorský M, Klimcáková L, idzik J, Gala I, Babjaková E, Schroner Z,
tolfová M, Hermanová H, Habalová V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 4, Faculty of Medicine, P. J. afárik
University, Rastislavova 43, 04190, Koice, Slovakia, ivan.tkac@upjs.sk.

PURPOSE: The aim of the present study was to investigate possible associations of
the single-nucleotide variants in six genes encoding the key molecules mediating 
the metformin pharmacodynamic effect with the response to treatment with
metformin in patients with type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: One hundred forty-eight drug-naïve patients with type 2 diabetes were
included in the study. PRKAA1 rs249429, STK11 rs741765, PCK1 rs4810083, PPARGC1A 
rs10213440, HNF1A rs11086926, and CAPN10 rs3792269 variants were genotyped. The
outcomes of the study were treatment success defined by achieving HbA1c <7 % and 
absolute reduction in HbAlc after 6-month metformin therapy. The relationships
between genotypes and outcomes were evaluated in multivariate logistic and linear
models. The level of statistical significance after Bonferroni correction was
predefined as p<0.0083.
RESULTS: The minor G-allele of CAPN10 rs3792269 A>G polymorphism was
significantly associated with less treatment success with an odds ratio of 0.27
(95 % CI 0.12-0.62, p=0.002) per variant allele. When the reduction in HbA1c was 
analyzed as a quantitative trait, G-allele was nominally associated with a
smaller reduction in HbA1c (per allele ß=-0.26, 95 % CI -0.50 to -0.02, p=0.032).
The reduction in HbA1c in minor allele carriers (24 % of study population) was
smaller by 0.3 % in comparison with the major allele homozygotes.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study provides the first observation of an association
between a variant in CAPN10 gene and the response to metformin therapy in
patients with type 2 diabetes. This observation needs to be replicated in further
studies in different populations.

PMID: 25327507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. BMC Genomics. 2014 Oct 4;15:860. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-860.

Genetic and epigenetic regulation of gene expression in fetal and adult human
livers.

Bonder MJ, Kasela S, Kals M, Tamm R, Lokk K, Barragan I, Buurman WA, Deelen P,
Greve JW, Ivanov M, Rensen SS, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Wolfs MG, Fu J, Hofker
MH, Wijmenga C, Zhernakova A, Ingelman-Sundberg M, Franke L(1), Milani L.

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of
Genetics, Hanzeplein 1, 9700 RB Groningen, the Netherlands. lude@ludesign.nl.

BACKGROUND: The liver plays a central role in the maintenance of homeostasis and 
health in general. However, there is substantial inter-individual variation in
hepatic gene expression, and although numerous genetic factors have been
identified, less is known about the epigenetic factors.
RESULTS: By analyzing the methylomes and transcriptomes of 14 fetal and 181 adult
livers, we identified 657 differentially methylated genes with adult-specific
expression, these genes were enriched for transcription factor binding sites of
HNF1A and HNF4A. We also identified 1,000 genes specific to fetal liver, which
were enriched for GATA1, STAT5A, STAT5B and YY1 binding sites. We saw strong
liver-specific effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms on both methylation
levels (28,447 unique CpG sites (meQTL)) and gene expression levels (526 unique
genes (eQTL)), at a false discovery rate (FDR)<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05. Of the 526 unique eQTL
associated genes, 293 correlated significantly not only with genetic variation
but also with methylation levels. The tissue-specificities of these associations 
were analyzed in muscle, subcutaneous adipose tissue and visceral adipose tissue.
We observed that meQTL were more stable between tissues than eQTL and a very
strong tissue-specificity for the identified associations between CpG methylation
and gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analyses generated a comprehensive resource of factors involved 
in the regulation of hepatic gene expression, and allowed us to estimate the
proportion of variation in gene expression that could be attributed to genetic
and epigenetic variation, both crucial to understanding differences in drug
response and the etiology of liver diseases.

PMCID: PMC4287518
PMID: 25282492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Ann Saudi Med. 2014 May-Jun;34(3):217-21. doi: 10.5144/0256-4947.2014.217.

Clinical and molecular characterization of maturity onset-diabetes of the young
caused by hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha mutation: red flags for prediction of
the diagnosis.

Mohamed S(1), Elkholy S, El-Meleagy E, Abu-Amero K, Hellani AM.

Author information: 
(1)Sarar Mohamed, Department of Pediatrics,, College of Medicine,, King Saud
University,, PO Box 2925, Riyadh 11461,, Saudi Arabia, T: +966541235272, F:
+966114691512, sararmohamed@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The prevalence of maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) in Saudi population remains unknown, and data on molecular etiology of
this condition is limited. Therefore, the present study was undertaken to
elucidate clinical and molecular characteristics of a Saudi family with MODY 1.
DESIGN AND SETTINGS: This is a case series study conducted at Saad Specialist
Hospital in Alkhobar, Saudi Arabia.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A 12-year-old female presented to us with symptoms
suggestive of diabetes. Investigations revealed hyperglycemia, glycosuria, and
ketonuria without acidosis. Pancreatic antibodies were negative. She responded
well to subcutaneous insulin. Her family history revealed that 2 of her siblings 
were diagnosed with type 1 diabetes (T1DM), while her father and mother had type 
2 diabetes (T2DM). In view of this strong family history, the possibility of
monogenic diabetes was raised, and the 2 genes consistent with this phenotype,
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1a) and hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha
(HNF4a), were studied. Accordingly, genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral
blood lymphocytes of the 8 members of this family, polymerase chain reaction was 
carried out, and sequencing of the whole HNF4a and HNF1a genes was done.
RESULTS: DNA study of the proband revealed a heterozygous substitution in intron 
1 (IVS1b C > T-5)(c.50-5C > T) of the HNF1a gene. This mutation was identified in
other 5 members of the family.
CONCLUSION: This study alerts physicians to suspect MODY in patients who have a
strongly positive family history of diabetes over a few generations with negative
pancreatic antibodies and absence of ketoacidosis and obesity.

PMID: 25266181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2015 Apr;39(2):e17-22. doi:
10.1016/j.clinre.2014.08.007. Epub 2014 Sep 26.

Steatotic hepatocellular adenomas with different phenotypic subtypes: a case
report.

Alberti N(1), Castain C(2), Crombe A(3), Frulio N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, hôpital St-André, CHU de Bordeaux, 1, rue
Jean-Burguet, 33000 Bordeaux, France. Electronic address:
nicoalbertibdx@gmail.com. (2)Department of Pathology, hôpital Pellegrin, CHU de
Bordeaux, place Amélie-Raba-Léon, 33000 Bordeaux, France. (3)Department of
Radiology, hôpital St-André, CHU de Bordeaux, 1, rue Jean-Burguet, 33000
Bordeaux, France.

Hepatocellular adenomas (HCAs) are heterogeneous group of benign tumors; three
pathomolecular subtypes have been identified so far: hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 
a-inactivated HCA (H-HCA) (35-40%), inflammatory HCA (I-HCA) (>50%), ß-catenin
activated HCA (10%). Ten percent of I-HCA are also ß-catenin activated. We report
a rare case of three histologically confirmed steatotic HCAs of three different
phenotypes: I-HCA, ß-catenin activated I-HCA, and H-HCA in a 36-year-old woman.
This observation outlines that in the same patient, HCA may be of different
subtypes. The predisposition to develop different HCA hypothetically caused by a 
"benign tumorigenic field effect" may result, even rarely, in different
genotypes/phenotypes such as H-HCA and I-HCA. Moreover, we illustrate the very
high specificity of MR for subtyping HCA.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25260568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2014 Dec 1;307(11):F1283-91. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00426.2014. Epub 2014 Sep 18.

Transcriptional regulation of human organic anion transporter 1 by B-cell
CLL/lymphoma 6.

Wegner W(1), Burckhardt G(1), Henjakovic M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systemic Physiology and Pathophysiology, University Medical
Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany. (2)Department of Systemic Physiology and
Pathophysiology, University Medical Center Göttingen, Göttingen, Germany
maja.henjakovic@med.uni-goettingen.de.

The human organic anion transporter 1 (OAT1) is crucial for the excretion of
organic anions in renal proximal tubular cells and has been classified as a
clinically relevant transporter in the kidneys. Our previous study indicated that
renal male-predominant expression of rat Oat1 and Oat3 appears to be regulated by
transcription factor B-cell CLL/lymphoma 6 (BCL6). The aim of this study was to
characterize the effect of BCL6 on human OAT1 promoter and on the transcription
of OAT1 mediated by hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a (HNF-1a). Luciferase assays were
carried out in opossum kidney (OK) cells transiently transfected with promoter
constructs of OAT1, expression vectors for BCL6 and HNF-1a, and the empty control
vectors. BCL6 and HNF-1a binding on OAT1 promoter was analyzed using
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). Protein expression of HNF-1a was
investigated by Western blot analysis. Site-directed mutagenesis was used to
introduce mutations into BCL6 and HNF-1a binding sites within the OAT1 promoter. 
BCL6 enhanced the promoter activity of OAT1 independently of predicted BCL6
binding sites but was dependent on HNF-1a response element and HNF-1a protein.
Coexpression of BCL6 and HNF-1a induced an additive effect on OAT1 promoter
activation compared with BCL6 or HNF-1a alone. BCL6 does not bind directly or
indirectly to OAT1 promoter but increases the protein expression of HNF-1a and
thereby indirectly enhances OAT1 gene transcription. BCL6 constitutes a promising
candidate gene for the regulation of human OAT1 transcription and other renal
and/or hepatic drug transporters that have been already shown to be activated by 
HNF-1a.

Copyright © 2014 the American Physiological Society.

PMID: 25234312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Carcinogenesis. 2014 Dec;35(12):2670-8. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgu193. Epub 2014 Sep
18.

Transcriptome analysis of pancreatic cancer reveals a tumor suppressor function
for HNF1A.

Hoskins JW(1), Jia J(1), Flandez M(2), Parikh H(1), Xiao W(3), Collins I(1),
Emmanuel MA(1), Ibrahim A(1), Powell J(4), Zhang L(5), Malats N(2), Bamlet WR(6),
Petersen GM(6), Real FX(7), Amundadottir LT(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Translational Genomics, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and
Genetics, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA, Epithelial Carcinogenesis Group, CNIO-Spanish National Cancer
Research Centre, E-28029 Madrid, Spain, Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, Center for 
Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute and Bioinformatics and Molecular
Analysis Section, Division of Computational Bioscience, Center for Information
Technology, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA, Department of
Laboratory Medicine and Pathology and Division of Epidemiology, Department of
Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA and Departament
de Ciències Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003
Barcelona, Spain. (2)Epithelial Carcinogenesis Group, CNIO-Spanish National
Cancer Research Centre, E-28029 Madrid, Spain. (3)Lymphoid Malignancies Branch,
Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute and. (4)Bioinformatics and 
Molecular Analysis Section, Division of Computational Bioscience, Center for
Information Technology, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(5)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology and. (6)Division of
Epidemiology, Department of Health Sciences Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 
55905, USA and. (7)Epithelial Carcinogenesis Group, CNIO-Spanish National Cancer 
Research Centre, E-28029 Madrid, Spain, Departament de Ciències Experimentals i
de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, Spain. (8)Laboratory of
Translational Genomics, Division of Cancer Epidemiology and Genetics, National
Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA,
Epithelial Carcinogenesis Group, CNIO-Spanish National Cancer Research Centre,
E-28029 Madrid, Spain, Lymphoid Malignancies Branch, Center for Cancer Research, 
National Cancer Institute and Bioinformatics and Molecular Analysis Section,
Division of Computational Bioscience, Center for Information Technology, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA, Department of Laboratory Medicine 
and Pathology and Division of Epidemiology, Department of Health Sciences
Research, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA and Departament de Ciències
Experimentals i de la Salut, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, 08003 Barcelona, Spain
amundadottirl@mail.nih.gov.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is driven by the accumulation of somatic 
mutations, epigenetic modifications and changes in the micro-environment. New
approaches to investigating disruptions of gene expression networks promise to
uncover key regulators and pathways in carcinogenesis. We performed messenger
RNA-sequencing in pancreatic normal (n = 10) and tumor (n = 8) derived tissue
samples, as well as in pancreatic cancer cell lines (n = 9), to determine
differential gene expression (DE) patterns. Sub-network enrichment analyses
identified HNF1A as the regulator of the most significantly and consistently
dysregulated expression sub-network in pancreatic tumor tissues and cells (median
P = 7.56×10(-7), median rank = 1, range = 1-25). To explore the effects of HNF1A 
expression in pancreatic tumor-derived cells, we generated stable HNF1A-inducible
clones in two pancreatic cancer cell lines (PANC-1 and MIA PaCa-2) and observed
growth inhibition (5.3-fold, P = 4.5×10(-5) for MIA PaCa-2 clones; 7.2-fold, P = 
2.2×10(-5) for PANC-1 clones), and a G0/G1 cell cycle arrest and apoptosis upon
induction. These effects correlated with HNF1A-induced down-regulation of 51 of
84 cell cycle genes (e.g. E2F1, CDK2, CDK4, MCM2/3/4/5, SKP2 and CCND1),
decreased expression of anti-apoptotic genes (e.g. BIRC2/5/6 and AKT) and
increased expression of pro-apoptotic genes (e.g. CASP4/9/10 and APAF1). In light
of the established role of HNF1A in the regulation of pancreatic development and 
homeostasis, our data suggest that it also functions as an important tumor
suppressor in the pancreas.

Published by Oxford University Press 2014.

PMCID: PMC4247517
PMID: 25233928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. World J Hepatol. 2014 Aug 27;6(8):580-95. doi: 10.4254/wjh.v6.i8.580.

Pictures of focal nodular hyperplasia and hepatocellular adenomas.

Sempoux C(1), Balabaud C(1), Bioulac-Sage P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Christine Sempoux, Service d'Anatomie Pathologique, Cliniques universitaires
Saint Luc, Université catholique de Louvain, 1200 Brussels, Belgium.

This practical atlas aims to help liver and non liver pathologists to recognize
benign hepatocellular nodules on resected specimen. Macroscopic and microscopic
views together with immunohistochemical stains illustrate typical and atypical
aspects of focal nodular hyperplasia and of hepatocellular adenoma, including
hepatocellular adenomas subtypes with references to clinical and imaging data.
Each step is important to make a correct diagnosis. The specimen including the
nodule and the non-tumoral liver should be sliced, photographed and all different
looking areas adequately sampled for paraffin inclusion. Routine histology
includes HE, trichrome and cytokeratin 7. Immunohistochemistry includes glutamine
synthase and according to the above results additional markers such as liver
fatty acid binding protein, C reactive protein and beta catenin may be realized
to differentiate focal nodular hyperplasia from hepatocellular adenoma subtypes. 
Clues for differential diagnosis and pitfalls are explained and illustrated.

PMCID: PMC4163741
PMID: 25232451  [PubMed]


127. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Sep 30;111(39):14289-94. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1407640111. Epub 2014 Sep 15.

Role of forkhead box protein A3 in age-associated metabolic decline.

Ma X(1), Xu L(1), Gavrilova O(2), Mueller E(3).

Author information: 
(1)Genetic of Development and Disease Branch and. (2)Mouse Metabolism Core,
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892. (3)Genetic of Development and Disease
Branch and elisabettam@niddk.nih.gov.

Aging is associated with increased adiposity and diminished thermogenesis, but
the critical transcription factors influencing these metabolic changes late in
life are poorly understood. We recently demonstrated that the winged helix factor
forkhead box protein A3 (Foxa3) regulates the expansion of visceral adipose
tissue in high-fat diet regimens; however, whether Foxa3 also contributes to the 
increase in adiposity and the decrease in brown fat activity observed during the 
normal aging process is currently unknown. Here we report that during aging,
levels of Foxa3 are significantly and selectively up-regulated in brown and
inguinal white fat depots, and that midage Foxa3-null mice have increased white
fat browning and thermogenic capacity, decreased adipose tissue expansion,
improved insulin sensitivity, and increased longevity. Foxa3 gain-of-function and
loss-of-function studies in inguinal adipose depots demonstrated a
cell-autonomous function for Foxa3 in white fat tissue browning. Furthermore, our
analysis revealed that the mechanisms of Foxa3 modulation of brown fat gene
programs involve the suppression of peroxisome proliferator activated receptor <U+03B3> 
coactivtor 1 a (PGC1a) levels through interference with cAMP responsive element
binding protein 1-mediated transcriptional regulation of the PGC1a promoter.
Overall, our data demonstrate a role for Foxa3 in energy expenditure and in
age-associated metabolic disorders.

PMCID: PMC4191794
PMID: 25225406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Nat Commun. 2014 Sep 12;5:4814. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5814.

Loss of IP3R-dependent Ca2+ signalling in thymocytes leads to aberrant
development and acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Ouyang K(1), Leandro Gomez-Amaro R(2), Stachura DL(3), Tang H(4), Peng X(4), Fang
X(5), Traver D(3), Evans SM(2), Chen J(5).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA [2] Drug Discovery Center, Key Laboratory 
of Chemical Genomics, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen
518055, China. (2)Skaggs School of Pharmacy, University of California San Diego, 
La Jolla, California 92093, USA. (3)Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California San Diego, La Jolla,
California 92093, USA. (4)Drug Discovery Center, Key Laboratory of Chemical
Genomics, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China.
(5)Department of Medicine, School of Medicine, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, California 92093, USA.

Calcium ions (Ca(2+)) function as universal second messengers in eukaryotic
cells, including immune cells. Ca(2+) is crucial for peripheral T-lymphocyte
activation and effector functions, and influences thymocyte selection and
motility in the developing thymus. However, the role of Ca(2+) signalling in
early T-lymphocyte development is not well understood. Here we show that the
inositol triphosphate receptors (IP3Rs) Ca(2+) ion channels are required for
proliferation, survival and developmental progression of T-lymphocyte precursors.
Our studies indicate that signalling via IP3Rs represses Sox13, an antagonist of 
the developmentally important transcription factor Tcf-1. In the absence of
IP3R-mediated Ca(2+) signalling, repression of key Notch transcriptional
targets--including Hes1--fail to occur in post ß-selection thymocytes, and mice
develop aggressive T-cell malignancies that resemble human T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). These data indicate that IP3R-mediated Ca(2+)
signalling reinforces Tcf-1 activity to both ensure normal development and
prevent thymocyte neoplasia.

PMID: 25215520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Biochem Res Int. 2014;2014:924105. doi: 10.1155/2014/924105. Epub 2014 Aug 18.

A Polymorphism in Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 Alpha, rs7310409, Is Associated
with Left Main Coronary Artery Disease.

Liu R(1), Liu H(1), Gu H(2), Teng X(1), Nie Y(1), Zhou Z(1), Zhao Y(1), Hu S(1), 
Zheng Z(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai Hospital, National
Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and
Peking Union Medical College, 167 Beilishilu Street, Beijing 100037, China.
(2)State Key Laboratory of Cardiovascular Disease, Fuwai Hospital, National
Center for Cardiovascular Diseases, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and
Peking Union Medical College, 167 Beilishilu Street, Beijing 100037, China ;
Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Affiliated People's Hospital of Jiangsu
University, Zhenjiang 212000, China.

Coronary artery disease is the leading cause of mortality and morbidity in the
world. Left main coronary artery disease (LMCAD) is a particularly severe
phenotypic form of CAD and has a genetic basis. We hypothesized that some
inflammation- and hyperhomocysteinemia-related gene polymorphisms may contribute 
to LMCAD susceptibility in a Chinese population. We studied the association
between polymorphisms in the genes hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1A;
rs7310409, G/A), C-reactive protein (rs1800947 and rs3093059 T/C),
methylenetetrahydrofolate reductase (rs1801133, C/T), and
methylenetetrahydrofolate dehydrogenase (rs1076991, A/G) in 402 LMCAD and 804
more peripheral CAD patients in a Chinese population. Genotyping was performed
using the matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass
spectrometry method. When the HNF1A rs7310409 GG homozygote genotype was used as 
the reference group, both the individual, GA and AA, and combined GA/AA genotypes
were associated with an increased risk of LMCAD. This single nucleotide
polymorphism (rs7310409) is strongly associated with plasma CRP levels. In
conclusion, the present study provides evidence that the HNF1A rs7310409 G/A
functional polymorphism may contribute to the risk of LMCAD.

PMCID: PMC4151485
PMID: 25202455  [PubMed]


130. Histopathology. 2015 Jun;66(7):910-21. doi: 10.1111/his.12539. Epub 2014 Oct 30.

Gene mutations in hepatocellular adenomas.

Raft MB(1), Jørgensen EN(1), Vainer B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Rigshospitalet, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Hepatocellular adenomas (HCA) are rare, benign liver tumours that often occur in 
women of reproductive age. HCA has been associated with the use of oral
contraceptives, but the increased incidence of the tumour in older women and in
men has linked the tumour type to other diseases, including the metabolic
syndrome. Genotypical classification of the adenomas has led to the
identification of four subgroups that correlate genotype with phenotype: human
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1a) inactivating HCA, ß-catenin activating 
HCA, inflammatory HCA and unclassified HCA. HNF1a inactivating HCA is associated 
with bi-allelic mutations in the TCF1 gene and morphologically has marked
steatosis. ß-catenin activating HCA has increased activity of the Wnt/ß-catenin
pathway and is associated with possible malignant transformation. Inflammatory
HCA is characterized by an oncogene-induced inflammation due to alterations in
the Janus kinase/signal transducer and activator of transcription (JAK/STAT)
pathway. In the diagnostic setting, sub classification of HCA is based primarily 
on immunohistochemical analyzes, and has had an increasing impact on choice of
treatment and individual prognostic assessment. This review offers an overview of
the reported gene mutations associated with hepatocellular adenomas together with
a discussion of the diagnostic and prognostic value.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25195525  [PubMed - in process]


131. Br Med Bull. 2014 Sep;111(1):117-38. doi: 10.1093/bmb/ldu016.

Myeloma bone disease: pathogenesis, current treatments and future targets.

Walker RE(1), Lawson MA(1), Buckle CH(1), Snowden JA(1), Chantry AD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Sheffield Myeloma Research Team (SmaRT), Department of Oncology, University of
Sheffield, Sheffield, UK Department of Haematology, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals 
NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, UK. (2)Sheffield Myeloma Research Team (SmaRT), 
Department of Oncology, University of Sheffield, Sheffield, UK Department of
Haematology, Sheffield Teaching Hospitals NHS Foundation Trust, Sheffield, UK
a.d.chantry@sheffield.ac.uk.

INTRODUCTION: Patients with myeloma develop localized and generalized bone loss
leading to hypercalcaemia, accelerated osteoporosis, vertebral wedge fractures,
other pathological fractures, spinal cord compression and bone pain. Bone loss is
mediated by a variety of biological modifiers including osteoclast-activating
factors (OAF) and osteoblast (OB) inhibitory factors produced either directly by 
malignant plasma cells (MPCs) or as a consequence of their interaction with the
bone marrow microenvironment (BMM). Raised levels of OAFs such as receptor
activator of nuclear factor-kappa B ligand (RANKL), macrophage inflammatory
protein 1 alpha, tumour necrosis factor-alpha and interleukin 6 stimulate bone
resorption by recruiting additional osteoclasts. Via opposing mechanisms,
increases in OB inhibitory factors, such as dickkopf-1 (Dkk-1), soluble
frizzled-related protein-3 and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), suppress bone
formation by inhibiting the differentiation and recruitment of OBs. These changes
result in an uncoupling of physiological bone remodelling, leading to myeloma
bone disease (MBD). Moreover, the altered BMM provides a fertile ground for the
growth and survival of MPCs. Current clinical management of MBD is both reactive 
(to pain and fractures) and preventive, with bisphosphonates (BPs) being the
mainstay of pharmacological treatment. However, side effects and uncertainties
associated with BPs warrant the search for more targeted treatments for MBD. This
review will summarize recent developments in understanding the intimate
relationship between MBD and the BMM and the novel ways in which they are being
therapeutically targeted.
SOURCES OF DATA: All data included were sourced and referenced from PubMed.
AREAS OF AGREEMENT: The clinical utility of BP therapy is well established.
However, there is general acknowledgement that BPs are only partially successful 
in the treatment of MBD. The number of skeletal events attributable to myeloma
are reduced by BPs but not totally eliminated. Furthermore, existing damage is
not repaired. It is widely recognized that more effective treatments are needed.
AREAS OF CONTROVERSY: There remains controversy concerning the duration of BP
therapy. Whether denosumab is a viable alternative to BP therapy is also
contested. Many of the new therapeutic strategies discussed are yet to translate 
to clinical practice and demonstrate equal efficacy or superiority to BP therapy.
It also remains controversial whether reported anti-tumour effects of
bone-modulating therapies are clinically significant.
GROWING POINTS: The potential clinical utility of bone anabolic therapies
including agents such as anti-Dkk-1, anti-sclerostin and anti-HGF is becoming
increasingly recognized.
AREAS TIMELY FOR DEVELOPING RESEARCH: Further research effectively targeting the 
mediators of MBD, targeting both bone resorption and bone formation, is urgently 
needed. This should translate promptly to clinical trials of combination therapy 
comprising anti-resorptives and bone anabolic therapies to demonstrate efficacy
and improved outcomes over BPs.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25190762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Hum Mol Genet. 2015 Jan 15;24(2):559-71. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu450. Epub 2014 Sep
3.

Association of exome sequences with plasma C-reactive protein levels in >9000
participants.

Schick UM(1), Auer PL(2), Bis JC(3), Lin H(4), Wei P(5), Pankratz N(6), Lange
LA(7), Brody J(3), Stitziel NO(8), Kim DS(9), Carlson CS(1), Fornage M(10),
Haessler J(1), Hsu L(11), Jackson RD(12), Kooperberg C(1), Leal SM(13), Psaty
BM(14), Boerwinkle E(15), Tracy R(16), Ardissino D(17), Shah S(18), Willer C(19),
Loos R(20), Melander O(21), Mcpherson R(22), Hovingh K(23), Reilly M(24), Watkins
H(25), Girelli D(26), Fontanillas P(27), Chasman DI(28), Gabriel SB(27), Gibbs
R(29), Nickerson DA(9), Kathiresan S(30), Peters U(1), Dupuis J(31), Wilson
JG(32), Rich SS(33), Morrison AC(5), Benjamin EJ(34), Gross MD(6), Reiner AP;
Cohorts for Heart and Aging Research in Genomic Epidemiology; National Heart,
Lung, and Blood Institute GO Exome Sequencing Project.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA 98109, USA. (2)Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson
Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA School of Public Health,
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Milwaukee, WI 53201, USA. (3)Cardiovascular
Health Research Unit, Department of Medicine, University of Washington, Seattle, 
WA 98101, USA. (4)Department of Medicine, Boston University School of Medicine,
Boston, MA 02118, USA. (5)Human Genetics Center, School of Public Health.
(6)Department of Lab Medicine and Pathology, University of Minnesota,
Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA. (7)Department of Genetics, University of North
Carolina School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA. (8)Cardiovascular
Division, Department of Medicine Division of Statistical Genomics, Washington
University School of Medicine, Saint Louis, MO 63110, USA. (9)Department of
Genome Sciences. (10)Human Genetics Center, School of Public Health Brown
Foundation Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Texas Health Science
Center at Houston, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (11)Public Health Sciences Division,
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA Department of
Biostatistics. (12)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Ohio
State University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA. (13)Center for Statistical Genetics,
Department of Molecular and Human Genetics. (14)Department of Epidemiology,
Cardiovascular Health Research Unit Department of Medicine Department of Health
Services Group Health Research Institute, Group Health Cooperative, Seattle, WA
98101, USA. (15)Human Genetics Center, School of Public Health Human Genome
Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
(16)Departments of Biochemistry and Pathology, University of Vermont, Burlington,
VT 05401, USA. (17)Division of Cardiology, Azienda Ospedaliero-Universitaria di
Parma, Parma, Italy. (18)Division of Cardiology, Department of Medicine and
Center for Human Genetics, Duke University, Durham, NC, USA. (19)Department of
Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiovascular Medicine Department of
Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics Department of Human Genetics,
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan, USA. (20)The Charles Bronfman
Institute for Personalized Medicine The Mindich Child Health and Development
Institute, The Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA. 
(21)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University,
University Hospital Malmö, Malmö, Sweden. (22)Division of Cardiology, University 
of Ottawa Heart Institute, Ottawa, ON, Canada. (23)Department of Vascular
Medicine Department of Experimental Vascular Medicine, Academic Medical Center,
Amsterdam 1105 AZ, The Netherlands. (24)The Institute for Translational Medicine 
and Therapeutics and The Cardiovascular Institute, Perleman School of Medicine at
the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (25)Cardiovascular
Medicine, Radcliffe Department of Medicine Wellcome Trust Centre for Human
Genetics, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. (26)Department of Medicine,
University of Verona School of Medicine, Verona, Italy. (27)Program in Medical
and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142,
USA. (28)Center for Cardiovascular Disease Prevention, Division of Preventative
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 900 Commonwealth Drive, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. (29)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 
77030, USA. (30)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of
MIT and Harvard, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. (31)National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute's,
Boston University's Framingham Heart Study, Framingham, MA 01702, USA Department 
of Biostatistics. (32)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of
Mississippi Medical Center, Jackson, MS 39216, USA and. (33)Center for Public
Health Genomics, Department of Public Health Sciences, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA 22908, USA. (34)Department of Medicine, Boston University
School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118, USA National Heart, Lung, and Blood
Institute's, Boston University's Framingham Heart Study, Framingham, MA 01702,
USA Department of Epidemiology, Boston University School of Public Health,
Boston, MA 02118, USA.

C-reactive protein (CRP) concentration is a heritable systemic marker of
inflammation that is associated with cardiovascular disease risk. Genome-wide
association studies have identified CRP-associated common variants associated in 
~25 genes. Our aims were to apply exome sequencing to (1) assess whether the
candidate loci contain rare coding variants associated with CRP levels and (2)
perform an exome-wide search for rare variants in novel genes associated with CRP
levels. We exome-sequenced 6050 European-Americans (EAs) and 3109
African-Americans (AAs) from the NHLBI-ESP and the CHARGE consortia, and
performed association tests of sequence data with measured CRP levels. In
single-variant tests across candidate loci, a novel rare (minor allele frequency 
= 0.16%) CRP-coding variant (rs77832441-A; p.Thr59Met) was associated with 53%
lower mean CRP levels (P = 2.9 × 10(-6)). We replicated the association of
rs77832441 in an exome array analysis of 11 414 EAs (P = 3.0 × 10(-15)). Despite 
a strong effect on CRP levels, rs77832441 was not associated with
inflammation-related phenotypes including coronary heart disease. We also found
evidence for an AA-specific association of APOE-e2 rs7214 with higher CRP levels.
At the exome-wide significance level (P < 5.0 × 10(-8)), we confirmed
associations for reported common variants of HNF1A, CRP, IL6R and TOMM40-APOE. In
gene-based tests, a burden of rare/lower frequency variation in CRP in EAs (P =
6.8 × 10(-4)) and in retinoic acid receptor-related orphan receptor a (RORA) in
AAs (P = 1.7 × 10(-3)) were associated with CRP levels at the candidate gene
level (P < 2.0 × 10(-3)). This inquiry did not elucidate novel genes, but instead
demonstrated that variants distributed across the allele frequency spectrum
within candidate genes contribute to CRP levels.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4334838
PMID: 25187575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2014 Nov;106(2):e44-8. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2014.08.006. Epub 2014 Aug 12.

Three unreported glucokinase (GCK) missense mutations detected in the screening
of thirty-two Brazilian kindreds for GCK and HNF1A-MODY.

Weinert LS(1), Silveiro SP(1), Giuffrida FM(2), Cunha VT(1), Bulcão C(3),
Calliari LE(4), Della Manna T(5), Kunii IS(6), Dotto RP(6), Dias-da-Silva MR(6), 
Reis AF(7).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Unit-Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Postgraduate
Fellowship Program in Endocrinology-Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Sul
(UFRGS), Porto Alegre, Brazil. (2)Centro de Endocrinologia do Estado da Bahia
(CEDEBA), Salvador, Brazil; Universidade do Estado da Bahia (UNEB), Salvador,
Brazil. (3)Centro de Endocrinologia do Estado da Bahia (CEDEBA), Salvador,
Brazil. (4)Pediatric Endocrinology Unit, Santa Casa de Misericórdia, São Paulo,
Brazil. (5)Instituto da Criança, Hospital das Clínicas, Universidade de São Paulo
(USP), Brazil. (6)Laboratory of Molecular and Translacional Endocrinology,
Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), Brazil. (7)Laboratory of Molecular
and Translacional Endocrinology, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP),
Brazil; Diabetes Center, Universidade Federal de São Paulo (UNIFESP), Brazil.
Electronic address: andrefreis@terra.com.br.

Comment in
    Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2015 Apr;108(1):e3-4.

Thirty-two Brazilian families with MODY phenotype were screened for GCK and HNF1A
mutations. GCK mutations were found in 8 families, all patients with mild
asymptomatic hyperglycaemia; 3 of them are novel: p.Asp365Asn, p.Gly81Asp and
p.Val253Leu. Previously described mutations in HNF1A were found in 2 families.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25174781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2014 Nov;58(11):2133-45. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201400366. Epub
2014 Sep 19.

Curcumin enhances cell-surface LDLR level and promotes LDL uptake through
downregulation of PCSK9 gene expression in HepG2 cells.

Tai MH(1), Chen PK, Chen PY, Wu MJ, Ho CT, Yen JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology and Human Genetics, Tzu Chi University,
Hualien, Taiwan.

SCOPE: Curcumin has been demonstrated as having numerous desirable
characteristics, such as antioxidant, anti-inflammatory, and antiatherogenic
activities. We report the hypocholesterolemic effect and molecular mechanism of
curcumin.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We found that curcumin enhanced LDL receptor (LDLR) level on
the cell surface, as well as LDLR activity; however, LDLR transcription and mRNA 
stability were not affected. Furthermore, we found that proprotein convertase
subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9) gene was downregulated at the transcriptional
level by curcumin, leading to an increase in LDL uptake in HepG2 cells. The
curcumin-responsive element of the PCSK9 promoter, a binding site for hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 1a (HNF-1a), was also identified. We demonstrated that curcumin
reduced the nuclear abundance of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a, resulting in its
attenuated interaction with the PCSK9 promoter and leading to a downregulation of
PCSK9 expression. Finally, we showed that curcumin decreased the statin-induced
PCSK9 expression and potentially synergized with statin administration.
CONCLUSION: Current results indicate that curcumin suppression of PCSK9
expression is associated with increases in cell-surface LDLR and LDLR activity in
hepatic cells and it acts in a molecular mechanism that is distinct from the
statins. Curcumin exhibits hypolipidemic activity and may serve as a useful
supplement to statin treatment for hypercholesterolemia.

© 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25164566  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 19;9(8):e104452. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0104452.
eCollection 2014.

Gene-specific function prediction for non-synonymous mutations in monogenic
diabetes genes.

Li Q(1), Liu X(2), Gibbs RA(3), Boerwinkle E(4), Polychronakos C(1), Qu HQ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine Genetics Lab, The McGill University Health Center (Montreal
Children's Hospital), Montréal, Québec, Canada. (2)Human Genetics Center,
Division of Epidemiology, Human Genetics and Environmental Sciences, The
University of Texas School of Public Health, Houston, Texas, United States of
America. (3)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas, United States of America; Department of Molecular and Human Genetics,
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (4)Human
Genetics Center, Division of Epidemiology, Human Genetics and Environmental
Sciences, The University of Texas School of Public Health, Houston, Texas, United
States of America; Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America.

The rapid progress of genomic technologies has been providing new opportunities
to address the need of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) molecular
diagnosis. However, whether a new mutation causes MODY can be questionable. A
number of in silico methods have been developed to predict functional effects of 
rare human mutations. The purpose of this study is to compare the performance of 
different bioinformatics methods in the functional prediction of nonsynonymous
mutations in each MODY gene, and provides reference matrices to assist the
molecular diagnosis of MODY. Our study showed that the prediction scores by
different methods of the diabetes mutations were highly correlated, but were more
complimentary than replacement to each other. The available in silico methods for
the prediction of diabetes mutations had varied performances across different
genes. Applying gene-specific thresholds defined by this study may be able to
increase the performance of in silico prediction of disease-causing mutations.

PMCID: PMC4138110
PMID: 25136813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. J Immunol. 2014 Sep 15;193(6):2784-91. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400465. Epub 2014
Aug 15.

Differences in the transduction of canonical Wnt signals demarcate effector and
memory CD8 T cells with distinct recall proliferation capacity.

Boudousquié C(1), Danilo M(1), Pousse L(1), Jeevan-Raj B(1), Angelov GS(1),
Chennupati V(2), Zehn D(2), Held W(3).

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Center for Cancer Research, Department of Oncology, University of
Lausanne, 1066 Epalinges, Switzerland; (2)Swiss Vaccine Research Institute,
Lausanne University Hospital, 1066 Epalinges, Switzerland; and Division of
Immunology and Allergy, Department of Medicine, Lausanne University Hospital,
1066 Epalinges, Switzerland. (3)Ludwig Center for Cancer Research, Department of 
Oncology, University of Lausanne, 1066 Epalinges, Switzerland;
Werner.Held@licr.unil.ch.

Protection against reinfection is mediated by Ag-specific memory CD8 T cells,
which display stem cell-like function. Because canonical Wnt (Wingless/Int1)
signals critically regulate renewal versus differentiation of adult stem cells,
we evaluated Wnt signal transduction in CD8 T cells during an immune response to 
acute infection with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus. Whereas naive CD8 T
cells efficiently transduced Wnt signals, at the peak of the primary response to 
infection only a fraction of effector T cells retained signal transduction and
the majority displayed strongly reduced Wnt activity. Reduced Wnt signaling was
in part due to the downregulation of Tcf-1, one of the nuclear effectors of the
pathway, and coincided with progress toward terminal differentiation. However,
the correlation between low and high Wnt levels with short-lived and memory
precursor effector cells, respectively, was incomplete. Adoptive transfer studies
showed that low and high Wnt signaling did not influence cell survival but that
Wnt high effectors yielded memory cells with enhanced proliferative potential and
stronger protective capacity. Likewise, following adoptive transfer and
rechallenge, memory cells with high Wnt levels displayed increased recall
expansion, compared with memory cells with low Wnt signaling, which were
preferentially effector-like memory cells, including tissue-resident memory
cells. Thus, canonical Wnt signaling identifies CD8 T cells with enhanced
proliferative potential in part independent of commonly used cell surface markers
to discriminate effector and memory T cell subpopulations. Interventions that
maintain Wnt signaling may thus improve the formation of functional CD8 T cell
memory during vaccination.

Copyright © 2014 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMID: 25127860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Pediatr Diabetes. 2015 May;16(3):227-33. doi: 10.1111/pedi.12150. Epub 2014 Aug
1.

Identifying monogenic diabetes in a pediatric cohort with presumed type 1
diabetes.

Gandica RG(1), Chung WK, Deng L, Goland R, Gallagher MP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Metabolism, Columbia
University Medical Center, New York, NY 10032, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Monogenic diabetes (MD) is rare and can often be confused with type 1 
diabetes (T1D) in a pediatric cohort. We sought to determine clinical criteria
that could optimally identify candidates for genetic testing of two common forms 
of MD that alter therapy: glucokinase (GCK) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha
(HNF1a).
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We performed a retrospective chart review of 939
patients with a presumed diagnosis of T1D, 6 months-20 yr of age, and identified 
four clinical criteria that were unusual for T1D and could warrant further
evaluation for MD: (i) negative pancreatic autoantibodies, (ii) evidence of
prolonged endogenous insulin production, or (iii) strong family history of
diabetes in multiple generations. One hundred and twenty-one patients were
identified as having one or more of these high-risk clinical criteria and were
offered screening for mutations in GCK and HNF1a; 58 consented for genetic
testing.
RESULTS: Of 58 patients with presumed T1D who underwent genetic testing, four
were found to have GCK and one had HNF1a. No patients with only one high-risk
feature were found to have MD. Of 10 patients who had two or more high risk
criteria, five had MD (50%).
CONCLUSION: A high frequency of MD from mutations in GCK/HNF1a may be identified 
among pediatric diabetic patients originally considered to have T1D by performing
genetic testing on those patients with multiple clinical risk factors for MD.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4767163
PMID: 25082184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Ann Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Jun;19(2):57-68. doi:
10.6065/apem.2014.19.2.57. Epub 2014 Jun 30.

Congenital hyperinsulinism: current status and future perspectives.

Yorifuji T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Children's Medical
Center, Osaka City General Hospital, Osaka, Japan.

The diagnosis and treatment of congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) have made a
remarkable progress over the past 20 years and, currently, it is relatively rare 
to see patients who are left with severe psychomotor delay. The improvement was
made possible by the recent developments in the understanding of the molecular
and pathological basis of CHI. Known etiologies include inactivating mutations of
the KATP channel genes (ABCC8 and KCNJ11) and HNF4A, HNF1A, HADH, and UCP2 or
activating mutations of GLUD1, GCK, and SLC16A1. The understanding of the focal
form of KATP channel CHI and its detection by (18)F-fluoro-L-DOPA positron
emission tomography have revolutionized the management of CHI, and many patients 
can be cured without postoperative diabetes mellitus. The incidence of the focal 
form appears to be higher in Asian countries; therefore, the establishment of
treatment systems is even more important in this population. In addition to
diazoxide or long-term subcutaneous infusion of octreotide or glucagon,
long-acting octreotide or lanreotide have also been used successfully until
spontaneous remission. Because of these medications, near-total pancreatectomy is
less often performed even for the diazoxide-unresponsive diffuse form of CHI.
Other promising medications include pasireotide, small-molecule correctors such
as sulfonylurea or carbamazepine, GLP1 receptor antagonists, or mammalian target 
of rapamycin inhibitors. Unsolved questions in this field include the
identification of the remaining genes responsible for CHI, the mechanisms leading
to transient CHI, and the mechanisms responsible for the spontaneous remission of
CHI. This article reviews recent developments and hypothesis regarding these
questions.

PMCID: PMC4114053
PMID: 25077087  [PubMed]


139. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2014 Aug;138(8):1090-7. doi: 10.5858/arpa.2013-0183-RA.

Update on the new classification of hepatic adenomas: clinical, molecular, and
pathologic characteristics.

Dhingra S(1), Fiel MI.

Author information: 
(1)From the Lillian and Henry M. Stratton-Hans Popper Department of Pathology,
Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.

CONTEXT: Hepatic adenoma is an uncommon, benign, hepatic neoplasm that typically 
occurs in women of child-bearing age, often with a history of long-term use of
oral contraceptive drugs. This is usually detected as an incidental mass lesion
in a noncirrhotic liver during imaging studies. Pathologic evaluation by needle
core biopsy remains the gold standard for diagnosis. Molecular studies have
revealed that hepatic adenomas involve unique molecular pathways that are
distinct from hepatocellular carcinoma. Based on these studies, a French
collaborative group has recently proposed a molecular-pathologic classification
for hepatic adenomas. In addition, advances in molecular studies have led to
reclassification of the "telangiectatic variant of focal nodular hyperplasia" as 
"hepatic adenoma, inflammatory subtype."
OBJECTIVE: To review the proposed, new classification of hepatic adenoma and the 
changes in diagnostic workup in light of the above-mentioned developments.
DATA SOURCES: Review of published literature and illustrations from clinical case
material.
CONCLUSIONS: Definitive diagnosis of liver mass lesion on needle core biopsies
has a decisive role in clinical management. With the advent of the new
classification of hepatic adenomas and its prognostic implications, it is vital
for pathologists to be aware of the morphologic features seen in different
subtypes and the available diagnostic tools, such as immunohistochemistry, to
help identify the correct subtype.

PMID: 25076298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. PLoS One. 2014 Jul 28;9(7):e103304. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0103304.
eCollection 2014.

Silencing of hypoxia-inducible factor-1ß induces anti-tumor effects in hepatoma
cell lines under tumor hypoxia.

Choi SH(1), Chung AR(1), Kang W(2), Park JY(2), Lee MS(3), Hwang SW(3), Kim do
Y(2), Kim SU(2), Ahn SH(4), Kim S(5), Han KH(4).

Author information: 
(1)Brain Korea 21 plus project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Yonsei Liver Cancer Special Clinic, Yonsei
University Health System, Seoul, Korea; Liver Cirrhosis Clinical Research Center,
Yonsei University Health System, Seoul, Korea. (3)Department of Premed, Yonsei
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (4)Brain Korea 21 plus project for 
Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Department 
of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Yonsei
Liver Cancer Special Clinic, Yonsei University Health System, Seoul, Korea; Liver
Cirrhosis Clinical Research Center, Yonsei University Health System, Seoul,
Korea. (5)Brain Korea 21 plus project for Medical Science, Yonsei University
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Liver Cirrhosis Clinical Research Center,
Yonsei University Health System, Seoul, Korea.

Dimerization of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 beta (HIF-1ß) [aryl hydrocarbon
receptor nuclear translocator (ARNT)] with HIF-1a is involved in various aspects 
of cancer biology, including proliferation and survival under hypoxic conditions.
We investigated the in vitro mechanism by which silencing of HIF-1ß leads to the 
suppression of tumor cell growth and cellular functions. Various hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) cell lines (Huh-7, Hep3B, and HepG2) were transfected with small 
interfering RNA (siRNA) against HIF-1ß (siHIF-1ß) and cultured under hypoxic
conditions (1% O2 for 24 h). The expression levels of HIF-1ß, HIF-1a, and growth 
factors were examined by immunoblotting. Tumor growth was measured using the
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide assay, and tumor
activity was measured by terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick end
labeling, tumor cell invasion, and migration assays. Under hypoxic conditions,
silencing of HIF-1ß expression suppressed tumor cell growth and regulated the
expression of tumor growth-related factors, such as vascular endothelial growth
factor, epidermal growth factor, and hepatocyte growth factor. Suppression of
tumor cell invasion and migration was also demonstrated in HIF-1ß-silenced HCC
cell lines. Silencing of HIF-1ß expression may induce anti-tumor effects under
hypoxic conditions in HCC cell lines.

PMCID: PMC4113399
PMID: 25068796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Immunol. 2014 Sep 1;193(5):2512-8. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1400588. Epub 2014 Jul
25.

Acute and chronic effects of IL-22 on acetaminophen-induced liver injury.

Feng D(1), Wang Y(1), Wang H(1), Weng H(2), Kong X(3), Martin-Murphy BV(4), Li
Y(1), Park O(1), Dooley S(2), Ju C(4), Gao B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Liver Diseases, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892; (2)Medical Clinic,
Faculty of Medicine at Mannheim, University of Heidelberg, Mannheim 68167,
Germany; (3)School of Biomedical Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University,
Shanghai 200030, China; Med-X Research Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, 
Shanghai 200030, China; and. (4)Skaggs School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Colorado Anschutz Medical Campus, Aurora, CO 80045.
(5)Laboratory of Liver Diseases, National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892; bgao@mail.nih.gov.

Acetaminophen (APAP)-induced liver injury (AILI) accounts for half of the acute
liver failure cases in the United States. A better understanding of the
underlying mechanisms of AILI is necessary for the development of novel
antidotes. We found that pretreatment with IL-22 protected mice from
APAP-mediated hepatotoxicity. The protection was dependent on STAT3, as IL-22
failed to reduce APAP hepatotoxicity in liver-specific STAT3 knockout mice. In
contrast to the acute exposure to IL-22, the endogenous chronic overexpression of
IL-22 in IL-22 transgenic (TG) mice or IL-22 adenovirus treatment for 6 wk
resulted in a markedly increased susceptibility to AILI. Furthermore, the hepatic
expression levels of cytochrome 2E1 (Cyp2E1) and Cyp1A2 were much higher in
IL-22TG mice. Ablation of Cyp2E1 but not hepatic STAT3 abolished AILI and
protein-adduct formation in IL-22TG mice. Finally, hepatic expression of HNF-1a, 
a transcriptional factor that is known to control Cyp2E1 expression, was elevated
in IL-22TG mice compared with wild-type mice. Upregulation of hepatic Cyp2E1 was 
only observed in mice with constitutive overexpression of IL-22 but not with
short-term treatment with one dose of IL-22 or multiple doses of IL-22 for 2 wk. 
In conclusion, short-term acute IL-22 exposure protects mice against AILI through
STAT3 activation; however, chronic constitutive overexpression of IL-22
exacerbates AILI by increasing Cyp2E1 and toxic reactive APAP metabolite
production. These findings may not only enhance our understanding of the effects 
of chronic inflammation on AILI in patients with liver disease, but are also
helpful to identify novel therapeutic targets for the treatment of AILI.

PMCID: PMC4135042
PMID: 25063867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Dis Markers. 2014;2014:291419. doi: 10.1155/2014/291419. Epub 2014 Jun 26.

A new susceptibility locus for myocardial infarction, hypertension, type 2
diabetes mellitus, and dyslipidemia on chromosome 12q24.

Wakil SM(1), Muiya NP(1), Tahir AI(1), Al-Najai M(1), Baz B(1), Andres E(1),
Mazhar N(1), Al Tassan N(1), Alshahid M(2), Meyer BF(1), Dzimiri N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Department, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre,
Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia. (2)King Faisal Heart Institute, King Faisal
Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia. (3)Genetics 
Department, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh 11211,
Saudi Arabia ; Cardiovascular and Pharmacogenomics Unit, MBC-03-05, Genetics
Department, King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, P.O. Box 3354,
Riyadh 11211, Saudi Arabia.

We examined the role of hepatic nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1a) gene polymorphism 
on coronary artery disease (CAD) traits in 4631 Saudi angiographed individuals
(2419 CAD versus 2212 controls) using TaqMan assay on ABI Prism 7900HT sequence
detection system. Following adjustment for confounders, the rs2259820_CC (1.19
(1.01-1.42); P = 0.041), rs2464196_TT (1.19 (1.00-1.40); P = 0.045), and
rs2259816_T (1.13 (1.01-1.26); P = 0.031) were associated with MI. The
rs2259820_T (1.14 (1.03-1.26); P = 0.011) and rs2464196_C (1.12 (1.02-1.24); P = 
0.024) were associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), while the
rs2393791_T (1.14 (1.01-1.28); P = 0.032), rs7310409_G (1.16 (1.03-1.30); P =
0.013), and rs2464196_AG+GG (1.25 (1.05-1.49); P = 0.012) were implicated in
hypertension. Hypertriglyceridemia was linked to the rs2393791_T (1.14
(1.02-1.27); P = 0.018), rs7310409_G (1.12 (1.01-1.25); P = 0.031), rs1169310_G
(1.15 (1.04-1.28); P = 0.010), and rs1169313_CT+TT (1.24 (1.06-1.45); P = 0.008) 
and high low density lipoprotein-cholesterol levels were associated with
rs2259820_T (1.23 (1.07-1.41); P = 0.004), rs2464196_T (1.22 (1.06-1.39); P =
0.004), and rs2259816_T (1.18 (1.02-1.36); P = 0.023). A 7-mer haplotype CATATAC 
(<U+03C7>(2) = 7.50; P = 0.0062), constructed from the studied SNPs, was associated with
MI, and CATATA implicated in T2DM (<U+03C7>(2) = 3.94; P = 0.047). Hypertriglyceridemia 
was linked to TGCGGG (<U+03C7>(2) = 4.26; P = 0.039), and obesity to ACGGGT (<U+03C7>(2) =
5.04; P = 0.025). Our results suggest that the HNF1a is a common susceptibility
gene for MI, T2DM, hypertension, and dyslipidemia.

PMCID: PMC4098619
PMID: 25057215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2015 Apr;82(4):533-42. doi: 10.1111/cen.12541. Epub 2014
Aug 7.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young in India - a distinctive mutation pattern
identified through targeted next-generation sequencing.

Chapla A(1), Mruthyunjaya MD, Asha HS, Varghese D, Varshney M, Vasan SK,
Venkatesan P, Nair V, Mathai S, Paul TV, Thomas N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, Christian Medical
College, Vellore, India.

OBJECTIVE: To establish and utilize a Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS)-based
strategy to screen for maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) gene mutations
in subjects with early-onset diabetes.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) genetic testing
was carried out in 80 subjects of Asian Indian origin with young onset diabetes
to identify mutations in a comprehensive panel of ten MODY genes. A novel
multiplex polymerase chain reaction (PCR)-based target enrichment was
established, followed by NGS on the Ion Torrent Personal Genome Machine (PGM).
All the mutations and rare variants were confirmed by Sanger sequencing.
RESULTS: We identified mutations in 11 (19%) of the 56 clinically diagnosed MODY 
subjects and seven of these mutations were novel. The identified mutations
include p.H241Q, p.E59Q, c.-162G>A 5' UTR in NEUROD1, p.V169I cosegregating with 
c.493-4G>A and c.493-20C>T, p.E271K in HNF4A, p.A501S in HNF1A, p.E440X in GCK,
p.V177M in PDX1, p.L92F in HNF1B and p.R31L in PAX4 genes. Interestingly, two
patients with NEUROD1 mutation were also positive for the p.E224K mutation in
PDX1 gene. These patients with coexisting NEUROD1-PDX1 mutations showed a marked 
reduction in glucose-induced insulin secretion. All 24 subjects who had not met
the clinical criteria of MODY were negative for the mutations. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first report of PDX1, HNF1B, NEUROD1 and PAX4 mutations
from India.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiplex PCR coupled with NGS provides a rapid, cost-effective and 
accurate method for comprehensive parallelized genetic testing of MODY. When
compared to earlier reports, we have identified a higher frequency and a novel
digenic mutation pattern involving NEUROD1 and PDX1 genes.

© 2014 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25041077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2014 Dec;38(6):e115-6. doi:
10.1016/j.clinre.2014.03.011. Epub 2014 Jun 26.

Congenital hepatic fibrosis with multiple HNF1a hepatocellular adenomas.

Paradis V(1), Bioulac-Sage P(2), Balabaud C(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Beaujon Hospital, 92118 Clichy, France. Electronic
address: valerieprds@gmail.com. (2)GREF/Inserm U1053, service de pathologie,
hôpital Pellegrin, CHU Bordeaux, université de Bordeaux, 33076 Bordeaux, France. 
Electronic address: paulette.bioulac-sage@u-bordeaux2.fr. (3)GREF/Inserm U1053,
université de Bordeaux, 33076 Bordeaux, France. Electronic address:
charles.balabaud@u-bordeaux2.fr.

PMID: 24981780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Br J Biomed Sci. 2014;71(2):84-5.

Comparability of high-sensitivity CRP methods to detect maturity-onset diabetes
of the young due to HNF1A mutations.

Shah N, Thanabalasingham G, Owen KR, James TJ.

PMID: 24974685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 25;9(6):e100134. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0100134.
eCollection 2014.

Direct reprogramming of human fibroblasts to hepatocyte-like cells by synthetic
modified mRNAs.

Simeonov KP(1), Uppal H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Investigative Toxicology, Genentech, South San Francisco,
California, United States of America.

Direct reprogramming by overexpression of defined transcription factors is a
promising new method of deriving useful but rare cell types from readily
available ones. While the method presents numerous advantages over induced
pluripotent stem (iPS) cell approaches, a focus on murine conversions and a
reliance on retroviral vectors limit potential human applications. Here we
address these concerns by demonstrating direct conversion of human fibroblasts to
hepatocyte-like cells via repeated transfection with synthetic modified mRNAs.
Hepatic induction was achieved with as little as three transcription factor mRNAs
encoding HNF1A plus any two of the factors, FOXA1, FOXA3, or HNF4A in the
presence of an optimized hepatic growth medium. We show that the absolute
necessity of exogenous HNF1A mRNA delivery is explained both by the factor's
inability to be activated by any other factors screened and its simultaneous
ability to strongly induce expression of other master hepatic transcription
factors. Further analysis of factor interaction showed that a series of robust
cross-activations exist between factors that induce a hepatocyte-like state.
Transcriptome and small RNA sequencing during conversion toward hepatocyte-like
cells revealed global preferential activation of liver genes and miRNAs over
those associated with other endodermal tissues, as well as downregulation of
fibroblast-associated genes. Induced hepatocyte-like cells also exhibited hepatic
morphology and protein expression. Our data provide insight into the process by
which direct hepatic reprogramming occurs in human cells. More importantly, by
demonstrating that it is possible to achieve direct reprogramming without the use
of retroviral gene delivery, our results supply a crucial step toward realizing
the potential of direct reprogramming in regenerative medicine.

PMCID: PMC4070971
PMID: 24963715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Nat Immunol. 2014 Jul;15(7):593-4. doi: 10.1038/ni.2927.

New ingredients for brewing CD4(+)T (cells): TCF-1 and LEF-1.

Mookerjee-Basu J(1), Kappes DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Comment on
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Jul;15(7):646-56.

PMID: 24940944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 May 8;2(5):707-20. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.04.001.
eCollection 2014.

Temporal perturbation of the Wnt signaling pathway in the control of cell
reprogramming is modulated by TCF1.

Aulicino F(1), Theka I(1), Ombrato L(1), Lluis F(1), Cosma MP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain ;
Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), 08003 Barcelona, Spain. (2)Centre for Genomic
Regulation (CRG), Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain ; Universitat Pompeu
Fabra (UPF), 08003 Barcelona, Spain ; Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis
Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluis Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain.

Cyclic activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway controls cell
fusion-mediated somatic cell reprogramming. TCFs belong to a family of
transcription factors that, in complex with ß-catenin, bind and transcriptionally
regulate Wnt target genes. Here, we show that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling needs to be
off during the early reprogramming phases of mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs)
into iPSCs. In MEFs undergoing reprogramming, senescence genes are repressed and 
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition is favored. This is correlated with a
repressive activity of TCF1, which contributes to the silencing of Wnt/ß-catenin 
signaling at the onset of reprogramming. In contrast, the Wnt pathway needs to be
active in the late reprogramming phases to achieve successful reprogramming. In
conclusion, continued activation or inhibition of the Wnt/ß-catenin signaling
pathway is detrimental to the reprogramming of MEFs; instead, temporal
perturbation of the pathway is essential for efficient reprogramming, and the
"Wnt-off" state can be considered an early reprogramming marker.

PMCID: PMC4050487
PMID: 24936456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Diabetes Metab. 2015 Feb;41(1):91-4. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2014.04.009. Epub 2014
Jun 2.

Associations between the common HNF1A gene variant p.I27L (rs1169288) and risk of
type 2 diabetes mellitus are influenced by weight.

Morita K(1), Saruwatari J(1), Tanaka T(1), Oniki K(1), Kajiwara A(1), Otake K(2),
Ogata Y(2), Nakagawa K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, 5-1, Oe-honmachi, Chuo-ku, 862-0973 Kumamoto,
Japan. (2)Japanese Red Cross Kumamoto Health Care Center, Kumamoto, Japan.
(3)Division of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Kumamoto University, 5-1, Oe-honmachi, Chuo-ku, 862-0973 Kumamoto,
Japan; Center for Clinical Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto, Japan. Electronic address: kazukon@gpo.kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

AIM: The common variants p.I27L (rs1169288), p.A98V (rs1800574) and p.S487N
(rs2464196) of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-a (HNF1A) gene have been
inconsistently associated with impaired glucose tolerance and/or an increased
risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). The present study aimed to investigate
whether these associations are affected by weight.
METHODS: A cross-sectional analysis was conducted among 861 Japanese subjects
(males: 65.5%; 61.8±12.3years) attending a health-screening programme.
Interactive effects between HNF1A variants and weight status on risk of T2DM or
dysglycaemic status were determined.
RESULTS: The 27L variant carriers were at higher risk of T2DM and dysglycaemic
status than non-carriers, but only in normal-weight subjects [odds ratio (OR):
2.04, P=0.03 and OR: 2.56, P=0.01, respectively]. An interactive effect of the
p.I27L (rs1169288) variant and weight status on the risk of dysglycaemic status
was found (P=0.04). Age, but not body mass index (BMI), was a risk factor for
dysglycaemic status in the 27L carriers (OR: 1.05, P=0.0003), whereas BMI was a
risk factor in non-carriers (OR: 1.23, P=0.008). No carriers of 98V were
identified, and 487N was not associated with either T2DM or dysglycaemic status
in our study population.
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that the HNF1A p.I27L (rs1169288) variant may 
be a significant risk factor of T2DM in normal-weight subjects and that earlier
inconsistent results may have been due, in part, to subjects' weight status.
Further investigations in larger cohorts are needed to verify these findings.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24933231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Diabetes Care. 2014 Jul;37(7):1797-805. doi: 10.2337/dc13-3007.

Glucose-lowering effects and low risk of hypoglycemia in patients with
maturity-onset diabetes of the young when treated with a GLP-1 receptor agonist: 
a double-blind, randomized, crossover trial.

Østoft SH(1), Bagger JI(2), Hansen T(3), Pedersen O(4), Faber J(5), Holst JJ(6), 
Knop FK(2), Vilsbøll T(7).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Division, Department of Medicine, Gentofte Hospital,
University of Copenhagen, Hellerup, DenmarkDepartment of Biomedical Sciences,
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkNNF
Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark s.ostoft@dadlnet.dk. (2)Diabetes Research Division, Department of
Medicine, Gentofte Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Hellerup,
DenmarkDepartment of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University 
of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkNNF Center for Basic Metabolic Research,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)NNF Center for Basic Metabolic 
Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkFaculty of Health
Sciences, University of Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. (4)NNF Center for
Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(5)Department of Medicine, Herlev Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Herlev,
DenmarkFaculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.
(6)Department of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkNNF Center for Basic Metabolic Research,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (7)Diabetes Research Division,
Department of Medicine, Gentofte Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Hellerup,
DenmarkFaculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

OBJECTIVE: The most common form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY),
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a (HNF1A diabetes: MODY3) is often treated with
sulfonylureas that confer a high risk of hypoglycemia. We evaluated treatment
with GLP-1 receptor agonists (GLP-1RAs) in patients with HNF1A diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Sixteen patients with HNF1A diabetes (8 women; mean 
age 39 years [range 23-67 years]; BMI 24.9 ± 0.5 kg/m(2) [mean ± SEM]; fasting
plasma glucose [FPG] 9.9 ± 0.9 mmol/L; HbA1c 6.4 ± 0.2% [47 ± 3 mmol/mol])
received 6 weeks of treatment with a GLP-1RA (liraglutide) and placebo (tablets),
as well as a sulfonylurea (glimepiride) and placebo (injections), in randomized
order, in a double-blind, crossover trial. Glimepiride was up-titrated once
weekly in a treat-to-target manner; liraglutide was up-titrated once weekly to
1.8 mg once daily. At baseline and at the end of each treatment period a
standardized liquid meal test was performed, including a 30-min light bicycle
test.
RESULTS: FPG decreased during the treatment periods (-1.6 ± 0.5 mmol/L
liraglutide [P = 0.012] and -2.8 ± 0.7 mmol/L glimepiride [P = 0.003]), with no
difference between treatments (P = 0.624). Postprandial plasma glucose (PG)
responses (total area under the curve) were lower with both glimepiride (2,136 ± 
292 min × mmol/L) and liraglutide (2,624 ± 340 min × mmol/L) compared with
baseline (3,127 ± 291 min × mmol/L; P < 0.001, glimepiride; P = 0.017,
liraglutide), with no difference between treatments (P = 0.121). Eighteen
episodes of hypoglycemia (PG =3.9 mmol/L) occurred during glimepiride treatment
and one during liraglutide treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Six weeks of treatment with glimepiride or liraglutide lowered FPG
and postprandial glucose excursions in patients with HNF1A diabetes. The
glucose-lowering effect was greater with glimepiride at the expense of a higher
risk of exclusively mild hypoglycemia.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association.

PMID: 24929431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Horm Res Paediatr. 2014;82(1):38-43. doi: 10.1159/000360476. Epub 2014 Jun 11.

Williams-beuren syndrome is a genetic disorder associated with impaired glucose
tolerance and diabetes in childhood and adolescence: new insights from a
longitudinal study.

Stagi S(1), Lapi E, Cecchi C, Chiarelli F, D'Avanzo MG, Seminara S, de Martino M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Sciences, University of Florence, Chieti, Italy.

BACKGROUND: In adults with Williams-Beuren syndrome (WBS), a common endocrine
abnormality is type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) or impaired glucose tolerance
(IGT). However, few and sporadic data are available in children, adolescents, and
young adults with WBS.
AIM: To evaluate the frequency of IGT and T2DM in a cohort of children and young 
patients with WBS.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We longitudinally evaluated 27 patients (9 males and 18
females, median age at study onset 13.6 years) with WBS. The median follow-up was
3.6 years. Variables of insulin resistance and ß-cell function were evaluated in 
all subjects using an oral glucose tolerance test. The homeostasis model
assessment (HOMA) of insulin resistance and the Matsuda index of insulin
sensitivity were calculated. The study of the GCK and HNF1<U+0391> genes was performed
in patients with glucose metabolism abnormalities. 45 age- and sex-matched
healthy subjects and 51 age-, sex- and BMI-matched subjects were recruited as two
control groups.
RESULTS: Considering nutritional status, 7 (25.9%) patients were obese, 9 (33.3%)
overweight, and 11 (40.8%) normal-weight. One (3.1%) patient had acanthosis
nigricans. IGT was diagnosed in 7 (25.9%) WBS patients and T2DM in 3 (11.1%).
Considering all WBS patients, the median value of HOMA was 5.23 (range
2.93-14.89; insulin 24.73 ± 14.67 µU/ml; glucose 104.98 ± 16.06 mg/dl).
Considering BMI values, HOMA was 11.00 (range 6.53-12.56), 5.64 (range
3.54-7.95), and 4.54 (range 3.21-5.43), and insulin was 34.53 ± 6.84, 22.76 ±
8.91, and 19.47 ± 6.01 µU/ml in obese, overweight, and normal-weight WBS
patients, respectively. Comparing the results with the two control groups, WBS
patients showed higher insulin values than healthy controls (p < 0.001), but
similar values as the BMI-matched control group (p = n.s.). However, WBS patients
showed significantly higher values of glycemia (healthy control group, p < 0.001;
BMI-matched control group, p < 0.05) and HOMA (healthy control group, p < 0.001; 
BMI-matched control group, p < 0.05) than the two control groups. Finally, among 
WBS patients there was a higher number of subjects with IGT and T2DM than among
healthy controls (p < 0.0001) and the BMI-matched control group (p = 0.0002).
CONCLUSION: Our data strongly suggest that IGT and T2DM may be frequently
discovered in children, adolescents, and young adults with WBS. WBS should be
included among the genetic syndromes associated with T2DM. Further studies are
necessary to evaluate the etiopathogenesis of this aspect.

PMID: 24925026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 2014 Oct;66(8):377-82. doi: 10.1016/j.etp.2014.05.005. Epub
2014 Jun 7.

PCB 126 perturbs hypoxia-induced HIF-1a activity and glucose consumption in human
HepG2 cells.

Vorrink SU(1), Sarsour EH(2), Olivier AK(3), Robertson LW(4), Goswami PC(1),
Domann FE(5).

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Human Toxicology, The University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (2)Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of 
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, The University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA, USA. (4)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Human Toxicology,
The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Occupational and
Environmental Health, The University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA.
(5)Interdisciplinary Graduate Program in Human Toxicology, The University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Radiation Oncology, The University of
Iowa, Iowa City, IA, USA; Department of Pathology, The University of Iowa, Iowa
City, IA, USA. Electronic address: frederick-domann@uiowa.edu.

Aerobic organisms strongly depend on the availability of oxygen for respiration
and countless other metabolic processes to maintain cellular homeostasis. Under
certain conditions, the amount of available oxygen can be limited. To support
survival in environments with limited oxygen supply, hypoxia-inducible factors
(HIFs) reprogram vital components of cellular metabolism. HIF-1a is an important 
mediator of acute and adaptive responses to hypoxic stress. Interestingly, the
heterodimeric partner required by HIF-1a to function as transcription factor,
known as ARNT, is also an essential part of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
transcription factor complex. Thus, via ARNT a crosstalk exists between these two
pathways that might affect HIF-1a-mediated processes. In this study we sought to 
assess the effect of the AhR agonist PCB 126 on HIF-1a activity as well as on
HIF-1a-regulated targets involved in cellular metabolism in human HepG2 cells.
Our results show that PCB 126 reduced HIF-1a localization to the nucleus.
Furthermore, in an in vivo setting, rats exposed to parenteral PCB 126 also
displayed reduced hepatocyte nuclear localization of HIF-1a. Additionally, HepG2 
cells exposed to PCB 126 displayed reduced hypoxia-regulated HRE-luciferase
reporter gene expression as well as a reduction in glucose consumption in
conditions of hypoxia. In summary, this study reveals that HIF-1a-regulated
cellular metabolic processes are negatively affected by PCB 126 which might
ultimately affect adaptive responses and cell survival in hypoxic environments.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4143452
PMID: 24916446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. JAMA. 2014 Jun 11;311(22):2305-14. doi: 10.1001/jama.2014.6511.

Association of a low-frequency variant in HNF1A with type 2 diabetes in a Latino 
population.

SIGMA Type 2 Diabetes Consortium, Estrada K(1), Aukrust I(2), Bjørkhaug L(3),
Burtt NP(4), Mercader JM(5), García-Ortiz H(6), Huerta-Chagoya A(7),
Moreno-Macías H(8), Walford G(9), Flannick J(10), Williams AL(11), Gómez-Vázquez 
MJ(12), Fernandez-Lopez JC(6), Martínez-Hernández A(6), Jiménez-Morales S(6),
Centeno-Cruz F(6), Mendoza-Caamal E(6), Revilla-Monsalve C(13), Islas-Andrade
S(13), Córdova EJ(6), Soberón X(6), González-Villalpando ME(14), Henderson E(15),
Wilkens LR(16), Le Marchand L(16), Arellano-Campos O(12), Ordóñez-Sánchez ML(12),
Rodríguez-Torres M(12), Rodríguez-Guillén R(12), Riba L(7), Najmi LA(17), Jacobs 
SB(4), Fennell T(18), Gabriel S(18), Fontanillas P(4), Hanis CL(19), Lehman
DM(20), Jenkinson CP(20), Abboud HE(20), Bell GI(21), Cortes ML(22), Boehnke
M(23), González-Villalpando C(14), Orozco L(6), Haiman CA(15), Tusié-Luna T(24), 
Aguilar-Salinas CA(12), Altshuler D(25), Njølstad PR(3), Florez JC(25), MacArthur
DG(26).

Collaborators: Estrada K, Fernandez-Lopez A, García-Ortiz H, Moreno-Macías H,
Mercader JM, Flannick J, Williams AL, Gómez-Vázquez MJ, Fernandez-Lopez JC, Burtt
NP, Aguilar-Salinas CA, Orozco L, Tusié-Luna T, Altshuler D, Florez JC, MacArthur
DG, García-Ortiz H, Martínez-Hernández A, Centeno-Cruz F, Mendoza-Caamal E,
Revilla-Monsalve C, Islas-Andrade S, Córdova EJ, Soberón X, Orozco L,
González-Villalpando C, González-Villalpando ME, Haiman CA, Henderson BE, Wilkens
LR, Le Marchand L, Arellano-Campos O, Huerta-Chagoya A, Ordóñez-Sánchez ML,
Rodríguez-Torres M, Rodríguez-Guillén R, Riba L, Tusié-Luna T, Aguilar-Salinas
CA, Najmi LA, Aukrust I, Bjørkhaug L, Jacobs SB, Njølstad PR, Burtt NP, Fennell
T, Gabriel S, Flannick J, Fontanillas P, Hanis CL, Lehman DM, Jenkinson CP,
Abboud HE, Bell GI, Florez JC, Altshuler D, Boehnke M, García-Ortiz H,
Martínez-Hernández A, Córdova EJ, Jiménez-Morales S, Centeno-Cruz F,
Mendoza-Caamal E, Revilla-Monsalve C, Islas-Andrade S, Soberón X, Orozco L, Burtt
NP, Cortes ML, Altshuler D, Florez JC, Haiman CA, Aguilar-Salinas CA,
González-Villalpando C, Orozco L, Tusié-Luna T.

Erratum in
    JAMA. 2014 Nov 12:312(18):1932. Jiménez-Morales, Silvia[Added].

IMPORTANCE: Latino populations have one of the highest prevalences of type 2
diabetes worldwide.
OBJECTIVES: To investigate the association between rare protein-coding genetic
variants and prevalence of type 2 diabetes in a large Latino population and to
explore potential molecular and physiological mechanisms for the observed
relationships.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: Whole-exome sequencing was performed on DNA
samples from 3756 Mexican and US Latino individuals (1794 with type 2 diabetes
and 1962 without diabetes) recruited from 1993 to 2013. One variant was further
tested for allele frequency and association with type 2 diabetes in large
multiethnic data sets of 14,276 participants and characterized in experimental
assays.
MAIN OUTCOME AND MEASURES: Prevalence of type 2 diabetes. Secondary outcomes
included age of onset, body mass index, and effect on protein function.
RESULTS: A single rare missense variant (c.1522G>A [p.E508K]) was associated with
type 2 diabetes prevalence (odds ratio [OR], 5.48; 95% CI, 2.83-10.61; P = 4.4 × 
10(-7)) in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-a (HNF1A), the gene responsible for
maturity onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3). This variant was observed in
0.36% of participants without type 2 diabetes and 2.1% of participants with it.
In multiethnic replication data sets, the p.E508K variant was seen only in Latino
patients (n = 1443 with type 2 diabetes and 1673 without it) and was associated
with type 2 diabetes (OR, 4.16; 95% CI, 1.75-9.92; P =<U+2009>.0013). In experimental
assays, HNF-1A protein encoding the p.E508K mutant demonstrated reduced
transactivation activity of its target promoter compared with a wild-type
protein. In our data, carriers and noncarriers of the p.E508K mutation with type 
2 diabetes had no significant differences in compared clinical characteristics,
including age at onset. The mean (SD) age for carriers was 45.3 years (11.2) vs
47.5 years (11.5) for noncarriers (P =<U+2009>.49) and the mean (SD) BMI for carriers
was 28.2 (5.5) vs 29.3 (5.3) for noncarriers (P =<U+2009>.19).
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Using whole-exome sequencing, we identified a single
low-frequency variant in the MODY3-causing gene HNF1A that is associated with
type 2 diabetes in Latino populations and may affect protein function. This
finding may have implications for screening and therapeutic modification in this 
population, but additional studies are required.

PMCID: PMC4425850
PMID: 24915262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Diabetologia. 2014 Sep;57(9):1859-68. doi: 10.1007/s00125-014-3287-8. Epub 2014
Jun 7.

Type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene variants predispose to adult-onset autoimmune
diabetes.

Andersen MK(1), Sterner M, Forsén T, Käräjämäki A, Rolandsson O, Forsblom C,
Groop PH, Lahti K, Nilsson PM, Groop L, Tuomi T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Programs Unit, Diabetes and Obesity, University of Helsinki,
Helsinki, Finland, mette.k.andersen@helsinki.fi.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA) is phenotypically a 
hybrid of type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Genetically LADA is poorly characterised
but does share genetic predisposition with type 1 diabetes. We aimed to improve
the genetic characterisation of LADA and hypothesised that type 2
diabetes-associated gene variants also predispose to LADA, and that the
associations would be strongest in LADA patients with low levels of GAD
autoantibodies (GADA).
METHODS: We assessed 41 type 2 diabetes-associated gene variants in Finnish
(phase I) and Swedish (phase II) patients with LADA (n = 911) or type 1 diabetes 
(n = 406), all diagnosed after the age of 35 years, as well as in non-diabetic
control individuals 40 years or older (n = 4,002).
RESULTS: Variants in the ZMIZ1 (rs12571751, p = 4.1 × 10(-5)) and TCF7L2
(rs7903146, p = 5.8 × 10(-4)) loci were strongly associated with LADA. Variants
in the KCNQ1 (rs2237895, p = 0.0012), HHEX (rs1111875, p = 0.0024 in Finns) and
MTNR1B (rs10830963, p = 0.0039) loci showed the strongest association in patients
with low GADA, supporting the hypothesis that the disease in these patients is
more like type 2 diabetes. In contrast, variants in the KLHDC5 (rs10842994, p =
9.5 × 10(-4) in Finns), TP53INP1 (rs896854, p = 0.005), CDKAL1 (rs7756992, p =
7.0 × 10(-4); rs7754840, p = 8.8 × 10(-4)) and PROX1 (rs340874, p = 0.003) loci
showed the strongest association in patients with high GADA. For type 1 diabetes,
a strong association was seen for MTNR1B (rs10830963, p = 3.2 × 10(-6)) and HNF1A
(rs2650000, p = 0.0012).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: LADA and adult-onset type 1 diabetes share genetic
risk variants with type 2 diabetes, supporting the idea of a hybrid form of
diabetes and distinguishing them from patients with classical young-onset type 1 
diabetes.

PMID: 24906951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Diabet Med. 2014 Jun;31(6):721-7. doi: 10.1111/dme.12416. Epub 2014 Mar 18.

Screening of diabetes of youth for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 mutations:
clinical phenotype of HNF1ß-related maturity-onset diabetes of the young and
HNF1a-related maturity-onset diabetes of the young in Japanese.

Horikawa Y(1), Enya M, Fushimi N, Fushimi Y, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Gifu University, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Gifu, Japan.

AIM: To compare the prevalence and clinical features of HNF1ß-related MODY and
HNF1a-related MODY in Japanese.
METHODS: We enrolled 230 Japanese patients with suspected MODY and examined them 
for HNF1a and HNF1ß mutations. We characterized the clinical features of
HNF1ß-related MODY (HNF1ß-MODY) and HNF1a-related MODY (HNF1a-MODY).
RESULTS: Six patients had HNF1ß mutations, four of which were large gene
deletions and 24 patients had HNF1a mutations, which included one gene deletion. 
The mean fasting plasma glucose level at onset of HNF1ß-MODY was considerably
higher and the age of onset of HNF1ß-MODY was considerably older than they were
for HNF1a-MODY, while the mean BMI and C-peptide index at onset were similar.
Three patients with HNF1ß-MODY were found to have dorsal pancreatic agenesis and 
four of them had whole-gene deletion. Five of the patients with HNF1ß-MODY had
insulin secretion defects and were treated with insulin, and four of these did
not have a parent with overt diabetes.
CONCLUSION: HNF1ß-MODY may present as ß-cell dysfunction in Japanese rather than 
as hyperinsulinaemia, which it does among European/American. This dysfunction
might result from an intrinsically lower capacity for insulin secretion in
Japanese. HNF1ß-MODY has an older age of onset than HNF1a-MODY, which may suggest
lower penetrance of the disease. In addition, HNF1ß-MODY has a broad spectrum of 
clinical manifestations, some of which are detectable by imaging. This may be
helpful in some cases for selecting HNF1ß-MODY candidates for genetic testing.

© 2014 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2014 Diabetes UK.

PMID: 24905847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Diabetes. 2014 Oct;63(10):3557-64. doi: 10.2337/db13-1784. Epub 2014 May 21.

Recessive mutations in PCBD1 cause a new type of early-onset diabetes.

Simaite D(1), Kofent J(2), Gong M(1), Rüschendorf F(3), Jia S(4), Arn P(5),
Bentler K(6), Ellaway C(7), Kühnen P(8), Hoffmann GF(9), Blau N(10), Spagnoli
FM(2), Hübner N(3), Raile K(11).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental and Clinical Research Center, Charité Medical Faculty and
Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany Cardiovascular and
Metabolic Diseases, Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany. 
(2)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Basis of Embryonic Development,
Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin, Germany. (3)Cardiovascular
and Metabolic Diseases, Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine, Berlin,
Germany. (4)Department of Neuroscience, Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular
Medicine, Berlin, Germany. (5)Division of Genetics, Department of Pediatrics,
Nemours Children's Clinic, Jacksonville, FL. (6)Division of Pediatric Genetics
and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota Amplatz
Children's Hospital, Minneapolis, MN. (7)Western Sydney Genetics Program, Royal
Alexandra Hospital for Children, Westmead, New South Wales, Australia.
(8)Institute for Experimental Pediatric Endocrinology, Charité Medical Faculty,
Berlin, Germany. (9)Division of Inborn Metabolic Diseases, Department of General 
Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany. (10)Division of 
Inborn Metabolic Diseases, Department of General Pediatrics, University
Children's Hospital, Heidelberg, Germany Division of Metabolism, University
Children's Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland. (11)Experimental and Clinical Research 
Center, Charité Medical Faculty and Max-Delbrück Center for Molecular Medicine,
Berlin, Germany klemens.raile@charite.de.

Mutations in several genes cause nonautoimmune diabetes, but numerous patients
still have unclear genetic defects, hampering our understanding of the
development of the disease and preventing pathogenesis-oriented treatment. We
used whole-genome sequencing with linkage analysis to study a consanguineous
family with early-onset antibody-negative diabetes and identified a novel
deletion in PCBD1 (pterin-4 a-carbinolamine dehydratase/dimerization cofactor of 
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 a), a gene that was recently proposed as a likely
cause of diabetes. A subsequent reevaluation of patients with mild neonatal
hyperphenylalaninemia due to mutations in PCBD1 from the BIODEF database
identified three additional patients who had developed HNF1A-like diabetes in
puberty, indicating early ß-cell failure. We found that Pcbd1 is expressed in the
developing pancreas of both mouse and Xenopus embryos from early specification
onward showing colocalization with insulin. Importantly, a morpholino-mediated
knockdown in Xenopus revealed that pcbd1 activity is required for the proper
establishment of early pancreatic fate within the endoderm. We provide the first 
genetic evidence that PCBD1 mutations can cause early-onset nonautoimmune
diabetes with features similar to dominantly inherited HNF1A-diabetes. This
condition responds to and can be treated with oral drugs instead of insulin,
which is important clinical information for these patients. Finally, patients at 
risk can be detected through a newborn screening for phenylketonuria.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 24848070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Immunol Res. 2014 Aug;59(1-3):45-55. doi: 10.1007/s12026-014-8545-9.

From inception to output, Tcf1 and Lef1 safeguard development of T cells and
innate immune cells.

Steinke FC(1), Xue HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA, 52242, USA.

Transcription factors have recurring roles during T cell development and
activation. Tcf1 and Lef1 are known to be essential for early stages of thymocyte
maturation. Recent research has revealed several novel aspects of their
functionality. Tcf1 is induced at the very earliest step of specifying
hematopoietic progenitors to the T cell lineage as a key target gene downstream
of Notch activation. In addition to promoting maturation of T-lineage-committed
thymocytes, Tcf1 functions as a tumor suppressor in developing thymocytes, and
this is mediated, paradoxically, by restraining Lef1 expression. After positive
selection, Tcf1 and Lef1 act together to direct CD4(+)CD8(+) double positive
thymocytes to a CD4(+) T cell fate. Although not required for CD8(+) T cell
differentiation, Tcf1 and Lef1 cooperate with Runx factors to achieve stable
silencing of the Cd4 gene in CD8(+) T cells. Tcf1 is also found to have versatile
roles in innate immune cells, which partly mirror its functions in mature T
helper cells. Discrepancy in requirements of Tcf1/Lef1 and ß-catenin in T cells
has been a long-standing enigma. We will review other protein factors interacting
with Tcf1 and Lef1 and discuss their regulatory roles independent of ß-catenin.

PMID: 24847765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Nat Immunol. 2014 Jul;15(7):646-56. doi: 10.1038/ni.2897. Epub 2014 May 18.

TCF-1 and LEF-1 act upstream of Th-POK to promote the CD4(+) T cell fate and
interact with Runx3 to silence Cd4 in CD8(+) T cells.

Steinke FC(1), Yu S(2), Zhou X(3), He B(4), Yang W(5), Zhou B(6), Kawamoto H(7), 
Zhu J(5), Tan K(8), Xue HH(9).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, Iowa, USA. [2] Interdisciplinary Immunology Graduate Program, Carver
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA. [3]. (2)1] State
Key Laboratory of Agrobiotechnology, College of Biological Sciences, China
Agricultural University, Beijing, China. [2]. (3)Insitute of Immunology, Third
Military Medical University, Chongqing, China. (4)Interdisciplinary Graduate
Program in Genetics, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City,
Iowa, USA. (5)Developmental Biology Center, NHLBI, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. 
(6)1] Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, Iowa, USA. [2]. (7)Department of Immunology, Institute for Frontier
Medical Sciences, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan. (8)Department of Internal
Medicine, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.
(9)1] Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, Iowa, USA. [2] Interdisciplinary Immunology Graduate Program, Carver
College of Medicine, University of Iowa, Iowa City, Iowa, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2014 Jul;15(7):593-4.

The transcription factors TCF-1 and LEF-1 are essential for early T cell
development, but their roles beyond the CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive (DP) stage
are unknown. By specific ablation of these factors in DP thymocytes, we
demonstrated that deficiency in TCF-1 and LEF-1 diminished the output of CD4(+) T
cells and redirected CD4(+) T cells to a CD8(+) T cell fate. The role of TCF-1
and LEF-1 in the CD4-versus-CD8 lineage 'choice' was mediated in part by direct
positive regulation of the transcription factor Th-POK. Furthermore, loss of
TCF-1 and LEF-1 unexpectedly caused derepression of CD4 expression in T cells
committed to the CD8(+) lineage without affecting the expression of Runx
transcription factors. Instead, TCF-1 physically interacted with Runx3 to
cooperatively silence Cd4. Thus, TCF-1 and LEF-1 adopted distinct genetic
'wiring' to promote the CD4(+) T cell fate and establish CD8(+) T cell identity.

PMCID: PMC4064003
PMID: 24836425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. PLoS One. 2014 May 15;9(5):e94408. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094408. eCollection
2014.

Tcf3 represses Wnt-ß-catenin signaling and maintains neural stem cell population 
during neocortical development.

Kuwahara A(1), Sakai H(1), Xu Y(1), Itoh Y(1), Hirabayashi Y(1), Gotoh Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cell Signaling, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

During mouse neocortical development, the Wnt-ß-catenin signaling pathway plays
essential roles in various phenomena including neuronal differentiation and
proliferation of neural precursor cells (NPCs). Production of the appropriate
number of neurons without depletion of the NPC population requires precise
regulation of the balance between differentiation and maintenance of NPCs.
However, the mechanism that suppresses Wnt signaling to prevent premature
neuronal differentiation of NPCs is poorly understood. We now show that the HMG
box transcription factor Tcf3 (also known as Tcf7l1) contributes to this
mechanism. Tcf3 is highly expressed in undifferentiated NPCs in the mouse
neocortex, and its expression is reduced in intermediate neuronal progenitors
(INPs) committed to the neuronal fate. We found Tcf3 to be a repressor of Wnt
signaling in neocortical NPCs in a reporter gene assay. Tcf3 bound to the
promoter of the proneural bHLH gene Neurogenin1 (Neurog1) and repressed its
expression. Consistent with this, Tcf3 repressed neuronal differentiation and
increased the self-renewal activity of NPCs. We also found that Wnt signal
stimulation reduces the level of Tcf3, and increases those of Tcf1 (also known as
Tcf7) and Lef1, positive mediators of Wnt signaling, in NPCs. Together, these
results suggest that Tcf3 antagonizes Wnt signaling in NPCs, thereby maintaining 
their undifferentiated state in the neocortex and that Wnt signaling promotes the
transition from Tcf3-mediated repression to Tcf1/Lef1-mediated enhancement of Wnt
signaling, constituting a positive feedback loop that facilitates neuronal
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC4022625
PMID: 24832538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2014 May;139(21):1127-30. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1370044. Epub
2014 May 13.

[Predisposition and phenotype of MODY - implications for diagnosis and
treatment].

[Article in German]

Hummel M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Forschergruppe Diabetes der TU München.

PMID: 24823984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2014 Jul;1839(7):604-20. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2014.05.001.
Epub 2014 May 10.

Serine 249 phosphorylation by ATM protein kinase regulates hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1a transactivation.

Zhao L(1), Chen H(2), Zhan YQ(2), Li CY(2), Ge CH(2), Zhang JH(1), Wang XH(2), Yu
M(3), Yang XM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, 100850, China. (2)Beijing
Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, 100850, China; State Key Laboratory of 
Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation
Medicine, Beijing, 102206, China. (3)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine,
Beijing, 100850, China; State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing Proteome
Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, 102206, China.
Electronic address: yumiaoer@hotmail.com. (4)Beijing Institute of Radiation
Medicine, Beijing, 100850, China; State Key Laboratory of Proteomics, Beijing
Proteome Research Center, Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing,
102206, China. Electronic address: xiaomingyang@sina.com.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1a) exerts important effects on gene
expression in multiple tissues. Several studies have directly or indirectly
supported the role of phosphorylation processes in the activity of HNF1a.
However, the molecular mechanism of this phosphorylation remains largely unknown.
Using microcapillary liquid chromatography MS/MS and biochemical assays, we
identified a novel phosphorylation site in HNF1a at Ser249. We also found that
the ATM protein kinase phosphorylated HNF1a at Ser249 in vitro in an
ATM-dependent manner and that ATM inhibitor KU55933 treatment inhibited
phosphorylation of HNF1a at Ser249 in vivo. Coimmunoprecipitation assays
confirmed the association between HNF1a and ATM. Moreover, ATM enhanced HNF1a
transcriptional activity in a dose-dependent manner, whereas the ATM
kinase-inactive mutant did not. The use of KU55933 confirmed our observation.
Compared with wild-type HNF1a, a mutation in Ser249 resulted in a pronounced
decrease in HNF1a transactivation, whereas no dominant-negative effect was
observed. The HNF1aSer249 mutant also exhibited normal nuclear localization but
decreased DNA-binding activity. Accordingly, the functional studies of
HNF1aSer249 mutant revealed a defect in glucose metabolism. Our results suggested
that ATM regulates the activity of HNF1a by phosphorylation of serine 249,
particularly in glucose metabolism, which provides valuable insights into the
undiscovered mechanisms of ATM in the regulation of glucose homeostasis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24821553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 24;9(4):e95866. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0095866. eCollection
2014.

New variants including ARG1 polymorphisms associated with C-reactive protein
levels identified by genome-wide association and pathway analysis.

Vinayagamoorthy N(1), Hu HJ(1), Yim SH(2), Jung SH(1), Jo J(3), Jee SH(3), Chung 
YJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Integrated Research Center for Genome Polymorphism, The Catholic University of
Korea, College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Department of Microbiology, The
Catholic University of Korea, College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (2)Integrated
Research Center for Genome Polymorphism, The Catholic University of Korea,
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea; Department of Medical Education, The Catholic 
University of Korea, College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (3)Institute of Health
Promotion, Graduate School of Public Health, Yonsei University, Seoul, Korea.

C-reactive protein (CRP) is a general marker of systemic inflammation and
cardiovascular disease (CVD). The genetic contribution to differences in CRP
levels remains to be explained, especially in non-European populations. Thus, the
aim of this study was to identify genetic loci associated with CRP levels in
Korean population. We performed genome-wide association studies (GWAS) using SNPs
from 8,529 Korean individuals (7,626 for stage 1 and 903 for stage 2). We also
performed pathway analysis. We identified a new genetic locus associated with CRP
levels upstream of ARG1 gene (top significant SNP: rs9375813,
Pmeta<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.85×10(-8)), which encodes a key enzyme of the urea cycle counteract the
effects of nitric oxide, in addition to known CRP (rs7553007,
Pmeta<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.72×10(-16)) and HNF1A loci (rs2259816, Pmeta<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.90×10(-10)). When we
evaluated the associations between the CRP-related SNPs with cardiovascular
disease phenotypes, rs9375813 (ARG1) showed a marginal association with
hypertension (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0440). To identify more variants and pathways, we performed
pathway analysis and identified six candidate pathways comprised of genes related
to inflammatory processes and CVDs (CRP, HNF1A, PCSK6, CD36, and ABCA1). In
addition to the previously reported loci (CRP, HNF1A, and IL6) in diverse ethnic 
groups, we identified novel variants in the ARG1 locus associated with CRP levels
in Korean population and a number of interesting genes related to inflammatory
processes and CVD through pathway analysis.

PMCID: PMC3999194
PMID: 24763700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Hum Pathol. 2014 May;45(5):976-83. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2013.12.011. Epub 2014 
Jan 8.

Hepatocellular adenomas in a large community population, 2000 to 2010:
reclassification per current World Health Organization classification and results
of long-term follow-up.

Shafizadeh N(1), Genrich G(2), Ferrell L(2), Kakar S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Woodland Hills Medical Center, Southern California
Permanente Medical Group, CA 91367. Electronic address:
nafis.x.shafizadeh@kp.org. (2)Department of Anatomic Pathology, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143. (3)Department of Anatomic
Pathology, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94121.

The data used for the World Health Organization classification of hepatocellular 
adenoma (HCA) is largely based on cases from tertiary level centers in Europe.
This study examines the distribution of HCA subtypes in a large community
population and determines the impact of immunohistochemistry (IHC) on
reclassification, diagnosis, and management. All cases diagnosed as HCA in a
large community hospital network from 2000 to 2010 were reviewed. The following
immunohistochemical stains were evaluated in cases where paraffin-embedded tissue
was available (n = 35): ß-catenin, glutamine synthetase, serum amyloid A,
C-reactive protein, liver fatty acid binding protein. Twenty-eight of 35 cases
were confirmed to be HCA, 5 cases were reclassified as well-differentiated
hepatocellular carcinoma, and 2 cases were reclassified as focal nodular
hyperplasia. The HCA cases were further subclassified into hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1a inactivated (29%), inflammatory (32%), inflammatory with ß-catenin
activation (3%), noninflammatory ß-catenin activated (0%), and unclassified
(36%). Long-term follow-up was available on 33 of 35 cases, and there were no
cases of recurrence or distant metastasis. IHC can provide a definite HCA subtype
in two-thirds of cases. HCA subtypes in this large community-based population
differed from the prior large French studies, in that there were a greater
proportion of unclassified adenomas and a virtual absence of ß-catenin-activated 
adenomas. It is likely that most ß-catenin-activated hepatocellular tumors show
morphologic and reticulin staining abnormalities indicative of
well-differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma. IHC for glutamine synthetase and
serum amyloid A can identify cases with ß-catenin activation and aid in the
distinction of inflammatory adenoma and focal nodular hyperplasia.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24746201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Eur J Hum Genet. 2015 Jan;23(1):29-33. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.59. Epub 2014 Apr
16.

A decade of molecular genetic testing for MODY: a retrospective study of
utilization in The Netherlands.

Weinreich SS(1), Bosma A(1), Henneman L(1), Rigter T(1), Spruijt CM(2),
Grimbergen AJ(2), Breuning MH(2), de Koning EJ(3), Losekoot M(2), Cornel MC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Section of Community Genetics, EMGO Institute
for Health and Care Research, VU University Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands. (2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Leiden University Medical
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Endocrinology and Department of
Nephrology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Genetic testing for maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) may be relevant
for treatment and prognosis in patients with usually early-onset, non-ketotic,
insulin-sensitive diabetes and for monitoring strategies in non-diabetic mutation
carriers. This study describes the first 10 years of genetic testing for MODY in 
The Netherlands in terms of volume and test positive rate, medical setting,
purpose of the test and age of patients tested. Some analyses focus on the most
prevalent subtype, HNF1A MODY. Data were retrospectively extracted from a
laboratory database. In total, 502 individuals were identified with a pathogenic 
mutation in HNF4A, GCK or HNF1A between 2001 and 2010. Although mutation scanning
for MODY was used at an increasing rate, cascade testing was only used for one
relative, on average, per positive index patient. Testing for HNF1A MODY was
mostly requested by internists and paediatricians, often from regional hospitals.
Primary care physicians and clinical geneticists rarely requested genetic testing
for HNF1A MODY. Clinical geneticists requested cascade testing relatively more
often than other health professionals. A substantial proportion (currently 29%)
of HNF1A MODY probands was at least 40 years old at the time of testing. In
conclusion, the number of individuals genetically tested for MODY so far in The
Netherlands is low compared with previously predicted numbers of patients.
Doctors' valuation of the test and patients' and family members' response to (an 
offer of) genetic testing on the other hand need to be investigated. Efforts may 
be needed to develop and implement translational guidelines.

PMCID: PMC4266743
PMID: 24736738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 14;9(4):e94885. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0094885. eCollection
2014.

Enhancement of CYP3A4 activity in Hep G2 cells by lentiviral transfection of
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha.

Chiang TS(1), Yang KC(2), Chiou LL(3), Huang GT(4), Lee HS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biotechnology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.
(2)School of Dentistry, College of Oral Medicine, Taipei Medical University,
Taipei, Taiwan. (3)Liver Disease Prevention and Treatment Research Foundation,
Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University
Hospital and National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.
(5)Institute of Biotechnology, National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan;
Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital and National
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Agricultural Biotechnology
Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Human hepatoma cell lines are commonly used as alternatives to primary
hepatocytes for the study of drug metabolism in vitro. However, the phase I
cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzyme activities in these cell lines occur at a much lower
level than their corresponding activities in primary hepatocytes, and thus these 
cell lines may not accurately predict drug metabolism. In the present study, we
selected hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1a) from six transcriptional
regulators for lentiviral transfection into Hep G2 cells to optimally increase
their expression of the CYP3A4 enzyme, which is the major CYP enzyme in the human
body. We subsequently found that HNF1a-transfected Hep G2 enhanced the CYP3A4
expression in a time- and dose-dependent manner and the activity was noted to
increase with time and peaked 7 days. With a multiplicity of infection (MOI) of
100, CYP3A4 expression increased 19-fold and enzyme activity more than doubled at
day 7. With higher MOI (1,000 to 3,000), the activity increased 8- to 10-fold;
however, it was noted the higher MOI, the higher cell death rate and lower cell
survival. Furthermore, the CYP3A4 activity in the HNF1a-transfected cells could
be induced by CYP3A4-specific inducer, rifampicin, and metabolized nifedipine in 
a dose-dependent manner. With an MOI of 3,000, nifedipine-metabolizing activity
was 6-fold of control and as high as 66% of primary hepatocytes. In conclusion,
forceful delivery of selected transcriptional regulators into human hepatoma
cells might be a valuable method to enhance the CYP activity for a more accurate 
determination of drug metabolism in vitro.

PMCID: PMC3986372
PMID: 24733486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014 Jun;10(6):312. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2014.52. Epub 2014
Apr 15.

Diabetes. Attenuated incretin effect after glucose loading in monogenic HNF1A
diabetes.

Holmes D.

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2014 Aug;63(8):2838-44.

PMID: 24732972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Scand J Gastroenterol. 2014 Jun;49(6):705-14. doi: 10.3109/00365521.2013.830328. 
Epub 2014 Apr 15.

Phenotypic and in vivo functional characterization of immortalized human fetal
liver cells.

Patil PB(1), Begum S, Joshi M, Kleman MI, Olausson M, Sumitran-Holgersson S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transplantation and Regenerative Medicine, Sahlgrenska Academy
at University of Gothenburg , Gothenburg , Sweden.

We report the establishment and characterization of immortalized human fetal
liver progenitor cells by expression of the Simian virus 40 large T (SV40 LT)
antigen. Well-characterized cells at various passages were transplanted into nude
mice with acute liver injury and tested for functional capacity. The SV40LT
antigen-immortalized fetal liver cells showed a morphology similar to primary
cells. Cultured cells demonstrated stable phenotypic expression in various
passages, of hepatic markers such as albumin, CK 8, CK18, transcription factors
HNF-4a and HNF-1a and CYP3A/7. The cells did not stain for any of the tested
cancer-associated markers. Albumin, HNF-4a and CYP3A7 expression was confirmed by
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Flow cytometry showed
expression of some progenitor cell markers. In vivo study showed that the cells
expressed both fetal and differentiated hepatocytes markers. Our study suggests
new approaches to expand hepatic progenitor cells, analyze their fate in animal
models aiming at cell therapy of hepatic diseases.

PMCID: PMC4059185
PMID: 24730442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Jun;42(10):6578-90. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku260. Epub 2014
Apr 4.

Modulation of HBV replication by microRNA-15b through targeting hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1a.

Dai X(1), Zhang W(1), Zhang H(2), Sun S(1), Yu H(1), Guo Y(1), Kou Z(1), Zhao
G(1), Du L(3), Jiang S(3), Zhang J(4), Li J(5), Zhou Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of
Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing 100071, China. (2)Henan Key Laboratory of 
Tumor Epidemiology, College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou,
Henan 450052, China. (3)Laboratory of Viral immunology, Lindsley F. Kimball
Research Institute, New York Blood Center, New York, NY 10065, USA. (4)Henan Key 
Laboratory of Tumor Epidemiology, College of Public Health, Zhengzhou University,
Zhengzhou, Henan 450052, China Department of Biological Sciences, The University 
of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, TX 79968, USA. (5)State Key Laboratory of Pathogen 
and Biosecurity, Beijing Institute of Microbiology and Epidemiology, Beijing
100071, China yszhou@bmi.ac.cn.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection remains a major health problem worldwide. The
role played by microRNAs (miRNAs) in HBV replication and pathogenesis is being
increasingly recognized. In this study, we found that miR-15b, an important miRNA
during HBV infection and hepatocellular carcinoma development, directly binds
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a (HNF1a) mRNA, a negative regulator of HBV Enhancer
I, to attenuate HNF1a expression, resulting in transactivation of HBV Enhancer I,
in turn causing the enhancement of HBV replication and expression of HBV
antigens, including HBx protein, finally leading to the down-regulated expression
of miR-15b in both cell lines and mice in a long cascade of events. Our research 
showed that miR-15b promotes HBV replication by augmenting HBV Enhancer I
activity via direct targeting HNF1a, while HBV replication and antigens
expression, particularly the HBx protein, then repress the expression of miR-15b.
The reciprocal regulation between miR-15b and HBV controls the level of HBV
replication and might play a role in persistent HBV infection. This work adds to 
the body of knowledge concerning the complex interactions between HBV and host
miRNAs.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4041434
PMID: 24705650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Nat Immunol. 2014 May;15(5):457-64. doi: 10.1038/ni.2867. Epub 2014 Apr 6.

The AGC kinase SGK1 regulates TH1 and TH2 differentiation downstream of the
mTORC2 complex.

Heikamp EB(1), Patel CH(1), Collins S(2), Waickman A(1), Oh MH(2), Sun IH(1),
Illei P(3), Sharma A(4), Naray-Fejes-Toth A(5), Fejes-Toth G(5), Misra-Sen J(4), 
Horton MR(2), Powell JD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Research Center, Department of Oncology,
Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA.
(2)Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (4)Immune Cells and Inflammation
Section, Laboratory of Immunology, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, Maryland, USA. (5)Department of Physiology,
Dartmouth Medical School, Lebanon, New Hampshire, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2014 May;15(5):411-3.

SGK1 is an AGC kinase that regulates the expression of membrane sodium channels
in renal tubular cells in a manner dependent on the metabolic checkpoint kinase
complex mTORC2. We hypothesized that SGK1 might represent an additional
mTORC2-dependent regulator of the differentiation and function of T cells. Here
we found that after activation by mTORC2, SGK1 promoted T helper type 2 (TH2)
differentiation by negatively regulating degradation of the transcription factor 
JunB mediated by the E3 ligase Nedd4-2. Simultaneously, SGK1 repressed the
production of interferon-<U+03B3> (IFN-<U+03B3>) by controlling expression of the long isoform 
of the transcription factor TCF-1. Consistent with those findings, mice with
selective deletion of SGK1 in T cells were resistant to experimentally induced
asthma, generated substantial IFN-<U+03B3> in response to viral infection and more
readily rejected tumors.

PMCID: PMC4267697
PMID: 24705297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2014 Jun;104(3):e72-4. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2014.03.008. Epub 2014 Mar 19.

Lessons from whole-exome sequencing in MODYX families.

Dusatkova P(1), Fang M(2), Pruhova S(3), Gjesing AP(4), Cinek O(3), Hansen T(5), 
Pedersen OB(6), Xu X(2), Lebl J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in
Prague and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. Electronic address:
petra.dusatkova@lfmotol.cuni.cz. (2)BGI-Shenzen, Shenzhen 518083, China.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in
Prague and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic. (4)Novo Nordisk
Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health Sciences,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (5)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center 
for Basic Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Faculty of Health Sciences, University of
Southern Denmark, Odense, Denmark. (6)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic
Metabolic Research, Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark; Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Faculty of Health and
Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; Faculty of
Health Sciences, Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark.

We report the first results from whole-exome sequencing performed in families
with Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young without a known genetic cause of
diabetes (MODYX). This next generation sequencing technique pointed out that
routine testing of MODY needs constant awareness and regular re-evaluation of
both clinical criteria and primer sequences.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24698406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Bone Miner Res. 2014 Sep;29(9):1960-9. doi: 10.1002/jbmr.2240.

Dlx5 and mef2 regulate a novel runx2 enhancer for osteoblast-specific expression.

Kawane T(1), Komori H, Liu W, Moriishi T, Miyazaki T, Mori M, Matsuo Y, Takada Y,
Izumi S, Jiang Q, Nishimura R, Kawai Y, Komori T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Unit of Basic Medical Sciences, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Nagasaki, Japan.

Runx2 is essential for osteoblast differentiation and chondrocyte maturation. The
expression of Runx2 is the first requisite step for the lineage determination
from mesenchymal stem cells to osteoblasts. Although the transcript from Runx2
distal promoter is majorly expressed in osteoblasts, the promoter failed to
direct green fluorescent protein (GFP) expression to osteoblasts. To find the
regulatory region, we generated GFP reporter mice driven by a bacterial
artificial chromosome (BAC) of Runx2 locus, and succeeded in the reproduction of 
endogenous Runx2 expression. By serially deleting it, we identified a 343-bp
enhancer, which directed GFP expression specifically to osteoblasts, about 30<U+2009>kb 
upstream of the distal promoter. The sequence of the 343-bp enhancer was highly
conserved among mouse, human, dog, horse, opossum, and chicken. Dlx5, Mef2c,
Tcf7, Ctnnb1, Sp7, Smad1, and Sox6, which localized on the enhancer region in
primary osteoblasts, synergistically upregulated the enhancer activity, whereas
Msx2 downregulated the activity in mouse osteoblastic MC3T3-E1 cells. Msx2 was
predominantly bound to the enhancer in mouse multipotent mesenchymal C3H10T1/2
cells, whereas Dlx5 was predominantly bound to the enhancer in MC3T3-E1 cells.
Dlx5 and Mef2 directly bound to the enhancer, and the binding sites were required
for the osteoblast-specific expression in mice, whereas the other factors bound
to the enhancer by protein-protein interaction. The enhancer was characterized by
the presence of the histone variant H2A.Z, the enrichment of histone H3 mono- and
dimethylated at Lys4 and acetylated at Lys18 and Lys27, but the depletion of
histone H3 trimethylated at Lys4 in primary osteoblasts. These findings indicated
that the enhancer, which had typical histone modifications for enhancers,
contains sufficient elements to direct Runx2 expression to osteoblasts, and that 
Dlx5 and Mef2, which formed an enhanceosome with Tcf7, Ctnnb1, Sp7, Smad1, and
Sox6, play an essential role in the osteoblast-specific activation of the
enhancer. © 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

© 2014 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMID: 24692107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Diabetes. 2014 Aug;63(8):2838-44. doi: 10.2337/db13-1878. Epub 2014 Mar 27.

Incretin effect and glucagon responses to oral and intravenous glucose in
patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young--type 2 and type 3.

Østoft SH(1), Bagger JI(2), Hansen T(3), Pedersen O(4), Holst JJ(5), Knop FK(2), 
Vilsbøll T(6).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Division, Department of Medicine, Gentofte Hospital,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkDepartment of Biomedical Sciences,
Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkNovo Nordisk
Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark s.ostoft@dadlnet.dk. (2)Diabetes Research Division,
Department of Medicine, Gentofte Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, 
DenmarkDepartment of Biomedical Sciences, Panum Institute, University of
Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkNovo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic
Research, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (3)Novo Nordisk
Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, DenmarkFaculty of Health Sciences, University of Southern Denmark,
Odense, Denmark. (4)Novo Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, 
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark. (5)Department of Biomedical
Sciences, Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, DenmarkNovo
Nordisk Foundation Center for Basic Metabolic Research, University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. (6)Diabetes Research Division, Department of Medicine,
Gentofte Hospital, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2014 Jun;10(6):312.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a clinically and genetically
heterogeneous subgroup of nonautoimmune diabetes, constituting 1-2% of all
diabetes. Because little is known about incretin function in patients with MODY, 
we studied the incretin effect and hormone responses to oral and intravenous
glucose loads in patients with glucokinase (GCK)-diabetes (MODY2) and hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 1a (HNF1A)-diabetes (MODY3), respectively, and in matched healthy 
control subjects. Both MODY groups exhibited glucose intolerance after oral
glucose (most pronounced in patients with HNF1A-diabetes), but only patients with
HNF1A-diabetes had impaired incretin effect and inappropriate glucagon responses 
to OGTT. Both groups of patients with diabetes showed normal suppression of
glucagon in response to intravenous glucose. Thus, HNF1A-diabetes, similar to
type 2 diabetes, is characterized by an impaired incretin effect and
inappropriate glucagon responses, whereas incretin effect and glucagon response
to oral glucose remain unaffected in GCK-diabetes, reflecting important
pathogenetic differences between the two MODY forms.

© 2014 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 24677712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Hypertens Res. 2014 Jul;37(7):692-8. doi: 10.1038/hr.2014.56. Epub 2014 Mar 27.

Genetic risk assessment for cardiovascular disease with seven genes associated
with plasma C-reactive protein concentrations in Asian populations.

Hong EP(1), Kim DH(2), Suh JG(1), Park JW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Hallym University College of Medicine,
Chuncheon, Republic of Korea. (2)1] Department of Social and Preventive Medicine,
Hallym University College of Medicine, Chuncheon, Republic of Korea [2] Hallym
Research Institute of Clinical Epidemiology, Hallym University Sacred Heart
Hospital, Anyang, Republic of Korea.

Plasma C-reactive protein (CRP) level is a predictor of cardiovascular risk. We
performed a meta-analysis on the effect of 12 single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) within 8 candidate loci in 36<U+2009>752 Asians. In addition, we created weighted
genetic risk scores (wGRSs) to evaluate the combined effects of genetic variants,
which were suggested in the meta-analysis, for predicting the risks of elevated
CRP levels as well as increased risks of hypertension and cardiovascular disease 
(CVD) in 748 Koreans. Nine SNPs located in seven genes, CRP, IL6R, GCKR, IL6,
CYP17A1, HNF1A and APOE, were significantly associated with circulating CRP
levels in this meta-analysis. Two SNPs, rs7310409 (HNF1A, P=3.4 × 10(-23)) and
rs7553007 (CRP, P=3.4 × 10(-17)), had the most significant effects on CRP levels;
and two SNPs, rs2097677 (IL6) and rs1004467 (CYP17A1) have never been found in
the previous European meta-analysis. In Koreans, the subjects in the highest wGRS
group had an ~2.5-fold higher mean CRP level compared with those in the lowest
wGRS group (P=2.1 × 10(-5)). We observed significant increases in the risks of
hypertension (odds ratio=2.18, P=0.006) and CVD (odds ratio=9.59, P=3.2 × 10(-6))
among the subjects in the highest wGRS group. The wGRS models specific to Koreans
may warrant further validation to be used as a proxy for the risk of CVD in
Asians.

PMID: 24671014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 19;9(3):e92219. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0092219. eCollection
2014.

Diffuse glomerular nodular lesions in diabetic pigs carrying a dominant-negative 
mutant hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-alpha, an inheritant diabetic gene in humans.

Hara S(1), Umeyama K(2), Yokoo T(3), Nagashima H(2), Nagata M(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kidney and Vascular Pathology, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba,
Japan; Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, Kanazawa
University of Graduate School of Medicine, Kanazawa, Japan. (2)Meiji University
International Institute for Bio-Resource Research, Kawasaki, Japan. (3)Division
of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine, The Jikei
University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Kidney and Vascular
Pathology, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Japan.

Glomerular nodular lesions, known as Kimmelstiel-Wilson nodules, are a
pathological hallmark of progressive human diabetic nephropathy. We have induced 
severe diabetes in pigs carrying a dominant-negative mutant hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1-alpha (HNF1a) P291fsinsC, a maturity-onset diabetes of the young type-3 
(MODY3) gene in humans. In this model, glomerular pathology revealed that
formation of diffuse glomerular nodules commenced as young as 1 month of age and 
increased in size and incidence until the age of 10 months, the end of the study 
period. Immunohistochemistry showed that the nodules consisted of various
collagen types (I, III, IV, V and VI) with advanced glycation end-product (AGE)
and Ne-carboxymethyl-lysine (CML) deposition, similar to those in human diabetic 
nodules, except for collagen type I. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-ß) was 
also expressed exclusively in the nodules. The ultrastructure of the nodules
comprised predominant interstitial-type collagen deposition arising from the
mesangial matrices. Curiously, these nodules were found predominantly in the deep
cortex. However, diabetic pigs failed to show any of the features characteristic 
of human diabetic nephropathy; e.g., proteinuria, glomerular basement membrane
thickening, exudative lesions, mesangiolysis, tubular atrophy, interstitial
fibrosis, and vascular hyalinosis. The pigs showed only Armanni-Ebstein lesions, 
a characteristic tubular manifestation in human diabetes. RT-PCR analysis showed 
that glomeruli in wild-type pigs did not express endogenous HNF1a and HNF1ß,
indicating that mutant HNF1a did not directly contribute to glomerular nodular
formation in diabetic pigs. In conclusion, pigs harboring the dominant-negative
mutant human MODY3 gene showed reproducible and distinct glomerular nodules,
possibly due to AGE- and CML-based collagen accumulation. Although the pathology 
differed in several respects from that of human glomerular nodular lesions, the
somewhat acute and constitutive formation of nodules in this mammalian model
might provide information facilitating identification of the principal mechanism 
underlying diabetic nodular sclerosis.

PMCID: PMC3960229
PMID: 24647409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Hum Genet. 2014 Aug;133(8):985-95. doi: 10.1007/s00439-014-1439-z. Epub 2014 Mar 
19.

Large multiethnic Candidate Gene Study for C-reactive protein levels:
identification of a novel association at CD36 in African Americans.

Ellis J(1), Lange EM, Li J, Dupuis J, Baumert J, Walston JD, Keating BJ, Durda P,
Fox ER, Palmer CD, Meng YA, Young T, Farlow DN, Schnabel RB, Marzi CS, Larkin E, 
Martin LW, Bis JC, Auer P, Ramachandran VS, Gabriel SB, Willis MS, Pankow JS,
Papanicolaou GJ, Rotter JI, Ballantyne CM, Gross MD, Lettre G, Wilson JG, Peters 
U, Koenig W, Tracy RP, Redline S, Reiner AP, Benjamin EJ, Lange LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, 5112 Genetic Medicine
Bldg., Chapel Hill, NC, 27599-7264, USA.

C-reactive protein (CRP) is a heritable biomarker of systemic inflammation and a 
predictor of cardiovascular disease (CVD). Large-scale genetic association
studies for CRP have largely focused on individuals of European descent. We
sought to uncover novel genetic variants for CRP in a multiethnic sample using
the ITMAT Broad-CARe (IBC) array, a custom 50,000 SNP gene-centric array having
dense coverage of over 2,000 candidate CVD genes. We performed analyses on 7,570 
African Americans (AA) from the Candidate gene Association Resource (CARe) study 
and race-combined meta-analyses that included 29,939 additional individuals of
European descent from CARe, the Women's Health Initiative (WHI) and KORA studies.
We observed array-wide significance (p < 2.2 × 10(-6)) for four loci in AA, three
of which have been reported previously in individuals of European descent (IL6R, 
p = 2.0 × 10(-6); CRP, p = 4.2 × 10(-71); APOE, p = 1.6 × 10(-6)). The fourth
significant locus, CD36 (p = 1.6 × 10(-6)), was observed at a functional variant 
(rs3211938) that is extremely rare in individuals of European descent. We
replicated the CD36 finding (p = 1.8 × 10(-5)) in an independent sample of 8,041 
AA women from WHI; a meta-analysis combining the CARe and WHI AA results at
rs3211938 reached genome-wide significance (p = 1.5 × 10(-10)). In the
race-combined meta-analyses, 13 loci reached significance, including ten (CRP,
TOMM40/APOE/APOC1, HNF1A, LEPR, GCKR, IL6R, IL1RN, NLRP3, HNF4A and BAZ1B/BCL7B) 
previously associated with CRP, and one (ARNTL) previously reported to be
nominally associated with CRP. Two novel loci were also detected (RPS6KB1, p =
2.0 × 10(-6); CD36, p = 1.4 × 10(-6)). These results highlight both shared and
unique genetic risk factors for CRP in AA compared to populations of European
descent.

PMCID: PMC4104766
PMID: 24643644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Horm Res Paediatr. 2014;81(4):280-4. doi: 10.1159/000356925. Epub 2014 Mar 12.

A family with a novel termination mutation in hepatic nuclear factor 1a in
maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 which is unresponsive to
sulphonylurea therapy.

Demol S(1), Lebenthal Y, Bar-Meisels M, Phillip M, Gat-Yablonski G, Gozlan Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Jesse Z. and Sara Lea Shafer Institute for Endocrinology and Diabetes,
National Center for Childhood Diabetes, Schneider Children's Medical Center of
Israel, Petach Tikva, Israel.

BACKGROUND: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of
diabetes mellitus.
AIMS: To identify the genetic basis in a family with 3 generations of diabetes
and to assess the concordance between the genotype and phenotype.
METHODS: A molecular analysis was performed on genomic DNA using polymerase chain
reaction, denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis, and sequencing. A mixed-meal
tolerance test (MMTT) was performed with/without glibenclamide. Abdominal
ultrasonography was performed on all family members with diabetes due to the
location of the mutation.
RESULTS: A novel c.618G>A, p.W206X termination mutation was identified in the
hepatic nuclear factor 1a (HNF1a) gene. The mutation was identified in the
proband and 8 of the 14 family members tested. An MMTT stimulus (±2.5 and 5 mg
glibenclamide) produced a similar glucose profile and C-peptide graph in both the
obese proband and her nonobese mother, showing no effect of the glibenclamide. No
evidence of liver adenomas was found in the abdominal ultrasonography.
CONCLUSIONS: We described a novel c.618G>A, p.W206X mutation in HNF1a associated 
with MODY 3 but not with hepatocellular adenoma. In contradistinction to most
MODY 3 mutations, treatment with sulphonylurea was found to be a clinically
ineffective alternative to insulin therapy.

PMID: 24642958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Mar 6;14(3):370-84. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.01.003. Epub
2014 Feb 27.

Direct reprogramming of human fibroblasts to functional and expandable
hepatocytes.

Huang P(1), Zhang L(1), Gao Y(1), He Z(2), Yao D(3), Wu Z(3), Cen J(1), Chen
X(1), Liu C(2), Hu Y(2), Lai D(4), Hu Z(5), Chen L(6), Zhang Y(6), Cheng X(1), Ma
X(6), Pan G(3), Wang X(7), Hui L(8).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. (2)Department of Cell Biology, Second Military 
Medical University, Shanghai 200433, China. (3)Center for Drug Safety Evaluation 
and Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Shanghai 201203, China. (4)The International Peace Maternity and Child Health
Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200030,
China. (5)Renji Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiaotong University,
Shanghai 200127, China. (6)Laboratory of Biomedical Material Engineering, Dalian 
Institute of Chemical Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Dalian 116023, China.
(7)Key Laboratory of National Education Ministry for Mammalian Reproductive
Biology and Biotechnology, Inner Mongolia University, Hohhot 010021, China;
Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Stem Cell Institute, University 
of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA; Hepatoscience Incorporation, 4062
Fabian Way, Palo Alto, CA 94303, USA. (8)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology,
Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China. Electronic
address: ljhui@sibcb.ac.cn.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Mar 6;14(3):267-9.

The generation of large numbers of functional human hepatocytes for cell-based
approaches to liver disease is an important and unmet goal. Direct reprogramming 
of fibroblasts to hepatic lineages could offer a solution to this problem but so 
far has only been achieved with mouse cells. Here, we generated human induced
hepatocytes (hiHeps) from fibroblasts by lentiviral expression of FOXA3, HNF1A,
and HNF4A. hiHeps express hepatic gene programs, can be expanded in vitro, and
display functions characteristic of mature hepatocytes, including cytochrome P450
enzyme activity and biliary drug clearance. Upon transplantation into mice with
concanavalin-A-induced acute liver failure and fatal metabolic liver disease due 
to fumarylacetoacetate dehydrolase (Fah) deficiency, hiHeps restore the liver
function and prolong survival. Collectively, our results demonstrate successful
lineage conversion of nonhepatic human cells into mature hepatocytes with
potential for biomedical and pharmaceutical applications.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24582927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Mar 6;14(3):394-403. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2014.01.008. Epub
2014 Feb 27.

Human hepatocytes with drug metabolic function induced from fibroblasts by
lineage reprogramming.

Du Y(1), Wang J(2), Jia J(3), Song N(3), Xiang C(1), Xu J(1), Hou Z(4), Su X(1), 
Liu B(2), Jiang T(5), Zhao D(1), Sun Y(6), Shu J(1), Guo Q(5), Yin M(1), Sun
D(2), Lu S(7), Shi Y(8), Deng H(9).

Author information: 
(1)The MOE Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation, College of
Life Sciences, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University,
Beijing 100871, China. (2)Shenzhen Stem Cell Engineering Laboratory, Key
Laboratory of Chemical Genomics, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School,
Shenzhen 518055, China. (3)The MOE Key Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and
Differentiation, College of Life Sciences, Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life
Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China; Shenzhen Stem Cell
Engineering Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Chemical Genomics, Peking University
Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China. (4)Beijing Vitalstar
Biotechnology, Beijing 100012, China. (5)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery,
Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. (6)Laboratory of Genome
Variations and Precision Bio-Medicine, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100101, China. (7)Department of Hepatobiliary
Surgery, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing 100853, China. Electronic address:
lsc620213@aliyun.com. (8)Shenzhen Stem Cell Engineering Laboratory, Key
Laboratory of Chemical Genomics, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School,
Shenzhen 518055, China. Electronic address: shiyan@pkusz.edu.cn. (9)The MOE Key
Laboratory of Cell Proliferation and Differentiation, College of Life Sciences,
Peking-Tsinghua Center for Life Sciences, Peking University, Beijing 100871,
China; Shenzhen Stem Cell Engineering Laboratory, Key Laboratory of Chemical
Genomics, Peking University Shenzhen Graduate School, Shenzhen 518055, China;
Peking University Stem Cell Research Center, Department of Cell Biology, School
of Basic Medical Sciences, Peking University Health Science Center, Beijing
100191, China. Electronic address: hongkui_deng@pku.edu.cn.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Mar 6;14(3):267-9.

Obtaining fully functional cell types is a major challenge for drug discovery and
regenerative medicine. Currently, a fundamental solution to this key problem is
still lacking. Here, we show that functional human induced hepatocytes (hiHeps)
can be generated from fibroblasts by overexpressing the hepatic fate conversion
factors HNF1A, HNF4A, and HNF6 along with the maturation factors ATF5, PROX1, and
CEBPA. hiHeps express a spectrum of phase I and II drug-metabolizing enzymes and 
phase III drug transporters. Importantly, the metabolic activities of CYP3A4,
CYP1A2, CYP2B6, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 are comparable between hiHeps and freshly
isolated primary human hepatocytes. Transplanted hiHeps repopulate up to 30% of
the livers of Tet-uPA/Rag2(-/-)/<U+03B3>c(-/-) mice and secrete more than 300 µg/ml
human ALBUMIN in vivo. Our data demonstrate that human hepatocytes with drug
metabolic function can be generated by lineage reprogramming, thus providing a
cell resource for pharmaceutical applications.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24582926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Sci Transl Med. 2014 Feb 26;6(225):225ra28. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3007607.

ß-Catenin promotes colitis and colon cancer through imprinting of proinflammatory
properties in T cells.

Keerthivasan S(1), Aghajani K, Dose M, Molinero L, Khan MW, Venkateswaran V,
Weber C, Emmanuel AO, Sun T, Bentrem DJ, Mulcahy M, Keshavarzian A, Ramos EM,
Blatner N, Khazaie K, Gounari F.

Author information: 
(1)Gwen Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology Research, The University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The density and type of lymphocytes that infiltrate colon tumors are predictive
of the clinical outcome of colon cancer. High densities of T helper 17 (T(H)17)
cells and inflammation predict poor outcome, whereas infiltration by T regulatory
cells (Tregs) that naturally suppress inflammation is associated with longer
patient survival. However, the role of Tregs in cancer remains controversial. We 
recently reported that Tregs in colon cancer patients can become proinflammatory 
and tumor-promoting. These properties were directly linked with their expression 
of ROR<U+03B3>t (retinoic acid-related orphan receptor-<U+03B3>t), the signature transcription 
factor of T(H)17 cells. We report that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in T cells
promotes expression of ROR<U+03B3>t. Expression of ß-catenin was elevated in T cells,
including Tregs, of patients with colon cancer. Genetically engineered activation
of ß-catenin in mouse T cells resulted in enhanced chromatin accessibility in the
proximity of T cell factor-1 (Tcf-1) binding sites genome-wide, induced
expression of T(H)17 signature genes including ROR<U+03B3>t, and promoted
T(H)17-mediated inflammation. Strikingly, the mice had inflammation of small
intestine and colon and developed lesions indistinguishable from colitis-induced 
cancer. Activation of ß-catenin only in Tregs was sufficient to produce
inflammation and initiate cancer. On the basis of these findings, we conclude
that activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in effector T cells and/or Tregs is
causatively linked with the imprinting of proinflammatory properties and the
promotion of colon cancer.

PMCID: PMC4020714
PMID: 24574339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Pediatrics. 2014 Mar;133(3):e775-9. doi: 10.1542/peds.2012-2537. Epub 2014 Feb
24.

Meglitinide analogues in adolescent patients with HNF1A-MODY (MODY 3).

Becker M(1), Galler A, Raile K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology, Charité University
Children's Hospital, Berlin, Germany; and.

For pediatric patients with hepatocyte nuclear factor-1A (HNF1A)-maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY 3), treatment with sulfonylureas is recommended. In
adults with HNF1A-MODY, meglitinide analogues achieve lower postprandial glucose 
levels and pose a lower risk of delayed hypoglycemia compared with sulfonylureas.
This therapy has not yet been reviewed in pediatric patients. We report on
meglitinide analogue treatment in 3 adolescents with HNF1A-MODY. Case 1
(14-year-old girl) was diagnosed asymptomatically but had an hemoglobin A1c
(HbA1c) level of 7.4%; her father had been recently diagnosed with HNF1A-MODY.
With repaglinide, her HbA1c level decreased to 5.5%, with no hypoglycemic
episodes. Case 2 (14-year-old boy) was diagnosed incidentally with glucosuria
(HbA1c level: 7.0%) and was treated with insulin. After the HNF1A-MODY diagnosis,
he was switched to glibenclamide. Due to several hypoglycemic episodes, treatment
was changed to nateglinide and his HbA1c level decreased to 6.2% with no further 
hypoglycemic episodes. Case 3 (11-year-old girl) presented with polyuria and
polydipsia (HbA1c level: 10.1%) and was initially treated with insulin. After the
HNF1A-MODY diagnosis, treatment was changed to repaglinide. She was obese (BMI:
28.8 kg/m(2); z-score: +2.2), and glucose control with repaglinide alone was
insufficient. Therefore, neutral protamine Hagedorn insulin (0.27 U/kg per day)
was added. With this combination therapy, her HbA1c level decreased to 8.2%. The 
use of meglitinides in these 3 adolescent patients was well tolerated and
effective. Furthermore, hypoglycemic episodes were rare compared with treatment
with insulin or sulfonylureas. We therefore suggest considering meglitinides as
the primary oral treatment option for adolescents suffering from HNF1A-MODY.

PMID: 24567025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Gastroenterology. 2014 Apr;146(4):893-6. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2014.02.020. Epub 
2014 Feb 22.

DCo(H2)ding the metabolic functions of SIRT1 in the intestine.

Lefebvre P(1), Staels B(2).

Author information: 
(1)European Genomic Institute for Diabetes and INSERM UMR1011 and Université
Lille 2 and Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France. (2)European Genomic
Institute for Diabetes and INSERM UMR1011 and Université Lille 2 and Institut
Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France. Electronic address:
bart.staels@pasteur-lille.fr.

Comment on
    Gastroenterology. 2014 Apr;146(4):1006-16.

PMID: 24566103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Vitam Horm. 2014;95:407-23. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-800174-5.00016-8.

Roles of HNF1a and HNF4a in pancreatic ß-cells: lessons from a monogenic form of 
diabetes (MODY).

Yamagata K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan. Electronic address: k-yamaga@kumamoto-u.ac.jp.

Mutations in the genes encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1a and HNF4a cause
a monogenic form of diabetes mellitus known as maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY). The primary cause of MODY is an impairment of glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion by pancreatic ß-cells, indicating the important roles of HNF1a 
and HNF4a in ß-cells. Large-scale genetic studies have clarified that the common 
variants of HNF1a and HNF4a genes are also associated with type 2 diabetes,
suggesting that they are involved in the pathogenesis of both diseases. Recent
experimental studies revealed that HNF1a controls both ß-cell function and growth
by regulating target genes such as glucose transporter 2, pyruvate kinase,
collectrin, hepatocyte growth factor activator, and HNF4a. In contrast, HNF4a
mainly regulates the function of ß-cells. Although direct target genes of HNF4a
in ß-cells are largely unknown, we recently identified Anks4b as a novel target
of HNF4a that regulates ß-cell susceptibility to endoplasmic reticulum stress.
Studies of MODY have led to a better understanding of the molecular mechanism of 
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion by pancreatic ß-cells.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24559927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Acta Diabetol. 2014 Aug;51(4):625-32. doi: 10.1007/s00592-014-0567-1. Epub 2014
Feb 19.

Less but better: cardioprotective lipid profile of patients with GCK-MODY despite
lower HDL cholesterol level.

Fendler W(1), Rizzo M, Borowiec M, Malachowska B, Antosik K, Szadkowska A, Banach
M, Urbanska-Kosinska M, Szopa M, Malecki M, Mlynarski W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oncology, Hematology and Diabetology, Medical
University of Lodz, 36/50 Sporna Str., 91-738, Lodz, Poland.

Patients with diabetes caused by single-gene mutations generally exhibit an
altered course of diabetes. Those with mutations of the glucokinase gene
(GCK-MODY) show good metabolic control and low risk of cardiovascular
complications despite paradoxically lowered high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
cholesterol levels. In order to investigate the matter, we analyzed the
composition of low-density lipoprotein (LDL) and HDL subpopulations in such
individuals. The LipoPrint(©) system (Quantimetrix, USA) based on non-denaturing,
linear polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis was used to separate and measure LDL
and HDL subclasses in fresh-frozen serum samples from patients with mutations of 
glucokinase or HNF1A, type 1 diabetes (T1DM) and healthy controls. Fresh serum
samples from a total of 37 monogenic diabetes patients (21 from GCK-MODY and 16
from HNF1A-MODY), 22 T1DM patients and 15 healthy individuals were measured in
this study. Concentrations of the small, highly atherogenic LDL subpopulation
were similar among the compared groups. Large HDL percentage was significantly
higher in GCK-MODY than in control (p = 0.0003), T1DM (p = 0.0006) and HNF1A-MODY
groups (p = 0.0246). Patients with GCK-MODY were characterized by significantly
lower intermediate HDL levels than controls (p = 0.0003) and T1DM (p = 0.0005).
Small, potentially atherogenic HDL content differed significantly with the
GCK-MODY group showing concentrations of that subfraction from control
(p = 0.0096), T1DM (p = 0.0193) and HNF1A-MODY (p = 0.0057) groups. Within-group 
heterogeneity suggested the existence of potential gene-gene or gene-environment 
interactions. GCK-MODY is characterized by a strongly protective profile of HDL
cholesterol subpopulations. A degree of heterogeneity within the groups suggests 
the existence of interactions with other genetic or clinical factors.

PMCID: PMC4127439
PMID: 24549415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Eur J Hum Genet. 2014 Sep;22(9). doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2014.14. Epub 2014 Feb 12.

Clinical utility gene card for: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Colclough K(1), Saint-Martin C(2), Timsit J(3), Ellard S(4), Bellanné-Chantelot
C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust,
Exeter, UK. (2)Department of Genetics, AP-HP Hôpitaux Universitaires
Pitie-Salpétrière-Charles Foix, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, Paris, France. 
(3)Department of Diabetology and Endocrinology, AP-HP Groupe Hospitalier
Cochin-Hôtel Dieu, Université Paris Descartes, Paris, France. (4)1] Department of
Molecular Genetics, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation Trust, Exeter, UK [2]
Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical
School, Exeter, UK.

PMCID: PMC4135417
PMID: 24518839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Peptides. 2013 Oct 25. pii: S0196-9781(13)00346-X. doi:
10.1016/j.peptides.2013.10.014. [Epub ahead of print]

Modulatory effects of NDP-MSH in the regenerating liver after partial hepatectomy
in rats.

Lonati C(1), Carlin A(2), Leonardi P(2), Valenza F(3), Bosari S(4), Catania A(5),
Gatti S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Centro di Ricerche Chirurgiche Precliniche, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda -
Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico. (2)Centro di Ricerche Chirurgiche Precliniche,
Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda - Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico; Dipartimento di
Fisiopatologia Medico-Chirurgica e dei Trapianti, Università degli Studi di
Milano, 20122 Milano, Italy. (3)Dipartimento di Anestesia, Rianimazione ed
Emergenza Urgenza, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda - Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico;
Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia Medico-Chirurgica e dei Trapianti, Università
degli Studi di Milano, 20122 Milano, Italy. (4)Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia
Medico-Chirurgica e dei Trapianti, Università degli Studi di Milano, 20122
Milano, Italy. (5)Centro di Ricerche Chirurgiche Precliniche, Fondazione IRCCS
Ca' Granda - Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico; Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia
Medico-Chirurgica e dei Trapianti, Università degli Studi di Milano, 20122
Milano, Italy. Electronic address: anna.catania@guest.unimi.it.

Melanocortins are endogenous peptides that exert protective actions on the host
physiology. The broad modulatory effects of these molecules suggest that they
might influence the mediator network induced during liver regeneration. The
research aim was to determine if melanocortin treatment alters liver molecular
changes induced by partial hepatectomy (PH). Rats under isoflurane anesthesia
were subjected to standard 70% PH or sham surgery. Animals received a single i.v.
injection of Nle4,DPhe7-a-melanocyte stimulating hormone (NDP-MSH) or saline
30min before surgery. Sacrifice was performed at time intervals between 4 and
72h. A preliminary screening based on TaqMan Low-Density Array (TLDA) identified 
71 transcripts altered by PH. Real-time PCR analysis revealed that NDP-MSH
modulated the expression of a substantial proportion of these transcripts
including several chemokines and their receptors. The critical signaling pathway 
interleukin-6 (IL-6)/signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT)/suppressor of cytokine signaling (SOCS) was significantly enhanced by
NDP-MSH. Further, peptide treatment considerably reduced the decline of I<U+03BA>Ba
protein caused by PH. Although the final organ regeneration was not substantially
affected, NDP-MSH modulated expression of cell cycle mediators and exerted subtle
influences on hepatocyte replication. Most of the changes brought about by
NDP-MSH, a peptide approved for clinical use, should be salutary during liver
regeneration.

Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 24512945  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


186. J Lipid Res. 2014 Apr;55(4):709-17. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M045922. Epub 2014 Jan 29.

TG-interacting factor 1 acts as a transcriptional repressor of sterol
O-acyltransferase 2.

Pramfalk C(1), Melhuish TA, Wotton D, Jiang ZY, Eriksson M, Parini P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Chemistry, Department of Laboratory Medicine, and Centre 
for Nutrition and Toxicology, NOVUM, Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska
University Hospital Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.

Acat2 [gene name: sterol O-acyltransferase 2 (SOAT2)] esterifies cholesterol in
enterocytes and hepatocytes. This study aims to identify repressor elements in
the human SOAT2 promoter and evaluate their in vivo relevance. We identified
TG-interacting factor 1 (Tgif1) to function as an important repressor of SOAT2.
Tgif1 could also block the induction of the SOAT2 promoter activity by hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1a and 4a. Women have ~ 30% higher hepatic TGIF1 mRNA compared
with men. Depletion of Tgif1 in mice increased the hepatic Soat2 expression and
resulted in higher hepatic lipid accumulation and plasma cholesterol levels.
Tgif1 is a new player in human cholesterol metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3966704
PMID: 24478032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. BMC Genet. 2014 Jan 29;15:13. doi: 10.1186/1471-2156-15-13.

Evaluation of a target region capture sequencing platform using monogenic
diabetes as a study-model.

Gao R, Liu Y, Gjesing AP, Hollensted M, Wan X, He S, Pedersen O, Yi X(1), Wang J,
Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)BGI-Shenzhen, Shenzhen, China. yix@genomics.cn.

BACKGROUND: Monogenic diabetes is a genetic disease often caused by mutations in 
genes involved in beta-cell function. Correct sub-categorization of the disease
is a prerequisite for appropriate treatment and genetic counseling. Target-region
capture sequencing is a combination of genomic region enrichment and next
generation sequencing which might be used as an efficient way to diagnose various
genetic disorders. We aimed to develop a target-region capture sequencing
platform to screen 117 selected candidate genes involved in metabolism for
mutations and to evaluate its performance using monogenic diabetes as a
study-model.
RESULTS: The performance of the assay was evaluated in 70 patients carrying known
disease causing mutations previously identified in HNF4A, GCK, HNF1A, HNF1B, INS,
or KCNJ11. Target regions with a less than 20-fold sequencing depth were either
introns or UTRs. When only considering translated regions, the coverage was 100% 
with a 50-fold minimum depth. Among the 70 analyzed samples, 63 small size single
nucleotide polymorphisms and indels as well as 7 large deletions and duplications
were identified as being the pathogenic variants. The mutations identified by the
present technique were identical with those previously identified through Sanger 
sequencing and Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification.
CONCLUSIONS: We hereby demonstrated that the established platform as an accurate 
and high-throughput gene testing method which might be useful in the clinical
diagnosis of monogenic diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3943834
PMID: 24476040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Diabetologia. 2014 Apr;57(4):729-37. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-3156-x. Epub 2014
Jan 19.

Pleiotropic effects of HNF1A rs1183910 in a population-based study of 60,283
individuals.

Allin KH(1), Nordestgaard BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Herlev Hospital, Copenhagen University
Hospital, Herlev Ringvej 75, 2730, Herlev, Denmark.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: According to genome-wide association studies (GWAS) a locus in
the HNF1A gene has pleiotropic effects on several metabolic traits. In a large
single-centre study we used the intronic variant rs1183910 located in a region
with no or low recombination rate as an instrument for the HNF1A locus to
evaluate pleiotropic effects of this locus on the risk of developing type 2
diabetes, as well as on body composition and levels of non-fasting glucose,
lipids, acute-phase reactants, and biomarkers of liver and pancreas function.
METHODS: We investigated 60,283 individuals from the Danish general population
who were all examined in the same laboratory, comprising the Copenhagen General
Population Study.
RESULTS: We confirm previous GWAS findings, namely that the minor rs1183910 A
allele is associated with an increased risk of developing type 2 diabetes
(p(trend) = 0.003), decreased levels of C-reactive protein (CRP; p(trend) = 6 ×
10(-76)) and <U+03B3>-glutamyltransferase (p(trend) = 4 × 10(-48)), and increased levels
of total cholesterol (p(trend) = 3 × 10(-10)) and LDL-cholesterol (p(trend) = 3 ×
10(-11)). For the first time, we report that the minor rs1183910 A allele is
associated with increased levels of non-fasting plasma glucose (p(trend) = 3 ×
10(-5)), apolipoprotein B (ApoB; p(trend) = 1 × 10(-4)) and alkaline phosphatase 
(p(trend) = 5 × 10(-14)), and decreased levels of bilirubin (p trend = 3 ×
10(-5)). Our results suggest that the association with increased risk of type 2
diabetes is driven by high non-fasting glucose levels.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The minor rs1183910 A allele prompts a potential
adverse metabolic profile with increased levels of non-fasting glucose, total
cholesterol, LDL-cholesterol, ApoB, and alkaline phosphatase, but simultaneously 
has potential beneficial effects through decreased levels of CRP,
<U+03B3>-glutamyltransferase and bilirubin.

PMID: 24442509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Cancer Med. 2013 Oct;2(5):595-610. doi: 10.1002/cam4.109. Epub 2013 Aug 18.

Treatment with the vascular disruptive agent OXi4503 induces an immediate and
widespread epithelial to mesenchymal transition in the surviving tumor.

Fifis T(1), Nguyen L, Malcontenti-Wilson C, Chan LS, Nunes Costa PL, Daruwalla J,
Nikfarjam M, Muralidharan V, Waltham M, Thompson EW, Christophi C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Melbourne, Austin Health, Heidelberg,
Victoria, 3084, Australia.

Epithelial to mesenchymal transition (EMT) is considered an important mechanism
in tumor resistance to drug treatments; however, in vivo observation of this
process has been limited. In this study we demonstrated an immediate and
widespread EMT involving all surviving tumor cells following treatment of a mouse
model of colorectal liver metastases with the vascular disruptive agent OXi4503. 
EMT was characterized by significant downregulation of E-cadherin, relocation and
nuclear accumulation of ß-catenin as well as significant upregulation of ZEB1 and
vimentin. Concomitantly, significant temporal upregulation in hypoxia and the
pro-angiogenic growth factors hypoxia-inducible factor 1-alpha, hepatocyte growth
factor, vascular endothelial growth factor and transforming growth factor-beta
were seen within the surviving tumor. The process of EMT was transient and by
5 days after treatment tumor cell reversion to epithelial morphology was evident.
This reversal, termed mesenchymal to epithelial transition (MET) is a process
implicated in the development of new metastases but has not been observed in vivo
histologically. Similar EMT changes were observed in response to other antitumor 
treatments including chemotherapy, thermal ablation, and antiangiogenic
treatments in our mouse colorectal metastasis model and in a murine orthotopic
breast cancer model after OXi4503 treatment. These results suggest that EMT may
be an early mechanism adopted by tumors in response to injury and hypoxic stress,
such that inhibition of EMT in combination with other therapies could play a
significant role in future cancer therapy.

© 2013 The Authors. Cancer Medicine published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3892792
PMID: 24403226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. CMAJ. 2014 Jun 10;186(9):678-84. doi: 10.1503/cmaj.130185. Epub 2014 Jan 6.

Approach to the patient with atypical diabetes.

Steenkamp DW(1), Alexanian SM(2), Sternthal E(2).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, Boston Medical Center, and
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Mass. devin.steenkamp@bmc.org.
(2)Section of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, Boston Medical Center, and
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Mass.

Comment in
    CMAJ. 2014 Dec 9;186(18):1397-8.
    CMAJ. 2014 Dec 9;186(18):1397.

PMCID: PMC4049991
PMID: 24396100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Physiol. 2014 Mar 15;592(6):1325-40. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2013.264002. Epub
2014 Jan 6.

Exercise training decreases mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-3
expression and suppresses hepatic gluconeogenesis in obese mice.

Souza Pauli LS(1), Ropelle EC, de Souza CT, Cintra DE, da Silva AS, de Almeida
Rodrigues B, de Moura LP, Marinho R, de Oliveira V, Katashima CK, Pauli JR,
Ropelle ER.

Author information: 
(1)School of Applied Science, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Limeira, São
Paulo, Brazil. eduardoropelle@gmail.com.

Insulin plays an important role in the control of hepatic glucose production.
Insulin resistant states are commonly associated with excessive hepatic glucose
production, which contributes to both fasting hyperglycaemia and exaggerated
postprandial hyperglycaemia. In this regard, increased activity of phosphatases
may contribute to the dysregulation of gluconeogenesis. Mitogen-activated protein
kinase phosphatase-3 (MKP-3) is a key protein involved in the control of
gluconeogenesis. MKP-3-mediated dephosphorylation activates FoxO1 (a member of
the forkhead family of transcription factors) and subsequently promotes its
nuclear translocation and binding to the promoters of gluconeogenic genes such as
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase). In 
this study, we investigated the effects of exercise training on the expression of
MKP-3 and its interaction with FoxO1 in the livers of obese animals. We found
that exercised obese mice had a lower expression of MKP-3 and FoxO1/MKP-3
association in the liver. Further, the exercise training decreased FoxO1
phosphorylation and protein levels of Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
gamma coactivator 1-alpha (PGC-1a) and gluconeogenic enzymes (PEPCK and G6Pase). 
These molecular results were accompanied by physiological changes, including
increased insulin sensitivity and reduced hyperglycaemia, which were not caused
by reductions in total body mass. Similar results were also observed with
oligonucleotide antisense (ASO) treatment. However, our results showed that only 
exercise training could reduce an obesity-induced increase in HNF-4a protein
levels while ASO treatment alone had no effect. These findings could explain, at 
least in part, why additive effects of exercise training treatment and ASO
treatment were not observed. Finally, the suppressive effects of exercise
training on MKP-3 protein levels appear to be related, at least in part, to the
reduced phosphorylation of Extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK) in the
livers of obese mice.

PMCID: PMC3961090
PMID: 24396063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Gastroenterology. 2014 Apr;146(4):1006-16. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.12.029.
Epub 2013 Dec 31.

Intestine-specific deletion of SIRT1 in mice impairs DCoH2-HNF-1a-FXR signaling
and alters systemic bile acid homeostasis.

Kazgan N(1), Metukuri MR(1), Purushotham A(1), Lu J(1), Rao A(2), Lee S(3),
Pratt-Hyatt M(4), Lickteig A(4), Csanaky IL(4), Zhao Y(3), Dawson PA(2), Li X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Signal Transduction, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina. (2)Section on Gastroenterology,
Department of Internal Medicine, Wake Forest School of Medicine, Winston-Salem,
North Carolina. (3)The Ben May Department for Cancer Research, University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, University of
Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas. (5)Laboratory of Signal Transduction,
National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park,
North Carolina. Electronic address: lix3@niehs.nih.gov.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2014 Apr;146(4):893-6.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Sirtuin 1 (SIRT1), the most conserved mammalian oxidized
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide-dependent protein deacetylase, is an important 
metabolic sensor in many tissues. However, little is known about its role in the 
small intestine, which absorbs and senses nutrients. We investigated the
functions of intestinal SIRT1 in systemic bile acid and cholesterol metabolism in
mice.
METHODS: SIRT1 was specifically deleted from the intestines of mice using the
flox-Villin-Cre system (SIRT1 iKO mice). Intestinal and hepatic tissues were
collected, and bile acid absorption was analyzed using the everted gut sac
experiment. Systemic bile acid metabolism was studied in SIRT1 iKO and flox
control mice placed on standard diets, diets containing 0.5% cholic acid or 1.25%
cholesterol, or lithogenic diets.
RESULTS: SIRT1 iKO mice had reduced intestinal farnesoid X receptor (FXR)
signaling via hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a (HNF-1a) compared with controls, which
reduced expression of the bile acid transporter genes Asbt and Mcf2l (encodes
Ost) and absorption of ileal bile acids. SIRT1 regulated HNF-1a/FXR signaling
partially through dimerization cofactor of HNF-1a (Dcoh2) Dcoh2, which increases 
dimerization of HNF-1a. SIRT1 was found to deacetylate Dcoh2, promoting its
interaction with HNF-1a and inducing DNA binding by HNF-1a. Intestine-specific
deletion of SIRT1 increased hepatic bile acid biosynthesis, reduced hepatic
accumulation of bile acids, and protected animals from liver damage from a diet
high in levels of bile acids.
CONCLUSIONS: Intestinal SIRT1, a key nutrient sensor, is required for ileal bile 
acid absorption and systemic bile acid homeostasis in mice. We delineated the
mechanism of metabolic regulation of HNF-1a/FXR signaling. Reagents designed to
inhibit intestinal SIRT1 might be developed to treat bile acid-related diseases
such as cholestasis.

Copyright © 2014 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4142427
PMID: 24389307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 2014;60(5):321-7. doi: 10.3177/jnsv.60.321.

Thyroid and glucocorticoid hormones induce expression of lactase-phlorizin
hydrolase gene in CDX-2/HNF-1a co-transfected IEC-6 cells.

Suzuki T(1), Mochizuki K, Goda T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nutritional Physiology, Graduate School of Integrated
Pharmaceutical and Nutritional Sciences, University of Shizuoka 422-8526; Faculty
of Education, Art and Science, Food Environment Design Course, Yamagata
University, Japan.

Thyroid and glucocorticoid hormones and several transcriptional factors such as
caudal type homeobox (CDX)-2 and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1a are important
for the differentiation of small intestinal absorptive cells and the consequent
expression of genes related to the digestion/absorption of carbohydrates. In this
study, we investigated whether thyroid and glucocorticoid hormones enhanced the
expression of lactase-phlorizin hydrolase (LPH) gene, an intestine-specific gene 
that encodes an enzyme for lactose digestion, in small intestinal stem-like IEC-6
cells co-transfected with CDX-2 and HNF-1a using a retrovirus system. Changes in 
expression of intestine-specific genes caused by treatment with thyroid and/or
glucocorticoid hormones were monitored in empty vector-transfected cells and in
CDX-2/HNF-1a co-transfected cells by qRT-PCR. Stable co-transfection with CDX-2
and HNF-1a evoked the expression of the LPH gene in IEC-6 cells. Furthermore,
treatment with a thyroid hormone, triiodothyronine, and a glucocorticoid receptor
agonist, dexamethasone, significantly enhanced expression of the LPH, CDX-2 and
HNF-1a genes in CDX-2/HNF-1a co-transfected IEC-6 cells. These results suggest
that thyroid and glucocorticoid hormones synergistically enhance expression of
the LPH gene in CDX-2/HNF-1a co-transfected IEC-6 cells.

PMID: 25744420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jan 7;111(1):391-6. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1315752111. 
Epub 2013 Dec 26.

ß-Catenin induces T-cell transformation by promoting genomic instability.

Dose M(1), Emmanuel AO, Chaumeil J, Zhang J, Sun T, Germar K, Aghajani K, Davis
EM, Keerthivasan S, Bredemeyer AL, Sleckman BP, Rosen ST, Skok JA, Le Beau MM,
Georgopoulos K, Gounari F.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Rheumatology and Knapp Center for Lupus and Immunology Research,
University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637.

Deregulated activation of ß-catenin in cancer has been correlated with genomic
instability. During thymocyte development, ß-catenin activates transcription in
partnership with T-cell-specific transcription factor 1 (Tcf-1). We previously
reported that targeted activation of ß-catenin in thymocytes (CAT mice) induces
lymphomas that depend on recombination activating gene (RAG) and myelocytomatosis
oncogene (Myc) activities. Here we show that these lymphomas have recurring
Tcra/Myc translocations that resulted from illegitimate RAG recombination events 
and resembled oncogenic translocations previously described in human T-ALL. We
therefore used the CAT animal model to obtain mechanistic insights into the
transformation process. ChIP-seq analysis uncovered a link between Tcf-1 and RAG2
showing that the two proteins shared binding sites marked by trimethylated
histone-3 lysine-4 (H3K4me3) throughout the genome, including near the
translocation sites. Pretransformed CAT thymocytes had increased DNA damage at
the translocating loci and showed altered repair of RAG-induced DNA double strand
breaks. These cells were able to survive despite DNA damage because activated
ß-catenin promoted an antiapoptosis gene expression profile. Thus, activated
ß-catenin promotes genomic instability that leads to T-cell lymphomas as a
consequence of altered double strand break repair and increased survival of
thymocytes with damaged DNA.

PMCID: PMC3890837
PMID: 24371308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Hepatol. 2014 Apr;60(4):847-54. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.12.003. Epub 2013 Dec 
11.

Hepatic steatosis exacerbated by endoplasmic reticulum stress-mediated
downregulation of FXR in aging mice.

Xiong X(1), Wang X(1), Lu Y(1), Wang E(1), Zhang Z(1), Yang J(1), Zhang H(1), Li 
X(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Endocrine
and Metabolic Diseases, Shanghai Clinical Center for Endocrine and Metabolic
Diseases, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai 200025, China. (2)Shanghai Institute of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Department of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Shanghai Clinical Center for
Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University 
School of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China; The Key Laboratory of Endocrine
Tumors and the Division of Endocrine and Metabolic Diseases, E-Institute of
Shanghai Universities, Shanghai 200025, China; Chinese-French Laboratory of
Genomics and Life Sciences, Ruijin Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai 200025, China. Electronic address: lixy@sibs.ac.cn.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2014 Apr;60(4):689-90.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is characterized by 
an increase in hepatic triglyceride (TG) contents. The prevalence of NAFLD is
increased with aging. However, the molecular mechanism for aging-induced fatty
liver remains poorly understood.
METHODS: Hepatic TG contents and gene expression profiles were analyzed in body
weight-matched young (2 months), middle (8 months) and old (18 months) C57BL/6
mice. Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress and farnesoid X receptor (FXR) expression
were examined. The mechanism of ER stress activation in the regulation of FXR
expression was further investigated.
RESULTS: In the present study, we found that TG was markedly accumulated and
lipogenic genes were up-regulated in the liver of C57BL/6 mice aged 18 months.
FXR, a key regulator of hepatic lipid metabolism was down-regulated in these old 
mice. At molecular levels, ER stress was activated in old mice and repressed FXR 
expression through inhibition of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1a)
transcriptional activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings demonstrate that FXR down-regulation plays a critical
role in aging-induced fatty liver.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24333182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Diabetologia. 2014 Mar;57(3):480-4. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-3119-2. Epub 2013 Dec
10.

De novo mutations of GCK, HNF1A and HNF4A may be more frequent in MODY than
previously assumed.

Stanik J(1), Dusatkova P, Cinek O, Valentinova L, Huckova M, Skopkova M,
Dusatkova L, Stanikova D, Pura M, Klimes I, Lebl J, Gasperikova D, Pruhova S.

Author information: 
(1)DIABGENE Laboratory, Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Slovak Academy
of Sciences, Vlarska 3, SK-833 06, Bratislava, Slovakia.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: MODY is mainly characterised by an early onset of diabetes and a
positive family history of diabetes with an autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance. However, de novo mutations have been reported anecdotally. The aim
of this study was to systematically revisit a large collection of MODY patients
to determine the minimum prevalence of de novo mutations in the most prevalent
MODY genes (i.e. GCK, HNF1A, HNF4A).
METHODS: Analysis of 922 patients from two national MODY centres (Slovakia and
the Czech Republic) identified 150 probands (16%) who came from pedigrees that
did not fulfil the criterion of two generations with diabetes but did fulfil the 
remaining criteria. The GCK, HNF1A and HNF4A genes were analysed by direct
sequencing.
RESULTS: Mutations in GCK, HNF1A or HNF4A genes were detected in 58 of 150
individuals. Parents of 28 probands were unavailable for further analysis, and in
19 probands the mutation was inherited from an asymptomatic parent. In 11
probands the mutations arose de novo.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: In our cohort of MODY patients from two national
centres the de novo mutations in GCK, HNF1A and HNF4A were present in 7.3% of the
150 families without a history of diabetes and 1.2% of all of the referrals for
MODY testing. This is the largest collection of de novo MODY mutations to date,
and our findings indicate a much higher frequency of de novo mutations than
previously assumed. Therefore, genetic testing of MODY could be considered for
carefully selected individuals without a family history of diabetes.

PMID: 24323243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Korean J Pathol. 2013 Oct;47(5):411-7. doi: 10.4132/KoreanJPathol.2013.47.5.411. 
Epub 2013 Oct 25.

Clinicopathological analysis of hepatocellular adenoma according to new bordeaux 
classification: report of eight korean cases.

Kim H(1), Jang JJ, Kim DS, Yeom BW, Won NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Gachon University Gil Medical Center, Incheon, Korea.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular adenoma (HCA) is a rare benign tumor of the liver. A
subtype classification of HCA (hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a [HNF1a]-mutated,
ß-catenin-mutated HCA, inflammatory HCA, and unclassified HCA) has recently been 
established based on a single institutional review of a HCA series by the
Bordeaux group.
METHODS: We used histologic and immunohistochemical parameters to classify and
evaluate eight cases from our institution. We evaluated the new classification
method and analyzed correlations between our results and those of other reports.
RESULTS: Seven of our eight cases showed histologic and immunohistochemical
results consistent with previous reports. However, one case showed overlapping
histologic features, as previously described by the Bordeaux group. Four cases
showed glutamine synthetase immunohistochemical staining inconsistent with their 
classification, indicating that glutamine synthetase staining may not be
diagnostic for ß-catenin-mutated HCA. HNF1a-mutated HCA may be indicated by the
absence of liver fatty acid binding protein expression. Detection of amyloid A
may indicate inflammatory HCA. HCA with no mutation in the HNF1a or ß-catenin
genes and no inflammatory protein expression is categorized as unclassified HCA.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the new classification is now generally accepted,
validation through follow-up studies is necessary.

PMCID: PMC3830987
PMID: 24255628  [PubMed]


198. Int J Cancer. 2014 Jun 15;134(12):2778-88. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28610. Epub 2013 Dec 
14.

Genetic and epigenetic changes in fibrosis-associated hepatocarcinogenesis in
mice.

Chappell G(1), Kutanzi K, Uehara T, Tryndyak V, Hong HH, Hoenerhoff M, Beland FA,
Rusyn I, Pogribny IP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Sciences and Engineering, University of North
Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most prevalent cancers and is rising
in incidence worldwide. The molecular mechanisms leading to the development of
HCC are complex and include both genetic and epigenetic events. To determine the 
relative contribution of these alterations in liver tumorigenesis, we evaluated
epigenetic modifications at both global and gene specific levels, as well as the 
mutational profile of genes commonly altered in liver tumors. A mouse model of
fibrosis-associated liver cancer that was designed to emulate cirrhotic liver, a 
prevailing disease state observed in most humans with HCC, was used. Tumor and
nontumor liver samples from B6C3F1 mice treated with N-nitrosodiethylamine (DEN; 
a single ip injection of 1 mg/kg at 14 days of age) and carbon tetrachloride
(CCl4; 0.2 ml/kg, 2 times/week ip starting at 8 weeks of age for 14 weeks), as
well as corresponding vehicle control animals, were analyzed for genetic and
epigenetic alterations. H-ras, Ctnnb1 and Hnf1a genes were not mutated in tumors 
in mice treated with DEN+CCl4 . In contrast, the increased tumor incidence in
mice treated with DEN+CCl4 was associated with marked epigenetic changes in liver
tumors and nontumor liver tissue, including demethylation of genomic DNA and
repetitive elements, a decrease in histone 3 lysine 9 trimethylation (H3K9me3)
and promoter hypermethylation and functional downregulation of Riz1, a histone
lysine methyltransferase tumor suppressor gene. Additionally, the reduction in
H3K9me3 was accompanied by increased expression of long interspersed nucleotide
elements 1 and short interspersed nucleotide elements B2, which is an indication 
of genomic instability. In summary, our results suggest that epigenetic events,
rather than mutations in known cancer-related genes, play a prominent role in
increased incidence of liver tumors in this mouse model of fibrosis-associated
liver cancer.

© 2013 UICC.

PMCID: PMC4209252
PMID: 24242335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Histopathology. 2014 May;64(6):890-5. doi: 10.1111/his.12326. Epub 2014 Jan 24.

Coexistence of inflammatory hepatocellular adenomas with HNF1a-inactivated
adenomas: is there an association?

Castain C(1), Sempoux C, Brunt EM, Causse O, Heitzmann A, Hernandez-Prera JC, Le 
Bail B, Schirmacher P, Thung SN, Balabaud C, Bioulac-Sage P.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Pathologie, Hôpital Pellegrin, CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France;
Inserm U1053, Université Bordeaux Segalen, Bordeaux, France.

AIMS: To report the coexistence of inflammatory hepatocellular adenoma (IHCA) and
HNF1a-inactivated HCA (H-HCA) in cases from a multicentre study.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We report nine cases with the coexistence of IHCA and H-HCA;
eight occurred in women, and one in a man. The numbers of nodules and the sizes
of the largest and smallest HCAs were variable. In one case, the nodules of the
two different subtypes were discovered at different times. In all women, HCAs
were histologically typical, regardless of their subtype, whereas H-HCA in the
man differed histologically from classic H-HCA.
CONCLUSIONS: These cases suggest that a predisposition to develop multiple
adenomas, hypothetically caused by a 'benign tumorigenic field effect', although 
common to all HCAs, may result in different genotypes and phenotypes. Although
this is rare, it is expected that more cases with the coexistence of different
genotypes will emerge, owing to progress in the use of specific
immunohistochemical approaches.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 24236804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Exp Gerontol. 2013 Dec;48(12):1518-25. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2013.10.011. Epub
2013 Oct 29.

HNF4a contributes to glucose formation in aged rat hepatocytes.

Park EY(1), Lee CH, Lee EK, Kim JH, Cova A, Lee SK, Cho SC, Kwak CS, Song KY,
Park SC, Jun HS, Kim KT.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Gachon Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, Gachon
University, Yeonsu-ku, Incheon 406-840, South Korea; Lee Gil Ya Cancer and
Diabetes Institute, Gachon University, Yeonsu-ku, Incheon 406-840, South Korea.

Aging-dependent physiological conditions are attributed to parenchymal structural
changes to cellular functions in aged organisms. Compared to the young animals,
the primary hepatocytes from old rats showed a higher glucose output and a higher
expression of the key gluconeogenesis-regulating enzyme, phosphoenol pyruvate
carboxykinase (PEPCK). The primary hepatocytes from old rats showed a higher
glucose output and a higher expression of the key gluconeogenesis-regulating
enzyme, phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK), compared with those from the 
young animals. The in situ hybridization study showed increased PEPCK mRNA
expression in the aged liver tissues. The livers from old rats showed loosened
hexagonal hepatic lobular structures, increased collagen accumulation, and high
expression of the hypoxia marker hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF1a). Hypoxia
increased the PEPCK mRNA and protein expression levels in accordance with the
HIF1a expression. PEPCK promoter luciferase reporter assay showed that hypoxia
increased PEPCK through transcriptional activation. Furthermore, the hepatocyte
nuclear factor a (HNF4a) protein, but not the HNF4a mRNA level, increased in
parallel with the PEPCK mRNA expression under hypoxic conditions. Glucose
production increased under hypoxic conditions, but this increment diminished by
HNF4a siRNA in young hepatocytes. Moreover, increased glucose production from old
rat hepatocytes was reversed by the down-regulation of HNF4a through a specific
siRNA. This study suggests that the mild hypoxic conditions in response to
aging-dependent hepatic structural changes may contribute to the induction of the
gluconeogenic enzyme PEPCK through HNF4a protein stabilization.

© 2013.

PMID: 24177414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Life Sci. 2013 Nov 19;93(22):805-13. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2013.10.011. Epub 2013
Oct 21.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1a/4a and forkhead box A2 regulate the solute carrier 
2A2 (Slc2a2) gene expression in the liver and kidney of diabetic rats.

David-Silva A(1), Freitas HS, Okamoto MM, Sabino-Silva R, Schaan BD, Machado UF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo (SP), Brazil.

AIMS: Solute carrier 2a2 (Slc2a2) gene codifies the glucose transporter GLUT2, a 
key protein for glucose flux in hepatocytes and renal epithelial cells of
proximal tubule. In diabetes mellitus, hepatic and tubular glucose output has
been related to Slc2a2/GLUT2 overexpression; and controlling the expression of
this gene may be an important adjuvant way to improve glycemic homeostasis. Thus,
the present study investigated transcriptional mechanisms involved in the
diabetes-induced overexpression of the Slc2a2 gene.
MAIN METHODS: Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1a and 4a (HNF-1a and HNF-4a), forkhead 
box A2 (FOXA2), sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c) and the
CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein (C/EBPß) mRNA expression (RT-PCR) and binding
activity into the Slc2a2 promoter (electrophoretic mobility assay) were analyzed 
in the liver and kidney of diabetic and 6-day insulin-treated diabetic rats.
KEY FINDINGS: Slc2a2/GLUT2 expression increased by more than 50% (P<0.001) in the
liver and kidney of diabetic rats, and 6-day insulin treatment restores these
values to those observed in non-diabetic animals. Similarly, the mRNA expression 
and the binding activity of HNF-1a, HNF-4a and FOXA2 increased by 50 to 100%
(P<0.05 to P<0.001), also returning to values of non-diabetic rats after insulin 
treatment. Neither the Srebf1 and Cebpb mRNA expression, nor the SREBP-1c and
C/EBP-ß binding activity was altered in diabetic rats.
SIGNIFICANCE: HNF-1a, HNF-4a and FOXA2 transcriptional factors are involved in
diabetes-induced overexpression of Slc2a2 gene in the liver and kidney. These
data point out that these transcriptional factors are important targets to
control GLUT2 expression in these tissues, which can contribute to glycemic
homeostasis in diabetes.

© 2013.

PMID: 24157454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Future Oncol. 2013 Nov;9(11):1757-72. doi: 10.2217/fon.13.122.

Wnt signaling in leukemias and myeloma: T-cell factors are in control.

Tiemessen MM(1), Staal FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology & Blood Transfusion, Leiden University Medical 
Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

Aberrant activation of the Wnt pathway has been implicated in the pathogenesis of
many malignancies, especially solid tumors. During the past decade it also became
clear that in hematological malignancies abnormal regulation of the Wnt pathway
can either be causative or enhance disease progression, which will be discussed
in detail in this review.

PMID: 24156335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. FASEB J. 2014 Feb;28(2):946-55. doi: 10.1096/fj.13-236273. Epub 2013 Oct 15.

Transcriptional control of the B3GALT5 gene by a retroviral promoter and
methylation of distant regulatory elements.

Zulueta A(1), Caretti A, Signorelli P, Dall'olio F, Trinchera M.

Author information: 
(1)1University of Insubria, via J. H. Dunant 5, 21100, Varese, Italy.
marco.trinchera@uninsubria.it.

We focused on transcription factors and epigenetic marks that regulate the
B3GALT5 gene through its retroviral long terminal repeat (LTR) promoter. We
compared the expression levels of the B3GALT5 LTR transcript, quantitated by
competitive RT-PCR, with those of the candidate transcription factors HNF1a/ß and
Cdx1/2, determined by Western blot analysis, in colon cancer biopsies, various
cell lines, and cell models serving as controls. We found that HNF1a/ß were
easily detected, irrespective of the amount of LTR transcript expressed by the
source, whereas Cdx1/2 were undetectable, and no sample lacking HNF1a/ß expressed
the LTR transcript. On transfection in proper host cells, both HNF1a and HNF1ß
provided detectable LTR transcript, whereas shRNA-mediated silencing of HNF1ß
impaired transcription. Treating cells with 5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5AZA)
strongly reduced expression, without affecting HNF1a/ß, despite the lack of CpG
islands in the LTR and proximal sequences. By electrophoresis mobility shift and 
luciferase reporter assays, the LTR promoter binding and activity did not
correlate with the amounts of LTR transcript expressed in the cells and depended 
on the levels of the transcription factors. We conclude that HNF1a/ß are
necessary but insufficient to activate and regulate B3GALT5 LTR transcription,
which depends on unknown regulatory elements that are active when methylated and 
located outside of and far from the LTR promoter.

PMID: 24128890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Clin Res Hepatol Gastroenterol. 2014 Apr;38(2):132-6. doi:
10.1016/j.clinre.2013.08.004. Epub 2013 Oct 11.

Hepatocellular adenomatosis: what should the term stand for!

Frulio N(1), Chiche L(2), Bioulac-Sage P(3), Balabaud C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Service de Radiologie, Hôpital Saint-André, CHU de Bordeaux, 33075 Bordeaux,
France. Electronic address: Nora.frulio@chu-bordeaux.fr. (2)Service de Chirurgie 
Hépatobiliaire et Pancréatique, Maison du Haut-Lévèque, CHU de Bordeaux, 33604
Pessac, France. Electronic address: Laurence.chiche@chu-bordeaux.fr. (3)Service
de Pathologie, Hôpital Pellegrin, CHU de Bordeaux, 33075 Bordeaux, France; Inserm
U1053, Université Victor-Segalen, 33076 Bordeaux, France. Electronic address:
paulette.bioulac-sage@chu-bordeaux.fr. (4)Inserm U1053, Université
Victor-Segalen, 33076 Bordeaux, France. Electronic address:
charles.balabaud@u-bordeaux2.fr.

In 1985, adenomatosis, a term coined to mean ten or more nodules, was considered 
as a specific entity different from hepatocellular adenoma (HCA) whether single
or multiple. In the 2000s the term has lost its individuality. The great
contribution of the classification was to clearly demonstrate that in all
hepatocellular subtypes and in particular etiologies such as glycogenosis and
male hormone administration, HCA could be solitary, multiple (<10) or multiple
(>10: adenomatosis). Management of hepatocellular adenomatosis may not be
different from solitary or multiple HCA. To keep its specificity in terms of
management and prognosis compared to solitary or multiple HCA, it is necessary to
indicate the number of nodules including the combination of three parameters:
size, location and subtypes. When the classical armentarium to treat nodules is
not possible or too risky, embolization or liver transplantation remains the only
therapeutic options.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24126236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 22;288(47):33813-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.482760. Epub
2013 Oct 11.

Enterocyte-specific regulation of the apical nutrient transporter SLC6A19
(B(0)AT1) by transcriptional and epigenetic networks.

Tümer E(1), Bröer A, Balkrishna S, Jülich T, Bröer S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra,
Australian Capital Territory 0200, Australia.

Enterocytes are specialized to absorb nutrients from the lumen of the small
intestine by expressing a select set of genes to maximize the uptake of
nutrients. They develop from stem cells in the crypt and differentiate into
mature enterocytes while moving along the crypt-villus axis. Using the Slc6a19
gene as an example, encoding the neutral amino acid transporter B(0)AT1, we
studied regulation of the gene by transcription factors and epigenetic factors in
the intestine. To investigate this question, we used a fractionation method to
separate mature enterocytes from crypt cells and analyzed gene expression.
Transcription factors HNF1a and HNF4a activate transcription of the Slc6a19 gene 
in villus enterocytes, whereas high levels of SOX9 repress expression in the
crypts. CpG dinucleotides in the proximal promoter were highly methylated in the 
crypt and fully de-methylated in the villus. Furthermore, histone modification
H3K27Ac, indicating an active promoter, was prevalent in villus cells but barely 
detectable in crypt cells. The results suggest that Slc6a19 expression in the
intestine is regulated at three different levels involving promoter methylation, 
histone modification, and opposing transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3837124
PMID: 24121511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Diabet Med. 2014 Apr;31(4):466-71. doi: 10.1111/dme.12314. Epub 2013 Oct 16.

Positivity for islet cell autoantibodies in patients with monogenic diabetes is
associated with later diabetes onset and higher HbA1c level.

Urbanová J(1), Rypácková B, Procházková Z, Kucera P, Cerná M, Andel M, Heneberg
P.

Author information: 
(1)Charles University in Prague, Third Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech
Republic.

AIMS: Islet cell autoantibodies are associated with autoimmune insulitis and
belong to the diagnostic criteria of type 1 diabetes mellitus. However, growing
evidence suggests that autoantibodies are present in other types of diabetes.
Here, we focus on the autoantibody incidence in Czech patients with
maturity-onset diabetes of the young and analyse their functional relevance in
terms of diabetes onset and control.
METHODS: Autoantibodies against glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) 65 and protein 
tyrosine phosphatase islet antigen 2 (IA-2) were measured in a cohort of 28 Czech
patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young, all confirmed by genetic
testing. Selected clinical data were correlated to the status and kinetics of
autoantibodies.
RESULTS: One quarter of patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young
examined (7/28; 25%) was positive for GAD or IA-2 autoantibodies. GAD
autoantibodies were more prevalent (7/7) than IA-2 autoantibodies (1/7). The
incidence of autoantibodies did not correlate with human leukocyte antigen
status. The patients who were positive for the autoantibodies developed diabetes 
later than those who were autoantibody-negative, but had worse glycaemic control 
(increased HbA1c ). Expression of autoantibodies decreased with any improvement
of diabetes compensation. Only one patient did not correspond to the above and
displayed signs of combined signs of maturity-onset diabetes of the young and
Type 1 diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: The data suggest transient but highly prevalent islet cell
autoantibody expression in Czech patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the
young. The autoantibodies were found in patients with delayed diabetes onset, and
in times of insufficient diabetes control. As improvement of glycaemic control
was associated with a decrease in levels of autoantibodies, their presence may
reflect the kinetics of ß-cell destruction induced by causes other than
autoimmune ones.

© 2013 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2013 Diabetes UK.

PMID: 24102923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Nov;1829(11):1225-35. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.09.007. Epub 2013 Oct 5.

The transcription factor HNF1a induces expression of angiotensin-converting
enzyme 2 (ACE2) in pancreatic islets from evolutionarily conserved promoter
motifs.

Pedersen KB(1), Chhabra KH, Nguyen VK, Xia H, Lazartigues E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology & Experimental Therapeutics and Cardiovascular
Center of Excellence, Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center, 1901
Perdido St., New Orleans, LA 70112, USA.

Pancreatic angiotensin-converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) has previously been shown to be
critical for maintaining glycemia and ß-cell function. Efforts to maintain or
increase ACE2 expression in pancreatic ß-cells might therefore have therapeutic
potential for treating diabetes. In our study, we investigated the
transcriptional role of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a (HNF1a) and hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1ß (HNF1ß) in induction of ACE2 expression in insulin-secreting
cells. A deficient allele of HNF1a or HNF1ß causes maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY) types 3 and 5, respectively, in humans. We found that ACE2 is
primarily transcribed from the proximal part of the ACE2 promoter in the
pancreas. In the proximal part of the human ACE2 promoter, we further identified 
three functional HNF1 binding sites, as they have binding affinity for HNF1a and 
HNF1ß and are required for induction of promoter activity by HNF1ß in insulinoma 
cells. These three sites are well-conserved among mammalian species. Both HNF1a
and HNF1ß induce expression of ACE2 mRNA and lead to elevated levels of ACE2
protein and ACE2 enzymatic activity in insulinoma cells. Furthermore, HNF1a
dose-dependently increases ACE2 expression in primary pancreatic islet cells. We 
conclude that HNF1a can induce the expression of ACE2 in pancreatic islet cells
via evolutionarily conserved HNF1 binding sites in the ACE2 promoter. Potential
therapeutics aimed at counteracting functional HNF1a depletion in diabetes and
MODY3 will thus have ACE2 induction in pancreatic islets as a likely beneficial
effect.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC3838857
PMID: 24100303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Nat Genet. 2013 Nov;45(11):1380-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.2794. Epub 2013 Oct 6.

Assessing the phenotypic effects in the general population of rare variants in
genes for a dominant Mendelian form of diabetes.

Flannick J(1), Beer NL, Bick AG, Agarwala V, Molnes J, Gupta N, Burtt NP, Florez 
JC, Meigs JB, Taylor H, Lyssenko V, Irgens H, Fox E, Burslem F, Johansson S,
Brosnan MJ, Trimmer JK, Newton-Cheh C, Tuomi T, Molven A, Wilson JG, O'Donnell
CJ, Kathiresan S, Hirschhorn JN, Njølstad PR, Rolph T, Seidman JG, Gabriel S, Cox
DR, Seidman CE, Groop L, Altshuler D.

Author information: 
(1)1] Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard and 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [2]
Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [3] Diabetes Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [4].

Genome sequencing can identify individuals in the general population who harbor
rare coding variants in genes for Mendelian disorders and who may consequently
have increased disease risk. Previous studies of rare variants in phenotypically 
extreme individuals display ascertainment bias and may demonstrate inflated
effect-size estimates. We sequenced seven genes for maturity-onset diabetes of
the young (MODY) in well-phenotyped population samples (n = 4,003). We filtered
rare variants according to two prediction criteria for disease-causing mutations:
reported previously in MODY or satisfying stringent de novo thresholds (rare,
conserved and protein damaging). Approximately 1.5% and 0.5% of randomly selected
individuals from the Framingham and Jackson Heart Studies, respectively, carry
variants from these two classes. However, the vast majority of carriers remain
euglycemic through middle age. Accurate estimates of variant effect sizes from
population-based sequencing are needed to avoid falsely predicting a substantial 
fraction of individuals as being at risk for MODY or other Mendelian diseases.

PMCID: PMC4051627
PMID: 24097065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 12;8(9):e74577. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074577. eCollection
2013.

Circulating CD36 is reduced in HNF1A-MODY carriers.

Bacon S(1), Kyithar MP, Schmid J, Costa Pozza A, Handberg A, Byrne MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland.

INTRODUCTION: Premature atherosclerosis is a significant cause of morbidity and
mortality in type 2 diabetes mellitus. Maturity onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) accounts for approximately 2% of all diabetes, with mutations in the
transcription factor; hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1A) accounting for
the majority of MODY cases. There is somewhat limited data available on the
prevalence of macrovascular disease in HNF1A-MODY carriers with diabetes. Marked 
insulin resistance and the associated dyslipidaemia are not clinical features of 
HNF1A-MODY carriers. The scavenger protein CD36 has been shown to play a
substantial role in the pathogenesis of atherosclerosis, largely through its
interaction with oxidised LDL. Higher levels of monocyte CD36 and plasma
CD36(sCD36) are seen to cluster with insulin resistance and diabetes. The aim of 
this study was to determine levels of sCD36 in participants with HNF1A-MODY
diabetes and to compare them with unaffected normoglycaemic family members and
participants with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: We recruited 37 participants with HNF1A-MODY diabetes and compared
levels of sCD36 with BMI-matched participants with type 2 diabetes mellitus and
normoglycaemic HNF1A-MODY negative family controls. Levels of sCD36 were
correlated with phenotypic and biochemical parameters.
RESULTS: HNF1A-MODY participants were lean, normotensive, with higher HDL and
lower triglyceride levels when compared to controls and participants with type 2 
diabetes mellitus. sCD36 was also significantly lower in HNF1A-MODY participants 
when compared to both the normoglycaemic family controls and to lean participants
with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
CONCLUSION: In conclusion, sCD36 is significantly lower in lean participants with
HNF1A-MODY diabetes when compared to weight-matched normoglycaemic familial
HNF1A-MODY negative controls and to lean participants with type 2 diabetes
mellitus. Lower levels of this pro-atherogenic marker may result from the higher 
HDL component in the lipid profile of HNF1A-MODY participants.

PMCID: PMC3771933
PMID: 24069322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Diabetes Care. 2014 Feb;37(2):475-82. doi: 10.2337/dc13-1458. Epub 2013 Sep 23.

Co-occurrence of risk alleles in or near genes modulating insulin secretion
predisposes obese youth to prediabetes.

Giannini C(1), Dalla Man C, Groop L, Cobelli C, Zhao H, Shaw MM, Duran E,
Pierpont B, Bale AE, Caprio S, Santoro N.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding author: Nicola Santoro, nicola.santoro@yale.edu.

OBJECTIVE: Paralleling the rise of pediatric obesity, the prevalence of impaired 
glucose tolerance (IGT) and type 2 diabetes (T2D) is increasing among youth. In
this study, we asked whether the co-occurrence of risk alleles in or near five
genes modulating insulin secretion (TCF7L2 rs7903146, IGF2BP2 rs4402960, CDKAL1
rs7754840, HHEX rs1111875, and HNF1A rs1169288) is associated with a higher risk 
of IGT/T2D in obese children and adolescents.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We studied 714 obese subjects (290 boys and 424
girls; mean age 13.6 ± 3.1 years; mean z score BMI 2.2 ± 0.4) and evaluated the
insulin secretion by using the oral minimal model and, in a subgroup of 37
subjects, the hyperglycemic clamp. Also, 203 subjects were followed up for a mean
of 2.1 years.
RESULTS: We observed that the increase of risk alleles was associated with a
progressive worsening of insulin secretion (P < 0.001) mainly due to an
impairment of the dynamic phase of insulin secretion (P = 0.004); the higher the 
number of the risk alleles, the higher the chance of progression from normal
glucose tolerance (NGT) to IGT/T2D (P = 0.022). Also, for those who were IGT at
baseline, a higher risk score was associated with a lower odds to revert to NGT
(P = 0.026).
CONCLUSIONS: Obese children and adolescents developing IGT/T2D have a higher
genetic predisposition than those who do not show these diseases, and this
predisposition is mainly related to gene variants modulating the early phase of
insulin secretion. Although these data are very interesting, they need to be
replicated in other cohorts.

PMCID: PMC3898754
PMID: 24062323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Pharmacol. 2013 Dec;84(6):808-23. doi: 10.1124/mol.113.088229. Epub 2013 Sep 
13.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 4a and 1a regulate kidney developmental expression of 
drug-metabolizing enzymes and drug transporters.

Martovetsky G(1), Tee JB, Nigam SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (G.M., S.K.N.), Department of Biomedical Sciences
(G.M.), Department of Medicine (S.K.N.), and Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine (S.K.N.), University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California;
and Department of Pediatrics, Dalhousie University and IWK Health Centre,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada (J.B.T.).

The transcriptional regulation of drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters
(here collectively referred to as DMEs) in the developing proximal tubule (PT) is
not well understood. As in the liver, DME regulation in the PT may be mediated
through nuclear receptors, which are thought to "sense" deviations from
homeostasis by being activated by ligands, some of which are handled by DMEs,
including drug transporters. Systems analysis of transcriptomic data during
kidney development predicted a set of upstream transcription factors, including
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (Hnf4a) and Hnf1a, as well as Nr3c1 (Gr), Nfe2l2
(Nrf2), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a (Ppara), and Tp53. Motif
analysis of cis-regulatory enhancers further suggested that Hnf4a and Hnf1a are
the main transcriptional regulators of DMEs in the PT. Available expression data 
from tissue-specific Hnf4a knockout tissues revealed that distinct subsets of
DMEs were regulated by Hnf4a in a tissue-specific manner. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation combined with massively parallel DNA sequencing was performed
to characterize the PT-specific binding sites of Hnf4a in rat kidneys at three
developmental stages (prenatal, immature, adult), which further supported a major
role for Hnf4a in regulating PT gene expression, including DMEs. In ex vivo
kidney organ culture, an antagonist of Hnf4a (but not a similar inactive
compound) led to predicted changes in DME expression, including among others
Fmo1, Cyp2d2, Cyp2d4, Nqo2, as well as organic cation transporters and organic
anion transporters Slc22a1 (Oct1), Slc22a2 (Oct2), Slc22a6 (Oat1), Slc22a8
(Oat3), and Slc47a1 (Mate1). Conversely, overexpression of Hnf1a and Hnf4a in
primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts, sometimes considered a surrogate for
mesenchymal stem cells, induced expression of several of these proximal tubule
DMEs, as well as epithelial markers and a PT-enriched brush border marker Ggt1.
These cells had organic anion transporter function. Taken together, the data
strongly supports a critical role for HNF4a and Hnf1a in the tissue-specific
regulation of drug handling and differentiation toward a PT-like cellular
identity. We discuss our data in the context of the "remote sensing and signaling
hypothesis" (Ahn and Nigam, 2009; Wu et al., 2011).

PMCID: PMC3834141
PMID: 24038112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Immunol. 2013 Oct 15;191(8):4383-91. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1301228. Epub 2013
Sep 13.

TCF-1 controls ILC2 and NKp46+ROR<U+03B3>t+ innate lymphocyte differentiation and
protection in intestinal inflammation.

Mielke LA(1), Groom JR, Rankin LC, Seillet C, Masson F, Putoczki T, Belz GT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Melbourne, Victoria 3052, Australia;

Innate lymphocyte populations play a central role in conferring protective
immunity at the mucosal frontier. In this study, we demonstrate that T cell
factor 1 (TCF-1; encoded by Tcf7), a transcription factor also important for NK
and T cell differentiation, is expressed by multiple innate lymphoid cell (ILC)
subsets, including GATA3(+) nuocytes (ILC2) and NKp46(+) ILCs (ILC3), which
confer protection against lung and intestinal inflammation. TCF-1 was
intrinsically required for the differentiation of both ILC2 and NKp46(+) ILC3.
Loss of TCF-1 expression impaired the capacity of these ILC subsets to produce
IL-5, IL-13, and IL-22 and resulted in crippled responses to intestinal infection
with Citrobacter rodentium. Furthermore, a reduction in T-bet expression required
for Notch-2-dependent development of NKp46(+) ILC3 showed a dose-dependent
reduction in TCF-1 expression. Collectively, our findings demonstrate an
essential requirement for TCF-1 in ILC2 differentiation and reveal a link among
Tcf7, Notch, and Tbx21 in NKp46(+) ILC3 development.

PMID: 24038093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Cancer Causes Control. 2013 Dec;24(12):2077-87. doi: 10.1007/s10552-013-0285-y.
Epub 2013 Sep 14.

Plasma C-reactive protein, genetic risk score, and risk of common cancers in the 
Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities study.

Prizment AE(1), Folsom AR, Dreyfus J, Anderson KE, Visvanathan K, Joshu CE, Platz
EA, Pankow JS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epidemiology and Community Health, School of Public Health,
University of Minnesota, 1300 2nd Street South, Suite 300, Minneapolis, MN,
55455, USA, prizm001@umn.edu.

PURPOSE: Many studies, including the Atherosclerosis Risk in Communities (ARIC)
cohort, reported a positive association between plasma C-reactive protein (CRP)-a
biomarker of low-grade chronic inflammation-and colorectal cancer risk, although 
it is unclear whether the association is causal. Our aims were to assess the
associations of a CRP genetic risk score (CRP-GRS) created from single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) with colorectal cancer risk, as well as examine plasma CRP
and CRP-GRS in relation to common cancers in the ARIC cohort.
METHODS: Cox proportional hazards models were used to prospectively estimate
hazard ratios (HRs) and 95 % confidence interval (95 % CI) of total, colorectal, 
lung, prostate, and breast cancers in relation to: (1) CRP-GRS among 8,657 Whites
followed in 1987-2006 and (2) log-transformed plasma CRP among 7,603 Whites
followed in 1996-2006. A weighted CRP-GRS was comprised of 20 CRP-related SNPs
located in/near CRP, APOC1, HNF1A, LEPR, and 16 other genes that were identified 
in genome-wide association studies.
RESULTS: After multivariable adjustment, one standard deviation increment of the 
CRP-GRS was associated with colorectal cancer risk (HR 1.19; 95 % CI 1.03-1.37), 
but not with any other cancer. One unit of log-transformed plasma CRP was
associated with the risk of total, colorectal, lung, and breast cancers: HRs
(95 % CIs) were 1.08 (1.01-1.15), 1.24 (1.01-1.51), 1.29 (1.08-1.54), and 1.27
(1.07-1.51), respectively. HRs remained elevated, although lost statistical
significance for all but breast cancer, after excluding subjects with <2 years of
follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: The study corroborates a causative role of chronic low-grade
inflammation in colorectal carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3836434
PMID: 24036889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(1):202-9. doi: 10.2337/dc13-0410. Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Cost-effectiveness of MODY genetic testing: translating genomic advances into
practical health applications.

Naylor RN(1), John PM, Winn AN, Carmody D, Greeley SA, Philipson LH, Bell GI,
Huang ES.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding author: Rochelle N. Naylor, rnaylor@bsd.uchicago.edu.

OBJECTIVE To evaluate the cost-effectiveness of a genetic testing policy for
HNF1A-, HNF4A-, and GCK-MODY in a hypothetical cohort of type 2 diabetic patients
25-40 years old with a MODY prevalence of 2%. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS We used
a simulation model of type 2 diabetes complications based on UK Prospective
Diabetes Study data, modified to account for the natural history of disease by
genetic subtype to compare a policy of genetic testing at diabetes diagnosis
versus a policy of no testing. Under the screening policy, successful
sulfonylurea treatment of HNF1A-MODY and HNF4A-MODY was modeled to produce a
glycosylated hemoglobin reduction of -1.5% compared with usual care. GCK-MODY
received no therapy. Main outcome measures were costs and quality-adjusted life
years (QALYs) based on lifetime risk of complications and treatments, expressed
as the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) (USD/QALY). RESULTS The
testing policy yielded an average gain of 0.012 QALYs and resulted in an ICER of 
205,000 USD. Sensitivity analysis showed that if the MODY prevalence was 6%, the 
ICER would be ~50,000 USD. If MODY prevalence was >30%, the testing policy was
cost saving. Reducing genetic testing costs to 700 USD also resulted in an ICER
of ~50,000 USD. CONCLUSIONS Our simulated model suggests that a policy of testing
for MODY in selected populations is cost-effective for the U.S. based on
contemporary ICER thresholds. Higher prevalence of MODY in the tested population 
or decreased testing costs would enhance cost-effectiveness. Our results make a
compelling argument for routine coverage of genetic testing in patients with high
clinical suspicion of MODY.

PMCID: PMC3867988
PMID: 24026547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Endocr Pract. 2014 Feb;20(2):107-11. doi: 10.4158/EP13254.OR.

Mody-3: novel HNF1A mutation and the utility of glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1
receptor agonist therapy.

Docena MK(1), Faiman C(2), Stanley CM(3), Pantalone KM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Summa Health System, Akron, Ohio. (2)Endocrinology and Metabolism Institute,
Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, Ohio. (3)Courtagen Life Sciences Inc., Woburn,
Massachusetts.

OBJECTIVE: An estimated 1 to 2% of cases of diabetes mellitus have a monogenic
basis; however, delayed diagnosis and misdiagnosis as type 1 and 2 diabetes are
common. Correctly identifying the molecular basis of an individual's diabetes may
significantly alter the management approach to both the patient and his or her
relatives. We describe a case of mature onset diabetes of the young (MODY) with
sufficient evidence to support the classification of a novel HNF1A (hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1-a) mutation as a cause of MODY-3.
METHODS: A 21-year-old Caucasian female presented to our office with a diagnosis 
of noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) at age 10; glycemia was
initially managed with oral antidiabetic (OAD) agents and insulin detemir. The
patient reported a strong family history of early-onset NIDDM in both her mother 
and maternal grandmother, both of whom eventually required insulin therapy to
control glycemia. The patient's medical and family history were highly suggestive
of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), and genetic testing was
performed.
RESULTS: Genetic screening detected a mutation p. Arg200Trp in the HNF1A gene in 
the patient, her mother, and maternal grandmother, suggesting a diagnosis of
MODY-3. This finding resulted in a change of antidiabetic therapy in all 3
patients, including the addition of once-daily liraglutide therapy, which helped 
improve their glycemic control.
CONCLUSION: Our case report supports the classification of the p. Arg200Trp
mutation as a cause of MODY-3. The findings also suggest that glucagon-like
peptide-1 (GLP-1) receptor agonist therapy may be of value in managing glycemia
in patients with MODY-3.

PMID: 24014008  [PubMed - in process]


216. Gut. 2014 Jun;63(6):881-90. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2013-305266. Epub 2013 Sep 2.

Long non-coding RNA HNF1A-AS1 regulates proliferation and migration in
oesophageal adenocarcinoma cells.

Yang X(1), Song JH, Cheng Y, Wu W, Bhagat T, Yu Y, Abraham JM, Ibrahim S, Ravich 
W, Roland BC, Khashab M, Singh VK, Shin EJ, Yang X, Verma AK, Meltzer SJ, Mori Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, , Baltimore, Maryland, USA.

OBJECTIVES: Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNA) have been shown to play important roles
in the development and progression of cancer. However, functional lncRNAs and
their downstream mechanisms are largely unknown in the molecular pathogenesis of 
oesophageal adenocarcinoma (EAC) and its progression.
DESIGN: lncRNAs that are abnormally upregulated in EACs were identified by
RNA-sequencing analysis, followed by quantitative RT-PCR (qRTPCR) validation
using tissues from 25 EAC patients. Cell biological assays in combination with
small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown were performed in order to probe the
functional relevance of these lncRNAs.
RESULTS: We discovered that a lncRNA, HNF1A-AS1, is markedly upregulated in human
primary EACs relative to their corresponding normal oesophageal tissues (mean
fold change 10.6, p<0.01). We further discovered that HNF1A-AS1 knockdown
significantly inhibited cell proliferation and anchorage-independent growth,
suppressed S-phase entry, and inhibited cell migration and invasion in multiple
in vitro EAC models (p<0.05). A gene ontological analysis revealed that HNF1A-AS1
knockdown preferentially affected genes that are linked to assembly of chromatin 
and the nucleosome, a mechanism essential to cell cycle progression. The well
known cancer-related lncRNA, H19, was the gene most markedly inhibited by
HNF1A-AS1 knockdown. Consistent to this finding, there was a significant positive
correlation between HNF1A-AS1 and H19 expression in primary EACs (p<0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: We have discovered abnormal upregulation of a lncRNA, HNF1A-AS1, in 
human EAC. Our findings suggest that dysregulation of HNF1A-AS1 participates in
oesophageal tumorigenesis, and that this participation may be mediated, at least 
in part, by modulation of chromatin and nucleosome assembly as well as by H19
induction.

PMCID: PMC4612639
PMID: 24000294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2014 Mar;29(3):524-32. doi: 10.1111/jgh.12371.

Prognostic value of hepatocyte nuclear factors 4a and 1a identified by tissue
microarray in resectable hepatocellular carcinoma.

Shim JH(1), Kang HJ, Han S, Lee YJ, Lee SG, Yu E, Lee HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Asan Medical Center, Seoul, Korea.

BACKGROUND AND AIM: This study aimed to investigate the prognostic value of
expression of hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) involved in hepatic gene
transcription in patients undergoing curative resection for hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: We performed immunohistochemical analyses on microarrays of the tumors
and matched adjacent tissue using antibodies against HNF1a, HNF1ß, HNF4a, and
a-fetoprotein (AFP). We evaluated the prognostic value of biomarker expression
using Cox regression and the Kaplan-Meier method in a training cohort of 220
patients and conducted an independent validation in 232 patients. We also
determined whether measurement of HNFs improved risk prediction beyond the use of
established factors, using net reclassification improvement (NRI).
RESULTS: Post-surgical recurrence and hepatic death were predicted by
intratumoral HNF4a underexpression in both cohorts. In the training cohort they
were also predicted by peritumoral HNF1a positivity. A pooled cohort analysis
showed that these predictors were independently associated with early but not
late-phase recurrence, and resultant mortality. Intratumoral expression levels of
HNF4a were correlated with those of HNF1a, HNF1ß, and AFP (P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). Similarly, 
HNF1a expression in peritumoral tissue was correlated with that of other markers 
(P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05). There was no significant correlation between expression of HNF4a in
tumors and HNF1a in peritumoral tissue. Adding combinations of intratumoral HNF4a
and peritumoral HNF1a to 2-year recurrence and 5-year mortality models including 
known clinicopathological prognostic factors significantly improved the NRI
indexes (39% and 44%, respectively; P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Immunohistological activation of intratumoral HNF4a and depletion of
peritumoral HNF1a have prognostic significance for delayed recurrence and death
after HCC resection.

© 2013 Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology Foundation and Wiley Publishing
Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23981200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. J Reprod Dev. 2013 Dec 17;59(6):599-603. Epub 2013 Aug 24.

Production of diabetic offspring using cryopreserved epididymal sperm by in vitro
fertilization and intrafallopian insemination techniques in transgenic pigs.

Umeyama K(1), Honda K, Matsunari H, Nakano K, Hidaka T, Sekiguchi K, Mochizuki H,
Takeuchi Y, Fujiwara T, Watanabe M, Nagaya M, Nagashima H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Engineering, Department of Life Sciences, School
of Agriculture, Meiji University, Kanagawa 214-8571, Japan.

Somatic cell nuclear transfer (SCNT) is a useful technique for creating pig
strains that model human diseases. However, production of numerous cloned disease
model pigs by SCNT for large-scale experiments is impractical due to its
complexity and inefficiency. In the present study, we aimed to establish an
efficient procedure for proliferating the diabetes model pig carrying the mutant 
human hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a gene. A founder diabetes transgenic cloned pig
was generated by SCNT and treated with insulin to allow for normal growth to
maturity, at which point epididymal sperm could be collected for
cryopreservation. In vitro fertilization and intrafallopian insemination using
the cryopreserved epididymal sperm resulted in diabetes model transgenic
offspring. These results suggest that artificial reproductive technology using
cryopreserved epididymal sperm could be a practical option for proliferation of
genetically modified disease model pigs.

PMCID: PMC3934148
PMID: 23979397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(8):e1003745. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003745. Epub 2013 Aug 
15.

Past visits present: TCF/LEFs partner with ATFs for ß-catenin-independent
activity.

Sprowl S(1), Waterman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, California, United States of America.

Comment on
    PLoS Genet. 2013;9(8):e1003603.

PMCID: PMC3744446
PMID: 23966883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. PLoS Genet. 2013;9(8):e1003603. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003603. Epub 2013 Aug 
15.

ß-Catenin-independent activation of TCF1/LEF1 in human hematopoietic tumor cells 
through interaction with ATF2 transcription factors.

Grumolato L(1), Liu G, Haremaki T, Mungamuri SK, Mong P, Akiri G, Lopez-Bergami
P, Arita A, Anouar Y, Mlodzik M, Ronai ZA, Brody J, Weinstein DC, Aaronson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncological Sciences, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai,
New York, New York, United States of America.

Comment in
    PLoS Genet. 2013;9(8):e1003745.

The role of Wnt signaling in embryonic development and stem cell maintenance is
well established and aberrations leading to the constitutive up-regulation of
this pathway are frequent in several types of human cancers. Upon ligand-mediated
activation, Wnt receptors promote the stabilization of ß-catenin, which
translocates to the nucleus and binds to the T-cell factor/lymphoid enhancer
factor (TCF/LEF) family of transcription factors to regulate the expression of
Wnt target genes. When not bound to ß-catenin, the TCF/LEF proteins are believed 
to act as transcriptional repressors. Using a specific lentiviral reporter, we
identified hematopoietic tumor cells displaying constitutive TCF/LEF
transcriptional activation in the absence of ß-catenin stabilization. Suppression
of TCF/LEF activity in these cells mediated by an inducible dominant-negative
TCF4 (DN-TCF4) inhibited both cell growth and the expression of Wnt target genes.
Further, expression of TCF1 and LEF1, but not TCF4, stimulated TCF/LEF reporter
activity in certain human cell lines independently of ß-catenin. By a
complementary approach in vivo, TCF1 mutants, which lacked the ability to bind to
ß-catenin, induced Xenopus embryo axis duplication, a hallmark of Wnt activation,
and the expression of the Wnt target gene Xnr3. Through generation of different
TCF1-TCF4 fusion proteins, we identified three distinct TCF1 domains that
participate in the ß-catenin-independent activity of this transcription factor.
TCF1 and LEF1 physically interacted and functionally synergized with members of
the activating transcription factor 2 (ATF2) family of transcription factors.
Moreover, knockdown of ATF2 expression in lymphoma cells phenocopied the
inhibitory effects of DN-TCF4 on the expression of target genes associated with
the Wnt pathway and on cell growth. Together, our findings indicate that, through
interaction with ATF2 factors, TCF1/LEF1 promote the growth of hematopoietic
malignancies in the absence of ß-catenin stabilization, thus establishing a new
mechanism for TCF1/LEF1 transcriptional activity distinct from that associated
with canonical Wnt signaling.

PMCID: PMC3744423
PMID: 23966864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Immunity. 2013 Aug 22;39(2):298-310. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.07.019. Epub 2013
Aug 15.

Canonical Wnt signaling negatively modulates regulatory T cell function.

van Loosdregt J(1), Fleskens V, Tiemessen MM, Mokry M, van Boxtel R, Meerding J, 
Pals CE, Kurek D, Baert MR, Delemarre EM, Gröne A, Koerkamp MJ, Sijts AJ,
Nieuwenhuis EE, Maurice MM, van Es JH, Ten Berge D, Holstege FC, Staal FJ, Zaiss 
DM, Prakken BJ, Coffer PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht 3584EA,
The Netherlands.

Foxp3 is crucial for both the development and function of regulatory T (Treg)
cells; however, the posttranslational mechanisms regulating Foxp3 transcriptional
output remain poorly defined. Here, we demonstrate that T cell factor 1 (TCF1)
and Foxp3 associates in Treg cells and that active Wnt signaling disrupts Foxp3
transcriptional activity. A global chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing
comparison in Treg cells revealed considerable overlap between Foxp3 and Wnt
target genes. The activation of Wnt signaling reduced Treg-mediated suppression
both in vitro and in vivo, whereas disruption of Wnt signaling in Treg cells
enhanced their suppressive capacity. The activation of effector T cells increased
Wnt3a production, and Wnt3a levels were found to be greatly increased in
mononuclear cells isolated from synovial fluid versus peripheral blood of
arthritis patients. We propose a model in which Wnt produced under inflammatory
conditions represses Treg cell function, allowing a productive immune response,
but, if uncontrolled, could lead to the development of autoimmunity.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23954131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Histol Histopathol. 2014 Feb;29(2):243-9. Epub 2013 Aug 13.

Retrospective study of hepatocellular adenomas based on the phenotypic
classification system: A report from China.

Pan J(1), Chen L(2), Fan J(3), Zhou J(4), Qin L(5), Tan Y(6), Ji Y(7), Huang
X(8).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Key Laboratory
of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education, Shanghai and
Nantong Cancer Hospital, Jiangsu, China. huang.xiaowu@zs-hospital.sh.cn.
(2)Department of Pathology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. chen.lingli@zs-hospital.sh.cn. (3)Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan
Hospital, Fudan University, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion,
Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China. fan.jia@zs-hospital.sh.cn. (4)Liver
Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Key Laboratory of
Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China.
zhou.jian@zs-hospital.sh.cn. (5)Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan
University, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of
Education, Shanghai, China. qin.lunxiu@zs-hospital.sh.cn. (6)Department of
Pathology, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China.
tan.yunshan@zs-hospital.sh.cn. (7)Department of Pathology, Zhongshan Hospital,
Fudan University, Shanghai, China. ji.yuan@zs-hospital.sh.cn. (8)Liver Cancer
Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Key Laboratory of Carcinogenesis
and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education, Shanghai, China.
huang.xiaowu@zs-hospital.sh.cn.

A molecular and pathological classification system for hepatocellular adenomas
(HCAs) was recently introduced in Europe, resulting in four major identified
subgroups. Asian countries have a considerably lower incidence of HCA as well as 
a different etiology. We aimed to characterize HCAs in a Chinese population based
on this new classification system. A series of 30 patients with HCA were analyzed
based on the phenotypic classification system using immunohistochemical analysis.
Investigated antigens included liver-fatty acid binding protein (L-FABP),
glutamine synthetase (GS), ß-catenin, serum amyloid A (SAA), and C-reactive
protein (CRP). Of the 30 cases (20 female) included in this study, only one had a
history of oral contraceptive use. We identified 9 (30%) hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-1a-inactivated HCAs, 3 (10%) ß-catenin-activated HCAs, 11 (36.7%)
inflammatory HCAs, and 7 (23.3%) unclassified HCAs. In the inflammatory HCA
group, 2 cases demonstrated concurrent ß-catenin-activation. Homogeneous
steatosis (6/9) and microadenomas (2/9) were more frequently observed in
HNF1a-inactivated HCAs. A body mass index (BMI) of greater than 25 (5/11),
alcohol use (4/11), and steatosis in background liver (3/11) were more frequent
in inflammatory HCAs. ß-catenin-activated HCAs were larger than those of other
subgroups. Despite obvious differences in etiology and gender proportion compared
with Western countries, the clinical and pathological characteristics of HCA
subgroups in China are similar to those in Europe. The phenotypic classification 
system could be reliably applied to Chinese patients as a meaningful tool for HCA
management.

PMID: 23939475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Immunity. 2013 Aug 22;39(2):286-97. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.07.013. Epub 2013 
Aug 8.

The transcription factor Foxo1 controls central-memory CD8+ T cell responses to
infection.

Kim MV(1), Ouyang W, Liao W, Zhang MQ, Li MO.

Author information: 
(1)Immunology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY
10065, USA.

Memory T cells protect hosts from pathogen reinfection, but how these cells
emerge from a pool of antigen-experienced T cells is unclear. Here, we show that 
mice lacking the transcription factor Foxo1 in activated CD8+ T cells have
defective secondary, but not primary, responses to Listeria monocytogenes
infection. Compared to short-lived effector T cells, memory-precursor T cells
expressed higher amounts of Foxo1, which promoted their generation and
maintenance. Chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing revealed the transcription 
factor Tcf7 and the chemokine receptor Ccr7 as Foxo1-bound target genes, which
have critical functions in central-memory T cell differentiation and trafficking.
These findings demonstrate that Foxo1 is selectively incorporated into the
genetic program that regulates memory CD8+ T cell responses to infection.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3809840
PMID: 23932570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Jul 21;19(27):4432-6. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i27.4432.

Hepatic adenoma mimicking a metastatic lesion on computed tomography-positron
emission tomography scan.

Lim D(1), Lee SY, Lim KH, Chan CY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore 169608,
Singapore.

Positron emission tomography (PET) using ¹8F-fluorodeoxyglucose (¹8F-FDG) is an
imaging modality which reflects cellular glucose metabolism. Most malignant cells
accumulate and trap ¹8F-FDG, allowing the visualisation of increased uptake. It
is hence widely used to differentiate malignant from benign lesions. "False
positive" findings of hepatic lesions have been described in certain instances
such as hepatic abscesses, but are rare in cases involving hepatocellular
adenomas. To our knowledge, there have been only 7 reports in the English
literature documenting PET-avid hepatocellular adenomas; 6 of the 7 reports were 
published in the last 3 years with the first report by Patel et al. We report the
case of a 44-year-old Chinese female patient with a history of cervical
adenocarcinoma, referred for a hepatic lesion noted on a surveillance computed
tomography (CT) scan. A subsequent CT-PET performed showed a hypermetabolic
lesion (standardized uptake value 7.9) in segment IVb of the liver. After
discussion at a multi-disciplinary hepato-pancreato-biliary conference, the
consensus was that of a metastatic lesion from her previous cervical
adenocarcinoma, and a resection of the hepatic lesion was performed. Histology
revealed features consistent with a hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 a inactivated
steatotic hepatocellular adenoma.

PMCID: PMC3718916
PMID: 23885159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Ann Clin Biochem. 2013 Sep;50(Pt 5):403-15. doi: 10.1177/0004563213483458. Epub
2013 Jul 22.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young: identification and diagnosis.

McDonald TJ(1), Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation
Trust, Exeter, UK.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic disorder that results 
in a familial, young-onset non-insulin dependent form of diabetes, typically
presenting in lean young adults before 25 years. Approximately 1% of diabetes has
a monogenic cause but this is frequently misdiagnosed as Type 1 or Type 2
diabetes. A correct genetic diagnosis is important as it often leads to improved 
treatment for those affected with diabetes and enables predictive genetic testing
for their asymptomatic relatives. An early diagnosis together with appropriate
treatment is essential for reducing the risk of diabetic complications in later
life. Mutations in the GCK and HNF1A/4<U+2009>A genes account for up to 80% of all MODY 
cases. Mutations in the GCK gene cause a mild, asymptomatic and non-progressive
fasting hyperglycaemia from birth usually requiring no treatment. In contrast,
mutations in the genes encoding the transcription factors HNF1A and HNF4A cause a
progressive insulin secretory defect and hyperglycaemia that can lead to vascular
complications. The diabetes in these patients is usually well controlled with
sulphonylurea tablets although insulin treatment may be required in later life.
In this review, we outline the key clinical and laboratory characteristics of the
common and rarer causes of MODY with the aim of raising awareness of this
condition amongst health-care scientists.

PMID: 23878349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 11;8(7):e69677. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0069677. Print 2013.

4-1BB signaling activates the t cell factor 1 effector/ß-catenin pathway with
delayed kinetics via ERK signaling and delayed PI3K/AKT activation to promote the
proliferation of CD8+ T Cells.

Lee do Y(1), Choi BK, Lee DG, Kim YH, Kim CH, Lee SJ, Kwon BS.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Immunology Branch, Division of Cancer Biology, National Cancer Center, 
Ilsan, Goyang, Gyeonggi-do, Korea.

4-1BB (CD137), an inducible costimulatory molecule, strongly enhances the
proliferation and effector function of CD8(+) T cells. Since the serine/threonine
kinase, glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK-3), is involved in a variety of signaling
pathways of cellular proliferation, migration, immune responses, and apoptosis,
we examined whether 4-1BB signaling activates GSK-3/ß-catenin signaling and
downstream transcription factors to enhance the proliferation of CD8(+) T cells. 
4-1BB signaling induces rapid activation of ERK and I<U+03BA>B degradation, and shows
delayed activation of AKT at 24 h post 4-1BB stimulation on anti-CD3 activated T 
cells. ERK and AKT signals were required for sustained ß-catenin levels by
inactivating GSK-3, which was also observed with delayed kinetics after 4-1BB
stimulation. As a transcriptional partner of ß-catenin, 4-1BB signaling decreased
levels of FOXO1 and increased levels of stimulatory TCF1 in CD8(+) T cells at 2-3
days but not at early time points after 4-1BB engagement. The enhanced
proliferation of CD8(+) T cells due to 4-1BB signaling was completely abolished
by treatment with the TCF1/ß-catenin inhibitor quercetin. These results show that
4-1BB signaling enhances the proliferation of activated CD8(+) T cells by
activating the TCF1/ß-catenin axis via the PI3K/AKT/ERK pathway. As effects of
4-1BB on AKT, FOXO1, ß-catenin and GSK-3ß showed delayed kinetics it is likely
that an intervening molecule induced by 4-1BB and ERK signaling in activated T
cells is responsible for these effects. These effects were observed on CD8(+) but
not on CD4(+) T cells. Moreover, 4-1BB appeared to be unique among several TNFRs 
tested in inducing increase in stimulatory over inhibitory TCF-1.

PMCID: PMC3708905
PMID: 23874982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 15;8(7):e68740. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068740. Print 2013.

Whole genome SNP genotyping and exome sequencing reveal novel genetic variants
and putative causative genes in congenital hyperinsulinism.

Proverbio MC(1), Mangano E, Gessi A, Bordoni R, Spinelli R, Asselta R, Valin PS, 
Di Candia S, Zamproni I, Diceglie C, Mora S, Caruso-Nicoletti M, Salvatoni A, De 
Bellis G, Battaglia C.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Fisiopatologia e dei Trapianti (DePT), Università degli Studi 
di Milano, Milan, Italy.

Congenital hyperinsulinism of infancy (CHI) is a rare disorder characterized by
severe hypoglycemia due to inappropriate insulin secretion. The genetic causes of
CHI have been found in genes regulating insulin secretion from pancreatic
ß-cells; recessive inactivating mutations in the ABCC8 and KCNJ11 genes represent
the most common events. Despite the advances in understanding the molecular
pathogenesis of CHI, specific genetic determinants in about 50 % of the CHI
patients remain unknown, suggesting additional locus heterogeneity. In order to
search for novel loci contributing to the pathogenesis of CHI, we combined a
family-based association study, using the transmission disequilibrium test on 17 
CHI patients lacking mutations in ABCC8/KCNJ11, with a whole-exome sequencing
analysis performed on 10 probands. This strategy allowed the identification of
the potential causative mutations in genes implicated in the regulation of
insulin secretion such as transmembrane proteins (CACNA1A, KCNH6, KCNJ10, NOTCH2,
RYR3, SCN8A, TRPV3, TRPC5), cytosolic (ACACB, CAMK2D, CDKAL1, GNAS, NOS2, PDE4C, 
PIK3R3) and mitochondrial enzymes (PC, SLC24A6), and in four genes (CSMD1,
SLC37A3, SULF1, TLL1) suggested by TDT family-based association study. Moreover, 
the exome-sequencing approach resulted to be an efficient diagnostic tool for
CHI, allowing the identification of mutations in three causative CHI genes
(ABCC8, GLUD1, and HNF1A) in four out of 10 patients. Overall, the present study 
should be considered as a starting point to design further investigations: our
results might indeed contribute to meta-analysis studies, aimed at the
identification/confirmation of novel causative or modifier genes.

PMCID: PMC3711910
PMID: 23869231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Hepatol. 2013 Dec;59(6):1200-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.07.016. Epub 2013 Jul 
16.

KEAP1-NRF2 complex in ischemia-induced hepatocellular damage of mouse liver
transplants.

Ke B(1), Shen XD, Zhang Y, Ji H, Gao F, Yue S, Kamo N, Zhai Y, Yamamoto M,
Busuttil RW, Kupiec-Weglinski JW.

Author information: 
(1)Dumont-UCLA Transplant Center, Department of Surgery, Division of Liver and
Pancreas Transplantation, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los Angeles,
CA, United States.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The Keap1-Nrf2 signaling pathway regulates host cell defense
responses against oxidative stress and maintains the cellular redox balance.
METHODS: We investigated the function/molecular mechanisms by which Keap1-Nrf2
complex may influence liver ischemia/reperfusion injury (IRI) in a mouse model of
hepatic cold storage (20h at 4°C) followed by orthotopic liver transplantation
(OLT).
RESULTS: The Keap1 hepatocyte-specific knockout (HKO) in the donor liver
ameliorated post-transplant IRI, evidenced by improved hepatocellular function
and OLT outcomes (Keap1 HKO<U+2192>Keap1 HKO; 100% survival), as compared with controls 
(WT<U+2192>WT; 50% survival; p<0.01). By contrast, donor liver Nrf2 deficiency
exacerbated IRI in transplant recipients (Nrf2 KO<U+2192>Nrf2 KO; 40% survival).
Ablation of Keap1 signaling reduced macrophage/neutrophil trafficking,
pro-inflammatory cytokine programs, and hepatocellular necrosis/apoptosis, while 
simultaneously promoting anti-apoptotic functions in OLTs. At the molecular
level, Keap1 HKO increased Nrf2 levels, stimulated Akt phosphorylation, and
enhanced expression of anti-oxidant Trx1, HIF-1a, and HO-1. Pretreatment of liver
donors with PI3K inhibitor (LY294002) disrupted Akt/HIF-1A signaling and
recreated hepatocellular damage in otherwise IR-resistant Keap1 HKO transplants. 
In parallel in vitro studies, hydrogen peroxide-stressed Keap1-deficient
hepatocytes were characterized by enhanced expression of Nrf2, Trx1, and Akt
phosphorylation, in association with decreased release of lactate dehydrogenase
(LDH) in cell culture supernatants.
CONCLUSIONS: Keap1-Nrf2 complex prevents oxidative injury in IR-stressed OLTs
through Keap1 signaling, which negatively regulates Nrf2 pathway. Activation of
Nrf2 induces Trx1 and promotes PI3K/Akt, crucial for HIF-1a activity.
HIF-1a-mediated overexpression of HO-1/Cyclin D1 facilitates cytoprotection by
limiting hepatic inflammatory responses, and hepatocellular necrosis/apoptosis in
a PI3K-dependent manner.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4524560
PMID: 23867319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Pathol Int. 2013 Jul;63(7):358-63. doi: 10.1111/pin.12072.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 a inactivated hepatocellular adenomas in patient with
congenital absence of the portal vein: a case report.

Tateishi Y(1), Furuya M, Kondo F, Torii I, Nojiri K, Tanaka Y, Umeda S, Okudela
K, Inayama Y, Endo I, Ohashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yokohama City University Graduate School of Medicine,
Kanazawa-ku, Yokohama, Japan. ytateish@yokohama-cu.ac.jp

Hepatocellular adenomas (HCAs) have been recognized recently as a heterogeneous
group, and are subclassified according to genotype as well as morphological
characteristics. We report a case of a 35-year-old Japanese woman who exhibited
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1a-inactivated HCA in the background of the
congenital absence of the portal vein (CAPV). On a dynamic contrast computed
tomography (CT) scan, the hypovascular tumor enlarged from 1 cm to 3 cm and
another tumor emerged in the course of 7 years. Because the possibility of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) with multiple metastases was not excluded, partial
hepatectomy was performed. On a cut section, two well-demarcated tumors were
observed and one tumor had a central fibrous scar. The histological features of
these tumors were similar to those of focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) with a
central scar and HCA; however, these tumors were diagnosed as HNF-1a-inactivated 
HCA by immunohistochemistry according to the criteria of the current World Health
Organization (WHO) classification. In non-tumorous liver tissue, an abnormal
architecture of the vessels and a vague nodular appearance of lobuli were
observed, which were likely to be those of nodular regenerated hyperplasia (NRH).
We discuss its pathogenesis and relationship with CAPV.

© 2013 The Authors. Pathology International © 2013 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 23865574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 2;8(7):e67650. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0067650. Print 2013.

Are C-reactive protein associated genetic variants associated with serum levels
and retinal markers of microvascular pathology in Asian populations from
Singapore?

Dorajoo R(1), Li R, Ikram MK, Liu J, Froguel P, Lee J, Sim X, Ong RT, Tay WT,
Peng C, Young TL, Blakemore AI, Cheng CY, Aung T, Mitchell P, Wang JJ, Klaver CC,
Boerwinkle E, Klein R, Siscovick DS, Jensen RA, Gudnason V, Smith AV, Teo YY,
Wong TY, Tai ES, Heng CK, Friedlander Y.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Institute of Singapore, Agency for Science, Technology and Research,
Singapore, Singapore.

INTRODUCTION: C-reactive protein (CRP) levels are associated with cardiovascular 
disease and systemic inflammation. We assessed whether CRP-associated loci were
associated with serum CRP and retinal markers of microvascular disease, in Asian 
populations.
METHODS: Genome-wide association analysis (GWAS) for serum CRP was performed in
East-Asian Chinese (N<U+200A>=<U+200A>2,434) and Malays (N<U+200A>=<U+200A>2,542) and South-Asian Indians
(N<U+200A>=<U+200A>2,538) from Singapore. Leveraging on GWAS data, we assessed, in silico,
association levels among the Singaporean datasets for 22 recently identified
CRP-associated loci. At loci where directional inconsistencies were observed,
quantification of inter-ethnic linkage disequilibrium (LD) difference was
determined. Next, we assessed association for a variant at CRP and retinal vessel
traits [central retinal artery equivalent (CRAE) and central retinal vein
equivalent (CRVE)] in a total of 24,132 subjects of East-Asian, South-Asian and
European ancestry.
RESULTS: Serum CRP was associated with SNPs in/near APOE, CRP, HNF1A and LEPR
(p-values =4.7×10(-8)) after meta-analysis of Singaporean populations. Using a
candidate-SNP approach, we further replicated SNPs at 4 additional loci that had 
been recently identified to be associated with serum CRP (IL6R, GCKR, IL6 and
IL1F10) (p-values =0.009), in the Singaporean datasets. SNPs from these 8 loci
explained 4.05% of variance in serum CRP. Two SNPs (rs2847281 and rs6901250) were
detected to be significant (p-value =0.036) but with opposite effect directions
in the Singaporean populations as compared to original European studies. At these
loci we did not detect significant inter-population LD differences. We further
did not observe a significant association between CRP variant and CRVE or CRAE
levels after meta-analysis of all Singaporean and European datasets (p-value
>0.058).
CONCLUSIONS: Common variants associated with serum CRP, first detected in
primarily European studies, are also associated with CRP levels in East-Asian and
South-Asian populations. We did not find a causal link between CRP and retinal
measures of microvascular disease.

PMCID: PMC3699653
PMID: 23844046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Am J Clin Nutr. 2013 Sep;98(3):668-76. doi: 10.3945/ajcn.112.044545. Epub 2013
Jul 3.

Common genetic loci influencing plasma homocysteine concentrations and their
effect on risk of coronary artery disease.

van Meurs JB(1), Pare G, Schwartz SM, Hazra A, Tanaka T, Vermeulen SH, Cotlarciuc
I, Yuan X, Mälarstig A, Bandinelli S, Bis JC, Blom H, Brown MJ, Chen C, Chen YD, 
Clarke RJ, Dehghan A, Erdmann J, Ferrucci L, Hamsten A, Hofman A, Hunter DJ, Goel
A, Johnson AD, Kathiresan S, Kampman E, Kiel DP, Kiemeney LA, Chambers JC, Kraft 
P, Lindemans J, McKnight B, Nelson CP, O'Donnell CJ, Psaty BM, Ridker PM,
Rivadeneira F, Rose LM, Seedorf U, Siscovick DS, Schunkert H, Selhub J, Ueland
PM, Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Waterworth DM, Watkins H, Witteman JC, den Heijer
M, Jacques P, Uitterlinden AG, Kooner JS, Rader DJ, Reilly MP, Mooser V, Chasman 
DI, Samani NJ, Ahmadi KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: The strong observational association between total homocysteine
(tHcy) concentrations and risk of coronary artery disease (CAD) and the null
associations in the homocysteine-lowering trials have prompted the need to
identify genetic variants associated with homocysteine concentrations and risk of
CAD.
OBJECTIVE: We tested whether common genetic polymorphisms associated with
variation in tHcy are also associated with CAD.
DESIGN: We conducted a meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) on
tHcy concentrations in 44,147 individuals of European descent. Polymorphisms
associated with tHcy (P < 10(<U+207B>8) were tested for association with CAD in 31,400
cases and 92,927 controls.
RESULTS: Common variants at 13 loci, explaining 5.9% of the variation in tHcy,
were associated with tHcy concentrations, including 6 novel loci in or near
MMACHC (2.1 × 10<U+207B><U+2079>), SLC17A3 (1.0 × 10<U+207B>8), GTPB10 (1.7 × 10<U+207B>8), CUBN (7.5 ×
10<U+207B>¹°), HNF1A (1.2 × 10<U+207B>¹²)), and FUT2 (6.6 × 10<U+207B><U+2079>), and variants previously
reported at or near the MTHFR, MTR, CPS1, MUT, NOX4, DPEP1, and CBS genes.
Individuals within the highest 10% of the genotype risk score (GRS) had 3-µmol/L 
higher mean tHcy concentrations than did those within the lowest 10% of the GRS
(P = 1 × 10<U+207B>³6). The GRS was not associated with risk of CAD (OR: 1.01; 95% CI:
0.98, 1.04; P = 0.49).
CONCLUSIONS: We identified several novel loci that influence plasma tHcy
concentrations. Overall, common genetic variants that influence plasma tHcy
concentrations are not associated with risk of CAD in white populations, which
further refutes the causal relevance of moderately elevated tHcy concentrations
and tHcy-related pathways for CAD.

PMCID: PMC4321227
PMID: 23824729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Toxicol In Vitro. 2014 Feb;28(1):113-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2013.06.014. Epub 2013
Jun 29.

Characterization of hepatic markers in human Wharton's Jelly-derived mesenchymal 
stem cells.

Buyl K(1), De Kock J, Najar M, Lagneaux L, Branson S, Rogiers V, Vanhaecke T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Center for Pharmaceutical Research (CePhaR), Vrije
Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Laarbeeklaan 103, 1090 Brussels, Belgium. Electronic 
address: karobuyl@vub.ac.be.

Stem cell technology could offer a unique tool to develop human-based in vitro
liver models that are applicable for testing of potential liver toxicity early
during drug development. In this context, recent research has indicated that
human Wharton's Jelly-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hWJs) represent an
interesting stem cell population to develop human hepatocyte-like cells. Here, an
in-depth analysis of the expression of liver-specific transcription factors and
other key hepatic markers in hWJs is evaluated at both the mRNA and protein
level. Our results reveal that transcription factors that are mandatory to
acquire and maintain an adult hepatic phenotype (HNF4A and HNF1A), as well as
adult hepatic markers (ALB, CX32, CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2B6 and CYP3A4) are not
expressed in hWJs with the exception of K18. On the contrary, transcription
factors involved in liver development (GATA4, GATA6, SOX9 and SOX17) and liver
progenitor markers (DKK1, DPP4, DSG2, CX43 and K19) were found to be highly
expressed in hWJs. These findings provide additional indication that hWJs could
be a promising stem cell source to generate hepatocyte-like cells necessary for
the development of a functional human-based in vitro liver model.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23820183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Oncogene. 2014 May 29;33(22):2909-17. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.247. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

KLF8 and FAK cooperatively enrich the active MMP14 on the cell surface required
for the metastatic progression of breast cancer.

Lu H(1), Hu L(1), Yu L(1), Wang X(1), Urvalek AM(1), Li T(1), Shen C(1),
Mukherjee D(1), Lahiri SK(1), Wason MS(1), Zhao J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of
Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA.

Krüppel-like factor 8 (KLF8) regulates critical gene transcription associated
with cancer. The underlying mechanisms, however, remain largely unidentified. We 
have recently demonstrated that KLF8 expression enhances the activity but not
expression of matrix metalloproteinase-2 (MMP2), the target substrate of MMP14.
Here, we report a novel KLF8 to MMP14 signaling that promotes human breast cancer
invasion and metastasis. Using cell lines for inducible expression and knockdown 
of KLF8, we demonstrate that KLF8 promotes MMP14 expression at the
transcriptional level. Knocking down KLF8 expression inhibited the breast cancer 
cell invasion both in vitro and in vivo as well as the lung metastasis in mice,
which could be rescued by ectopic expression of MMP14. Promoter reporter assays
and oligonucleotide and chromatin immunoprecipitations determined that KLF8
activates the human MMP14 gene promoter by both directly acting on the promoter
and indirectly via promoting the nuclear translocation of ß-catenin, the
expression of T-cell factor-1 (TCF1) and subsequent activation of the promoter by
the ß-catenin/TCF1 complex. Inhibition of focal adhesion kinase (FAK) using
pharmacological inhibitor, RNA interference or knockout showed that the cell
surface presentation of active MMP14 downstream of KLF8 depends on FAK expression
and activity. Taken together, this work identified novel signaling mechanisms by 
which KLF8 and FAK work together to promote the extracellular activity of MMP14
critical for breast cancer metastasis.

PMCID: PMC3929536
PMID: 23812425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Transl Med. 2013 Jun 26;11:156. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-156.

Effects of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1A and -4A on pancreatic stone
protein/regenerating protein and C-reactive protein gene expression: implications
for maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Kyithar MP(1), Bonner C, Bacon S, Kilbride SM, Schmid J, Graf R, Prehn JH, Byrne 
MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, 30
Eccles Street, Dublin 7, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: There is a significant clinical overlap between patients with
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1A and HNF4A maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY), two forms of monogenic diabetes. HNF1A and HNF4A are transcription
factors that control common and partly overlapping sets of target genes. We have 
previously shown that elevated serum pancreatic stone protein / regenerating
protein A (PSP/reg1A) levels can be detected in subjects with HNF1A-MODY. In this
study, we investigated whether PSP/reg is differentially regulated by HNF1A and
HNF4A.
METHODS: Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) and Western blotting were used to
validate gene and protein expression in cellular models of HNF1A- and HNF4A-MODY.
Serum PSP/reg1A levels and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) were
measured by ELISA in 31 HNF1A- and 9 HNF4A-MODY subjects. The two groups were
matched for age, body mass index, diabetes duration, blood pressure, lipid
profile and aspirin and statin use.
RESULTS: Inducible repression of HNF1A and HNF4A function in INS-1 cells
suggested that PSP/reg induction required HNF4A, but not HNF1A. In contrast, crp 
gene expression was significantly reduced by repression of HNF1A, but not HNF4A
function. PSP/reg levels were significantly lower in HNF4A subjects when compared
to HNF1A subjects [9.25 (7.85-12.85) ng/ml vs. 12.5 (10.61-17.87) ng/ml, U-test
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025]. hsCRP levels were significantly lower in HNF1A-MODY [0.22 (0.17-0.35)
mg/L] compared to HNF4A-MODY group [0.81 (0.38-1.41) mg/L, U-test P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002],
Parallel measurements of serum PSP/reg1A and hsCRP levels were able to
discriminate HNF1A- and HNF4A-MODY subjects.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrates that two distinct target genes, PSP/reg and
crp, are differentially regulated by HNF1A and HNF4A, and provides clinical
proof-of-concept that serum PSP/reg1A and hsCRP levels may distinguish HNF1A-MODY
from HNF4A-MODY subjects.

PMCID: PMC3707779
PMID: 23803251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. BMJ Open. 2013 May 28;3(5). pii: e002905. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-002905.

Development of an economic evaluation of diagnostic strategies: the case of
monogenic diabetes.

Peters JL(1), Anderson R, Hyde C.

Author information: 
(1)PenTAG/PenCLAHRC, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

OBJECTIVES: To describe the development process for defining an appropriate model
structure for the economic evaluation of test-treatment strategies for patients
with monogenic diabetes (caused by mutations in the GCK, HNF1A or HNF4A genes).
DESIGN: Experts were consulted to identify and define realistic test-treatment
strategies and care pathways. A systematic assessment of published diabetes
models was undertaken to inform the model structure.
SETTING: National Health Service in England and Wales.
PARTICIPANTS: Experts in monogenic diabetes whose collective expertise spans the 
length of the patient care pathway.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOMES: A defined model structure, including the
test-treatment strategies, and the selection of a published diabetes model
appropriate for the economic evaluation of strategies to identify patients with
monogenic diabetes.
RESULTS: Five monogenic diabetes test-treatment strategies were defined: no
testing of any kind, referral for genetic testing based on clinical features as
noted by clinicians, referral for genetic testing based on the results of a
clinical prediction model, referral for genetic testing based on the results of
biochemical and immunological tests, referral for genetic testing for all
patients with a diagnosis of diabetes under the age of 30 years. The systematic
assessment of diabetes models identified the IMS CORE Diabetes Model (IMS CDM) as
a good candidate for modelling the long-term outcomes and costs of the
test-treatment strategies for monogenic diabetes. The short-term test-treatment
events will be modelled using a decision tree which will feed into the IMS CDM.
CONCLUSIONS: Defining a model structure for any economic evaluation requires
decisions to be made. Expert consultation and the explicit use of critical
appraisal can inform these decisions. Although arbitrary choices have still been 
made, decision modelling allows investigation into such choices and the impact of
assumptions that have to be made due to a lack of data.

PMCID: PMC3657677
PMID: 23793674  [PubMed]


236. Rheumatology (Oxford). 2013 Sep;52(9):1609-18. doi: 10.1093/rheumatology/ket214. 
Epub 2013 Jun 17.

Expression of Wnt pathway mediators in metaplasic tissue in animal model and
clinical samples of tendinopathy.

Lui PP(1), Lee YW, Wong YM, Zhang X, Dai K, Rolf CG.

Author information: 
(1)Headquarters, Hospital Authority, Sheung Wan, Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region, China. paulinelui00@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Tissue metaplasia is observed in both ossified failed healing animal
model and clinical samples of tendinopathy. The Wnt signalling pathway plays a
vital role in pathological calcification. We hypothesized that the Wnt signalling
pathway might contribute to tissue metaplasia and failed healing in tendinopathy.
This study aimed to examine the spatial-temporal expression of Wnt pathway
mediators in an ossified failed tendon healing animal model and clinical samples 
of tendinopathy. The effect of Wnt3a on the osteogenic differentiation of
tendon-derived stem cells (TDSCs) was also examined.
METHODS: Ossified failed tendon healing was induced by the injection of
collagenase into the patellar tendon of rats. At various times the tendons were
harvested for immunohistochemical staining of Wnt3a, ß-catenin, Lrp5 and Tcf1.
Patellar tendon samples were obtained from 13 patients with patellar tendinopathy
(11 unossified and 2 ossified) and 10 controls. Immunohistochemical staining of
Wnt3a, ß-catenin, Lrp5 and Tcf1 was similarly performed. Rat patellar TDSCs were 
treated with Wnt3a. The osteogenic differentiation of TDSCs was examined by ALP
activity, alizarin red S staining and mRNA expression of osteogenic markers.
RESULTS: There was increased expression of Wnt3a, ß-catenin, Lrp5 and Tcf1 in the
healing fibroblast-like cells, chondrocyte-like cells and ossified deposits in
the animal model and in some clinical samples of tendinopathy. Wnt3a increased
ALP activity, calcium nodule formation and expression of osteogenic markers in
TDSCs.
CONCLUSION: Activation of the Wnt signalling pathway and its effect on TDSCs
might contribute to tissue metaplasia and failed healing in some cases of
tendinopathy.

PMID: 23776285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Oct;98(10):4055-62. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-1279. Epub
2013 Jun 14.

Prevalence, characteristics and clinical diagnosis of maturity onset diabetes of 
the young due to mutations in HNF1A, HNF4A, and glucokinase: results from the
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth.

Pihoker C(1), Gilliam LK, Ellard S, Dabelea D, Davis C, Dolan LM, Greenbaum CJ,
Imperatore G, Lawrence JM, Marcovina SM, Mayer-Davis E, Rodriguez BL, Steck AK,
Williams DE, Hattersley AT; SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)MD, Department of Pediatrics/Division of Endocrinology, A5902, Seattle
Children's Hospital, 4800 Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, Washington 98105.
catherine.pihoker@seattlechildrens.org.

AIMS: Our study aims were to determine the frequency of MODY mutations (HNF1A,
HNF4A, glucokinase) in a diverse population of youth with diabetes and to assess 
how well clinical features identify youth with maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY).
METHODS: The SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study is a US multicenter,
population-based study of youth with diabetes diagnosed at age younger than 20
years. We sequenced genomic DNA for mutations in the HNF1A, HNF4A, and
glucokinase genes in 586 participants enrolled in SEARCH between 2001 and 2006.
Selection criteria included diabetes autoantibody negativity and fasting
C-peptide levels of 0.8 ng/mL or greater.
RESULTS: We identified a mutation in one of three MODY genes in 47 participants, 
or 8.0% of the tested sample, for a prevalence of at least 1.2% in the pediatric 
diabetes population. Of these, only 3 had a clinical diagnosis of MODY, and the
majority was treated with insulin. Compared with the MODY-negative group,
MODY-positive participants had lower FCP levels (2.2 ± 1.4 vs 3.2 ± 2.1 ng/mL, P 
< .01) and fewer type 2 diabetes-like metabolic features. Parental history of
diabetes did not significantly differ between the 2 groups.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: In this systematic study of MODY in a large pediatric
US diabetes cohort, unselected by referral pattern or family history, MODY was
usually misdiagnosed and incorrectly treated with insulin. Although many type 2
diabetes-like metabolic features were less common in the mutation-positive group,
no single characteristic identified all patients with mutations. Clinicians
should be alert to the possibility of MODY diagnosis, particularly in
antibody-negative youth with diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3790621
PMID: 23771925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Diabetes. 2013 Sep;62(9):3194-206. doi: 10.2337/db13-0151. Epub 2013 Jun 12.

MicroRNA-24/MODY gene regulatory pathway mediates pancreatic ß-cell dysfunction.

Zhu Y(1), You W, Wang H, Li Y, Qiao N, Shi Y, Zhang C, Bleich D, Han X.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Human Functional Genomics of Jiangsu Province, Jiangsu
Diabetes Center, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu, People's Republic 
of China.

Overnutrition and genetics both contribute separately to pancreatic ß-cell
dysfunction, but how these factors interact is unclear. This study was aimed at
determining whether microRNAs (miRNAs) provide a link between these factors. In
this study, miRNA-24 (miR-24) was highly expressed in pancreatic ß-cells and
further upregulated in islets from genetic fatty (db/db) or mice fed a high-fat
diet, and islets subject to oxidative stress. Overexpression of miR-24 inhibited 
insulin secretion and ß-cell proliferation, potentially involving 351
downregulated genes. By using bioinformatic analysis combined with
luciferase-based promoter activity assays and quantitative real-time PCR assays, 
we identified two maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) genes as direct
targets of miR-24. Silencing either of these MODY genes (Hnf1a and Neurod1)
mimicked the cellular phenotype caused by miR-24 overexpression, whereas
restoring their expression rescued ß-cell function. Our findings functionally
link the miR-24/MODY gene regulatory pathway to the onset of type 2 diabetes and 
create a novel network between nutrient overload and genetic diabetes via miR-24.

PMCID: PMC3749364
PMID: 23761103  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Clin Med (Lond). 2013 Jun;13(3):278-81. doi: 10.7861/clinmedicine.13-3-278.

Monogenic diabetes: old and new approaches to diagnosis.

Owen KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)University of Oxford, Oxford, UK. katharine.owen@drl.ox.ac.uk

Up to 5% of young adults diagnosed with diabetes have a monogenic aetiology, the 
most common of which is maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). A definitive
molecular diagnosis is important, as this affects treatment, prognosis and family
screening. Currently, however, rates of diagnosis are low due to a combination of
lack of awareness of the benefits of making the diagnosis and the challenges of
differentiating patients with MODY from those with common forms of diabetes. This
article aims to introduce general physicians to the characteristics of monogenic 
diabetes and the clinical features that can be used to diagnose patients.
Recently, genomewide association studies have resulted in the identification of
C-reactive protein and glycan profile as specific biomarkers for the most common 
MODY subtype due to HNF1A mutations, and the potential translation of these
findings are discussed.

PMID: 23760703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Transpl Immunol. 2013 Dec;29(1-4):155-61. doi: 10.1016/j.trim.2013.05.005. Epub
2013 May 27.

Genetic polymorphisms of UGT1A8, UGT1A9 and HNF-1a and gastrointestinal symptoms 
in renal transplant recipients taking mycophenolic acid.

Vu D(1), Tellez-Corrales E, Yang J, Qazi Y, Shah T, Naraghi R, Hutchinson IV, Min
DI.

Author information: 
(1)Mendez National Institute of Transplantation, Los Angeles, CA, United States; 
Saint Vincent Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, United States; Western University 
of Health Sciences, Pomona, CA, United States.

Mycophenolic acid (MPA), a widely used immunosuppressant, has a complex
metabolism that involves a number of enzymes. Some of its metabolites are thought
to be the cause of gastrointestinal (GI) side effects. In this study, we
investigated whether polymorphisms of UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGT1) A8,
1A9, and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF1a) genes or pharmacokinetic parameters of
mycophenolic acid (MPA) were associated with the severity of GI symptoms in
patients receiving MPA therapy. A total of 109 kidney transplant patients taking 
mycophenolic acid (MPA) derivatives were genotyped for UGT1A8, 1A9 and HNF1a
genes. Among these, a total of 15 patients were participants in the
pharmacokinetic study. Severity of GI symptoms was assessed using a validated
Gastrointestinal Symptom Rating Scale (GSRS). The overall and subscale GSRS
scores were measured at 1 week (baseline), 2 weeks, 3 months and 6 months
post-transplantation. In the case of the pharmacokinetic study, EC-MPS was
administered and a total of nine blood samples were obtained at -1, 0, 0.5, 1, 2,
4, 6, 8, and 12h. Genotypes of UGT1A8 were significantly associated with the
overall GSRS scores at week 1 (p=0.02) and week 2 (p=0.036). Subscales were only 
statistically significant for constipation at week 1 (p=0.002) and indigestion at
week 2 (p=0.02), while UGT1A9 was only significant for the constipation at week 1
(p=0.04). HNF1a genotypes were significantly different at week 1 in the overall
GSRS (p=0.004), and for abdominal pain (p=0.04), acid reflux (p=0.036) and
constipation subscales (p=0.04). In addition, abdominal pain was statistically
significantly different at 3 months and 6 months after transplantation (p=0.03
and 0.02, respectively). In the case of the pharmacokinetic study, we have found 
some correlations between MPAC0 and constipation (p=0.02) where MPAAUC was
correlated with acid reflux (p=0.02) and constipation (p=0.012), MPAGCL/F was
correlated to acid reflux, indigestion, constipation and the sum of the GSRS
scores (p=0.037, p=0.032, p=0.033 and p=0.04, respectively). Multinomial
regression analysis for MPAGCL/F showed a statistical significance for the
subscale indigestion and the sum of the GSRS (p=0.033 and p=0.037, respectively).
Our data suggests that among patients receiving MPA the UGT1A9 alleles might play
a role in determining the severity of early GI side effects, while the HNF1a
allele appears to be associated with a later effect as well as early side
effects. Our data also showed that some kinetic parameters might predict MPA side
effects.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23721685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Exp Med. 2013 Jun 3;210(6):1189-200. doi: 10.1084/jem.20130392. Epub 2013 May
27.

Differentiation of CD8 memory T cells depends on Foxo1.

Hess Michelini R(1), Doedens AL, Goldrath AW, Hedrick SM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Section, Division of Biological Sciences, Department of
Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA, USA.

The forkhead O transcription factors (FOXO) integrate a range of extracellular
signals, including growth factor signaling, inflammation, oxidative stress, and
nutrient availability, to substantially alter the program of gene expression and 
modulate cell survival, cell cycle progression, and many yet to be unraveled cell
type-specific responses. Naive antigen-specific CD8(+) T cells undergo a rapid
expansion and arming of effector function within days of pathogen exposure. In
addition, by the peak of expansion, they form precursors to memory T cells
capable of self-renewal and indefinite survival. Using lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus Armstrong to probe the response to infection, we found
that Foxo1(-/-) CD8(+) T cells expand normally with no defects in effector
differentiation, but continue to exhibit characteristics of effector T cells long
after antigen clearance. The KLRG1(lo) CD8(+) T cells that are normally enriched 
for memory-precursor cells retain Granzyme B and CD69 expression, and fail to
up-regulate TCF7, EOMES, and other memory signature genes. As a correlate,
Foxo1(-/-) CD8(+) T cells were virtually unable to expand upon secondary
infection. Collectively, these results demonstrate an intrinsic role for FOXO1 in
establishing the post-effector memory program that is essential to forming
long-lived memory cells capable of immune reactivation.

PMCID: PMC3674697
PMID: 23712431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Asian J Androl. 2013 Jul;15(4):447-8. doi: 10.1038/aja.2013.62. Epub 2013 May 27.

The ubiquitin ligase Siah2 is revealed as an accomplice of the androgen receptor 
in castration resistant prostate cancer.

Freeman MR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Research Division of Cancer Biology and Therapeutics, Department of Surgery,
Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer Institute, Los Angeles, CA 90048, USA.
Michael.freeman@cshs.org

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2010 Jul 13;18(1):23-38.

PMCID: PMC3739249
PMID: 23708461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Hepatol. 2013 Oct;59(4):904-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.05.024. Epub 2013 May
23.

Primary hepatocellular neoplasms in a MODY3 family with a novel HNF1A germline
mutation.

Willson JS(1), Godwin TD, Wiggins GA, Guilford PJ, McCall JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Dunedin School of Medicine, University of
Otago, Dunedin, New Zealand.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) and hepatocellular adenomas
(HCAs) are associated with mutations in the HNF1A gene. HNF1A codes for the
transcription factor HNF1a, which interacts with DNA as a homodimer or a
heterodimer with HNF1ß, to regulate multiple cellular functions including
glucidic metabolism, lipidic transport, and detoxication. We report three members
of one family with a novel germline in-frame deletion of HNF1A exons 2-3
identified initially using array CGH and direct sequence analysis. All three
family members have MODY3 in association with primary liver cell tumours (HCA,
liver adenomatosis (LA), and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC)). Additionally, a
high rate of infant mortality was observed in the family. The described family
demonstrates a novel HNF1A mutation associated with both benign and malignant
primary liver cell tumours and MODY3.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23707370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. PLoS One. 2013 May 21;8(5):e63585. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0063585. Print 2013.

Hnf-1ß transcription factor is an early hif-1a-independent marker of epithelial
hypoxia and controls renal repair.

Faguer S(1), Mayeur N, Casemayou A, Pageaud AL, Courtellemont C, Cartery C,
Fournie GJ, Schanstra JP, Tack I, Bascands JL, Chauveau D.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Néphrologie et Transplantation d'organes, CHU Rangueil,
Toulouse, France. faguer.s@chu-toulouse.fr

Epithelial repair following acute kidney injury (AKI) requires
epithelial-mesenchyme-epithelial cycling associated with transient re-expression 
of genes normally expressed during kidney development as well as activation of
growth factors and cytokine-induced signaling. In normal kidney, the Hnf-1ß
transcription factor drives nephrogenesis, tubulogenesis and epithelial
homeostasis through the regulation of epithelial planar cell polarity and
expression of developmental or tubular segment-specific genes. In a mouse model
of ischemic AKI induced by a 2-hours hemorrhagic shock, we show that expression
of this factor is tightly regulated in the early phase of renal repair with a
biphasic expression profile (early down-regulation followed by transient
over-expression). These changes are associated to tubular epithelial
differentiation as assessed by KSP-cadherin and megalin-cubilin endocytic complex
expression analysis. In addition, early decrease in Hnf1b expression is
associated with the transient over-expression of one of its main target genes,
the suppressor of cytokine signaling Socs3, which has been shown essential for
renal repair. In vitro, hypoxia induced early up-regulation of Hnf-1ß from 1 to
24 hours, independently of the hypoxia-inducible factor Hif-1a. When prolonged,
hypoxia induced Hnf-1ß down-regulation while normoxia led to Hnf-1ß
normalization. Last, Hnf-1ß down-regulation using RNA interference in HK-2 cells 
led to phenotype switch from an epithelial to a mesenchyme state. Taken together,
we showed that Hnf-1ß may drive recovery from ischemic AKI by regulating both the
expression of genes important for homeostasis control during organ repair and the
state of epithelial cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3660442
PMID: 23704921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Int J Hepatol. 2013;2013:268625. doi: 10.1155/2013/268625. Epub 2013 Apr 14.

Focal Nodular Hyperplasia and Hepatocellular Adenoma around the World Viewed
through the Scope of the Immunopathological Classification.

Balabaud C(1), Al-Rabih WR, Chen PJ, Evason K, Ferrell L, Hernandez-Prera JC,
Huang SF, Longerich T, Park YN, Quaglia A, Schirmacher P, Sempoux C, Thung SN,
Torbenson M, Wee A, Yeh MM, Yeh SH, Le Bail B, Zucman-Rossi J, Bioulac-Sage P.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U1053, Université Bordeaux Segalen, 33076 Bordeaux Cedex, France.

Focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) and hepatocellular adenoma (HCA) are benign
hepatocellular tumors. The risk of bleeding and malignant transformation of HCA
are strong arguments to differentiate HCA from FNH. Despite great progress that
has been made in the differential radiological diagnosis of the 2 types of
nodules, liver biopsy is sometimes necessary to separate the 2 entities.
Identification of HCA subtypes using immunohistochemical techniques, namely,
HNF1A-inactivated HCA (35-40%), inflammatory HCA (IHCA), and beta-catenin-mutated
inflammatory HCA (b-IHCA) (50-55%), beta-catenin-activated HCA (5-10%), and
unclassified HCA (10%) has greatly improved the diagnostic accuracy of benign
hepatocellular nodules. If HCA malignant transformation occurs in all HCA
subgroups, the risk is by far the highest in the ß -catenin-mutated subgroups
(b-HCA, b-IHCA). In the coming decade the management of HCA will be more
dependent on the identification of HCA subtypes, particularly for smaller nodules
(<5<U+2009>cm) in terms of imaging, follow-up, and resection.

PMCID: PMC3654480
PMID: 23691331  [PubMed]


246. Immunity. 2013 May 23;38(5):930-42. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.01.014. Epub 2013 
May 16.

Transcriptional repression of Gata3 is essential for early B cell commitment.

Banerjee A(1), Northrup D, Boukarabila H, Jacobsen SE, Allman D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6082, USA.

The mechanisms underlying the silencing of alternative fate potentials in very
early B cell precursors remain unclear. Using gain- and loss-of-function
approaches together with a synthetic Zinc-finger polypeptide (6ZFP) engineered to
prevent transcription factor binding to a defined cis element, we show that the
transcription factor EBF1 promotes B cell lineage commitment by directly
repressing expression of the T-cell-lineage-requisite Gata3 gene. Ebf1-deficient 
lymphoid progenitors exhibited increased T cell lineage potential and elevated
Gata3 transcript expression, whereas enforced EBF1 expression inhibited T cell
differentiation and caused rapid loss of Gata3 mRNA. Notably, 6ZFP-mediated
perturbation of EBF1 binding to a Gata3 regulatory region restored Gata3
expression, abrogated EBF1-driven suppression of T cell differentiation, and
prevented B cell differentiation via a GATA3-dependent mechanism. Furthermore,
EBF1 binding to Gata3 regulatory sites induced repressive histone modifications
across this region. These data identify a transcriptional circuit critical for B 
cell lineage commitment.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3664383
PMID: 23684985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Pediatr Int. 2013 Apr;55(2):e32-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1442-200X.2012.03741.x.

Japanese boy with maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 who developed
diabetes at 19 months old.

Iwabuchi A(1), Kamoda T, Shinohara H, Sumazaki R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.
a.iwabuchi@axel.ocn.ne.jp

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) is caused by hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1a gene mutation and is clinically characterized by young onset
and insufficient insulin secretion. We report a 19-month-old Japanese boy with a 
family history of young-onset diabetes who was initially diagnosed with type 1
diabetes. Mutational analysis of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a gene revealed a
novel heterozygous frameshift mutation (c.593delA p.Lys198fs) resulting in a
truncated protein in the patient and his father. The patient was diagnosed as
having MODY3 and was successfully treated with insulin glargine. We could not
determine the genetic or environmental factors to explain the difference in the
age of disease onset within the same family. This is the youngest case of a MODY3
child presenting with overt diabetes. Our experience suggests that clinicians
should always consider the possible diagnosis of MODY3 in a diabetic child with a
family history of young-onset diabetes and should perform molecular
investigations.

© 2013 The Authors. Pediatrics International © 2013 Japan Pediatric Society.

PMID: 23679181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Diabetologia. 2013 Aug;56(8):1743-51. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-2939-4. Epub 2013
May 15.

Identification of circulating microRNAs in HNF1A-MODY carriers.

Bonner C(1), Nyhan KC, Bacon S, Kyithar MP, Schmid J, Concannon CG, Bray IM,
Stallings RL, Prehn JH, Byrne MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, Royal College of Surgeons,
Dublin, Ireland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: HNF1A-MODY is a monogenic form of diabetes caused by mutations
in the HNF1A gene. Here we identify, for the first time, HNF1A-MODY-associated
microRNAs (miRNAs) that can be detected in the serum of HNF1A-MODY carriers.
METHODS: An miRNA array was carried out in rat INS-1 insulinoma cells inducibly
expressing the common human Pro291fsinsC-HNF1A frame shift mutation.
Differentially expressed miRNAs were validated by quantitative real-time PCR.
Expression of miRNAs in the serum of HNF1A-MODY carriers (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>31), MODY-negative 
family members (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10) and individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>17)
was quantified by absolute real-time PCR analysis.
RESULTS: Inducible expression of Pro291fsinsC-HNF1A in INS-1 cells caused a
significant upregulation of three miRNAs (miR-103, miR-224, miR-292-3p). The
differential expression of two miRNAs (miR-103 and miR-224) was validated in
vitro. Strongly elevated levels of miR-103 and miR-224 could be detected in the
serum of HNF1A-MODY carriers compared with MODY-negative family controls. Serum
levels of miR-103 distinguished HNF1A-MODY carriers from HbA1c-matched
individuals with type 2 diabetes mellitus.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our study demonstrates that the pathophysiology of
HNF1A-MODY is associated with the overexpression of miR-103 and miR-224.
Furthermore, our study demonstrates that these miRNAs can be readily detected in 
the serum of HNF1A-MODY carriers.

PMID: 23674172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Hepatol. 2013 Oct;59(4):830-41. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.04.031. Epub 2013 May 
7.

Pleiotropic effects of methionine adenosyltransferases deregulation as
determinants of liver cancer progression and prognosis.

Frau M(1), Feo F, Pascale RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Laboratory of Experimental
Pathology and Oncology, University of Sassari, Sassari, Italy.

Downregulation of liver-specific MAT1A gene, encoding S-adenosylmethionine (SAM) 
synthesizing isozymes MATI/III, and upregulation of widely expressed MAT2A,
encoding MATII isozyme, known as MAT1A:MAT2A switch, occurs in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). Being inhibited by its reaction product, MATII isoform
upregulation cannot compensate for MATI/III decrease. Therefore, MAT1A:MAT2A
switch contributes to decrease in SAM level in rodent and human
hepatocarcinogenesis. SAM administration to carcinogen-treated rats prevents
hepatocarcinogenesis, whereas MAT1A-KO mice, characterized by chronic SAM
deficiency, exhibit macrovesicular steatosis, mononuclear cell infiltration in
periportal areas, and HCC development. This review focuses upon the pleiotropic
changes, induced by MAT1A/MAT2A switch, associated with HCC development.
Epigenetic control of MATs expression occurs at transcriptional and
post-transcriptional levels. In HCC cells, MAT1A/MAT2A switch is associated with 
global DNA hypomethylation, decrease in DNA repair, genomic instability, and
signaling deregulation including c-MYC overexpression, rise in polyamine
synthesis, upregulation of RAS/ERK, IKK/NF-kB, PI3K/AKT, and LKB1/AMPK axis.
Furthermore, decrease in MAT1A expression and SAM levels results in increased HCC
cell proliferation, cell survival, and microvascularization. All of these changes
are reversed by SAM treatment in vivo or forced MAT1A overexpression or MAT2A
inhibition in cultured HCC cells. In human HCC, MAT1A:MAT2A and MATI/III:MATII
ratios correlate negatively with cell proliferation and genomic instability, and 
positively with apoptosis and global DNA methylation. This suggests that SAM
decrease and MATs deregulation represent potential therapeutic targets for HCC.
Finally, MATI/III:MATII ratio strongly predicts patients' survival length
suggesting that MAT1A:MAT2A expression ratio is a putative prognostic marker for 
human HCC.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23665184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2013 Jun-Jul;36(6):388-95. doi:
10.1016/j.gastrohep.2013.02.013. Epub 2013 May 10.

[Immunophenotypic classification of 3 cases of hepatocellular adenoma.
Differential diagnosis with focal nodular hyperplasia].

[Article in Spanish]

Pérez Rojas J(1), Guarín Corredor MJ, Artes Martinez MJ, Vera Sempere FJ, Brisa
Estelles C, Huart Peris MC, Hernandez Giron S.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Anatomía Patológica, Hospital Universitario La Fe, Valencia,
España. judithpr@terra.es

Interest in adenomas has been renewed by the discovery of the molecular changes
in these tumors. The latest World Health Organization publication on
gastrointestinal tract tumors (2010) includes four types of hepatic adenomas,
which are well characterized immunohistochemically, genotypically and
phenotypically. In these tumors, medical history and morphological behavior play 
an important role in determining the risk of malignancy, mainly in adenomas with 
a b-catenin mutation. The presence of steatosis, inflammation, vascular changes
linked to response to L-FABP, serum amyloid A, and glutamyl synthetase help to
classify these tumors into four groups: hepatocellular adenomas with the HNF1A
mutation (H-HCA), those with the b-catenin mutation (b-HCA), inflammatory HCA
(IHCA), and HCA without markers. The absence of glypican 3 expression, HSP 70 and
perivenular mapping of glutamyl synthetase helps to distinguish these tumors from
well differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma. We describe the clinical,
morphological and immunophenotypic features of three patients diagnosed with
hepatic adenomas in a 2-year period.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier España, S.L. and AEEH y AEG. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23664829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Blood. 2013 May 9;121(19):4008-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-01-477349.

TCF-1 mediates repression of Notch pathway in T lineage-committed early
thymocytes.

Yu S, Xue HH.

PMCID: PMC3650711
PMID: 23660861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mol Syndromol. 2013 Mar;4(3):136-42. doi: 10.1159/000346473. Epub 2013 Jan 15.

Report on a patient with a 12q24.31 microdeletion inherited from an
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus father.

Chouery E(1), Choucair N, Abou Ghoch J, El Sabbagh S, Corbani S, Mégarbané A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique Médicale et Laboratoire Associé INSERM à l'Unité UMR_S 910,
Pôle Technologie Santé, Université Saint-Joseph, Beirut, Lebanon.

We report a 2.3-year-old female patient with global developmental delay,
infantile spasms, hypotonia, microcephaly, flat face, full cheeks, macroglossia, 
highly arched palate, retro-gnathia, narrow ear orifices, and café-au-lait spots.
Molecular karyotyping revealed approximately a 1-Mb interstitial deletion of the 
long arm of one chromosome 12, del(12)(q24.31). The same deletion was identified 
in her father who presents insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) diagnosed
at 14 years. Only one other patient with a similar de novo deletion has been
reported previously [Mol Syndromol 2010;1:42-45]. A phenotype-genotype
correlation is discussed, and the description of a novel rare microdeletion
entity is raised.

PMCID: PMC3638924
PMID: 23653585  [PubMed]


253. Meat Sci. 2013 Aug;94(4):474-9. doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2013.04.015. Epub 2013 Apr
13.

Association and expression analysis of porcine HNF1A gene related to meat and
carcass quality traits.

Kayan A(1), Uddin MJ, Kocamis H, Tesfaye D, Looft C, Tholen E, Schellander K,
Cinar MU.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Science, Animal Breeding and Husbandry Group, University
of Bonn, 53115 Bonn, Germany.

The aim of this study was to investigate the association and expression of HNF1A 
gene as a candidate gene for meat and carcass quality traits in pigs. Statistical
analysis revealed that the g.8260 A>G polymorphism significantly associated with 
pH 24(H), meat percentage and muscle area in the F2 Duroc × Pietrain (DuPi,
n=313) and with pH 24(L), fat area and backfat thickness in the Pietrain (Pi,
n=110) population. HNF1A mRNA and protein expressions were higher (p<0.05) in
animals with the low post-mortem muscle pH 24(L). The promoter methylation
profiling suggested that methylation was not involved on HNF1A expression
regulation (p>0.05) in animal with divergent muscle pH. In conclusion,
polymorphism in porcine HNF1A gene could be used as a candidate marker to improve
the meat and carcass quality traits, with the consideration of breed-specific
effect.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23628452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Diabetologia. 2013 Jul;56(7):1512-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-2916-y. Epub 2013
Apr 27.

Prevalence of monogenic diabetes in the population-based Norwegian Childhood
Diabetes Registry.

Irgens HU(1), Molnes J, Johansson BB, Ringdal M, Skrivarhaug T, Undlien DE, Søvik
O, Joner G, Molven A, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Clinical Science,
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Monogenic diabetes (MD) might be misdiagnosed as type 1
diabetes. The prevalence of MD among children with apparent type 1 diabetes has
not been established. Our aim was to estimate the prevalence of common forms of
MD in childhood diabetes.
METHODS: We investigated 2,756 children aged 0-14 years with newly diagnosed
diabetes who had been recruited to the nationwide population-based Norwegian
Childhood Diabetes Registry (NCDR), from July 2002 to March 2012. Completeness of
ascertainment was 91%. Children diagnosed with diabetes who were under12 months
of age were screened for mutations in KCNJ11, ABCC8 and INS. Children without GAD
and protein tyrosine phosphatase-like protein antibodies were screened in two
ways. Those who had a parent with diabetes were screened for mutations in HNF1A, 
HNF4A, INS and MT-TL1. Children with HbA1c <7.5% (<58 mmol/mol) and no insulin
requirement were screened for mutations in GCK. Finally, we searched the
Norwegian MODY Registry for children with genetically verified MD.
RESULTS: We identified 15 children harbouring a mutation in HNF1A, nine with one 
in GCK, four with one in KCNJ11, one child with a mutation in INS and none with a
mutation in MT-TL1. The minimum prevalence of MD in the NCDR was therefore 1.1%. 
By searching the Norwegian MODY Registry, we found 24 children with
glucokinase-MODY, 15 of whom were not present in the NCDR. We estimated the
minimum prevalence of MD among Norwegian children to be 3.1/100,000.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This is the first prevalence study of the common
forms of MD in a nationwide, population-based registry of childhood diabetes. We 
found that 1.1% of patients in the Norwegian Childhood Diabetes Registry had MD.

PMID: 23624530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2013 Jun;121(6):368-71. doi:
10.1055/s-0033-1341519. Epub 2013 Apr 24.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young and hepatic adenomatosis - characterisation 
of a new mutation.

Iwen KA(1), Klein J, Hubold C, Lehnert H, Weitzel JM.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik I, Universität zu Lübeck, Lübeck, Germany.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1A) mutations cause maturity-onset diabetes
of the young (MODY) type 3. Further extending the phenotypic spectrum, HNF1A
mutations are associated with hepatic adenomatosis. A 20-year old lean, female
patient with newly diagnosed diabetes mellitus was negative for
diabetes-associated autoantibodies and had no relevant family history. Hepatic
adenomatosis was diagnosed. Her HNF1A gene was examined and identified
alterations further analysed.Sequencing of her HNF1A gene revealed a previously
uncharacterised Q495X nonsense mutation, along with the known A98V polymorphism, 
both in the heterozygous state. The patient's father was also a carrier of both
the mutation and the polymorphism. An oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) revealed
impaired glucose tolerance, whereas imaging of his liver was unremarkable. Wild
type HNF1A and HNF1A carrying the Q495X mutation were co-transfected in reporter 
gene assays. The mutation causes a dominant-negative HNF1A protein variant which 
blocks HNF1A wild-type-mediated gene expression.The novel Q495X mutation is the
likely cause of our patient's diabetes and hepatic adenomatosis. It may also
cause her father's impaired glucose tolerance. More generally speaking, if
non-autoimmune diabetes is suspected, examination of the liver may provide
important diagnostic clues. Furthermore, patients with hepatic adenomatosis
without known diabetes should be screened by OGTT. Relatives of patients with
HNF1A mutations should also be screened by OGTT to detect potential early-stage
diabetes.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 23616187  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Diabetes Care. 2013 Sep;36(9):2573-4. doi: 10.2337/dc13-0058. Epub 2013 Apr 22.

Two cases of diabetic ketoacidosis in HNF1A-MODY linked to severe dehydration: is
it time to change the diagnostic criteria for MODY?

Pruhova S(1), Dusatkova P, Neumann D, Hollay E, Cinek O, Lebl J, Sumnik Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, 2nd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in
Prague and University Hospital Motol, Prague, Czech Republic.
stepanka.pruhova@fnmotol.cz

OBJECTIVE: Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1A maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(HNF1A-MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes caused by heterozygous mutations in 
HNF1A. Currently, a history of diabetic ketoacidosis (DKA) is an exclusion
criterion for genetic testing for MODY.
HISTORY AND EXAMINATION: In this article, we describe two unrelated patients aged
17 and 24 years with severe DKA developed several years after the diagnosis of
HNF1A-MODY.
INVESTIGATION: Both patients were treated with insulin, but their metabolic
control was poor (HbA1c 15%, 140 mmol/mol and 13%, 119 mmol/mol, respectively)
due to noncompliance and missed insulin injections. In both patients, DKA
followed a course of recurrent vomiting with dehydration and prerenal acute
kidney injury. Their glycemia, blood pH, and base excess at admission were 97
mmol/L [1,748 mg/dL], 6.80, and -33 mmol/L (patient 1) and 34 mmol/L [613 mg/dL],
7.03, and -14 mmol/L (patient 2).
CONCLUSIONS: This anecdotal observation supports the notion that a history of DKA
does not exclude MODY.

PMCID: PMC3747930
PMID: 23610083  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Intern Med. 2013 Sep;274(3):263-72. doi: 10.1111/joim.12082. Epub 2013 May 6.

Alterations in bile acid synthesis in carriers of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a
mutations.

Ekholm E(1), Nilsson R, Groop L, Pramfalk C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Malmö University 
Hospital, Sweden.

OBJECTIVES: Heterozygous mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a (HNF1a) cause 
maturity onset diabetes of the young 3 (MODY3), an autosomal dominant form of
diabetes. Deficiency of HNF1a in mice results in diabetes, hypercholesterolaemia 
and increased bile acid (BA) and cholesterol synthesis. Little is known about
alterations in lipid metabolism in patients with MODY3. The aim of this study was
to investigate whether patients with MODY3 have altered cholesterol and BA
synthesis and intestinal cholesterol absorption. A secondary aim was to
investigate the effects of HNF1a mutations on the transcriptional regulation of
BA metabolism.
METHODS: Plasma biomarkers of BA and cholesterol synthesis and intestinal
cholesterol absorption were measured in patients with MODY3 (n = 19) and in
matched healthy control subjects (n = 15). Cotransfection experiments were
performed with several promoters involved in BA metabolism along with expression 
vectors carrying the mutations found in these patients.
RESULTS: Plasma analysis showed higher levels of BA synthesis in patients with
MODY3. No differences were observed in cholesterol synthesis or intestinal
cholesterol absorption. Cotransfection experiments showed that one of the
mutations (P379A) increased the induction of the cholesterol 7a-hydroxylase
promoter compared with HNF1a, without further differences in other studied
promoters. By contrast, the other four mutations (L107I, T260M, P291fsinsC and
R131Q) reduced the induction of the farnesoid X receptor (FXR) promoter, which
was followed by reduced repression of the small heterodimer partner promoter. In 
addition, these mutations also reduced the induction of the apical
sodium-dependent bile salt transporter promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: BA synthesis is increased in patients with MODY3 compared with
control subjects. Mutations in HNF1a affect promoters involved in BA metabolism.

© 2013 The Association for the Publication of the Journal of Internal Medicine.

PMID: 23607861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Int J Hepatol. 2013;2013:374170. doi: 10.1155/2013/374170. Epub 2013 Mar 27.

MR Imaging of Hepatocellular Adenomas and Differential Diagnosis Dilemma.

Grazioli L(1), Olivetti L, Mazza G, Bondioni MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Spedali Civili, 25100 Brescia, Italy.

HEPATOCELLULAR ADENOMAS (HCAS) ARE CURRENTLY CATEGORIZED INTO DISTINCT GENETIC
AND PATHOLOGIC SUBTYPES AS FOLLOWS: inflammatory hepatocellular adenoma,
hepatocyte-nuclear-factor-1-alpha (HNF-1 a -mutated) hepatocellular adenoma, and 
ß -catenin-mutated hepatocellular adenomas; the fourth, defined as unclassified
subtype, encompasses HCAs without any genetic abnormalities. This classification 
has accepted management implications due to different risks of haemorrhage and
malignant transformation of the four subtypes. Imaging guided biopsy and/or
surgical resection very important in obtaining definitive characterization;
nevertheless, MRI with intra-extravascular and hepatobiliary (dual phase) agents,
is an important tool not only in differential subtypes definition but even in
surveillance with early identification of complications and discovery of some
signs of HCA malignant degeneration. Inflammation, abnormal rich vascularisation,
peliotic areas, and abundant fatty infiltration are pathologic findings
differently present in the HCA subtypes and they may be detected by
multiparametric MRI approach. Lesion enlargement and heterogeneity of signal
intensity and of contrast enhancement are signs to be considered in malignant
transformation. The purpose of this paper is to present the state of the art of
MRI in the diagnosis of HCA and subtype characterization, with particular regard 
to morphologic and functional information available with dual phase contrast
agents, and to discuss differential diagnosis with the most common benign and
malignant lesions mimicking HCAs.

PMCID: PMC3623472
PMID: 23606972  [PubMed]


259. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Sep;1829(9):970-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.04.004. 
Epub 2013 Apr 16.

14-3-3<U+03B6> interacts with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a and enhances its DNA binding 
and transcriptional activation.

Yu M(1), Guo HX, Hui-Chen, Wang XH, Li CY, Zhan YQ, Ge CH, Yang XM.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, China.

14-3-3 proteins regulate numerous cellular processes through interaction with a
variety of proteins, and have been identified as HNF1a binding partner by mass
spectrometry analysis in our previous study. In the present study, the
interaction between 14-3-3<U+03B6> and HNF1a has been further validated by in vivo and
in vitro assays. Moreover, we have found that overexpression of 14-3-3<U+03B6>
potentiated the transcriptional activity of HNF1a in cultured cells, and
silencing of 14-3-3<U+03B6> by RNA interference in HepG2 cells specifically affected the
HNF1a-dependent gene expression. Furthermore, we have demonstrated that 14-3-3<U+03B6>
is recruited to endogenous HNF1a responsive promoters and enhances HNF1a binding 
to its cognate DNA sequences. In addition, we have also provided evidence that
the association between HNF1a and 14-3-3<U+03B6> is phosphorylation-dependent. Taken
together, these results suggest that 14-3-3<U+03B6> may be an endogenous physiologic
regulator of HNF1a.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23603156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Immunity. 2013 Apr 18;38(4):694-704. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.12.003.

T cell factor 1 is required for group 2 innate lymphoid cell generation.

Yang Q(1), Monticelli LA, Saenz SA, Chi AW, Sonnenberg GF, Tang J, De Obaldia ME,
Bailis W, Bryson JL, Toscano K, Huang J, Haczku A, Pear WS, Artis D, Bhandoola A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine
at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Group 2 innate lymphoid cells (ILC2) are innate lymphocytes that confer
protective type 2 immunity during helminth infection and are also involved in
allergic airway inflammation. Here we report that ILC2 development required
T cell factor 1 (TCF-1, the product of the Tcf7 gene), a transcription factor
also implicated in T cell lineage specification. Tcf7(-/-) mice lack ILC2, and
were unable to mount ILC2-mediated innate type 2 immune responses. Forced
expression of TCF-1 in bone marrow progenitors partially bypassed the requirement
for Notch signaling in the generation of ILC2 in vivo. TCF-1 acted through both
GATA-3-dependent and GATA-3-independent pathways to promote the generation of
ILC2. These results are reminiscent of the critical roles of TCF-1 in early
T cell development. Hence, transcription factors that underlie early steps of
T cell development are also implicated in the development of innate lymphoid
cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4029843
PMID: 23601684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Drug Metab Rev. 2013 May;45(2):166-72. doi: 10.3109/03602532.2012.756012.

Epigenetic regulation of pregnane X receptor activity.

Tian Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, MS
4466, College Station, 77845 TX, USA. ytian@cvm.tamu.edu

Pregnane X receptor (PXR, NR1I2) is a ligand-dependent nuclear receptor (NR) that
functions as a xenobiotic sensor and effector in coordinately regulating
expression of genes of the xenobiotic detoxification network. PXR exerts its
transcriptional regulatory functions by dimerization with retinoic X receptor
RXR, and PXR-RXR complex binds to specific DNA sequences for regulating gene
expression. PXR functions are regulated at the epigenetic level by chromatin
modifications, DNA methylation and noncoding RNA. Chromatin modifications are
carried out, in part, through interaction with coregulator complexes, including
steroid coactivators (SRCs), corepressors (NcoR/SMRT), hepatocyte nuclear factor 
4 alpha, proliferator activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator 1 alpha and protein
arginine methyltransferase 1. PXR can be modified by acetylation, phosphorylation
and sumoylation, and the promoter of PXR can be methylated at the "CpG" island.
These factors collectively determine the ways in which PXR activity can be
regulated, thereby affecting the magnitude and duration of the PXR-regulated drug
metabolic responses. Most studies of PXR focus on its role as a transcription
factor, which is responsible for the generation of messenger RNA. Recent emerging
evidence suggests that PXR regulates gene expression at both transcriptional and 
translational levels. This review highlights recent research on the epigenetic
mechanisms that are found to be important for the gene-regulatory activity of PXR
and discusses their implications in xenobiotic metabolism and adverse drug
responses.

PMID: 23600685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Int J Dev Biol. 2013;57(1):49-54. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.120191kv.

The Wnt signaling mediator tcf1 is required for expression of foxd3 during
Xenopus gastrulation.

Janssens S(1), Van Den Broek O, Davenport IR, Akkers RC, Liu F, Veenstra GJ,
Hoppler S, Vleminckx K, Destrée O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Molecular Biology, Ghent University, Belgium.

TCF1 belongs to the family of LEF1/TCF transcription factors that regulate gene
expression downstream of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling, which is crucial for embryonic 
development and is involved in adult stem cell regulation and tumor growth. In
early Xenopus embryos, tcf1 plays an important role in mesoderm induction and
patterning. Foxd3 emerged as a potential tcf1 target gene in a microarray
analysis of gastrula stage embryos. Because foxd3 and tcf1 are coexpressed during
gastrulation, we investigated whether foxd3 is regulated by tcf1. By using
morpholino-mediated knockdown, we show that during gastrulation foxd3 expression 
is dependent on tcf1. By chromatin immunoprecipitation, we also demonstrate
direct interaction of ß-catenin/tcf complexes with the foxd3 gene locus. Hence,
our results indicate that tcf1 acts as an essential activator of foxd3, which is 
critical for dorsal mesoderm formation in early embryos.

PMID: 23585352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Immunity. 2013 Apr 18;38(4):681-93. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2013.01.010. Epub 2013 
Apr 4.

A network of high-mobility group box transcription factors programs innate
interleukin-17 production.

Malhotra N(1), Narayan K, Cho OH, Sylvia KE, Yin C, Melichar H, Rashighi M,
Lefebvre V, Harris JE, Berg LJ, Kang J; Immunological Genome Project Consortium.

Collaborators: Gautier EL, Jakubzick C, Randolph GJ, Best JA, Knell J, Goldrath
A, Miller J, Brown B, Merad M, Jojic V, Koller D, Cohen N, Brennan P, Brenner M, 
Shay T, Regev A, Fletcher A, Elpek K, Bellemare-Pelletier A, Malhotra D, Turley
S, Jianu R, Laidlaw D, Collins J, Malhotra N, Sylvia K, Kang J, Gazit R, Garrison
B, Rossi DJ, Kim F, Rao TN, Wagers A, Shinton SA, Hardy RR, Monach P, Bezman NA, 
Sun JC, Kim CC, Lanier LL, Heng T, Kreslavsky T, Painter M, Ericson J, Davis S,
Mathis D, Benoist C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

How innate lymphoid cells (ILCs) in the thymus and gut become specialized
effectors is unclear. The prototypic innate-like <U+03B3>d T cells (T<U+03B3>d17) are a major
source of interleukin-17 (IL-17). We demonstrate that T<U+03B3>d17 cells are programmed 
by a gene regulatory network consisting of a quartet of high-mobility group (HMG)
box transcription factors, SOX4, SOX13, TCF1, and LEF1, and not by conventional
TCR signaling. SOX4 and SOX13 directly regulated the two requisite T<U+03B3>d17
cell-specific genes, Rorc and Blk, whereas TCF1 and LEF1 countered the SOX
proteins and induced genes of alternate effector subsets. The T cell lineage
specification factor TCF1 was also indispensable for the generation of IL-22
producing gut NKp46(+) ILCs and restrained cytokine production by lymphoid tissue
inducer-like effectors. These results indicate that similar gene network
architecture programs innate sources of IL-17, independent of anatomical origins.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3811080
PMID: 23562159  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Diabetes. 2013 Aug;62(8):2978-83. doi: 10.2337/db12-1627. Epub 2013 Apr 4.

Effects of common genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes and glycemic
traits on a- and ß-cell function and insulin action in humans.

Jonsson A(1), Ladenvall C, Ahluwalia TS, Kravic J, Krus U, Taneera J, Isomaa B,
Tuomi T, Renström E, Groop L, Lyssenko V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Lund University
Diabetes Centre, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. jonsson@sund.ku.dk

Although meta-analyses of genome-wide association studies have identified >60
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with type 2 diabetes and/or
glycemic traits, there is little information on whether these variants also
affect a-cell function. The aim of the current study was to evaluate the effects 
of glycemia-associated genetic loci on islet function in vivo and in vitro. We
studied 43 SNPs in 4,654 normoglycemic participants from the Finnish
population-based Prevalence, Prediction, and Prevention of Diabetes-Botnia
(PPP-Botnia) Study. Islet function was assessed, in vivo, by measuring insulin
and glucagon concentrations during oral glucose tolerance test, and, in vitro, by
measuring glucose-stimulated insulin and glucagon secretion from human pancreatic
islets. Carriers of risk variants in BCL11A, HHEX, ZBED3, HNF1A, IGF1, and NOTCH2
showed elevated whereas those in CRY2, IGF2BP2, TSPAN8, and KCNJ11 showed
decreased fasting and/or 2-h glucagon concentrations in vivo. Variants in BCL11A,
TSPAN8, and NOTCH2 affected glucagon secretion both in vivo and in vitro. The
MTNR1B variant was a clear outlier in the relationship analysis between insulin
secretion and action, as well as between insulin, glucose, and glucagon. Many of 
the genetic variants shown to be associated with type 2 diabetes or glycemic
traits also exert pleiotropic in vivo and in vitro effects on islet function.

PMCID: PMC3717852
PMID: 23557703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Pediatr Diabetes. 2013 Nov;14(7):535-8. doi: 10.1111/pedi.12018. Epub 2013 Mar
31.

Digenic heterozygous HNF1A and HNF4A mutations in two siblings with
childhood-onset diabetes.

Shankar RK(1), Ellard S, Standiford D, Pihoker C, Gilliam LK, Hattersley A, Dolan
LM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Monogenic diabetes due to mutations in the transcription factor genes hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 1A (HNF1A) and HNF4A is characterized by islet cell antibody
negative, familial diabetes with residual insulin secretion. We report two
sisters with childhood onset diabetes who are both heterozygous for the most
common mutation in each of two transcription factors, HNF1A, and HNF4A. The
proband was diagnosed with diabetes at 7 yr of age and treated with insulin for 4
yr. Her genetic diagnosis resulted in transition to sulfonylureas for one and a
half years before insulin therapy was re-initiated due to declining glycemic
control. Her sister was diagnosed with diabetes at 14 yr of age, treated
initially with insulin but has been well controlled on oral sulfonylurea therapy 
for over 2 yr. Both sisters inherited the HNF4A gene mutation R127W from their
mother and the HNF1A gene mutation P291fsinsC (c.872dup) from their father. The
father was diagnosed with diabetes at 45 yr of age. Their brother is heterozygous
for the HNF4A R127W mutation. Both the brother and mother have normal glucose
tolerance at the ages of 16 and 46 yr, respectively. Digenic inheritance of HNF1A
and HNF4A mutations is very rare and has only been reported in two families where
conclusive evidence for the pathogenicity of their mutations was lacking.
Follow-up studies in this family co-segregating the two most commonly reported
HNF1A/HNF4A mutations will be informative for understanding the effect of digenic
inheritance upon phenotypic severity and response to sulfonylurea therapy.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4090307
PMID: 23551881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Int Arch Allergy Immunol. 2013;161(3):279-84. doi: 10.1159/000346906. Epub 2013
Mar 15.

Should the negativity for islet cell autoantibodies be used in a prescreening for
genetic testing in maturity-onset diabetes of the young? The case of
autoimmunity-associated destruction of pancreatic ß-cells in a family of
HNF1A-MODY subjects.

Urbanová J(1), Rypácková B, Kucera P, Andel M, Heneberg P.

Author information: 
(1)Charles University in Prague, Third Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech
Republic.

It was recently suggested that routine islet cell autoantibody testing should be 
performed to discriminate maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) from type 1
diabetes mellitus (T1DM). This is the first report ever to describe the familial 
manifestation of T1DM autoimmunity in nonobese HNF1A-MODY subjects and the
presence of islet antigen-2 (IA-2) antibodies in MODY subjects. Three nonobese
subjects in an age range of 14-35 years were diagnosed with HNF1A-MODY (p.
Arg159Gln mutation). All the tested subjects had detectable (but varying) levels 
of islet cell autoantibodies (i.e., antibodies against glutamate decarboxylase or
IA-2) in the absence of other T1DM characteristics. They displayed long-term
expression of intermediate fasting C-peptide levels, ketoacidosis was absent even
in periods of spontaneous insulin withdrawal, and full dependence on externally
administered insulin was not detected in any of them although better glycemic
control was achieved when insulin was supplemented. The course of the disease was
similar to that of the autoantibody-negative HNF1A-MODY subjects. The case
questions the selectivity of autoantibodies as a marker of T1DM or late-onset
autoimmune diabetes of adulthood (LADA) over MODY and challenges the use of
autoantibodies as a universal negative marker of MODY in an effort to decrease
the cost of health care, as it may eventually lead to the wrong diagnosis and
thus to the incorrect treatment. Further research should involve examination of
the autoantibody titers and prevalence in large and geographically diverse
cohorts of MODY subjects selected for genetic testing (regardless of their
autoantibody titers) as well as determination of the islet cell autoantibody
kinetics in the course of MODY onset and progression.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23548576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Pediatr Endocrinol Rev. 2012 Dec-2013 Jan;10(2):234-42.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young: clinical characteristics, diagnosis and
management.

Kavvoura FK(1), Owen KR.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, University of Oxford, 
Churchill Hospital, Oxford UK.

Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY), represents a rare cause of diabetes 
(1% of all cases), commonly misdiagnosed as Type 1 Diabetes (T1D) or Type 2
Diabetes (T2D). Clinical characteristics of MODY include age of onset before 45
years, absence of beta-cell autoimmunity and features of metabolic syndrome,
sustained endogenous insulin production and strong family history. Common reasons
for misdiagnosis are limitations in physicians' awareness and restrictions in
performing genetic testing. In an attempt to improve diagnosis rates, recent
research efforts have focused on the discovery of non-genetic biomarkers for
prioritising individuals for genetic testing, with some promising progress
(identification of high-sensitivity CRP, plasma glycan profile as HNF1A-MODY).
The information provided is relevant to physicians dealing with young adults but 
details on pediatric populations are also included. Raising awareness about MODY 
and making the diagnosis more accessible will improve prognostication and
management of these patients and their relatives.

PMID: 23539835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Immunol. 2013 May 1;190(9):4585-94. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1300099. Epub 2013
Mar 27.

Id2-mediated inhibition of E2A represses memory CD8+ T cell differentiation.

Masson F(1), Minnich M, Olshansky M, Bilic I, Mount AM, Kallies A, Speed TP,
Busslinger M, Nutt SL, Belz GT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Immunology, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical
Research, Melbourne, Victoria 3052, Australia.

The transcription factor inhibitor of DNA binding (Id)2 modulates T cell fate
decisions, but the molecular mechanism underpinning this regulation is unclear.
In this study we show that loss of Id2 cripples effector differentiation and
instead programs CD8(+) T cells to adopt a memory fate with increased
Eomesodermin and Tcf7 expression. We demonstrate that Id2 restrains CD8(+) T cell
memory differentiation by inhibiting E2A-mediated direct activation of Tcf7 and
that Id2 expression level mirrors T cell memory recall capacity. As a result of
the defective effector differentiation, Id2-deficient CD8(+) T cells fail to
induce sufficient Tbx21 expression to generate short-lived effector CD8(+) T
cells. Our findings reveal that the Id2/E2A axis orchestrates T cell
differentiation through the induction or repression of downstream transcription
factors essential for effector and memory T cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3631715
PMID: 23536629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Clin Invest. 2013 Apr;123(4):1647-61. doi: 10.1172/JCI65048. Epub 2013 Mar 25.

WNT signaling determines tumorigenicity and function of ESC-derived retinal
progenitors.

Cui L(1), Guan Y, Qu Z, Zhang J, Liao B, Ma B, Qian J, Li D, Li W, Xu GT, Jin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Stem Cell Biology, Institute of Health Sciences, Shanghai
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

Comment in
    J Clin Invest. 2013 Apr;123(4):1422-4.

Tumor formation constitutes a major obstacle to the clinical application of
embryonic stem cell-derived (ESC-derived) cells. In an attempt to find major
extracellular signaling and intrinsic factors controlling tumorigenicity and
therapeutic functionality of transplanted ESC-derived retinal progenitor cells
(ESC-RPCs), we evaluated multiple kinds of ESC-RPCs in a mouse retinal
degeneration model and conducted genome-wide gene expression profiling. We
identified canonical WNT signaling as a critical determinant for the
tumorigenicity and therapeutic function of ESC-RPCs. The function of WNT
signaling is primarily mediated by TCF7, which directly induces expression of
Sox2 and Nestin. Inhibition of WNT signaling, overexpression of dominant-negative
Tcf7, and silencing Tcf7, Sox2, or Nestin all resulted in drastically reduced
tumor formation and substantially improved retinal integration and visual
preservation in mice. These results demonstrate that the WNT signaling cascade
plays a critical role in modulating the tumorigenicity and functionality of
ESC-derived progenitors.

PMCID: PMC3613909
PMID: 23524971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Pediatr Diabetes. 2013 Nov;14(7):526-34. doi: 10.1111/pedi.12032. Epub 2013 Mar
21.

The spectrum of HNF1A gene mutations in Greek patients with MODY3: relative
frequency and identification of seven novel germline mutations.

Tatsi C(1), Kanaka-Gantenbein C, Vazeou-Gerassimidi A, Chrysis D, Delis D,
Tentolouris N, Dacou-Voutetakis C, Chrousos GP, Sertedaki A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Metabolism, First Department of
Pediatrics, Athens University School of Medicine, 'Agia Sophia' Children's
Hospital, Athens, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) is the most common type of
monogenic diabetes accounting for 1-2% of the population with diabetes. The
relative incidence of HNF1A-MODY (MODY3) is high in European countries; however, 
data are not available for the Greek population. The aims of this study were to
determine the relative frequency of MODY3 in Greece, the type of the mutations
observed, and their relation to the phenotype of the patients.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Three hundred ninety-five patients were referred to our
center because of suspected MODY during a period of 15 yr. The use of Denaturing 
Gradient Gel Electrophoresis of polymerase chain reaction amplified DNA revealed 
72 patients carrying Glucokinase gene mutations (MODY2) and 8 patients carrying
HNF1A gene mutations (MODY3). After using strict criteria, 54 patients were
selected to be further evaluated by direct sequencing or by multiplex ligation
probe amplification (MLPA) for the presence of HNF1A gene mutations.
RESULTS: In 16 unrelated patients and 13 of their relatives, 15 mutations were
identified in the HNF1A gene. Eight of these mutations were previously reported, 
whereas seven were novel. Clinical features, such as age of diabetes at diagnosis
or severity of hyperglycemia, were not related to the mutation type or location.
CONCLUSIONS: In our cohort of patients fulfilling strict clinical criteria for
MODY, 12% carried an HNF1A gene mutation, suggesting that defects of this gene
are responsible for a significant proportion of monogenic diabetes in the Greek
population. No clear phenotype-genotype correlations were identified.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23517481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Gene. 2013 May 25;521(1):160-5. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.03.021. Epub 2013 Mar
16.

Congenital hyperinsulinism: clinical and molecular analysis of a large Italian
cohort.

Faletra F(1), Athanasakis E, Morgan A, Biarnés X, Fornasier F, Parini R, Furlan
F, Boiani A, Maiorana A, Dionisi-Vici C, Giordano L, Burlina A, Ventura A,
Gasparini P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Maternal and Child Health-IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste,
Italy. faletra@burlo.trieste.it

Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is a genetic disorder characterized by profound 
hypoglycemia related to an inappropriate insulin secretion. It is a heterogeneous
disease classified into two major subgroups: "channelopathies" due to defects in 
ATP-sensitive potassium channel, encoded by ABCC8 and KCNJ11 genes, and
"metabolopathies" caused by mutation of several genes (GLUD1, GCK, HADH, SLC16A1,
HNF4A and HNF1A) and involved in different metabolic pathways. To elucidate the
genetic etiology of CHI in the Italian population, we conducted an extensive
sequencing analysis of the CHI-related genes in a large cohort of 36 patients:
Twenty-nine suffering from classic hyperinsulinism (HI) and seven from
hyperinsulinism-hyperammonemia (HI/HA). Seventeen mutations have been found in
fifteen HI patients and five mutations in five HI/HA patients. Our data confirm
the major role of ATP-sensitive potassium channel in the pathogenesis of Italian 
cases (~70%) while the remaining percentage should be attributed to other. A
better knowledge of molecular basis of CHI would lead to improve strategies for
genetic screening and prenatal diagnosis. Moreover, genetic analysis might also
help to distinguish the two histopathological forms of CHI, which would lead to a
clear improvement in the treatment and in genetic counseling.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23506826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2013 May;533(1-2):1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.abb.2013.03.002.
Epub 2013 Mar 13.

Anti-inflammatory effects of propofol are mediated by apolipoprotein M in a
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a-dependent manner.

Ma X(1), Hu YW, Zhao ZL, Zheng L, Qiu YR, Huang JL, Wu XJ, Mao XR, Yang J, Zhao
JY, Li SF, Gu MN, Wang Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, Guangdong 510515, China.

Propofol (2,6-diisopropylphenol) is probably the most widely used intravenous
hypnotic agent in daily practice. However, its anti-inflammatory properties have 
seldom been addressed. In this study, we evaluated the anti-inflammatory activity
and mechanisms of propofol on lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced inflammation in
vivo and in vitro and found that propofol markedly inhibited LPS-induced
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines, including tumor necrosis factor
(TNF)-a, interleukin (IL)-1ß, and IL-6, and expression of inducible nitric oxide 
synthase (iNOS). At the same time, the expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a
(HNF-1a) and apolipoprotein M (APOM) was inhibited by treatment with LPS and
LPS-induced down-regulation of HNF-1a expression and APOM expression could be
compensated by propofol treatment. However, propofol could not compensate
LPS-induced down-regulation of APOM expression by treatment with HNF-1a siRNA and
the suppressive effect on LPS-induced pro-inflammatory cytokines production by
propofol was significantly compensated by treatment with APOM siRNA. These
results provide evidence that propofol may first up-regulate APOM expression by
enhancing HNF-1a expression and then inhibit pro-inflammatory cytokine production
in LPS-stimulated cells. Therefore, our study may be useful in understanding the 
critical effect of propofol in patients with systemic inflammatory response
syndrome.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23500137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Gastroenterology. 2013 May;144(5):888-902. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2013.02.032.
Epub 2013 Feb 26.

Hepatocellular benign tumors-from molecular classification to personalized
clinical care.

Nault JC(1), Bioulac-Sage P, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, UMR-674, Génomique Fonctionnelle des Tumeurs Solides, IUH, Paris,
France.

Focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) and hepatocellular adenoma (HCA) are benign
hepatocellular tumors that develop most frequently in women without cirrhosis.
Genomic approaches have identified signaling pathways related to these benign
hepatocyte proliferations. FNH, a polyclonal lesion, is characterized by local
vascular abnormalities and heterogeneous activation of Wnt/ß-catenin and
transforming growth factor ß signaling. Four major subgroups of HCAs have been
identified based on mutations in specific oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes.
Each molecular subtype of HCA has been associated with specific pathways,
providing new information about benign tumorigenesis. Key features include
metabolic alterations (induced by defects in HNF1A), oncogene-induced
inflammation (activation of JAK-STAT signaling in inflammatory adenomas), and an 
association between activation of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling and progression of HCAs
in hepatocellular carcinomas. Benign hepatocellular tumors can be classified
using immunohistochemical analyses. Studies of genotypes and phenotypes of FNH
and HCAs have led to the identification of risk factors and improved invasive and
noninvasive diagnostic techniques, evaluation of prognosis, and treatment. We
review the molecular pathways involved in benign hepatocyte proliferation and
discuss how this basic knowledge has been progressively translated into
personalized clinical care.

Copyright © 2013 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23485860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Clin Invest. 2013 Mar;123(3):1241-61. doi: 10.1172/JCI61271. Epub 2013 Feb 15.

Cigarette smoke mediates epigenetic repression of miR-487b during pulmonary
carcinogenesis.

Xi S(1), Xu H, Shan J, Tao Y, Hong JA, Inchauste S, Zhang M, Kunst TF, Mercedes
L, Schrump DS.

Author information: 
(1)Thoracic Oncology Section, Surgery Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

MicroRNAs are critical mediators of stem cell pluripotency, differentiation, and 
malignancy. Limited information exists regarding microRNA alterations that
facilitate initiation and progression of human lung cancers. In this study, array
techniques were used to evaluate microRNA expression in normal human respiratory 
epithelia and lung cancer cells cultured in the presence or absence of cigarette 
smoke condensate (CSC). Under relevant exposure conditions, CSC significantly
repressed miR-487b. Subsequent experiments demonstrated that miR-487b directly
targeted SUZ12, BMI1, WNT5A, MYC, and KRAS. Repression of miR-487b correlated
with overexpression of these targets in primary lung cancers and coincided with
DNA methylation, de novo nucleosome occupancy, and decreased H2AZ and TCF1 levels
within the miR-487b genomic locus. Deoxy-azacytidine derepressed miR-487b and
attenuated CSC-mediated silencing of miR-487b. Constitutive expression of
miR-487b abrogated Wnt signaling, inhibited in vitro proliferation and invasion
of lung cancer cells mediated by CSC or overexpression of miR-487b targets, and
decreased growth and metastatic potential of lung cancer cells in vivo.
Collectively, these findings indicate that miR-487b is a tumor suppressor
microRNA silenced by epigenetic mechanisms during tobacco-induced pulmonary
carcinogenesis and suggest that DNA demethylating agents may be useful for
activating miR-487b for lung cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC3582115
PMID: 23426183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Bull Acad Natl Med. 2012 Feb;196(2):459-81; discussion 482-3.

[Malignant transformation of multiple isolated hepatocellular adenomas.
Therapeutic implications of immunohistochemical and radiological findings].

[Article in French]

Baulieux J(1), Manichon AF, Bancel B, D'Errico E, Raspado O, Ducerf C, Mabrut JY,
Rode A.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital de la Croix Rousse, 103 Grande rue de la Croix Rousse-69317 Lyon.
jbaulieux@aol.com

Malignant transformation of hepatic adenoma (HA) is now a well-documented
phenomenon. Recent pathological and immunophenotypic studies have identified
several subtypes with different prognoses. In many cases the HA subtype can be
determined by modern radiological methods, including contrast-enhanced
ultrasonography (CEUS) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Based on a series of
26 cases of HA studied with CEUS, MR1 histopathology and immunochemistry, we
propose tailored therapeutic options. Watchful waiting is appropriate in some
cases, while others require biopsy or resection. Management is more conservative 
than in previous years.

PMID: 23420963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Int J Hepatol. 2013;2013:315947. doi: 10.1155/2013/315947. Epub 2013 Jan 15.

Molecular classification of hepatocellular adenomas.

Nault JC(1), Zucman Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm UMR-674, Génomique Fonctionnelle des Tumeurs Solides, IUH, 75010 Paris,
France ; Labex Immuno-Oncology, Faculté de Médecine, Université Paris Descartes, 
Sorbonne Paris Cité, 75005 Paris, France.

Hepatocellular adenomas (HCAs) are benign tumors developed in normal liver most
frequently in women before menopause. HCAs lead to diagnostic pitfalls and
several difficulties to assess the risk of malignant transformation in these
young patients. Recent advances in basic knowledge have revealed a molecular
classification related to risk factors, pathological features, and risk of
transformation in hepatocellular carcinoma. Three major molecular pathways have
been identified altered in specific HCA subgroups that are defined by either (1) 
inactivation of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1A (HNF1A) transcription factor, (2)
activation of the WNT/ß-catenin by CTNNB1 mutations, or (3) activation of the
IL6/STAT3 pathway by somatic mutation of IL6ST, GNAS, or STAT3. Here, we will
review the different molecular classes of HCA.

PMCID: PMC3562579
PMID: 23401783  [PubMed]


277. Drug Metab Dispos. 2013 Oct;41(10):1738-43. doi: 10.1124/dmd.113.051201. Epub
2013 Feb 11.

Epigenetic regulation is a crucial factor in the repression of UGT1A1 expression 
in the human kidney.

Oda S(1), Fukami T, Yokoi T, Nakajima M.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Metabolism and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kanazawa
University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa, Japan.

Human uridine 5'-diphospho-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A1 catalyzes the
metabolism of numerous clinically and pharmacologically important compounds, such
as bilirubin and SN-38. UGT1A1 is predominantly expressed in the liver and
intestine but not in the kidney. The purpose of this study was to uncover the
mechanism of the tissue-specific expression of UGT1A1, focusing on its epigenetic
regulation. Bisulfite sequence analysis revealed that the CpG-rich region near
the UGT1A1 promoter (-85 to +40) was hypermethylated (83%) in the kidney, whereas
it was hypomethylated (37%) in the liver. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
demonstrated that histone H3 near the promoter was hypoacetylated in the kidney
but hyperacetylated in the liver; this hyperacetylation was accompanied by the
recruitment of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1a to the promoter. The UGT1A1
promoter in human kidney-derived HK-2 cells that do not express UGT1A1 was fully 
methylated, but this promoter was relatively unmethylated in human liver-derived 
HuH-7 cells that express UGT1A1. Treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(5-aza-dC), an inhibitor of DNA methylation, resulted in an increase of UGT1A1
mRNA expression in both cell types, but the increase was much larger in HK-2
cells than in HuH-7 cells. The transfection of an HNF1a expression plasmid into
the HK-2 cells resulted in an increase of UGT1A1 mRNA only in the presence of
5-aza-dC. In summary, we found that DNA hypermethylation, along with histone
hypoacetylation, interferes with the binding of HNF1a, resulting in the defective
expression of UGT1A1 in the human kidney. Thus, epigenetic regulation is a
crucial determinant of tissue-specific expression of UGT1A1.

PMID: 23401472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 May;1833(5):1190-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.01.023.
Epub 2013 Feb 5.

Control of mitogenic and motogenic pathways by miR-198, diminishing hepatoma cell
growth and migration.

Elfimova N(1), Sievers E, Eischeid H, Kwiecinski M, Noetel A, Hunt H, Becker D,
Frommolt P, Quasdorff M, Steffen HM, Nürnberg P, Büttner R, Teufel A, Dienes HP, 
Drebber U, Odenthal M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the leading causes of cancer deaths,
worldwide. MicroRNAs, inhibiting gene expression by targeting various
transcripts, are involved in genomic dysregulation during hepatocellular
tumorigenesis. In previous studies, microRNA-198 (miR-198) was shown to be
significantly downregulated in HCV-positive hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Herein, the function of miR-198 in hepatocellular carcinoma cell growth and gene 
expression was studied. In hepatoma cell-types with low levels of liver-specific 
transcription factor HNF1a indicating a low differentiation grade, miR-198
expression was most downregulated. However, miR-198 treatment did not restore the
expression of the liver-specific transcription factors HNF1a or HNF4a.
Importantly, overexpression of miR-198 in Pop10 hepatoma cells markedly reduced
cell growth. In agreement, comprehensive gene expression profiling by microarray 
hybridisation and real-time quantification revealed that central signal
transducers of proliferation pathways were downregulated by miR-198. In contrast,
genes mediating cellular adherence were highly upregulated by miR-198. Thus, the 
low expression of E-cadherin and claudin-1, involved in cell adhesion and
cell-cell contacts, was abolished in hepatoma cells after miR-198 overexpression.
This definite induction of both proteins by miR-198 was shown to be accompanied
by a significantly impaired migration activity of hepatoma Pop10 cells. In
conclusion, miR-198 acts as a tumor suppressor by repression of mitogenic and
motogenic pathways diminishing cell growth and migration.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23391410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Int J Pediatr Endocrinol. 2013 Feb 6;2013(1):3. doi: 10.1186/1687-9856-2013-3.

Monogenic hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia: current insights into the pathogenesis
and management.

Lord K(1), De León DD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Diabetes, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, 3615 Civic Center Boulevard, Abramson Research Center Room 802A,
Philadelphia, PA, 19104, USA. deleon@chop.edu.

Hyperinsulinism (HI) is the leading cause of persistent hypoglycemia in children,
which if unrecognized may lead to development delays and permanent neurologic
damage. Prompt recognition and appropriate treatment of HI are essential to avoid
these sequelae. Major advances have been made over the past two decades in
understanding the molecular basis of hyperinsulinism and mutations in nine genes 
are currently known to cause HI. Inactivating KATP channel mutations cause the
most common and severe type of HI, which occurs in both a focal and a diffuse
form. Activating mutations of glutamate dehydrogenase (GDH) lead to
hyperinsulinism/hyperammonemia syndrome, while activating mutations of
glucokinase (GK), the "glucose sensor" of the beta cell, causes hyperinsulinism
with a variable clinical phenotype. More recently identified genetic causes
include mutations in the genes encoding short-chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA (SCHAD),
uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF-4a),
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-alpha (HNF-1a), and monocarboyxlate transporter 1
(MCT-1), which results in a very rare form of HI triggered by exercise. For a
timely diagnosis, a critical sample and a glucagon stimulation test should be
done when plasma glucose is < 50 mg/dL. A failure to respond to a trial of
diazoxide, a KATP channel agonist, suggests a KATP defect, which frequently
requires pancreatectomy. Surgery is palliative for children with diffuse KATPHI, 
but children with focal KATPHI are cured with a limited pancreatectomy.
Therefore, distinguishing between diffuse and focal disease and localizing the
focal lesion in the pancreas are crucial aspects of HI management. Since 2003,
18<U+2009>F-DOPA PET scans have been used to differentiate diffuse and focal disease and
localize focal lesions with higher sensitivity and specificity than more invasive
interventional radiology techniques. Hyperinsulinism remains a challenging
disorder, but recent advances in the understanding of its genetic basis and
breakthroughs in management should lead to improved outcomes for these children.

PMCID: PMC3573904
PMID: 23384201  [PubMed]


280. FEBS Lett. 2013 Mar 1;587(5):522-7. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.01.034. Epub 2013
Jan 25.

Synthesis of novel inhibitors blocking Wnt signaling downstream of ß-catenin.

Halbedl S(1), Kratzer MC, Rahm K, Crosta N, Masters KS, Zippert J, Bräse S, Gradl
D.

Author information: 
(1)Zoological Institute, Cell- and Developmental Biology, Karlsruhe Institute of 
Technology, D-76131 Karlsruhe, Germany.

Large scale screening of libraries consisting of natural and small molecules led 
to the identification of many small molecule inhibitors repressing Wnt/ß-Catenin 
signaling. However, targeted synthesis of novel Wnt pathway inhibitors has been
rarely described. We developed a modular and expedient way to create the aromatic
ring system with an aliphatic ring in between. Our synthesis opens up the
possibility, in principle, to substitute all positions at the ring system with
any desired substituent. Here, we tested five different haloquinone analogs
carrying methoxy- and hydroxy-groups at different positions. Bona fide Wnt
activity assays in cell culture and in Xenopus embryos revealed that two of these
compounds act as potent inhibitors of aberrant activated Wnt/ß-Catenin signaling.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23357029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Hum Mutat. 2013 May;34(5):669-85. doi: 10.1002/humu.22279. Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Mutations in the genes encoding the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 alpha and 4 alpha in maturity-onset diabetes of the young and
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia.

Colclough K(1), Bellanne-Chantelot C, Saint-Martin C, Flanagan SE, Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation Trust,
Exeter, UK.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic disorder characterized
by autosomal dominant inheritance of young-onset (typically <25 years),
noninsulin-dependent diabetes due to defective insulin secretion. MODY is both
clinically and genetically heterogeneous with mutations in at least 10 genes.
Mutations in the HNF1A gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha are the
most common cause of MODY in most adult populations studied. The number of
different pathogenic HNF1A mutations totals 414 in 1,247 families. Mutations in
the HNF4A gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha are a rarer cause of
MODY with 103 different mutations reported in 173 families to date. Sensitivity
to treatment with sulfonylurea tablets is a feature of both HNF1A and HNF4A
mutations. The HNF4A MODY phenotype has been expanded by the reports of
macrosomia in ~50% of babies, and more rarely, neonatal hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia. The identification of an HNF1A or HNF4A gene mutation has important
implications for clinical management in diabetes and pregnancy, but MODY is
significantly underdiagnosed. Current research is focused on identifying
biomarkers and developing probability models to identify those patients most
likely to have MODY, until next generation sequencing technology enables
cost-effective gene analysis for all patients with young onset diabetes.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23348805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013 Mar 15;168(4):557-64. doi: 10.1530/EJE-12-0673. Print 2013
Apr.

Clinical and molecular characterisation of 300 patients with congenital
hyperinsulinism.

Kapoor RR(1), Flanagan SE, Arya VB, Shield JP, Ellard S, Hussain K.

Author information: 
(1)London Centre for Paediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Great Ormond Street
Hospital for Children NHS Trust, The Institute of Child Health, University
College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is a clinically heterogeneous
condition. Mutations in eight genes (ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK, HADH, SLC16A1,
HNF4A and HNF1A) are known to cause CHI.
AIM: To characterise the clinical and molecular aspects of a large cohort of
patients with CHI.
METHODOLOGY: Three hundred patients were recruited and clinical information was
collected before genotyping. ABCC8 and KCNJ11 genes were analysed in all
patients. Mutations in GLUD1, HADH, GCK and HNF4A genes were sought in patients
with diazoxide-responsive CHI with hyperammonaemia (GLUD1), raised
3-hydroxybutyrylcarnitine and/or consanguinity (HADH), positive family history
(GCK) or when CHI was diagnosed within the first week of life (HNF4A).
RESULTS: Mutations were identified in 136/300 patients (45.3%). Mutations in
ABCC8/KCNJ11 were the commonest genetic cause identified (n=109, 36.3%). Among
diazoxide-unresponsive patients (n=105), mutations in ABCC8/KCNJ11 were
identified in 92 (87.6%) patients, of whom 63 patients had recessively inherited 
mutations while four patients had dominantly inherited mutations. A paternal
mutation in the ABCC8/KCNJ11 genes was identified in 23 diazoxide-unresponsive
patients, of whom six had diffuse disease. Among the diazoxide-responsive
patients (n=183), mutations were identified in 41 patients (22.4%). These include
mutations in ABCC8/KCNJ11 (n=15), HNF4A (n=7), GLUD1 (n=16) and HADH (n=3).
CONCLUSIONS: A genetic diagnosis was made for 45.3% of patients in this large
series. Mutations in the ABCC8 gene were the commonest identifiable cause. The
vast majority of patients with diazoxide-responsive CHI (77.6%) had no
identifiable mutations, suggesting other genetic and/or environmental mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3599069
PMID: 23345197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 22;288(8):5353-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C112.428979. Epub 2013
Jan 10.

Derivation of human induced pluripotent stem cells from patients with maturity
onset diabetes of the young.

Teo AK(1), Windmueller R, Johansson BB, Dirice E, Njolstad PR, Tjora E, Raeder H,
Kulkarni RN.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Islet Cell and Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes Center,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is an autosomal dominant disease.
Despite extensive research, the mechanism by which a mutant MODY gene results in 
monogenic diabetes is not yet clear due to the inaccessibility of patient
samples. Induced pluripotency and directed differentiation toward the pancreatic 
lineage are now viable and attractive methods to uncover the molecular mechanisms
underlying MODY. Here we report, for the first time, the derivation of human
induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) from patients with five types of MODY:
MODY1 (HNF4A), MODY2 (GCK), MODY3 (HNF1A), MODY5 (HNF1B), and MODY8 (CEL) with a 
polycistronic lentiviral vector expressing a Cre-excisable human "stem cell
cassette" containing the four reprogramming factors OCT4, KLF4, SOX2, and CMYC.
These MODY-hiPSCs morphologically resemble human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs), 
express pluripotency markers OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, SSEA-4, and TRA-1-60, give rise
to derivatives of the three germ layers in a teratoma assay, and are
karyotypically normal. Overall, our MODY-hiPSCs serve as invaluable tools to
dissect the role of MODY genes in the development of pancreas and islet cells and
to evaluate their significance in regulating beta cell function. This knowledge
will aid future attempts aimed at deriving functional mature beta cells from
hPSCs.

PMCID: PMC3581399
PMID: 23306198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. BMC Genomics. 2012;13 Suppl 7:S11. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-S7-S11. Epub 2012
Dec 13.

A novel unbiased measure for motif co-occurrence predicts combinatorial
regulation of transcription.

Vandenbon A(1), Kumagai Y, Akira S, Standley DM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Systems Immunology, Immunology Frontier Research Center, Osaka
University, 3-1 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
alexisvdb@ifrec.osaka-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Multiple transcription factors (TFs) are involved in the generation
of gene expression patterns, such as tissue-specific gene expression and
pleiotropic immune responses. However, how combinations of TFs orchestrate
diverse gene expression patterns is poorly understood. Here we propose a new
measure for regulatory motif co-occurrence and a new methodology to
systematically identify TF pairs significantly co-occurring in a set of promoter 
sequences.
RESULTS: Initial analyses suggest that non-CpG promoters have a higher potential 
for combinatorial regulation than CpG island-associated promoters, and that
co-occurrences are strongly influenced by motif similarity. We applied our method
to large-scale gene expression data from various tissues, and showed how our
measure for motif co-occurrence is not biased by motif over-representation. Our
method identified, amongst others, the binding motifs of HNF1 and FOXP1 to be
significantly co-occurring in promoters of liver/kidney specific genes. Binding
sites tend to be positioned proximally to each other, suggesting interactions
exist between this pair of transcription factors. Moreover, the binding sites of 
several TFs were found to co-occur with NF-<U+03BA>B and IRF sites in sets of genes with
similar expression patterns in dendritic cells after Toll-like receptor
stimulation. Of these, we experimentally verified that CCAAT enhancer binding
protein alpha positively regulates its target promoters synergistically with
NF-<U+03BA>B.
CONCLUSIONS: Both computational and experimental results indicate that the
proposed method can clarify TF interactions that could not be observed by
currently available prediction methods.

PMCID: PMC3521209
PMID: 23282148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. World J Hepatol. 2012 Nov 27;4(11):322-6. doi: 10.4254/wjh.v4.i11.322.

Hepatocellular adenoma associated with familial adenomatous polyposis coli.

Inaba K(1), Sakaguchi T, Kurachi K, Mori H, Tao H, Nakamura T, Takehara Y, Baba
S, Maekawa M, Sugimura H, Konno H.

Author information: 
(1)Keisuke Inaba, Department of Surgery, Iwata City Hospital, Iwata 438-8500,
Japan.

Hepatocellular adenoma (HCA) is a benign liver tumor that most frequently occurs 
in young women using oral contraceptives. We report a rare case of HCA in a 29
years old female with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP). The first proband was
her sister, who underwent a total colectomy and was genetically diagnosed as FAP.
A tumor, 3.0 cm in diameter, was detected in the right lobe of the liver during a
screening study for FAP. A colonoscopy and gastroendoscopy revealed numerous
adenomatous polyps without carcinoma. The patient underwent a total colectomy and
ileo-anal anastomosis and hepatic posterior sectoriectomy. The pathological
findings of the liver tumor were compatible with HCA. The resected specimen of
the colon revealed multiple colonic adenomatous polyps. Examination of genetic
alteration revealed a germ-line mutation of the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) 
gene. Inactivation of the second APC allele was not found. Other genetic
alterations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha and ß-catenin gene, which
are reported to be associated with HCA, were not detected. Although FAP is
reported to be complicated with various neoplasias in extracolic organs, only six
cases of HCA associated with FAP, including the present case, have been reported.
Additional reports will establish the precise mechanisms of HCA development in
FAP patients.

PMCID: PMC3536841
PMID: 23293720  [PubMed]


286. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Feb;98(2):E355-63. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-2169. Epub 
2012 Dec 28.

Genotype and phenotype correlations in 417 children with congenital
hyperinsulinism.

Snider KE(1), Becker S, Boyajian L, Shyng SL, MacMullen C, Hughes N, Ganapathy K,
Bhatti T, Stanley CA, Ganguly A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, 415 Anatomy Chemistry
Building, 3620 Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

CONTEXT: Hypoglycemia due to congenital hyperinsulinism (HI) is caused by
mutations in 9 genes.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to correlate genotype with phenotype in 417 children
with HI.
METHODS: Mutation analysis was carried out for the ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP)
channel genes (ABCC8 and KCNJ11), GLUD1, and GCK with supplemental screening of
rarer genes, HADH, UCP2, HNF4A, HNF1A, and SLC16A1.
RESULTS: Mutations were identified in 91% (272 of 298) of diazoxide-unresponsive 
probands (ABCC8, KCNJ11, and GCK), and in 47% (56 of 118) of diazoxide-responsive
probands (ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, HADH, UCP2, HNF4A, and HNF1A). In
diazoxide-unresponsive diffuse probands, 89% (109 of 122) carried KATP mutations;
2% (2 of 122) had GCK mutations. In mutation-positive diazoxide-responsive
probands, 42% were GLUD1, 41% were dominant KATP mutations, and 16% were in rare 
genes (HADH, UCP2, HNF4A, and HNF1A). Of the 183 unique KATP mutations, 70% were 
novel at the time of identification. Focal HI accounted for 53% (149 of 282) of
diazoxide-unresponsive probands; monoallelic recessive KATP mutations were
detectable in 97% (145 of 149) of these cases (maternal transmission excluded in 
all cases tested). The presence of a monoallelic recessive KATP mutation
predicted focal HI with 97% sensitivity and 90% specificity.
CONCLUSIONS: Genotype to phenotype correlations were most successful in children 
with GLUD1, GCK, and recessive KATP mutations. Correlations were complicated by
the high frequency of novel missense KATP mutations that were uncharacterized,
because such defects might be either recessive or dominant and, if dominant, be
either responsive or unresponsive to diazoxide. Accurate and timely prediction of
phenotype based on genotype is critical to limit exposure to persistent
hypoglycemia in infants and children with congenital HI.

PMCID: PMC3565119
PMID: 23275527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Diabetes. 2013 Apr;62(4):1329-37. doi: 10.2337/db12-0880. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Mutations in HNF1A result in marked alterations of plasma glycan profile.

Thanabalasingham G(1), Huffman JE, Kattla JJ, Novokmet M, Rudan I, Gloyn AL,
Hayward C, Adamczyk B, Reynolds RM, Muzinic A, Hassanali N, Pucic M, Bennett AJ, 
Essafi A, Polasek O, Mughal SA, Redzic I, Primorac D, Zgaga L, Kolcic I, Hansen
T, Gasperikova D, Tjora E, Strachan MW, Nielsen T, Stanik J, Klimes I, Pedersen
OB, Njølstad PR, Wild SH, Gyllensten U, Gornik O, Wilson JF, Hastie ND, Campbell 
H, McCarthy MI, Rudd PM, Owen KR, Lauc G, Wright AF.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK.

A recent genome-wide association study identified hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-a
(HNF1A) as a key regulator of fucosylation. We hypothesized that loss-of-function
HNF1A mutations causal for maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) would
display altered fucosylation of N-linked glycans on plasma proteins and that
glycan biomarkers could improve the efficiency of a diagnosis of HNF1A-MODY. In a
pilot comparison of 33 subjects with HNF1A-MODY and 41 subjects with type 2
diabetes, 15 of 29 glycan measurements differed between the two groups. The
DG9-glycan index, which is the ratio of fucosylated to nonfucosylated
triantennary glycans, provided optimum discrimination in the pilot study and was 
examined further among additional subjects with HNF1A-MODY (n = 188), glucokinase
(GCK)-MODY (n = 118), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-a (HNF4A)-MODY (n = 40), type 1
diabetes (n = 98), type 2 diabetes (n = 167), and nondiabetic controls (n = 98). 
The DG9-glycan index was markedly lower in HNF1A-MODY than in controls or other
diabetes subtypes, offered good discrimination between HNF1A-MODY and both type 1
and type 2 diabetes (C statistic = 0.90), and enabled us to detect three
previously undetected HNF1A mutations in patients with diabetes. In conclusion,
glycan profiles are altered substantially in HNF1A-MODY, and the DG9-glycan index
has potential clinical value as a diagnostic biomarker of HNF1A dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC3609552
PMID: 23274891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Tunis Med. 2012 Dec;90(12):882-7.

Familial early-onset diabetes is not a typical MODY in several Tunisian patients.

Amara A(1), Chadli-Chaieb M, Ghezaiel H, Philippe J, Brahem R, Dechaume A, Saad
A, Chaieb L, Froguel P, Gribaa M, Vaxillaire M.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Endocrinology, Sousse Faculty of Medicine, Tunisia.

Erratum in
    Tunis Med. 2013 Oct;91(10):604. Froguele, Philippe [corrected to Froguel,
Philippe].

BACKGROUND: MODY (Maturity-onset diabetes of the young), a dominantly inherited
form of early-onset diabetes, is clinically and genetically heterogeneous with
more than ten genetic subtypes described worldwide.
AIM: To evaluate the possible existence of MODY in 12 young diabetic Tunisian
patients by searching for mutations in the most prevalent MODY genes.
METHODS: Twelve patients with diabetes in 2-to-3 generations, all diagnosed
before age 31, were screened for mutations and deletions in HNF1A, HNF4A, INS,
IPF1, NEUROD1 and GCK genes by Sanger sequencing and by Multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification assay.
RESULTS: The patients had no evidence of autoimmunity and a mean age at diabetes 
diagnosis of 25.66 ± 3.96 years with severe overt diabetes (fasting glycaemia:
10.91 ± 3.55 mmol/ l; HbA1c: 10.46 ± 3.31 %). Two subjects were initially treated
with insulin. On the ten initially treated with OHA or on diet, eight converted
to insulin therapy (within 3 months to 20 years). Molecular analysis showed only 
one missense HNF4A mutation (I453V) in one family. No mutations in the studied
genes were detected in the other patients.
CONCLUSION: A molecular defect in known MODY genes has been excluded in 11
patients with early-onset diabetes suggesting that other genetic causes may
explain diabetes in these families. In such cases, new generation sequencing
approaches may be well appropriate to identify specific molecular etiologies from
extended families and to establish a strategy of molecular diagnostic of MODY in 
Tunisia.

PMID: 23247789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Diabetologia. 2013 Mar;56(3):497-507. doi: 10.1007/s00125-012-2779-7. Epub 2012
Dec 15.

Autonomous and self-sustained circadian oscillators displayed in human islet
cells.

Pulimeno P(1), Mannic T, Sage D, Giovannoni L, Salmon P, Lemeille S,
Giry-Laterriere M, Unser M, Bosco D, Bauer C, Morf J, Halban P, Philippe J,
Dibner C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, University Hospital of
Geneva, Aile Jura 4-771.2, Rue Gabrielle-Perret-Gentil 4, CH-1211 Geneva,
Switzerland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Following on from the emerging importance of the pancreas
circadian clock on islet function and the development of type 2 diabetes in
rodent models, we aimed to examine circadian gene expression in human islets. The
oscillator properties were assessed in intact islets as well as in beta cells.
METHODS: We established a system for long-term bioluminescence recording in
cultured human islets, employing lentivector gene delivery of the core clock gene
Bmal1 (also known as Arntl)-luciferase reporter. Beta cells were stably labelled 
using a rat insulin2 promoter fluorescent construct. Single-islet/cell
oscillation profiles were measured by combined bioluminescence-fluorescence
time-lapse microscopy.
RESULTS: Human islets synchronised in vitro exhibited self-sustained circadian
oscillations of Bmal1-luciferase expression at both the population and
single-islet levels, with period lengths of 23.6 and 23.9 h, respectively.
Endogenous BMAL1 and CRY1 transcript expression was circadian in synchronised
islets over 48 h, and antiphasic to REV-ERBa (also known as NR1D1), PER1, PER2,
PER3 and DBP transcript circadian profiles. HNF1A and PDX1 exhibited weak
circadian oscillations, in phase with the REV-ERBa transcript. Dispersed islet
cells were strongly oscillating as well, at population and single-cell levels.
Importantly, beta and non-beta cells revealed oscillatory profiles that were well
synchronised with each other.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We provide for the first time compelling evidence for
high-amplitude cell-autonomous circadian oscillators displayed in human
pancreatic islets and in dispersed human islet cells. Moreover, these clocks are 
synchronised between beta and non-beta cells in primary human islet cell
cultures.

PMCID: PMC3563957
PMID: 23242133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Int J Oncol. 2013 Feb;42(2):535-42. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1728. Epub 2012 Dec 6.

HGF regulates VEGF expression via the c-Met receptor downstream pathways,
PI3K/Akt, MAPK and STAT3, in CT26 murine cells.

Matsumura A(1), Kubota T, Taiyoh H, Fujiwara H, Okamoto K, Ichikawa D, Shiozaki
A, Komatsu S, Nakanishi M, Kuriu Y, Murayama Y, Ikoma H, Ochiai T, Kokuba Y,
Nakamura T, Matsumoto K, Otsuji E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Digestive Surgery, Department of Surgery, Kyoto Prefectural
University of Medicine, Kamigyo-ku, Kyoto 602-8566, Japan.

In the present study, we assessed the involvement of hepatocyte growth factor
(HGF)/c-Met signalling with vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF) and
hypoxia inducible factor (HIF)-1a expression in the downstream pathways
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt, mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK)
and signal transducer and activator of transcription 3 (STAT3) in CT26 cells, to 
determine the mechanisms of the potent anti-angiogenic effect of NK4. We
established genetically modified CT26 cells to produce NK4 (CT26-NK4). VEGF
expression in subcutaneous CT26 tumours in vivo and in culture supernatants in
vitro was determined by ELISA. HIF-1a expression in nuclear extracts was
evaluated by western blot analysis. VEGF and HIF-1a mRNA levels were examined by 
real-time reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). The DNA
binding activity of HIF-1a was evaluated using an HIF-1a transcription factor
assay kit. Our results demonstrated that VEGF expression was reduced in
homografts of CT26-NK4 cells, compared to those of the control cells. In vitro,
VEGF expression, which was induced by HGF, was inhibited by anti-HGF antibody,
NK4 and by kinase inhibitors (PI3K, LY294002; MAPK, PD98059; and STAT3, Stattic).
HGF-induced HIF-1a transcriptional activity was also inhibited by the kinase
inhibitors. Real-time RT-PCR demonstrated that HGF-induced HIF-1a mRNA expression
was not inhibited by LY294002 and PD98059, but was inhibited by Stattic. These
data suggest that the PI3K/Akt, MAPK and STAT3 pathways, downstream of HGF/c-Met 
signalling, are involved in the regulation of VEGF expression in CT26 cells.
HGF/c-Met signalling may be a promising target for anti-angiogenic strategies.

PMID: 23233163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Leukemia. 2013 Jul;27(7):1613-4. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.354. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

Loss of Tcf7 diminishes hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell function.

Huls G, van Es J, Clevers H, de Haan G, van Os R.

PMID: 23212152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Liver Transpl. 2013 Mar;19(3):336-45. doi: 10.1002/lt.23584.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1ß is a novel prognostic marker independent of the
Milan criteria in transplantable hepatocellular carcinoma: a retrospective
analysis based on tissue microarrays.

Shim JH(1), Lee HC, Han S, Kang HJ, Yu E, Lee SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology (Asan Liver Center), University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We retrospectively investigated the prognostic value of hepatocyte nuclear factor
1 (HNF1) proteins in 159 liver transplant patients with hepatocellular carcinoma 
(HCC), including 36 (22.6%) exceeding the Milan criteria. The expression of
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), HNF1a, and HNF1ß was examined with immunohistochemistry 
on duplicate tissue microarray slides containing HCC tumor explants. The times to
recurrence and cancer death were analyzed with a Cox regression model and were
compared according to the expression of markers of interest. We compared risk
predictions with area under the receiver operator curves (AUROCs) and C
statistics. AFP, HNF1a, and HNF1ß were positive in 22.6%, 46.5%, and 61.0% of the
tumor immunoprofiles, respectively. Although several variables were associated
with the times to recurrence and cancer death in univariate Cox analyses, only
AFP expression for the time to recurrence and the Milan criteria and HNF1ß
expression for the times to recurrence and cancer death remained significant
after multivariate adjustments. The expression of HNF1ß (but not HNF1a) was
related to a serum AFP level = 200 ng/mL, microvascular invasion, and AFP
expression (P < 0.05 for all). A subgroup analysis showed that in the group
meeting the Milan criteria, recurrence and cancer death rates at 10 years in the 
HNF1ß-negative patients were approximately one-tenth of those in the
HNF1ß-positive patients, but the difference was not significant in the group
exceeding the Milan criteria. The addition of HNF1ß expression to the Milan
criteria increased the C statistics and AUROCs for both recurrence and mortality 
(P < 0.05 for all). In conclusion, the immunohistological detection of HNF1ß
predicts recurrence and HCC-specific death after transplantation and provides an 
additive benefit in comparison with the Milan selection criteria on their own.

Copyright © 2013 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 23203386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. PLoS Biol. 2012;10(11):e1001430. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.1001430. Epub 2012 Nov
20.

The nuclear effector of Wnt-signaling, Tcf1, functions as a T-cell-specific tumor
suppressor for development of lymphomas.

Tiemessen MM(1), Baert MR, Schonewille T, Brugman MH, Famili F, Salvatori DC,
Meijerink JP, Ozbek U, Clevers H, van Dongen JJ, Staal FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunohematology and Blood Transfusion, Leiden University
Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands.

The HMG-box factor Tcf1 is required during T-cell development in the thymus and
mediates the nuclear response to Wnt signals. Tcf1(-/-) mice have previously been
characterized and show developmental blocks at the CD4-CD8- double negative (DN) 
to CD4+CD8+ double positive transition. Due to the blocks in T-cell development, 
Tcf1(-/-) mice normally have a very small thymus. Unexpectedly, a large
proportion of Tcf1(-/-) mice spontaneously develop thymic lymphomas with 50% of
mice developing a thymic lymphoma/leukemia at the age of 16 wk. These lymphomas
are clonal, highly metastatic, and paradoxically show high Wnt signaling when
crossed with Wnt reporter mice and have high expression of Wnt target genes Lef1 
and Axin2. In wild-type thymocytes, Tcf1 is higher expressed than Lef1, with a
predominance of Wnt inhibitory isoforms. Loss of Tcf1 as repressor of Lef1 leads 
to high Wnt activity and is the initiating event in lymphoma development, which
is exacerbated by activating Notch1 mutations. Thus, Notch1 and loss of Tcf1
functionally act as collaborating oncogenic events. Tcf1 deficiency predisposes
to the development of thymic lymphomas by ectopic up-regulation of Lef1 due to
lack of Tcf1 repressive isoforms and frequently by cooperating activating
mutations in Notch1. Tcf1 therefore functions as a T-cell-specific tumor
suppressor gene, besides its established role as a Wnt responsive transcription
factor. Thus, Tcf1 acts as a molecular switch between proliferative and
repressive signals during T-lymphocyte development in the thymus.

PMCID: PMC3502537
PMID: 23185135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Neuro Endocrinol Lett. 2012;33 Suppl 2:13-6.

Variants within HNF1a and ANGPTL4 genes and acute coronary syndrome in Czech
population. The GENDEMIP study.

Dlouha D(1), Pitha J, Adámkova V, Lanska V, Hubacek JA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Prague, Czech Republic.
dadl@ikem.cz

BACKGROUND: Atherosclerosis is a complex arterial disease involving interactions 
between multiple genetic and environmental factors. A large number of genetic
polymorphisms associated with atherosclerotic diseases have been identified in
recent years. We investigated the possible association between hepatic nuclear
factor (HNF1-a) and angiopoietin-like 4 (ANGPTL4) single nucleotide polymorphisms
and the risk of acute coronary syndrome (ACS) in the Czech population.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: A total of 1,182 patients with ACS (835 males and 347
females) and 1,200 healthy controls (827 males and 373 females) were included in 
the study. All patients were younger than 65 years of age. rs7310409 (A>G within 
the HNF1-a gene) and rs116843064 (G>A within the ANGPTL4 gene) were genotyped
using TaqMan genotyping assays.
RESULTS: The frequencies of the genotypes in patients with ACS did not
significantly differ from the control group for the rs7310409 polymorphism
(AA=17.1%, AG=46.6%, GG=36.2% vs. AA=14.4%, AG=50.3%, GG=35.3%, respectively;
p=0.12) or the rs116843064 polymorphism (AA=0.1%, AG=3.5%, GG=96.4% vs. AA=0.1%, 
AG=4.2%, GG=95.7%, respectively; p=0.69). There was no interaction with gender.
In addition, gene variants were not associated with common cardiovascular risk
factors (dyslipidaemia, hypertension, smoking, obesity and diabetes).
CONCLUSIONS: No association was observed between polymorphisms within the HNF1-a 
and ANGPTL4 genes and the risk of ACS in the Czech population.

PMID: 23183503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Diabet Med. 2013 Feb;30(2):246-50. doi: 10.1111/dme.12066.

Apolipoprotein M can discriminate HNF1A-MODY from Type 1 diabetes.

Mughal SA(1), Park R, Nowak N, Gloyn AL, Karpe F, Matile H, Malecki MT, McCarthy 
MI, Stoffel M, Owen KR.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK.

AIMS: Missed diagnosis of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) has led to 
an interest in biomarkers that enable efficient prioritization of patients for
definitive molecular testing. Apolipoprotein M (apoM) was suggested as a
biomarker for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1A)-MODY because of its
reduced expression in Hnf1a(-/-) mice. However, subsequent human studies
examining apoM as a biomarker have yielded conflicting results. We aimed to
evaluate apoM as a biomarker for HNF1A-MODY using a highly specific and sensitive
ELISA.
METHODS: ApoM concentration was measured in subjects with HNF1A-MODY (n = 69),
Type 1 diabetes (n = 50), Type 2 diabetes (n = 120) and healthy control subjects 
(n = 100). The discriminative accuracy of apoM and of the apoM/HDL ratio for
diabetes aetiology was evaluated.
RESULTS: Mean (standard deviation) serum apoM concentration (µmol/l) was
significantly lower for subjects with HNF1A-MODY [0.86 (0.29)], than for those
with Type 1 diabetes [1.37 (0.26), P = 3.1 × 10(-18) ) and control subjects [1.34
(0.22), P = 7.2 × 10(-19) ). There was no significant difference in apoM
concentration between subjects with HNF1A-MODY and Type 2 diabetes [0.89 (0.28), 
P = 0.13]. The C-statistic measure of discriminative accuracy for apoM was 0.91
for HNF1A-MODY vs. Type 1 diabetes, indicating high discriminative accuracy. The 
apoM/HDL ratio was significantly lower in HNF1A-MODY than other study groups.
However, this ratio did not perform well in discriminating HNF1A-MODY from either
Type 1 diabetes (C-statistic = 0.79) or Type 2 diabetes (C-statistic = 0.68).
CONCLUSIONS: We confirm an earlier report that serum apoM levels are lower in
HNF1A-MODY than in controls. Serum apoM provides good discrimination between
HNF1A-MODY and Type 1 diabetes and warrants further investigation for clinical
utility in diabetes diagnostics.

© 2012 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2012 Diabetes UK.

PMCID: PMC4193536
PMID: 23157689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Diabetes Care. 2013 Mar;36(3):557-61. doi: 10.2337/dc12-1174. Epub 2012 Nov 12.

Heterogeneity in phenotype of usher-congenital hyperinsulinism syndrome: hearing 
loss, retinitis pigmentosa, and hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia ranging from severe
to mild with conversion to diabetes.

Al Mutair AN(1), Brusgaard K, Bin-Abbas B, Hussain K, Felimban N, Al Shaikh A,
Christesen HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Endocrinology Division, King Abdulaziz Medical
City-Riyadh, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the phenotype of 15 children with congenital
hyperinsulinism (CHI) and profound hearing loss, known as Homozygous 11p15-p14
Deletion syndrome (MIM #606528).
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Prospective clinical follow-up and genetic analysis 
by direct sequencing, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification, and
microsatellite markers.
RESULTS: Genetic testing identified the previous described homozygous deletion in
11p15, USH1C:c.(90+592)_ABCC8:c.(2694-528)del. Fourteen patients had severe CHI
demanding near-total pancreatectomy. In one patient with mild, transient neonatal
hypoglycemia and nonautoimmune diabetes at age 11 years, no additional mutations 
were found in HNF1A, HNF4A, GCK, INS, and INSR. Retinitis pigmentosa was found in
two patients aged 9 and 13 years. No patients had enteropathy or renal tubular
defects. Neuromotor development ranged from normal to severe delay with epilepsy.
CONCLUSIONS: The phenotype of Homozygous 11p15-p14 Deletion syndrome, or
Usher-CHI syndrome, includes any severity of neonatal-onset CHI and severe,
sensorineural hearing loss. Retinitis pigmentosa and nonautoimmune diabetes may
occur in adolescence.

PMCID: PMC3579360
PMID: 23150283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Diabetes. 2013 Feb;62(2):653-61. doi: 10.2337/db12-0827. Epub 2012 Nov 8.

Metabolite profiling reveals normal metabolic control in carriers of mutations in
the glucokinase gene (MODY2).

Spégel P(1), Ekholm E, Tuomi T, Groop L, Mulder H, Filipsson K.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Metabolism, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund
University Diabetes Centre, Malmö, Sweden. peter.spegel@med.lu.se

Mutations in the gene encoding glucokinase (GCK) cause a mild hereditary form of 
diabetes termed maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)2 or GCK-MODY. The
disease does not progress over time, and diabetes complications rarely develop.
It has therefore been suggested that GCK-MODY represents a metabolically
compensated condition, but experimental support for this notion is lacking. Here,
we profiled metabolites in serum from patients with MODY1 (HNF4A), MODY2 (GCK),
MODY3 (HNF1A), and type 2 diabetes and from healthy individuals to characterize
metabolic perturbations caused by specific mutations. Analysis of four GCK-MODY
patients revealed a metabolite pattern similar to that of healthy individuals,
while other forms of diabetes differed markedly in their metabolite profiles.
Furthermore, despite elevated glucose concentrations, carriers of GCK mutations
showed lower levels of free fatty acids and triglycerides than healthy control
subjects. The metabolite profiling was confirmed by enzymatic assays and
replicated in a cohort of 11 GCK-MODY patients. Elevated levels of fatty acids
are known to associate with ß-cell dysfunction, insulin resistance, and increased
incidence of late complications. Our results show that GCK-MODY represents a
metabolically normal condition, which may contribute to the lack of late
complications and the nonprogressive nature of the disease.

PMCID: PMC3554352
PMID: 23139355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 2012;58(4):287-91.

Short-chain fatty acids increase the level of calbindin-D9k messenger RNA in
Caco-2 cells.

Fukushima A(1), Aizaki Y, Sakuma K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Nutrition, Kagawa Nutrition University, Sakado,
Saitama, Japan.

Fructooligosaccharides (FOS) are indigestible oligosaccharides that increase the 
expression of calbindin-D9k and consequently increase calcium absorption by the
colon in rats. The molecular mechanism of the increased expression of
calbindin-D9k resulting from FOS ingestion has not been elucidated. Short-chain
fatty acids (SCFAs), namely, fermentation products of FOS by intestinal bacteria 
have been hypothesized as direct effectors of calbindin-D9k gene expression. To
test this hypothesis, SCFAs were added to Caco-2 human intestinal epithelial
cells, and changes in the levels of transcription of genes for calbindin-D9k, and
transcription factors (vitamin D receptor: VDR, caudal homeobox-2: Cdx-2,
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-a: HNF1-a) were determined by quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction. Addition of sodium propionate or sodium 
butyrate to cell cultures increased levels of calbindin-D9k mRNA to 731% (p<0.05)
and 321% (p<0.05), respectively. However, addition of these SCFAs did not affect 
the levels of mRNA VDR, Cdx-2, or HNF1-a. In conclusion, addition of SCFAs to
cultured Caco-2 cells results in elevation of calbindin-D9k mRNA, consistent with
the expected role of SCFAs as mediators of the increase of calcium absorption in 
rats that were fed with FOS.

PMID: 23132313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. BMC Genomics. 2012 Nov 5;13:594. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-594.

Molecular evidence for the bi-clonal origin of neuroendocrine tumor derived
metastases.

Rinner B(1), Gallè B, Trajanoski S, Fischer C, Hatz M, Maierhofer T, Michelitsch 
G, Moinfar F, Stelzer I, Pfragner R, Guelly C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Research, Medical University of Graz, Stiftingtalstraße 24,
Graz, 8010, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Reports on common mutations in neuroendocrine tumors (NET) are rare
and clonality of NET metastases has not been investigated in this tumor entity
yet. We selected one NET and the corresponding lymph node and liver metastases as
well as the derivative cell lines to screen for somatic mutations in the primary 
NET and to track the fate of genetic changes during metastasis and in vitro
progression.
RESULTS: Applying microarray based sequence capture resequencing including 4,935 
Exons from of 203 cancer-associated genes and high-resolution copy number and
genotype analysis identified multiple somatic mutations in the primary NET,
affecting BRCA2, CTNNB1, ERCC5, HNF1A, KIT, MLL, RB1, ROS1, SMAD4, and TP53. All 
mutations were confirmed in the patients' lymph node and liver metastasis tissue 
as well as early cell line passages. In contrast to the tumor derived cell line, 
higher passages of the metastases derived cell lines lacked somatic mutations and
chromosomal alterations, while expression of the classical NET marker serotonin
was maintained.
CONCLUSION: Our study reveals that both metastases have evolved from the same
pair of genetically differing NET cell clones. In both metastases, the in vivo
dominating "mutant" tumor cell clone has undergone negative selection in vitro
being replaced by the "non-mutant" tumor cell population. This is the first
report of a bi-clonal origin of NET derived metastases, indicating selective
advantage of interclonal cooperation during metastasis. In addition, this study
underscores the importance to monitor cell line integrity using high-resolution
genome analysis tools.

PMCID: PMC3500212
PMID: 23127113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Diabet Med. 2013 Mar;30(3):260-6. doi: 10.1111/dme.12038.

RD Lawrence lecture 2012: assessing aetiology in diabetes: how C-peptide, CRP and
fucosylation came to the party!

Owen KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Katharine.owen@drl.ox.ac.uk

Assigning the correct aetiology in diabetes is important for treatment,
understanding prognosis and for follow-up of family members. Despite these
benefits, many are missing out on the opportunity to have testing for monogenic
forms of diabetes. This review gives the clinical features of the commoner forms 
of monogenic diabetes and examines which clinical and biological markers can be
used to identify those at highest risk of having Maturity onset diabetes of the
young (MODY). MODY is characterised by young-onset, familial diabetes which is
C-peptide positive, ß-cell antibody negative and not associated with metabolic
syndrome. Differentiating from type 1 and type 2 diabetes can be challenging due 
to the overlap of clinical features. In type 1 diabetes, insulin production
ceases after the honeymoon period. Thus C-peptide can be used to detect those
with persisting insulin secretion who might have a different cause for their
diabetes. In type 2 diabetes, most have insulin resistance, so absence of
metabolic syndrome could be used to identify those most likely to have MODY.
Another approach is to look for non-pancreatic features associated with mutations
in MODY genes. Following results from Genome-wide association studies, we have
shown that those with HNF1A mutations (the commonest form of MODY) have decreased
serum levels of highly-sensitive C-reactive protein (hsCRP) and altered patterns 
of plasma protein fucosylation. These features can differentiate HNF1A-MODY from 
common forms of diabetes with a high degree of discriminative accuracy. Using
combinations of clinical features and new biomarkers in diagnostic pathways will 
help increase diagnosis rates of MODY.

© 2012 The Author. Diabetic Medicine © 2012 Diabetes UK.

PMID: 23106207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Immunity. 2012 Nov 16;37(5):813-26. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2012.08.009. Epub 2012 
Oct 25.

The TCF-1 and LEF-1 transcription factors have cooperative and opposing roles in 
T cell development and malignancy.

Yu S(1), Zhou X, Steinke FC, Liu C, Chen SC, Zagorodna O, Jing X, Yokota Y,
Meyerholz DK, Mullighan CG, Knudson CM, Zhao DM, Xue HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Erratum in
    Immunity. 2014 Jan 16;40(1):166.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2012 Nov 16;37(5):761-3.

The TCF-1 and LEF-1 transcription factors are known to play critical roles in
normal thymocyte development. Unexpectedly, we found that TCF-1-deficient
(Tcf7(-/-)) mice developed aggressive T cell malignancy, resembling human T cell 
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL). LEF-1 was aberrantly upregulated in
premalignant Tcf7(-/-) early thymocytes and lymphoma cells. We further
demonstrated that TCF-1 directly repressed LEF-1 expression in early thymocytes
and that conditional inactivation of Lef1 greatly delayed or prevented T cell
malignancy in Tcf7(-/-) mice. In human T-ALLs, an early thymic progenitor (ETP)
subtype was associated with diminished TCF7 expression, and two of the ETP-ALL
cases harbored TCF7 gene deletions. We also showed that TCF-1 and LEF-1 were
dispensable for T cell lineage commitment but instead were required for early
thymocytes to mature beyond the CD4(-)CD8(-) stage. TCF-1 thus has dual roles,
i.e., acting cooperatively with LEF-1 to promote thymocyte maturation while
restraining LEF-1 expression to prevent malignant transformation of developing
thymocytes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3501598
PMID: 23103132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub. 2013 Sep;157(3):214-21. doi:
10.5507/bp.2012.075. Epub 2012 Sep 5.

Construction and characterization of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma co-activator 1 alpha (PGC-1a over-expressing cell line derived
from human hepatocyte carcinoma HepG2 cells).

Novotna A(1), Doricakova A, Pavek P, Dvorak Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Science, Palacky
University Olomouc, Czech Republic.

AIMS: The aim was develop stable human cell line stable over-expressing
transcription co-activator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
co-activator 1a (PGC-1a) with restored hepatospecific functions and increased
expression of major xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes.
METHODS: Six clones of HepG2-PGC-1a and one control clone HepG2-pcDNA3 were
isolated and analyzed for secretion of hepatospecific markers, fibrinogen,
albumin and alpha1-antitrypsin. Expression levels of protein and mRNA of
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF4a), pregnane X receptor (PXR) and aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) were determined. We measured basal and ligand inducible expression
of CYP1A1 and CYP3A4.
RESULTS: Stably transfected cell line HepG2-PGC-1a derived from HepG2 cells
over-expressing PGC-1a displayed increased secretion of fibrinogen, but not
albumin or alpha1-antitrypsin compared to parent HepG2 cells. We found increased 
levels of HNF4a, PXR and AhR proteins but not their mRNAs in HepG2-PGC1 cells.
Basal expression of CYP3A4 protein in HepG2-PGC-1a cells was increased but
rifampicin-inducible expression of CYP3A4 protein was lowered in comparison with 
parent HepG2 cells. Induction of CYP3A4 mRNA varied between 1.3 - 1.9 fold in
individual clones. Expression of TCDD-inducible CYP1A1 protein was lower in
HepG2-PGC-1a cells than in parent HepG2 cells. Induction of CYP1A1 mRNA by TCDD
in HepG2-PGC-1a cells was comparable with that in parent HepG2 cells and ranged
between 103 - 198 fold.
CONCLUSION: Stable expression of PGC-1a in HepG2 cells restores several
hepatospecific functions, such as secretion of fibrinogen, expression of HNF4a1
and xenoreceptors PXR and AhR. However, the expression and induction of key
drug-metabolizing enzymes (CYP1A1 and CYP3A4) were not improved.

PMID: 23073537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Immunol. 2012 Dec 1;189(11):5119-28. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201482. Epub 2012
Oct 15.

p27(Kip1) negatively regulates the magnitude and persistence of CD4 T cell
memory.

Jatzek A(1), Tejera MM, Singh A, Sullivan JA, Plisch EH, Suresh M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiological Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison,
Madison, WI 53706, USA.

Much is known about the differentiation of naive T cells into distinct lineages
of effector cells, but the molecular mechanisms underlying the generation and
maintenance of CD4 T cell memory are poorly characterized. Our studies ascribe a 
novel role for the cell cycle regulator p27(Kip1) as a prominent negative
regulator of the establishment and long-term maintenance of Th1 CD4 T cell
memory. We demonstrate that p27(Kip1) might restrict the differentiation and
survival of memory precursors by increasing the T-bet/Bcl-6 ratio in effector CD4
T cells. By promoting apoptosis and contraction of effector CD4 T cells by
mechanisms that are at least in part T cell intrinsic, p27(Kip1) markedly limits 
the abundance of memory CD4 T cells. Furthermore, we causally link
p27(Kip1)-dependent apoptosis to the decay of CD4 T cell memory, possibly by
repressing the expression of <U+03B3>-chain receptors and the downstream effector of the
Wnt/ß-catenin signaling pathway, Tcf-1. We extend these findings by showing that 
the antagonistic effects of p27(Kip1) on CD4 T cell memory require its
cyclin-dependent kinase-binding domain. Collectively, these findings provide key 
insights into the mechanisms underlying the governance of peripheral CD4 T cell
homeostasis and identify p27(Kip1) as a target to enhance vaccine-induced CD4 T
cell memory.

PMCID: PMC3504176
PMID: 23071285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Am J Surg Pathol. 2012 Nov;36(11):1691-9. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e3182653ece.

Immunohistochemical markers on needle biopsies are helpful for the diagnosis of
focal nodular hyperplasia and hepatocellular adenoma subtypes.

Bioulac-Sage P(1), Cubel G, Taouji S, Scoazec JY, Leteurtre E, Paradis V, Sturm
N, Nhieu JT, Wendum D, Bancel B, Ramos J, Paraf F, Saint Paul MC, Michalak S,
Fabre M, Guettier C, Le Bail B, Zucman-Rossi J, Balabaud C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, CHU Bordeaux, Hôpital Pellegrin, Bordeaux, France.
paulette.bioulac-sage@chu-bordeaux.fr

Phenotypic identification of focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) and hepatocellular
adenoma (HCA) subtypes using immunohistochemical markers has been developed from 
their molecular characteristics. Our objective was to evaluate the sensitivity of
these markers in the definitive diagnosis of these lesions by core needle
biopsies. A total of 239 needle biopsies paired with their surgical resection
specimen (group A) or without an associated resection specimen (group B) were
reviewed. Using a step-by-step algorithm after standard staining, appropriate
immunostaining analyses were performed to determine the certainty of diagnosis of
FNH, HNF1a-inactivated HCA, inflammatory HCA, ß-catenin-activated HCA, or
unclassified HCA. The diagnosis of FNH was certain or probable on routine stains 
in 53% of needle biopsies of group A, whereas after glutamine synthetase
staining, the diagnosis was certain in 86.7% as compared with 100% on the
corresponding surgical specimen (P=0.04). In needle biopsies of group A, the
diagnosis of HCA was certain on routine stains in 58.6% as compared with 94.3% on
surgical specimens. After specific immunostaining, diagnosis was established on
biopsies with 74.3% certainty, including all HCA subtypes, with similar
distribution in surgical specimens. For each "certain diagnosis" paired
diagnostic test (biopsy and surgical specimen), a positive correlation was
observed (P<0.001). No significant difference was observed between groups A and B
for FNH (P=0.714) or for HCA subtypes (P=0.750). Compared with surgical
specimens, immunohistochemical analysis performed on biopsies allowed the
discrimination of FNH from HCA and the identification of HCA subtypes with good
performance.

PMID: 23060349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46887. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046887. Epub 2012 Oct 4.

Insights into pancreatic cancer etiology from pathway analysis of genome-wide
association study data.

Wei P(1), Tang H, Li D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biostatistics and Human Genetics Center, School of Public Health, 
University of Texas Health Science Center, Houston, Texas, United States of
America.

BACKGROUND: Pancreatic cancer is the fourth leading cause of cancer death in the 
U.S. and the etiology of this highly lethal disease has not been well defined. To
identify genetic susceptibility factors for pancreatic cancer, we conducted
pathway analysis of genome-wide association study (GWAS) data in 3,141 pancreatic
cancer patients and 3,367 controls with European ancestry.
METHODS: Using the gene set ridge regression in association studies (GRASS)
method, we analyzed 197 pathways identified from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes 
and Genomes database. We used the logistic kernel machine (LKM) test to identify 
major contributing genes to each pathway. We conducted functional enrichment
analysis of the most significant genes (P<0.01) using the Database for
Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery (DAVID).
RESULTS: Two pathways were significantly associated with risk of pancreatic
cancer after adjusting for multiple comparisons (P<0.00025) and in replication
testing: neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction, (Ps<0.00002), and the olfactory
transduction pathway (P<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.0001). LKM test identified four genes that were
significantly associated with risk of pancreatic cancer after Bonferroni
correction (P<1×10(-5)): ABO, HNF1A, OR13C4, and SHH. Functional enrichment
analysis using DAVID consistently found the G protein-coupled receptor signaling 
pathway (including both neuroactive ligand-receptor interaction and olfactory
transduction pathways) to be the most significant pathway for pancreatic cancer
risk in this study population.
CONCLUSION: These novel findings provide new perspectives on genetic
susceptibility to and molecular mechanisms of pancreatic cancer.

PMCID: PMC3464266
PMID: 23056513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Arch Toxicol. 2013 Jun;87(6):1001-12. doi: 10.1007/s00204-012-0948-6. Epub 2012
Oct 5.

Inhibition of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 and 4 alpha (HNF1a and HNF4a) as a
mechanism of arsenic carcinogenesis.

Pastoret A(1), Marcos R, Sampayo-Reyes A, Saucedo-Cardenas O, Lozano-Garza GH,
Hernandez A.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Genètica i de Microbiologia, Facultat de Biociències, Grup de
Mutagènesi, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Cerdanyola del Vallès,
Bellaterra, Spain.

Inorganic arsenic (i-As) is a naturally occurring toxic metalloid affecting
millions of people worldwide. It is known to be carcinogen, liver being a
potential target, and related to the prevalence of diabetes in arseniasis-endemic
areas. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 and 4 alpha (HNF1a and HNF4a) are key members 
of a transcriptional network essential for normal liver architecture. Changes in 
HNF1a and HNF4a expression are clearly associated with the development of liver
malignancies and diabetes in humans. In this work, hepatic HepG2 cells and golden
Syrian hamsters were exposed to sub-toxic, environmentally relevant doses of
sodium arsenite (SA; up to 10 µM in vitro, 15 mg/L in vivo) in order to evaluate 
whether arsenic is able to compromise the expression of hepatocyte nuclear
factors. Also, liver histopathological examination was carried out, and several
markers of hepatocyte differentiation and glucose metabolism status were
determined as a measure of i-As-induced effects. Results show a consistent
down-regulation of HNF1a and HNF4a under a scenario of exposure where HepG2 cells
(1) gained resistance to arsenic-induced toxicity/apoptosis, (2) attained loss of
tissue-specific features (as shown by the observed down-regulation of ALDOB,
PEPCK and CYP1A2, triggering of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition program 
and the hypersecretion of matrix metalloproteinase-2 and 9), (3) failed to
maintain balanced expression of the "stemness" genes C-MYC, OCT3/4, LIN28 and
NOTCH2 and (4) showed glucose metabolism impairment. We conclude that the
i-As-induced down-regulation of HNF1a and HNF4a under chronic settings may play a
central role in the features of disease and cancer observed both in vivo and in
vitro.

PMID: 23052196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. J Hepatol. 2013 Feb;58(2):350-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.09.030. Epub 2012 Oct
6.

Molecular characterization of hepatocellular adenomas developed in patients with 
glycogen storage disease type I.

Calderaro J(1), Labrune P, Morcrette G, Rebouissou S, Franco D, Prévot S, Quaglia
A, Bedossa P, Libbrecht L, Terracciano L, Smit GP, Bioulac-Sage P, Zucman-Rossi
J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, UMR-674, Génomique fonctionnelle des tumeurs solides, IUH, F-75010
Paris, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hepatocellular adenomas (HCA) are benign liver tumors mainly
related to oral contraception and classified into 4 molecular subgroups:
inflammatory (IHCA), HNF1A-inactivated (H-HCA), ß-catenin-activated (bHCA) or
unclassified (UHCA). Glycogen storage disease type I (GSD) is a rare hereditary
metabolic disease that predisposes to HCA development. The aim of our study was
to characterize the molecular profile of GSD-associated HCA.
METHODS: We characterized a series of 25 HCAs developed in 15 patients with GSD
by gene expression and DNA sequence of HNF1A, CTNNB1, IL6ST, GNAS, and STAT3
genes. Moreover, we searched for glycolysis, gluconeogenesis, and fatty acid
synthesis alterations in GSD non-tumor livers and compared our results to those
observed in a series of sporadic H-HCA and various non-GSD liver samples.
RESULTS: GSD adenomas were classified as IHCA (52%) mutated for IL6ST or GNAS,
bHCA (28%) or UHCA (20%). In contrast, no HNF1A inactivation was observed,
showing a different molecular subtype distribution in GSD-associated HCA from
that observed in sporadic HCA (p = 0.0008). In non-tumor GSD liver samples, we
identified glycolysis and fatty acid synthesis activation with gluconeogenesis
repression. Interestingly, this gene expression profile was similar to that
observed in sporadic H-HCA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study showed a particular molecular profile in GSD-related HCA
characterized by a lack of HNF1A inactivation. This exclusion could be explained 
by similar metabolic defects observed with HNF1A inactivation and
glucose-6-phosphatase deficiency. Inversely, the high frequency of ß-catenin
mutations could be related to the increased frequency of malignant transformation
in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Copyright © 2012 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23046672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Diabet Med. 2012 Nov;29(11):1349. doi: 10.1111/dme.12011.

Finally, a UK consensus on the use of HbA1c to diagnose diabetes.

Hitman GA.

Comment on
    Diabet Med. 2012 Nov;29(11):1456-64.
    Diabet Med. 2012 Nov;29(11):1385-9.

PMID: 23039277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. BMC Genomics. 2012 Sep 25;13:509. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-509.

Transcriptomic analysis of peritoneal cells in a mouse model of sepsis:
confirmatory and novel results in early and late sepsis.

Bhatty M(1), Fan R, Muir WM, Pruett SB, Nanduri B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, Mississippi
State University, Mississippi State, MS 39762, USA.

BACKGROUND: The events leading to sepsis start with an invasive infection of a
primary organ of the body followed by an overwhelming systemic response.
Intra-abdominal infections are the second most common cause of sepsis. Peritoneal
fluid is the primary site of infection in these cases. A microarray-based
approach was used to study the temporal changes in cells from the peritoneal
cavity of septic mice and to identify potential biomarkers and therapeutic
targets for this subset of sepsis patients.
RESULTS: We conducted microarray analysis of the peritoneal cells of mice
infected with a non-pathogenic strain of Escherichia coli. Differentially
expressed genes were identified at two early (1 h, 2 h) and one late time point
(18 h). A multiplexed bead array analysis was used to confirm protein expression 
for several cytokines which showed differential expression at different time
points based on the microarray data. Gene Ontology based hypothesis testing
identified a positive bias of differentially expressed genes associated with
cellular development and cell death at 2 h and 18 h respectively. Most
differentially expressed genes common to all 3 time points had an immune response
related function, consistent with the observation that a few bacteria are still
present at 18 h.
CONCLUSIONS: Transcriptional regulators like PLAGL2, EBF1, TCF7, KLF10 and SBNO2,
previously not described in sepsis, are differentially expressed at early and
late time points. Expression pattern for key biomarkers in this study is similar 
to that reported in human sepsis, indicating the suitability of this model for
future studies of sepsis, and the observed differences in gene expression suggest
species differences or differences in the response of blood leukocytes and
peritoneal leukocytes.

PMCID: PMC3621573
PMID: 23009705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2013 Sep;79(3):342-7. doi: 10.1111/cen.12050. Epub 2013
Apr 1.

Co-inheritance of HNF1a and GCK mutations in a family with maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY): implications for genetic testing.

López-Garrido MP(1), Herranz-Antolín S, Alija-Merillas MJ, Giralt P, Escribano J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Genética Molecular Humana, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad de
Castilla-La Mancha, Albacete, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the genetic basis of dominant early-onset diabetes
mellitus in two families.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Molecular analysis by PCR sequencing of the promoter, the
5' untranslated region (UTR) and exons of both GCK and HNF1A genes was carried
out in two families with clinically diagnosed dominant diabetes mellitus.
RESULTS: The novel HNF1A c.-154_-160TGGGGGT mutation, located in the 5' UTR, was 
present in several members of the two families in the heterozygous state.
Interestingly, the GCK p.Y61X mutation was also identified in three members of
one of the families, and two of them carried both mutations in heterozygosis. To 
the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of the co-inheritance of GCK 
and HNF1A mutations and the coexistence of maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) 2, MODY 3 and unusual MODY 2-3 genotypes in the same family.
CONCLUSIONS: Carriers of both GCK and HNF1A mutations manifested a typical MODY 3
phenotype and showed that the presence of a second mutation in the GCK gene
apparently did not modify the clinical outcome, at least at the time of this
study. Our data show that co-inheritance of MODY 2 and MODY 3 mutations should be
considered, at least in some cases, for accurate genetic testing.

© 2012 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23009393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Curr Diab Rep. 2012 Dec;12(6):659-66. doi: 10.1007/s11892-012-0325-0.

Monogenic models: what have the single gene disorders taught us?

Klupa T(1), Skupien J, Malecki MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University, Medical College, 15
Kopernika Street, 31-501, Krakow, Poland.

Monogenic diabetes constitutes a heterogeneous group of single gene disorders.
The molecular background and clinical picture of many of these diseases have been
described. While each of these forms is much less prevalent than multifactorial
type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), together they affect millions of
patients worldwide. Genetic diagnosis, which has become widely available, is of
great clinical importance for patients with single gene diabetes. It helps to
fully understand the pathophysiology of the disease, tailor the optimal
hypoglycemic treatment, and define the prognosis for the entire family. Monogenic
diabetes forms can be divided into 2 large groups, resulting from impaired
insulin secretion or from an abnormal response to insulin. There are several
lessons we have been taught by single-gene diabetes. We learned that the gene
responsible for the occurrence of diabetes can be identified if an appropriate
search strategy is used. In addition, discoveries of genes responsible for
monogenic disorders pointed to them as susceptibility candidates for T2DM.
Moreover, establishing that some families of proteins or biological pathways,
such as transcription factors or potassium channel subunits, are involved in
monogenic diabetes sparked research on their involvement in multifactorial
diabetes. Finally, the example of single gene diabetes, particularly HNF1A MODY
and permanent neonatal diabetes associated with the KCNJ11 and ABCC8 genes, all
efficiently controlled on sulfonylurea, inspires us to continue the efforts to
tailor individual treatment for T2DM patients. In this review paper, we summarize
the impact of single gene disease discoveries on diabetes research and clinical
practice.

PMCID: PMC3488607
PMID: 22996131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Virol. 2012 Dec;86(23):12903-11. doi: 10.1128/JVI.01418-12. Epub 2012 Sep 19.

Hepatitis C virus infection suppresses GLUT2 gene expression via downregulation
of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a.

Matsui C(1), Shoji I, Kaneda S, Sianipar IR, Deng L, Hotta H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Microbiology, Center for Infectious Diseases, Kobe University
Graduate School of Medicine, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Hyogo, Japan.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection causes not only intrahepatic diseases but also 
extrahepatic manifestations, including type 2 diabetes. We previously reported
that HCV replication suppresses cellular glucose uptake by downregulation of cell
surface expression of glucose transporter 2 (GLUT2) (D. Kasai et al., J. Hepatol.
50:883-894, 2009). GLUT2 mRNA levels were decreased in both HCV RNA replicon
cells and HCV J6/JFH1-infected cells. To elucidate molecular mechanisms of
HCV-induced suppression of GLUT2 gene expression, we analyzed transcriptional
regulation of the GLUT2 promoter using a series of GLUT2 promoter-luciferase
reporter plasmids. HCV-induced suppression of GLUT2 promoter activity was
abrogated when the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a (HNF-1a)-binding motif was
deleted from the GLUT2 promoter. HNF-1a mRNA levels were significantly reduced in
HCV J6/JFH1-infected cells. Furthermore, HCV infection remarkably decreased
HNF-1a protein levels. We assessed the effects of proteasome inhibitor or
lysosomal protease inhibitors on the HCV-induced reduction of HNF-1a protein
levels. Treatment of HCV-infected cells with a lysosomal protease inhibitor, but 
not with a proteasome inhibitor, restored HNF-1a protein levels, suggesting that 
HCV infection promotes lysosomal degradation of HNF-1a protein. Overexpression of
NS5A protein enhanced lysosomal degradation of HNF-1a protein and suppressed
GLUT2 promoter activity. Immunoprecipitation analyses revealed that the region
from amino acids 1 to 126 of the NS5A domain I physically interacts with HNF-1a
protein. Taken together, our results suggest that HCV infection suppresses GLUT2 
gene expression via downregulation of HNF-1a expression at transcriptional and
posttranslational levels. HCV-induced downregulation of HNF-1a expression may
play a crucial role in glucose metabolic disorders caused by HCV.

PMCID: PMC3497665
PMID: 22993150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Cell Biochem Funct. 2013 Mar;31(2):166-72. doi: 10.1002/cbf.2871. Epub 2012 Sep
7.

Over-expression of circadian clock gene Bmal1 affects proliferation and the
canonical Wnt pathway in NIH-3T3 cells.

Lin F(1), Chen Y, Li X, Zhao Q, Tan Z.

Author information: 
(1)Orthodontic Centre, West China College of Stomatology, Sichuan University,
Chengdu, China.

Comment in
    Cell Biochem Funct. 2013 Oct;31(7):626-7.

Bmal1 is a transcription factor that plays a central role in the regulation of
circadian rhythms. Recent study reported that Bmal1-/- mice displayed many known 
features of premature ageing, such as reduction of bone mass. Our previous study 
has found that both the proliferation of bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
(BMSCs) and Bmal1 expression decreased with advancing age. It seemed that a
positive correlation existed between Bmal1 protein level and the proliferative
activity of BMSCs. ß-catenin, the core factor of the canonical Wnt pathway, also 
showed reduced expression in aged mice. In order to further confirm this, we
constructed a lentiviral vector to over-express Bmal1 in NIH-3T3 cells;
successful transfection was verified. The cell proliferation rate of infected
cells was higher than the non-transfected NIH-3T3 cells, suggesting that
circadian clock gene Bmal1 can promote proliferation. ß-catenin showed an
increased expression in NIH-3T3 cells after Bmal1 over-expression, indicating
that activation of the canonical Wnt pathway might be the mechanism underlying
the effect of circadian clock gene Bmal on promoting cell proliferation.

Copyright © 2012 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 22961668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Atherosclerosis. 2012 Oct;224(2):401-10. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2012.08.012. Epub 2012 Aug 24.

Delineation of molecular pathways that regulate hepatic PCSK9 and LDL receptor
expression during fasting in normolipidemic hamsters.

Wu M(1), Dong B, Cao A, Li H, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Palo Alto Health Care System, 3801 Miranda
Avenue, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

BACKGROUND: PCSK9 has emerged as a key regulator of serum LDL-C metabolism by
promoting the degradation of hepatic LDL receptor (LDLR). In this study, we
investigated the effect of fasting on serum PCSK9, LDL-C, and hepatic LDLR
expression in hamsters and further delineated the molecular pathways involved in 
fasting-induced repression of PCSK9 transcription.
RESULTS: Fasting had insignificant effects on serum total cholesterol and HDL-C
levels, but reduced LDL-C, triglyceride and insulin levels. The decrease in serum
LDL-C was accompanied by marked reductions of hepatic PCSK9 mRNA and serum PCSK9 
protein levels with concomitant increases of hepatic LDLR protein amounts.
Fasting produced a profound impact on SREBP1 expression and its transactivating
activity, while having modest effects on mRNA expressions of SREBP2 target genes 
in hamster liver. Although PPARa mRNA levels in hamster liver were elevated by
fasting, ligand-induced activation of PPARa with WY14643 compound in hamster
primary hepatocytes did not affect PCSK9 mRNA or protein expressions. Further
investigation on HNF1a, a critical transactivator of PCSK9, revealed that fasting
did not alter its mRNA expression, however, the protein abundance of HNF1a in
nuclear extracts of hamster liver was markedly reduced by prolonged fasting.
CONCLUSION: Fasting lowered serum LDL-C in hamsters by increasing hepatic LDLR
protein amounts via reductions of serum PCSK9 levels. Importantly, our results
suggest that attenuation of SREBP1 transactivating activity owing to decreased
insulin levels during fasting is primarily responsible for compromised PCSK9 gene
transcription, which was further suppressed after prolonged fasting by a
reduction of nuclear HNF1a protein abundance.

Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4528917
PMID: 22954675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Sep 7;91(3):502-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.07.023. Epub
2012 Aug 30.

Genome-wide association and population genetic analysis of C-reactive protein in 
African American and Hispanic American women.

Reiner AP(1), Beleza S, Franceschini N, Auer PL, Robinson JG, Kooperberg C,
Peters U, Tang H.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA 98109, USA. apreiner@u.washington.edu

C-reactive protein (CRP) is a systemic inflammation marker that predicts future
cardiovascular risk. CRP levels are higher in African Americans and Hispanic
Americans than in European Americans, but the genetic determinants of CRP in
these admixed United States minority populations are largely unknown. We
performed genome-wide association studies (GWASs) of 8,280 African American (AA) 
and 3,548 Hispanic American (HA) postmenopausal women from the Women's Health
Initiative SNP Health Association Resource. We discovered and validated a
CRP-associated variant of triggering receptors expressed by myeloid cells 2
(TREM2) in chromosomal region 6p21 (p = 10(-10)). The TREM2 variant associated
with higher CRP is common in Africa but rare in other ancestral populations. In
AA women, the CRP region in 1q23 contained a strong admixture association signal 
(p = 10(-17)), which appears to be related to several independent CRP-associated 
alleles; the strongest of these is present only in African ancestral populations 
and is associated with higher CRP. Of the other genomic loci previously
associated with CRP through GWASs of European populations, most loci (LEPR,
IL1RN, IL6R, GCKR, NLRP3, HNF1A, HNF4A, and APOC1) showed consistent patterns of 
association with CRP in AA and HA women. In summary, we have identified a common 
TREM2 variant associated with CRP in United States minority populations. The
genetic architecture underlying the CRP phenotype in AA women is complex and
involves genetic variants shared across populations, as well as variants specific
to populations of African descent.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3511984
PMID: 22939635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Sci China Life Sci. 2012 Aug;55(8):699-708. doi: 10.1007/s11427-012-4365-0. Epub 
2012 Aug 30.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms in the human corticosteroid-binding globulin
promoter alter transcriptional activity.

Li Y(1), Wu L, Lei J, Zhu C, Wang H, Yu X, Lin H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, College of Basic Medical
Science, Harbin Medical University, Harbin, 150081, China.

Erratum in
    Sci China Life Sci. 2012 Sep;55(9):840.

Corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG) is a high-affinity plasma protein that
transports glucocorticoids and progesterone. Others and we have reported
non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that influence CBG
production or steroid-binding activity. However, no promoter polymorphisms
affecting the transcription of human CBG gene (Cbg) have been reported. In the
present study we investigated function implications of six promoter SNPs,
including -26 C/G, -54 C/T, -144 G/C, -161 A/G, -205 C/A, and -443/-444 AG/-,
five of which are located within the first 205 base pairs of 5'-flanking region
and close to the highly conserved footprinted elements, TATA-box, or CCAAT-box.
Luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that basal activity of the promoter
carrying -54 T or -161 G was significantly enhanced. The first three
polymorphisms, -26 C/G, -54 C/T, and -144 G/C located close to the putative
hepatic nuclear factor (HNF) 1 binding elements, altered the transactivation
effect of HNF1ß. We also found a negative promoter response to
dexamethasone-activated glucocorticoid receptor (GR) a, although none of the SNPs
affected its transrepression function. Our results suggest that human Cbg -26
C/G, -54 C/T, -144 G/C, and -161 A/G promoter polymorphisms alter transcriptional
activity, and further studies are awaited to explore their association with
physiological and pathological conditions.

PMID: 22932886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2012 Oct 15;264(2):192-201. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2012.08.001. Epub 2012 Aug 10.

Effect of trifluoperazine on toxicity, HIF-1a induction and hepatocyte
regeneration in acetaminophen toxicity in mice.

Chaudhuri S(1), McCullough SS, Hennings L, Brown AT, Li SH, Simpson PM, Hinson
JA, James LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, Arkansas, USA. SCHAUDHURI@uams.edu

Oxidative stress and mitochondrial permeability transition (MPT) are important
mechanisms in acetaminophen (APAP) toxicity. The MPT inhibitor trifluoperazine
(TFP) reduced MPT, oxidative stress, and toxicity in freshly isolated hepatocytes
treated with APAP. Since hypoxia inducible factor-one alpha (HIF-1a) is induced
very early in APAP toxicity, a role for oxidative stress in the induction has
been postulated. In the present study, the effect of TFP on toxicity and HIF-1a
induction in B6C3F1 male mice treated with APAP was examined. Mice received TFP
(10mg/kg, oral gavage) prior to APAP (200mg/kg IP) and at 7 and 36h after APAP.
Measures of metabolism (hepatic glutathione and APAP protein adducts) were
comparable in the two groups of mice. Toxicity was decreased in the APAP/TFP mice
at 2, 4, and 8h, compared to the APAP mice. At 24 and 48h, there were no
significant differences in toxicity between the two groups. TFP lowered HIF-1a
induction but also reduced the expression of proliferating cell nuclear antigen, 
a marker of hepatocyte regeneration. TFP can also inhibit phospholipase A(2), and
cytosolic and secretory PLA(2) activity levels were reduced in the APAP/TFP mice 
compared to the APAP mice. TFP also lowered prostaglandin E(2) expression, a
known mechanism of cytoprotection. In summary, the MPT inhibitor TFP delayed the 
onset of toxicity and lowered HIF-1a induction in APAP treated mice. TFP also
reduced PGE(2) expression and hepatocyte regeneration, likely through a mechanism
involving PLA(2).

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3519387
PMID: 22902588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Aug 31;425(3):619-24. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.134. Epub 2012 Aug 1.

Identification of hepatocyte growth factor activator (Hgfac) gene as a target of 
HNF1a in mouse ß-cells.

Ohki T(1), Sato Y, Yoshizawa T, Yamamura K, Yamada K, Yamagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto, Japan.

HNF1a is a transcription factor that is expressed in pancreatic ß-cells and
mutations of the HNF1a gene cause a form of monogenic diabetes. To understand the
role of HNF1a in pancreatic ß-cells, we established the MIN6 ß-cell line that
stably expressed HNF1a-specific shRNA. Expression of the gene encoding hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF) activator (Hgfac), a serine protease that efficiently
activates HGF, was decreased in HNF1a KD-MIN6 cells. Down-regulation of Hgfac
expression was also found in the islets of HNF1a (+/-) mice. Reporter gene
analysis and the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay indicated that HNF1a
directly regulates the expression of Hgfac in ß-cells. It has been reported that 
HGF has an important influence on ß-cell mass and ß-cell function. Thus, HNF1a
might regulate ß-cell mass or function at least partly by modulating Hgfac
expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22877752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Immunol. 2012 Sep 15;189(6):2722-6. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1201150. Epub 2012
Aug 8.

Cutting edge: generation of memory precursors and functional memory CD8+ T cells 
depends on T cell factor-1 and lymphoid enhancer-binding factor-1.

Zhou X(1), Xue HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA. xinyuan.zhou@gmail.com

T cell factor (TCF)-1 and lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (LEF)-1 transcription 
factors have redundant roles in promoting thymocyte maturation. TCF-1 has been
recently shown to critically regulate memory CD8+ T cell differentiation and
persistence. The complete spectra of regulatory roles for TCF-1 and LEF-1 in CD8+
T cell responses are yet unknown. We conditionally targeted LEF-1, and by
combination with germline deletion of TCF-1, we found that loss of both factors
completely abrogated the generation of KLR G1(lo)IL-7Ra+ memory precursors in
effector CD8+ T cell populations in response to Listeria monocytogenes infection.
Whereas CD8+ effectors deficient for TCF-1 and LEF-1 retained the capacity to
express IFN-<U+03B3>, granzyme B, and perforin, they were defective in TNF-a production.
In the memory phase, the Ag-specific CD8+ T cells lacking TCF-1 and LEF-1
exhibited an effector phenotype and were severely impaired in secondary expansion
upon rechallenge. Thus, TCF-1 and LEF-1 cooperatively regulate generation of
memory precursors and protective memory CD8+ T cells.

PMCID: PMC3437003
PMID: 22875805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Jan 15;22(2):204-15. doi: 10.1089/scd.2011.0575. Epub 2012
Oct 5.

Activation of diverse signaling pathways by ex-vivo delivery of multiple
cytokines for myocardial repair.

Konoplyannikov M(1), Haider KH, Lai VK, Ahmed RP, Jiang S, Ashraf M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Cincinnati, 231Albert Sabin Way,
Cincinnati, OH 45267, USA.

We tested the hypothesis that simultaneous transgenic overexpression of a select 
quartet of growth factors activates diverse signaling pathways for mobilization
and participation of various stem/progenitor cells for cardiogenesis in the
infarcted heart. Human insulin growth factor-1 (IGF-1), vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF), stromal cell-derived factor-1 (SDF-1a), and hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF) plasmids were synthesized and transfected into skeletal
myoblasts (SM) from young male wild-type or transgenic rats expressing green
fluorescent protein (GFP). Overexpression of growth factors in transfected SM
((Trans)SM) was confirmed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction,
western blotting, and fluorescence immunostaining. Using our custom-made growth
factor array and western blotting, multiple angiogenic and prosurvival factors
were detected in (Trans)SM, including secreted frizzled related protein-1,2,4,5, 
matrix metalloproteinases-3 and 9, connexin-43, netrin-1, Nos-2, Wnt-3, Akt,
MAPK42/44, Stat3, nuclear factor kappa B (NF<U+03BA>B), hypoxia-inducible factor 1
(HIF-1a), and protein kinase C (PKC). The conditioned medium (CM) from (Trans)SM 
was cytoprotective for cardiomyocytes following H(2)O(2) treatment [P<0.01 vs. CM
from native SM ((Nat)SM)], promoted a higher transwell migration of human
umbilical cord vein endothelial cells (223.3±1.8, P<0.01) and in vitro tube
formation (47.8±1.9, P<0.01). Intramyocardial transplantation of 1.5×10(6)
(Trans)SM (group-3) in a rat model of acute myocardial infarction induced
extensive mobilization of cMet(+), ckit(+), ckit(+)/GATA(4+), CXCR4(+), CD44(+), 
CD31(+), and CD59(+) cells into the infarcted heart on day 7 and improved
integration of (Trans)SM in the heart compared to (Nat)SM (group 2) (P<0.05).
Extensive neomyogenesis and angiogenesis in group-3 (P<0.01 vs. group-2), with
resultant attenuation of infarct size (P<0.01 vs. group-2) and improvement in
global heart function (P<0.01 vs. group-2) was observed at 8 weeks. In
conclusion, simultaneous activation of diverse signaling pathways by
overexpression of multiple growth factors caused massive mobilization and homing 
of stem/progenitor cells from peripheral circulation, the bone marrow, and the
heart for accelerated repair of the infarcted myocardium.

PMCID: PMC3545358
PMID: 22873203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40962. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040962. Epub 2012 Jul 30.

Metabolic profiling in Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and young
onset type 2 diabetes fails to detect robust urinary biomarkers.

Gloyn AL(1), Faber JH, Malmodin D, Thanabalasingham G, Lam F, Ueland PM, McCarthy
MI, Owen KR, Baunsgaard D.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology & Metabolism, University of Oxford, 
Oxford, United Kingdom.

It is important to identify patients with Maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) as a molecular diagnosis determines both treatment and prognosis. Genetic 
testing is currently expensive and many patients are therefore not assessed and
are misclassified as having either type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Biomarkers could
facilitate the prioritisation of patients for genetic testing. We hypothesised
that patients with different underlying genetic aetiologies for their diabetes
could have distinct metabolic profiles which may uncover novel biomarkers. The
aim of this study was to perform metabolic profiling in urine from patients with 
MODY due to mutations in the genes encoding glucokinase (GCK) or hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1A), type 2 diabetes (T2D) and normoglycaemic control 
subjects. Urinary metabolic profiling by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) and
ultra performance liquid chromatography hyphenated to Q-TOF mass spectrometry
(UPLC-MS) was performed in a Discovery set of subjects with HNF1A-MODY (n = 14), 
GCK-MODY (n = 17), T2D (n = 14) and normoglycaemic controls (n = 34). Data were
used to build a valid partial least squares discriminate analysis (PLS-DA) model 
where HNF1A-MODY subjects could be separated from the other diabetes subtypes. No
single metabolite contributed significantly to the separation of the patient
groups. However, betaine, valine, glycine and glucose were elevated in the urine 
of HNF1A-MODY subjects compared to the other subgroups. Direct measurements of
urinary amino acids and betaine in an extended dataset did not support
differences between patients groups. Elevated urinary glucose in HNF1A-MODY is
consistent with the previously reported low renal threshold for glucose in this
genetic subtype. In conclusion, we report the first metabolic profiling study in 
monogenic diabetes and show that, despite the distinct biochemical pathways
affected, there are unlikely to be robust urinary biomarkers which distinguish
monogenic subtypes from T2D. Our results have implications for studies
investigating metabolic profiles in complex traits including T2D.

PMCID: PMC3408469
PMID: 22859960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Reproduction. 2012 Oct;144(4):505-18. doi: 10.1530/REP-12-0114. Epub 2012 Aug 2.

Low abundance plasma proteins in labour.

Yuan W(1), Heesom K, Phillips R, Chen L, Trinder J, López Bernal A.

Author information: 
(1)School of Clinical Sciences, University of Bristol, Dorothy Hodgkin Building, 
Whitson Street, Bristol BS1 3NY, UK.

Every year, millions of births worldwide are complicated by prematurity or
difficult post-term deliveries, resulting in a high incidence of perinatal
mortality and morbidity. Our poor understanding of human parturition is a key
reason for our inability to improve the management of preterm and post-term
birth. In this study, we used proteomic techniques to look into protein changes
in placental blood plasma obtained from women before or after spontaneous or
induced labour, with vaginal or caesarean section deliveries. Our aim was to
understand the basic mechanisms of human parturition regardless of whether the
signals that trigger labour are of maternal and/or fetal origin. We found
proteins from 33 genes with significantly altered expression profiles in relation
to mode of labour and delivery. Most changes in labour occurred in proteins
associated with 'immune and defence responses'. Although the signal transduction 
and regulation of these pathways varied among modes of delivery, hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 homeobox A emerged as a shared protein in the mechanism of
labour. Moreover, several apolipoproteins such as apolipoprotein A-IV and APOE
were found to change with labour, and these changes were also confirmed in
maternal plasma. This study has identified significant protein changes in
placental intervillous plasma with labour and has revealed several pathways
related to human parturition.

PMID: 22859520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Folia Biol (Praha). 2012;58(3):121-7.

Genetic and functional analyses of MRAS and HNF1A genes in diabetes and diabetic 
nephropathy.

Horová E(1), Prázný M, Kanková K, Brismar K, Gu HF.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Medicine - Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
First Faculty of Medicine, Charles University in Prague and General University
Hospital in Prague, Czech Republic. eva.horova@email.cz

Evidence has recently indicated that the MRAS and HNF1A genetic polymorphisms are
associated with coronary artery disease. The MRAS and HNF1A genes are located on 
chromosomes 3q and 12q within the regions where associations with diabetes and
diabetic nephropathy occur. We thus performed genetic and functional analyses of 
these two genes to evaluate their impacts on diabetes and diabetic nephropathy.
MRAS and HNF1A genetic polymorphisms were genotyped in 1399 Czech subjects
including non-diabetic controls (339), type 1 (243) and type 2 (817) diabetic
patients with and without diabetic nephropathy using TaqMan allelic
discrimination. Gene expression levels in the kidneys of diabetic Goto-Kakizaki
and Wistar rats were detected with real-time RT-PCR. Despite no significance in
genetic analysis of diabetic subjects, SNP rs2259816 in the HNF1A gene tended to 
associate with diabetic nephropathy in type 1 diabetic patients. The hnf1a gene
expression was significantly decreased in kidney tissues of Goto-Kakizaki rats
compared to Wistar and insulin-treated Goto-Kakizaki rats. There was neither
significant association in the MRAS genetic polymorphism with diabetic
nephropathy nor variation of mras gene expression in the kidneys of Goto-Kakizaki
and Wistar rats. Data from the present study have not proved any significant
association of the MRAS and HNF1A genetic polymorphisms with diabetes and
diabetic nephropathy in a cohort of Czech population. However, the functional
analysis and the trend in genetic analysis suggest that the HNF1A gene may have
primary genetic impact on the development of diabetic nephropathy.

PMID: 22849862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Am J Pathol. 2012 Oct;181(4):1279-86. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2012.06.013. Epub
2012 Jul 27.

Leptin deficiency contributes to the pathogenesis of alcoholic fatty liver
disease in mice.

Tan X(1), Sun X, Li Q, Zhao Y, Zhong W, Sun X, Jia W, McClain CJ, Zhou Z.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Biomedical Research, University of North Carolina at 
Greensboro, North Carolina Research Campus, Kannapolis, North Carolina 28081,
USA.

White adipose tissue (WAT) secretes adipokines, which critically regulate lipid
metabolism. The present study investigated the effects of alcohol on adipokines
and the mechanistic link between adipokine dysregulation and alcoholic fatty
liver disease. Mice were fed alcohol for 2, 4, or 8 weeks to document changes in 
adipokines over time. Alcohol exposure reduced WAT mass and body weight in
association with hepatic lipid accumulation. The plasma adiponectin concentration
was increased at 2 weeks, but declined to normal at 4 and 8 weeks. Alcohol
exposure suppressed leptin gene expression in WAT and reduced the plasma leptin
concentration at all times measured. There is a highly positive correlation
between plasma leptin concentration and WAT mass or body weight. To determine
whether leptin deficiency mediates alcohol-induced hepatic lipid dyshomeostasis, 
mice were fed alcohol for 8 weeks with or without leptin administration for the
last 2 weeks. Leptin administration normalized the plasma leptin concentration
and reversed alcoholic fatty liver. Alcohol-perturbed genes involved in fatty
acid ß-oxidation, very low-density lipoprotein secretion, and transcriptional
regulation were attenuated by leptin. Leptin also normalized alcohol-reduced
phosphorylation levels of signal transducer Stat3 and adenosine
monophosphate-activated protein kinase. These data demonstrated for the first
time that leptin deficiency in association with WAT mass reduction contributes to
the pathogenesis of alcoholic fatty liver disease.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3463622
PMID: 22841822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. PLoS Pathog. 2012;8(7):e1002771. doi: 10.1371/journal.ppat.1002771. Epub 2012 Jul
19.

Tc17 cells mediate vaccine immunity against lethal fungal pneumonia in immune
deficient hosts lacking CD4+ T cells.

Nanjappa SG(1), Heninger E, Wüthrich M, Gasper DJ, Klein BS.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Pediatrics, School of Medicine and Public Health, University
of Wisconsin Madison, Madison, Wisconsin, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS Pathog. 2014 Apr;10(4):e1004148.

Vaccines may help reduce the growing incidence of fungal infections in
immune-suppressed patients. We have found that, even in the absence of CD4(+)
T-cell help, vaccine-induced CD8(+) T cells persist and confer resistance against
Blastomyces dermatitidis and Histoplasma capsulatum. Type 1 cytokines contribute 
to that resistance, but they also are dispensable. Although the role of T helper 
17 cells in immunity to fungi is debated, IL-17 producing CD8(+) T cells (Tc17
cells) have not been investigated. Here, we show that Tc17 cells are
indispensable in antifungal vaccine immunity in hosts lacking CD4(+) T cells.
Tc17 cells are induced upon vaccination, recruited to the lung on pulmonary
infection, and act non-redundantly in mediating protection in a manner that
requires neutrophils. Tc17 cells did not influence type I immunity, nor did the
lack of IL-12 signaling augment Tc17 cells, indicating a distinct lineage and
function. IL-6 was required for Tc17 differentiation and immunity, but IL-1R1 and
Dectin-1 signaling was unexpectedly dispensable. Tc17 cells expressed surface
CXCR3 and CCR6, but only the latter was essential in recruitment to the lung.
Although IL-17 producing T cells are believed to be short-lived, effector Tc17
cells expressed low levels of KLRG1 and high levels of the transcription factor
TCF-1, predicting their long-term survival and stem-cell like behavior. Our work 
has implications for designing vaccines against fungal infections in immune
suppressed patients.

PMCID: PMC3400565
PMID: 22829762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2012 Aug;199(2):341-8. doi: 10.2214/AJR.11.7046.

Role of contrast-enhanced sonography in differentiation of subtypes of
hepatocellular adenoma: correlation with MRI findings.

Laumonier H(1), Cailliez H, Balabaud C, Possenti L, Zucman-Rossi J, Bioulac-Sage 
P, Trillaud H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Hôpital Saint-André, 1 Rue Jean Burguet, Bordeaux,
33076, France. herve.laumonier@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Hepatocellular adenomas (HCAs) are divided into three subtypes
according to genotype and phenotype. The two main subgroups are hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1a (HNF1a)-inactivated HCA and inflammatory HCA. Specific imaging 
features of these subgroups of adenoma have been delineated with MRI. The aim of 
this study was to document the contrast-enhanced sonographic (CEUS) features
specific for adenoma subtypes and to correlate them with MRI findings.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We retrospectively analyzed data on 38 patients with HCA
confirmed at pathologic examination in all cases. All cases were classified with 
MRI.
RESULTS: HNF1a-inactivated HCA (n = 16) was found to have a homogeneous
hyperechoic aspect at baseline gray-scale sonography, isovascularity or moderate 
hypervascularity with mixed filling in the arterial phase, and isoechogenicity in
the portal and late portal venous phases. Homogeneous hyperechogenicity during
B-mode sonography was the most specific pattern (sensitivity, 88%; specificity,
91%) and correlated with diffuse fat repartition observed on MR images obtained
with chemical-shift sequences. In inflammatory HCA (n = 17) the association of
arterial hypervascularity with centripetal filling, linear vascularities,
peripheral rim of sustained enhancement, and central washout in the late venous
phase was specific (sensitivity, 64%; specificity, 100%). Discrepancy between
delayed washout during CEUS and sustained enhancement during MRI could be related
to differences between gadolinium and microbubbles in diffusing in the
interstitial spaces. In the five other HCA cases (four unclassified, one
ß-catenin activated) CEUS showed characteristics of benign hepatocellular tumors 
with no specific features.
CONCLUSION: HNF1a-inactivated HCA and inflammatory HCA had characteristic CEUS
patterns. Delayed washout, an unusual finding in benign hepatic lesions, is of
particular interest and was a characteristic of inflammatory HCA subtype.

PMID: 22826395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. BMC Endocr Disord. 2012 Jul 18;12:13. doi: 10.1186/1472-6823-12-13.

Serum levels of pancreatic stone protein (PSP)/reg1A as an indicator of beta-cell
apoptosis suggest an increased apoptosis rate in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1
alpha (HNF1A-MODY) carriers from the third decade of life onward.

Bacon S(1), Kyithar MP, Schmid J, Rizvi SR, Bonner C, Graf R, Prehn JH, Byrne MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Dublin 7,
Ireland. mbyrne@mater.ie.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1-alpha (HNF1A) result in the commonest type of maturity onset diabetes of
the young (MODY). HNF1A-MODY carriers have reduced pancreatic beta cell mass,
partially due to an increased rate of apoptosis. To date, it has not been
possible to determine when apoptosis is occurring in HNF1A-MODY.We have recently 
demonstrated that beta cell apoptosis stimulates the expression of the pancreatic
stone protein/regenerating (PSP/reg) gene in surviving neighbour cells, and that 
PSP/reg1A protein is subsequently secreted from these cells. The objective of
this study was to determine whether serum levels of PSP/reg1A are elevated during
disease progression in HNF1A-MODY carriers, and whether it may provide
information regarding the onset of beta-cell apoptosis.
METHODS: We analysed serum PSP/reg1A levels and correlated with clinical and
biochemical parameters in subjects with HNF1A-MODY, glucokinase (GCK-MODY), and
type 1 diabetes mellitus. A control group of normoglycaemic subjects was also
analysed.
RESULTS: PSP/reg1A serum levels were significantly elevated in HNF1A-MODY
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>37) subjects compared to controls (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>60) (median<U+2009>=<U+2009>12.50<U+2009>ng/ml,
IQR<U+2009>=<U+2009>10.61-17.87<U+2009>ng/ml versus median<U+2009>=<U+2009>10.72<U+2009>ng/ml, IQR<U+2009>=<U+2009>8.94-12.54<U+2009>ng/ml,
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.0008). PSP/reg1A correlated negatively with insulin levels during OGTT,
(rho<U+2009>=<U+2009>-0.40, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02). Interestingly we noted a significant positive
correlation of PSP/reg1A with age of the HNF1A-MODY carriers (rho<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.40
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.02) with an age of 25<U+2009>years separating carriers with low and high PSP/reg1A
levels. Patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus also had elevated serum levels of 
PSP/reg1A compared to controls, however this was independent of the duration of
diabetes.
CONCLUSION: Our data suggest that beta cell apoptosis contributes increasingly to
the pathophysiology of HNF1A-MODY in patients 25<U+2009>years and over. PSP/reg1A may be
developed as a serum marker to detect increased beta-cell apoptosis, or its
therapeutic response.

PMCID: PMC3433346
PMID: 22808921  [PubMed]


328. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Oct;97(10):E2026-30. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-1356.
Epub 2012 Jul 16.

Novel presentations of congenital hyperinsulinism due to mutations in the MODY
genes: HNF1A and HNF4A.

Stanescu DE(1), Hughes N, Kaplan B, Stanley CA, De León DD.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Translational Research Center, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, 3615 Civic Center Boulevard, Abramson Research Center Room 802A,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

CONTEXT: Inactivating mutations in HNF1A and HNF4A cause the maturity-onset
diabetes of youth (MODY)-3 and MODY1 forms of monogenic diabetes, respectively.
Children carrying HNF4A (MODY1) mutations can present in early infancy with
macrosomia and diazoxide-responsive hyperinsulinism.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to describe three novel cases of hyperinsulinism
associated with MODY1 and MODY3 mutations.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Clinical data were obtained from chart review. Gene 
sequencing was performed on genomic DNA.
RESULTS: Case 1 was diagnosed at 20 months with persistent hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia and was found to have a novel MODY3 HNF1A mutation, carried by her
father who had diabetes. Case 2 was diagnosed with diazoxide-responsive
hyperinsulinism at 3 months of age and had complete resolution of hyperinsulinism
by 4 yr. She was found to have a novel MODY3 HNF1A missense mutation, also
carried by her father. Case 3 presented as a newborn with diazoxide-responsive
hyperinsulinism and later developed renal Fanconi syndrome, hypophosphatemic
rickets, and hepatic glycogenosis. Although the latter's features suggested
Fanconi-Bickel syndrome, sequencing of the SLC2A2 gene was normal. The patient
was found to have a known MODY1 mutation in HNF4A. In all cases, the
hyperinsulinism improved with age.
CONCLUSIONS: The first two cases demonstrate that mutations in HNF1A (MODY3) can 
cause hyperinsulinism early in life and diabetes later, similar to the phenotype 
recently reported for HNF4A (MODY1) mutations. Case 3 indicates that the effects 
of HNF4A mutations in infancy may extend beyond pancreatic ß-cells to produce a
disorder similar to glucose transporter 2 deficiency involving both liver
glycogen metabolism and renal tubular transport.

PMCID: PMC3674296
PMID: 22802087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Int J Immunogenet. 2013 Apr;40(2):120-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1744-313X.2012.01141.x.
Epub 2012 Jul 13.

Genetic associations with C-reactive protein level and white blood cell count in 
the KARE study.

Kong M(1), Lee C.

Author information: 
(1)School of Systems Biomedical Science, Soongsil University, Seoul, Korea.

C-reactive protein (CRP) and white blood cell (WBC) have been utilized as
critical markers contributing to acute and chronic inflammation. Genome-wide
associations were examined to identify nucleotide sequence variants associated
with the two markers using 8842 individuals in the Korean Association REsource
(KARE) study. A total of six and three nucleotide variants turned out to be
associated with CRP and WBC (P < 1.42 × 10(-7) ), and they were mutually
exclusive. The only common variant associated with CRP was rs2393791 within
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1A) gene [minor allele frequency
(MAF) = 0.478]. The only common variant associated with WBC [MAF = 0.468] was
rs8078723, an intergenic single nucleotide polymorphism located between
proteasome 26S subunits non-ATPase 3 (PSMD3) and colony-stimulating factor 3
(CSF3) in chromosome 17. The 2 variants were also associated with other
inflammation-related phenotypes (P < 0.05), and each phenotype was associated
with the variant rs2393791 or with the variant rs8078723. We suggested that HNF1A
gene was associated with CRP, and the region including PSMD3 and CSF3 genes was
associated with WBC. The two inflammatory markers appeared to have distinct
genetic components. Not only the functions of these two markers but also the
functions of the corresponding genetic components might be largely complementary 
in determining inflammation process.

© 2012 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 22788528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. BMJ Case Rep. 2012 Jul 11;2012. pii: bcr0120125612. doi:
10.1136/bcr.01.2012.5612.

Using highly sensitive C-reactive protein measurement to diagnose MODY in a
family with suspected type 2 diabetes.

Besser RE(1), Jones J, McDonald TJ, Smith R, Shepherd MH, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula NIHR Clinical Research Facility, Peninsula Medical School, Exeter,
UK.

The authors report an adolescent who was found to have diabetes on routine blood 
testing. The initial diagnosis was type 2 diabetes because she was obese, did not
have type 1 diabetes antibodies and both parents had diabetes. Highly sensitive
C-reactive protein (hsCRP) was low in the proband and her father (=0.1 mg/l)
indicating that type 2 diabetes was unlikely, and that hepatocyte nuclear factor 
1-a-maturity onset diabetes of the young (HNF1A-MODY) was the most likely
diagnosis. Following a genetic diagnosis of HNF1A-MODY in the proband and her
father, both patients were treated with gliclazide, with improvement in HbA1c.
This case highlights the challenges of making a correct diagnosis of MODY in
young onset diabetes. The authors report the first case where hsCRP, an easily
available biomarker, has been used on an individual level to determine
appropriate genetic testing of MODY in a family whose main differential diagnosis
was familial type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3416990
PMID: 22787179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Leuk Res. 2012 Oct;36(10):1290-5. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2012.05.023. Epub 2012
Jun 27.

Hypermethylation of Wnt antagonist gene promoters and activation of Wnt pathway
in myelodysplastic marrow cells.

Masala E(1), Valencia A, Buchi F, Nosi D, Spinelli E, Gozzini A, Sassolini F,
Sanna A, Zecchi S, Bosi A, Santini V.

Author information: 
(1)UF Ematologia, Azienda Ospedaliero Universitaria Careggi, University of
Florence, Florence, Italy.

We observed aberrant gene methylation of Wnt antagonists: sFRP1, sFRP2, sFRP4,
sFRP5 and DKK1 in marrow cells of 55 MDS cases. Methylation of Wnt antagonist
genes was associated with activation of the Wnt signaling pathway, consistent
with the up-regulation of the Wnt downstream genes TCF1 and LEF1. Azacitidine
exposure induced demethylation of Wnt-antagonist gene promoters and reduction of 
the non-phosphorylated ß-catenin (NPBC) which is prevalent during Wnt pathway
inactivation. Presence of =5% of bone marrow blasts was associated with
methylation of sFRP1 and DKK1 and with methylation of more than two of the five
Wnt antagonist genes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22742816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2012 Jun;4(2):104-6. doi: 10.4274/jcrpe.584.

Early onset of liver steatosis in a Japanese girl with maturity-onset diabetes of
the young type 3 (MODY3).

Nakamura A(1), Ishidu K, Tajima T.

Author information: 
(1)Hokkaido University School of Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Sapporo,
Japan.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) is caused by heterozygous
mutation in the HNF1A gene. Liver adenomatosis has been reported in MODY3
patients. The patient reported in this paper is a Japanese girl who first
developed hepatomegaly, fatty liver, and hepatic dysfunction at age 5 years.
Liver biopsy demonstrated steatosis and degeneration of hepatocytes. At that
time, blood glucose and HbA1c levels were within normal ranges. Elevated HbA1c
was noticed 4 years later, but islet cell and glutamic acid decarboxylase
antibodies were not detected in the serum. Therefore, MODY3 was suspected and
subsequent analysis of the HNF1A gene identified a heterozygous germline splice
donor-site mutation in intron 9. MODY3 patients should be screened by
non-invasive liver imaging, and careful follow-up of liver disease should be
performed.

PMCID: PMC3386769
PMID: 22672869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Biochem J. 2012 Sep 1;446(2):203-12. doi: 10.1042/BJ20120693.

Transcriptional networks driving enhancer function in the CFTR gene.

Kerschner JL(1), Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Human Molecular Genetics Program, Children's Memorial Research Center,
Chicago, IL 60614, USA.

A critical cis-regulatory element for the CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane
conductance regulator) gene is located in intron 11, 100 kb distal to the
promoter, with which it interacts. This sequence contains an intestine-selective 
enhancer and associates with enhancer signature proteins, such as p300, in
addition to tissue-specific TFs (transcription factors). In the present study we 
identify critical TFs that are recruited to this element and demonstrate their
importance in regulating CFTR expression. In vitro DNase I footprinting and EMSAs
(electrophoretic mobility-shift assays) identified four cell-type-selective
regions that bound TFs in vitro. ChIP (chromatin immunoprecipitation) identified 
FOXA1/A2 (forkhead box A1/A2), HNF1 (hepatocyte nuclear factor 1) and CDX2
(caudal-type homeobox 2) as in vivo trans-interacting factors. Mutation of their 
binding sites in the intron 11 core compromised its enhancer activity when
measured by reporter gene assay. Moreover, siRNA (small interfering RNA)-mediated
knockdown of CDX2 caused a significant reduction in endogenous CFTR transcription
in intestinal cells, suggesting that this factor is critical for the maintenance 
of high levels of CFTR expression in these cells. The ChIP data also demonstrate 
that these TFs interact with multiple cis-regulatory elements across the CFTR
locus, implicating a more global role in intestinal expression of the gene.

PMCID: PMC3419791
PMID: 22671145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. BMJ Case Rep. 2012 Jan 10;2012. pii: bcr1120115127. doi:
10.1136/bcr.11.2011.5127.

Diabetes in the young but not needing insulin--what type is it?

Dashora U(1), Golton R, Combes A, Kumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Diabetes Department, Conquest Hospital, St Leonards on Sea, 
UK. umesh.dashora@esht.nhs.uk

A 57-year-old female who was diagnosed with diabetes at the age of 22 is
presented. She was initially controlled with diet alone and then was prescribed
oral glucose lowering treatment over the next 35 years. She was referred to the
diabetes clinic for insulin start because of poor control of diabetes. In view of
her presentation at such a young age and strong family history, a possibility of 
maturity onset diabetes in young was considered and the genetic test confirmed
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 a mutation on chromosome 12. Further oral treatment
and attention to lifestyle modification improved control avoiding insulin
therapy.

PMCID: PMC4542727
PMID: 22665711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e38050. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038050. Epub 2012 May 25.

Exome sequencing and genetic testing for MODY.

Johansson S(1), Irgens H, Chudasama KK, Molnes J, Aerts J, Roque FS, Jonassen I, 
Levy S, Lima K, Knappskog PM, Bell GI, Molven A, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

CONTEXT: Genetic testing for monogenic diabetes is important for patient care.
Given the extensive genetic and clinical heterogeneity of diabetes, exome
sequencing might provide additional diagnostic potential when standard Sanger
sequencing-based diagnostics is inconclusive.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to examine the performance of exome
sequencing for a molecular diagnosis of MODY in patients who have undergone
conventional diagnostic sequencing of candidate genes with negative results.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We performed exome enrichment followed by
high-throughput sequencing in nine patients with suspected MODY. They were Sanger
sequencing-negative for mutations in the HNF1A, HNF4A, GCK, HNF1B and INS genes. 
We excluded common, non-coding and synonymous gene variants, and performed
in-depth analysis on filtered sequence variants in a pre-defined set of 111 genes
implicated in glucose metabolism.
RESULTS: On average, we obtained 45 X median coverage of the entire targeted
exome and found 199 rare coding variants per individual. We identified 0-4 rare
non-synonymous and nonsense variants per individual in our a priori list of 111
candidate genes. Three of the variants were considered pathogenic (in ABCC8,
HNF4A and PPARG, respectively), thus exome sequencing led to a genetic diagnosis 
in at least three of the nine patients. Approximately 91% of known heterozygous
SNPs in the target exomes were detected, but we also found low coverage in some
key diabetes genes using our current exome sequencing approach. Novel variants in
the genes ARAP1, GLIS3, MADD, NOTCH2 and WFS1 need further investigation to
reveal their possible role in diabetes.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that exome sequencing can improve molecular
diagnostics of MODY when used as a complement to Sanger sequencing. However,
improvements will be needed, especially concerning coverage, before the full
potential of exome sequencing can be realized.

PMCID: PMC3360646
PMID: 22662265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Hepatol. 2012 Sep;57(3):628-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.04.038. Epub 2012 May 
29.

Generation of metabolically functioning hepatocytes from human pluripotent stem
cells by FOXA2 and HNF1a transduction.

Takayama K(1), Inamura M, Kawabata K, Sugawara M, Kikuchi K, Higuchi M, Nagamoto 
Y, Watanabe H, Tashiro K, Sakurai F, Hayakawa T, Furue MK, Mizuguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hepatocyte-like cells differentiated from human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) and induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) can be utilized as a
tool for screening for hepatotoxicity in the early phase of pharmaceutical
development. We have recently reported that hepatic differentiation is promoted
by sequential transduction of SOX17, HEX, and HNF4a into hESC- or hiPSC-derived
cells, but further maturation of hepatocyte-like cells is required for widespread
use of drug screening.
METHODS: To screen for hepatic differentiation-promoting factors, we tested the
seven candidate genes related to liver development.
RESULTS: The combination of two transcription factors, FOXA2 and HNF1a, promoted 
efficient hepatic differentiation from hESCs and hiPSCs. The expression profile
of hepatocyte-related genes (such as genes encoding cytochrome P450 enzymes,
conjugating enzymes, hepatic transporters, and hepatic nuclear receptors)
achieved with FOXA2 and HNF1a transduction was comparable to that obtained in
primary human hepatocytes. The hepatocyte-like cells generated by FOXA2 and HNF1a
transduction exerted various hepatocyte functions including albumin and urea
secretion, and the uptake of indocyanine green and low density lipoprotein.
Moreover, these cells had the capacity to metabolize all nine tested drugs and
were successfully employed to evaluate drug-induced cytotoxicity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our method employing the transduction of FOXA2 and HNF1a represents 
a useful tool for the efficient generation of metabolically functional
hepatocytes from hESCs and hiPSCs, and the screening of drug-induced
cytotoxicity.

Copyright © 2012 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22659344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Genomics. 2012 Sep;100(3):176-83. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2012.05.010. Epub 2012 May
30.

Genome-wide analysis of hepatic gene silencing in hepatoma cell variants.

Bulla GA(1), Aylmer CM, Dust AL, Kurkewich JL, Mire LK, Estanda AB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Eastern Illinois University, 600 Lincoln
Avenue, Charleston, IL 61920, USA. gabulla@eiu.edu

Genome-wide gene expression profiling was carried out on rat hepatoma cells and
compared to profiles of hepatoma "variant" cell lines derived via a stringent
selection protocol that enriches for rare cells (<1 in 100,000 cells) that fail
to drive liver function. Results show 132 genes that are strongly (>5-fold)
repressed in each of the four variant cell lines tested. An additional 68 genes
were repressed in 3 of 4 variant cell lines. Importantly, several of the
repressed genes are members of transcriptional activation pathways, suggesting
that they may contribute to maintaining the hepatic phenotype. Ectopic expression
of the HNF1A gene in a variant cell line resulted in activation of 56 genes, 37
of which were included in the repressed data set. These data suggest that a high 
level of reprogramming occurs when hepatoma cells convert to a non-differentiated
phenotype, a process that can be partially reversed by the introduction of
transcription factors.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22659237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes. 2012;5:101-8. doi: 10.2147/DMSO.S23353. Epub 2012 May 
1.

Clinical features and treatment of maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY).

Gardner DS(1), Tai ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a heterogeneous group of disorders
that result in ß-cell dysfunction. It is rare, accounting for just 1%-2% of all
diabetes. It is often misdiagnosed as type 1 or type 2 diabetes, as it is often
difficult to distinguish MODY from these two forms. However, diagnosis allows
appropriate individualized care, depending on the genetic etiology, and allows
prognostication in family members. In this review, we discuss features of the
common causes of MODY, as well as the treatment and diagnosis of MODY.

PMCID: PMC3363133
PMID: 22654519  [PubMed]


339. Eur J Hum Genet. 2012 Dec;20(12):1290-4. doi: 10.1038/ejhg.2012.103. Epub 2012
May 30.

A novel missense mutation in the signal peptide of the human POMC gene: a
possible additional link between early-onset type 2 diabetes and obesity.

Mencarelli M(1), Zulian A, Cancello R, Alberti L, Gilardini L, Di Blasio AM,
Invitti C.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Istituto Auxologico Italiano, Milano, Italy.

Rare mutations in several genes have a critical role in the control of
homeostatic mechanisms such as food-intake, energy balance and glucose
metabolism. In this study, we performed a mutational screening in a 58-year-old
woman presenting early-onset type 2 diabetes and central obesity. The entire
coding regions of MC4R, MC3R, HNF1A, GCK and POMC (pro-opiomelanocortin) genes
were analyzed by direct sequencing. A new missense mutation was identified within
the POMC gene signal peptide sequence, resulting in a heterozygous substitution
of an arginine for a glycine at codon 15 (p.A15G) that was excluded in 300
healthy normal weight controls. The mutation segregated in the family and was
associated with overweight, type 2 diabetes, hypertension and coronary heart
disease in the carriers. Functional studies demonstrated that POMC protein was
not detectable in ß-TC3 cells transfected with A15G-POMC vector as well as in
their culture media, despite POMC mRNA levels were comparable for amount and
stability to those of wild-type-transfected cells. In silico RNA folding
prediction indicated that the mutation gives rise to a different RNA secondary
structure, suggesting that it might affect translation and protein synthesis. To 
the best of our knowledge, this is the first report addressing the functional
consequences of a mutation in the signal peptide of POMC. These findings further 
support the hypothesis that POMC-derived peptides might have a role in the
control of peripheral glucose metabolism and suggest that disruption of central
POMC secretion might represent an additional link between type 2 diabetes and
obesity.

PMCID: PMC3499745
PMID: 22643178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012 Sep;97(3):394-8. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2012.04.020. Epub 2012 May 14.

Genetic prediction of postpartum diabetes in women with gestational diabetes
mellitus.

Ekelund M(1), Shaat N, Almgren P, Anderberg E, Landin-Olsson M, Lyssenko V, Groop
L, Berntorp K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Hospital of Helsingborg, Helsingborg, Sweden.
magnus.ekelund@med.lu.se

AIMS: To examine whether genetic variants that predispose individuals to type 2
diabetes (T2D) could predict the development of diabetes after gestational
diabetes mellitus (GDM).
METHODS: 13 SNPs (FTO rs8050136, CDKAL1 rs7754840 and rs7756992, CDKN2A/2B
rs10811661, HHEX rs1111875, IGF2BP2 rs1470579 and rs4402960, SLC30A8 rs13266634, 
TCF7L2 rs7903146, PPARG rs1801282, GCK rs1799884, HNF1A rs1169288, and KCNJ11
rs5219) were genotyped in 793 women with GDM after a median follow-up of 57
months.
RESULTS: After adjustment for age and ethnicity, the TCF7L2 rs7903146 and the FTO
rs8050136 variants significantly predicted postpartum diabetes; hazard ratio (95%
confidence interval 1.29 (1.01-1.66) and 1.36 (1.06-1.74), respectively (additive
model) versus 1.45 (1.01-2.08) and 1.56 (1.06-2.29) (dominant model)). Adjusting 
for BMI attenuated the effect of the FTO variant, suggesting that the effect was 
mediated through its effect on BMI. Combining all risk alleles to a weighted risk
score was significantly associated with the risk of postpartum diabetes (hazard
ratio 1.11, 95% confidence interval 1.05-1.18, p=0.00016 after adjustment for age
and ethnicity).
CONCLUSIONS: The TCF7L2 rs7903146 and FTO rs8050136 polymorphisms, and
particularly a weighted risk score of T2D risk alleles, predict diabetes after
GDM. Further studies in other populations are needed to confirm our results.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22591707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Proteomics. 2012 Jun 27;75(12):3386-99. doi: 10.1016/j.jprot.2012.04.036. Epub 
2012 May 5.

MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry screening of cholelithiasis risk markers in the gene 
of HNF1alpha.

Richter D(1), Harsch S, Strohmeyer A, Hirobe-Jahn S, Schimmel S, Renner O, Müller
O, Schäffeler E, Kratzer W, Schwab M, Stange EF.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch Institute for Clinical Pharmacology and University
of Tübingen, Stuttgart, Germany. Dominique.Richter@ikp-stuttgart.de

In recent years MALDI-TOF MS gained importance for high-throughput DNA analysis. 
In the present study this technique was used for the pathogenetic analysis of
gallstone disease. The intestinal apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter
(ASBT) shows a genetic association with gallstone disease. ASBT has 3 binding
sites in its 5'UTR for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha). We
hypothesized that genetic alterations in the HNF1alpha gene could influence ASBT 
expression. The gene HNF1alpha was sequenced in 46 Stuttgart random samples,
composed of 16 controls and 30 gallstone patients. Subsequently, two independent 
cohorts (Stuttgart: 67 gallstones carriers, 109 controls, Leutkirch: 112
gallstone carriers, 99 controls) were screened by MALDI-TOF MS. The subjects were
further divided by gender and weight. 24 known polymorphisms and two novel SNPs
in the 3'UTR of HNF1alpha were detected (c.*220G>A and c.*1151G>A). After
gender-specific sub-division of the pooled cohorts, 4 SNPs resulted in
significant differences between male gallstone carriers and male controls
(Stuttgart/Leutkirch: rs2255531 OR=2.78; p=0.006, rs1169288 OR=2.13; p=0.032,
rs7310409 OR=2.34; p=0.025 and rs1169294 OR=2.13; p=0.031). Two novel variants in
the 3'UTR of HNF1alpha were detected and four SNPs of HNF1alpha show a
significant association to cholelithiasis in male gallstone patients. This
article is part of a Special Section entitled: Understanding genome regulation
and genetic diversity by mass spectrometry.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22569176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 May 22;109(21):8218-23. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1119899109. Epub 2012 May 7.

Genome-wide association and functional studies identify the DOT1L gene to be
involved in cartilage thickness and hip osteoarthritis.

Castaño Betancourt MC(1), Cailotto F, Kerkhof HJ, Cornelis FM, Doherty SA, Hart
DJ, Hofman A, Luyten FP, Maciewicz RA, Mangino M, Metrustry S, Muir K, Peters MJ,
Rivadeneira F, Wheeler M, Zhang W, Arden N, Spector TD, Uitterlinden AG, Doherty 
M, Lories RJ, Valdes AM, van Meurs JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, 3000 DR Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.

Hip osteoarthritis (HOA) is one of the most disabling and common joint disorders 
with a large genetic component that is, however, still ill-defined. To date,
genome-wide association studies (GWAS) in osteoarthritis (OA) and specifically in
HOA have yielded only few loci, which is partly explained by heterogeneity in the
OA definition. Therefore, we here focused on radiographically measured
joint-space width (JSW), a proxy for cartilage thickness and an important
underlying intermediate trait for HOA. In a GWAS of 6,523 individuals on hip-JSW,
we identified the G allele of rs12982744 on chromosome 19p13.3 to be associated
with a 5% larger JSW (P = 4.8 × 10(-10)). The association was replicated in 4,442
individuals from three United Kingdom cohorts with an overall meta-analysis P
value of 1.1 × 10(-11). The SNP was also strongly associated with a 12% reduced
risk for HOA (P = 1 × 10(-4)). The SNP is located in the DOT1L gene, which is an 
evolutionarily conserved histone methyltransferase, recently identified as a
potentially dedicated enzyme for Wnt target-gene activation in leukemia.
Immunohistochemical staining of the DOT1L protein in mouse limbs supports a role 
for DOT1L in chondrogenic differentiation and adult articular cartilage. DOT1L is
also expressed in OA articular chondrocytes. Silencing of Dot1l inhibited
chondrogenesis in vitro. Dot1l knockdown reduces proteoglycan and collagen
content, and mineralization during chondrogenesis. In the ATDC5 chondrogenesis
model system, DOT1L interacts with TCF and Wnt signaling. These data are a
further step to better understand the role of Wnt-signaling during chondrogenesis
and cartilage homeostasis. DOT1L may represent a therapeutic target for OA.

PMCID: PMC3361426
PMID: 22566624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Oncogene. 2013 Mar 21;32(12):1594-600. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.151. Epub 2012 May
7.

The Trop-2 signalling network in cancer growth.

Guerra E(1), Trerotola M, Aloisi AL, Tripaldi R, Vacca G, La Sorda R, Lattanzio
R, Piantelli M, Alberti S.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Cancer Pathology, Department of Oncology and Experimental Medicine and
CeSI, Foundation University 'G. d'Annunzio', Chieti, Italy.

Our findings show that upregulation of a wild-type Trop-2 has a key controlling
role in human cancer growth, and that tumour development is quantitatively driven
by Trop-2 expression levels. However, little is known about the regulation of
expression of the TROP2 gene. Hence, we investigated the TROP2 transcription
control network. TROP2 expression was shown to depend on a highly interconnected 
web of transcription factors: TP63/TP53L, ERG, GRHL1/Get-1 (grainyhead-like
epithelial transactivator), HNF1A/TCF-1 (T-cell factor), SPI1/PU.1, WT (Wilms'
tumour)1, GLIS2, AIRE (autoimmune regulator), FOXM1 (forkhead box M1) and FOXP3, 
with HNF4A as the major network hub. TROP2 upregulation was shown to subsequently
drive the expression and activation of CREB1 (cyclic AMP-responsive-element
binding protein), Jun, NF-<U+03BA>B, Rb, STAT1 and STAT3 through induction of the cyclin
D1 and ERK (extracellular signal regulated kinase)/MEK (MAPK/ERK kinase)
pathways. Growth-stimulatory signalling through NF-<U+03BA>B, cyclin D1 and ERK was
shown to require an intact Trop-2 cytoplasmic tail. Network hubs and interacting 
partners are co-expressed with Trop-2 in primary human tumours, supporting a role
of this signalling network in cancer growth.

PMID: 22562244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Virol. 2012 Jul;86(13):7192-206. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00563-12. Epub 2012 Apr 24.

Implication of inflammatory macrophages, nuclear receptors, and interferon
regulatory factors in increased virulence of pandemic 2009 H1N1 influenza A virus
after host adaptation.

Josset L(1), Belser JA, Pantin-Jackwood MJ, Chang JH, Chang ST, Belisle SE,
Tumpey TM, Katze MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, School of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington, USA.

While pandemic 2009 H1N1 influenza A viruses were responsible for numerous severe
infections in humans, these viruses do not typically cause corresponding severe
disease in mammalian models. However, the generation of a virulent 2009 H1N1
virus following serial lung passage in mice has allowed for the modeling of human
lung pathology in this species. Genetic determinants of mouse-adapted 2009 H1N1
viral pathogenicity have been identified, but the molecular and signaling
characteristics of the host response following infection with this adapted virus 
have not been described. Here we compared the gene expression response following 
infection of mice with A/CA/04/2009 (CA/04) or the virulent mouse-adapted strain 
(MA-CA/04). Microarray analysis revealed that increased pathogenicity of MA-CA/04
was associated with the following: (i) an early and sustained inflammatory and
interferon response that could be driven in part by interferon regulatory factors
(IRFs) and increased NF-<U+03BA>B activation, as well as inhibition of the negative
regulator TRIM24, (ii) early and persistent infiltration of immune cells,
including inflammatory macrophages, and (iii) the absence of activation of lipid 
metabolism later in infection, which may be mediated by inhibition of nuclear
receptors, including PPARG and HNF1A and -4A, with proinflammatory consequences. 
Further investigation of these signatures in the host response to other H1N1
viruses of various pathogenicities confirmed their general relevance for
virulence of influenza virus and suggested that lung response to MA-CA/04 virus
was similar to that following infection with lethal H1N1 r1918 influenza virus.
This study links differential activation of IRFs, nuclear receptors, and
macrophage infiltration with influenza virulence in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3416346
PMID: 22532695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Toxicol Lett. 2012 Jun 20;211(3):304-11. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2012.04.008. Epub 
2012 Apr 17.

Renal efflux transporter expression in pregnant mice with Type I diabetes.

Yacovino LL(1), Aleksunes LM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Rutgers University Ernest Mario
School of Pharmacy, 170 Frelinghuysen Rd, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA.

Prior research suggests that sex hormones and metabolic changes, such as obesity 
and hyperglycemia, can alter renal transporter expression in rodents. The purpose
of this study was to characterize the expression of kidney efflux transporters
and regulatory transcription factors in response to Type I diabetes and
pregnancy. Female C57BL/6 mice were treated with multiple low doses of
streptozotocin (STZ) to induce hyperglycemia and then mated with normoglycemic
male mice. Transporter mRNA and protein expression were quantified in kidneys
from vehicle- and STZ-treated non-pregnant and pregnant mice on gestation day 14.
Pregnancy decreased the expression of Mdr1b, Mrp4, and 5 proteins and increased
the mRNA and protein expression of Mrp3 by 50-60%. STZ treatment elevated Mrp1,
2, 4, and 5 and reduced Mrp3, 6, and Mdr1b mRNA and/or protein in non-pregnant
mice. Pregnancy had little effect on STZ-mediated changes in renal efflux
transporter expression. Transcriptional profiles of Hnf1a, PXR, AhR, and Nrf2
were altered in patterns similar to some efflux transporters suggesting potential
involvement in their regulation. Taken together, these results suggest that renal
drug efflux transporters and regulatory signaling pathways are altered by
endocrine and metabolic changes that occur during pregnancy and Type I diabetes.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3370395
PMID: 22531820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Jul;33(7):1384-90. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs151. Epub 2012 Apr
20.

Pathway analysis of genome-wide association study data highlights pancreatic
development genes as susceptibility factors for pancreatic cancer.

Li D(1), Duell EJ, Yu K, Risch HA, Olson SH, Kooperberg C, Wolpin BM, Jiao L,
Dong X, Wheeler B, Arslan AA, Bueno-de-Mesquita HB, Fuchs CS, Gallinger S, Gross 
M, Hartge P, Hoover RN, Holly EA, Jacobs EJ, Klein AP, LaCroix A, Mandelson MT,
Petersen G, Zheng W, Agalliu I, Albanes D, Boutron-Ruault MC, Bracci PM, Buring
JE, Canzian F, Chang K, Chanock SJ, Cotterchio M, Gaziano JM, Giovannucci EL,
Goggins M, Hallmans G, Hankinson SE, Hoffman Bolton JA, Hunter DJ, Hutchinson A, 
Jacobs KB, Jenab M, Khaw KT, Kraft P, Krogh V, Kurtz RC, McWilliams RR,
Mendelsohn JB, Patel AV, Rabe KG, Riboli E, Shu XO, Tjønneland A, Tobias GS,
Trichopoulos D, Virtamo J, Visvanathan K, Watters J, Yu H, Zeleniuch-Jacquotte A,
Amundadottir L, Stolzenberg-Solomon RZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastrointestinal Medical Oncology, The University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Four loci have been associated with pancreatic cancer through genome-wide
association studies (GWAS). Pathway-based analysis of GWAS data is a
complementary approach to identify groups of genes or biological pathways
enriched with disease-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) whose
individual effect sizes may be too small to be detected by standard single-locus 
methods. We used the adaptive rank truncated product method in a pathway-based
analysis of GWAS data from 3851 pancreatic cancer cases and 3934 control
participants pooled from 12 cohort studies and 8 case-control studies (PanScan). 
We compiled 23 biological pathways hypothesized to be relevant to pancreatic
cancer and observed a nominal association between pancreatic cancer and five
pathways (P < 0.05), i.e. pancreatic development, Helicobacter pylori
lacto/neolacto, hedgehog, Th1/Th2 immune response and apoptosis (P = 2.0 ×
10(-6), 1.6 × 10(-5), 0.0019, 0.019 and 0.023, respectively). After excluding
previously identified genes from the original GWAS in three pathways (NR5A2, ABO 
and SHH), the pancreatic development pathway remained significant (P = 8.3 ×
10(-5)), whereas the others did not. The most significant genes (P < 0.01) in the
five pathways were NR5A2, HNF1A, HNF4G and PDX1 for pancreatic development; ABO
for H.pylori lacto/neolacto; SHH for hedgehog; TGFBR2 and CCL18 for Th1/Th2
immune response and MAPK8 and BCL2L11 for apoptosis. Our results provide a link
between inherited variation in genes important for pancreatic development and
cancer and show that pathway-based approaches to analysis of GWAS data can yield 
important insights into the collective role of genetic risk variants in cancer.

PMCID: PMC3405651
PMID: 22523087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Diabetes Care. 2012 May;35(5):e35. doi: 10.2337/dc12-0030.

Double heterozygous germline HNF1A mutations in a patient with liver
adenomatosis.

Jeannot E, Lacape G, Gin H, Couchy G, Saric J, Laumonier H, Le Bail B,
Bioulac-Sage P, Balabaud C, Zucman-Rossi J.

PMCID: PMC3329811
PMID: 22517943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. J Immunol. 2012 Apr 15;188(8):3859-68. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1103729.

T cell factor-1 and ß-catenin control the development of memory-like CD8
thymocytes.

Sharma A(1), Chen Q, Nguyen T, Yu Q, Sen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Immunology, National Institute on Aging,
National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.

Innate memory-like CD8 thymocytes develop and acquire effector function during
maturation in the absence of encounter with Ags. In this study, we demonstrate
that enhanced function of transcription factors T cell factor (TCF)-1 and
ß-catenin regulate the frequency of promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger
(PLZF)-expressing, IL-4-producing thymocytes that promote the generation of
eomesodermin-expressing memory-like CD8 thymocytes in trans. In contrast,
TCF1-deficient mice do not have PLZF-expressing thymocytes and
eomesodermin-expressing memory-like CD8 thymocytes. Generation of TCF1 and
ß-catenin-dependent memory-like CD8 thymocytes is non-cell-intrinsic and requires
the expression of IL-4 and IL-4R. CD8 memory-like thymocytes migrate to the
peripheral lymphoid organs, and the memory-like CD8 T cells rapidly produce
IFN-<U+03B3>. Thus, TCF1 and ß-catenin regulate the generation of PLZF-expressing
thymocytes and thereby facilitate the generation of memory-like CD8 T cells in
the thymus.

PMCID: PMC3471543
PMID: 22492686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 May;26(5):775-85. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1383. Epub 2012 Apr
2.

Hepatocarcinogenesis in FXR-/- mice mimics human HCC progression that operates
through HNF1a regulation of FXR expression.

Liu N(1), Meng Z, Lou G, Zhou W, Wang X, Zhang Y, Zhang L, Liu X, Yen Y, Lai L,
Forman BM, Xu Z, Xu R, Huang W.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Regulation and Drug Discovery, Beckman Research Institute,
City of Hope National Medical Center, Duarte, California 91010, USA.

Farnesoid X receptor (FXR) (nuclear receptor subfamily 1, group H, member 4) is a
member of nuclear hormone receptor superfamily, which plays essential roles in
metabolism of bile acids, lipid, and glucose. We previously showed spontaneously 
hepatocarcinogenesis in aged FXR(-/-) mice, but its relevance to human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is unclear. Here, we report a systematical
analysis of hepatocarcinogenesis in FXR(-/-) mice and FXR expression in human
liver cancer. In this study, liver tissues obtained from FXR(-/-) and wild-type
mice at different ages were compared by microarray gene profiling, histological
staining, chemical analysis, and quantitative real-time PCR. Primary hepatic
stellate cells and primary hepatocytes isolated from FXR(-/-) and wild-type mice 
were also analyzed and compared. The results showed that the altered genes in
FXR(-/-) livers were mainly related to metabolism, inflammation, and fibrosis,
which suggest that hepatocarcinogenesis in FXR(-/-) mice recapitulated the
progression of human liver cancer. Indeed, FXR expression in human HCC was
down-regulated compared with normal liver tissues. Furthermore, the
proinflammatory cytokines, which were up-regulated in human HCC microenvironment,
decreased FXR expression by inhibiting the transactivity of hepatic nuclear
factor 1a on FXR gene promoter. Our study thereby demonstrates that the
down-regulation of FXR has an important role in human hepatocarcinogenesis and
FXR(-/-) mice provide a unique animal model for HCC study.

PMCID: PMC3355555
PMID: 22474109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Diabetes Metab. 2012 Oct;38(4):316-23. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2012.02.003. Epub
2012 Mar 29.

European genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes in North African Arabs.

Cauchi S(1), Ezzidi I, El Achhab Y, Mtiraoui N, Chaieb L, Salah D, Nejjari C,
Labrune Y, Yengo L, Beury D, Vaxillaire M, Mahjoub T, Chikri M, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8199, Genomics and Metabolic Diseases, Lille, France.

AIMS: Recent genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and previous approaches have 
identified many genetic variants associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in
populations of European descent, but their contribution in Arab populations from 
North Africa is unknown. Our study aimed to validate these markers and to assess 
their combined effects, using large case-control studies of Moroccan and Tunisian
individuals.
METHODS: Overall, 44 polymorphisms, located at 37 validated European loci, were
first analyzed in 1055 normoglycaemic controls and 1193 T2D cases from Morocco.
Associations and trends were then assessed in 942 normoglycaemic controls and
1446 T2D cases from Tunisia. Finally, their ability to discriminate cases from
controls was evaluated.
RESULTS: Carrying a genetic variant in BCL11A, ADAMTS9, IGF2BP2, WFS1, CDKAL1,
TP53INP1, CDKN2A/B, TCF7L2, KCNQ1, HNF1A, FTO, MC4R and GCK increased the risk of
T2D when assessing the Moroccan and Tunisian samples together. Each additional
risk allele increased the susceptibility for developing the disease by 12% (P =
9.0 × 10(-9)). Genotype information for 13 polymorphisms slightly improved the
classification of North Africans with and without T2D, as assessed by clinical
parameters, with an increase in the area under the receiver operating
characteristic curve from 0.64 to 0.67 (P = 0.004).
CONCLUSION: In addition to TCF7L2, 12 additional loci were found to be shared
between Europeans and North African Arabs. As for Europeans, the reliability of
genetic testing based on these markers to determine the risk for T2D is low. More
genome-wide studies, including next-generation sequencing, in North African
populations are needed to identify the genetic variants responsible for ethnic
disparities in T2D susceptibility.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22463974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. PLoS One. 2012;7(3):e33945. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0033945. Epub 2012 Mar 23.

Cell fusion reprogramming leads to a specific hepatic expression pattern during
mouse bone marrow derived hepatocyte formation in vivo.

Quintana-Bustamante O(1), Grueso E, Garcia-Escudero R, Arza E, Alvarez-Barrientos
A, Fabregat I, Garcia-Bravo M, Meza NW, Segovia JC.

Author information: 
(1)Differentiation and Cytometry Unit, Hematopoiesis and Gene Therapy Division,
Centro de Investigaciones Energéticas, Medioambientales y Tecnológicas-CIEMAT and
Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de Enfermedades Raras-CIBER-ER, Madrid, 
Spain.

The fusion of bone marrow (BM) hematopoietic cells with hepatocytes to generate
BM derived hepatocytes (BMDH) is a natural process, which is enhanced in damaged 
tissues. However, the reprogramming needed to generate BMDH and the identity of
the resultant cells is essentially unknown. In a mouse model of chronic liver
damage, here we identify a modification in the chromatin structure of the
hematopoietic nucleus during BMDH formation, accompanied by the loss of the key
hematopoietic transcription factor PU.1/Sfpi1 (SFFV proviral integration 1) and
gain of the key hepatic transcriptional regulator HNF-1A homeobox A
(HNF-1A/Hnf1a). Through genome-wide expression analysis of laser captured BMDH, a
differential gene expression pattern was detected and the chromatin changes
observed were confirmed at the level of chromatin regulator genes. Similarly,
Tranforming Growth Factor-ß1 (TGF-ß(1)) and neurotransmitter (e.g. Prostaglandin 
E Receptor 4 [Ptger4]) pathway genes were over-expressed. In summary, in vivo
BMDH generation is a process in which the hematopoietic cell nucleus changes its 
identity and acquires hepatic features. These BMDHs have their own cell identity 
characterized by an expression pattern different from hematopoietic cells or
hepatocytes. The role of these BMDHs in the liver requires further investigation.

PMCID: PMC3311566
PMID: 22457803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Exp Oncol. 2012;34(1):57-63.

Gene expression profiling of B-CLL in Ukrainian patients in post-Chernobyl
period.

Savli H(1), Sunnetci D, Cine N, Gluzman DF, Zavelevich MP, Sklyarenko LM,
Nadgornaya VA, Koval SV.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Department, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, Turkey.
hakansavli@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Genetic mechanisms that result in the development and progression of 
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) are mainly unknown. We have analyzed 
gene expression patterns in Ukrainian B-CLL patients with the aim of identifying 
B-CLL involved / associated genes in order to shed light on the biology of this
pathological entity.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The samples of the peripheral blood and bone marrow of 44
Ukrainian B-CLL patients with no characteristics indicative of unfavorable course
of the disease such as CD38 were analyzed morphologically and
immunocytochemically according to the new WHO classification. Total RNA was
isolated, and gene expression levels were determined by microarray method
comparing with the sample from 17 healthy donors.
RESULTS: We investigated interactions using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) 
software and found 1191 network eligible up-regulated genes and 3398
Functions/Pathways eligible up-regulated genes, 1225 network eligible
down-regulated genes and 2657 Functions/Pathways eligible down-regulated genes.
CONCLUSION: In B-CLL patients, gene networks around MYC, HNF1A and HNF4A, YWHAG, 
NF-<U+03BA>B1 and SP1 are identified as up-regulated; CEBPA, YWHAG, SATB1 and RB1 -- as 
down-regulated. G protein coupled receptor signaling, arachidonic acid and
linoleic acid metabolisms, calcium signaling, metabolism of xenobiotics by
cytochrome P450 are found out as significant up-regulated pathways. EIF2 and
Cdc42 signaling, regulation of eIF4 and p70S6k signaling, protein ubiquitination 
pathway and oxidative phosphorylation are the most significant down-regulated
pathways obtained in our study. The involvement of NF-<U+03BA>B gene network and
upregulated levels of G protein coupled receptor signaling pathway, which has an 
important role in transcription of NF-<U+03BA>B, are important and need further
examination.

PMID: 22453151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Jun 1;302(11):E1431-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00619.2011. Epub 2012 Mar 20.

Developmental programming of neonatal pancreatic ß-cells by a maternal
low-protein diet in rats involves a switch from proliferation to differentiation.

Rodríguez-Trejo A(1), Ortiz-López MG, Zambrano E, Granados-Silvestre Mde L,
Méndez C, Blondeau B, Bréant B, Nathanielsz PW, Menjivar M.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México. Av. Universidad 3000, Facultad de
Química, Mexico City, Mexico.

Maternal low-protein diets (LP) impair pancreatic ß-cell development, resulting
in later-life failure and susceptibility to type 2 diabetes (T2D). We
hypothesized that intrauterine and/or postnatal developmental programming seen in
this situation involve altered ß-cell structure and relative time course of
expression of genes critical to ß-cell differentiation and growth. Pregnant
Wistar rats were fed either control (C) 20% or restricted (R) 6% protein diets
during pregnancy (1st letter) and/or lactation (2nd letter) in four groups: CC,
RR, RC, and CR. At postnatal days 7 and 21, we measured male offspring ß-cell
fraction, mass, proliferation, aggregate number, and size as well as mRNA level
for 13 key genes regulating ß-cell development and function in isolated islets.
Compared with CC, pre- and postnatal LP (RR) decreased ß-cell fraction, mass,
proliferation, aggregate size, and number and increased Hnf1a, Hnf4a, Pdx1, Isl1,
Rfx6, and Slc2a2 mRNA levels. LP only in pregnancy (RC) also decreased ß-cell
fraction, mass, proliferation, aggregate size, and number and increased Hnf1a,
Hnf4a, Pdx1, Rfx6, and Ins mRNA levels. Postnatal LP offspring (CR) showed
decreased ß-cell mass but increased ß-cell fraction, aggregate number, and Hnf1a,
Hnf4a, Rfx6, and Slc2a2 mRNA levels. We conclude that LP in pregnancy sets the
trajectory of postnatal ß-cell growth and differentiation, whereas LP in
lactation has smaller effects. We propose that LP promotes differentiation
through upregulation of transcription factors that stimulate differentiation at
the expense of proliferation. This results in a decreased ß-cell reserve, which
can contribute to later-life predisposition to T2D.

PMCID: PMC3378070
PMID: 22436693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Transpl Int. 2012 May;25(5):564-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1432-2277.2012.01458.x. Epub
2012 Mar 21.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young: clinical characteristics and outcome after 
kidney and pancreas transplantation in MODY3 and RCAD patients: a single center
experience.

Poitou C(1), Francois H, Bellanne-Chantelot C, Noel C, Jacquet A, Clauin S,
Beaudreuil S, Damieri H, Hebibi H, Hammoudi Y, Benoit G, Charpentier B, Durrbach 
A.

Author information: 
(1)Service de Néphrologie, Dialyse et Transplantation, IFRNT, Hôpital Bicêtre, Le
Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.

The diabetes and renal phenotype of patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the 
young (MODY) on a transplantation waiting list is not known; neither is their
outcome after pancreas (PT) and/or kidney transplantation (KT). Between 2002 and 
2009, we screened 50 of 150 patients referred for kidney and pancreas
transplantation to the Kremlin-Bicêtre center for HNF1B and HNF1A mutations if
one or more of the following criteria was present (i) an atypical history of
diabetes (ii) diabetes with at least one affected parent or two affected
relatives, (iii) an absence of auto-antibodies at diagnosis (iv) a persistent
secretion of fasting C peptide (v) a personal or a family history of renal cysts 
or dysplasia. Their phenotype and their outcome were analyzed. Four HNF1A (MODY3)
and eight HNF1B mutations [renal cysts and diabetes (RCAD)] were identified. All 
MODY3 patients had diabetic nephropathy, but only 50% of RCAD patients. Four
patients underwent a kidney and pancreas transplantation and two a kidney
transplant alone. After 4.1 ± 1.1 years of follow-up, 83% of patients still have 
a functioning kidney and 75% a functioning pancreas. PT can be proposed with good
results for MODY3 and RCAD patients.

© 2012 The Authors. Transplant International © 2012 European Society for Organ
Transplantation.

PMID: 22432796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Diabetes Care. 2012 Jun;35(6):1206-12. doi: 10.2337/dc11-1243. Epub 2012 Mar 19.

Systematic assessment of etiology in adults with a clinical diagnosis of
young-onset type 2 diabetes is a successful strategy for identifying
maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Thanabalasingham G(1), Pal A, Selwood MP, Dudley C, Fisher K, Bingley PJ, Ellard 
S, Farmer AJ, McCarthy MI, Owen KR.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology andMetabolism, University of Oxford,
U.K

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2012 Jun;8(6):319.

OBJECTIVE: Misdiagnosis of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) remains
widespread, despite the benefits of optimized management. This cross-sectional
study examined diagnostic misclassification of MODY in subjects with clinically
labeled young adult-onset type 1 and type 2 diabetes by extending genetic testing
beyond current guidelines.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Individuals were selected for diagnostic sequencing 
if they displayed features atypical for their diagnostic label. From 247 case
subjects with clinically labeled type 1 diabetes, we sequenced hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 a (HNF1A) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 a (HNF4A) in 20 with residual 
ß-cell function = 3 years from diagnosis (random or glucagon-stimulated C-peptide
= 0.2 nmol/L). From 322 with clinically labeled type 2 diabetes, we sequenced
HNF1A and HNF4A in 80 with diabetes diagnosed = 30 years and/or diabetes
diagnosed = 45 years without metabolic syndrome. We also sequenced the
glucokinase (GCK) in 40 subjects with mild fasting hyperglycemia.
RESULTS: In the type 1 diabetic group, two HNF1A mutations were found (0.8%
prevalence). In type 2 diabetic subjects, 10 HNF1A, two HNF4A, and one GCK
mutation were identified (4.0%). Only 47% of MODY case subjects identified met
current guidelines for diagnostic sequencing. Follow-up revealed a further 12
mutation carriers among relatives. Twenty-seven percent of newly identified MODY 
subjects changed treatment, all with improved glycemic control (HbA(1c) 8.8 vs.
7.3% at 3 months; P = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: The systematic use of widened diagnostic testing criteria doubled
the numbers of MODY case subjects identified compared with current clinical
practice. The yield was greatest in young adult-onset type 2 diabetes. We
recommend that all patients diagnosed before age 30 and with presence of
C-peptide at 3 years' duration are considered for molecular diagnostic analysis.

PMCID: PMC3357216
PMID: 22432108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Clin Invest. 2012 Apr;122(4):1262-70. doi: 10.1172/JCI61919. Epub 2012 Mar 19.

Regulation of hepatic LDL receptors by mTORC1 and PCSK9 in mice.

Ai D(1), Chen C, Han S, Ganda A, Murphy AJ, Haeusler R, Thorp E, Accili D, Horton
JD, Tall AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.
da2424@columbia.edu

Individuals with type 2 diabetes have an increased risk of atherosclerosis. One
factor underlying this is dyslipidemia, which in hyperinsulinemic subjects with
early type 2 diabetes is typically characterized by increased VLDL secretion but 
normal LDL cholesterol levels, possibly reflecting enhanced catabolism of LDL via
hepatic LDLRs. Recent studies have also suggested that hepatic insulin signaling 
sustains LDLR levels. We therefore sought to elucidate the mechanisms linking
hepatic insulin signaling to regulation of LDLR levels. In WT mice, insulin
receptor knockdown by shRNA resulted in decreased hepatic mTORC1 signaling and
LDLR protein levels. It also led to increased expression of PCSK9, a known
post-transcriptional regulator of LDLR expression. Administration of the mTORC1
inhibitor rapamycin caused increased expression of PCSK9, decreased levels of
hepatic LDLR protein, and increased levels of VLDL/LDL cholesterol in WT but not 
Pcsk9-/- mice. Conversely, mice with increased hepatic mTORC1 activity exhibited 
decreased expression of PCSK9 and increased levels of hepatic LDLR protein
levels. Pcsk9 is regulated by the transcription factor HNF1a, and our further
detailed analyses suggest that increased mTORC1 activity leads to activation of
PKCd, reduced activity of HNF4a and HNF1a, decreased PCSK9 expression, and
ultimately increased hepatic LDLR protein levels, which result in decreased
circulating LDL levels. We therefore suggest that PCSK9 inhibition could be an
effective way to reduce the adverse side effect of increased LDL levels that is
observed in transplant patients taking rapamycin as immunosuppressive therapy.

PMCID: PMC3314476
PMID: 22426206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Diabet Med. 2012 Nov;29(11):1456-64. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2012.03626.x.

Functional analyses of the mutation nt-128 T<U+2192>G in the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1a promoter region in Chinese diabetes pedigrees.

Fang Q(1), Chen S, Wang Y, Jiang S, Zhang R, Hu C, Wang C, Liu F, Xiang K, Jia W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Comment in
    Diabet Med. 2012 Nov;29(11):1349.

AIMS: Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a (HNF-1a) regulates the expression of genes
encoding proteins involved in glucose metabolism and insulin secretion. Mutations
in the HNF-1a gene cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young Type 3. However,
the mechanism leading to this disease has not been completely ascertained.
Previously, we found a novel mutation in the regulatory element of the human
HNF-1a gene in two Chinese diabetes pedigrees. The nucleotide at position -128 T 
was substituted by G (nt-128 T<U+2192>G). In this study, we analysed the functional
defect of nt-128 T<U+2192>G in HNF-1a transcription activity.
METHODS: Luciferase reporter gene assays were carried out to examine the
functional characteristics of this mutant. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation were performed to confirm the binding of
nuclear proteins to oligonucleotides.
RESULTS: The variant construct (nt-128 T<U+2192>G) had a 1.65-fold increase in promoter 
activity compared with that of the wild-type construct in HepG2 cells and a
1.33-fold increase in MIN6 cells, respectively. The variant resided at a
FOXA/HNF-3 binding site identified by a series of competitive electrophoretic
mobility shift assays and antibody supershift analyses. The assays showed a
differential binding affinity in the wild-type and the nt-128 T<U+2192>G mutant
fragments by FOXA/HNF-3. Chromatin immunoprecipitation indicated that FOXA/HNF-3 
bound to this region in vivo. One nucleotide substitution in the FOXA/HNF-3 site 
in the human HNF-1a regulatory element caused an increase of HNF-1a
transcriptional activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggested that this substitution in the promoter region
affects DNA-protein interaction and HNF-1a gene transcription. The mutant may
contribute to the development of diabetes in these two nt-128 T<U+2192>G pedigrees of
Chinese.

© 2012 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2012 Diabetes UK.

PMCID: PMC3570122
PMID: 22413961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. PLoS Genet. 2012;8(3):e1002565. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002565. Epub 2012 Mar 
8.

Tcf7 is an important regulator of the switch of self-renewal and differentiation 
in a multipotential hematopoietic cell line.

Wu JQ(1), Seay M, Schulz VP, Hariharan M, Tuck D, Lian J, Du J, Shi M, Ye Z,
Gerstein M, Snyder MP, Weissman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California, United States of America. Jiaqian2009.wu@gmail.com

A critical problem in biology is understanding how cells choose between
self-renewal and differentiation. To generate a comprehensive view of the
mechanisms controlling early hematopoietic precursor self-renewal and
differentiation, we used systems-based approaches and murine EML multipotential
hematopoietic precursor cells as a primary model. EML cells give rise to a
mixture of self-renewing Lin-SCA+CD34+ cells and partially differentiated
non-renewing Lin-SCA-CD34- cells in a cell autonomous fashion. We identified and 
validated the HMG box protein TCF7 as a regulator in this
self-renewal/differentiation switch that operates in the absence of autocrine Wnt
signaling. We found that Tcf7 is the most down-regulated transcription factor
when CD34+ cells switch into CD34- cells, using RNA-Seq. We subsequently
identified the target genes bound by TCF7, using ChIP-Seq. We show that TCF7 and 
RUNX1 (AML1) bind to each other's promoter regions and that TCF7 is necessary for
the production of the short isoforms, but not the long isoforms of RUNX1,
suggesting that TCF7 and the short isoforms of RUNX1 function coordinately in
regulation. Tcf7 knock-down experiments and Gene Set Enrichment Analyses suggest 
that TCF7 plays a dual role in promoting the expression of genes characteristic
of self-renewing CD34+ cells while repressing genes activated in partially
differentiated CD34- state. Finally a network of up-regulated transcription
factors of CD34+ cells was constructed. Factors that control hematopoietic stem
cell (HSC) establishment and development, cell growth, and multipotency were
identified. These studies in EML cells demonstrate fundamental cell-intrinsic
properties of the switch between self-renewal and differentiation, and yield
valuable insights for manipulating HSCs and other differentiating systems.

PMCID: PMC3297581
PMID: 22412390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Lab Invest. 2012 May;92(5):713-23. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2012.45. Epub 2012 Mar 
12.

Caspase-1-mediated regulation of fibrogenesis in diet-induced steatohepatitis.

Dixon LJ(1), Berk M, Thapaliya S, Papouchado BG, Feldstein AE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine 
of Case Western University, Cleveland, OH, USA.

Non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) is typically associated with pro-apoptotic
caspase activation. A potential role for pro-inflammatory caspases remains
incompletely understood. Our aims were to examine a potential role of caspase-1
in the development of liver damage and fibrosis in NASH. C57BL/6 wild type (WT)
developed marked steatohepatitis, activation, fibrosis and increased hepatic
caspase-1 and interleukin-1ß expression when placed on the methionine- and
choline-deficient (MCD) diet. Marked caspase-1 activation was detected in the
liver of MCD-fed mice. Hepatocyte and non-parenchymal fractionation of the livers
further demonstrated that caspase-1 activation after MCD feeding was mainly
localized to non-parenchymal cells. Caspase-1-knockout (Casp1(-/-)) mice on the
MCD diet showed marked reduction in mRNA expression of genes involved in
inflammation and fibrogenesis (tumor necrosis factor-a was 7.6-fold greater in WT
vs Casp1(-/-) MCD-fed mice; F4/80 was 1.5-fold greater in WT vs Casp1(-/-)
MCD-fed mice; a-smooth muscle actin was 3.2-fold greater in WT vs Casp1(-/-)
MCD-fed mice; collagen 1-a was 7.6-fold greater in WT vs Casp1(-/-) MCD-fed mice;
transforming growth factor-ß was 2.4-fold greater in WT vs Casp1(-/-) MCD-fed
mice; cysteine- and glycine-rich protein 2 was 3.2-fold greater in WT vs
Casp1(-/-) MCD-fed mice). Furthermore, Sirius red staining for hepatic collagen
deposition was significantly reduced in Casp1(-/-) MCD-fed mice compared with WT 
MCD-fed animals. However, serum alanine aminotransferase levels, caspase-3
activity and terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase dUTP nick-end
labeling-positive cells were similar in Casp1(-/-) and WT mice on the MCD diet.
Selective Kupffer cell depletion by clodronate injection markedly suppressed
MCD-induced caspase-1 activation and protected mice from fibrogenesis and
fibrosis associated with this diet. The conclusion of this study is that it
uncovers a novel role for caspase-1 in inflammation and fibrosis during NASH
development.

PMCID: PMC3808241
PMID: 22411067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Epigenetics. 2012 Feb;7(2):164-72. doi: 10.4161/epi.7.2.18918.

Epigenetic silencing of HNF1A associates with changes in the composition of the
human plasma N-glycome.

Zoldo V(1), Horvat T, Novokmet M, Cuenin C, Muinic A, Pucic M, Huffman JE,
Gornik O, Polaek O, Campbell H, Hayward C, Wright AF, Rudan I, Owen K, McCarthy 
MI, Herceg Z, Lauc G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Zagreb Faculty of Science, University of Zagreb, Zagreb,
Croatia.

Protein glycosylation is a ubiquitous modification that affects the structure and
function of proteins. Our recent genome wide association study identified
transcription factor HNF1A as an important regulator of plasma protein
glycosylation. To evaluate the potential impact of epigenetic regulation of HNF1A
on protein glycosylation we analyzed CpG methylation in 810 individuals. The
association between methylation of four CpG sites and the composition of plasma
and IgG glycomes was analyzed. Several statistically significant associations
were observed between HNF1A methylation and plasma glycans, while there were no
significant associations with IgG glycans. The most consistent association with
HNF1A methylation was observed with the increase in the proportion of highly
branched glycans in the plasma N-glycome. The hypothesis that inactivation of
HNF1A promotes branching of glycans was supported by the analysis of plasma
N-glycomes in 61 patients with inactivating mutations in HNF1A, where the
increase in plasma glycan branching was also observed. This study represents the 
first demonstration of epigenetic regulation of plasma glycome composition,
suggesting a potential mechanism by which epigenetic deregulation of the glycome 
may contribute to disease development.

PMCID: PMC3335910
PMID: 22395466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e29527. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0029527. Epub 2012 Feb 27.

Transcriptional regulation of N-acetylglutamate synthase.

Heibel SK(1), Lopez GY, Panglao M, Sodha S, Mariño-Ramírez L, Tuchman M, Caldovic
L.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genetic Medicine Research, Children's National Medical Center,
Washington, DC, United States of America.

The urea cycle converts toxic ammonia to urea within the liver of mammals. At
least 6 enzymes are required for ureagenesis, which correlates with dietary
protein intake. The transcription of urea cycle genes is, at least in part,
regulated by glucocorticoid and glucagon hormone signaling pathways.
N-acetylglutamate synthase (NAGS) produces a unique cofactor, N-acetylglutamate
(NAG), that is essential for the catalytic function of the first and
rate-limiting enzyme of ureagenesis, carbamyl phosphate synthetase 1 (CPS1).
However, despite the important role of NAGS in ammonia removal, little is known
about the mechanisms of its regulation. We identified two regions of high
conservation upstream of the translation start of the NAGS gene. Reporter assays 
confirmed that these regions represent promoter and enhancer and that the
enhancer is tissue specific. Within the promoter, we identified multiple
transcription start sites that differed between liver and small intestine.
Several transcription factor binding motifs were conserved within the promoter
and enhancer regions while a TATA-box motif was absent. DNA-protein pull-down
assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation confirmed binding of Sp1 and CREB, but
not C/EBP in the promoter and HNF-1 and NF-Y, but not SMAD3 or AP-2 in the
enhancer. The functional importance of these motifs was demonstrated by decreased
transcription of reporter constructs following mutagenesis of each motif. The
presented data strongly suggest that Sp1, CREB, HNF-1, and NF-Y, that are known
to be responsive to hormones and diet, regulate NAGS transcription. This provides
molecular mechanism of regulation of ureagenesis in response to hormonal and
dietary changes.

PMCID: PMC3287996
PMID: 22383952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Clin Chim Acta. 2012 May 18;413(9-10):927-32. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2012.02.005.
Epub 2012 Feb 14.

Lipoprotein composition in HNF1A-MODY: differentiating between HNF1A-MODY and
type 2 diabetes.

McDonald TJ(1), McEneny J, Pearson ER, Thanabalasingham G, Szopa M, Shields BM,
Ellard S, Owen KR, Malecki MT, Hattersley AT, Young IS.

Author information: 
(1)NIHR Clinical Research Facility, Peninsula College or Medicine and Dentistry, 
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK. Tim.McDonald@rdeft.nhs.uk

INTRODUCTION: The young-onset diabetes seen in HNF1A-MODY is often misdiagnosed
as Type 2 diabetes. Type 2 diabetes, unlike HNF1A-MODY, is associated with
insulin resistance and a characteristic dyslipidaemia. We aimed to compare the
lipid profiles in HNF1A-MODY, Type 2 diabetes and control subjects and to
determine if lipids can be used to aid the differential diagnosis of diabetes
sub-type.
METHODS: 1) 14 subjects in each group (HNF1A-MODY, Type 2 diabetes and controls) 
were matched for gender and BMI. Fasting lipid profiles and HDL lipid
constituents were compared in the 3 groups. 2) HDL-cholesterol was assessed in a 
further 267 patients with HNF1A-MODY and 297 patients with a diagnosis of Type 2 
diabetes to determine its discriminative value.
RESULTS: 1) In HNF1A-MODY subjects, plasma-triglycerides were lower (1.36 vs.
1.93 mmol/l, p = 0.07) and plasma-HDL-cholesterol was higher than in subjects
with Type 2 diabetes (1.47 vs. 1.15 mmol/l, p = 0.0008), but was similar to
controls. Furthermore, in the isolated HDL; HDL-phospholipid and HDL-cholesterol 
ester content were higher in HNF1A-MODY, than in Type 2 diabetes (1.59 vs. 1.33
mmol/L, p = 0.04 and 1.10 vs. 0.83 mmol/L, p = 0.019, respectively), but were
similar to controls (1.59 vs. 1.45 mmol/L, p = 0.35 and 1.10 vs. 1.21 mmol/L, p =
0.19, respectively). 2) A plasma-HDL-cholesterol > 1.12 mmol/L was 75% sensitive 
and 64% specific (ROC AUC = 0.76) at discriminating HNF1A-MODY from Type 2
diabetes.
CONCLUSION: The plasma-lipid profiles of HNF1A-MODY and the lipid constituents of
HDL are similar to non-diabetic controls. However, HDL-cholesterol was higher in 
HNF1A-MODY than in Type 2 diabetes and could be used as a biomarker to aid in the
identification of patients with HNF1A-MODY.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22360925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Lipid Res. 2012 May;53(5):901-8. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M025130. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

NR2F1 disrupts synergistic activation of the MTTP gene transcription by HNF-4a
and HNF-1a.

Dai K(1), Hussain MM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology and Pediatrics, Program of Molecular and Cellular 
Biology, School of Graduate Studies, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY,
USA.

Regulation of microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) expression mainly
occurs at the transcriptional level. We have previously shown that MTTP gene
expression was repressed in nondifferentiated intestinal cells by nuclear
receptor 2 family 1 (NR2F1). However, mechanisms involved in the repression of
MTP by NR2F1 were not elucidated. Here, we show that MTP expression requires
hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-4a transcription factor. Different HNF-1 proteins
synergistically enhance MTP promoter activity along with HNF-4a by binding to
different cis elements. NR2F1 does not alter individual effects of HNF-4a and
HNF-1 proteins on the MTTP gene promoter. However, NR2F1 suppresses synergistic
activation of the MTP promoter by HNF-4a/HNF-1a by binding to a direct repeat 1
(DR1) element. This suppression is further enhanced in the presence of nuclear
receptor corepressor 1. In short, these studies identified a novel mechanism of
MTP repression that involves binding of NR2F1 to the DR1 element and recruitment 
of corepressors. In this mechanism, NR2F1 does not affect activities of
individual transcription factors; instead, it abrogates synergistic activation by
HNF-4a and HNF-1 proteins.

PMCID: PMC3329389
PMID: 22357705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Korean J Parasitol. 2011 Dec;49(4):431-6. doi: 10.3347/kjp.2011.49.4.431. Epub
2011 Dec 16.

Expression of exogenous human hepatic nuclear factor-1a by a lentiviral vector
and its interactions with Plasmodium falciparum subtilisin-like protease 2.

Liao S(1), Liu Y, Zheng B, Cho PY, Song HO, Lee YS, Jung SY, Park H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Zoonosis Research Center, Wonkwang University
School of Medicine, Iksan 570-749, Korea.

The onset, severity, and ultimate outcome of malaria infection are influenced by 
parasite-expressed virulence factors as well as by individual host responses to
these determinants. In both humans and mice, liver injury follows parasite entry,
persisting to the erythrocytic stage in the case of infection with the fatal
strain of Plasmodium falciparum. Hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-1a is a master
regulator of not only the liver damage and adaptive responses but also diverse
metabolic functions. In this study, we analyzed the expression of host HNF-1a in 
relation to malaria infection and evaluated its interaction with the
5'-untranslated region of subtilisin-like protease 2 (subtilase, Sub2).
Recombinant human HNF-1a expressed by a lentiviral vector (LV HNF-1a) was
introduced into mice. Interestingly, differences in the activity of the
5'-untranslated region of the Pf-Sub2 promoter were detected in 293T cells, and
LV HNF-1a was observed to influence promoter activity, suggesting that host
HNF-1a interacts with the Sub2 gene.

PMCID: PMC3279685
PMID: 22355214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Acta Diabetol. 2013 Oct;50(5):815-20. doi: 10.1007/s00592-012-0378-1. Epub 2012
Feb 19.

Cystatin C is not a good candidate biomarker for HNF1A-MODY.

Nowak N(1), Szopa M, Thanabalasingham G, McDonald TJ, Colclough K, Skupien J,
James TJ, Kiec-Wilk B, Kozek E, Mlynarski W, Hattersley AT, Owen KR, Malecki MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 15 
Kopernika Street, 31-501, Krakow, Poland.

Cystatin C is a marker of glomerular filtration rate (GFR). Its level is
influenced, among the others, by CRP whose concentration is decreased in
HNF1A-MODY. We hypothesized that cystatin C level might be altered in HNF1A-MODY.
We aimed to evaluate cystatin C in HNF1A-MODY both as a diagnostic marker and as 
a method of assessing GFR. We initially examined 51 HNF1A-MODY patients, 56
subjects with type 1 diabetes (T1DM), 39 with type 2 diabetes (T2DM) and 43
non-diabetic individuals (ND) from Poland. Subjects from two UK centres were used
as replication panels: including 215 HNF1A-MODY, 203 T2DM, 39 HNF4A-MODY, 170
GCK-MODY, 17 HNF1B-MODY and 58 T1DM patients. The data were analysed with
additive models, adjusting for gender, age, BMI and estimated GFR (creatinine).
In the Polish subjects, adjusted cystatin C level in HNF1A-MODY was lower
compared with T1DM, T2DM and ND (p < 0.05). Additionally, cystatin C-based GFR
was higher than that calculated from creatinine level (p < 0.0001) in HNF1A-MODY,
while the two GFR estimates were similar or cystatin C-based lower in the other
groups. In the UK subjects, there were no differences in cystatin C between
HNF1A-MODY and the other diabetic subgroups, except HNF1B-MODY. In UK HNF1A-MODY,
cystatin C-based GFR estimate was higher than the creatinine-based one
(p < 0.0001). Concluding, we could not confirm our hypothesis (supported by the
Polish results) that cystatin C level is altered by HNF1A mutations; thus, it
cannot be used as a biomarker for HNF1A-MODY. In HNF1A-MODY, the cystatin C-based
GFR estimate is higher than the creatinine-based one.

PMCID: PMC3898131
PMID: 22350134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012 May;96(2):e36-9. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2012.01.032. Epub 2012 Feb 16.

Clinical assessment of HNF1A and GCK variants and identification of a novel
mutation causing MODY2.

Shoemaker AH(1), Zienkiewicz J, Moore DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
ashley.h.shoemaker@vanderbilt.edu

A child with impaired fasting glucose was found to be heterozygous for a novel
variant at c.659G>A in GCK and a variant at c.1663C>T in HNF1A. Structural
modeling and clinical correlation suggests that the GCK variant causes monogenic 
diabetes while the variant in HNF1A is unlikely to be pathogenic.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3560353
PMID: 22341299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. PLoS Genet. 2012 Jan;8(1):e1002480. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1002480. Epub 2012 
Jan 26.

A genome-wide association scan on the levels of markers of inflammation in
Sardinians reveals associations that underpin its complex regulation.

Naitza S(1), Porcu E, Steri M, Taub DD, Mulas A, Xiao X, Strait J, Dei M, Lai S, 
Busonero F, Maschio A, Usala G, Zoledziewska M, Sidore C, Zara I, Pitzalis M, Loi
A, Virdis F, Piras R, Deidda F, Whalen MB, Crisponi L, Concas A, Podda C, Uzzau
S, Scheet P, Longo DL, Lakatta E, Abecasis GR, Cao A, Schlessinger D, Uda M,
Sanna S, Cucca F.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricerca Genetica e Biomedica, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 
Cagliari, Italy.

Identifying the genes that influence levels of pro-inflammatory molecules can
help to elucidate the mechanisms underlying this process. We first conducted a
two-stage genome-wide association scan (GWAS) for the key inflammatory biomarkers
Interleukin-6 (IL-6), the general measure of inflammation erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR), monocyte chemotactic protein-1 (MCP-1), and
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) in a large cohort of individuals from
the founder population of Sardinia. By analysing 731,213 autosomal or X
chromosome SNPs and an additional ~1.9 million imputed variants in 4,694
individuals, we identified several SNPs associated with the selected quantitative
trait loci (QTLs) and replicated all the top signals in an independent sample of 
1,392 individuals from the same population. Next, to increase power to detect and
resolve associations, we further genotyped the whole cohort (6,145 individuals)
for 293,875 variants included on the ImmunoChip and MetaboChip custom arrays.
Overall, our combined approach led to the identification of 9 genome-wide
significant novel independent signals-5 of which were identified only with the
custom arrays-and provided confirmatory evidence for an additional 7. Novel
signals include: for IL-6, in the ABO gene (rs657152, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.13×10(-29)); for ESR,
at the HBB (rs4910472, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.31×10(-11)) and UCN119B/SPPL3 (rs11829037,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>8.91×10(-10)) loci; for MCP-1, near its receptor CCR2 (rs17141006,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>7.53×10(-13)) and in CADM3 (rs3026968, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>7.63×10(-13)); for hsCRP, within
the CRP gene (rs3093077, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>5.73×10(-21)), near DARC (rs3845624,
p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.43×10(-10)), UNC119B/SPPL3 (rs11829037, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.50×10(-14)), and ICOSLG/AIRE 
(rs113459440, p<U+200A>=<U+200A>1.54×10(-08)) loci. Confirmatory evidence was found for IL-6 in
the IL-6R gene (rs4129267); for ESR at CR1 (rs12567990) and TMEM57 (rs10903129); 
for MCP-1 at DARC (rs12075); and for hsCRP at CRP (rs1205), HNF1A (rs225918), and
APOC-I (rs4420638). Our results improve the current knowledge of genetic variants
underlying inflammation and provide novel clues for the understanding of the
molecular mechanisms regulating this complex process.

PMCID: PMC3266885
PMID: 22291609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Apr;32(7):1226-36. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05988-11. Epub 2012 Jan
30.

Hepatic deletion of SIRT1 decreases hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a/farnesoid X
receptor signaling and induces formation of cholesterol gallstones in mice.

Purushotham A(1), Xu Q, Lu J, Foley JF, Yan X, Kim DH, Kemper JK, Li X.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Signal Transduction, National Institute of Environmental Health 
Sciences, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina, USA.

SIRT1, a highly conserved NAD(+)-dependent protein deacetylase, is a key
metabolic sensor that directly links nutrient signals to animal metabolic
homeostasis. Although SIRT1 has been implicated in a number of hepatic metabolic 
processes, the mechanisms by which hepatic SIRT1 modulates bile acid metabolism
are still not well understood. Here we report that deletion of hepatic SIRT1
reduces the expression of farnesoid X receptor (FXR), a nuclear receptor that
regulates bile acid homeostasis. We provide evidence that SIRT1 regulates the
expression of FXR through hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a (HNF1a). SIRT1 deficiency 
in hepatocytes leads to decreased binding of HNF1a to the FXR promoter.
Furthermore, we show that hepatocyte-specific deletion of SIRT1 leads to
derangements in bile acid metabolism, predisposing the mice to development of
cholesterol gallstones on a lithogenic diet. Taken together, our findings
indicate that SIRT1 plays a vital role in the regulation of hepatic bile acid
homeostasis through the HNF1a/FXR signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3302441
PMID: 22290433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. PLoS Comput Biol. 2011 Dec;7(12):e1002325. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002325.
Epub 2011 Dec 22.

Joint ancestry and association testing in admixed individuals.

Shriner D(1), Adeyemo A, Rotimi CN.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Genomics and Global Health, National Human Genome
Research Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
shrinerda@mail.nih.gov

For samples of admixed individuals, it is possible to test for both ancestry
effects via admixture mapping and genotype effects via association mapping. Here,
we describe a joint test called BMIX that combines admixture and association
statistics at single markers. We first perform high-density admixture mapping
using local ancestry. We then perform association mapping using stratified
regression, wherein for each marker genotypes are stratified by local ancestry.
In both stages, we use generalized linear models, providing the advantage that
the joint test can be used with any phenotype distribution with an appropriate
link function. To define the alternative densities for admixture mapping and
association mapping, we describe a method based on autocorrelation to empirically
estimate the testing burdens of admixture mapping and association mapping. We
then describe a joint test that uses the posterior probabilities from admixture
mapping as prior probabilities for association mapping, capitalizing on the
reduced testing burden of admixture mapping relative to association mapping. By
simulation, we show that BMIX is potentially orders-of-magnitude more powerful
than the MIX score, which is currently the most powerful frequentist joint test. 
We illustrate the gain in power through analysis of fasting plasma glucose among 
922 unrelated, non-diabetic, admixed African Americans from the Howard University
Family Study. We detected loci at 1q24 and 6q26 as genome-wide significant via
admixture mapping; both loci have been independently reported from linkage
analysis. Using the association data, we resolved the 1q24 signal into two
regions. One region, upstream of the gene FAM78B, contains three binding sites
for the transcription factor PPARG and two binding sites for HNF1A, both
previously implicated in the pathology of type 2 diabetes. The fact that both
loci showed ancestry effects may provide novel insight into the genetic
architecture of fasting plasma glucose in individuals of African ancestry.

PMCID: PMC3245293
PMID: 22216000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Neurol Res. 2012 Jan;34(1):25-31. doi: 10.1179/1743132811Y.0000000052.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha mediated upregulation of albumin expression in
focal ischemic rat brain.

Prajapati KD(1), Sharma SS, Roy N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, National Institute of
Pharmaceutical Education and Research, Sector-67, S.A.S. Nagar, Punjab, India.

OBJECTIVE: Exogenous human albumin has been shown to be neuroprotective in
experimental ischemic stroke and it is currently investigated in clinical trials.
However, the role of endogenous expression of albumin and its transcriptional
regulation in the ischemic brain is not known. We have previously reported the
upregulation of de novo synthesis of albumin in the ischemic rat brain (at 0 and 
22 hours of reperfusion after 2 hours of ischemia). In this study, we analyzed
the role of transcription factors in albumin expression in ischemic rat brain.
METHODS: The putative transcription factor binding sites for the albumin promoter
was analyzed using transcription factor search computational tool and validated
in rat middle cerebral artery occlusion model of transient cerebral ischemia.
RESULTS: Computational analysis predicted approximately 20 transcription factor
binding sites including hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha). We found
for the first time mRNA and protein expression of HNF-1alpha in the control and
ischemic rat brain. There was no significant difference in mRNA and protein
expression of HNF-1alpha between control and ischemic (0, 2 and 22 hours of
reperfusion) group but there was increased interaction of HNF-1alpha with p300
(known interacting partner for HNF-1alpha, a histone acetyl-transferase) in 0-
and 22-hour reperfusion groups. Also albumin promoter binding activity of
HNF-1alpha in ischemic animals of 0- and 22-hour reperfusion groups significantly
increased compared to respective control group animals.
DISCUSSION: Although, HNF-1alpha is mainly expressed in the rat liver and
involved in hepatic expression of albumin, our study conclusively shows for the
first time de novo synthesis of HNF-1alpha in rat brain. Moreover, an increased
interaction of HNF-1alpha with p300 and albumin promoter seems to be responsible 
for overexpression of albumin in ischemic conditions.

PMID: 22196858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Indian J Pediatr. 2012 Jul;79(7):955-8. doi: 10.1007/s12098-011-0633-4. Epub 2011
Dec 10.

Clinical suspicion of Maturity Onset of Diabetes of the Young in pediatric
patients diagnosed with diabetes mellitus.

Ramesh SC(1), Marshall I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, UMDNJ-Robert
Wood Johnson Medical School, Child Health Institute of New Jersey, 89 French
Street, New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.

Type 1 diabetes remains the predominant form of diabetes in the pediatric
population, while the incidence of type 2 diabetes has increased, paralleling the
increase in obesity. Another form of diabetes, Maturity Onset Diabetes of the
Young (MODY), should also be considered especially in those whose clinical
presentation is atypical for type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Although testing for
MODY is a challenge, testing in appropriate patients and family members should be
standard of care. Knowledge of the genetic etiology of the type of diabetes will 
enable appropriate treatment and optimize outcomes, allow more accurate
prediction of disease progression, as well as allow screening for and the
diagnosis of MODY in family members.

PMID: 22161582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2012 Mar;340(3):648-55. doi: 10.1124/jpet.111.187161. Epub 
2011 Dec 7.

Regulation of tissue-specific expression of renal organic anion transporters by
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 a/ß and DNA methylation.

Jin L(1), Kikuchi R, Saji T, Kusuhara H, Sugiyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pharmacokinetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

We have reported previously that the kidney- and liver-specific expression of
transporters in mice involves the coordinated regulation by hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 (HNF1) and DNA methylation. The present study was aimed at investigating
the role of this cascade in the transcriptional regulation of renal organic anion
transporters (OATs) yet to be characterized in human and mouse. Luciferase assays
and electrophoretic mobility-shift assays demonstrated that HNF1a/ß enhances the 
promoter activity of OAT4/SLC22A11 via binding to the HNF1 motif located near the
transcriptional start site (TSS). DNA methylation profiles of human OAT1, OAT3,
OAT4, and urate transporter 1 (URAT1) were determined in human liver and kidney
cortex by bisulfite sequencing. Most of the CpG dinucleotides around the TSSs of 
OAT1 and OAT3 were highly methylated in the liver compared with kidney cortex,
being consistent with their tissue specificity, whereas the difference in the DNA
methylation status was less remarkable between the two tissues for OAT4 and
URAT1. Mouse Oat1 gene also contained CpG dinucleotides hypomethylated in the
kidney and hypermethylated in the liver downstream its TSS, whereas two of the
seven CpG dinucleotides around the TSS of mouse Oat3 were significantly
methylated in the liver compared with the kidney. Taken together, these findings 
underscored the central role of HNF1a/ß in the transcriptional regulation of OATs
and highlighted DNA methylation-dependent gene silencing as one of the mechanisms
underlying the tissue-specific transactivation by this master regulator.

PMID: 22160269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Int J Mol Med. 2012 Mar;29(3):510-4. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2011.853. Epub 2011 Dec 5.

Effect of simvastatin on the expression and regulation mechanism of
apolipoprotein M.

Yang L(1), Zhao S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cadres Medical, Xiangya Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha 410011, P.R. China.

Apolipoprotein M (ApoM) is a recently discovered human apolipoprotein
predominantly present in high-density lipoprotein (HDL) in the plasma. Statins
have effects on many HDL-associated apolipoproteins. However, it is unknown
whether statins have effects on ApoM. In the present study, we investigated the
effects of simvastatin on ApoM expression and the underlying mechanism(s).
Simvastatin up-regulated hepatic ApoM mRNA and protein expression in mice. In
HepG2 cells, simvastatin significantly enhanced ApoM mRNA and protein expression 
in a dose-dependent manner. Simvastatin increased hepatic hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1a (HNF-1a) mRNA and reduced liver X receptor-a (LXRa) mRNA expression in 
mice. The simvastatin-induced up-regulation of ApoM was blocked by an HNF-1a
inhibitor (UCDA) or an LXRa agonist (TO901317) in HepG2 cells which indicates
that this effect is mediated via the regulation of HNF-1a and LXRa. In
conclusion, simvastatin signi<U+FB01>cantly up-regulated ApoM expression in vivo and in 
vitro, which indicates that ApoM is another novel apolipoprotein regulated by
simvastatin. The mechanism of this effect is related to the regulation of HNF-1a 
and LXRa.

PMID: 22160096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. ASAIO J. 2012 Jan-Feb;58(1):73-8. doi: 10.1097/MAT.0b013e318239fce5.

A novel technique for hepatic progenitor cell isolation from normal adult rat
livers.

Guo J(1), Li J, Lu Y, Xin J, Jiang L, Wu W, Cao H, Qiu Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, The
First Affiliated Hospital, School of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou,
China.

The transplantation of hepatic progenitor cells (HPCs) is a promising alternate
approach to liver transplantation for patients with end-stage liver disease.
Here, we report a novel technique for HPCs isolation from normal adult rat livers
(no preexposure to chemicals and no injury). HPCs were isolated from normal adult
rat livers using a novel four-step collagenase perfusion method followed by
density gradient centrifugation. The phenotypic properties of HPCs were
characterized by morphological observation, reverse-transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR), and immunocytochemistry. The results showed that HPCs
formed loose colonies and possessed a round or oval shape at culture day 3. These
cells proliferated slowly and exhibited progenitor-like characteristics during
the 30-day culture period. RT-PCR analysis indicated that the cultured cells were
positive for several HPC-specific genes, such as albumin (ALB), alpha-fetoprotein
(AFP), cytokeratin 18 (CK18), cytokeratin 19 (CK19), CD45, hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1-alpha (HNF-1a), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF-4a), and Thy-1.
Immunocytochemical staining showed that these cells were consistently positive
for ALB, AFP, CK18, CK19, Thy-1, and OV-6. HPCs can be isolated from normal adult
rat livers using a simple and effective technique involving four-step collagenase
perfusion, further confirming their potential as a strong candidate for
hepatocyte therapy.

PMID: 22157072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2011 Dec 13;58(25):2675-82. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2011.08.054.

Genetic susceptibility to coronary heart disease in type 2 diabetes: 3
independent studies.

Qi L(1), Parast L, Cai T, Powers C, Gervino EV, Hauser TH, Hu FB, Doria A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. nhlqi@channing.harvard.edu

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to evaluate whether coronary heart disease 
(CHD)-susceptibility loci identified by genome-wide association studies of the
general population also contribute to CHD in type 2 diabetes.
BACKGROUND: No study has examined the effects of these genetic variants on CHD in
diabetic patients.
METHODS: We genotyped 15 genetic markers of 12 loci in 3 studies of diabetic
patients: the prospective Nurses' Health Study (309 CHD cases, and 544 control
subjects) and Health Professional Follow-up Study (345 CHD cases, and 451 control
subjects) and the cross-sectional Joslin Heart Study (422 CHD cases, and 435
control subjects).
RESULTS: Five single-nucleotide polymorphisms, rs4977574 (CDKN2A/2B), rs12526453 
(PHACTR1), rs646776 (CELSR2-PSRC1-SORT1), rs2259816 (HNF1A), and rs11206510
(PCSK9) showed directionally consistent associations with CHD in the 3 studies,
with combined odds ratios (ORs) ranging from 1.17 to 1.25 (p = 0.03 to 0.0002).
None of the other single-nucleotide polymorphisms reached significance in
individual or combined analyses. A genetic risk score (GRS) was created by
combining the risk alleles of the 5 significantly associated loci. The OR of
CHD/GRS unit was 1.19 (95% confidence interval: 1.13 to 1.26; p < 0.0001).
Individuals with GRS =8 (19% of diabetic subjects) had almost a 2-fold increase
in CHD risk (OR: 1.94, 95% confidence interval: 1.60 to 2.35) as compared with
individuals with GRS =5 (30% of diabetic subjects). Prediction of CHD was
significantly improved (p < 0.001) when the GRS was added to a model including
clinical predictors in the combined samples.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results illustrate the consistency and differences in the
determinants of genetic susceptibility to CHD in diabetic patients and the
general populations.

Copyright © 2011 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3240896
PMID: 22152955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Periodontal Res. 2012 Jun;47(3):309-19. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0765.2011.01433.x. 
Epub 2011 Dec 11.

Wnt/ß-catenin pathway regulates bone morphogenetic protein (BMP2)-mediated
differentiation of dental follicle cells.

Silvério KG(1), Davidson KC, James RG, Adams AM, Foster BL, Nociti FH Jr,
Somerman MJ, Moon RT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Stem Cells and Regenerative Medicine, University of Washington, 
School of Medicine, Seattle, WA, USA. kgsilverio@fop.unicamp.br

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Bone morphogenetic protein 2 (BMP2)-induced osteogenic 
differentiation has been shown to occur through the canonical Wnt/ßcatenin
pathway, whereas factors promoting canonical Wnt signaling in cementoblasts
inhibit cell differentiation and promote cell proliferation in vitro. The aim of 
this study was to investigate whether putative precursor cells of cementoblasts, 
dental follicle cells (murine SVF4 cells), when stimulated with BMP2, would
exhibit changes in genes/proteins associated with the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: SVF4 cells were stimulated with BMP2, and the following
assays were carried out: (i) Wnt/ß-catenin pathway activation assessed by western
blotting, ß-catenin/transcription factor (TCF) reporter assays and expression of 
the lymphoid enhancer-binding factor-1 (Lef1), transcription factor 7 (Tcf7), Wnt
inhibitor factor 1 (Wif1) and Axin2 (Axin2) genes; and (ii)
cementoblast/osteoblast differentiation assessed by mineralization in vitro, and 
by the mRNA levels of runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2), osterix (Osx),
alkaline phosphatase (Alp), osteocalcin (Ocn) and bone sialoprotein (Bsp),
determined by quantitative PCR after treatment with wingless-type MMTV
integration site family, member 3A (WNT3A) and knockdown of ß-catenin.
RESULTS: WNT3A induced ß-catenin nuclear translocation and up-regulated the
transcriptional activity of a canonical Wnt-responsive reporter, suggesting that 
the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway functions in SVF4 cells. Activation of Wnt signaling
with WNT3A suppressed BMP2-mediated induction of cementoblast/osteoblast
maturation of SVF4 cells. However, ß-catenin knockdown showed that the
BMP2-induced expression of cementoblast/osteoblast differentiation markers
requires endogenous ß-catenin. WNT3A down-regulated transcripts for Runx2, Alp
and Ocn in SVF4 cells compared with untreated cells. In contrast, BMP2 induction 
of Bsp transcripts occurred independently of Wnt/ß-catenin signaling.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that stabilization of ß-catenin by WNT3A inhibits 
BMP2-mediated induction of cementoblast/osteoblast differentiation in SVF4 cells,
although BMP2 requires endogenous Wnt/ß-catenin signaling to promote cell
maturation.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMCID: PMC3865600
PMID: 22150562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Diabetes Care. 2011 Dec;34(12):e186; author reply e187. doi: 10.2337/dc11-1654.

Comment on: McDonald et al. High-sensitivity CRP discriminates HNF1A-MODY from
other subtypes of diabetes. Diabetes Care 2011;34:1860-1862.

Blanco J, Costa A, Giménez M, Conget I.

Comment on
    Diabetes Care. 2011 Aug;34(8):1860-2.

PMCID: PMC3220860
PMID: 22110178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27425. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027425. Epub 2011 Nov 7.

Novel common integration sites targeted by mouse mammary tumor virus insertion in
mammary tumors have oncogenic activity.

Kim HH(1), van den Heuvel AP, Schmidt JW, Ross SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology/Abramson Cancer Center, Perelman School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States
of America.

Non-acute transforming retroviruses like mouse mammary tumor virus (MMTV) cause
cancer, at least in part, through integration near cellular genes involved in
growth control, thereby de-regulating their expression. It is well-established
that MMTV commonly integrates near and activates expression of members of the Wnt
and Fgf pathways in mammary tumors. However, there are a significant number of
tumors for which the proviral integration sites have not been identified. Here,
we used high through-put screening to identify common integration sites (CISs) in
MMTV-induced tumors from C3H/HeN and BALB/c mice. As expected, members of both
the Wnt and Fgf families were identified in this screen. In addition, a number of
novel CISs were found, including Tcf7l2, Antxr1/Tem8, and Arhgap18. We show here 
that expression of these three putative oncogenes in normal murine mammary gland 
cells altered their growth kinetics and caused their morphological transformation
when grown in three dimensional cultures. Additionally, expression of Tcf7l2 and 
Antxr1/Tem8 sensitized cells to exogenous WNT ligand. As Tcf7l2, Antxr1/Tem8, and
Arhgap18 have been associated with human breast and other cancers, these data
demonstrate that MMTV-induced insertional mutation remains an important means for
identifying genes involved in breast cancer.

PMCID: PMC3210173
PMID: 22087314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Pediatr Diabetes. 2012 Feb;13(1):26-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5448.2011.00827.x.
Epub 2011 Nov 8.

Comprehensive molecular analysis of Japanese patients with pediatric-onset
MODY-type diabetes mellitus.

Yorifuji T(1), Fujimaru R, Hosokawa Y, Tamagawa N, Shiozaki M, Aizu K, Jinno K,
Maruo Y, Nagasaka H, Tajima T, Kobayashi K, Urakami T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Children's Medical
Center, Osaka City General Hospital, 2-13-22 Miyakojima-Hondori, Miyakojima,
Osaka 534-0021, Japan. yorif@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Erratum in
    Pediatr Diabetes. 2013 May;14(3):230.

BACKGROUND: In Asians, mutations in the known maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY) genes have been identified in only <15% of patients. These results
were obtained mostly through studies on adult patients.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the molecular basis of Japanese patients with
pediatric-onset MODY-type diabetes.
SUBJECTS: Eighty Japanese patients with pediatric-onset MODY-type diabetes.
METHODS: Mitochondrial 3243A>G mutation was first tested by the polymerase chain 
reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis for maternally
inherited families. Then, all coding exons and exon-intron boundaries of the
HNF1A, HNF1B, GCK, and HNF4A genes were amplified from genomic DNA and directly
sequenced. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis was also
performed to detect whole-exon deletions.
RESULTS: After excluding one patient with a mitochondrial 3243A>G, mutations were
identified in 38 (48.1%) patients; 18 had GCK mutations, 11 had HNF1A mutations, 
3 had HNF4A mutations, and 6 had HNF1B mutations. In patients aged <8 yr,
mutations were detected mostly in GCK at a higher frequency (63.6%). In patients 
>9 yr of age, mutations were identified less frequently (45.1%), with HNF1A
mutations being the most frequent. A large fraction of mutation-negative patients
showed elevated homeostasis model assessment (HOMA) insulin-resistance and normal
HOMA-ß indices. Most of the HNF1B mutations were large deletions, and,
interestingly, renal cysts were undetectable in two patients with whole-gene
deletion of HNF1B.
CONCLUSION: In Japanese patients with pediatric-onset MODY-type diabetes,
mutations in known genes were identified at a much higher frequency than
previously reported for adult Asians. A fraction of mutation-negative patients
presented with insulin-resistance and normal insulin-secretory capacities
resembling early-onset type 2 diabetes.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22060211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Immunol. 2011 Dec 1;187(11):5964-73. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1101205. Epub 2011
Oct 28.

T cell factor 1 regulates thymocyte survival via a ROR<U+03B3>t-dependent pathway.

Wang R(1), Xie H, Huang Z, Ma J, Fang X, Ding Y, Sun Z.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Beckman Research Institute, City of Hope, Duarte, CA
91010, USA.

Survival of CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive (DP) thymocytes plays a critical role in
shaping the peripheral T cell repertoire. However, the mechanisms responsible for
the regulation of DP thymocyte lifespan remain poorly understood. In this work,
we demonstrate that T cell factor (TCF)-1 regulates DP thymocyte survival by
upregulating ROR<U+03B3>t. Microarray analysis revealed that ROR<U+03B3>t was significantly
downregulated in TCF-1(-/-) thymocytes that underwent accelerated apoptosis,
whereas ROR<U+03B3>t was greatly upregulated in thymocytes that had enhanced survival
due to transgenic expression of a stabilized ß-catenin (ß-cat(Tg)), a TCF-1
activator. Both TCF-1(-/-) and ROR<U+03B3>t(-/-) DP thymocytes underwent similar
accelerated apoptosis. Forced expression of ROR<U+03B3>t successfully rescued TCF-1(-/-)
DP thymocytes from apoptosis, whereas ectopically expressed TCF-1 was not able to
rescue the defective T cell development because of the lack of ROR<U+03B3>t-supported
survival. Furthermore, activation of TCF-1 by stabilized ß-catenin was able to
enhance DP thymocyte survival only in the presence of ROR<U+03B3>t, indicating that
ROR<U+03B3>t acts downstream of TCF-1 in the regulation of DP thymocyte survival.
Moreover, ß-catenin/TCF-1 directly interacted with the ROR<U+03B3>t promoter region and 
stimulated its activity. Therefore, our data demonstrated that TCF-1 enhances DP 
thymocyte survival through transcriptional upregulation of ROR<U+03B3>t, which we
previously showed is an essential prosurvival molecule for DP thymocytes.

PMCID: PMC3221934
PMID: 22039299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 Jan 1;302(1):G123-33. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00102.2011. Epub 2011 Oct 20.

Regulation of the gene encoding the intestinal bile acid transporter ASBT by the 
caudal-type homeobox proteins CDX1 and CDX2.

Ma L(1), Jüttner M, Kullak-Ublick GA, Eloranta JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Hospital
Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Comment in
    World J Gastroenterol. 2013 May 14;19(18):2736-9.

The apical sodium-dependent bile acid transporter (ASBT) is expressed abundantly 
in the ileum and mediates bile acid absorption across the apical membranes.
Caudal-type homeobox proteins CDX1 and CDX2 are transcription factors that
regulate genes involved in intestinal epithelial differentiation and
proliferation. Aberrant expression of both ASBT and CDXs in Barrett's esophagus
(BE) prompted us to study, whether the expression of the ASBT gene is regulated
by CDXs. Short interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of CDXs resulted in reduced
ASBT mRNA expression in intestinal cells. CDXs strongly induced the activity of
the ASBT promoter in reporter assays in esophageal and intestinal cells. Nine CDX
binding sites were predicted in silico within the ASBT promoter, and binding of
CDXs to six of them was verified in vitro and within living cells by
electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays,
respectively. RNAs were extracted from esophageal biopsies from 20 BE patients
and analyzed by real-time PCR. Correlation with ASBT expression was found for
CDX1, CDX2, and HNF-1a in BE biopsies. In conclusion, the human ASBT promoter is 
activated transcriptionally by CDX1 and CDX2. Our finding provides a possible
explanation for the reported observation that ASBT is aberrantly expressed in
esophageal metaplasia that also expresses CDX transcription factors.

PMID: 22016432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. BMJ. 2011 Oct 19;343:d6044. doi: 10.1136/bmj.d6044.

Diagnosis and management of maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY).

Thanabalasingham G(1), Owen KR.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford OX3 7LJ, UK.

PMID: 22012810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Nat Genet. 2011 Oct 16;43(11):1131-8. doi: 10.1038/ng.970.

Genome-wide association study identifies loci influencing concentrations of liver
enzymes in plasma.

Chambers JC, Zhang W, Sehmi J, Li X, Wass MN, Van der Harst P, Holm H, Sanna S,
Kavousi M, Baumeister SE, Coin LJ, Deng G, Gieger C, Heard-Costa NL, Hottenga JJ,
Kühnel B, Kumar V, Lagou V, Liang L, Luan J, Vidal PM, Mateo Leach I, O'Reilly
PF, Peden JF, Rahmioglu N, Soininen P, Speliotes EK, Yuan X, Thorleifsson G,
Alizadeh BZ, Atwood LD, Borecki IB, Brown MJ, Charoen P, Cucca F, Das D, de Geus 
EJ, Dixon AL, Döring A, Ehret G, Eyjolfsson GI, Farrall M, Forouhi NG, Friedrich 
N, Goessling W, Gudbjartsson DF, Harris TB, Hartikainen AL, Heath S, Hirschfield 
GM, Hofman A, Homuth G, Hyppönen E, Janssen HL, Johnson T, Kangas AJ, Kema IP,
Kühn JP, Lai S, Lathrop M, Lerch MM, Li Y, Liang TJ, Lin JP, Loos RJ, Martin NG, 
Moffatt MF, Montgomery GW, Munroe PB, Musunuru K, Nakamura Y, O'Donnell CJ,
Olafsson I, Penninx BW, Pouta A, Prins BP, Prokopenko I, Puls R, Ruokonen A,
Savolainen MJ, Schlessinger D, Schouten JN, Seedorf U, Sen-Chowdhry S,
Siminovitch KA, Smit JH, Spector TD, Tan W, Teslovich TM, Tukiainen T,
Uitterlinden AG, Van der Klauw MM, Vasan RS, Wallace C, Wallaschofski H, Wichmann
HE, Willemsen G, Würtz P, Xu C, Yerges-Armstrong LM; Alcohol Genome-wide
Association (AlcGen) Consortium; Diabetes Genetics Replication and Meta-analyses 
(DIAGRAM+) Study; Genetic Investigation of Anthropometric Traits (GIANT)
Consortium; Global Lipids Genetics Consortium; Genetics of Liver Disease (GOLD)
Consortium; International Consortium for Blood Pressure (ICBP-GWAS);
Meta-analyses of Glucose and Insulin-Related Traits Consortium (MAGIC), Abecasis 
GR, Ahmadi KR, Boomsma DI, Caulfield M, Cookson WO, van Duijn CM, Froguel P,
Matsuda K, McCarthy MI, Meisinger C, Mooser V, Pietiläinen KH, Schumann G,
Snieder H, Sternberg MJ, Stolk RP, Thomas HC, Thorsteinsdottir U, Uda M, Waeber
G, Wareham NJ, Waterworth DM, Watkins H, Whitfield JB, Witteman JC, Wolffenbuttel
BH, Fox CS, Ala-Korpela M, Stefansson K, Vollenweider P, Völzke H, Schadt EE,
Scott J, Järvelin MR, Elliott P, Kooner JS.

Collaborators: Voight BF, Scott LJ, Steinthorsdottir V, Morris AP, Dina C, Welch 
RP, Zeggini E, Huth C, Aulchenko YS, Thorleifsson G, McCulloch LJ, Ferreira T,
Grallert H, Amin N, Wu G, Willer CJ, Raychaudhuri S, McCarroll SA, Langenberg C, 
Hofmann OM, Dupuis J, Qi L, Segrè AV, van Hoek M, Navarro P, Ardlie K, Balkau B, 
Benediktsson R, Bennett AJ, Blagieva R, Boerwinkle E, Bonnycastle LL, Bengtsson
Boström K, Bravenboer B, Bumpstead S, Burtt NP, Charpentier G, Chines PS,
Cornelis M, Couper DJ, Crawford G, Doney AS, Elliott KS, Elliott AL, Erdos MR,
Fox CS, Franklin CS, Ganser M, Gieger C, Grarup N, Green T, Griffin S, Groves CJ,
Guiducci C, Hadjadj S, Hassanali N, Herder C, Isomaa B, Jackson AU, Johnson PR,
Jørgensen T, Kao WH, Klopp N, Kong A, Kraft P, Kuusisto J, Lauritzen T, Li M,
Lieverse A, Lindgren CM, Lyssenko V, Marre M, Meitinger T, Midthjell K, Morken
MA, Narisu N, Nilsson P, Owen KR, Payne F, Perry JR, Petersen AK, Platou C,
Proença C, Prokopenko I, Rathmann W, William Rayner N, Robertson NR, Rocheleau G,
Roden M, Sampson MJ, Saxena R, Shields BM, Shrader P, Sigurdsson G, Sparsø T,
Strassburger K, Stringham HM, Sun Q, Swift AJ, Thorand B, Tichet J, Tuomi T, van 
Dam RM, van Haeften TW, van Herpt T, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Walters GB, Weedon
MN, Wijmenga C, Witteman J, Bergman RN, Cauchi S, Collins FS, Gloyn AL,
Gyllensten U, Hansen T, Hide WA, Hitman GA, Hofman A, Hunter DJ, Hveem K, Laakso 
M, Mohlke KL, Morris AD, Palmer CN, Pramstaller PP, Rudan I, Sijbrands E, Stein
LD, Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden A, Walker M, Wareham NJ, Watanabe RM, Abecasis GR,
Boehm BO, Campbell H, Daly MJ, Hattersley AT, Hu FB, Meigs JB, Pankow JS,
Pedersen O, Wichmann HE, Barroso I, Florez JC, Frayling TM, Groop L, Sladek R,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Wilson JF, Illig T, Froguel P, van Duijn CM, Stefansson K,
Altshuler D, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI, Lango Allen H, Estrada K, Lettre G, Berndt
SI, Weedon MN, Rivadeneira F, Willer CJ, Jackson AU, Vedantam S, Raychaudhuri S, 
Ferreira T, Wood AR, Weyant RJ, Segrè AV, Speliotes EK, Wheeler E, Soranzo N,
Park JH, Yang J, Gudbjartsson D, Heard-Costa NL, Randall JC, Qi L, Smith AV, Mägi
R, Pastinen T, Liang L, Heid IM, Luan J, Thorleifsson G, Winkler TW, Goddard ME, 
Sin Lo K, Palmer C, Workalemahu T, Aulchenko YS, Johansson A, Zillikens MC,
Feitosa MF, Esko T, Johnson T, Ketkar S, Kraft P, Mangino M, Prokopenko I, Absher
D, Albrecht E, Ernst F, Glazer NL, Hayward C, Hottenga JJ, Jacobs KB, Knowles JW,
Kutalik Z, Monda KL, Polasek O, Preuss M, Rayner NW, Robertson NR,
Steinthorsdottir V, Tyrer JP, Voight BF, Wiklund F, Xu J, Zhao JH, Nyholt DR,
Pellikka N, Perola M, Perry JR, Surakka I, Tammesoo ML, Altmaier EL, Amin N,
Aspelund T, Bhangale T, Boucher G, Chasman DI, Chen C, Coin L, Cooper MN, Dixon
AL, Gibson Q, Grundberg E, Hao K, Juhani Junttila M, Kaplan LM, Kettunen J, König
IR, Kwan T, Lawrence RW, Levinson DF, Lorentzon M, McKnight B, Morris AP, Müller 
M, Suh Ngwa J, Purcell S, Rafelt S, Salem RM, Salvi E, Sanna S, Shi J, Sovio U,
Thompson JR, Turchin MC, Vandenput L, Verlaan DJ, Vitart V, White CC, Ziegler A, 
Almgren P, Balmforth AJ, Campbell H, Citterio L, De Grandi A, Dominiczak A, Duan 
J, Elliott P, Elosua R, Eriksson JG, Freimer NB, Geus EJ, Glorioso N, Haiqing S, 
Hartikainen AL, Havulinna AS, Hicks AA, Hui J, Igl W, Illig T, Jula A, Kajantie
E, Kilpeläinen TO, Koiranen M, Kolcic I, Koskinen S, Kovacs P, Laitinen J, Liu J,
Lokki ML, Marusic A, Maschio A, Meitinger T, Mulas A, Paré G, Parker AN, Peden
JF, Petersmann A, Pichler I, Pietiläinen KH, Pouta A, Ridderstråle M, Rotter JI, 
Sambrook JG, Sanders AR, Schmidt CO, Sinisalo J, Smit JH, Stringham HM, Walters
GB, Widen E, Wild SH, Willemsen G, Zagato L, Zgaga L, Zitting P, Alavere H,
Farrall M, McArdle WL, Nelis M, Peters MJ, Ripatti S, van Meurs JB, Aben KK,
Ardlie KG, Beckmann JS, Beilby JP, Bergman RN, Bergmann S, Collins FS, Cusi D,
den Heijer M, Eiriksdottir G, Gejman PV, Hamsten A, Huikuri HV, Iribarren C,
Kähönen M, Kaprio J, Kathiresan S, Kiemeney L, Kocher T, Launer LJ, Lehtimäki T, 
Melander O, Mosley TH Jr, Musk AW, Nieminen MS, O'Donnell CJ, Ohlsson C, Oostra
B, Palmer LJ, Raitakari O, Ridker PM, Rioux JD, Rissanen A, Rivolta C, Schunkert 
H, Shuldiner AR, Siscovick DS, Stumvoll M, Tönjes A, Tuomilehto J, van Ommen GJ, 
Viikari J, Heath AC, Martin NG, Montgomery GW, Province MA, Kayser M, Arnold AM, 
Atwood LD, Boerwinkle E, Chanock SJ, Deloukas P, Gieger C, Grönberg H, Hall P,
Hattersley AT, Hengstenberg C, Hoffman W, Lathrop GM, Salomaa V, Schreiber S, Uda
M, Waterworth D, Wright AF, Assimes TL, Barroso I, Hofman A, Mohlke KL, Boomsma
DI, Caulfield MJ, Cupples LA, Erdmann J, Fox CS, Gudnason V, Gyllensten U, Harris
TB, Hayes RB, Jarvelin MR, Mooser V, Munroe PB, Ouwehand WH, Penninx BW,
Pramstaller PP, Quertermous T, Rudan I, Samani NJ, Spector TD, Völzke H, Watkins 
H, Wilson JF, Groop LC, Haritunians T, Hu FB, Kaplan RC, Metspalu A, North KE,
Schlessinger D, Wareham NJ, Hunter DJ, O'Connell JR, Strachan DP, Wichmann HE,
Borecki IB, van Duijn CM, Schadt EE, Thorsteinsdottir U, Peltonen L, Uitterlinden
AG, Visscher PM, Chatterjee N, Loos RJ, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI, Ingelsson E,
Lindgren CM, Abecasis GR, Stefansson K, Frayling TM, Hirschhorn JN, Teslovich TM,
Musunuru K, Smith AV, Edmondson AC, Stylianou IM, Koseki M, Pirruccello JP,
Ripatti S, Chasman DI, Willer CJ, Johansen CT, Fouchier SW, Isaacs A, Peloso GM, 
Barbalic M, Ricketts SL, Bis JC, Aulchenko YS, Thorleifsson G, Feitosa MF,
Chambers J, Orho-Melander M, Melander O, Johnson T, Li X, Guo X, Li M, Cho YS, Go
MJ, Kim YJ, Lee JY, Park T, Kim K, Sim X, Ong RT, Croteau-Chonka DC, Lange LA,
Smith JD, Song K, Zhao JH, Yuan X, Luan J, Lamina C, Ziegler A, Zhang W, Zee RY, 
Wright AF, Witteman JC, Wilson JF, Willemsen G, Wichmann HE, Whitfield JB,
Waterworth DM, Wareham NJ, Waeber G, Vollenweider P, Voight BF, Vitart V,
Uitterlinden AG, Uda M, Tuomilehto J, Thompson JR, Tanaka T, Surakka I, Stringham
HM, Spector TD, Soranzo N, Smit JH, Sinisalo J, Silander K, Sijbrands EJ, Scuteri
A, Scott J, Schlessinger D, Sanna S, Salomaa V, Salomaa J, Sabatti C, Ruokonen A,
Rudan I, Rose LM, Roberts R, Rieder M, Psaty BM, Pramstaller PP, Pichler I,
Perola M, Penninx BW, Pedersen NL, Pattaro C, Pare G, Oostra BA, O'Donnell CJ,
Nieminen MS, Nickerson DA, Montgomery GW, Meitinger T, McPherson R, McCarthy MI, 
McArdle W, Masson D, Martin NG, Marroni F, Mangino M, Magnusson PK, Lucas G,
Luben R, Loos RJ, Lokki ML, Lettre G, Langenberg C, Launer LJ, Lakatta EG,
Laaksonen R, Kyvik KO, Kronenberg F, König IR, Khaw KT, Kaprio J, Kaplan LM,
Johansson A, Jarvelin MR, Janssens AC, Ingelsson E, Igl W, Hovingh GK, Hottenga
JJ, Hofman A, Hicks AA, Hengstenberg C, Heid IM, Hayward C, Havulinna AS, Hastie 
ND, Harris TB, Haritunians T, Hall AS, Gyllensten U, Guiducci C, Groop LC,
Gonzalez E, Gieger C, Gieger NB, Ferrucci L, Erdmann J, Elliott P, Ejebe KG,
Döring A, Dominiczak AF, Demissie S, Deloukas P, de Geus EJ, de Faire U, Crawford
G, Collins FS, Chen YD, Caulfield MJ, Campbell H, Burtt NP, Bonnycastle LL,
Boomsma DI, Boekholdt SM, Bergman RN, Barroso I, Bandinelli S, Ballantyne CM,
Ballantyne TL, Quertermous T, Altshuler D, Seielstad M, Wong TY, Tai ES, Feranil 
AB, Kuzawa CW, Adair LS, Taylor HA Jr, Borecki IB, Gabriel SB, Wilson JG, Holm H,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Gudnason V, Krauss RM, Mohlke KL, Ordovas JM, Munroe PB,
Kooner JS, Tall AR, Hegele RA, Kastelein JJ, Schadt EE, Rotter JI, Boerwinkle E, 
Strachan DP, Mooser V, Stefansson K, Reilly MP, Samani NJ, Schunkert H, Cupples
LA, Sandhu MS, Ridker PM, Rader DJ, van Duijn CM, Peltonen L, Abecasis GR,
Boehnke M, Kathiresan S, Speliotes EK, Yerges-Armstrong LM, Hernaez R, Kim LJ,
Palmer CD, Gudnason V, Eiriksdottir G, Garcia ME, Launer LJ, Nalls MA, Clark JM, 
Mitchell BD, Shuldiner AR, Butler JL, Tomas M, Hoffmann U, Hwang SJ, Massaro JM, 
O'Donnell CJ, Sahani DV, Salomaa V, Schadt EE, Schwartz SM, Siscovick DS, Voight 
BF, Carr JJ, Feitosa MF, Harris TB, Fox CS, Smith AV, Kao WH, Hirschhorn JN,
Borecki IB, Ehret GB, Munroe PB, Rice KM, Bochud M, Johnson AD, Chasman DI, Smith
AV, Tobin MD, Verwoert GC, Hwang SJ, Pihur V, Vollenweider P, O'Reilly PF, Amin
N, Bragg-Gresham JL, Teumer A, Glazer NL, Launer L, Zhao JH, Aulchenko Y, Heath
S, Sober S, Parsa A, Luan J, Arora P, Dehghan A, Zhang F, Lucas G, Hicks AA,
Jackson AU, Peden JF, Tanaka T, Wild SH, Rudan I, Igl W, Milaneschi Y, Parker AN,
Fava C, Chambers JC, Fox ER, Kumari M, Go MJ, van der Harst P, Kao WH, Sjogren M,
Vinay DG, Alexander M, Tabara Y, Shaw-Hawkins S, Whincup PH, Liu Y, Shi G,
Kuusisto J, Tayo B, Seielstad M, Sim X, Nguyen KD, Lehtimaki T, Matullo G, Wu Y, 
Gaunt TR, Onland-Moret NC, Cooper MN, Platou CG, Org E, Hardy R, Dahgam S, Palmen
J, Vitart V, Braund PS, Kuznetsova T, Uiterwaal CS, Adeyemo A, Palmas W, Campbell
H, Ludwig B, Tomaszewski M, Tzoulaki I, Palmer ND, Aspelund T, Garcia M, Chang
YP, O'Connell JR, Steinle NI, Grobbee DE, Arking DE, Kardia SL, Morrison AC,
Hernandez D, Najjar S, McArdle WL, Hadley D, Brown MJ, Connell JM, Hingorani AD, 
Day IN, Lawlor DA, Beilby JP, Lawrence RW, Clarke R, Collins R, Hopewell JC,
Ongen H, Dreisbach AW, Li Y, Young JH, Bis JC, Kahonen M, Viikari J, Adair LS,
Lee NR, Chen MH, Olden M, Pattaro C, Bolton JA, Kottgen A, Bergmann S, Mooser V, 
Chaturvedi NR, Frayling TM, Islam M, Jafar TH, Erdmann J, Kulkarni SR, Bornstein 
SR, Grassler J, Groop L, Voight BF, Kettunen J, Howard P, Taylor A, Guarrera S,
Ricceri F, Emilsson V, Plump A, Barroso I, Khaw KT, Weder AB, Hunt SC, Sun YV,
Bergman RN, Collins FS, Bonnycastle LL, Scott LJ, Stringham HM, Peltonen L,
Perola M, Vartiainen E, Brand SM, Staessen JA, Wang TJ, Burton PR, Artigas MS,
Dong Y, Snieder H, Wang X, Zhu H, Lohman KK, Rudock ME, Heckbert SR, Smith NL,
Wiggins KL, Doumatey A, Shriner D, Veldre G, Viigimaa M, Kinra S, Prabhakaran D, 
Tripathy V, Langefeld CD, Rosengren A, Thelle DS, Corsi AM, Singleton A,
Forrester T, Hilton G, McKenzie CA, Salako T, Iwai N, Kita Y, Ogihara T, Ohkubo
T, Okamura T, Ueshima H, Umemura S, Eyheramendy S, Meitinger T, Wichmann HE, Cho 
YS, Kim HL, Lee JY, Scott J, Sehmi JS, Zhang W, Hedblad B, Nilsson P, Smith GD,
Wong A, Narisu N, Stancakova A, Raffel LJ, Yao J, Kathiresan S, O'Donnell C,
Schwartz SM, Ikram MA, Longstreth WT Jr, Mosley TH, Seshadri S, Shrine NR, Wain
LV, Morken MA, Swift AJ, Laitinen J, Prokopenko I, Zitting P, Cooper JA,
Humphries SE, Danesh J, Rasheed A, Goel A, Hamsten A, Watkins H, Bakker SJ, van
Gilst WH, Janipalli CS, Mani KR, Yajnik CS, Hofman A, Mattace-Raso FU, Oostra BA,
Demirkan A, Isaacs A, Rivadeneira F, Lakatta EG, Orru M, Scuteri A, Ala-Korpela
M, Kangas AJ, Lyytikainen LP, Soininen P, Tukiainen T, Wurz P, Ong RT, Dorr M,
Kroemer HK, Volker U, Volzke H, Galan P, Hercberg S, Lathrop M, Zelenika D,
Deloukas P, Mangino M, Spector TD, Zhai G, Meschia JF, Nalls MA, Sharma P, Terzic
J, Kumar MJ, Denniff M, Zukowska-Szczechowska E, Wagenknecht LE, Fowkes FG,
Charchar FJ, Schwarz PE, Hayward C, Guo X, Rotimi C, Bots ML, Brand E, Samani NJ,
Polasek O, Talmud PJ, Nyberg F, Kuh D, Laan M, Hveem K, Palmer LJ, van der Schouw
YT, Casas JP, Mohlke KL, Vineis P, Raitakari O, Ganesh SK, Wong TY, Tai ES,
Cooper RS, Laakso M, Rao DC, Harris TB, Morris RW, Dominiczak AF, Kivimaki M,
Marmot MG, Miki T, Saleheen D, Chandak GR, Coresh J, Navis G, Salomaa V, Han BG, 
Zhu X, Kooner JS, Melander O, Ridker PM, Bandinelli S, Gyllensten UB, Wright AF, 
Wilson JF, Ferrucci L, Farrall M, Tuomilehto J, Pramstaller PP, Elosua R, Soranzo
N, Sijbrands EJ, Altshuler D, Loos RJ, Shuldiner AR, Gieger C, Meneton P,
Uitterlinden AG, Wareham NJ, Gudnason V, Rotter JI, Rettig R, Uda M, Strachan DP,
Witteman JC, Hartikainen AL, Beckmann JS, Boerwinkle E, Vasan RS, Boehnke M,
Larson MG, Jarvelin MR, Psaty BM, Abecasis GR, Chakravarti A, Elliott P, van
Duijn CM, Newton-Cheh C, Levy D, Caulfield MJ, Johnson T, Dupuis J, Langenberg C,
Prokopenko I, Saxena R, Soranzo N, Jackson AU, Wheeler E, Glazer NL, Bouatia-Naji
N, Gloyn AL, Lindgren CM, Mägi R, Morris AP, Randall J, Johnson T, Elliott P,
Rybin D, Thorleifsson G, Steinthorsdottir V, Henneman P, Grallert H, Dehghan A,
Hottenga JJ, Franklin CS, Navarro P, Song K, Goel A, Perry JR, Egan JM, Lajunen
T, Grarup N, Sparsø T, Doney A, Voight BF, Stringham HM, Li M, Kanoni S, Shrader 
P, Cavalcanti-Proença C, Kumari M, Qi L, Timpson NJ, Gieger C, Zabena C,
Rocheleau G, Ingelsson E, An P, O'Connell J, Luan J, Elliott A, McCarroll SA,
Payne F, Roccasecca RM, Pattou F, Sethupathy P, Ardlie K, Ariyurek Y, Balkau B,
Barter P, Beilby JP, Ben-Shlomo Y, Benediktsson R, Bennett AJ, Bergmann S, Bochud
M, Boerwinkle E, Bonnefond A, Bonnycastle LL, Borch-Johnsen K, Böttcher Y,
Brunner E, Bumpstead SJ, Charpentier G, Chen YD, Chines P, Clarke R, Coin LJ,
Cooper MN, Cornelis M, Crawford G, Crisponi L, Day IN, de Geus EJ, Delplanque J, 
Dina C, Erdos MR, Fedson AC, Fischer-Rosinsky A, Forouhi NG, Fox CS, Frants R,
Franzosi MG, Galan P, Goodarzi MO, Graessler J, Groves CJ, Grundy S, Gwilliam R, 
Gyllensten U, Hadjadj S, Hallmans G, Hammond N, Han X, Hartikainen AL, Hassanali 
N, Hayward C, Heath SC, Hercberg S, Herder C, Hicks AA, Hillman DR, Hingorani AD,
Hofman A, Hui J, Hung J, Isomaa B, Johnson PR, Jørgensen T, Jula A, Kaakinen M,
Kaprio J, Kesaniemi YA, Kivimaki M, Knight B, Koskinen S, Kovacs P, Kyvik KO,
Lathrop GM, Lawlor DA, Le Bacquer O, Lecoeur C, Li Y, Lyssenko V, Mahley R,
Mangino M, Manning AK, Martínez-Larrad MT, McAteer JB, McCulloch LJ, McPherson R,
Meisinger C, Melzer D, Meyre D, Mitchell BD, Morken MA, Mukherjee S, Naitza S,
Narisu N, Neville MJ, Oostra BA, Orrù M, Pakyz R, Palmer CN, Paolisso G, Pattaro 
C, Pearson D, Peden JF, Pedersen NL, Perola M, Pfeiffer AF, Pichler I, Polasek O,
Posthuma D, Potter SC, Pouta A, Province MA, Psaty BM, Rathmann W, Rayner NW,
Rice K, Ripatti S, Rivadeneira F, Roden M, Rolandsson O, Sandbaek A, Sandhu M,
Sanna S, Sayer AA, Scheet P, Scott LJ, Seedorf U, Sharp SJ, Shields B,
Sigurethsson G, Sijbrands EJ, Silveira A, Simpson L, Singleton A, Smith NL, Sovio
U, Swift A, Syddall H, Syvänen AC, Tanaka T, Thorand B, Tichet J, Tönjes A, Tuomi
T, Uitterlinden AG, van Dijk KW, van Hoek M, Varma D, Visvikis-Siest S, Vitart V,
Vogelzangs N, Waeber G, Wagner PJ, Walley A, Walters GB, Ward KL, Watkins H,
Weedon MN, Wild SH, Willemsen G, Witteman JC, Yarnell JW, Zeggini E, Zelenika D, 
Zethelius B, Zhai G, Zhao JH, Zillikens MC, Borecki IB, Loos RJ, Meneton P,
Magnusson PK, Nathan DM, Williams GH, Hattersley AT, Silander K, Salomaa V, Smith
GD, Bornstein SR, Schwarz P, Spranger J, Karpe F, Shuldiner AR, Cooper C,
Dedoussis GV, Serrano-Ríos M, Morris AD, Lind L, Palmer LJ, Hu FB, Franks PW,
Ebrahim S, Marmot M, Kao WH, Pankow JS, Sampson MJ, Kuusisto J, Laakso M, Hansen 
T, Pedersen O, Pramstaller PP, Wichmann HE, Illig T, Rudan I, Wright AF, Stumvoll
M, Campbell H, Wilson JF, Hamsten A, Bergman RN, Buchanan TA, Collins FS, Mohlke 
KL, Tuomilehto J, Valle TT, Altshuler D, Rotter JI, Siscovick DS, Penninx BW,
Boomsma DI, Deloukas P, Spector TD, Frayling TM, Ferrucci L, Kong A,
Thorsteinsdottir U, Stefansson K, van Duijn CM, Aulchenko YS, Cao A, Scuteri A,
Schlessinger D, Uda M, Ruokonen A, Jarvelin MR, Waterworth DM, Vollenweider P,
Peltonen L, Mooser V, Abecasis GR, Wareham NJ, Sladek R, Froguel P, Watanabe RM, 
Meigs JB, Groop L, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI, Florez JC, Barroso.

Concentrations of liver enzymes in plasma are widely used as indicators of liver 
disease. We carried out a genome-wide association study in 61,089 individuals,
identifying 42 loci associated with concentrations of liver enzymes in plasma, of
which 32 are new associations (P = 10(-8) to P = 10(-190)). We used functional
genomic approaches including metabonomic profiling and gene expression analyses
to identify probable candidate genes at these regions. We identified 69 candidate
genes, including genes involved in biliary transport (ATP8B1 and ABCB11),
glucose, carbohydrate and lipid metabolism (FADS1, FADS2, GCKR, JMJD1C, HNF1A,
MLXIPL, PNPLA3, PPP1R3B, SLC2A2 and TRIB1), glycoprotein biosynthesis and cell
surface glycobiology (ABO, ASGR1, FUT2, GPLD1 and ST3GAL4), inflammation and
immunity (CD276, CDH6, GCKR, HNF1A, HPR, ITGA1, RORA and STAT4) and glutathione
metabolism (GSTT1, GSTT2 and GGT), as well as several genes of uncertain or
unknown function (including ABHD12, EFHD1, EFNA1, EPHA2, MICAL3 and ZNF827). Our 
results provide new insight into genetic mechanisms and pathways influencing
markers of liver function.

PMCID: PMC3482372
PMID: 22001757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Radiographics. 2011 Oct;31(6):1529-43. doi: 10.1148/rg.316115527.

Genetics and imaging of hepatocellular adenomas: 2011 update.

Katabathina VS(1), Menias CO, Shanbhogue AK, Jagirdar J, Paspulati RM, Prasad SR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Texas Health Science Center at San
Antonio, San Antonio, Tex, USA.

Comment in
    Radiographics. 2011 Oct;31(6):1543-5; discussion 1545.

Hepatocellular adenomas are benign liver neoplasms with specific but varied
histopathologic findings and tumor biology. The results from recent studies of
the pathologic and genetic basis of hepatocellular adenomas provide important
insights into the pathogenesis and molecular changes, as well as the putative
oncologic pathways used by diverse adenoma subtypes. On the basis of the genetic 
and pathologic features, hepatocellular adenomas are categorized into three
distinct subtypes: (a) inflammatory hepatocellular adenomas, (b) hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 a-mutated hepatocellular adenomas, and (c) ß-catenin-mutated
hepatocellular adenomas. Different subtypes show variable clinical behavior,
imaging findings, and natural history, and thus the options for treatment and
surveillance may vary. Cross-sectional imaging plays an important role in the
diagnosis, subtype characterization, identification of complications, and
surveillance of hepatocellular adenomas. New schemas for genotype-phenotype
classification of hepatic adenomas, as well as management triage of patients with
specific subtypes of adenomas, are being proposed in an attempt to improve
clinical outcomes.

©RSNA, 2011.

PMID: 21997980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Diabetologia. 2012 Jan;55(1):123-7. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2319-x. Epub 2011 Oct
12.

Heterozygous ABCC8 mutations are a cause of MODY.

Bowman P(1), Flanagan SE, Edghill EL, Damhuis A, Shepherd MH, Paisey R,
Hattersley AT, Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula NIHR Clinical Research Facility, Peninsula Medical School,
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The ABCC8 gene encodes the sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1)
subunit of the pancreatic beta cell ATP-sensitive potassium (K(ATP)) channel.
Inactivating mutations cause congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) and activating
mutations cause transient neonatal diabetes (TNDM) or permanent neonatal diabetes
(PNDM) that can usually be treated with sulfonylureas. Sulfonylurea sensitivity
is also a feature of HNF1A and HNF4A MODY, but patients referred for genetic
testing with clinical features of these types of diabetes do not always have
mutations in the HNF1A/4A genes. Our aim was to establish whether mutations in
the ABCC8 gene cause MODY that is responsive to sulfonylurea therapy.
METHODS: We sequenced the ABCC8 gene in 85 patients with a BMI <30 kg/m², no
family history of neonatal diabetes and who were deemed sensitive to
sulfonylureas by the referring clinician or were sulfonylurea-treated. All had
tested negative for mutations in the HNF1A and HNF4A genes.
RESULTS: ABCC8 mutations were found in seven of the 85 (8%) probands. Four
patients were heterozygous for previously reported mutations and four novel
mutations, E100K, G214R, Q485R and N1245D, were identified. Only four probands
fulfilled MODY criteria, with two diagnosed after 25 years and one patient, who
had no family history of diabetes, as a result of a proven de novo mutation.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: ABCC8 mutations can cause MODY in patients whose
clinical features are similar to those with HNF1A/4A MODY. Therefore, sequencing 
of ABCC8 in addition to the known MODY genes should be considered if such
features are present, to facilitate optimal clinical management of these
patients.

PMID: 21989597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. BMC Genomics. 2011 Oct 11;12:499. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-499.

Regional genome transcriptional response of adult mouse brain to hypoxia.

Xu H(1), Lu A, Sharp FR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Genomics and Global Health, National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 12 South Drive, Bethesda, MD
20892-5635, USA. huichun.xu@nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Since normal brain function depends upon continuous oxygen delivery
and short periods of hypoxia can precondition the brain against subsequent
ischemia, this study examined the effects of brief hypoxia on the whole genome
transcriptional response in adult mouse brain.
RESULT: Pronounced changes of gene expression occurred after 3 hours of hypoxia
(8% O(2)) and after 1 hour of re-oxygenation in all brain regions. The
hypoxia-responsive genes were predominantly up-regulated in hindbrain and
predominantly down-regulated in forebrain - possibly to support hindbrain
survival functions at the expense of forebrain cognitive functions. The
up-regulated genes had a significant role in cell survival and involved both
shared and unshared signaling pathways among different brain regions.
Up-regulation of transcriptional signaling including hypoxia inducible factor,
insulin growth factor (IGF), the vitamin D3 receptor/retinoid X nuclear receptor,
and glucocorticoid signaling was common to many brain regions. However, many of
the hypoxia-regulated target genes were specific for one or a few brain regions. 
Cerebellum, for example, had 1241 transcripts regulated by hypoxia only in
cerebellum but not in hippocampus; and, 642 (54%) had at least one hepatic
nuclear receptor 4A (HNF4A) binding site and 381 had at least two HNF4A binding
sites in their promoters. The data point to HNF4A as a major hypoxia-responsive
transcription factor in cerebellum in addition to its known role in regulating
erythropoietin transcription. The genes unique to hindbrain may play critical
roles in survival during hypoxia.
CONCLUSION: Differences of forebrain and hindbrain hypoxia-responsive genes may
relate to suppression of forebrain cognitive functions and activation of
hindbrain survival functions, which may coordinately mediate the neuroprotection 
afforded by hypoxia preconditioning.

PMCID: PMC3218040
PMID: 21988864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Basic Clin Pharmacol Toxicol. 2012 Apr;110(4):327-34. doi:
10.1111/j.1742-7843.2011.00812.x. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

Echinomycin decreases induction of vascular endothelial growth factor and
hepatocyte regeneration in acetaminophen toxicity in mice.

Milesi-Hallé A(1), McCullough S, Hinson JA, Kurten RC, Lamps LW, Brown A, James
LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little 
Rock, AR, USA.

Up-regulation of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF) is important to
hepatocyte regeneration in the late stages of acetaminophen (APAP) toxicity in
the mouse. This study was conducted to examine the relationship of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF-1a) to VEGF and hepatocyte regeneration in APAP 
toxicity using an inhibitor of HIF-1a DNA-binding activity, echinomycin (EC).
B6C3F1 male mice were treated with APAP (200 mg/kg IP), followed by EC (0.15 mg
IP) and killed at 4 hr. Serum alanine aminotransferase (ALT), necrosis, hepatic
glutathione (GSH) and APAP protein adducts were comparable in the APAP/EC and the
APAP/veh mice at 4 hr. Additional studies showed that high dose EC (0.3 mg)
reduced hepatic VEGF but also lowered hepatic GSH. Subsequent studies were
performed using the 0.15-mg dose of EC. Although EC 0.15 mg had no effect on
hepatic VEGF levels at 8 hr, by 24 hr VEGF levels were decreased by 40%. Toxicity
(ALT and histopathology) was comparable in the APAP and APAP/EC groups at 24 and 
48 hr. Proliferating cell nuclear antigen expression was reduced by both Western 
blot analysis and immunohistochemical staining in the APAP/EC mice at 48 hr. The 
data support the hypothesis that induction of HIF-1a, its binding to DNA and
subsequent expression of VEGF are important factors in hepatocyte regeneration in
APAP toxicity in the mouse.

© 2011 The Authors. Basic & Clinical Pharmacology & Toxicology © 2011 Nordic
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3289727
PMID: 21985601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. BMC Cancer. 2011 Oct 5;11:427. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-11-427.

HNF1a inhibition triggers epithelial-mesenchymal transition in human liver cancer
cell lines.

Pelletier L(1), Rebouissou S, Vignjevic D, Bioulac-Sage P, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U674 Génomique fonctionnelle des tumeurs solides, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1a (HNF1a) is an atypical
homeodomain-containing transcription factor that transactivates liver-specific
genes including albumin, a-1-antitrypsin and a- and ß-fibrinogen. Biallelic
inactivating mutations of HNF1A have been frequently identified in hepatocellular
adenomas (HCA), rare benign liver tumors usually developed in women under oral
contraceptives, and in rare cases of hepatocellular carcinomas developed in
non-cirrhotic liver. HNF1a-mutated HCA (H-HCA) are characterized by a marked
steatosis and show activation of glycolysis, lipogenesis, translational machinery
and mTOR pathway. We studied the consequences of HNF1a silencing in hepatic cell 
lines, HepG2 and Hep3B and we reproduced most of the deregulations identified in 
H-HCA.
METHODS: We transfected hepatoma cell lines HepG2 and Hep3B with siRNA targeting 
HNF1a and obtained a strong inhibition of HNF1a expression. We then looked at the
phenotypic changes by microscopy and studied changes in gene expression using
qRT-PCR and Western Blot.
RESULTS: Hepatocytes transfected with HNF1a siRNA underwent severe phenotypic
changes with loss of cell-cell contacts and development of migration structures. 
In HNF1a-inhibited cells, hepatocyte and epithelial markers were diminished and
mesenchymal markers were over-expressed. This epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) was related to the up regulation of several EMT transcription factors, in
particular SNAIL and SLUG. We also found an overexpression of TGFß1, an EMT
initiator, in both cells transfected with HNF1a siRNA and H-HCA. Moreover, TGFß1 
expression is strongly correlated to HNF1a expression in cell models, suggesting 
regulation of TGFß1 expression by HNF1a.
CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that HNF1a is not only important for hepatocyte
differentiation, but has also a role in the maintenance of epithelial phenotype
in hepatocytes.

PMCID: PMC3203860
PMID: 21975049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Sci Signal. 2011 Sep 27;4(193):pe41. doi: 10.1126/scisignal.2002436.

A WNTer revisit: new faces of ß-catenin and TCFs in pluripotency.

Watanabe K(1), Dai X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, School of Medicine, D250 Med Sci I,
University of California, Irvine, CA 92697-1700, USA.

New evidence has revealed interesting aspects of how the Wnt-ß-catenin pathway
controls self-renewal and lineage differentiation of pluripotent embryonic stem
cells. Although Wnt-ß-catenin signaling is dispensable for the self-renewal of
naive mouse embryonic stem cells, it facilitates their expansion and resistance
to differentiation through an unconventional dual mechanism involving the
transcriptional repressor T cell factor (TCF) 3 and the transcriptional activator
TCF1.

PMID: 21971038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. J Sci Food Agric. 2012 Mar 15;92(4):857-61. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.4658. Epub 2011 Oct
3.

Effects of Lens culinaris agglutinin on gene expression of gluconeogenic enzymes 
in the mouse intestine.

Pervin M(1), Paeng N, Yasui K, Imai S, Isemura M, Yokogoshi H, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Nutritional and Environmental Sciences and Global COE,
University of Shizuoka, Yada, Shizuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Lectins are proteins that bind specifically to the carbohydrate
moiety of glyco-conjugates. Japanese mistletoe lectin given intragastrically
affected cytokine gene expression in the mouse intestine. This study examines the
actions of Lens culinaris agglutinin (LCA) on the gene expression of
gluconeogenic enzymes in the intestine.
RESULTS: The results of quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction indicated that LCA caused an up-regulation of the gene expression 
of glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK). 
This change was correlated with an increase in the expression of two
transcription factors, HNF1a and HNF4a. Experiments using human colonic cancer
Caco-2 cells demonstrated that LCA up-regulated the gene expression of G6Pase and
PEPCK whereas insulin had the opposite effect. In addition, the observed
up-regulation of HNF4a gene expression in the duodenum raises the possibility
that the lectin promotes the colorectal cancer.
CONCLUSION: Lentil beans should be cooked well to avoid unfavourable effects of
LCA.

Copyright © 2011 Society of Chemical Industry.

PMID: 21969243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Gut. 2012 Aug;61(8):1187-96. doi: 10.1136/gutjnl-2011-300360. Epub 2011 Sep 23.

Gene expression dynamics after murine pancreatitis unveils novel roles for Hnf1a 
in acinar cell homeostasis.

Molero X(1), Vaquero EC, Flández M, González AM, Ortiz MÁ, Cibrián-Uhalte E,
Servitja JM, Merlos A, Juanpere N, Massumi M, Skoudy A, Macdonald R, Ferrer J,
Real FX.

Author information: 
(1)Grup de Recerca en Patologia Pancreàtica Exocrina, Institut de Recerca
Hospital Universitari Vall d'Hebron, Pg Vall d'Hebron 119-129, Barcelona 08035,
Spain. xmolero@ir.vhebron.net

OBJECTIVES: During pancreatitis, specific transcriptional programmes govern
functional regeneration after injury. The objective of this study was to analyse 
the dynamic regulation of pancreatic genes and the role of transcriptional
regulators during recovery from pancreatitis.
DESIGN: Wild-type and genetically modified mice (Hnf1a(-/-) and Ptf1a(+/-)) were 
used. After caerulein or L-arginine induced pancreatitis, blood or pancreata were
processed for enzymatic assays, ELISA, histology, immunohistochemistry, western
blotting and quantitative reverse transcriptase-PCR. Nr5a2 promoter reporter and 
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays for Hnf1a were also performed.
RESULTS: After caerulein pancreatic injury, expression of acinar and endocrine
genes rapidly decreased, but eventually recovered, depicting distinct
cell-type-specific patterns. Pdx1 and Hnf1a mRNAs underwent marked
downregulation, matching endocrine/exocrine gene expression profiles. Ptf1a, Pdx1
and Hnf1a protein levels were also reduced and recovered gradually. These changes
were associated with transient impairment of exocrine and endocrine function,
including abnormal glucose tolerance. On l-arginine pancreatitis, changes in
Ptf1a, Pdx1 and Hnf1a gene and protein expression were recapitulated. Reduced
Hnf1a and Ptf1a levels after pancreatitis coincided with increased acinar cell
proliferation, both in Hnf1a(-/-) and Ptf1a(+/-) mice. Moreover, Hnf1a(-/-) mice 
had reduced Ptf1a protein as well as transcripts for Ptf1a and digestive enzymes.
Dispersed acini from Hnf1a(-/-) mice showed suboptimal secretory responses to
caerulein. Bioinformatics analysis did not support a role for Hnf1a as a direct
regulator of digestive enzyme genes. Instead, it was found that Hnf1a binds to,
and regulates, the promoter of Nr5a2, coding an orphan nuclear receptor that
regulates acinar gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Dynamic changes in gene expression occur on pancreatitis induction, 
determining altered exocrine and endocrine function. This analysis uncovers roles
for Hnf1a in the regulation of acinar cell determination and function. This
effect may be mediated, in part, through direct regulation of Nr5a2.

PMID: 21948943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Hum Genet. 2011 Dec;56(12):823-7. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.106. Epub 2011 Sep 22.

Single-nucleotide polymorphisms at five loci are associated with C-reactive
protein levels in a cohort of Filipino young adults.

Curocichin G(1), Wu Y, McDade TW, Kuzawa CW, Borja JB, Qin L, Lange EM, Adair LS,
Lange LA, Mohlke KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-7264, USA.

C-reactive protein (CRP) is a component of nonspecific immune defense and is a
reliable marker of low-grade inflammation involved in obesity, type 2 diabetes
and cardiovascular disease. Genome-wide association studies in middle-aged and
elderly populations, predominantly of European descent, demonstrated associations
of CRP levels with single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) at several loci. To
examine whether the variants identified are replicated in Filipino young adults, 
we applied Tobit regression models to study the association of plasma CRP with 12
SNPs at seven loci in a cohort of 1691 Filipino young adults (aged 21.5±0.3
years) from the Cebu Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey. SNPs in or near
CRP (P=3.2 × 10(-11)), HNF1A, IL6R, APOE-APOC1 and LEPR showed significant
associations (P<0.05) and together explained 4.8% of the total variation in CRP. 
Modest interactions were observed between LEPR-rs1892534 and waist circumference 
(uncorrected P(interaction)=0.020) and between APOE-rs769449 and pathogen
exposure (uncorrected P(interaction)=0.0073) in models predicting CRP. Our
results demonstrated that variants in several loci are significantly associated
with plasma CRP in Filipino young adults, suggesting shared genetic influences on
circulating CRP across populations and age groups.

PMCID: PMC3245328
PMID: 21937998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Dec 15;20(24):5000-11. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr414. Epub 2011 Sep
9.

Polymorphisms in B3GAT1, SLC9A9 and MGAT5 are associated with variation within
the human plasma N-glycome of 3533 European adults.

Huffman JE(1), Knezevic A, Vitart V, Kattla J, Adamczyk B, Novokmet M, Igl W,
Pucic M, Zgaga L, Johannson Å, Redzic I, Gornik O, Zemunik T, Polasek O, Kolcic
I, Pehlic M, Koeleman CA, Campbell S, Wild SH, Hastie ND, Campbell H, Gyllensten 
U, Wuhrer M, Wilson JF, Hayward C, Rudan I, Rudd PM, Wright AF, Lauc G.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Western
General Hospital, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK. jennifer.huffman@hgu.mrc.ac.uk

The majority of human proteins are post-translationally modified by covalent
addition of one or more complex oligosaccharides (glycans). Alterations in
glycosylation processing are associated with numerous diseases and glycans are
attracting increasing attention both as disease biomarkers and as targets for
novel therapeutic approaches. Using a recently developed high-throughput
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) analysis method, we have reported, 
in a pilot genome-wide association study of 13 glycan features in 2705
individuals from three European populations, that polymorphisms at three loci
(FUT8, FUT6/FUT3 and HNF1A) affect plasma levels of N-glycans. Here, we extended 
the analysis to 33 directly measured and 13 derived glycosylation traits in 3533 
individuals and identified three novel gene association (MGAT5, B3GAT1 and
SLC9A9) as well as replicated the previous findings using an additional European 
cohort. MGAT5 (meta-analysis association P-value = 1.80 × 10(-10) for rs1257220) 
encodes a glycosyltransferase which is known to synthesize the associated
glycans. In contrast, neither B3GAT1 (rs7928758, P = 1.66 × 10(-08)) nor SLC9A9
(rs4839604, P = 3.50 × 10(-13)) had previously been associated functionally with 
glycosylation of plasma proteins. Given the glucuronyl transferase activity of
B3GAT1, we were able to show that glucuronic acid is present on antennae of
plasma glycoproteins underlying the corresponding HPLC peak. SLC9A9 encodes a
proton pump which affects pH in the endosomal compartment and it was recently
reported that changes in Golgi pH can impair protein sialylation, giving a
possible mechanism for the observed association.

PMID: 21908519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Hepatology. 2011 Dec;54(6):2036-47. doi: 10.1002/hep.24647.

Recombinant adenovirus carrying the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene
inhibits hepatocellular carcinoma xenograft growth in mice.

Zeng X(1), Lin Y, Yin C, Zhang X, Ning BF, Zhang Q, Zhang JP, Qiu L, Qin XR, Chen
YX, Xie WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai Changzheng Hospital, Second Military 
Medical University, Shanghai, China.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF1a) is one of the key transcription factors 
of the HNF family, which plays a critical role in hepatocyte differentiation.
Substantial evidence has suggested that down-regulation of HNF1a may contribute
to the development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Herein, human cancer cells 
and tumor-associated fibroblasts (TAFs) were isolated from human HCC tissues,
respectively. A recombinant adenovirus carrying the HNF1a gene (AdHNF1a) was
constructed to determine its effect on HCC in vitro and in vivo. Our results
demonstrated that HCC cells and HCC tissues revealed reduced expression of HNF1a.
Forced reexpression of HNF1a significantly suppressed the proliferation of HCC
cells and TAFs and inhibited the clonogenic growth of hepatoma cells in vitro. In
parallel, HNF1a overexpression reestablished the expression of certain
liver-specific genes and microRNA 192 and 194 levels, with a resultant increase
in p21 levels and induction of G(2)/M arrest. Additionally, AdHNF1a inhibited the
expression of cluster of differentiation 133 and epithelial cell adhesion
molecule and the signal pathways of the mammalian target of rapamycin and
transforming growth factor beta/Smads. Furthermore, HNF1a abolished the
tumorigenicity of hepatoma cells in vivo. Most interestingly, intratumoral
injection of AdHNF1a significantly inhibited the growth of subcutaneous HCC
xenografts in nude mice. Systemic delivery of AdHNF1a could eradicate the
orthotopic liver HCC nodules in nonobese diabetic/severe combined
immunodeficiency mice.CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the potent
inhibitive effect of HNF1a on HCC is attained by inducing the differentiation of 
hepatoma cells into mature hepatocytes and G(2)/M arrest. HNF1a might represent a
novel, promising therapeutic agent for human HCC treatment. Our findings also
encourage the evaluation of differentiation therapy for tumors of organs other
than liver using their corresponding differentiation-determining transcription
factor.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 21898499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Sep 2;13(9):1024-6. doi: 10.1038/ncb2333.

Wnt: what's needed to maintain pluripotency?

Niwa H.

Comment on
    Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Jul;13(7):838-45.
    Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Sep;13(9):1070-5.
    Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Jul;13(7):762-70.
    Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Jul;13(7):753-61.

A precise role for the canonical Wnt pathway in maintaining pluripotency in mouse
embryonic stem cells (mESCs) has been debated. Four recent reports add pieces to 
the puzzle and together these results may help establish a robust model.

PMID: 21892143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Hepatology. 2012 Jan;55(1):98-107. doi: 10.1002/hep.24658.

MicroRNA-194 is a target of transcription factor 1 (Tcf1, HNF1a) in adult liver
and controls expression of frizzled-6.

Krützfeldt J(1), Rösch N, Hausser J, Manoharan M, Zavolan M, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Systems Biology, ETH Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.

Transcription factor 1 (Tcf1; hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a [HNF1a]) is critical
for hepatocyte development and function. Whether Tcf1 also regulates hepatic
microRNAs (miRNAs) has not been investigated yet. Here we analyzed Tcf1-dependent
miRNA expression in adult mice in which this transcription factor had been
genetically deleted (Tcf1(-/-) ) using miRNA microarray analysis. The
miR-192/-194 cluster was markedly down-regulated in liver of Tcf1(-/-) mice.
MiR-192/-194 levels were also decreased in two other tissues that express Tcf1,
kidney and small intestine, although to a lesser extent than in liver. In order
to identify targets of miR-192/-194 in vivo we combined Affymetrix gene analysis 
of liver in which miR-192/-194 had been silenced or overexpressed, respectively, 
and tested regulated messenger RNAs (mRNAs) with multiple binding sites for these
miRNAs. This approach revealed frizzled-6 (Fzd6) as a robust endogenous target of
miR-194. MiR-194 also targets human FZD6 and expression of miR-194 and Fzd6 are
inversely correlated in a mouse model of hepatocellular carcinoma
(Dgcr8(flox/flox) p53(flox/flox) × Alb-Cre).CONCLUSION: Our results support a
role of miR-194 in liver tumorigenesis through its endogenous target Fzd6. These 
results may have important implications for Tcf1-mediated liver proliferation.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 21887698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Oncol Rep. 2011 Dec;26(6):1539-46. doi: 10.3892/or.2011.1443. Epub 2011 Sep 1.

Remarkable difference of somatic mutation patterns between oncogenes and tumor
suppressor genes.

Liu H(1), Xing Y, Yang S, Tian D.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Biotechnology, Department of Biology,
Nanjing University, Nanjing, PR China.

Cancers arise owing to mutations that confer selective growth advantages on the
cells in a subset of tumor suppressor and/or oncogenes. To understand oncogenesis
and diagnose cancers, it is crucial to discriminate these two groups of genes by 
using the difference in their mutation patterns. Here, we investigated>120,000
mutation samples in 66 well-known tumor suppressor genes and oncogenes of the
COSMIC database, and found a set of significant differences in mutation patterns 
(e.g., non-3n-indel, non-sense SNP and mutation hotspot) between them. By
screening the best measurement, we developed indices to readily distinguish one
from another and predict clearly the unknown oncogenesis genes as tumor
suppressors (e.g., ASXL1, HNF1A and KDM6A) or oncogenes (e.g., FOXL2, MYD88 and
TSHR). Based on our results, a third gene group can be classified, which has a
mutational pattern between tumor suppressors and oncogenes. The concept of the
third gene group could help to understand gene function in different cancers or
individual patients and to know the exact function of genes in oncogenesis. In
conclusion, our study provides further insights into cancer-related genes and
identifies several potential therapeutic targets.

PMID: 21887471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Apoptosis. 2011 Nov;16(11):1128-37. doi: 10.1007/s10495-011-0641-x.

Rapamycin protects against dominant negative-HNF1A-induced apoptosis in INS-1
cells.

Farrelly AM(1), Kilbride SM, Bonner C, Prehn JH, Byrne MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Eccles
Street, Dublin 7, Ireland.

HNF1A-maturity onset diabetes of the young (HNF1A-MODY) is caused by mutations in
Hnf1a gene encoding the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
(HNF1A). An increased rate of apoptosis has been associated with the decrease in 
beta-cell mass that is a hallmark of HNF1A-MODY and other forms of diabetes. In a
cellular model of HNF1A-MODY, we have recently shown that signalling through
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is decreased by the overexpression of a
dominant-negative mutant of HNF1A (DN-HNF1A). mTOR is a protein kinase which has 
important roles in cell metabolism and growth, but also in cell survival, where
it has been shown to be both protective and detrimental. Here, we show that
pharmacological inhibition of mTOR activity with rapamycin protected INS-1 cells 
against DN-HNF1A-induced apoptosis. Rapamycin also prevented DN-HNF1A-induced
activation of AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), an intracellular energy sensor
which we have previously shown to mediate DN-HNF1A-induced apoptosis. Conversely,
activation of mTOR with leucine potentiated DN-HNF1A-induced apoptosis. Gene
silencing of raptor (regulatory associated protein of mTOR), a subunit of mTOR
complex 1 (mTORC1), also conferred protection on INS-1 cells against
DN-HNF1A-induced apoptosis, confirming that mTORC1 mediates the protective
effect. The potential relevance of this effect with regards to the clinical use
of rapamycin as an immunosuppressant in diabetics post-transplantation is
discussed.

PMID: 21874357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Nat Med. 2011 Aug 14;17(9):1067-75. doi: 10.1038/nm.2414.

Pathway to diabetes through attenuation of pancreatic beta cell glycosylation and
glucose transport.

Ohtsubo K(1), Chen MZ, Olefsky JM, Marth JD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Nanomedicine, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute,
University of California-Santa Barbara, Santa Barbara, California, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2011 Oct 5;14(4):439-40.

A connection between diet, obesity and diabetes exists in multiple species and is
the basis of an escalating human health problem. The factors responsible provoke 
both insulin resistance and pancreatic beta cell dysfunction but remain to be
fully identified. We report a combination of molecular events in human and mouse 
pancreatic beta cells, induced by elevated levels of free fatty acids or by
administration of a high-fat diet with associated obesity, that comprise a
pathogenic pathway to diabetes. Elevated concentrations of free fatty acids
caused nuclear exclusion and reduced expression of the transcription factors
FOXA2 and HNF1A in beta cells. This resulted in a deficit of GnT-4a
glycosyltransferase expression in beta cells that produced signs of metabolic
disease, including hyperglycemia, impaired glucose tolerance, hyperinsulinemia,
hepatic steatosis and diminished insulin action in muscle and adipose tissues.
Protection from disease was conferred by enforced beta cell-specific GnT-4a
protein glycosylation and involved the maintenance of glucose transporter
expression and the preservation of glucose transport. We observed that this
pathogenic process was active in human islet cells obtained from donors with type
2 diabetes; thus, illuminating a pathway to disease implicated in the diet- and
obesity-associated component of type 2 diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC3888087
PMID: 21841783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Hepatol. 2012 Jan;56(1):184-91. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2011.07.018. Epub 2011 Aug 
9.

GNAS-activating mutations define a rare subgroup of inflammatory liver tumors
characterized by STAT3 activation.

Nault JC(1), Fabre M, Couchy G, Pilati C, Jeannot E, Tran Van Nhieu J, Saint-Paul
MC, De Muret A, Redon MJ, Buffet C, Salenave S, Balabaud C, Prevot S, Labrune P, 
Bioulac-Sage P, Scoazec JY, Chanson P, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U674, Génomique fonctionnelle des tumeurs solides, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Mosaic G-protein alpha-subunit (GNAS)-activating mutations are
responsible for the McCune-Albright (MCA) syndrome. This oncogene that activates 
the adenylate cyclase is also mutated in various tumor types leading to the
accumulation of cyclic-AMP. Identification of a hepatocellular adenoma (HCA) in
two MCA patients led us to search for GNAS activation in benign and malignant
hepatocellular carcinogenesis.
METHODS: GNAS mutations were screened by sequencing 164 HCA, 245 hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC), and 17 fibrolamellar carcinomas. Tumors were characterized by
quantitative RT-PCR, gene mutation screening and pathological reviewing. The
consequences of wild type and mutant GNAS expression were analyzed in
hepatocellular cell lines.
RESULTS: A somatic GNAS-activating mutation was identified in 5 benign tumors and
in 2 HCC. In benign tumors, GNAS mutations were exclusive from HNF1A, CTNNB1, and
IL6ST mutations whereas one HCC demonstrated both CTNNB1 and GNAS mutations.
Quantitative RT-PCR showed an activation of the IL-6 and interferon pathways in
GNAS-mutated tumor tissues. Accordingly, pathological reviewing identified in
GNAS-mutated tumors an inflammatory phenotype characterized by fibrosis and STAT3
activation. We further demonstrated in HCC cell lines that GNAS mutant expression
induced inflammatory response and STAT3 activation.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified for the first time the association between two rare
diseases, MCA syndrome and HCA occurrence, but also that somatic GNAS-activating 
mutations in sporadic benign and malignant liver tumors are characterized by an
inflammatory phenotype. These results showed a cross-talk between cyclic-AMP and 
JAK/STAT pathways in liver tumors and they reinforce the role of STAT3 activation
in liver tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2011 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21835143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2011;24(5-6):377-9.

HNF1A mutation presenting with fetal macrosomia and hypoglycemia in childhood
prior to onset of overt diabetes.

Dusátková P(1), Pruhová S, Sumník Z, Kolousková S, Obermannová B, Cinek O, Lebl
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Motol and Second Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: HNF1A-MODY (MODY3) is a common subtype of autosomal dominant
diabetes. Unlike HNF4-MODY where fetal macrosomia and early postnatal
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia have been reported, a history of transient insulin 
overproduction has not been recognized in individuals with HNF1A-MODY yet.
CASE REPORT: Here, we report a 40-year-old male patient with HNFJA mutation
p.Arg272His (c.815G>A) with a history of fetal macrosomia (4750 g, 59 cm) and, at
least, one attack of symptomatic hypoglycemia in childhood. Diabetes was
subsequently diagnosed at 19 years. The proband's daughter who developed diabetes
at 16 years carries the same mutation, but her birth weight and length were in
the upper normal range, and she never experienced hypoglycemic symptoms.
CONCLUSION: The observation of fetal macrosomia and hypoglycemia in childhood is 
suggestive of a biphasic impact of the HNF1A mutation on beta-cell function over 
the lifespan, leading from inappropriate insulin oversecretion to final clinical 
diabetes.

PMID: 21823540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Diabetologia. 2011 Nov;54(11):2801-10. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2261-y. Epub 2011 
Aug 4.

A large multi-centre European study validates high-sensitivity C-reactive protein
(hsCRP) as a clinical biomarker for the diagnosis of diabetes subtypes.

Thanabalasingham G(1), Shah N, Vaxillaire M, Hansen T, Tuomi T, Gaperíková D,
Szopa M, Tjora E, James TJ, Kokko P, Loiseleur F, Andersson E, Gaget S, Isomaa B,
Nowak N, Raeder H, Stanik J, Njolstad PR, Malecki MT, Klimes I, Groop L, Pedersen
O, Froguel P, McCarthy MI, Gloyn AL, Owen KR.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford,
Churchill Hospital, Headington, Oxford, OX3 7LJ, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: An accurate molecular diagnosis of diabetes subtype confers
clinical benefits; however, many individuals with monogenic diabetes remain
undiagnosed. Biomarkers could help to prioritise patients for genetic
investigation. We recently demonstrated that high-sensitivity C-reactive protein 
(hsCRP) levels are lower in UK patients with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha
(HNF1A)-MODY than in other diabetes subtypes. In this large multi-centre study we
aimed to assess the clinical validity of hsCRP as a diagnostic biomarker, examine
the genotype-phenotype relationship and compare different hsCRP assays.
METHODS: High-sensitivity CRP levels were analysed in individuals with HNF1A-MODY
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>457), glucokinase (GCK)-MODY (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>404), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha
(HNF4A)-MODY (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>54) and type 2 diabetes (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>582) from seven European centres. 
Three common assays for hsCRP analysis were evaluated. We excluded 121
participants (8.1%) with hsCRP values >10 mg/l. The discriminative power of hsCRP
with respect to diabetes aetiology was assessed by receiver operating
characteristic curve-derived C-statistic.
RESULTS: In all centres and irrespective of the assay method, meta-analysis
confirmed significantly lower hsCRP levels in those with HNF1A-MODY than in those
with other aetiologies (z score -21.8, p<U+2009><<U+2009>5<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-105)). HNF1A-MODY cases with
missense mutations had lower hsCRP levels than those with truncating mutations
(0.03 vs 0.08 mg/l, p<U+2009><<U+2009>5<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-5)). High-sensitivity CRP values between assays
were strongly correlated (r (2)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.91, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>1<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-5)). Across the seven
centres, the C-statistic for distinguishing HNF1A-MODY from young adult-onset
type 2 diabetes ranged from 0.79 to 0.97, indicating high discriminative
accuracy.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: In the largest study to date, we have established
that hsCRP is a clinically valid biomarker for HNF1A-MODY in European
populations. Given the modest costs and wide availability, hsCRP could translate 
rapidly into clinical practice, considerably improving diagnosis rates in
monogenic diabetes.

PMID: 21814873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Nature. 2011 Aug 3;476(7358):63-8. doi: 10.1038/nature10279.

A critical role for TCF-1 in T-lineage specification and differentiation.

Weber BN(1), Chi AW, Chavez A, Yashiro-Ohtani Y, Yang Q, Shestova O, Bhandoola A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The vertebrate thymus provides an inductive environment for T-cell development.
Within the mouse thymus, Notch signals are indispensable for imposing the T-cell 
fate on multipotential haematopoietic progenitors, but the downstream effectors
that impart T-lineage specification and commitment are not well understood. Here 
we show that a transcription factor, T-cell factor 1 (TCF-1; also known as
transcription factor 7, T-cell specific, TCF7), is a critical regulator in T-cell
specification. TCF-1 is highly expressed in the earliest thymic progenitors, and 
its expression is upregulated by Notch signals. Most importantly, when TCF-1 is
forcibly expressed in bone marrow (BM) progenitors, it drives the development of 
T-lineage cells in the absence of T-inductive Notch1 signals. Further
characterization of these TCF-1-induced cells revealed expression of many
T-lineage genes, including T-cell-specific transcription factors Gata3 and
Bcl11b, and components of the T-cell receptor. Our data suggest a model where
Notch signals induce TCF-1, and TCF-1 in turn imprints the T-cell fate by
upregulating expression of T-cell essential genes.

PMCID: PMC3156435
PMID: 21814277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Hum Genet. 2011 Oct;56(10):695-700. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.83. Epub 2011 Aug 4.

Association of variants in genes involved in pancreatic ß-cell development and
function with type 2 diabetes in North Indians.

Chavali S(1), Mahajan A, Tabassum R, Dwivedi OP, Chauhan G, Ghosh S, Tandon N,
Bharadwaj D.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Genomics and Integrative
Biology, CSIR, Delhi, India.

Variants in genes involved in pancreatic ß-cell development and function are
known to cause monogenic forms of type 2 diabetes and are also associated with
complex form. In this study, we studied the genetic association of polymorphisms 
in such important genes with type 2 diabetes in the high-risk Indians. We
genotyped 91 polymorphisms in 19 genes (ABCC8, HNF1A, HNF1B, HNF4A, INS, INSM1,
ISL1, KCNJ11, MAFA, MNX1, NEUROD1, NEUROG3, NKX2.2, NKX6.1, PAX4, PAX6, PDX1,
USF1 and WFS1) in 2025 unrelated North Indians of Indo-European ethnicity
comprising of 1019 diabetic and 1006 non-diabetic subjects. HNF4A promoter P2
polymorphisms rs1884613 and rs2144908, which are in high linkage disequilibrium, 
showed significant association with type 2 diabetes (odds ratio (OR)=1.37 (95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.19-1.57), P=9.4 × 10(-6) for rs1884613 and OR=1.37
(95%CI 1.20-1.57), P=6.0 × 10(-6) for rs2144908), as previously shown in other
populations. We observed body mass index-dependent association of these variants 
with type 2 diabetes in normal-weight/lean subjects. Variants in USF1, ABCC8,
ISL1 and KCNJ11 showed nominal association, while haplotypes in these genes were 
significantly associated. rs3812704 upstream of NEUROG3 significantly increased
risk for type 2 diabetes in normal-weight/lean subjects (OR=1.68 (95%CI
1.25-2.24), P=4.9 × 10(-4)). Thus, pancreatic ß-cell development and function
genes contribute to susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in North Indians.

PMID: 21814221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. J Biol Chem. 2011 Sep 16;286(37):32300-12. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.247866. Epub
2011 Jul 22.

Hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) dysfunction down-regulates
X-box-binding protein 1 (XBP1) and sensitizes beta-cells to endoplasmic reticulum
stress.

Kirkpatrick CL(1), Wiederkehr A, Baquié M, Akhmedov D, Wang H, Gauthier BR,
Akerman I, Ishihara H, Ferrer J, Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Physiology and Metabolism, Centre Médical Universitaire,
Université de Genève, 1 Rue Michel-Servet, 1211 Genève 4, Switzerland.

Correct endoplasmic reticulum (ER) function is critical for the health of
secretory cells, such as the pancreatic ß-cell, and ER stress is often a
contributory factor to ß-cell death in type 2 diabetes. We have used an
insulin-secreting cell line with inducible expression of dominant negative (DN)
HNF1a, a transcription factor vital for correct ß-cell development and function, 
to show that HNF1a is required for Xbp1 transcription and maintenance of the
normal ER stress response. DN HNF1a expression sensitizes the ß-cell to ER stress
by directly down-regulating Xbp1 transcription, whereas Atf6 is unaffected.
Furthermore, DN HNF1a alters calcium homeostasis, resulting in elevated
cytoplasmic calcium and increased store-operated calcium entry, whereas
mitochondrial calcium uptake is normal. Loss of function of XBP1 is toxic to the 
ß-cell and decreases production of the ER chaperone BiP, even in the absence of
ER stress. DN HNF1a-induced sensitivity to cyclopiazonic acid can be partially
rescued with the chemical chaperone tauroursodeoxycholate. Rat insulin 2
promoter-DN HNF1a mouse islets express lower levels of BiP mRNA, synthesize less 
insulin, and are sensitized to ER stress relative to matched control mouse
islets, suggesting that this mechanism is also operating in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3173152
PMID: 21784843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Acta Diabetol. 2012 Oct;49(5):349-54. doi: 10.1007/s00592-011-0312-y. Epub 2011
Jul 16.

Characterization of beta cell and incretin function in patients with MODY1 (HNF4A
MODY) and MODY3 (HNF1A MODY) in a Swedish patient collection.

Ekholm E(1), Shaat N, Holst JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences/Diabetes and Endocrinology, Malmö University
Hospital, Lund University, Sweden. ella.ekholm@med.lu.se

The aim of this study was to evaluate the beta cell and incretin function in
patients with HNF4A and HNF1A MODY during a test meal. Clinical characteristics
and biochemical data (glucose, proinsulin, insulin, C-peptide, GLP-1 and GIP)
during a test meal were compared between MODY patients from eight different
families. BMI-matched T2D and healthy subjects were used as two separate control 
groups. The early phase of insulin secretion was attenuated in HNF4A, HNF1A MODY 
and T2D (AUC0-30 controls: 558.2 ± 101.2, HNF4A MODY: 93.8 ± 57.0, HNF1A MODY:
170.2 ± 64.5, T2D: 211.2 ± 65.3, P < 0.01). Markedly reduced levels of proinsulin
were found in HNF4A MODY compared to T2D and that tended to be so also in HNF1A
MODY (HNF4A MODY: 3.7 ± 1.2, HNF1A MODY: 8.3 ± 3.8 vs. T2D: 26.6 ± 14.3).
Patients with HNF4A MODY had similar total GLP-1 and GIP responses as controls
(GLP-1 AUC: (control: 823.9 ± 703.8, T2D: 556.4 ± 698.2, HNF4A MODY: 1,257.0 ±
999.3, HNF1A MODY: 697.1 ± 818.4) but with a different secretion pattern. The AUC
insulin during the test meal was strongly correlated with the GIP secretion
(Correlation coefficient 1.0, P < 0.001). No such correlation was seen for
insulin and GLP-1. Patients with HNF4A and HNF1A MODY showed an attenuated early 
phase of insulin secretion similar to T2Ds. AUC insulin during the test meal was 
strongly correlated with GIP secretion, whereas no such correlation was seen for 
insulin and GLP-1. Thus, GIP may be a more important factor for insulin secretion
than GLP-1 in MODY patients.

PMID: 21761282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Surg Res. 2012 Jun 15;175(2):298-304. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2011.04.062. Epub 2011
May 24.

Injury-induced changes in liver specific transcription factors HNF-1a and HNF-4a.

Bauzá G(1), Miller G, Kaseje N, Wang Z, Sherburne A, Agarwal S, Burke PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

BACKGROUND: The hepatic acute phase response(APR) is an organ-specific response
to a diverse array of insults and is largely under transcriptional control.
Liver-specific transcription factors, hepatic nuclear factors (HNFs)-1a and 4a
play important roles in maintenance of liver phenotype and function and their
binding activity changes early after injury. However, their roles in modulation
of the liver's response over time are not defined.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: C57/BL6 mice were anesthetized and exposed to 95°C water
for 10 s to create a 15% body surface area full-thickness burn. At specific time 
points, the mice were sacrificed. An ELISA for IL-6 was performed on serum and
hepatic mRNA levels for fibrinogen-<U+03B3> and serum amyloid A(SAA)-3 were obtained
through polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Transcriptional factor binding activity 
was assessed with electrophoretic mobility shift assays.
RESULTS: Serum IL-6 levels peaked at 3 h and fibrinogen-<U+03B3> and SAA mRNA levels
increased more than 6-fold at 12 h before returning to control levels at 48 h.
The binding activity of HNF-4a and HNF-1a rapidly declined after injury (1.5 h)
but recovered to near control level at 24 and 6 h, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Changes in HNF-4a and HNF-1a binding occurred before changes in
acute phase protein mRNA levels and were preceded by the peak in IL-6 levels. The
rapid suppression and reconstitution of liver-specific transcription factor
binding after injury may represent a mechanism that allows the normal liver
phenotype to change and an injury-response phenotype to prevail. This mechanism
in the liver's adaptive response to injury suggests a central role for both
HNF-4a and HNF-1a in transcriptional regulation of the hepatic APR.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3191271
PMID: 21737100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. BMC Biochem. 2011 Jun 30;12:33. doi: 10.1186/1471-2091-12-33.

All Dact (Dapper/Frodo) scaffold proteins dimerize and exhibit conserved
interactions with Vangl, Dvl, and serine/threonine kinases.

Kivimäe S(1), Yang XY, Cheyette BN.

Author information: 
(1)The Nina Ireland Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Department of
Psychiatry, University of California San Francisco, 1550 4th St, San Francisco CA
94158-2324, USA. bc@ucsf.edu

BACKGROUND: The Dact family of scaffold proteins was discovered by virtue of
binding to Dvl proteins central to Wnt and Planar Cell Polarity (PCP) signaling. 
Subsequently Dact proteins have been linked to a growing list of potential
partners implicated in ß-catenin-dependent and ß-catenin-independent forms of Wnt
and other signaling. To clarify conserved and non-conserved roles for this
protein family, we systematically compared molecular interactions of all three
murine Dact paralogs by co-immunoprecipitation of proteins recombinantly
expressed in cultured human embryonic kidney cells.
RESULTS: Every Dact paralog readily formed complexes with the Vangl, Dvl, and
CK1d/e proteins of species ranging from fruit flies to humans, as well as with
PKA and PKC. Dact proteins also formed complexes with themselves and with each
other; their conserved N-terminal leucine-zipper domains, which have no known
binding partners, were necessary and sufficient for this interaction, suggesting 
that it reflects leucine-zipper-mediated homo- and hetero-dimerization. We also
found weaker, though conserved, interactions of all three Dact paralogs with the 
catenin superfamily member p120ctn. Complex formation with other previously
proposed partners including most other catenins, GSK3, LEF/TCF, HDAC1, and TGFß
receptors was paralog-specific, comparatively weak, and/or more sensitive to
empirical conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Combined with published functional evidence from targeted knock-out 
mice, these data support a conserved role for Dact proteins in kinase-regulated
biochemistry involving Vangl and Dvl. This strongly suggests that a principal
role for all Dact family members is in the PCP pathway or a molecularly related
signaling cascade in vertebrates.

PMCID: PMC3141656
PMID: 21718540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Diabetes Care. 2011 Aug;34(8):1860-2. doi: 10.2337/dc11-0323. Epub 2011 Jun 23.

High-sensitivity CRP discriminates HNF1A-MODY from other subtypes of diabetes.

McDonald TJ(1), Shields BM, Lawry J, Owen KR, Gloyn AL, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry, Peninsula NIHR Clinical
ResearchFacility, Exeter, Devon, UK. tim.mcdonald@rdeft.nhs.uk

Comment in
    Diabetes Care. 2011 Dec;34(12):e186; author reply e187.

OBJECTIVE: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) as a result of mutations
in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-a (HNF1A) is often misdiagnosed as type 1 diabetes
or type 2 diabetes. Recent work has shown that high-sensitivity C-reactive
protein (hs-CRP) levels are lower in HNF1A-MODY than type 1 diabetes, type 2
diabetes, or glucokinase (GCK)-MODY. We aim to replicate these findings in larger
numbers and other MODY subtypes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: hs-CRP levels were assessed in 750 patients (220
HNF1A, 245 GCK, 54 HNF4-a [HNF4A], 21 HNF1-ß (HNF1B), 53 type 1 diabetes, and 157
type 2 diabetes).
RESULTS: hs-CRP was lower in HNF1A-MODY (median [IQR] 0.3 [0.1-0.6] mg/L) than
type 2 diabetes (1.40 [0.60-3.45] mg/L; P < 0.001) and type 1 diabetes (1.10
[0.50-1.85] mg/L; P < 0.001), HNF4A-MODY (1.45 [0.46-2.88] mg/L; P < 0.001),
GCK-MODY (0.60 [0.30-1.80] mg/L; P < 0.001), and HNF1B-MODY (0.60 [0.10-2.8]
mg/L; P = 0.07). hs-CRP discriminated HNF1A-MODY from type 2 diabetes with hs-CRP
<0.75 mg/L showing 79% sensitivity and 70% specificity (receiver operating
characteristic area under the curve = 0.84).
CONCLUSIONS: hs-CRP levels are lower in HNF1A-MODY than other forms of diabetes
and may be used as a biomarker to select patients for diagnostic HNF1A genetic
testing.

PMCID: PMC3142017
PMID: 21700917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Pediatr Diabetes. 2012 Mar;13(2):208-12. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5448.2011.00788.x.
Epub 2011 Jun 23.

Onset of type 1 diabetes mellitus in two patients with maturity onset diabetes of
the young.

Maltoni G(1), Zucchini S, Scipione M, Mantovani V, Salardi S, Cicognani A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, S. Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, University of Bologna, 
Bologna, Italy.

The association between maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and type 1
diabetes mellitus (T1DM) has been rarely described. We report two patients
affected by MODY who developed T1DM. Case 1: a 4-yr-old girl referred for
glycosuria presented hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) of 6.6%. Islet cell antibodies (ICA) 
and anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase (GADA) were initially negative. As her
father, uncle and grandmother showed mild hyperglycemia, they were screened for
MODY 2. A novel mutation in glucokinase gene was found in the family. Few months 
later, her glycemic control worsened consistently and she required insulin
treatment. A high titer of GADA and ICA was then detected. Six years afterwards
insulin requirement is 0.8 U/kg and HbA1c 6.7%. Case 2: a 15-yr-old boy treated
for growth hormone deficiency was found with a blood glucose level of 106 mg/dL. 
HbA1c was 7.2%, ICA and GADA were negative. Family history was positive for
autoimmune diseases and type 2 diabetes mellitus. The patient was investigated
for MODY 2 and MODY 3, and a mutation of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha gene
was found. The same mutation was found in the mother who had never been referred 
for hyperglycemia. After 1 yr, due to an unjustified worsening of the metabolic
control, autoimmunity was again investigated and a mild positivity was found. He 
then required insulin therapy and after 5 yr current HbA1c was 8.2%. The
diagnosis of MODY does not exclude the risk of developing T1DM. Therefore
autoimmunity should be investigated when ordinary treatments fail and metabolic
control unexpectedly worsens.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21696527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Jun 19;13(7):762-70. doi: 10.1038/ncb2283.

Opposing effects of Tcf3 and Tcf1 control Wnt stimulation of embryonic stem cell 
self-renewal.

Yi F(1), Pereira L, Hoffman JA, Shy BR, Yuen CM, Liu DR, Merrill BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Illinois at
Chicago, 900 S Ashland Avenue, MBRB 2270, M/C 669, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Sep;13(9):1024-6.

The co-occupancy of Tcf3 with Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog on embryonic stem cell (ESC)
chromatin indicated that Tcf3 has been suggested to play an integral role in a
poorly understood mechanism underlying Wnt-dependent stimulation of mouse ESC
self-renewal of mouse ESCs. Although the conventional view of Tcf proteins as the
ß-catenin-binding effectors of Wnt signalling suggested Tcf3-ß-catenin activation
of target genes would stimulate self-renewal, here we show that an antagonistic
relationship between Wnt3a and Tcf3 on gene expression regulates ESC
self-renewal. Genetic ablation of Tcf3 replaced the requirement for exogenous
Wnt3a or GSK3 inhibition for ESC self-renewal, demonstrating that inhibition of
Tcf3 repressor is the necessary downstream effect of Wnt signalling.
Interestingly, both Tcf3-ß-catenin and Tcf1-ß-catenin interactions contributed to
Wnt stimulation of self-renewal and gene expression, and the combination of Tcf3 
and Tcf1 recruited Wnt-stabilized ß-catenin to Oct4 binding sites on ESC
chromatin. This work elucidates the molecular link between the effects of Wnt and
the regulation of the Oct4/Sox2/Nanog network.

PMCID: PMC3129424
PMID: 21685894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Diabetes Metab. 2011 Dec;37(6):512-9. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2011.04.002. Epub
2011 Jun 16.

Identification of HNF1A-MODY and HNF4A-MODY in Irish families: phenotypic
characteristics and therapeutic implications.

Kyithar MP(1), Bacon S, Pannu KK, Rizvi SR, Colclough K, Ellard S, Byrne MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland. pyehkyithar@hotmail.com

AIM: The prevalence of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1A and HNF4A mutations,
and the clinical implications following the genetic diagnosis of maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) in the Irish population, remain unknown. The aim of 
this study was to establish the occurrence of HNF1A and HNF4A mutations in
subjects classified clinically as MODY to identify novel mutations, and to
determine the phenotypic features and response to therapy.
METHODS: A total of 36 unrelated index cases with a clinical diagnosis of MODY
were analyzed for HNF1A/HNF4A mutations. OGTT was performed to determine the
degree of glucose tolerance and insulin secretory response. Also, 38 relatives
underwent OGTT and were tested for the relevant known mutations.
HNF1A-/HNF4A-MODY subjects were compared with nine HNF1A mutation-negative
relatives and 20 type 2 diabetic (T2DM) patients.
RESULTS: Seven different HNF1A mutations were identified in 11/36 (30.5%) index
cases, two of which were novel (S352fsdelG and F426X), as well as two novel HNF4A
mutations (M1? and R290C; 6%). Family screening revealed 20 subjects with HNF1A
and seven with HNF4A mutations. Only 51.6% of HNF1A mutation carriers were
diagnosed with diabetes by age 25 years; 11 of the mutation carriers were
overweight and four were obese. Insulin secretory response to glucose was
significantly lower in HNF1A-MODY subjects than in T2DM patients and HNF1A
mutation-negative relatives (P=0.01). Therapeutic changes occurred in 48% of
mutation carriers following genetic diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: There was an HNF1A-MODY pick-up rate of 30.5% and an HNF4A-MODY
pick-up rate of 6% in Irish MODY families. Genetically confirmed MODY has
significant therapeutic implications.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21683639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Gastroenterology. 2011 Aug;141(2):707-18, 718.e1-5. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2011.04.051. Epub 2011 May 4.

Wnt-ß-catenin signaling protects against hepatic ischemia and reperfusion injury 
in mice.

Lehwald N(1), Tao GZ, Jang KY, Sorkin M, Knoefel WT, Sylvester KG.

Author information: 
(1)Divison of Pediatric Surgery, Department of Surgery, Stanford University
School of Medicine, Stanford, California 94305-5148, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Ischemia and reperfusion injury are common causes of oxidative
tissue damage associated with many liver diseases and hepatic surgery. The
Wnt-ß-catenin signaling pathway is an important regulator of hepatic development,
regeneration, and carcinogenesis. However, the role of Wnt signaling in the
hepatocellular response to ischemia-reperfusion (I/R) injury has not been
determined.
METHODS: Hepatic injury following ischemia or I/R was investigated in
hepatocyte-specific, ß-catenin-deficient mice, as well as Wnt1-overexpressing and
wild-type (control) mice.
RESULTS: Wnt-ß-catenin signaling was affected by the cellular redox balance in
hepatocytes. Following ischemia or I/R, mice with ß-catenin-deficient hepatocytes
were significantly more susceptible to liver injury. Conversely, mice that
overexpressed Wnt1 in hepatocytes were resistant to hepatic I/R injury. Hypoxia
inducible factor (HIF)-1a signaling was reduced in ß-catenin-deficient liver but 
increased in hepatocytes that overexpressed Wnt1 under hypoxia and following I/R,
indicating an interaction between ß-catenin and HIF-1a signaling in the liver.
The mechanism by which Wnt signaling protects against liver injury involves the
role of ß-catenin as a transcriptional coactivator of HIF-1a signaling, which
promotes hepatocyte survival under hypoxic conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Cellular redox balance affects Wnt-ß-catenin signaling, which
protects against hypoxia and I/R injury. These findings might be used to develop 
strategies for protection of hepatocytes, regeneration of liver, and inhibition
of carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2011 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4084974
PMID: 21679710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. J R Coll Physicians Edinb. 2011 Jun;41(2):119-21. doi: 10.4997/JRCPE.2011.205.

Diagnosis in diabetes: does it matter?

Thethy I(1), Robertson L, Swaminathan K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, Victoria Hospital, Kirkcaldy, Fife, UK.

The diagnosis of diabetes subtypes in a busy clinic is usually based on the age
at onset, phenotype and biochemical diagnostic criteria. Not surprisingly, the
focus is predominantly on diagnosing type 1 and type 2 diabetes. More challenging
for the physician is to think of monogenic diabetes, which results from gene
mutations that reduce beta cell function. Often misdiagnosed as type 1 or type 2 
diabetes, maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is the most common form of 
monogenic diabetes, accounting for 1-2% of all diabetes cases. A diagnosis of
monogenic diabetes has important implications in treatment, the prediction of
disease progression and screening of family members. We highlight two cases of
monogenic diabetes, where the diagnosis had significant implications in all the
above parameters. This is followed by a discussion on the glucokinase and
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha MODY, which together constitute the most
frequent cause of MODY syndromes in all populations.

PMID: 21677915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Aug;96(8):E1346-51. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-0268. Epub
2011 Jun 15.

Clinical characteristics and diagnostic criteria of maturity-onset diabetes of
the young (MODY) due to molecular anomalies of the HNF1A gene.

Bellanné-Chantelot C(1), Lévy DJ, Carette C, Saint-Martin C, Riveline JP, Larger 
E, Valéro R, Gautier JF, Reznik Y, Sola A, Hartemann A, Laboureau-Soares S,
Laloi-Michelin M, Lecomte P, Chaillous L, Dubois-Laforgue D, Timsit J; French
Monogenic Diabetes Study Group.

Collaborators: Saltiel A, Basin C, Bertagna L, Brémond-Weil C, Guignat L,
Mosnier-Pudar H, Boitard C, M'Bemba J, Morbois L, Pelletier L, Skurnik G,
Charpentier G, Réquéda E, Varroud M, Atlan C, Narbonne H, Vialettes B,
Bouallouche A, Bouche C, Leblanc H, Joubert M, Rousseau E, Bosquet F, Ciangura C,
Grimaldi A, Jaqueminet S, Sachon C, Ducluzeau PH, Rohmer V, Guillausseau PJ,
Renard JP, Anton B, Colombel A, Le Rhun M, Moreau C, Guerci B, Jellimann S,
Wilhelm JM, Duron F, Ouzounian S, Hiéronimus S, Jeandidier N, Kessler L, Moreau
F, Assayag M, Kaloustian E, Penfornis A, Gaillard D, Créa T, Cuny P,
Baud-Besançon S, Daumont M, Bony-Trifunovic H, Bourhiba M, Brunetière C, Bully C,
Carreau A, Collin P, Cordonnier M, Deburge A, Dolz M, Dusselier L, Evrard A,
Galland-Jos C, Verges B, Geneste B, Guedj AM, Loeuille GA, Méchain C,
Nadler-Fluteau S, Ogor C, Popelier M, Raffin-Sanson ML, Rigalleau V, Vantyghem
MC, Stuckens C, Weill J, Vittaz J, Velho G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Pitié
-Salpétrière Hospital, University Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, 75013 Paris,
France. christine.bellanne-chantelot@psl.aphp.fr

CONTEXT: The diagnosis of maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3),
associated with HNF1A molecular abnormalities, is often missed.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to describe the phenotypes of a large
series of MODY3 patients and to reassess parameters that may improve its
diagnosis.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PATIENTS: This retrospective multicenter study included 487 
unrelated patients referred because of suspicion of MODY3. Genetic analysis
identified 196 MODY3 and 283 non-MODY3 cases. Criteria associated with MODY3 were
assessed by multivariate analysis. The capacity of the model to predict MODY3
diagnosis was assessed by the area under the receiver-operating characteristic
curve and was further validated in an independent sample of 851 patients (165
MODY3 and 686 non-MODY3).
RESULTS: In the MODY3 patients, diabetes was revealed by clinical symptoms in 25%
of the cases and was diagnosed by screening in the others. Age at diagnosis of
diabetes was more than 25 yr in 40% of the MODY3 patients. There was considerable
variability and overlap of all assessed parameters in MODY3 and non-MODY3
patients. The best predictive model was based on criteria available at diagnosis 
of diabetes, including age, body mass index, number of affected generations,
presence of diabetes symptoms, and geographical origin. The area under the curve 
of the receiver-operating characteristic analysis was 0.81. When sensitivity was 
set to 90%, specificity was 49%.
CONCLUSIONS: Differential diagnosis between MODY3 and early-onset type 2 diabetes
remains difficult. Whether the proposed model will improve the pick-up rate of
MODY3 diagnosis needs to be confirmed in independent populations.

PMID: 21677039  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2011;24(3-4):187-9.

HNF1A mutation presenting with fetal macrosomia and hypoglycemia in childhood
prior to onset of overt diabetes.

Dusatkova P(1), Pruhova S, Sumnik Z, Kolouskova S, Obermannova B, Cinek O, Lebl
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Motol and Second Faculty of
Medicine, Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND: HNF1A-MODY (MODY3) is a common subtype of autosomal dominant
diabetes. Unlike HNF4-MODY where fetal macrosomia and early postnatal
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia have been reported, history of transient insulin
overproduction has not yet been recognized in individuals with HNF1A-MODY.
CASE REPORT: Here, we report on a 40-year-old male patient with HNF1A mutation
p.Arg272His (c.815G>A) having a history of fetal macrosomia (4750 g, 59 cm), and,
at least, one attack of symptomatic hypoglycemia in childhood. Diabetes was
subsequently diagnosed at 19 years of age. The proband's daughter who developed
diabetes at 16 years carries the same mutation, but her birth weight and length
were in the upper normal range, and she never experienced hypoglycemic symptoms.
CONCLUSION: The observation of fetal macrosomia and hypoglycemia in childhood is 
indicative of a biphasic impact of the HNF1A mutation on p-cell function over the
lifespan, leading from inappropriate insulin oversecretion to final clinical
diabetes.

PMID: 21648289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Inflammation. 2012 Apr;35(2):574-83. doi: 10.1007/s10753-011-9348-y.

Genome-wide association with C-reactive protein levels in CLHNS: evidence for the
CRP and HNF1A loci and their interaction with exposure to a pathogenic
environment.

Wu Y(1), McDade TW, Kuzawa CW, Borja J, Li Y, Adair LS, Mohlke KL, Lange LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, 5112 Genetic Medicine
Building, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7264, USA.

Recent genome-wide association studies have related several genetic loci,
including C-reactive protein (CRP), hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 homeobox (HNF1A),
and genetic variations in the leptin receptor (LEPR), to circulating CRP levels
in populations of European ancestry. The genetic effects in other populations and
across varying levels of exposure to a pathogenic environment, an important
environmental factor associated with CRP, remain to be determined. We tested
2,073,674 single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) for association with plasma CRP 
(limited to =10 mg/L) in 1,709 unrelated Filipino women from the Cebu
Longitudinal Health and Nutrition Survey. The strongest evidence of association
was observed with variants at CRP (rs876537, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.4<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-9)) and HNF1A
(rs7305618, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.0<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8)). Among other previously reported CRP-associated
loci, the apolipoprotein E e4 haplotype was associated with decreased CRP level
(P<U+2009>=<U+2009>7.1<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-4)), and modest association was observed with LEPR (rs1892534,
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.076), with direction of effects consistent with previous studies. The
strongest signal at a locus not previously reported mapped to a gene desert
region on chromosome 6q16.1 (rs1408282, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.9<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-6)). Finally, we observed
nominal evidence of interaction with exposure to a pathogenic environment for top
main effect SNPs at HNF1A (rs7305618, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.031), LEPR (rs1892535, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.030) and
6q16.1 (rs1408282, P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.046). Our findings demonstrate convincing evidence that 
genetic variants in CRP and HNF1A contribute to plasma CRP in Filipino women and 
provide the first evidence that exposure to a pathogenic environment may modify
the genetic influence at the HNF1A, LEPR, and 6q16.1 loci on plasma CRP level.

PMCID: PMC3193904
PMID: 21647738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Diabetologia. 2011 Aug;54(8):2047-55. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2188-3. Epub 2011
Jun 7.

Genome-wide association and meta-analysis in populations from Starr County,
Texas, and Mexico City identify type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci and
enrichment for expression quantitative trait loci in top signals.

Below JE(1), Gamazon ER, Morrison JV, Konkashbaev A, Pluzhnikov A, McKeigue PM,
Parra EJ, Elbein SC, Hallman DM, Nicolae DL, Bell GI, Cruz M, Cox NJ, Hanis CL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We conducted genome-wide association studies (GWASs) and
expression quantitative trait loci (eQTL) analyses to identify and characterise
risk loci for type 2 diabetes in Mexican-Americans from Starr County, TX, USA.
METHOD: Using 1.8 million directly interrogated and imputed genotypes in 837
unrelated type 2 diabetes cases and 436 normoglycaemic controls, we conducted
Armitage trend tests. To improve power in this population with high disease
rates, we also performed ordinal regression including an intermediate class with 
impaired fasting glucose and/or glucose tolerance. These analyses were followed
by meta-analysis with a study of 967 type 2 diabetes cases and 343 normoglycaemic
controls from Mexico City, Mexico.
RESULT: The top signals (unadjusted p value <1<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-5)) included 49 single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in eight gene regions (PER3, PARD3B, EPHA4,
TOMM7, PTPRD, HNT [also known as RREB1], LOC729993 and IL34) and six intergenic
regions. Among these was a missense polymorphism (rs10462020; Gly639Val) in the
clock gene PER3, a system recently implicated in diabetes. We also report a
second signal (minimum p value 1.52<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-6)) within PTPRD, independent of the
previously implicated SNP, in a population of Han Chinese. Top meta-analysis
signals included known regions HNF1A and KCNQ1. Annotation of top association
signals in both studies revealed a marked excess of trans-acting eQTL in both
adipose and muscle tissues.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: In the largest study of type 2 diabetes in Mexican
populations to date, we identified modest associations of novel and previously
reported SNPs. In addition, in our top signals we report significant excess of
SNPs that predict transcript levels in muscle and adipose tissues.

PMCID: PMC3761075
PMID: 21647700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jul 22;286(29):25719-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.215525. Epub
2011 May 31.

Bone morphogenetic protein 3 controls insulin gene expression and is
down-regulated in INS-1 cells inducibly expressing a hepatocyte nuclear factor
1A-maturity-onset diabetes of the young mutation.

Bonner C(1), Farrelly AM, Concannon CG, Dussmann H, Baquié M, Virard I, Wobser H,
Kögel D, Wollheim CB, Rupnik M, Byrne MM, König HG, Prehn JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, Royal College of Surgeons in
Ireland, Dublin 2, Ireland.

Inactivating mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF) 1A cause HNF1A-maturity-onset diabetes of the young (HNF1A-MODY), the most 
common monogenic form of diabetes. To examine HNF1A-MODY-induced defects in gene 
expression, we performed a microarray analysis of the transcriptome of rat INS-1 
cells inducibly expressing the common hot spot HNF1A frameshift mutation,
Pro291fsinsC-HNF1A. Real-time quantitative PCR (qPCR), Western blotting,
immunohistochemistry, reporter assays, and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)
were used to validate alterations in gene expression and to explore biological
activities of target genes. Twenty-four hours after induction of the mutant HNF1A
protein, we identified a prominent down-regulation of the bone morphogenetic
protein 3 gene (Bmp-3) mRNA expression. Reporter assays, qPCR, and Western blot
analysis validated these results. In contrast, inducible expression of wild-type 
HNF1A led to a time-dependent increase in Bmp-3 mRNA and protein levels.
Moreover, reduced protein levels of BMP-3 and insulin were detected in islets of 
transgenic HNF1A-MODY mice. Interestingly, treatment of naïve INS-1 cells or
murine organotypic islet cultures with recombinant human BMP-3 potently increased
their insulin levels and restored the decrease in SMAD2 phosphorylation and
insulin gene expression induced by the HNF1A frameshift mutation. Our study
suggests a critical link between HNF1A-MODY-induced alterations in Bmp-3
expression and insulin gene levels in INS-1 cells and indicates that the reduced 
expression of growth factors involved in tissue differentiation may play an
important role in the pathophysiology of HNF1A-MODY.

PMCID: PMC3138325
PMID: 21628466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2011 May;136(21):1111-5. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1280519. Epub 
2011 May 17.

[Clinical parameters for molecular testing of Maturity Onset Diabetes of the
Young (MODY)].

[Article in German]

Datz N(1), Nestoris C, von Schütz W, Danne T, Driesel AJ, Maringa M, Kordonouri
O.

Author information: 
(1)Diabeteszentrum für Kinder und Jugendliche, Kinderkrankenhaus auf der Bult,
Hannover, Deutschland. datz@hka.de

BACKGROUND: Monogenic forms of diabetes are often diagnosed by chance, due to the
variety of clinical presentation and limited experience of the diabetologists
with this kind of diabetes. Aim of this study was to evaluate clinical parameters
for an efficient screening.
METHODS: Clinical parameters were: negative diabetes-specific antibodies at onset
of diabetes, positive family history of diabetes, and low to moderate insulin
requirements after one year of diabetes treatment. Molecular testing was
performed through sequencing of the programming regions of HNF-4alpha (MODY 1),
glucokinase (MODY 2) and HNF-1alpha/TCF1 (MODY 3) and in one patient the
HNF-1beta/TCF2 region (MODY 5). 39 of 292 patients treated with insulin were
negative for GADA and IA2A, and 8 (20.5%) patients fulfilled both other criteria.
RESULTS: Positive molecular results were found in five (63%) patients (two with
MODY 2, two with MODY 3, one with MODY 5). At diabetes onset, the mean age of the
5 patients with MODY was 10.6 ± 5.3 yrs (range 2.6-15 yrs), HbA(1c) was 8.4 ± 3.1
% (6.5-13.9%), mean diabetes duration until diagnosis of MODY was 3.3 ± 3.6 yrs
(0.8-9.6 yrs) with insulin requirements of 0.44 ± 0.17 U/kg/d (0.2-0.6 U/kg/d).
Patients with MODY 3 were changed from insulin to repaglinide, those with MODY 2 
were recommended discontinuing insulin treatment.
CONCLUSION: In patients with negative diabetes-specific antibodies at onset of
diabetes, with a positive family history, and low to moderate insulin needs a
genetic screening for MODY is indicated. Watchful consideration of these clinical
parameters may lead to an early genetic testing, and to an adequate treatment.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 21590629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Diabetologia. 2011 Aug;54(8):2038-46. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2172-y. Epub 2011
May 15.

Genome-wide association study of type 2 diabetes in a sample from Mexico City and
a meta-analysis of a Mexican-American sample from Starr County, Texas.

Parra EJ(1), Below JE, Krithika S, Valladares A, Barta JL, Cox NJ, Hanis CL,
Wacher N, Garcia-Mena J, Hu P, Shriver MD; Diabetes Genetics Replication and
Meta-analysis (DIAGRAM) Consortium, Kumate J, McKeigue PM, Escobedo J, Cruz M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, University of Toronto at Mississauga, 3359
Mississauga Road North, Mississauga, ON, Canada, L5L 1C6.
esteban.parra@utoronto.ca

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We report a genome-wide association study of type 2 diabetes in 
an admixed sample from Mexico City and describe the results of a meta-analysis of
this study and another genome-wide scan in a Mexican-American sample from Starr
County, TX, USA. The top signals observed in this meta-analysis were followed up 
in the Diabetes Genetics Replication and Meta-analysis Consortium (DIAGRAM) and
DIAGRAM+ datasets.
METHODS: We analysed 967 cases and 343 normoglycaemic controls. The samples were 
genotyped with the Affymetrix Genome-wide Human SNP array 5.0. Associations of
genotyped and imputed markers with type 2 diabetes were tested using a missing
data likelihood score test. A fixed-effects meta-analysis including 1,804 cases
and 780 normoglycaemic controls was carried out by weighting the effect estimates
by their inverse variances.
RESULTS: In the meta-analysis of the two Hispanic studies, markers showing
suggestive associations (p<U+2009><<U+2009>10(-5)) were identified in two known diabetes genes,
HNF1A and KCNQ1, as well as in several additional regions. Meta-analysis of the
two Hispanic studies and the recent DIAGRAM+ dataset identified genome-wide
significant signals (p<U+2009><<U+2009>5<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8)) within or near the genes HNF1A and
CDKN2A/CDKN2B, as well as suggestive associations in three additional regions,
IGF2BP2, KCNQ1 and the previously unreported C14orf70.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: We observed numerous regions with suggestive
associations with type 2 diabetes. Some of these signals correspond to regions
described in previous studies. However, many of these regions could not be
replicated in the DIAGRAM datasets. It is critical to carry out additional
studies in Hispanic and American Indian populations, which have a high prevalence
of type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3818640
PMID: 21573907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011 Jul;23(7):623-7. doi:
10.1097/MEG.0b013e328347964d.

New monoallelic (partial tandem duplication) mutation of HNF1a gene in steatotic 
hepatocellular adenoma.

Sakellariou S(1), Morgan Y, Heaton N, Portmann B, Quaglia A, Tobal K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Liver Studies, King's College Hospital, London, UK.
stratigoula.sakellariou@nhs.net

Hepatocellular adenomas (HCAs) containing inactivating HNF1a mutations correspond
to a homogenous group of tumors with marked steatosis and no cytological
abnormalities or inflammatory infiltrates. We report a case of a 60-year-old
woman who was referred with a 13-cm mass in the left lobe of the liver with no
history of oral contraception use and no family history of note. Histology
revealed a severely steatotic HCA. Immunohistochemistry showed no nuclear
staining for ß-catenin, limited glutamine synthetase positivity, and slightly
attenuated liver-fatty acid binding protein staining. Serum amyloid A2 antibodies
produced a coarse granular staining. Mutational screening detected monoallelic
partial tandem duplication within exon 4 of TCF1 in tumoral tissue. No mutations 
in the ß-catenin and IL6ST genes were detected. Quantitative reverse
transcription PCR showed lower expression levels of FABP1 and uridine
glycosyltransferase 2B7 and higher levels of serum amyloid A2 in tumor than in
normal hepatocytes. Clinicopathological and molecular investigation of HCA cases 
with unique features could result in a better understanding of HCAs pathogenesis.

PMID: 21566527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Nature. 2011 May 11;475(7356):386-9. doi: 10.1038/nature10116.

Induction of functional hepatocyte-like cells from mouse fibroblasts by defined
factors.

Huang P(1), He Z, Ji S, Sun H, Xiang D, Liu C, Hu Y, Wang X, Hui L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy for
Sciences, Yueyang Road 320, 200031 Shanghai, China.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Aug 5;9(2):89-91.
    Hepatology. 2012 Jan;55(1):316-8.

The generation of functional hepatocytes independent of donor liver organs is of 
great therapeutic interest with regard to regenerative medicine and possible
cures for liver disease. Induced hepatic differentiation has been achieved
previously using embryonic stem cells or induced pluripotent stem cells.
Particularly, hepatocytes generated from a patient's own induced pluripotent stem
cells could theoretically avoid immunological rejection. However, the induction
of hepatocytes from induced pluripotent stem cells is a complicated process that 
would probably be replaced with the arrival of improved technology.
Overexpression of lineage-specific transcription factors directly converts
terminally differentiated cells into some other lineages, including neurons,
cardiomyocytes and blood progenitors; however, it remains unclear whether these
lineage-converted cells could repair damaged tissues in vivo. Here we demonstrate
the direct induction of functional hepatocyte-like (iHep) cells from mouse
tail-tip fibroblasts by transduction of Gata4, Hnf1a and Foxa3, and inactivation 
of p19(Arf). iHep cells show typical epithelial morphology, express hepatic genes
and acquire hepatocyte functions. Notably, transplanted iHep cells repopulate the
livers of fumarylacetoacetate-hydrolase-deficient (Fah(-/-)) mice and rescue
almost half of recipients from death by restoring liver functions. Our study
provides a novel strategy to generate functional hepatocyte-like cells for the
purpose of liver engineering and regenerative medicine.

PMID: 21562492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2011 Sep;75(3):321-7. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.04052.x.

HDL cholesterol as a diagnostic tool for clinical differentiation of GCK-MODY
from HNF1A-MODY and type 1 diabetes in children and young adults.

Fendler W(1), Borowiec M, Antosik K, Szadkowska A, Deja G, Jarosz-Chobot P,
Mysliwiec M, Wyka K, Pietrzak I, Skupien J, Malecki MT, Mlynarski W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Oncology, Hematology and Diabetology, Medical
University of Lodz, Lodz, Poland.

INTRODUCTION: Confirmation of monogenic diabetes caused by glucokinase mutations 
(GCK-MODY) allows pharmacogenetic intervention in the form of insulin
discontinuation. This is especially important among paediatric and young adult
populations where GCK-MODY is most prevalent.
METHODS: The study evaluated the utility of lipid parameters in screening for
patients with GCK-MODY. Eighty-nine children with type 1 diabetes and 68 with
GCK-MODY were screened for triglyceride (TG), total and HDL cholesterol levels.
Standardization against a control group of 171 healthy children was applied to
eliminate the effect of development. Clinical applicability and cut-off value
were evaluated in all available patients with GCK-MODY (n = 148), hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1-alpha-MODY (HNF1A MODY) (n = 37) or type 1 diabetes (n = 221).
RESULTS: Lower lipid parameter values were observed in GCK-MODY than in patients 
with type 1 diabetes. Standard deviation scores were -0·22 ± 2·24 vs 1·31 ± 2·17 
for HDL cholesterol (P < 0·001), -0·16 ± 2·14 vs 0·60 ± 1·77 for total
cholesterol (P = 0·03) and -0·57 ± 0·97 vs-0·22 ± 0·97 for TG (P = 0·05).
Validation analysis confirmed that HDL cholesterol was the best parameter for
GCK-MODY selection [sensitivity 87%, specificity 54%, negative predictive value
(NPV) 86%, positive PV 56%]. A threshold HDL concentration of 1·56 mm offered
significantly better diagnostic efficiency than total cholesterol (cut-off value 
4·51 mm; NPV 80%; PPV 38%; P < 0·001). TG did not offer a meaningful cut-off
value.
CONCLUSIONS: HDL cholesterol levels measured in individuals with likely monogenic
diabetes may be useful in screening for GCK-MODY and differentiation from T1DM
and HNF1A-MODY, regardless of treatment or metabolic control.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21521320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2011 Oct;75(4):422-6. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.04049.x.

Who should have genetic testing for maturity-onset diabetes of the young?

Naylor R(1), Philipson LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Kovler Diabetes Center, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 606037, USA.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a clinically heterogeneous group
of monogenic disorders characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance of
young-onset, non-insulin-dependent diabetes. The genes involved are important in 
beta cell development, function and regulation and lead to disorders in glucose
sensing and insulin secretion. Heterozygous GCK mutations cause impaired
glucokinase activity resulting in stable, mild hyperglycaemia that rarely
requires treatment. HNF1A mutations cause a progressive insulin secretory defect 
that is sensitive to sulphonylureas, most often resulting in improved glycaemic
control compared with other diabetes treatment. MODY owing to mutations in the
HNF4A gene results in a similar phenotype, including sensitivity to sulphonylurea
treatment. HNF1B mutations most frequently cause developmental renal disease
(particularly renal cysts) but may also cause MODY in isolation or may cause the 
renal cysts and diabetes syndrome (RCAD syndrome). Mutations in NEUROD1, PDX1
(IPF1), CEL and INS are rare causes of MODY. MODY is often misdiagnosed as type 1
or type 2 diabetes. However, a correct genetic diagnosis impacts treatment and
identifies at-risk family members. Thus, it is important to consider a diagnosis 
of MODY in appropriate individuals and to pursue genetic testing to establish a
molecular diagnosis.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21521318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Exp Med. 2011 May 9;208(5):1001-13. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102144. Epub 2011 Apr
25.

The lineage-defining factors T-bet and Bcl-6 collaborate to regulate Th1 gene
expression patterns.

Oestreich KJ(1), Huang AC, Weinmann AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA.

The T-box transcription factor T-bet is important for the differentiation of
naive CD4(+) T helper cells (Th cells) into the Th1 phenotype. Much is known
about T-bet's role as a transcriptional activator, but less is known about the
mechanisms by which T-bet functionally represses alternative Th cell genetic
programs. In this study, we first identify Socs1, Socs3, and Tcf7 (TCF-1) as gene
targets that are negatively regulated by T-bet. Significantly, T-bet's role in
the repression of these genes is through a direct interaction with their
promoters. Consistent with this, we identified two T-bet DNA-binding elements in 
the Socs1 promoter that are functionally used to down-regulate transcription in
primary Th1 cells. Importantly, T-bet's novel role in transcriptional repression 
is because of its ability to physically associate with, and functionally recruit,
the transcriptional repressor Bcl-6 to a subset of promoters. Furthermore, T-bet 
functionally recruits Bcl-6 to the Ifng locus in late stages of Th1
differentiation to repress its activity, possibly to prevent the overproduction
of IFN-<U+03B3>, which could result in autoimmunity. Collectively, these data establish 
a novel mechanism for T-bet-mediated gene repression in which two
lineage-defining transcription factors, one a classical activator and one a
repressor, collaborate to promote and properly regulate Th1 development.

PMCID: PMC3092354
PMID: 21518797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Pediatr Diabetes. 2011 May;12(3 Pt 1):142-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-5448.2010.00681.x. Epub 2010 Sep 6.

Persistently autoantibody negative (PAN) type 1 diabetes mellitus in children.

Hameed S(1), Ellard S, Woodhead HJ, Neville KA, Walker JL, Craig ME, Armstrong T,
Yu L, Eisenbarth GS, Hattersley AT, Verge CF.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology, Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick, NSW, Australia.
shihab.hameed@sesiahs.health.nsw.gov.au

Comment in
    Pediatr Diabetes. 2011 May;12(3 Pt 1):139-41.

BACKGROUND: Autoantibody-negative children diagnosed with type 1 diabetes might
have unrecognized monogenic or type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: At diagnosis of type 1 diabetes (between ages 0.5
and 16.3 yr, n = 470), autoantibodies [glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD),
insulinoma-associated protein 2 (IA2), insulin autoantibodies (IAA), and/or islet
cell antibody (ICA)] were positive (ab+) in 330 and negative in 37 (unknown in
103). Autoantibody-negative patients were retested at median diabetes duration of
3.2 yr (range 0.9-16.2) for autoantibodies (GAD, IA2, ZnT8), human leukocyte
antigen (HLA) typing, non-fasting C-peptide, and sequencing of HNF4A, HNF1A,
KCNJ11, and INS.
RESULTS: Nineteen (5% of 367) remained persistently autoantibody negative (PAN), 
17 were positive on repeat testing (PORT), and 1 refused retesting. No mutations 
were found in PORT. One PAN was heterozygous for P112L mutation in HNF1A and
transferred from insulin to oral gliclazide. Another PAN transferred to metformin
and the diagnosis was revised to type 2 diabetes. The remaining 17 PAN were
indistinguishable from the ab+ group by clinical characteristics. HLA genotype
was at high risk for type 1 diabetes in 82% of remaining PAN and 100% of PORT.
After excluding patients with diabetes duration <1 yr, C-peptide was detectable
more frequently in the remaining PAN (7/16) and PORT (6/17) than in a random
selection of ab+ (3/28, p = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of type 1 diabetes should be reevaluated in PAN
patients, because a subset has monogenic or type 2 diabetes. The remaining PAN
have relatively preserved C-peptide compared with ab+, suggesting slower ß-cell
destruction, but a very high frequency of diabetogenic HLA, implying that type 1B
(idiopathic) diabetes is rare.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21518407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Cancer Res. 2011 Jul 1;71(13):4352-8. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0124. Epub
2011 Apr 15.

Genome-wide "pleiotropy scan" identifies HNF1A region as a novel pancreatic
cancer susceptibility locus.

Pierce BL(1), Ahsan H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Health Studies and Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA. brandonpierce@uchicago.edu

In genome-wide association (GWA) studies, hundreds of thousands of
single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) are tested for association with a disease
trait. Typically, GWA studies give equal consideration to all SNPs tested,
regardless of existing knowledge of an SNP's functionality or biological
plausibility of association. Because many tests are conducted, very low
statistical significance thresholds (P < 5 × 10(-8)) are required to identify
true associations with confidence. By restricting GWA analyses to SNPs with
enhanced prior probabilities of association, we can reduce the number of tests
conducted and relax the required significance threshold, increasing power to
detect association. In this analysis of existing GWA data on pancreatic cancer
cases (n = 1,736) and controls (n = 1,802) of European descent (the PanScan
study), we conduct a GWA scan restricted to SNPs that have been reported to
associate with human phenotypes in previous GWA studies (with P < 5 × 10(-8)).
Using this method, we drastically reduce the number of tests conducted (from
~550,000 to 1,087) and test only SNPs that are known to be (or tag) variants that
influence human biological processes. Of the 1,087 SNPs tested, the strongest
association observed was for HNF1A SNP rs7310409 (P = 3 × 10(-5); P(Bonferroni) =
0.03), an SNP known to associate with circulating C-reactive protein. This
association was replicated in an independent sample of 1,094 cases and 1,165
controls (P = 0.02), producing a highly significant association in the combined
data sets (P = 2 × 10(-6); P(Bonferroni) = 0.002). The HNF1A region also harbors 
variants that influence several human traits, including maturity-onset diabetes
of the young, type 2 diabetes, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and N-glycan 
levels. This novel "pleiotropy scan" method may be useful for identifying
susceptibility loci for other cancer phenotypes.

©2011 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3129443
PMID: 21498636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Expert Rev Mol Diagn. 2011 Apr;11(3):313-20. doi: 10.1586/erm.10.123.

Role of molecular genetics in transforming diagnosis of diabetes mellitus.

Molven A(1), Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)The Gade Institute, University of Bergen, N-5020 Bergen, Norway.

Most common diseases also run in families as rare, monogenic forms. Diabetes is
no exception. Mutations in approximately 20 different genes are now known to
cause monogenic diabetes, a disease group that can be subclassified into
maturity-onset diabetes of the young, neonatal diabetes and mitochondrial
diabetes. In some families, additional features, such as urogenital
malformations, exocrine pancreatic dysfunction and neurological abnormalities,
are present and may aid the diagnostic classification. The finding of a mutation 
in monogenic diabetes may have implications for the prediction of prognosis and
choice of treatment. Mutations in the GCK gene cause a mild form of diabetes,
which seldom needs insulin and has a low risk for complications. By contrast,
HNF1A mutations lead to a diabetes form that in severity, treatment and
complication risk resembles Type 1 diabetes, although these patients may
experience a good effect of sulfonylurea treatment. The majority of neonatal
diabetes cases are caused by mutations in the K(ATP) channel genes ABCC8 and
KCNJ11, and sulfonylurea therapy is then usually superior to insulin. Diseases
with a considerable genetic component may now be explored by genome-wide
approaches using next-generation DNA sequencing technology. We expect that within
a few years important breakthroughs will be made in mapping cases of diabetes
with a suspected, but still unsolved monogenic basis.

PMID: 21463240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2011;66(1):167-8.

New HNF-1a nonsense mutation causes maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3.

Nogaroto V(1), Svidnicki PV, Bonatto N, Milléo FQ, Almeida MC, Vicari MR, Artoni 
RF.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biologia Estrutural, Molecular e Genética, Universidade
Estadual de Ponta Grossa, Ponta Grossa, Paraná, Brazil.
vivianenogaroto@hotmail.com

PMCID: PMC3044575
PMID: 21437455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Pediatr Diabetes. 2011 May;12(3 Pt 2):219-28. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-5448.2010.00694.x. Epub 2011 Mar 23.

Obesity and type 2 diabetes mellitus in a birth cohort of First Nation children
born to mothers with pediatric-onset type 2 diabetes.

Mendelson M(1), Cloutier J, Spence L, Sellers E, Taback S, Dean H.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Pediatrics, University 
of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Children who are born to mothers with pediatric-onset type 2 diabetes
mellitus are exposed to a hyperglycemic intra-uterine environment throughout
pregnancy. The growth patterns and risk of type 2 diabetes in these offspring may
be influenced by unique gene-environment interactions during intra-uterine and
postnatal life.
SUBJECTS: We established a cohort of offspring of First Nation mothers with onset
of type 2 diabetes before age 18 years in Manitoba, Canada.
METHODS: We measured height or length and weight at study entry and annually
thereafter with fasting blood glucose in offspring aged = 7 years. We collected
birth and breastfeeding history and determined the population-specific hepatic
nuclear factor-1a (HNF-1a) G319S genotype of offspring at age 7 years.
RESULTS: From July 2003 to April 2008, we enrolled 76 offspring of 37 mothers.
Sixty-four percent (23/36) of the offspring aged 2-19 years were obese at initial
assessment. The rates of obesity remained constant throughout the 5 years. As of 
April 2008, 7/28 (25%) of the offspring aged 7-19 years have diabetes including
6/14 (43%) aged 10-19 years. Most offspring with diabetes (5/7, 71%) were obese
at diagnosis. All of the 7 offspring with diabetes have 1 or 2 copies of the
G319S polymorphism.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of type 2 diabetes in this cohort of offspring of
First Nation women with pediatric-onset type 2 diabetes is the highest ever
reported. Obesity is an important postnatal risk factor for type 2 diabetes in
this population and may result from a unique gene-environment interaction.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21429061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Diabet Med. 2011 Sep;28(9):1028-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2011.03287.x.

Islet autoantibodies can discriminate maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)
from Type 1 diabetes.

McDonald TJ(1), Colclough K, Brown R, Shields B, Shepherd M, Bingley P, Williams 
A, Hattersley AT, Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School,
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

Comment in
    Diabet Med. 2011 Sep;28(9):1009.

AIM: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young is a monogenic form of familial,
young-onset diabetes. It is rare (~1% diabetes) and may be misdiagnosed as Type 1
diabetes and inappropriately treated with insulin. Type 1 diabetes is
characterized by the presence of islet autoantibodies, including glutamate
decarboxylase (GAD) and islet antigen-2 (IA-2) antibodies. The prevalence of
islet autoantibodies is unknown in maturity-onset diabetes of the young and may
have the potential to differentiate this form of diabetes from Type 1 diabetes.
The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of GAD and IA-2 antibodies 
in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young and Type 1 diabetes.
METHODS: We measured plasma GAD and IA-2 antibodies in 508 patients with the most
common forms of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (GCK: n = 227; HNF1A: n =
229; HNF4A: n = 52) and 98 patients with newly diagnosed Type 1 diabetes
(diagnosed < 6 months). Autoantibodies were considered positive if = 99th centile
of 500 adult control subjects.
RESULTS: GAD and/or IA-2 antibodies were present in 80/98 (82%) patients with
Type 1 diabetes and 5/508 (< 1%) patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the
young. In the cohort with Type 1 diabetes, both GAD and IA-2 antibodies were
detected in 37.8% of patients, GAD only in 24.5% and IA-2 only in 19.4%. All five
patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young with detectable antibodies had
GAD antibodies and none had detectable IA-2 antibodies.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of GAD and IA-2 antibodies in maturity-onset diabetes 
of the young is the same as in control subjects (< 1%). The finding of islet
autoantibodies, especially IA-2 antibodies, makes the diagnosis of maturity-onset
diabetes of the young very unlikely and genetic testing should only be performed 
if other clinical characteristics strongly suggest this form of diabetes rather
than Type 1 diabetes. This supports routine islet autoantibody testing before
proceeding to more expensive molecular genetic testing.

© 2011 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2011 Diabetes UK.

PMID: 21395678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Hepatology. 2011 Jun;53(6):2063-74. doi: 10.1002/hep.24280.

The stable repression of mesenchymal program is required for hepatocyte identity:
a novel role for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a.

Santangelo L(1), Marchetti A, Cicchini C, Conigliaro A, Conti B, Mancone C, Bonzo
JA, Gonzalez FJ, Alonzi T, Amicone L, Tripodi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Hematology, Pasteur Institute-Cenci
Bolognetti Foundation, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

The concept that cellular terminal differentiation is stably maintained once
development is complete has been questioned by numerous observations showing that
differentiated epithelium may undergo an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) program. EMT and the reverse process, mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition 
(MET), are typical events of development, tissue repair, and tumor progression.
In this study, we aimed to clarify the molecular mechanisms underlying these
phenotypic conversions in hepatocytes. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) was
overexpressed in different hepatocyte cell lines and the resulting gene
expression profile was determined by real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction. HNF4a recruitment on promoters of both mesenchymal and EMT regulator
genes was determined by way of electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation. The effect of HNF4a depletion was assessed in silenced cells
and in the context of the whole liver of HNF4 knockout animals. Our results
identified key EMT regulators and mesenchymal genes as new targets of HNF4a.
HNF4a, in cooperation with its target HNF1a, directly inhibits transcription of
the EMT master regulatory genes Snail, Slug, and HMGA2 and of several mesenchymal
markers. HNF4a-mediated repression of EMT genes induces MET in hepatomas, and its
silencing triggers the mesenchymal program in differentiated hepatocytes both in 
cell culture and in the whole liver.CONCLUSION: The pivotal role of HNF4a in the 
induction and maintenance of hepatocyte differentiation should also be ascribed
to its capacity to continuously repress the mesenchymal program; thus, both HNF4a
activator and repressor functions are necessary for the identity of hepatocytes.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 21384409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. DNA Cell Biol. 2011 Mar;30(3):135. doi: 10.1089/dna.2011.2501.

Highlights from the March 2011 issue of DNA and Cell Biology.

Handelsman J.

PMID: 21361778  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Pediatr. 2011 May;158(5):852-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jpeds.2011.01.003. Epub 2011 Feb
24.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a gene mutation associated with familial neonatal
hyperinsulinism and maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Pingul MM(1), Hughes N, Wu A, Stanley CA, Gruppuso PA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Rhode Island Hospital and 
Brown University, Providence, RI, USA.

Neonatal macrosomia and hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia with strong family history 
of diabetes may indicate monogenic diabetes. Here we report a family in which 4
individuals in 3 generations were found to have a mutation (Arg80Gln) in
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a. Genetic testing was a factor in choosing
sulfonylurea therapy for diabetes.

Copyright © 2011 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21353246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Semin Liver Dis. 2011 Feb;31(1):91-103. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1272837. Epub 2011
Feb 22.

Revisiting the pathology of resected benign hepatocellular nodules using new
immunohistochemical markers.

Bioulac-Sage P(1), Cubel G, Balabaud C, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie Pathologique, Hôpital Pellegrin, CHU Bordeaux, Bordeaux
Cedex France. paulette.bioulac-sage@chu-bordeaux.fr

In this review, the authors focus on the use of immunohistochemistry to
characterize the different types and subtypes of benign hepatocellular nodules.
They describe the classical and currently accepted features leading to the easy
and formal diagnosis of focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) and hepatocellular
adenoma (HCA). In addition, they report some atypical features and difficulties
in the interpretation of section staining analyses, which represent important
parameters for pathologists. A significant contribution of molecular biology to
the characterization of FNH has been to reclassify some cases of FNH as
inflammatory HCA. Furthermore, the pattern of overexpression of glutamine
synthetase (GS), a target gene of ß-catenin has been successfully used to
identify FNH by immunohistochemistry. Molecular approaches have demonstrated that
HCA is a heterogeneous entity. Genotype classification of HCA has allowed the
identification of three subtypes: HNF1A-mutated HCA (H-HCA) in 35% of cases,
ß-catenin-mutated HCA (b-HCA) in 10%, and inflammatory HCA (IHCA) in 55%.
Following molecular data, the diagnosis of H-HCA relies on the lack of liver
fatty acid binding protein (LFABP) immunostaining. The diagnosis of b-HCA is
straightforward when GS is strongly and diffusely expressed by lesional
hepatocytes, and is accompanied by nuclear ß-catenin immunoreactivity. In IHCA,
serum amyloid protein and C- reactive protein are strongly and usually diffusely 
expressed by tumoral hepatocytes with a sharp limit with the surrounding
nontumoral liver. IHCA can also be ß-catenin activated (10%). Due to the strong
association of b-HCA with hepatocellular carcinoma transformation, the
identification of this HCA subtype is extremely important.

© Thieme Medical Publishers.

PMID: 21344354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. J Immunol. 2011 Apr 1;186(7):3946-52. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1003497. Epub 2011
Feb 21.

T cell factor-1 negatively regulates expression of IL-17 family of cytokines and 
protects mice from experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Yu Q(1), Sharma A, Ghosh A, Sen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Lymphocyte Development Unit, Laboratory of Molecular Biology and Immunology,
National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, 
USA.

Activated CD4 T cells are associated with protective immunity and autoimmunity.
The manner in which the inflammatory potential of T cells and resultant
autoimmunity is restrained is poorly understood. In this article, we demonstrate 
that T cell factor-1 (TCF1) negatively regulates the expression of IL-17 and
related cytokines in activated CD4 T cells. We show that TCF1 does not affect
cytokine signals and expression of transcription factors that have been shown to 
regulate Th17 differentiation. Instead, TCF1 regulates IL-17 expression, in part,
by binding to the regulatory regions of the Il17 gene. Moreover, TCF1-deficient
Th17 CD4 T cells express higher levels of IL-7Ra, which potentially promotes
their survival and expansion in vivo. Accordingly, TCF1-deficient mice are
hyperresponsive to experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Thus, TCF1, a
constitutively expressed T cell-specific transcription factor, is a critical
negative regulator of the inflammatory potential of TCR-activated T cells and
autoimmunity.

PMCID: PMC3158594
PMID: 21339363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Hum Genet. 2011 Oct;130(4):483-93. doi: 10.1007/s00439-011-0966-0. Epub 2011 Feb 
15.

The -14010*C variant associated with lactase persistence is located between an
Oct-1 and HNF1a binding site and increases lactase promoter activity.

Jensen TG(1), Liebert A, Lewinsky R, Swallow DM, Olsen J, Troelsen JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Panum Institute, Building 6.4, 
University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3B, 2200, Copenhagen N, Denmark.

In most people worldwide intestinal lactase expression declines in childhood. In 
many others, particularly in Europeans, lactase expression persists into adult
life. The lactase persistence phenotype is in Europe associated with the -13910*T
single nucleotide variant located 13,910 bp upstream the lactase gene in an
enhancer region that affects lactase promoter activity. This variant falls in an 
Oct-1 binding site and shows greater Oct-1 binding than the ancestral variant and
increases enhancer activity. Several other variants have been identified very
close to the -13910 position, which are associated with lactase persistence in
the Middle East and Africa. One of them, the -14010*C, is associated with lactase
persistence in Africa. Here we show by deletion analysis that the -14010 position
is located in a 144 bp region that reduces the enhancer activity. In
transfections the -14010*C allele shows a stronger enhancer effect than the
ancestral -4010*G allele. Binding sites for Oct-1 and HNF1a surrounding the
-14010 position were identified by gel shift assays, which indicated that
-14010*C has greater binding affinity to Oct-1 than -14010*G.

PMID: 21327791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011 May 1;252(3):211-20. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2011.02.005. Epub 2011 Feb 24.

Acetaminophen hepatotoxicity and HIF-1a induction in acetaminophen toxicity in
mice occurs without hypoxia.

Chaudhuri S(1), McCullough SS, Hennings L, Letzig L, Simpson PM, Hinson JA, James
LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, USA.
schaudhuri@uams.edu

HIF-1a is a nuclear factor important in the transcription of genes controlling
angiogenesis including vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF). Both hypoxia
and oxidative stress are known mechanisms for the induction of HIF-1a. Oxidative 
stress and mitochondrial permeability transition (MPT) are mechanistically
important in acetaminophen (APAP) toxicity in the mouse. MPT may occur as a
result of oxidative stress and leads to a large increase in oxidative stress. We 
previously reported the induction of HIF-1a in mice with APAP toxicity and have
shown that VEGF is important in hepatocyte regeneration following APAP toxicity. 
The following study was performed to examine the relative contribution of hypoxia
versus oxidative stress to the induction of HIF-1a in APAP toxicity in the mouse.
Time course studies using the hypoxia marker pimonidazole showed no staining for 
pimonidazole at 1 or 2h in B6C3F1 mice treated with APAP. Staining for
pimonidazole was present in the midzonal to periportal regions at 4, 8, 24 and
48h and no staining was observed in centrilobular hepatocytes, the sites of the
toxicity. Subsequent studies with the MPT inhibitor cyclosporine A showed that
cyclosporine A (CYC; 10mg/kg) reduced HIF-1a induction in APAP treated mice at 1 
and 4h and did not inhibit the metabolism of APAP (depletion of hepatic
non-protein sulfhydryls and hepatic protein adduct levels). The data suggest that
HIF-1a induction in the early stages of APAP toxicity is secondary to oxidative
stress via a mechanism involving MPT. In addition, APAP toxicity is not mediated 
by a hypoxia mechanism.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3099476
PMID: 21316383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Circulation. 2011 Feb 22;123(7):731-8. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.948570.
Epub 2011 Feb 7.

Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies in >80 000 subjects identifies
multiple loci for C-reactive protein levels.

Dehghan A, Dupuis J, Barbalic M, Bis JC, Eiriksdottir G, Lu C, Pellikka N,
Wallaschofski H, Kettunen J, Henneman P, Baumert J, Strachan DP, Fuchsberger C,
Vitart V, Wilson JF, Paré G, Naitza S, Rudock ME, Surakka I, de Geus EJ, Alizadeh
BZ, Guralnik J, Shuldiner A, Tanaka T, Zee RY, Schnabel RB, Nambi V, Kavousi M,
Ripatti S, Nauck M, Smith NL, Smith AV, Sundvall J, Scheet P, Liu Y, Ruokonen A, 
Rose LM, Larson MG, Hoogeveen RC, Freimer NB, Teumer A, Tracy RP, Launer LJ,
Buring JE, Yamamoto JF, Folsom AR, Sijbrands EJ, Pankow J, Elliott P, Keaney JF, 
Sun W, Sarin AP, Fontes JD, Badola S, Astor BC, Hofman A, Pouta A, Werdan K,
Greiser KH, Kuss O, Meyer zu Schwabedissen HE, Thiery J, Jamshidi Y, Nolte IM,
Soranzo N, Spector TD, Völzke H, Parker AN, Aspelund T, Bates D, Young L, Tsui K,
Siscovick DS, Guo X, Rotter JI, Uda M, Schlessinger D, Rudan I, Hicks AA, Penninx
BW, Thorand B, Gieger C, Coresh J, Willemsen G, Harris TB, Uitterlinden AG,
Järvelin MR, Rice K, Radke D, Salomaa V, Willems van Dijk K, Boerwinkle E, Vasan 
RS, Ferrucci L, Gibson QD, Bandinelli S, Snieder H, Boomsma DI, Xiao X, Campbell 
H, Hayward C, Pramstaller PP, van Duijn CM, Peltonen L, Psaty BM, Gudnason V,
Ridker PM, Homuth G, Koenig W, Ballantyne CM, Witteman JC, Benjamin EJ, Perola M,
Chasman DI.

Comment in
    Biomark Med. 2011 Jun;5(3):373-4.

BACKGROUND: C-reactive protein (CRP) is a heritable marker of chronic
inflammation that is strongly associated with cardiovascular disease. We sought
to identify genetic variants that are associated with CRP levels.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We performed a genome-wide association analysis of CRP in 66
185 participants from 15 population-based studies. We sought replication for the 
genome-wide significant and suggestive loci in a replication panel comprising 16 
540 individuals from 10 independent studies. We found 18 genome-wide significant 
loci, and we provided evidence of replication for 8 of them. Our results confirm 
7 previously known loci and introduce 11 novel loci that are implicated in
pathways related to the metabolic syndrome (APOC1, HNF1A, LEPR, GCKR, HNF4A, and 
PTPN2) or the immune system (CRP, IL6R, NLRP3, IL1F10, and IRF1) or that reside
in regions previously not known to play a role in chronic inflammation (PPP1R3B, 
SALL1, PABPC4, ASCL1, RORA, and BCL7B). We found a significant interaction of
body mass index with LEPR (P<2.9×10(-6)). A weighted genetic risk score that was 
developed to summarize the effect of risk alleles was strongly associated with
CRP levels and explained 5% of the trait variance; however, there was no
evidence for these genetic variants explaining the association of CRP with
coronary heart disease.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified 18 loci that were associated with CRP levels. Our
study highlights immune response and metabolic regulatory pathways involved in
the regulation of chronic inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3147232
PMID: 21300955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Diabetes Care. 2011 Feb;34(2):286-91. doi: 10.2337/dc10-1293.

Urinary C-peptide creatinine ratio is a practical outpatient tool for identifying
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-{alpha}/hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-{alpha}
maturity-onset diabetes of the young from long-duration type 1 diabetes.

Besser RE(1), Shepherd MH, McDonald TJ, Shields BM, Knight BA, Ellard S,
Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula National Institute for Health Research Clinical Research Facility,
Peninsula Medical School, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-a (HNF1A)/hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-a
(HNF4A) maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is frequently misdiagnosed as
type 1 diabetes, and patients are inappropriately treated with insulin. Blood
C-peptide can aid in the diagnosis of MODY, but practical reasons limit its
widespread use. Urinary C-peptide creatinine ratio (UCPCR), a stable measure of
endogenous insulin secretion, is a noninvasive alternative. We aimed to compare
stimulated UCPCR in adults with HNF1A/4A MODY, type 1 diabetes, and type 2
diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Adults with diabetes for = 5 years, without renal
impairment, were studied (HNF1A MODY [n = 54], HNF4A MODY [n = 23], glucokinase
MODY [n = 20], type 1 diabetes [n = 69], and type 2 diabetes [n = 54]). The UCPCR
was collected in boric acid 120 min after the largest meal of the day and mailed 
for analysis. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were used to
identify optimal UCPCR cutoffs to differentiate HNF1A/4A MODY from type 1 and
type 2 diabetes.
RESULTS: UCPCR was lower in type 1 diabetes than HNF1A/4A MODY (median
[interquartile range]) (<0.02 nmol/mmol [<0.02 to <0.02] vs. 1.72 nmol/mmol
[0.98-2.90]; P < 0.0001). ROC curves showed excellent discrimination (area under 
curve [AUC] 0.98) and identified a cutoff UCPCR of = 0.2 nmol/mmol for
differentiating HNF1A/4A MODY from type 1 diabetes (97% sensitivity, 96%
specificity). UCPCR was lower in HNF1A/4A MODY than in type 2 diabetes (1.72
nmol/mmol [0.98-2.90] vs. 2.47 nmol/mmol [1.4-4.13]); P = 0.007). ROC curves
showed a weak distinction between HNF1A/4A MODY and type 2 diabetes (AUC 0.64).
CONCLUSIONS: UCPCR is a noninvasive outpatient tool that can be used to
discriminate HNF1A and HNF4A MODY from long-duration type 1 diabetes. To
differentiate MODY from type 1 diabetes of >5 years' duration, UCPCR could be
used to determine whether genetic testing is indicated.

PMCID: PMC3024335
PMID: 21270186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Diabetologia. 2011 May;54(5):1052-6. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2054-3. Epub 2011
Jan 26.

Type 2 diabetes risk allele near CENTD2 is associated with decreased
glucose-stimulated insulin release.

Nielsen T(1), Sparsø T, Grarup N, Jørgensen T, Pisinger C, Witte DR; Diabetes
Genetics Replication and Meta-analysis (DIAGRAM) Consortium, Hansen T, Pedersen
O.

Author information: 
(1)Marie Krogh Center for Metabolic Research, Section of Metabolic Genetics,
Faculty of Health Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Universitetsparken 1, 2100 
Copenhagen, Denmark. trine.nielsen@sund.ku.dk

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2011 May 54(5):1266.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: By combining multiple genome-wide association (GWA) studies and 
comprehensive replication efforts, 12 novel type 2 diabetes associated loci have 
recently been discovered. Here we evaluate the effect of lead variants of these
loci on estimates of insulin release and insulin resistance derived from an oral 
glucose tolerance test.
METHODS: We examined 12 lead variants in or near HMGA2, CENTD2 (also known as
ARAP1), KLF14, PRC1, TP53INP1, ZBED3, ZFAND6, CHCHD9, DUSP9, KCNQ1, BCL11A and
HNF1A in 5,722 middle-aged people from the population-based Inter99 sample.
RESULTS: Carriers of the major diabetogenic allele of rs1552224 in CENTD2 had
increased 30-min plasma glucose values (2.0%, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>2<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-5)) as well as 4.2%
reduced insulin release 30 min after an oral glucose load (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.001). Risk
allele carriers also had decreased BIGTT-acute insulin release (AIR), which is a 
surrogate measure of insulin release where sex, BMI, plasma glucose and serum
insulin are integrated (5.3%, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>8<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-7)). In addition, a decreased corrected
insulin response (CIR; 9.9%, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>3<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-8)) was observed. For rs5945326 near
DUSP9 on the X-chromosome we stratified according to sex. Male carriers of the
risk allele showed nominally decreased BIGTT-AIR (2.6%, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.01). No
associations with intermediate metabolic traits were found in women. For the
remaining ten lead variants no consistent associations were demonstrated.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Of the lead variants from 12 novel type 2 diabetes
associated loci, CENTD2 significantly associated with increased plasma glucose
values and decreased glucose-stimulated insulin release, suggesting that the
diabetogenic effect of this locus is mediated through an impaired pancreatic beta
cell function.

PMID: 21267535  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Ann Saudi Med. 2011 Mar-Apr;31(2):190-3. doi: 10.4103/0256-4947.75590.

Response to oral gliclazide in a pre-pubertal child with hepatic nuclear factor-1
alpha maturity onset diabetes of the young.

Habeb AM(1), George ET, Mathew V, Hattersley AL.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Endocrine Unit, Maternity and Children Hospital, Medina, Saudi
Arabia. amhabeb@hotmail.com

The term "maturity onset diabetes of the young" (MODY) describes a heterogeneous 
group of monogenic diabetes of which hepatic nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1a) MODY
is the most common. Patients with HNF-1a mutations typically present after
puberty, and oral sulfonylureas (SU) have been shown to be effective in adults
with this condition. A 7-year-old boy presented with asymptomatic hyperglycemia
ranging between 6.2 and 10.1 mmol/L and glycosuria for nearly a year. The child's
initial HbA 1c was 6.9% and the pancreatic Islet cell autoantibodies were
negative. His response to the oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) showed a large
increment of glucose from basal level of 7.7 to 21.1 mmol/L in 120 min. The mild 
presentation, family history, and negative autoantibodies were suggestive of
HNF-1a MODY, which was confirmed by mutation analysis. Initial management with
diet alone was not sufficient, but he responded well to 20 mg oral gliclazide
once a day with an improvement of HbA 1C from 7.2% to 6.5% within 3 months of
treatment. The case is an illustration of the clinical utility of molecular
genetic tests in the management of childhood diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3102482
PMID: 21242637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Mol Genet Metab. 2011 Apr;102(4):453-60. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2010.12.009. Epub
2010 Dec 21.

GCKR mutations in Japanese families with clustered type 2 diabetes.

Tanaka D(1), Nagashima K, Sasaki M, Yamada C, Funakoshi S, Akitomo K, Takenaka K,
Harada K, Koizumi A, Inagaki N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Clinical Nutrition, Graduate School of Medicine,
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The aim was to investigate the genetic background of familial
clustering of type 2 diabetes.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We recruited Japanese families with a 3-generation history 
of diabetes. Genome-wide linkage analysis was performed assuming an autosomal
dominant model. Genes in the linkage region were computationally prioritized
using Endeavour. We sequenced the candidate genes, and the frequencies of
detected nucleotide changes were then examined in normoglycemic controls.
RESULTS: To exclude known genetic factors, we sequenced 6 maturity onset diabetes
of the young (MODY) genes in 10 familial cases. Because we detected a MODY3
mutation HNF1A R583G in one case, we excluded this case from further
investigation. Linkage analysis revealed a significant linkage region on 2p25-22 
(LOD score=3.47) for 4 families. The 23.6-Mb linkage region contained 106 genes. 
Those genes were scored by computational prioritization. Eleven genes, i.e., top 
10% of 106 genes, were selected and considered primary candidates. Considering
their functions, we eliminated 3 well characterized genes and finally sequenced 8
genes. GCKR ranked highly in the computational prioritization. Mutations (minor
allele frequency less than 1%) in exons and the promoter of GCKR were found in
index cases of the families (3 of 18 alleles) more frequently than in controls (0
of 36 alleles, P=0.033). In one pedigree with 9 affected members, the mutation
GCKR g.6859C>G was concordant with affection status. No mutation in other 7 genes
that ranked highly in the prioritization was concordant with affection status in 
families.
CONCLUSIONS: We propose that GCKR is a susceptibility gene in Japanese families
with clustered diabetes. The family based approach seems to be complementary with
a large population study.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21236713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Eur J Endocrinol. 2011 Apr;164(4):513-20. doi: 10.1530/EJE-10-0842. Epub 2011 Jan
11.

Genetic and clinical characteristics of patients with HNF1A gene variations from 
the German-Austrian DPV database.

Awa WL(1), Thon A, Raile K, Grulich-Henn J, Meissner T, Schober E, Holl RW;
DPV-Wiss. Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Faculty of Medicine, University of Ulm,
Albert-Einstein-Allee 47, D-89081 Ulm, Germany. wendy.awa@uni-ulm.de

OBJECTIVE: To determine prevalence, genetic and phenotype characteristics of
patients with hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a (HNF1A) variants in the Diabetes
Patienten Verlaufsdokumenation (DPV) multicentre database and to examine the
influence of HNF1A mutation type, or location on clinical phenotypes.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Seventy-one DPV patients were labelled as HNF1A-MODY
(MODY3). Forty-four patients carried HNF1A mutations, while 27 patients were
found to have HNF1A polymorphisms only. Associations between mutation
type/position and age at disease onset, HbAlc, body mass index (BMI), diagnosis, 
family history and treatment modality were analysed using non-parametric
statistics (Wilcoxon test).
RESULTS: Patients with HNF1A mutations were 36% male, aged 14.1±5.8 years at
diagnosis, and slightly overweight (BMI-SDS: +0.8±1.1). Treatment was lifestyle
intervention (20.5%), insulin (35.3%), oral anti-diabetic (OAD, 43%) and both
insulin+OAD (15.9%). More patients with missense mutations (60%) than patients
with nonsense mutations/frameshift (23.8%) did not use insulin (P=0.03). No
differences were found with regard to mutation types, isoform or domain. We
identified several previously undescribed mutations in the cohort including
c.-158insGGGTTGG in the promoter region, G31X, E41X, Q130X, L162P, R245I, A269P, 
S355X, Q398X, Q473X, Q495X, E508X, P588fs-insGCCA and P588fs-delAC. Patients
carrying HNF1A polymorphisms were significantly younger at diagnosis than
patients with HNF1A mutations (10.9±4.2 vs 14.19±5.8 years; P=0.027), and all
carried I27L, S487N and A98V (n=3).
CONCLUSION: HNF1A-MODY is the second most frequent MODY diagnosis registered in
the DPV database, and previously undescribed HNF1A mutations account for about
one-third of HNF1A-MODY cases. Patients with HNF1A polymorphisms documented as
HNF1A-MODY were misclassified. They may have autoantibody-negative type 1B or
type 2 diabetes or may have other MODY types.

PMID: 21224407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. BMC Med Genet. 2011 Jan 5;12:1. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-12-1.

HNF1A G319S variant, active cigarette smoking and incident type 2 diabetes in
Aboriginal Canadians: a population-based epidemiological study.

Ley SH(1), Hegele RA, Harris SB, Mamakeesick M, Cao H, Connelly PW, Gittelsohn J,
Retnakaran R, Zinman B, Hanley AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, ON,
Canada.

BACKGROUND: In a recent report of large-scale association analysis, a type 2
diabetes susceptibility locus near HNF1A was identified in predominantly European
descent populations. A population-specific G319S polymorphism in HNF1A was
previously identified in Aboriginal Canadians who have a high prevalence of type 
2 diabetes. We aimed to investigate the association of the HNF1A G319S
polymorphism with incident type 2 diabetes and to assess whether clinical risk
variables for type 2 diabetes influence the association in an Aboriginal
population.
METHODS: Of 606 participants who were free of diabetes at baseline in 1993-1995, 
540 (89.1%) participated in 10-year follow-up assessments in 2003-2005. Fasting
glucose and a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test were obtained to determine
incident type 2 diabetes. Participants were genotyped for the HNF1A G319S
polymorphism. Interviewers administered questionnaires on smoking behavior.
RESULTS: The incidence rates of type 2 diabetes were 14.2% (55/388) in major
allele homozygotes and 31.2% (29/93) in minor allele carriers (p < 0.001). The
HNF1A G319S carrier status was associated with incident type 2 diabetes (odds
ratio [OR] 3.78 [95% CI 2.13-6.69]) after adjustment for age, sex, hypertension, 
triglyceride, HDL cholesterol, and waist circumference. A statistical interaction
was observed between HNF1A G319S and baseline active cigarette smoking on the
development of type 2 diabetes with similar adjustment (p = 0.006). When
participants were stratified by baseline smoking status, HNF1A G319S carriers who
were active smokers had increased risk of developing diabetes (OR 6.91 [95% CI
3.38-14.12]), while the association was attenuated to non-significance among
non-smokers (1.11 [0.40-3.08]).
CONCLUSIONS: The HNF1A G319S variant is associated with incident type 2 diabetes 
in Aboriginal Canadians. Furthermore, cigarette smoking appears to amplify
incident diabetes risk in carriers of HNF1A G319S.

PMCID: PMC3022797
PMID: 21208426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. PLoS Genet. 2010 Dec 23;6(12):e1001256. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1001256.

Genomics meets glycomics-the first GWAS study of human N-Glycome identifies HNF1a
as a master regulator of plasma protein fucosylation.

Lauc G(1), Essafi A, Huffman JE, Hayward C, Kneevic A, Kattla JJ, Polaek O,
Gornik O, Vitart V, Abrahams JL, Pucic M, Novokmet M, Redic I, Campbell S, Wild 
SH, Borovecki F, Wang W, Kolcic I, Zgaga L, Gyllensten U, Wilson JF, Wright AF,
Hastie ND, Campbell H, Rudd PM, Rudan I.

Author information: 
(1)Glycobiology Laboratory, Genos Ltd., Zagreb, Croatia.

Over half of all proteins are glycosylated, and alterations in glycosylation have
been observed in numerous physiological and pathological processes. Attached
glycans significantly affect protein function; but, contrary to polypeptides,
they are not directly encoded by genes, and the complex processes that regulate
their assembly are poorly understood. A novel approach combining genome-wide
association and high-throughput glycomics analysis of 2,705 individuals in three 
population cohorts showed that common variants in the Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor
1a (HNF1a) and fucosyltransferase genes FUT6 and FUT8 influence N-glycan levels
in human plasma. We show that HNF1a and its downstream target HNF4a regulate the 
expression of key fucosyltransferase and fucose biosynthesis genes. Moreover, we 
show that HNF1a is both necessary and sufficient to drive the expression of these
genes in hepatic cells. These results reveal a new role for HNF1a as a master
transcriptional regulator of multiple stages in the fucosylation process. This
mechanism has implications for the regulation of immunity, embryonic development,
and protein folding, as well as for our understanding of the molecular mechanisms
underlying cancer, coronary heart disease, and metabolic and inflammatory
disorders.

PMCID: PMC3009678
PMID: 21203500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Mar 15;20(6):1224-31. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddq551. Epub 2010 Dec 
31.

Genome-wide association study for C-reactive protein levels identified
pleiotropic associations in the IL6 locus.

Okada Y(1), Takahashi A, Ohmiya H, Kumasaka N, Kamatani Y, Hosono N, Tsunoda T,
Matsuda K, Tanaka T, Kubo M, Nakamura Y, Yamamoto K, Kamatani N.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Statistical Analysis, Center for Genomic Medicine, RIKEN,
Yokohama, Japan. yokada@src.riken.jp

C-reactive protein (CRP) is a hallmark acute-phase reactant and is widely used as
a blood marker for inflammation. Substantial roles of serum CRP levels in the
pathogenesis of diseases have been suggested, and investigation of the mechanisms
that regulate serum CRP levels would have a substantial clinical impact. Here,
through genome-wide association and replication studies performed using 12 854
Japanese subjects, we identified a significant association between serum CRP
levels and a single nucleotide polymorphism in the promoter region of
interleukin-6 (IL6) (rs2097677, P = 4.1 × 10(-11)), a typical pleiotropic
pro-inflammatory cytokine. Our study also replicated the associations in the CRP 
(rs3093059, P = 3.5 × 10(-21)) and HNF1A loci (rs7310409, P = 2.7 × 10(-8)).
Pleiotropic association analysis with hematological and biochemical traits using 
30 466 Japanese subjects demonstrated that the CRP-increasing allele of rs2097677
in the IL6 locus was significantly associated with an increased white blood cell 
count, platelet count and serum globulin and a decreased mean corpuscular
hemoglobin and mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration (P < 5.0 × 10(-4)),
although no pleiotropic association was observed in the CRP or HNF1A locus (a =
0.01). Our study demonstrated the pivotal role of the IL6 locus in the regulation
of serum CRP levels and inflammatory pathways.

PMID: 21196492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Clin Chim Acta. 2011 Apr 11;412(9-10):725-9. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2010.12.027. Epub
2010 Dec 31.

Effect of obesity on the association between common variations in the HNF1A gene 
region and C-reactive protein level in Taiwanese.

Hsu LA(1), Ko YL, Teng MS, Wu S, Chou HH, Chang PY, Chang HH.

Author information: 
(1)The First Cardiovascular Division, Department of Internal Medicine, Chang Gung
Memorial Hospital, Chang Gung University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: The level of C-reactive protein (CRP), an inflammatory biomarker that
predicts future cardiovascular events, is a heritable trait that has been
associated with variants of CRP and hepatic nuclear factor-1a (HNF1A) genes. Our 
aim was to test the statistical association between HNF1A genotypes/haplotypes
and serum CRP level in Taiwanese.
METHODS: A sample population of 617 Taiwanese subjects (all Han-Chinese origin)
was enrolled. Five HNF1A single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) rs1920792,
rs1169288, rs7310409, rs2464196, rs1169310 were genotyped and analyzed.
RESULTS: After adjusting for clinical covariates, minor alleles of all the 5
study SNPs were associated with decreased CRP level (P=0.0078, P=0.0107,
P=0.0006, P=0.0004 and P=0.0003, respectively). A common haplotype (TGATA) tagged
by the minor alleles of study SNPs was associated with significantly decreased
CRP level (P=0.0112). Subgroup analysis revealed that the association between
HNF1A genotypes and CRP level occurred only in non-obese subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: HNF1A polymorphisms are independently associated with CRP level in
Taiwanese. Further, HNF1A genotypes interact with obesity to set CRP level,
revealing that genetic determinants for CRP level may be different between obese 
and non-obese individuals.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21195701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Feb;25(2):339-47. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0362. Epub 2010 Dec
30.

Hnf1a (MODY3) regulates ß-cell-enriched MafA transcription factor expression.

Hunter CS(1), Maestro MA, Raum JC, Guo M, Thompson FH 3rd, Ferrer J, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

The expression pattern of genes important for pancreatic islet cell function
requires the actions of cell-enriched transcription factors. Musculoaponeurotic
fibrosarcoma homolog A (MafA) is a ß-cell-specific transcriptional activator
critical to adult islet ß-cell function, with MafA mutant mice manifesting
symptoms associated with human type 2 diabetes. Here, we describe that MafA
expression is controlled by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-a (Hnf1a), the
transcription factor gene mutated in the most common monoallelic form of maturity
onset diabetes of the young. There are six conserved sequence domains in the
5'-flanking MafA promoter, of which one, region 3 (R3) [base pair (bp)
-8118/-7750] is principally involved in controlling the unique developmental and 
adult islet ß-cell-specific expression pattern. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis demonstrated that Hnf1a bound specifically within R3. Furthermore, in
vitro DNA-binding experiments localized an Hnf1a regulatory element between bp
-7822 and -7793, an area previously associated with stimulation by the islet
developmental regulator, Islet1. However, site-directed mutational studies showed
that Hnf1a was essential to R3-driven reporter activation through bp -7816/-7811.
Significantly, MafA levels were dramatically reduced in the insulin(+) cell
population remaining in embryonic and adult Hnf1a(-/-) pancreata. Our results
demonstrate that Hnf1a regulates MafA in ß-cells and suggests that compromised
MafA expression contributes to ß-cell dysfunction in maturity onset diabetes of
the young.

PMCID: PMC3386541
PMID: 21193557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Gastroenterology. 2011 Feb;140(2):735-6. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2010.11.051. Epub 
2010 Dec 21.

Hepatic adenomas caused by somatic HNF1A mutations in children with biallelic
mismatch repair gene mutations.

Holter S, Pollett A, Zogopoulos G, Kim H, Schwenter F, Asai K, Gallinger S,
Clendenning M, Steinbach G, Jacobson A, Boycott KM.

PMID: 21182953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Aging Cell. 2011 Apr;10(2):305-17. doi: 10.1111/j.1474-9726.2010.00667.x. Epub
2011 Feb 1.

A nutrient-sensitive interaction between Sirt1 and HNF-1a regulates Crp
expression.

Grimm AA(1), Brace CS, Wang T, Stormo GD, Imai S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology Department of Genetics, Washington
University School of Medicine, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Silent information regulator 2 (Sir2) orthologs are an evolutionarily conserved
family of NAD-dependent protein deacetylases that regulate aging and longevity in
model organisms. The mammalian Sir2 ortholog Sirt1 regulates metabolic and stress
responses through the deacetylation of many transcriptional regulatory factors.
To elucidate the mechanism by which Sirt1 controls gene expression in response to
nutrient availability, we devised a bioinformatic screen combining gene
expression analysis with phylogenetic footprinting to identify transcription
factors as new candidate partners of Sirt1. One candidate target was HNF-1a, a
homeodomain transcription factor that regulates pancreatic ß-cell and hepatocyte 
functions and is commonly mutated in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY). Interestingly, Sirt1 physically interacts with HNF-1ain vitro but
does so in vivo only in nutrient-restricting conditions. This interaction
requires 12-24 h of nutrient restriction and is dependent on protein synthesis.
Both nutrient restriction and Sirt1 suppress HNF-1a transcriptional activity and 
the expression of one of its target genes, C-reactive protein (Crp), in mouse
primary hepatocytes. Pharmacological inhibition of Sirt1 blocks the suppression
of Crp by nutrient restriction. Similarly, Crp expression is also suppressed in
fasted and diet-restricted liver. Furthermore, Sirt1 and HNF-1a co-localize on
two HNF-1a binding sites on the Crp promoter, leading to decreased acetylation of
lysine 16 of histone H4 at these sites only in response to nutrient restriction. 
These findings reveal a novel nutrient-dependent interaction between Sirt1 and
HNF-1a and provide important insight into the molecular mechanism by which Sirt1 
mediates the anti-aging effects of diet restriction.

© 2011 The Authors. Aging Cell © 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd/Anatomical Society
of Great Britain and Ireland.

PMCID: PMC3079228
PMID: 21176092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Mol Med. 2011 Mar-Apr;17(3-4):256-65. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2010.00097. Epub 2010
Dec 15.

Differential effects of HNF-1a mutations associated with familial young-onset
diabetes on target gene regulation.

Galán M(1), García-Herrero CM, Azriel S, Gargallo M, Durán M, Gorgojo JJ, Andía
VM, Navas MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology III, Faculty of Medicine,
Complutense University of Madrid, Madrid, Spain.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-a (HNF-1a) is a homeodomain transcription factor
expressed in a variety of tissues (including liver and pancreas) that regulates a
wide range of genes. Heterozygous mutations in the gene encoding HNF-1a (HNF1A)
cause familial young-onset diabetes, also known as maturity-onset diabetes of the
young, type 3 (MODY3). The variability of the MODY3 clinical phenotype can be due
to environmental and genetic factors as well as to the type and position of
mutations. Thus, functional characterization of HNF1A mutations might provide
insight into the molecular defects explaining the variability of the MODY3
phenotype. We have functionally characterized six HNF1A mutations identified in
diabetic patients: two novel ones, p.Glu235Gly and c-57-64delCACGCGGT;c-55G>C;
and four previously described, p.Val133Met, p.Thr196Ala, p.Arg271Trp and
p.Pro379Arg. The effects of mutations on transcriptional activity have been
measured by reporter assays on a subset of HNF-1a target promoters in Cos7 and
Min6 cells. Target DNA binding affinities have been quantified by electrophoretic
mobility shift assay using bacterially expressed glutathione-S-transferase
(GST)-HNF-1a fusion proteins and nuclear extracts of transfected Cos7 cells. Our 
functional studies revealed that mutation c-57-64delCACGCGGT;c-55G>C reduces
HNF1A promoter activity in Min6 cells and that missense mutations have variable
effects. Mutation p.Arg271Trp impairs HNF-1a activity in all conditions tested,
whereas mutations p.Val133Met, p.Glu235Gly and p.Pro379Arg exert differential
effects depending on the target promoter. In contrast, substitution p.Thr196Ala
does not appear to alter HNF-1a function. Our results suggest that HNF1A
mutations may have differential effects on the regulation of specific target
genes, which could contribute to the variability of the MODY3 clinical phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3060974
PMID: 21170474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Acta Pharm. 2010 Dec;60(4):387-406. doi: 10.2478/v10007-010-0040-9.

Genetic polymorphisms in diabetes: influence on therapy with oral antidiabetics.

Glamoclija U(1), Jevric-Cauevic A.

Author information: 
(1)Hercegovinalijek d.o.o., Mostar, Bosnia and Herzegovina.
una.glamoclija@hercegovinalijek.ba

Due to new genetic insights, etiologic classification of diabetes is under
constant scrutiny. Hundreds, or even thousands, of genes are linked with type 2
diabetes. Three common variants (Lys23 of KCNJ11, Pro12 of PPARG, and the T
allele at rs7903146 of TCF7L2) have been shown to be predisposed to type 2
diabetes mellitus across many large studies. Individually, each of these
polymorphisms is only moderately predisposed to type 2 diabetes. On the other
hand, monogenic forms of diabetes such as MODY and neonatal diabetes are
characterized by unique clinical features and the possibility of applying a
tailored treatment.Genetic polymorphisms in drug-metabolizing enzymes,
transporters, receptors, and other drug targets have been linked to
interindividual differences in the efficacy and toxicity of a number of
medications. Mutations in genes important in drug absorption, distribution,
metabolism and excretion (ADME) play a critical role in pharmacogenetics of
diabetes.There are currently five major classes of oral pharmacological agents
available to treat type 2 diabetes: sulfonylureas, meglitinides, metformin (a
biguanide), thiazolidinediones, and a-glucosidase inhibitors. Other classes are
also mentioned in literature.In this work, different types of genetic mutations
(mutations of the gene for glucokinase, HNF 1a, HNF1ß and Kir6.2 and SUR1 subunit
of KATP channel, PPAR-<U+03B3>, OCT1 and OCT2, cytochromes, direct drug-receptor
(KCNJ11), as well as the factors that influence the development of the disease
(TCF7L2) and variants of genes that lead to hepatosteatosis caused by
thiazolidinediones) and their influence on the response to therapy with oral
antidiabetics will be reviewed.

PMID: 21169132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2011 Feb;91(2):208-12. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2010.11.024. Epub 2010 Dec 17.

HNF1 alpha gene coding regions mutations screening, in a Caucasian population
clinically characterized as MODY from Argentina.

Lopez AP(1), Foscaldi SA, Perez MS, Rodriguez M, Traversa M, Puchulu FM, Bergada 
I, Frechtel GD.

Author information: 
(1)Cátedra de Genética y Biología Molecular, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica,
Universidad de Buenos Aires, Junin 956, 1113 Buenos Aires, Argentina.
aplopez@ffyb.uba.ar

INTRODUCTION: There are at least six subtypes of Maturity Onset Diabetes of the
Young (MODY) with distinctive genetic causes. MODY 3 is caused by mutations in
HNF1A gene, an insulin transcription factor, so mutations in this gene are
associated with impaired insulin secretion. MODY 3 prevalence differs according
to the population analyzed, but it is one of the most frequent subtypes.
Therefore, our aims in this work were to find mutations present in the HNF1A gene
and provide information on their prevalence.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Mutations screening was done in a group of 80 unrelated
patients (average age 17.1 years) selected by clinical characterization of MODY, 
by SSCP electrophoresis followed by sequenciation.
RESULTS: We found eight mutations, of which six were novel and four sequence
variants, which were all novel. Therefore the prevalence of MODY 3 in this group 
was 10%. Compared clinical data between the non-MODY 3 patients and the MODY 3
diagnosed patients did not show any significant difference.
DISCUSSION: Eight patients were diagnosed as MODY 3 and new data about the
prevalence of that subtype is provided. Our results contribute to reveal novel
mutations, providing new data about the prevalence of that subtype.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21168233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Ann Pathol. 2010 Dec;30(6):439-47. doi: 10.1016/j.annpat.2010.10.005. Epub 2010
Nov 27.

[Interest of immunohistochemistry for the diagnosis of benign hepatocellular
tumors].

[Article in French]

Bioulac-Sage P(1), Balabaud C, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Pellegrin, CHU de Bordeaux, France.
paulette.bioulac-sage@chu-bordeaux.fr

In this review, we focus on the interest of immunohistochemistry first, to
differentiate the two types of benign hepatocellular nodules: focal nodular
hyperplasia (FNH) and hepatocellular adenoma (HCA) and second, to recognize the
different subtypes of HCA: HNF1a inactivated HCA, ß-catenin activated HCA and
inflammatory HCA. This pathomolecular classication followed the study of
genotype/phenotype correlations which led to the identification of
immunohistochemical data characteristic of each subgroup. Immunohistochemical
characteristics described on resected specimen are suitable on biopies of these
tumors, facilitating their diagnosis and therefore allowing a better management
of the patients.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21167430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Clinics (Sao Paulo). 2010;65(10):1059-60.

A missense TCF1 mutation in a patient with mody-3 and liver adenomatosis.

Lerario AM, Brito LP, Mariani BM, Fragoso MC, Machado MA, Teixeira R.

PMCID: PMC2972616
PMID: 21120312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Diabet Med. 2010 Dec;27(12):1454-8.

Familial young-onset forms of diabetes related to HNF4A and rare HNF1A molecular 
aetiologies.

Carette C(1), Dubois-Laforgue D, Saint-Martin C, Clauin S, Beaufils S, Larger E, 
Sola A, Mosnier-Pudar H, Timsit J, Bellanné-Chantelot C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetology, Université Paris Descartes, AP-HP Hôpital Cochin,
Paris, France. claire.carette@inserm.fr

OBJECTIVE: We have dissected the rare molecular anomalies that may affect
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a (HNF1A) and hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a (HNF4A) in 
patients with familial young-onset diabetes for whom HNF1A mutations have been
excluded by sequence analysis.
METHODS: Eighty-four unrelatedHNF1A-negative patients with diabetes diagnosed
before the age of 40 years, a family history of diabetes and the absence of
features suggestive of Type 2 diabetes were included. We analysed by sequencing
the HNF4A promoter and coding regions, the HNF1A promoter region and specific
regions of HNF1A(B) and HNF1A(C) isoforms and searched for large deletions of
HNF1A and HNF4A by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA).
RESULTS: We identified five novel HNF4A mutations (5 / 84, 6%), including four
missense and one in-frame deletion, and one mutation of the HNF1A promoter (1 /
84). Sequence analysis of isoform-specific coding regions of HNF1A did not reveal
any mutation. We next identified two whole gene deletions of HNF1A and HNF4A,
respectively (2 / 84, 2.4%).
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, the search for rare molecular events in HNF1A and HNF4A 
led us to elucidate 8 / 84 (9.5%) of our HNF1A-negative cases.This study shows
that genetic aetiologies remain to be elucidated in familial young-onset
diabetes. It also highlights the difficulty of the differential diagnosis with
Type 2 diabetes because of the wide clinical expression of monogenic young-onset 
diabetes and the absence of specific biomarkers.

PMID: 21105491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Am J Cardiol. 2010 Dec 1;106(11):1588-93. doi: 10.1016/j.amjcard.2010.07.044.

Effect of central obesity, low high-density lipoprotein cholesterol and
C-reactive protein polymorphisms on C-reactive protein levels during treatment
with Rosuvastatin (10 mg Daily).

Hu M(1), Lee MH, Mak VW, Tomlinson B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong SAR, China.

Plasma levels of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) are an important
predictor of cardiovascular disease, and achievement of lower targets of hsCRP
with rosuvastatin treatment was associated with improved cardiovascular outcomes.
The aim of this study was to examine whether hsCRP levels were related to genetic
variants and traditional cardiovascular risk factors in Chinese patients treated 
with rosuvastatin 10 mg/day. The relations were analyzed between on-treatment
plasma hsCRP concentrations and cardiovascular risk factors and 14
single-nucleotide polymorphisms in CRP and other candidate genes. In 281 patients
with a median plasma hsCRP level of 0.81 mg/L (interquartile range 0.46 to 1.86),
higher hsCRP levels were significantly associated with female gender, greater
waist circumference (WC), having diabetes, higher triglycerides, and lower
high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol. Three single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(rs1205, 3872G>A and rs2808630, 5237A>G in CRP and rs1169288, I27L in HNF1A) were
independently associated with hsCRP levels before and after adjustment for other 
variables. WC and the CRP rs1205 polymorphism showed the strongest relations with
hsCRP, and in multiple regression analysis, gender, WC, diabetes, triglycerides, 
HDL cholesterol, and the 3 genetic variants explained 35.5% of the variance in
hsCRP levels. The 2 CRP polymorphisms, female gender, higher WC, and lower HDL
cholesterol were associated with risk for having CRP concentrations = 1 mg/L. In 
conclusion, central obesity, low HDL cholesterol, and CRP polymorphisms are major
determinants of higher hsCRP levels in Chinese patients receiving treatment with 
rosuvastatin.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21094359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Br J Dermatol. 2011 Apr;164(4):729-37. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2133.2010.10130.x.
Epub 2011 Mar 16.

Vitamin D: a novel therapeutic approach for keloid, an in vitro analysis.

Zhang GY(1), Cheng T, Luan Q, Liao T, Nie CL, Zheng X, Xie XG, Gao WY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hand and Plastic Surgery, the 2nd Affiliated Hospital of Wenzhou
Medical College, Xueyuan West Road 109, Wenzhou 325027, Zhejiang Province, China.
guoyou.zhang@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Vitamin D and its metabolites play an important role in calcium
homeostasis, bone remodelling, hormone secretion, cell proliferation and
differentiation. Recent studies also suggest a beneficial role of vitamin D in
slowing the progression of tissue fibrosis. However, their effects on dermal
fibrosis and keloids are unknown. Objectives  To investigate the effect of
1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 (1,25D) in the pathogenesis of tissue fibrosis by keloid
fibroblasts (KFs).
METHODS: KFs were cultured and exposed to different concentrations of 1,25D in
the presence or absence of transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß1. KF phenotypes and
protein production were analysed by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction, Western blot, immunofluorescence and multiplex enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay techniques. Collagen synthesis was evaluated by measuring (3)
H-proline incorporation. The effect of 1,25D on cell proliferation and viability 
was evaluated by Formazan assay, proliferating cell nuclear antigen expression
and the colorimetric conversion of 3-[4, 5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl]-2,
5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide.
RESULTS: We confirmed the presence of vitamin D receptors (VDRs) in cultured
keloid fibroblasts. Fibroblasts transfected with a vitamin D response element
reporter construct and exposed to the active vitamin D metabolite 1,25D showed
increased promoter activity indicating VDR functionality in these cells.
Incubation of KFs with 1,25D suppressed TGF-ß1-induced collagen type I,
fibronectin and a-smooth muscle actin expression. 1,25D also modulated
plasminogen activator inhibitor-1 and matrix metalloproteinase-9 expression
induced by TGF-ß1. Interestingly, 1,25D induced hepatocyte growth factor mRNA
expression and protein secretion in keloid fibroblasts.
CONCLUSIONS: This study highlights key mechanistic pathways through which vitamin
D decreases fibrosis, and provides a rationale for studies to test vitamin D
supplementation as a preventive and/or early treatment strategy for keloid and
related fibrotic disorders.

© 2011 The Authors. BJD © 2011 British Association of Dermatologists.

PMID: 21070203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Breast Cancer Res Treat. 2011 Sep;129(2):433-50. doi: 10.1007/s10549-010-1240-1. 
Epub 2010 Nov 11.

Nuclear co-localization and functional interaction of COX-2 and HIF-1a
characterize bone metastasis of human breast carcinoma.

Maroni P(1), Matteucci E, Luzzati A, Perrucchini G, Bendinelli P, Desiderio MA.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Ortopedico Galeazzi-IRCCS, Via Riccardo Galeazzi, 4-20161, Milan,
Italy.

The aim of this article is to identify nuclear co-localization of COX-2 and
HIF-1a in human-bone metastasis of breast cancer, index of transcriptionally
activated cells and functional for gene expression. In particular, we verified
whether hypoxia exerted a direct role on metastasis-gene expression or through
COX-2 signaling, due to the relevance for clinical implications to individuate
molecular targets for diagnosis and therapy. The experiments were performed in
vitro with two metastatic clones, 1833 and MDA-231BO, and the parental MDA-MB231 
cells, in vivo (1833-xenograft model), and in human-bone metastasis specimens. In
1833 cells in vitro, COX-2 signaling pathway was critical for nuclear
HIF-1a-protein expression/translocation, mechanisms determining HIF-1 activity
and gene expression. The data were corroborated by immunohistochemistry in
human-bone metastasis specimens. COX-2 and HIF-1a showed wide co-localization in 
the nucleus, indicative of COX-2-nuclear import in transcriptionally activated
metastatic cells and consistent with COX-2-HIF-1a functional interaction. A
network of microenvironmental signals controlled COX-2 induction and HIF-1
activation downstream. In fact, hypoxia through HGF and TGF-ß1 autoregulatory
loops triggered a specific array of transcription factors responsible for COX-2
transactivation. The novelty was that HGF and TGF-ß1 biological signals were
produced by hypoxic metastatic cells and, therefore, the microenvironment seemed 
to be modified by metastatic-cell engraftment in the bone. In agreement, HIF-1a
expression in bone marrow supportive cells occurred in metastasis-bearing
animals. Altogether, the data supported the pre-metastatic-niche theory. Our
observations might be useful to design therapies against bone metastasis, by
affecting the phenotype changes of metastatic cells occurring at the secondary
growth site through COX-2-HIF-1 interaction.

PMID: 21069452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Nov 9;11:157. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-157.

Effect of the rs2259816 polymorphism in the HNF1A gene on circulating levels of
c-reactive protein and coronary artery disease (the ludwigshafen risk and
cardiovascular health study).

Kleber ME(1), Grammer TB, Renner W, März W.

Author information: 
(1)Synlab Centre of Laboratory Diagnostics, Heidelberg, Germany.

BACKGROUND: C-reactive protein is a well established marker of inflammation and
has been used to predict future cardiovascular disease. It is still controversial
if it plays an active role in the development of cardiovascular disease.
Recently, polymorphisms in the gene for HNF1a have been linked to the levels of
C-reactive protein and coronary artery disease.
METHODS: We investigated the association of the rs2259816 polymorphism in the
HNF1A gene with the circulating level of C-reactive protein and the hazard of
coronary artery disease in the LURIC Study cohort.
RESULTS: Compared to CC homozygotes, the level of C-reactive protein was
decreased in carriers of at least one A-allele. Each A-allele decreased CRP by
approximately 15%. The odds ratio for coronary artery disease was only very
slightly increased in carriers of the A-allele and this association did not reach
statistical significance.
CONCLUSIONS: In the LURIC Study cohort the A-allele of rs2259816 is associated
with decreased CRP but not with coronary artery disease.

PMCID: PMC2994837
PMID: 21062467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. QJM. 2011 Oct;104(10):881-3. doi: 10.1093/qjmed/hcq195. Epub 2010 Nov 4.

Monogenic diabetes, renal dysplasia and hypopituitarism: a patient with a HNF1A
mutation.

Simms RJ(1), Sayer JA, Quinton R, Walker M, Ellard S, Goodship TH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Newcastle University, Central Parkway, Newcastle 
upon Tyne NE1 3BZ, UK. roz.simms@ncl.ac.uk

PMID: 21051477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Biochemistry. 2010 Nov 30;49(47):10187-97. doi: 10.1021/bi1015056. Epub 2010 Nov 
4.

Kinetic stability may determine the interaction dynamics of the bifunctional
protein DCoH1, the dimerization cofactor of the transcription factor HNF-1a .

Rho H(1), Jones CN, Rose RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Structural Biochemistry, 128 Polk Hall, North
Carolina State University, Raleigh, North Carolina 27695, United States.

The two disparate functions of DCoH1 (dimerization cofactor of HNF-1)/PCD
(pterin-4a-carbinolamine dehydratase) are associated with a change in oligomeric 
state. DCoH dimers enhance the activity of the diabetes-associated transcription 
factor HNF-1a (hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a), while the PCD activity of DCoH1
homotetramers aids in aromatic amino acid metabolism. These complexes compete for
the same interface of the DCoH dimer. Formation of the DCoH1/HNF-1a complex
requires cofolding. The homotetramer of the DCoH1 paralogue, DCoH2, interacts
with HNF-1a through simple mixing. To further investigate regulation of
DCoH/HNF-1a complex formation, we measured the stability of the DCoH1
homotetramer through unfolding studies by intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence.
DCoH2 unfolding is reversible. Surprisingly, the DCoH1 homotetramer is resistant 
to guanidine unfolding but refolds at a much lower guanidine concentration. We
show that a point mutation at the DCoH1 tetramer interface, Thr 51 Ser, overcomes
the dissociation barrier of the homotetramer and increases the interaction with
HNF-1a. The 1.8 Å´ resolution crystal structure of DCoH1 T51S shows the presence 
of an ordered water molecule at the tetramer interface, as in DCoH2, which may
destabilize the homotetramer. The equilibrium unfolding data were fit to a
two-state model with no apparent intermediate. Folding intermediates were
detectable by size exclusion chromatography. For wild-type DCoH1 the
intermediates changed with time, suggesting a kinetic origin for the unfolding
barrier of the homotetramer. We propose an unfolding pathway in which the
tetramer unfolds slowly, but the dimer folds reversibly. Implications for
regulation of DCoH1/HNF-1a complex formation are discussed.

PMID: 21047120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Cancer Sci. 2010 Dec;101(12):2658-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1349-7006.2010.01736.x. Epub
2010 Oct 12.

Sorafenib efficacy in ovarian clear cell carcinoma revealed by transcriptome
profiling.

Matsumura N(1), Mandai M, Okamoto T, Yamaguchi K, Yamamura S, Oura T, Baba T,
Hamanishi J, Kang HS, Matsui S, Mori S, Murphy SK, Konishi I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Kyoto University Graduate School of
Medicine, Kyoto, Japan.

The purpose of this study was to investigate a new modality of therapy against
ovarian clear cell carcinoma (OCCC), a chemoresistant subtype of ovarian cancer. 
Microarray datasets of ovarian cancer cell lines and cancer tissues were analyzed
using bioinformatic tools. The gene expression profile of OCCC was similar to
that of renal cell carcinoma (RCC). This similarity was at least partially due to
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 pathway activation common to both malignancies. In
addition, oncogenic pathway alterations were characteristic of OCCC including
hypoxia inducible factor 1 alpha subunit and relatively high Ras activities.
Therefore, we predicted that the multi-kinase inhibitor sorafenib, which is
approved for RCC and suppresses Ras activity, would also be effective against
OCCC. Orally administered sorafenib (40 mg/kg per day) significantly inhibited
tumor growth in nude mice when it was given after inoculation with the OCCC cell 
line RMG-2 (P = 0.002). Furthermore, sorafenib significantly reduced tumor size
when it was administered to established RMG-2 tumors (P = 0.0002), while
intraperitoneal injection of cisplatin (5 mg/kg per week) did not. In conclusion,
the prominent anti-tumor effect of sorafenib against OCCC indicates that
sorafenib is a promising candidate drug and supports the need for clinical trials
using sorafenib against OCCC. This report demonstrates a method to utilize
genome-wide information to facilitate translational research for treatments
against less common subtypes of cancers.

© 2010 Japanese Cancer Association.

PMID: 21040214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Oncotarget. 2010 Sep;1(5):379-85.

The Siah2-HIF-FoxA2 axis in prostate cancer  new markers and therapeutic
opportunities.

Qi J(1), Pellecchia M, Ronai ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Recent studies indicate the importance of the ubiquitin ligase Siah2 in control
of more aggressive prostate tumors  namely, neuroendocrine (NE) prostate tumors 
and prostate adenocarcinoma (PCa) harboring neuroendocrine lesions.
Siah2-dependent expression and activity of HIF-1a regulate its availability to
form a transcriptional complex with FoxA2, resulting in expression of specific
target genes, including Hes6, Sox9 and Jmjd1a, whose co-expression is sufficient 
for formation of NE tumors and NE lesions in PCa. These studies provide novel
markers to diagnose and monitor formation of NE lesions and NE tumors.
Furthermore, defining the regulatory axis consisting of Siah2 and HIF-1a/FoxA2
cooperation suggests novel therapeutic modalities to treat these most aggressive 
forms of prostate cancer. Here we review current understanding of Siah role in
control of hypoxia and prostate tumor development and highlight potential
approaches for targeting components along Siah-regulated pathways.

PMCID: PMC2964873
PMID: 21037926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 14;286(2):919-28. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.144949. Epub 2010
Oct 27.

Inhibition of suppressive T cell factor 1 (TCF-1) isoforms in naive CD4+ T cells 
is mediated by IL-4/STAT6 signaling.

Maier E(1), Hebenstreit D, Posselt G, Hammerl P, Duschl A, Horejs-Hoeck J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, University of Salzburg, Hellbrunner Strasse
34, A-5020 Salzburg, Austria.

The Wnt pathway transcription factor T cell factor 1 (TCF-1) plays essential
roles in the control of several developmental processes, including T cell
development in the thymus. Although previously regarded as being required only
during early T cell development, recent studies demonstrate an important role for
TCF-1 in T helper 2 (Th2) cell polarization. TCF-1 was shown to activate
expression of the Th2 transcription factor GATA-binding protein 3 (GATA3) and
thus to promote the development of IL-4-producing Th2 cells independent of STAT6 
signaling. In this study, we show that TCF-1 is down-regulated in human naive
CD4(+) T cells cultured under Th2-polarizing conditions. The down-regulation is
largely due to the polarizing cytokine IL-4 because IL-4 alone is sufficient to
substantially inhibit TCF-1 expression. The IL-4-induced suppression of TCF-1 is 
mediated by STAT6, as shown by electrophoretic mobility shift assays, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, and STAT6 knockdown experiments. Moreover, we found that
IL-4/STAT6 predominantly inhibits the shorter, dominant-negative TCF-1 isoforms, 
which were reported to inhibit IL-4 transcription. Thus, this study provides a
model for an IL-4/STAT6-dependent fine tuning mechanism of TCF-1-driven T helper 
cell polarization.

PMCID: PMC3019123
PMID: 20980261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. DNA Cell Biol. 2011 Mar;30(3):137-47. doi: 10.1089/dna.2010.1097. Epub 2010 Oct
27.

The mouse alpha-albumin (afamin) promoter is differentially regulated by
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1ß.

Liu H(1), Ren H, Spear BT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

Alpha-albumin (AFM), a member of the albumin gene family that also includes
albumin, alpha-fetoprotein, and vitamin D-binding protein, is expressed
predominantly in the liver and activated at birth. Here, we identify two
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1)-binding sites in the AFM promoter that are
highly conserved in different mammals. These two sites bind HNF1a and HNF1ß. The 
distal site (centered at -132, relative to AFM exon 1) is more important than
proximal site (centered at -58), based on HNF1 binding and mutational analysis in
transfected cells. Our data indicate that HNF1a is a more potent activator of AFM
promoter than is HNF1ß. However, HNF1ß can act in a dominant manner to inhibit
HNF1a-dependent transactivation of the AFM promoter when both proteins are
expressed together. This suggests that the differential timing with which the
albumin family genes are activated in the liver may be influenced by their
responsiveness to HNF1a and HNF1ß. Our comparison of HNF1-binding sites in the
promoters in the albumin family of genes indicates that the primordial
albumin-like gene contained two HNF1 sites; one of these sites was lost from the 
albumin promoter, but both sites still are present in other members of this gene 
family.

PMCID: PMC3045788
PMID: 20979532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 24;285(52):41172-86. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.167585. Epub
2010 Oct 26.

Transgenic mice with -6A haplotype of the human angiotensinogen gene have
increased blood pressure compared with -6G haplotype.

Jain S(1), Tillinger A, Mopidevi B, Pandey VG, Chauhan CK, Fiering SN, Warming S,
Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, New York Medical College, Valhalla, New York 10595,
USA.

Hypertension is a serious risk factor for cardiovascular disease, and the
angiotensinogen (AGT) gene locus is associated with human essential hypertension.
The human AGT (hAGT) gene has an A/G polymorphism at -6, and the -6A allele is
associated with increased blood pressure. However, transgenic mice containing 1.2
kb of the promoter with -6A of the hAGT gene show neither increased plasma AGT
level nor increased blood pressure compared with -6G. We have found that the hAGT
gene has three additional SNPs (A/G at -1670, C/G at -1562, and T/G at -1561).
Variants -1670A, -1562C, and -1561T almost always occur with -6A, and variants
-1670G, -1562G, and -1561G almost always occur with -6G. Therefore, the hAGT gene
may be subdivided into either -6A or -6G haplotypes. We show that these
polymorphisms affect the binding of HNF-1a and glucocorticoid receptor to the
promoter, and a reporter construct containing a 1.8-kb hAGT gene promoter with
-6A haplotype has 4-fold increased glucocorticoid-induced promoter activity as
compared with -6G haplotype. In order to understand the physiological
significance of these haplotypes in an in vivo situation, we have generated
double transgenic mice containing either the -6A or -6G haplotype of the hAGT
gene and the human renin gene. Our ChIP assay shows that HNF-1a and
glucocorticoid receptor have stronger affinity for the chromatin obtained from
the liver of transgenic mice containing -6A haplotype. Our studies also show that
transgenic mice containing -6A haplotype have increased plasma AGT level and
increased blood pressure as compared with -6G haplotype. Our studies explain the 
molecular mechanism involved in association of the -6A allele of the hAGT gene
with hypertension.

PMCID: PMC3003415
PMID: 20978123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Diabet Med. 2010 Nov;27(11):1331-3. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2010.03095.x.

Clinical application of best practice guidelines for the genetic diagnosis of
MODY2 and MODY3.

Incani M, Cambuli VM, Cavalot F, Congiu T, Paderi M, Sentinelli F, Romeo S, Poy
P, Soro M, Pilia S, Loche S, Cossu E, Trovati M, Mariotti S, Baroni MG.

PMID: 20950394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Dec;24(12):2343-55. doi: 10.1210/me.2010-0130. Epub 2010 Oct
13.

Metabolomics identifies novel Hnf1alpha-dependent physiological pathways in vivo.

Bonzo JA(1), Patterson AD, Krausz KW, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. .

Mutations in the HNF1A gene cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3,
one of the most common genetic causes of non-insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes 
mellitus. Although the whole-body Hnf1a-null mouse recapitulates the low insulin 
levels and high blood glucose observed in human maturity-onset diabetes of the
young type 3 patients, these mice also suffer from Laron dwarfism and
aminoaciduria, suggesting a role for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a (Hnf1a) in
pathophysiologies distinct from non-insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes mellitus.
In an effort to identify pathways associated with inactivation of Hnf1a, an
ultraperformance liquid chromatography coupled to mass spectrometry-based
metabolomics study was conducted on urine samples from wild-type and Hnf1a-null
mice. An increase in phenylalanine metabolites is in agreement with the known
regulation of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene by Hnf1a. This metabolomic
approach also identified urinary biomarkers for three tissue-specific
dysfunctions previously unassociated with Hnf1a function. 1) Elevated
indolelactate coupled to decreased xanthurenic acid also indicated defects in the
indole and kynurenine pathways of tryptophan metabolism, respectively. 2) An
increase in the neutral amino acid proline in the urine of Hnf1a-null mice
correlated with loss of renal apical membrane transporters of the Slc6a family.
3) Further investigation into the mechanism of aldosterone increase revealed an
overactive adrenal gland in Hnf1a-null mice possibly due to inhibition of
negative feedback regulation. Although the phenotype of the Hnf1a-null mouse is
complex, metabolomics has opened the door to investigation of several
physiological systems in which Hnf1a may be a critical regulatory component.

PMCID: PMC2999475
PMID: 20943816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Differentiation. 2011 Jan;81(1):42-8. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2010.08.005. Epub 2010 
Oct 12.

Enhanced hepatic differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells after pretreatment
with injured liver tissue.

Mohsin S(1), Shams S, Ali Nasir G, Khan M, Javaid Awan S, Khan SN, Riazuddin S.

Author information: 
(1)National Center of Excellence in Molecular Biology, 87-West Canal Bank Road,
University of the Punjab, Lahore, Pakistan.

Liver failure represents a serious challenge for cell based therapies.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) possess potential for regeneration of fibrotic
liver; however, there is a dire need to improve their hepatic differentiation.
This study examines a pretreatment strategy to augment the differentiation
potential of MSCs towards hepatic lineage. MSCs were isolated from C57BL/6 wild
type mice and were characterized by flow cytometry for CD44 (92.4%), CD90
(96.6%), CD105 (94.7%), CD45 (0.8%) and CD34 (1.4%) markers. To improve the
differentiation potential of MSCs towards hepatic lineage, cells were pretreated 
with injured liver tissue in an in-vitro model, which resulted in high expression
of albumin, cytokeratin 8, 18, TAT and HNF1a as compared to untreated MSCs. The
efficacy of pretreated MSCs was evaluated by preparing in-vivo mouse model with
liver fibrosis by intraperitoneal administration of CCl(4). Pretreated MSCs were 
transplanted in the left lateral lobe of mice with liver fibrosis and showed
enhanced localization and differentiation abilities after 1 month. The expression
for cytokeratin 8, 18, albumin and Bcl-xl was up-regulated and that of HGF, Bax
and Caspase- 3 was down-regulated in animals transplanted with pretreated MSCs.
Sirus red staining also confirmed a significant reduction in the fibrotic area in
liver tissue transplanted with pretreated MSCs as compared to untreated MSCs and 
was concomitant with improved serum levels of bilirubin and alkaline phosphatase 
(ALP). Therefore, it was concluded that pretreatment with injured liver tissue
augment homing and hepatic differentiation abilities of MSCs and provides an
improved procedure for the treatment of liver fibrosis.

Copyright © 2010 International Society of Differentiation. Published by Elsevier 
B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20943307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. J Bone Miner Metab. 2011 May;29(3):291-9. doi: 10.1007/s00774-010-0222-z. Epub
2010 Oct 2.

Regulation of Tcf7 by Runx2 in chondrocyte maturation and proliferation.

Mikasa M(1), Rokutanda S, Komori H, Ito K, Tsang YS, Date Y, Yoshida CA, Komori
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Unit of Basic Medical Sciences, Nagasaki
University Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, 1-7-1 Sakamoto, Nagasaki
852-8588, Japan.

Runx2 plays important roles in the regulation of chondrocyte differentiation and 
proliferation; however, the Runx2 target molecules still remain to be
investigated. We searched the genes upregulated by the introduction of Runx2 into
Runx2(-/-) chondrocytes using microarray and found that Tcf7 is upregulated by
Runx2. Thus, we examined the functions of Runx2 in the regulation of the Tcf/Lef 
family of transcription factors. Runx2 induced Tcf7 and Lef1 strongly, but Tcf7l1
and Tcf7l2 only slightly in Runx2(-/-) chondrocytes; the expressions of Tcf7 and 
Tcf7l2 were reduced in Runx2(-/-) cartilaginous skeletons and calvaria, and Tcf7 
showed a similar expression pattern to Runx2. In reporter assays, Runx2 mildly
activated the 8.6 and 1.8 kb Tcf7 promoter constructs. The reporter assays using 
the deletion constructs of the 1.8-kb fragment showed that the 0.3-kb promoter
region is responsible for the Runx2-dependent transcriptional activation. To
investigate the function of Tcf7 in skeletal development, we generated
dominant-negative (dn) Tcf7 transgenic mice using the Col2a1 promoter. Dn-Tcf7
transgenic embryos showed dwarfism, and mineralization was retarded in limbs,
ribs, and vertebrae in a manner dependent on the expression levels of the
transgene. In situ hybridization analysis showed that endochondral ossification
is retarded in dn-Tcf7 transgenic embryos due to the decelerated chondrocyte
maturation. Further, BrdU labeling showed a reduction in chondrocyte
proliferation in the proliferating layer of the growth plate in dn-Tcf7
transgenic embryos. These findings indicate that Runx2 regulates chondrocyte
maturation and proliferation at least partly through the induction of Tcf7.

PMID: 20890621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Dev Biol. 2010 Dec 1;348(1):97-106. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.09.009. Epub 2010
Sep 27.

Wnt/ß-catenin signaling in the dental mesenchyme regulates incisor development by
regulating Bmp4.

Fujimori S(1), Novak H, Weissenböck M, Jussila M, Gonçalves A, Zeller R, Galloway
J, Thesleff I, Hartmann C.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, Dr. Bohrgasse 7, Vienna, Austria.

Loss- and gain-of function approaches modulating canonical Wnt/ß-catenin activity
have established a role for the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway during tooth development.
Here we show that Wnt/ß-catenin signaling is required in the dental mesenchyme
for normal incisor development, as locally restricted genetic inactivation of
ß-catenin results in a splitting of the incisor placode, giving rise to two
incisors. Molecularly this is first associated with down-regulation of Bmp4 and
subsequent splitting of the Shh domain at a subsequent stage. The latter
phenotype can be mimicked by ectopic application of the BMP antagonist Noggin.
Conditional genetic inactivation of Bmp4 in the mesenchyme reveals that
mesenchymal BMP4 activity is required for maintenance of Shh expression in the
dental ectoderm. Taken together our results indicate that ß-catenin together with
Lef1 and Tcf1 are required to activate Bmp4 expression in order to maintain Shh
expression in the dental ectoderm. This provides a mechanism whereby the number
of incisors arising from one placode can be varied through local alterations of a
mesenchymal signaling circuit involving ß-catenin, Lef1, Tcf1 and Bmp4.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2997430
PMID: 20883686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Animal. 2010 Oct;4(10):1619-27. doi: 10.1017/S175173111000087X.

The Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha ( HNF1A) gene is associated with fatness
and loin muscle area in the pig.

Fan B(1), Du ZQ, Rothschild MF.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Animal Science and Center for Integrated Animal Genomics, Iowa 
State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

The significance of hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) in ß-cell development and
function has been generally recognized in humans, as evidenced by their
associations with cases of maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY). Common
Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1A), Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta
(HNF1B) and Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF4A) mutations could lead to
monogenic forms 3, 5 and 1 of diabetes mellitus, respectively, and were
characterized by MODY in humans. In this study, multiple variants were discovered
in the porcine HNF1A and HNF4A genes, and one single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) was detected in the HNF1B gene. Using the Iowa State University Berkshire ×
Yorkshire pig resource population, the HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A genes were mapped
on chromosomes 14, 12 and 17, respectively. The linkage disequilibrium (LD)
analyses indicated that most of the HNF1A variants were not in strong LD with
each other; however, nearly all of them were highly significantly (P < 0.01)
associated with loin muscle area (LMA). The SNPs c.327-19G>T and c.1768+40_23del 
were significantly (P < 0.05) associated with backfat and total lipid percentage,
and the latter was also associated with muscle glycogen metabolism measures. Four
major haplotypes were observed and the association analyses suggested that
haplotype 3 (-CGCGD-, I indicates Insertion and D indicates Deletion) was
favorable for reduced backfat, while haplotype 1 (-CACGI-) was unfavorably
associated with backfat and LMA. There was no significant interaction effect on
backfat among the SNPs c.327-19G>T, c.1768+40_23del of the HNF1A gene and
c.646C>T of the transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene. These findings
suggest that the HNF1A gene has significant effects on both fatness- and meat
production-related traits. No significant associations with production traits
with the SNPs from the HNF1B and HNF4A genes were observed in the study.

PMID: 22445113  [PubMed]


476. Diabetologia. 2010 Dec;53(12):2465-7. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1908-4. Epub 2010
Sep 25.

The search for undiagnosed MODY patients: what is the next step?

Malecki MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 15 
Kopernika Street, 31-501 Krakow, Poland. malecki_malecki@yahoo.com

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2010 Dec;53(12):2504-8.

PMID: 20865241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. BMC Endocr Disord. 2010 Sep 23;10:16. doi: 10.1186/1472-6823-10-16.

Disease progression and search for monogenic diabetes among children with new
onset type 1 diabetes negative for ICA, GAD- and IA-2 Antibodies.

Pörksen S(1), Laborie LB, Nielsen L, Louise Max Andersen M, Sandal T, de Wet H,
Schwarcz E, Aman J, Swift P, Kocova M, Schönle EJ, de Beaufort C, Hougaard P,
Ashcroft F, Molven A, Knip M, Mortensen HB, Hansen L, Njølstad PR; Hvidøre Study 
Group on Childhood Diabetes.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Glostrup Hospital & University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. spoerksen@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: To investigate disease progression the first 12 months after
diagnosis in children with type 1 diabetes negative (AAB negative) for pancreatic
autoantibodies [islet cell autoantibodies(ICA), glutamic acid decarboxylase
antibodies (GADA) and insulinoma-associated antigen-2 antibodies (IA-2A)].
Furthermore the study aimed at determining whether mutations in KCNJ11, ABCC8,
HNF1A, HNF4A or INS are common in AAB negative diabetes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In 261 newly diagnosed children with type 1 diabetes, we
measured residual ß-cell function, ICA, GADA, and IA-2A at 1, 6 and 12 months
after diagnosis. The genes KCNJ11, ABCC8, HNF1A, HNF4A and INS were sequenced in 
subjects AAB negative at diagnosis. We expressed recombinant K-ATP channels in
Xenopus oocytes to analyse the functional effects of an ABCC8 mutation.
RESULTS: Twenty-four patients (9.1%) tested AAB negative after one month.
Patients, who were AAB-negative throughout the 12-month period, had higher
residual ß-cell function (P = 0.002), lower blood glucose (P = 0.004), received
less insulin (P = 0.05) and had lower HbA1c (P = 0.02) 12 months after diagnosis.
One patient had a heterozygous mutation leading to the substitution of arginine
at residue 1530 of SUR1 (ABCC8) by cysteine. Functional analyses of recombinant
K-ATP channels showed that R1530C markedly reduced the sensitivity of the K-ATP
channel to inhibition by MgATP. Morover, the channel was highly sensitive to
sulphonylureas. However, there was no effect of sulfonylurea treatment after four
weeks on 1.0-1.2 mg/kg/24 h glibenclamide.
CONCLUSION: GAD, IA-2A, and ICA negative children with new onset type 1 diabetes 
have slower disease progression as assessed by residual beta-cell function and
improved glycemic control 12 months after diagnosis. One out of 24 had a mutation
in ABCC8, suggesting that screening of ABCC8 should be considered in patients
with AAB negative type 1 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2955624
PMID: 20863361  [PubMed]


478. Nat Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;12(10):1007-13. doi: 10.1038/ncb2102. Epub 2010 Sep 19.

O2 regulates stem cells through Wnt/ß-catenin signalling.

Mazumdar J(1), O'Brien WT, Johnson RS, LaManna JC, Chavez JC, Klein PS, Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, University of Pennsylvania School
of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2010 Oct;12(10):926-7.

Stem cells reside in specialized microenvironments or 'niches' that regulate
their function. In vitro studies using hypoxic culture conditions (<5% O2) have
revealed strong regulatory links between O2 availability and functions of stem
and precursor cells. Although some stem cells are perivascular, others may occupy
hypoxic niches and be regulated by O2 gradients. However, the underlying
mechanisms remain unclear. Here, we show that hypoxia inducible factor-1a
(HIF-1a), a principal mediator of hypoxic adaptations, modulates Wnt/ß-catenin
signalling in hypoxic embryonic stem (ES) cells by enhancing ß-catenin activation
and expression of the downstream effectors LEF-1 and TCF-1. This regulation
extends to primary cells, including isolated neural stem cells (NSCs), and is not
observed in differentiated cells. In vivo, Wnt/ß-catenin activity is closely
associated with low O2 regions in the subgranular zone of the hippocampus, a key 
NSC niche. Hif-1a deletion impairs hippocampal Wnt-dependent processes, including
NSC proliferation, differentiation and neuronal maturation. This decline
correlates with reduced Wnt/ß-catenin signalling in the subgranular zone. O2
availability, therefore, may have a direct role in stem cell regulation through
HIF-1a modulation of Wnt/ß-catenin signalling.

PMCID: PMC3144143
PMID: 20852629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Biotechnol. 2010 Oct 15;150(2):259-67. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2010.09.929. Epub
2010 Sep 17.

Boosting native promoter activities with non-adjacent response-element multimers.

Huang J(1), Levitsky LL, Rhoads DB.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrine Unit, MassGeneral Hospital for Children and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114-2696, USA. jmhuang@partners.org

Effective gene therapy requires regulated gene expression and vector safety. We
developed a strategy to exponentially increase native promoter activity while
retaining inherent regulation by inserting multi-copy response elements (REs)
into non-adjacent locations. For the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4a-dependent
Hnf1a (MODY3) gene, HNF4a stimulation increased from 5- to 90-fold by inserting 3
additional HNF4a REs (H4REs). Constructing a promoter with two 4xH4REs 0.25kb
apart by duplicating the 4xH4RE fragment increased stimulation to >1000-fold.
HNF4a-induced protein expression by the duplicate 4xH4RE Hnf1a promoter was
comparable to a viral promoter. Converting the two Apolipoprotein C3 (ApoC3)
H4REs spaced 0.61kb apart to 4xH4REs achieved a similar result. Increasing
spacing to 2.1kb with non-promoter DNA abolished the augmentation. Finally,
converting the HNF1a RE of the HNF4A (MODY1) P2 promoter to 4xH1RE and adding a
second 4xH1RE 0.84kb upstream increased HNF1a stimulation from 26- to >200-fold. 
Deleting intervening DNA to produce 0.23-kb spacing increased stimulation to
>500-fold. Spaced multi-copy RE motifs is a novel strategy for engineering
promoters that boosts activity far beyond other techniques. Augmentation of three
promoters suggests that this approach is potentially applicable to other
promoters for gene therapy and might obviate the need for viral promoters.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20850486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Hepatology. 2010 Oct;52(4):1431-42. doi: 10.1002/hep.23818.

Liver-enriched transcription factors regulate microRNA-122 that targets CUTL1
during liver development.

Xu H(1), He JH, Xiao ZD, Zhang QQ, Chen YQ, Zhou H, Qu LH.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the Ministry of Education, State Key
Laboratory for Biocontrol, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic
of China.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2010 Oct;52(4):1517; author reply 1518.

MicroRNA-122 (miR-122) is a liver-specific microRNA whose expression is
specifically turned on in the mouse liver during embryogenesis, thus it is
expected to be involved in liver development. However, the role of miR-122 in
liver development and its potential underlying mechanism remain unclear. Here, we
show that the expression of miR-122 is closely correlated with four
liver-enriched transcription factors (LETFs)-hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1a, 
HNF3ß, HNF4a, and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) a-in the livers of
developing mouse embryos and in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) cell lines. 
Correspondingly, promoter analysis revealed that these LETFs are coordinately
involved in the transcriptional regulation of miR-122, and three HNFs directly
bind to the miR-122 promoter as transcriptional activators. Using a luciferase
reporter system, we identified a group of miR-122 targets involved in
proliferation and differentiation regulation. Among these targets, the most
prominently repressed target was CUTL1, a transcriptional repressor of genes
specifying terminal differentiation in multiple cell lineages, including
hepatocytes. We show that CUTL1 expression is gradually silenced at the
posttranscriptional level during mouse liver development. Overexpression and
knockdown studies both showed that miR-122 repressed CUTL1 protein expression in 
HCC cell lines. Finally, we show that the stable restoration of miR-122 in HepG2 
cells suppresses cellular proliferation and activates the expression of three
hepatocyte functional genes, including the cholesterol-7a hydroxylase gene
(CYP7A1), a known target of CUTL1 in hepatocytes.CONCLUSION: Our study provides a
model in which miR-122 functions as an effector of LETFs and contributes to liver
development by regulating the balance between proliferation and differentiation
of hepatocytes, at least by targeting CUTL1.

PMID: 20842632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. J Biol Chem. 2010 Nov 12;285(46):36199-206. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.138107. Epub
2010 Sep 14.

AMP-activated protein kinase mediates apoptosis in response to bioenergetic
stress through activation of the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 homology domain-3-only
protein BMF.

Kilbride SM(1), Farrelly AM, Bonner C, Ward MW, Nyhan KC, Concannon CG, Wollheim 
CB, Byrne MM, Prehn JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, Royal College of Surgeons in
Ireland, 123 St Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland.

Heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1A
(HNF1A) gene result in the pathogenesis of maturity-onset diabetes-of-the-young
type 3, (HNF1A-MODY). This disorder is characterized by a primary defect in
metabolism-secretion coupling and decreased beta cell mass, attributed to
excessive beta cell apoptosis. Here, we investigated the link between energy
stress and apoptosis activation following HNF1A inactivation. This study employed
single cell fluorescent microscopy, flow cytometry, gene expression analysis, and
gene silencing to study the effects of overexpression of dominant-negative
(DN)-HNF1A expression on cellular bioenergetics and apoptosis in INS-1 cells.
Induction of DN-HNF1A expression led to reduced ATP levels and diminished the
bioenergetic response to glucose. This was coupled with activation of the
bioenergetic stress sensor AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK), which preceded
the onset of apoptosis. Pharmacological activation of AMPK using aminoimidazole
carboxamide ribonucleotide (AICAR) was sufficient to induce apoptosis in naive
cells. Conversely, inhibition of AMPK with compound C or AMPKa gene silencing
protected against DN-HNF1A-induced apoptosis. Interestingly, AMPK mediated the
induction of the pro-apoptotic Bcl-2 homology domain-3-only protein Bmf
(Bcl-2-modifying factor). Bmf expression was also elevated in islets of DN-HNF1A 
transgenic mice. Furthermore, knockdown of Bmf expression in INS-1 cells using
siRNA was sufficient to protect against DN-HNF1A-induced apoptosis. Our study
suggests that overexpression of DN-HNF1A induces bioenergetic stress and
activation of AMPK. This in turn mediates the transcriptional activation of the
pro-apoptotic Bcl-2-homology protein BMF, coupling prolonged energy stress to
apoptosis activation.

PMCID: PMC2975242
PMID: 20841353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Aug;24(4):605-15. doi:
10.1016/j.beem.2010.05.008.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young and pregnancy.

Colom C(1), Corcoy R.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona,
Spain.

Three and a half decades after the clinical description of "Maturity Onset
Diabetes of the Young" (MODY), and despite its low prevalence, important
knowledge has been gathered concerning its genetic basis, molecular pathways,
clinical phenotypes and pharmacogenetic issues. This knowledge has proved to be
important not only for the attention of subjects carrying a mutation but also for
the insight provided in Type 2 diabetes mellitus. In recent years, a shift from
the term "MODY" to "monogenic diabetes" has taken place, the latter term being a 
better and more comprehensive descriptor. We stick to the "old" term because
information on other types of monogenic diabetes and pregnancy is scarce. In this
review we perform an overview of the entity, the prevalence rates reported in
women with gestational diabetes mellitus and the specific impact of each type on 
pregnancy outcome.

2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20832739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Mol Pharmacol. 2010 Dec;78(6):1079-87. doi: 10.1124/mol.110.065201. Epub 2010 Sep
9.

The human organic anion transporter genes OAT5 and OAT7 are transactivated by
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a (HNF-1a).

Klein K(1), Jüngst C, Mwinyi J, Stieger B, Krempler F, Patsch W, Eloranta JJ,
Kullak-Ublick GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Hospital
Zurich, Rämistrasse 100, Zurich, Switzerland.

Organic anion transporters (OATs) are anion exchangers that transport small
hydrophilic anions and diuretics, antibiotics, nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs, antiviral nucleoside analogs, and antitumor drugs across membrane barriers
of epithelia of diverse organs. Three OATs are present in human liver: OAT2,
OAT5, and OAT7. Given that hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a (HNF-1a) has previously
been shown to regulate the expression of several hepatocellular transporter
genes, we investigated whether the liver-specific human OAT genes are also
regulated by HNF-1a. Short interfering RNAs targeting HNF-1a reduced endogenous
expression of OAT5 and OAT7, but not OAT2, in human liver-derived Huh7 cells.
Luciferase reporter gene constructs containing the OAT5 (SLC22A10) and OAT7
(SLC22A9) promoter regions were transactivated by HNF-1a in HepG2 cells. Two
putative HNF-1a binding elements in the proximal OAT5 promoter, located at
nucleotides -68/-56 and -173/-160, and one element in the OAT7 promoter, located 
at nucleotides -14/-2 relative to the transcription start site, were shown to
bind HNF-1a in electromobility shift assays, and these promoter regions also
interacted with HNF-1a in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. A correlation
between HNF-1a and OAT5 (r = 0.134, P < 0.05) or OAT7 (r = 0.461, P < 0.001) mRNA
expression levels in surgical liver biopsies from 75 patients further supported
an important role of HNF-1a in the regulation of OAT gene expression.

PMID: 20829431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Liver Transpl. 2010 Sep;16(9):1086-97. doi: 10.1002/lt.22111.

Hepatic differentiation of liver-derived progenitor cells and their
characterization by microRNA analysis.

Chen Y(1), Zhou H, Sarver AL, Zeng Y, Roy-Chowdhury J, Steer CJ, Sahin MB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

We recently reported the isolation and characterization of a novel population of 
progenitor cells called liver-derived progenitor cells (LDPCs), which could
differentiate into functional hepatocytes in vitro. However, our original studies
resulted in relatively low and variable hepatic differentiation efficiency
without validation of in vivo potential of LDPCs. Here, we report an efficient
and robust hepatic differentiation of LDPCs under well-defined culture conditions
and in vivo differentiation of LDPCs to mature hepatocytes. In addition to
morphological studies, we performed reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) and microRNA analyses of the in vitro hepatic differentiation
of LDPCs to substantiate the efficiency of the differentiation process. The
histological studies on the differentiated LDPCs showed that more than 50% of the
cells were positive for albumin, cytokeratin 18, and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 
alpha and contained glycogen particles, all consistent with differentiation to
functional hepatocytes. We also demonstrated by RT-PCR that upon differentiation,
they expressed several markers found in mature hepatocytes and the microRNA
profile of LDPCs became similar to the profile of fresh hepatocytes, confirming
our morphological findings. Finally, the transplantation of LDPCs in a dipeptidyl
peptidase IV-deficient (DPPIV(-/-)) rat model showed that LDPCs were able to
engraft and form mature hepatocytes in the livers of the DPPIV(-/-) rats. In
summary, LDPCs are a unique population of liver progenitor cells capable of
hepatic differentiation both in vitro and in vivo, which makes them a potentially
valuable resource for important applications such as pharmacological studies and 
cell therapies for a variety of liver disorders.

(c) 2010 AASLD.

PMID: 20818747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2010 Dec;299(6):F1339-47. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00077.2010. Epub 2010 Sep 1.

The transcription factor HNF1a regulates expression of chloride-proton exchanger 
ClC-5 in the renal proximal tubule.

Tanaka K(1), Terryn S, Geffers L, Garbay S, Pontoglio M, Devuyst O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo,
Japan.

The Cl(-)/H(+) exchanger ClC-5 is essential for the endocytic activity of the
proximal tubule cells and the tubular clearance of proteins filtered in the
glomeruli. The mechanisms that regulate the expression of ClC-5 in general and
its specific expression in the proximal tubule are unknown. In this study, we
investigated the hypothesis that the hepatocyte nuclear transcription factor
HNF1a, which is predominantly expressed in proximal tubule segments, may directly
regulate the expression of ClC-5. In situ hybridization demonstrated that the
expression of Clcn5 overlaps with that of Hnf1a in the developing kidney as well 
as in absorptive epithelia, including the digestive tract and yolk sac. Multiple 
binding sites for HNF1 were mapped in the 5'-regulatory sequences of the mouse
and human Clcn5/CLCN5 genes. The transactivation of the Clcn5/CLCN5 promoter by
HNF1a was verified in vitro, and the binding of HNF1a to the Clcn5 promoter in
vivo was confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation in mouse kidney. The
expression of Clcn5 was reduced in the proximal tubule segments of HNF1a-null
kidneys, and it was rescued upon transfection of HNF1a-null cells with wild-type 
but not with mutant HNF1a. These data demonstrate that HNF1a directly regulates
the expression of ClC-5 in the renal proximal tubule and yield insights into the 
mechanisms governing epithelial differentiation and specialized transport
activities in the kidney.

PMID: 20810608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 24;5(8):e12378. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012378.

Loss of hepatocyte-nuclear-factor-1alpha impacts on adult mouse intestinal
epithelial cell growth and cell lineages differentiation.

Lussier CR(1), Brial F, Roy SA, Langlois MJ, Verdu EF, Rivard N, Perreault N,
Boudreau F.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Anatomie et Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des
Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Although Hnf1alpha is crucial for pancreas and liver
functions, it is believed to play a limited functional role for intestinal
epithelial functions. The aim of this study was to assess the consequences of
abrogating Hnf1alpha on the maintenance of adult small intestinal epithelial
functions.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: An Hnf1alpha knockout mouse model was used.
Assessment of histological abnormalities, crypt epithelial cell proliferation,
epithelial barrier, glucose transport and signalling pathways were measured in
these animals. Changes in global gene expression were also analyzed. Mice lacking
Hnf1alpha displayed increased crypt proliferation and intestinalomegaly as well
as a disturbance of intestinal epithelial cell lineages production during adult
life. This phenotype was associated with a decrease of the mucosal barrier
function and lumen-to-blood glucose delivery. The mammalian target of rapamycin
(mTOR) signalling pathway was found to be overly activated in the small intestine
of adult Hnf1alpha mutant mice. The intestinal epithelium of Hnf1alpha null mice 
displayed a reduction of the enteroendocrine cell population. An impact was also 
observed on proper Paneth cell differentiation with abnormalities in the granule 
exocytosis pathway.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Together, these results unravel a functional role for
Hnf1alpha in regulating adult intestinal growth and sustaining the functions of
intestinal epithelial cell lineages.

PMCID: PMC2927538
PMID: 20808783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Immunity. 2010 Aug 27;33(2):229-40. doi: 10.1016/j.immuni.2010.08.002.

Differentiation and persistence of memory CD8(+) T cells depend on T cell factor 
1.

Zhou X(1), Yu S, Zhao DM, Harty JT, Badovinac VP, Xue HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

Comment in
    Immunity. 2010 Aug 27;33(2):145-7.

T cell factor 1 (TCF-1) is a transcription factor known to act downstream of the 
canonical Wnt pathway and is essential for normal T cell development. However,
its physiological roles in mature CD8(+) T cell responses are unknown. Here we
showed that TCF-1 deficiency limited proliferation of CD8(+) effector T cells and
impaired their differentiation toward a central memory phenotype. Moreover,
TCF-1-deficient memory CD8(+) T cells were progressively lost over time,
exhibiting reduced expression of the antiapoptotic molecule Bcl-2 and
interleukin-2 receptor beta chain and diminished IL-15-driven proliferation.
TCF-1 was directly associated with the Eomes allele and the Wnt-TCF-1 pathway was
necessary and sufficient for optimal Eomes expression in naive and memory CD8(+) 
T cells. Importantly, forced expression of Eomes partly protected TCF-1-deficient
memory CD8(+) T cells from time-dependent attrition. Our studies thus identify
TCF-1 as a critical player in a transcriptional program that regulates memory CD8
differentiation and longevity.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2928475
PMID: 20727791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Diabetes Care. 2010 Sep;33(9):1919-24. doi: 10.2337/dc10-0288. Epub 2010 Aug 19.

Assessment of high-sensitivity C-reactive protein levels as diagnostic
discriminator of maturity-onset diabetes of the young due to HNF1A mutations.

Owen KR(1), Thanabalasingham G, James TJ, Karpe F, Farmer AJ, McCarthy MI, Gloyn 
AL.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford,
Oxford, U.K. katharine.owen@drl.ox.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: Despite the clinical importance of an accurate diagnosis in
individuals with monogenic forms of diabetes, restricted access to genetic
testing leaves many patients with undiagnosed diabetes. Recently, common
variation near the HNF1 homeobox A (HNF1A) gene was shown to influence C-reactive
protein levels in healthy adults. We hypothesized that serum levels of
high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hs-CRP) could represent a clinically useful 
biomarker for the identification of HNF1A mutations causing maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY).
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Serum hs-CRP was measured in subjects with
HNF1A-MODY (n = 31), autoimmune diabetes (n = 316), type 2 diabetes (n = 240),
and glucokinase (GCK) MODY (n = 24) and in nondiabetic individuals (n = 198). The
discriminative accuracy of hs-CRP was evaluated through receiver operating
characteristic (ROC) curve analysis, and performance was compared with standard
diagnostic criteria. Our primary analyses excluded approximately 11% of subjects 
in whom the single available hs-CRP measurement was >10 mg/l.
RESULTS: Geometric mean (SD range) hs-CRP levels were significantly lower (P <or=
0.009) for HNF1A-MODY individuals, 0.20 (0.03-1.14) mg/l, than for any other
group: autoimmune diabetes 0.58 (0.10-2.75) mg/l, type 2 diabetes 1.33
(0.28-6.14) mg/l, GCK-MODY 1.01 (0.19-5.33) mg/l, and nondiabetic 0.48
(0.10-2.42) mg/l. The ROC-derived C-statistic for discriminating HNF1A-MODY and
type 2 diabetes was 0.8. Measurement of hs-CRP, either alone or in combination
with current diagnostic criteria, was superior to current diagnostic criteria
alone. Sensitivity and specificity for the combined criteria approached 80%.
CONCLUSIONS: Serum hs-CRP levels are markedly lower in HNF1A-MODY than in other
forms of diabetes. hs-CRP has potential as a widely available, cost-effective
screening test to support more precise targeting of MODY diagnostic testing.

PMCID: PMC2928334
PMID: 20724646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2010 Aug 18;9:39. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-9-39.

Assessing the association of the HNF1A G319S variant with C-reactive protein in
Aboriginal Canadians: a population-based epidemiological study.

Ley SH(1), Hegele RA, Connelly PW, Harris SB, Mamakeesick M, Cao H, Gittelsohn J,
Retnakaran R, Zinman B, Hanley AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.

BACKGROUND: C-reactive protein (CRP), a biomarker of inflammation, has been
associated with increased risk of developing cardiovascular disease. Common
variants of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1A (HNF1A) gene encoding HNF-1alpha
have been associated with plasma CRP in predominantly European Caucasian samples.
HNF1A might therefore have an impact on vascular disease and diabetes risk that
is mediated by CRP. In an Aboriginal Canadian population, a private polymorphism,
HNF1A G319S, was associated with increased prevalence of type 2 diabetes.
However, it has not been investigated whether this association is mediated by
CRP. We aimed to investigate whether CRP was mediating the association between
HNF1A G319S and type 2 diabetes in an Aboriginal Canadian population with a high 
prevalence of diabetes.
METHODS: A total of 718 individuals who participated in a diabetes prevalence and
risk factor survey were included in the current analysis. Participants were
genotyped for HNF1A G319S. Fasting plasma samples were analyzed for CRP. Fasting 
plasma glucose and a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test were obtained to determine 
type 2 diabetes.
RESULTS: The prevalence rate of type 2 diabetes was 17.4% (125/718) using the
1999 World Health Organization definition and was higher among S319 allele
carriers compared to G/G homozygotes (p < 0.0001). Among participants without
type 2 diabetes, CRP levels were higher among G/G homozygotes (1.64 [95%
confidence interval 1.35-2.00] mg/l) than in S319 carriers (1.26 [1.04-1.54]
mg/l) (p = 0.009) after adjustment for age, sex, 2-h post-load glucose, waist
circumference, and serum amyloid A. CRP levels were elevated among those with
diabetes after similar adjustment (4.39 [95% confidence interval 3.09-6.23] and
4.44 [3.13-6.30] mg/L, respectively), and no significant difference in CRP was
observed between S319 carriers and non-carriers (p = 0.95).
CONCLUSIONS: CRP levels were lower in S319 allele carriers of the HNF1A gene
compared to non-carriers among individuals without diabetes, but this difference 
was not present among those with diabetes, who uniformly had elevated CRP levels.
Therefore, while HNF1A appears to influence CRP concentrations in the
non-diabetic state, chronic elevation of CRP is unlikely mediating the
association between the HNF1A polymorphism and the high prevalence of type 2
diabetes in this Aboriginal population.

PMCID: PMC2929219
PMID: 20716378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Diabetes Care. 2010 Nov;33(11):2336-8. doi: 10.2337/dc10-0561. Epub 2010 Aug 12.

Double heterozygous mutations involving both HNF1A/MODY3 and HNF4A/MODY1 genes: a
case report.

Forlani G(1), Zucchini S, Di Rocco A, Di Luzio R, Scipione M, Marasco E, Romeo G,
Marchesini G, Mantovani V.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Metabolic Diseases and Clinical Dietetics, Alma Mater Studiorum
University of Bologna, Center for Applied Biomedical Research (CRBA), S.
Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy. gabriele.forlani@aosp.bo.it

OBJECTIVE: We describe a maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) case with
mutations involving both HNF4A and HNF1A genes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A male patient was diagnosed with diabetes at age
17; the metabolic control rapidly worsened to insulin requirement. At that time
no relatives were known to be affected by diabetes, which was diagnosed years
later in both the parents (father at age 50 years, mother at age 54 years) and
the sister (at age 32 years, during pregnancy).
RESULTS: The genetic screening showed a double heterozygosity for the mutation
p.E508K in the HNF1A/MODY3 gene and the novel variant p.R80Q in the HNF4A/MODY1
gene. The genetic testing of the family showed that the father carried the MODY3 
mutation while the mother, the sister, and her two children carried the MODY1
mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: MODY1 and MODY3 mutations may interact by chance to give a more
severe form of diabetes (younger age at presentation and early need of insulin
therapy to control hyperglycemia).

PMCID: PMC2963490
PMID: 20705777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2011 Mar;119(3):182-5. doi: 10.1055/s-0030-1262816.
Epub 2010 Aug 5.

Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) caused by a novel nonsense mutation
E41X in the HNF-1a gene.

Buchbinder S(1), Zorn M, Bierhaus A, Nawroth PP, Müller M, Schilling T.

Author information: 
(1)University of Heidelberg, Department of Internal Medicine 1 and Clinical
Chemistry, Heidelberg, Germany.

The most common cause of Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) are
mutations in the Hepatic Nuclear Factor 1a (HNF-1a) gene, resulting in MODY3. In 
a family afflicted with diabetes, a novel nonsense mutation in HNF-1a, E41X,
causing a termination codon behind the dimerization domain, was found. The
penetrance in individuals older than 25 years was 81.8%. The age at manifestation
of diabetes ranged from 18 to 63 years, only 2 out of 10 diabetic individuals
developed the disease at ages younger than 25 years. Although diabetes duration
lasted up to 35 years in this family, only one family member suffered from
diabetic complications. Additional polymorphisms in HNF-1a, I27L and S487N, were 
found in this pedigree. Despite its biological inactivity, S487N polymorphism led
in combination with E41X to a significant earlier manifestation of diabetes,
whereas I27L polymorphism or increased Body Mass Index (BMI) did not. In spite of
the severe gene defect, which truncates the protein behind the dimerization
domain, the phenotype of E41X was relatively benign without frequent diabetic
complications.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 20690076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Diabetes. 2010 Nov;59(11):2799-808. doi: 10.2337/db09-1478. Epub 2010 Aug 3.

INS-1 cells undergoing caspase-dependent apoptosis enhance the regenerative
capacity of neighboring cells.

Bonner C(1), Bacon S, Concannon CG, Rizvi SR, Baquié M, Farrelly AM, Kilbride SM,
Dussmann H, Ward MW, Boulanger CM, Wollheim CB, Graf R, Byrne MM, Prehn JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Medical Physics, Royal College of Surgeons in
Ireland, Dublin, Ireland.

OBJECTIVE: In diabetes, ß-cell mass is not static but in a constant process of
cell death and renewal. Inactivating mutations in transcription factor 1
(tcf-1)/hepatocyte nuclear factor1a (hnf1a) result in decreased ß-cell mass and
HNF1A-maturity onset diabetes of the young (HNF1A-MODY). Here, we investigated
the effect of a dominant-negative HNF1A mutant (DN-HNF1A) induced apoptosis on
the regenerative capacity of INS-1 cells.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: DN-HNF1A was expressed in INS-1 cells using a
reverse tetracycline-dependent transactivator system. Gene(s)/protein(s) involved
in ß-cell regeneration were investigated by real-time quantitative RT-PCR,
Western blotting, and immunohistochemistry. Pancreatic stone protein/regenerating
protein (PSP/reg) serum levels in human subjects were detected by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay.
RESULTS: We detected a prominent induction of PSP/reg at the gene and protein
level during DN-HNF1A-induced apoptosis. Elevated PSP/reg levels were also
detected in islets of transgenic HNF1A-MODY mice and in the serum of HNF1A-MODY
patients. The induction of PSP/reg was glucose dependent and mediated by caspase 
activation during apoptosis. Interestingly, the supernatant from
DN-HNF1A-expressing cells, but not DN-HNF1A-expressing cells treated with
zVAD.fmk, was sufficient to induce PSP/reg gene expression and increase cell
proliferation in naïve, untreated INS-1 cells. Further experiments demonstrated
that annexin-V-positive microparticles originating from apoptosing INS-1 cells
mediated the induction of PSP/reg. Treatment with recombinant PSP/reg reversed
the phenotype of DN-HNF1A-induced cells by stimulating cell proliferation and
increasing insulin gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that apoptosing INS-1 cells shed microparticles 
that may stimulate PSP/reg induction in neighboring cells, a mechanism that may
facilitate the recovery of ß-cell mass in HNF1A-MODY.

PMCID: PMC2963538
PMID: 20682686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Endocrinol. 2010 Oct;207(1):77-86. doi: 10.1677/JOE-10-0044. Epub 2010 Jul 30.

Insulin treatment and high-fat diet feeding reduces the expression of three Tcf
genes in rodent pancreas.

Columbus J(1), Chiang Y, Shao W, Zhang N, Wang D, Gaisano HY, Wang Q, Irwin DM,
Jin T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

Specific single-nucleotide polymorphisms in intronic regions of human TCF7L2 are 
associated with an elevated risk of developing type 2 diabetes. Whether Tcf7l2 is
expressed in pancreatic islets of rodent species at a considerable level,
however, remains controversial. We used RT-PCR and quantitative RT-PCR to examine
Tcf7l2 expression in rodent gut, pancreas, isolated pancreatic islets, and
cultured cell lines. The expression level of Tcf7l2 was relatively lower in the
pancreas compared to the gut or the pancreatic ß-cell line Ins-1. Immunostaining 
did not detect a Tcf7l2 signal in mouse pancreatic islets. Endogenous canonical
Wnt activity was not appreciable in the pancreas of TOPGAL transgenic mice. Both 
Tcf7 and Tcf7l1, but not Lef1, were expressed in the pancreas. The expression of 
the three Tcf genes (Tcf7, Tcf7l1, and Tcf7l2) in the pancreas was reduced by
treatment with insulin or high-fat diet feeding, in contrast to the stimulation
of Tcf7l2 expression by insulin in the gut. We suggest that hyperinsulinemia
represses Tcf gene expression in the pancreas. Whether and how this reduction
alters the function of pancreatic ß cells during hyperinsulinemia deserves
further investigation.

PMID: 20675304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Mol Syndromol. 2010 Feb;1(1):42-5. doi: 10.1159/000275671. Epub 2010 Jan 11.

A microdeletion at 12q24.31 can mimic beckwith-wiedemann syndrome neonatally.

Baple E(1), Palmer R, Hennekam RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Great Ormond Street Hospital for Children,
UCL, London, UK.

We report on a patient who was initially suspected to have Beckwith-Wiedemann
syndrome because of recurrent neonatal hypoglycaemias, macroglossia and
overgrowth, but in whom no 11p15 abnormality could be found. Follow-up showed
continued overgrowth and disturbed glucose homeostasis, a marked developmental
delay, and severe behavioural problems especially caused by anxieties. Array
comparative genomic hybridization analysis showed a de novo 12q24.31 interstitial
deletion, which was confirmed by fluorescence in situ hybridization. The deleted 
region contains amongst others: HNF1 homeobox A (HNF1A) which is important for
the regulation of gene expression in the liver and involved in maturity-onset
diabetes of the young type 3 and insulin resistance; acyl-CoA dehydrogenase short
chain (ACADS) which encodes an enzyme important in mitochondrial fatty acid
beta-oxidation and can cause short-chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenese (SCAD)
deficiency, and purinergic receptor P2X7 (P2RX7) which encodes a ligand-gated ion
channel, and of which polymorphisms are found with increased frequency in
patients with psychiatric disorders, especially anxieties. We conclude the
present patient has a hitherto undescribed contiguous gene syndrome, which can
initially resemble Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome.

PMCID: PMC2883851
PMID: 20648245  [PubMed]


495. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Jun;15(6):1329-38. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01128.x.
Epub 2010 Jul 12.

High fat diet-induced liver steatosis promotes an increase in liver mitochondrial
biogenesis in response to hypoxia.

Carabelli J(1), Burgueño AL, Rosselli MS, Gianotti TF, Lago NR, Pirola CJ,
Sookoian S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Molecular Hepatology, Institute of Medical Research
A Lanari-IDIM, University of Buenos Aires-National Council of Scientific and
Technological Research (CONICET), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos Aires, Buenos Aires, 
Argentina.

Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) copy number plays a key role in the pathophysiology of 
metabolic syndrome-related phenotypes, but its role in non-alcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD) is not well understood. We evaluated the molecular mechanisms
that may be involved in the regulation of liver mtDNA content in a
high-fat-induced rat model of NAFLD. In particular, we tested the hypothesis that
liver mtDNA copy number is associated with liver expression of HIF-1a. Rats were 
given either standard chow diet (SCD, n = 10) or high-fat diet (HFD, n = 15) for 
20 weeks. Subsequently, mtDNA quantification using nuclear DNA (nDNA) as a
reference was carried out using real time quantitative PCR. HFD induced a
significant increase in liver mtDNA/nDNA ratio, which significantly correlated
with the liver triglyceride content (R: 0.29, P < 0.05). The liver mtDNA/nDNA
ratio significantly correlated with the hepatic expression of HIF-1a mRNA (R:
0.37, P < 0.001); liver HIF-1a mRNA was significantly higher in the HFD group. In
addition, liver cytochrome c oxidase subunit IV isoform 1 (COX4I1) mRNA
expression was also positively correlated with liver mtDNA content. The hepatic
expression of mRNA of transcriptional factors that regulate mitochondrial
biogenesis, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator-1a (PGC-1a) and PGC-1ß, nuclear respiratory factor-1 (NRF-1),
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor d and Tfam, was not associated with
the liver mtDNA content. Neither hepatocyte apoptosis nor oxidative stress was
involved in the HIF-1a-mediated increase in mtDNA copy number. In conclusion, we 
found that HFD promotes an increase in liver mitochondrial biogenesis in response
to hypoxia via HIF-1a, probably to enhance the mitochondrial function as well as 
to accommodate the metabolic load.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4373333
PMID: 20629985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Toxicol Sci. 2010 Oct;117(2):515-23. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq208. Epub 2010 Jul 8.

The oxygen tension modulates acetaminophen-induced mitochondrial oxidant stress
and cell injury in cultured hepatocytes.

Yan HM(1), Ramachandran A, Bajt ML, Lemasters JJ, Jaeschke H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutics, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA.

Oxidative stress and mitochondrial dysfunction play an important role in
acetaminophen (APAP)-induced hepatocyte cell death. However, exact mechanisms
involved in the process are controversial, in part, because of the disparity in
findings between in vitro and in vivo studies. A major difference in this context
is the oxygen tension, with cells in culture being exposed to 21% oxygen, whereas
those in the liver experience a gradient from 3 to 9% oxygen. To determine if
oxygen tensions could modulate hepatocyte responses to APAP, primary mouse
hepatocytes were treated with 5mM APAP for up to 15 h under various oxygen
tensions and mitochondrial dysfunction
(2,3-bis[2-methoxy-4-nitro-5-sulfophenyl]-2H-tetrazolium-5-carboxyanilide inner
salt assay, 5,5',6,6'-tetrachloro-1,1,3,3-tetraethylbenzimidazolylcarbocyanine
iodide [JC-1] fluorescence ratio) and cell death (lactate dehydrogenase release) 
was evaluated. Mitochondrial reactive oxygen and reactive nitrogen species were
measured using Mitosox Red or dihydrorhodamine fluorescence and nitrotyrosine
staining, respectively. Exposure of hepatocytes to 5mM APAP at 21% O(2) resulted 
in mitochondrial oxidant stress formation, deterioration of mitochondrial
function, and loss of membrane potential as early as 6 h and massive cell death
at 15 h. Culture of cells at 10% O(2) resulted in no increase in mitochondrial
oxidant stress and better preserved mitochondrial function at 6 h and significant
protection against cell death at 15 h. Furthermore, dihydrorhodamine fluorescence
was significantly attenuated at 10% oxygen. Cells cultured at 5% oxygen were also
protected but showed evidence of hypoxia (accumulation of lactate and nuclear
translocation of hypoxia-inducing factor-1a). These results suggest that oxygen
tension can modulate hepatocyte responses to APAP, with low physiological levels 
(10%) decreasing mitochondrial oxidant stress and delaying hepatocyte cell death.

PMCID: PMC2940407
PMID: 20616211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Cancer Cell. 2010 Jul 13;18(1):23-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.05.024.

Siah2-dependent concerted activity of HIF and FoxA2 regulates formation of
neuroendocrine phenotype and neuroendocrine prostate tumors.

Qi J(1), Nakayama K, Cardiff RD, Borowsky AD, Kaul K, Williams R, Krajewski S,
Mercola D, Carpenter PM, Bowtell D, Ronai ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Signal Transduction Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research Institute, La
Jolla, CA 92037, USA.

Comment in
    Asian J Androl. 2013 Jul;15(4):447-8.
    Cancer Cell. 2010 Jul 13;18(1):3-4.

Neuroendocrine (NE) phenotype, seen in >30% of prostate adenocarcinomas (PCa),
and NE prostate tumors are implicated in aggressive prostate cancer. Formation of
NE prostate tumors in the TRAMP mouse model was suppressed in mice lacking the
ubiquitin ligase Siah2, which regulates HIF-1alpha availability. Cooperation
between HIF-1alpha and FoxA2, a transcription factor expressed in NE tissue,
promotes recruitment of p300 to transactivate select HIF-regulated genes, Hes6,
Sox9, and Jmjd1a. These HIF-regulated genes are highly expressed in metastatic
PCa and required for hypoxia-mediated NE phenotype, metastasis in PCa, and the
formation of NE tumors. Tissue-specific expression of FoxA2 combined with
Siah2-dependent HIF-1alpha availability enables a transcriptional program
required for NE prostate tumor development and NE phenotype in PCa.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2919332
PMID: 20609350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Nat Genet. 2010 Jul;42(7):579-89. doi: 10.1038/ng.609.

Twelve type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci identified through large-scale
association analysis.

Voight BF, Scott LJ, Steinthorsdottir V, Morris AP, Dina C, Welch RP, Zeggini E, 
Huth C, Aulchenko YS, Thorleifsson G, McCulloch LJ, Ferreira T, Grallert H, Amin 
N, Wu G, Willer CJ, Raychaudhuri S, McCarroll SA, Langenberg C, Hofmann OM,
Dupuis J, Qi L, Segrè AV, van Hoek M, Navarro P, Ardlie K, Balkau B, Benediktsson
R, Bennett AJ, Blagieva R, Boerwinkle E, Bonnycastle LL, Bengtsson Boström K,
Bravenboer B, Bumpstead S, Burtt NP, Charpentier G, Chines PS, Cornelis M, Couper
DJ, Crawford G, Doney AS, Elliott KS, Elliott AL, Erdos MR, Fox CS, Franklin CS, 
Ganser M, Gieger C, Grarup N, Green T, Griffin S, Groves CJ, Guiducci C, Hadjadj 
S, Hassanali N, Herder C, Isomaa B, Jackson AU, Johnson PR, Jørgensen T, Kao WH, 
Klopp N, Kong A, Kraft P, Kuusisto J, Lauritzen T, Li M, Lieverse A, Lindgren CM,
Lyssenko V, Marre M, Meitinger T, Midthjell K, Morken MA, Narisu N, Nilsson P,
Owen KR, Payne F, Perry JR, Petersen AK, Platou C, Proença C, Prokopenko I,
Rathmann W, Rayner NW, Robertson NR, Rocheleau G, Roden M, Sampson MJ, Saxena R, 
Shields BM, Shrader P, Sigurdsson G, Sparsø T, Strassburger K, Stringham HM, Sun 
Q, Swift AJ, Thorand B, Tichet J, Tuomi T, van Dam RM, van Haeften TW, van Herpt 
T, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Walters GB, Weedon MN, Wijmenga C, Witteman J,
Bergman RN, Cauchi S, Collins FS, Gloyn AL, Gyllensten U, Hansen T, Hide WA,
Hitman GA, Hofman A, Hunter DJ, Hveem K, Laakso M, Mohlke KL, Morris AD, Palmer
CN, Pramstaller PP, Rudan I, Sijbrands E, Stein LD, Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden A,
Walker M, Wareham NJ, Watanabe RM, Abecasis GR, Boehm BO, Campbell H, Daly MJ,
Hattersley AT, Hu FB, Meigs JB, Pankow JS, Pedersen O, Wichmann HE, Barroso I,
Florez JC, Frayling TM, Groop L, Sladek R, Thorsteinsdottir U, Wilson JF, Illig
T, Froguel P, van Duijn CM, Stefansson K, Altshuler D, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI;
MAGIC investigators; GIANT Consortium.

Erratum in
    Nat Genet. 2011 Apr;43(4):388.

By combining genome-wide association data from 8,130 individuals with type 2
diabetes (T2D) and 38,987 controls of European descent and following up
previously unidentified meta-analysis signals in a further 34,412 cases and
59,925 controls, we identified 12 new T2D association signals with combined
P<5x10(-8). These include a second independent signal at the KCNQ1 locus; the
first report, to our knowledge, of an X-chromosomal association (near DUSP9); and
a further instance of overlap between loci implicated in monogenic and
multifactorial forms of diabetes (at HNF1A). The identified loci affect both
beta-cell function and insulin action, and, overall, T2D association signals show
evidence of enrichment for genes involved in cell cycle regulation. We also show 
that a high proportion of T2D susceptibility loci harbor independent association 
signals influencing apparently unrelated complex traits.

PMCID: PMC3080658
PMID: 20581827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Sep;299(3):G769-77. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00237.2010. Epub 2010 Jun 24.

Differential transcriptional characteristics of small and large biliary
epithelial cells derived from small and large bile ducts.

Glaser S(1), Wang M, Ueno Y, Venter J, Wang K, Chen H, Alpini G, Holterman A.

Author information: 
(1)Scott and White Digestive Disease Research Center, Temple, Texas, USA.

Biliary epithelial cells (BEC) are morphologically and functionally
heterogeneous. To investigate the molecular mechanism for their diversities, we
test the hypothesis that large and small BEC have disparity in their target gene 
response to their transcriptional regulator, the biliary cell-enriched hepatocyte
nuclear factor HNF6. The expression of the major HNF (HNF6, OC2, HNF1b, HNF1a,
HNF4a, C/EBPb, and Foxa2) and representative biliary transport target genes that 
are HNF dependent were compared between SV40-transformed BEC derived from large
(SV40LG) and small (SV40SM) ducts, before and after treatment with recombinant
adenoviral vectors expressing HNF6 (AdHNF6) or control LacZ cDNA (AdLacZ). Large 
and small BEC were isolated from mouse liver treated with growth hormone, a known
transcriptional activator of HNF6, and the effects on selected target genes were 
examined. Constitutive Foxa2, HNF1a, and HNF4a gene expression were 2.3-, 12.4-, 
and 2.6-fold, respectively, higher in SV40SM cells. This was associated with 2.7-
and 4-fold higher baseline expression of HNF1a- and HNF4a-regulated ntcp and
oatp1 genes, respectively. Following AdHNF6 infection, HNF6 gene expression was
1.4-fold higher (P = 0.02) in AdHNF6 SV40SM relative to AdHNF6 SV40LG cells, with
a corresponding higher Foxa2 (4-fold), HNF1a (15-fold), and HNF4a (6-fold) gene
expression in AdHNF6-SV40SM over AdHNF6-SV40LG. The net effects were upregulation
of HNF6 target gene glucokinase and of Foxa2, HNF1a, and HNF4a target genes
oatp1, ntcp, and mrp2 over AdLacZ control in both cells, but with higher levels
in AdH6-SV40SM over AdH6-SV40LG of glucokinase, oatp1, ntcp, and mrp2 (by 1.8-,
3.4-, 2.4-, and 2.5-fold, respectively). In vivo, growth hormone-mediated
increase in HNF6 expression was associated with similar higher upregulation of
glucokinase and mrp2 in cholangiocytes from small vs. large BEC. Small and large 
BEC have a distinct profile of hepatocyte transcription factor and cognate target
gene expression, as well as differential strength of response to transcriptional 
regulation, thus providing a potential molecular basis for their divergent
function.

PMCID: PMC2950684
PMID: 20576918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Adolesc Med State Art Rev. 2010 Apr;21(1):120-8, x.

The "other" forms of diabetes in children.

Jones KL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, Rady Children's
Hospital, MC5103, 3020 Children's Way, San Diego, CA 92123-4282, USA.
kljones@ucsd.edu

The large majority of children with diabetes seen by any pediatrician or in any
pediatric diabetes clinic will fall into the two major categories of type 1
(T1DM) and, more recently in adolescents, type 2 (T2DM). But one has only to look
at the diabetes classifications currently proposed by the American Diabetes
Association or the World Health Organization to see that these forms account for 
only two of the many forms of diabetes listed. The goal of this chapter is to
discuss, very briefly, the other classes of diabetes which occur in children and 
are of importance to physicians caring for adolescents.

PMID: 20568559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Cell Biochem. 2010 Oct 15;111(3):618-26. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22742.

HNF1a and CDX2 transcriptional factors bind to cadherin-17 (CDH17) gene promoter 
and modulate its expression in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zhu R(1), Wong KF, Lee NP, Lee KF, Luk JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Center for Cancer Research, The University of Hong
Kong, Pokfulam, Hong Kong, China.

Cadherin-17 (CDH17) belongs to the cell adhesion cadherin family with a prominent
role in tumorigenesis. It is highly expressed in human hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) and is proposed to be a biomarker and therapeutic molecule for liver
malignancy. The present study aims to identify the transcription factors which
interact and regulate CDH17 promoter activity that might contribute to the
up-regulation of CDH17 gene in human HCC. A 1-kb upstream sequence of CDH17 gene 
was cloned and the promoter activity was studied by luciferase reporter assay. By
bioinformatics analysis, deletion and mutation assays, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies, we identified hepatic nuclear factor 1a (HNF1a) and 
caudal-related homeobox 2 (CDX2) binding sites at the proximal promoter region
which modulate the CDH17 promoter activities in two HCC cell lines (Hep3B and
MHCC97L). A consistent down-regulation of CDH17 and the two transcriptional
activators (HNF1a and CDX2) expression was found in the liver of mouse during
development, as well as in human liver cancer cells with less metastatic
potential. Suppression of HNF1a and CDX2 expression by small interfering RNA
(siRNA) significantly down-regulated expressions of CDH17 and its downstream
target cyclin D1 and the viability of HCC cells in vitro. In summary, we
identified the minimal promoter region of CDH17 that is regulated by HNF1a and
CDX2 transcriptional factors. The present findings enhance our understanding on
the regulatory mechanisms of CDH17 oncogene in HCC, and may shed new insights
into targeting CDH17 expression as potential therapeutic intervention for cancer 
treatment.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20568120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Kidney Int. 2010 Sep;78(6):569-77. doi: 10.1038/ki.2010.176. Epub 2010 Jun 16.

Genome-wide analysis of epigenetic signatures for kidney-specific transporters.

Kikuchi R(1), Yagi S, Kusuhara H, Imai S, Sugiyama Y, Shiota K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacokinetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

DNA methylation-dependent gene silencing is one of the most characterized
mechanisms in epigenetic regulation of gene expression. This process is thought
to influence the ability of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) to transactivate
organic anion transporter expression in the liver and kidney. To evaluate this
further we profiled 282 mouse solute carrier transporters by examining regions
near their transcription start sites for tissue-dependent differentially
methylated regions (T-DMR) using restriction tag-mediated amplification to
determine T-DMR disparity between the liver and kidney. Forty-two of these were
associated with T-DMR tags hypomethylated in the kidney but hypermethylated in
the liver. Computational analysis found a canonical HNF1-binding motif within 1
kbp of the promoter region of 13 carriers including the amino acid transporters
Slc6a19, Slc6a20, Slc7a8 and Slc7a9; all expressed predominantly in the kidney.
Bisulfite genomic sequencing found that CpG dinucleotides neighboring the T-DMR
tags were hypomethylated in the kidney compared with the liver. The Hnf1alpha
promoter region itself contained a T-DMR hypomethylated in the liver and kidney
but hypermethylated in the cerebrum, consistent with the tissue distribution of
Hnf1alpha. Taken together, our results show a central role of DNA methylation in 
the kidney-specific expression of amino acid transporters thus determining both
the tissue distribution of their master regulator, Hnf1alpha, and its interaction
with downstream genes.

PMID: 20555317  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Diabet Med. 2010 Feb;27(2):157-61. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2009.02913.x.

Increased all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in monogenic diabetes as a
result of mutations in the HNF1A gene.

Steele AM(1), Shields BM, Shepherd M, Ellard S, Hattersley AT, Pearson ER.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula NIHR Clinical Research Facility, Peninsula Medical School, Exeter.

AIMS: To investigate all-cause and cardiovascular mortality in subjects with
diabetes caused by a mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha gene
(HNF1A).
METHODS: We identified 39 British families with HNF1A mutations. Consenting
individuals were asked details of age and cause of death of parents and siblings.
Copies of death certificates were requested from the family or were obtained via 
the Offices for National Statistics.
RESULTS: Data were collated on 241 control subjects and 153 mutation carriers. Of
those who died, 66% of mutation carriers died from a cardiovascular-related
illness compared with 43% of control subjects (P = 0.02). Family members with
HNF1A mutations died at a younger age than familial control subjects [all-cause
hazard ratio, adjusting for sex and smoking status: 1.9 (95% confidence interval 
1.2, 2.9, P = 0.006; cardiovascular hazard ratio: 2.3, confidence interval 1.3,
4.2, P = 0.006)].
CONCLUSIONS: We have shown that individuals known to have diabetes caused by a
mutation in the HNF1A gene have an increased risk of cardiovascular mortality
compared with their unaffected family members. As with other forms of diabetes,
consideration should be given to early statin therapy despite a seemingly
protective lipid profile.

PMID: 20546258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2010 Jun 3;130(11):1145-9. doi: 10.4045/tidsskr.09.1035.

[Progress in diabetes genetics].

[Article in Norwegian]

Njølstad PR(1), Hertel JK, Søvik O, Raeder H, Johansson S, Molven A.

Author information: 
(1)Senter for diabetesgenetikk, Barneklinikken, Haukeland universitetssykehus,
5021 Bergen, Norway. pal.njolstad@uib.no

BACKGROUND: Diabetes is classified as Type 1 diabetes, Type 2 diabetes,
gestational diabetes and other types. Our goal was to provide an overview of new 
genetic knowledge of monogenic and type 2 diabetes.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: The article is based on literature identified through a
non-systematic search in PubMed and own experience concerning research in
diabetes genetics and treatment of patients with monogenic diabetes.
RESULTS: 18 genes have been found for which one single mutation may cause
diabetes. The most common causes for such monogenic diabetes are mutations in the
genes KCNJ11, ABCC8 and INS when the condition is diagnosed at the age 0 - 6
months, and in the genes HNF1A, GCK, HNF4A and HNF1B when the diagnosis is made
later than six months of age. Genetic testing is appropriate in assessment of
monogenic diabetes, because antidiabetic tablets rather that insulin injections
can be used to treat patients with mutations in certain genes; i.e. KCNJ11,
ABCC8, HNF1A and HNF4A. Genome-wide association studies have recently identified 
about 20 genetic variants that increase the risk of Type 2 diabetes, but which
have a low predictive value for development of disease. How these genetic
variants can cause Type 2 diabetes has not been assessed and clinical relevance
remains to be shown.
INTERPRETATION: So far, genetic findings only affect diagnosis and treatment of
monogenic diabetes.

PMID: 20531501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. PLoS Genet. 2010 May 27;6(5):e1000970. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000970.

Epistasis of transcriptomes reveals synergism between transcriptional activators 
Hnf1alpha and Hnf4alpha.

Boj SF(1), Petrov D, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Programming of Beta-Cells Laboratory, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain.

The transcription of individual genes is determined by combinatorial interactions
between DNA-binding transcription factors. The current challenge is to understand
how such combinatorial interactions regulate broad genetic programs that underlie
cellular functions and disease. The transcription factors Hnf1alpha and Hnf4alpha
control pancreatic islet beta-cell function and growth, and mutations in their
genes cause closely related forms of diabetes. We have now exploited genetic
epistasis to examine how Hnf1alpha and Hnf4alpha functionally interact in
pancreatic islets. Expression profiling in islets from either Hnf1a(+/-) or
pancreas-specific Hnf4a mutant mice showed that the two transcription factors
regulate a strikingly similar set of genes. We integrated expression and genomic 
binding studies and show that the shared transcriptional phenotype of these two
mutant models is linked to common direct targets, rather than to known effects of
Hnf1alpha on Hnf4a gene transcription. Epistasis analysis with transcriptomes of 
single- and double-mutant islets revealed that Hnf1alpha and Hnf4alpha regulate
common targets synergistically. Hnf1alpha binding in Hnf4a-deficient islets was
decreased in selected targets, but remained unaltered in others, thus suggesting 
that the mechanisms for synergistic regulation are gene-specific. These findings 
provide an in vivo strategy to study combinatorial gene regulation and reveal how
Hnf1alpha and Hnf4alpha control a common islet-cell regulatory program that is
defective in human monogenic diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2877749
PMID: 20523905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Diabetologia. 2010 Dec;53(12):2504-8. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1799-4. Epub 2010
May 25.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY): how many cases are we missing?

Shields BM(1), Hicks S, Shepherd MH, Colclough K, Hattersley AT, Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2011 May;54(5):1261-3.
    Diabetologia. 2010 Dec;53(12):2465-7.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young is frequently misdiagnosed 
as type 1 or type 2 diabetes. A correct diagnosis of MODY is important for
determining treatment, but can only be confirmed by molecular genetic testing. We
aimed to compare the regional distribution of confirmed MODY cases in the UK and 
to estimate the minimum prevalence.
METHODS: UK referrals for genetic testing in 2,072 probands and 1,280 relatives
between 1996 and 2009 were examined by region, country and test result. Referral 
rate and prevalence were calculated using UK Census 2001 figures.
RESULTS: MODY was confirmed in 1,177 (35%) patients, with HNF1A (52%) and GCK
mutations (32%) being most frequent in probands confirmed with MODY. There was
considerable regional variation in proband referral rates (from <20 per million
in Wales and Northern Ireland to >50 per million for South West England and
Scotland) and patients diagnosed with MODY (5.3 per million in Northern Ireland, 
48.9 per million in South West England). Referral rates and confirmed cases were 
highly correlated (r = 0.96, p < 0.0001). The minimum prevalence of MODY was
estimated to be 108 cases per million.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Assuming this minimal prevalence throughout the UK
then >80% of MODY is not diagnosed by molecular testing. The marked regional
variation in the prevalence of confirmed MODY directly results from differences
in referral rates. This could reflect variation in awareness of MODY or unequal
access to genetic testing. Increased referral for diagnostic testing is required 
if the majority of MODY patients are to have the genetic diagnosis necessary for 
optimal treatment.

PMID: 20499044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. J Lipid Res. 2010 Jun;51(6):1354-62. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M900274.

HNF1alpha and SREBP2 are important regulators of NPC1L1 in human liver.

Pramfalk C(1), Jiang ZY, Cai Q, Hu H, Zhang SD, Han TQ, Eriksson M, Parini P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Chemistry, Department of Endocrinology, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, S-141 86 Stockholm, Sweden.

Niemann-Pick C1-like 1 (NPC1L1), a key regulator of intestinal cholesterol
absorption, is highly expressed in human liver. Here, we aimed to gain more
insight into mechanisms participating in its hepatic regulation in humans.
Correlation analysis in livers from Chinese patients with and without gallstone
disease revealed strong positive correlations between NPC1L1 and sterol
regulatory element binding protein 2 (SREBP2) (r = 0.74, P < 0.05) and between
NPC1L1 and hepatic nuclear factor alpha (HNF4alpha) (r = 0.53, P < 0.05) mRNA
expression. HNF4alpha is an upstream regulator of HNF1alpha; thus, we also tested
whether HNF1alpha participates in the regulation of NPC1L1. We showed a
dose-dependent regulation by SREBP2 on the NPC1L1 promoter activity and mRNA
expression in HuH7 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay confirmed the
binding of SREBP2 to the promoter in vivo. Surprisingly, HNF4alpha slightly
decreased the NPC1L1 promoter activity but had no effect on its gene expression. 
By contrast, HNF1alpha increased the promoter activity and the gene expression,
and an important HNF1 binding site was identified within the human NPC1L1
promoter. ChIP assays confirmed that HNF1alpha can bind to the NPC1L1 promoter in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC3035498
PMID: 20460578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 May 25;107(21):9777-82. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0914127107. Epub 2010 May 10.

Essential role of the Wnt pathway effector Tcf-1 for the establishment of
functional CD8 T cell memory.

Jeannet G(1), Boudousquié C, Gardiol N, Kang J, Huelsken J, Held W.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Ltd., Lausanne Branch and University of
Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland.

Immune protection from intracellular pathogens depends on the generation of
terminally differentiated effector and of multipotent memory precursor CD8 T
cells, which rapidly regenerate effector and memory cells during recurrent
infection. The identification of factors and pathways involved in CD8 T cell
differentiation is of obvious importance to improve vaccination strategies. Here,
we show that mice lacking T cell factor 1 (Tcf-1), a nuclear effector of the
canonical Wingless/Integration 1 (Wnt) signaling pathway, mount normal effector
and effector memory CD8 T cell responses to infection with lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus (LCMV). However, Tcf-1-deficient CD8 T cells are
selectively impaired in their ability to expand upon secondary challenge and to
protect from recurrent virus infection. Tcf-1-deficient mice essentially lack CD8
memory precursor T cells, which is evident already at the peak of the primary
response, suggesting that Tcf-1 programs CD8 memory cell fate. The function of
Tcf-1 to establish CD8 T cell memory is dependent on the catenin-binding domain
in Tcf-1 and requires the Tcf-1 coactivators and Wnt signaling intermediates
beta-catenin and gamma-catenin. These findings demonstrate that the canonical Wnt
signaling pathway plays an essential role for CD8 central memory T cell
differentiation under physiological conditions in vivo. They raise the
possibility that modulation of Wnt signaling may be exploited to improve the
generation of CD8 memory T cells during vaccination or for therapies designed to 
promote sustained cytotoxic CD8 T cell responses against tumors.

PMCID: PMC2906901
PMID: 20457902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Drug Metab Dispos. 2010 Jul;38(7):1246-57. doi: 10.1124/dmd.109.030403. Epub 2010
Apr 20.

Shared regulation of UGT1A7 by hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1alpha and
HNF4alpha.

Ehmer U(1), Kalthoff S, Lankisch TO, Freiberg N, Manns MP, Strassburg CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology, and Endocrinology, Hannover
Medical School, 30625 Hannover, Germany.

Substrates for glucuronidation include endogenous and xenobiotic compounds such
as environmental carcinogens and drugs, as well as the chemotherapeutic agent
irinotecan. The UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A7 gene is expressed in the
upper gastrointestinal tract and the lung but is not expressed in the liver. The 
transcriptional regulation of UGT1A7 and the putative influence of single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are incompletely characterized. UGT1A8, UGT1A9,
and UGT1A10, which are highly homologous to UGT1A7, have been reported to be
transcriptionally regulated by hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs). In this study, 
we show the activation of UGT1A7 by the aforementioned transcription factors.
Sequence analyses, mutagenesis, reporter gene experiments, small interfering RNA 
silencing, chromatin immunoprecipitation, and electromobility shift assays
identified five HNF binding sites in the proximal promoter region of UGT1A7 that 
were regulated by HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha. Activation by HNF1alpha was lower in
the presence of the UGT1A7 -57G SNP. In contrast to liver-expressed UGT1A9,
transcriptional activation of UGT1A7 by HNF4alpha was lower and dependent on
higher HNF4alpha concentrations, which may contribute to the observed differences
in tissue expression patterns. Therefore, a specific role of HNF in the
transcriptional control of UGT1A7 is shown and characterized, which may
contribute to its tissue specificity and function.

PMID: 20406851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Clin Biochem. 2010 Jun;43(9):754-8. doi: 10.1016/j.clinbiochem.2010.04.001. Epub 
2010 Apr 13.

Interaction of common sequence variants and selected risk factors in
determination of HDL cholesterol levels.

Katerina H(1), Michaela S, Michal V, Helena S, Jana Z, Jaroslav H, Richard C.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology and Medical Genetics, 1st Faculty of Medicine and General
Teaching Hospital, Charles University in Prague, 12800 Prague, Czech Republic.
kzidk@lf1.cuni.cz

OBJECTIVES: The aim of our study was to assess the association of common sequence
variants, and selected interactions, with HDL-c plasma levels.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We analysed 743 individuals (340 men and 403 women) with high
mean triglyceride and LDL-c levels. The association of five polymorphic sites
(ABCA1 g.1051G>A, APOA1 g.-75G>A, CETP g.-629C>A, HNF1A g.102A>C, and LIPG
g.584C>T), apoE isoforms and selected interactions with HDL-c levels were
evaluated using linear regression models.
RESULTS: After adjusting for triglycerides, sex, and BMI the only genotype with a
statistically significant effect on HDL-c levels (p-value=0.004) was the CETP
promoter variant. Further, linear regression model with interactions included
indicated possible interplay between APOA1 genotype and menopause (p-value=0.002)
and ABCA1 and APOE isoforms (p-value=0.017) on HDL-c plasma concentration.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study indicated that not only the CETP variant but also apoE
isoforms and menopause could operate as potent modulators of HDL-c
concentrations.

2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20394740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Diabetes. 2010 Jul;59(7):1836-44. doi: 10.2337/db09-1819. Epub 2010 Apr 14.

Spectrum of HNF1A somatic mutations in hepatocellular adenoma differs from that
in patients with MODY3 and suggests genotoxic damage.

Jeannot E(1), Mellottee L, Bioulac-Sage P, Balabaud C, Scoazec JY, Tran Van Nhieu
J, Bacq Y, Michalak S, Buob D; Groupe d'étude Génétique des Tumeurs Hépatiques
(INSERM Network), Laurent-Puig P, Rusyn I, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de Santé et de Recherche Médicale, U674, Génomique
Fonctionnelle des Tumeurs Solides, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVE: Maturity onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) is a consequence
of heterozygous germline mutation in HNF1A. A subtype of hepatocellular adenoma
(HCA) is also caused by biallelic somatic HNF1A mutations (H-HCA), and rare HCA
may be related to MODY3. To better understand a relationship between the
development of MODY3 and HCA, we compared both germline and somatic spectra of
HNF1A mutations.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We compared 151 somatic HNF1A mutations in HCA with 
364 germline mutations described in MODY3. We searched for genotoxic and
oxidative stress features in HCA and surrounding liver tissue.
RESULTS: A spectrum of HNF1A somatic mutations significantly differed from the
germline changes in MODY3. In HCA, we identified a specific hot spot at codon
206, nonsense and frameshift mutations mainly in the NH(2)-terminal part, and
almost all amino acid substitutions were restricted to the POU-H domain. The high
frequency of G-to-T tranversions, predominantly found on the nontranscribed DNA
strand, suggested a genotoxic mechanism. However, no features of oxidative stress
were observed in the nontumor liver tissue. Finally, in a few MODY3 patients with
HNF1A germline mutation leading to amino acid substitutions outside the POU-H
domain, we identified a different subtype of HCA either with a gp130 and/or
CTNNB1 activating mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: Germline HNF1A mutations could be associated with different
molecular subtypes of HCA. H-HCA showed mutations profoundly inactivating
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha function; they are associated with a genotoxic
signature suggesting a specific toxicant exposure that could be associated with
genetic predisposition.

PMCID: PMC2889786
PMID: 20393147  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Development. 2010 May;137(9):1573-82. doi: 10.1242/dev.044420.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha and beta control terminal differentiation and
cell fate commitment in the gut epithelium.

D'Angelo A(1), Bluteau O, Garcia-Gonzalez MA, Gresh L, Doyen A, Garbay S, Robine 
S, Pontoglio M.

Author information: 
(1)Expression Génique, Développement et Maladies Equipe 26/ INSERM U567/ CNRS UMR
8104 / Université Paris-Descartes Institut Cochin Dpt. Génétique et
Développement, 75014 Paris, France.

The intestinal epithelium is a complex system characterized by massive and
continuous cell renewal and differentiation. In this context, cell-type-specific 
transcription factors are thought to play a crucial role by modulating specific
transcription networks and signalling pathways. Hnf1alpha and beta are closely
related atypical homeoprotein transcription factors expressed in several
epithelia, including the gut. With the use of a conditional inactivation system, 
we generated mice in which Hnf1b is specifically inactivated in the intestinal
epithelium on a wild-type or Hnf1a(-/-) genetic background. Whereas the
inactivation of Hnf1a or Hnf1b alone did not lead to any major intestinal
dysfunction, the concomitant inactivation of both genes resulted in a lethal
phenotype. Double-mutant animals had defective differentiation and cell fate
commitment. The expression levels of markers of all the differentiated cell
types, both enterocytes and secretory cells, were affected. In addition, the
number of goblet cells was increased, whereas mature Paneth cells were missing.
At the molecular level, we show that Hnf1alpha and beta act upstream of the Notch
pathway controlling directly the expression of two crucial components: Jag1 and
Atoh1. We demonstrate that the double-mutant mice present with a defect in
intestinal water absorption and that Hnf1alpha and beta directly control the
expression of Slc26a3, a gene whose mutations are associated with chloride
diarrhoea in human patients. Our study identifies new direct target genes of the 
Hnf1 transcription factors and shows that they play crucial roles in both
defining cell fate and controlling terminal functions in the gut epithelium.

PMID: 20388655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Pharmazie. 2010 Mar;65(3):206-12.

Bicyclol attenuates pro-inflammatory cytokine and chemokine productions in
CpG-DNA-stimulated L02 hepatocytes by inhibiting p65-NF-kappaB and p38-MAPK
activation.

Lou XE(1), Xu N, Yao HP, Chen Z.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Bicyclol, a novel synthetic anti-hepatitis drug, has a potent
hepatocyte-protective effect and a mild anti-hepatitis virus function. However,
its pharmaceutical effects and mechanism are still unclear. In the present study,
we found that bicyclol pre-treatment could attenuate the production of the
inflammatory cytokines (TNF-alpha and IL-18) and chemokines (MCP-1, MIP-1 alpha
and Rantes) and inhibit the activation of the p65-NF-kappaB and MAPK signaling
pathways in CpG-ODN 2006-stimulated L02 hepatocytes in a dose-dependent manner.
Collectively, these results suggest that bicyclol could exert its
hepatocyte-protective effect through attenuating CpG-ODN 2006-stimulated
inflammatory responses in L02 hepatocytes, which might be associated with the
activations of NF-kappaB and MAPK pathways.

PMID: 20383942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Meat Sci. 2010 Apr;84(4):645-50. doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2009.10.025. Epub 2009
Oct 27.

Identification of genetic markers associated with residual feed intake and meat
quality traits in the pig.

Fan B(1), Lkhagvadorj S, Cai W, Young J, Smith RM, Dekkers JC, Huff-Lonergan E,
Lonergan SM, Rothschild MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

Residual feed intake (RFI) has become increasingly important and is being
considered as a more reasonable approach to evaluate feed efficiency in
livestock. However, the cost and technical difficulties in measuring this trait
restrict the extensive adoption of RFI selection, and this makes marker assisted 
selection (MAS) a feasible tool. In addition, the effects on meat quality caused 
by low RFI selection have yet to be clarified. In this study, 11 SNPs from eight 
candidate genes were evaluated in a Yorkshire pig experimental population (n=169)
consisting of a low RFI selection line and a randomly selected control line.
Associations of these SNPs with RFI, growth rate, carcass composition, and meat
quality measures including water holding capacity, pH at 2d postmortem, meat
color and sensory traits were analyzed. The SNPs FTO p.Ala198Ala and TCF7L2
c.646+514A>G showed significant (P<0.05) and suggestively significant (P<0.1)
associations with RFI, respectively. The MC4R SNP p.Asp298Asn was associated with
backfat but it was not with ADG and meat quality attributes. Both SNPs within
HNF1A were associated with intramuscular lipid content and sensory juiciness. The
SNPs ACC1 c(*)384C>T and TCF7L2 c.646+514A>G were significantly (P<0.05)
associated with ADG. The SNPs CTSZ p.Arg64Lys and TCF7L2 c.646+514A>G were
associated with both visual scoring of meat color and the objective L-value
measure of meat color. This study has identified potential genetic markers
suitable for MAS in improving RFI, ADG, and meat color traits, but these
associations need to be validated in other larger populations.

Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 20374837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 26;5(3):e9903. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009903.

Gene-gene interactions lead to higher risk for development of type 2 diabetes in 
an Ashkenazi Jewish population.

Neuman RJ(1), Wasson J, Atzmon G, Wainstein J, Yerushalmi Y, Cohen J, Barzilai N,
Blech I, Glaser B, Permutt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
Missouri, United States of America. rneuman@wustl.edu

BACKGROUND: Evidence has accumulated that multiple genetic and environmental
factors play important roles in determining susceptibility to type 2 diabetes
(T2D). Although variants from candidate genes have become prime targets for
genetic analysis, few studies have considered their interplay. Our goal was to
evaluate interactions among SNPs within genes frequently identified as associated
with T2D.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Logistic regression was used to study interactions
among 4 SNPs, one each from HNF4A[rs1884613], TCF7L2[rs12255372],
WFS1[rs10010131], and KCNJ11[rs5219] in a case-control Ashkenazi sample of 974
diabetic subjects and 896 controls. Nonparametric multifactor dimensionality
reduction (MDR) and generalized MDR (GMDR) were used to confirm findings from the
logistic regression analysis. HNF4A and WFS1 SNPs were associated with T2D in
logistic regression analyses [P<0.0001, P<0.0002, respectively]. Interaction
between these SNPs were also strong using parametric or nonparametric methods:
the unadjusted odds of being affected with T2D was 3 times greater in subjects
with the HNF4A and WFS1 risk alleles than those without either (95% CI =
[1.7-5.3]; P<or=0.0001). Although the univariate association between the TCF7L2
SNP and T2D was relatively modest [P = 0.02], when paired with the HNF4A SNP, the
OR for subjects with risk alleles in both SNPs was 2.4 [95% CI = 1.7-3.4;
P<or=0.0001]. The KCNJ11 variant reached significance only when paired with
either the HNF4A or WFSI SNPs: unadjusted ORs were 2.0 [95% CI = 1.4-2.8;
P<or=0.0001] and 2.3 [95% CI = 1.2-4.4; P<or=0.0001], respectively. MDR and GMDR 
results were consistent with the parametric findings.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide evidence of strong independent associations
between T2D and SNPs in HNF4A and WFS1 and their interaction in our Ashkenazi
sample. We also observed an interaction in the nonparametric analysis between the
HNF4A and KCNJ11 SNPs (P<or=0.001), demonstrating that an independently
non-significant variant may interact with another variant resulting in an
increased disease risk.

PMCID: PMC2845632
PMID: 20361036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Dig Surg. 2010;27(1):39-45. doi: 10.1159/000268406. Epub 2010 Apr 1.

Subtype classification of hepatocellular adenoma.

Bioulac-Sage P(1), Balabaud C, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie Pathologique, Hôpital Pellegrin, CHU Bordeaux, France.
paulette.bioulac-sage@chu-bordeaux.fr

Hepatocellular adenomas (HCA) are rare benign tumours occurring mainly in women
under oral contraceptives. HCA bleed frequently and transform rarely into
hepatocellular carcinoma. Identification of genes recurrently mutated in HCA and 
good genotype/phenotype correlations provided the basis of a pathomolecular
classification of different HCA subgroups, characterized using
immunohistochemical markers. HNF1A-mutated HCA: Biallelic-inactivating mutations 
of HNF1A gene are identified in 35-40% of HCA. HNF1alpha-inactivated HCA display 
characteristic pathological features, including marked steatosis. The expression 
of FABP1 (which is a HNF1A target gene) is downregulated and the absence of
L-FABP expression diagnosed this subgroup. beta-Catenin-mutated HCA: beta-catenin
mutations leading to activation of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway represented
10-15% of HCA. They are characterized by overexpression of glutamine synthetase
and aberrant nuclear beta-catenin staining. These beta-catenin-activated HCA are 
at greater risk of malignant transformation; they are difficult to differentiate 
from well-differentiated HCC. Inflammatory HCA (50%): These are defined by the
presence of inflammatory infiltrates, sinusoidal dilatation and thick-walled
arteries. Small in-frame deletions that target the binding site of gp130 for IL-6
have been reported in 60% of inflammatory HCA. There is an overexpression of the 
inflammatory proteins serum amyloid A and C-reactive protein in tumour
hepatocytes both at mRNA and protein levels. Inflammatory HCA occurred more
frequently in patients with high body mass index; they can be also mutated for
beta-catenin and therefore are probably at risk of HCC. Unclassified HCA: Less
than 10% of HCA do not express any of the above-mentioned phenotypic markers.
Taking into account noticeable differences between the HCA subgroups, in terms of
clinical and prognostic features, phenotyping may become an important tool for
HCA management strategy.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20357450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Diabetes Technol Ther. 2010 Apr;12(4):313-6. doi: 10.1089/dia.2009.0159.

Dipeptidyl peptidase-IV inhibitors are efficient adjunct therapy in HNF1A
maturity-onset diabetes of the young patients--report of two cases.

Katra B(1), Klupa T, Skupien J, Szopa M, Nowak N, Borowiec M, Kozek E, Malecki
MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 15 
Kopernika Street, Krakow, Poland.

BACKGROUND: In HNF1A maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), sulfonylurea
(SU) is the first-line treatment. Over time, such therapy fails, and additional
treatment is required. Dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPP-IV) inhibitors are new agents
that lower blood glucose by prolonging the activity of circulating incretins.
METHODS: We applied DPP-IV inhibitors in two HNF1A MODY patients whose earlier
therapeutic regimen included SU.
RESULTS: Case 1, a 39-year-old woman, a carrier of the ArgR171X HNF1A mutation,
with a 7-year history of diabetes was on 160 mg of gliclazide and 2,000 mg of
metformin. Her initial hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c) level was 7.2%, while the mean
glucose level on the CGMS((R)) (Medtronic, Northridge, CA) record was 162 mg/dL. 
Sitagliptine, in a dose of 100 mg/day, was added to the previous treatment. Case 
2, a 62-year-old woman, a carrier of the IVS7nt-6G>A mutation, with a 41-year
history of diabetes was treated with 240 mg/day gliclazide and 6 IU of
insulin/day. Her initial HbA1c was 8.8%, and average glycemia reached 172 mg/dL. 
In her case, we started the combined therapy with 50 mg of vildagliptine twice
daily. Patients were reexamined after 3 months, and HbA1c fell to 6.3% in both
subjects. Similarly, significant improvement in glycemic control on CGMS was
observed as the average glycemia decreased to 114 mg/dL and 134 mg/dL in Case 1
and Case 2, respectively. No episodes of hypoglycemia or other side effects were 
recorded. As intravenous glucose tolerance tests (IVGTTs) were performed before
and after DPP-IV implementation, we were able to assess their impact on insulin
secretion under fasting conditions. We saw a substantial rise in insulin level
increment during IVGTT (by 9.8 and13.4 mIU/L in Case 1 and Case 2, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: DPP-IV inhibitors may be an effective tool of combined therapy in
HNF1A MODY, and they seem to improve beta-cell function under fasting conditions.

PMID: 20210571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Endocrinol Nutr. 2010 Jan;57(1):4-8. doi: 10.1016/S1575-0922(10)70002-4.

Clinical differences between patients with MODY-3, MODY-2 and type 2 diabetes
mellitus with I27L polymorphism in the HNF1alpha gene.

Pinés Corrales PJ(1), López Garrido MP, Aznar Rodríguez S, Louhibi Rubio L, López
Jiménez LM, Lamas Oliveira C, Alfaro Martínez JJ, Lozano García JJ, Hernández
López A, Requejo Castillo R, Escribano Martínez J, Botella Romero F.

Author information: 
(1)Sección de Endocrinología y Nutrición, Complejo Hospitalario Universitario de 
Albacete, Albacete, España. pjpines@sescam.jccm.es

OBJECTIVE: The aim of our study was to describe and evaluate the clinical and
metabolic characteristics of patients with MODY-3, MODY-2 or type 2 diabetes who 
presented I27L polymorphism in the HNF1alpha gene.
METHODS: The study included 31 previously diagnosed subjects under follow-up for 
MODY-3 (10 subjects from 5 families), MODY-2 (15 subjects from 9 families), or
type 2 diabetes (6 subjects) with I27L polymorphism in the HNF1alpha gene. The
demographic, clinical, metabolic, and genetic characteristics of all patients
were analyzed.
RESULTS: No differences were observed in distribution according to sex, age of
onset, or form of diagnosis. All patients with MODY-2 or MODY-3 had a family
history of diabetes. In contrast, 33.3% of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus
and I27L polymorphism in the HNF1alpha gene had no family history of diabetes (p 
< 0.05). No differences were observed in body mass index, prevalence of
hypertension, or microvascular or macrovascular complications. Drug therapy was
required by 100% of MODY-3 patients, but not required by 100% of MODY-2 patients 
or 16.7% of patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus and I27L polymorphism in the
HNF1alpha gene (p < 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Occasional difficulties may be encountered when classifying patients
with MODY-2, MODY-3 or type 2 diabetes of atypical characteristics, in this case 
patients who present I27L polymorphism in the HNF1alpha gene.

Copyright 2010 Sociedad Española de Endocrinología y Nutrición. Published by
Elsevier Espana. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20172480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Apr;298(4):G504-17. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00265.2009. Epub 2010 Feb 4.

Cooperation between HNF-1alpha, Cdx2, and GATA-4 in initiating an enterocytic
differentiation program in a normal human intestinal epithelial progenitor cell
line.

Benoit YD(1), Paré F, Francoeur C, Jean D, Tremblay E, Boudreau F, Escaffit F,
Beaulieu JF.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Team on Digestive Epithelium, Département d'anatomie et de biologie
cellulaire, Faculté de médecine et des sciences de santé, Université de
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.

In the intestinal epithelium, the Cdx, GATA, and HNF transcription factor
families are responsible for the expression of differentiation markers such as
sucrase-isomaltase. Although previous studies have shown that Cdx2 can induce
differentiation in rat intestinal IEC-6 cells, no data are available concerning
the direct implication of transcription factors on differentiation in human
normal intestinal epithelial cell types. We investigated the role of Cdx2,
GATA-4, and HNF-1alpha using the undifferentiated human intestinal epithelial
crypt cell line HIEC. These transcription factors were tested on proliferation
and expression of polarization and differentiation markers. Ectopic expression of
Cdx2 or HNF-1alpha, alone or in combination, altered cell proliferation abilities
through the regulation of cyclin D1 and p27 expression. HNF-1alpha and GATA-4
together induced morphological modifications of the cells toward polarization,
resulting in the appearance of functional features such as microvilli. HNF-1alpha
was also sufficient to induce the expression of cadherins and
dipeptidylpeptidase, whereas in combination with Cdx2 it allowed the expression
of the late differentiation marker sucrase-isomaltase. Large-scale analysis of
gene expression confirmed the cooperative effect of these factors. Finally,
although DcamKL1 and Musashi-1 expression were downregulated in differentiated
HIEC, other intestinal stem cell markers, such as Bmi1, were unaffected. These
observations show that, in cooperation with Cdx2, HNF-1alpha acts as a key factor
on human intestinal cells to trigger the onset of their functional
differentiation program whereas GATA-4 appears to promote morphological changes.

PMCID: PMC2907224
PMID: 20133952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2010 May;88(2):132-8. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2010.01.005. Epub 2010 Feb 4.

Three novel mutations in MODY and its phenotype in three different Czech
families.

Bazalová Z(1), Rypácková B, Broz J, Brunerová L, Polák J, Rusavý Z, Treslová L,
Andel M.

Author information: 
(1)3rd Faculty of Medicine of Charles University, Centre of Research for
Diabetes, Endocrinological Diseases and Clinical Nutrition, Ruská 87, 100 00
Prague 10, Czech Republic. bazalova@modydiabetes.cz

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: MODY (Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young) is an autosomal
dominant inherited type of diabetes with significant genetic heterogeneity. New
mutations causing MODY are still being found. A genetically confirmed diagnosis
of MODY allows application of individualized treatment based on the underlying
concrete genetic dysfunction. Detection of novel MODY mutations helps provide a
more complete picture of the possible MODY genotypes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We tested 43 adult Czech patients with clinical
characteristics of MODY, using direct sequencing of HNF1A (hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1-alpha), HNF4A (hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha) and GCK (glucokinase) 
genes.
RESULTS: In three Czech families we identified three novel mutations we believe
causing MODY-two missense mutations in HNF1A [F268L (c.802T>C) and P291S
(c.871C>T)] and one frame shift mutation in GCK V244fsdelG (c.729delG). Some of
the novel HNF1A mutation carriers were successfully transferred from insulin to
gliclazide, while some of the novel GCK mutation carriers had a good clinical
response when switched from insulin or oral antidiabetic drugs to diet.
CONCLUSION: We describe three novel MODY mutations in three Czech families. The
identification of MODY mutations had a meaningful impact on therapy on the
mutation carriers.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20132997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2009 Dec;86 Suppl 1:S15-21. doi:
10.1016/S0168-8227(09)70004-X. Epub 2009 Dec 18.

The clinical application of non-genetic biomarkers for differential diagnosis of 
monogenic diabetes.

Owen KR(1), Skupien J, Malecki MT; CEED3 Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, UK.

Diabetes mellitus is not a single disorder but rather a heterogeneous group of
diseases that differ in respect to pathogenesis, the clinical picture and the
response to dietary and pharmacological treatments. Thus, the differential
diagnosis of various types and forms of diabetes is of great practical
importance. This is particularly true for monogenic disease forms where some
spectacular applications of pharmacogenetics have recently been described.
Unfortunately, most patients with monogenic diabetes such as maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) or neonatal diabetes have not undergone diagnostic
molecular testing, so they can not benefit from the progress seen in this field. 
The reasons for this include the complexity and cost of molecular diagnostics.
One of ways to change this situation is to find an efficient and cheap test to
screen thousands of patients for specific forms of monogenic diabetes. These
tests can be based on biomarkers discovered by one of two general strategies: a
candidate approach or a systematic search based on metabonomics or proteonomics. 
This review summarizes recent advances in the search for putative biomarkers and 
the perspectives of the future progress.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20115926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Genes Brain Behav. 2010 Apr;9(3):348-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-183X.2010.00565.x.
Epub 2010 Jan 4.

Associations between polymorphisms in five inflammation-related genes and
cognitive ability in older persons.

Marioni RE(1), Deary IJ, Murray GD, Fowkes FG, Price JF.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Population Health Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Scotland, UK. 
R.E.Marioni@sms.ed.ac.uk <R.E.Marioni@sms.ed.ac.uk>

Several studies have found associations between inflammatory biomarker levels and
cognitive ability. This study tested the relationship between polymorphisms in
genes that are associated with or encode the biomarkers and cognitive ability and
estimated lifetime cognitive change. Data came from the aspirin for asymptomatic 
atherosclerosis trial (n = 2091, mean age = 67.2 years ). Twelve single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were genotyped from five genes (IL-1alpha,
IL-1beta, IL-6, HNF-1A and F13A1). Cognition was assessed via administration of a
five-test battery of psychometric tests, which were used to derive a general
intelligence factor, g. A vocabulary-based cognitive test was also administered
and adjusted for in the analysis to enable an estimation of lifetime cognitive
change. Age- and sex-adjusted analyses yielded one weakly significant association
between the IL-1alpha rs2856838 SNP and a measure of mental
flexibility/processing speed (P = 0.044). Adjustment for the vocabulary-based
scores resulted in a single, significant association between the IL-1alpha
rs3783546 SNP and a measure of processing speed (P = 0.048). There is little
evidence to suggest an association between SNPs in the inflammation-related genes
IL-1alpha, IL-1beta, IL-6, TCF-1 and F13A1 and cognition in an elderly population
of community-dwelling Scottish citizens.

PMID: 20113359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 16;285(16):12181-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.064238. Epub 2010
Jan 27.

Distinct regulation of hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha by NKX6.1 in pancreatic beta
cells.

Donelan W(1), Koya V, Li SW, Yang LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

Hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) is a key regulator of development and
function in pancreatic beta cells and is specifically involved in regulation of
glycolysis and glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Abnormal expression of
HNF1alpha leads to development of MODY3 (maturity-onset diabetes of the young 3).
We report that NK6 homeodomain 1 (NKX6.1) binds to a cis-regulatory element in
the HNF1alpha promoter and is a major regulator of this gene in beta cells. We
identified an NKX6.1 recognition sequence in the distal region of the HNF1alpha
promoter and demonstrated specific binding of NKX6.1 in beta cells by
electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
Site-directed mutagenesis of the NKX6.1 core-binding sequence eliminated
NKX6.1-mediated activation and substantially decreased activity of the HNF1alpha 
promoter in beta cells. Overexpression or small interfering RNA-mediated
knockdown of the Nkx6.1 gene resulted in increased or diminished HNF1alpha gene
expression, respectively, in beta cells. We conclude that NKX6.1 is a novel
regulator of HNF1alpha in pancreatic beta cells. This novel regulatory mechanism 
for HNF1alpha in beta cells may provide new molecular targets for the diagnosis
of MODY3.

PMCID: PMC2852957
PMID: 20106981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Pharmacotherapy. 2010 Feb;30(2):195-209. doi: 10.1592/phco.30.2.195.

Understanding the genetic basis for adverse drug effects: the calcineurin
inhibitors.

Bai JP(1), Lesko LJ, Burckart GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Office of Clinical Pharmacology, Office of Translational Science, Center for
Drug Evaluation and Research, United States Food and Drug Administration, Silver 
Spring, Maryland, USA.

The calcineurin inhibitors-cyclosporine and tacrolimus-are the mainstay of
immunosuppressive therapy in solid organ transplantation. These drugs produce
severe adverse drug effects (ADEs) such as nephrotoxicity, posttransplantation
diabetes mellitus, and hypertension. Accumulated evidence suggests that the
development of type 2 diabetes, hypertension, and renal failure may be associated
with specific DNA genotypes. In this review, the genes involved with the
development of these disease processes are compared with those implicated in
calcineurin inhibitor-induced ADEs. The renin-angiotensin system genes,
cytokine-encoding genes, and plasminogen activator inhibitor type 1 genes have
been implicated in calcineurin inhibitor-induced nephrotoxicity, as well as in
development of renal failure. A number of genes are implicated in contributing to
diabetes, and these include the vitamin D receptor gene, VDR; hepatocyte nuclear 
factor genes, HNF; transcription factor 7-like 2 gene, TCF7L2;
angiotensin-converting enzyme gene, ACE; cytokines; peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma gene, PPARG; and others. Studies have
suggested that the VDR, PPARG, HNF1A, and adenosine 5'-triphosphate-binding
cassette ABCC8 (which encodes the sulfonylurea receptor) genes are associated
with calcineurin inhibitor-induced diabetes. The genes encoding for the
angiotensin-converting enzyme, endothelial constitutive nitric oxide synthase,
and cytochrome P450 3A isoenzyme have been involved in the development of
hypertension and in calcineurin inhibitor-induced hypertension. The genetic study
of disease states can be the stepping stones for thoroughly understanding the
genetic basis of ADEs. Gene polymorphisms are implicated in the development of
diseases and corresponding disease-like ADEs. The disease-associated genes
provide candidate genes for exploring ADEs and may provide genomic biomarkers for
assessing the risk for developing severe calcineurin inhibitor-related ADEs as
well as for developing preventive strategies.

PMID: 20099993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. BMC Mol Biol. 2010 Jan 22;11:9. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-11-9.

Regulation of UGT1A1 and HNF1 transcription factor gene expression by DNA
methylation in colon cancer cells.

Bélanger AS(1), Tojcic J, Harvey M, Guillemette C.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacogenomics Laboratory, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, 2705 
Laurier, Quebec, G1V 4G2, Canada.

BACKGROUND: UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 (UGT1A1) is a pivotal enzyme involved
in metabolism of SN-38, the active metabolite of irinotecan commonly used to
treat metastatic colorectal cancer. We previously demonstrated aberrant
methylation of specific CpG dinucleotides in UGT1A1-negative cells, and revealed 
that methylation state of the UGT1A1 5'-flanking sequence is negatively
correlated with gene transcription. Interestingly, one of these CpG dinucleotides
(CpG -4) is found close to a HNF1 response element (HRE), known to be involved in
activation of UGT1A1 gene expression, and within an upstream stimulating factor
(USF) binding site.
RESULTS: Gel retardation assays revealed that methylation of CpG-4 directly
affect the interaction of USF1/2 with its cognate sequence without altering the
binding for HNF1-alpha. Luciferase assays sustained a role for USF1/2 and
HNF1-alpha in UGT1A1 regulation in colon cancer cells. Based on the differential 
expression profiles of HNF1A gene in colon cell lines, we also assessed whether
methylation affects its expression. In agreement with the presence of CpG islands
in the HNF1A promoter, treatments of UGT1A1-negative HCT116 colon cancer cells
with a DNA methyltransferase inhibitor restore HNF1A gene expression, as observed
for UGT1A1.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reveals that basal UGT1A1 expression in colon cells is
positively regulated by HNF1-alpha and USF, and negatively regulated by DNA
methylation. Besides, DNA methylation of HNF1A could also play an important role 
in regulating additional cellular drug metabolism and transporter pathways. This 
process may contribute to determine local inactivation of drugs such as the
anticancer agent SN-38 by glucuronidation and define tumoral response.

PMCID: PMC2835698
PMID: 20096102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Development. 2010 Feb;137(3):507-18. doi: 10.1242/dev.043257.

Insights into the organization of dorsal spinal cord pathways from an
evolutionarily conserved raldh2 intronic enhancer.

Castillo HA(1), Cravo RM, Azambuja AP, Simões-Costa MS, Sura-Trueba S, Gonzalez
J, Slonimsky E, Almeida K, Abreu JG, de Almeida MA, Sobreira TP, de Oliveira SH, 
de Oliveira PS, Signore IA, Colombo A, Concha ML, Spengler TS, Bronner-Fraser M, 
Nobrega M, Rosenthal N, Xavier-Neto J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Genética e Cardiologia Molecular, InCor-FMUSP, 05403-000, São
Paulo, Brazil.

Comparative studies of the tetrapod raldh2 (aldh1a2) gene, which encodes a
retinoic acid (RA) synthesis enzyme, have led to the identification of a dorsal
spinal cord enhancer. Enhancer activity is directed dorsally to the roof plate
and dorsal-most (dI1) interneurons through predicted Tcf- and Cdx-homeodomain
binding sites and is repressed ventrally via predicted Tgif homeobox and ventral 
Lim-homeodomain binding sites. Raldh2 and Math1/Cath1 expression in mouse and
chicken highlights a novel, transient, endogenous Raldh2 expression domain in dI1
interneurons, which give rise to ascending circuits and intraspinal commissural
interneurons, suggesting roles for RA in the ontogeny of spinocerebellar and
intraspinal proprioceptive circuits. Consistent with expression of raldh2 in the 
dorsal interneurons of tetrapods, we also found that raldh2 is expressed in
dorsal interneurons throughout the agnathan spinal cord, suggesting ancestral
roles for RA signaling in the ontogenesis of intraspinal proprioception.

PMCID: PMC4074295
PMID: 20081195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Cell Physiol. 2010 Apr;223(1):1-5. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22007.

PSMD9 is linked to MODY3.

Gragnoli C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Laboratory, Bios Biotech Multi-Diagnostic Health Center,
Rome, Italy. claudia.gragnoli@gmail.com

Type 2 diabetes has a replicated linkage on chromosome12q24.2 (NIDDM2
locus/non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 2 locus), near the HNF-1alpha/MODY3
gene. The MODY3 gene is not responsible for this linkage. PSMD9--contributing to 
T2D in Italians by rare unique mutations and by the common haplotype A/T/G--lies 
in the NIDDM2 region. By genotyping the two markers D12S1721/D12S2073 nearby the 
MODY3 gene in our unrelated T2D cases, we previously excluded that the PSMD9 SNPs
are in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with the MODY3 gene. In the present study, we 
aimed at identifying whether the PSMD9 A/T/G haplotype is present in the Italy-1 
and Italy-3 MODY3 families and whether it cosegregates with diabetes/MODY3. We
raised the question whether there is a digenic additive model within the MODY3
families to which the PSMD9 A/T/G haplotype contributes. We demonstrated that the
PSMD9 A/T/G haplotype is linked to the MODY3 established mutations in the Italy-1
and Italy-3 families. By non-parametric and parametric linkage analyses, and LD
modeling, in the Italy-1 and Italy-3 families we hereby show that the MODY3
mutation and the PSMD9 IVS3 + nt460A/IVS3 + nt437T/G197 SNPs act in an additional
model to cause diabetes. Since in the two MODY3 Italian families the PSMD9 A/T/G 
haplotype is linked to MODY3, it contributes to MODY3/diabetes via an additional 
model. All MODY3 families should be tested for the PSMD9 A/T/G haplotype. The
potential clinical impact of our study is of relevance.

J. Cell. Physiol. 223: 1-5, 2010. (c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20069546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Lipid Res. 2010 Jun;51(6):1486-95. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M003566. Epub 2010 Jan 4.

Strong induction of PCSK9 gene expression through HNF1alpha and SREBP2: mechanism
for the resistance to LDL-cholesterol lowering effect of statins in dyslipidemic 
hamsters.

Dong B(1), Wu M, Li H, Kraemer FB, Adeli K, Seidah NG, Park SW, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs, Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto, CA
94304, USA.

We investigated the role of proprotein convertase subtilisin/kexin type 9 (PCSK9)
in the resistance of dyslipidemic hamsters to statin-induced LDL-cholesterol
(LDL-C) reduction and the molecular mechanism by which statins modulated PCSK9
gene expression in vivo. We utilized the fructose diet-induced dyslipidemic
hamsters as an in vivo model and rosuvastatin to examine its effects on liver
PCSK9 and LDL receptor (LDLR) expression and serum lipid levels. We showed that
rosuvastatin induced PCSK9 mRNA to a greater extent than LDLR mRNA in the hamster
liver. The net result was that hepatic LDLR protein level was reduced. This
correlated closely with an increase in serum LDL-C with statin treatment. More
importantly, we demonstrated that in addition to an increase in sterol response
element binding protein 2 (SREBP2) expression, rosuvastatin treatment increased
the liver expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1alpha), the newly 
identified key transactivator for PCSK9 gene expression. Our study suggests that 
the inducing effect of rosuvastatin on HNF1alpha is likely a underlying mechanism
accounting for the higher induction of PCSK9 than LDLR because of the utilization
of two transactivators (HNF1alpha and SREBP2) in PCSK9 transcription versus one
(SREBP2) in LDLR transcription. Thus, the net balance is in favor of
PCSK9-induced degradation of LDLR in the hamster liver, abrogating the effect of 
rosuvastatin on LDL-C lowering.

PMCID: PMC3035512
PMID: 20048381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Hepatology. 2010 Feb;51(2):557-66. doi: 10.1002/hep.23362.

Loss of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha function in human hepatocellular
adenomas leads to aberrant activation of signaling pathways involved in
tumorigenesis.

Pelletier L(1), Rebouissou S, Paris A, Rathahao-Paris E, Perdu E, Bioulac-Sage P,
Imbeaud S, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Sante et de la Recherche Medicale, U674, Génomique
fonctionnelle des tumeurs solides, Paris, France.

Hepatocellular adenomas (HCAs) are benign liver tumors that usually develop in
women who are taking oral contraceptives. Among these tumors, biallelic
inactivating mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1A)
transcription factor have been frequently identified and in rare cases of
hepatocellular carcinomas developed in noncirrhotic liver. Because HNF1A meets
the genetic criteria of a tumor suppressor gene, we aimed to elucidate the
tumorigenic mechanisms related to HNF1alpha inactivation in hepatocytes. We
searched for signaling pathways aberrantly activated in human HNF1A-mutated HCA
(H-HCA) using a genome-wide transcriptome analysis comparing five H-HCA with four
normal livers. We validated the main pathways by quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and western blotting in a large 
series of samples. Then, we assessed the role of HNF1alpha in the observed
deregulations in hepatocellular cell models (HepG2 and Hep3B) by silencing its
endogenous expression using small interfering RNA. Along with the previously
described induction of glycolysis and lipogenesis, H-HCA also displayed
overexpression of several genes encoding growth factor receptors, components of
the translation machinery, cell cycle, and angiogenesis regulators, with, in
particular, activation of the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) pathway.
Moreover, estradiol detoxification activities were shut down, suggesting a
hypersensitivity of H-HCA to estrogenic stimulation. In the cell model,
inhibition of HNF1alpha recapitulated most of these identified transcriptional
deregulations, demonstrating that they were related to HNF1alpha
inhibition.CONCLUSION: H-HCA showed a combination of alterations related to
HNF1alpha inactivation that may cooperate to promote tumor development.
Interestingly, mTOR appears as a potential new attractive therapeutic target for 
treatment of this group of HCAs.

PMID: 20041408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2009 Jun;2(3):244-54. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.108.839506. Epub 2009 Apr 6.

Common coding variants of the HNF1A gene are associated with multiple
cardiovascular risk phenotypes in community-based samples of younger and older
European-American adults: the Coronary Artery Risk Development in Young Adults
Study and The Cardiovascular Health Study.

Reiner AP(1), Gross MD, Carlson CS, Bielinski SJ, Lange LA, Fornage M, Jenny NS, 
Walston J, Tracy RP, Williams OD, Jacobs DR Jr, Nickerson DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. 
apreiner@u.washington.edu

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha
regulates the activity of a number of genes involved in innate immunity, blood
coagulation, lipid and glucose transport and metabolism, and cellular
detoxification. Common polymorphisms of the HNF-1 alpha gene (HNF1A) were
recently associated with plasma C-reactive protein and gamma-glutamyl transferase
concentration in middle-aged to older European Americans (EA).
METHODS AND RESULTS: We assessed whether common variants of HNF1A are associated 
with C-reactive protein, gamma-glutamyl transferase, and other atherosclerotic
and metabolic risk factors, in the large, population-based Coronary Artery Risk
Development in Young Adults Study of healthy young EA (n=2154) and African
American (AA; n=2083) adults. The minor alleles of Ile27Leu (rs1169288) and
Ser486Asn (rs2464196) were associated with 0.10 to 0.15 standard deviation units 
lower C-reactive protein and gamma-glutamyl transferase levels in EA. The same
HNF1A coding variants were associated with higher low-density lipoprotein
cholesterol, apolipoprotein B, creatinine, and fibrinogen in EA. We replicated
the associations between HNF1A coding variants and C-reactive protein,
fibrinogen, low-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and renal function in a second
population-based sample of EA adults 65 years and older from the Cardiovascular
Health Study. The HNF1A Ser486Asn and/or Ile27Leu variants were also associated
with increased risk of subclinical coronary atherosclerosis in Coronary Artery
Risk Development in Young Adults and with incident coronary heart disease in
Cardiovascular Health Study. The Ile27Leu and Ser486Asn variants were 3-fold less
common in AA than in EA. There was little evidence of association between HNF1A
genotype and atherosclerosis-related phenotypes in AA.
CONCLUSIONS: Common polymorphisms of HNF1A seem to influence multiple phenotypes 
related to cardiovascular risk in the general population of younger and older EA 
adults.

PMCID: PMC2841292
PMID: 20031592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 19;285(8):5726-37. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.046649. Epub 2009 
Dec 22.

Interaction between Hhex and SOX13 modulates Wnt/TCF activity.

Marfil V(1), Moya M, Pierreux CE, Castell JV, Lemaigre FP, Real FX, Bort R.

Author information: 
(1)Unitat de Biologia Cellular i Molecular, Institut Municipal d'Investigació
Mèdica, Universitat Pompeu Fabra, Barcelona 08003, Spain.

Fine-tuning of the Wnt/TCF pathway is crucial for multiple embryological
processes, including liver development. Here we describe how the interaction
between Hhex (hematopoietically expressed homeobox) and SOX13 (SRY-related high
mobility group box transcription factor 13), modulates Wnt/TCF pathway activity. 
Hhex is a homeodomain factor expressed in multiple endoderm-derived tissues, like
the liver, where it is essential for proper development. The pleiotropic
expression of Hhex during embryonic development and its dual role as a
transcriptional repressor and activator suggest the presence of different
tissue-specific partners capable of modulating its activity and function. While
searching for developmentally regulated Hhex partners, we set up a yeast
two-hybrid screening using an E9.5-10.5 mouse embryo library and the N-terminal
domain of Hhex as bait. Among the putative protein interactors, we selected SOX13
for further characterization. We found that SOX13 interacts directly with
full-length Hhex, and we delineated the interaction domains within the two
proteins. SOX13 is known to repress Wnt/TCF signaling by interacting with TCF1.
We show that Hhex is able to block the SOX13-dependent repression of Wnt/TCF
activity by displacing SOX13 from the SOX13 x TCF1 complex. Moreover, Hhex
de-repressed the Wnt/TCF pathway in the ventral foregut endoderm of cultured
mouse embryos electroporated with a SOX13-expressing plasmid. We conclude that
the interaction between Hhex and SOX13 may contribute to control Wnt/TCF
signaling in the early embryo.

PMCID: PMC2820800
PMID: 20028982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Immunol. 2010 Feb 1;184(3):1191-9. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901199. Epub 2009 Dec
21.

Constitutive activation of Wnt signaling favors generation of memory CD8 T cells.

Zhao DM(1), Yu S, Zhou X, Haring JS, Held W, Badovinac VP, Harty JT, Xue HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Carver College of Medicine, University of Iowa,
Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

T cell factor-1 (TCF-1) and lymphoid enhancer-binding factor 1, the effector
transcription factors of the canonical Wnt pathway, are known to be critical for 
normal thymocyte development. However, it is largely unknown if it has a role in 
regulating mature T cell activation and T cell-mediated immune responses. In this
study, we demonstrate that, like IL-7Ralpha and CD62L, TCF-1 and lymphoid
enhancer-binding factor 1 exhibit dynamic expression changes during T cell
responses, being highly expressed in naive T cells, downregulated in effector T
cells, and upregulated again in memory T cells. Enforced expression of a p45
TCF-1 isoform limited the expansion of Ag-specific CD8 T cells in response to
Listeria monocytogenes infection. However, when the p45 transgene was coupled
with ectopic expression of stabilized beta-catenin, more Ag-specific memory CD8 T
cells were generated, with enhanced ability to produce IL-2. Moreover, these
memory CD8 T cells expanded to a larger number of secondary effectors and cleared
bacteria faster when the immunized mice were rechallenged with virulent L.
monocytogenes. Furthermore, in response to vaccinia virus or lymphocytic
choriomeningitis virus infection, more Ag-specific memory CD8 T cells were
generated in the presence of p45 and stabilized beta-catenin transgenes. Although
activated Wnt signaling also resulted in larger numbers of Ag-specific memory CD4
T cells, their functional attributes and expansion after the secondary infection 
were not improved. Thus, constitutive activation of the canonical Wnt pathway
favors memory CD8 T cell formation during initial immunization, resulting in
enhanced immunity upon second encounter with the same pathogen.

PMCID: PMC2809813
PMID: 20026746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Hepatology. 2009 Dec;50(6):1773-82. doi: 10.1002/hep.23226.

Not interferon, but interleukin-6 controls early gene expression in hepatitis B
virus infection.

Hösel M(1), Quasdorff M, Wiegmann K, Webb D, Zedler U, Broxtermann M, Tedjokusumo
R, Esser K, Arzberger S, Kirschning CJ, Langenkamp A, Falk C, Büning H, Rose-John
S, Protzer U.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (ZMMK), University Hospital Cologne,
Köln, Germany.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2009 Dec;50(6):1692-5.

With about 350 million virus carriers, hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection remains 
a major health problem. HBV is a noncytopathic virus causing persistent
infection, but it is still unknown whether host recognition of HBV may activate
an innate immune response. We describe that upon infection of primary human liver
cells, HBV is recognized by nonparenchymal cells of the liver, mainly by liver
macrophages (Kupffer cells), although they are not infected. Within 3 hours, this
recognition leads to the activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) and
subsequently to the release of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and other proinflammatory
cytokines (IL-8, TNF-alpha, IL-1beta), but does not induce an interferon
response. The activation of proinflammatory cytokines, however, is transient, and
even inhibits responsiveness toward a subsequent challenge. IL-6 released by
Kupffer cells after activation of NF-kappaB controls HBV gene expression and
replication in hepatocytes at the level of transcription shortly after infection.
Upon binding to its receptor complex, IL-6 activates the mitogen-activated
protein kinases exogenous signal-regulated kinase 1/2, and c-jun N-terminal
kinase, which inhibit expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1alpha and
HNF 4alpha, two transcription factors essential for HBV gene expression and
replication.CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate recognition of HBV patterns by
nonparenchymal liver cells, which results in IL-6-mediated control of HBV
infection at the transcriptional level. Thus, IL-6 ensures early control of the
virus, limiting activation of the adaptive immune response and preventing death
of the HBV-infected hepatocyte. This pattern recognition may be essential for a
virus, which infects a new host with only a few virions. Our data also indicate
that therapeutic neutralization of IL-6 for treatment of certain diseases may
represent a risk if the patient is HBV-infected.

PMID: 19937696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Diabetes Care. 2010 Feb;33(2):252-7. doi: 10.2337/dc09-1246. Epub 2009 Nov 23.

Evaluation of serum 1,5 anhydroglucitol levels as a clinical test to
differentiate subtypes of diabetes.

Pal A(1), Farmer AJ, Dudley C, Selwood MP, Barrow BA, Klyne R, Grew JP, McCarthy 
MI, Gloyn AL, Owen KR.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Laboratories, Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and 
Metabolism, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Assignment of the correct molecular diagnosis in diabetes is necessary
for informed decisions regarding treatment and prognosis. Better clinical markers
would facilitate discrimination and prioritization for genetic testing between
diabetes subtypes. Serum 1,5 anhydroglucitol (1,5AG) levels were reported to
differentiate maturity-onset diabetes of the young due to HNF1A mutations
(HNF1A-MODY) from type 2 diabetes, but this requires further validation. We
evaluated serum 1,5AG in a range of diabetes subtypes as an adjunct for defining 
diabetes etiology.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: 1,5AG was measured in U.K. subjects with: HNF1A-MODY
(n = 23), MODY due to glucokinase mutations (GCK-MODY, n = 23), type 1 diabetes
(n = 29), latent autoimmune diabetes in adults (LADA, n = 42), and type 2
diabetes (n = 206). Receiver operating characteristic curve analysis was
performed to assess discriminative accuracy of 1,5AG for diabetes etiology.
RESULTS: Mean (SD range) 1,5AG levels were: GCK-MODY 13.06 microg/ml
(5.74-29.74), HNF1A-MODY 4.23 microg/ml (2.12-8.44), type 1 diabetes 3.09
microg/ml (1.45-6.57), LADA 3.46 microg/ml (1.42-8.45), and type 2 diabetes 5.43 
(2.12-13.23). Levels in GCK-MODY were higher than in other groups (P < 10(-4) vs.
each group). HNF1A-MODY subjects showed no difference in unadjusted 1,5AG levels 
from type 2 diabetes, type 1 diabetes, and LADA. Adjusting for A1C revealed a
difference between HNF1A-MODY and type 2 diabetes (P = 0.001). The discriminative
accuracy of unadjusted 1,5AG levels was 0.79 for GCK-MODY versus type 2 diabetes 
and 0.86 for GCK-MODY versus HNF1A-MODY but was only 0.60 for HNF1A-MODY versus
type 2 diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: In our dataset, serum 1,5AG performed well in discriminating
GCK-MODY from other diabetes subtypes, particularly HNF1A-MODY. Measurement of
1,5AG levels could inform decisions regarding MODY diagnostic testing.

PMCID: PMC2809258
PMID: 19933992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Diabet Med. 2009 Nov;26(11):1172-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2009.02855.x.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1A and HNF4A substitution occurring simultaneously
in a family with maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Beijers HJ(1), Losekoot M, Odink RJ, Bravenboer B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, The
Netherlands. hanneke.beijers@cze.nl

INTRODUCTION: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of 
diabetes mellitus characterized by an early age at onset, autosomal dominant
inheritance and a primary defect in the function of the B-cells of the pancreas. 
We report a family with two members carrying a substitution in both the
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1A and HNF4A gene simultaneously.
CASE REPORT: A 39-year-old man was referred because of mild diabetic retinopathy.
Because of a dominant presentation of diabetes in his family, genetic testing was
performed. Sequence analysis of the genes involved in MODY-1-3 revealed the
presence of an amino acid substitution in the HNF1A as well as the HNF4A gene.
Both substitutions were also detected in his mother. The HNF1A substitution has
been described previously as pathogenic, whereas the HNF4A substitution had not
been found previously. The HNF4A substitution was located in a conserved region
of the protein and, additionally, the proband and his mother had high
birthweights and low triglyceride levels, both of which are associated with
pathogenic HNF4A substitutions.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge this is the first reported family carrying both a
substitution of HNF1A and HNF4A gene simultaneously. The exact contribution of
each substitution to the phenotype of our subjects remains to be further
elucidated, however, given the high birthweights and the low triglyceride levels 
in those with both substitutions, it is reasonable that the HNF4A substitution is
pathogenic.

PMID: 19929997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 16;4(11):e7855. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007855.

Species-specific differences in the expression of the HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A
genes.

Harries LW(1), Brown JE, Gloyn AL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Peninsula Medical School,
University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom. L.W.Harries@exeter.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A genes are part of an autoregulatory
network in mammalian pancreas, liver, kidney and gut. The layout of this network 
appears to be similar in rodents and humans, but inactivation of HNF1A, HNF1B or 
HNF4A genes in animal models cause divergent phenotypes to those seen in man. We 
hypothesised that some differences may arise from variation in the expression
profile of alternatively processed isoforms between species.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We measured the expression of the major isoforms 
of the HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A genes in human and rodent pancreas, islet, liver
and kidney by isoform-specific quantitative real-time PCR and compared their
expression by the comparative Ct (DeltaDeltaCt) method. We found major changes in
the expression profiles of the HNF genes between humans and rodents. The
principal difference lies in the expression of the HNF1A gene, which exists as
three isoforms in man, but as a single isoform only in rodents. More subtle
changes were to the balance of HNF1B and HNF4A isoforms between species; the
repressor isoform HNF1B(C) comprised only 6% in human islets compared with 24-26%
in rodents (p = 0.006) whereas HNF4A9 comprised 22% of HNF4A expression in human 
pancreas but only 11% in rodents (p = 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The differences we note in the isoform-specific
expression of the human and rodent HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A genes may impact on the
absolute activity of these genes, and therefore on the activity of the pancreatic
transcription factor network as a whole. We conclude that alterations to
expression of HNF isoforms may underlie some of the phenotypic variation caused
by mutations in these genes.

PMCID: PMC2773013
PMID: 19924231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Diabet Med. 2009 Oct;26(10):1070-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2009.02812.x.

Testing for monogenic diabetes among children and adolescents with
antibody-negative clinically defined Type 1 diabetes.

Rubio-Cabezas O(1), Edghill EL, Argente J, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús,
Madrid, Spain. oscar.rubio-cabezas@pms.ac.uk

AIMS: Monogenic diabetes is frequently misdiagnosed as Type 1 diabetes. We aimed 
to screen for undiagnosed monogenic diabetes in a cohort of children who had a
clinical diagnosis of Type 1 diabetes but were pancreatic autoantibody-negative.
METHODS: We studied 252 patients diagnosed clinically with Type 1 diabetes
between 6 months and 17 years of age. Pancreatic autoantibodies [islet cell
autoantibodies (ICA), glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies (GADA) and/or
insulinoma-associated antigen-2 antibodies (IA2A)] were absent in 25 cases
(9.9%). The most frequent genes involved in monogenic diabetes [KCNJ11 and INS
for neonatal diabetes and HNF1A and HNF4A for maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY)] were directly sequenced.
RESULTS: Two of the 25 (8%) antibody-negative patients had de novo heterozygous
mutations in INS; c.94G>A (G32S) and c.265C>T (R89C). The two patients presented 
with non-ketotic hyperglycaemia at 8 and 11 months of age. In contrast, the four 
antibody-positive patients who presented at a similar age (6-12 months) had a
more severe metabolic derangement, manifested as ketosis in all four cases, with 
ketoacidosis in two. At ages 15 and 5 years, both INS mutation patients were
prescribed a replacement dose of insulin with good glycaemic control [glycated
haemoglobin (HbA(1c)) 7.0 and 7.2%]. No mutations were found in KCNJ11, HNF1A or 
HNF4A.
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of patients with monogenic diabetes from children
with clinically defined Type 1 diabetes may be helped by clinical criteria
including the absence of pancreatic autoantibodies.

PMID: 19900242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Yakugaku Zasshi. 2009 Nov;129(11):1357-65.

[Dosing time based on molecular mechanism of biological clock of hepatic drug
metabolic enzyme].

[Article in Japanese]

Matsunaga N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pharmaceutics, Division of Clinical Pharmacy, Department of
Medico-Pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu
University, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka, Japan. matunaga@phar.kyushu-u.ac.jp

The mammalian circadian pacemaker stays in the paired suprachiasmatic nuclei
(SCN). Recent several studies reveal that the circadian rhythms of physiology and
behavior are controlled by clock genes. In addition, the effectiveness and
toxicity of many drugs vary depending on dosing time associated with 24-h rhythms
of biochemical, physiological, and behavioral processes under the control of the 
circadian clock. Acetaminophen (APAP) is a widely used analgesic drug, and is
mainly biotransformed and eliminated as nontoxic conjugates with glucuronic acid 
and sulfuric acid. Only a small portion of the dose is mainly bioactivated by
CYP2E1 to N-acetyl-p-benzoquinone imine (NAPQI), a reactive toxic intermediate.
For APAP overdose, glucuronidation and sulfation are saturated and the formation 
of NAPQI increases. However, the exact mechanisms underlying the chronotoxicity
of APAP have not been clarified yet. In the present study, we have clarified that
there was a significant dosing time-dependent difference in hepatotoxicity
induced by APAP in mice. The mechanism may be related to the rhythmicity of
CYP2E1 activity and GSH conjugation. In additon, we investigated whether the
liver transcription factor hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) and clock
genes undergoing astriking 24-h rhythm in mouse liver contribute to the 24-h
regulation of CYP2E1 activity. A significant 24-h rhythmicity was demonstrated
for CYP2E1 activity, protein levels and mRNA levels. HNF-1alpha and clock genes
may contribute to produce the 24-h rhythm of CYP2E1 mRNA levels. Metabolism by
CYP and GSH conjugation are common metabolic pathways for many drugs such as
APAP. These findings support the concept that choosing the most appropriate time 
of day to administer the drugs associated with metabolic rhythmicity such as CYP 
and GSH conjugation may reduce hepatotoxicity in experimental and clinical
situations. 24-h rhythm of CYP2E1 activity was controlled by HNF-1alpha and clock
gene, in a transcriptional level. Identification of rhythmic marker for selecting
dosing time will lead improved progress and diffusion of chronopharmacotherapy.

PMID: 19881208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Diabetes. 2010 Jan;59(1):266-71. doi: 10.2337/db09-0555. Epub 2009 Sep 30.

Polygenic risk variants for type 2 diabetes susceptibility modify age at
diagnosis in monogenic HNF1A diabetes.

Lango Allen H(1), Johansson S, Ellard S, Shields B, Hertel JK, Raeder H,
Colclough K, Molven A, Frayling TM, Njølstad PR, Hattersley AT, Weedon MN.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics of Complex Traits, Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of Exeter, Exeter, U.K. hana.langoallen@pms.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: Mutations in the HNF1A gene are the most common cause of
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). There is a substantial variation in 
the age at diabetes diagnosis, even within families where diabetes is caused by
the same mutation. We investigated the hypothesis that common polygenic variants 
that predispose to type 2 diabetes might account for the difference in age at
diagnosis.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Fifteen robustly associated type 2 diabetes variants
were successfully genotyped in 410 individuals from 203 HNF1A-MODY families, from
two study centers in the U.K. and Norway. We assessed their effect on the age at 
diagnosis both individually and in a combined genetic score by summing the number
of type 2 diabetes risk alleles carried by each patient.
RESULTS: We confirmed the effects of environmental and genetic factors known to
modify the age at HNF1A-MODY diagnosis, namely intrauterine hyperglycemia (-5.1
years if present, P = 1.6 x 10(-10)) and HNF1A mutation position (-5.2 years if
at least two isoforms affected, P = 1.8 x 10(-2)). Additionally, our data showed 
strong effects of sex (females diagnosed 3.0 years earlier, P = 6.0 x 10(-4)) and
age at study (0.3 years later diagnosis per year increase in age, P = 4.7 x
10(-38)). There were no strong individual single nucleotide polymorphism effects;
however, in the combined genetic score model, each additional risk allele was
associated with 0.35 years earlier diabetes diagnosis (P = 5.1 x 10(-3)).
CONCLUSIONS: We show that type 2 diabetes risk variants of modest effect sizes
reduce the age at diagnosis in HNF1A-MODY. This is one of the first studies to
demonstrate that clinical characteristics of a monogenic disease can be modified 
by common polygenic variants.

PMCID: PMC2797932
PMID: 19794065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2009 Nov-Dec;1789(11-12):709-18. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2009.09.005. Epub 2009 Sep 24.

Interaction of intestinal and pancreatic transcription factors in the regulation 
of CFTR gene expression.

McCarthy VA(1), Ott CJ, Phylactides M, Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Molecular Genetics, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, UK.

The tissue-specific regulation of the cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance
regulator gene (CFTR) is coordinated by intronic and extragenic cis-acting
elements that influence its transcriptional activity. The promoter apparently
lacks sequences to drive cell type-specific expression. We previously identified 
a number of intronic elements that were associated with DNase I hypersensitive
sites (DHS) and bound the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) transcription
factor. Moreover, we demonstrated the likely involvement of HNF1 in the
regulation of CFTR expression in vivo. Here we investigate DHS in introns 16 and 
17a of the CFTR gene, which are evident in intestinal and pancreatic cell lines, 
and determine the transcription factors that interact with these sites. Of
particular interest were factors known to interact with HNF1 in coordinated
expression of genes in the gastrointestinal tract. We demonstrate that though
sequences within these DHS bind HNF1, CDX2, and PBX1 in vitro, only PBX1 show a
robust in vivo interaction. These data contribute to our understanding of the
complexity of cell-type-specific CFTR regulatory mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC2783911
PMID: 19782160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Dec 15;18(24):4781-90. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp441. Epub 2009 Sep
16.

Chromosomal and genetic alterations in human hepatocellular adenomas associated
with type Ia glycogen storage disease.

Kishnani PS(1), Chuang TP, Bali D, Koeberl D, Austin S, Weinstein DA, Murphy E,
Chen YT, Boyette K, Liu CH, Chen YT, Li LH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Genetics, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC
27710, USA.

Hepatocellular adenoma (HCA) is a frequent long-term complication of glycogen
storage disease type I (GSD I) and malignant transformation to hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) is known to occur in some cases. However, the molecular
pathogenesis of tumor development in GSD I is unclear. This study was conducted
to systematically investigate chromosomal and genetic alterations in HCA
associated with GSD I. Genome-wide SNP analysis and mutation detection of target 
genes was performed in ten GSD Ia-associated HCA and seven general population HCA
cases for comparison. Chromosomal aberrations were detected in 60% of the GSD Ia 
HCA and 57% of general population HCA. Intriguingly, simultaneous gain of
chromosome 6p and loss of 6q were only seen in GSD Ia HCA (three cases) with one 
additional GSD I patient showing submicroscopic 6q14.1 deletion. The sizes of GSD
Ia adenomas with chromosome 6 aberrations were larger than the sizes of adenomas 
without the changes (P = 0.012). Expression of IGF2R and LATS1 candidate tumor
suppressor genes at 6q was reduced in more than 50% of GSD Ia HCA that were
examined (n = 7). None of the GSD Ia HCA had biallelic mutations in the HNF1A
gene. These findings give the first insight into the distinct genomic and genetic
characteristics of HCA associated with GSD Ia. These results strongly suggest
that chromosome 6 alterations could be an early event in the liver tumorigenesis 
in GSD I, and may be in general population. These results also suggest an
interesting relationship between GSD Ia HCA and steps to HCC transformation.

PMID: 19762333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Intern Med. 2010 Mar;267(3):316-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2796.2009.02145.x. Epub
2009 Jun 22.

An investigation of serum concentration of apoM as a potential MODY3 marker using
a novel ELISA.

Cervin C(1), Axler O, Holmkvist J, Almgren P, Rantala E, Tuomi T, Groop L,
Dahlbäck B, Karlsson E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes & Endocrinology, Clinical Research
Centre, Malmö University Hospital, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the fitness of serum apolipoprotein M (apoM)
concentration as a marker for maturity-onset diabetes of the young 3 (MODY3).
STUDY DESIGN AND SUBJECTS: This study consisted of two parts. A family study
included 71 carriers of the P291fsinsC mutation in hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) from the Finnish Botnia study, 53 of whom were
diabetic, and 75 matched family controls. A second, case-control study included
24 MODY3 patients, 17 healthy MODY3 mutation carriers, 11 MODY1 patients, 18 type
2 diabetes patients and 19 healthy control individuals. Subjects in the
case-control study were recruited from the Botnia study or the Clinic of
Endocrinology, Malmö University Hospital. Serum apoM levels were measured using a
novel ELISA based on two monoclonal apoM antibodies.
RESULTS: In the family study, mean serum apoM was 10% lower in female carriers of
the P291fsinsC mutation compared to the family controls (P = 0.0058), a
difference which remained significant after adjustment for diabetes status. There
was no observed difference between groups for men. In the case-control study, no 
significant difference in apoM concentration was observed between MODY3 and type 
2 diabetes patients, neither before nor after adjustment for total cholesterol.
CONCLUSIONS: Female carriers of the P291fsinsC mutation in HNF-1alpha displayed
slightly lower apoM serum levels. This difference is too small for apoM to be
reliably employed as a biomarker for HNF-1alpha mutation status.

PMID: 19754856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Immunol. 2009 Sep 15;183(6):3873-84. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901369. Epub 2009
Aug 28.

Beta-catenin/Tcf determines the outcome of thymic selection in response to
alphabetaTCR signaling.

Kovalovsky D(1), Yu Y, Dose M, Emmanouilidou A, Konstantinou T, Germar K,
Aghajani K, Guo Z, Mandal M, Gounari F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Research Institute, Tufts New England Medical Center,
Boston, MA 02111, USA.

Thymic maturation of T cells depends on the intracellular interpretation of
alphabetaTCR signals by processes that are poorly understood. In this study, we
report that beta-catenin/Tcf signaling was activated in double-positive
thymocytes in response to alphabetaTCR engagement and impacted thymocyte
selection. TCR engagement combined with activation of beta-catenin signaled
thymocyte deletion, whereas Tcf-1 deficiency rescued from negative selection.
Survival/apoptotis mediators including Bim, Bcl-2, and Bcl-x(L) were
alternatively influenced by stabilization of beta-catenin or ablation of Tcf-1,
and Bim-mediated beta-catenin induced thymocyte deletion. TCR activation in
double-positive cells with stabilized beta-catenin triggered signaling associated
with negative selection, including sustained overactivation of Lat and Jnk and a 
transient activation of Erk. These observations are consistent with
beta-catenin/Tcf signaling acting as a switch that determines the outcome of
thymic selection downstream the alphabetaTCR cascade.

PMCID: PMC4695211
PMID: 19717519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Diabet Med. 2009 Aug;26(8):834-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2009.02753.x.

Exenatide-a potential role in treatment of HNF1-alpha MODY in obese patients?

Ahluwalia R, Perkins K, Ewins D, Goenka N.

Comment on
    Diabet Med. 2009 Feb;26(2):189-90.

PMID: 19709161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Biol Chem. 2009 Oct 16;284(42):28885-95. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.052407. Epub
2009 Aug 17.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha plays a critical role in PCSK9 gene
transcription and regulation by the natural hypocholesterolemic compound
berberine.

Li H(1), Dong B, Park SW, Lee HS, Chen W, Liu J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System, Palo Alto,
California 94304, USA.

PCSK9 is a natural inhibitor of LDL receptor (LDLR) that binds the extracellular 
domain of LDLR and triggers its intracellular degradation. PCSK9 and LDLR are
coordinately regulated at the transcriptional level by sterols through their
promoter-imbedded sterol response elements (SRE) and co-induced by statins.
Identification of regulatory networks modulating PCSK9 transcription is important
for developing selective repressors of PCSK9 to improve statin efficacy by
prolonging the up-regulation of LDLR. Interestingly, the plant-derived
hypocholesterolemic compound berberine (BBR) up-regulates LDLR expression while
down-regulating PCSK9. In our investigations to define mechanisms underlying the 
transcriptional suppression of PCSK9 by BBR in HepG2 cells, we have identified a 
highly conserved hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) binding site residing 28 bp
upstream from SRE as a critical sequence motif for PCSK9 transcription and its
regulation by BBR. Mutation of the HNF1 site reduced PCSK9 promoter activity
>90%. A battery of functional assays identified HNF1alpha as the predominant
trans-activator for PCSK9 gene working through this sequence motif. We further
provide evidence suggesting that HNF1 site works cooperatively with SRE as HNF1
mutation significantly attenuated the activity of nuclear SREBP2 to transactivate
PCSK9 promoter. Finally, we show that a coordinate modest reduction of HNF1alpha 
and nuclear SREBP2 by BBR led to a strong suppression of PCSK9 transcription
through these two critical regulatory sequences. This is the first described
example of SREBP pairing with HNF1 to control an important regulatory pathway in 
cholesterol homeostasis. This work also provides a mechanism for how BBR
suppresses PCSK9 transcription.

PMCID: PMC2781434
PMID: 19687008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. PLoS One. 2009 Aug 12;4(8):e6615. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006615.

Low frequency variants in the exons only encoding isoform A of HNF1A do not
contribute to susceptibility to type 2 diabetes.

Jafar-Mohammadi B(1), Groves CJ, Owen KR, Frayling TM, Hattersley AT, McCarthy
MI, Gloyn AL.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK.

BACKGROUND: There is considerable interest in the hypothesis that low frequency, 
intermediate penetrance variants contribute to the proportion of Type 2 Diabetes 
(T2D) susceptibility not attributable to the common variants uncovered through
genome-wide association approaches. Genes previously implicated in monogenic and 
multifactorial forms of diabetes are obvious candidates in this respect. In this 
study, we focussed on exons 8-10 of the HNF1A gene since rare, penetrant
mutations in these exons (which are only transcribed in selected HNF1A isoforms) 
are associated with a later age of diagnosis of Maturity onset diabetes of the
young (MODY) than mutations in exons 1-7. The age of diagnosis in the subgroup of
HNF1A-MODY individuals with exon 8-10 mutations overlaps with that of early
multifactorial T2D, and we set out to test the hypothesis that these exons might 
also harbour low-frequency coding variants of intermediate penetrance that
contribute to risk of multifactorial T2D.
METHODOLOGY AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We performed targeted capillary resequencing 
of HNF1A exons 8-10 in 591 European T2D subjects enriched for genetic aetiology
on the basis of an early age of diagnosis (< or =45 years) and/or family history 
of T2D (> or =1 affected sibling). PCR products were sequenced and compared to
the published HNF1A sequence. We identified several variants (rs735396
[IVS9-24T>C], rs1169304 [IVS8+29T>C], c.1768+44C>T [IVS9+44C>T] and rs61953349
[c.1545G>A, p.T515T] but no novel non-synonymous coding variants were detected.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: We conclude that low frequency, nonsynonymous
coding variants in the terminal exons of HNF1A are unlikely to contribute to
T2D-susceptibility in European samples. Nevertheless, the rationale for seeking
low-frequency causal variants in genes known to contain rare, penetrant mutations
remains strong and should motivate efforts to screen other genes in a similar
fashion.

PMCID: PMC2720540
PMID: 19672314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Hepatology. 2009 Nov;50(5):1674-5. doi: 10.1002/hep.23109.

Hepatic congestion plays a role in liver stiffness.

Frulio N, Laumonier H, Balabaud C, Trillaud H, Bioulac-Sage P.

Comment on
    Hepatology. 2008 Dec;48(6):2089.

PMID: 19670411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Cell Transplant. 2009;18(12):1319-40. doi: 10.3727/096368909X12483162197321. Epub
2009 Aug 5.

Sequential hepatogenic transdifferentiation of adipose tissue-derived stem cells:
relevance of different extracellular signaling molecules, transcription factors
involved, and expression of new key marker genes.

Bonora-Centelles A(1), Jover R, Mirabet V, Lahoz A, Carbonell F, Castell JV,
Gómez-Lechón MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Hepatología Experimental, Centro de Investigación, Hospital La Fe,
Valencia, Spain.

Adipose tissue contains a mesenchymal stem cell (MSC) population known as
adipose-derived stem cells (ASCs) capable of differentiating into different cell 
types. Our aim was to induce hepatic transdifferentiation of ASCs by sequential
exposure to several combinations of cytokines, growth factors, and hormones. The 
most efficient hepatogenic protocol includes fibroblastic growth factors (FGF) 2 
and 4 and epidermal growth factor (EGF) (step 1), hepatocyte growth factor (HGF),
FGF2, FGF4, and nicotinamide (Nic) (step 2), and oncostatin M (OSM),
dexamethasone (Dex), and insulin-tranferrin-selenium (step 3). This protocol
activated transcription factors [GATA6, Hex, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha
and beta (CEBPalpha and beta), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma, 
coactivator 1 alpha (PGC1alpha), and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha
(HNF4alpha)], which promoted a characteristic hepatic phenotype, as assessed by
new informative markers for the step-by-step hepatic transdifferentiation of hMSC
[early markers: albumin (ALB), alpha-2-macroglobuline (alpha2M), complement
protein C3 (C3), and selenoprotein P1 (SEPP1); late markers: cytochrome P450 3A4 
(CYP3A4), apolipoprotein E (APOE), acyl-CoA synthetase long-chain family member 1
(ACSL1), and angiotensin II receptor, type 1 (AGTR1)]. The loss of adipose adult 
stem cell phenotype was detected by losing expression of Thy1 and inhibitor of
DNA binding 3 (Id3). The reexpression of phosphoenolpyruvate corboxykinase
(PEPCK), apolipoprotein C3 (APOCIII), aldolase B (ALDOB), and cytochrome P450 1A2
(CYP1A2) was achieved by transduction with a recombinant adenovirus for HNF4alpha
and finally hepatic functionality was also assessed by analyzing specific
biochemical markers. We conclude that ASCs could represent an alternative tool in
clinical therapy for liver dysfunction and regenerative medicine.

PMID: 19660180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Diabet Med. 2009 May;26(5):569-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2009.02705.x.

Variants in the isoform-specific coding regions of the HNF1A, HNF4A and HNF1B
genes are not a common cause of familial, young-onset diabetes or renal cysts and
diabetes (RCAD).

Locke JM, Ellard S, Norwood VF, Harries LW.

PMID: 19646202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Diabet Med. 2009 May;26(5):466-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2009.02720.x.

Phenotypical aspects of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY diabetes) in
comparison with Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in children and adolescents:
experience from a large multicentre database.

Schober E(1), Rami B, Grabert M, Thon A, Kapellen T, Reinehr T, Holl RW; DPV-Wiss
Initiative of the German Working Group for Paediatric Diabetology and.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Department, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
edith.schober@meduniwien.ac.at

AIMS: To analyse and compare clinical characteristics in young patients with
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
METHODS: We conducted an observational investigation using the DPV-Wiss database 
containing clinical data on 40 757 diabetic patients < 20 years of age from
Germany and Austria.
RESULTS: Three hundred and thirty-nine cases were clinically categorized as MODY 
(0.83%); 562 patients were diagnosed as T2DM (1.4%). In 20% of cases, the
diagnosis of MODY was based on clinical findings only. Of the 272 subjects where 
genetic testing was available, 3% did not carry mutations in the three examined
MODY genes. Glucokinase-MODY was commoner than HNF1A-MODY and HNF4A-MODY. Age at 
diagnosis was younger in MODY patients. The body mass index of T2DM was
significantly higher compared with all MODY subgroups. Macrovascular risk factors
such as dyslipidaemia and hypertension were commoner in T2DM, but 23% of MODY
patients had dyslipidaemia and 10% hypertension. Glycaemic control was within the
therapeutic target (HbA(1c) < 7.5%) in 86% of MODY and 70% of T2DM patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of MODY in children and adolescents in Germany and
Austria is lower than that of T2DM in this age group. Dyslipidaemia and
hypertension are less frequent in MODY compared with T2DM patients, but do occur.

PMID: 19646184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Hum Cell. 2009 Aug;22(3):55-63. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-0774.2009.00069.x. Epub 2009 
Jun 23.

Induced in vitro differentiation of pancreatic-like cells from human
amnion-derived fibroblast-like cells.

Tamagawa T(1), Ishiwata I, Sato K, Nakamura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Cell Biology, Ishiwata Hospital, Mito, Ibaraki, Japan.

There is growing evidence that the human amnion contains various types of stem
cells. As amniotic tissue is readily available, it has the potential to be an
important source of material for regenerative medicine. In the present study, we 
evaluated the potential of human amnion-derived fibroblast-like (HADFIL) cells to
differentiate into pancreatic islet cells. Two HADFIL cell populations, derived
from two different neonates, were analyzed. The expression of pancreatic
cell-specific genes was examined before and after in vitro induction of cellular 
differentiation. We found that Pdx-1, Isl-1, Pax-4, and Pax-6 showed
significantly increased expression following the induction of differentiation. In
addition, immunostaining demonstrated that insulin, glucagon, and somatostatin
were present in HADFIL cells following the induction of differentiation. These
results indicate that HADFIL cell populations have the potential to differentiate
into pancreatic islet cells. Although further studies are necessary to determine 
whether such in vitro-differentiated cells can function in vivo as pancreatic
islet cells, these amniotic cell populations might be of value in therapeutic
applications that require human pancreatic islet cells.

PMID: 19624306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Oncogene. 2009 Oct 8;28(40):3526-36. doi: 10.1038/onc.2009.211. Epub 2009 Jul 20.

Loss of miR-122 expression in liver cancer correlates with suppression of the
hepatic phenotype and gain of metastatic properties.

Coulouarn C(1), Factor VM, Andersen JB, Durkin ME, Thorgeirsson SS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda 20892-4262,
MD, USA.

Growing evidence indicates that microRNAs have a significant role in tumor
development and may constitute robust biomarkers for cancer diagnosis and
prognosis. In this study, we evaluated the clinical and functional relevance of
microRNA-122 (miR-122) expression in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). We
report that miR-122 is specifically repressed in a subset of primary tumors that 
are characterized by poor prognosis. We further show that the loss of miR-122
expression in tumor cells segregates with specific gene expression profiles
linked to cancer progression, namely the suppression of hepatic phenotype and the
acquisition of invasive properties. We identify liver-enriched transcription
factors as central regulatory molecules in the gene networks associated with loss
of miR-122, and provide evidence suggesting that miR-122 is under the
transcriptional control of HNF1A, HNF3A and HNF3B. We further show that loss of
miR-122 results in an increase of cell migration and invasion and that
restoration of miR-122 reverses this phenotype. In conclusion, miR-122 is a
marker of hepatocyte-specific differentiation and an important determinant in the
control of cell migration and invasion. From a clinical point of view, our study 
emphasizes miR-122 as a diagnostic and prognostic marker for HCC progression.

PMCID: PMC3492882
PMID: 19617899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Hepatology. 2009 Aug;50(2):481-9. doi: 10.1002/hep.22995.

Hepatocellular adenoma management and phenotypic classification: the Bordeaux
experience.

Bioulac-Sage P(1), Laumonier H, Couchy G, Le Bail B, Sa Cunha A, Rullier A,
Laurent C, Blanc JF, Cubel G, Trillaud H, Zucman-Rossi J, Balabaud C, Saric J.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie Pathologique, Hôpital Pellegrin, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire Bordeaux, Bordeaux, France. Paulette.bioulac-sage@chu-bordeaux.fr

We took advantage of the reported genotype/phenotype classification to analyze
our surgical series of hepatocellular adenoma (HCA). The series without specific 
known etiologies included 128 cases (116 women). The number of nodules varies
from single, <5, and >or=5 in 78, 38, and 12 cases, respectively. The resection
was complete in 95 cases. We identified 46 HNF1alpha-inactivated HCAs (44 women),
63 inflammatory HCAs (IHCA, 53 women) of which nine were also
beta-catenin-activated, and seven beta-catenin-activated HCAs (all women); six
additional cases had no known phenotypic marker and six others could not be
phenotypically analyzed. Twenty-three of 128 HCAs showed bleeding. No differences
were observed in solitary or multiple tumors in terms of hemorrhagic
manifestations between groups. In contrast, differences were observed between the
two main groups. Steatosis (tumor), microadenomas (resected specimen), and
additional benign nodules were more frequently observed in HNF1alpha-inactivated 
HCAs (P < 0.01) than in IHCAs. Body mass index > 25, peliosis (tumor), and
steatosis in background liver were more frequent in IHCA (P < 0.01). After
complete resection, new HCAs in the centimetric range were more frequently found 
during follow-up (>1 year) in HNF1alpha-inactivated HCA. After incomplete
resection (HCA left in nonresected liver), the majority of HCA remained stable in
the two main groups and even sometimes regressed. Six patients of 128 developed
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) (all were beta-catenin-activated, whether
inflammatory or not).CONCLUSION: There were noticeable clinical differences
between HNF1alpha-inactivated HCA and IHCA; there was no increased risk of
bleeding or HCC related to the number of HCAs; beta-catenin-activated HCAs are at
higher risk of HCC. As a consequence, we believe that management of HCA needs to 
be adapted to the phenotype of these tumors.

PMID: 19585623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. JAMA. 2009 Jul 1;302(1):37-48. doi: 10.1001/jama.2009.954.

Genetic Loci associated with C-reactive protein levels and risk of coronary heart
disease.

Elliott P(1), Chambers JC, Zhang W, Clarke R, Hopewell JC, Peden JF, Erdmann J,
Braund P, Engert JC, Bennett D, Coin L, Ashby D, Tzoulaki I, Brown IJ, Mt-Isa S, 
McCarthy MI, Peltonen L, Freimer NB, Farrall M, Ruokonen A, Hamsten A, Lim N,
Froguel P, Waterworth DM, Vollenweider P, Waeber G, Jarvelin MR, Mooser V, Scott 
J, Hall AS, Schunkert H, Anand SS, Collins R, Samani NJ, Watkins H, Kooner JS.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine, Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.
p.elliott@imperial.ac.uk

Comment in
    JAMA. 2009 Jul 1;302(1):92-3.

CONTEXT: Plasma levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) are independently associated
with risk of coronary heart disease, but whether CRP is causally associated with 
coronary heart disease or merely a marker of underlying atherosclerosis is
uncertain.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate association of genetic loci with CRP levels and risk of
coronary heart disease.
DESIGN, SETTING, AND PARTICIPANTS: We first carried out a genome-wide association
(n = 17,967) and replication study (n = 13,615) to identify genetic loci
associated with plasma CRP concentrations. Data collection took place between
1989 and 2008 and genotyping between 2003 and 2008. We carried out a mendelian
randomization study of the most closely associated single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) in the CRP locus and published data on other CRP variants involving a total
of 28,112 cases and 100,823 controls, to investigate the association of CRP
variants with coronary heart disease. We compared our finding with that predicted
from meta-analysis of observational studies of CRP levels and risk of coronary
heart disease. For the other loci associated with CRP levels, we selected the
most closely associated SNP for testing against coronary heart disease among
14,365 cases and 32,069 controls.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Risk of coronary heart disease.
RESULTS: Polymorphisms in 5 genetic loci were strongly associated with CRP levels
(% difference per minor allele): SNP rs6700896 in LEPR (-14.8%; 95% confidence
interval [CI], -17.6% to -12.0%; P = 6.2 x 10(-22)), rs4537545 in IL6R (-11.5%;
95% CI, -14.4% to -8.5%; P = 1.3 x 10(-12)), rs7553007 in the CRP locus (-20.7%; 
95% CI, -23.4% to -17.9%; P = 1.3 x 10(-38)), rs1183910 in HNF1A (-13.8%; 95% CI,
-16.6% to -10.9%; P = 1.9 x 10(-18)), and rs4420638 in APOE-CI-CII (-21.8%; 95%
CI, -25.3% to -18.1%; P = 8.1 x 10(-26)). Association of SNP rs7553007 in the CRP
locus with coronary heart disease gave an odds ratio (OR) of 0.98 (95% CI, 0.94
to 1.01) per 20% lower CRP level. Our mendelian randomization study of variants
in the CRP locus showed no association with coronary heart disease: OR, 1.00; 95%
CI, 0.97 to 1.02; per 20% lower CRP level, compared with OR, 0.94; 95% CI, 0.94
to 0.95; predicted from meta-analysis of the observational studies of CRP levels 
and coronary heart disease (z score, -3.45; P < .001). SNPs rs6700896 in LEPR
(OR, 1.06; 95% CI, 1.02 to 1.09; per minor allele), rs4537545 in IL6R (OR, 0.94; 
95% CI, 0.91 to 0.97), and rs4420638 in the APOE-CI-CII cluster (OR, 1.16; 95%
CI, 1.12 to 1.21) were all associated with risk of coronary heart disease.
CONCLUSION: The lack of concordance between the effect on coronary heart disease 
risk of CRP genotypes and CRP levels argues against a causal association of CRP
with coronary heart disease.

PMCID: PMC2803020
PMID: 19567438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Clin Biochem Rev. 2009 May;30(2):67-74.

Investigating maturity onset diabetes of the young.

Nyunt O(1), Wu JY, McGown IN, Harris M, Huynh T, Leong GM, Cowley DM, Cotterill
AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus, Mater Children's
Hospital, South Brisbane, Qld 4101, Australia. ohn.nyunt@mater.org.au

Maturity Onset Diabetes of Young (MODY) is a monogenic and autosomal dominant
form of diabetes mellitus with onset of the disease often before 25 years of age.
It is due to dysfunction of pancreatic beta cells characterised by non-ketotic
diabetes and absence of pancreatic auto-antibodies. It is frequently mistaken for
type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus. Diagnosis of MODY is important as the GCK
subtype has better prognosis and may not require any treatment. Subtypes HNF1A
and HNF4A are sensitive to sulfonylureas, however diabetes complications are
common if not treated early. Moreover, there is genetic implication for the
patient and family. Rare MODY subtypes can be associated with pancreatic and
renal anomalies as well as exocrine dysfunction of the pancreas. So far there are
six widely accepted subtypes of MODY described but the list has grown to nine.
Although the majority of diabetes mellitus in youth remains type 1 and the
incidence of type 2 is rising, MODY should be considered in patients with
non-ketotic diabetes at presentation, and in patients with a strong family
history of diabetes mellitus without pancreatic auto-antibodies. Furthermore the 
diagnosis must be confirmed by molecular studies. With advancement in genomic
technology, rapid screening for MODY mutations will become readily available in
the future.

PMCID: PMC2702215
PMID: 19565026  [PubMed]


56. Diabetes Care. 2009 Oct;32(10):1864-6. doi: 10.2337/dc08-2018. Epub 2009 Jun 29.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young in children with incidental hyperglycemia: a
multicenter Italian study of 172 families.

Lorini R(1), Klersy C, d'Annunzio G, Massa O, Minuto N, Iafusco D,
Bellannè-Chantelot C, Frongia AP, Toni S, Meschi F, Cerutti F, Barbetti F;
Italian Society of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology (ISPED) Study Group.

Collaborators: Banin P, Cadario F, Calisti L, Cappa M, Crinò A, Cherubini V,
Chiari G, Vanelli M, Cotellessa M, D'Amato E, Cauvin V, Franzese A, Guazzarotti
L, Iughetti L, Mancabitti ML, Meossi C, Pinelli L, Pocecco M, Scaramuzza A, Sulli
N, Visentin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, IRCCS Gaslini Children's Hospital, University of
Genoa, Genoa, Italy. renatalorini@ospedale-gaslini.ge.it

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the prevalence of maturity-onset diabetes of the young 
(MODY) in Italian children with incidental hyperglycemia.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Among 748 subjects age 1-18 years with incidental
hyperglycemia, minimal diagnostic criteria for MODY were met by 172 families.
Mutational analyses of the glucokinase (GCK) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
(HNF1A) genes were performed.
RESULTS: We identified 85 GCK gene mutations in 109 probands and 10 HNF1A
mutations in 12 probands. In GCK patients, the median neonatal weight and age at 
the first evaluation were lower than those found in patients with HNF1A
mutations. Median fasting plasma glucose and impaired fasting glucose/impaired
glucose tolerance frequency after oral glucose tolerance testing were higher in
GCK patients, who also showed a lower frequency of diabetes than HNF1A patients.
CONCLUSIONS: GCK mutations are the prevailing cause of MODY (63.4%) when the
index case is recruited in Italian children with incidental hyperglycemia.

PMCID: PMC2752915
PMID: 19564454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Oct 1;315(16):2690-704. doi: 10.1016/j.yexcr.2009.06.021. Epub
2009 Jun 27.

Genomic response to Wnt signalling is highly context-dependent--evidence from DNA
microarray and chromatin immunoprecipitation screens of Wnt/TCF targets.

Railo A(1), Pajunen A, Itäranta P, Naillat F, Vuoristo J, Kilpeläinen P, Vainio
S.

Author information: 
(1)Oulu Centre for Cell Matrix Research, Biocenter Oulu, Laboratory of
Developmental Biology and Department of Medical Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, FIN-90014, University of Oulu, P. O. Box 5000, Finland.

Wnt proteins are important regulators of embryonic development, and dysregulated 
Wnt signalling is involved in the oncogenesis of several human cancers. Our
knowledge of the downstream target genes is limited, however. We used a chromatin
immunoprecipitation-based assay to isolate and characterize the actual gene
segments through which Wnt-activatable transcription factors, TCFs, regulate
transcription and an Affymetrix microarray analysis to study the global
transcriptional response to the Wnt3a ligand. The anti-beta-catenin
immunoprecipitation of DNA-protein complexes from mouse NIH3T3 fibroblasts
expressing a fusion protein of beta-catenin and TCF7 resulted in the
identification of 92 genes as putative TCF targets. GeneChip assays of gene
expression performed on NIH3T3 cells and the rat pheochromocytoma cell line PC12 
revealed 355 genes in NIH3T3 and 129 genes in the PC12 cells with marked changes 
in expression after Wnt3a stimulus. Only 2 Wnt-regulated genes were shared by
both cell lines. Surprisingly, Disabled-2 was the only gene identified by the
chromatin immunoprecipitation approach that displayed a marked change in
expression in the GeneChip assay. Taken together, our approaches give an insight 
into the complex context-dependent nature of Wnt pathway transcriptional
responses and identify Disabled-2 as a potential new direct target for Wnt
signalling.

PMID: 19563800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Drug Metab Dispos. 2009 Sep;37(9):1978-86. doi: 10.1124/dmd.109.027409. Epub 2009
Jun 18.

Genetic polymorphisms in the TATA box and upstream phenobarbital-responsive
enhancer module of the UGT1A1 promoter have combined effects on
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 transcription mediated by constitutive androstane
receptor, pregnane X receptor, or glucocorticoid receptor in human liver.

Li Y(1), Buckley D, Wang S, Klaassen CD, Zhong XB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutics, University of Kansas
Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd., Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Transcription of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A1 is regulated by the
transcription factors, constitutive androstane receptor (CAR), pregnane X
receptor (PXR), glucocorticoid receptor (GR), hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1
alpha, and HNF4 alpha. The purpose of this study was to determine whether the
genetic polymorphisms in the RNA polymerase II core promoter and the upstream
phenobarbital-responsive element module (PBREM) of the UGT1A1 promoter have
combined effects on UGT1A1 transcription mediated by the transcription factors. A
polymorphism of A(TA)(5-8)TAA in the UGT1A1 TATA box and a single nucleotide
polymorphism of -3279T>G in PBREM were genotyped in 98 human liver samples.
Relative mRNA levels of CAR, PXR, GR, HNF1 alpha, HNF4 alpha, and UGT1A1 were
quantified by a multiplex branched DNA technique. Correlations of mRNA levels
between UGT1A1 and the transcription factors were established in liver samples
with different combined genetic polymorphisms. Correlation of mRNA levels between
UGT1A1 and CAR, PXR, or GR, but not HNF1 alpha or HNF4 alpha, was abolished in
the samples with the combined genotype of TA7/7 plus -3279G/G, which was also
associated with significantly lower UGT1A1 mRNA levels compared with other
combined genotypes. Correlations of mRNA levels between UGT1A1 and CAR or PXR
were reduced but not abolished in the samples with the combined genotype of TA6/7
plus -3279 G/G, which showed significantly lower UGT1A1 mRNA levels compared with
the combined genotype of TA6/7 plus -3279T/G and other genotypes containing
TA6/6. In conclusion, the combined genotypes containing A(TA)(7)TAA and -3279G
decrease UGT1A transcription mediated by CAR, PXR, or GR but not by HNF1 alpha or
HNF4 alpha.

PMCID: PMC2729330
PMID: 19541828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nat Med. 2009 Jul;15(7):808-13. doi: 10.1038/nm.1982. Epub 2009 Jun 14.

Wnt signaling arrests effector T cell differentiation and generates CD8+ memory
stem cells.

Gattinoni L(1), Zhong XS, Palmer DC, Ji Y, Hinrichs CS, Yu Z, Wrzesinski C, Boni 
A, Cassard L, Garvin LM, Paulos CM, Muranski P, Restifo NP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, US National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA. gattinol@mail.nih.gov

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2010 May;16(5):513-4; author reply 514-5.
    Nat Med. 2009 Jul;15(7):731-2.

Self-renewing cell populations such as hematopoietic stem cells and memory B and 
T lymphocytes might be regulated by shared signaling pathways. The
Wnt-beta-catenin pathway is an evolutionarily conserved pathway that promotes
hematopoietic stem cell self-renewal and multipotency by limiting stem cell
proliferation and differentiation, but its role in the generation and maintenance
of memory T cells is unknown. We found that induction of Wnt-beta-catenin
signaling by inhibitors of glycogen sythase kinase-3beta or the Wnt protein
family member Wnt3a arrested CD8(+) T cell development into effector cells. By
blocking T cell differentiation, Wnt signaling promoted the generation of
CD44(low)CD62L(high)Sca-1(high)CD122(high)Bcl-2(high) self-renewing multipotent
CD8(+) memory stem cells with proliferative and antitumor capacities exceeding
those of central and effector memory T cell subsets. These findings reveal a key 
role for Wnt signaling in the maintenance of 'stemness' in mature memory CD8(+) T
cells and have major implications for the design of new vaccination strategies
and adoptive immunotherapies.

PMCID: PMC2707501
PMID: 19525962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Eur J Pediatr. 2010 Feb;169(2):207-13. doi: 10.1007/s00431-009-1008-y. Epub 2009 
Jun 13.

DNA hypomethylation, transient neonatal diabetes, and prune belly sequence in one
of two identical twins.

Laborie LB(1), Mackay DJ, Temple IK, Molven A, Søvik O, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, 5021 Bergen, Norway.

One known genetic mechanism for transient neonatal diabetes is loss of
methylation at 6q24. The etiology of prune belly sequence is unknown but a
genetic defect, affecting the mesoderm from which the triad abdominal muscle
hypoplasia, urinary tract abnormalities, and cryptorchidism develop, has been
suggested. We investigated a family, including one twin, with transient neonatal 
diabetes and prune belly sequence. Autoantibody tests excluded type 1 diabetes.
Microsatellite marker analysis confirmed the twins being monozygotic. We
identified no mutations in ZFP57, KCNJ11, ABCC8, GCK, HNF1A, HNF1B, HNF3B, IPF1, 
PAX4, or ZIC3. The proband had loss of methylation at the 6q24 locus TNDM and
also at the loci IGF2R, DIRAS3, and PEG1, while the other family members,
including the healthy monozygotic twin, had normal findings. The loss of
methylation on chromosome 6q24 and elsewhere may indicate a generalized maternal 
hypomethylation syndrome, which accounts for both transient neonatal diabetes and
prune belly sequence.

PMID: 19521719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2009 Jun 2;8:28. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-8-28.

HNF1A gene polymorphisms and cardiovascular risk factors in individuals with
late-onset autosomal dominant diabetes: a cross-sectional study.

Giuffrida FM(1), Furuzawa GK, Kasamatsu TS, Oliveira MM, Reis AF, Dib SA.

Author information: 
(1)Universidade Federal de São Paulo, Departamento de Medicina, Disciplina de
Endocrinologia, R, Pedro de Toledo, 981 12o andar, Vila Clementino, Sao Paulo, SP
- Brazil. fernandogiuffrida@uol.com.br

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is a genetically heterogeneous
disease, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 homeobox A (HNF1A) single-nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) playing a minor role in its pathogenesis. HNF1A is a
frequent cause of monogenic diabetes, albeit with early-onset. Some uncommon
subgroups like late-onset autosomal dominant diabetes mellitus (LOADDM) may
present peculiar inheritance patterns with a stronger familial component. This
study aims to investigate the relationship of HNF1A SNPs with cardiovascular risk
factors in this group, as well as to characterize them in contrast with classical
T2DM (CT2DM).
METHODS: eighteen LOADDM (age at onset > 40 y.o.; diabetes in 3 contiguous
generations, uniparental lineage) along with 48 CT2DM patients and 42
normoglycemic controls (N group) have been evaluated for cardiovascular risk
factors and SNPs of HNF1A.
RESULTS: LOADDM showed significantly higher frequencies of SNPs A98V (22.2% vs
2.1%, p = 0.02) and S487N (72.2% vs 43.8%, p = 0.049) of HNF1A compared to CT2DM.
I27L did not show significant difference (66.7% vs 45.8%), but associated with
lower risk of hypertriglyceridemia (OR 0.16, 95% CI 0.04-0.65, p = 0.01).
"Protective effect" was independent from other well-known predictive risk factors
for hypertriglyceridemia, such as waist circumference (OR 1.09 per 1 cm increase,
p = 0.01) and HDL (OR 0.01 per 1 mmol/l, p = 0.005), after logistic regression.
CONCLUSION: Late onset autosomal dominant diabetes mellitus is clinically
indistinguishable from classical type 2 diabetes individuals. However, LOADDM
group is enriched for common HNF1A polymorphisms A98V and S487N. I27L showed
"protective effect" upon hypertriglyceridemia in this sample of individuals,
suggesting a role for HNF1A on diabetic individuals' lipid profile. These data
contribute to the understanding of the complex interactions between genes,
hyperglycemia and cardiovascular risk factors development in type 2 diabetes
mellitus.

PMCID: PMC2696421
PMID: 19490620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Med Sci (Paris). 2009 May;25(5):467-72. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2009255467.

[miRNAs in cancer: the case of liver tumors].

[Article in French]

Ladeiro Y(1), Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U, Université Paris Diderot, France.

Comment in
    Med Sci (Paris). 2009 May;25(5):435-6.

Micro RNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression. Many
studies show that they are implicated in essential physiological functions and
particularly in tumors. Specific alterations of miRNA expression have been
identified directly involved in carcinogenesis. Indeed, miRNAs could act as
oncogenes or tumor suppressors. In addition, some miRNAs deregulations seem to be
associated to specific tumors subtypes, suggesting that they could be used as
tumor biomarkers. In this review, we summarize recent works about miRNAs and
hepatocellular tumorigenesis in order to understand the role of these small
non-coding RNAs in the carcino-genesis process and their possible use as
diagnostic and prognostic markers of these tumors.

PMID: 19480827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Xenobiotica. 2009 Jul;39(7):514-22. doi: 10.1080/00498250902952514.

Application of multivariate statistical procedures to identify transcription
factors that correlate with MRP2, 3, and 4 mRNA in adult human livers.

Aleksunes LM(1), Yeager RL, Klaassen CD.

Author information: 
(1)University of Kansas Medical Center, Pharmacology, Toxicology, and
Therapeutics, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Multidrug resistance-associated proteins 2-4 (MRP2-4) are membrane efflux
transporters critical for the hepatic clearance of pharmaceuticals and endogenous
chemicals. Little is known about the constitutive regulation of MRP2-4 mRNA in
normal human liver. The purpose of this study was to identify transcription
factors whose expression significantly correlates with MRP2-4 mRNA in human liver
specimens. Ninety adult human livers were profiled for mRNA expression of MRP2-4 
as well as aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), constitutive androstane receptor
(CAR), pregnane X receptor (PXR), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
alpha (PPAR alpha) and gamma (gamma), liver X receptor alpha (LXR alpha),
farnesoid X receptor (FXR), glucocorticoid receptor (GR), retinoid X receptor
alpha (RXR alpha), hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1 alpha) and 4 alpha (4 
alpha), and nuclear factor E2-related factor 2 (Nrf2) transcription factors.
Using linear regression and stepwise selection of partial R(2)-values, CAR, HNF1 
alpha, and PPAR alpha mRNA exhibited the greatest correlation with MRP2, 3, and
4, respectively. Interindividual variation in the expression of the identified
transcription factors may account for the variability in constitutive mRNA levels
of MRP2-4. The multivariate approach presented in this study should aid in
predicting signalling pathways that participate either directly or indirectly in 
regulating hepatic drug disposition.

PMCID: PMC2698955
PMID: 19480556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2009 Jun 16;305(1-2):63-70. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2009.02.014. 
Epub 2009 Mar 4.

SLC2A2 gene expression in kidney of diabetic rats is regulated by HNF-1alpha and 
HNF-3beta.

Freitas HS(1), Schaan BD, David-Silva A, Sabino-Silva R, Okamoto MM, Alves-Wagner
AB, Mori RC, Machado UF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Sao Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes 1524, 05505-900 Sao Paulo (SP), 
Brazil. ubiratan@icb.usp.br

We hypothesize that, in kidney of diabetic rats, hepatocyte nuclear factors
(HNF-1alpha and HNF-3beta) play a critical role in the overexpression of solute
carrier 2A2 (SLC2A2) gene. Diabetic rats submitted or not to rapid (up to 12h)
and short-term (1, 4 and 6 days) insulin treatment were investigated. Twofold
increase in GLUT2 mRNA was observed in diabetic, accompanied by significant
increases in HNF-1alpha and HNF-3beta expression and binding activity. Additional
2-fold increase in GLUT2 mRNA and HNF-3beta expression/activity was observed in
12-h insulin-treated rats. Six-day insulin treatment decreased GLUT2 mRNA and
HNF-1alpha expression and activity to levels of non-diabetic rats, whereas
HNF-3beta decreased to levels of non-insulin-treated diabetic rats. Our results
provide evidence for a link between the overexpression of SLC2A2 gene and the
transcriptional activity of HNF-1alpha and HNF-3beta in kidney of diabetic rats. 
Furthermore, recovery of SLC2A2 gene after 6-day insulin treatment also involves 
HNF-1alpha and HNF-3beta activity.

PMID: 19433262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Jul;37(12):4100-15. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp333. Epub 2009
May 8.

Molecular characterization of SMILE as a novel corepressor of nuclear receptors.

Xie YB(1), Nedumaran B, Choi HS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, 500-757, Republic of Korea.

SMILE (small heterodimer partner interacting leucine zipper protein) has been
identified as a coregulator in ER signaling. In this study, we have examined the 
effects of SMILE on other NRs (nuclear receptors). SMILE inhibits GR, CAR and
HNF4 alpha-mediated transactivation. Knockdown of SMILE gene expression increases
the transactivation of the NRs. SMILE interacts with GR, CAR and HNF4 alpha in
vitro and in vivo. SMILE and these NRs colocalize in the nucleus. SMILE binds to 
the ligand-binding domain or AF2 domain of the NRs. Competitions between SMILE
and the coactivators GRIP1 or PGC-1 alpha have been demonstrated in vitro and in 
vivo. Furthermore, an intrinsic repressive activity of SMILE is observed in
Gal4-fusion system, and the intrinsic repressive domain is mapped to the
C-terminus of SMILE, spanning residues 203-354. Moreover, SMILE interacts with
specific HDACs (histone deacetylases) and SMILE-mediated repression is released
by HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A, in a NR-specific manner. Finally, ChIP
(chromatin immunoprecipitation) assays reveal that SMILE associates with the NRs 
on the target gene promoters. Adenoviral overexpression of SMILE represses GR-,
CAR- and HNF4 alpha-mediated target gene expression. Overall, these results
suggest that SMILE functions as a novel corepressor of NRs via competition with
coactivators and the recruitment of HDACs.

PMCID: PMC2709580
PMID: 19429690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2009 Sep;16(3):991-1004. doi: 10.1677/ERC-08-0340. Epub 2009
May 7.

Activation of a prometastatic gene expression program in hypoxic neuroblastoma
cells.

Poomthavorn P(1), Wong SH, Higgins S, Werther GA, Russo VC.

Author information: 
(1)Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Centre for Hormone Research, Royal
Children's Hospital, University of Melbourne, Flemington Road, 3052 Parkville,
Victoria, Australia.

The hypoxia inducible factor-1alpha (HIF1alpha) is a key regulator of oxygen
homeostasis, modulating cell survival, and growth in cells exposed to hypoxia. In
this study, neuroblastoma (NB) cells SH-SY5Y and SK-N-MC were employed to
determine the mechanisms regulating adaptation to hypoxia. NB cells were cultured
in a serum-free medium in the presence or absence of CoCl(2) (100 muM, hypoxia
mimic) for up to 48 h. SH-SY5Y and SK-N-MC cell numbers were not affected by
CoCl(2) treatment, while mitochondrial activity was reduced by approximately 50% 
in SH-SY5Y cells and by approximately 70% in SK-N-MC cells. Intracellular
accumulation of HIF1alpha protein was detected as early as 30 min of
post-hypoxia, followed by the increase of mRNA for vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) and nuclear accumulation of the ID1-2 transcription factors by 4 h.
In hypoxic SH-SY5Y NB cells, real-time PCR analysis showed that the genes
involved in maintenance of cell-cell and cell-matrix interactions (i.e.
adenomatosis polyposis coli, E-cadherin, catenin, EphB2, fibronectin-1, HTATIP2, 
tissue inhibitor of metalloprotease-4) were down-regulated by up to 90%, while
genes involved in enhancement of metastatic behavior (integrin a7b1, hepatocyte
growth factor receptor, transforming growth factor-beta1, VEGF, kisspeptin,
interleukin-1beta) were dramatically up-regulated above 200%. These changes were 
all consistent with the induction of epithelial-mesenchymal transition. We have
thus demonstrated that NB cell adaptation to hypoxia, in addition to the
modulation of HIF1alpha and VEGF expression and nuclear translocation of ID1 and 
ID2 transcription factors, involve in the activation of a gene expression program
consistent with the pro-metastatic events. These processes are probably
responsible for the NB cell transition from an adherent phenotype to a highly
migratory, invasive and aggressive NB cell type.

PMID: 19423615  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Jul;94(7):2658-64. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-2189. Epub 
2009 May 5.

Expanded clinical spectrum in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1b-maturity-onset
diabetes of the young.

Raile K(1), Klopocki E, Holder M, Wessel T, Galler A, Deiss D, Müller D, Riebel
T, Horn D, Maringa M, Weber J, Ullmann R, Grüters A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Charité Campus Virchow,
13353 Berlin, Germany. klemens.raile@charite.de

AIMS: HNF1B-maturity-onset diabetes of the young is caused by abnormalities in
the HNF1B gene encoding the transcription factor HNF-1beta. We aimed to
investigate detailed clinical features and the type of HNF1B gene anomaly in five
pediatric cases with HNF1B-MODY.
METHODS: From a cohort of 995 children and adolescents with diabetes, we analyzed
the most frequent maturity-onset diabetes of the young genes (GCK, HNF1A, HNF4A) 
including HNF1B sequencing and deletion analysis by quantitative Multiplex-PCR of
Short Fluorescent Fragments (QMPSF) if patients were islet autoantibody-negative 
and had one parent with diabetes or associated extrapancreatic features or
detectable C-peptide outside honeymoon phase. Presence and size of
disease-causing chromosomal rearrangements detected by QMPSF were further
analyzed by array comparative genomic hybridization.
RESULTS: Overall, five patients had a heterozygous HNF1B deletion, presenting
renal disease, elevated liver enzymes, and diabetes. Diabetes was characterized
by insulin resistance and adolescent onset of hyperglycemia. Additionally,
clinical features in some patients were pancreas dysplasia and exocrine
insufficiency (two of five patients), genital defects (three of five), mental
retardation (two of five), and eye abnormalities (coloboma, cataract in two of
five). One case also had severe growth deficit combined with congenital
cholestasis, and another case had common variable immune deficiency. All patients
reported here had monoallelic loss of the entire HNF1B gene. Whole genome array
comparative genomic hybridization confirmed a precurrent genomic deletion of
approximately 1.3-1.7 Mb in size.
CONCLUSION: The clinical data of our cases enlarge the wide spectrum of patients 
with HNF1B anomaly. The underlying molecular defect in all cases was a 1.3- to
1.7-Mb deletion, and paired, segmental duplications along with breakpoints were
most likely involved in this recurrent chromosomal microdeletion.

PMID: 19417042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Diabet Med. 2009 Apr;26(4):437-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2009.02690.x.

A genetic diagnosis of HNF1A diabetes alters treatment and improves glycaemic
control in the majority of insulin-treated patients.

Shepherd M(1), Shields B, Ellard S, Rubio-Cabezas O, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Health and Social Care Research Peninsula Medical School, Exeter,
UK. m.h.shepherd@exeter.ac.uk

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1A) gene mutations are
the commonest cause of monogenic diabetes, but patients are often misdiagnosed as
having Type 1 diabetes and started on insulin treatment. Patients with HNF1A
diabetes are particularly sensitive to the glucose-lowering effect of
sulphonylureas, which are the pharmacological treatment of choice. We aimed to
assess if patients do change from insulin to sulphonylurea treatment when HNF1A
diabetes is confirmed and the impact of this treatment change on long-term
glycaemic control.
METHODS: We investigated the clinical course of 43 patients who were insulin
treated from diagnosis for a median 4 years (range 1-14) before an HNF1A gene
mutation was identified.
RESULTS: Thirty-four patients (79%) stopped insulin following genetic testing and
transferred to sulphonylureas. Twenty-four of them (71%) remained off insulin at 
a median 39 months (range 17-90) post-transfer. The 10 patients who recommenced
insulin had a trend towards a longer duration of diabetes (18 vs. 7 years, P =
0.066) compared with those remaining on tablets. The median glycated haemoglobin 
(HbA(1c)) was good (6.9%; interquartile range 6.3-8.0%) in the patients who
remained off insulin and 19/24 patients (79%) achieved HbA(1c) < 7.5% or improved
their pre-genetic diagnosis HbA(1c) by > 1.0%. Transfer off insulin was not
attempted in eight patients: one of these was planning pregnancy and two chose to
remain on insulin.
CONCLUSION: In this observational study we found that a molecular genetic
diagnosis of HNF1A diabetes does alter treatment in clinical practice, with 79%
attempting transfer to sulphonylureas. Transfer to sulphonylureas was successful 
in the majority of patients without deterioration in glycaemic control.

PMID: 19388975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jun 19;284(25):16808-21. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M807723200. Epub 2009
Apr 17.

Mitochondrial dysfunction contributes to impaired insulin secretion in INS-1
cells with dominant-negative mutations of HNF-1alpha and in HNF-1alpha-deficient 
islets.

Pongratz RL(1), Kibbey RG, Kirkpatrick CL, Zhao X, Pontoglio M, Yaniv M, Wollheim
CB, Shulman GI, Cline GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young-type 3 (MODY-3) has been linked to mutations
in the transcription factor hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, resulting in
deficiency in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. In INS-1 cells overexpressing
doxycycline-inducible HNF-1alpha dominant-negative (DN-) gene mutations, and
islets from Hnf-1alpha knock-out mice, insulin secretion was impaired in response
to glucose (15 mm) and other nutrient secretagogues. Decreased rates of insulin
secretion in response to glutamine plus leucine and to methyl pyruvate, but not
potassium depolarization, indicate defects specific to mitochondrial metabolism. 
To identify the biochemical mechanisms responsible for impaired insulin
secretion, we used (31)P NMR measured mitochondrial ATP synthesis (distinct from 
glycolytic ATP synthesis) together with oxygen consumption measurements to
determine the efficiency of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation.
Mitochondrial uncoupling was significantly higher in DN-HNF-1alpha cells, such
that rates of ATP synthesis were decreased by approximately one-half in response 
to the secretagogues glucose, glutamine plus leucine, or pyruvate. In addition to
closure of the ATP-sensitive K(+) channels with mitochondrial ATP synthesis,
mitochondrial production of second messengers through increased anaplerotic flux 
has been shown to be critical for coupling metabolism to insulin secretion.
(13)C-Isotopomer analysis and tandem mass spectrometry measurement of Krebs cycle
intermediates revealed a negative impact of DN-HNF-1alpha and Hnf-1alpha
knock-out on mitochondrial second messenger production with glucose but not amino
acids. Taken together, these results indicate that, in addition to reduced
glycolytic flux, uncoupling of mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation
contributes to impaired nutrient-stimulated insulin secretion with either
mutations or loss of HNF-1alpha.

PMCID: PMC2719317
PMID: 19376774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Transgenic Res. 2009 Oct;18(5):697-706. doi: 10.1007/s11248-009-9262-3. Epub 2009
Apr 9.

Dominant-negative mutant hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha induces diabetes in
transgenic-cloned pigs.

Umeyama K(1), Watanabe M, Saito H, Kurome M, Tohi S, Matsunari H, Miki K,
Nagashima H.

Author information: 
(1)BIOS Research Laboratory Inc, Hiratsuka, Kanagawa 254-0031, Japan.
umeyama@isc.meiji.ac.jp

Pigs have been recognized as an excellent biomedical model for investigating a
variety of human health issues. We developed genetically modified pigs that
exhibit the apparent symptoms of diabetes. Transgenic cloned pigs carrying a
mutant human hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha gene, which is known to cause the
type 3 form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young, were produced using a
combined technology of intracytoplasmic sperm injection-mediated gene transfer
and somatic cell nuclear transfer. Although most of the 22 cloned offspring
obtained died before weaning, four pigs that lived for 20-196 days were diagnosed
as diabetes mellitus with nonfasting blood glucose levels greater than 200 mg/dl.
Oral glucose tolerance test on a cloned pig also revealed a significant increase 
of blood glucose level after glucose loading. Histochemical analysis of pancreas 
tissue from the cloned pigs showed small and irregularly formed Langerhans
Islets, in which poor insulin secretion was detected.

PMID: 19357985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Jun 1;27(16):2604-14. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.20.6300. Epub 2009
Apr 6.

Comprehensive pharmacogenetic analysis of irinotecan neutropenia and
pharmacokinetics.

Innocenti F(1), Kroetz DL, Schuetz E, Dolan ME, Ramírez J, Relling M, Chen P, Das
S, Rosner GL, Ratain MJ.

Author information: 
(1)The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
finnocen@medicine.bsd.uchicago.edu

Comment in
    J Clin Oncol. 2009 Jun 1;27(16):2578-9.

PURPOSE: We aim to identify genetic variation, in addition to the UGT1A1*28
polymorphism, that can explain the variability in irinotecan (CPT-11)
pharmacokinetics and neutropenia in cancer patients.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Pharmacokinetic, genetic, and clinical data were obtained
from 85 advanced cancer patients treated with single-agent CPT-11 every 3 weeks
at doses of 300 mg/m(2) (n = 20) and 350 mg/m(2) (n = 65). Forty-two common
variants were genotyped in 12 candidate genes of the CPT-11 pathway using several
methodologies. Univariate and multivariate models of absolute neutrophil count
(ANC) nadir and pharmacokinetic parameters were evaluated.
RESULTS: Almost 50% of the variation in ANC nadir is explained by UGT1A1*93,
ABCC1 IVS11 -48C>T, SLCO1B1*1b, ANC baseline levels, sex, and race (P < .0001).
More than 40% of the variation in CPT-11 area under the curve (AUC) is explained 
by ABCC2 -24C>T, SLCO1B1*5, HNF1A 79A>C, age, and CPT-11 dose (P < .0001). Almost
30% of the variability in SN-38 (the active metabolite of CPT-11) AUC is
explained by ABCC1 1684T>C, ABCB1 IVS9 -44A>G, and UGT1A1*93 (P = .004). Other
models explained 17%, 23%, and 27% of the variation in APC (a metabolite of
CPT-11), SN-38 glucuronide (SN-38G), and SN-38G/SN-38 AUCs, respectively. When
tested in univariate models, pretreatment total bilirubin was able to modify the 
existing associations between genotypes and phenotypes.
CONCLUSION: On the basis of this exploratory analysis, common polymorphisms in
genes encoding for ABC and SLC transporters may have a significant impact on the 
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of CPT-11. Confirmatory studies are
required.

PMCID: PMC2690389
PMID: 19349540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. J Clin Oncol. 2009 Jun 1;27(16):2578-9. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2008.21.2480. Epub 2009 
Apr 6.

Irinogenetics: how many stars are there in the sky?

Mathijssen RH, Gurney H.

Comment on
    J Clin Oncol. 2009 Jun 1;27(16):2604-14.

PMID: 19349537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jul 1;18(13):2328-43. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp165. Epub 2009 Apr 
3.

Systems biology of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD):
computational identification of gene expression pathways and integrated
regulatory networks.

Song X(1), Di Giovanni V, He N, Wang K, Ingram A, Rosenblum ND, Pei Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, University Health Network, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

To elucidate the molecular pathways that modulate renal cyst growth in ADPKD, we 
performed global gene profiling on cysts of different size (<1 ml, n = 5; 10-20
ml, n = 5; >50 ml, n = 3) and minimally cystic tissue (MCT, n = 5) from five PKD1
human polycystic kidneys using Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus 2.0 arrays. We used gene
set enrichment analysis to identify overrepresented signaling pathways and key
transcription factors (TFs) between cysts and MCT. We found down-regulation of
kidney epithelial restricted genes (e.g. nephron segment-specific markers and
cilia-associated cystic genes such as HNF1B, PKHD1, IFT88 and CYS1) in the renal 
cysts. On the other hand, PKD1 cysts displayed a rich profile of gene sets
associated with renal development, mitogen-mediated proliferation, cell cycle
progression, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, hypoxia, aging and
immune/inflammatory responses. Notably, our data suggest that up-regulation of
Wnt/beta-catenin, pleiotropic growth factor/receptor tyrosine kinase (e.g.
IGF/IGF1R, FGF/FGFR, EGF/EGFR, VEGF/VEGFR), G-protein-coupled receptor (e.g.
PTGER2) signaling was associated with renal cystic growth. By integrating these
pathways with a number of dysregulated networks of TFs (e.g. SRF, MYC, E2F1,
CREB1, LEF1, TCF7, HNF1B/ HNF1A and HNF4A), our data suggest that epithelial
dedifferentiation accompanied by aberrant activation and cross-talk of specific
signaling pathways may be required for PKD1 cyst growth and disease progression. 
Pharmacological modulation of some of these signaling pathways may provide a
potential therapeutic strategy for ADPKD.

PMID: 19346236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2009 May;46(5):621-35. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2009.01.005. Epub
2009 Jan 21.

Transcriptional regulation of SM22alpha by Wnt3a: convergence with
TGFbeta(1)/Smad signaling at a novel regulatory element.

Shafer SL(1), Towler DA.

Author information: 
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, Center for Cardiovascular Research, 
Internal Medicine/BMD, Campus Box 8301, 660 South Euclid Ave, St. Louis, MO
63110, USA.

The role of canonical Wnt signaling in myofibroblast biology has not been fully
investigated. The C3H10T1/2 mesenchymal cell line recapitulates myofibroblast
differentiation in vitro and in vivo, including SM22alpha expression. Using this 
model, we find that Wnt3a upregulates SM22alpha in concert with TGFbeta(1). Wnt1,
Wnt5a and BMP2 could not replace Wnt3a and TGFbeta(1) signals. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation identified that Wnt3a enhances both genomic SM22alpha histone
H3 acetylation and beta-catenin association, hallmarks of transcriptional
activation. By analyzing a series of SM22alpha promoter-luciferase (LUC) reporter
constructs, we mapped Wnt3a-regulated DNA transcriptional activation to
nucleotides -213 to -192 relative to the transcription initiation site. In gel
shift assays, DNA-protein complexes assembled on this element were disrupted with
antibodies to beta-catenin, Smad2/3, and TCF7, confirming the participation of
known Wnt3a and TGFbeta transcriptional mediators. Mutation of a CAGAG motif
within this region abrogated recognition by these DNA binding proteins. Wnt3a
treatment increased Smad2/3 binding to this element. Mutation of the cognate
within the context of the native 0.44 kb SM22alpha promoter resulted in a 70%
decrease in transcription, and reduced Wnt3a+TGFbeta(1) induction. A concatamer
of SM22alpha [-213 to -192] conveyed Wnt3a+TGFbeta(1) activation to the
unresponsive RSV promoter. Dominant negative TCF inhibited SM22alpha [-213 to
-192] x 6 RSVLUC activation. Moreover, ICAT (inhibitor of beta-catenin and TCF)
decreased while TCF7L2 and beta-catenin enhanced 0.44 kb SM22alpha promoter
induction by Wnt3a+TGFbeta(1). RNAi "knockdown" of beta-catenin inhibited Wnt3a
induction of SM22alpha. Thus, Wnt/beta-catenin signaling interacts with
TGFbeta/Smad pathways to control SM22alpha gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC2666882
PMID: 19344627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Diabetes Metab. 2009 Jun;35(3):233-5. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2009.01.003. Epub
2009 Apr 1.

Mutations in the ABCC8 gene can cause autoantibody-negative insulin-dependent
diabetes.

Hartemann-Heurtier A(1), Simon A, Bellanné-Chantelot C, Reynaud R, Cavé H, Polak 
M, Vaxillaire M, Grimaldi A.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology, Nutrition and Diabetes Department, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, 
Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, 75651 Paris cedex 13, France.
agnes.heurtier@psl.ap-hop-paris.fr

Activating mutations in genes KCNJ11 and ABCC8, which form the ATP-sensitive
K+channel (K(ATP) channel), have been shown to cause transient or permanent
neonatal diabetes. We describe here a rather different phenotype: two cases of
adult diabetic patients-considered and treated as insulin-dependent diabetic
patients since adolescence-who, in fact, turned out to be heterozygous for an
ABCC8 mutation and able to successfully discontinue insulin while taking
sulphonylurea treatment.

PMID: 19342262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Jun;94(6):1959-65. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-2371. Epub 
2009 Mar 31.

Identification of novel variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in 
South Indian patients with maturity onset diabetes of young.

Radha V(1), Ek J, Anuradha S, Hansen T, Pedersen O, Mohan V.

Author information: 
(1)Madras Diabetes Research Foundation, Indian Council of Medical Research
Advanced Centre for Genomics of Type 2 Diabetes, Gopalapuram, Chennai 600 086,
India.

CONTEXT: Mutations in the HNF 1A gene are the most common cause of maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) in most populations. India currently has the largest
number of people with diabetes in the world, and onset of type 2 diabetes occurs 
at a younger age with possible overlap with MODY. There are very few data on MODY
mutations from India.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to screen coding and promoter regions of HNF1A gene 
for mutations in unrelated South Indian subjects in whom a clinical diagnosis of 
MODY was made.
DESIGN: This was an observational cross-sectional study.
SETTING: The study was conducted at a diabetes specialties centre in Chennai in
southern India.
PATIENTS: Ninety-six unrelated south Indian subjects in whom clinical diagnosis
of MODY was made were included in the study. The control population comprised of 
57 unrelated nondiabetic subjects selected from the Chennai Urban Rural
Epidemiology Study, a study conducted on a representative population (aged > or
=20 yr) of Chennai.
RESULTS: We identified nine novel variants comprising seven mutations (one novel 
mutation -538G>C at promoter region and six novel coding region mutations) and
two polymorphisms in the HNF1A gene. Functional studies revealed reduced
transcriptional activity of the HNF1A promoter for two promoter variants. We also
observed cosegregation with diabetes of the Arg263His coding region mutation in
eight members of one MODY family, whereas it was absent in nondiabetic subjects
of this family.
CONCLUSION: This study suggests that mutations in the HNF1A gene comprise about
9% of clinically diagnosed MODY subjects in southern India and a novel Arg263His 
mutation cosegregates with MODY in one family.

PMID: 19336507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 May 22;383(1):68-72. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.03.130. Epub 2009 Mar 29.

Functional defect of truncated hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (G554fsX556)
associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Kooptiwut S(1), Sujjitjoon J, Plengvidhya N, Boonyasrisawat W, Chongjaroen N,
Jungtrakoon P, Semprasert N, Furuta H, Nanjo K, Banchuin N, Yenchitsomanus PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand.
S_kooptiwut@hotmail.com

A novel frameshift mutation attributable to 14-nucleotide insertion in hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) encoding a truncated HNF-1alpha (G554fsX556)
with 76-amino acid deletion at its carboxyl terminus was identified in a Thai
family with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). The wild-type and mutant
HNF-1alpha proteins were expressed by in vitro transcription and translation
(TNT) assay and by transfection in HeLa cells. The wild-type and mutant
HNF-1alpha could similarly bind to human glucose-transporter 2 (GLUT2) promoter
examined by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). However, the
transactivation activities of mutant HNF-1alpha on human GLUT2 and rat L-type
pyruvate kinase (L-PK) promoters in HeLa cells determined by luciferase reporter 
assay were reduced to approximately 55-60% of the wild-type protein. These
results suggested that the functional defect of novel truncated HNF-1alpha
(G554fsX556) on the transactivation of its target-gene promoters would account
for the beta-cell dysfunction associated with the pathogenesis of MODY.

PMID: 19336222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Pediatr Diabetes. 2009 Sep;10(6):382-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5448.2009.00499.x.
Epub 2009 Mar 2.

Mild fasting hyperglycemia in children: high rate of glucokinase mutations and
some risk of developing type 1 diabetes mellitus.

Codner E(1), Rocha A, Deng L, Martínez-Aguayo A, Godoy C, Mericq V, Chung WK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Maternal and Child Research (IDIMI), School of Medicine,
University of Chile, Santiago, Chile. ecodner@med.uchile.cl

BACKGROUND: Incidental hyperglycemia in children generates concern about the
presence of preclinical type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM).
OBJECTIVE: To genetically evaluate two common forms of maturity-onset diabetes of
youth (MODY), the short-term prognosis in children with mild hyperglycemia, and a
positive family history of diabetes mellitus.
SUBJECTS: Asymptomatic children and adolescents (n = 14), younger than 15 yr,
with fasting hyperglycemia, a positive family history of mild non-progressive
hyperglycemia, and negative pancreatic autoantibodies were studied.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Glucokinase gene (GCK) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1
alpha gene (HNF1A) causing two common forms of MODY were sequenced. The clinical 
outcome was evaluated after a follow-up period of 2.8 +/- 1.3 yr.
RESULTS: GCK mutations were present in seven children. The confirmation of this
diagnosis allowed discontinuation of insulin in two families and oral medications
in three families. Mutations of HNF1A were not detected in any of the families.
During the follow-up period, all the GCK mutation carrier children remained
asymptomatic without medication and the last hemoglobin A1c levels were 6.4 +/-
0.7%. In the GCK-negative children (n = 7), one developed T1DM, corresponding to 
7.2% of the total group. Mild fasting hyperglycemia persisted during follow-up in
four GCK-negative children and normalized in the remaining two.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of mild persistent hyperglycemia in any patient without
autoantibodies should lead to genetic analysis of GCK, particularly if there is a
positive family history. Furthermore, those without GCK mutations should be
followed with repeat autoantibody testing, and other genetic types of diabetes
should be considered if hyperglycemia worsens.

PMCID: PMC2864306
PMID: 19309449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Biol Chem. 2009 May 15;284(20):13335-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806393200. Epub 2009
Mar 19.

Specific expression and regulation of hepassocin in the liver and down-regulation
of the correlation of HNF1alpha with decreased levels of hepassocin in human
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yu HT(1), Yu M, Li CY, Zhan YQ, Xu WX, Li YH, Li W, Wang ZD, Ge CH, Yang XM.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing 100850, China.

Hepassocin (HPS), is a liver-specific gene with mitogenic activity on isolated
hepatocytes. It is up-regulated following partial hepatectomy and down-regulated 
frequently in heptocellular carcinoma (HCC). However, very little is known about 
the HPS transcription regulation mechanism. In this study, we identified
HNF1alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha) as an important liver-specific
cis-acting element for HPS using in vivo luciferase assays. Deletion of the HNF1 
binding site not only led to a complete loss of HPS promoter activity in vivo but
also abolished the induction of the HPS promoter by HNF1alpha. An electrophoretic
mobility shift assay demonstrated that HNF1alpha interacted with the HPS gene
promoter in vitro. Chromatin immunoprecipitation showed that HNF1alpha interacted
with HMGB1 and CREB-binding protein, and all of them were recruited to the HPS
promoter in vivo. Moreover, HNF1alpha expression was lower in HCC cell lines and 
tissues and correlated significantly with the down-regulation of HPS expression. 
Re-expression of HNF1alpha in human hepatoma HepG2 cells reinduced HPS
expression. In contrast, knockdown of endogenous HNF1alpha expression by small
interfering RNA resulted in a significant reduction of HPS expression.
Furthermore, we found that partial hepatectomy and IL-6 significantly induced
promoter activity of HPS, depending on STAT3 and HNF1 binding sites in the HPS
promoter. These results demonstrate that the HNF1 binding site and HNF1alpha are 
critical to liver-specific expression of HPS, and down-regulation or loss of
HNF1alpha causes, at least in part, the transcriptional down-regulation of HPS in
HCC.

PMCID: PMC2679433
PMID: 19304666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Gene Expr Patterns. 2009 Jun;9(5):296-305. doi: 10.1016/j.gep.2009.03.001. Epub
2009 Mar 19.

Gene expression analysis of canonical Wnt pathway transcriptional regulators
during early morphogenesis of the facial region in the mouse embryo.

Vendrell V(1), Summerhurst K, Sharpe J, Davidson D, Murphy P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, School of Natural Sciences, Trinity College Dublin,
Ireland.

Structures and features of the face, throat and neck are formed from a series of 
branchial arches that grow out along the ventrolateral aspect of the embryonic
head. Multiple signalling pathways have been implicated in patterning
interactions that lead to species-specific growth and differentiation within the 
branchial region that sculpt these features. A direct role for Wnt signalling in 
particular has been shown. The spatial and temporal distribution of Wnt pathway
components contributes to the operation of the signalling system. We present the 
precise distribution of gene expression of canonical Wnt pathway transcriptional 
regulators, Tcf1, Lef1, Tcf3, Tcf4 and beta-catenin between embryonic day (E) 9.5
and 11.5. In situ hybridization combined with Optical Projection Tomography was
used to record and compare distribution of transcripts in 3D within the
developing branchial arches. This shows widespread yet very specific expression
of the gene set indicating that all genes contribute to proper patterning of the 
region. Tcf1 and Lef1 are more prominent in rostral arches, particularly at later
ages, and Tcf3 and Tcf4 are in general expressed more deeply (medial/endodermal
aspect) in the arches than Tcf1 and Lef1. Comparison with Wnt canonical pathway
readout patterns shows that the relationship between the expression of individual
transcription factors and activation of the pathway is not simple, indicating
complexity and flexibility in the signalling system.

PMID: 19303461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Jun;29(11):2945-59. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01389-08. Epub 2009 Mar 
16.

Hnf1alpha (MODY3) controls tissue-specific transcriptional programs and exerts
opposed effects on cell growth in pancreatic islets and liver.

Servitja JM(1), Pignatelli M, Maestro MA, Cardalda C, Boj SF, Lozano J, Blanco E,
Lafuente A, McCarthy MI, Sumoy L, Guigó R, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Programming of Beta-Cells Laboratory, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), Barcelona, Spain.

Heterozygous HNF1A mutations cause pancreatic-islet beta-cell dysfunction and
monogenic diabetes (MODY3). Hnf1alpha is known to regulate numerous hepatic
genes, yet knowledge of its function in pancreatic islets is more limited. We now
show that Hnf1a deficiency in mice leads to highly tissue-specific changes in the
expression of genes involved in key functions of both islets and liver. To gain
insights into the mechanisms of tissue-specific Hnf1alpha regulation, we
integrated expression studies of Hnf1a-deficient mice with identification of
direct Hnf1alpha targets. We demonstrate that Hnf1alpha can bind in a
tissue-selective manner to genes that are expressed only in liver or islets. We
also show that Hnf1alpha is essential only for the transcription of a minor
fraction of its direct-target genes. Even among genes that were expressed in both
liver and islets, the subset of targets showing functional dependence on
Hnf1alpha was highly tissue specific. This was partly explained by the
compensatory occupancy by the paralog Hnf1beta at selected genes in
Hnf1a-deficient liver. In keeping with these findings, the biological
consequences of Hnf1a deficiency were markedly different in islets and liver.
Notably, Hnf1a deficiency led to impaired large-T-antigen-induced growth and
oncogenesis in beta cells yet enhanced proliferation in hepatocytes.
Collectively, these findings show that Hnf1alpha governs broad, highly
tissue-specific genetic programs in pancreatic islets and liver and reveal key
consequences of Hnf1a deficiency relevant to the pathophysiology of monogenic
diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2682018
PMID: 19289501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Curr Opin Lipidol. 2009 Apr;20(2):106-11.

Hepatic nuclear factor 1-alpha: inflammation, genetics, and atherosclerosis.

Armendariz AD(1), Krauss RM.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, CA 94609, USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Increased plasma levels of C-reactive protein (CRP), a hepatic
acute phase reactant, predict risk for coronary heart disease. There has been
interest in identifying genetic determinants of CRP as a means of better
understanding its regulation and its relation to coronary heart disease. We here 
review recent findings that have linked plasma CRP levels to single nucleotide
polymorphisms in hepatic nuclear factor (HNF) 1-alpha, a transcription factor
with a wide range of functions, including many involved in cholesterol, bile
acid, and lipoprotein metabolism.
RECENT FINDINGS: Two genome-wide association studies have identified single
nucleotide polymorphisms in several genes that are strongly related to plasma CRP
levels, including several on chromosome 12 in the vicinity of the HNF1A gene. The
CRP gene promoter has two HNF1-alpha-binding sites. Recently, it has been
demonstrated that HNF1-alpha is required for cytokine-driven CRP expression and
that this involves formation of a complex with STAT3 and c-Fos.
SUMMARY: Based on the recent genetic findings as well as delineation of the role 
of HNF1-alpha in regulating the expression of the CRP gene, it appears that this 
transcription factor may play a key role in linking metabolic and inflammatory
pathways underlying the pathogenesis of coronary heart disease.

PMID: 19280766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Jun;23(6):881-92. doi: 10.1210/me.2008-0274. Epub 2009 Feb
26.

Increased insulin sensitivity in mice lacking collectrin, a downstream target of 
HNF-1alpha.

Malakauskas SM(1), Kourany WM, Zhang XY, Lu D, Stevens RD, Koves TR, Hohmeier HE,
Muoio DM, Newgard CB, Le TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.
smalak@uab.edu

Collectrin is a downstream target of the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear 
factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha), which is mutated in maturity-onset diabetes of the
young subtype 3 (MODY3). Evidence from transgenic mouse models with collectrin
overexpression in pancreatic islets suggests divergent roles for collectrin in
influencing beta-cell mass and insulin exocytosis. To clarify the function of
collectrin in the pancreas, we used a mouse line with targeted deletion of the
gene. We examined pancreas morphology, glucose homeostasis by ip glucose
tolerance testing (IPGTT) and insulin tolerance testing (IPITT), and pancreas
function by in vivo acute-phase insulin response determination and
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from isolated islets. We find no difference 
in either pancreas morphology or function between wild-type and
collectrin-deficient animals (Tmem27(-/y)). However, we note that by 6 months of 
age, Tmem27(-/y) mice exhibit increased insulin sensitivity by IPITT and
decreased adiposity by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry scanning compared with
wild-type. We have previously reported that Tmem27(-/y) mice exhibit profound
aminoaciduria due to failed renal recovery. We now demonstrate that Tmem27(-/y)
animals also display inappropriate excretion of some short-chain acylcarnitines
derived from amino acid and fatty acid oxidation. We provide further evidence for
compensatory up-regulation of oxidative metabolism in Tmem27(-/y) mice, along
with enhanced protein turnover associated with preserved lean mass even out to
1.5 yr of age. Our studies suggest that collectrin-deficient mice activate a
number of adaptive mechanisms to defend energy homeostasis in the setting of
ongoing nutrient losses.

PMCID: PMC2691681
PMID: 19246514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Diabet Med. 2009 Feb;26(2):189-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2008.02645.x.

Treatment of HNF1-alpha MODY with the DPP-4 inhibitor Sitagliptin(1).

Lumb AN, Gallen IW.

Comment in
    Diabet Med. 2009 Aug;26(8):834-5.

PMID: 19236626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Diabetes Care. 2009 May;32(5):873-7. doi: 10.2337/dc08-1529. Epub 2009 Feb 19.

A-beta-subtype of ketosis-prone diabetes is not predominantly a monogenic
diabetic syndrome.

Haaland WC(1), Scaduto DI, Maldonado MR, Mansouri DL, Nalini R, Iyer D, Patel S, 
Guthikonda A, Hampe CS, Balasubramanyam A, Metzker ML.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas,
USA.

OBJECTIVE: Ketosis-prone diabetes (KPD) is an emerging syndrome that encompasses 
several distinct phenotypic subgroups that share a predisposition to diabetic
ketoacidosis. We investigated whether the A-beta- subgroup of KPD, characterized 
by complete insulin dependence, absent beta-cell functional reserve, lack of
islet cell autoantibodies, and strong family history of type 2 diabetes,
represents a monogenic form of diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Over 8 years, 37 patients with an A-beta- phenotype 
were identified in our longitudinally followed cohort of KPD patients. Seven
genes, including hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A (HNF4A), glucokinase (GCK), HNF1A, 
pancreas duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1), HNF1B, neurogenic differentiation 1
(NEUROD1), and PAX4, were directly sequenced in all patients. Selected gene
regions were also sequenced in healthy, unrelated ethnically matched control
subjects, consisting of 84 African American, 96 Caucasian, and 95 Hispanic
subjects.
RESULTS: The majority (70%) of the A-beta- KPD patients had no significant causal
polymorphisms in either the proximal promoter or coding regions of the seven
genes. The combination of six potentially significant low-frequency, heterozygous
sequence variants in HNF-1 alpha (A174V or G574S), PDX1 (putative 5'-untranslated
region CCAAT box, P33T, or P239Q), or PAX4 (R133W) were found in 27% (10/37) of
patients, with one additional patient revealing two variants, PDX1 P33T and PAX4 
R133W. The A174V variant has not been previously reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite its well-circumscribed, robust, and distinctive phenotype of
severe, nonautoimmune-mediated beta-cell dysfunction, A-beta- KPD is most likely 
not a predominantly monogenic diabetic syndrome. Several A-beta- KPD patients
have low-frequency variants in HNF1A, PDX1, or PAX4 genes, which may be of
functional significance in their pathophysiology.

PMCID: PMC2671096
PMID: 19228875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Endocrinology. 2009 Jun;150(6):2577-85. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-1250. Epub 2009 Feb 
12.

G protein-coupled receptor 39 deficiency is associated with pancreatic islet
dysfunction.

Holst B(1), Egerod KL, Jin C, Petersen PS, Østergaard MV, Hald J, Sprinkel AM,
Størling J, Mandrup-Poulsen T, Holst JJ, Thams P, Orskov C, Wierup N, Sundler F, 
Madsen OD, Schwartz TW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Pharmacology, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen,
Denmark. holst@sund.ku.dk

G protein-coupled receptor (GPR)-39 is a seven-transmembrane receptor expressed
mainly in endocrine and metabolic tissues that acts as a Zn(++) sensor signaling 
mainly through the G(q) and G(12/13) pathways. The expression of GPR39 is
regulated by hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and HNF-4alpha, and in the
present study, we addressed the importance of GPR39 for glucose homeostasis and
pancreatic islets function. The expression and localization of GPR39 were
characterized in the endocrine pancreas and pancreatic cell lines. Gpr39(-/-)
mice were studied in vivo, especially in respect of glucose tolerance and insulin
sensitivity, and in vitro in respect of islet architecture, gene expression, and 
insulin secretion. Gpr39 was down-regulated on differentiation of the pluripotent
pancreatic cell line AR42J cells toward the exocrine phenotype but was along with
Pdx-1 strongly up-regulated on differentiation toward the endocrine phenotype.
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated that GRP39 is localized selectively in the
insulin-storing cells of the pancreatic islets as well as in the duct cells of
the exocrine pancreas. Gpr39(-/-) mice displayed normal insulin sensitivity but
moderately impaired glucose tolerance both during oral and iv glucose tolerance
tests, and Gpr39(-/-) mice had decreased plasma insulin response to oral glucose.
Islet architecture was normal in the Gpr39 null mice, but expression of Pdx-1 and
Hnf-1alpha was reduced. Isolated, perifused islets from Gpr39 null mice secreted 
less insulin in response to glucose stimulation than islets from wild-type
littermates. It is concluded that GPR39 is involved in the control of endocrine
pancreatic function, and it is suggested that this receptor could be a novel
potential target for the treatment of diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2732286
PMID: 19213833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Nat Genet. 2009 Mar;41(3):280-2. doi: 10.1038/ng.307. Epub 2009 Feb 8.

New susceptibility locus for coronary artery disease on chromosome 3q22.3.

Erdmann J(1), Grosshennig A, Braund PS, König IR, Hengstenberg C, Hall AS,
Linsel-Nitschke P, Kathiresan S, Wright B, Trégouët DA, Cambien F, Bruse P,
Aherrahrou Z, Wagner AK, Stark K, Schwartz SM, Salomaa V, Elosua R, Melander O,
Voight BF, O'Donnell CJ, Peltonen L, Siscovick DS, Altshuler D, Merlini PA,
Peyvandi F, Bernardinelli L, Ardissino D, Schillert A, Blankenberg S, Zeller T,
Wild P, Schwarz DF, Tiret L, Perret C, Schreiber S, El Mokhtari NE, Schäfer A,
März W, Renner W, Bugert P, Klüter H, Schrezenmeir J, Rubin D, Ball SG, Balmforth
AJ, Wichmann HE, Meitinger T, Fischer M, Meisinger C, Baumert J, Peters A,
Ouwehand WH; Italian Atherosclerosis, Thrombosis, and Vascular Biology Working
Group; Myocardial Infarction Genetics Consortium; Wellcome Trust Case Control
Consortium; Cardiogenics Consortium, Deloukas P, Thompson JR, Ziegler A, Samani
NJ, Schunkert H.

Author information: 
(1)Medizinische Klinik II, Universität zu Lübeck, 23538 Lübeck, Germany.
j.erdmann@cardiogenics.eu

We present a three-stage analysis of genome-wide SNP data in 1,222 German
individuals with myocardial infarction and 1,298 controls, in silico replication 
in three additional genome-wide datasets of coronary artery disease (CAD) and
subsequent replication in approximately 25,000 subjects. We identified one new
CAD risk locus on 3q22.3 in MRAS (P = 7.44 x 10(-13); OR = 1.15, 95% CI =
1.11-1.19), and suggestive association with a locus on 12q24.31 near
HNF1A-C12orf43 (P = 4.81 x 10(-7); OR = 1.08, 95% CI = 1.05-1.11).

PMCID: PMC2695543
PMID: 19198612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Diabetes. 2009 May;58(5):1245-53. doi: 10.2337/db08-0812. Epub 2009 Feb 2.

Functional targets of the monogenic diabetes transcription factors HNF-1alpha and
HNF-4alpha are highly conserved between mice and humans.

Boj SF(1), Servitja JM, Martin D, Rios M, Talianidis I, Guigo R, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Programming of Beta-cells Laboratory, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: The evolutionary conservation of transcriptional mechanisms has been
widely exploited to understand human biology and disease. Recent findings,
however, unexpectedly showed that the transcriptional regulators hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and -4alpha rarely bind to the same genes in mice and
humans, leading to the proposal that tissue-specific transcriptional regulation
has undergone extensive divergence in the two species. Such observations have
major implications for the use of mouse models to understand HNF-1alpha- and
HNF-4alpha-deficient diabetes. However, the significance of studies that assess
binding without considering regulatory function is poorly understood.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We compared previously reported mouse and human
HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha binding studies with independent binding experiments.
We also integrated binding studies with mouse and human loss-of-function gene
expression datasets.
RESULTS: First, we confirmed the existence of species-specific HNF-1alpha and
-4alpha binding, yet observed incomplete detection of binding in the different
datasets, causing an underestimation of binding conservation. Second, only a
minor fraction of HNF-1alpha- and HNF-4alpha-bound genes were downregulated in
the absence of these regulators. This subset of functional targets did not show
evidence for evolutionary divergence of binding or binding sequence motifs.
Finally, we observed differences between conserved and species-specific binding
properties. For example, conserved binding was more frequently located near
transcriptional start sites and was more likely to involve multiple binding
events in the same gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite evolutionary changes in binding, essential direct
transcriptional functions of HNF-1alpha and -4alpha are largely conserved between
mice and humans.

PMCID: PMC2671044
PMID: 19188435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2009 Apr;84(1):19-26. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2008.12.014. Epub 2009 Jan 31.

Role of HNF-1alpha in regulating the expression of genes involved in cellular
growth and proliferation in pancreatic beta-cells.

Uchizono Y(1), Baldwin AC, Sakuma H, Pugh W, Polonsky KS, Hara M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, 5841 South Maryland Avenue,
MC1027, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha is a homeodomain-containing transcription 
factor. Humans heterozygous for mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene develop
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3), which is associated with reduced
insulin secretion. The mechanisms responsible for defective glucose-induced
insulin secretion due to HNF-1alpha deficiency are complex. In order to explore
the relationship between HNF-1alpha and beta-cell proliferation, we have created 
a novel animal model. Mice lacking one allele of the HNF-1alpha gene were crossed
with transgenic mice expressing the large T antigen driven by the rat insulin II 
promoter (RIP). The resulting mouse strains allowed us to study the effect of
HNF-1alpha deficiency on the extensive beta-cell proliferation that occurs in
these mice. Our results indicate that deficiency of HNF-1alpha severely
constrains the extent of beta-cell proliferation occurring in RIP-Tag mice
leading to significant changes in blood glucose concentrations as a result of
reduced beta-cell number, insulin content, insulin secretion and intracellular
responses in Ca(2+). Furthermore expression profiling studies using immortalized 
cell lines generated from HNF-1alpha/RIP-Tag mice showed changes in expression of
genes involved in cellular growth and proliferation. These results provide
insights into the mechanisms whereby HNF-1alpha affects beta-cell function.

PMCID: PMC2782714
PMID: 19181415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Arq Bras Endocrinol Metabol. 2008 Nov;52(8):1326-31.

HNF1alpha mutations are present in half of clinically defined MODY patients in
South-Brazilian individuals.

Maraschin Jde F(1), Kannengiesser C, Murussi N, Campagnolo N, Canani LH, Gross
JL, Velho G, Grandchamp B, Silveiro SP.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do
Sul, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes
mellitus characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, early age of onset, and
pancreatic beta cell dysfunction. Heterozygous mutations in at least seven genes 
can cause MODY. In the present study we investigated the relative prevalence of
GCK (glucokinase) and HNF1alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha) mutations, the
more frequent causes of MODY, in 13 South-Brazilian families with multiple cases 
of diabetes consistent with MODY. Heterozygous variants in GCK and HNF1alpha
genes were observed respectively in one (7.7%), and six (46.2%) families. The six
HNF1alpha variants are likely to cause diabetes in the families where they were
observed. However, we could not ascertain whether the GCK Gly117Ser variant found
in one family is a causal mutation. In conclusion, we have confirmed in a
South-Brazilian population that HNF1alpha mutations are a common cause of
monogenic diabetes in adults selected with strict clinical diagnostic criteria.

PMID: 19169489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2009 Mar;83(3):e72-4. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2008.12.007. Epub 2009 Jan 15.

Novel mutations in GCK and HNF1A genes in Italian families with MODY phenotype.

Cappelli A(1), Tumini S, Consoli A, Carinci S, Piersanti C, Ruggiero G, Simonella
G, Soletti F, Staffolani P, Pianese L.

Author information: 
(1)U.O. Laboratorio Analisi Cliniche e Microbiologiche, Settore di Medicina
Molecolare ASUR ZT13, Ascoli Piceno, Italy. alessia.cappelli@unicam.it

Analysis of GCK and HNF1A genes in 32 MODY families identified three novel
mutations: the missense mutation G170D and the deletion/insertion P432Xfs in GCK 
and the splicing mutation IVS4nt-1G>T, in HNF1A. For IVS4nt-1G>T the sequence
analysis of RT-PCR products demonstrated exon skipping with the use of a cryptic 
splicing site.

PMID: 19150152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. An Pediatr (Barc). 2008 Dec;69(6):568-71.

[Childhood-onset diabetes treated with sulphonylureas].

[Article in Spanish]

Palomo Atance E(1), Ballester Herrera MJ, Giralt Muiña P, López Garrido P.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Endocrinología Pediátrica, Servicio de Pediatría, Hospital General
de Ciudad Real, Ciudad Real, España. kikepalomo@wanadoo.es

MODY 3 type diabetes belongs to the group of monogenic diabetes and is caused by 
mutations in the gene for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-alpha (HNF1-alpha).
Although MODY 2 type diabetes is the most frequent form of MODY diabetes in
childhood, type 3 is the most frequent in the general population. We report the
case of a 12 year old child with basal and post-prandrial hyperglycaemia. No
cardinal symptoms of type 1 diabetes mellitus were present. There are numerous
cases of diabetes in his family. C-Peptide was 1.13 ng/ml and pancreatic
autoimmunity markers were negative. HNF-1alpha gene mutation was found in the
patient as well as in his father and sister. Treatment with glibenclamide was
started at a dose of 2.5 mg/day in order to reduce the risk of microvascular
disease, as this as high in MODY 3 type diabetes as in type 1 diabetes mellitus. 
Blood glucose returned to normal and glycosylated haemoglobin was maintained
between 4.9 and 5.6 %. Side-effects were not observed except some mild
hypoglycaemias.

PMID: 19128771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Korean J Intern Med. 2008 Dec;23(4):165-9. doi: 10.3904/kjim.2008.23.4.165.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-alpha mutation in normal glucose-tolerant subjects
and early-onset type 2 diabetic patients.

Lim DM(1), Huh N, Park KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Konyang University College of Medicine,
Daejon, Korea.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: The prevalence of diabetes in Korea is reported to be
approximately 10%, but cases of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) are
rare in Korea. A diagnostic technique for autosomal dominant MODY is being
actively sought. In this regard, we used a DNA chip to investigate the frequency 
of mutations of the MODY3 gene (hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha) in Korean
patients with early-onset type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: The genomic DNA of 30 normal individuals [age, 24.9+/-8.6 years] and 25 
patients with early-onset type 2 diabetes (age, 27+/-5.9 years) was extracted,
and the MODY3 gene was amplified. The amplified DNA was hybridized onto a MODY3
chip, which has oligonucleotides of 15-25 bases, representing wild-type and
mutant MODY3 sequences in both forward and reverse orientations, immobilized on
its surface.
RESULTS: Among the normal subjects, there was no mutation of MODY3. Among those
with early-onset type 2 diabetes, there was one case of MODY3 mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate that MODY3 mutations are not rare in Korean
early-onset type 2 diabetes patients in Korea and suggest that MODY3 mutations in
patients with early-onset type 2 diabetes need to be further evaluated.

PMCID: PMC2687678
PMID: 19119252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Med Sci (Paris). 2008 Dec;24(12):1113-4. doi: 10.1051/medsci/200824121113.

[Gp130-activating mutations in inflammatory liver adenomas].

[Article in French]

Zucman-Rossi J, Amessou M, Bioulac-Sage P, Rebouissou S.

PMID: 19116130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Mol Med (Berl). 2009 Mar;87(3):299-306. doi: 10.1007/s00109-008-0425-0. Epub
2008 Dec 11.

Transcriptional co-activator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
(PPAR)gamma co-activator-1beta is involved in the regulation of
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in INS-1E cells.

Oberkofler H(1), Hafner M, Felder T, Krempler F, Patsch W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Landeskliniken and Paracelsus Private
Medical University Salzburg, Müllner Hauptstr., Austria. h.oberkofler@salk.at

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma co-activator-1 (PGC-1) alpha and
-beta play pivotal roles in the regulation of intermediary metabolism. We have
previously shown that PGC-1alpha-mediated upregulation of beta-cell sterol
element binding protein (SREBP) gene expression impairs insulin secretion via
increased transcription of uncoupling protein 2 (UCP2). PGC-1beta, in contrast to
PGC-1alpha, directly binds to and acts as a co-activator of SREBPs and the
forkhead transcription factor 2A (FOXA2) involved in pancreas development and
function. To address a possible role of PGC-1beta in beta-cell function, we
determined islet gene expression levels of PGC-1alpha, PGC-1beta, SREBPs, FOXA2, 
FOXO1, UCP2 as well as granuphilin, a critical component of the insulin secretory
machinery, in Zucker diabetic fatty rats (ZDF). In comparison to controls, mRNA
levels of all genes studied except for FOXA2 and FOXO1 were increased in islets
of obese, fa/fa ZDF rats. The transcriptional activities of the UCP2 and
granuphilin promoters were assessed in INS-1E cells in response to PGC-1beta
overexpression and small interference RNA (siRNA)-mediated gene silencing.
PGC-1beta as well as SREBP-1c and -2 increased transcription from the UCP2
promoter in INS-1E cells. Transient transfection of PGC-1beta-specific siRNAs
significantly decreased SREBP-2-mediated transcriptional activation of the UCP2
gene. Furthermore PGC-1beta, SREBP-1c, and FOXA2 overexpression augmented
granuphilin promoter activity, whereas siRNA-mediated gene knockdown of PGC-1beta
reduced the effects of SREBP-1c and FOXA2 on granuphilin gene transcription and
significantly increased glucose-stimulated insulin release from INS-1E cells. Our
results support a role of PGC-1beta in the regulation of insulin secretion via
upregulation of UCP2 and granuphilin gene expression.

PMID: 19082571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Feb;37(3):778-92. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn978. Epub 2008 Dec 
15.

Identification of DNA regions and a set of transcriptional regulatory factors
involved in transcriptional regulation of several human liver-enriched
transcription factor genes.

Miura H(1), Tomaru Y, Nakanishi M, Kondo S, Hayashizaki Y, Suzuki M.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute 1-7-22 Suehiro-Cho,
Tsurumi-Ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

Mammalian tissue- and/or time-specific transcription is primarily regulated in a 
combinatorial fashion through interactions between a specific set of
transcriptional regulatory factors (TRFs) and their cognate cis-regulatory
elements located in the regulatory regions. In exploring the DNA regions and TRFs
involved in combinatorial transcriptional regulation, we noted that individual
knockdown of a set of human liver-enriched TRFs such as HNF1A, HNF3A, HNF3B,
HNF3G and HNF4A resulted in perturbation of the expression of several single TRF 
genes, such as HNF1A, HNF3G and CEBPA genes. We thus searched the potential
binding sites for these five TRFs in the highly conserved genomic regions around 
these three TRF genes and found several putative combinatorial regulatory
regions. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that almost all of the
putative regulatory DNA regions were bound by the TRFs as well as two
coactivators (CBP and p300). The strong transcription-enhancing activity of the
putative combinatorial regulatory region located downstream of the CEBPA gene was
confirmed. EMSA demonstrated specific bindings of these HNFs to the target DNA
region. Finally, co-transfection reporter assays with various combinations of
expression vectors for these HNF genes demonstrated the transcriptional
activation of the CEBPA gene in a combinatorial manner by these TRFs.

PMCID: PMC2647325
PMID: 19074951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. J Virol. 2009 Feb;83(4):1682-8. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02208-08. Epub 2008 Dec 10.

Limited effects of fasting on hepatitis B virus (HBV) biosynthesis in HBV
transgenic mice.

Li L(1), Oropeza CE, Kaestner KH, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, College of Medicine, University of 
Illinois at Chicago, 60612, USA.

Nuclear receptors have a unique role in governing hepatitis B virus (HBV)
transcription and replication. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) and
retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRalpha) plus peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor alpha (PPARalpha) have been shown to support viral biosynthesis in
nonhepatoma cells in the absence of additional liver-enriched transcription
factors. However, the in vivo importance of these nuclear receptors in HBV
biosynthesis has been investigated only to a limited extent. Fasting has been
shown to activate gluconeogenesis, in part, by activating PPARgamma coactivator 1
alpha, which in turn leads to activation of HNF4alpha- and
RXRalpha/PPARalpha-mediated transcription. As HBV pregenomic RNA synthesis is
primarily believed to be regulated by HNF4alpha under normal physiological
conditions, it was of interest to determine the effect of fasting on the levels
of HBV RNA and DNA synthesis. Fasting was shown to rather modestly increase the
levels of viral proteins, transcripts, and replication intermediates in the HBV
transgenic mouse model of chronic viral infection, suggesting that caloric
restriction may modulate viremia to some extent during natural infection.

PMCID: PMC2643774
PMID: 19073739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2008 Dec;132(12):1951-5. doi: 10.1043/1543-2165-132.12.1951.

Hepatic adenomatosis.

Greaves WO(1), Bhattacharya B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Rhode Island Hospital and Brown University,
Providence, RI 02903, USA. wgreaves@lifespan.org

Hepatic adenomatosis was first described in 1985 by Flejou et al as multiple
adenomas, arbitrarily more than 10, in an otherwise normal liver parenchyma.
Several authors have suggested that it is a distinct entity from hepatic adenoma,
which is predominantly seen in young women taking oral contraceptives. Although
considered a benign disease, it can be associated with potentially fatal
complications such as malignant transformation and intraperitoneal hemorrhage due
to rupture. Although its etiology and natural history have not been fully
elucidated, germline mutation of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha, which is
associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3, has recently been
implicated in a subset of cases. Currently, there is no consensus on patient
management. However, surgical removal of large lesions may significantly improve 
symptoms and reduce the risk of complications. Genetic counseling may now play an
important role in case management.

PMID: 19061298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Nat Genet. 2009 Jan;41(1):56-65. doi: 10.1038/ng.291. Epub 2008 Dec 7.

Common variants at 30 loci contribute to polygenic dyslipidemia.

Kathiresan S(1), Willer CJ, Peloso GM, Demissie S, Musunuru K, Schadt EE, Kaplan 
L, Bennett D, Li Y, Tanaka T, Voight BF, Bonnycastle LL, Jackson AU, Crawford G, 
Surti A, Guiducci C, Burtt NP, Parish S, Clarke R, Zelenika D, Kubalanza KA,
Morken MA, Scott LJ, Stringham HM, Galan P, Swift AJ, Kuusisto J, Bergman RN,
Sundvall J, Laakso M, Ferrucci L, Scheet P, Sanna S, Uda M, Yang Q, Lunetta KL,
Dupuis J, de Bakker PI, O'Donnell CJ, Chambers JC, Kooner JS, Hercberg S, Meneton
P, Lakatta EG, Scuteri A, Schlessinger D, Tuomilehto J, Collins FS, Groop L,
Altshuler D, Collins R, Lathrop GM, Melander O, Salomaa V, Peltonen L,
Orho-Melander M, Ordovas JM, Boehnke M, Abecasis GR, Mohlke KL, Cupples LA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center and Cardiology Division, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Jan;41(1):5-6.

Blood low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
cholesterol and triglyceride levels are risk factors for cardiovascular disease. 
To dissect the polygenic basis of these traits, we conducted genome-wide
association screens in 19,840 individuals and replication in up to 20,623
individuals. We identified 30 distinct loci associated with lipoprotein
concentrations (each with P < 5 x 10(-8)), including 11 loci that reached
genome-wide significance for the first time. The 11 newly defined loci include
common variants associated with LDL cholesterol near ABCG8, MAFB, HNF1A and
TIMD4; with HDL cholesterol near ANGPTL4, FADS1-FADS2-FADS3, HNF4A, LCAT, PLTP
and TTC39B; and with triglycerides near AMAC1L2, FADS1-FADS2-FADS3 and PLTP. The 
proportion of individuals exceeding clinical cut points for high LDL cholesterol,
low HDL cholesterol and high triglycerides varied according to an allelic dosage 
score (P < 10(-15) for each trend). These results suggest that the cumulative
effect of multiple common variants contributes to polygenic dyslipidemia.

PMCID: PMC2881676
PMID: 19060906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2009 Feb 1;234(3):281-92. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2008.10.005. Epub 2008 Oct 29.

Interaction of hepatocyte nuclear factors in transcriptional regulation of tissue
specific hormonal expression of human multidrug resistance-associated protein 2
(abcc2).

Qadri I(1), Hu LJ, Iwahashi M, Al-Zuabi S, Quattrochi LC, Simon FR.

Author information: 
(1)NUST Center of Virology and Immunology, National University of Science and
Technology, Tamizudin Road, Rawalpindi, Pakistan. dg-ncvi@nust.edu.pk

Multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2) (ABCC2) is an ATP-binding
cassette membrane protein located primarily on apical surface of hepatocytes that
mediates transport of conjugated xenobiotics and endogenous compounds into bile. 
MRP2 is highly expressed in hepatocytes, and at lower levels in small intestines,
stomach and kidney. Previous reports have characterized mammalian MRP2 promoters,
but none have established the molecular mechanism(s) involved in liver enriched
expression. This study aims to investigate the mechanism of hepatic MRP2
regulation. A 2130 bp of MRP2 promoter was cloned from PAC-1 clone P108G1-7, to
identify putative liver specific/hormone responsive functional DNA binding sites.
Using deletion analysis, site specific mutagenesis and co-transfection studies,
liver specific expression was determined. MRP2 promoter-LUC constructs were
highly expressed in liver cell lines compared to non-liver cells. The region
extending from -3 to+458 bp of MRP2 promoter starting from AUG contained the
potential binding sites for CAATT box enhancer binding protein (C/EBP),
hepatocytes nuclear factor 1, 3 and 4 (HNF1, HNF3, and HNF4. Only HNF1 and HNF4
co-transfection with MRP2 luciferase increased expression. Site specific
mutational analysis of HNF1 binding site indicated an important role for
HNF1alpha. HNF4alpha induction of MRP2 was independent of HNF1 binding site.
C/EBP, HNF3, and HNF6 inhibited HNF1alpha while HNF4alpha induced MRP2 luciferase
expression and glucocorticoids stimulated MRP2 expression. This study emphasizes 
the complex regulation of MRP2 with HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha playing a central
role. The coordinated regulation of xenobiotic transporters and oxidative
conjugation may determine the adaptive responses to cellular detoxification
processes.

PMID: 19010343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Circulation. 2008 Nov 18;118(21):2146-55. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.108.787259.
Epub 2008 Nov 3.

Collectrin is involved in the development of salt-sensitive hypertension by
facilitating the membrane trafficking of apical membrane proteins via interaction
with soluble N-ethylmaleiamide-sensitive factor attachment protein receptor
complex.

Yasuhara A(1), Wada J, Malakauskas SM, Zhang Y, Eguchi J, Nakatsuka A, Murakami
K, Kanzaki M, Teshigawara S, Yamagata K, Le TH, Makino H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Clinical Science, Okayama University Graduate
School of Medicine, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

Erratum in
    Circulation. 2015 Jul 7;132(1):e13.
    Circulation. 2014 Feb 4;129(5):e325.

BACKGROUND: Collectrin, a homologue of angiotensin converting enzyme 2, is
expressed in pancreatic beta cells and renal proximal tubular and collecting duct
cells under the control of hepatocyte nuclear factors-1alpha and -1beta. Because 
collectrin interacts with the soluble N-ethylmaleiamide-sensitive factor
attachment protein receptor (SNARE) complexes, we investigated whether collectrin
is involved in sodium handling in hypertension by vesicle trafficking of apical
membrane proteins.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Collectrin physically interacts with the SNARE complex:
snapin, synaptosomal-associated protein 23 kDa, syntaxin-4, and
vesicle-associated membrane protein-2 in mIMCD-3 cells. siRNA knockdown of
collectrin resulted in a reduction in membrane-associated aquaporin-2,
alpha-epithelial Na+ channel, and H+-ATPase. Collectrin and SNARE proteins were
abundantly expressed in collecting ducts of Wistar-Kyoto rats. Wistar-Kyoto rats 
and spontaneously hypertensive rats 7 weeks of age were subjected to normal-salt 
(1% NaCl) and high-salt (8% NaCl) chow for 10 weeks. High-salt chow prominently
elevated blood pressure, oral intake, and urinary excretion of NaCl and water in 
both groups. Although urinary excretion of aldosterone was significantly
suppressed in both groups, collectrin expression was upregulated and associated
with the maintenance of aquaporin-2, alpha-epithelial Na+ channel, and H+-ATPase 
in membrane fractions. Collectrin promoter activities and mRNA and protein
expressions were upregulated and ubiquitinated collectrin was reduced by high
NaCl (175 to 225 mmol/L) and not altered by 1 micromol/L aldosterone in mIMCD-3
cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Upregulation of collectrin by high NaCl independent of aldosterone
functionally links to the trafficking of apical membrane proteins via the SNARE
complex, and collectrin may be responsible for the sodium retention in
salt-sensitive hypertension.

PMID: 18981302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Diabetes. 2008 Nov;57(11):2889-98. doi: 10.2337/db08-0343.

Learning from molecular genetics: novel insights arising from the definition of
genes for monogenic and type 2 diabetes.

McCarthy MI(1), Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK.

PMCID: PMC2570381
PMID: 18971436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Genome Res. 2008 Dec;18(12):1969-78. doi: 10.1101/gr.074070.107. Epub 2008 Oct
29.

DNA methylation profile of tissue-dependent and differentially methylated regions
(T-DMRs) in mouse promoter regions demonstrating tissue-specific gene expression.

Yagi S(1), Hirabayashi K, Sato S, Li W, Takahashi Y, Hirakawa T, Wu G, Hattori N,
Hattori N, Ohgane J, Tanaka S, Liu XS, Shiota K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Animal Resource
Sciences/Veterinary Medical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Japan.

DNA methylation constitutes an important epigenetic regulation mechanism in many 
eukaryotes, although the extent of DNA methylation in the regulation of gene
expression in the mammalian genome is poorly understood. We developed D-REAM, a
genome-wide DNA methylation analysis method for tissue-dependent and
differentially methylated region (T-DMR) profiling with restriction tag-mediated 
amplification in mouse tissues and cells. Using a mouse promoter tiling array
covering a region from -6 to 2.5 kb ( approximately 30,000 transcription start
sites), we found that over 3000 T-DMRs are hypomethylated in liver compared to
cerebrum. The DNA methylation profile of liver was distinct from that of kidney
and spleen. This hypomethylation profile marked genes that are specifically
expressed in liver, including key transcription factors such as Hnf1a and Hnf4a. 
Genes with T-DMRs, especially those lacking CpG islands and those with HNF-1A
binding motifis in their promoters, showed good correlation between their
tissue-specific expression and liver hypomethylation status. T-DMRs located
downstream from their transcription start sites also showed tissue-specific gene 
expression. These data indicate that multilayered regulation of tissue-specific
gene function could be elucidated by DNA methylation tissue profiling.

PMCID: PMC2593572
PMID: 18971312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Dec;36(21):6795-805. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn752. Epub 2008
Oct 25.

Positional distribution of human transcription factor binding sites.

Koudritsky M(1), Domany E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot, Israel.

We developed a method for estimating the positional distribution of transcription
factor (TF) binding sites using ChIP-chip data, and applied it to recently
published experiments on binding sites of nine TFs: OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, HNF1A,
HNF4A, HNF6, FOXA2, USF1 and CREB1. The data were obtained from a genome-wide
coverage of promoter regions from 8-kb upstream of the transcription start site
(TSS) to 2-kb downstream. The number of target genes of each TF ranges from few
hundred to several thousand. We found that for each of the nine TFs the estimated
binding site distribution is closely approximated by a mixture of two components:
a narrow peak, localized within 300-bp upstream of the TSS, and a distribution of
almost uniform density within the tested region. Using Gene Ontology (GO) and
Enrichment analysis, we were able to associate (for each of the TFs studied) the 
target genes of both types of binding with known biological processes. Most GO
terms were enriched either among the proximal targets or among those with a
uniform distribution of binding sites. For example, the three stemness-related
TFs have several hundred target genes that belong to 'development' and
'morphogenesis' whose binding sites belong to the uniform distribution.

PMCID: PMC2588498
PMID: 18953043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Diabetologia. 2009 Jan;52(1):136-44. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1168-8. Epub 2008
Oct 24.

Early loss of mammalian target of rapamycin complex 1 (mTORC1) signalling and
reduction in cell size during dominant-negative suppression of hepatic nuclear
factor 1-alpha (HNF1A) function in INS-1 insulinoma cells.

Farrelly AM(1), Wobser H, Bonner C, Anguissola S, Rehm M, Concannon CG, Prehn JH,
Byrne MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Eccles
Street, Dublin 7, Ireland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mutations in the HNF1A (previously known as TCF1) gene encoding 
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF1A) lead to the development of
maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 3 (HNF1A-MODY), characterised by
impaired insulin secretion and a reduction in beta cell mass. HNF1A plays an
important role in pancreatic beta cell differentiation and survival. The
mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) is a central growth factor- and
nutrient-activated protein kinase controlling cell metabolism, growth and
survival. We investigated the role of mTOR inactivation in the decline in beta
cell mass in a cellular model of HNF1A-MODY.
METHODS: Previously we showed that suppression of HNF1A function via expression
of a dominant-negative mutant (DN-HNF1A) decreases insulin gene transcription in 
insulinoma (INS-1) cells. We investigated the signalling of two distinct mTOR
protein complexes, mTORC1 and mTORC2, in response to DN-HNF1A induction.
RESULTS: We observed delayed inactivation of mTORC2 48 h after DN-HNF1A
induction, evidenced by a reduction in serine 473 phosphorylation of thymoma
viral proto-oncogene 1 (AKT1). We also observed an early inactivation of mTORC1
24 h after DN-HNF1A induction, which was detected by decreases in threonine 389
phosphorylation of p70 ribosomal protein S6 kinase (S6K1) and serine 65
phosphorylation of translational inhibitor eukaryotic translation initiation
factor 4E binding protein 1 (4E-BP1). Flow cytometry and gene expression analysis
demonstrated a pre-apoptotic decrease in INS-1 cell size in response to DN-HNF1A 
induction, and an increase in the level of the mTORC1-regulated cell-cycle
inhibitor, cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor 1B p27.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our data suggest that mTOR kinase and signalling
through mTORC1 are highly sensitive to suppression of HNF1A function, and may
contribute to disturbance of cell-size regulation and cell-cycle progression in
HNF1A-MODY.

PMID: 18949455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2009 Jan;328(1):116-22. doi: 10.1124/jpet.108.144600. Epub 
2008 Oct 23.

Farnesoid X receptor deficiency induces nonalcoholic steatohepatitis in
low-density lipoprotein receptor-knockout mice fed a high-fat diet.

Kong B(1), Luyendyk JP, Tawfik O, Guo GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutics, University of Kansas
Medical Center. 3901 Rainbow Blvd., Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Nonalcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) comprises dysregulation of lipid metabolism
and inflammation. Identification of the various genetic and environmental
susceptibility factors for NASH may provide novel treatments to limit
inflammation and fibrosis in patients. This study utilized a mouse model of
hypercholesterolemia, low-density lipoprotein receptor knockout (LDLr(-/-)) mice 
fed a high-fat diet for 5 months, to test the hypothesis that farnesoid X
receptor (FXR) deficiency contributed to NASH development. Either the high-fat
diet or FXR deficiency increased serum alanine aminotransferase activity, whereas
only FXR deficiency increased bile acid and alkaline phosphatase levels. FXR
deficiency and high-fat feeding increased serum cholesterol and triglycerides.
Although high fat led to macrosteatosis and hepatocyte ballooning in livers of
mice regardless of genotype, no inflammatory infiltrate was observed in the
livers of LDLr(-/-) mice. In contrast, in the livers of LDLr(-/-)/FXR(-/-) mice, 
foci of inflammatory cells were observed occasionally when fed the control diet
and were greatly increased when fed the high-fat diet. Consistent with enhanced
inflammatory cells, hepatic levels of tumor necrosis factor alpha and
intercellular adhesion molecule-1 mRNA were increased by the high-fat diet in
LDLr(-/-)/FXR(-/-) mice. In agreement with elevated levels of procollagen 1 alpha
1 and TGF-beta mRNA, type 1 collagen protein levels were increased in livers of
LDLr(-/-)/FXR(-/-) mice fed a high-fat diet. In conclusion, FXR deficiency
induces pathologic manifestations required for NASH diagnosis in a mouse model of
hypercholesterolemia, including macrosteatosis, hepatocyte ballooning, and
inflammation, which suggest a combination of FXR deficiency and high-fat diet is 
a risk factor for NASH development, and activation of FXR may be a therapeutic
intervention in the treatment of NASH.

PMCID: PMC2685903
PMID: 18948497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Oct;83(4):520-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.09.012.

Population-based genome-wide association studies reveal six loci influencing
plasma levels of liver enzymes.

Yuan X(1), Waterworth D, Perry JR, Lim N, Song K, Chambers JC, Zhang W,
Vollenweider P, Stirnadel H, Johnson T, Bergmann S, Beckmann ND, Li Y, Ferrucci
L, Melzer D, Hernandez D, Singleton A, Scott J, Elliott P, Waeber G, Cardon L,
Frayling TM, Kooner JS, Mooser V.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Division, GlaxoSmithKline, King of Prussia, PA 19406, USA.

Plasma liver-enzyme tests are widely used in the clinic for the diagnosis of
liver diseases and for monitoring the response to drug treatment. There is
considerable evidence that human genetic variation influences plasma levels of
liver enzymes. However, such genetic variation has not been systematically
assessed. In the present study, we performed a genome-wide association study of
plasma liver-enzyme levels in three populations (total n = 7715) with replication
in three additional cohorts (total n = 4704). We identified two loci influencing 
plasma levels of alanine-aminotransferase (ALT) (CPN1-ERLIN1-CHUK on chromosome
10 and PNPLA3-SAMM50 on chromosome 22), one locus influencing gamma-glutamyl
transferase (GGT) levels (HNF1A on chromosome 12), and three loci for alkaline
phosphatase (ALP) levels (ALPL on chromosome 1, GPLD1 on chromosome 6, and
JMJD1C-REEP3 on chromosome 10). In addition, we confirmed the associations
between the GGT1 locus and GGT levels and between the ABO locus and ALP levels.
None of the ALP-associated SNPs were associated with other liver tests,
suggesting intestine and/or bone specificity. The mechanisms underlying the
associations may involve cis- or trans-transcriptional effects (some of the
identified variants were associated with mRNA transcription in human liver or
lymphoblastoid cells), dysfunction of the encoded proteins (caused by missense
variations at the functional domains), or other unknown pathways. These findings 
may help in the interpretation of liver-enzyme tests and provide candidate genes 
for liver diseases of viral, metabolic, autoimmune, or toxic origin. The specific
associations with ALP levels may point to genes for bone or intestinal diseases.

PMCID: PMC2561937
PMID: 18940312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2008 Sep;116 Suppl 1:S50-5. doi:
10.1055/s-2008-1081492. Epub 2008 Sep 5.

The A98V single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha
(HNF-1alpha) is associated with insulin sensitivity and beta-cell function.

Bergmann A(1), Li J, Selisko T, Reimann M, Fischer S, Grässler J, Schulze J,
Bornstein SR, Schwarz PE.

Author information: 
(1)Health Care Centre of Medical Faculty Carl-Gustav-Carus of the Technical
University, Dresden, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Mutations in the hepatic nuclear factor-1-alpha ( HNF-1alpha) gene is 
considered as a candidate for the aetiology of type 2 diabetes. The aims of the
study was to determine whether two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
ile27-to-leu and ala98-to-val in the HNF-1alpha gene associate with diabetes,
insulin sensitivity as well as beta-cell function.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: 1 479 subjects of a volunteer sample with increased 
risk of type 2 diabetes were investigated. They underwent a 75 g oral glucose
tolerance test (OGTT) with measurements of plasma glucose, insulin and C-peptide 
at fasting and at 30, 60, 90 and 120 minutes after the glucose challenge. The
HNF-1alpha SNPs, I27L and A98V were genotyped.
RESULT: Patients harbouring the V98 allele exhibited higher serum insulin and
C-peptide levels. The heterozygote variant was also associated with decrease in
beta-cell function but better insulin sensitivity. No significant differences of 
any clinical parameters were found for I27L gene variants.
CONCLUSION: Significant associations between the heterozygote A98V genotype and
clinical parameters of insulin metabolism were reported but no relationship with 
type 2 diabetes was obtained. This may be explained by a balancing negative
effect on insulin secretion and concomitant positive effect on insulin resistance
in Val allele carriers.

PMID: 18777455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Diabetes Metab. 2008 Nov;34(5):524-8. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2008.05.004. Epub
2008 Oct 1.

Molecular background and clinical characteristics of HNF1A MODY in a Polish
population.

Skupien J(1), Gorczynska-Kosiorz S, Klupa T, Cyganek K, Wanic K, Borowiec M,
Sieradzki J, Malecki MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University, Medical College,
15, Kopernika Street, 31-501 Krakow, Poland.

PURPOSE: Knowing the molecular background of monogenic diabetes in affected
individuals influences the clinical practice. Mutations in the HNF1A gene are the
most frequent cause of MODY. The aim of the present study was to identify the
genetic and clinical characteristics of HNF1A MODY in a Polish population, and
the prevalence of diabetic complications and renal malformations.
METHODS: We identified 47 families with the early-onset, autosomal-dominant form 
of diabetes that met the criteria of MODY. Mutation screening involved direct
sequencing of the HNF1A gene. Patients' characteristics included clinical data,
anthropometric measurements and biochemical parameters. The search for renal
malformations involved ultrasound examination of all HNF1A mutation carriers.
RESULTS: We identified 13 HNF1A MODY families and examined 56 mutation carriers, 
including 46 diabetic patients. The average HbA(1c) level among the diabetics was
7.5%. We identified diabetic retinopathy in 47.7% of the MODY patients, while
diabetic nephropathy was present in 25%. In five HNF1A mutation carriers from
three families, renal developmental malformations were identified, including one 
functioning kidney in two (3.6%) of them.
CONCLUSION: This first systematic search for HNF1A mutations in a Polish
population revealed that they are a frequent cause of MODY. In this population,
HNF1A mutation carriers were characterized by a high prevalence of diabetic
complications. In addition, renal developmental abnormalities were found in some 
mutation carriers.

PMID: 18838325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2009 Jun;70(6):847-53. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2008.03397.x. Epub 2008 Sep 22.

Mutations of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) genes in Thais with
early-onset type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Plengvidhya N(1), Boonyasrisawat W, Chongjaroen N, Jungtrakoon P, Sriussadaporn
S, Vannaseang S, Banchuin N, Yenchitsomanus PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Siriraj
Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10700, Thailand. sinpv.natpl@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Six known genes responsible for maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) were analysed to evaluate the prevalence of their mutations in Thai
patients with MODY and early-onset type 2 diabetes.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifty-one unrelated probands with early-onset type 2
diabetes, 21 of them fitted into classic MODY criteria, were analysed for
nucleotide variations in promoters, exons, and exon-intron boundaries of six
known MODY genes, including HNF-4alpha, GCK, HNF-1alpha, IPF-1, HNF-1beta, and
NeuroD1/beta2, by the polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformation
polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) method followed by direct DNA sequencing. Missense
mutations or mutations located in regulatory region, which were absent in 130
chromosomes of non-diabetic controls, were classified as potentially pathogenic
mutations.
RESULTS: We found that mutations of the six known MODY genes account for a small 
proportion of classic MODY (19%) and early-onset type 2 diabetes (10%) in Thais. 
Five of these mutations are novel including GCK R327H, HNF-1alpha P475L,
HNF-1alphaG554fsX556, NeuroD1-1972 G > A and NeuroD1 A322N. Mutations of IPF-1
and HNF-1beta were not identified in the studied probands.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations of the six known MODY genes may not be a major cause of
MODY and early-onset type 2 diabetes in Thais. Therefore, unidentified genes
await discovery in a majority of Thai patients with MODY and early-onset type 2
diabetes.

PMID: 18811724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Cell Biochem. 2008 Nov 1;105(4):1117-27. doi: 10.1002/jcb.21914.

Egr-1 and serum response factor are involved in growth factors- and
serum-mediated induction of E2-EPF UCP expression that regulates the VHL-HIF
pathway.

Lim JH(1), Jung CR, Lee CH, Im DS.

Author information: 
(1)Gene Therapy Research Unit, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Yusong, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea.

E2-EPF ubiquitin carrier protein (UCP) has been shown to be highly expressed in
common human cancers and target von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) for proteosomal
degradation in cells, thereby stabilizing hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1alpha. 
Here, we investigated cellular factors that regulate the expression of UCP gene. 
Promoter deletion assay identified binding sites for early growth response-1
(Egr-1) and serum response factor (SRF) in the UCP promoter. Hepatocyte or
epidermal growth factor (EGF), or phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate induced UCP
expression following early induction of Egr-1 expression in HeLa cells. Serum
increased mRNA and protein levels of SRF and UCP in the cell. By electrophoretic 
mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays, sequence-specific
DNA-binding of Egr-1 and SRF to the UCP promoter was detected in nuclear extracts
from HeLa cells treated with EGF and serum, respectively. Overexpression of Egr-1
or SRF increased UCP expression. RNA interference-mediated depletion of
endogenous Egr-1 or SRF impaired EGF- or serum-mediated induction of UCP
expression, which was required for cancer cell proliferation. Systemic delivery
of EGF into mice also increased UCP expression following early induction of Egr-1
expression in mouse liver. The induced UCP expression by the growth factors or
serum increased HIF-1alpha protein level under non-hypoxic conditions, suggesting
that the Egr-1/SRF-UCP-VHL pathway is in part responsible for the increased
HIF-1alpha protein level in vitro and in vivo. Thus, growth factors and serum
induce expression of Egr-1 and SRF, respectively, which in turn induces UCP
expression that positively regulates cancer cell growth.

PMID: 18780286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. World J Gastroenterol. 2008 Aug 14;14(30):4830-3.

Unexpected discovery of 2 cases of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha-mutated
infracentimetic adenomatosis.

Laumonier H(1), Rullier A, Saric J, Balabaud C, Bioulac-Sage P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Hôpital St André, CHU Bordeaux, 1 rue Jean Burguet,
Bordeaux 33075, France. herve.laumonier@chu-bordeaux.fr

We present 2 cases of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha)-mutated
adenomatosis, discovered for reasons unrelated to this disease, and identified
using immunohistochemical methods. These new tools may further our understanding 
of the link between adenomas/adenomatosis subtypes and their complications, and
their association with other abnormalities.

PMCID: PMC2739350
PMID: 18720549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Oct;41(4):229-38. doi: 10.1677/JME-08-0080. Epub 2008 Aug 
12.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 binding element within the promoter of microsomal
triglyceride transfer protein (MTTP) gene is crucial for MTTP basal expression
and insulin responsiveness.

Au WS(1), Lu L, Yeung CM, Liu CC, Wong OG, Lai L, Kung HF, Lin MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry, Institute of Molecular Technology for Drug Discovery 
and Synthesis, The University of Hong Kong, Room 8N-11, Kadoorie Biological
Science Building, Pokfulam Road, Hong Kong, China.

Insulin inhibits the transcription of the microsomal triglyceride transfer
protein (MTTP), which plays a pivotal role in lipoprotein assembly and secretion.
Here, we provide evidence that a hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 binding element
(HNF1A element) within the MTTP promoter serves as a novel negative
insulin-responsive element. Deletion/mutation mapping of the MTTP gene promoter
identified a modified HNF1A element that is crucial to the negative insulin
effect. Chimeric promoter containing this HNF1A element and minimal TEAD1
promoter also responded negatively toward insulin treatment. Gel shift assay
demonstrated that HNF1A but not HNF1B binds to this element. Enforced expression 
of HNF1A was sufficient to reconstitute the negative insulin responsiveness of
MTTP promoter in TM4SF1 myocytes that are HNF1A negative. Furthermore, replacing 
this element with consensus HNF1A element preserved the negative insulin
response, suggesting that negative insulin responsiveness is a generic
characteristic of HNF1A element. Given that many genes implicated in diabetes
contain HNF1A element, the potential regulation of these genes by insulin via
HNF1A element may provide important clues for the manifestation and treatment of 
diabetic metabolic syndromes.

PMID: 18697801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Hepatology. 2008 Sep;48(3):808-18. doi: 10.1002/hep.22417.

Hepatocellular adenomas: magnetic resonance imaging features as a function of
molecular pathological classification.

Laumonier H(1), Bioulac-Sage P, Laurent C, Zucman-Rossi J, Balabaud C, Trillaud
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, CHU de Bordeaux, Hopital Saint-André, Bordeaux,
France.

Erratum in
    Hepatology. 2008 Oct;48(4):1356.

Hepatocellular adenomas (HCAs) are a group of benign tumors forming three
molecular pathological subgroups: (1) hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
(HNF-1alpha)-inactivated, (2) beta-catenin-activated, and (3) inflammatory. Some 
HCAs present both beta-catenin activation and inflammation. We analyzed magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI) data for correlations between features on imaging and
pathological classification of HCAs. We included 50 cases for which pathology
specimens were classified into three groups based on immunohistochemical
staining. Two characteristic MRI profiles were identified corresponding to
HNF-1alpha-inactivated and inflammatory HCAs. Fifteen HCAs were
HNF-1alpha-inactivated. The corresponding lesions showed (1) diffuse signal
dropout on T1-weighted chemical shift sequence due to steatosis, (2) isosignal or
slight hypersignal on T2-weighted (T2W) images, and (3) moderate enhancement in
the arterial phase, with no persistent enhancement in the portal venous and
delayed phases. For the diagnosis of HNF-1alpha-inactivated HCA, the positive
predictive value of homogeneous signal dropout on chemical shift images was 100%,
the negative predictive value was 94.7%, the sensitivity was 86.7%, and the
specificity was 100%. Twenty-three HCAs were inflammatory and showed (1) an
absence or only focal signal dropout on chemical shift sequence; (2) marked
hypersignal on T2W sequences, with a stronger signal in the outer part of the
lesions, correlating with sinusoidal dilatation areas; and (3) strong arterial
enhancement, with persistent enhancement in the portal venous and delayed phases.
Marked hypersignal on T2W sequences associated with delayed persistent
enhancement had a positive predictive value of 88.5%, a negative predictive value
of 84%, a sensitivity of 85.2%, and a specificity of 87.5% for the diagnosis of
inflammatory HCA.CONCLUSION: HNF-1alpha-mutated HCAs and inflammatory HCAs were
associated with specific MRI patterns related to diffuse fat repartition and
sinusoidal dilatation, respectively.

PMID: 18688875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Prim Care Diabetes. 2008 Jun;2(2):87-90. doi: 10.1016/j.pcd.2008.02.002. Epub
2008 Apr 18.

Our evolving understanding of monogenic diabetes: possibilities of improving
glycaemic control following transfer from insulin to sulphonylureas.

Shepherd M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Barrack Road, Exeter EX25DW, UK.
m.h.shepherd@exeter.ac.uk

PMID: 18684428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Prim Care Diabetes. 2008 Jun;2(2):67-72. doi: 10.1016/j.pcd.2007.12.005. Epub
2008 Feb 12.

Recent advances in the genetics of diabetes.

Pearson ER(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medicine & Therapeutics, Ninewells Hospital & Medical School,
Dundee DD19SY, United Kingdom. e.pearson@chs.dundee.ac.uk

After many years of effort with only modest result, the last 5 years has seen a
tremendous surge in our understanding of the genetics of diabetes. This review
will focus on the therapeutic implications of diagnosing monogenic diabetes and
the recent advances in type 1 and type 2 diabetes genetics following the
development of Genome Wide Association studies.

PMID: 18684425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Arch Toxicol. 2008 Sep;82(9):573-82. doi: 10.1007/s00204-008-0347-1. Epub 2008
Aug 2.

Aryl hydrocarbon receptor-mediated regulation of the human estrogen and bile acid
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A3 gene.

Lankisch TO(1), Gillman TC, Erichsen TJ, Ehmer U, Kalthoff S, Freiberg N, Munzel 
PA, Manns MP, Strassburg CP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Hepatology and Endocrinology, Hannover Medical
School, Carl Neuberg Strasse 1, Hannover, Germany.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferases contribute to the detoxification of drugs by forming
water soluble beta-D-glucopyranosiduronic acids. The human UGT1A3 protein
catalyzes the glucuronidation of estrogens, bile acids and xenobiotics including 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs and lipid lowering drugs. Regulation of
UGT1A3 by xenobiotic response elements is likely, but the responsible elements
are yet uncharacterized. In addition, genetic promoter variants may affect UGT1A3
regulation and potential induction by xenobiotics. The UGT1A3 promoter was
analyzed by mutagenesis, reporter gene, and mobility shift analyses. Three
hundred and eighty-nine blood donors were genotyped for promoter single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) showing an allelic frequency of 42% of variants
at -66 (T to C) and -204 (A to G). A xenobiotic response element regulating aryl 
hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-mediated UGT1A3 transcription was identified and
characterized. UGT1A3 transcription was reduced in the presence of promoter SNPs.
These data demonstrate xenobiotic induced regulation of the UGT1A3 gene by the
AhR, which shows genetic variability.

PMID: 18677463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2008 Sep;81(3):e12-4. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2008.06.011. Epub 2008 Jul 30.

Low prevalence of MODY2 and MODY3 mutations in Brazilian individuals with
clinical MODY phenotype.

Furuzawa GK(1), Giuffrida FM, Oliveira CS, Chacra AR, Dib SA, Reis AF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Diabetes, Molecular Endocrinology Laboratory, Federal University
of São Paulo, São Paulo, Brazil.

Prevalence of MODY2 and MODY3 mutations has been assessed in 23 Brazilian
families with MODY phenotype. Mutations in HNF-1alpha have been found in 3
families (13%) and 2 families (8.7%) had new glucokinase mutations. These genes
do not explain the majority of MODY cases in Brazilian population.

PMID: 18672310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Clin Exp Pharmacol Physiol. 2008 Dec;35(12):1433-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1440-1681.2008.05015.x. Epub 2008 Jul 29.

Glucose regulation of dipeptidyl peptidase IV gene expression is mediated by
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha in epithelial intestinal cells.

Gu N(1), Tsuda M, Matsunaga T, Adachi T, Yasuda K, Ishihara A, Tsuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Graduate School of Human and Environmental Studies, 
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

1. Dipeptidyl peptidase IV (DPP-IV) is a new drug target in the treatment of Type
2 diabetes. Dipeptidyl peptidase IV enzyme activity is significantly altered in
Type 2 diabetic patients with hyperglycaemia, but the underlying molecular
mechanisms remain unclear. 2. The first aim of the present study was to clarify
whether glucose regulates DPP-IV enzyme activity. To address this, DPP-IV gene
expression and enzyme activity were measured in Caco2 cells cultured in the
presence of low (2.5 mmol/L) or high (16.7 mmol/L) concentrations of glucose. We 
observed that high glucose inhibited DPP-IV gene expression and enzyme activity. 
3. The second aim of the present study was to investigate whether hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha contributes to glucose regulation of DPP-IV gene
expression. To explore this question, associations between the gene expression of
DPP-IV and HNF-1alpha were examined in Caco-2 cells cultured in the presence of
low (2.5 mmol/L) or high (16.7 mmol/L) glucose. We found that the pattern of
glucose-regulated DPP-IV gene expression is similar to that of HNF-1alpha.
Moreover, to elucidate whether glucose regulation of DPP-IV gene expression is
affected when HNF-1alpha is inhibited, we produced two stable cell lines in which
a dominant-negative mutant HNF-1alphaR271G or basic vectors were stably
expressed. We found that glucose regulation of DPP-IV gene expression was
compromised in HNF-1alphaR271G cells, but was well maintained in basic vector
cells. 4. These results suggest that glucose regulation of DPP-IV gene expression
is mediated by HNF-1alpha.

PMID: 18671716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Chem Res Toxicol. 2008 Aug;21(8):1548-61. doi: 10.1021/tx800061w. Epub 2008 Jul
26.

Integrated pathway analysis of rat urine metabolic profiles and kidney
transcriptomic profiles to elucidate the systems toxicology of model
nephrotoxicants.

Xu EY(1), Perlina A, Vu H, Troth SP, Brennan RJ, Aslamkhan AG, Xu Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Safety Assessment, Merck Research Laboratories, West Point,
Pennsylvania 19486, USA. ethan_xu@merck.com, qiuwei_xu@merck.com

In this study, approximately 40 endogenous metabolites were identified and
quantified by (1)H NMR in urine samples from male rats dosed with two proximal
tubule toxicants, cisplatin and gentamicin. The excreted amount of a majority of 
those metabolites in urine was found to be dose-dependent and exhibited a strong 
correlation with histopathology scores of overall proximal tubule damage.
MetaCore pathway analysis software (GeneGo Inc.) was employed to identify
nephrotoxicant-associated biochemical changes via an integrated quantitative
analysis of both urine metabolomic and kidney transcriptomic profiles.
Correlation analysis was applied to establish quantitative linkages between pairs
of individual metabolite and gene transcript profiles in both cisplatin and
gentamicin studies. This analysis revealed that cisplatin and gentamicin
treatments were strongly linked to declines in mRNA transcripts for several
luminal membrane transporters that handle each of the respective elevated urinary
metabolites, such as glucose, amino acids, and monocarboxylic acids. The
integrated pathway analysis performed on these studies indicates that cisplatin- 
or gentamicin-induced renal Fanconi-like syndromes manifested by glucosuria,
hyperaminoaciduria, lactic aciduria, and ketonuria might be better explained by
the reduction of functional proximal tubule transporters rather than by the
perturbation of metabolic pathways inside kidney cells. Furthermore, this
analysis suggests that renal transcription factors HNF1alpha, HNF1beta, and HIF-1
might be the central mediators of drug-induced kidney injury and adaptive
response pathways.

PMID: 18656965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Surgery. 2008 Aug;144(2):168-73. doi: 10.1016/j.surg.2008.03.010. Epub 2008 May
9.

Defining the transcriptional regulation of the intestinal sodium-glucose
cotransporter using RNA-interference mediated gene silencing.

Balakrishnan A(1), Stearns AT, Rhoads DB, Ashley SW, Tavakkolizadeh A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: The sodium glucose cotransporter (SGLT1) is responsible for all
active intestinal glucose uptake. Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1 alpha and beta
(HNF 1 alpha and HNF 1 beta) activate the SGLT1 promoter, whereas GATA-binding
protein 5 (GATA-5) and caudal-type homeobox protein 2 (CDX2) regulate
transcription of other intestinal genes. We investigated SGLT1 regulation by
these transcription factors using promoter studies and RNA interference.
METHODS: Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells were transiently cotransfected with an
SGLT1-luciferase promoter construct and combinations of expression vectors for
HNF 1 alpha, HNF 1 beta, CDX2, and GATA-5. Caco-2 cells were stably transfected
with knockdown vectors for either HNF 1 alpha or HNF 1 beta. mRNA levels of HNF 1
alpha, HNF 1 beta, and SGLT1 were determined using quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction (qPCR).
RESULTS: HNF 1 alpha, GATA-5, and HNF 1 beta significantly activated the SGLT1
promoter (P < .05). Cotransfection of GATA-5 with HNF 1 alpha had an additive
effect, whereas HNF 1 beta and CDX2 antagonized HNF 1 alpha and GATA-5. SGLT1
expression was significantly reduced in HNF 1 alpha or HNF 1 beta knockdowns (P <
.001). HNF alpha knockdown significantly reduced HNF 1 beta expression and vice
versa (P < .005).
CONCLUSIONS: HNF 1 alpha and HNF 1 beta are important transcription factors for
endogenous SGLT1 expression by cultured enterocytes. GATA-5 and CDX2 also
regulate SGLT1 promoter activity and show cooperativity with the HNF1s. We,
therefore, propose a multifactorial model for SGLT1 regulation, with interactions
between HNF1, GATA-5, and CDX2 modulating intestinal glucose absorption.

PMCID: PMC2577164
PMID: 18656622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Sep;93(9):3505-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-0340. Epub
2008 Jul 1.

Reduced pancreatic volume in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1A-maturity-onset diabetes
of the young.

Vesterhus M(1), Haldorsen IS, Raeder H, Molven A, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, N-5021 Bergen,
Norway.

CONTEXT: There are interplays between the endocrine and exocrine pancreas. We
recently reported an increased frequency of exocrine dysfunction in
HNF1A-maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3) patients, compared with
controls. Reduced pancreatic volume is seen in HNF1B-MODY (MODY5) and diabetes
types 1 and 2.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to investigate whether HNF1A mutation
carriers have reduced pancreatic volume or abnormal pancreatic structure and
whether any changes are associated with exocrine dysfunction.
METHODS: Fifteen HNF1A mutation carriers recruited from the Norwegian MODY
Registry, 31 subjects with type 1 diabetes, 10 subjects with type 2 diabetes, and
11 controls underwent computed tomography of the pancreas. We measured pancreatic
volume and X-ray attenuation. Pancreatic volume index was defined as pancreatic
volume divided by body surface area.
RESULTS: Pancreatic volume index was reduced in subjects with HNF1A-MODY (34.5
ml/m2; P < 0.02) and type 1 diabetes (21.4 ml/m2; P < 0.001) as compared with
nondiabetic controls (45.7 ml/m2), and was reduced in subjects with diabetes in
combination with fecal elastase deficiency (P = 0.03). Subjects with type 1
diabetes had smaller pancreatic volume index, compared with HNF1A mutation
carriers (P < 0.001). Reduced pancreatic volume index was associated with
increasing duration of diabetes. Pancreatic X-ray attenuation in HNF1A mutation
carriers was not significantly different from that of nondiabetic controls.
CONCLUSIONS: HNF1A mutation carriers have reduced pancreatic volume but less
reduced than in patients with type 1 diabetes. Insulinopenia could explain both
the pancreatic volume reduction and the associated pancreatic dysfunction.

PMID: 18593771  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Diabetes. 2008 Jul;57(7):1978-82. doi: 10.2337/db07-1663.

Diabetes susceptibility in the Canadian Oji-Cree population is moderated by
abnormal mRNA processing of HNF1A G319S transcripts.

Harries LW(1), Sloman MJ, Sellers EA, Hattersley AT, Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, U.K. l.w.harries@exeter.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: The G319S HNF1A variant is associated with an increased risk of type 2
diabetes in the Canadian Oji-Cree population. We hypothesized that the variant
site at the 3' end of exon 4 might influence splicing and characterized mRNA
transcripts to investigate the mutational mechanism underlying this
susceptibility to diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We established lymphoblastoid cell lines from a
G319S homozygote and controls. HNF1A transcripts were characterized in the cell
lines and pancreatic tissue by sequence analysis of RT-PCR products and
quantification using real-time PCR. Susceptibility to mRNA surveillance was
investigated using cycloheximide.
RESULTS: Full-length G319S mRNA accounted for 24% of mRNA transcripts in the
homozygous G319S cell line. A novel isoform lacking the terminal 12 bases of exon
4 was upregulated (55% of mRNA transcripts) compared with control cell lines
(33%) and human pancreatic tissue (17%). Two abnormal transcripts present only in
the G319S cell line included premature termination codons as a result of the
inclusion of seven nucleotides from intron 4 or the deletion of exon 8.
Cycloheximide treatment increased the levels of both transcripts.
CONCLUSIONS: The G319S variant results in the production of two abnormal
transcripts and an alteration in the relative balance of normal splicing
products. This is predicted to lead to a reduction in total HNF1A transcript
levels, but residual hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha protein activity in G319S
homozygotes may still reach up to 66% of normal levels. A combination of abnormal
splicing and reduced activity of the G319S protein may explain the diabetes
susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2453634
PMID: 18586913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2008 Sep;295(3):G542-51. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00081.2008. Epub 2008 Jun 26.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha regulates glucocorticoid receptor expression to 
control postnatal body growth.

Lin WY(1), Hu YJ, Lee YH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia
Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF-1alpha) is a homeodomain-containing
transcription factor and is important in postnatal growth and development in
mice. In the HNF-1alpha-deficient liver, the expressions of a large set of growth
hormone (GH)-responsive genes were significantly downregulated. By analyzing
various HNF-1alpha mutant mice, we disclosed a mechanism by which hepatic
HNF-1alpha regulates the expression of GH-responsive genes that are crucial for
growth and development. We found that HNF-1alpha is required for the normal
expression of glucocorticoid receptor (GR) specifically in livers. In the liver, 
GR, together with STAT5, is known to mediate the GH action by transactivating the
GH-responsive genes that function in body growth and development. We further
demonstrated that HNF-1alpha modulated GR gene expression by directly
transactivating the GR gene promoter via a cryptic regulatory element located 3
bp upstream of the translation start site in exon 2 of the GR gene locus.

PMCID: PMC2536778
PMID: 18583462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Hepatology. 2008 Jul;48(1):240-51. doi: 10.1002/hep.22304.

The molecular mechanism regulating 24-hour rhythm of CYP2E1 expression in the
mouse liver.

Matsunaga N(1), Ikeda M, Takiguchi T, Koyanagi S, Ohdo S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacy, Department of Medico-Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) is clinically and toxicologically important and
exhibits 24-hour periodicity in its activity. In the present study, we
investigated whether hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) and clock genes
with a striking 24-hour rhythm in mouse liver contributed to the 24-hour
regulation of CYP2E1 expression. The results demonstrated that the expression of 
CYP2E1 messenger RNA (mRNA) in the liver was affected by HNF-1alpha and the
circadian organization of molecular clocks. The mRNA levels of CYP2E1 in the
liver increased from the late light phase to the early dark phase. Luciferase
reporter gene analysis revealed that HNF-1alpha activated CYP2E1 promoter
activity, which was restricted by CRY1, a member of the circadian organization of
molecular clocks. Repressor activity of CRY1 was observed on the HNF-1alpha
binding site of the CYP2E1 promoter region with mutated E-box. Serum shock
induced approximately 24-hour oscillation in CYP2E1 mRNA in HepG2. Transfection
of HNF-1alpha and CRY1 small interfering RNA dampened the oscillation of CYP2E1
mRNA in HepG2. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay in the CYP2E1 promoter
indicated that HNF-1alpha binding to the CYP2E1 promoter increased from the late 
light phase to the early dark phase. Using the chromatin immunoprecipitation
reimmunoprecipitation assay, time-dependent differences were demonstrated for
CRY1 protein interaction with HNF-1alpha transcriptional complexes, including
coactivator p300 on the HNF-1alpha binding site in the CYP2E1
promoter.CONCLUSION: Our results suggest that the transcription activator of
HNF-1alpha acts periodically and the negative limbs of molecular clocks
periodically inhibit CYP2E1 transcription, resulting in the 24-hour rhythm of its
mRNA expression.

PMID: 18537186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Diabet Med. 2008 Jul;25(7):775-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2008.02459.x.

Prevalence of HNF1A (MODY3) mutations in a Norwegian population (the HUNT2
Study).

Eide SA(1), Raeder H, Johansson S, Midthjell K, Søvik O, Njølstad PR, Molven A.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Pediatrics, Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway.

AIMS: Previous reports have indicated that maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) caused by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1A (HNF1A) mutations (MODY3) is the
most common MODY subtype in Northern Europe, but population-based prevalence
estimates are lacking. We sought to determine the prevalence of HNF1A-MODY in
diabetic subjects of a defined Norwegian population (the HUNT2 Study).
METHODS: Of the 1972 diabetic HUNT2 subjects, we identified a subgroup of 43
suspected MODY cases based on information on family history, disease onset and
anti-glutamic acid decarboxylase autoantibody status. These cases were considered
a discovery group for HNF1A mutations and underwent full DNA sequencing.
Subsequently, the entire cohort of diabetic HUNT2 subjects was screened for three
selected HNF1A mutations. Possible founder effects were examined using the
Norwegian MODY Registry.
RESULTS: Three subjects from the discovery group harboured HNF1A mutations. Two
subjects had the previously described R229Q mutation, one had a novel S6N
alteration, whereas the HNF1A hot-spot mutation P291fsinsC was not identified.
Genotyping the cohort of diabetic HUNT2 subjects identified five additional
R229Q-positive subjects. Microsatellite analysis performed for all R229Q-positive
probands of the Norwegian MODY Registry and those found in the HUNT2 population
revealed that 17 of 18 (94%) had genotypes consistent with a common haplotype.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical MODY criteria were fulfilled in 2.2% of diabetic HUNT2
subjects. The minimum prevalence of HNF1A-MODY among diabetic HUNT2 subjects was 
0.4%. Because of founder effects, registry-based prevalence studies probably need
to be very large and they should also include prospectively collected phenotypes 
and extensive mutation screening to establish the true prevalence of MODY.

PMID: 18513305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Diabet Med. 2008 Jul;25(7):788-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2008.02467.x.

Can complement factors 5 and 8 and transthyretin be used as biomarkers for MODY 1
(HNF4A-MODY) and MODY 3 (HNF1A-MODY)?

Karlsson E(1), Shaat N, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences/Diabetes and Endocrinology, Malmö University
Hospital, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. ella.karlsson@med.lu.se

AIMS: Genetic testing is needed for the formal diagnosis of maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY), but this is not widely available. If any MODY
biomarkers were known, these could possibly be used as an alternative. Hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and HNF-4alpha regulate transcription of genes
encoding complement 5 (C5), complement 8 (C8) and transthyretin (TTR), suggesting
that these could be potential biomarkers for the disease. We therefore set out to
determine whether serum concentrations of C5, C8 and TTR can be used as
biomarkers for patients with HNF4A-MODY and HNF1A-MODY.
METHODS: The serum concentrations of C5, C8 and TTR were analysed in patients
with mutations in the HNF-1alpha (n=29) and HNF-4alpha (N=13) genes. Type 2
diabetic (n = 14) and healthy subjects (n = 20), matched for body mass index
(BMI), served as diabetic and non-diabetic control groups, respectively.
RESULTS: Type 2 diabetic patients had markedly increased levels of C5 and C8
compared with healthy control subjects. Levels of C5 and C8 correlated with
glycated haemoglobin (C5: r = 0.48, P = 0.019). After adjustment for BMI,
glycated haemoglobin, age and gender, HNF4A-MODY and HNF1A patients had reduced
levels of C5 and C8 compared with Type 2 diabetic patients (C5: P = 0.001; C8: P 
= 0.004). In addition, patients with HNF4A-MODY, but not those with HNF1A-MODY,
had decreased TTR compared with diabetic patients (P = 0.038).
CONCLUSIONS: Serum concentrations of C5 and C8 seem to distinguish HNF4A and
HNF1A-MODY from other forms of diabetes. However, hyperglycaemia per se increases
the serum concentrations, thereby attenuating their potential role as biomarkers 
for MODY.

PMID: 18513302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. BMC Med Genet. 2008 May 22;9:45. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-45.

The genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes may be modulated by obesity status:
implications for association studies.

Cauchi S(1), Nead KT, Choquet H, Horber F, Potoczna N, Balkau B, Marre M,
Charpentier G, Froguel P, Meyre D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR8090, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Génomique et Physiologie
Moléculaire des Maladies Métaboliques, Lille, France. Stephane.Cauchi@good.ibl.fr

BACKGROUND: Considering that a portion of the heterogeneity amongst previous
replication studies may be due to a variable proportion of obese subjects in
case-control designs, we assessed the association of genetic variants with type 2
diabetes (T2D) in large groups of obese and non-obese subjects.
METHODS: We genotyped RETN, KCNJ11, HNF4A, HNF1A, GCK, SLC30A8, ENPP1, ADIPOQ,
PPARG, and TCF7L2 polymorphisms in 1,283 normoglycemic (NG) and 1,581 T2D obese
individuals as well as in 3,189 NG and 1,244 T2D non-obese subjects of European
descent, allowing us to examine T2D risk over a wide range of BMI.
RESULTS: Amongst non-obese individuals, we observed significant T2D associations 
with HNF1A I27L [odds ratio (OR) = 1.14, P = 0.04], GCK -30G>A (OR = 1.23, P =
0.01), SLC30A8 R325W (OR = 0.87, P = 0.04), and TCF7L2 rs7903146 (OR = 1.89, P = 
4.5 x 10-23), and non-significant associations with PPARG Pro12Ala (OR = 0.85, P 
= 0.14), ADIPOQ -11,377C>G (OR = 1.00, P = 0.97) and ENPP1 K121Q (OR = 0.99, P = 
0.94). In obese subjects, associations with T2D were detected with PPARG Pro12Ala
(OR = 0.73, P = 0.004), ADIPOQ -11,377C>G (OR = 1.26, P = 0.02), ENPP1 K121Q (OR 
= 1.30, P = 0.003) and TCF7L2 rs7903146 (OR = 1.30, P = 1.1 x 10-4), and
non-significant associations with HNF1A I27L (OR = 0.96, P = 0.53), GCK -30G>A
(OR = 1.15, P = 0.12) and SLC30A8 R325W (OR = 0.95, P = 0.44). However, a
genotypic heterogeneity was only found for TCF7L2 rs7903146 (P = 3.2 x 10-5) and 
ENPP1 K121Q (P = 0.02). No association with T2D was found for KCNJ11, RETN, and
HNF4A polymorphisms in non-obese or in obese individuals.
CONCLUSION: Genetic variants modulating insulin action may have an increased
effect on T2D susceptibility in the presence of obesity, whereas genetic variants
acting on insulin secretion may have a greater impact on T2D susceptibility in
non-obese individuals.

PMCID: PMC2412856
PMID: 18498634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. PLoS Genet. 2008 May 23;4(5):e1000079. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000079.

Targeted deficiency of the transcriptional activator Hnf1alpha alters subnuclear 
positioning of its genomic targets.

Luco RF(1), Maestro MA, Sadoni N, Zink D, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Programming of Beta-cells Laboratory, Institut d'Investigacions August
Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain.

DNA binding transcriptional activators play a central role in gene-selective
regulation. In part, this is mediated by targeting local covalent modifications
of histone tails. Transcriptional regulation has also been associated with the
positioning of genes within the nucleus. We have now examined the role of a
transcriptional activator in regulating the positioning of target genes. This was
carried out with primary beta-cells and hepatocytes freshly isolated from mice
lacking Hnf1alpha, an activator encoded by the most frequently mutated gene in
human monogenic diabetes (MODY3). We show that in Hnf1a-/- cells inactive
endogenous Hnf1alpha-target genes exhibit increased trimethylated histone
H3-Lys27 and reduced methylated H3-Lys4. Inactive Hnf1alpha-targets in Hnf1a-/-
cells are also preferentially located in peripheral subnuclear domains enriched
in trimethylated H3-Lys27, whereas active targets in wild-type cells are
positioned in more central domains enriched in methylated H3-Lys4 and RNA
polymerase II. We demonstrate that this differential positioning involves the
decondensation of target chromatin, and show that it is spatially restricted
rather than a reflection of non-specific changes in the nuclear organization of
Hnf1a-deficient cells. This study, therefore, provides genetic evidence that a
single transcriptional activator can influence the subnuclear location of its
endogenous genomic targets in primary cells, and links activator-dependent
changes in local chromatin structure to the spatial organization of the genome.
We have also revealed a defect in subnuclear gene positioning in a model of a
human transcription factor disease.

PMCID: PMC2375116
PMID: 18497863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Diabetologia. 2008 Aug;51(8):1423-8. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1042-8. Epub 2008
May 22.

An RBP4 promoter polymorphism increases risk of type 2 diabetes.

van Hoek M(1), Dehghan A, Zillikens MC, Hofman A, Witteman JC, Sijbrands EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center, P.O. Box 2040, 3000
CA, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Retinol-binding protein 4 (RBP4), originally known for retinol
transport, was recently identified as an adipokine affecting insulin resistance. 
The RBP4 -803GA promoter polymorphism influences binding of hepatic nuclear
factor 1alpha and is associated with type 2 diabetes in case-control studies. We 
hypothesised that the RBP4 -803GA polymorphism increases type 2 diabetes risk at 
a population-based level. In addition, information on retinol intake and plasma
vitamin A levels enabled us to explore the possible underlying mechanism.
METHODS: In the Rotterdam Study, a prospective, population-based, follow-up
study, the -803GA polymorphism was genotyped. In Cox proportional hazards models,
associations of the -803GA polymorphism and retinol intake with type 2 diabetes
risk were examined. Moreover, the interaction of the polymorphism with retinol
intake on type 2 diabetes risk was assessed. In a subgroup of participants the
association of the polymorphism and vitamin A plasma levels was investigated.
RESULTS: Homozygous carriers of the -803A allele had increased risk of type 2
diabetes (HR 1.83; 95% CI 1.26-2.66). Retinol intake was not associated with type
2 diabetes risk and showed no interaction with the RBP4 -803GA polymorphism.
Furthermore, there was no significant association of the polymorphism with plasma
vitamin A levels.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our results provide evidence that homozygosity for
the RBP4 -803A allele is associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes in the
Rotterdam population. This relationship was not clearly explained by retinol
intake and vitamin A plasma levels. Therefore, we cannot differentiate between a 
retinol-dependent or -independent mechanism of this RBP4 variant.

PMCID: PMC2491414
PMID: 18496666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Diabetes Care. 2008 Aug;31(8):1496-501. doi: 10.2337/dc07-2334. Epub 2008 May 20.

Clinical application of 1,5-anhydroglucitol measurements in patients with
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Skupien J(1), Gorczynska-Kosiorz S, Klupa T, Wanic K, Button EA, Sieradzki J,
Malecki MT.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University, Medical College,
Krakow, Poland.

OBJECTIVE: 1,5-anhydroglucitol (1,5-AG) is a short-term marker of metabolic
control in diabetes. Its renal loss is stimulated in hyperglycemic conditions by 
glycosuria, which results in a lowered plasma concentration. As a low renal
threshold for glucose has been described in hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha) maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), the 1,5-AG level may be
altered in these patients. The purpose of this study was to assess the 1,5-AG
levels in patients with HNF-1alpha MODY and in type 2 diabetic subjects with a
similar degree of metabolic control. In addition, we aimed to evaluate this
particle as a biomarker for HNF-1alpha MODY.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We included 33 diabetic patients from the Polish
Nationwide Registry of MODY. In addition, we examined 43 type 2 diabetic patients
and 47 nondiabetic control subjects. The 1,5-AG concentration was measured with
an enzymatic assay (GlycoMark). Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curve
analysis was used to evaluate 1,5-AG as a screening marker for HNF-1alpha MODY.
RESULTS: The mean 1,5-AG plasma concentration in diabetic HNF-1alpha mutation
carriers was 5.9 microg/ml, and it was lower than that in type 2 diabetic
patients (11.0 microg/ml, P = 0.003) and in nondiabetic control subjects (23.9
microg/ml, P < 0.00005). The ROC curve analysis revealed 85.7% sensitivity and
80.0% specificity of 1,5-AG in screening for HNF-1alpha MODY at the criterion of 
<6.5 microg/ml in patients with an A1C level between 6.5 and 9.0%.
CONCLUSIONS: 1,5-AG may be a useful biomarker for differential diagnosis of
patients with HNF-1alpha MODY with a specific range of A1C, although this
requires further investigation. However, the clinical use of this particle in
diabetic HNF-1alpha mutation carriers for metabolic control has substantial
limitations.

PMCID: PMC2494661
PMID: 18492944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. RNA. 2008 Jul;14(7):1433-42. doi: 10.1261/rna.810208. Epub 2008 May 20.

Inducible expression of microRNA-194 is regulated by HNF-1alpha during intestinal
epithelial cell differentiation.

Hino K(1), Tsuchiya K, Fukao T, Kiga K, Okamoto R, Kanai T, Watanabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Tokyo 113-8519, Japan.

Maintenance of the intestinal epithelium is based on well-balanced molecular
mechanisms that confer the stable and continuous supply of specialized epithelial
cell lineages from multipotent progenitors. Lineage commitment decisions in the
intestinal epithelium system involve multiple regulatory systems that interplay
with each other to establish the cellular identities. Here, we demonstrate that
the microRNA system could be involved in intestinal epithelial cell
differentiation, and that microRNA-194 (miR-194) is highly induced during this
process. To investigate this inducible expression mechanism, we identified the
genomic structure of the miR-194-2, -192 gene, one of the inducible class of
miR-194 parental genes. Furthermore, we identified its transcriptional regulatory
region that contains a consensus-binding motif for hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha), which is well known as a transcription factor to
regulate gene expression in intestinal epithelial cells. By chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay and luciferase reporter analysis, we revealed that
pri-miR-194-2 expression is controlled by HNF-1alpha, and its consensus binding
region is required for the transcription of pri-miR-194-2 in vivo in an
intestinal epithelial cell line, Caco-2. Our observations indicate that microRNA 
genes could be targets of lineage-specific transcription factors and that
microRNAs are regulated by a tissue-specific manner in the intestinal epithelium.
Therefore, our work suggests that induced expression of these microRNAs have
important roles in intestinal epithelium maturation.

PMCID: PMC2441992
PMID: 18492795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Diabetologia. 2008 Jul;51(7):1169-80. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-1006-z. Epub 2008
May 20.

Transcription factor expression in the developing human fetal endocrine pancreas.

Lyttle BM(1), Li J, Krishnamurthy M, Fellows F, Wheeler MB, Goodyer CG, Wang R.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Health Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, London,
ON, Canada.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Morphological changes that occur during pancreatic endocrine
cell differentiation have been shown in rodent systems to be dependent on
sequential alterations in transcription factor expression. However, similar data 
for humans have been limited. The aim of the present study was to provide a
connection between pancreatic morphology, transcription factor gene expression
and protein localisation during human fetal development.
METHODS: Human fetal pancreases were examined at early (8-12 weeks of fetal age),
middle (14-16 weeks) and late (19-21 weeks) stages, using immunohistological,
microarray and qRT-PCR analyses.
RESULTS: We observed a significant decrease in pancreatic duodenal homeobox 1
(PDX-1)(+)/cytokeratin 19(+) cells (p < 0.001), with a simultaneous increase in
PDX-1(+)/insulin(+) cells from 8 to 21 weeks (p < 0.05). Increased PDX-1/insulin 
co-localisation within islet clusters was noted, while no co-expression of PDX-1 
with glucagon was found, suggesting that loss of PDX-1 is essential for alpha
cell formation. Given that neurogenin 3 (NGN3) expression is critical for
establishing the endocrine cell programme in the rodent pancreas, we examined its
expression pattern and co-localisation in PDX-1(+), insulin(+) and glucagon(+)
cells. Co-localisation of NGN3 with PDX-1, insulin and glucagon was noted during 
early development, with significant decreases in middle and late stages (p <
0.001). Our microarray and co-localisation analyses of transcription factors
linked to NGN3 demonstrated that ISL1 transcription factor (ISL1), neurogenic
differentiation 1 (NEUROD1), NK2 related transcription factor related, locus 2
(NKX2-2) and paired box gene 6 (PAX6) were upregulated during development and
present in all four endocrine cell types, while NK6 related transcription factor 
related, locus 1 (NKX6-1) was expressed exclusively in beta cells.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This study is an important step towards identifying
key molecular factors involved in development of the human fetal endocrine
pancreas.

PMID: 18491072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Drug Metab Dispos. 2008 Aug;36(8):1453-6. doi: 10.1124/dmd.108.020503. Epub 2008 
Apr 28.

Hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha inhibitor ursodeoxycholic acid influences
pharmacokinetics of the organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B1 substrate
rosuvastatin and bilirubin.

He YJ(1), Zhang W, Tu JH, Kirchheiner J, Chen Y, Guo D, Li Q, Li ZY, Chen H, Hu
DL, Wang D, Zhou HH.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacogenetics Research Institute, Institute of Clinical Pharmacology,
Central South University, Changsha, Hunan 410078, China.

Expression of the organic anion transporting polypeptide 1B1 (OATP1B1) is
regulated by transcription factor hepatic nuclear factor (HNF) 1alpha. The aim of
this study was to investigate the effect of ursodeoxycholic acid (UDCA), an
inhibitor of transcription factor HNF1alpha, on rosuvastatin and bilirubin
kinetics in human healthy volunteers. Both substances are substrates of OATP1B1. 
Twelve subjects with OATP1B1(*)1b/(*)1b genotype predicting high transport
activity were recruited for this randomized, crossover study. Each subject
received a single p.o. dose of 20 mg of rosuvastatin after 14 days of p.o. intake
of either 500 mg of UDCA or placebo. Plasma concentrations of rosuvastatin were
determined on days 15 to 18 of each study period. Subjects were randomly assigned
to UDCA or placebo group. Intake of UDCA led to a significant increase in
rosuvastatin area under the curve (AUC)(0-72) from 128.5 ng/ml.h to 182.1
ng/ml.h(P = 0.008) compared with the control group. The oral clearance decreased 
from 155.2 l/h with placebo to 109.8 l/h with UDCA. In addition, the mean values 
of total bilirubin, conjugated bilirubin, and unconjugated bilirubin
significantly increased to 139 +/- 39% (P = 0.003), 127 +/- 29% (P = 0.005), and 
151 +/- 52% (P = 0.004), respectively, after UDCA treatment. These results in
healthy volunteers confirm the findings from in vitro studies that UDCA inhibits 
OATP1B1 activity by inhibition of the transcription factor HNF1alpha. They
highlight a novel mechanism of OATP1B1-based interaction that is mediated by
transcription factor HNF1alpha.

PMID: 18443034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Gene. 2008 Jun 15;416(1-2):48-52. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2008.02.025. Epub 2008 Mar 
10.

Transcriptional regulation of the fatty acid binding protein 2 (FABP2) gene by
the hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1alpha).

Klapper M(1), Böhme M, Nitz I, Döring F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Nutrition, Institute of Human Nutrition and Food Science,
Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Heinrich-Hecht-Platz 10, D-24118 Kiel,
Germany. klapper@molnut.uni-kiel.de

The human fatty acid binding protein (FABP2) is involved in intestinal absorption
and intracellular trafficking of long-chain fatty acids. Here we investigate
transcriptional regulation of FABP2 by the endodermal hepatic nuclear factor 1
alpha (HNF-1alpha). In electromobility shift and supershift assays we show the
presence of two adjacent HNF-1alpha binding sites within the FABP2 promoter
regions -185 to -165 and -169 to -149. HNF-1alpha activates an FABP2 promoter
luciferase construct by 3.5 and 20-fold in Caco-2 and Hela cells, respectively.
Mutational analysis of HNF-1alpha elements resulted in about 50% reduction of
basal and HNF-1alpha induced activity of FABP2 promoter constructs, predominantly
caused by deletion of the -185 to -165 site. Thus, our data suggest a major role 
of HNF-1alpha in control of FABP2 expression in intestine via a functional
HNF-1alpha recognition element within FABP2 promoter region -185 to -165.

PMID: 18440731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 May;82(5):1193-201. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.03.017. Epub
2008 Apr 24.

Polymorphisms of the HNF1A gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha are
associated with C-reactive protein.

Reiner AP(1), Barber MJ, Guan Y, Ridker PM, Lange LA, Chasman DI, Walston JD,
Cooper GM, Jenny NS, Rieder MJ, Durda JP, Smith JD, Novembre J, Tracy RP, Rotter 
JI, Stephens M, Nickerson DA, Krauss RM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Washington, Department of Epidemiology, Seattle, WA 98195, USA. 
apreiner@u.washington.edu

Data from the Pharmacogenomics and Risk of Cardiovascular Disease (PARC) study
and the Cardiovascular Health Study (CHS) provide independent and confirmatory
evidence for association between common polymorphisms of the HNF1A gene encoding 
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha and plasma C-reactive protein (CRP)
concentration. Analyses with the use of imputation-based methods to combine
genotype data from both studies and to test untyped SNPs from the HapMap database
identified several SNPs within a 5 kb region of HNF1A intron 1 with the strongest
evidence of association with CRP phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2427318
PMID: 18439552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 May;82(5):1185-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.03.015. Epub
2008 Apr 24.

Loci related to metabolic-syndrome pathways including LEPR,HNF1A, IL6R, and GCKR 
associate with plasma C-reactive protein: the Women's Genome Health Study.

Ridker PM(1), Pare G, Parker A, Zee RY, Danik JS, Buring JE, Kwiatkowski D, Cook 
NR, Miletich JP, Chasman DI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cardiovascular Disease Prevention, Brigham and Women's Hospital,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA. pridker@partners.org

Although elevated levels of C-reactive protein (CRP) independently predict
increased risk of development of metabolic syndrome, diabetes, myocardial
infarction, and stroke, comprehensive analysis of the influence of genetic
variation on CRP is not available. To address this issue, we performed a
genome-wide association study among 6345 apparently healthy women in which we
evaluated 336,108 SNPs as potential determinants of plasma CRP concentration.
Overall, seven loci that associate with plasma CRP at levels achieving
genome-wide statistical significance were found (range of p values for lead SNPs 
within the seven loci: 1.9 x 10(-)(8) to 6.2 x 10(-)(28)). Two of these loci
(GCKR and HNF1A) are suspected or known to be associated with maturity-onset
diabetes of the young, one is a gene-desert region on 12q23.2, and the remaining 
four loci are in or near the leptin receptor protein gene, the apolipoprotein E
gene, the interleukin-6 receptor protein gene, or the CRP gene itself. The
protein products of six of these seven loci are directly involved in metabolic
syndrome, insulin resistance, beta cell function, weight homeostasis, and/or
premature atherothrombosis. Thus, common variation in several genes involved in
metabolic and inflammatory regulation have significant effects on CRP levels,
consistent with CRP's identification as a useful biomarker of risk for incident
vascular disease and diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2427311
PMID: 18439548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2008 Jul;81(1):e1-3. doi: 10.1016/j.diabres.2008.03.005.
Epub 2008 Apr 22.

A case of new mutation in maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY 3)
responsive to a low dose of sulphonylurea.

Jesic MD(1), Sajic S, Jesic MM, Maringa M, Micic D, Necic S.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Department, University Children's Hospital, Tirsova 10, 11000
Belgrade, Serbia. MMatejic@beotel.yu

We describe a girl aged 10.5 years with hyperglycemia, whose mother and maternal 
father had insulin treated diabetes since adolescence. Using genetic analysis in 
mother and child, we identified identical new mutation of the HNF-1alpha
sequence. Treatment with small doses of sulphonylurea was initiated and that
therapy gave good results.

PMID: 18433912  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Hepatology. 2008 Jun;47(6):1955-63. doi: 10.1002/hep.22256.

MicroRNA profiling in hepatocellular tumors is associated with clinical features 
and oncogene/tumor suppressor gene mutations.

Ladeiro Y(1), Couchy G, Balabaud C, Bioulac-Sage P, Pelletier L, Rebouissou S,
Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U674, Génomique Fonctionnelle des Tumeurs Solides, Paris, France.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2008 Jun;47(6):1807-9.

Molecular classifications defining new tumor subtypes have been recently refined 
with genetic and transcriptomic analyses of benign and malignant hepatocellular
tumors. Here, we performed microRNA (miRNA) profiling in two series of fully
annotated liver tumors to uncover associations between oncogene/tumor suppressor 
mutations and clinical and pathological features. Expression levels of 250 miRNAs
in 46 benign and malignant hepatocellular tumors were compared to those of 4
normal liver samples with quantitative reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction. miRNAs associated with genetic and clinical characteristics were
validated in a second series of 43 liver tumor samples and 16 nontumor samples.
miRNA profiling unsupervised analysis classified samples in unique clusters
characterized by histological features (tumor/nontumor, P < 0.001;
benign/malignant tumors, P < 0.01; inflammatory adenoma and focal nodular
hyperplasia, P < 0.01), clinical characteristics [hepatitis B virus (HBV)
infection, P < 0.001; alcohol consumption, P < 0.05], and oncogene/tumor
suppressor gene mutations [beta-catenin, P < 0.01; hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha (HNF1alpha), P < 0.01]. Our study identified and validated miR-224
overexpression in all tumors and miR-200c, miR-200, miR-21, miR-224, miR-10b, and
miR-222 specific deregulation in benign or malignant tumors. Moreover, miR-96 was
overexpressed in HBV tumors, and miR-126* was down-regulated in alcohol-related
hepatocellular carcinoma. Down-regulations of miR-107 and miR-375 were
specifically associated with HNF1alpha and beta-catenin gene mutations,
respectively. miR-375 expression was highly correlated to that of
beta-catenin-targeted genes as miR-107 expression was correlated to that of
HNF1alpha in a small interfering RNA cell line model. Thus, this strongly
suggests that beta-catenin and HNF1alpha could regulate miR-375 and miR-107
expression levels, respectively.CONCLUSION: Hepatocellular tumors may have a
distinct miRNA expression fingerprint according to malignancy, risk factors, and 
oncogene/tumor suppressor gene alterations. Dissecting these relationships
provides a new hypothesis to understand the functional impact of miRNA
deregulation in liver tumorigenesis and the promising use of miRNAs as diagnostic
markers.

PMID: 18433021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Thyroid. 2008 May;18(5):533-9. doi: 10.1089/thy.2007.0312.

Expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha mRNA in human anaplastic thyroid
cancer cell lines and tumors.

Xu J(1), Filetti S, Hershman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, VA Greater Los Angeles Healthcare System, UCLA School
of Medicine, University of California-Los Angeles, CA 90073, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and HNF-1beta are related
transcription factors that are mainly expressed in liver cells. Our previous
study showed that HNF-1beta was highly expressed in papillary thyroid cancer cell
lines and tumors. HNF-1alpha mRNA, however, was not detected in differentiated
thyroid cancer cell lines. The objective of this study was to determine whether
HNF-1alpha is expressed in dedifferentiated anaplastic thyroid cancer cells.
METHODS: Total RNA isolated from six anaplastic thyroid cancer cell lines and 38 
surgical samples was analyzed for HNF-1alpha mRNA by conventional
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) or real-time RT-PCR.
HNF-1alpha DNA binding activity was measured by gel retardation assay and
HNF-1alpha protein was identified by Western blotting.
RESULTS: HNF-1alpha mRNA was expressed in four of the six anaplastic cell lines. 
The presence of HNF-1alpha protein and DNA binding activity was detected in three
lines with higher HNF-1alpha mRNA level. Three cell lines also expressed
HNF-1beta. HNF-1alpha transcripts were also detected in five out of six
anaplastic tumors, but not in the papillary tumors except one with weak PCR
signal.
CONCLUSION: HNF-1alpha mRNA was detected in high frequency in anaplastic thyroid 
cancer cell lines and tumors. HNF-1alpha might play a role in the pathogenesis of
anaplastic thyroid cancer.

PMID: 18399756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 May;1779(5):341-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2008.03.002. 
Epub 2008 Mar 19.

RNA interference-mediated inhibition of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
identifies target genes.

Evans JR(1), Kelly DL, Morris KJ, Arvide EM, Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Molecular Genetics, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
Oxford University, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford, OX3 9DS, UK.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) is a homeodomain transcription
factor that is central to co-ordinated differentiation of a number of cell
lineages, including hepatocytes in the liver and islet cells in the pancreas.
HNF1alpha interacts directly with other transcription factors and co-factors and 
is involved in chromatin modification to alter gene expression. To further
investigate the pivotal role of HNF1alpha in transcriptional control pathways we 
utilized RNA interference. An siRNA oligonucleotide specific for HNF1alpha
reduced HNF1alpha protein levels by up to 70% in transient transfections of Caco2
cells. The same sequence incorporated into an shRNAi reduced protein levels by up
to 90% in stable transfections. Microarray analysis of RNA from cell lines with
stable RNAi-mediated down-regulation of HNF1alpha, identified genes known to be
regulated by this transcription factor and also novel genes.

PMID: 18397763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2008 Apr 1;64(Pt 4):313-7. doi:
10.1107/S1744309108007136. Epub 2008 Mar 29.

Crystallization of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4 alpha) in complex with
the HNF1 alpha promoter element.

Lu P(1), Liu J, Melikishvili M, Fried MG, Chi YI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry and Center for Structural
Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is a member of the nuclear receptor 
superfamily that plays a central role in organ development and metabolic
functions. Mutations on HNF4alpha cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY), a dominant monogenic cause of diabetes. In order to understand the
molecular mechanism of promoter recognition and the molecular basis of
disease-causing mutations, the recombinant HNF4alpha DNA-binding domain was
prepared and used in a study of its binding properties and in crystallization
with a 21-mer DNA fragment that contains the promoter element of another MODY
gene, HNF1alpha. The HNF4alpha protein displays a cooperative and specific
DNA-binding activity towards its target gene-recognition elements. Crystals of
the complex diffract to 2.0 A using a synchrotron-radiation source under
cryogenic (100 K) conditions and belong to space group C2, with unit-cell
parameters a = 121.63, b = 35.43, c = 70.99 A, beta = 119.36 degrees . A
molecular-replacement solution has been obtained and structure refinement is in
progress. This structure and the binding studies will provide the groundwork for 
detailed functional and biochemical studies of the MODY mutants.

PMCID: PMC2374247
PMID: 18391435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Blood. 2008 Aug 1;112(3):480-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-10-120261. Epub 2008 Apr
4.

Core binding factors are necessary for natural killer cell development and
cooperate with Notch signaling during T-cell specification.

Guo Y(1), Maillard I, Chakraborti S, Rothenberg EV, Speck NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2008 Aug 1;112(3):454.

CBFbeta is the non-DNA binding subunit of the core binding factors (CBFs). Mice
with reduced CBFbeta levels display profound, early defects in T-cell but not
B-cell development. Here we show that CBFbeta is also required at very early
stages of natural killer (NK)-cell development. We also demonstrate that T-cell
development aborts during specification, as the expression of Gata3 and Tcf7,
which encode key regulators of T lineage specification, is substantially reduced,
as are functional thymic progenitors. Constitutively active Notch or IL-7
signaling cannot restore T-cell expansion or differentiation of CBFbeta
insufficient cells, nor can overexpression of Runx1 or CBFbeta overcome a lack of
Notch signaling. Therefore, the ability of the prethymic cell to respond
appropriately to Notch is dependent on CBFbeta, and both signals converge to
activate the T-cell developmental program.

PMCID: PMC2481540
PMID: 18390836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Ann Biol Clin (Paris). 2008 Mar-Apr;66(2):189-93. doi: 10.1684/abc.2008.0201.

[Diabetic ketoacidosis with a fatal issue: is it a MODY3 (maturity-onset diabetes
of the young type 3)?].

[Article in French]

Dehan C(1), Tran Van D, Delacour H, Deroudilhe G, Fritsch N, Chiappini J, Dardare
E, Gardet V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de biochimie, Hôpital d'instruction des Armées Robert Picqué,
Bordeaux.

Ketoacidotic coma is one of the possible diabetes mellitus first symptoms. It
results from complete or relative lack of insuline and is often associated with
type 1 diabetes. The authors report a case of a 45-years old woman with inaugural
diabetes of which atypical features have motivated the study of MODY gene
(maturity-onset diabetes of the young). Gly574ser polymorphism in the HNF-1alpha 
gene was found, in homozygous state, and the question of the responsibility of
this polymorphism in this diabete is asked.

PMID: 18390429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Cell Res. 2008 Apr;18(4):491-9. doi: 10.1038/cr.2008.42.

Estradiol-17beta protects against hypoxia-induced hepatocyte injury through
ER-mediated upregulation of Bcl-2 as well as ER-independent antioxidant effects.

Lee MY(1), Jung SC, Lee JH, Han HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology, College of Veterinary Medicine,
Biotherapy Human Resources Center (BK21), Chonnam National University, Gwangju
500-757, Korea.

Although many previous studies have suggested that estrogen functions as a
cytoprotective agent under oxidative stress conditions, the underlying mechanism 
by which this effect is exerted remains to be elucidated. This study assessed the
effects of estradiol-17beta (E(2)) (10(-8) M) on hypoxia-induced cell injury and 
its related signaling in primary cultured chicken hepatocytes. Hypoxic conditions
were found to augment the level of DNA damage and to reduce cell viability and
the level of [(3)H]-thymidine incorporation, and these phenomena were prevented
through treatment with E(2). Hypoxia also increased caspase-3 expression, but
showed no evidence of an influence on the expression of Bcl-2. However, E(2)
induced an increase in the level of Bcl-2 expression under hypoxic conditions and
reduced the level of caspase-3 expression. The effects of E(2) on Bcl-2 and
caspase expression were blocked by ICI 182780 (E(2) receptor (ER) antagonist,
10(-7) M). In addition, hypoxia resulted in an increase in the intracellular
reactive oxygen species (ROS) generated. These effects were blocked by E(2), but 
not by E(2)-BSA and ICI 182780. Hypoxia also activated p38 mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK), c-JUN N-terminal kinase/stress-activated protein kinase
(JNK/SAPK) and nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB). These effects were blocked by
E(2), but not by ICI 182780. The inhibition of p38 MAPK and JNK/SAPK blocked
NF-kappaB activation. In conclusion, E(2) was found to protect against
hypoxia-induced cell injury in chicken hepatocytes through ER-mediated
upregulation of Bcl-2 expression and through reducing the activity of
ROS-dependent p38 MAPK, JNK/SAPK and NF-kappaB.

PMID: 18379592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Gastroenterol Clin Biol. 2008 Mar;32(3):296-303; quiz 293, 314. doi:
10.1016/j.gcb.2008.02.015. Epub 2008 Mar 25.

[Benign liver cell tumors: recent results, from molecular biology to diagnosis].

[Article in French]

Bioulac-Sage P(1), Balabaud C, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Anatomie Pathologique, CHU de Bordeaux, Hôpital Pellegrin, 33076
Bordeaux, France. paulette.bioulac-sage@gref.u-bordeaux2.fr

Comment in
    Gastroenterol Clin Biol. 2008 Mar;32(3):294-5.

PMID: 18367358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Cell Microbiol. 2008 Jul;10(7):1478-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01141.x.
Epub 2008 Mar 11.

A concerted action of HNF4alpha and HNF1alpha links hepatitis B virus replication
to hepatocyte differentiation.

Quasdorff M(1), Hösel M, Odenthal M, Zedler U, Bohne F, Gripon P, Dienes HP,
Drebber U, Stippel D, Goeser T, Protzer U.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Infectiology at the Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, Institute
for Medical Microbiology, Goldenfelsstr. 19-21, 50935 Cologne, Germany.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is an important human pathogen, which targets the liver
extremely efficient, gaining access to hepatocytes by a so far unknown receptor
and replicating in a hepatocyte-specific fashion. Cell differentiation seems to
determine HBV replication. We here show that the level of hepatocyte
differentiation, as indicated by hepatocyte polarization and metabolic activity, 
is closely correlated to the transcription of the HBV RNA pregenome. Pregenome
transcription determined the level of HBV replication in various cell lines of
hepatocellular origin and in primary human hepatocytes. A variety of
hepatocyte-enriched nuclear factors have been described to regulate transcription
of the pregenome, but it remained unknown which factors link HBV replication to
hepatocyte differentiation. We determined that high expression levels of
HNF4alpha but not its potential cofactors or other hepatocyte-enriched
transcription factors were essential for efficient HBV replication, and link it
to hepatocyte differentiation. HNF1alpha contributed to the control of HBV
replication because it regulated the expression of HNF4alpha. Thus, a concerted
action of HNF4alpha and HNF1alpha, which also determines morphological and
functional differentiation of hepatocytes, links HBV replication to hepatocyte
differentiation.

PMID: 18346225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Hepatol. 2008 May;48(5):884-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2008.02.001. Epub 2008 Feb
14.

Human and mouse hepatocellular adenoma and carcinoma display similar
tumorigenesis pathway alterations.

Zucman-Rossi J(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U674, Génomique fonctionnelle des tumeurs solides, Paris, France.
zucman@cephb.fr

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Sep 11;104(37):14771-6.

PMID: 18314218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Apr;4(4):200-13. doi:
10.1038/ncpendmet0778. Epub 2008 Feb 26.

Clinical implications of a molecular genetic classification of monogenic
beta-cell diabetes.

Murphy R(1), Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, UK.

Monogenic diabetes resulting from mutations that primarily reduce beta-cell
function accounts for 1-2% of diabetes cases, although it is often misdiagnosed
as either type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Knowledge of the genetic etiology of
diabetes enables more-appropriate treatment, better prediction of disease
progression, screening of family members and genetic counseling. We propose that 
the old clinical classifications of maturity-onset diabetes of the young and
neonatal diabetes are obsolete and that specific genetic etiologies should be
sought in four broad clinical situations because of their specific treatment
implications. Firstly, diabetes diagnosed before 6 months of age frequently
results from mutation of genes that encode Kir6.2 (ATP-sensitive inward rectifier
potassium channel) or sulfonylurea receptor 1 subunits of an ATP-sensitive
potassium channel, and improved glycemic control can be achieved by treatment
with high-dose sulfonylureas rather than insulin. Secondly, patients with stable,
mild fasting hyperglycemia detected particularly when they are young could have a
glucokinase mutation and might not require specific treatment. Thirdly,
individuals with familial, young-onset diabetes that does not fit with either
type 1 or type 2 diabetes might have mutations in the transcription factors
HNF-1alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-alpha) or HNF-4alpha, and can be treated 
with low-dose sulfonylureas. Finally, extrapancreatic features, such as renal
disease (caused by mutations in HNF-1beta) or deafness (caused by a mitochondrial
m.3243A>G mutation), usually require early treatment with insulin.

PMID: 18301398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Diabetologia. 2008 Apr;51(4):546-53. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-0942-y. Epub 2008
Feb 23.

Best practice guidelines for the molecular genetic diagnosis of maturity-onset
diabetes of the young.

Ellard S(1), Bellanné-Chantelot C, Hattersley AT; European Molecular Genetics
Quality Network (EMQN) MODY group.

Collaborators: Carette C, Castano Gonzalez L, de Nanclares Leal G, Elles R,
Gaspar G, Gasperikova D, Hansen T, Herr M, Kamarainen O, Kannengiesser C, Klimes 
I, Lacape G, Losekoot M, Malecki M, Meyer P, Njolstad P, Predragovic T, Pruhova
S, Wuyts W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, UK. Sian.Ellard@rdeft.nhs.uk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mutations in the GCK and HNF1A genes are the most common cause
of the monogenic forms of diabetes known as 'maturity-onset diabetes of the
young'. GCK encodes the glucokinase enzyme, which acts as the pancreatic glucose 
sensor, and mutations result in stable, mild fasting hyperglycaemia. A
progressive insulin secretory defect is seen in patients with mutations in the
HNF1A and HNF4A genes encoding the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 alpha and -4 alpha. A molecular genetic diagnosis often changes
management, since patients with GCK mutations rarely require pharmacological
treatment and HNF1A/4A mutation carriers are sensitive to sulfonylureas. These
monogenic forms of diabetes are often misdiagnosed as type 1 or 2 diabetes. Best 
practice guidelines for genetic testing were developed to guide testing and
reporting of results.
METHODS: A workshop was held to discuss clinical criteria for testing and the
interpretation of molecular genetic test results. The participants included 22
clinicians and scientists from 13 countries. Draft best practice guidelines were 
formulated and edited using an online tool (http://www.coventi.com).
RESULTS: An agreed set of clinical criteria were defined for the testing of
babies, children and adults for GCK, HNF1A and HNF4A mutations. Reporting
scenarios were discussed and consensus statements produced.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Best practice guidelines have been established for
monogenic forms of diabetes caused by mutations in the GCK, HNF1A and HNF4A
genes. The guidelines include both diagnostic and predictive genetic tests and
interpretation of the results.

PMCID: PMC2270360
PMID: 18297260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Immunol. 2008 Mar 1;180(5):3492-501.

Transcriptional complex formation of c-Fos, STAT3, and hepatocyte NF-1 alpha is
essential for cytokine-driven C-reactive protein gene expression.

Nishikawa T(1), Hagihara K, Serada S, Isobe T, Matsumura A, Song J, Tanaka T,
Kawase I, Naka T, Yoshizaki K.

Author information: 
(1)Health Care Center, Osaka University, Department of Respiratory Medicine,
Allergy, Rheumatic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka, Japan.

C-reactive protein (CRP) is a sensitive marker and mediator of inflammation,
whereas IL-6 blocking therapy can normalize serum levels of CRP in chronic
inflammatory diseases. We investigated the precise synergistic induction
mechanism of CRP gene expression by IL-1 and IL-6 in Hep3B cells. In the early
induction phase, IL-1 inhibited IL-6-mediated CRP gene expression, and NF-kappaB 
p65 inhibited the luciferase activity of pGL3-CRP by IL-1 plus IL-6 even in the
presence of overexpressed STAT3. In the late induction phase, we focused on JNK
and p38 activated by IL-1. SP600125 reduced the expression of the CRP gene
induced by IL-1 plus IL-6. Unexpectedly, overexpression of c-Fos dramatically
enhanced the luciferase activity by IL-1 and IL-6 even though the CRP gene has no
AP-1 response element (RE) in its promoter. The augmentative effect of c-Fos
required the presence of STAT3 and 3'-hepatocyte NF-1 (HNF-1) RE, which were
eliminated by dominant negative STAT3 and HNF-1alpha, respectively. SB203580
inhibited the phosphorylation of c-Fos enhanced by IL-1 plus IL-6, and diminished
expression of the CRP gene. Immunoprecipitation, Western blot analysis, the
Supershift assay using a CRP oligonucleotide containing STAT3 and 3'-HNF-1 RE,
and the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated that
c-Fos/STAT3/HNF-1alpha forms a complex on the CRP gene promoter. Because human
fetus liver cells failed to express c-Fos/STAT3/HNF-1alpha showed no CRP
production, transcriptional complex formation of c-Fos/STAT3/HNF-1alpha is
essential for the synergistic induction of CRP gene expression by IL-1 plus IL-6.
Our findings fully explain the clinical results of IL-6 blocking therapy and are 
expected to contribute to the development of a therapeutic strategy for chronic
inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 18292576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Pathol. 2008 May;215(1):56-66. doi: 10.1002/path.2319.

Hypoxia-inducible factor is expressed in giant cell tumour of bone and mediates
paracrine effects of hypoxia on monocyte-osteoclast differentiation via induction
of VEGF.

Knowles HJ(1), Athanasou NA.

Author information: 
(1)Botnar Research Centre, University of Oxford, Nuffield Orthopaedic Centre,
Oxford, OX3 7LD, UK.

Hypoxia is an important regulator of bone biology and stimulates osteoclast
differentiation from monocytic precursors. Hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) is a
key pro-tumourigenic transcription factor mediating pathways of hypoxia-inducible
gene expression. We have described expression of HIF-1alpha and HIF-2alpha in the
multi-nucleated, osteoclast-like giant cells and the mononuclear stromal
component of giant cell tumour of bone (GCTB), a locally osteolytic primary bone 
tumour. HIF induction was observed in culture in the osteoblastic MG-63 cell
line, primary GCTB stromal cells, and monocyte-derived osteoclasts following
stimulation with hypoxia (0.1% O2) or the osteoclastogenic cytokines hepatocyte
growth factor (HGF) and macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF). This was
accompanied by increased expression of the downstream target genes
Bcl-2/adenovirus E1B 19 kD-interacting protein 3 (BNIP3), Glut-1, and vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF). As VEGF can substitute for M-CSF to support
osteoclastogenesis in the presence of receptor activator for nuclear factor
kappaB ligand (RANKL), we assessed the effect of MG-63 hypoxic conditioned media 
on osteoclast differentiation. In the presence of RANKL, hypoxic conditioned
media induced the formation of active osteoclasts, as assessed from the numbers
of TRAP-positive multi-nucleated cells and the area of lacunar bone resorption,
which was inhibited by co-incubation with a neutralizing anti-VEGF antibody.
Targeted siRNA ablated HIF-1alpha and/or HIF-2alpha expression in MG-63 cells and
reduced hypoxic secretion of VEGF. Hypoxic conditioned media from cells treated
with siRNA for (HIF-1alpha + HIF-2alpha) produced a significant decrease in
osteoclast number (p < 0.005) and activity (p < 0.05) in comparison with the
scrambled siRNA control. These results suggest that local hypoxia could
indirectly influence osteoclastogenesis via autocrine and paracrine secretion of 
VEGF under the control of HIF. This is potentially an important mechanism of
pathogenesis for GCTB and other osteolytic lesions.

PMID: 18283716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Pediatr Diabetes. 2008 Apr;9(2):162-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5448.2007.00335.x.
Epub 2008 Jan 19.

Triple diabetes: coexistence of type 1 diabetes mellitus and a novel mutation in 
the gene responsible for MODY3 in an overweight adolescent.

Bowden SA(1), Hoffman RP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Pediatrics, Columbus Children's
Hospital, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43205, USA.
bowdens@pediatrics.ohiostate.edu

We report an interesting and unique case of an overweight adolescent with a novel
mutation of the maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)3 gene [hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1alpha)] and positive islet cell autoantibodies. The 
patient is a 17-yr-old Caucasian female, who was diagnosed with type 2 diabetes
mellitus, treated with metformin and glipizide, with poor control for 18 months
prior to being referred to the Endocrinology clinic. Family history was strongly 
positive for type 2 diabetes (father, paternal aunts, uncles, and grandmother).
All were diagnosed at age 40-50 and treated with oral hypoglycemic agents. The
patient's body mass index was 36.4 kg/m(2). She had no acanthosis nigricans.
Initial hemoglobin A1c was 11.9%, with fasting glucose of 234 mg/dL and fasting
insulin 10.7 microU/mL. She was started on insulin therapy (0.6 units/kg/d),
resulting in good glycemic control. Oral hypoglycemic agents were discontinued.
Immunologic studies showed positive islet cell (29 U/mL, normal <1.0) and
glutamic acid decarboxylase-65 (0.9 U/mL, normal <0.5) antibodies. Sequencing for
HNF-1alpha gene revealed a nucleotide A to G substitution (ACC to GCC), resulting
in a missense mutation, T196A. To our knowledge, T196A has not been previously
reported. The coexistence of type 1 diabetes autoimmunity and a mutation in the
gene responsible for MODY3 in this overweight patient is intriguing and might
explain the early onset of progressive insulinopenia compared with the later age 
of diabetes onset of the earlier generation in the family.

PMID: 18221440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Clin Invest. 2008 Feb;118(2):695-709. doi: 10.1172/JCI33156.

Combination of ursodeoxycholic acid and glucocorticoids upregulates the AE2
alternate promoter in human liver cells.

Arenas F(1), Hervias I, Uriz M, Joplin R, Prieto J, Medina JF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gene Therapy and Hepatology, Center for Applied Medical Research, 
Clínica Universitaria, University of Navarra School of Medicine, CIBERehd,
Pamplona, Spain.

Primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) is a cholestatic disease associated with
autoimmune phenomena and alterations in both biliary bicarbonate excretion and
expression of the bicarbonate carrier AE2. The bile acid ursodeoxycholic acid
(UCDA) is currently used in treatment of cholestatic liver diseases and is the
treatment of choice in PBC; however, a subset of PBC patients respond poorly to
UDCA monotherapy. In these patients, a combination of UDCA and glucocorticoid
therapy appears to be beneficial. To address the mechanism of this benefit, we
analyzed the effects of UDCA and dexamethasone on AE2 gene expression in human
liver cells from hepatocyte and cholangiocyte lineages. The combination of UDCA
and dexamethasone, but not UDCA or dexamethasone alone, increased the expression 
of liver-enriched alternative mRNA isoforms AE2b1 and AE2b2 and enhanced AE2
activity. Similar effects were obtained after replacing UDCA with UDCA
conjugates. In in vitro and in vivo reporter assays, we found that a
UDCA/dexamethasone combination upregulated human AE2 alternate overlapping
promoter sequences from which AE2b1 and AE2b2 are expressed. In chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we demonstrated that combination UCDA/dexamethasone
treatment induced p300-related interactions between HNF1 and glucocorticoid
receptor on the AE2 alternate promoter. Our data provide a potential molecular
explanation for the beneficial effects of the combination of UDCA and
glucocorticoids in PBC patients with inadequate response to UDCA monotherapy.

PMCID: PMC2176189
PMID: 18188457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2008 Jun;377(4-6):597-605. doi:
10.1007/s00210-007-0226-y. Epub 2008 Jan 3.

Transcriptional regulation of human UGT1A1 gene expression through distal and
proximal promoter motifs: implication of defects in the UGT1A1 gene promoter.

Sugatani J(1), Mizushima K, Osabe M, Yamakawa K, Kakizaki S, Takagi H, Mori M,
Ikari A, Miwa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaco-Biochemistry, Global Center of Excellence for
Innovation in Human Health Sciences, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
University of Shizuoka, 52-1 Yada, Shizuoka, 422-8526, Japan.

Human UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT)1A1 is a critical enzyme responsible for
detoxification and metabolism of endogenous and exogenous lipophilic compounds,
such as potentially neurotoxic bilirubin and the anticancer drug irinotecan
SN-38, via conjugation with glucuronic acid. A 290-bp distal enhancer module,
phenobarbital-responsive enhancer module of UGT1A1 (gtPBREM), fully accounts for 
constitutive androstane receptor (CAR)-, pregnane X receptor (PXR)-,
glucocorticoid receptor (GR)-, and aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)-mediated
activation of the UGT1A1 gene. This study indicates that hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) bound to the proximal promoter motif not only enhances 
the basal reporter activity of UGT1A1, including the distal (-3570/-3180) and
proximal (-165/-1) regions, but also influences the transcriptional regulation of
UGT1A1 by CAR, PXR, GR, and AhR to markedly enhance reporter activities.
Moreover, we assessed the influence of the TA repeat polymorphism and gtPBREM
T-3279G mutation on transcriptional activation of UGT1A1 by CAR, PXR, GR, and
AhR. Transcriptional activation of the A(TA)(7)TAA mutant by CAR, the PXR
activator rifampicin, the GR activator dexamethasone, and the AhR activator
benzo[a]pyrene was more reduced than that of the T-3279G variant, and the
activity of the UGT1A1 promoter with both T-3279G and A(TA)(7)TAA mutations was
still lower. Thus, UGT1A1 gene promoter variations, including the TA repeat
polymorphism and T-3279G gtPBREM, have important clinical implications.

PMID: 18172616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Mar;36(4):1209-19. Epub 2007 Dec 26.

Proteomic screen defines the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha-binding partners
and identifies HMGB1 as a new cofactor of HNF1alpha.

Yu M(1), Wang J, Li W, Yuan YZ, Li CY, Qian XH, Xu WX, Zhan YQ, Yang XM.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, Beijing, 100850, Beijing Proteomics
Research Center, Beijing, 102206, PR China.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha is one of the liver-enriched transcription
factors involved in many tissue-specific expressions of hepatic genes. The
molecular mechanisms for determining HNF1alpha-mediated transactivation have not 
been explained fully. To identify unknown proteins that interact with HNF1alpha, 
we developed a co-IP-MS strategy to search HNF1alpha interactions, and high
mobility group protein-B1 (HMGB1), a chromosomal protein, was identified as a
novel HNF1alpha-interacting protein. In vitro glutathione S-transferase pull-down
and in vivo co-immunoprecipitation studies confirmed an interaction between HMGB1
and HNF1alpha. The protein-protein interaction was mediated through the HMG box
domains of HMGB1 and the homeodomain of HNF1alpha. Furthermore, electrophoretic
mobility shift assay and chromatin-immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated that
HMGB1 was recruited to endogenous HNF1alpha-responsive promoters and enhanced
HNF1alpha binding to its cognate DNA sequences. Moreover, luciferase reporter
analyses showed that HMGB1 potentiated the transcriptional activities of
HNF1alpha in cultured cells, and downregulation of HMGB1 by RNA interference
specifically affected the HNF1alpha-dependent gene expression in HepG2 cell.
Taken together, these findings raise the intriguing possibility that HMGB1 is a
new cofactor of HNF1alpha and participates in HNF1alpha-mediated transcription
regulation through protein-protein interaction.

PMCID: PMC2275099
PMID: 18160415  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Chem Res Toxicol. 2008 Feb;21(2):341-8. Epub 2007 Dec 12.

Significance of prolyl hydroxylase 2 in the interference of aryl hydrocarbon
receptor and hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha signaling.

Seifert A(1), Katschinski DM, Tonack S, Fischer B, Navarrete Santos A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Martin Luther University Faculty of
Medicine, D-06097 Halle (Saale), Germany. anja.seifert@medizin.uni-halle.de

Hypoxia-inducible factor-1 alpha (HIF-1 alpha) and the aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
(AhR) work as environmental sensors in human tissues. These proteins are members 
of the helix-loop-helix/Per-ARNT-SIM transcription factor family and form
heterodimers with the aryl hydrocarbon receptor nuclear translocator. HIF-1 alpha
can be activated by low oxygen concentrations and hypoxia-inducing agents. The
AhR is activated by xenobiotica such as dioxins. Here, we analyze the
interference between the AhR signaling, activated by 10 nM
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo- p-dioxin (TCDD), and the HIF-1 alpha pathway, induced
by hypoxia (5% O2), in two human cell lines, the breast carcinoma cell line MCF-7
and the hepatocyte cell line HepG2. In both cell lines, treatment with TCDD and
hypoxia clearly reduced the stabilization of HIF-1 alpha and HRE-mediated
promoter activity when compared to the induction under hypoxia alone. Because
these effects were not observed after alpha-naphthoflavone treatment and HIF-1
alpha mRNA was not down-regulated, HIF-1 alpha stabilization was revealed to be
the target by TCDD in an AhR-depended mechanism. Under exposure to TCDD or
hypoxia, the main regulator of HIF-1 alpha stability, the prolyl hydroxylase
domain containing protein 2 (PHD2) showed an increase in promoter activity,
transcript numbers, and protein amount. Therefore, PHD2 expression is regulated
in an AhR-dependent manner under normoxia. The AhR-dependent regulation of PHD2
under normoxia, however, is overwritten by the TCDD-mediated destabilization of
HIF-1 alpha. The destabilization of HIF-1 alpha is the dominant effect causing
the reduced PHD2 expression after simultaneous exposure to TCDD and hypoxia. We
conclude that PHD2 does not mediate the TCDD-mediated HIF-1 alpha destabilization
and does not control the interference of AhR and HIF-1 alpha pathways.

PMID: 18072750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Development. 2008 Jan;135(2):237-47. Epub 2007 Dec 5.

Wnt canonical pathway restricts graded Shh/Gli patterning activity through the
regulation of Gli3 expression.

Alvarez-Medina R(1), Cayuso J, Okubo T, Takada S, Martí E.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Biología Molecular de Barcelona, CSIC, Parc Cientific de
Barcelona, C/Josep Samitier 1-5, Barcelona 08028, Spain.

Dorsoventral patterning of the vertebrate nervous system is achieved by the
combined activity of morphogenetic signals secreted from dorsal and ventral
signalling centres. The Shh/Gli pathway plays a major role in patterning the
ventral neural tube; however, the molecular mechanisms that limit target gene
responses to specific progenitor domains remain unclear. Here, we show that
Wnt1/Wnt3a, by signalling through the canonical beta-catenin/Tcf pathway, control
expression of dorsal genes and suppression of the ventral programme, and that
this role in DV patterning depends on Gli activity. Additionally, we show that
Gli3 expression is controlled by Wnt activity. Identification and
characterization of highly conserved non-coding DNA regions around the human Gli3
gene revealed the presence of transcriptionally active Tcf-binding sequences.
These indicated that dorsal Gli3 expression might be directly regulated by
canonical Wnt activity. In turn, Gli3, by acting as a transcriptional repressor, 
restricted graded Shh/Gli ventral activity to properly pattern the spinal cord.

PMID: 18057099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Pediatr Diabetes. 2007 Dec;8 Suppl 9:42-7.

Genetics and type 2 diabetes in youth.

Gill-Carey O(1), Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Peninsula Medical School,
Barrack Road, Exeter, UK.

The rapid increase in the population prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus
(T2DM) in youth can only be explained by changes in lifestyle. However, even when
most members of a population have changed their lifestyle, only a minority of
children develop diabetes, and genetic factors are important in determining which
children are affected. Support for the role of genetic factors comes from
epidemiological evidence that diabetes in youth is most common in high diabetes
prevalence racial groups, in subjects with a strong family history, and in girls.
Defining the genes predisposing to T2DM is extremely difficult as there are
multiple genes involved each contributing only a small amount and lifestyle
factors play a large role. Defining the molecular genetics of T2DM in youth is
even harder because in addition to the low number of subjects, there is also the 
ethnic heterogeneity of the subjects and the lack of robust diagnostic criteria. 
Recently, there has been considerable progress in defining the predisposing genes
for adults with T2DM using thousands of cases and controls and a collaborative
genome-wide approach. Similar numbers will be needed to assess if the genes found
in adults also predispose to T2DM of youth and this will require large
multi-center studies. Progress to date in the molecular genetics of T2DM in youth
is limited to one population, the Oji-Cree Native Canadians, where the private
variant - G319S - a variant of HNF1A strongly predisposes to diabetes in children
as well as in adults.

PMID: 17991132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Pediatr Diabetes. 2008 Feb;9(1):60-4. Epub 2007 Nov 23.

Childhood obesity complicating the differential diagnosis of maturity-onset
diabetes of the young and type 2 diabetes.

Weintrob N(1), Stern E, Klipper-Aurbach Y, Phillip M, Gat-Yablonski G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Endocrinology and Diabetes, National Center for Childhood
Diabetes, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel, Petah Tiqva, Israel.

OBJECTIVE: To describe a proband with features of type 2 diabetes who was found
to have concomitant maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and the
consequent multigeneration genetic analysis.
DESIGN: Familial genetic analysis.
SETTING: Tertiary university medical center.
PARTICIPANTS: The proband was a 13.5-yr-old boy with marked non-ketotic
hyperglycemia, obesity, systolic hypertension, and insulin resistance. His
mother, maternal aunt, grandmother, and great grandmother had diabetes; his
father was obese and had early ischemic heart disease.
INTERVENTIONS: Clinical examination, laboratory work-up, and DNA study.
OUTCOME MEASURES: Mutation in hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene, the most
common cause of MODY.
RESULTS: The proband showed elevated C-peptide level and was negative for
beta-cell antibodies. On genetic analysis for MODY, the 291fsinsC mutation was
identified in all affected family members. A younger sister who was obese but had
no signs of impaired glucose tolerance was also tested on the basis of these
findings and was found to have the same mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: The patient, who presented with apparent type 2 diabetes, had
concomitant MODY 3, inherited from his mother's side, and some features of type 2
diabetes secondary to marked obesity. This combination probably caused an earlier
and more severe presentation of the disease and had significant implications for 
medical management. A search for MODY mutations should be considered in patients 
with a history of diabetes in three generations of one side of the family, even
those in whom the clinical picture resembles type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 18036134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2008 Feb;294(2):G418-28. Epub 2007 Nov
21.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha promotes differentiation of intestinal
epithelial cells in a coculture system.

Lussier CR(1), Babeu JP, Auclair BA, Perreault N, Boudreau F.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Institute of Health Research Team on Digestive Epithelium,
Département d'Anatomie et de Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des
Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, QC, Canada, J1H 5N4.

Normal cellular models able to efficiently recapitulate intestinal epithelial
cell differentiation in culture are not yet available. The aim of this work was
to establish and genetically characterize a mesenchymal-epithelial coculture
system to identify transcriptional regulators involved in this process. The
deposition of rat intestinal epithelial cells on human intestinal mesenchymal
cells led to the formation of clustered structures that expanded shortly after
seeding. These structures were composed of polarized epithelial cells with brush 
borders and cell junction complexes. A rat GeneChip statistical analysis
performed at different time points during this process identified hepatocyte
nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha) as being induced coincidently with the apparition of polarized
epithelial structures. Stable introduction of HNF-4alpha in undifferentiated
epithelial cells alone led to the rapid induction of HNF-1alpha and several
intestinal-specific markers and metabolism-related genes for which mRNA was
identified to be upregulated during epithelial differentiation. HNF-4alpha was
capable to transactivate the calbindin 3 gene promoter, a process that was
synergistically increased in the presence of HNF-1alpha. When
HNF-4alpha-expressing cells were plated on mesenchymal cells, an epithelial
monolayer formed rapidly with the apparition of dome structures that are
characteristics of vectorial ion transport. Forced expression of HNF-1alpha alone
did not result in dome structures formation. In sum, this novel coculture system 
functionally identified for the first time HNF-4alpha as an important modulator
of intestinal epithelial differentiation and offers an innovative opportunity to 
investigate molecular mechanisms involved in this process.

PMID: 18032476  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Nucleic Acids Symp Ser (Oxf). 2007;(51):415-6.

Regulatory interaction of HNF1-alpha to microRNA-194 gene during intestinal
epithelial cell differentiation.

Hino K(1), Fukao T, Watanabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Graduate School, Tokyo Medical 
and Dental University, Bunkyoku, Tokyo, Japan.

Maintenance of intestinal epithelium is based on well-balanced molecular
mechanisms that confer the stable and continuous supply of specialized epithelial
cell lineages from multipotent progenitors. Lineage commitment decisions in
intestinal epithelium system involve multiple regulatory systems that interplay
each other to establish the cellular identities. Here, we demonstrate that the
microRNA system could be involved in intestinal epithelial cell differentiation
and that microRNA-194 (miR194) is highly induced during this process and
controlled by a transcription factor, HNF-alpha, that is well known to regulate
gene expression in intestinal epithelial cells. Thus, the 5' conserved genomic
region of miR-1942 gene, the inducible class of miR-194 parental gene, contains a
binding motif for HNF1-alpha. This consensus region is required for the
transcription of miR-1942 and active in intestinal epithelial cell line, Caco-2, 
in-vivo. Our observations indicate that microRNA genes could be targets of
lineage specific transcription factors and that microRNAs are regulated in
intestinal epithelial cells in a tissue specific manner. Given that role of
microRNA in fine tuning of gene expression patterns, our results suggest that
HNF1-alpha regulates the gene expression program by not only direct activation of
genes but also modulation through induction of microRNAs such as miR-194, in
intestinal epithelial cells. This represents a novel molecular machinery that
might specify the fates of intestinal epithelial cell lineages during their
differentiation.

PMID: 18029763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2008 Feb;324(2):784-90. Epub 2007 Nov 20.

Transcriptional regulation of human and mouse organic anion transporter 1 by
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha/beta.

Saji T(1), Kikuchi R, Kusuhara H, Kim I, Gonzalez FJ, Sugiyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacokinetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, USA.

Organic anion transporter 1 (OAT1/SLC22A6) is predominantly expressed in the
proximal tubules of the kidney. Cumulative studies have shown its critical role
in the tubular secretion of a variety of organic anions, including several
clinically important drugs. In addition, OAT1 is also involved in the
pharmacological effect of diuretics and the nephrotoxicity of antiviral drugs. In
contrast to these functional characterizations, the regulatory mechanism of OAT1 
expression is poorly understood. It was recently demonstrated that the expression
of Oat1 was markedly reduced in the kidneys of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
(Hnf1alpha)-null mice. However, in vitro evidence for the involvement of
HNF1alpha and further analyses are required to illustrate the transcriptional
regulation of OAT1 genes in more detail. Computational analysis of the potential 
transcription factor binding sites revealed that the HNF1-motif was conserved in 
the proximal-promoter region of human and mouse OAT1 genes. The mRNA expression
of mouse organic anion transporter 1 was drastically reduced in Hnf1alpha-null
mice compared with that in wild-type mice, which was consistent with a previous
report (Maher et al., 2006). Forced expression of HNF1alpha alone or both
HNF1alpha and HNF1beta enhanced the activity of human and mouse OAT1 promoters in
the transactivation assays, whereas HNF1beta alone was not active. Mutations in
the HNF1-motif significantly reduced this transactivation. Direct binding of
HNF1alpha/HNF1alpha homodimer and HNF1alpha/HNF1beta heterodimer to the
HNF1-motif found in the human OAT1 promoter was demonstrated by electrophoretic
mobility shift assays. These results provide convincing evidence for the
involvement of HNF1alpha/beta in the constitutive expression of human and mouse
OAT1 in the kidney.

PMID: 18029548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Free Radic Biol Med. 2008 Feb 1;44(3):430-43. Epub 2007 Oct 22.

Regulation of NOX1 expression by GATA, HNF-1alpha, and Cdx transcription factors.

Valente AJ(1), Zhou Q, Lu Z, He W, Qiang M, Ma W, Li G, Wang L, Banfi B, Steger
K, Krause KH, Clark RA, Li S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Texas Health Science Center, San
Antonio, TX 78229-3900, USA. valente@uthscsa.edu

NOX1, a member of the NOX family of NADPH oxidases, is expressed primarily in
colon epithelium, where it may function in host defense and growth regulation. We
investigated factors responsible for its transcriptional regulation in vitro and 
its expression in vivo. Analysis of promoter constructs in the CaCo2 cell line
identified a complex element between -422 and -291 critical for promoter
activity. This element contained four sites that bound GATA-4, -5, and -6 in
vitro with varied affinities. One site also bound the caudal-related homeodomain 
proteins Cdx1 and Cdx2, whereas another also bound hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha). GATA-6, HNF-1alpha, and Cdx2 also bound to this
region in the intact chromatin of CaCo2 cells. These factors demonstrated
cooperativity when transactivating the NOX1 promoter. NOX1 mRNA was detected in
human colon epithelial cells along the crypt-villus axis. A gradient of NOX1 mRNA
expression was seen in the colons of normal as well as germ-free mice, with
significantly higher levels in distal compared with proximal segments. The
expression gradients of NOX1 mRNA in the colon paralleled those of GATA-6,
HNF-1alpha, and Cdx1. These data indicate that developmental, tissue-restricted
transcription factors play a key role in NOX1 regulation in vivo.

PMID: 18005670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Diabetes. 2008 Feb;57(2):503-8. Epub 2007 Nov 14.

The type and the position of HNF1A mutation modulate age at diagnosis of diabetes
in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)-3.

Bellanné-Chantelot C(1), Carette C, Riveline JP, Valéro R, Gautier JF, Larger E, 
Reznik Y, Ducluzeau PH, Sola A, Hartemann-Heurtier A, Lecomte P, Chaillous L,
Laloi-Michelin M, Wilhem JM, Cuny P, Duron F, Guerci B, Jeandidier N,
Mosnier-Pudar H, Assayag M, Dubois-Laforgue D, Velho G, Timsit J.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Génétique, Groupe Hospitalier Pitié-Salpétrière, Bât 6 rue
Lapeyronie, 47/83 Boulevard de l'Hôpital, 75651 Paris Cedex 13, France.
christine.bellanne-chantelot@psl.aphp.fr

OBJECTIVE: The clinical expression of maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY)-3 is highly variable. This may be due to environmental and/or genetic
factors, including molecular characteristics of the hepatocyte nuclear factor
1-alpha (HNF1A) gene mutation.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed the mutations identified in 356
unrelated MODY3 patients, including 118 novel mutations, and searched for
correlations between the genotype and age at diagnosis of diabetes.
RESULTS: Missense mutations prevailed in the dimerization and DNA-binding domains
(74%), while truncating mutations were predominant in the transactivation domain 
(62%). The majority (83%) of the mutations were located in exons 1- 6, thus
affecting the three HNF1A isoforms. Age at diagnosis of diabetes was lower in
patients with truncating mutations than in those with missense mutations (18 vs. 
22 years, P = 0.005). Missense mutations affecting the dimerization/DNA-binding
domains were associated with a lower age at diagnosis than those affecting the
transactivation domain (20 vs. 30 years, P = 10(-4)). Patients with missense
mutations affecting the three isoforms were younger at diagnosis than those with 
missense mutations involving one or two isoforms (P = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that part of the variability of the clinical
expression in MODY3 patients may be explained by the type and the location of
HNF1A mutations. These findings should be considered in studies for the search of
additional modifier genetic factors.

PMID: 18003757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Gene Expr Patterns. 2008 Jan;8(2):96-106. Epub 2007 Oct 9.

Expression of HNF-4alpha (MODY1), HNF-1beta (MODY5), and HNF-1alpha (MODY3)
proteins in the developing mouse pancreas.

Nammo T(1), Yamagata K, Tanaka T, Kodama T, Sladek FM, Fukui K, Katsube F, Sato
Y, Miyagawa J, Shimomura I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, B5, Osaka
University, 2-2 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The type 1, 3, and 5 forms of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) are
caused by mutations of the genes encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha,
HNF-1alpha, and HNF-1beta, respectively [Yamagata, K., Oda, N., Kaisaki, P.J.,
Menzel, S., Furuta, H., Vaxillaire, M., et al., 1996a. Mutations in the
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY3). Nature 384, 455-458; Yamagata, K., Furuta, H., Oda, N., Kaisaki, P.J.,
Menzel, S., Cox, N.J., et al., 1996b. Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4alpha gene in maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY1). Nature 384,
458-460; Horikawa, Y., Iwasaki, N., Hara, M., Furuta, H., Hinokio, Y., Cockburn, 
B.N. et al., 1997. Mutation in hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta gene (TCF2)
associated with MODY. Nat. Genet. 17, 384-385]. Among these transcription
factors, the pattern of HNF-4alpha expression during pancreatic differentiation
remains largely unknown. We performed an immunohistochemical study to investigate
its expression in comparison with the expression of HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta. We 
found considerable variation in the level of HNF-4alpha expression by the
individual epithelial cells in the pancreatic buds on E9.5. HNF-4alpha and
HNF-1beta were initially expressed by Pdx1(+) common progenitor cells and
neurogenin3(+) (Ngn3(+)) endocrine precursor cells during the first transition,
but expression of HNF-1beta and either HNF-4alpha or HNF-1alpha became
complementary around the end of the second transition (E15.5). In the mature
pancreas, HNF-4alpha was expressed by glucagon-positive alpha-cells,
insulin-positive beta-cells, somatostatin-positive delta-cells, and pancreatic
polypeptide-positive PP-cells, as well as by pancreatic exocrine cells and ductal
cells. Most of the HNF-4alpha(+) cells were also positive for HNF-1alpha, but
HNF-4alpha expression in some non-beta-cells was remarkably high, and this was
not paralleled by high HNF-1alpha expression. These results indicate that the
expression of MODY proteins in each of the pancreatic cell types is strictly
regulated in accordance with the status of differentiation during pancreatic
organogenesis.

PMID: 17996499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Clin Invest. 2007 Dec;117(12):3979-87.

Monosaccharide-induced lipogenesis regulates the human hepatic sex
hormone-binding globulin gene.

Selva DM(1), Hogeveen KN, Innis SM, Hammond GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of British Columbia, Child
and Family Research Institute, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

The liver produces plasma sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), which transports
sex steroids and regulates their access to tissues. In overweight children and
adults, low plasma SHBG levels are a biomarker of the metabolic syndrome and its 
associated pathologies. Here, we showed in transgenic mice and HepG2
hepatoblastoma cells that monosaccharides (glucose and fructose) reduce human
SHBG production by hepatocytes. This occurred via a downregulation of hepatocyte 
nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) and replacement of HNF-4alpha by the chicken
OVA upstream promoter-transcription factor 1 at a cis-element within the human
SHBG promoter, coincident with repression of its transcriptional activity. The
dose-dependent reduction of HNF-4alpha levels in HepG2 cells after treatment with
glucose or fructose occurred in concert with parallel increases in cellular
palmitate levels and could be mimicked by treatment with palmitoyl-CoA. Moreover,
inhibition of lipogenesis prevented monosaccharide-induced downregulation of
HNF-4alpha and reduced SHBG expression in HepG2 cells. Thus,
monosaccharide-induced lipogenesis reduced hepatic HNF-4alpha levels, which in
turn attenuated SHBG expression. This provides a biological explanation for why
SHBG is a sensitive biomarker of the metabolic syndrome and the metabolic
disturbances associated with increased fructose consumption.

PMCID: PMC2066187
PMID: 17992261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Diabetes Care. 2008 Feb;31(2):306-10. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

Pancreatic exocrine dysfunction in maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3.

Vesterhus M(1), Raeder H, Johansson S, Molven A, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Haukeland University Hospital, Bergen, Norway.

OBJECTIVE: Exocrine pancreas dysfunction is seen in 10-30% of patients with type 
1 and 2 diabetes. We have recently identified a syndrome of diabetes and exocrine
pancreas dysfunction attributable to mutations in the carboxyl ester lipase (CEL)
gene. We wanted to investigate the prevalence of pancreatic exocrine dysfunction 
in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3).
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: All 119 patients with MODY3 in the Norwegian MODY
Registry were invited to participate, and 70 (60.5%) responded, among whom 63
were adults. Control groups included 140 subjects with type 1 diabetes and 78
nondiabetic control subjects. Pancreatic dysfunction was defined by fecal
elastase deficiency. Fecal fat excretion was measured in 25 patients with fecal
elastase deficiency. CEL was investigated for sequence changes.
RESULTS: We found a prevalence of fecal elastase deficiency of 12.7% in adult
patients with MODY3, compared with 18.6% in patients with type 1 diabetes and
3.8% in nondiabetic control subjects. The six patients with MODY3 with fecal
elastase deficiency available for analysis all had increased fecal fat excretion.
Fecal elastase decreased with age. Controlled for age, patients with MODY3 still 
had decreased fecal elastase compared with control subjects. Twelve of 70
patients (17%) had single-base insertions in CEL exon 11. Two of these had fecal 
elastase deficiency.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of pancreatic exocrine dysfunction was 12.7% in a
cohort of 63 adult patients with MODY3, similar to the prevalence among type 1
diabetic patients. Fecal fat excretion was increased in all patients with MODY3
with fecal elastase deficiency who were investigated, underscoring the potential 
clinical importance of the exocrine dysfunction.

PMID: 17989309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Am J Hum Genet. 2007 Dec;81(6):1158-68.

So many correlated tests, so little time! Rapid adjustment of P values for
multiple correlated tests.

Conneely KN(1), Boehnke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics and Center for Statistical Genetics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, USA. kconneely@genetics.emory.edu

Contemporary genetic association studies may test hundreds of thousands of
genetic variants for association, often with multiple binary and continuous
traits or under more than one model of inheritance. Many of these association
tests may be correlated with one another because of linkage disequilibrium
between nearby markers and correlation between traits and models. Permutation
tests and simulation-based methods are often employed to adjust groups of
correlated tests for multiple testing, since conventional methods such as
Bonferroni correction are overly conservative when tests are correlated. We
present here a method of computing P values adjusted for correlated tests
(P(ACT)) that attains the accuracy of permutation or simulation-based tests in
much less computation time, and we show that our method applies to many common
association tests that are based on multiple traits, markers, and genetic models.
Simulation demonstrates that P(ACT) attains the power of permutation testing and 
provides a valid adjustment for hundreds of correlated association tests. In data
analyzed as part of the Finland-United States Investigation of NIDDM Genetics
(FUSION) study, we observe a near one-to-one relationship (r(2)>.999) between
P(ACT) and the corresponding permutation-based P values, achieving the same
precision as permutation testing but thousands of times faster.

© 2007 by The American Society of Human Genetics. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2276357
PMID: 17966093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2007 Oct;22(5):391-8.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha and 4 alpha are factors involved in
interindividual variability in the expression of UGT1A6 and UGT1A9 but not
UGT1A1, UGT1A3 and UGT1A4 mRNA in human livers.

Aueviriyavit S(1), Furihata T, Morimoto K, Kobayashi K, Chiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) catalyze phase-II biotransformation reaction 
of a variety of substances. Among the UGT1A isoforms, UGT1A1, UGT1A3, UGT1A4,
UGT1A6 and UGT1A9 are predominantly expressed in the liver. Interindividual
variability in expression of these isoforms would cause interindividual
differences in drug response, toxicity and cancer susceptibility. In the present 
study, we investigated the interindividual variability in UGT1A mRNA expression
and whether hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) and HNF4alpha were
factors responsible for their variability in human livers. The amounts of UGT1A1,
UGT1A3, UGT1A4, UGT1A6, UGT1A9, HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha mRNA in 18 human livers
were measured by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. The largest
and smallest interindividual differences in expression levels were observed in
UGT1A1 (8.6-fold) and UGT1A4 (2.5-fold) mRNA, respectively. The amounts of
HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha mRNA were strongly correlated with the amount of UGT1A9
mRNA and moderately correlated with that of UGT1A6 mRNA, whereas no significant
correlation was found with the amounts of UGT1A1, UGT1A3 and UGT1A4 mRNA. Our
results suggest that HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha are the factors involved in the
interindividual variability of UGT1A6 and UGT1A9 mRNA expression. Further studies
of other transcription factors are needed to clarify the factor(s) determining
the interindividual variations in UGT1A1, UGT1A3 and UGT1A4 mRNA expression.

PMID: 17965524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. BMC Biol. 2007 Oct 26;5:47.

Classification and nomenclature of all human homeobox genes.

Holland PW(1), Booth HA, Bruford EA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Oxford, South Parks Road, Oxford, OX1
3PS, UK. peter.holland@zoo.ox.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: The homeobox genes are a large and diverse group of genes, many of
which play important roles in the embryonic development of animals. Increasingly,
homeobox genes are being compared between genomes in an attempt to understand the
evolution of animal development. Despite their importance, the full diversity of 
human homeobox genes has not previously been described.
RESULTS: We have identified all homeobox genes and pseudogenes in the euchromatic
regions of the human genome, finding many unannotated, incorrectly annotated,
unnamed, misnamed or misclassified genes and pseudogenes. We describe 300 human
homeobox loci, which we divide into 235 probable functional genes and 65 probable
pseudogenes. These totals include 3 genes with partial homeoboxes and 13
pseudogenes that lack homeoboxes but are clearly derived from homeobox genes.
These figures exclude the repetitive DUX1 to DUX5 homeobox sequences of which we 
identified 35 probable pseudogenes, with many more expected in heterochromatic
regions. Nomenclature is established for approximately 40 formerly unnamed loci, 
reflecting their evolutionary relationships to other loci in human and other
species, and nomenclature revisions are proposed for around 30 other loci. We use
a classification that recognizes 11 homeobox gene 'classes' subdivided into 102
homeobox gene 'families'.
CONCLUSION: We have conducted a comprehensive survey of homeobox genes and
pseudogenes in the human genome, described many new loci, and revised the
classification and nomenclature of homeobox genes. The classification scheme may 
be widely applicable to homeobox genes in other animal genomes and will
facilitate comparative genomics of this important gene superclass.

PMCID: PMC2211742
PMID: 17963489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Endocrinology. 2008 Feb;149(2):717-24. Epub 2007 Oct 25.

Na(+) -glucose transporter-2 messenger ribonucleic acid expression in kidney of
diabetic rats correlates with glycemic levels: involvement of hepatocyte nuclear 
factor-1alpha expression and activity.

Freitas HS(1), Anhê GF, Melo KF, Okamoto MM, Oliveira-Souza M, Bordin S, Machado 
UF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Sao Paulo, Av Prof Lineu Prestes, 1524, 05505-900 Sao Paulo, SP,
Brazil.

Mutations in Na(+)-glucose transporters (SGLT)-2 and hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-1alpha genes have been related to renal glycosuria and maturity-onset
diabetes of the young 3, respectively. However, the expression of these genes
have not been investigated in type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Here in kidney of
diabetic rats, we tested the hypotheses that SGLT2 mRNA expression is altered;
HNF-1alpha is involved in this regulation; and glycemic homeostasis is a related 
mechanism. The in vivo binding of HNF-1alpha into the SGLT2 promoter region in
renal cortex was confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation assay. SGLT2 and
HNF-1alpha mRNA expression (by Northern and RT-PCR analysis) and HNF-1 binding
activity of nuclear proteins (by EMSA) were investigated in diabetic rats and
treated or not with insulin or phlorizin (an inhibitor of SGLT2). Results showed 
that diabetes increases SGLT2 and HNF-1alpha mRNA expression (~50%) and binding
of nuclear proteins to a HNF-1 consensus motif (~100%). Six days of insulin or
phlorizin treatment restores these parameters to nondiabetic-rat levels.
Moreover, both treatments similarly reduced glycemia, despite the differences in 
plasma insulin and urinary glucose concentrations, highlighting the plasma
glucose levels as involved in the observed modulations. This study shows that
SGLT2 mRNA expression and HNF-1alpha expression and activity correlate positively
in kidney of diabetic rats. It also shows that diabetes-induced changes are
reversed by lowering glycemia, independently of insulinemia. Our demonstration
that HNF-1alpha binds DNA that encodes SGLT2 supports the hypothesis that
HNF-1alpha, as a modulator of SGLT2 expression, may be involved in diabetic
kidney disease.

PMID: 17962340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Med J Aust. 2007 Oct 15;187(8):478.

Paediatric diabetes--which children can gain insulin independence?

Harris MF, McGown IN, Cowley DM.

Comment on
    Med J Aust. 2007 May 7;186(9):436-7.

PMID: 17937654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Aug;20(8):909-21.

Four novel mutations, including the first gross deletion in TCF1, identified in
HNF-4alpha, GCK and TCF1 in patients with MODY in Israel.

Stern E(1), Strihan C, Potievsky O, Nimri R, Shalitin S, Cohen O, Shehadeh N,
Weintrob N, Phillip M, Gat-Yablonski G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Endocrinology and Diabetes, National Center for Childhood
Diabetes, Schneider Children's Medical Center of Israel, Petah Tiqva, Israel.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is characterized by a primary defect 
in insulin secretion with non-ketotic hyperglycemia, monogenic autosomal dominant
mode of inheritance, age at onset less than 25 years, and lack of autoantibodies.
The aim of this study was to characterize the genetic basis of MODY in different 
ethnic groups in the Israeli population. Fifty-nine unrelated Israeli patients
with MODY were assessed for mutations in the three common MODY genes: hepatocyte 
nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha, glucokinase (GCK), and transcription factor 1
(TCF1). Overall, 11 mutations in 12 unrelated families were found (20.3% of
patients), for a relative frequency of 1.7% for MODY1, 8.5% for MODY2, and 10.1% 
for MODY3. Four mutations were novel, including the first gross deletion ever
described in the TCF1 gene. The low overall mutation frequency found here may
suggest the involvement of other, yet unidentified, genes in the etiology of MODY
in Israel.

PMID: 17937063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Pharm Res. 2007 Dec;24(12):2327-32. Epub 2007 Oct 12.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha is a factor responsible for the interindividual
variation of OATP1B1 mRNA levels in adult Japanese livers.

Furihata T(1), Satoh T, Yamamoto N, Kobayashi K, Chiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba, 260-8675, Japan.
tomomif@p.chiba-u.ac.jp

PURPOSE: The aim of the present study was to clarify the factors responsible for 
interindividual variability of organic anion transporting polypeptide (OATP, gene
symbol SLCO) 1B1 mRNA expression level in the human liver.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: OATP1B1 mRNA expression levels were determined by
real-time PCR in 31 human liver samples. The results were analyzed in relation to
a single nucleotide polymorphism (-11187G>A) located in the promoter region and
levels of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1alpha mRNA.
RESULTS: There was a 4.9-fold interindividual variability of OATP1B1 mRNA
expression level in the livers analyzed, which was not associated with -11187G>A 
polymorphism. Accordingly, the -11187G>A polymorphism did not alter the SLCO1B1
gene promoter activity in luciferase assays. On the other hand, OATP1B1 mRNA
levels showed a significant correlation with HNF1alpha mRNA levels (r=0.83,
P<0.0001). This correlation was consistent with the results of luciferase assays 
and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showing functional interaction between
HNF1alpha and SLCO1B1 gene promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that HNF1alpha is an essential regulator of
OATP1B1 mRNA expression and thus the level of HNF1alpha expression is one of the 
major determinants of interindividual variability in OATP1B1 mRNA expression.

PMID: 17932728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Endocr Dev. 2007;12:33-45.

Distinct roles of HNF1beta, HNF1alpha, and HNF4alpha in regulating pancreas
development, beta-cell function and growth.

Maestro MA(1), Cardalda C, Boj SF, Luco RF, Servitja JM, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Programming of Beta Cells Laboratory, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Endocrinology, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.

Mutations in the genes encoding transcriptional regulators HNF1beta (TCF2),
HNF1alpha (TCF1), and HNF4alpha cause autosomal dominant diabetes (also known as 
maturity-onset diabetes of the young). Herein, we review what we have learnt
during recent years concerning the functions of these regulators in the
developing and adult pancreas. Mouse studies have revealed that HNF1beta is a
critical regulator of a transcriptional network that controls the specification, 
growth, and differentiation of the embryonic pancreas. HNF1beta mutations in
humans accordingly often cause pancreas hypoplasia. By contrast, HNF1alpha and
HNF4alpha have been shown to regulate the function of differentiated beta-cells. 
HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha mutations in patients thus cause decreased
glucose-induced insulin secretion that leads to a progressive form of diabetes.
HNF4alpha mutations paradoxically also cause in utero and neonatal
hyperinsulinism, which later evolves to decreased glucose-induced secretion.
Recent studies show that Hnf4alpha deficiency in mice causes not only abnormal
insulin secretion, but also an impairment of the expansion of beta-cell mass that
normally occurs during pregnancy. In line with this finding, we present data that
Hnf1alpha-/- beta-cells expressing SV40 large T antigen show a severe impairment 
of proliferation and failure to form tumours. Collectively, these findings
implicate HNF1beta as a regulator of pancreas organogenesis and differentiation, 
whereas HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha primarily regulate both growth and function of
islet beta-cells.

PMID: 17923767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2007 Nov;9 Suppl 2:40-5.

The HNF-1alpha-SNARE connection.

Yamagata K(1), Nammo T, Sato Y, Saisho K, Shoda H, Fukui K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Suita, Osaka, Japan. kazu@imed.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of type 2
diabetes mellitus that is characterized by impairment of glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion from pancreatic beta-cells. We previously reported that
heterozygous mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha gene cause a
form of MODY (MODY3). We have subsequently found that collectrin, a recently
cloned kidney-specific gene of unknown function, is a novel target of HNF-1alpha 
in pancreatic beta-cells. In addition, we have demonstrated that collectrin forms
a complex with the soluble N-ethylmaleimide-sensitive factor attachment protein
receptor (SNARE) complex by direct interaction with snapin, a protein that is
thought to be involved in neurotransmission by binding to synaptosomal-associated
protein, 25 KD (SNAP25). Collectrin favours the formation of SNARE complexes and 
controls insulin exocytosis.

PMID: 17919177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Pol J Vet Sci. 2007;10(2):123-6.

Possible implications of redox-sensitive tumour cell transformation; lessons from
cell culture studies.

Orzechowski A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw
Agricultural University, Nowoursynowska 159, 02-776 Warsaw, Poland.
arkadiusz-orzechowski@sggw.pl

It is generally accepted that chronic inflammatory disease, either local or
generalized, is associated with higher incidence of cancer. Since inflammation is
often accompanied by oxidative stress the latter was indicated as the foundation 
for progressive mutations leading to tumor development (proliferation, invasion, 
metastasis). Even though, it is very hard to demonstrate by in vitro studies the 
causal relationship between oxidative stress and cell transformations. From our
studies it is clear that cells are more likely to stop divisions and they commit 
suicide by apoptosis. During last decade, a novel view on the origin of cancer
emerged. The so called cancer stem cells (CSC) were found that form the
side-population of stem cells (SC) and they are believed to initiate cancer. Are 
the SC ancestors for CSC? Do SC transform into CSC? These and other questions
remain unanswered. We hypothesize that SC might undergo transformation into CSC
during prolonged oxidative stress. We claim that several changes in cell
biochemistry has to occur to start the molecular modifications leading to
neoplasma. These include either hypoxia-promoted apoptosis signal inducing kinase
1 (ASK-1), hypoxia inducing factor 1 alpha (HIF-1alpha) and glycolysis, or
normoxia-promoted activating protein-1 (AP-1) or hyperoxia-induced nuclear factor
kappa B (NF-kappaB). Next, harsh microenvironment and heterogenous extracellular 
matrix (ECM) induced by oxidative stress accelerate the selection of clones of
cells resistant to apoptogenic signal. HIF-1alpha, protein crucial for
transcriptional activation of protooncogene met leads to the overexpression of
c-Met receptor that in turn sensitizes cells to hepatocyte growth factor/scatter 
factor (HGF/SF) mitogen. Finally, both impaired function of mitochondria and
hypoxia elevate fibrin protein level and amplify hemostasis as disseminated
intracapillary coagulation (DIC). In any case, it is very interesting and remains
to be answered whether imbalance in prooxidant-antioxidant homeostasis has causal
relationship with transformation of SC to CSC.

PMID: 17882938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Diabetes Care. 2007 Dec;30(12):3091-2. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

GAD antibody in multiplex diabetic pedigrees of Chinese.

Chen T(1), Ren Y, Long Y, Zhang X, Yu H, Tian H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, West China Hospital of Sichuan University,
Sichuan, China

PMID: 17878243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Oncogene. 2008 Mar 6;27(11):1520-6. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

Coiled-coil domain containing 85B suppresses the beta-catenin activity in a
p53-dependent manner.

Iwai A(1), Hijikata M, Hishiki T, Isono O, Chiba T, Shimotohno K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of Medicine, Kyoto
University, Kyoto, Japan.

Aberrant accumulation of beta-catenin is closely related to carcinogenesis.
Mutations in the p53 gene are reported to induce the aberrant accumulation of
beta-catenin in the absence of dysfunction in the glycogen synthase kinase 3beta 
(GSK3beta)-mediated degradation pathway, but the mechanism remains incompletely
understood. Here, we show that human coiled-coil domain containing 85B (CCDC85B) 
is induced by p53 and regulates beta-catenin activity via interaction with the
T-cell factor 4 in the nucleus. Moreover, CCDC85B enhances the degradation of
beta-catenin and suppresses tumor cell growth. In conclusion, we revealed that
CCDC85B-induced degradation of beta-catenin is independent of GSK3beta and other 
p53-inducible products, Siah-1L, suggesting that CCDC85B constitutes the one of
the frameworks of p53-induced multiple regulatory pathways for beta-catenin
activity.

PMID: 17873903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Pharmacol. 2007 Dec;72(6):1619-25. Epub 2007 Sep 13.

Regulation of tissue-specific expression of the human and mouse urate transporter
1 gene by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha/beta and DNA methylation.

Kikuchi R(1), Kusuhara H, Hattori N, Kim I, Shiota K, Gonzalez FJ, Sugiyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacokinetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Expression of Urate transporter 1 (URAT1/SLC22A12) is restricted to the proximal 
tubules in the kidney, where it is responsible for the tubular reabsorption of
urate. To elucidate the mechanism underlying its tissue-specific expression, the 
transcriptional regulation of the hURAT1 and mUrat1 genes was investigated.
Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1alpha) and HNF1beta positively regulate
minimal promoter activity of the URAT1 gene as shown by reporter gene assays.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed binding of HNF1alpha and/or
HNF1beta to the HNF1 motif in the hURAT1 promoter. Furthermore, the mRNA
expression of Urat1 is reduced in the kidneys of Hnf1alpha-null mice compared
with wild-type mice, confirming the indispensable role of HNF1alpha in the
constitutive expression of URAT1 genes. It was also shown that the proximal
promoter region of mUrat1 was hypermethylated in the liver and kidney medulla,
whereas this region was relatively hypomethylated in the kidney cortex. These
methylation profiles are in a good agreement with the proximal tubule-restricted 
expression of mUrat1 in the kidney cortex. Taken together, these results strongly
suggest that tissue-specific expression of the URAT1 genes is coordinately
regulated by the transcriptional activation by HNF1alpha/HNF1beta heterodimer and
repression by DNA methylation.

PMID: 17855651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Diabetologia. 2007 Nov;50(11):2313-7. Epub 2007 Sep 8.

Partial and whole gene deletion mutations of the GCK and HNF1A genes in
maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Ellard S(1), Thomas K, Edghill EL, Owens M, Ambye L, Cropper J, Little J,
Strachan M, Stride A, Ersoy B, Eiberg H, Pedersen O, Shepherd MH, Hansen T,
Harries LW, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Science and Clinical Medicine, Peninsula Medical
School, Exeter, UK. Sian.Ellard@rdeft.nhs.uk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Heterozygous mutations of glucokinase (GCK) and hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1A; also known as hepatic transcription factor 1
[TCF1]) genes are the most common cause of MODY. Genomic deletions of the HNF1B
(also known as TCF2) gene have recently been shown to account for one third of
mutations causing renal cysts and diabetes syndrome. We investigated the
prevalence of partial and whole gene deletions in UK patients meeting clinical
criteria for GCK or HNF-1alpha/-4alpha MODY and in whom no mutation had been
identified by sequence analysis.
METHODS: A multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) assay was
developed using synthetic oligonucleotide probes for 30 exons of the GCK, HNF1A
and HNF4A genes.
RESULTS: Partial or whole gene deletions were identified in 1/29 (3.5%) probands 
using the GCK MLPA assay and 4/60 (6.7%) of probands using the HNF1A/-4A MLPA
assay. Four different deletions were detected: GCK exon 2, HNF1A exon 1, HNF1A
exons 2 to 10 and HNF1A exons 1 to 10. An additional Danish pedigree with
evidence of linkage to HNF1A had a deletion of exons 2 to 10. Testing other
family members confirmed co-segregation of the deletion mutations with diabetes
in the pedigrees.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Large deletions encompassing whole exons can cause
GCK or HNF-1alpha MODY and will not be detected by sequencing. Gene dosage
assays, such as MLPA, are a useful adjunct to sequence analysis when a diagnosis 
of MODY is strongly suspected.

PMID: 17828387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Nov;27(21):7365-80. Epub 2007 Sep 4.

An intronic locus control region plays an essential role in the establishment of 
an autonomous hepatic chromatin domain for the human vitamin D-binding protein
gene.

Hiroki T(1), Liebhaber SA, Cooke NE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Boulevard,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The human vitamin D-binding protein (hDBP) gene exists in a cluster of four
liver-expressed genes. A minimal hDBP transgene, containing a defined set of
liver-specific DNase I hypersensitive sites (HSs), is robustly expressed in mouse
liver in a copy-number-dependent manner. Here we evaluate these HSs for function.
Deletion of HSI, located 5' to the promoter (kb -2.1) had no significant effect
on hDBP expression. In contrast, deletion of HSIV and HSV from intron 1 repressed
hDBP expression and eliminated copy number dependency without a loss of liver
specificity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed peaks of histone H3 
and H4 acetylation coincident with HSIV in the intact hDBP locus. This region
contains a conserved array of binding sites for the liver-enriched transcription 
factor C/EBP. In vitro studies revealed selective binding of C/EBPalpha to HSIV. 
In vivo occupancy of C/EBPalpha at HSIV was demonstrated in hepatic chromatin,
and depletion of C/EBPalpha in a hepatic cell line decreased hDBP expression. A
nonredundant role for C/EBPalpha was confirmed in vivo by demonstrating a
reduction of hDBP expression in C/EBPalpha-null mice. Parallel studies revealed
in vivo occupancy of the liver-enriched factor HNF1alpha at HSIII (at kb 0.13)
within the hDBP promoter. These data demonstrate a critical role for elements
within intron 1 in the establishment of an autonomous and productive hDBP
chromatin locus and suggest that this function is dependent upon C/EBPalpha.
Cooperative interactions between these intronic complexes and liver-restricted
complexes within the target promoter are likely to underlie the consistency and
liver specificity of the hDBP activation.

PMCID: PMC2169047
PMID: 17785430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Sep 11;104(37):14771-6. Epub 2007 Sep 4.

Distinct pathways of genomic progression to benign and malignant tumors of the
liver.

Tward AD(1), Jones KD, Yant S, Cheung ST, Fan ST, Chen X, Kay MA, Wang R, Bishop 
JM.

Author information: 
(1)G. W. Hooper Foundation and Department of Microbiology and Immunology,
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. atward@partners.org

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2008 May;48(5):884-6.

We used several of the genetic lesions commonly associated with human liver
tumors to reconstruct genetic progression to hepatocellular carcinoma and adenoma
in mouse models. We initiated tumorigenesis with a transgene of the protooncogene
MET or by hydrodynamic transfection of MET in combination with other genes into
the livers of adult animals. Hepatocellular carcinoma in both instances arose
from cooperation between MET and constitutively active versions of beta-catenin. 
In contrast, adenomas were produced by cooperation between MET and defective
signaling through the transcription factor HNF1alpha. Prompted by these findings,
we uncovered a coincidence between activation of the protein-tyrosine kinase
encoded by MET and activating mutations of beta-catenin in a subset of human
hepatocellular carcinomas. Inactivation of MET transgenes led to regression of
hepatocellular carcinomas despite the persistence of activated beta-catenin. The 
tumors eventually recurred in the absence of MET expression, however, presumably 
after the occurrence of one or more events that cooperated with activated
beta-catenin in lieu of MET. These results offer insight into hepatic
tumorigenesis, provide mouse models that should be useful in the further study of
hepatic tumorigenesis and for preclinical testing, and identify a subset of human
hepatocellular carcinomas that may be susceptible to combination therapy directed
against Met and the Wnt signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC1964540
PMID: 17785413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Shock. 2008 Apr;29(4):490-6.

IL-6 modulates sepsis-induced decreases in transcription of hepatic organic anion
and bile acid transporters.

Andrejko KM(1), Raj NR, Kim PK, Cereda M, Deutschman CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-4283, USA.

Sepsis, a lethal inflammatory syndrome, is characterized by organ system
dysfunction. In the liver, we have observed decreased expression of genes
encoding proteins modulating key processes. These include organic anion and bile 
acid transport. We hypothesized that the inflammatory mediator IL-6 modulates
altered expression of several key hepatic genes in sepsis via induction of the
intracellular transcription factor signal transducer and activator of
transcription (Stat) 3. Sepsis was induced in IL-6 +/+ and IL-6 -/- mice, and
expression of the liver-restricted genes encoding the sodium-taurocholate
cotransporter (Ntcp), the multidrug resistant protein (MRP) 2 and the organic
anion transporter protein (OATP), was determined. As demonstrated previously,
cecal ligation and puncture decreases expression of Ntcp, MRP-2, and OATP in IL-6
+/+ mice. Transcription elongation analysis demonstrated that altered expression 
resulted from decreased transcription. These changes were not observed in IL-6
-/- animals. Cecal ligation and puncture increased the DNA binding activity of
Stat-3 in IL-6 +/+ but not IL-6 -/- mice. Because the promoters of Ntcp, MRP-2,
and OATP do not contain Stat-3 binding sites, we postulated that altered Ntcp,
MRP-2, and OATP expression resulted from activation of hepatocyte nuclear factor 
(HNF) 1alpha, which is IL-6 dependent. Cecal ligation and puncture decreased
HNF-1alpha expression and DNA binding activity in IL-6 +/+ but not IL-6 -/- mice.
Recombinant human IL-6 restored the sepsis-induced decrease in Ntcp, MRP-2, OATP,
and HNF-1alpha expression in IL-6 -/- mice. We conclude that sepsis decreases the
expression of three key hepatic genes via a transcriptional mechanism that is
IL-6, Stat-3, and HNF-1alpha dependent.

PMCID: PMC2667679
PMID: 17724432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Stem Cells. 2007 Nov;25(11):2855-63. Epub 2007 Aug 16.

Isolation of a bone marrow-derived stem cell line with high proliferation
potential and its application for preventing acute fatal liver failure.

Miyazaki M(1), Hardjo M, Masaka T, Tomiyama K, Mahmut N, Medina RJ, Niida A,
Sonegawa H, Du G, Yong R, Takaishi M, Sakaguchi M, Huh NH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine,
Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Schikata-cho, Okayama 700-8558,
Japan.

Transplantation of hepatocytes or hepatocyte-like cells of extrahepatic origin is
a promising strategy for treatment of acute and chronic liver failure. We
examined possible utility of hepatocyte-like cells induced from bone marrow cells
for such a purpose. Clonal cell lines were established from the bone marrow of
two different rat strains. One of these cell lines, rBM25/S3 cells, grew rapidly 
(doubling time, approximately 24 hours) without any appreciable changes in cell
properties for at least 300 population doubling levels over a period of 300 days,
keeping normal diploid karyotype. The cells expressed CD29, CD44, CD49b, CD90,
vimentin, and fibronectin but not CD45, indicating that they are of mesenchymal
cell origin. When plated on Matrigel with hepatocyte growth factor and fibroblast
growth factor-4, the cells efficiently differentiated into hepatocyte-like cells 
that expressed albumin, cytochrome P450 (CYP) 1A1, CYP1A2, glucose 6-phosphatase,
tryptophane-2,3-dioxygenase, tyrosine aminotransferase, hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)1 alpha, and HNF4alpha. Intrasplenic transplantation of the differentiated
cells prevented fatal liver failure in 90%-hepatectomized rats. In conclusion, a 
clonal stem cell line derived from adult rat bone marrow could differentiate into
hepatocyte-like cells, and transplantation of the differentiated cells could
prevent fatal liver failure in 90%-hepatectomized rats. The present results
indicate a promising strategy for treating human fatal liver diseases.

PMID: 17702985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Hepatology. 2007 Sep;46(3):740-8.

Hepatocellular adenoma subtype classification using molecular markers and
immunohistochemistry.

Bioulac-Sage P(1), Rebouissou S, Thomas C, Blanc JF, Saric J, Sa Cunha A, Rullier
A, Cubel G, Couchy G, Imbeaud S, Balabaud C, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, CHU Bordeaux, France.

Hepatocellular adenomas (HCA) with activated beta-catenin present a high risk of 
malignant transformation. To permit robust routine diagnosis to allow for HCA
subtype classification, we searched new useful markers. We analyzed the
expression of candidate genes by quantitative reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction QRT-PCR followed by immunohistochemistry to validate their
specificity and sensitivity according to hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha
(HNF1alpha) and beta-catenin mutations as well as inflammatory phenotype.
Quantitative RT-PCR showed that FABP1 (liver fatty acid binding protein) and
UGT2B7 were downregulated in HNF1alpha-inactivated HCA (P <or= 0.0002); GLUL
(glutamine synthetase) and GPR49 overexpression were associated with
beta-catenin-activating mutations (P <or= 0.0005), and SAA2 (serum amyloid A2)
and CRP (C-reactive protein) were upregulated in inflammatory HCA (P = 0.0001).
Immunohistochemistry validation confirmed that the absence of liver-fatty acid
binding protein (L-FABP) expression rightly indicated HNF1alpha mutation (100%
sensitivity and specificity), the combination of glutamine synthetase
overexpression and nuclear beta-catenin staining were excellent predictors of
beta-catenin-activating mutation (85% sensitivity, 100% specificity), and SAA
hepatocytic staining was ideal to classify inflammatory HCA (91% sensitivity and 
specificity). Finally, a series of 93 HCA was unambiguously classified using our 
4 validated immunohistochemical markers. Importantly, new associations were
revealed for inflammatory HCA defined by SAA staining with frequent hemorrhages
(P = 0.003), telangiectatic phenotype (P < 0.001), high body mass index, and
alcohol intake (P <or= 0.04). Previously described associations were confirmed
and in particular the significant association between beta-catenin-activated HCA 
and hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) at diagnosis or during follow-up (P <
10(-5)).CONCLUSION: We refined HCA classification and its phenotypic
correlations, providing a routine test to classify hepatocellular adenomas using 
simple and robust immunohistochemistry.

PMID: 17663417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Sep;293(3):G615-22. Epub 2007 Jul
12.

Intestinal capacity to digest and absorb carbohydrates is maintained in a rat
model of cholestasis.

Los EL(1), Wolters H, Stellaard F, Kuipers F, Verkade HJ, Rings EH.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Gastroenterology/Research Laboratory of Pediatrics, University
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, 9700 RB Groningen, The
Netherlands.

Cholestasis is associated with systemic accumulation of bile salts and with
deficiency of bile in the intestinal lumen. During the past years bile salts have
been identified as signaling molecules that regulate lipid, glucose, and energy
metabolism. Bile salts have also been shown to activate signaling routes leading 
to proliferation, apoptosis, or differentiation. It is unclear, however, whether 
cholestasis affects the constitution and absorptive capacity of the intestinal
epithelium in vivo. We studied small intestinal morphology, proliferation,
apoptosis, expression of intestine-specific genes, and carbohydrate absorption in
cholestatic (1 wk bile duct ligation), bile-deficient (1 wk bile diversion), and 
control (sham) rats. Absorptive capacity was assessed by determination of plasma 
[(2)H]- and [(13)C]glucose concentrations after intraduodenal administration of
[(2)H]glucose and naturally enriched [(13)C]sucrose, respectively. Small
intestinal morphology, proliferation, apoptosis, and gene expression of
intestinal transcription factors (mRNA levels of Cdx-2, Gata-4, and Hnf-1alpha,
and Cdx-2 protein levels) were similar in cholestatic, bile-deficient, and
control rats. The (unlabeled) blood glucose response after intraduodenal
administration was delayed in cholestatic animals, but the absorption over 180
min was quantitatively similar between the groups. Plasma concentrations of
[(2)H]glucose and [(13)C]glucose peaked to similar extents in all groups within
7.5 and 30 min, respectively. Absorption of [(2)H]glucose and [(13)C]glucose in
plasma was similar in all groups. The present data indicate that neither
accumulation of bile salts in the body, nor their intestinal deficiency, two
characteristic features of cholestasis, affect rat small intestinal
proliferation, differentiation, apoptosis, or its capacity to digest and absorb
carbohydrates.

PMID: 17627970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Br J Haematol. 2007 Jul;138(2):231-44.

Molecular analysis of the human thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor gene 
promoter.

Garand M(1), Bastajian N, Nesheim ME, Boffa MB, Koschinsky ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Queen's University, Kingston, ON, Canada.

Thrombin-activatable fibrinolysis inhibitor (TAFI) is a carboxypeptidase B-like
pro-enzyme that, once activated, attenuates fibrinolysis. Little is presently
known of the factors that regulate expression of CPB2, the gene encoding TAFI.
This study identified 10 potential transcription factor binding sites (denoted
A-J) within the proximal promoter region of CPB2, spanning nucleotides -425 to
+21; two of these represent previously-described binding sites for CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein and glucocorticoid receptor. We identified additional
transcription factors that bind within the proximal CPB2 promoter, namely,
nuclear factor-Y (NF-Y) and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha).
Binding of NF-Y to the region between nucleotides -76 to -59 (Site B) is
important for basal CPB2 promoter activity; NF-Y may be a key factor for the
recruitment of the transcriptional machinery to the TAFI gene promoter.
HNF-1alpha binds at the interface between Sites C and B. Transient transfections 
of CPB2 promoter-reporter constructs showed that HNF-1alpha binding is essential 
for the activity of this promoter in HepG2 cells, indicating that HNF-1alpha is
involved in the liver-specific expression of CPB2.

PMID: 17593031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2007 Oct;67(4):538-46. Epub 2007 Jun 15.

Mutations in GCK and HNF-1alpha explain the majority of cases with clinical
diagnosis of MODY in Spain.

Estalella I(1), Rica I, Perez de Nanclares G, Bilbao JR, Vazquez JA, San Pedro
JI, Busturia MA, Castaño L; Spanish MODY Group.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Diabetes Research Group, Hospital de Cruces, Barakaldo,
Basque Country, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to group patients with MODY (maturity-onset 
diabetes of the young) according to the genetic alterations underlying the
disease and to investigate their clinical characteristics.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Molecular analysis of GCK (MODY2), HNF-1alpha (MODY3),
HNF-4alpha (MODY1) and HNF-1beta (MODY5) genes was performed by DNA sequencing in
95 unrelated index probands (47M/48F; mean age 9.9 +/- 5.2 years) with clinical
diagnosis of MODY. After classification into MODY subtypes according to the
genetic alterations, clinical characteristics were compared between the groups.
RESULTS: Seventy-six families were shown to carry mutations in GCK (34 of them
previously unreported), eight families presented HNF-1alpha mutations, and a
large genomic rearrangement in HNF-1beta was found in a family. No alteration was
found in HNF-4alpha. Thus, relative frequencies in the group studied were 80%
MODY2, 8.5% MODY3 and 1% MODY5. Comparison of clinical parameters according to
genetic status showed significant differences between MODY2 and MODY3 patients in
age at diagnosis (9.4 +/- 5.4 years vs. 12.7 +/- 4.6 years), diagnosis (impaired 
glucose tolerance vs. diabetes), diagnostic test used (OGTT vs. fasting glucose),
treatment (diet and exercise vs. insulin/oral antidiabetic agents) and birth
weight (2.96 +/- 0.44 kg vs. 3.40 +/- 0.67 kg).
CONCLUSION: Almost 90% of the MODY cases in the group studied are explained by
mutations in the major genes GCK (MODY2) and HNF-1alpha(MODY3), although
differences in the relative prevalence of each form could be partly due to
patient referral bias (paediatric vs. adult). In general, patients with MODY2
were diagnosed at an earlier age in life than MODY3 patients and had a milder
form of diabetes. Moreover, the majority of patients with MODY2 mutations were
treated with diet whereas half of MODY3 patients received pharmacological
treatment.

PMID: 17573900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. World J Gastroenterol. 2007 May 21;13(19):2649-54.

Genotype phenotype classification of hepatocellular adenoma.

Bioulac-Sage P, Blanc JF, Rebouissou S, Balabaud C, Zucman-Rossi J.

Studies that compare tumor genotype with phenotype have provided the basis of a
new histological/molecular classification of hepatocellular adenomas. Based on
two molecular criteria (presence of a TCF1/HNF1 alpha or beta-catenin mutation), 
and an additional histological criterion (presence or absence of an inflammatory 
infiltrate), subgroups of hepatocellular adenoma can be defined and distinguished
from focal nodular hyperplasia. Analysis of 96 hepatocellular adenomas performed 
by a French collaborative network showed that they can be divided into four broad
subgroups: the first one is defined by the presence of mutations in TCF1 gene
inactivating the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1 alpha); the second by the
presence of beta-catenin activating mutations; the category without mutations of 
HNF1 alpha or beta-catenin is further divided into 2 subgroups depending on the
presence or absence of inflammation. Therefore, the approach to the diagnosis of 
problematic benign hepatocytic nodules may be entering a new era directed by new 
molecular information. It is hoped that immunohistological tools will improve
significantly diagnosis of liver biopsy in our ability to distinguish
hepatocellular adenoma from focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH), and to delineate
clinically meaningful entities within each group to define the best clinical
management. The optimal care of patients with a liver nodule will benefit from
the recent knowledge coming from molecular biology and the combined expertise of 
hepatologists, pathologists, radiologists, and surgeons.

PMCID: PMC4147112
PMID: 17569132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 3;282(31):22638-50. Epub 2007 Jun 6.

The human mucin MUC4 is transcriptionally regulated by caudal-related homeobox,
hepatocyte nuclear factors, forkhead box A, and GATA endodermal transcription
factors in epithelial cancer cells.

Jonckheere N(1), Vincent A, Perrais M, Ducourouble MP, Male AK, Aubert JP, Pigny 
P, Carraway KL, Freund JN, Renes IB, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U560, Place de Verdun, Lille, F-59045, France.

The human gene MUC4 encodes a large transmembrane mucin that is developmentally
regulated and expressed along the undifferentiated pseudostratified epithelium,
as early as 6.5 weeks during fetal development. Immunohistochemical analysis of
Muc4 expression in developing mouse lung and gastrointestinal tract showed a
different spatio-temporal pattern of expression before and after
cytodifferentiation. The molecular mechanisms governing MUC4 expression during
development are, however, unknown. Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF), forkhead box
A (FOXA), GATA, and caudal-related homeobox transcription factors (TFs) are known
to control cell differentiation of gut endoderm derived-tissues during embryonic 
development. They also control the expression of cell- and tissue-specific genes 
and may thus control MUC4 expression. To test this hypothesis, we studied and
deciphered the molecular mechanisms responsible for MUC4 transcriptional
regulation by these TFs. Experiments using small interfering RNA, cell
co-transfection, and site-directed mutagenesis indicated that MUC4 is regulated
at the transcriptional level by CDX-1 and -2, HNF-1 alpha and -1 beta, FOXA1/A2, 
HNF-4 alpha and -4 gamma, and GATA-4, -5, and -6 factors in a cell-specific
manner. Binding of TFs was assessed by chromatin immunoprecipitation, and
gel-shift assays. Altogether, these results demonstrate that MUC4 is a target
gene of endodermal TFs and thus point out an important role for these TFs in
regulating MUC4 expression during epithelial differentiation during development, 
cancer, and repair.

PMID: 17553805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Cell Biochem. 2007 Aug 1;101(5):1109-24.

Cross-talk between Wnt signaling pathways in human mesenchymal stem cells leads
to functional antagonism during osteogenic differentiation.

Baksh D(1), Boland GM, Tuan RS.

Author information: 
(1)Department and Health and Human Services, Cartilage Biology and Orthopaedics
Branch, National Institute of Arthritis, and Musculoskeletal and Skin Diseases,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Wnt signaling is involved in developmental processes and in adult stem cell
homeostasis. This study analyzes the role(s) of key Wnt signaling mediators in
the maintenance and osteogenesis of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs). We focus
specifically on the involvement of low-density lipoprotein-related protein 5
(LRP5), T-cell factor 1 (TCF1), and Frizzled (Fz) receptors, in the presence or
absence of exogenous, prototypical canonical (Wnt3a), and non-canonical (Wnt5a)
Wnts. In undifferentiated MSCs, LRP5 and TCF1 mediate canonical Wnt signal
transduction, leading to increased proliferation, enhanced synergistically by
Wnt3a. However, LRP5 overexpression inhibits osteogenic differentiation, further 
suppressed by Wnt3a. Wnt5a does not affect cell proliferation but enhances
osteogenesis of MSCs. Interestingly, Wnt5a inhibits Wnt3a effects on MSCs, while 
Wnt3a suppresses Wnt5a-mediated enhancement of osteogenesis. Flow cytometry
revealed that LRP5 expression elicits differential changes in Fz receptor
profiles in undifferentiated versus osteogenic MSCs. Taken together, these
results suggest that Wnt signaling crosstalk and functional antagonism with the
LRP5 co-receptor are key signaling regulators of MSC maintenance and
differentiation.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17546602  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Hepatology. 2007 Jun;45(6):1478-88.

Glucocorticoid signaling synchronizes the liver circadian transcriptome.

Reddy AB(1), Maywood ES, Karp NA, King VM, Inoue Y, Gonzalez FJ, Lilley KS,
Kyriacou CP, Hastings MH.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Hills Road, Cambridge, Cabridgeshire, UK.
areddy@cantab.net

Circadian control of physiology is mediated by local, tissue-based clocks,
synchronized to each other and to solar time by signals from the suprachiasmatic 
nuclei (SCN), the master oscillator in the hypothalamus. These local clocks
coordinate the transcription of key pathways to establish tissue-specific daily
metabolic programs. How local transcriptomes are synchronized across the organism
and their relative contribution to circadian output remain unclear. In the
present study we showed that glucocorticoids alone are able to synchronize
expression of about 60% of the circadian transcriptome. We propose that
synchronization occurs directly by the action of glucocorticoids on a diverse
range of downstream targets and indirectly by regulating the core clock genes
mPer1, Bmal1, mCry1, and Dbp. We have identified the pivotal liver transcription 
factor, HNF4alpha, as a mediator of circadian and glucocorticoid-regulated
transcription, showing that it is a key conduit for downstream
targeting.CONCLUSION: We have demonstrated that by orchestrating transcriptional 
cascades, glucocorticoids are able to direct synchronization of a diverse range
of functionally important circadian genes.

PMID: 17538967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Eur J Endocrinol. 2007 Jun;156(6):617-21.

Regressive liver adenomatosis following androgenic progestin therapy withdrawal: 
a case report with a 10-year follow-up and a molecular analysis.

Svrcek M(1), Jeannot E, Arrivé L, Poupon R, Fromont G, Fléjou JF, Zucman-Rossi J,
Bouchard P, Wendum D.

Author information: 
(1)Services d'Anatomie et Cytologie Pathologiques, AP-HP, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, 
F-75571 Paris Cedex 12, France. magali.svrcek@sat.aphp.fr

OBJECTIVE: The relationship between sex hormones and hepatocellular adenoma
development is well established. On the contrary, their contribution to liver
adenomatosis (LA) development is still a debatable issue. Recently, inactivating 
mutations of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) transcription factor
gene or activating mutations of beta-catenin have been demonstrated in some liver
adenomas, and a possible link between HNF-1alpha gene mutations and oral
contraceptives has been suggested. Only two cases of regressive LA after hormone 
withdrawal therapy have been described so far but without any information
concerning the molecular characteristics of the tumours.
CASE: We report the case of a 48-year-old woman with LA, who had been taking an
androgenic progestin therapy (lynestrenol) for 10 years. A major regression in
the number and size of the lesions was observed 6 months after complete
withdrawal of this therapy.
METHODS: Hepatocellular adenomas were studied by immunohistochemistry for
oestrogen, progesterone and androgen receptors (ER, PR and AR respectively), and 
for beta-catenin. Direct sequencing of the HNF-1alpha gene was also performed.
RESULTS: For the first time, we demonstrate significant immunostaining of AR in
the hepatocellular adenomas. This staining was negative in the partially
regressive adenoma. Immunostainings for ER and PR were negative. HNF-1alpha and
the beta-catenin pathways were not involved in tumour pathogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our case suggests a role of androgenic progestin therapy in some
cases of LA. Hormone therapy withdrawal may induce a significant regression in
lesions.

PMID: 17535860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Nat Genet. 2007 Jun;39(6):730-2. Epub 2007 May 21.

Tissue-specific transcriptional regulation has diverged significantly between
human and mouse.

Odom DT(1), Dowell RD, Jacobsen ES, Gordon W, Danford TW, MacIsaac KD, Rolfe PA, 
Conboy CM, Gifford DK, Fraenkel E.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA.

We demonstrate that the binding sites for highly conserved transcription factors 
vary extensively between human and mouse. We mapped the binding of four
tissue-specific transcription factors (FOXA2, HNF1A, HNF4A and HNF6) to 4,000
orthologous gene pairs in hepatocytes purified from human and mouse livers.
Despite the conserved function of these factors, from 41% to 89% of their binding
events seem to be species specific. When the same protein binds the promoters of 
orthologous genes, approximately two-thirds of the binding sites do not align.

PMCID: PMC3797512
PMID: 17529977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2007 Jul;293(1):C401-10. Epub 2007 May 2.

HNF-1alpha plays an important role in IL-6-induced expression of the human
angiotensinogen gene.

Jain S(1), Li Y, Patil S, Kumar A.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Dept., New York Medical College, Valhalla, NY 10595, USA.
sudhir_jain@nymc.edu

Angiotensinogen (AGT) is the precursor of one of the most important vasoactive
hormone angiotensin II and this gene locus is associated with human essential
hypertension. AGT is an acute phase protein and its gene expression is regulated 
by IL-6. Previous studies have identified three potential STAT-3 binding sites
(APREs) located between -160 and -280 of the hAGT gene promoter but only APRE-1
(located between -271 and -279) was shown to be a bonafide enhancer for
IL-6-induced promoter activity. We show here that APRE-2, located between -236
and -247, is indeed an HNF-1alpha-binding site and plays an important role in
basal and IL-6 induced promoter activity of this gene. Our chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay shows that HNF-1alpha binds to this region of
the hAGT gene promoter and its recruitment is increased in the presence of IL-6
in Hep3B cells. We also show that the promoter activity of a deletion construct
containing only 223 bp of the hAGT gene promoter (that contains only APRE-3) is
increased after IL-6 treatment. Our ChIP assay shows that IL-6 treatment recruits
STAT-3 to APRE-3 and suggests that this is also an IL6 responsive element. We
have previously shown that GR binds to the proximal promoter of the hAGT gene.
Since GR physically interacts with STAT-3, we propose that transcription factors 
GR, STAT-3, and HNF-1alpha that bind to the nucleotide sequence located between
-160 and -280 of the hAGT gene promoter are responsible for IL-6 induced promoter
activity of this gene.

PMID: 17475670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Biomed Environ Sci. 2007 Feb;20(1):41-6.

Association of a common haplotype of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha with type 2
diabetes in Chinese population.

Wang CR(1), Hu C, Zhang R, Fang QC, Ma XJ, Jia WP, Xiang KS.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Diabetes Institute, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai, China.
wcr601@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the association of variants of hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene with type 2 diabetes in Chinese population.
METHODS: In 152 unrelated type 2 diabetes patients and 93 unrelated controls,
eleven single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified and genotyped.
Statistical analyses were performed to investigate whether these SNPs were
associated with diabetes status in our samples.
RESULTS: In the individual SNP study, no SNP differed significantly in frequency 
between type 2 diabetes patients and controls. In the haplotype analysis, two
haplotype blocks were identified. In haplotype block 1, no evidence was found
between common HNF-1alpha haplotypes and type 2 diabetes. However, in haplotype
block 2, a common haplotype GCGC formed by four tagging SNPs (tSNPs) was found to
be associated with decreased risk of type 2 diabetes (odds ratio [OR] 0.6011, 95%
confidence interval [CI] 0.4138-0.8732, P = 0.0073, empirical P = 0.0511,
permutation test). A similar trend was also observed in the diplotype analysis,
indicating that the increasing copy number of the haplotype GCGC was associated
with the decreased frequency of diabetes (P = 0.0193).
CONCLUSION: The results of this study provide evidence that the haplotype of
HNF-1alpha decreases the risk of type 2 diabetes in Chinese individuals.

PMID: 17458140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Pharmacogenomics J. 2008 Apr;8(2):152-61. Epub 2007 Apr 17.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha is associated with UGT1A1, UGT1A9 and UGT2B7
mRNA expression in human liver.

Ramírez J(1), Mirkov S, Zhang W, Chen P, Das S, Liu W, Ratain MJ, Innocenti F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Experimental evidence suggests HNF1alpha regulates UGT expression. This study
investigates (1) whether the variability in HNF1alpha expression is associated
with the variability in UGT1A1, UGT1A9 and UGT2B7 expression in human livers and 
(2) the functionality of 12 HNF1alpha variants using mRNA expression as
phenotype. Controlling for known UGT variation in cis-acting elements known to
affect UGT expression, we demonstrate that a combination of HNF1alpha mRNA levels
and UGT genotype predicts variance in UGT expression to a higher extent than UGT 
genotype alone. None of the HNF1alpha polymorphisms studied, however, seem to
have an effect on HNF1alpha, UGT1A1, UGT1A9 and UGT2B7 expression, ruling out
their functional role. Our data provide evidence for HNF1alpha being a
determinant of UGT1A1, UGT1A9 and UGT2B7 mRNA expression. However, the amount of 
UGT intergenotype variability explained by HNF1alpha expression appears to be
modest, and further studies should investigate the role of multiple transcription
factors.

PMID: 17440429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Jul;92(7):2462-7. Epub 2007 Apr 17.

Etiology of early-onset type 2 diabetes in Indians: islet autoimmunity and
mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha and mitochondrial gene.

Sahu RP(1), Aggarwal A, Zaidi G, Shah A, Modi K, Kongara S, Aggarwal S, Talwar S,
Chu S, Bhatia V, Bhatia E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Sanjay Gandhi Postgraduate Institute of Medical
Sciences, Lucknow 226 014, India.

CONTEXT: Indians are at high risk of developing type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
at an early age, despite their lower body mass index. Studies on the etiology of 
patients presenting as early-onset T2DM in this racial group are not available.
OBJECTIVE: The objective was to delineate the clinical features in young Indian
patients with T2DM and to determine the role of mutations in the hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) gene [MODY3 (maturity-onset diabetes of the
young, type 3)], mitochondrial A3243G mutation, and islet autoimmunity in its
etiology.
DESIGN: This was an observational cohort study.
SETTING: The setting was an outpatient diabetes clinic in a teaching hospital.
PATIENTS: Ninety-six consecutive young patients with T2DM (onset, <or=30 yr) were
included in the study.
INTERVENTIONS: Glutamic acid decarboxylase and insulinoma antigen 2 antibodies,
mitochondrial A3243G mutation, and the common HNF1alpha mutation P291fsinsC were 
measured in all patients. The entire HNF1alpha gene was studied for mutations in 
32 subjects with onset less than 25 yr or with normal weight. The common
HNF1alpha A98V polymorphism was studied in 91 patients.
RESULTS: The patients were clinically heterogeneous, with 42% having a normal
body mass index. Glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies were present in three
(3%) subjects and mitochondrial A3243G mutation in one (1%) subject. The
P291fsinsC mutation was not detected in any patient. A MODY3 mutation (R200W) was
detected in one patient (3%). In this family, diabetes cosegregated with the
R200W mutation in the proband and his youngest brother but not in three paternal 
uncles. The Val 98 allele was associated with T2DM (allele frequency, 0.14 vs.
0.03 in controls; odds ratio, 5.2; P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: Despite a significant proportion of young Indian patients with T2DM 
having normal weight, islet autoimmunity, A3243G mitochondrial, and HNF1alpha
gene mutations were infrequent.

PMID: 17440016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. PLoS Med. 2007 Apr;4(4):e148.

Type 2 diabetes: hypoinsulinism, hyperinsulinism, or both?

Glaser B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Metabolism Service, Internal Medicine Department,
Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. beng@cc.huji.ac.il

Comment on
    PLoS Med. 2007 Apr;4(4):e118.

PMCID: PMC1831715
PMID: 17407388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. PLoS Med. 2007 Apr;4(4):e118.

Macrosomia and hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia in patients with heterozygous
mutations in the HNF4A gene.

Pearson ER(1), Boj SF, Steele AM, Barrett T, Stals K, Shield JP, Ellard S, Ferrer
J, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    PLoS Med. 2007 Apr;4(4):e148.
    Diabetologia. 2007 Dec;50(12):2600-1.

BACKGROUND: Macrosomia is associated with considerable neonatal and maternal
morbidity. Factors that predict macrosomia are poorly understood. The increased
rate of macrosomia in the offspring of pregnant women with diabetes and in
congenital hyperinsulinaemia is mediated by increased foetal insulin secretion.
We assessed the in utero and neonatal role of two key regulators of pancreatic
insulin secretion by studying birthweight and the incidence of neonatal
hypoglycaemia in patients with heterozygous mutations in the maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) genes HNF4A (encoding HNF-4alpha) and HNF1A/TCF1
(encoding HNF-1alpha), and the effect of pancreatic deletion of Hnf4a on foetal
and neonatal insulin secretion in mice.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We examined birthweight and hypoglycaemia in 108 patients
from families with diabetes due to HNF4A mutations, and 134 patients from
families with HNF1A mutations. Birthweight was increased by a median of 790 g in 
HNF4A-mutation carriers compared to non-mutation family members (p < 0.001); 56% 
(30/54) of HNF4A-mutation carriers were macrosomic compared with 13% (7/54) of
non-mutation family members (p < 0.001). Transient hypoglycaemia was reported in 
8/54 infants with heterozygous HNF4A mutations, but was reported in none of 54
non-mutation carriers (p = 0.003). There was documented hyperinsulinaemia in
three cases. Birthweight and prevalence of neonatal hypoglycaemia were not
increased in HNF1A-mutation carriers. Mice with pancreatic beta-cell deletion of 
Hnf4a had hyperinsulinaemia in utero and hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia at
birth.
CONCLUSIONS: HNF4A mutations are associated with a considerable increase in
birthweight and macrosomia, and are a novel cause of neonatal hypoglycaemia. This
study establishes a key role for HNF4A in determining foetal birthweight, and
uncovers an unanticipated feature of the natural history of HNF4A-deficient
diabetes, with hyperinsulinaemia at birth evolving to decreased insulin secretion
and diabetes later in life.

PMCID: PMC1845156
PMID: 17407387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2007 Apr;24(2):157-61.

[The genetic and clinical characteristics of transcription factor 1 gene
mutations in Chinese diabetes].

[Article in Chinese]

Yang Z(1), Wu SH, Zheng TS, Wang SJ, Lu HJ, Xiang KS.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Diabetes Institute, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Shanghai No.6 People Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, 200233 PR 
China. yangzhen1020@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the genetic and clinical features of mutations and
sequence variations of the transcription factor 1 gene (TCF1, HNF-1A) in Chinese 
with familial early-onset and/or multiplex diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: All ten exons of the TCF1 gene were screened, including exon and intron 
junctions, by direct sequencing method in 341 unrelated Chinese subjects,
including 80 healthy controls and 261 probands of early-onset and/or multiplex
diabetes pedigrees.
RESULTS: Five mutations were found in all. Four of the 5 different TCF1 mutations
were newly identified novel mutations(T82M, Q130H, G253G,
P353fsdelACGGGCCTGGAGC), mean body mass index of mutation carriers was 21.9 kg/m 
(2), and insulin secretion was impaired in the mutation carriers. In this study, 
the maturity-onset diabetes of the young type III (MODY3) only accounted for 3%
of Chinese early-onset diabetes. Moreover, eleven substitutions were identified
in 261 probands. Of them, three variants IVS1-8 (G-->A), IVS1 -128 (T-->G ) and
IVS2+21 (G-->A) were not observed in 80 healthy controls and one of them IVS1-8
(G-->A) was not reported previously and the two promoter variants co-segregated
with diabetes.
CONCLUSION: TCF1 gene is not a common cause of early-onset and/or multiplex
diabetes among Chinese patients.

PMID: 17407072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Biol Chem. 2007 May 11;282(19):14437-46. Epub 2007 Mar 22.

HNF1alpha inactivation promotes lipogenesis in human hepatocellular adenoma
independently of SREBP-1 and carbohydrate-response element-binding protein
(ChREBP) activation.

Rebouissou S(1), Imbeaud S, Balabaud C, Boulanger V, Bertrand-Michel J, Tercé F, 
Auffray C, Bioulac-Sage P, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U674, Génomique fonctionnelle des tumeurs solides, Paris Cedex,
France.

Biallelic inactivating mutations of the transcription factor 1 gene (TCF1),
encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) were identified in 50% of
hepatocellular adenomas (HCA) phenotypically characterized by a striking
steatosis. To understand the molecular basis of this aberrant lipid storage, we
performed a microarray transcriptome analysis validated by quantitative reverse
transcription-PCR, Western blotting, and lipid profiling. In mutated HCA, we
showed a repression of gluconeogenesis coordinated with an activation of
glycolysis, citrate shuttle, and fatty acid synthesis predicting elevated rates
of lipogenesis. Moreover, the strong down-regulation of liver fatty acid-binding 
protein suggests that impaired fatty acid trafficking may also contribute to the 
fatty phenotype. In addition, transcriptional profile analysis of the observed
deregulated genes in non-HNF1alpha-mutated HCA as well as in non-tumor livers
allowed us to define a specific signature of the HNF1alpha-mutated HCA. In these 
tumors, lipid composition was dramatically modified according to the
transcriptional deregulations identified in the fatty acid synthetic pathway.
Surprisingly, lipogenesis activation did not operate through sterol regulatory
element-binding protein-1 (SREBP-1) and carbohydrate-response element-binding
protein (ChREBP) that were repressed. We conclude that steatosis in
HNF1alpha-mutated HCA results mainly from an aberrant promotion of lipogenesis
that is linked to HNF1alpha inactivation and that is independent of both SREBP-1 
and ChREBP activation. Finally, our findings have potential clinical implications
since lipogenesis can be efficiently inhibited by targeted therapies.

PMID: 17379603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2007 Apr;64(7-8):989-98.

Interleukin-1beta inhibits the hypoxic inducibility of the erythropoietin
enhancer by suppressing hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha.

Krajewski J(1), Batmunkh C, Jelkmann W, Hellwig-Bürgel T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Luebeck, Ratzeburger Allee 160,
Luebeck, Germany.

The suppression of hypoxia-induced erythropoietin (EPO) expression by
inflammatory cytokines like interleukin-1 (IL-1) contributes to the development
of the anemia of chronic disease (ACD). However, the precise mechanism of this
suppression is unclear. The 3'-EPO enhancer mediates the transcriptional response
to hypoxia by binding several transcription factors, including hypoxia-inducible 
factor, hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) and chicken ovalbumin
upstream promoter transcription factor. We investigated whether IL-1beta inhibits
the activity of the 3'-EPO enhancer via HNF-4alpha. IL-1beta inhibited HNF-4alpha
mRNA expression and caused proteasome-dependent degradation of HNF-4alpha
protein, which resulted in a strongly reduced DNA-binding activity of HNF-4alpha.
Reporter gene assays revealed that IL-1beta caused a complete suppression of the 
hypoxic inducibility of the 3' enhancer via inhibition of HNF-4alpha. We conclude
that IL-1beta, at least partially, reduces hypoxia-induced EPO expression by
down-regulation of HNF-4alpha.

PMID: 17372675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Cancer Res. 2007 Mar 15;67(6):2611-6.

Association of CYP1B1 germ line mutations with hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha-mutated hepatocellular adenoma.

Jeannot E(1), Poussin K, Chiche L, Bacq Y, Sturm N, Scoazec JY, Buffet C, Van
Nhieu JT, Bellanné-Chantelot C, de Toma C, Laurent-Puig P, Bioulac-Sage P,
Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U674, Génomique Fonctionnelle des Tumeurs Solides, Paris, France.

Biallelic somatic mutations of TCF1 coding for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
(HNF1alpha) are found in 50% of the hepatocellular adenoma (HCA) cases usually
associated with oral contraception. In rare cases, HNF1alpha germ line mutations 
could also predispose to familial adenomatosis. In order to identify new genetic 
factors predisposing to HNF1alpha-mutated HCA, we searched for mutations in genes
involved in the metabolism of estrogen. For 10 genes (CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP3A4,
CYP3A5, COMT, UGT2B7, NQO1, GSTM1, GSTP1, and GSTT1), we did not find mutations
nor differences in the allele distribution among 32 women presenting
HNF1alpha-mutated adenomas compared with 58 controls. In contrast, we identified 
a CYP1B1 germ line heterozygous mutation in 4 of 32 women presenting
HNF1alpha-mutated adenomas compared with none in 58 controls. We confirmed these 
results with the identification of four additional CYP1B1 mutations in a second
series of 26 cases. No mutations were found in the control group, which was
extended to 98 individuals, and only a known rare genetic variant was observed in
two controls (P = 0.0003). We did an ethoxyresorufin O-deethylase assay to
evaluate the functional consequence of the CYP1B1 mutations. We found reduced
enzymatic activity in each CYP1B1 variant. In addition, an E229K CYP1B1 mutation 
was found in a woman with a germ line HNF1alpha mutation in a familial
adenomatosis context. In this large family, all three patients with adenomatosis 
bore both HNF1 and CYP1B1 germ line mutations. In conclusion, our data suggested 
that CYP1B1 germ line-inactivating mutations might increase the incidence of HCA 
in women with HNF1alpha mutations.

PMID: 17363580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Curr Med Chem. 2007;14(5):569-83.

Genetics of gestational diabetes mellitus.

Shaat N(1), Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences/ Diabetes & Endocrinology, Malmö University
Hospital, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. nael.shaat@med.lu.se

About 2-5% of all pregnant women develop gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM)
during their pregnancies and the prevalence has increased considerably during the
last decade. GDM is a heterogeneous disorder that is defined as carbohydrate
intolerance with onset or first recognition during pregnancy. It is manifested
when pancreatic beta cells are no longer able to compensate for the increased
insulin resistance during pregnancy, but the pathogenesis of the disease is still
largely unknown. GDM is considered to result from interaction between genetic and
environmental risk factors. Genetic predisposition to GDM has been suggested
since GDM clusters in families. Also, women with mutations in MODY (Maturity
onset diabetes of the young) genes often present with GDM. In addition, common
variants in several candidate genes (e.g. potassium inwardly rectifying channel
subfamily J, member 11 [KCNJ11], Glucokinase [GCK], Hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha [HNF1A] etc.) have been demonstrated to increase the risk of GDM.
Old age, obesity and high fat diet represent some important non-genetic factors. 
There are several approaches to search for genes predisposing to a polygenic
disease like GDM including linkage and association studies, expression profiling 
and animal models. A combination of several methods is usually necessary.
Identification of the underlying genetic causes of GDM will eventually give a
better view of the mechanisms that contribute to the pathophysiology of the
disease. Furthermore, it may improve options to possibly prevent GDM and
complications for the mother and her child. This review focuses on the genetics
of GDM and possible implications in clinical practice.

PMID: 17346148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. J Neurosci. 2007 Feb 28;27(9):2196-203.

Transcription factor expression in the hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal system of the
dehydrated rat: upregulation of gonadotrophin inducible transcription factor 1
mRNA is mediated by cAMP-dependent protein kinase A.

Qiu J(1), Yao S, Hindmarch C, Antunes V, Paton J, Murphy D.

Author information: 
(1)Henry Wellcome Laboratories for Integrative Neuroscience and Endocrinology,
University of Bristol, Bristol BS1 3NY, United Kingdom.

The supraoptic (SON) and paraventricular (PVN) nuclei of the
hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal system (HNS) undergo a dramatic function-related
plasticity during dehydration. We hypothesize that alterations in steady-state
transcript levels might be partially responsible for this remodeling. In turn,
regulation of transcript abundance might be mediated by transcription factors. We
used microarrays to identify changes in the expression of mRNAs encoding
transcription factors in response to water deprivation in the SON. We observed
downregulation of 10 and upregulation of 28 transcription factor transcripts. For
five of the upregulated mRNAs, namely gonadotropin inducible ovarian
transcription factor 1 (Giot1), Giot2, cAMP-responsive element binding protein
3-like 1, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta, and activating transcription
factor 4, in situ hybridization was used to confirm the array results,
demonstrating a significant increase in expression in SON and PVN magnocellular
neurons (MCNs) after 3 d of water deprivation and, in some cases, upregulation in
parvocellular PVN neurons. Using a viral vector expressing a potent inhibitor of 
cAMP-dependent protein kinase A (PKA), we show that the osmotically induced
increase in the abundance of transcripts encoding Giot1 is mediated in vivo by
the PKA pathway. We thus suggest that signaling pathways activated by dehydration
in MCNs mediate transcription factor gene activation, which, in turn, regulate
target genes that mediate HNS remodeling.

PMID: 17329416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Diabetes. 2007 Mar;56(3):685-93.

Evaluation of common variants in the six known maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY) genes for association with type 2 diabetes.

Winckler W(1), Weedon MN, Graham RR, McCarroll SA, Purcell S, Almgren P, Tuomi T,
Gaudet D, Boström KB, Walker M, Hitman G, Hattersley AT, McCarthy MI, Ardlie KG, 
Hirschhorn JN, Daly MJ, Frayling TM, Groop L, Altshuler D.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard and
MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

An important question in human genetics is the extent to which genes causing
monogenic forms of disease harbor common variants that may contribute to the more
typical form of that disease. We aimed to comprehensively evaluate the extent to 
which common variation in the six known maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) genes, which cause a monogenic form of type 2 diabetes, is associated with
type 2 diabetes. Specifically, we determined patterns of common sequence
variation in the genes encoding Gck, Ipf1, Tcf2, and NeuroD1 (MODY2 and
MODY4-MODY6, respectively), selected a comprehensive set of 107 tag single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that captured common variation, and genotyped
each in 4,206 patients and control subjects from Sweden, Finland, and Canada
(including family-based studies and unrelated case-control subjects). All SNPs
with a nominal P value <0.1 for association to type 2 diabetes in this initial
screen were then genotyped in an additional 4,470 subjects from North America and
Poland. Of 30 nominally significant SNPs from the initial sample, 8 achieved
consistent results in the replication sample. We found the strongest effect at
rs757210 in intron 2 of TCF2, with corrected P values <0.01 for an odds ratio
(OR) of 1.13. This association was observed again in an independent sample of
5,891 unrelated case and control subjects and 500 families from the U.K., for an 
overall OR of 1.12 and a P value <10(-6) in >15,000 samples. We combined these
results with our previous studies on HNF4alpha and TCF1 and explicitly tested for
gene-gene interactions among these variants and with several known type 2
diabetes susceptibility loci, and we found no genetic interactions between these 
six genes. We conclude that although rare variants in these six genes explain
most cases of MODY, common variants in these same genes contribute very modestly,
if at all, to the common form of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 17327436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Physiol Res. 2006;55 Suppl 2:S43-66.

(Far) Outside the box: genomic approach to acute porphyria.

Thunell S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Inborn Metabolic Disorders, Karolinska University Hospital
Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.

If I were living in Caucasus I would be writing fairy tales there Chekov, 1888
The question of the reasons for the extreme variation in morbidity among the gene
carriers of acute porphyria and the great diversity of the precipitating factors 
are approached by the aid of a model of interacting genomic circuits. It is based
on the current paradigm of the acute porphyric attack as a result of a toxic
proximal overload of the enzyme-deficient heme-biosynthetic patway. Porphyrogenic
influx of precursors is seen as a consequence of uncontrolled induction of its
gate-keeping enzyme, ubiquitous 5-aminolevulinate synthase (ALAS1), due to
attenuated post-translational control of the enzyme combined with activated gene 
transcription. Focus is directed on the genomic control of the master-regulator
of ALAS1-transcription, the nuclear receptor pair constitutively active receptor 
(CAR) and pregnane xenobiotic receptor (PXR). On activation by their ligands,
i.e. lipophilic drugs, solvents, alcohols, hormonal steroids and biocides, these 
DNA-binding proteins transform xenobiotic or steroid stimuli to coordinated
activations of gene transcription-programs for ALAS1 and apo-cytochromes P450
(apo-CYPs), thus effecting the formation of xenobiotic-metabolizing cytochrome
P450 enzymes. The potency of the CAR/PXR-transduction axis is enhanced by
co-activators generated in at least four other genomic circuits, each triggered
by different external and internal stimuli clinically experienced to be
porphyrogenic, and each controlled by co-activating and co-repressing modulators.
The expressions of the genes for CAR and PXR are thus augmented by binding
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) activated by a steroid hormone, e.g, cortisol
generated in fasting, infection or different forms of stress. The promotor
regions of ALAS1 and apoCYPs contain binding sites for at least three
co-activating transcription factors enhancing CAR/PXR transduction: i.e. the
ligand-independent growth hormone (GH)-pulse controlled hepatocyte nuclear factor
4 (HNF4), the insulin-responsive forkhead box class O-(FOXO) protein pathway
activated in stress and infection, and the proliferator-activated receptor gamma 
co-activator 1 alpha (PGC-1alpha) circuit responding to glucagon liberated in
fasting. Many interactions and cross-talk take place within the tangle of genomic
circuits that control ALAS1-transcription, which may explain the extreme inter-
and intra-individual variability in morbidity in acute porphyria. Reasons for
gender-differences are found in sex-dependent control of HPA- and GH-activity as 
well as in direct, or GR-mediated effects on CAR/PCR activation. Constitutional
differences in individual porphyric morbidity may be discussed along lines of
mutations or duplications of genes for co-activating or co-repressing nuclear
proteins active at different levels within the circuits.

PMID: 17298222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2007 Jan;115(1):62-4.

Two Caucasian families with the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha mutation
Tyr218Cys.

Hummel M(1), Vasseur F, Mathieu C, Bellanne-Chantelot C, Froguel P, Standl E,
Füchtenbusch M.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Research Institute and Academical Hospital Munich-Schwabing, Munich, 
Germany. Michael.Hummel@lrz.uni-muenchen.de

We report on the first two Caucasian families with the MODY3 HNF-1alpha mutation 
Tyr218Cys. Clinical and laboratory examinations are shown in detail. Patients
with HNF-1alpha related MODY may develop the full spectrum of diabetic
complications. Therefore, early detection of family members with MODY3 is
warranted.

PMID: 17286239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 May;292(5):G1302-14. Epub 2007 Feb 
1.

Gata4 and Hnf1alpha are partially required for the expression of specific
intestinal genes during development.

Bosse T(1), Fialkovich JJ, Piaseckyj CM, Beuling E, Broekman H, Grand RJ,
Montgomery RK, Krasinski SD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medicine, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.

The terminal differentiation phases of intestinal development in mice occur
during cytodifferentiation and the weaning transition. Lactase-phlorizin
hydrolase (LPH), liver fatty acid binding protein (Fabp1), and sucrase-isomaltase
(SI) are well-characterized markers of these transitions. With the use of gene
inactivation models in mature mouse jejunum, we have previously shown that a
member of the zinc finger transcription factor family (Gata4) and hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1alpha (Hnf1alpha) are each indispensable for LPH and Fabp1 gene
expression but are both dispensable for SI gene expression. In the present study,
we used these models to test the hypothesis that Gata4 and Hnf1alpha regulate
LPH, Fabp1, and SI gene expression during development, specifically focusing on
cytodifferentiation and the weaning transition. Inactivation of Gata4 had no
effect on LPH gene expression during either cytodifferentiation or suckling,
whereas inactivation of Hnf1alpha resulted in a 50% reduction in LPH gene
expression during these same time intervals. Inactivation of Gata4 or Hnf1alpha
had a partial effect ( approximately 50% reduction) on Fabp1 gene expression
during cytodifferentiation and suckling but no effect on SI gene expression at
any time during development. Throughout the suckling period, we found a
surprising and dramatic reduction in Gata4 and Hnf1alpha protein in the nuclei of
absorptive enterocytes of the jejunum despite high levels of their mRNAs.
Finally, we show that neither Gata4 nor Hnf1alpha mediates the
glucocorticoid-induced precocious maturation of the intestine but rather are
downstream targets of this process. Together, these data demonstrate that
specific intestinal genes have differential requirements for Gata4 and Hnf1alpha 
that are dependent on the developmental time frame in which they are expressed.

PMID: 17272516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Nov;19(11):1359-62.

Infantile presentation of MODY 3 diabetes.

Homan Y(1), Schober E, Rami B.

Author information: 
(1)University Children's Hospital, Vienna, Austria.

PMID: 17220065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Endocrinol. 2007 Jan;192(1):141-7.

Regulation of human insulin, IGF-I, and multidrug resistance protein 2 promoter
activity by hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1beta and HNF-1alpha and the
abnormality of HNF-1beta mutants.

Kitanaka S(1), Sato U, Igarashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. sachi-tky@umin.ac.jp

Mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) lead to type 5
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY5). Moreover, mutations in the
HNF-1beta gene might cause multiorgan abnormalities including renal diseases,
genital malformations, and abnormal liver function. The objective of this study
was to investigate the molecular mechanism of diabetes mellitus, intrauterine
growth retardation, and cholestasis observed in MODY5 patients. We analyzed the
transactivity of wild-type and three mutant HNF-1beta on native human insulin,
IGF-I, and multidrug resistance protein 2 (MRP2) promoters in combination with
HNF-1alpha, using a reporter-assay system in transiently transfected mammalian
cells. In the human insulin gene promoter, we found that the cooperation of
HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta is prominent. Absence of this cooperation was observed
in all of the HNF-1beta mutants. In the human IGF-I and MRP2 promoters, we found 
that the HNF-1beta His153Asn (H153N) mutant had a mutant-specific repressive
effect on both HNF-1alpha and wild-type HNF-1beta transactivity. Absence of the
cooperation of HNF-1beta mutants with HNF-1alpha in the human insulin gene
promoter might be one cause of defective insulin secretion. The H153N
mutant-specific repression of HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta transactivity in human
IGF-I and MRP2 promoters might explain the case-specific clinical features of
growth retardation and cholestasis observed only in early infancy. We found
differential property of HNF-1alpha/HNF-1beta activity and the effect of
HNF-1beta mutants by the promoters. We consider that analyses of HNF-1beta
mutants on the intended human native promoters in combination with HNF-1alpha may
be useful in investigating the molecular mechanisms of the various features in
MODY5.

PMID: 17210751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Feb 16;353(3):617-22. Epub 2006 Dec 19.

HNF-1alpha participates in glucose regulation of sucrase-isomaltase gene
expression in epithelial intestinal cells.

Gu N(1), Adachi T, Matsunaga T, Tsujimoto G, Ishihara A, Yasuda K, Tsuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Graduate School of Human and Environmental Studies, 
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

Sucrase-isomaltase (SI) gene expression is negatively regulated by glucose, but
its molecular mechanism is not completely clear. The purpose of this study is to 
investigate whether HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta contribute to glucose regulation of 
SI gene expression. To explore this question, we examined the association of gene
expressions between SI and HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta in Caco-2 cells cultured in
medium containing 2.0 and 16.7 mM glucose. We found that gene expression of
HNF-1alpha but not HNF-1beta exhibits a positive correlation with that of SI
regulated by glucose. Moreover, to elucidate whether glucose regulation of SI
gene expression is changed when HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta are inhibited, we
produced three stable cell lines, in which dominant-negative mutant
HNF-1alphaT539fsdelC, mutant HNF-1betaR177X, and empty vector (as a control),
respectively, were stably expressed. We found that the glucose regulation of SI
gene expression was significantly attenuated in HNF-1alphaT539fsdelC cells, but
it was well maintained in empty vector and HNF-1betaR177X cells. These results
suggest that HNF-1alpha participates in glucose regulation of SI gene expression.

PMID: 17194452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Diabetes. 2007 Jan;56(1):256-64.

Screening of 134 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) previously associated
with type 2 diabetes replicates association with 12 SNPs in nine genes.

Willer CJ(1), Bonnycastle LL, Conneely KN, Duren WL, Jackson AU, Scott LJ, Narisu
N, Chines PS, Skol A, Stringham HM, Petrie J, Erdos MR, Swift AJ, Enloe ST, Sprau
AG, Smith E, Tong M, Doheny KF, Pugh EW, Watanabe RM, Buchanan TA, Valle TT,
Bergman RN, Tuomilehto J, Mohlke KL, Collins FS, Boehnke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Center for Statistical Genetics, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109-2029, USA.

More than 120 published reports have described associations between single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and type 2 diabetes. However, multiple studies of
the same variant have often been discordant. From a literature search, we
identified previously reported type 2 diabetes-associated SNPs. We initially
genotyped 134 SNPs on 786 index case subjects from type 2 diabetes families and
617 control subjects with normal glucose tolerance from Finland and excluded from
analysis 20 SNPs in strong linkage disequilibrium (r(2) > 0.8) with another typed
SNP. Of the 114 SNPs examined, we followed up the 20 most significant SNPs (P <
0.10) on an additional 384 case subjects and 366 control subjects from a
population-based study in Finland. In the combined data, we replicated
association (P < 0.05) for 12 SNPs: PPARG Pro12Ala and His447, KCNJ11 Glu23Lys
and rs5210, TNF -857, SLC2A2 Ile110Thr, HNF1A/TCF1 rs2701175 and GE117881_360,
PCK1 -232, NEUROD1 Thr45Ala, IL6 -598, and ENPP1 Lys121Gln. The replication of 12
SNPs of 114 tested was significantly greater than expected by chance under the
null hypothesis of no association (P = 0.012). We observed that SNPs from genes
that had three or more previous reports of association were significantly more
likely to be replicated in our sample (P = 0.03), although we also replicated 4
of 58 SNPs from genes that had only one previous report of association.

PMID: 17192490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. World J Gastroenterol. 2006 Nov 28;12(44):7221-4.

Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia due to adult nesidioblastosis in insulin-dependent 
diabetes.

Raffel A(1), Anlauf M, Hosch SB, Krausch M, Henopp T, Bauersfeld J, Klofat R,
Bach D, Eisenberger CF, Kloppel G, Knoefel WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General and Visceral Surgery, Heinrich-Heine University,
Düsseldorf, Germany.

In neonates, persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia (PHH) is associated with
nesidioblastosis. In adults, PHH is usually caused by solitary benign
insulinomas. We report on an adult patient who suffered from insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus, and subsequently developed PHH caused by diffuse
nesidioblastosis. Mutations of the MEN1 and Mody (2/3) genes were ruled out.
Preoperative diagnostic procedures, the histopathological criteria and the
surgical treatment options of adult nesidioblastosis are discussed. So far only
one similar case of adult nesidioblastosis subsequent to diabetes mellitus II has
been reported in the literature. In case of conversion of diabetes into
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia syndrome, nesidioblastosis in addition to
insulinoma should be considered.

PMCID: PMC4087792
PMID: 17131493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Diabet Med. 2006 Dec;23(12):1295-300.

HNF-1alpha G574S is a functional variant with decreased transactivation activity.

Navalón-García K(1), Mendoza-Alcantar L, Díaz-Vargas ME, Martínez-Godínez MA,
Reyna-Garfias H, Aguilar-Salinas CA, Riba L, Canizales-Quinteros S,
Villarreal-Molina T, González-Chávez A, Argueta-Villamar V, Tusié-Luna MT,
Miliar-García A.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Politécnico Nacional Escuela Superior de Medicins, Sección de
Estudios de Postgrado e Investigación, Plan de San Luis y Díaz Mirón s/n, Miguel 
Hidalgo, Mexico.

AIM: To assess the functional consequence of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
gene (HNF-1alpha) G574S variant previously proposed as a diabetes susceptibility 
allele, in a group of Mexican Type 2 diabetic patients with end-stage renal
disease (ESRD).
METHODS: The transcriptional activity of the HNF-1alpha G574S recombinant protein
on the human insulin promoter was assessed by transfection assays in RINm5f and
HepG2 cell lines.
RESULTS: Two unrelated Mexican diabetic patients with no known African ancestry
were found to carry the G574S variant. This substitution was not found among
unrelated healthy control subjects. Whereas the G574S HNF-1alpha transcription
activation of the human insulin promoter was 40% lower than that of the wild-type
protein in RINm5f beta cells, no difference was found in a hepatic cell line
(HepG2).
CONCLUSIONS: G574S affects the transactivation potential of HNF-1alpha on the
insulin promoter in pancreatic beta-cells. Although it has been difficult to
prove its role in the development of diabetes in case-control association
studies, this variant exhibits functional effects consistent with it being a
potential diabetes susceptibility allele.

PMID: 17116178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. J Reprod Dev. 2007 Apr;53(2):189-200. Epub 2006 Nov 1.

The production of a diabetic mouse using constructs encoding porcine insulin
promoter-driven mutant human hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha.

Watanabe M(1), Umeyama K, Kawano HO, Izuno N, Nagashima H, Miki K.

Author information: 
(1)BIOS Research Laboratory Inc., Hiratsuka, Japan.

A diabetic mouse model was produced using a mutant human hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha gene (HNF1alphaP291fsinsC) regulated by the porcine insulin
promoter. The functionality of two different constructs containing
HNF1alphaP291fsinsC, termed PD1 and PD2 (cytomegalovirus enhancer minus and
plus), were examined in transgenic mice. The blood glucose levels and body
weights of the PD1 transgenic mice did not differ from their non-transgenic
littermates over the period from 3 to 8 weeks of age. Conversely, the PD2
transgenic mice exhibited hyperglycemia and decreased body weight. Western blot
analysis demonstrated that mutant HNF-1alpha protein (HNF1alphaP291), derived
from the PD2 transgene, was expressed in the PD2 mice. Morphometric studies of
the pancreas of a PD2 mouse revealed that the number of pancreatic islets present
was less than that in the non-transgenic mice, indicating disturbed islet
neogenesis. These results suggest that impaired insulin secretion in disrupted
islets causes hyperglycemia. In addition, the phenotype of PD2 transgenic mice
similar to that of the HNF-1alpha gene-deficient mouse, which displays growth
retardation and impaired viability. These results indicate that HNF1alphaP291
expression driven by the porcine insulin promoter, together with the
cytomegalovirus enhancer, induces a diabetic phenotype in transgenic mice.

PMID: 17077577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Eur J Endocrinol. 2006 Nov;155(5):671-9.

Transcription factors regulating beta-cell function.

Cerf ME(1).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Discovery Platform, South African Medical Research Council, PO Box
19070, Tygerberg, 7505, South Africa. marlon.cerf@mrc.ac.za

Type 2 diabetes is primarily associated with insulin resistance and beta-cell
dysfunction. Maintenance of functional mature beta-cells is imperative for
ensuring glucose homeostasis. This can be achieved by optimal expression of key
transcription factors that are required for normal pancreatic development and
maintaining beta-cell function. Defining the regulation of transcription factors 
as well as their regulation of important beta-cell genes like insulin will
provide further insight into elucidating the mechanisms leading to beta-cell
dysfunction.

PMID: 17062882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Diabet Med. 2006 Nov;23(11):1257-60.

Asian MODY: are we missing an important diagnosis?

Porter JR(1), Rangasami JJ, Ellard S, Gloyn AL, Shields BM, Edwards J, Anderson
JM, Shaw NJ, Hattersley AT, Frayling TM, Plunkett M, Barrett TG.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Child Health, Birmingham Children's Hospital, Birmingham, UK.
j.porter@bham.ac.uk

AIMS: Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes
where correct diagnosis alters treatment, prognosis and genetic counselling. The 
first UK survey of childhood MODY identified 20 White, but no Asian children with
MODY. We hypothesized that MODY causes diabetes in UK Asians, but is
underdiagnosed.
METHODS: Children with dominant family histories of diabetes were recruited.
Direct sequencing for mutations in the two most common MODY genes; HNF1A (TCF1)
and GCK was performed in autoantibody-negative probands. We also compared MODY
testing data for Asian and White cases from the Exeter MODY database, to 2001 UK 
census data.
RESULTS: We recruited 30 families and identified three Asian families with MODY
gene mutations (two HNF1A, one GCK) and three White UK families (two HNF1A, one
GCK). Heterozygous MODY phenotypes were similar in Asians and Whites. Only eight 
(0.5%) of 1369 UK referrals for MODY testing were known to be Asian, but in 2001 
Asians represented 4% of the English/Welsh population and have a higher
prevalence of diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified three cases of childhood MODY in UK Asians and
demonstrated reduced rates of MODY testing in Asians, which has negative
implications for treatment. It is unclear why this is. MODY should be considered 
in autoantibody-negative Asian diabetes patients lacking evidence of insulin
resistance.

PMID: 17054605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Drug Metab Dispos. 2007 Jan;35(1):116-20. Epub 2006 Oct 18.

Isolation of the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A3 and 1A4 proximal promoters and
characterization of their dependence on the transcription factor hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1alpha.

Gardner-Stephen DA(1), Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park,
South Australia 5042, Australia.

The UGT1A3-1A5 genes are a highly related UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT)
cluster exhibiting high levels of coding and regulatory region homology. However,
the ensuing proteins have both differing substrate specificities and differing
expression patterns. The expression profile of each enzyme also varies
considerably from one individual to the next. Differences in UGT expression have 
been predicted to contribute to an individual's response to pharmaceuticals and
to predisposition toward cancer in the event of carcinogen exposure. Therefore,
it is desirable to elucidate the mechanisms that drive the transcription of UGT
genes and identify the factors responsible for their variable expression. To this
end, we have isolated the UGT1A3, UGT1A4, and UGT1A5 proximal promoters and begun
to investigate the regulatory elements necessary for activity in vitro. We have
established that the nucleotide sequence upstream of the UGT1A5 exon 1 is an
ineffective promoter, correlating with the lack of substantial expression of this
UGT in human tissues. In contrast, the UGT1A3 and UGT1A4 proximal promoters are
both highly active in hepatic and colonic cell lines, with maximal activity being
encoded by the proximal 500 base pairs. However, the UGT1A3 and UGT1A4 promoters 
exhibit low activity in the human embryonic kidney cell line HEK293, unless
coexpressed with hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1alpha. Furthermore, mutation of
the consensus-like HNF1-binding site in the UGT1A3 promoter abolishes promoter
function in all cell types. This study suggests an important role for HNF1alpha
in the transcriptional regulation of the human UGT1A3 and UGT1A4 genes.

PMID: 17050649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Hepatol. 2006 Dec;45(6):883-6. Epub 2006 Oct 4.

Hepatocellular adenoma displaying a HNF1alpha inactivation in a patient with
familial adenomatous polyposis coli.

Jeannot E(1), Wendum D, Paye F, Mourra N, de Toma C, Fléjou JF, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U674, IUH, Université Paris 7, Paris, France.

Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis coli (FAP) may rarely develop
hepatocellular adenoma. Here we report the case of a 37-year-old FAP woman
presenting a hepatocellular adenoma after oestroprogestative oral contraception
use. In this steatotic adenoma, we identified an inactivating biallelic mutation 
of HNF1alpha. In addition to the known germline APC mutation Q1062fs, we did not 
find an inactivation of the second APC allele nor an activation of the
beta-catenin target genes GLUL and GPR49. Our findings contrast with two
hepatocellular adenoma cases related to FAP, for which a biallelic inactivation
of the APC gene was previously described. Altogether, these results suggest that 
benign hepatocellular carcinogenesis may be dependent on or independent of the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway in patients with FAP.

PMCID: PMC2121664
PMID: 17049664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Biochem J. 2007 Feb 15;402(1):81-91.

Regulation of the human mucin MUC4 by taurodeoxycholic and taurochenodeoxycholic 
bile acids in oesophageal cancer cells is mediated by hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha.

Piessen G(1), Jonckheere N, Vincent A, Hémon B, Ducourouble MP, Copin MC,
Mariette C, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 560, Place de Verdun, 59045 Lille Cedex, France.

MUC4 (mucin 4) is a membrane-bound mucin overexpressed in the early steps of
oesophageal carcinogenesis and implicated in tumour progression. We previously
showed that bile acids, main components of gastro-oesophageal reflux and tumour
promoters, up-regulate MUC4 expression [Mariette, Perrais, Leteurtre, Jonckheere,
Hemon, Pigny, Batra, Aubert, Triboulet and Van Seuningen (2004) Biochem. J. 377, 
701-708]. HNF (hepatocyte nuclear factor) 1alpha and HNF4alpha transcription
factors are known to mediate bile acid effects, and we previously identified
cis-elements for these factors in MUC4 distal promoter. Our aim was to
demonstrate that these two transcription factors were directly involved in MUC4
activation by bile acids. MUC4, HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha expressions were
evaluated by immunohistochemistry in human oesophageal tissues. Our results
indicate that MUC4, HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha were co-expressed in oesophageal
metaplastic and adenocarcinomatous tissues. Studies at the mRNA, promoter and
protein levels indicated that HNF1alpha regulates endogenous MUC4 expression by
binding to two cognate cis-elements respectively located at -3332/-3327 and
-3040/-3028 in the distal promoter. We also showed by siRNA (small interfering
RNA) approach, co-transfection and site-directed mutagenesis that HNF1alpha
mediates taurodeoxycholic and taurochenodeoxycholic bile acid activation of
endogenous MUC4 expression and transcription in a dose-dependent manner. In
conclusion, these results describe a new mechanism of regulation of MUC4
expression by bile acids, in which HNF1alpha is a key mediator. These results
bring new insights into MUC4 up-regulation in oesophageal carcinoma associated
with bile reflux.

PMCID: PMC1783985
PMID: 17037983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Hepatol. 2006 Dec;45(6):767-9. Epub 2006 Sep 25.

Genetic mutation in hepatic adenoma: seeing is believing.

Chen PJ.

PMID: 17034896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Diabetologia. 2006 Dec;49(12):2882-91. Epub 2006 Oct 11.

Common variants in HNF-1 alpha and risk of type 2 diabetes.

Holmkvist J(1), Cervin C, Lyssenko V, Winckler W, Anevski D, Cilio C, Almgren P, 
Berglund G, Nilsson P, Tuomi T, Lindgren CM, Altshuler D, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, Diabetes and Endocrinology, Clinical Research
Center, Malmö University Hospital, Lund University, S-205 02, Malmö, Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-alpha gene
(HNF-1alpha, now known as the transcription factor 1 gene [TCF1]) cause the most 
common monogenic form of diabetes, MODY3, but it is not known if common variants 
in HNF-1a are associated with decreased transcriptional activity or phenotypes
related to type 2 diabetes, or whether they predict future type 2 diabetes.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We studied the effect of four common polymorphisms
(rs1920792, I27L, A98V and S487N) in and upstream of the HNF-1alpha gene on
transcriptional activity in vitro, and their possible association with type 2
diabetes and insulin secretion in vivo.
RESULTS: Certain combinations of the I27L and A98V polymorphisms in the
HNF-1alpha gene showed decreased transcriptional activity on the target promoters
glucose transporter 2 (now known as solute carrier family 2 [facilitated glucose 
transporter], member 2) and albumin in both HeLa and INS-1 cells. In vivo, these 
polymorphisms were associated with a modest but significant impairment in insulin
secretion in response to oral glucose. Insulin secretion deteriorated over time
in individuals carrying the V allele of the A98V polymorphism (n = 2,293; p =
0.003). In a new case-control (n = 1,511 and n = 2,225 respectively) data set,
the I27L polymorphism was associated with increased risk of type 2 diabetes, odds
ratio (OR) = 1.5 (p = 0.002; multiple logistic regression), particularly in
elderly (age > 60 years) and overweight (BMI > 25 kg/m(2)) patients (OR = 2.3, p 
= 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This study provides in vitro and in vivo evidence
that common variants in the MODY3 gene, HNF-1alpha, influence transcriptional
activity and insulin secretion in vivo. These variants are associated with a
modestly increased risk of late-onset type 2 diabetes in subsets of elderly
overweight individuals.

PMID: 17033837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Sep 28;Suppl 3:54-8.

[MODY].

[Article in Japanese]

Sasaki A(1), Horikawa Y, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Division of Molecule and Structure
Research Field of Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu University.

PMID: 17022499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Development. 2006 Nov;133(21):4233-43. Epub 2006 Oct 4.

Suppression of C/EBPalpha expression in periportal hepatoblasts may stimulate
biliary cell differentiation through increased Hnf6 and Hnf1b expression.

Yamasaki H(1), Sada A, Iwata T, Niwa T, Tomizawa M, Xanthopoulos KG, Koike T,
Shiojiri N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Faculty of Science, Shizuoka University, 836 Oya,
Surugaku, Shizuoka City, Shizuoka 422-8529, Japan.

The expression of C/EBPalpha, which may govern transcription of mature hepatocyte
marker genes, was suppressed in periportal hepatoblasts in mouse liver
development, leading to biliary cell differentiation. This study was undertaken
to analyze how inactivation of the Cebpa gene affects biliary cell
differentiation and gene expression of the regulatory genes for that
differentiation, including Hnf1b and Hnf6. In the knockout mouse liver at
midgestation stages, pseudoglandular structures were abundantly induced in the
parenchyma with elevated expression of Hnf6 and Hnf1b mRNAs. The wild-type liver 
parenchyma expressed mRNAs of these transcription factors at low levels, though
periportal biliary progenitors had strong expression of them. These results
suggest that expression of Hnf6 and Hnf1b is downstream of C/EBPalpha action in
fetal liver development, and that the suppression of C/EBPalpha expression in
periportal hepatoblasts may lead to expression of Hnf6 and Hnf1b mRNAs.
Immunohistochemical studies with biliary cell markers in knockout livers
demonstrated that differentiated biliary epithelial cells were confined to around
the portal veins. The suppression of C/EBPalpha expression may result in
upregulation of Hnf6 and Hnf1b gene expression, but be insufficient for biliary
cell differentiation. When liver fragments of Cebpa-knockout fetuses, in which
hepatoblasts were contained as an endodermal component, were transplanted in the 
testis of Scid (Prkdc) male mice, almost all hepatoblasts gave rise to biliary
epithelial cells. Wild-type hepatoblasts constructed mature hepatic tissue
accompanied by biliary cell differentiation. These results also demonstrate that 
the suppression of C/EBPalpha expression may stimulate biliary cell
differentiation.

PMID: 17021047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Hum Genet. 2007 Feb;120(6):879-88. Epub 2006 Sep 28.

Identification of a regulatory SNP in the retinol binding protein 4 gene
associated with type 2 diabetes in Mongolia.

Munkhtulga L(1), Nakayama K, Utsumi N, Yanagisawa Y, Gotoh T, Omi T, Kumada M,
Erdenebulgan B, Zolzaya K, Lkhagvasuren T, Iwamoto S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Genetics, Center for Community Medicine, Jichi Medical
University, 3311-1 Yakushiji, Shimotsuke, Tochigi, Japan.

Increased levels of retinol binding protein 4 (RBP4) in serum is associated with 
insulin resistance. To examine this further, the genomic region of RBP4 was
genetically surveyed in Mongolian people, who as a group are suffering from a
recent rapid increase in diabetes. The RBP4 gene was screened by DHPLC system,
and the PCR fragments which showed heteroduplex peaks in multiple samples were
followed by direct sequencing to identify common polymorphisms in 48 Mongolian
diabetic samples. Identified single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were
genotyped in 511 control and 281 type 2 diabetes samples. The functions of SNPs
in the regulatory region were assessed by reporter gene assay and electrophoretic
mobility shift assay. Possible association between functional SNPs and serum RBP4
levels or metabolic parameters was statistically assessed. Nine SNPs were
identified in the RBP4 gene. A case-control study revealed that the rare alleles 
of four SNPs were associated with increased risk of diabetes, even after
Bonferroni correction (-803, G > A, P = 0.0054; +5169, C > T, P = 0.0025; +6969, 
G > C, P = 0.0015; +7542, T > del, P = 0.0015). The -803 G > A SNP influenced the
transcription efficiency in a hepatocarcinoma cell line as well as the binding
efficiency of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha to the motif. In addition, the
-803 A allele was associated with increased serum RBP4 levels in diabetic
patients. We have identified a functional SNP in the RBP4 gene associated with
type 2 diabetes in Mongolian people.

PMID: 17006670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2007 Apr;76(1):157-8. Epub 2006 Sep 11.

GCK and HNF1alpha mutations and polymorphisms in Polish women with gestational
diabetes.

Zurawek M, Wender-Ozegowska E, Januszkiewicz-Lewandowska D, Zawiejska A, Nowak J.

PMID: 16963153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Diabetes. 2006 Sep;55(9):2534-40.

Common variants in maturity-onset diabetes of the young genes contribute to risk 
of type 2 diabetes in Finns.

Bonnycastle LL(1), Willer CJ, Conneely KN, Jackson AU, Burrill CP, Watanabe RM,
Chines PS, Narisu N, Scott LJ, Enloe ST, Swift AJ, Duren WL, Stringham HM, Erdos 
MR, Riebow NL, Buchanan TA, Valle TT, Tuomilehto J, Bergman RN, Mohlke KL,
Boehnke M, Collins FS.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-2152, USA.

Prior reports have suggested that variants in the genes for maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) may confer susceptibility to type 2 diabetes, but
results have been conflicting and coverage of the MODY genes has been incomplete.
To complement our previous studies of HNF4A, we examined the other five known
MODY genes for association with type 2 diabetes in Finnish individuals. For each 
of the five genes, we selected 1) nonredundant single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) (r(2)< 0.8 with other SNPs) from the HapMap database or another linkage
disequilibrium map, 2) SNPs with previously reported type 2 diabetes association,
and 3) nonsynonymous coding SNPs. We tested 128 SNPs for association with type 2 
diabetes in 786 index cases from type 2 diabetic families and 619 normal
glucose-tolerant control subjects. We followed up 35 of the most significant SNPs
by genotyping them on another 384 case subjects and 366 control subjects from
Finland. We also supplemented our previous HNF4A results by genotyping 12 SNPs on
additional Finnish samples. After correcting for testing multiple correlated SNPs
within a gene, we find evidence of type 2 diabetes association with SNPs in five 
of the six known MODY genes: GCK, HNF1A, HNF1B, NEUROD1, and HNF4A. Our data
suggest that common variants in several MODY genes play a modest role in type 2
diabetes susceptibility.

PMID: 16936201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. J Mol Biol. 2006 Sep 22;362(3):414-29. Epub 2006 Jul 27.

Diabetes mellitus due to misfolding of a beta-cell transcription factor:
stereospecific frustration of a Schellman motif in HNF-1alpha.

Narayana N(1), Phillips NB, Hua QX, Jia W, Weiss MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid
Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4935, USA.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3), a monogenic form of type II
diabetes mellitus, results most commonly from mutations in hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1alpha (HNF-1alpha). Diabetes-associated mutation G20R perturbs the
dimerization domain of HNF-1alpha, an intertwined four-helix bundle. In the
wild-type structure G20 participates in a Schellman motif to cap an alpha-helix; 
its dihedral angles lie in the right side of the Ramachandran plot (alpha(L)
region; phi 97 degrees). Substitutions G20R and G20A lead to dimeric molten
globules of low stability, suggesting that the impaired function of the
diabetes-associated transcription factor is due in large part to a main-chain
perturbation rather than to specific features of the Arg side-chain. This
hypothesis is supported by the enhanced stability of non-standard analogues
containing D-Ala or D-Ser at position 20. The crystal structure of the D-Ala20
analogue, determined to a resolution of 1.4 A, is essentially identical to the
wild-type structure in the same crystal form. The mean root-mean-square deviation
between equivalent C(alpha) atoms (residues 5-28) is 0.3 A; (phi, psi) angles of 
D-Ala20 are the same as those of G20 in the wild-type structure. Whereas the
side-chain of A20 or R20 would be expected to clash with the preceding carbonyl
oxygen (thus accounting for its frustrated energy landscape), the side-chain of
D-Ala20 projects into solvent without perturbation of the Schellman motif.
Calorimetric studies indicate that the increased stability of the D-Ala20
analogue (DeltaDeltaG(u) 1.5 kcal/mol) is entropic in origin, consistent with a
conformational bias toward native-like conformations in the unfolded state.
Studies of multiple substitutions at G20 and neighboring positions highlight the 
essential contributions of a glycine-specific tight turn and adjoining
inter-subunit side-chain hydrogen bonds to the stability and architectural
specificity of the intertwined dimer. Comparison of L- and D amino acid
substitutions thus provides an example of the stereospecific control of an energy
landscape by a helix-capping residue.

PMID: 16930618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. J Lipid Res. 2006 Nov;47(11):2503-14. Epub 2006 Aug 23.

Apolipoprotein A-IV is regulated by nutritional and metabolic stress: involvement
of glucocorticoids, HNF-4 alpha, and PGC-1 alpha.

Hanniman EA(1), Lambert G, Inoue Y, Gonzalez FJ, Sinal CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia,
Canada.

Apolipoprotein A-IV (apoA-IV) is a 46 kDa glycoprotein that associates with
triglyceride-rich and high density lipoproteins. Blood levels of apoA-IV
generally correlate with triglyceride levels and are increased in diabetic
patients. This study investigated the mechanisms regulating the in vivo
expression of apoA-IV in the liver and intestine of mice in response to changes
in nutritional status. Fasting markedly increased liver and ileal apoA-IV mRNA
and plasma protein concentrations. This induction was associated with increased
serum glucocorticoid levels and was abolished by adrenalectomy. Treatment with
dexamethasone increased apoA-IV expression in adrenalectomized mice. Marked
increases of apoA-IV expression were also observed in two murine models of
diabetes. Reporter gene analysis of the murine and human apoA-IV/C-III promoters 
revealed a conserved cooperative activation by the hepatic nuclear factor-4 alpha
(HNF-4 alpha) and the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
coactivator-1 alpha (PGC-1 alpha) but no evidence of a direct regulatory role for
the glucocorticoid receptor. Consistent with these in vitro data, induction of
apoA-IV in response to fasting was accompanied by increases in HNF-4 alpha and
PGC-1 alpha expression and was abolished in liver-specific HNF-4 alpha-deficient 
mice. Together, these results indicate that the induction of apoA-IV expression
in fasting and diabetes likely involves PGC-1 alpha-mediated coactivation of
HNF-4 alpha in addition to glucocorticoid-dependent actions.

PMID: 16929032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Hum Mutat. 2006 Sep;27(9):854-69.

Mutations in the genes encoding the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 alpha (HNF1A) and 4 alpha (HNF4A) in maturity-onset diabetes of the
young.

Ellard S(1), Colclough K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation Trust,
Exeter, United Kingdom. S.Ellard@exeter.ac.uk

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes
mellitus characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, early age of onset
(often <25 years of age), and pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. MODY is both
clinically and genetically heterogeneous, with six different genes identified to 
date; glucokinase (GCK), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1A, or TCF1),
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF4A), insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF1 or
PDX1), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta (HNF1B or TCF2), and neurogenic
differentiation 1 (NEUROD1). Mutations in the HNF1A gene are a common cause of
MODY in the majority of populations studied. A total of 193 different mutations
have been described in 373 families. The most common mutation is Pro291fs
(P291fsinsC) in the polycytosine (poly C) tract of exon 4, which has been
reported in 65 families. HNF4A mutations are rarer; 31 mutations reported in 40
families. Sensitivity to treatment with sulfonylurea tablets is a feature of both
HNF1A and HNF4A mutations. The identification of an HNF1A or 4A gene mutation
confirms a diagnosis of MODY and has important implications for clinical
management.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16917892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Life Sci. 2006 Oct 12;79(20):1913-20. Epub 2006 Aug 14.

Ageing is associated with increased expression but decreased activity of CYP2E1
in male Wistar rats.

Wauthier V(1), Schenten V, Verbeeck RK, Calderon PB.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Pharmacocinétique, Métabolisme, Nutrition et Toxicologie (PMNT),
Département des sciences pharmaceutiques, Université Catholique de Louvain,
Avenue E. Mounier 73, 1200, Brussels, Belgium.

The effect of ageing on CYP2E1 activity and its protein and mRNA contents was
investigated in both adult (9 months) and senescent (24 months) male Wistar rats.
The CYP2E1 activity (as measured by chlorzoxazone hydroxylation) was
significantly decreased by 36% in senescent rats as compared to adult rats.
However, this decrease of activity was not associated with a loss of protein
content because the amount of both CYP2E1 protein and CYP2E1 mRNA did not
decrease in senescent rats but rather increased, by 79% and 64% respectively, as 
compared to adult rats. Lipid peroxidation was increased significantly by 140%
with ageing. The decrease in CYP2E1 activity could be explained by
post-translational modification of CYP2E1 proteins, due to an increase in
oxidative stress in senescent animals, leading to a loss of their functionality. 
However, no changes in the extent of protein carbonyls were observed in the adult
versus senescent rats (16.2 +/- 9.6 vs. 12.7 +/- 7.3 nmol/mg prot) and the major 
proteasome activity remained unchanged. With regards to the increase of CYP2E1
expression, our results showed that the amount of hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha mRNA, a transcription factor that positively regulates CYP2E1, was
strongly increased (154%) in senescent rats.

PMID: 16904701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 20;281(42):31268-78. Epub 2006 Aug 7.

Transcriptional regulation of the glucose-6-phosphatase gene by cAMP/vasoactive
intestinal peptide in the intestine. Role of HNF4alpha, CREM, HNF1alpha, and
C/EBPalpha.

Gautier-Stein A(1), Zitoun C, Lalli E, Mithieux G, Rajas F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U.449, F-69372 Lyon, France. Amandine.Gautier@univ-lyon1.fr

Gluconeogenesis is induced in both the liver and intestine by increased cAMP
levels. However, hepatic and intestinal glucose production can have opposite
effects on glucose homeostasis. Glucose release into the portal vein by the
intestine increases glucose uptake and reduces food intake. In contrast, glucose 
production by the liver contributes to hyperglycemia in type II diabetes.
Glucose-6-phosphatase (Glc6Pase) is the key enzyme of gluconeogenesis in both the
liver and intestine. Here we specify the cAMP/protein kinase A regulation of the 
Glc6Pase gene in the intestine compared with the liver. Similarly to the liver,
the molecular mechanism of cAMP/protein kinase A regulation involves
cAMP-response element-binding protein, HNF4alpha, CAAT/enhancer-binding protein, 
and HNF1. In contrast to the situation in the liver, we find that different
isoforms of CAAT/enhancer-binding protein and HNF1 contribute to the specific
regulation of the Glc6Pase gene in the intestine. Moreover, we show that
cAMP-response element binding modulator specifically contributes to the
regulation of the Glc6Pase gene in the intestine but not in the liver. These
results allow us to identify intestine-specific regulators of the Glc6Pase gene
and to improve the understanding of the differences in the regulation of
gluconeogenesis in the intestine compared with the liver.

PMID: 16893891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Diabetes. 2006 Aug;55(8):2202-11.

A conditional model reveals that induction of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha in
Hnf1alpha-null mutant beta-cells can activate silenced genes postnatally, whereas
overexpression is deleterious.

Luco RF(1), Maestro MA, del Pozo N, Philbrick WM, de la Ossa PP, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Unit, Hospital Clinic de Barcelona, Institut d'Investigacions
August Pi i Sunyer, Villarroel 170, Barcelona 08036, Spain.

Humans with heterozygous loss-of-function mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF1alpha) gene develop beta-cell-deficient diabetes
(maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3), indicating that HNF1alpha gene
dosage is critical in beta-cells. However, whether increased HNF1alpha expression
might be beneficial or deleterious for beta-cells is unknown. Furthermore,
although it is clear that HNF1alpha is required for beta-cell function, it is not
known whether this role is cell autonomous or whether there is a restricted
developmental time frame for HNF1alpha to elicit gene activation in beta-cells.
To address this, we generated a tetracycline-inducible mouse model that
transcribes HNF1alpha selectively in beta-cells in either wild-type or
Hnf1alpha-null backgrounds. Short-term induction of HNF1alpha in islets from
adult Hnf1alpha(-/-) mice that did not express HNF1alpha throughout development
resulted in the activation of target genes, indicating that HNF1alpha has
beta-cell-autonomous functions that can be rescued postnatally. However,
transgenic induction throughout development, which inevitably resulted in
supraphysiological levels of HNF1alpha, strikingly caused a severe reduction of
cellular proliferation, increased apoptosis, and consequently beta-cell depletion
and diabetes. Thus, HNF1alpha is sensitive to both reduced and excessive
concentrations in beta-cells. This finding illustrates the paramount importance
of using the correct concentration of a beta-cell transcription factor in both
gene therapy and artificial differentiation strategies.

PMID: 16873682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Chin Med J (Engl). 2006 Jul 5;119(13):1072-8.

Identification of four novel mutations in the HNF-1A gene in Chinese early-onset 
and/or multiplex diabetes pedigrees.

Yang Z(1), Wu SH, Zheng TS, Lu HJ, Xiang KS.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Diabetes Institute, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Shanghai No. 6 People's Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai 200233, 
China.

BACKGROUND: Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1A gene cause the type 3
form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3). This study was undertaken
to determine mutations and sequence variations of the HNF-1A gene in Chinese with
familial early-onset and/or multiplex diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: We screened all ten exons of the HNF-1A gene, including exon/intron
junctions, by direct sequencing in 272 unrelated Chinese, including 80 healthy
controls and 192 probands of early-onset and/or multiplex diabetes pedigrees.
RESULTS: In addition to one silent mutation of c.864 G > C [p.G288G] in exon4 at 
codon 288, which had been reported previously, a total of four novel mutations
including two missense mutations (c.245C > T [p.T82M] and c. 390 G > T [p.Q130H])
and one frameshift mutation P353fsdelACGGGCCTGGAGC and one silent mutation c.759 
G > T [p.G253G] were identified. Moreover, eleven substitutions were identified
in 192 probands. Of these, three variants (-8 G > A, -128 T > G and IVS2 + 21 G >
A) were not observed in 80 healthy controls and one of them (-8 G > A) was not
reported previously and the two promoter variants co-segregated with diabetes.
The genotype and allele frequencies of the other eight variants in the diabetic
patients were not significantly different from those in the healthy controls. No 
significant relationships were observed between the eight variants of the HNF-1A 
gene and clinical variables (plasma glucose, insulin, C-peptide and fasting lipid
profile).
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of structural mutations in the HNF-1A gene responsible
for familial early-onset and/or multiplex diabetes appears to be rare among
Chinese patients.

PMID: 16834925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Biochem Pharmacol. 2006 Aug 14;72(4):512-22. Epub 2006 Mar 30.

Alterations in transporter expression in liver, kidney, and duodenum after
targeted disruption of the transcription factor HNF1alpha.

Maher JM(1), Slitt AL, Callaghan TN, Cheng X, Cheung C, Gonzalez FJ, Klaassen CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutics, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

The transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) is involved
in regulation of glucose metabolism and transport, and in the expression of
several drug and bile acid metabolizing enzymes. Targeted disruption of the
HNF1alpha gene results in decreased Cyp1a2, and Cyp2e1 expression, and increased 
Cyp4a1 and Cyp7a1 expression, suggesting these enzymes are HNF1alpha target
genes. Since hepatic metabolism can be coordinately linked with drug and
metabolite transport, this study aims to demonstrate whether HNF1alpha regulates 
expression of a variety of organic anion and cation transporters through
utilization of an HNF1alpha-null mouse model. Expression of 32 transporters,
including members of the Oat, Oatp, Oct, Mrp, Mdr, bile acid and sterolin
families, was quantified in three different tissues: liver, kidney, and duodenum.
The expression of 17 of 32 transporters was altered in liver, 21 of 32 in kidney,
and 6 of 32 in duodenum of HNF1alpha-null mice. This includes many novel
observations, including marked downregulation of Oats in kidney, as well as
upregulation of many Mrp and Mdr family members in all three tissues. These data 
indicate that disruption of HNF1alpha causes a marked attenuation of several Oat 
and Oatp uptake transporters in liver and kidney, and increased expression of
efflux transporters such as Mdrs and Mrps, thus suggesting that HNF1alpha is a
central mediator in regulating hepatic, renal, and intestinal transporters.

PMID: 16806085  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. World J Gastroenterol. 2006 Jun 28;12(24):3841-7.

Isolation, characterization and culture of Thy1-positive cells from fetal rat
livers.

Isabel Z(1), Miri B, Einav H, Ella BL, Zamir H, Ran O.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Unit, Gastroenterology Institute, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center,
Israel. isab@tasmc.health.gov.il

AIM: To investigate whether Thy1 recognizes oval cells in the fetal liver and to 
characterize the cultured Thy1- selected cells from E14 rat livers.
METHODS: Thy1 populations were analyzed by fluorescence activated cell sorter
analysis. Thy1 positive cells were isolated using magnetic beads. Hepatic markers
were detected by Western blotting, immunocytochemistry and RT-PCR.
RESULTS: The percentage of Thy1-positive cells decreased during early development
of fetal rat liver (E13-E16). E14 fetal livers contained 7.8% Thy1 positive
cells, of which 61% were positive for alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) and 25% expressed
albumin. The Thy1+ population expressed oval cell markers c-Kit and CXCR4, liver 
enriched-transcription factors HNF1alpha and HNF6, hepatocytic markers albumin,
AFP and cytokeratin 18, and biliary marker cytokeratin 19. Thy1- selected cells
formed only mesenchymal colonies when plated on collagen and in serum-containing 
media. Thy1 selected cells were able to form hepatic colonies positive for
HNF1alpha, HNF6, albumin, AFP, cytokeratin 18, cytokeratin 19 and glycogen, when 
grown on STO feeder layers in serum free-media.
CONCLUSION: Oval cells positive for Thy1 are present in early liver embryonic
stages.

PMCID: PMC4087931
PMID: 16804968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Nutr Sci Vitaminol (Tokyo). 2006 Apr;52(2):105-12.

Sucrase-isomaltase gene expression is inhibited by mutant hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-1alpha and mutant HNF-1beta in Caco-2 cells.

Gu N(1), Adachi T, Takeda J, Aoki N, Tsujimoto G, Ishihara A, Tsuda K, Yasuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Graduate School of Human and Environmental Studies, 
Kyoto University, Japan.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and HNF-1beta are concerned in
sucrase-isomaltase (SI) gene expression, and directly bind two sites (SIF2, SIF3)
of the promoter of the SI gene. However, it is not completely clear that
HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta play a role in regulation of SI gene expression. To
clarify mechanisms of SI gene expression regulated by HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta,
we established four stable cell lines based on enterocyte-like cell line Caco-2, 
in which wild HNF-1alpha or wild HNF-1beta, or else mutant HNF-1alphaT539fsdelC
or mutant HNF-1betaR177X was overexpressed. In the HNF-1alphaT539fsdelC cells and
HNF-1betaR177X cells, but not in the wild HNF-1alpha cells and wild HNF-1beta
cells, SI gene expression and enzyme activity were significantly diminished
compared with that in Caco-2 cells. Moreover, to clarify whether or not stable
cell differentiation was influenced by overexpression of these transgenes,
alkaline phosphatase (ALP) gene expression and enzyme activity were measured.
There were no changes in ALP gene expression or enzyme activity in these cells.
These observations suggest that mutant HNF-1alphaT539fsdelC and mutant
HNF-1betaR177X inhibits SI gene at the transcriptional level, resulting in
decreased SI enzyme activity in Caco-2 cells. We propose that both HNF-1alpha and
HNF-1beta would contribute to constitutive expression of the SI gene in the
differentiated state in Caco-2 cells.

PMID: 16802690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Mol Pharmacol. 2006 Sep;70(3):887-96. Epub 2006 Jun 22.

Regulation of the expression of human organic anion transporter 3 by hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1alpha/beta and DNA methylation.

Kikuchi R(1), Kusuhara H, Hattori N, Shiota K, Kim I, Gonzalez FJ, Sugiyama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pharmacokinetics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.

Human organic anion transporter 3 (hOAT3/SLC22A8) is predominantly expressed in
the proximal tubules of the kidney and plays a major role in the urinary
excretion of a variety of organic anions. The promoter region of hOAT3 was
characterized to elucidate the mechanism underlying the tissue-specific
expression of hOAT3. The minimal promoter of hOAT3 was identified to be located
approximately 300 base pairs upstream of the transcriptional start site, where
there are canonical TATA and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF1) binding motifs,
which are conserved in the rodent Oat3 genes. Transactivation assays revealed
that HNF1alpha and HNF1beta markedly increased hOAT3 promoter activity, where the
transactivation potency of HNF1beta was lower than that of HNF1alpha. Mutations
in the HNF1 binding motif prevented the transactivation. Electrophoretic mobility
shift assays demonstrated binding of the HNF1alpha/HNF1alpha homodimer or
HNF1alpha/HNF1beta heterodimer to the hOAT3 promoter. It was also demonstrated
that the promoter activity of hOAT3 is repressed by DNA methylation. Moreover,
the expression of hOAT3 was activated de novo by forced expression of HNF1alpha
alone or both HNF1alpha and HNF1beta together with the concomitant DNA
demethylation in human embryonic kidney 293 cells that lack expression of
endogenous HNF1alpha and HNF1beta, whereas forced expression of HNF1beta alone
could not activate the expression of hOAT3. This suggests a synergistic action of
the HNF1alpha/HNF1alpha homodimer or HNF1alpha/HNF1beta heterodimer and DNA
demethylation for the constitutive expression of hOAT3. These results indicate
that the tissue-specific expression of hOAT3 might be regulated by the concerted 
effect of genetic (HNF1alpha and HNF1beta) and epigenetic (DNA methylation)
factors.

PMID: 16793932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2006 Jul;16(7):527-36.

The caudal-related homeodomain protein Cdx2 and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha 
cooperatively regulate the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2B7 gene promoter.

Gregory PA(1), Gardner-Stephen DA, Rogers A, Michael MZ, Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University School of Medicine,
Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park, SA 5042, Australia.

The gastrointestinal tract, contains several UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) 
of the UGT1A and UGT2B subfamilies. UGT2B7 is one particular enzyme expressed
throughout the gastrointestinal tract that possesses broad substrate specificity 
towards orally administered drugs. Because the caudal-related homeodomain protein
2 (Cdx2) regulates many gastrointestinal properties, we sought to determine
whether it could regulate the UGT2B7 promoter in the colon-derived cell line
Caco-2. Levels of Cdx2 and UGT2B7 were measured in differentiated and
non-differentiated Caco-2 cells by the quantitative polymerase chain reaction.
The capacity of the UGT2B7 gene promoter to drive expression of the luciferase
reporter gene was assessed by transfection into Caco-2 cells, with transcription 
factor expression plasmids. Mutation of putative transcription factor binding
sites and electrophoretic mobility shift assays were used to define important
regulatory regions of the UGT2B7 gene promoter. The levels of Cdx2 and UGT2B7
mRNAs were co-ordinately increased in differentiated Caco2 cells compared to
non-differentiated cells. Cdx2 activates the UGT2B7 proximal promoter by binding 
to two adjacent sites. Promoter activation requires Cdx2 binding to both sites
wherein these proteins interact to form a putative functional dimer. Dimerization
was shown to be dependent on redox state using extracts depleted of
dithiothreitol. In addition, Cdx2 was shown to cooperatively activate the UGT2B7 
promoter in conjunction with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha), a
mechanism previously observed to regulate other intestine-specific genes. The
present study is the first to define transcription factors involved in the
control of intestinal UGT2B expression. The demonstration that Cdx2 and HNF1alpha
are important regulators of UGT2B7 expression will aid in defining pathways for
coordinate control of drug metabolism in the gastrointestinal tract.

PMID: 16788384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2006 Aug 4;346(3):1016-23. Epub 2006 Jun 9.

Mutant HNF-1alpha and mutant HNF-1beta identified in MODY3 and MODY5 downregulate
DPP-IV gene expression in Caco-2 cells.

Gu N(1), Adachi T, Matsunaga T, Takeda J, Tsujimoto G, Ishihara A, Yasuda K,
Tsuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Graduate School of Human and Environmental Studies, 
Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

Dipeptidylpeptidase IV (DPP-IV) is a well-documented drug target for the
treatment of type 2 diabetes. Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF)-1alpha and
HNF-1beta, known as the causal genes of MODY3 and MODY5, respectively, have been 
reported to be involved in regulation of DPP-IV gene expression. But, it is not
completely clear (i) that they play roles in regulation of DPP-IV gene
expression, and (ii) whether DPP-IV gene activity is changed by mutant HNF-1alpha
and mutant HNF-1beta in MODY3 and MODY5. To explore these questions, we
investigated transactivation effects of wild HNF-1alpha and 13 mutant HNF-1alpha,
as well as wild HNF-1beta and 2 mutant HNF-1beta, on DPP-IV promoter luciferase
gene in Caco-2 cells by means of a transient experiment. Both wild HNF-1alpha and
wild HNF-1beta significantly transactivated DPP-IV promoter, but mutant
HNF-1alpha and mutant HNF-1beta exhibited low transactivation activity. Moreover,
to study whether mutant HNF-1alpha and mutant HNF-1beta change endogenous DPP-IV 
enzyme activity, we produced four stable cell lines from Caco-2 cells, in which
wild HNF-1alpha or wild HNF-1beta, or else respective dominant-negative mutant
HNF-1alphaT539fsdelC or dominant-negative mutant HNF-1betaR177X, was stably
expressed. We found that DPP-IV gene expression and enzyme activity were
significantly increased in wild HNF-1alpha cells and wild HNF-1beta cells,
whereas they decreased in HNF-1alphaT539fsdelC cells and HNF-1betaR177X cells,
compared with DPP-IV gene expression and enzyme activity in Caco-2 cells. These
results suggest that both wild HNF-1alpha and wild HNF-1beta have a stimulatory
effect on DPP-IV gene expression, but that mutant HNF-1alpha and mutant HNF-1beta
attenuate the stimulatory effect.

PMID: 16781669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Hum Mol Genet. 2006 Jul 15;15(14):2216-24. Epub 2006 Jun 7.

Isomers of the TCF1 gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha show
differential expression in the pancreas and define the relationship between
mutation position and clinical phenotype in monogenic diabetes.

Harries LW(1), Ellard S, Stride A, Morgan NG, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clincal Sciences, Peninsula Medical School,
Barrack Road, Exeter, Devon, UK. l.w.harries@exeter.ac.uk

The generation of multiple transcripts by mRNA processing has the potential to
moderate differences in gene expression both between tissues and at different
stages of development. Where gene function is compromised by mutation, the
presence of multiple isoforms may influence the resulting phenotype. Heterozygous
mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1A or
TCF1 gene) result in early-onset diabetes as a result of pancreatic beta-cell
dysfunction. We investigated the expression of the three alternatively processed 
isoforms of the HNF1A gene and their impact on the phenotype associated with
mutations. Real-time PCR demonstrated variation in tissue expression of HNF1A
isomers: HNF1A(A), with the lowest transactivation activity compared with the
truncated isoforms HNF1A(B) and HNF1A(C), is the major isomer in liver (54%) and 
kidney (67%) but not in adult pancreas (24%) and islets (26%). However, in fetal 
pancreas HNF1A(A) is the major transcript (84%), which supports developmental
regulation of isomer expression. We examined whether the isomers affected by the 
mutation altered the diabetes phenotype in 564 subjects with 123 mutations in
HNF1A. Mutations that affected only isomer HNF1A(A) (exons 8-10) were diagnosed
later (25.5 years) than mutations affecting all three isomers (exons 1-6) (18.0
years) (P=0.006). This first genotype/phenotype relationship described for
patients with HNF1A mutations is explained by isomer structure and not by either 
mutation type or functional domain. We conclude that all three isomers may be
critical for beta-cell function and could play a role in both the developing and 
mature beta cell.

PMID: 16760222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Med Clin (Barc). 2006 May 6;126(17):651-2.

[Young adult onset diabetes mellitus. Clinical differences between MODY-3 and
type 2 diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Spanish]

Conget I(1), Giménez M, Nicolau J, Costa A, Oriola J, Casamitjana R.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Endocrinología y Diabetes, Hospital Clínic i Universitari,
Barcelona, España. icognet@clinic.ub.es

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: The aim of our study was to evaluate the clinical and
metabolic characteristics of type 2 diabetes diagnosed in young adults (T2DYA)
and in subjects with mutations in HNF-1* gene.
PATIENTS AND METHOD: We included 8 subjects diagnosed of MODY-3 (3 women) at ages
25-45. They were matched (1/2) by gender and age of diagnosis with 16 (6 women)
T2DYA. Clinical and metabolic characteristics, as well as C-reactive protein
levels, were evaluated.
RESULTS: There were not differences in terms of age, disease duration and family 
history of type 2 diabetes. MODY-3 subjects had a lower body mass index -24 (3)
vs. 31 (4) kg/m2; P = .000- and in a lower proportion they had hypertension and
required insulin treatment. High density lipoprotein-cholesterol value was higher
-50 (4) vs. 43 (2) mg/dl; P = .000) and HbA1c -7.1% (1,0%) vs. 8.2% (1,2%); P =
.036-, triglycerides -147 (17) vs. 184 (20) mg/dl; P = .000- and C-reactive
protein -0.6 (0,2) vs. 1.7 (0,6) mg/l; P = .000- levels were lower in subjects
with MODY-3.
CONCLUSIONS: The presence of clinical and metabolic features related to metabolic
syndrome could be of help in order to differentiate between T2DYA and diabetes
due to mutations in HNF-1*.

PMID: 16759564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Diabetologia. 2006 Jul;49(7):1545-51. Epub 2006 Apr 26.

Common variants in MODY genes increase the risk of gestational diabetes mellitus.

Shaat N(1), Karlsson E, Lernmark A, Ivarsson S, Lynch K, Parikh H, Almgren P,
Berntorp K, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences/Diabetes and Endocrinology, Malmö University
Hospital, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. nael.shaat@med.lu.se

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2006 Sep;49(9):2226-7.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Impaired beta cell function is the hallmark of gestational
diabetes mellitus (GDM) and MODY. In addition, women with MODY gene mutations
often present with GDM, but it is not known whether common variants in MODY genes
contribute to GDM.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We genotyped five common variants in the glucokinase (GCK, 
commonly known as MODY2), hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-alpha (HNF1A, commonly
known as MODY3) and 4-alpha (HNF4A commonly known as MODY1) genes in 1,880
Scandinavian women (648 women with GDM and 1,232 pregnant non-diabetic control
women).
RESULTS: The A allele of the GCK -30G-->A polymorphism was more common in GDM
women than in control subjects (odds ratio [OR] 1.28 [95% CI 1.06-1.53], p=0.008,
corrected p value, p=0.035). Under a recessive model [AA vs GA+GG], the OR
increased further to 2.12 (95% CI 1.21-3.72, p=0.009). The frequency of the L
allele of the HNF1A I27L polymorphism was slightly higher in GDM than in controls
(1.16 [95% CI 1.001-1.34], p=0.048, corrected p value, p=0.17). However, the OR
increased under a dominant model (LL+IL vs II; 1.31 [95% CI 1.08-1.60], p=0.007).
The rs2144908, rs2425637 and rs1885088 variants, which are located downstream of 
the primary beta cell promoter (P2) of HNF4A, were not associated with GDM.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The -30G-->A polymorphism of the beta-cell-specific
promoter of GCK and the I27L polymorphism of HNF1A seem to increase the risk of
GDM in Scandinavian women.

PMID: 16752173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. J Gastroenterol. 2006 Apr;41(4):369-77.

Farnesoid X receptor, hepatocyte nuclear factors 1alpha and 3beta are essential
for transcriptional activation of the liver-specific organic anion transporter-2 
gene.

Ohtsuka H(1), Abe T, Onogawa T, Kondo N, Sato T, Oshio H, Mizutamari H, Mikkaichi
T, Oikawa M, Rikiyama T, Katayose Y, Unno M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterological Surgery, Department of Surgery, Tohoku
University Graduate School of Medical Science, Sendai 980-8574, Japan.

BACKGROUND: We isolated the human liver-specific organic anion transporter gene, 
LST-2 (OATP8/SLCO1B3), which is exclusively expressed in the basolateral membrane
of the hepatocytes. In this study, we analyzed the transcriptional regulation of 
the LST-2 gene in hepatocyte-derived cells and the effect of bile acid.
METHODS: Transcriptional activity of the LST-2 gene was measured using a human
LST-2 promoter-luciferase reporter plasmid under various concentrations of bile
acids. Electrophoresis mobility shift assays of farnesoid X receptor (FXR),
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1alpha, and HNF3beta were performed.
RESULTS: Luciferase analysis showed that the 5'-flanking region from -180 to -20 
bp is responsible for LST-2 transcriptional activity. By site-directed mutation
analysis, it was revealed that the consensus binding sites for FXR, HNF1alpha,
and HNF3beta play important roles in the transcriptional activity of the LST-2
gene. By electrophoresis mobility shift assay, we observed specific protein-DNA
complexes of FXR, HNF1alpha, and HNF-3beta. Luciferase activity was increased
fivefold when chenodeoxycholate or deoxycholate were added. Northern blot
analyses revealed that the expression of LST-2 was increased by addition of
chenodeoxycholate or deoxycholate in a dose-dependent manner.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrated that the transcription of the LST-2 gene is 
regulated by three transcription factors, FXR, HNF1alpha, and HNF3beta. HNF1alpha
and HNF3beta might contribute to its liver-specific expression, and FXR might
play a role in its transcriptional activation by bile acids.

PMID: 16741617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Vnitr Lek. 2006 Mar;52(3):275-9.

[Glibenclamide instead of insulin: a new chance for MODY 3 type diabetes
patients: case report].

[Article in Czech]

Brunerová L(1), Treslová L, Pruhová S, Vosáhlo J, Broz J, Lebl J, Andel M.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetologické centrum II interní kliniky 3 lékarské fakulty UK a FN Královské
Vinohrady, Praha. brunerova@seznam.cz

Comment in
    Vnitr Lek. 2006 Mar;52(3):205-6.

MODY 3 belongs to monogenic forms of diabetes mellitus and is caused by
monoallelic mutation in gene for transcription factor HNF-1alpha, essential for
regulation of beta-cell function. Clinical presentation of MODY 3 is similar to
that of type 1 diabetes. Although MODY 3 patients are not threatened by
ketoacidosis, tight metabolic control is important for prevention of chronic
diabetic complications. In the sibbling pair diabetes was manifested by osmotic
symptoms resulting from hyperglycaemia at the age of 18 years (brother) resp. 15 
years (sister) and both of them started being treated with intensified insulin
treatment. Metabolic control of the brother was very tight with HbA1c 3.3 % but
frequent hypoglycaemias occured. On the contrary metabolic control of the sister 
was very poor due to her non-compliance (HbA1c 10.9 %, IFCC). Molecular-genetic
testing proved HNF-1alpha gene mutation (Arg200Gly). In accordance with the
references treatment with sulphonylurea derivate glibenclamide was initiated [at 
the doses 1.25 (brother) resp. 7.5 (sister) mg/day] and insulin treatment was
discontinued. The treatment change led to better quality of life and metabolic
control in both the patients and suprisingly to the lower frequency of the
hypoglycaemias in the brother (HbA1c decreased from 3.3 % to 2.8 % in three
months in the brother resp. from 10.9 % to 10.0 % in two months in the sister).
Molecular-genetic testing enables the change of treatment leading to better
quality of life and metabolic control, although its longterm safety and efficacy 
will have to be confirmed.

PMID: 16722160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2006 Oct 1;216(1):1-10. Epub 2006 May 18.

The regulation of cytochrome P450 2E1 during LPS-induced inflammation in the rat.

Abdulla D(1), Goralski KB, Renton KW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Sir Charles Tupper Medical Bldg., Dalhousie
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada B3H 4H7.

It is well known that inflammatory and infectious conditions differentially
regulate cytochrome P450 (P450)-mediated drug metabolism in the liver. We have
previously outlined a potential pathway for the downregulation in hepatic
cytochrome P450 following LPS-mediated inflammation in the CNS (Abdulla, D.,
Goralski, K.B., Garcia Del Busto Cano, E., Renton, K.W., 2005. The signal
transduction pathways involved in hepatic cytochrome P450 regulation in the rat
during an LPS-induced model of CNS inflammation. Drug Metab. Dispos). The purpose
of this study was to outline the effects of LPS-induced peripheral and central
nervous system inflammation on hepatic cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1) in vivo, an
enzyme that plays an important role in various physiological and pathological
states. We report an increase in hepatic mRNA expression of CYP2E1 that occurred 
as early as 2-3 h following either the intraperitoneal (i.p.) injection of 5
mg/kg LPS or i.c.v. administration of 25 mug of LPS. This increase in CYP2E1 mRNA
expression was sustained for 24 h. In sharp contrast to the increase in hepatic
CYP2E1 mRNA, we observed a significant reduction in the catalytic activity of
this enzyme 24 h following either the i.c.v. or i.p. administration of LPS.
Cycloheximide or actinomycin-D did not change the LPS-mediated downregulation in 
hepatic CYP2E1 catalytic activity. Our results support the idea that LPS acts at 
two different levels to regulate hepatic CYP2E1: a transcriptional level to
increase CYP2E1 mRNA expression and a post-transcriptional level to regulate
CYP2E1 protein and activity.

PMID: 16712892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2006 Oct;74(1):75-81. Epub 2006 May 2.

Genetic and clinical characteristics of Korean maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY) patients.

Hwang JS(1), Shin CH, Yang SW, Jung SY, Huh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, South
Korea.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is mostly caused by mutations of the 
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha (MODY3) and glucokinase (MODY2) genes in
Caucasians. But most Japanese and Chinese MODY patients are not linked to known
MODY genes. In this study, we examined the genetic and clinical characteristics
of Korean subjects with MODY and early onset type 2 diabetes who had been
diagnosed before 15 years of age. The study included 23 unrelated subjects
fulfilling the criteria for MODY (three consecutive generations of type 2
diabetes with at least one member diagnosed under the age of 25 year) and 17
unrelated subjects diagnosed with early onset type 2 DM under the age of 15
years. The HNF-4alpha (MODY1), glucokinase (MODY2) and HNF-1alpha (MODY3) genes
were analysed by direct sequencing. Mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene were found
in two patients (5%). One of these, P393fsdelC, was novel, and was found in a
patient classified in the MODY group. The GCK gene mutation, R191W, was
identified in one patient classified as early-onset type 2 DM (2.5%). No
mutations were found in the HNF-4alpha gene, except the T130I variant, which is a
known rare polymorphism. In conclusion, the mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene and 
GCK account for a small proportion, about 5% and 2.5%, respectively, in Korean
MODY and early onset type 2 patients. The majority of MODY cases in the Korean
population are due to defects in unknown genes.

PMID: 16632067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Mol Pharmacol. 2006 Jul;70(1):277-86. Epub 2006 Apr 11.

Chemical inducers of rodent glutathione s-transferases down-regulate human GSTA1 
transcription through a mechanism involving variant hepatic nuclear factor 1-C.

Romero L(1), Ng L, Kirby GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Guelph, Guelph, ON, Canada
N1G 2W1. gkirby@uoguelph.ca.

The regulation of human GSTA1 by chemical inducers of rodent glutathione
S-transferases (GSTs) and the regulatory role of hepatic nuclear factor (HNF) 1
was investigated in Caco-2 cells. Treatment of preconfluent and confluent cells
with 12-O-tetra-decanoyl phorbol-13-acetate (TPA), 3-methylcholanthrene (3-MC),
2-tert-butyl-4-hydroxy-anisol (BHA), and phenobarbital (PB) reduced GSTA1 mRNA
levels in preconfluent and confluent cells. Constitutive levels of GSTA1 and
HNF1alpha mRNA were elevated 6.25- and 50-fold, respectively, in postconfluent
cells compared with preconfluent cells. Overexpression of HNF1alpha in cells
transfected with a GSTA1 promoter-luciferase construct (pGSTA1-1591-luc) resulted
in dose-related increases in reporter activity not observed when an HNF1 response
element (HRE) in the proximal promoter was mutated (pGSTA1-DeltaHNF1-luc). TPA,
3-MC, BHA, and PB reduced HNF1alpha mRNA levels in preconfluent and confluent
cells and caused marked reductions in luciferase activity in pGSTA1-1591-luc
transfectants. Transcriptional repression was abrogated with pGSTA1-DeltaHNF1-luc
and with truncated constructs that eliminated a functional HRE. Moreover,
cotransfection of pHNF1alpha with pGSTA1-1591-luc partially prevented the
reduction in luciferase activity by rodent GST inducers. Immunoblot analysis of
DNA binding studies indicate that variant (v)HNF1-C binding to HRE is increased
in preconfluent cells treated with 3-MC, BHA, and PB. In addition, overexpression
of vHNF1-C repressed GSTA1 transcriptional activity in luciferase reporter
assays. Finally, treatment with 3-MC, BHA, and PB increased vHNF1-C mRNA levels
in preconfluent cells. These data demonstrate that repression of human GSTA1
transcription by chemical inducers of rodent GSTs occurs, in part, through a
mechanism involving the repressive action of vHNF1-C.

PMID: 16608922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Lipid Res. 2006 Jul;47(7):1463-77. Epub 2006 Apr 7.

Transcriptional regulation of the human hepatic lipase (LIPC) gene promoter.

Rufibach LE(1), Duncan SA, Battle M, Deeb SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.
lewarner@u.washington.edu

Hepatic lipase (HL) plays a key role in the metabolism of plasma lipoproteins,
and its level of activity requires tight regulation, given the association of
both low and high levels with atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease.
However, little is known about the factors responsible for HL expression. Here,
we report that the human hepatic lipase gene (LIPC) promoter is regulated by
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha), peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha), apolipoprotein A-I regulatory
protein-1 (ARP-1), and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha). Reporter
analysis showed that HNF4alpha directly regulates the LIPC promoter via two newly
identified direct repeat elements, DR1 and DR4. PGC-1alpha is capable of
stimulating the HNF4alpha-dependent transactivation of the LIPC promoter. ARP-1
displaces HNF4alpha from the DR1 site and blocks its ability to activate the LIPC
promoter. Induction by HNF1alpha requires the HNF1 binding site and upon
cotransfection with HNF4alpha leads to an additive effect. In addition, the in
vivo relevance of HNF4alpha in LIPC expression is shown by the ability of the
HNF4alpha antagonist Medica 16 to repress endogenous LIPC mRNA expression.
Furthermore, disruption of Hnf4alpha in mice prevents the expression of HL mRNA
in liver. The overall effect these transcription factors have on HL expression
will ultimately depend on the interplay between these various factors and their
relative intracellular concentrations.

PMID: 16603721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Diabetologia. 2006 Jun;49(6):1412-20. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Prenatal programming of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha in the rat: A key
mechanism in the 'foetal origins of hyperglycaemia'?

Nyirenda MJ(1), Dean S, Lyons V, Chapman KE, Seckl JR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Queen's Medical Research Institute,
University of Edinburgh, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK.
m.nyirenda@ed.ac.uk

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2006 Nov;49(11):2809-10.
    Diabetologia. 2006 Jun;49(6):1138-41.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Prenatal glucocorticoid exposure causes lifelong hyperglycaemia 
in rat offspring, associated with permanently increased hepatic
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 2 (PCK2), the rate-controlling enzyme of
gluconeogenesis. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying the 'programming' of
PCK2, this study examined the effect of prenatal dexamethasone treatment on
expression of transcription factors that regulate Pck2.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Real-time RT-PCR and in situ hybridisation were used to
measure and localise hepatic mRNA transcribed from the genes for PCK2, hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4, alpha (HNF4A), transcription factor 1 (TCF1), CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein, alpha (CEBPA), CEBPB, the glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1) and
peroxisome proliferative activated receptor, gamma, coactivator 1 alpha
(PPARGC1A) in foetal and adult offspring of dams treated with dexamethasone or
vehicle during the last week of gestation.
RESULTS: Prenatal dexamethasone exposure significantly elevated Hnf4a mRNA
expression in foetal and adult liver. This resulted from increased expression of 
isoforms derived from the 'adult' (P1) Hnf4a promoter. In contrast, isoforms from
the 'foetal' (P2) promoter were markedly suppressed by dexamethasone. Like Pck2, 
the increase in hepatic Hnf4a mRNA occurred exclusively in the periportal zone.
Foetal Tcf1 expression was also increased by dexamethasone treatment, but this
did not persist into adulthood. Prenatal dexamethasone did not affect the amounts
of foetal and/or adult Cebpa, Cebpb, Nr3c1 or Ppargc1a mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Prenatal dexamethasone exposure caused a permanent
increase in hepatic Hnf4a mRNA. This increase, which was associated with a
premature switch from foetal to adult promoter predominance, was congruent with
changes in Pck2 expression. These data suggest that HNF4A might mediate Pck2
overexpression and subsequent hyperglycaemia.

PMID: 16570165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Feb;19(2):143-8.

Molecular genetic analysis of MODY candidate genes in Japanese patients with
non-obese juvenile onset diabetes mellitus.

Kagami-Takasugi M(1), Katsumata N, Tanaka T, Tajima T, Fujieda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

We analyzed 84 Japanese patients with juvenile-onset (before 18 years of age)
non-obese diabetes mellitus (DM) for mutations in the genes for HNF-1alpha,
HNF-4alpha and HNF-1beta. In HNF-1alpha, previously reported mutations (R271W and
R272C) and one novel sequence variant (at nucleotide -129/-130 insTTGGGG of the
promoter region) were identified in three different patients. In vitro functional
study of the new promoter variant demonstrated that the transcriptional activity 
was 1.6-2.0 times higher than that of the wild-type. This may lead to
overexpression of HNF-1alpha and subsequent negative regulation of the target
genes of HNF-1alpha. No mutation was identified in the HNF-4alpha and HNF-1beta
genes. In this study on a small series of non-obese Japanese patients with
juvenile-onset DM, the prevalence of MODY3 was 3.5%. The significance of the new 
promoter variant in the development of DM is unclear; however, a promoter
mutation in the HNF-1alpha gene could be diabetogenic.

PMID: 16562587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Endocrinology. 2006 Jun;147(6):2657-63. Epub 2006 Mar 23.

Minireview: pharmacogenetics and beyond: the interaction of therapeutic response,
beta-cell physiology, and genetics in diabetes.

Hattersley AT(1), Pearson ER.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Exeter EX2 5DW, United Kingdom.
a.t.hattersley@exeter.ac.uk

Defining the molecular genetics of diabetes gives new insight into the underlying
etiology and so should help improve treatment. The genetic etiology is now known 
for most patients with beta-cell monogenic diabetes, allowing genetic
classification. We review how this genetic knowledge alters treatment. Patients
with a glucose-sensing beta-cell defect due to glucokinase mutations have
regulated, mild, fasting hyperglycemia. Oral hypoglycemic agents or low-dose
insulin rarely improve glycemic control. Patients with hepatic nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF1alpha) mutations have progressive beta-cell deterioration and 
require treatment. HNF1alpha patients are 4 times more sensitive to sulfonylureas
than matched type 2 diabetic patients. This is partly due to greater insulin
secretion, reflecting the fact that the defect in HNF1alpha deficiency precedes
the K(ATP) channel where sulfonylureas act. HNF1beta is expressed in pancreatic
stem cells before differentiation into endocrine or exocrine cells, so patients
with HNF1beta mutations have reduced pancreatic development, resulting in
early-onset diabetes and exocrine dysfunction. These patients usually rapidly
require insulin and are not sensitive to sulfonylureas. Thirty-five to 50% of
patients diagnosed with diabetes before 6 months have a mutation in Kir6.2. The
mutated KATP channel in these patients does not close in response to increased
ATP concentrations, but can be closed when sulfonylureas bind to the sulfonylurea
receptor 1 subunit of the channel by an ATP-independent route. These patients are
usually insulin dependent, but have excellent glycemic control on high-dose
sulfonylureas tablets. In conclusion, the defining of molecular genetic etiology 
in monogenic diabetes has identified several specific beta-cell defects, and
these are critical in determining the response to treatment.

PMID: 16556760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Jan-Feb;1759(1-2):44-50. Epub 2006 Feb 13.

Activin A-induced expression of PAX4 in AR42J-B13 cells involves the increase in 
transactivation of E47/E12.

Kanno R(1), Ogihara T, Igarashi Y, Tanaka Y, Smith SB, Kojima I, German MS,
Kawamori R, Watada H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Metabolism and Endocrinology, Juntendo University
School of Medicine, 2-1-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8421, Japan.

Pax4 is a paired-homeodomain containing transcriptional factor that controls the 
differentiation of pancreatic beta cells. The aim of this study was to
investigate the mechanism of PAX4 expression by activin A. By reporter gene
analysis using AR42J-B13 cells, in which treatment with activin A induced PAX4
mRNA expression, we identified that a short sequence located approximately 1930
bp upstream of the transcriptional start site is essential for activin A induced 
PAX4 promoter activation. This region contains an E box and binding sites for
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha. Mutation introduced in each binding site 
markedly reduced activin A responsiveness. It has been reported that HNF-1alpha
synergizes with basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) proteins in activating the PAX4
promoter, and we demonstrated that activin A strongly enhanced the functional
activity of E47/E12 without the increase in its binding ability. In addition,
suppression of E47/E12 expression in AR42J-B13 cells using siRNA oligonucleotides
results in the significant decrease in the intrinsic activin A-induced PAX4
expression. Our results suggest that activin A enhances PAX4 expression by
enhanced transactivation of E47/E12 proteins and might result in a cumulative
transactivation of the promoter.

PMID: 16546275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Hepatology. 2006 Mar;43(3):515-24.

Genotype-phenotype correlation in hepatocellular adenoma: new classification and 
relationship with HCC.

Zucman-Rossi J(1), Jeannot E, Nhieu JT, Scoazec JY, Guettier C, Rebouissou S,
Bacq Y, Leteurtre E, Paradis V, Michalak S, Wendum D, Chiche L, Fabre M,
Mellottee L, Laurent C, Partensky C, Castaing D, Zafrani ES, Laurent-Puig P,
Balabaud C, Bioulac-Sage P.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, U674, IUH, CEPH, Paris, France. zucman@cephb.fr

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2006 Mar;43(3):401-4.
    Histopathology. 2007 Dec;51(6):855-6.

Hepatocellular adenomas are benign tumors that can be difficult to diagnose. To
refine their classification, we performed a comprehensive analysis of their
genetic, pathological, and clinical features. A multicentric series of 96 liver
tumors with a firm or possible diagnosis of hepatocellular adenoma was reviewed
by liver pathologists. In all cases, the genes coding for hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) and beta-catenin were sequenced. No tumors were mutated
in both HNF1alpha and beta-catenin enabling tumors to be classified into 3
groups, according to genotype. Tumors with HNF1alpha mutations formed the most
important group of adenomas (44 cases). They were phenotypically characterized by
marked steatosis (P < 10(-4)), lack of cytological abnormalities (P < 10(-6)),
and no inflammatory infiltrates (P < 10(-4)). In contrast, the group of tumors
defined by beta-catenin activation included 13 lesions with frequent cytological 
abnormalities and pseudo-glandular formation (P < 10(-5)). The third group of
tumors without mutation was divided into two subgroups based on the presence of
inflammatory infiltrates. The subgroup of tumors consisting of 17 inflammatory
lesions, resembled telangiectatic focal nodular hyperplasias, with frequent
cytological abnormalities (P = 10(-3)), ductular reaction (P < 10(-2)), and
dystrophic vessels (P = .02). In this classification, hepatocellular carcinoma
associated with adenoma or borderline lesions between carcinoma and adenoma is
found in 46% of the beta-catenin-mutated tumors whereas they are never observed
in inflammatory lesions and are rarely found in HNF1alpha mutated tumors (P =
.004). In conclusion, the molecular and pathological classification of
hepatocellular adenomas permits the identification of strong genotype-phenotype
correlations and suggests that adenomas with beta-catenin activation have a
higher risk of malignant transformation.

PMID: 16496320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Gut. 2006 Sep;55(9):1321-31. Epub 2006 Feb 16.

Cholesterol dependent downregulation of mouse and human apical sodium dependent
bile acid transporter (ASBT) gene expression: molecular mechanism and
physiological consequences.

Thomas C(1), Landrier JF, Gaillard D, Grober J, Monnot MC, Athias A, Besnard P.

Author information: 
(1)Physiologie de la Nutrition, ENSBANA, 1 Esplanade Erasme, 21000 Dijon, France.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Faecal bile acid elimination greatly contributes to
cholesterol homeostasis. Synthesised from cholesterol in the liver, bile acids
are actively reclaimed in the ileum by the apical sodium dependent bile acid
transporter (ASBT). Although the expression level of ASBT affects body
cholesterol balance, the impact of cholesterol on ASBT gene expression remains
unclear. In this study, the effect of cholesterol on ASBT expression and ileal
bile acid uptake was explored in vivo and in vitro.
METHODS: ASBT gene expression was assessed by real time quantitative polymerase
chain reaction and northern or western blotting, or both, in mice subjected to a 
2% cholesterol diet for two weeks, in mouse ileal explants, or in human
enterocyte-like Caco-2 cells cultured in sterol enriched or depleted media. Bile 
acid uptake was determined by measuring [3H]-taurocholic acid influx into in situ
isolated ileal loops from mice or into differentiated Caco-2 cells. Molecular
analysis of mouse and human ASBT promoters was undertaken with reporter assays,
site directed mutagenesis, and electrophoretic mobility shift assays.
RESULTS: In mice, cholesterol enriched diet triggered a downregulation of ASBT
expression (mRNA and protein), a fall in ileal bile acid uptake, and a rise in
the faecal excretion of bile acids. This effect was direct as it was reproduced
ex vivo using mouse ileal explants and in vitro in differentiated Caco-2 cells.
CONCLUSIONS: This regulation, which involves an original partnership between
SREBP-2 and HNF-1alpha transcription factors, affects ileal bile acid recycling
and thus might participate in the maintenance of body cholesterol homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC1860007
PMID: 16484503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Am J Physiol Regul Integr Comp Physiol. 2006 Jul;291(1):R131-7. Epub 2006 Feb 9.

A novel approach to assess insulin sensitivity reveals no increased insulin
sensitivity in mice with a dominant-negative mutant hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha.

Ahrén B(1), Pacini G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Lund University, Lund, Sweden. bo.ahren@med.lu.se

In phenotype experiments in mice, determination of dynamic insulin sensitivity
often uses the insulin tolerance test. However, the interpretation of this test
is complicated by the counterregulation occurring at low glucose. To overcome
this problem, we determined the dynamic insulin sensitivity after inhibition of
endogenous insulin secretion by diazoxide (25 mg/kg) in association with
intravenous administration of glucose plus insulin (the DSGIT technique).
Estimation of insulin sensitivity index (SI) by this technique showed good
correlation to SI from a regular intravenous glucose tolerance test (r = 0.87; P 
< 0.001; n = 15). With DSGIT, we evaluated dynamic insulin sensitivity in mice
with a rat insulin promoter (beta-cell-targeted) dominant-negative mutation of
hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha [RIP-DN HNF-1alpha (Tg) mice]. When insulin
was administered exogenously at the same dose in Tg and wild-type (WT) mice,
plasma insulin levels were higher in WT, indicating an increased insulin
clearance in Tg mice. When the diazoxide test was used, different doses of
insulin were therefore administered (0.1 and 0.15 U/kg in WT and 0.2 and 0.25
U/kg in Tg) to achieve similar insulin levels in the groups. Minimal model
analysis showed that SI was the same in the two groups (0.78 +/- 0.21 x 10(-4)
min.pmol(-1).l(-1) in WT vs. 0.60 +/- 0.11 in Tg; P = 0.45) as was the glucose
elimination rate (P = 0.27). We conclude that 1) the DSGIT technique determines
the in vivo dynamic insulin action in mice, 2) insulin clearance is increased in 
Tg mice, and 3) chronic islet dysfunction in RIP-DN HNF-1alpha mice is not
compensated with increased insulin sensitivity.

PMID: 16469839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2006 Sep-Oct;22(5):348-55.

Glucokinase mutations in young children with hyperglycemia.

Codner E(1), Deng L, Pérez-Bravo F, Román R, Lanzano P, Cassorla F, Chung WK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Maternal and Child Research (I.D.I.M.I.), School of Medicine,
University of Chile, Santiago, Chile. ecodner@med.uchile.cl

BACKGROUND: The etiology of mild hyperglycemia without ketoacidosis in young
children is often unknown. Maturity onset diabetes of youth (MODY) is a form of
diabetes mellitus (DM) characterized by fasting hyperglycemia without evidence
for autoimmune destruction of beta-cells.
METHODS: We genetically analyzed four families of young children with fasting
hyperglycemia with family histories of diabetes for mutations in the genes for
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4alpha), glucokinase (GCK), and hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1alpha), the genes responsible for MODY1, MODY2, and
MODY3, respectively.
RESULTS: We identified mutations in GCK (Gly258Asp, Arg303Trp, and Arg191Gln) in 
three of the four families. Molecular genetic characterization in these children 
clarified the etiology and prognosis of the hyperglycemia and allowed
discontinuation of insulin therapy in one family.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that molecular evaluation for MODY in children with mild
fasting hyperglycemia without ketosis with family histories of diabetes can
provide important prognostic information to guide therapy and exclude preclinical
type 1 diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 16444761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2006 Feb;109(2):173-79.

Microarray analysis of selenium-depleted and selenium-supplemented mice.

Hooven LA(1), Butler J, Ream LW, Whanger PD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental and Molecular Toxicology, Oregon State University,
Corvallis, OR 97331, USA.

Nutritional selenium deficiency is associated with Keshan disease in humans and
white muscle disease in ruminant livestock. In this study, mice were fed a
selenium-deficient diet for three generations. Female mice from the third
depleted generation of these mice were given water containing either no added
selenium or 0.1 or 1.0 ppm selenium as sodium selenate; DNA microarrays were used
to compare gene expression in the muscle from mice fed the selenium diets to that
from mice remaining on the depleted diet. The most prominent expression increases
were observed with Ptger2 (a prostaglandin E receptor), Tcrb-V13 (a T-cell
receptor beta), Tcf-7 (a T-cell transcription factor), and Lck (lymphocyte
protein tyrosine kinase), and the major consistent decrease was Vav2, an oncogene
in mice consuming the selenium containing diets.

PMID: 16444006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Diabetes. 2006 Feb;55(2):405-11.

Contrasting insulin sensitivity of endogenous glucose production rate in subjects
with hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta and -1alpha mutations.

Brackenridge A(1), Pearson ER, Shojaee-Moradie F, Hattersley AT, Russell-Jones D,
Umpleby AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Royal Surrey County Hospital,
Guildford, UK.

Heterozygous mutations in the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-1alpha and -1beta result in MODY (maturity-onset diabetes of the young).
Despite structural similarity between HNF-1alpha and -1beta, HNF-1beta mutation
carriers have hyperinsulinemia, whereas HNF-1alpha mutation carriers have normal 
or reduced insulin concentrations. We examined whether HNF-1beta mutation
carriers are insulin resistant. The endogenous glucose production rate and rate
of glucose uptake were measured with a two-step, low-dose (0.3 mU . kg(-1) .
min(-1)) and high-dose (1.5 mU . kg(-1) . min(-1)) hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic
clamp, with an infusion of [6,6-(2)H(2)]glucose, in six subjects with HNF-1alpha 
mutations, six subjects with HNF-1beta mutations, and six control subjects,
matched for age, sex, and BMI. Endogenous glucose production rate was not
suppressed by low-dose insulin in HNF-1beta subjects but was suppressed by 89% in
HNF-1alpha subjects (P = 0.004) and 80% in control subjects (P < 0.001).
Insulin-stimulated glucose uptake and suppression of lipolysis were similar in
all groups at low- and high-dose insulin. Subjects with HNF-1beta mutations have 
reduced insulin sensitivity of endogenous glucose production but normal
peripheral insulin sensitivity. This is likely to reflect reduced action of
HNF-1beta in the liver and possibly the kidney. This may be mediated through
regulation by HNF-1beta of the key gluconeogenic enzymes glucose-6-phosphatase or
PEPCK.

PMID: 16443774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. FEBS Lett. 2006 Feb 20;580(5):1227-30. Epub 2006 Jan 20.

Bcr interferes with beta-catenin-Tcf1 interaction.

Ress A(1), Moelling K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Virology, University of Zurich, Gloriastrasse 30, CH-8006
Zurich, Switzerland.

The beta-catenin/Tcf complex is a downstream effector of the Wnt signalling
pathway. It is a transcription complex, which activates gene expression and
contributes to proliferation and tumor progression. Tcf1 in complex with
beta-catenin is able to activate beta-catenin-dependent gene expression. We
demonstrate that expressed Bcr is able to bind the transcription factor Tcf1 to
disrupt the Tcf1/beta-catenin complex. Phosphorylation of Bcr by the tyrosine
kinase pp60(src) can lead to dissociation of the transcriptionally inactive
Bcr/Tcf1 complex. Thus two independent mechanisms may regulate
Tcf/beta-catenin-mediated transcription via Bcr: binding to beta-catenin as we
have previously shown and to Tcf1 as shown here.

PMID: 16442529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Diabetologia. 2006 Mar;49(3):519-26. Epub 2006 Jan 27.

Downregulation of protein kinase B/Akt-1 mediates INS-1 insulinoma cell apoptosis
induced by dominant-negative suppression of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
function.

Wobser H(1), Bonner C, Nolan JJ, Byrne MM, Prehn JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland, 123 St.
Stephen's Green, Dublin 2, Ireland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Inactivating mutations in Tcf1, which encodes the transcription 
factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, cause maturity-onset diabetes of
the young-3. We have previously shown that a dominant-negative mutant
(DN-HNF-1alpha) renders INS-1 insulinoma cells sensitive to the mitochondrial
apoptosis pathway, but the underlying alterations in signal transduction remain
unknown.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Using a reverse tetracycline-dependent transactivator
system, DN-HNF-1alpha-induced apoptosis was assessed by immunoblotting and
caspase assays. Alterations in AKT1 kinase/protein kinase B (AKT1) survival
signalling during DN-HNF-1alpha-induced apoptosis were investigated by
phospho-specific immunodetection and transient transfection experiments.
RESULTS: Induction of DN-HNF-1alpha caused significant changes in the
activation-specific phosphorylation status of AKT1 that were preceded by a
downregulation of Ins1 gene transcription. Phosphorylation of AKT1 at Ser473 was 
dramatically reduced after 36 to 48 h of DN-HNF-1alpha induction and coincided
with maximal apoptosis activation. Overexpression of a constitutively active
mutant of Akt1 rescued INS-1 cells from DN-HNF-1alpha-induced apoptosis, while
ectopic expression of a dominant-negative mutant mimicked the effect of
DN-HNF-1alpha on apoptosis activation. Pharmacological suppression of growth
factor survival signalling through administration of the phosphatidylinositol-3
kinase (PI-3K) inhibitor wortmannin accelerated the induction of apoptosis by
DN-HNF-1alpha.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These data suggest that a decrease in PI-3K/AKT1
survival signalling mediates DN-HNF-1alpha-induced apoptosis in insulin-secreting
cells.

PMID: 16440211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Tissue Eng. 2005 Nov-Dec;11(11-12):1650-7.

Novel method to examine hepatocyte-specific gene expression in a functional
coculture system.

Kurosawa Y(1), Taniguchi A, Okano T.

Author information: 
(1)Bionic Materials Technology Group, Biomaterials Center, National Institute for
Materials Science, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

To mimic native tissue function, coculture systems are an extremely useful model.
In many cases, differentiated functions can be maintained only through the
interactions of various cell types. Therefore, methods for examining the
interactions between cocultured cells are necessary. The assessment of
cell-to-cell cross-talk at the level of gene expression is one such method to
examine interactions between different cell types. However, it is generally
difficult to determine the gene expression of specific cell types in coculture
without first separating cell populations. To overcome these obstacles, we have
established a novel method to determine gene expression levels of a targeted cell
population in coculture, using species-specific primers. With this approach, we
were able to determine hepatocyte-specific gene expression of Fao cells (a rat
hepatocyte cell line) in culture with human umbilical vein endothelial cells
(HUVECs). Expression of both albumin and apolipoprotein A-I (apoA-I) increased
time dependently for 10 days and maintained significantly higher expression in
the coculture system as compared with isolated Fao cells. This indicates that
hepatocyte function increased gradually in our coculture system and could be
maintained long-term, suggesting that the construction of mature cell-to-cell
communication between the two cell lines required a considerable amount of time. 
The expression of HNF-4 and HNF-1alpha, which are liver-enriched transcription
factors, did not differ between the monolayer and cocultured Fao cells,
suggesting that expression of HNF-4 and HNF-1alpha was not responsible for the
increased expression albumin and apoA-I. Our findings suggest that this novel
method for the detection of gene expression of targeted cell populations can be a
useful tool in determining the molecular mechanisms that regulate communication
between different cell types.

PMID: 16411810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Diabet Med. 2006 Jan;23(1):67-71.

Islet autoimmunity and genetic mutations in Chinese subjects initially thought to
have Type 1B diabetes.

Zhang D(1), Zhou Z, Li L, Weng J, Huang G, Jing P, Zhang C, Peng J, Xiu L.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, Institute of Metabolism and Endocrinology, The Second Xiangya
Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China.

AIMS: To explore the contribution of islet autoimmunity and genetic mutations in 
Chinese patients initially thought to have Type 1B diabetes.
METHODS: A group of 33 Chinese patients with newly diagnosed Type 1B diabetes,
were identified by the absence of autoantibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase
(GAD), IA-2, insulin, thyroid globulin or thyroid peroxidase, or high-risk HLA-DQ
haplotypes. The cohort was further characterized by measurement of autoantibodies
to carboxypeptidase H (CPH) and SOX13 using radioligand assays, and testing for
genetic mutations associated with MODY3/MODY6 and mitochondrial diabetes.
Mutations of HNF-1alpha (MODY3) and neuroD1/beta2 (MODY6) genes were screened
using the single-strand conformation polymorphism (SSCP) technique and
sequencing. Mitochondrial DNA mutations were analysed with polymerase chain
reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP).
RESULTS: Within the cohort, we found one patient with a novel mutation, R321H
(CGC-->CAC) in exon 5 of the HNF-1alpha gene, one with ND1 mt3316 G-->A mutation 
in mitochondrial DNA, five with Ala45Thr polymorphisms in the neuroD1/beta2 gene,
and two patients with autoantibodies to SOX13.
CONCLUSIONS: Some of the Chinese patients originally thought to have Type 1B
diabetes do have other evidence of islet autoimmunity and genetic mutations
involved in the underlying aetiology. This suggests that more rigorous screening 
for these conditions is needed before classifying subjects as having Type 1B
diabetes.

PMID: 16409568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Methods Enzymol. 2005;400:22-46.

Identification and characterization of functional hepatocyte nuclear factor
1-binding sites in UDP-glucuronosyltransferase genes.

Gardner-Stephen DA(1), Gregory PA, Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Oncology, Flinders University School of Medicine,
Flinders-Medical Center, Adelaide, Australia.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) transcription factor family is composed of
two closely related homeodomain proteins with similar but distinct expression
profiles. Homodimers and heterodimers of these transcription factors, HNF1alpha
and HNF1beta, increase transcription from target genes through direct physical
interaction with one or more elements of sufficient similarity to a 13
nucleotide-inverted dyad consensus-binding sequence. Potential HNF1-binding sites
have been found in the proximal upstream regulatory regions of most known human
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) genes. As the liver and gastrointestinal tract 
are both important sites of glucuronidation and express significant levels of one
or both HNF1 proteins, it is thought that these homeoproteins may play a role in 
transcriptional regulation of UGTs. This chapter explores the current evidence
that HNF1 transcription factors are explicitly involved in the transcription of
mammalian UGT genes. Most data supporting this hypothesis come from in vitro
reporter assays, site-directed mutagenesis, and electrophoretic mobility-shift
assays, for which methods are detailed. However, as in vitro functionality of
transcription factors does not necessarily imply significance in vivo, some of
the limitations of these techniques are also examined. In addition, available in 
vivo data are discussed, with particular attention given to contributions made by
HNF1alpha knockout mouse models and microarray studies of human tissue. Finally, 
possible scenarios in which HNF1-mediated regulation of UGT expression may be
clinically relevant are suggested.

PMID: 16399341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Nat Genet. 2006 Jan;38(1):12-3.

Beyond the beta cell in diabetes.

Hattersley AT.

Comment on
    Nat Genet. 2006 Jan;38(1):54-62.

PMID: 16380722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Diabetes. 2006 Jan;55(1):61-9.

A vHNF1/TCF2-HNF6 cascade regulates the transcription factor network that
controls generation of pancreatic precursor cells.

Poll AV(1), Pierreux CE, Lokmane L, Haumaitre C, Achouri Y, Jacquemin P, Rousseau
GG, Cereghini S, Lemaigre FP.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone and Metabolic Research Unit, Université Catholique de Louvain and
Institute of Cellular Pathology, Avenue Hippocrate 75/7529, B-1200 Brussels,
Belgium.

Generation of pancreatic precursor cells in the endoderm is controlled by a
network of transcription factors. Hepatocyte nuclear factor-6 (HNF6) is a key
player in this network, because it controls the initiation of the expression of
pancreatic and duodenal homeobox 1 (Pdx1), the earliest marker of pancreatic
precursor cells. To further characterize this network, we have investigated how
the expression of HNF6 is controlled in mouse endoderm, by using in vitro and in 
vivo protein-DNA interaction techniques combined with endoderm electroporation,
transgenesis, and gene inactivation in embryos. We delineated Hnf6 regulatory
regions that confer expression of a reporter gene in the embryonic endoderm but
not in extraembryonic visceral endoderm. HNF6 expression in the embryonic
endoderm was found to depend on an intronic enhancer. This enhancer contains
functional binding sites for the tissue-specific factors of the forkhead box A
and HNF1 families. Among the latter, variant HNF1 (vHNF1)/TCF2, which is
expressed before HNF6 in the endoderm, was found to be critical for HNF6
expression. Therefore, the sequential activation of vHNF1, HNF6, and Pdx1 in the 
endoderm appears to control the generation of pancreatic precursors. This cascade
may be used to benchmark in vitro differentiation of pancreatic precursor cells
from embryonic stem cells, for cell therapy of diabetes.

PMID: 16380477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Apr;6(4):426-32. Epub 2005 Dec 27.

Spatio-temporal patterns of intestine-specific transcription factor expression
during postnatal mouse gut development.

Fang R(1), Olds LC, Sibley E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology, Stanford University School of
Medicine, 750 Welch Road, Suite 116, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA.

The small intestine matures from a primitive tube into morphologically and
functionally distinct regions during gut development. Maximal expression of the
genes encoding the digestive enzymes lactase-phlorizin hydrolase and
sucrase-isomaltase is spatially restricted to distinct segments along the
anterior-posterior axis of the small intestine and is temporally regulated during
postnatal maturation. Transcription factors capable of interacting with the
intestinal lactase and sucrase gene promoters are candidate regulators of
spatio-temporal patterning during gut development and maturation. We aimed to
quantitatively examine and compare the relative expression levels of a set of
intestine-specific transcription factors along the anterior-posterior gut axis
during postnatal maturation. Our analysis was focused on the transcription
factors capable of regulating the intestinal lactase and sucrase-isomaltase
genes. A real-time PCR protocol was used to quantitatively examine and compare
spatially and temporally the relative transcript abundance levels for
intestine-specific factors during postnatal intestinal maturation. Distinct
spatial expressions patterns were detected along the length of the small
intestine for PDX-1, Cdx-2, GATA-4, GATA-5, GATA-6, HNF-1alpha, HNF-1beta and CDP
transcription factor genes. There is a general decline in transcript abundance
for the factor genes during postnatal maturation. Defining the spatio-temporal
expression patterns for intestine-specific transcription factor genes contributes
to investigation of the roles that factor gradients play in mediating gut
development and differentiation.

PMID: 16377257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2006 Jan;8(1):75-82.

IRS1, KCNJ11, PPARgamma2 and HNF-1alpha: do amino acid polymorphisms in these
candidate genes support a shared aetiology between type 1 and type 2 diabetes?

Johansen A(1), Jensen DP, Bergholdt R, Mortensen HB, Pociot F, Nerup J, Hansen T,
Pedersen O; Danish Society of Childhood Diabetes.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Copenhagen,
Denmark. adjo@steno.dk

AIMS: Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1DM) is a chronic disorder primarily triggered
by environmental and immunological factors in genetically susceptible
individuals. Despite the fact that there are indications of common aetiological
features of T1DM and type 2 diabetes (T2DM), variation in genes involved in
insulin secretion and insulin signalling has to a large extent been ignored as
potential modifiers in the pathogenesis of T1DM. Recent studies suggest, however,
that proven T2DM susceptibility gene variants may be involved in the pathogenesis
of T1DM. The objective of this study was to estimate the impact of four selected 
amino acid polymorphisms -IRS-1 Gly972Arg, Kir6.2 Glu23Lys, HNF-1alpha Ala98Val
and PPARgamma2 Pro12Ala in a Danish population of T1DM families.
METHODS: All variants were genotyped in 490 simplex- and multiplex-T1DM families 
applying polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism, and 
results were evaluated by means of a transmission disequilibrium test (TDT)
analysis.
RESULTS: TDT analysis revealed that the Arg972 IRS-1, the Lys23 Kir6.2 and the
Val98 HNF-1alpha variants were transmitted from heterozygous parents to affected 
probands at frequencies of 49.1%, 47.0% and 54.1%, respectively (p > 0.05 for
all). This was similar to the rate of transmission to unaffected siblings. The
transmission rate of the Ala12 PPARgamma2 variant to affected probands was 46.5% 
(p > 0.05) which differed significantly from the transmission to unaffected
offspring (p = 0.024). A combined analysis of the present and published pertinent
data of 1691 transmissions showed a significantly decreased transmission of the
PPARgamma2 Ala12 allele to affected probands (p = 0.0045).
CONCLUSIONS: The Pro12Ala variant of PPARgamma2 is associated with T1DM, the
minor Ala allele conferring a reduced risk. This same finding has been reported
in patients with T2DM.

PMID: 16367885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Cell Metab. 2005 Dec;2(6):385-97.

Tmem27: a cleaved and shed plasma membrane protein that stimulates pancreatic
beta cell proliferation.

Akpinar P(1), Kuwajima S, Krützfeldt J, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, New York 10021, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Metab. 2005 Dec;2(6):342-4.

The signals and molecular mechanisms that regulate the replication of terminally 
differentiated beta cells are unknown. Here, we report the identification and
characterization of transmembrane protein 27 (Tmem27, collectrin) in pancreatic
beta cells. Expression of Tmem27 is reduced in Tcf1(-/-) mice and is increased in
islets of mouse models with hypertrophy of the endocrine pancreas. Tmem27 forms
dimers and its extracellular domain is glycosylated, cleaved and shed from the
plasma membrane of beta cells. This cleavage process is beta cell specific and
does not occur in other cell types. Overexpression of full-length Tmem27, but not
the truncated or soluble protein, leads to increased thymidine incorporation,
whereas silencing of Tmem27 using RNAi results in a reduction of cell
replication. Furthermore, transgenic mice with increased expression of Tmem27 in 
pancreatic beta cells exhibit increased beta cell mass. Our results identify a
pancreatic beta cell transmembrane protein that regulates cell growth of
pancreatic islets.

PMID: 16330324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Cell Metab. 2005 Dec;2(6):342-4.

Collecting new targets in MODY.

Kaestner KH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, and Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 415 Curie Boulevard, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA.

Comment on
    Cell Metab. 2005 Dec;2(6):373-84.
    Cell Metab. 2005 Dec;2(6):385-97.

PMID: 16330318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Dev Biol. 2006 Jan 15;289(2):318-28. Epub 2005 Dec 2.

Maternal XTcf1 and XTcf4 have distinct roles in regulating Wnt target genes.

Standley HJ(1), Destrée O, Kofron M, Wylie C, Heasman J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology ML7007, Cincinnati Children's Hospital
Research Foundation, 3333 Burnet Avenue, OH 45229-3039, USA.

Wnt signaling pathways have essential roles in developing embryos and adult
tissue, and alterations in their function are implicated in many disease
processes including cancers. The major nuclear transducers of Wnt signals are the
Tcf/LEF family of transcription factors, which have binding sites for both the
transcriptional co-repressor groucho, and the co-activator beta-catenin. The
early Xenopus embryo expresses three maternally inherited Tcf/LEF mRNAs, and
their relative roles in regulating the expression of Wnt target genes are not
understood. We have addressed this by using antisense oligonucleotides to deplete
maternal XTcf1 and XTcf4 mRNAs in oocytes. We find that XTcf1 represses
expression of Wnt target genes ventrally and laterally, and activates their
expression dorsally. Double depletions of XTcf1 and XTcf3 suggest that they act
cooperatively to repress Wnt target genes ventrally. In contrast, XTcf4 has no
repressive role but is required to activate expression of Xnr3 and chordin in
organizer cells at the gastrula stage. This work provides evidence for distinct
roles for XTcfs in regulating Wnt target gene expression.

PMID: 16325796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Dec 15;14(24):3945-53. Epub 2005 Nov 21.

T-13910 DNA variant associated with lactase persistence interacts with Oct-1 and 
stimulates lactase promoter activity in vitro.

Lewinsky RH(1), Jensen TG, Møller J, Stensballe A, Olsen J, Troelsen JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Panum Institute, University
of Copenhagen, Denmark.

Two phenotypes exist in the human population with regard to expression of lactase
in adults. Lactase non-persistence (adult-type hypolactasia and lactose
intolerance) is characterized by a decline in the expression of lactase-phlorizin
hydrolase (LPH) after weaning. In contrast, lactase-persistent individuals have a
high LPH throughout their lifespan. Lactase persistence and non-persistence are
associated with a T/C polymorphism at position -13,910 upstream the lactase gene.
A nuclear factor binds more strongly to the T-13,910 variant associated with
lactase persistence than the C-13,910 variant associated with lactase
non-persistence. Oct-1 and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase were
co-purified by DNA affinity purification using the sequence of the T-13,910
variant. Supershift analyses show that Oct-1 binds directly to the T-13,910
variant, and we suggest that GAPDH is co-purified due to interactions with Oct-1.
Expression of Oct-1 stimulates reporter gene expression from the T and the
C-13,910 variant/LPH promoter constructs only when it is co-expressed with
HNF1alpha. Binding sites for other intestinal transcription factors (GATA-6,
HNF4alpha, Fox and Cdx-2) were identified in the region of the -13,910 T/C
polymorphism. Three of these sites are required for the enhancer activity of the 
-13,910 region. The data suggest that the binding of Oct-1 to the T-13,910
variant directs increased lactase promoter activity and this might provide an
explanation for the lactase persistence phenotype in the human population.

PMID: 16301215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2005 Dec 20;1731(3):179-90. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

Identification of target genes of the transcription factor HNF1beta and HNF1alpha
in a human embryonic kidney cell line.

Senkel S(1), Lucas B, Klein-Hitpass L, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
D-45122 Essen, Germany.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta (HNF1beta, TCF2) is a tissue-specific
transcription factor whose mutation in humans leads to renal cysts, genital
malformations, pancreas atrophy and maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY5).
Furthermore, HNF1beta overexpression has been observed in clear cell cancer of
the ovary. To identify potential HNF1beta target genes whose activity may be
deregulated in human patients, we established a human embryonic kidney cell line 
(HEK293) expressing HNF1beta conditionally. Using Flp recombinase, we introduced 
wild type or mutated HNF1beta at a defined chromosomal position allowing a most
reproducible induction of the HNF1beta derivatives upon tetracycline addition. By
oligonucleotide microarrays we identified 25 HNF1beta-regulated genes. By an
identical approach, we identified that the related transcription factor HNF1alpha
(TCF1) affects only nine genes in HEK293 cells and thus is a less efficient
factor in these kidney cells. The HNF1beta target genes dipeptidyl peptidase 4
(DPP4), angiotensin converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) and osteopontin (SPP1) are most
likely direct target genes, as they contain functional HNF1 binding sites in
their promoter region. Since nine of the potential HNF1beta target genes are
deregulated in clear cell carcinoma of the ovary, we propose that HNF1beta
overexpression in the ovarian cancer participates in the altered expression
pattern.

PMID: 16297991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Development. 2005 Dec;132(24):5375-85. Epub 2005 Nov 16.

Distinct roles for Xenopus Tcf/Lef genes in mediating specific responses to
Wnt/beta-catenin signalling in mesoderm development.

Liu F(1), van den Broek O, Destrée O, Hoppler S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Sciences, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen AB25 2ZD, UK.

Tcf/Lef transcription factors and beta-catenin mediate canonical Wnt signalling, 
which plays remarkably diverse roles in embryonic development, stem cell renewal 
and cancer progression. To investigate the molecular mechanisms allowing for
these diverse yet specific functions, we studied the several distinct roles for
Wnt/beta-catenin signalling in early Xenopus development: establishing the dorsal
body axis; regulating mesoderm induction; and subsequent ventrolateral
patterning. Our previous experiments and the expression patterns of Tcf/Lef
factors during these embryonic stages led us to examine whether different Tcf/Lef
factors mediate these distinct events downstream of canonical Wnt/beta-catenin
signalling. By manipulating gene expression with morpholino-driven gene knockdown
and capped RNA-mediated rescue, we show that genes encoding different Tcf/Lef
transcription factors mediate distinct responses to Wnt signalling in early
Xenopus development: Tcf1 and Tcf3 genes are non-redundantly required in mesoderm
induction for mediating primarily transcriptional activation and repression,
respectively; while ventrolateral patterning requires both Tcf1 and Lef1 genes to
express sufficient levels of transcription-activating Tcf factors. Our
investigation further identifies that motifs within their central domain, rather 
than their C-terminus, determine the particular molecular function of Tcf/Lef
factors. These findings suggest that Tcf/Lef genes encode factors of different
activities, which function together in antagonistic or synergistic ways to
modulate the intensity and outcome of Wnt/beta-catenin signalling and to trigger 
tissue-specific responses.

PMID: 16291789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jan 20;281(3):1755-64. Epub 2005 Nov 16.

HIC-5 is a novel repressor of lymphoid enhancer factor/T-cell factor-driven
transcription.

Ghogomu SM(1), van Venrooy S, Ritthaler M, Wedlich D, Gradl D.

Author information: 
(1)Zoologisches Institut II, Universität Karlsruhe (Technische Hochschule),
Kaiserstrasse 12, 76131 Karlsruhe, Germany.

Activation of Wnt/beta-catenin target genes is regulated by a heterodimer of
beta-catenin and the high mobility group box transcription factors of the
lymphoid enhancer factor (LEF)/T-cell factor (TCF) family. In vertebrates, four
LEF/TCF family members have been identified. They all contain a conserved
beta-catenin-binding motif at the N terminus and a highly conserved high mobility
group box for DNA binding. The core sequence between these motifs is less
conserved and contributes to the specific properties of the individual family
members. To identify interacting proteins that allocate specific functions to the
individual LEF/TCF transcription factors, we performed a yeast two-hybrid screen 
using the less conserved core sequence as bait. We isolated the murine LIM
protein HIC-5 (hydrogen peroxide-induced clone 5; also termed ARA-55 (androgen
receptor activator of 55 kDa)) and cloned the highly conserved Xenopus homolog.
In addition, we report that the LIM domain-containing C-terminal half of HIC-5
binds to a conserved alternatively spliced exon in LEF/TCF transcription factors.
Our functional analyses revealed that HIC-5 acts as negative regulator of a
subset of LEF/TCF family members, which have been characterized as activators in 
reporter gene analyses and in the Xenopus axis induction assay. In addition, we
observed a repressive interference of LEF/TCF family members with HIC-5-mediated 
activation of glucocorticoid-driven transcription, which again could be allocated
to specific LEF/TCF subtypes. With the characterization of HIC-5 as a binding
partner of the alternatively spliced exon in LEF/TCF transcription factors, we
identified a novel molecular mechanism in the dialog of steroid and canonical Wnt
signaling that is LEF/TCF subtype-dependent.

PMID: 16291758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Int J Obes (Lond). 2006 Mar;30(3):484-91.

Clinical and genetic associations with hypertriglyceridemic waist in a Canadian
aboriginal population.

Pollex RL(1), Hanley AJ, Zinman B, Harris SB, Hegele RA.

Author information: 
(1)Blackburn Cardiovascular Genetics Laboratory, Robarts Research Institute and
University of Western Ontario, London, Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVES: To determine the prevalence of 'hypertriglyceridemic waist' (HTGW) in
Oji-Cree, to examine its interaction with hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF1A)
in association with type 2 diabetes, and to characterize its putative genetic
determinants.
METHOD: The presence or absence of HTGW was determined in 522 Oji-Cree subjects
(223 males, 299 females), >or=18 years of age, in whom physical measurements and 
fasting plasma analyte concentrations were gathered, and a 75-g oral glucose
tolerance test was administered, as part of a cross-sectional study. Subjects
were genotyped for HNF1A codon 319, angiotensinogen (AGT) codons 174 and 235,
G-protein beta3-subunit (GNB3) nucleotide 825, fatty acid-binding protein (FABP2)
codon 54, nucleotides -455 and -482 of the apolipoprotein (apo) C-III (APOC3)
promoter, and a 5-bp insertion/deletion polymorphism within the 3'-untranslated
region of protein phosphatase 1 regulatory subunit 3 (PPP1R3).
RESULTS: The unadjusted prevalence of HTGW in Oji-Cree adults was 20.5%, with
more males affected than females (27.8 vs 15.1%, P=0.0004). Logistic regression
analysis, adjusted for age and gender, showed type 2 diabetes was associated with
both HNF1A G319S (odds ratio (OR) 4.85, 95% CI 2.45, 9.58) and HTGW (OR 4.96, 95%
CI 2.49, 9.88). When the HNF1A mutation and HTGW were present in combination, the
OR for type 2 diabetes was markedly increased (OR 43.2, 95% CI 12.4, 150). In
women only, both GNB3 825C>T and FABP2 A54T genotypes were significantly
associated with HTGW (OR 2.02, 95% CI 1.01, 4.05 and OR 1.95, 95% CI 1.01, 3.74, 
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: HTGW is prevalent in Oji-Cree, especially in men. The ORs for type 2
diabetes were similar ( approximately 5-fold) for subjects with either the
presence of HTGW or the private HNF1A G319S mutation. These two independent risk 
factors acted synergistically to confer an even greater increased risk of type 2 
diabetes.

PMID: 16276364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Biochem J. 2006 Mar 15;394(Pt 3):617-26.

Human acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase 2 gene expression in intestinal Caco-2
cells and in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Song BL(1), Wang CH, Yao XM, Yang L, Zhang WJ, Wang ZZ, Zhao XN, Yang JB, Qi W,
Yang XY, Inoue K, Lin ZX, Zhang HZ, Kodama T, Chang CC, Liu YK, Chang TY, Li BL.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.

Humans express two ACAT (acyl-CoA:cholesterol acyltransferase) genes, ACAT1 and
ACAT2. ACAT1 is ubiquitously expressed, whereas ACAT2 is primarily expressed in
intestinal mucosa and plays an important role in intestinal cholesterol
absorption. To investigate the molecular mechanism(s) responsible for the
tissue-specific expression of ACAT2, we identified five cis-elements within the
human ACAT2 promoter, four for the intestinal-specific transcription factor CDX2 
(caudal type homeobox transcription factor 2), and one for the transcription
factor HNF1alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha). Results of luciferase
reporter and electrophoretic mobility shift assays show that CDX2 and HNF1alpha
exert a synergistic effect, enhancing the ACAT2 promoter activity through binding
to these cis-elements. In undifferentiated Caco-2 cells, the ACAT2 expression is 
increased when exogenous CDX2 and/or HNF1alpha are expressed by co-transfection. 
In differentiated Caco-2 cells, the ACAT2 expression significantly decreases when
the endogenous CDX2 or HNF1alpha expression is suppressed by using RNAi (RNA
interference) technology. The expression levels of CDX2, HNF1alpha, and ACAT2 are
all greatly increased when the Caco-2 cells differentiate to become
intestinal-like cells. These results provide a molecular mechanism for the
tissue-specific expression of ACAT2 in intestine. In normal adult human liver,
CDX2 expression is not detectable and the ACAT2 expression is very low. In the
hepatoma cell line HepG2 the CDX2 expression is elevated, accounting for its
elevated ACAT2 expression. A high percentage (seven of fourteen) of liver samples
from patients affected with hepatocellular carcinoma exhibited elevated ACAT2
expression. Thus, the elevated ACAT2 expression may serve as a new biomarker for 
certain form(s) of hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC1383711
PMID: 16274362  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. DNA Cell Biol. 2005 Nov;24(11):661-9.

Functional dissection of the HNF-1alpha transcription factor: a study on nuclear 
localization and transcriptional activation.

Bjørkhaug L(1), Bratland A, Njølstad PR, Molven A.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Bergen,
Bergen, Norway.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) is a homeodomain-containing
transcription factor regulating the expression of liver and pancreas-specific
genes. Mutations in the HNF-1alpha-encoding gene TCF1 cause maturity-onset
diabetes of the young, type 3 (MODY3). These mutations may affect nuclear import 
or reduce the ability of HNF-1alpha to stimulate transcription. We performed a
functional dissection of HNF-1alpha, attempting both to define its nuclear
localization signals (NLSs) and to identify important elements of the Cterminal
transactivation domain. Three HNF-1alpha regions, A (amino acids 158-171), B
(197-205), and C (271-282), highly similar to consensus NLSs, were studied by
immunolocalization in HeLa cells. Region B could be identified as the most
critical for correct nuclear localization. Deletion of two subregions (amino
acids 398-470 and 544-631, respectively) in the HNF-1alpha C-terminal
transactivation domain, resulted in the greatest reduction in stimulation of
transcription compared to wild-type protein. However, this domain probably
consists of many elements that work in concert to give the full transactivation
potential of the protein.

PMID: 16274290  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Clin Med (Lond). 2005 Sep-Oct;5(5):476-81.

Molecular genetics goes to the diabetes clinic.

Hattersley AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Peninsu Medical School, Exeter. A.T.Hattersley@exeter.ac.uk

Diabetes has historically been thought of as a medical specialty which primarily 
deals with treatment rather than diagnosis. Molecular genetic testing can now be 
used to make a diagnosis of the 1-2% of all diabetic patients with monogenic
diabetes. Making a diagnosis of monogenic diabetes is important as it can have a 
dramatic effect on the treatment a patient should receive: glucokinase MODY
patients need no treatment; HNF1alpha MODY patients are very sensitive to low
dose sulphonylureas; and patients with neonatal diabetes due to Kir6.2 mutations,
despite being insulin dependent, can discontinue insulin and be well controlled
on high dose sulphonylurea tablets. The challenge for diabetologists is to use
clinical skills to detect these monogenic patients whose care will be greatly
helped by the treatment changes that follow molecular genetic testing.

PMID: 16268330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Diabetes Care. 2005 Nov;28(11):2774-6.

Renal malformations may be linked to mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (MODY3) gene.

Malecki MT(1), Skupien J, Gorczynska-Kosiorz S, Klupa T, Nazim J, Moczulski DK,
Sieradzki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University, Medical College,
Krakow, Poland. malecki_malecki@yahoo.com

PMID: 16249556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2005 Nov;20(11):1753-61.

Hepatocyte growth factor accelerates the proliferation of hepatic oval cells and 
possibly promotes the differentiation in a 2-acetylaminofluorene/partial
hepatectomy model in rats.

Hasuike S(1), Ido A, Uto H, Moriuchi A, Tahara Y, Numata M, Nagata K, Hori T,
Hayashi K, Tsubouchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Miyazaki, Kihara, Kiyotake, Miyazaki, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is the primary agent promoting the
proliferation of mature hepatocytes. The purpose of the present paper was to
clarify the effects of HGF on the proliferation and differentiation of hepatic
oval cells using a 2-acetylaminofluorene/partial hepatectomy (2-AAF/PH) model in 
rats.
METHODS: Recombinant human HGF (0.2 mg/day) was administered to 2-AAF/PH rats for
7 days using osmotic pumps intraperitoneally implanted in conjunction with
hepatectomy (day zero).
RESULTS: Periportal basophilic areas consisting of oval cells were significantly 
enlarged by treatment with HGF on day 8. In control animals, expression of
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) in the liver was gradually upregulated, leading a marked 
increase on day 12. In HGF-treated rats, AFP expression was stimulated at an
earlier date and decreased to an undetectable level on day 12. Conversely,
expression of albumin transcripts, which was stimulated by HGF-treatment at a
later date, continued to increase even after HGF administration ceased, leading
to an extremely high level on day 12. Moreover, treatment with HGF also
stimulated the expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha and -4alpha at an
early date.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that, besides the proliferation of hepatic
oval cells, HGF possibly promotes the differentiation to hepatocytes in vivo,
suggesting that recombinant human HGF accelerates the regeneration of severely
damaged livers, a situation in which the proliferation of mature hepatocytes is
impaired.

(c) 2005 Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 16246197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Diabet Med. 2005 Nov;22(11):1510-5.

Synergism between mutant HNF1A and the metabolic syndrome in Oji-Cree Type 2
diabetes.

Pollex RL(1), Hanley AJ, Zinman B, Harris SB, Khan HM, Hegele RA.

Author information: 
(1)Blackburn Cardiovascular Genetics Laboratory, Robarts Research Institute and
University of Western Ontario, 100 Perth Drive, London, Ontario, Canada N6A 5KB.

AIMS: To determine the prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in the Sandy Lake
Oji-Cree and to examine its interaction with HNF1A in association with impaired
glucose tolerance and Type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: Using data collected from the Sandy Lake Health and Diabetes Project
(1993-1995), the presence or absence of the metabolic syndrome was determined in 
515 Oji-Cree subjects, > or = 18 years of age. In the original study, fasting
plasma analytes were measured, a 75-g oral glucose tolerance test was
administered, and subjects were genotyped for HNF1A G319S.
RESULTS: The unadjusted prevalence of the metabolic syndrome in the Oji-Cree
adults was 29.9%. The adjusted odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval for
Type 2 diabetes among subjects who carried the HNF1A G319S mutation and had the
modified metabolic syndrome (excluding hyperglycaemia) was 20.3 (6.94, 59.6).
Adjusted ORs for Type 2 diabetes for subjects with either the HNF1A G319S
mutation alone or the modified metabolic syndrome alone were 5.56 (2.85, 10.9)
and 4.84 (2.53, 9.27), respectively. The risk of having impaired glucose
tolerance was not influenced by the presence of either factor.
CONCLUSIONS: The risk of Type 2 diabetes was similar (approximately five-fold
increased) for subjects with either the presence of the modified metabolic
syndrome or the private HNF1A G319S mutation. Interestingly, when present in
combination, the two independent risk factors appeared to act synergistically to 
confer an even greater increased risk of Type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 16241915  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. J Lipid Res. 2006 Jan;47(1):42-50. Epub 2005 Oct 19.

Apical sodium bile acid transporter and ileal lipid binding protein in gallstone 
carriers.

Bergheim I(1), Harsch S, Mueller O, Schimmel S, Fritz P, Stange EF.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Stuttgart,
Germany.

Although a cholesterol supersaturation of gallbladder bile has been identified as
the underlying pathophysiologic defect, the molecular pathomechanism of gallstone
formation in humans remains poorly understood. A deficiency of the apical sodium 
bile acid transporter (ASBT) and ileal lipid binding protein (ILBP) in the small 
intestine may result in bile acid loss into the colon and might promote gallstone
formation by reducing the bile acid pool and increasing the amount of hydrophobic
bile salts. To test this hypothesis, protein levels and mRNA expression of ASBT
and ILBP were assessed in ileal mucosa biopsies of female gallstone carriers and 
controls. Neither ASBT nor ILBP levels differed significantly between gallstone
carriers and controls. However, when study participants were subgrouped by body
weight, ASBT and ILBP protein were 48% and 67% lower in normal weight gallstone
carriers than in controls (P < 0.05); similar differences were found for mRNA
expression levels. The loss of bile transporters in female normal weight
gallstone carriers was coupled with a reduction of protein levels of hepatic
nuclear factor 1alpha and farnesoid X receptor. In conclusion, in normal weight
female gallstone carriers, the decreased expression of ileal bile acid
transporters may form a molecular basis for gallstone formation.

PMID: 16237211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2006 Mar;290(3):G466-75. Epub 2005 Oct
13.

Mechanisms of mutual functional interactions between HNF-4alpha and HNF-1alpha
revealed by mutations that cause maturity onset diabetes of the young.

Rowley CW(1), Staloch LJ, Divine JK, McCaul SP, Simon TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, Campus Box
8208, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha and HNF-1alpha are key endodermal
transcriptional regulators that physically and functionally interact. HNF-4alpha 
and HNF-1alpha cooperatively activate genes with binding sites for both factors, 
whereas suppressive interactions occur at regulatory sequences with a binding
site for only one factor. The liver fatty acid binding protein gene (Fabp1) has
binding sites for both factors, and chromatin precipitation assays were utilized 
to demonstrate that HNF-4alpha increased HNF-1alpha Fabp1 promoter occupancy
during cooperative transcriptional activation. The HNF4 P2 promoter contains a
HNF-1 but not HNF-4 binding site, and HNF-4alpha suppressed HNF-1alpha HNF4 P2
activation and decreased promoter HNF-1alpha occupancy. The apolipoprotein C III 
(APOC3) promoter contains a HNF-4 but not HNF-1 binding site, and HNF-1alpha
suppressed HNF-4alpha APOC3 activation and decreased HNF-4alpha promoter
occupancy. Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) as well as defects in
hepatic lipid metabolism result from mutations in either HNF-4alpha or
HNF-1alpha. We found that MODY missense mutant R127W HNF-4alpha retained
wild-type individual Fabp1 activation and bound to HNF-1alpha better than
wild-type HNF-4alpha, yet did not cooperate with HNF-1alpha or increase
HNF-1alpha Fabp1 promoter occupancy. The R127W mutant was also defective in both 
suppressing HNF-1alpha activation of HNF4 P2 and decreasing HNF-1alpha promoter
occupancy. The HNF-1alpha R131Q MODY mutant also retained wild-type Fabp1
activation and bound to HNF-4alpha as well as the wild type but was defective in 
both suppressing HNF-4alpha APOC3 activation and decreasing HNF-4alpha promoter
occupancy. These results suggest HNF-1alpha-HNF-4alpha functional interactions
are accomplished by regulating factor promoter occupancy and that defective
factor-factor interactions may contribute to the MODY phenotype.

PMID: 16223942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Biol Chem. 2005 Dec 2;280(48):39827-34. Epub 2005 Oct 4.

Nuclear factor 1 family members interact with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha to
synergistically activate L-type pyruvate kinase gene transcription.

Satoh S(1), Noaki T, Ishigure T, Osada S, Imagawa M, Miura N, Yamada K, Noguchi
T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Molecular Biosciences, Graduate School of
Bioagricultural Sciences, Nagoya University, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8601, Japan.

Transcription of hepatic L-type pyruvate kinase (L-PK) gene is cell type-specific
and is under the control of various nutritional conditions. The L-PK gene
contains multiple cis-regulatory elements located within a 170-bp upstream region
necessary for these regulations. These elements can synergistically stimulate
L-PK gene transcription, although their mechanisms are largely unknown. Because
nuclear factor (NF) 1 family members bind to specific cis-regulatory elements
known as L-IIA and L-IIB and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1alpha binds to the 
adjacent element L-I, we examined the functional and physical interactions
between these two transcription factors. Reporter gene assay showed that these
two factors synergistically activated the L-PK promoter containing the
5'-flanking region up to -189. Although two NF1-binding sites are required for
the maximum synergistic effect of NF1 family members with HNF1alpha, significant 
functional interaction between the two factors was observed in the L-PK promoter 
containing two mutated NF1-binding sites and also in the promoter containing only
the HNF1alpha-binding site, raising the possibility that NF1 proteins function as
HNF1alpha co-activators. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that both
NF1 proteins and HNF1alpha bound to the promoter region of the L-PK gene in vivo.
In vitro binding assay confirmed that NF1 proteins directly interacted mainly
with the homeodomain of HNF1alpha via their DNA-binding domains. This interaction
enhanced HNF1alpha binding to the L-I element and was also observed in rat liver 
by co-immunoprecipitation assay. Thus, we conclude that cooperative interaction
between NF1 family members and HNF1alpha plays an important role in hepatic L-PK 
transcription.

PMID: 16204235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Biosens Bioelectron. 2005 Oct 15;21(4):637-44.

Oligonucleotide chip for the diagnosis of HNF-1 alpha mutations.

Park HG(1), Ham HO, Kim KH, Huh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute 
of Science and Technology, 373-1 Guseong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon 305-701,
Republic of Korea. hgpark@kaist.ac.kr

Mutations in HNF-1 alpha cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) type
3, which is the most prevalent MODY subtype in most countries. In the present
study, we investigated an oligonucleotide microchip for the detection of the
known HNF-1 alpha mutations. We first optimized the coupling chemistries for
covalent immobilization of allele-specific oligonucleotides on aldehyde (CHO)-
and thiocyanate (NCS)-activated glass slides and compared their hybridization
efficiencies. CHO-glass was found to provide a more favorable environment for
hybridization than NCS-glass, whereas the binding capacity of NCS-glass for
amine-activated oligonucleotide was much greater than with CHO-glass. We also
investigated the effects of the length of the capture probes on the hybridized
signals. To determine the presence of HNF-1 alpha mutations in a human sample, we
prepared an oligonucleotide chip from selected mutation sites of exon2 from HNF-1
alpha. Cy3-labeled RNA target probes were obtained by in vitro transcription of
promoter-tagged PCR products from a wild-type blood sample and subsequent
fragmentation. Hybridization of the chip with the RNA target probes successfully 
identified all of the genotypes for the tested sites. This work demonstrates that
oligonucleotide chip-based analysis is a good candidate for routine clinical
testing for HNF-1 alpha mutations.

PMID: 16202877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Diabetes Care. 2005 Oct;28(10):2430-5.

A prevalent amino acid polymorphism at codon 98 (Ala98Val) of the hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1alpha is associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young and
younger age at onset of type 2 diabetes in Asian Indians.

Anuradha S(1), Radha V, Deepa R, Hansen T, Carstensen B, Pedersen O, Mohan V.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Mohans' MV Diabetes Specialties Centre & Madras Diabetes Research
Foundation, Gopalapuram, Chennai, India.

OBJECTIVE: Among Europeans, mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF1alpha) gene are associated with the most common form of maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY)3. In Asian Indians, type 2 diabetes occurs earlier
and often overlaps with MODY, but the genetics of the latter are unknown. The aim
of this study was to estimate the prevalence of Ala98Val polymorphism of the
HNF1alpha gene in different types of diabetes in Asian Indians.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Genotyping of Ala98Val was done by the
PCR-restriction fragment-length polymorphism method in the following groups: 1)
MODY, defined as non-insulin-dependent diabetes (age at onset <25 years) and
vertical transmission of diabetes through at least three generations (n = 122);
2) very-early-onset type 2 diabetes (age at onset <25 years) without family
history (n = 23); 3) early-onset type 2 diabetes (age at onset between 26 and 40 
years, n = 171); 4) late-onset type 2 diabetes (age at onset >40 years, n = 133);
5) type 1 diabetes (n = 150); and 6) normal glucose tolerance (n = 130). The
frequency of the Val genotypes was compared in the diabetic and control groups.
RESULTS: The frequency of the Val allele was significantly higher in MODY
patients (P = 0.0013) compared with control groups. Furthermore, in the total
group of patients with type 2-like diabetes (groups 1-4), the Val allele was
associated with an earlier diagnosis of diabetes (P = 0.0002).
CONCLUSIONS: Among Asian Indians, the Ala98Val polymorphism of HNF1alpha gene is 
associated with MODY and with earlier age at onset of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 16186275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Eur J Pharmacol. 2005 Oct 3;521(1-3):164-8. Epub 2005 Sep 19.

Beta-cell expression of a dominant-negative HNF-1alpha compromises the ability of
inhibition of dipeptidyl peptidase-4 to elicit a long-term augmentation of
insulin secretion in mice.

Ahrén B(1), Sörhede Winzell M, Burkey B, Hughes TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Lund University, B11 BMC, SE 221 84 LUND, Sweden.
Bo.Ahren@med.lu.se

Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) has long-term effects on pancreatic islets by
increasing the insulin secretory capacity and beta cell mass. The islet effects
of GLP-1 are glucose dependent and therefore tied to glucose sensing and
metabolism. We examined whether prevention of inactivation of GLP-1 by inhibiting
dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) is sufficient to promote long-term augmentation of
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. We also explored whether a defective
glucose sensing and metabolism could be overcome by DPP-4 inhibition. We
administered the orally active and highly selective DPP-4 inhibitor
(1-[[(3-hydroxy-1-adamantyl) amino] acetyl]-2-cyano-(S)-pyrrolidineP-4;
vildagliptin; 3 mumol/mouse daily) to normal, wildtype, mice and to mice with a
beta-cell targeted dominant-negative mutant hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha); these mice have a defective islet response to glucose. After eight 
weeks, vildagliptin augmented the insulin response after gastric glucose (75 mg) 
by 5-fold in male mice (7.3+/-0.8 vs. 1.3+/-0.5 nmol/l, P<0.001) and 30-fold in
female mice (26.5+/-5.8 vs. 0.9+/-0.3 nmol/l, P<0.001). Furthermore,
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from isolated islets was markedly enhanced
by 9 weeks treatment with vildagliptin. In contrast, in transgenic mice, the
severely suppressed insulin response was only marginally improved by vildagliptin
in males, and not affected at all in females. We conclude that DPP-4 inhibition
improves islet function and increases beta cell secretory responses on a
long-term basis and that this is dependent on intact expression of HNF-1alpha.

PMID: 16171801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2006 Jun;57(6):801-10. Epub 2005 Sep 15.

The effect of cytostatic drug treatment on intestine-specific transcription
factors Cdx2, GATA-4 and HNF-1alpha in mice.

de Koning BA(1), Lindenbergh-Kortleve DJ, Pieters R, Rings EH, Büller HA, Renes
IB, Einerhand AW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pediatrics, Division of Pediatric Gastro-enterology, Erasmus
MC-Sophia Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
b.dekoning@erasmusmc.nl

Chemotherapy-induced intestinal damage is a very important dose-limiting side
effect for which there is no definitive prophylaxis or treatment. This is in part
due to the lack of understanding of its pathophysiology and impact on intestinal 
differentiation. The objective of this study was to investigate the gene
expression of the small intestinal transcription factors HNF-1alpha, Cdx2, GATA-4
in an experimental model of methotrexate (MTX)-induced intestinal damage, and to 
correlate these alterations with histological damage, epithelial proliferation
and differentiation. HNF-1alpha, Cdx2 and GATA-4 are critical transcription
factors in epithelial differentiation, and in combination they act as promoting
factors of the sucrase-isomaltase (SI) gene, an enterocyte-specific
differentiation marker which is distinctly downregulated after MTX treatment.
Mice received two doses of MTX i.v. on two consecutive days and were sacrificed
1, 3 and 7 or 9 days after final injection. Segments of the jejunum were taken
for morphological, immunohistochemical and quantitative analyses. Intestinal
damage was most severe at day 3 and was associated with decreased expression of
the transcriptional factors HNF-1alpha, Cdx2 and GATA-4, which correlated well
with decreased expression of SI, and seemed inversely correlated with enhanced
proliferation of epithelial crypt cells. During severe damage, the epithelium was
preferentially concerned with proliferation rather than differentiation, most
likely in order to restore the small intestinal barrier function rather than
maintaining its absorptive function. Since HNF-1alpha, Cdx2 and GATA-4 are
critical for intestine-specific gene expression and therefore crucial in
epithelial differentiation, these results may explain, at least in part, why
intestinal differentiation is compromised during MTX treatment.

PMID: 16163540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Oct 15;310(1):176-85.

Hepatocyte growth factor enhances CXCR4 expression favoring breast cancer cell
invasiveness.

Matteucci E(1), Locati M, Desiderio MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Milan, via
Luigi Mangiagalli, 31-20133 Milan, Italy.

Microenvironmental factors affect different aspects of tumor cell biology,
including cell survival, invasion, and metastasis. Here, we report that
hepatocyte growth factor and hypoxia may contribute to breast carcinoma cell
invasiveness by inducing the chemokine receptor CXCR4. Hepatocyte growth factor
enhanced CXCR4 mRNA and protein expression exclusively in MCF-7 (low invasive)
carcinoma cells, while in response to hypoxia, CXCR4 induction was observed in
both MCF-7 and MDA-MB 231 (highly invasive) carcinoma cells. The receptor
induction had a functional role in cancer cells, as demonstrated by the fact that
hepatocyte growth factor pretreatment promoted MCF-7 cell migration toward the
CXCR4-specific ligand CXCL12. Extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase 1/2
(ERK1/2) and phosphoinositide-3-kinase (PI3K) transduction pathways seemed to be 
differently implicated in the early induction of CXCR4 by hepatocyte growth
factor or hypoxia in the two breast carcinoma cells examined.

PMID: 16112111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Virol. 2005 Sep;79(17):11045-52.

Alpha/beta interferon differentially modulates the clearance of cytoplasmic
encapsidated replication intermediates and nuclear covalently closed circular
hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA from the livers of hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha-null HBV transgenic mice.

Anderson AL(1), Banks KE, Pontoglio M, Yaniv M, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

Treatment with alpha interferon is a standard therapy for patients with chronic
hepatitis B virus (HBV) infections. This treatment can reduce virus load and
ameliorate disease symptoms. However, in the majority of cases, alpha interferon 
therapy fails to resolve the chronic HBV infection. The reason alpha interferon
therapy is inefficient at resolving chronic HBV infections is assumed to be
because it fails to eliminate covalently closed circular (CCC) HBV DNA from the
nuclei of infected hepatocytes. In an attempt to address this issue, the
stability of HBV CCC DNA in response to alpha/beta interferon induction was
examined in HNF1alpha-null HBV transgenic mice. Alpha/beta interferon induction
by polyinosinic-polycytidylic acid [poly(I-C)] treatment efficiently eliminated
encapsidated cytoplasmic HBV replication intermediates while only modestly
reducing nuclear HBV CCC DNA. These observations indicate that nuclear HBV CCC
DNA is more stable than cytoplasmic replication intermediates in response to
alpha/beta interferon induction. Consequently it appears that for therapies to
resolve chronic HBV infection efficiently, they will have to target the
elimination of the most stable HBV replication intermediate, nuclear HBV CCC DNA.

PMCID: PMC1193586
PMID: 16103155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Swiss Med Wkly. 2005 Jun 11;135(23-24):352-6.

Genetic testing for glucokinase mutations in clinically selected patients with
MODY: a worthwhile investment.

Schnyder S(1), Mullis PE, Ellard S, Hattersley AT, Flück CE.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetology, University Children's Hospital
Berne, Switzerland.

The differential diagnosis for children with diabetes includes a group of
monogenic diabetic disorders known as maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY). So far, six underlying gene defects have been identified. The most common
subtypes are caused by mutations in the genes encoding the transcription factor
HNF-1a (MODY 3) and the glycolytic enzyme glucokinase (GCK) (MODY 2). MODY 2 is
the most benign form of diabetes as the threshold for glucose sensing is elevated
resulting in mild, regulated hyperglycemia. MODY 2 may usually be treated with
diet alone without risk of microvascular complications. Patients with MODY
usually present as children or young adults. Genetic testing for MODY in diabetic
subjects is often not performed because of the costs and its unavailability in
Switzerland. We describe the impact of the genetic analysis for MODY 2 on
diabetes management and treatment costs in a five-year-old girl. The patient and 
her diabetic mother were both found to have a heterozygous missense mutation
(V203A) in the glucokinase gene. The five-year-old girl was started on insulin
therapy for her diabetes but because her HbA1c remained between 5.8-6.4%
(reference 4.1-5.7%) and her clinical presentation suggested MODY insulin was
discontinued. She is now well controlled on a carbohydrate controlled diet
regimen only. Omission of insulin treatment made regular blood glucose monitoring
unnecessary and removed her risk of hypoglycemia. Costs for the genetic analysis 
were 500 Euro. At our centre costs for diabetes care of a patient with type 1
diabetes are approximately 2050 Euro/year compared to 410 Euro/year for the care 
of a patient with MODY 2. In addition, a diagnosis of MODY 2 may reassure
patients and their families, as microvascular complications are uncommon. Thus
there are both health and financial benefits in diagnosing MODY 2. We recommend
genetic testing for MODY 2 in clinically selected patients even though this
analysis is currently not available in Switzerland and costs are not necessarily 
covered by the health insurances.

PMID: 16059790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Diabetes. 2005 Aug;54(8):2487-91.

A large-scale association analysis of common variation of the HNF1alpha gene with
type 2 diabetes in the U.K. Caucasian population.

Weedon MN(1), Owen KR, Shields B, Hitman G, Walker M, McCarthy MI, Hattersley AT,
Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, UK.

HNF1alpha (TCF1) is a key transcription factor that is essential for pancreatic
beta-cell development and function. Rare mutations of HNF1alpha cause
maturity-onset diabetes of the young. A common variant, G319S, private to the
Oji-Cree population, predisposes to type 2 diabetes, but the role of common
HNF1alpha variation in European populations has not been comprehensively
assessed. We determined the linkage disequilibrium and haplotype structure across
the HNF1alpha gene region using 29 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Eight 
tagging SNPs (tSNPs) that efficiently capture common haplotypes and the amino
acid-changing variant, A98V, were genotyped in 5,307 subjects (2,010 type 2
diabetic case subjects, 1,643 control subjects, and 1,654 members of 521
families). We did not find any evidence of association between the tSNPs or
haplotypes and type 2 diabetes. We could exclude odds ratios (ORs) >1.25 for all 
tSNPs. The rare V98 allele (approximately 3% frequency) showed possible evidence 
of association with type 2 diabetes (OR 1.23 [95% CI 0.99-1.54], P = 0.07), a
result that was supported by meta-analysis of this and published studies (OR 1.31
[1.08-1.59], P = 0.007). Further studies are required to investigate this
association, demonstrating the difficulty of defining the role of rare (<5%)
alleles in type 2 diabetes risk.

PMID: 16046319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Diabetes. 2005 Aug;54(8):2336-42.

Association of common variation in the HNF1alpha gene region with risk of type 2 
diabetes.

Winckler W(1), Burtt NP, Holmkvist J, Cervin C, de Bakker PI, Sun M, Almgren P,
Tuomi T, Gaudet D, Hudson TJ, Ardlie KG, Daly MJ, Hirschhorn JN, Altshuler D,
Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
02114, USA.

It is currently unclear how often genes that are mutated to cause rare,
early-onset monogenic forms of disease also harbor common variants that
contribute to the more typical polygenic form of each disease. The gene for MODY3
diabetes, HNF1alpha, lies in a region that has shown linkage to late-onset type 2
diabetes (12q24, NIDDM2), and previous association studies have suggested a weak 
trend toward association for common missense variants in HNF1alpha with
glucose-related traits. Based on genotyping of 79 common SNPs in the 118 kb
spanning HNF1alpha, we selected 21 haplotype tag single nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) and genotyped them in >4,000 diabetic patients and control subjects from
Sweden, Finland, and Canada. Several SNPs from the coding region and 5' of the
gene demonstrated nominal association with type 2 diabetes, with the most
significant marker (rs1920792) having an odds ratio of 1.17 and a P value of
0.002. We then genotyped three SNPs with the strongest evidence for association
to type 2 diabetes (rs1920792, I27L, and A98V) in an additional 4,400 type 2
diabetic and control subjects from North America and Poland and compared our
results with those of the original sample and of Weedon et al. None of the
results were consistently observed across all samples, with the possible
exception of a modest association of the rare (3-5%) A98V variant. These results 
indicate that common variants in HNF1alpha either play no role in type 2
diabetes, a very small role, or a role that cannot be consistently observed
without consideration of as yet unmeasured genetic or environmental modifiers.

PMID: 16046299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. J Biol Chem. 2005 Sep 30;280(39):33132-40. Epub 2005 Jul 25.

Canonical WNT signaling promotes osteogenesis by directly stimulating Runx2 gene 
expression.

Gaur T(1), Lengner CJ, Hovhannisyan H, Bhat RA, Bodine PV, Komm BS, Javed A, van 
Wijnen AJ, Stein JL, Stein GS, Lian JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and the Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts 
Medical School, Worcester, Massachusetts 01655-0106, USA.

Both activating and null mutations of proteins required for canonical WNT
signaling have revealed the importance of this pathway for normal skeletal
development. However, tissue-specific transcriptional mechanisms through which
WNT signaling promotes the differentiation of bone-forming cells have yet to be
identified. Here, we address the hypothesis that canonical WNT signaling and the 
bone-related transcription factor RUNX2/CBFA1/AML3 are functionally linked
components of a pathway required for the onset of osteoblast differentiation. Our
findings show that, in bone of the SFRP1 (secreted frizzled-related
protein-1)-null mouse, which exhibits activated WNT signaling and a high bone
mass phenotype, there is a significant increase in expression of T-cell factor
(TCF)-1, Runx2, and the RUNX2 target gene osteocalcin. We demonstrate by
mutational analysis that a functional TCF regulatory element responsive to
canonical WNT signaling resides in the promoter of the Runx2 gene (-97 to -93).
By chromatin immunoprecipitation, recruitment of beta-catenin and TCF1 to the
endogenous Runx2 gene is shown. Coexpression of TCF1 with canonical WNT proteins 
resulted in a 2-5-fold activation of Runx2 promoter activity and a 7-8-fold
induction of endogenous mRNA in mouse pluripotent mesenchymal and osteoprogenitor
cells. This enhancement was abrogated by SFRP1. Taken together, our results
provide evidence for direct regulation of Runx2 by canonical WNT signaling and
suggest that Runx2 is a target of beta-catenin/TCF1 for the stimulation of bone
formation. We propose that WNT/TCF1 signaling, like bone morphogenetic
protein/transforming growth factor-beta signaling, activates Runx2 gene
expression in mesenchymal cells for the control of osteoblast differentiation and
skeletal development.

PMID: 16043491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Diabetes Care. 2005 Jul;28(7):1751-6.

Beta-cell dysfunction, insulin sensitivity, and glycosuria precede diabetes in
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha mutation carriers.

Stride A(1), Ellard S, Clark P, Shakespeare L, Salzmann M, Shepherd M, Hattersley
AT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School, Devon,
UK.

OBJECTIVE: Patients with diabetes due to hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha
mutations have beta-cell deficiency, insulin sensitivity, altered proinsulin
levels, and a low renal threshold for glucose. It is uncertain how many of these 
features precede the development of diabetes. The aim of our study was to test
for these characteristics in young nondiabetic HNF-1alpha mutation carriers.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 47 offspring from 19 extended families
underwent genetic testing, a standard oral glucose tolerance test, and urine
testing.
RESULTS: HNF-1alpha mutations were found in 20 offspring, 7 with diabetes and 13 
without diabetes. The 13 nondiabetic mutation carriers were compared with 27
family control subjects, who were matched for age, sex, and BMI. There was marked
beta-cell deficiency with reduced insulinogenic index (53.5 [31.5-90.9] vs. 226.0
[126.0-407.1], SD [range], P < 0.001) and area under the curve for insulin (P <
0.001). Insulin sensitivity was increased in mutation carriers (homeostatic model
assessment of insulin sensitivity 144.6 [82.7-252.7] vs. 100 [66.9-149.4], P =
0.025). A total of 38% of mutation carriers had glycosuria at 2 h compared with
0% of control subjects (P = 0.0034). Those with glycosuria had peak glucose
values that were higher than the mutations carriers without glycosuria (range
8.1-11.8 vs. 6.2-8.4 mmol/l, P = 0.002). The seven subjects with diabetes all
showed glycosuria.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that marked beta-cell deficiency, increased insulin
sensitivity, and a low renal threshold are present in young nondiabetic
HNF-1alpha mutation carriers. The presence of glycosuria post-glucose load could 
be used to screen children of mutation carriers as it occurs in all mutation
carriers with a peak glucose in the oral glucose tolerance test >8.4 mmol/l.

PMID: 15983330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005 Sep 1;207(2 Suppl):77-83.

Polymorphic variations in the expression of the chemical detoxifying UDP
glucuronosyltransferases.

Mackenzie PI(1), Gregory PA, Lewinsky RH, Yasmin SN, Height T, McKinnon RA,
Gardner-Stephen DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University School of Medicine,
Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park, SA 5042, Australia.
Peter.Mackenzie@flinders.edu.au

The UDP glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) are expressed predominantly in the liver
and gastrointestinal tract in humans. Their expression varies widely between
individuals, due in part to coding region polymorphisms that alter catalytic
function and in part, to differences in the regulation of UGT genes. The latter
differences are most likely the result of polymorphisms in the regulatory
elements of UGT genes and in the transcription factors that bind to these
elements. Several frequent polymorphisms in the promoters of UGT genes have been 
described; however, few of these fall within critical regulatory elements and
alter UGT expression. Some rare mutations alter UGT promoter activity in in vitro
systems but their effect in the clinic is still to be confirmed. Several
transcription factors that regulate UGT gene expression in cells of hepatic and
intestinal origin have been identified. These include positive regulators of UGT 
gene expression such as hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1 alpha), octamer
transcription factor-1 (Oct-1) and the intestine-specific transcription factor,
caudal-related homeodomain protein 2 (Cdx2). Negative regulators include the Pre 
B cell homeobox factor (Pbx2) and its dimerization partner, Pbx regulating
protein 1 (Prep1). Polymorphisms in these transcription factors may cause
differences in their interaction and binding to UGT promoters. Current work
describing the effects of these transcription factor polymorphisms on UGT
expression will be described. Knowledge of UGT promoter elements and the proteins
that bind to these elements, as well as knowledge of polymorphisms that alter
their function, may aid in the prediction of an individual's response to
chemicals and in the prediction of chemical toxicities.

PMID: 15979674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Lipid Res. 2005 Sep;46(9):1868-76. Epub 2005 Jun 16.

Control of ACAT2 liver expression by HNF1.

Pramfalk C(1), Davis MA, Eriksson M, Rudel LL, Parini P.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolism Unit, Center for Metabolism and Endocrinology, NOVUM, Karolinska
Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital in Huddinge, S-141 86 Stockholm,
Sweden.

ACAT catalyzes the formation of cholesteryl esters from cholesterol and
long-chain fatty acids. There are two known genes encoding the two ACAT enzymes, 
ACAT1 and ACAT2 (also known as Soat1 and Soat2). In adult humans, ACAT1 is
present in most tissues, whereas ACAT2 is localized to enterocytes and
hepatocytes. In this report, we elucidate the mechanisms that control the
liver-specific expression of the human ACAT2 gene. We identified hepatic nuclear 
factor 1 (HNF1) as an important liver-specific trans-acting element for the human
ACAT2 gene using the human hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines HuH7 and HepG2.
Targeted deletion of the HNF1 binding site in the DNA sequence abolished not only
the basal promoter function in HepG2 and HuH7 cells but also the induction of the
ACAT2 promoter by HNF1. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay demonstrated that the transcription factors HNF1alpha
and HNF1beta interact with this region in the human ACAT2 gene in vitro and in
vivo. These data indicate that a) the identified HNF1 binding site serves as a
positive regulator sequence, b) the binding site is functionally active both in
vivo and in vitro, and c) the transcription factors HNF1alpha and HNF1beta, which
bind to this site, play an important part in the regulation of the human ACAT2
promoter.

PMID: 15961790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Diabetes Obes Metab. 2005 Jul;7(4):318-26.

Genetic and clinical characteristics of maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Giuffrida FM(1), Reis AF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Federal University of São Paulo, São
Paulo, SP, Brazil.

Genetic factors play an important role in various forms of diabetes mellitus
(DM), but inheritance is complex and interacts with environmental factors.
Although in most cases type 2 DM (T2DM) and T1DM are polygenic disorders, several
monogenic forms have been identified. Among them, maturity-onset diabetes of the 
young (MODY) has been the most intensively investigated. MODY is a group of six
different forms of monogenic diabetes, characterized by insulin secretion defects
in pancreatic beta-cells, supposed to be responsible for 2-5% of all cases of
diabetes. The most common are MODY2 and MODY3, caused by mutations in the genes
encoding glucokinase and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-alpha respectively. MODY2 is
characterized by glucose sensing defects, leading to an increase in insulin
secretion threshold. This causes lifelong sustained and mild hyperglycaemia from 
birth, most often in non-diabetic levels. Diagnosis is incidental in most cases. 
These patients are asymptomatic, seldom need treatment and rarely present chronic
complications. MODY3 is characterized by a severe insulin secretion defect in
response to glucose. Diagnosis is made usually in adolescence and early
adulthood, often by osmotic symptoms. Hyperglycaemia is progressive, and patients
frequently need treatment with oral drugs or insulin some time in their follow
up. This group seems to have a marked sensitivity to sulphonylureas compared to
other types of diabetes. The recognition of MODY as a monogenic disorder and a
thorough understanding of its pathophysiology are important for correct diagnosis
and treatment, with great impact on prognosis. Besides, the study of these forms 
of diabetes brings important contributions to the understanding of glucose
homeostasis as a whole.

PMID: 15955117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Jun 7;33(10):3313-22. Print 2005.

Formation of a large, complex domain of histone hyperacetylation at human 14q32.1
requires the serpin locus control region.

Baxter EW(1), Cummings WJ, Fournier RE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center 1100
Fairview Avenue N., Seattle, WA 98109-1024, USA.

The human serine protease inhibitor (serpin) gene cluster at 14q32.1 is a useful 
model system to study cell-type-specific gene expression and chromatin structure.
Activation of the serpin locus can be induced in vitro by transferring human
chromosome 14 from non-expressing to expressing cells. Serpin gene activation in 
expressing cells is correlated with locus-wide alterations in chromatin
structure, including the de novo formation of 17 expression-associated DNase
I-hypersensitive sites (DHSs). In this study, we investigated histone acetylation
throughout the proximal serpin subcluster. We report that gene activation is
correlated with high levels of histone H3 and H4 acetylation at serpin gene
promoters and other regulatory regions. However, the locus is not uniformly
hyperacetylated, as there are regions of hypoacetylation between genes.
Furthermore, genetic tests indicate that locus-wide controls regulate both gene
expression and chromatin structure. For example, deletion of a previously
identified serpin locus control region (LCR) upstream of the proximal subcluster 
reduces both gene expression and histone acetylation throughout the approximately
130 kb region. A similar down regulation phenotype is displayed by
transactivator-deficient cell variants, but this phenotype can be rescued by
transfecting the cells with expression cassettes encoding hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) or HNF-4. Taken together, these results suggest that
histone acetylation depends on interactions between the HNF-1alpha/HNF-4
signaling cascade and the serpin LCR.

PMCID: PMC1143699
PMID: 15942032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Aug;90(8):4607-14. Epub 2005 May 31.

Half of clinically defined maturity-onset diabetes of the young patients in
Denmark do not have mutations in HNF4A, GCK, and TCF1.

Johansen A(1), Ek J, Mortensen HB, Pedersen O, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Niels Steensens Vej 2, 
DK-2820 Gentofte, Denmark. adjo@steno.dk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically
heterogeneous monogenic form of diabetes characterized by an autosomal dominant
inheritance, an early clinical onset, and a primary defect in beta-cell function.
The aims of the present study were to examine the prevalence and nature of
mutations in the three common MODY genes, HNF4A, GCK, and TCF1, in Danish
patients with a clinical diagnosis of MODY and to describe metabolic differences 
in probands with and without mutations in HNF4A, GCK, and TCF1.
METHODS: Seventy-eight unrelated subjects of Danish Caucasian origin (29 men, 49 
women) and their 351 family members were examined. The promotor and coding
regions including intron-exon boundaries of HNF4A, GCK, and TCF1 were examined by
denaturing HPLC and/or direct sequencing.
RESULTS: We identified 29 different mutations in 38 MODY families. Fifteen of the
mutations were novel. The variants segregated with diabetes within the families, 
and none of the variants were found in 100 normal Danish chromosomes. Our
findings suggest a relative prevalence of 3% of MODY1 (two different mutations in
two families), 10% of MODY2 (seven in eight), and 36% of MODY3 (21 in 28) among
Danish kindred clinically diagnosed as MODY. No significant differences in
biochemical and anthropometric measurements were observed at baseline
examinations.
CONCLUSIONS: Forty-nine percent of the families carried mutations in the three
examined MODY genes. Our findings highlight that unidentified MODY genes may play
a central role for diabetes characterized by autosomal dominant transmission.
Furthermore, baseline measurements of various anthropometric and biochemical
variables are not appropriate markers of MODYX.

PMID: 15928245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 15;280(28):26565-72. Epub 2005 May 17.

Prostaglandin E2 Stimulates the beta-catenin/T cell factor-dependent
transcription in colon cancer.

Shao J(1), Jung C, Liu C, Sheng H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana 46202, USA.

Cyclooxygenase and its derived prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) have been shown to
stimulate the growth of cancer cells and promote tumor angiogenesis. Here, we
show that PGE2 activated the beta-catenin/T cell factor-dependent transcription
in colon cancer cells through the cAMP/protein kinase A pathway. The expression
of cyclin D1 and vascular endothelial growth factor was induced by PGE2 in
LS-174T cells. Moreover, PGE2 and mutated beta-catenin stimulated the
transcription of cyclin D1 and vascular endothelial growth factor in a
synergistic fashion. Mechanistically, PGE2 increased the phosphorylation of
glycogen synthase kinase-3 and consequently accumulated beta-catenin. In
addition, PGE2 induced the expression of T cell factor-4 transcription factor,
which formed transcriptionally active complex with beta-catenin. In animal
experiments, administration of 16,16-dimethyl PGE2 strongly increased the
expression of cyclin D1 and vascular endothelial growth factor in APC(min/+)
mouse polyps. Thus, our results provide a novel mechanism, suggesting that
cyclooxygenase-2/PGE2 may exert pro-oncogenic actions through stimulating the
beta-catenin/T cell factor-mediated transcription, which plays critical roles in 
colorectal carcinogenesis.

PMID: 15899904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Blood. 2005 Sep 1;106(5):1726-33. Epub 2005 May 12.

Cooperating pre-T-cell receptor and TCF-1-dependent signals ensure thymocyte
survival.

Goux D(1), Coudert JD, Maurice D, Scarpellino L, Jeannet G, Piccolo S, Weston K, 
Huelsken J, Held W.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne Branch, Ch des Boveresses 155, 
1066 Epalinges, Switzerland.

Intrathymic T-cell maturation critically depends on the selective expansion of
thymocytes expressing a functionally rearranged T-cell receptor (TCR) beta chain.
In addition, TCR-independent signals also contribute to normal T-cell
development. It is unclear whether and how signals from the 2 types of pathways
are integrated. Here, we show that T-cell factor-1 (TCF-1), a nuclear effector of
the canonical wingless/int (wnt)/catenin signaling pathway, ensures the survival 
of proliferating, pre-TCR(+) thymocytes. The survival of pre-TCR(+) thymocytes
requires the presence of the N-terminal catenin-binding domain in TCF-1. This
domain can bind the transcriptional coactivator beta-catenin and may also bind
gamma-catenin (plakoglobin). However, in the absence of gamma-catenin, T-cell
development is normal, supporting a role for beta-catenin. Signaling competent
beta-catenin is present prior to and thus arises independently from pre-TCR
signaling and does not substantially increase on pre-TCR signaling. In contrast, 
pre-TCR signaling significantly induces TCF-1 expression. This coincides with the
activation of a wnt/catenin/TCF reporter transgene in vivo. Collectively, these
data suggest that efficient TCF-dependent transcription requires that pre-TCR
signaling induces TCF-1 expression, whereas wnt signals may provide the
coactivator such as beta-catenin. The 2 pathways thus have to cooperate to ensure
thymocyte survival at the pre-TCR stage.

PMID: 15890681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Cancer Lett. 2005 Jun 1;223(1):159-67.

Forced expression of deltaN-TCF-1B in colon cancer derived cell lines is
accompanied by the induction of CEACAM5/6 and mesothelin.

Liebig B(1), Brabletz T, Staege MS, Wulfänger J, Riemann D, Burdach S, Ballhausen
WG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 1, Section Molecular GI Oncology, University
of Halle-Wittenberg, Halle, Germany.

The colon cancer cell lines HT29 and SW480 were transfected with an N-terminal
beta-catenin binding site-deficient high mobility group (HMG)-box T-cell factor 1
(deltaN-TCF-1) construct to identify differentially expressed genes.
Oligonucleotide HG-U133A microarray expression profiling revealed increased mRNA 
levels of carcinoembryonic antigen-related cell adhesion molecule (CEACAM) 5, 6
and mesothelin in transfectants positive for nuclear deltaN-TCF-1B. Increased
amounts of CEACAM5 (CEA) were detectable in membrane-associated compartments,
particularly in cholesterol-enriched microdomains. Similarly, mesothelin was
demonstrated as an uncleaved membrane-bound constituent. The identified markers
were examined in specimens of 46 colorectal carcinomas (CRC) by
immunohistochemistry. Patchy areas of increased CEACAM5/6 staining were seen at
the tumour-host front in all samples studied. Twenty-eight (58%) of these cases
showed over-expression of mesothelin in a small fraction of tumor cells
displaying dedifferentiation and dissemination at the invasion front. We conclude
that forced expression of deltaN-TCF-1B in HT29 and SW480 is associated with
up-regulation of GPI-anchored adhesion molecules, which were assigned to the
tumour-host front in CRC patients.

PMID: 15890249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Gastroenterology. 2005 May;128(5):1211-8.

Clinical, morphologic, and molecular features defining so-called telangiectatic
focal nodular hyperplasias of the liver.

Bioulac-Sage P(1), Rebouissou S, Sa Cunha A, Jeannot E, Lepreux S, Blanc JF,
Blanché H, Le Bail B, Saric J, Laurent-Puig P, Balabaud C, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Bordeaux, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Telangiectatic focal nodular hyperplasia (TFNH) of the liver
is generally believed to belong to the focal nodular hyperplasia (FNH) family.
The aim of this study was to use molecular markers, in addition to morphologic
features, to better characterize TFNH.
METHODS: Thirteen patients with TFNH were compared with 28 patients with FNH and 
17 patients with hepatocellular adenoma. Full clinical and morphologic data were 
analyzed. Molecular markers included determination of clonality by examining the 
active X chromosome, genome-wide allelotyping, a search for hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) mutations, and determination of ANGPT1/ANGPT2
transcript levels.
RESULTS: No clinical differences were evident between patients with TFNH and
adenoma; in particular, bleeding was observed in 77% and 53% of the cases,
respectively. Patients with TFNH were more likely to experience nodule recurrence
and the presence of multiple nodules than those with either FNH or adenoma. All
TFNH and adenoma samples that were available for analysis were monoclonal, in
contrast to 40% of the FNH samples. Chromosome losses confirmed monoclonality and
were significantly less frequent in TFNH and FNH (22% and 26%) than in adenoma
(53%). HNF1alpha mutations were found exclusively in half of the adenomas. ANGPT2
was overexpressed in TFNH and down-regulated in adenoma (P < .01) and FNH (P <
.0005).
CONCLUSIONS: TFNHs are monoclonal lesions frequently subject to bleeding that are
similar to adenomas not carrying HNF1alpha mutations and require a similar type
of treatment. However, morphologic and molecular data support the hypothesis that
TFNH is a separate entity.

PMID: 15887105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2005 Nov 1;208(3):285-94.

Low dose DDT inhibition of hepatocarcinogenesis initiated by diethylnitrosamine
in male rats: possible mechanisms.

Kushida M(1), Sukata T, Uwagawa S, Ozaki K, Kinoshita A, Wanibuchi H, Morimura K,
Okuno Y, Fukushima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Osaka City University Medical School, 1-4-3
Asahi-machi, Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan; Environmental Health Science
Laboratory, Sumitomo Chemical Co., Ltd., 1-98, 3-chome, Kasugade-Naka,
Konohana-ku, Osaka 554-8558, Japan.

Previously we reported a tendency for reduction of the development of
glutathione-S-transferase placental form (GST-P) positive foci, recognized as
preneoplastic changes in rat liver, by a low dose of
1,1-bis(p-chlorophenyl)-2,2,2-trichloroethane (DDT), which belongs to the same
group of hepatic cytochrome P-450 inducers as phenobarbital and is itself a
non-genotoxic hepatocarcinogen. In order to clarify the biological significance
of this phenomenon, we investigated the reproducibility and changes in other
parameters using an initiation-promotion model in which male F344 rats were
treated with DDT at doses of 0, 0.005, 0.5, 500 ppm in the diet for 11 or 43
weeks after initiation of hepatocarcinogenesis with N-diethylnitrosamine (DEN).
When 500 ppm DDT was applied, the formation of GST-P positive foci and tumor were
markedly elevated. In contrast, induction of GST-P positive foci and liver tumors
tended to be inhibited at a dose of 0.005 ppm, correlating with protein levels of
cytochrome P450 2B1 and 3A2 (CYP2B1 and 3A2) and generation of
8-hydroxy-2'-deoxyguanosine (8-OHdG), a marker of oxidative DNA damage. mRNA
levels for 8-oxoguanine glycosylase 1 (OGG1), an 8-OHdG repair enzyme, connexin
32 (Cx32), a major component of Gap junctions, and hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha 
(HNF-1alpha), a Cx32 regulator, were inversely correlated with GST-P positive
foci and tumor formation. These results indicate that low dose DDT may indeed
exhibit inhibitory effects on chemically initiated-rat hepatocarcinogenicity, in 
contrast to the promotion observed with high doses, and that this is related to
changes in metabolizing enzymes, cell communication, and DNA damage and its
repair.

PMID: 15885732  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. JOP. 2005 May 10;6(3):238-45.

Mutations in MODY genes are not common cause of early-onset type 2 diabetes in
Mexican families.

Domínguez-López A(1), Miliar-García A, Segura-Kato YX, Riba L, Esparza-López R,
Ramírez-Jiménez S, Rodríguez-Torres M, Canizales-Quinteros S, Cabrera-Vásquez S, 
Fragoso-Ontiveros V, Aguilar-Salinas CA, Altamirano-Bustamante N, Calzada-León R,
Robles-Valdés C, Bravo-Ríos LE, Tusié-Luna MT.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Medical Sciences and Nutrition Salvador Zubirán,
Biomedical Research Institute, National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico
City, Mexico.

CONTEXT: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of
diabetes mellitus characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, early age of
onset and a primary insulin secretion defect. Certain MODY gene sequence variants
may be involved in polygenic forms of type 2 diabetes.
OBJECTIVE: We assessed the contribution of MODY genes to the etiology of type 2
early-onset diabetes in 23 Mexican families, including five with apparently
autosomal dominant inheritance.
PATIENTS: Twenty-three unrelated Mexican families with early-onset type 2
diabetes previously screened for the presence of glucokinase mutations, were
studied.
DESIGN: We screened MODY genes for sequence variants by PCR-SSCP analysis and
automated sequencing. We performed a functional analysis of the HNF-1alpha P379H 
recombinant protein in vitro in both HeLa and RINm5f beta-cell lines.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: MODY gene mutation screening and P379H mutant protein
transactivation assay.
RESULTS: No mutations were detected in the HNF-4alpha, IPF-1, NEUROD1 or
HNF-1beta genes in any of the families studied. A new mutation (P379H) of the
HNF-1alpha gene was identified in one MODY family. RINm5f and HeLa cell
transfection assays revealed decreased transactivation activity of the mutant
protein on the human insulin promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: All known MODY genes were screened for abnormalities in this cohort 
of early-onset diabetes families which included 5 MODY pedigrees. We identified a
new HNF-1alpha MODY mutation (P379H) and demonstrated that it reduces the
transactivation potential of the mutant protein on the human insulin promoter. No
other mutation was identified in this cohort indicating that abnormalities in
MODY genes are generally not a common cause of early-onset diabetes and this
includes MODY families in Mexico.

PMID: 15883474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Hum Mutat. 2005 May;25(5):503-4.

Identification of novel GCK and HNF1A/TCF1 mutations and polymorphisms in German 
families with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY).

Toaima D(1), Näke A, Wendenburg J, Praedicow K, Rohayem J, Engel K, Galler A,
Gahr M, Lee-Kirsch MA.

Author information: 
(1)Klinik für Kinder- und Jugendmedizin, Technische Universität Dresden, Dresden,
Germany.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young is a genetically heterogeneous autosomal
dominant form of diabetes mellitus, characterized by an early age at onset and a 
primary defect in beta-cell function. Forty families with a clinical presentation
suggestive of MODY were screened for the most common MODY subtypes caused by
mutations in the genes encoding glucokinase (GCK, MODY2) and hepatocyte nuclear
1-alpha (HNF1A/TCF1, MODY3). Overall, 14 mutations were found (35%) giving a
relative frequency of 22.5% and 12.5% for MODY2 and MODY3, respectively. Five of 
the nine GCK mutations identified were novel and included two deletions, two
nonsense, and one splice site mutation. The GCK splice donor mutation was shown
to result in an aberrant transcript owing to the recruitment of a cryptic splice 
site. The translated protein is predicted to contain an in frame insertion of
nine amino acids. Among the five HNF1A mutations identified, three were novel
comprising one missense mutation, one deletion, and one insertion. In addition,
several novel polymorphisms within GCK were identified and their allele
frequencies estimated. Knowledge of the genetic cause of MODY has significant
impact on therapeutic decision making and may help to identify family members at 
risk for diabetes.

PMID: 15841481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Diabet Med. 2005 Apr;22(4):406-9.

Preserved insulin response to tolbutamide in hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
mutation carriers.

Sagen JV(1), Pearson ER, Johansen A, Spyer G, Søvik O, Pedersen O, Njølstad PR,
Hattersley AT, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Paediatrics, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, 
Bergen, Norway. Jorn.Sagen@pedi.uib.no

AIMS: Diabetic subjects with mutations in the gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-1alpha (MODY3) are prone to develop hypoglycaemia at low doses of
glibenclamide, interpreted as sulphonylurea hypersensitivity. The present study
was undertaken to compare the plasma insulin responses to glucose and tolbutamide
in HNF-1alpha mutation carriers with those of healthy control subjects.
METHODS: Seven mutation carriers; three normoglycaemic, two with impaired glucose
tolerance, and two with newly detected diabetes, underwent an oral glucose
tolerance test and a tolbutamide-modified intravenous glucose tolerance test with
measurements of plasma insulin. Twenty-two healthy subjects served as controls.
RESULTS: The plasma insulin response to intravenous glucose was reduced in the
HNF-1alpha mutation carriers compared to the control subjects, with an area under
the curve (median (interquartile range)) of 812 min pmol/l (421, 1647) and 1933
min pmol/l (1521, 2908), respectively (P = 0.03). In striking contrast, the
plasma insulin response to tolbutamide was preserved, with an area under the
curve of 2109 min pmol/l (1126, 3172) and 2250 min pmol/l (1614, 3276) in the
mutation carriers and control subjects, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: HNF-1alpha mutation carriers are characterized by preserved
tolbutamide-induced insulin secretion. Compared to healthy subjects, our MODY3
individuals did not show any increased serum insulin response to tolbutamide,
suggesting that HNF-1alpha mutation carriers are not characterized by
sulphonylurea hypersensitivity.

PMID: 15787664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Ir Med J. 2005 Jan;98(1):28-9.

Maturity Onset Diabetes in the Young (MODY) type 3.

Samaan MC, Brennan A, Fitzgerald H, Roche EF, Hoey HM.

PMID: 15782734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Apr 29;330(1):11-7.

Inhibition of the DNA binding by the TCF-1 binding RNA aptamer.

Park MW(1), Choi KH, Jeong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Nanosensor and Biotechnology,
Dankook University, Seoul 140-714, Republic of Korea.

The DNA binding architectural protein, TCF, and the transcriptional activator,
beta-catenin, form a complex that regulates the expression of diverse target
genes during early development and carcinogenesis. As an approach to modulating
transcription by this complex, we selected an RNA aptamer that binds to the DNA
binding domain of TCF-1. The aptamer interfered with the binding of TCF-1 to its 
specific DNA recognition sequences in vitro and also inhibited DNA binding of
cellular TCF-1. We also developed the truncated version of the aptamer for
efficient delivery to the cells. Structural analysis of the truncated aptamer
revealed that a stem-loop with an internal loop was responsible for the binding
to TCF-1. Similar approach may well be applicable to other proteins, especially
DNA binding transcription factors, in order to modulate their DNA binding and
transcriptional activity in the cells.

PMID: 15781225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Nihon Rinsho. 2005 Feb;63 Suppl 2:171-5.

[HNF-1alpha G319S mutation in Oji-Cree type 2 diabetes].

[Article in Japanese]

Yamagata K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University.

PMID: 15779364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Dev Biol. 2005 Apr 1;280(1):59-72.

Retinoic acid, hypoxia, and GATA factors cooperatively control the onset of fetal
liver erythropoietin expression and erythropoietic differentiation.

Makita T(1), Duncan SA, Sucov HM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Genetic Medicine, University of Southern California Keck School 
of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

The cytokine erythropoietin (Epo) is an essential factor promoting the survival, 
proliferation, and differentiation of erythroid progenitor cells. Epo expression 
and the initial phase of definitive erythropoietic differentiation in the fetal
liver (E9-E12) are compromised in mouse embryos lacking the retinoic acid
receptor RXRalpha. Our previous work demonstrated that the Epo gene is a direct
target of retinoic acid action, via a retinoic acid receptor binding site in the 
Epo gene enhancer. However, Epo expression and erythropoietic differentiation
become normalized in RXRalpha mutants from E12. In this study, we have
investigated the molecular mechanisms underlying the transition in Epo gene
regulation from RXRalpha-dependence to RXRalpha-independence. We find that three 
independent regulatory components are required for high level Epo expression in
the early fetal liver: ligand-activated retinoic acid receptors, the
hypoxia-regulated factor HIF1, and GATA factors. By E11.5, the fetal liver is no 
longer hypoxic, and retinoic acid signaling is no longer active; Epo expression
from E11.5 onward is enhancer-independent, and is driven instead by basal
promoter elements that provide a sufficient level of expression to support
further erythropoietic differentiation.

PMID: 15766748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Exp Dermatol. 2005 Mar;14(3):182-7.

In vivo and in vitro evidence for autocrine DCoH/HNF-1alpha transcription of
albumin in the human epidermis.

Hasse S(1), Kothari S, Rokos H, Kauser S, Schürer NY, Schallreuter KU.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Experimental Dermatology, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Bradford, Bradford, West Yorkshire BD7 1DP, UK.

The presence of albumin in the human epidermis has been reported more than a
decade ago, but until now, it was assumed that this protein is synthesized in the
liver and transported to the avascular skin. To our knowledge, transcription of
albumin in the human epidermis was never considered. In this report, we present
for the first time evidence for autocrine synthesis of albumin in the human
epidermis in keratinocytes in situ and in vitro. Using double immunofluorescence 
labelling, we identified that albumin colocalized together with its transcription
factor PCD/DCoH/HNF-1alpha in suprabasal keratinocytes in human full-thickness
skin sections and in keratinocytes cultured in serum-free medium. Moreover,
albumin and HNF-1alpha protein expression was confirmed by Western blotting in
undifferentiated and differentiated keratinocytes as well as in human epidermal
suction blister roof extracts. Reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
analysis from human epidermal keratinocytes and epidermal suction blister roofs
revealed the transcription of albumin. Using in vivo fluorescence excitation
spectroscopy at the surface of human skin, we confirmed albumin as a major
constituent yielding a lambda(max) at 295 nm, which was assigned to the single
tryptophan 214 fluorophore in this protein. This in vivo result is in agreement
with albumin concentrations of 10(-3) M, underlining the importance of this
protein in epidermal homeostasis.

PMID: 15740590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Hepatology. 2005 Mar;41(3):470-7.

Cytokine-independent repression of rodent Ntcp in obstructive cholestasis.

Geier A(1), Zollner G, Dietrich CG, Wagner M, Fickert P, Denk H, van Rooijen N,
Matern S, Gartung C, Trauner M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Aachen University (RWTH), Aachen,
Germany.

Cholestatic liver injury is associated not only with accumulation of bile acids
but also with activation of proinflammatory cytokines. Common bile duct ligation 
(CBDL) induces sustained downregulation of the Na(+)/taurocholate cotransporter
(Ntcp) in rodent liver. Although repression of Ntcp during endotoxemia is
cytokine mediated, it is unclear whether inflammatory cytokines contribute to
this downregulation in obstructive cholestasis. Cytokine inactivation in CBDL
rats and mice was either performed directly with tumor necrosis factor alpha
(etanercept) or interleukin 1 beta inactivation (anakinra/AMG 719) or indirectly 
Kupffer cell depletion via intraperitoneal administration of
liposome-encapsulated dichloromethylene bisphosphonate. Protein and messenger RNA
(mRNA) expression of Ntcp and short heterodimer partner (SHP) were analyzed via
Western and Northern blotting. Key regulators of Ntcp (hepatocyte nuclear factor 
1 alpha [HNF-1alpha], HNF-4alpha, retinoid X receptor alpha [RXRalpha]:retinoic
acid receptor alpha [RARalpha]) were studied via electrophoretic mobility shift
analysis and nuclear Western blot analysis. Both methods of cytokine inactivation
failed to maintain Ntcp protein or mRNA expression within 3 days after CBDL in
either rats or mice (20%-40% of sham controls), while SHP mRNA expression
increased three- to five-fold. Decreased nuclear HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha
protein levels (45% and 60% of sham controls, respectively) and HNF-1alpha
binding activity (32% of sham controls) were not restored during cytokine
inactivation after CBDL, indicating cytokine-independent mechanisms of Ntcp
regulation. RXRalpha:RARalpha binding remained unchanged in all experimental
conditions. In conclusion, during obstructive cholestasis accumulating bile acids
per se, without major contribution of cytokines, leads to downregulation of Ntcp 
via repression of HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha.

PMID: 15723437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Feb 18;33(3):1077-86. Print 2005.

The mouse RNase 4 and RNase 5/ang 1 locus utilizes dual promoters for
tissue-specific expression.

Dyer KD(1), Rosenberg HF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Allergic Diseases NIAID, NIH, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
kdyer@niaid.nih.gov

The ribonuclease A (RNase A) superfamily has been the subject of extensive
studies in the areas of protein evolution, structure and biochemistry and are
exciting molecules in that they appear to be responding to unique selection
pressures, generating proteins capable of multiple and diverse activities. The
RNase 4 and RNase 5/ang 1 shared locus breaks a pattern that is otherwise
canonical among the members of the RNase A gene superfamily. Conserved among
humans, mice and rats, the locus includes two non-coding exons followed by two
distinct exons encoding RNase 4 and RNase 5/ang 1. Transcription from this locus 
is controlled by differential splicing and tissue-specific expression from
promoters located 5' to each of the non-coding exons. Promoter 1, 5' to exon I,
is universally active, while Promoter 2, 5' to exon II, is active only in hepatic
cells in promoter assays in vitro. Transcription from Promoter 2 is dependent on 
an intact HNF-1 consensus binding site which binds the transcription factor
HNF-1alpha. In summary, RNase 4 and RNase 5/ang 1 are unique among the RNase A
ribonuclease genes in that they maintain a complex gene locus that is conserved
across species with transcription initiated from tissue-specific dual promoters
followed by differential exon splicing.

PMCID: PMC549413
PMID: 15722482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Int J Obes (Lond). 2005 Mar;29 Suppl 1:S5-9.

Tissue-specific regulation of metabolic pathways through the transcriptional
coactivator PGC1-alpha.

Puigserver P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. ppuigse1@bs.jhmi.edu

Metabolic pathways are controlled at different levels in response to
environmental or hormonal stimuli. This control is achieved, at least in part, at
the transcriptional level of gene expression. The regulation of gene expression
is executed by specific transcription factors, but there is another level of
regulation by a set of proteins that modulate these factors called
transcriptional coactivators. In mammals, one of the most characterized examples 
of regulation of metabolic pathways by transcriptional coactivators is peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptors gamma (PPARgamma) coactivator-1 alpha
(PGC-1alpha). PGC-1alpha is activated by signals that control energy and nutrient
homeostasis. Notably, PGC-1alpha induces and coordinates gene expression that
stimulates mitochondrial biogenesis and a thermogenic program in brown fat,
fiber-type switching in skeletal muscle, and metabolic pathways linked to the
fasted response in the liver. PGC-1alpha activates gene expression through
specific interaction with transcription factors that bind to the promoters of
metabolic genes. These transcription factors can be ubiquitous such as the
nuclear respiratory factors or tissue-enriched factors such as PPARgamma (brown
fat), hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF4alpha) (liver and pancreas) and muscle
enhancer factor (MEF2s). The fact that PGC-1alpha controls important metabolic
pathways in several tissues suggests that it can be a therapeutic target for
antiobesity or diabetes drugs.

PMID: 15711583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2005 Jan 15;149(3):139-43.

[Molecular diagnosis on indication of maturity onset diabetes of the young;
results from 184 patients].

[Article in Dutch]

Losekoot M(1), Broekman AJ, Breuning MH, de Koning EJ, Romijn JA, Maassen JA.

Author information: 
(1)Leids Universitair Medisch Centrum, afd. Klinische Genetica, Centrum voor
Humane en Klinische Genetica, Wassenaarseweg 72, 2333 AL Leiden.
m.losekoot@lumc.nl

OBJECTIVE: To describe the results of mutation analysis of the genes involved in 
maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) types 1-3.
DESIGN: Descriptive.
METHOD: In the period July 2000-October 2003 the DNA from 184 possible MODY
patients was analysed for the presence of mutations of the genes involved in MODY
types 1, 2 and 3. The patients fulfilled at least one of the following criteria: 
diabetes mellitus had been diagnosed before the age of 25, or at least before the
age of 40, there was a family history of diabetes mellitus at an early age, there
were no characteristics to indicate diabetes mellitus type 1 or 2.
RESULTS: In the blood of 65 patients (35%) a pathogenic gene mutation was found. 
A total of 45 patients had a mutation in the HNF-1alpha-gene (which is linked to 
MODY3), 11 in the glucokinase gene (MODY2) and 9 in the HNF-4alpha-gene (MODY1). 
Of all the HNF-1alpha-gene mutations, the insertion of a C in codon 291 was the
most frequently seen (in 11 families). A mutation in exon 9 of the
HNF-1alpha-gene was also shown in 9 apparently non-related families, which
probably was a founder mutation.
CONCLUSION: The MODY subtype was found in one third of the selected patients.
This diagnosis may have implications in the clinical management of the patient.

PMID: 15693590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Feb 1;33(2):e19.

Diagnosis of HNF-1alpha mutations on a PNA zip-code microarray by single base
extension.

Song JY(1), Park HG, Jung SO, Park J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Korea Advanced Institute 
of Science and Technology 373-1 Guseong-dong, Yuseong-gu, Daejeon, 305-701,
Republic of Korea.

In the present study, we exploited the superior features of peptide nucleic acids
(PNAs) to develop an efficient PNA zip-code microarray for the detection of
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) mutations that cause type 3
maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY). A multi-epoxy linker compound was
synthesized and used to achieve an efficient covalent linking of amine-modified
PNA to an aminated glass surface. PCR was performed to amplify the genomic
regions containing the mutation sites. The PCR products were then employed as
templates in a subsequent multiplex single base extension reaction using chimeric
primers with 3' complementarity to the specific mutation site and 5'
complementarity to the respective PNA zip-code sequence on the microarray. The
primers were extended by a single base at each corresponding mutation site in the
presence of biotin-labeled ddNTPs, and the products were hybridized to the PNA
microarray. Compared to the corresponding DNA, the PNA zip-code sequence showed a
much higher duplex specificity for the complementary DNA sequence. The PNA
zip-code microarray was finally stained with streptavidin-R-phycoerythrin to
generate a fluorescent signal. Using this strategy, we were able to correctly
diagnose several mutation sites in exon 2 of HNF-1alpha with a wild-type and
mutant samples including a MODY3 patient. This work represents one of the few
successful applications of PNA in DNA chip technology.

PMCID: PMC548378
PMID: 15687377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Diabet Med. 2005 Feb;22(2):137-43.

Clinical characteristics, beta-cell function, HLA class II and mutations in MODY 
genes in non-paediatric subjects with Type 1 diabetes without pancreatic
autoantibodies.

Aguilera E(1), Casamitjana R, Ercilla G, Oriola J, Nicoletti F, Gomis R, Conget
I.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Diabetes Unit, IDIBAPS, Hospital Clínic i Universitari,
Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To study clinical characteristics, beta-cell function, HLA typing and 
mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and HNF-4alpha genes in
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D) patients without pancreatic autoantibodies.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Twenty patients without pancreatic autoantibodies (Ab neg)
and 20 with autoantibodies (Ab pos), age/gender matched, were included (age 17-34
years). Islet cell, glutamic acid decarboxylase, tyrosine phosphatase and insulin
autoantibodies, basal and stimulated C-peptide were measured. HLA-DRB1-DQA1-DQB1 
typing and screening for mutations in the HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha genes were
performed.
RESULTS: No differences were found in clinical presentation, metabolic control
and beta-cell function in the two groups (onset or after 12 months).
DRB1*0301-DQA1*0501-DQB1*0201 was the most frequent haplotype in both groups but 
we found a higher proportion of protective T1D haplotypes and Asp(beta57) in the 
Ab neg group, but in all the cases in combination with susceptible T1D
haplotypes. We found two previously reported polymorphisms (HNF-1alpha, Ala98Val;
HNF-4alpha, Thr130Ile) in Ab neg and a new variant (Ser165Gly) in the HNF-4alpha 
gene in an Ab pos subject. Conclusions In a non-paediatric population with newly 
diagnosed T1D, the absence of islet antibodies does not imply clinical or
metabolic differences when compared with those cases with islet antibodies.
Despite a similar HLA-DR/DQ typing, the presence of protective alleles and
molecular properties in a higher proportion in the Ab neg group suggests that
these factors could modulate the presence or absence of islet antibodies.
Variants in HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha are unlikely to be major contributors to
the pathogenesis of diabetes in antibody-negative T1D.

PMID: 15660729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 Apr;13(4):422-7.

Genetic and clinical characteristics of maturity-onset diabetes of the young in
Chinese patients.

Xu JY(1), Dan QH, Chan V, Wat NM, Tam S, Tiu SC, Lee KF, Siu SC, Tsang MW, Fung
LM, Chan KW, Lam KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong
Kong, China.

In Caucasians, maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is mostly caused by
mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha (MODY3) and glucokinase
(MODY2) genes. Most Japanese MODY patients, however, are not linked to known MODY
genes. In this study, we examined the genetic and clinical characteristics of
Chinese subjects with MODY. The study included 146 unrelated families fulfilling 
the minimum criteria for MODY: two consecutive generations of type II diabetes
with at least one member diagnosed under the age of 25. We screened for mutations
in the HNF-4alpha (MODY1), MODY2 and MODY3 genes by direct sequencing. Antibody
to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD-Ab) was measured in subjects with MODY of
unknown cause (MODYX). Insulin resistance index and other clinical data were
compared in sex-, age- and duration-matched MODY3 and MODYX patients. In all, 13 
families had MODY3 mutations and two had MODY2 mutations. No MODY1 mutation was
found. Four of the 12 different MODY3 mutations were newly identified novel
mutations (Q243E, A311D, P379R and P488fsdelC). In subjects with MODYX, 3% were
GAD-Ab positive and 60% were overweight. Compared to MODY3 patients, MODYX
patients had higher body mass index (P<0.02), higher insulin resistance index
(P=0.001) and triglyceride level (P<0.02), lower HDL level (P=0.001) and more
hypertension (P<0.05), but no significant difference in the prevalence of
diabetic complications. In conclusion, MODY3 and MODY2 account for only 9 and 1%,
respectively, of Chinese MODY. A majority of Chinese MODY patients are due to
defects in unknown genes and appear to be characterized by insulin resistance.

PMID: 15657605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Mar 1;14(5):603-14. Epub 2005 Jan 13.

Germline hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha and 1beta mutations in renal cell
carcinomas.

Rebouissou S(1), Vasiliu V, Thomas C, Bellanné-Chantelot C, Bui H, Chrétien Y,
Timsit J, Rosty C, Laurent-Puig P, Chauveau D, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U674, CEPH, IUH Saint-Louis, Paris, France.

Mutations in one copy of the hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF) 1alpha and 1beta
homeodomain containing transcription factors predispose the carrier to
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) types 3 and 5, respectively.
Moreover, previous identification of biallelic inactivation of HNF1alpha in
hepatocellular adenoma identified its tumor suppressor function in
hepatocarcinogenesis. The seminal observation of an ovarian carcinoma in a MODY5 
patient who subsequently developed a chromophobe renal cell carcinoma, prompted
us to screen for HNF1beta and HNF1alpha inactivation in a series of 20 ovarian
and 35 renal neoplasms. Biallelic HNF1beta inactivation was found in two of 12
chromophobe renal carcinomas by association of a germline mutation and a somatic 
gene deletion. In these cases, the expression of PKHD1 (polycystic kidney and
hepatic disease 1) and UMOD (Uromodulin), two genes regulated by HNF1beta, was
turned off. Interestingly, in two of 13 clear cell renal carcinomas, we found a
monoallelic germline mutation of HNF1alpha with no associated suppression of
target mRNA expression. In normal and tumor renal tissues, we showed the
existence of a network of transcription factors differentially regulated in tumor
subtypes. We identified two related clusters of co-regulated genes associating
HNF1beta, PKHD1 and UMOD in the first group and HNF1alpha, HNF4alpha, FABP1 and
UGT2B7 in the second group. Finally, these results suggest that germline
mutations of HNF1beta and HNF1alpha may predispose to renal tumors. Furthermore, 
we suggest that HNF1beta functions as a tumor suppressor gene in chromophobe
renal cell carcinogenesis through a PKHD1 expression control.

PMID: 15649945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Dev Biol. 2005 Feb 1;278(1):49-59.

XNP-1/ATR-X acts with RB, HP1 and the NuRD complex during larval development in
C. elegans.

Cardoso C(1), Couillault C, Mignon-Ravix C, Millet A, Ewbank JJ, Fontés M, Pujol 
N.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U491, Faculté de Médecine la Timone, 27, Bd Jean Moulin, 13385
Marseille Cedex 5, France.

Mutations in the XNP/ATR-X gene cause several X-linked mental retardation
syndromes in humans. The XNP/ATR-X gene encodes a DNA-helicase belonging to the
SNF2 family. It has been proposed that XNP/ATR-X might be involved in chromatin
remodelling. The lack of a mouse model for the ATR-X syndrome has, however,
hampered functional studies of XNP/ATR-X. C. elegans possesses one homolog of the
XNP/ATR-X gene, named xnp-1. By analysing a deletion mutant, we show that xnp-1
is required for the development of the embryo and the somatic gonad. Moreover, we
show that abrogation of xnp-1 function in combination with inactivation of genes 
of the NuRD complex, as well as lin-35/Rb and hpl-2/HP1 leads to a stereotyped
block of larval development with a cessation of growth but not of cell division. 
We also demonstrate a specific function for xnp-1 together with lin-35 or hpl-2
in the control of transgene expression, a process known to be dependent on
chromatin remodelling. This study thus demonstrates that in vivo XNP-1 acts in
association with RB, HP1 and the NuRD complex during development.

PMID: 15649460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Treat Endocrinol. 2005;4(1):9-18.

Diagnosis and management of maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Timsit J(1), Bellanné-Chantelot C, Dubois-Laforgue D, Velho G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Diabetology, Hôpital Cochin, Paris, France.
jose.timsit@cch.ap-hop-paris.fr

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a dominantly inherited form of
non-ketotic diabetes mellitus. It results from a primary defect of insulin
secretion, and usually develops at childhood, adolescence, or young adulthood.
MODY is a heterogeneous disease with regard to genetic, metabolic, and clinical
features. All MODY genes have not been identified, but heterozygous mutations in 
six genes cause the majority of the MODY cases. By far MODY2 (due to mutations of
the glucokinase gene) and MODY3 (due to mutations in hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha) are the most frequent. As with MODY3, all the other MODY subtypes 
are associated with mutations in transcription factors. The clinical
presentations of the different MODY subtypes differ, particularly in the severity
and the course of the insulin secretion defect, the risk of microvascular
complications of diabetes, and the defects associated with diabetes. Patients
with MODY2 have mild, asymptomatic, and stable hyperglycemia that is present from
birth. They rarely develop microvascular disease, and seldom require
pharmacologic treatment of hyperglycemia. In patients with MODY3, severe
hyperglycemia usually occurs after puberty, and may lead to the diagnosis of type
1 diabetes. Despite the progression of insulin defects, sensitivity to
sulfonylureas may be retained in MODY3 patients. Diabetic retinopathy and
nephropathy frequently occur in patients with MODY3, making frequent follow-up
mandatory. By contrast, other risk factors are not present in patients with MODY 
and the frequency of cardiovascular disease is not increased. The clinical
spectrum of MODY is wider than initially described, and might include multi-organ
involvement in addition to diabetes. In patients with MODY5, due to mutations in 
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta, diabetes is associated with pancreatic atrophy, 
renal morphologic and functional abnormalities, and genital tract and liver test 
abnormalities. Although MODY is dominantly inherited, penetrance or expression of
the disease may vary and a family history of diabetes is not always present.
Thus, the diagnosis of MODY should be raised in various clinical circumstances.
Molecular diagnosis has important consequences in terms of prognosis, family
screening, and therapy.

PMID: 15649097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Endocrinol. 2005 Jan;184(1):95-105.

Growth hormone regulates the expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 gamma and 
other liver-enriched transcription factors in the bovine liver.

Eleswarapu S(1), Jiang H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal and Poultry Sciences, Virginia Polytechnic Institute and 
State University, Blacksburg, Virginia 24061, USA.

Growth hormone (GH) regulates the expression of many genes in the liver, and for 
some genes this regulation may be mediated through liver-enriched transcription
factors (LETFs). As part of the long-term goal to investigate the role of LETFs
in GH regulation of gene expression in the liver, in this study we determined the
effect of GH administration on the expression of 10 LETFs, including hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, HNF-1beta, HNF-3alpha, HNF-3beta, HNF-3gamma,
HNF-4alpha, HNF-6, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) alpha, C/EBPbeta, and
albumin D-element binding protein (DBP) in the bovine liver. Eighteen
non-lactating and non-pregnant Angus cows were assigned randomly to three groups 
(n=6 per group) and each cow received a single intramuscular injection of 500 mg 
slow-release recombinant bovine GH. Liver biopsy samples were taken from group 1 
cows 6 h after GH administration, from group 2 cows 24 h after GH administration,
and from group 3 cows 1 week after GH administration. Liver biopsies were also
collected from group 3 cows 1 day before GH administration, serving as pre-GH
controls. The LETF mRNAs in these liver samples were quantified using
ribonuclease protection assays with probes generated from bovine LETF cDNAs
cloned by standard reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. The levels of
HNF-3gamma and HNF-6 mRNAs were higher (P< 0.05) in the cows 24 h and 1 week
after GH administration than in the untreated cows or the cows 6 h after GH
administration. The levels of HNF-4alpha mRNA were higher (P< 0.05) in the cows 1
week after GH administration than in the other three groups of cows. The levels
of C/EBPalpha mRNA were higher (P< 0.05) in the cows 24 h after GH administration
than in the untreated cows or the cows 6 h after GH administration. The levels of
HNF-3alpha mRNA were higher (P< 0.05) in the cows 6 h after GH administration but
were lower (P< 0.05) in the cows 24 h or 1 week after GH administration compared 
with those in the untreated cows. The levels of DBP mRNA were higher (P< 0.05) in
the cows 6 h after GH administration but were lower (P< 0.05) in the cows 24 h
after GH administration compared with those in the untreated cows. The levels of 
HNF-1alpha, HNF-3alpha, and C/EBPbeta mRNAs were not different (P>0.05) between
groups. The expression of HNF-1beta mRNA was not detectable. Thus, the expression
of six LETFs including HNF-3gamma , HNF-3beta, HNF-4alpha, HNF-6, C/EBPalpha, and
DBP mRNAs in the bovine liver is regulated by GH, and these six LETFs may play a 
role in mediating GH regulation of gene expression in the liver. Among the 10
LETFs, the response of HNF-3gamma to GH is most significant. Cloning and
sequencing the promoter region of this gene revealed multiple putative binding
elements for signal transducers and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5),
suggesting that GH regulation of HNF-3gamma expression in the liver may be
mediated through direct binding of STAT5 to the HNF-3gamma promoter.

PMID: 15642787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Hepatol. 2005 Jan;42(1):102-9.

Kupffer cell depletion with liposomal clodronate prevents suppression of Ntcp
expression in endotoxin-treated rats.

Sturm E(1), Havinga R, Baller JF, Wolters H, van Rooijen N, Kamps JA, Verkade HJ,
Karpen SJ, Kuipers F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Center for Liver, Digestive, and Metabolic Diseases,
University of Groningen, The Netherlands. e.sturm@bkk.azg.nl

BACKGROUND/AIMS: In sepsis-associated cholestasis, expression of many genes
involved in bile acid transport, including Ntcp, is suppressed by cytokines.
Kupffer cells (KC) are an important source of cytokines in sepsis. To assess the 
consequences of KC depletion on hepatic Ntcp expression in endotoxemic rats.
METHODS: Sprague-Dawley rats received liposomal clodronate (CLO) or vehicle (PBS)
to deplete KC prior to lipopolysaccharide (LPS) exposure. Plasma and liver
samples were taken 1 and 16 h after LPS exposure.
RESULTS: Complete CLO-depletion of KC by was demonstrated by
immunohistochemistry. Hepatic gene expression of IL-1beta and TNFalpha as well as
TNFalpha plasma levels in CLO/LPS-injected animals were significantly reduced to 
a mean of 41, 36 and 23% of controls injected with LPS only. Ntcp RNA- and
protein expression was significantly higher whereas plasma bile salt
concentration was lower in CLO/LPS animals vs. animals injected with LPS only.
Binding activity of transcription factors RXR:RAR and HNF1alpha was decreased in 
LPS only controls but preserved in CLO/LPS treated animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Clodronate-depletion of KC blocks cytokine-mediated Ntcp suppression
upon endotoxin exposure. KC may represent pharmacological targets for treatment
of sepsis-associated cholestasis.

PMID: 15629514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Feb 4;327(1):294-9.

An RNA aptamer that binds to the beta-catenin interaction domain of TCF-1
protein.

Lee SK(1), Park MW, Yang EG, Yu J, Jeong S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Institute of Nanosensor and Biotechnology,
Dankook University, Seoul 140-714, Republic of Korea.

The architectural transcription factor TCF-1 interacts directly with beta-catenin
and activates transcription of various target genes that are important for early 
development and carcinogenesis. We selected an RNA aptamer that specifically
bound to the beta-catenin-interacting N-terminal motif of TCF-1. Structural
analysis revealed that it formed a stem-loop structure that was responsible for
binding TCF-1 and contained a pair of internal loops. The RNA aptamer interfered 
with the binding of TCF-1 to beta-catenin and also inhibited the formation of
TCF-1/beta-catenin complexes. Disruption of TCF-1/beta-catenin complexes could
alter the transcriptional activity of TCF-1. Taken together our observations show
that a rationally designed RNA aptamer can disrupt protein-protein interactions
required for the formation of an active transcription complex.

PMID: 15629461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Biochem. 2004 Sep;136(3):313-9.

Transcriptional coactivators CBP and p300 cooperatively enhance
HNF-1alpha-mediated expression of the albumin gene in hepatocytes.

Dohda T(1), Kaneoka H, Inayoshi Y, Kamihira M, Miyake K, Iijima S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, Graduate School of Engineering, Nagoya
University, Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8603, Japan.

Transcriptional coactivators, CREB-binding protein (CBP) and p300, exhibit high
homology in structure and similar functions. In the present study, we analyzed
the function of CBP and p300 proteins as transcriptional coactivators in the
expression of albumin in hepatocytes. The expression levels of CBP and p300 were 
high in fetal hepatocytes, but low in adult ones. Immunoprecipitation assays
showed that both CBP and p300 interacted with hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha) in primary hepatocytes. Furthermore, CBP and p300 were
co-precipitated without HNF-1alpha. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays
revealed that both CBP and p300 are located in the albumin promoter region in
hepatocytes. These results suggested that HNF-1alpha, CBP and p300 were
incorporated into a preinitiation complex of RNA polymerase II at the albumin
promoter. Luciferase reporter assays showed that CBP and p300 cooperatively
triggered HNF-1alpha-mediated transcription of the albumin promoter. In addition,
inhibition of CBP or p300 using small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) resulted in a
reduction in albumin expression. These results suggest that both CBP and p300 are
required for enhanced expression of albumin.

PMID: 15598887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. FEBS Lett. 2004 Dec 3;578(1-2):63-8.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1alpha and 4alpha control expression of proline
oxidase in adult liver.

Kamiya A(1), Inoue Y, Kodama T, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bldg 37, Rm 3106B1, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Adult liver functions are regulated by several hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs).
HNF4alpha and HNF1alpha are involved in metabolic functions in the liver. The
expression of proline oxidase (PO) and proline dehydrogenase was downregulated in
the HNF4alpha liver-specific null mice. In addition, the expression of PO was
also diminished in the liver derived from HNF1alpha-null mice. The -160 bp
proximal promoter region of the PO gene has two HNF4alpha- and HNF1alpha-binding 
consensus sites. Transactivation, electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies revealed that these regions are important for PO
promoter activity. These results suggested that HNF4alpha and HNF1alpha regulate 
proline metabolism in adult liver.

PMID: 15581617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Diabet Med. 2004 Dec;21(12):1310-5.

Studies of the Ala/Val98 polymorphism of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
gene and the relationship to beta-cell function during an OGTT in
glucose-tolerant women with and without previous gestational diabetes mellitus.

Lauenborg J(1), Damm P, Ek J, Glümer C, Jørgensen T, Borch-Johnsen K, Vestergaard
H, Hornnes P, Pedersen O, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Rigshospitalet, Copenhagen, Denmark.
jeannet@lauenb.org

AIMS: In pregnancies complicated by gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) an
increased demand for insulin is not met due to beta-cell dysfunction. An Ala/Val 
polymorphism at codon 98 of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha)
gene has been associated with decreased serum insulin and C-peptide responses
during an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) in glucose-tolerant subjects. The
aims of the present study were to evaluate the influence of the polymorphism on
the serum insulin and C-peptide responses to an OGTT in glucose-tolerant women
with and without previous GDM and to investigate if this polymorphism is
associated with GDM.
METHODS: The Ala/Val98 polymorphism was measured in 376 women of Danish origin
with previous GDM, and in 724 age-matched and 310 middle-aged glucose tolerant
women using polymerase chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism.
RESULTS: The allelic frequency of the Ala/Val98 polymorphism was 0.043 [95%
confidence interval (CI) 0.028, 0.057] in women with previous GDM vs. 0.037 (95% 
CI 0.028, 0.047) in age-matched and 0.039 (95% CI 0.024, 0.054) in middle-age
women. Among 117 glucose-tolerant women with previous GDM, 10 carriers of the
Ala/Val98 polymorphism had a non-significant 27% and 22% reduction in serum
C-peptide and insulin levels, respectively, at 30 min during an OGTT.
Seventy-eight control subjects carrying the Ala/Val98 polymorphism had a 10% (P =
0.001) and 16% (P = 0.004) reduction in serum C-peptide and insulin levels,
respectively, compared with 956 Ala/Ala control subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: The Ala/Val polymorphism at codon98 of HNF-1alpha is not associated 
with GDM in Danish women. However, the codon 98 variant is associated with a
significant impairment of serum insulin and C-peptide responses during an OGTT in
glucose-tolerant women without previous GDM.

PMID: 15569134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2004 Nov 24;1681(1):28-37.

Transcriptional regulation of the IAPP gene in pancreatic beta-cells.

Shepherd LM(1), Campbell SC, Macfarlane WM.

Author information: 
(1)School of Cell and Molecular Biosciences, University of Newcastle upon Tyne,
The Medical School, Framlington Place, Newcastle upon Tyne, NE2 4HH, UK.

Islet amyloid polypeptide (IAPP or amylin) is co-secreted with insulin from the
pancreatic beta-cells. Transcription of the IAPP gene is controlled by a complex 
promoter region, spanning from -2798 to +450 relative to the transcriptional
start site. In the present study, we have used reporter gene analysis and
semi-quantitative RT-PCR to establish that insulin, glucagon, glucagon-like
peptide-1 (GLP-1) and the GLP-1 derivatives GLP(7-36)Amide and Exendin-4 all
stimulate IAPP promoter activity, as well as endogenous IAPP mRNA levels in
isolated islets of Langerhans. In contrast, somatostatin had no effect, and
whilst the inflammatory cytokines TNF-alpha, IL-1alpha and IL-1beta had no effect
on promoter activity, they all decreased IAPP mRNA levels in isolated islets.
Finally, utilising a series of deletion reporter gene constructs of the human
IAPP gene promoter, we used overexpression studies to establish that HNF-3beta
(FoxA2) negatively regulates the IAPP promoter, whilst the MODY3 transcription
factor HNF-1alpha positively regulates promoter activity.

PMID: 15566941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Diabetes. 2004 Dec;53 Suppl 3:S92-6.

Beta-cell-targeted expression of a dominant-negative mutant of hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha in mice: diabetes model with beta-cell dysfunction partially
rescued by nonglucose secretagogues.

Winzell MS(1), Pacini G, Wollheim CB, Ahrén B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Lund University, B11 BMC, SE-221 84 Lund, Sweden.

We studied islet function in mice with beta-cell-targeted expression of a
dominant-negative mutant of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha. At age 2-3
months, anesthetized transgenic and wild-type male mice underwent an intravenous 
glucose (1 g/kg) tolerance test (IVGTT). It was found that transgenic mice had an
abolished insulin response in association with severe glucose intolerance. In
other tests, the 5-min insulin response to intravenous arginine was impaired by
79% (P=0.032) and the 15-min insulin response to gastric glucose was suppressed
by 97% (P=0.006). In islets incubated for 60 min, the insulin response to glucose
(3.3-22.2 mmol/l) was impaired by >80% in transgenic mice. In contrast, insulin
responses to nonglucose secretagogues were only partially suppressed (to GLP-1
[100 nmol/l] by 40%, to carbachol [1 micromol/l] by 20%, and to palmitate [0.5
mmol/l] by 15%), whereas the response to depolarization by KCl (50 mmol/l) was
not reduced. Finally, the IVGTT data insulin sensitivity in transgenic mice was
not significantly different from that of wild-type mice. Thus, mice with targeted
suppression of beta-cell HNF-1alpha represent a good diabetes model exhibiting
severely impaired insulin secretion after glucose with marked glucose
intolerance. In contrast, the insulin responses to nonglucose stimuli are not
suppressed when the islet insulin content is taken into account.

PMID: 15561929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Dec 3;325(1):308-13.

Effect of mutations in HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta on the transcriptional regulation
of human sucrase-isomaltase in Caco-2 cells.

Gu N(1), Suzuki N, Takeda J, Adachi T, Tsujimoto G, Aoki N, Ishihara A, Tsuda K, 
Yasuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry, Kyoto University Graduate School of Human and
Environmental Studies, Kyoto, Japan.

Mutations in transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF)-1alpha and
HNF-1beta cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) types 3 and 5,
respectively. HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta mutations are well studied in some
tissues, but the mechanism by which HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta mutations affect
sucrase-isomaltase (SI) transcription in the small intestine is unclear. We
studied the effects of 13 HNF-1alpha mutants and 2 HNF-1beta mutants on human SI 
gene transcription, which were identified in subjects with MODY3 and MODY5,
respectively. Transactivation activity of 11 HNF-1alpha and 2 HNF-1beta mutants
was significantly lower than that of wild (wt)-HNF-1alpha and wt-HNF-1beta.
Furthermore, in co-expression studies with mutant (mu)-HNF-1alpha/ wt-HNF-1beta
and wt-HNF-1alpha/mu-HNF-1beta, the combination of mu-HNF-1alpha (P379fsdelCT and
T539fsdelC)/wt-HNF-1beta impaired SI transcription, but the others were not
remarkably different from wt-HNF-1alpha/wt-HNF-1beta. Although wt-HNF-1beta
inhibited the transactivation activity of wt-HNF-1alpha on SI transcription, the 
inhibitory effect was reduced by 2 HNF-1beta mutants. These results suggest that 
SI transcription might tend to be unchanged or lower in MODY3, while occurring
more in MODY5.

PMID: 15522234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Lab Invest. 2005 Jan;85(1):124-36.

Strong expression of methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) in human colon
carcinoma cells is regulated by TCF1/[beta]-catenin.

Bataille F(1), Rogler G, Modes K, Poser I, Schuierer M, Dietmaier W, Ruemmele P, 
Mühlbauer M, Wallner S, Hellerbrand C, Bosserhoff AK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University of Regensburg Medical School, Regensburg,
Germany.

Methylthioadenosine phosphorylase (MTAP) is known as a ubiquitously expressed
house keeping gene important in biochemical salvage processes. The MTAP gene is
localized on the human chromosomal region 9p21, a region often deleted in cancer.
Recently, several groups including our own have shown that MTAP serves as a
tumour suppressor gene. The aim of this study was to analyse the role of MTAP in 
colon carcinoma and normal colon epithelium and the regulation of gene
expression. To examine MTAP RNA and protein expression, we screened six colon
carcinoma cell lines and human primary colon epithelial cells by RT-PCR and
immunoblotting. MTAP expression was confirmed in vivo by immunohistochemical
staining of normal colon tissue compared to adenoma and colon carcinoma.
Interestingly, we found strong MTAP mRNA and protein expression by colon
carcinoma cell lines but no expression by colonic epithelial cells. To analyse
the regulation of MTAP expression, promoter studies were performed and revealed
control of MTAP expression by LEF/TCF/beta-catenin. Furthermore, we demonstrated 
a significant correlation between MTAP protein expression and tumour progression 
as the intensity of MTAP protein staining increased from normal tissue to
carcinoma. In addition, the recently postulated association between MTAP activity
and interferon (IFN) sensitivity was confirmed in colon epithelial cells showing 
only little response to IFN-gamma, in contrast to the carcinoma cell lines. In
summary, these data indicate for the first time that MTAP is not expressed in
normal human colonic epithelium but is strongly upregulated in colon carcinoma.
This finding may be of clinical significance concerning the homeostasis of normal
colon epithelium and potential treatment of colon carcinoma.

PMID: 15492751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2004 Nov 15;431(2):252-60.

The pig CYP2E1 promoter is activated by COUP-TF1 and HNF-1 and is inhibited by
androstenone.

Tambyrajah WS(1), Doran E, Wood JD, McGivan JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medical Sciences, University Walk,
Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.

Functional analysis of the pig cytochrome P4502E1 (CYP2E1) promoter identified
two major activating elements. One corresponded to the hepatic nuclear factor 1
(HNF-1) consensus binding sequence at nucleotides -128/-98 and the other was
located in the region -292/-266. The binding of proteins in pig liver nuclear
extracts to a synthetic double-stranded oligonucleotide corresponding to this
more distal activating sequence was studied by electrophoretic mobility shift
assay. The minimum protein binding sequence was identified as TGTTCTGACCTCTGGG.
Gel super-shift assays identified the protein binding to this site as chick
ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor 1 (COUP-TF1). Androstenone
inhibited promoter activity in transfection experiments only with constructs
which included the COUP-TF1 binding site. Androstenone inhibited COUP-TF1 binding
to synthetic oligonucleotides but did not affect HNF-1 binding. The results offer
an explanation for the inhibition of CYP2E1 protein expression by androstenone in
isolated pig hepatocytes and may be relevant to the low expression of hepatic
CYP2E1 in those pigs which accumulate high levels of androstenone in vivo.

PMID: 15488474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Cell Physiol. 2005 Apr;203(1):15-26.

Differential expression of claudin-2 along the human intestine: Implication of
GATA-4 in the maintenance of claudin-2 in differentiating cells.

Escaffit F(1), Boudreau F, Beaulieu JF.

Author information: 
(1)CIHR Group on Functional Development and Physiopathology of the Digestive
Tract, Département d'anatomie et de Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine,
Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

Claudins, and particularly claudin-2, are important regulatory components of
tight junction permeability. A better understanding of the involvement of
claudin-2 in intestinal barrier functions requires the characterization of its
distribution and regulation in the intestine. Interestingly, the claudin-2 gene
promoter harbors a number of similarities to that of sucrase-isomaltase, a marker
of enterocyte differentiation. We thus investigated the expression of claudin-2
in relation to the transcription factors CDX2, HNF-1alpha, and GATA-4 in the
human intestine. The characterization of claudin-2 and the expression of the
above transcription factors were performed by immunofluorescence, Western blot,
and RT-PCR in the developing human intestinal epithelium. The functional role of 
CDX2, HNF-1alpha, and GATA-4 on claudin-2 regulation was also examined by ectopic
expression studies in intestinal cell models. Claudin-2 was detected in both
crypt and villus cells of the small intestine but restricted to undifferentiated 
crypt cells in the colon. CDX2 and HNF-1alpha were expressed along the entire
intestine whereas GATA-4 was undetectable in the colon. Accordingly, in the
colonic Caco-2 cell model, claudin-2 was found to be present only in
undifferentiated cells. Like in the colonic epithelium, GATA-4 was found to be
also lacking in Caco-2 cells while CDX2 and HNF-1alpha were present at
significant levels. Cotransfection experiments showed that the claudin-2 promoter
was activated by CDX2, HNF-1alpha, and GATA-4 in a cooperative manner.
Furthermore, forced GATA-4 expression in Caco-2 cells enhances maintenance of
claudin-2 expression during differentiation. These observations suggest that
optimal claudin-2 expression in the gut relies on the presence of GATA-4,
suggesting a role for this factor in intestinal regionalization.

2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15389642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Aug 2;84(15):1247-51.

[Etiological dissection in common anti-islet autoantibody-negative patients with 
type 1 diabetes].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang DM(1), Zhou ZG, Weng JP, Li LR, Deng H, Zhang C, Jin P, Huang G, Peng J,
Xiu LL, Wang JP, Yang L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Metabolism & Endocrinology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central
South University, Changsha 410011, China.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the immunological and genetic factors of common anti-islet 
autoantibody-negative patients with type 1 diabetes.
METHODS: Specimens of peripheral blood were collected from 33 common autoantibody
(GAD-Ab, IA2-Ab, IAA, TGA and TPO-Ab) negative diabetic patients with new-onset
of unprovoked ketosis (or ketoacidosis), and genome DNA was extracted. The
antibodies to carboxypeptide-H (CPH) and SOX13 (ICA12) were detected by
radioligand assay. The gene mutations of MODY3 (HNF-1alpha) and MODY6
(NeuroD1/Beta2) were detected by PCR-SSCP sequencing. Mitochondrial gene
mutations were analyzed with PCR-RFLP.
RESULTS: Two (6%) of the patients were SOX13-Ab positive, while none of them was 
positive for CPH-Ab. Gene mutation detection found one case of a new mutation,
R321H (CGC-->CAC) in the exon 5 of HNF-1alpha gene and one case with ND1 mt3316
G-->A mutation in mitochondrial DNA. In addition to the diabetes-associated
mutations described above, seven polymorphisms of HNF-1alpha gene, including
L17L, I27L, L459L, S487N, IVS5 + 9 C > G, IVS6-42 G > T, and IVS7 + 7 G > A, and 
one NeuroD1/Beta2 gene polymorphic variant Ala45Thr, were found.
CONCLUSION: Autoimmunity and gene mutations (such as MODY3 and mitochondrial
genes mutations) may be etiological in a few cases initially diagnosed as
autoantibody-negative type 1 diabetes. Autoimmunity and MODY and mitochondrial
diabetes should be excluded if idiopathic type 1 (type 1B) diabetes is diagnosed.

PMID: 15387959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. J Exp Med. 2004 Sep 20;200(6):797-803. Epub 2004 Sep 13.

IL-7 receptor signals inhibit expression of transcription factors TCF-1, LEF-1,
and RORgammat: impact on thymocyte development.

Yu Q(1), Erman B, Park JH, Feigenbaum L, Singer A.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Immunology Branch, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes
of Health, Bldg. 10, Rm. 4B36, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Intrathymic T cell development depends on signals transduced by both T cell
receptor and cytokine receptors. Early CD4(-)CD8(-) (double negative) thymocytes 
require interleukin (IL)-7 receptor (IL-7R) signals for survival and
proliferation, but IL-7R signals are normally extinguished by the immature single
positive (ISP) stage of thymocyte development. We now demonstrate that IL-7R
signals inhibit expression of transcription factors TCF-1, LEF-1, and RORgammat
that are required for the ISP to double positive (DP) transition in the thymus.
In addition, we demonstrate that IL-7R signals also inhibit TCF-1 and LEF-1
expression in mature peripheral T cells. Thus, the present work has identified
several important downstream target genes of IL-7R signaling in T cells and
thymocytes that provide a molecular mechanism for the inhibitory influence of
IL-7R signaling on DP thymocyte development. We conclude that IL-7R signals
down-regulate transcription factors required for the ISP to DP transition and so 
must be terminated by the ISP stage of thymocyte development.

PMCID: PMC2211960
PMID: 15365098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Exp Cell Res. 2004 Oct 1;299(2):427-41.

IL-1beta regulates expression of Cx32, occludin, and claudin-2 of rat hepatocytes
via distinct signal transduction pathways.

Yamamoto T(1), Kojima T, Murata M, Takano K, Go M, Chiba H, Sawada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Sapporo, Japan.

The functions of gap and tight junctions are perturbed during the acute-phase
response to liver injury. To elucidate the mechanism of pro-inflammatory cytokine
IL-1beta responsible for regulation of hepatic gap and tight junctions, we
analyzed expression and function of gap and tight junctions using a rat liver
injury model and primary cultures of rat hepatocyte. In rat liver lobules at 24 h
after thioacetamide (TAA) treatment, where some IL-1beta-positive non-parenchymal
cells existed, disappearance of connexin32-positive spots at cell borders of the 
hepatocytes and increases of claudin-2 and occludin immunoreactivities in bile
canalicular regions were observed. In primary cultures of rat hepatocytes,
IL-1beta caused the disappearance of connexin32, which was reciprocal to the
induction and localization of claudin-2 to cell membranes. The downregulated
connexin32 expression was inhibited by treatment with a MAP-kinase inhibitor
(PD98059), whereas the upregulated claudin-2 expression was blocked by p38 MAP
and PI3-kinase inhibitors (SB203580 and LY294002). The changes of connexin32 and 
claudin-2 may be controlled at the transcriptional level via NF-kappaB,
HNF-1alpha, and CDX2. Occludin was hyperphosphorylated by IL-1beta treatment and 
was inhibited by treatment with a PI3-kinase inhibitor. These results demonstrate
that MAP-kinase, p38 MAP-kinase, and PI3-kinase are distinctly involved in the
regulation of hepatic gap and tight junctions during the acute-phase response to 
IL-1beta.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 15350541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Jan;288(1):G74-84. Epub 2004 Aug
26.

Mechanism of rifampicin and pregnane X receptor inhibition of human cholesterol 7
alpha-hydroxylase gene transcription.

Li T(1), Chiang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Pathology, Northeastern Ohio University
College of Medicine, Rootstown, OH 44272, USA.

Bile acids, steroids, and drugs activate steroid and xenobiotic receptor pregnane
X receptor (PXR; NR1I2), which induces human cytochrome P4503A4 (CYP3A4) in drug 
metabolism and cholesterol 7 alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) in bile acid synthesis in
the liver. Rifampicin, a human PXR agonist, inhibits bile acid synthesis and has 
been used to treat cholestatic diseases. The objective of this study is to
elucidate the mechanism by which PXR inhibits CYP7A1 gene transcription. The mRNA
expression levels of CYP7A1 and several nuclear receptors known to regulate the
CYP7A1 gene were assayed in human primary hepatocytes by quantitative real-time
PCR (Q-PCR). Rifampicin reduced CYP7A1 and small heterodimer partner (SHP; NR02B)
mRNA expression suggesting that SHP was not involved in PXR inhibition of CYP7A1.
Rifampicin inhibited CYP7A1 reporter activity and a PXR binding site was
localized to the bile acid response element-I. Mammalian two-hybrid assays
revealed that PXR interacted with hepatic nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4 alpha,
NR2A1) and rifampicin was required. Coimmunoprecipitation assay confirmed PXR
interaction with HNF4 alpha. PXR also interacted with peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator (PGC-1 alpha), which interacted
with HNF4 alpha and induced CYP7A1 gene transcription. Rifampicin enhanced PXR
interaction with HNF4 alpha and reduced PGC-1 alpha interaction with HNF4 alpha. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed that PXR, HNF4 alpha, and PGC-1 alpha 
bound to CYP7A1 chromatin, and rifampicin dissociated PGC-1 alpha from chromatin.
These results suggest that activation of PXR by rifampicin promotes PXR
interaction with HNF4 alpha and blocks PGC-1 alpha activation with HNF4 alpha and
results in inhibition of CYP7A1 gene transcription. Rifampicin inhibition of bile
acid synthesis may be a protective mechanism against drug and bile acid-induced
cholestasis.

PMID: 15331348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Oncogene. 2004 Sep 30;23(45):7588-92.

Mutation of TCF1 encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha in gynecological
cancer.

Rebouissou S(1), Rosty C, Lecuru F, Boisselier S, Bui H, Le Frere-Belfa MA,
Sastre X, Laurent-Puig P, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U434, 27 rue Juliette Dodu, 75010 Paris, France.

TCF1: (transcription factor 1) encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
(HNF1alpha) is mutated in 50% of liver cell adenomas, a benign tumor closely
associated with oral contraceptive use. These genetic alterations inactivate both
alleles, leading to the absence of wild-type HNF1alpha expression in liver cell
adenomas. To search for a role of HNF1alpha in other hormone-related neoplasias, 
we screened for HNF1alpha mutations in a series of 36 endometrial carcinomas, 29 
breast carcinomas and 20 ovarian epithelial tumors. HNF1alpha mutations were
identified in 4/36 (11%) of endometrial tumors. No mutation was found in ovarian 
and breast tumors. HNF1alpha mutations were somatic in all cases, monoallelic in 
three cases and biallelic in one case. These results suggest that HNF1alpha may
contribute to endometrial carcinogenesis through complete HNF1alpha inactivation 
like in liver cell adenoma or by haploinsufficiency like in MSI-H colorectal
cancer.

PMID: 15326484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Mol Pharmacol. 2004 Sep;66(3):694-701.

Role of liver-enriched transcription factors in the down-regulation of organic
anion transporting polypeptide 4 (oatp4; oatplb2; slc21a10) by
lipopolysaccharide.

Li N(1), Klaassen CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Boulevard, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) administration is a model of cholestasis. Organic anion 
transporting polypeptide 4 (Oatp4; Slc21a10) is almost exclusively expressed in
liver. Therefore, it was hypothesized that LPS would down-regulate mouse Oatp4
and that this action is due to a decrease in nuclear binding activity of one or
more liver-enriched transcription factors to mouse Oatp4 promoter. The present
study indicates a time-dependent decrease in mouse Oatp4 mRNA levels by LPS.
Moreover, LPS produced a rapid and profound decrease in nuclear binding activity 
to the mouse Oatp4 putative response elements for hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)
1, CAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP), HNF3, and heterodimers of retinoid X
receptor (RXR) and retinoic acid receptor (RAR). Maximal decrease in nuclear
binding activity to these response elements preceded a significant reduction of
Oatp4 mRNA levels. HNF1alpha bound to the Oatp4 HNF1 response element as a
homodimer. Multiple copies of the Oatp4 HNF1alpha response element, inserted
upstream of a minimal promoter, were sufficient to mediate reporter activity and 
responded to the coexpression of HNF1alpha in mouse hepatoma cells. Moreover,
HNF1alpha dose dependently activated the Oatp4 promoter (-4.8 kilo-bases to +30
bp). Therefore, HNF1alpha is a potent trans-activator of the mouse Oatp4
promoter. In addition, Oatp4 mRNA levels were markedly decreased (95%) in
HNF1alpha-null mice as compared with wild-type mice, suggesting that HNF1alpha
levels are critical for the constitutive expression of the Oatp4 gene. Taken
together, these findings suggest that the LPS-induced down-regulation of Oatp4 is
likely due to reduction in the binding of HNF1alpha, C/EBP, HNF3, and RXR:RAR to 
the Oatp4 promoter.

PMID: 15322262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Clin Invest Med. 2004 Jun;27(3):135-41.

Spectrum of HNF1A and GCK mutations in Canadian families with maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY).

McKinney JL(1), Cao H, Robinson JF, Metzger DL, Cummings E, Riddell DC, Sanderson
SR, Pacaud D, Ho J, Hegele RA.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute, London, Ont.

PURPOSE: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a subtype of type 2
diabetes characterized by autosomal-dominant inheritance and early onset. The
pathophysiology of MODY is primarily defective insulin secretion resulting from
mutations in at least 6 different genes. Most affected patients harbour mutations
in either GCK (encoding glucokinase, also called MODY2) and HNF1A (encoding
hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha, also called MODY3). We studied Canadian probands
to determine if they had mutations in MODY2 or MODY3 genes.
METHOD: We used genomic DNA sequencing of probands from 9 previously unreported
Canadian MODY families.
RESULTS: Five MODY probands had mutations in HNF1A, of which 4 were novel (namely
IVS5-1delTAG, E275fsdelGAAG, F268S and L44fsdelC) and 4 had mutations in GCK, of 
which 2 were novel (E237K and L324P). These mutations expand the spectrum of MODY
mutations and bring the total number of Canadian MODY families that have been
molecularly defined in our laboratory to 15 (8 MODY3 and 7 MODY2).
CONCLUSION: Because of the growing evidence that molecular diagnosis may affect
prognosis and treatment, this information may be important in future for Canadian
MODY families and their physicians.

PMID: 15305805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Gene. 2004 Aug 18;338(1):35-46.

Two distinct teleost hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 genes, hnf1alpha/tcf1 and
hnf1beta/tcf2, abundantly expressed in liver, pancreas, gut and kidney of
zebrafish.

Gong HY(1), Lin CJ, Chen MH, Hu MC, Lin GH, Zhou Y, Zon LI, Wu JL.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Life Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, 
Taiwan.

Two distinct forms of zebrafish hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (hnf1) were
identified and referred to as hnf1alpha/tcf1 and hnf1beta/tcf2. Both hnf1 genes
were shown to be expressed abundantly in liver, pancreas, gut and kidney.
Zebrafish HNF1alpha and HNF1beta proteins contain all HNF1 signature domains
including the dimerization domain, POU-like domain and atypical homeodomain.
Sequence and phylogenetic analysis reveals that zebrafish hnf1alpha is closer to 
tetrapodian hnf1alpha than to tetrapodian hnf1beta and zebrafish hnf1beta is
highly conserved with tetrapodian hnf1beta. Existences of hnf1alpha and hnf1beta 
in teleost zebrafish, tilapia and fugu suggest that hnf1 gene duplication might
occur before the divergence of teleost and tetrapod ancestors. Zebrafish
hnf1alpha and hnf1beta genes were mapped to linkage group LG8 and LG15 in T51
panel by RH mapping and are composed of 10 and 9 exons, respectively. Zebrafish
hnf1beta gene with at least 11 genes in LG15 was identified to maintain the
conserved synteny with those of human in chromosome 17 and those of mouse in
chromosome 11. Our results indicate that distinct hnf1alpha and hnf1beta genes in
teleosts had been evolved from the hnf1 ancestor gene of chordate.

PMID: 15302404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Aug;21(4):329-34.

[Scanning HNF-1 alpha gene mutation in Chinese early-onset and/or multiplex
diabetes pedigrees].

[Article in Chinese]

Fang QC(1), Zhang R, Wang CR, Lin X, Xiang KS.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Diabetes Institute, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Shanghai No.6 People Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University, Shanghai, 200233 PR 
China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the prevalence of mutations of hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-1 alpha gene in Chinese families with early-onset and/or multiplex
diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: The studied population consisted of 247 unrelated Chinese residents in
Shanghai, including 93 healthy controls and 154 probands of early-onset and/or
multiplex diabetes pedigrees. The ten exons, flanking introns and minimal
promoter region of HNF-1 alpha gene were screened using polymerase chain
reaction-single strand conformation polymorphism and DNA sequencing.
RESULTS: Fourteen substitutions were identified in 154 probands. Three variants
were not observed in 93 healthy controls. Two of them (nt-128T-->G IVS2
nt+21G-->A) were not reported previously and all co-segregated with diabetes. The
genotype and allele frequencies of the other eleven variants in the diabetic
patients were not significantly different from those in the healthy controls.
There were no significant relationships between the eleven variants of HNF-1
alpha gene and clinical variables (plasma glucose, insulin, C-peptide and fasting
lipid profile).
CONCLUSION: HNF-1 alpha gene is not a major cause of early-onset or multiplex
diabetes pedigrees in this Chinese population in Shanghai.

PMID: 15300627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Diabetes. 2004 Aug;53(8):2122-5.

Polymorphic variations in the neurogenic differentiation-1, neurogenin-3, and
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha genes contribute to glucose intolerance in a
South Indian population.

Jackson AE(1), Cassell PG, North BV, Vijayaraghavan S, Gelding SV, Ramachandran
A, Snehalatha C, Hitman GA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Diabetes and Metabolic Medicine, Institute of Cell and Molecular
Science, Barts and The London, Queen Mary's School of Medicine and Dentistry,
University of London, UK.

The neurogenic differentiation-1 (NEUROD1), neurogenin-3 (NEUROG3), and hepatic
nuclear factor-1alpha (TCF1) genes are interacting transcription factors
implicated in controlling islet cell development and insulin secretion.
Polymorphisms of these genes (Ala45Thr [NEUROD1], Ser199Phe [NEUROG3], and
Ala98Val [TCF1]) have been postulated to influence the development of type 2
diabetes. We have investigated the role and interaction between these variants
using PCR/restriction fragment-length polymorphism assays in 454 subjects
recruited as part of a population survey in South India. Additionally, 97 South
Indian parent-offspring trios were studied. Polymorphisms of all three genes were
associated with either fasting blood glucose (FBG) and/or 2-h blood glucose (BG) 
in either the total dataset or when restricted to a normoglycemic population. A
monotonically increasing effect, dependent on the total number of risk-associated
alleles carried, was observed across the whole population (P < 0.0001 for FBG and
2-h BG), raising FBG by a mean of 2.9 mmol/l and 2-h BG by a mean of 4.3 mmol/l. 
Similarly, an ascending number of the same risk alleles per subject increased the
likelihood of type 2 diabetes (P = 0.002). In conclusion, we observed a combined 
effect of variations in NEUROD1, NEUROG3, and TCF1 in contributing to overall
glucose intolerance in a South Indian population.

PMID: 15277395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Diabet Med. 2004 Aug;21(8):928-30.

Serum amino acids in patients with mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
alpha gene.

Stride A(1), Pearson ER, Brown A, Gooding K, Castleden HA, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, UK.

AIMS: Knockout mice lacking both copies of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1)
gene have altered serum levels of amino acids and generalized aminoaciduria. The 
aim of our study was to test whether alterations in serum amino acid levels were 
found in patients with mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha
(HNF-1alpha) gene compared with controls.
METHODS: Fasting serum from 20 patients with HNF-1alpha mutations and 20 age, sex
and body mass index-matched controls was analysed for 16 amino acids. Means were 
compared between the two groups and Z scores calculated.
RESULTS: There was no significant difference between patients with HNF-1alpha
mutations and controls in serum levels of phenylalanine, arginine, citrulline or 
lysine as suggested by knockout mice models. Although serum levels of eight amino
acids were different in the two groups, these were not significant after
Bonferroni correction.
CONCLUSIONS: The alterations in serum amino acid levels seen in mice models are
not seen in patients with mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene. This suggests
differences in mouse and man in the regulation of amino acid transport and has
not provided us with a phenotypic marker to use before confirmatory genetic
testing.

Copyright 2004 Diabetes UK

PMID: 15270800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Diabetes. 2004 Jul;53(7):1894-9.

Cosegregation of MIDD and MODY in a pedigree: functional and clinical
consequences.

Cervin C(1), Liljeström B, Tuomi T, Heikkinen S, Tapanainen JS, Groop L, Cilio
CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Malmö University Hospital, S-205 02 Malmö,
Sweden. camilla.cervin@endo.mas.lu.se

The aim of this study was characterization of a family carrying two mutations
known to cause monogenic forms of diabetes, the M626K mutation in the HNF1alpha
gene (MODY3) and the A3243G in mtDNA. Beta-cell function and insulin sensitivity 
were assessed with the Botnia clamp. Heteroplasmy of the A3243G mutation and
variants in type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes were determined, and
transcriptional activity, DNA binding, and subcellular localization of mutated
HNF1alpha were studied. Thirteen family members carried the mutation in mtDNA; 6 
of them also had the M626K mutation, whereas none had only the M626K mutation.
The protective Ala12 allele in peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
(PPAR)gamma was present in two nondiabetic individuals. Carriers of both mtDNA
and HNF1alpha mutations showed an earlier age at onset of diabetes than carriers 
of only the mtDNA mutation (median 22 vs. 45 years) but no clear difference in
beta-cell function or insulin sensitivity. In vitro, the M626K mutation caused a 
53% decrease in transcriptional activity in HeLa cells. The mutated protein
showed normal nuclear targeting but increased DNA binding. These data demonstrate
that several genetic factors might contribute to diabetes risk, even in families 
with mtDNA and HNF1alpha mutations.

PMID: 15220216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004 Nov;287(5):G943-53. Epub 2004 Jun
24.

Control of differentiation-induced calbindin-D9k gene expression in Caco-2 cells 
by cdx-2 and HNF-1alpha.

Wang L(1), Klopot A, Freund JN, Dowling LN, Krasinski SD, Fleet JC.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Nutrition Program, Purdue University, West Lafayette,
Indiana 47907, USA.

Calbindin D9k (CaBP) is critical for intestinal calcium absorption; its in vivo
expression is restricted to differentiated enterocytes of the small intestine.
Our goal was to identify factors controlling the transcriptional regulation of
this gene in the human intestine. Both the natural gene and a 4600-bp promoter
construct were strongly regulated by differentiation (>100-fold) but not by
treatment with 1,25(OH)2 vitamin D (<2-fold) in the Caco-2 clone TC7.
Deletion-mutation studies revealed that conserved promoter sequences for cdx-2
(at -3158 bp) and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 (at -3131 and at -98 bp)
combined to control CaBP expression during differentiation. Other putative
response elements were not important for CaBP regulation in TC7 cells (CCAAT
enhancer binding protein, pancreatic duodenal homebox-1 (pdx-1), a proximal cdx-2
element). Mutation of the distal HNF-1 site had the greatest impact on CaBP gene 
expression through disruption of HNF-1alpha binding; both basal and
differentiation-mediated CaBP expression was reduced by 80%. In contrast,
mutation of the distal cdx-2 element reduced only basal CaBP expression. Whereas 
a 60% reduction of CaBP mRNA in the duodenum of HNF-1alpha null mice confirmed
the physiological importance of HNF-1alpha for CaBP gene regulation, additional
studies showed that maximal CaBP expression requires the presence of both
HNF-1alpha and cdx-2. Our data suggest that cdx-2 is a permissive factor that
influences basal CaBP expression in enterocytes and that HNF-1alpha modulates
CaBP gene expression during cellular differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2701355
PMID: 15217781  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2004 Jun;112(6):298-301.

A novel nonsense mutation in GCK exon 9 co-segregates with diabetes phenotype.

Knebel B(1), Jacob S, Boxberg CV, Müller-Wieland D, Kotzka J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Clinical Biochemistry and Pathobiochemistry, German Diabetes
Center at the Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Auf'm Hennekamp 65, 40225
Düsseldorf, Germany.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young is an autosomal dominant form of non-insulin
dependent diabetes mellitus and is caused by mutations in at least six different 
genes. In the most common forms, i.e. MODY2 and MODY3, the glucokinase (GCK) and 
the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha gene is affected, respectively. We
have screened the GCK gene and HNF-1alpha gene by direct sequencing in three
German families with early onset type-2-diabetes, possibly MODY. Next to known
polymorphisms we have identified two novel intronic insertions in GCK and a novel
non-sense mutation in exon 9 (C364 X). The latter mutation has an autosomal
dominant inheritance pattern. Accordingly, this novel mutation segregates with
diabetes phenotype in this family.

PMID: 15216446  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Biochemistry. 2004 Jun 29;43(25):7983-91.

Functional switches in transcription regulation; molecular mimicry and plasticity
in protein-protein interactions.

Beckett D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, College of Life Sciences, University
of Maryland, College Park, Maryland 20742, USA. db248@umail.umd.edu

The pairwise interactions in which a protein participates can dictate the
functional properties of the protein. Indeed, there are many biological
regulatory processes in which protein function is orchestrated via exchange of
one protein partner for another. Several transcription regulatory proteins that
participate in functional switching have been identified and extensively studied.
In the examination of the structural basis of the switch for four of these
proteins, a common theme of mutually exclusive protein-protein interactions
emerges. The ability of these proteins to utilize the same surface to form
alternative interactions reflects a second characteristic of these systems of
molecular mimicry. Finally, in two of the systems, plasticity in adoption of
secondary structure is integral to the formation of alternative protein-protein
interactions. Regulation of formation of the alternative parings occurs by a
range of mechanisms. In the simplest systems, the outcome of the switch reflects 
the relative probability of encounter of one partner versus another.
Alternatively, more complex mechanisms include regulation of protein availability
and compartmentalization of protein partners.

PMID: 15209493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Mol Cell. 2004 Jun 18;14(6):727-38.

Localized domains of G9a-mediated histone methylation are required for silencing 
of neuronal genes.

Roopra A(1), Qazi R, Schoenike B, Daley TJ, Morrison JF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1300 University
Avenue, Madison, WI 53706, USA. roopra@neurology.wisc.edu

Negative regulation of transcription is an important strategy in establishing and
maintaining cell-specific gene expression patterns. Many neuronal genes are
subject to active transcriptional repression outside the nervous system to
establish neuronal specificity. NRSF/REST has been demonstrated to regulate at
least 30 genes and contribute to their neuronal targeting by repressing
transcription outside the nervous system. Further, human genome database searches
reveal that over 800 genes contain an NRSE. Here we report that NRSF recruits the
histone methylase G9a to silence NRSF target genes in nonneuronal cells. We show 
that G9a generates a highly localized domain of dimethylated histone H3-K9 around
NRSEs, but H3-K27 remains unmethylated. The NRSEs are also associated with HP1.
Finally, we demonstrate that dominant-negative G9a abrogates silencing of
chromosomal neuronal genes. These findings implicate a role for histone
methylation in targeting neuronal gene expression to the nervous system.

PMID: 15200951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. J Virol. 2004 Jul;78(13):6908-14.

Regulation of hepatitis B virus core promoter by transcription factors HNF1 and
HNF4 and the viral X protein.

Zheng Y(1), Li J, Ou JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) core promoter contains a binding site for nuclear
receptors. A natural double mutation in this binding site, which changes
nucleotide (nt) 1765 from A to T and nt 1767 from G to A, selectively abolishes
the binding of several nuclear receptors without affecting that of HNF4. This
double mutation also creates a binding site for the transcription factor HNF1 and
changes two amino acids in the overlapping X protein sequence. In this study, we 
have examined the roles of HNF1, HNF4, and the X protein in the regulation of the
core promoter activities in Huh7 hepatoma cells. Our results indicate that HNF4
could stimulate the expression of the precore RNA and the core RNA from the core 
promoter of both the wild-type (WT) HBV and the double mutant, although its
effect on the former was more prominent. In contrast, HNF1, which did not affect 
the WT core promoter, suppressed the precore RNA expression of the double mutant.
Further analysis using HBV genomic constructs, with and without the ability to
express the X protein, indicates that the X protein did not affect the HNF4
activity on the core promoter and affected the HNF1 activity on the core promoter
of only the double mutant. Thus, our results indicate that the phenotypic
differences of HBV WT and double-mutant core promoters are at least partially due
to the differential activities of HNF1, HNF4, and the X protein on these two
promoters.

PMCID: PMC421633
PMID: 15194767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Biochemistry. 2004 Jun 15;43(23):7345-55.

Biochemical and structural basis for partially redundant enzymatic and
transcriptional functions of DCoH and DCoH2.

Rose RB(1), Pullen KE, Bayle JH, Crabtree GR, Alber T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California 94720-3206, USA. bob_rose@ncsu.edu

An inherited form of diabetes, maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3
(MODY3), results from mutations in the transcriptional activator, hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF1alpha). Transcription by HNF1alpha is stimulated by
the bifunctional coactivator DCoH (dimerization cofactor of HNF1). Strikingly, an
HNF1alpha deletion in mice causes more severe phenotypes than a DCoH deletion. It
has been hypothesized that a DCoH homolog, DCoH2, partially complements the DCoH 
deletion. To test this idea, we determined the biochemical properties and the
1.6-A-resolution crystal structure of DCoH2. Like DCoH, DCoH2 forms a tetramer,
displays pterin-4alpha-carbinolamine dehydratase activity, and binds HNF1alpha in
vivo and in vitro. DCoH and DCoH2 adopt identical folds with structural
differences confined largely to the protein surfaces and the tetramer interface. 
In contrast to the hyperstable DCoH tetramer, DCoH2 readily disproportionates and
forms a 2:2 complex with HNF1 in vitro. Phylogenetic analysis reveals six major
subfamilies of DCoH proteins, including unique DCoH and DCoH2 branches in
metazoans. These results suggest distinct roles for DCoH and DCoH2. Differences
in conserved surface residues could mediate binding to different effectors. We
propose that HNF1alpha binding kinetics may distinguish regulation by DCoH2,
under thermodynamic control, from regulation by DCoH, under kinetic control.

PMID: 15182178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004 Oct;287(4):G899-909. Epub 2004 Jun 
3.

Complex regulation of the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase promoter by GATA-4.

van Wering HM(1), Bosse T, Musters A, de Jong E, de Jong N, Hogen Esch CE,
Boudreau F, Swain GP, Dowling LN, Montgomery RK, Grand RJ, Krasinski SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Free University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam 1081HV.

Lactase-phlorizin hydrolase (LPH), a marker of intestinal differentiation, is
expressed in absorptive enterocytes on small intestinal villi in a tightly
regulated pattern along the proximal-distal axis. The LPH promoter contains
binding sites that mediate activation by members of the GATA-4, -5, and -6
subfamily, but little is known about their individual contribution to LPH
regulation in vivo. Here, we show that GATA-4 is the principal GATA factor from
adult mouse intestinal epithelial cells that binds to the mouse LPH promoter, and
its expression is highly correlated with that of LPH mRNA in jejunum and ileum.
GATA-4 cooperates with hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha to synergistically 
activate the LPH promoter by a mechanism identical to that previously
characterized for GATA-5/HNF-1alpha, requiring physical association between
GATA-4 and HNF-1alpha and intact HNF-1 binding sites on the LPH promoter. GATA-4 
also activates the LPH promoter independently of HNF-1alpha, in contrast to
GATA-5, which is unable to activate the LPH promoter in the absence of
HNF-1alpha. GATA-4-specific activation requires intact GATA binding sites on the 
LPH promoter and was mapped by domain-swapping experiments to the zinc finger and
basic regions. However, the difference in the capacity between GATA-4 and GATA-5 
to activate the LPH promoter was not due to a difference in affinity for binding 
to GATA binding sites on the LPH promoter. These data indicate that GATA-4 is a
key regulator of LPH gene expression that may function through an evolutionarily 
conserved mechanism involving cooperativity with an HNF-1alpha and/or a
GATA-specific pathway independent of HNF-1alpha.

PMID: 15178553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 6;279(32):33928-36. Epub 2004 May 28.

Structure of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 6alpha and its interaction with DNA.

Sheng W(1), Yan H, Rausa FM 3rd, Costa RH, Liao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, College of Medicine,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60607, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 6 (HNF-6) belongs to the family of One Cut
transcription factors (also known as OC-1) and is essential for the development
of the mouse pancreas, gall bladder, and the interhepatic bile ducts. HNF-6 binds
to DNA as a monomer utilizing a single cut domain and a divergent homeodomain
motif located at its C terminus. Here, we have used NMR methods to determine the 
solution structures of the 162 amino acid residue DNA-binding domain of the
HNF-6alpha protein. The resulting overall structure of HNF-6alpha has two
different distinct domains: the Cut domain and the Homeodomain connected by a
long flexible linker. Our NMR structure shows that the Cut domain folds into a
topology homologous to the POU DNA-binding domain, even though the sequences of
these two protein families do not show homology. The DNA contact sequence of the 
HNF-6alpha was mapped with chemical shift perturbation methods. Our data also
show that a proposed CREB-binding protein histone acetyltransferase
protein-recruiting sequence, LSDLL, forms a helix and is involved in the
hydrophobic core of the Cut domain. The structure implies that this sequence has 
to undergo structural changes when it interacts with CREB-binding protein.

PMID: 15169783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Biol Chem. 2004 Aug 6;279(32):33398-408. Epub 2004 May 24.

Expression of the alpha7 isoform of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4 is
activated by HNF6/OC-2 and HNF1 and repressed by HNF4alpha1 in the liver.

Briançon N(1), Bailly A, Clotman F, Jacquemin P, Lemaigre FP, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, URA 2578 du CNRS, Département de
Biologie du Développement, Institut Pasteur, Paris Cedex 15 75724, France.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4alpha gene possesses two promoters, proximal
P1 and distal P2, whose use results in HNF4alpha1 and HNF4alpha7 transcripts,
respectively. Both isoforms are expressed in the embryonic liver, whereas
HNF4alpha1 is almost exclusively in the adult liver. A 516-bp fragment,
encompassing a DNase I-hypersensitive site associated with P2 activity that is
still retained in adult liver, contains functional HNF1 and HNF6 binding sites
and confers full promoter activity in transient transfections. We demonstrate a
critical role of the Onecut factors in P2 regulation using site-directed
mutagenesis and embryos doubly deficient for HNF6 and OC-2 that show reduced
hepatic HNF4alpha7 transcript levels. Transient transgenesis showed that a 4-kb
promoter region is sufficient to drive expression of a reporter gene in the
stomach, intestine, and pancreas, but not the liver, for which additional
activating sequences may be required. Quantitative PCR analysis revealed that
throughout liver development HNF4alpha7 transcripts are lower than those of
HNF4alpha1. HNF4alpha1 represses P2 activity in transfection assays and as
deduced from an increase in P2-derived transcript levels in recombinant mice in
which HNF4alpha1 has been deleted and replaced by HNF4alpha7. We conclude that
although HNF6/OC-2 and perhaps HNF1 activate the P2 promoter in the embryo,
increasing HNF4alpha1 expression throughout development causes a switch to
essentially exclusive P1 promoter activity in the adult liver.

PMID: 15159395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Mol Pharmacol. 2004 Jun;65(6):1475-84.

Ceramide negatively regulates glutathione S-transferase gene transactivation via 
repression of hepatic nuclear factor-1 that is degraded by the ubiquitin
proteasome system.

Park IN(1), Cho IJ, Kim SG.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Laboratory, College of Pharmacy and Research Institute of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea.

The level of cellular ceramide, an apoptotic rheostat, is increased by
sphingomyelinase or de novo synthesis. The expression of the glutathione
S-transferase (GST) gene, whose induction accounts for cell viability, is
regulated by activation of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-beta (C/EBPbeta) and
NF-E2-related factor-2 (Nrf2). Hepatic nuclear factor-1 (HNF1) is a transcription
factor necessary for cell survival. This study investigated the role of HNF1 in
GSTA2 gene transactivation, the ubiquitin proteasomal degradation of HNF1, and
the inhibition of activating HNF1 by ceramide for GSTA2 repression. C2-ceramide
(C2), a cell-permeable analog, repressed the GSTA2 expression in H4IIE cells,
whereas dihydro-C2, an inactive analog, had no effect. Immunoblot,
immunocytochemical, and gel shift analyses revealed that C2 decreased the level
of nuclear HNF1 and protein binding to the HNF response element (HRE). Deletion
of the HRE or the GSTA2 gene promoter region containing the HRE reduced
luciferase reporter expression. Immunoprecipitation and immunoblot analyses
showed that C2 decreased the level of ubiquitinated HNF1, which was reversed by
treatment with MG132, a proteasome inhibitor. C2 suppressed GSTA2 induction by
oltipraz via inhibition of inducible HNF1 DNA binding. The functional role of HRE
for C2 repression of GSTA2 gene transactivation by oltipraz was verified by both 
the luciferase reporter gene expression and the transfection experiment with
DeltaHNF-pGL-1651 lacking the HRE. C2 similarly repressed the induction of GSTA2 
promoter-luciferase by tert-butylhydroquinone via HNF1 suppression, suggesting
that constitutive HNF1 activation is required for GSTA2 induction. C2 also
inhibited GSTA3/5 expression. In conclusion, the HRE in the GSTA2 promoter region
is functionally active for the constitutive and inducible gene expression, and
ceramide inhibits GST gene transactivation through decrease in nuclear HNF1,
which is degraded by the ubiquitin proteasome system.

PMID: 15155840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 May 11;32(8):2586-93. Print 2004.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha enhances the hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha-mediated activation of transcription.

Eeckhoute J(1), Formstecher P, Laine B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 459, Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine H.
Warembourg, 1 Place de Verdun, F 59045 Lille, France.

Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) and Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4alpha
(HNF4alpha) are two liver-enriched transcription factors coexpressed in specific 
tissues where they play a crucial role through their involvement in a complex
cross-regulatory network. HNF1alpha down regulates HNF4alpha-mediated activation 
of transcription via a direct protein-protein interaction. Here we show that
HNF4alpha enhances the transcriptional activity of HNF1alpha in a DNA binding
independent manner, thus indicating that it behaves as a HNF1alpha coactivator.
Using mutations in the ligand binding domain (LBD) of HNF4alpha, we confirmed the
involvement of the Activation Function 2 module and demonstrated the requirement 
of the integrity of the LBD for the interaction with HNF1alpha. Moreover, we show
that HNF4alpha cooperates with p300 to achieve the highest HNF1alpha-mediated
transcription rates. Our findings highlight a new way by which HNF4alpha can
regulate gene expression and extend our knowledge of the complexity of the
transcriptional network involving HNF4alpha and HNF1alpha.

PMCID: PMC419469
PMID: 15141028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Clin Med (Lond). 2004 Mar-Apr;4(2):144-7.

'I don't feel like a diabetic any more': the impact of stopping insulin in
patients with maturity onset diabetes of the young following genetic testing.

Shepherd M(1), Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, Devon. M.H.Shepherd@exeter.ac.uk

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) maturity onset diabetes of the
young (MODY) is the commonest cause of monogenic diabetes but is frequently
misdiagnosed as type 1 diabetes. The availability of genetic testing in MODY has 
improved diagnosis. Sulphonylurea sensitivity in HNF-1alpha patients means that
those on insulin from diagnosis can transfer to sulphonylureas and may improve
glycaemic control. To gain insight into the implications for patients of stopping
insulin, in-depth interviews were conducted with eight HNF-1alpha patients
transferred to sulphonylureas after a median of 20 years on insulin. Thematic
content analysis highlighted four key themes: Fear, anxiety and excitement
regarding stopping insulin, particularly among those who had been on insulin for 
many years or had never omitted insulin in the past. Improved lifestyle and self 
image accompanied by feelings of relief and 'increased normality'. Reflections on
their time on insulin, including feelings of annoyance, particularly when the
need for insulin treatment had been questioned at diagnosis. Difficulty 'letting 
go' of insulin treatment--some patients found it hard to believe that they no
longer required injections as this conflicted with messages previously received
from healthcare professionals. Transferring from insulin to sulphonylureas had a 
positive impact on lifestyle but support was needed for patients to adjust, many 
having grown up with the belief they would be on insulin for life.

PMID: 15139733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Biol Chem. 2004 Mar-Apr;385(3-4):239-47.

Modulation of glucokinase expression by hypoxia-inducible factor 1 and upstream
stimulatory factor 2 in primary rat hepatocytes.

Roth U(1), Jungermann K, Kietzmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekulare Zellbiologie, Georg-August-Universität, 
Humboldtallee 23, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.

Glucokinase (GK) is the key enzyme of glucose utilization in liver and is
localized in the less aerobic perivenous area. Until now, the O2-responsive
elements in the liver-specific GK promoter are unknown, and therefore the aim of 
this study was to identify the O2-responsive element in this promoter. We found
that the GK promoter sequence -87/-80 matched the binding site for hypoxia
inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) and upstream stimulatory factor (USF). In primary rat 
hepatocytes we could show that venous pO2 enhanced HIF-1alpha and USF-2a levels, 
both of which activated GK expression. Furthermore, transfection experiments
revealed that the GK sequence -87/-80 mediated the HIF-1alpha- or USF-2-dependent
activation of the GK promoter. The binding of HIF-1 and USF to the GK-HRE was
corroborated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). However, the maximal
response to HIF-1alpha or USF was only achieved when constructs with the -87/-80 
sequence in context with a 3'-36 bp native GK promoter sequence containing a
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF-4) binding site were used. HIF-1alpha and HNF-4 
additively activated the GK promoter, while USF-2 and HNF-4 together did not show
this additive activation. Thus, HIF-1 and USF may play differential roles in the 
modulation of GK expression in response to O2.

PMID: 15134337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Bone Miner Res. 2004 Jun;19(6):947-58. Epub 2004 Feb 20.

Identification of novel regulators associated with early-phase osteoblast
differentiation.

de Jong DS(1), Vaes BL, Dechering KJ, Feijen A, Hendriks JM, Wehrens R, Mummery
CL, van Zoelen EJ, Olijve W, Steegenga WT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Applied Biology, University of Nijmegen, Nijmegen, The
Netherlands.

Key regulatory components of the BMP-induced osteoblast differentiation cascade
remain to be established. Microarray and subsequent expression analyses in mice
identified two transcription factors, Hey1 and Tcf7, with in vitro and in vivo
expression characteristics very similar to Cbfa1. Transfection studies suggest
that Tcf7 modulates BMP2-induced osteoblast differentiation. This study
contributes to a better definition of the onset of BMP-induced osteoblast
differentiation.INTRODUCTION: Elucidation of the genetic cascade guiding
mesenchymal stem cells to become osteoblasts is of extreme importance for
improving the treatment of bone-related diseases such as osteoporosis. The aim of
this study was to identify regulators of the early phases of bone morphogenetic
protein (BMP)2-induced osteoblast differentiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Osteoblast differentiation of mouse C2C12 cells was
induced by treatment with BMP2, and regulation of gene expression was studied
during the subsequent 24 h using high-density microarrays. The regulated genes
were grouped by means of model-based clustering, and protein functions were
assigned. Real-time quantitative RT-PCR analysis was used to validate
BMP2-induced gene expression patterns in C2C12 cells. Osteoblast specificity was 
studied by comparing these expression patterns with those in C3H10T1/2 and NIH3T3
cells under similar conditions. In situ hybridization of mRNA in embryos at
embryonic day (E)14.5 and E16.5 of gestation and on newborn mouse tails were used
to study in vivo expression patterns. Cells constitutively expressing the
regulated gene Tcf7 were used to investigate its influence on BMP-induced
osteoblast differentiation.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: A total of 184 genes and expressed sequence tags (ESTs) 
were differentially expressed in the first 24 h after BMP2 treatment and grouped 
in subsets of immediate early, intermediate early, and late early response genes.
Signal transduction regulatory factors mainly represented the subset of immediate
early genes. Regulation of expression of these genes was direct, independent of
de novo protein synthesis and independent of the cell type studied. The
intermediate early and late early genes consisted primarily of genes related to
processes that modulate morphology, basement membrane formation, and synthesis of
extracellular calcified matrix. The late early genes require de novo protein
synthesis and show osteoblast specificity. In vivo and in vitro experiments
showed that the transcription factors Hey1 and Tcf7 exhibited expression
characteristics and cell type specificity very similar to those of the osteoblast
specific transcription factor Cbfa1, and constitutive expression of Tcf7 in C2C12
cells differentially regulated osteoblast differentiation marker genes.

Copyright 2004 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research

PMID: 15125793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Biochem J. 2004 Aug 1;381(Pt 3):887-94.

Regulation of Cyp2a5 transcription in mouse primary hepatocytes: roles of
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 and nuclear factor I.

Ulvila J(1), Arpiainen S, Pelkonen O, Aida K, Sueyoshi T, Negishi M, Hakkola J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Oulu, P.O. Box 5000, 
90014 Oulu, Finland.

The cytochrome P4502a5 (Cyp2a5) gene is expressed principally in liver and
olfactory mucosa. In the present study, the transcriptional mechanisms of
hepatocyte-specific expression of Cyp2a5 were studied in mouse primary
hepatocytes. The Cyp2a5 5'-flanking region -3033 to +10 was cloned in front of a 
luciferase reporter gene and transfected into hepatocytes. Deletion analysis
revealed two major activating promoter regions localized at proximal 271 bp and
at a more distal area from -3033 to -2014 bp. The proximal activation region was 
characterized further by DNase I footprinting, and a single clear footprint was
detected in the studied area centred over a sequence similar to the NF-I (nuclear
factor I)-binding site. The binding of NF-I was confirmed using an EMSA
(electrophoretic mobility-shift assay). A putative HNF-4 (hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4)-binding site was localized at the proximal promoter by computer
analysis of the sequence, and HNF-4alpha was shown to interact with the site
using an EMSA. The functional significance of HNF-4 and NF-I binding to the
Cyp2a5 promoter was evaluated by site-directed mutagenesis of the binding motifs 
in reporter constructs. Both mutations strongly decreased transcriptional
activation by the Cyp2a5 promoter in primary hepatocytes, and double mutation
almost completely abolished transcriptional activity. Also, the functionality of 
the distal activation region was found to be dependent on the intact HNF-4 and
NF-I sites at the proximal promoter. In conclusion, these results indicate that
HNF-4 and NF-I play major roles in the constitutive regulation of hepatic
expression of Cyp2a5.

PMCID: PMC1133900
PMID: 15115437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Transplantation. 2004 Apr 27;77(8):1298-301.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young with end-stage nephropathy: a new indication
for simultaneous pancreas and kidney transplantation?

Saudek F(1), Pruhová S, Boucek P, Lebl J, Adamec M, Ek J, Pedersen O, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, Institute for Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Praha,
Czech Republic.

BACKGROUND AND CASE: Simultaneous pancreas and kidney transplantation (SPK) is
applied almost exclusively in C-peptide-negative type 1 diabetic patients,
although some data on SPK in type 2 diabetes have been published as well. Nothing
is known about SPK in the autosomal diabetes form, maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY). SPK was performed in a 47-year old man who has MODY3 because of a
Arg272His mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alphagene. He developed
overt diabetes mellitus at 19 years and end-stage diabetic nephropathy 26 years
thereafter. Before SPK, the patient had measurable fasting serum C-peptide
levels, but lacked beta-cell response to intravenous glucose and glucagon. He was
treated with 34 IU of insulin per day. At 2 years post-transplantation, the
patient remains normoglycemic and insulin independent. A hyperglycemic clamp test
showed a normal beta-cell function.CONCLUSION: Identification of MODY3 among all 
C-peptide-positive patients with advanced diabetic nephropathy might help to
select a specific group profiting from SPK.

PMID: 15114102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Diabetes Care. 2004 May;27(5):1102-7.

Contrasting diabetes phenotypes associated with hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha 
and -1beta mutations.

Pearson ER(1), Badman MK, Lockwood CR, Clark PM, Ellard S, Bingham C, Hattersley 
AT.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Mutations in the highly homologous transcription factors hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and -1beta cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young
types 3 and 5, respectively. Diabetes due to HNF-1alpha mutations is well
characterized. However, physiological assessment of the HNF-1beta phenotype is
limited. We aimed to test the hypothesis that the diabetes phenotype due to
HNF-1beta mutations is similar to that in HNF-1alpha.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Fasting biochemistry and a tolbutamide-modified
intravenous glucose tolerance test (IVGTT) were compared in matched HNF-1beta,
HNF-1alpha, type 2 diabetic, and control subjects. Homeostasis model assessment
indexes were determined from fasting insulin and glucose. The peak measures for
the insulin increment after tolbutamide and for the insulin increment after
glucose were determined from the IVGTT.
RESULTS: The HNF-1beta patients showed a 2.4-fold reduction in insulin
sensitivity compared with the HNF-1alpha patients (P = 0.001) with fasting
insulin concentrations 2.7-fold higher (P = 0.004). HNF-1beta patients had lower 
HDL cholesterol (1.17 vs. 1.46 mmol/l; P = 0.009) and higher triglyceride (2.2
vs. 1.35 mmol/l; P = 0.015) levels than HNF-1alpha patients. The HNF-1beta
patients had similar beta-cell responses to tolbutamide and glucose as the type 2
diabetic patients, but in the HNF-1alpha patients, the tolbutamide response was
considerably increased relative to the response to glucose (P = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: HNF-1beta patients have a different diabetes phenotype than
HNF-1alpha patients. Those with HNF-1beta mutations have hyperinsulinemia and
associated dyslipidemia consistent with insulin resistance and may have a
different beta-cell defect. This suggests that despite considerable homology and 
a shared binding site, HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta have a different role in
maintaining normal glucose homeostasis. This result suggests a new etiological
pathway for insulin resistance involving HNF-1beta.

PMID: 15111528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Ann Intern Med. 2004 Apr 6;140(7):I42.

Summaries for patients. Maturity onset diabetes of the young 5.

[No authors listed]

Comment on
    Ann Intern Med. 2004 Apr 6;140(7):510-7.

PMID: 15069003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Ann Intern Med. 2004 Apr 6;140(7):510-7.

Clinical spectrum associated with hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta mutations.

Bellanné-Chantelot C(1), Chauveau D, Gautier JF, Dubois-Laforgue D, Clauin S,
Beaufils S, Wilhelm JM, Boitard C, Noël LH, Velho G, Timsit J.

Author information: 
(1)Fédération des Services de Biochimie, Laboratoire de Biologie Moléculaire,
Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France. christine.bellanne@sat.ap-hop-paris.fr

Comment in
    Ann Intern Med. 2004 Apr 6;140(7):I42.

BACKGROUND: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 5 (MODY5), a type of
dominantly inherited diabetes mellitus and nephropathy, has been associated with 
mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) gene, mostly
generating truncated protein. Various phenotypes, including urogenital
malformations, are related to HNF-1beta mutations.
OBJECTIVE: To describe clinical and genetic findings in 13 patients with 8 novel 
HNF-1beta mutations.
DESIGN: Multicenter, descriptive study.
SETTING: 2 departments of diabetes, 1 department of internal medicine, and 1
department of nephrology.
PARTICIPANTS: 8 probands with diabetes diagnosed before 40 years of age and
nondiabetic kidney disease who were selected independent of their family history 
of diabetes, and 5 offspring.
MEASUREMENTS: Characteristics of diabetes, renal function and structure, genital 
tract abnormalities, pancreas structure, insulin secretion, exocrine pancreas
function, and liver test results.
RESULTS: All mutations, including 5 missense changes, were found in the
DNA-binding domain. Cosegregation of the mutation and MODY5 phenotype was
observed in 4 families. Occurrence of a de novo mutation was demonstrated in 2
families. Diabetes was present in 10 of 13 mutation carriers. It was clinically
overt in 5 participants and found by screening at age 19 to 38 years in 5
participants. Pancreas atrophy was observed in 5 of 6 probands, and pancreas
exocrine insufficiency was observed in 6 of 7 probands. Renal involvement,
consisting of structural changes and slowly progressive renal failure, was
recognized in 9 patients at 18 to 41 years of age. Dysplastic kidneys were found 
by ultrasonography in 3 fetuses who subsequently showed transient neonatal renal 
failure. Genital tract abnormalities were present in 5 probands and liver enzyme 
levels were abnormal in 11 of 13 patients.
LIMITATIONS: Since the study was small and not population-based, it could not
estimate the prevalence of MODY5. Other phenotypes might be associated with
HNF-1beta mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 5 encompasses a wide
clinical spectrum. Analysis for mutations of HNF-1beta is warranted, even without
a family history of diabetes, in nonobese patients with diabetes and slowly
progressive nondiabetic nephropathy, particularly when pancreatic atrophy or
genital abnormalities are present.

PMID: 15068978  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Hepatology. 2004 Apr;39(4):1038-47.

Progression of HCC in mice is associated with a downregulation in the expression 
of hepatocyte nuclear factors.

Lazarevich NL(1), Cheremnova OA, Varga EV, Ovchinnikov DA, Kudrjavtseva EI,
Morozova OV, Fleishman DI, Engelhardt NV, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Immunochemistry, Institute of Carcinogenesis, N.N. Blokhin
Cancer Research Center, Moscow, Russia.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF) play a critical role in development of the
liver. Their roles during liver tumorigenesis and progression of hepatocellular
carcinomas (HCC) are, however, poorly understood. To address the role of HNFs in 
tumor progression, we generated a new experimental model in which a highly
differentiated slow-growing transplantable mouse HCC (sgHCC) rapidly gives rise
in vivo to a highly invasive fast-growing dedifferentiated variant (fgHCC). This 
in vivo model has allowed us to investigate the fundamental mechanisms underlying
HCC progression. A complete loss of cell polarity, a decrease in cell-cell and
cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesion, elevation of telomerase activity, and
extinction of liver-specific gene expression accompanies tumor progression.
Moreover, cells isolated from fgHCCs acquired the ability to proliferate rapidly 
in culture. These alterations were coupled with a reduced expression of several
liver transcription factors including HNF4, a factor essential for hepatocyte
differentiation. Forced re-expression of HNF4alpha1 in cultured fgHCC cells
reversed the progressive phenotype and induced fgHCC cells to re-establish an
epithelium and reform cell-ECM contacts. Moreover, fgHCC cells that expressed
HNF4alpha1 also re-established expression of the profile of liver transcription
factors and hepatic genes that are associated with a differentiated hepatocyte
phenotype. Importantly, re-expression of HNF4alpha1 in fgHCC reduced the
proliferation rate in vitro and diminished tumor formation in congenic recipient 
mice. In conclusion, loss of HNF4 expression is an important determinant of HCC
progression. Forced expression of this factor can promote reversion of tumors
toward a less invasive highly differentiated slow-growing phenotype.

PMID: 15057908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. EMBO J. 2004 Apr 21;23(8):1825-33. Epub 2004 Apr 1.

Hindgut defects and transformation of the gastro-intestinal tract in
Tcf4(-/-)/Tcf1(-/-) embryos.

Gregorieff A(1), Grosschedl R, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology and Center for Biomedical
Genetics, Hubrecht Laboratory, Uppsalalaan, CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Wnt signalling plays a critical role in both initiating and patterning of the
anterior-posterior axis during development. Wnts exert their biological effects, 
in part, by activating specific target genes through members of the TCF/LEF
family of transcription factors. To gain new insight into the role of T-cell
factors (or Tcf's) during development, we analysed Tcf4 and Tcf1 compound null
embryos. These mutants showed severe caudal truncations, as well as duplications 
of the neural tube. Unlike other mutations affecting Wnt signalling, paraxial
mesoderm formation was not impaired and early caudal markers, such as T, were
unaffected. Analysis of endodermal markers uncovered early and specific defects
in hindgut expansion, and later an anterior transformation of the
gastro-intestinal tract. Our results reveal a novel role for Wnt signalling in
early gut morphogenesis and suggest that specific Wnt-driven patterning events
are determined by the unique tissue distribution of Tcf/Lef family members.

PMCID: PMC394245
PMID: 15057272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Mol Pharmacol. 2004 Apr;65(4):953-63.

Coordinate regulation of the human UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A8, 1A9, and 1A10
genes by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha and the caudal-related homeodomain
protein 2.

Gregory PA(1), Lewinsky RH, Gardner-Stephen DA, Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park,
South Australia 5042, Australia.

The human UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) -1A8 and -1A10 are exclusively
expressed in extrahepatic tissues and primarily in the gastrointestinal tract,
whereas UGT1A9 is expressed mainly in the liver and kidneys. We have demonstrated
previously that the UGT1A8 and UGT1A10 genes, in contrast to the UGT1A9 gene, are
regulated via an initiator-like element in their proximal promoters. To determine
the elements that contribute to the gastrointestinal expression of UGT1A8 and
-1A10, we conducted deletion analysis of the UGT1A8, -1A9, and -1A10 promoters in
the colon-derived cell line Caco2. DNA elements contributing significantly to
UGT1A8, -1A9, and -1A10 promoter activity were found to reside primarily within
140 base pairs of the transcription start site. Within this region, putative
binding sites for the intestine-specific transcription factor, caudal-related
homeodomain protein 2 (Cdx2), and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) were
identified. Using gel shift and functional assays, HNF1alpha was demonstrated to 
bind to and activate the UGT1A8, -1A9, and -1A10 promoters. In contrast, Cdx2
bound to and activated the UGT1A8 and -1A10 promoters but could not activate the 
UGT1A9 promoter. A single base pair difference between the UGT1A8 and -1A10
promoters, three base pairs downstream of the consensus Cdx2 site, contributed to
the observed difference in Cdx2 binding and Cdx2-mediated promoter activation of 
these two promoters. In addition, Cdx2 was shown to cooperate with HNF1alpha to
synergistically activate the UGT1A8, -1A9, and -1A10 promoters. These studies
provide insight into the mechanisms controlling the extrahepatic expression of
the UGT1A8, -1A9, and -1A10 genes.

PMID: 15044625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Gene. 2004 Mar 31;329:71-9.

Analysis of gene structures and promoter activities of the chipmunk
alpha(1)-antitrypsin-like genes.

Nakazawa A(1), Inaba Y, Kamijima A, Kondo N, Ito M, Shiba T, Takamatsu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, School of Science, Kitasato University, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan.

The chipmunk hibernation-specific protein HP-55 is a component of a 140-kDa
complex whose levels are drastically decreased in the blood during hibernation.
It is highly homologous to alpha(1)-antitrypsin (AT). In the chipmunk, several
alpha(1)-AT-like genes in addition to HP-55 (or CM55-ML) are expressed in the
liver and have distinct patterns of regulation during hibernation: in hibernating
chipmunks, the level of CM55-ML gene expression is greatly reduced, that of the
CM55-MS gene is slightly increased, and the expression of the CM55-MM gene is
hardly affected. As a first step towards understanding the hibernation-associated
gene regulation of these chipmunk alpha(1)-AT-like genes, we isolated genomic
clones for the CM55-ML, CM55-MM, and CM55-MS genes, and analyzed their promoter
activities. These alpha(1)-AT-like genes are composed of five exons, and show a
similar gene structure to that of the human alpha(1)-AT gene, suggesting that
they were generated by the duplication of an ancestral alpha(1)-AT gene.
Transient transfection studies using HepG2 and COS-7 cells revealed that for all 
three alpha(1)-AT-like genes, approximately 150-bp 5' flanking sequences were
sufficient for the liver-specific promoter activity, and that the binding of
HNF-1 to the promoter region could transactivate transcription. In addition,
analysis of the activity of chimeric promoters composed of CM55-ML and CM55-MS
gene sequences indicated that the lack of a TATA box-like sequence in the CM55-MS
gene is responsible for its weak promoter activity.

PMID: 15033530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2004 Feb;112(2):84-7.

A new mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1-alpha gene (P224S) in a newly
discovered German family with maturity-onset diabetes of the young 3 (MODY 3).
Family members carry additionally the homozygous I27L amino acid polymorphism in 
the HNF1 alpha gene.

Fehmann HC(1), Gross U, Epe M.

Author information: 
(1)Practice for Internal Medicine and Diabetes, Marburg, Germany.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1-alpha gene cause maturity onset
diabetes of the young 3 (MODY 3). Here we describe a new family affected by this 
disorder carrying the so far unknown mutation Pro224Ser in exon 3. First we
identified a 17-year-old patient. OGTT demonstrated that insulin secretion was
severely impaired: basal insulin was 3.7 uU/ml and 60 min after an oral glucose
load plasma insulin peaked only threefold to 10.7 uU/ml. In addition, this
patient carries the homozygous polymorphism Ile27Leu (exon1) in the hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1-alpha gene that was shown to be associated with insulin
resistance. So far, we have no evidence for insulin resistance in this individual
patient. Additionally, two other family members carry the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1-alpha mutation Pro224Ser and the homozygous polymorphism Ile27Leu. A
similar case with these two mutations in the HNF-1-alpha gene has not been
described before. This data will allow to discover more patients with MODY 3.

PMID: 15031772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Pediatr Diabetes. 2000 Jun;1(2):88-117.

Molecular and biochemical analysis of the MODY syndromes.

Winter WE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida, College of Medicine, Box 100275, Gainesville, FL 32610-0275, USA.
winter@pathology.ufl.edu

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is characterized by youth-onset
diabetes that is inherited in an autosomal dominant (monogenic) pattern. Classic 
MODY accounts for less than 5% of cases of childhood diabetes in Caucasians,
presents prior to age 25 years, is nonketotic, and may not require insulin
treatment. A variant form of MODY that lacks a clearly defined genetic basis
occurs in African Americans [atypical diabetes mellitus (ADM)] clinically
presents more acutely and is initially insulin requiring. To date, five molecular
causes of classic MODY have been identified: hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha
(HNF-4 alpha; MODY1), glucokinase (MODY2), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha
(HNF-1 alpha; MODY3), insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF-1, MODY4), and hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 beta (HNF-1 beta; MODY5). MODY is studied as a model of beta
cell hypofunction and modest insulinopenia. Clinical recognition of ADM is
important for patient management to avoid confusion with type 1 diabetes
mellitus.

PMID: 15016234  [PubMed]


378. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Mar;89(3):1476-80.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha gene inactivation: cosegregation between liver 
adenomatosis and diabetes phenotypes in two maturity-onset diabetes of the young 
(MODY)3 families.

Reznik Y(1), Dao T, Coutant R, Chiche L, Jeannot E, Clauin S, Rousselot P, Fabre 
M, Oberti F, Fatome A, Zucman-Rossi J, Bellanne-Chantelot C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire of Caen, 14033
Cannes, France. reznik-y@chu-caen.fr

Heterozygous germline mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha
are associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)3. Recently, the
biallelic inactivation of the HNF-1 alpha gene was reported in liver adenomas. We
show the occurrence of liver adenomatosis in six MODY3-affected patients from two
unrelated and large families. Liver adenomatosis was characterized by the
presence of numerous adenomas within a normal hepatic parenchyma. The HNF-1 alpha
hot-spot germline mutation P291fs was identified in the two probands and in 16
relatives from the two families. The six patients affected by liver adenomatosis 
and diabetes exhibited the mutation. The analysis of liver-cell tumors from two
affected patients evidenced the biallelic inactivation of HNF-1 alpha. The
familial screening confirmed the clinical heterogeneity of the liver phenotype,
from silent liver adenomatosis to fatal hemorrhage. These observations warrant
the systematic screening for liver adenomatosis in MODY3 families to prevent its 
potentially deadly complications. Moreover, such screening may help to determine 
if a particular mutational spectrum of HNF-1 alpha is associated with liver
adenomatosis and to establish its prevalence in this frequent form of diabetes in
the young adult.

PMID: 15001650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Mar;89(3):1369-78.

Promoter-specific repression of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 beta and HNF-1 
alpha transcriptional activity by an HNF-1 beta missense mutant associated with
Type 5 maturity-onset diabetes of the young with hepatic and biliary
manifestations.

Kitanaka S(1), Miki Y, Hayashi Y, Igarashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. sachi-tky@umin.ac.jp

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 beta lead to type 5
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY5). HNF-1 beta forms a homodimer or a
heterodimer with HNF-1 alpha and regulates various target genes. HNF-1 beta
mutations are rare, and no functional analysis has been performed in conjunction 
with HNF-1 alpha. HNF-1 beta is expressed in the liver and biliary system and
controls liver-specific and bile acid-related genes. Moreover, liver-specific
Hnf-1 beta knockout mice present with severe jaundice. However, no patients with 
HNF-1 beta mutations have biliary manifestations. In this report, we found a
novel missense mutation in the HNF-1 beta gene in a patient with neonatal
cholestasis and liver dysfunction together with the common features of MODY5.
Functional analysis revealed that the mutant HNF-1 beta had diminished
transcriptional activity by loss of the DNA binding activity. The mutant had a
promoter-specific dominant-negative transcriptional effect on wild-type HNF- and 
inhibited its DNA binding. Moreover, the mutant had a promoter- and cell-specific
transcriptional repressive effect on HNF-1 alpha and a promoter-specific
inhibitory effect on HNF-1 alpha DNA binding. From these results, we considered
that the different phenotype of patients with HNF-1 beta mutations might be
caused by the different HNF-1 beta activity in conjunction with the different
repression of HNF-1 alpha activity in selected promoters and tissues.

PMID: 15001636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Pathol Biol (Paris). 2004 Mar;52(2):60-2.

[Genetic alterations in hepatocellular adenomas].

[Article in French]

Zucman-Rossi J.

PMID: 15001232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. J Pathol. 2004 Mar;202(3):352-8.

Increased expression of Met protein is associated with up-regulation of hypoxia
inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) in tumour cells in papillary carcinoma of the thyroid.

Scarpino S(1), Cancellario d'Alena F, Di Napoli A, Pasquini A, Marzullo A, Ruco
LP.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Diagnostica di Laboratorio e Patologia, II Facoltà di Medicina
e Chirurgia, Ospedale Sant'Andrea, Università La Sapienza, Roma, Italy.

Met protein, the high affinity receptor for hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), was
highly expressed by the tumour cells of 64 well-differentiated papillary
carcinomas of the thyroid. The p145 mature form and the p170 precursor form of
the protein were both isolated from the tumours. Enhanced expression of Met
protein was associated with a 9.5 +/- 5-fold increase in MET RNA transcript
levels, suggesting increased transcription of the gene. In the same tumours, the 
levels of RNA transcripts for hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1), a potent
stimulator of met gene transcription, were 4.5 +/- 3-fold higher than those
present in the surrounding normal thyroid tissues. HIF-1 is generally induced by 
hypoxia. Histological features suggestive of a hypoxia were observed in 37 of 50 
tumours and included coagulative necrosis, psammoma bodies, cystic changes,
intratumoural haemorrhage, and hyalinization of the fibrous stroma.
Immunostaining for Met protein was particularly intense in some cells located at 
the tumour periphery which were characterized by an invasive phenotype.
Microdissection of tumour cell nests from the invading front revealed that the
levels of RNA transcripts for MET/HIF were higher than in the centre of the
tumour in four of nine cases. Taken together, the findings of this study suggest 
that HIF-1, perhaps driven by hypoxia, may be one of the factors leading to the
increased transcription of met gene in papillary carcinoma and that this event is
often more pronounced at the tumour periphery.

Copyright 2004 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 14991901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Science. 2004 Feb 27;303(5662):1378-81.

Control of pancreas and liver gene expression by HNF transcription factors.

Odom DT(1), Zizlsperger N, Gordon DB, Bell GW, Rinaldi NJ, Murray HL, Volkert TL,
Schreiber J, Rolfe PA, Gifford DK, Fraenkel E, Bell GI, Young RA.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2004 Feb 27;303(5662):1311-2.

The transcriptional regulatory networks that specify and maintain human tissue
diversity are largely uncharted. To gain insight into this circuitry, we used
chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with promoter microarrays to identify
systematically the genes occupied by the transcriptional regulators HNF1alpha,
HNF4alpha, and HNF6, together with RNA polymerase II, in human liver and
pancreatic islets. We identified tissue-specific regulatory circuits formed by
HNF1alpha, HNF4alpha, and HNF6 with other transcription factors, revealing how
these factors function as master regulators of hepatocyte and islet
transcription. Our results suggest how misregulation of HNF4alpha can contribute 
to type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3012624
PMID: 14988562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Science. 2004 Feb 27;303(5662):1311-2.

Molecular biology. HNFs--linking the liver and pancreatic islets in diabetes.

Kulkarni RN(1), Kahn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Physiology, Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. rohit.kulkarni@joslin.harvard.edu

Comment on
    Science. 2004 Feb 27;303(5662):1378-81.

PMID: 14988544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Biochem J. 2004 Jun 1;380(Pt 2):455-63.

Cloning and characterization of the human beta2-glycoprotein I (beta2-GPI) gene
promoter: roles of the atypical TATA box and hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha in
regulating beta2-GPI promoter activity.

Wang HH(1), Chiang AN.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, School of Life Science, National Yang-Ming
University, Taipei 112, Taiwan, ROC.

Beta2-glycoprotein I (beta2-GPI) is a plasma glycoprotein primarily synthesized
in the liver. The interindividual variability of beta2-GPI expression in subjects
with various metabolic syndromes and disease states suggests that it may have
clinical importance. However, the regulation of beta2-GPI gene expression has not
been clarified. To gain more insight into the control of beta2-GPI gene
expression, we cloned the 4.1-kb 5'-flanking region and characterized the
proximal promoter of the beta2- GPI gene in this study. Cis -acting elements
required for beta2-GPI promoter activity were identified with transient
transfection assays in the hepatoma cell lines HepG2 and Huh7 and in non-hepatic 
HeLa cells. Serial deletion analyses of the beta2-GPI 5'-flanking sequence
revealed that the region from -197 to +7 had strong promoter activity in hepatoma
cells but not in HeLa cells. Truncation and site-directed mutagenesis of putative
cis -elements within this region showing an atypical TATA box and a HNF-1
(hepatic nuclear factor-1) element were both essential for the beta2-GPI promoter
activity. Subsequent gel mobility shift assays confirmed the interaction of
HNF-1alpha with the HNF-1 site residing downstream of the TATA box.
Co-transfection of beta2-GPI promoter-luciferase vector with HNF-1alpha
expression vector in Huh7 and HNF-1-deficient HeLa cells demonstrated the
transactivation effect of HNF-1alpha on beta2-GPI promoter activity. In addition,
overexpression of HNF-1alpha enhanced the endogenous beta2-GPI expression. These 
results suggest that the atypical TATA box and HNF-1 cis-element are critical for
beta2-GPI transcription and HNF-1alpha may play an important role in
cell-specific regulation of beta2-GPI gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1224180
PMID: 14984368  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Feb 11;32(3):1113-21. Print 2004.

The inhibition of the human cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase gene (CYP7A1) promoter
by fibrates in cultured cells is mediated via the liver x receptor alpha and
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha heterodimer.

Gbaguidi GF(1), Agellon LB.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Institutes of Health Research Group in Molecular and Cell Biology of 
Lipids and Department of Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta
T6G 2S2, Canada.

In previous work, we showed that the binding of the liver x receptor
alpha:peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (LXRalpha:PPARalpha)
heterodimer to the murine Cyp7a1 gene promoter antagonizes the stimulatory effect
of their respective ligands. In this study, we determined if LXRalpha:PPARalpha
can also regulate human CYP7A1 gene promoter activity. Co-expression of LXRalpha 
and PPARalpha in McArdle RH7777 hepatoma cells decreased the activity of the
human CYP7A1 gene promoter in response to fibrates and 25-hydroxycholesterol. In 
vitro, the human CYP7A1 Site I bound LXRalpha:PPARalpha, although with
substantially less affinity compared with the murine Cyp7a1 Site I. The binding
of LXRalpha:PPARalpha to human CYP7A1 Site I was increased in the presence of
either LXRalpha or PPARalpha ligands. In HepG2 hepatoblastoma cells, fibrates and
25-hydroxycholesterol inhibited the expression of the endogenous CYP7A1 gene as
well as the human CYP7A1 gene promoter when co-transfected with plasmids encoding
LXRalpha and PPARalpha. However, a derivative of the human CYP7A1 gene promoter
that contains a mutant form of Site I that does not bind LXRalpha:PPARalpha was
not inhibited by WY 14,643 or 25-hydroxycholesterol in both McArdle RH7777 and
HepG2 cells. The ligand-dependent recruitment of LXRalpha:PPARalpha heterodimer
onto the human CYP7A1 Site I can explain the inhibition of the human CYP7A1 gene 
promoter in response to fibrates and 25-hydroxycholesterol.

PMCID: PMC373396
PMID: 14960721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Diabetes. 2004 Feb;53(2):500-4.

Messenger RNA transcripts of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene containing
premature termination codons are subject to nonsense-mediated decay.

Harries LW(1), Hattersley AT, Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, U.K.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1a) gene cause
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). Approximately 30% of these mutations
generate mRNA transcripts harboring premature termination codons (PTCs).
Degradation of such transcripts by the nonsense-mediated decay (NMD) pathway has 
been reported for many genes. To determine whether PTC mutant transcripts of the 
HNF-1alpha gene elicit NMD, we have developed a novel quantitative RT-PCR assay. 
We performed quantification of ectopically expressed mutant transcripts relative 
to normal transcripts in lymphoblastoid cell lines using a coding single
nucleotide polymorphism (cSNP) as a marker. The nonsense mutations R171X,
I414G415ATCG-->CCA, and P291fsinsC showed reduced mutant mRNA expression to 40%
(P = 0.009), <0.01% (P </= 0.0001), and 6% (P = 0.001), respectively, of the
normal allele. Transcript levels were restored using the translation inhibitor
cycloheximide, indicating that the instability arises from NMD. The missense
mutations G207D and R229P did not show NMD although R229P exhibited moderate RNA 
instability. This study provides the first evidence that HNF-1alpha PTC mutations
may be subject to NMD. Mutations that result in significant reduction of protein 
levels due to NMD will not have dominant-negative activity in vivo.
Haploinsufficiency is therefore likely to be the most important mutational
mechanism of HNF-1alpha mutations causing MODY.

PMID: 14747304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Life Sci. 2004 Feb 6;74(12):1519-28.

Postnatal changes in gene expression of retinal dehydrogenase and retinoid
receptors in liver of rats.

Ogura Y(1), Suruga K, Mochizuki H, Yamamoto T, Takase S, Goda T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nutritional Physiology and COE Program in the 21st Century,
University of Shizuoka School of Food and Nutritional Sciences, 52-1 Yada,
Shizuoka-shi, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan.

Retinoic acid (RA) plays important roles in cellular differentiation and
proliferation in various tissues including the liver. To explore a possible role 
of RA in the postnatal development of hepatic function, we analyzed RA-generation
enzyme activity and the RA-related hepatic gene expressions in the suckling and
weaning rats. At 5 days after birth, retinal dehydrogenase (RALDH) activity in
the liver was relatively high. Its activity decreased by 70% until day 17, and
then it gradually increased to a high level by the completion of weaning period. 
Northern blot analysis showed that RALDH2 mRNA levels decreased in the suckling
period, whereas RALDH1 mRNA levels increased in the weaning period. Retinoid X
receptor alpha (RXRalpha) mRNA levels increased in the suckling period and
attained to a higher level at 17 days after birth. Retinoic acid receptor alpha
(RARalpha) mRNA level showed only a slight and temporary increase on day 13. The 
mRNA levels of hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF-4 and HNF-1alpha) exhibited
parallel increases around suckling-weaning period, and the transcript levels of
albumin, a typical target gene of the hepatocyte nuclear factors, increased
during the suckling-weaning transition period. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assay using a putative nuclear receptor-binding element on rat HNF-1 alpha gene
revealed that HNF-4 homodimer, but not RXRalpha homodimer, bound to this element.
These results suggest that postnatal expressions of hepatocyte-specific genes
might be up-regulated by retinoid receptors, which may be related with the
alterations of RALDH expression during postnatal development in the liver.

PMID: 14729401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Cell Res. 2003 Dec;13(6):451-8.

LRH-1/hB1F and HNF1 synergistically up-regulate hepatitis B virus gene
transcription and DNA replication.

Cai YN(1), Zhou Q, Kong YY, Li M, Viollet B, Xie YH, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

Enhancer II (ENII) is one of the critical cis-elements in the Hepatitis B Virus
(HBV) genome for the hepatic viral gene transcription and DNA replication. The
liver-specific activity of ENII is regulated by multiple liver-enriched
transcription factors, including LRH-1/hB1F, HNF1, HNF3b, HNF4 and C/EBP.
Knowledge on the interplay of these important factors is still limited. In this
study, we demonstrate a functional synergism between the orphan nuclear receptor 
LRH-1/hB1F and the homeoprotein HNF1 in up-regulating the liver-specific activity
of ENII. This synergism is sufficient for initiating the viral gene transcription
and DNA replication in non-hepatic cells. We have defined the activation domains 
in hB1F and HNF1 that contribute to the synergism. We further show that hB1F and 
HNF1 can interact directly in vitro and have mapped the domains required for this
interaction.

PMID: 14728801  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004 Nov;287(5):G1086-99. Epub 2004 Jan 
8.

GATA-4, GATA-5, and GATA-6 activate the rat liver fatty acid binding protein gene
in concert with HNF-1alpha.

Divine JK(1), Staloch LJ, Haveri H, Jacobsen CM, Wilson DB, Heikinheimo M, Simon 
TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

Transcriptional regulation by GATA-4, GATA-5, and GATA-6 in intestine and liver
was explored using a transgene constructed from the proximal promoter of the rat 
liver fatty acid binding protein gene (Fabpl). An immunohistochemical survey
detected GATA-4 and GATA-6 in enterocytes, GATA-6 in hepatocytes, and GATA-5 in
neither cell type in adult animals. In cell transfection assays, GATA-4 or GATA-5
but not GATA-6 activated the Fabpl transgene solely through the most proximal of 
three GATA binding sites in the Fabpl promoter. However, all three factors
activated transgenes constructed from each Fabpl site upstream of a minimal viral
promoter. GATA factors interact with hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, and the
proximal Fabpl GATA site adjoins an HNF-1 site. GATA-4, GATA-5, or GATA-6 bounded
to HNF-1alpha in solution, and all cooperated with HNF-1alpha to activate the
Fabpl transgene. Mutagenizing all Fabpl GATA sites abrogated transgene activation
by GATA factors, but GATA-4 activated the mutagenized transgene in the presence
of HNF-1alpha. These in vitro results suggested GATA/HNF-1alpha interactions
function in Fabpl regulation, and in vivo relevance was determined with
subsequent experiments. In mice, the Fabpl transgene was active in enterocytes
and hepatocytes, a transgene with mutagenized HNF-1 site was silent, and a
transgene with mutagenized GATA sites had identical expression as the native
transgene. Mice mosaic for biallelic Gata4 inactivation lost intestinal but not
hepatic Fabpl expression in Gata4-deficient cells but not wild-type cells. These 
results demonstrate GATA-4 is critical for intestinal gene expression in vivo and
suggest a specific GATA-4/HNF-1alpha physical and functional interaction in Fabpl
activation.

PMID: 14715527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Jan 30;314(1):131-7.

Targeting of therapeutic gene expression to the liver by using liver-type
pyruvate kinase proximal promoter and the SV40 viral enhancer active in multiple 
cell types.

Park CW(1), Park YM, Lee GT, Lee Y, Woo S, Cha JY, Ahn CW, Cha BS, Kim KS, Ahn
YH, Lee HC.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Endocrine Research, College of Medicine, Yonsei University,
Seoul, South Korea.

To achieve the liver-directed expression in sufficient amounts of therapeutic
genes for successful and safe gene therapy, natural liver-specific promoters can 
be used to direct the expression of therapeutic genes in the liver, whereas
strong viral enhancers were used to obtain sufficient amounts of expressed
therapeutic gene products. However, very often use of either the former or the
latter does not guarantee both potent and liver-specific therapeutic gene
expression. Here we conglomerate them and thus create a potent tissue-specific
promoter by characterizing and using the liver-type pyruvate kinase proximal
promoter (LPKPP) harboring its TATA box and a HNF-1alpha binding site. Alone it
hardly activated its reporter gene expression in non-hepatocytes or hepatocytes. 
However, in the presence of the SV40 viral enhancer (SV40VE), which is active in 
multiple cell types, it was able to potently activate its reporter gene
expression specifically in hepatocytes. The tissue-specific activation of the
LPKPP by the viral enhancer was attributed to HNF-1alpha binding to the LPKPP.
Taken together, these results support the idea that the constitutively active
SV40VE could be used to activate the LPKPP in a tissue-specific manner in the
presence of HNF-1alpha. To our knowledge, this is the first study to utilize
HNF-1alpha and its binding site, in the context of the LPKPP, to generate a basal
promoter that is transcriptionally activated potently in a tissue-specific manner
by a viral enhancer that is active in multiple cell types.

PMID: 14715256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. J Immunol. 2004 Jan 15;172(2):1099-108.

Wnt target genes identified by DNA microarrays in immature CD34+ thymocytes
regulate proliferation and cell adhesion.

Staal FJ(1), Weerkamp F, Baert MR, van den Burg CM, van Noort M, de Haas EF, van 
Dongen JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center Rotterdam, Dr.
Molewaterplein 50, 3015 GE Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The thymus is seeded by very small numbers of progenitor cells that undergo
massive proliferation before differentiation and rearrangement of TCR genes
occurs. Various signals mediate proliferation and differentiation of these cells,
including Wnt signals. Wnt signals induce the interaction of the cytoplasmic
cofactor beta-catenin with nuclear T cell factor (TCF) transcription factors. We 
identified target genes of the Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF pathway in the most immature 
(CD4-CD8-CD34+) thymocytes using Affymetrix DNA microarrays in combination with
three different functional assays for in vitro induction of Wnt signaling. A
relatively small number (approximately 30) of genes changed expression, including
several proliferation-inducing transcription factors such as c-fos and c-jun,
protein phosphatases, and adhesion molecules, but no genes involved in
differentiation to mature T cell stages. The adhesion molecules likely confine
the proliferating immature thymocytes to the appropriate anatomical sites in the 
thymus. For several of these target genes, we validated that they are true
Wnt/beta-catenin/TCF target genes using real-time quantitative PCR and reporter
gene assays. The same core set of genes was repressed in Tcf-1-null mice,
explaining the block in early thymocyte development in these mice. In conclusion,
Wnt signals mediate proliferation and cell adhesion, but not differentiation of
the immature thymic progenitor pool.

PMID: 14707084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2004 May;286(5):G752-61. Epub 2003 Dec
30.

Role of liver-enriched transcription factors and nuclear receptors in regulating 
the human, mouse, and rat NTCP gene.

Jung D(1), Hagenbuch B, Fried M, Meier PJ, Kullak-Ublick GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Dept. of Internal Medicine, Univ.
Hospital, CH-8091 Zurich, Switzerland.

Hepatic uptake of bile acids is mediated by the Na(+)-taurocholate cotransporting
polypeptide (NTCP; SLC10A1) of the basolateral hepatocyte membrane. Several
cis-acting elements in the rat Ntcp gene promoter have been characterized.
However, little is known about the mechanisms that control the expression of the 
human or mouse NTCP/Ntcp. We, therefore, compared the transcriptional regulation 
of the human and mouse NTCP/Ntcp gene with that of the rat. By computer
alignment, a sequence in the 5'-regulatory region that is conserved between
species was identified near the transcription start site. Huh7 cells were
transfected with luciferase constructs containing the conserved region from each 
species. The hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF)1alpha and -4alpha and the retinoid 
X receptor/retinoic acid receptor dimer (RXRalpha/RARalpha) bound and
transactivated the rat but not the human or mouse NTCP/Ntcp promoters. In
contrast, activation by the CCAAT/enhancer binding protein-beta was specific for 
human and mouse NTCP/Ntcp. The only consensus motif present in all three species 
was HNF3beta. HNF3beta formed a specific DNA-protein complex in electrophoretic
mobility shift assays and inhibited NTCP/Ntcp promoter activity in cotransfection
assays. Finally, a minor repressive effect of bile acids was only found for rat
Ntcp. The transcriptional repressor small heterodimer partner (SHP) did not
affect NTCP/Ntcp promoter activity. We conclude that 1) the transcriptional
regulation of the conserved NTCP/Ntcp 5'-regulatory region differs considerably
among human, mouse, and rat; and 2) the conserved NTCP/Ntcp regulatory region is 
not directly regulated by SHP. Bile acids may regulate NTCP/Ntcp indirectly by
modulating the capacity of nuclear factors to activate gene expression.

PMID: 14701722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Gastroenterology. 2004 Jan;126(1):308-17.

Hereditary persistence of alpha-fetoprotein is due to both proximal and distal
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 site mutations.

Alj Y(1), Georgiakaki M, Savouret JF, Mal F, Attali P, Pelletier G, Fourré C,
Milgrom E, Buffet C, Guiochon-Mantel A, Perlemuter G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U135 Hormones, Hôpital Bicêtre, Cedex, France.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2004 Aug;127(2):687; author reply 688.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: The molecular mechanism of hereditary persistence of
alpha-fetoprotein (HPAFP) has been previously described in a large Scottish
family, consisting of a -119G>A substitution in the distal hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 (HNF-1) binding site of the alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene promoter. We
report here the molecular mechanisms of HPAFP in 2 new unrelated families.
METHODS: Family 1 was of Bengali origin, and family 2 was Italian. Four of 5
subjects (family 1) and 3 of 9 (family 2) showed HPAFP. The AFP gene promoter was
studied in all available family members.
RESULTS: All subjects with high AFP levels had mutated promoter sequences. Family
1 showed the reported -119G>A substitution. Family 2 showed -55C>A and -65C>T
substitutions in the proximal putative HNF-1 binding region of the promoter. The 
-55C>A mutation increased the similarity of the proximal HNF-1 binding region to 
a consensus binding region. Gel shift assays confirmed its increased affinity
toward HNF-1, and transfection experiments revealed an increased level of gene
transcription. The -65C>T substitution theoretically created a CCAAT box.
However, gel shift and transfection experiments failed to show any biological
effect of this substitution that is associated with the -55C>A mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: Two different mutations localized in either HNF-1 binding sites of
the AFP gene promoter may result in HPAFP. This highlights the importance of
HNF-1 in AFP gene expression. Unexplained persistent AFP should lead to family
study and/or AFP gene promoter sequencing to avoid inappropriate explorations and
treatment decisions.

PMID: 14699509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Biochem J. 2004 Mar 15;378(Pt 3):909-18.

HNF1alpha is involved in tissue-specific regulation of CFTR gene expression.

Mouchel N(1), Henstra SA, McCarthy VA, Williams SH, Phylactides M, Harris A.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Molecular Genetics, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
Oxford University, John Radcliffe Hospital, Oxford OX3 9DS, UK.

The CFTR (cystic fibrosis transmembrane conductance regulator) gene shows a
complex pattern of expression with tissue-specific and temporal regulation.
However, the genetic elements and transcription factors that control CFTR
expression are largely unidentified. The CFTR promoter does not confer tissue
specificity on gene expression, suggesting that there are regulatory elements
outside the upstream region. Analysis of potential regulatory elements defined as
DNase 1-hypersensitive sites within introns of the gene revealed multiple
predicted binding sites for the HNF1alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha)
transcription factor. HNF1alpha, which is expressed in many of the same
epithelial cell types as CFTR and shows similar differentiation-dependent changes
in gene expression, bound to these sites in vitro. Overexpression of heterologous
HNF1alpha augmented CFTR transcription in vivo. In contrast, antisense inhibition
of HNF1 alpha transcription decreased the CFTR mRNA levels. Hnf1 alpha knockout
mice showed lower levels of CFTR mRNA in their small intestine in comparison with
wild-type mice. This is the first report of a transcription factor, which confers
tissue specificity on the expression of this important disease-associated gene.

PMCID: PMC1224019
PMID: 14656222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Brain Pathol. 2003 Oct;13(4):617-29.

Differential expression of the chemokine receptors CX3CR1 and CCR1 by microglia
and macrophages in myelin-oligodendrocyte-glycoprotein-induced experimental
autoimmune encephalomyelitis.

Sunnemark D(1), Eltayeb S, Wallström E, Appelsved L, Malmberg A, Lassmann H,
Ericsson-Dahlstrand A, Piehl F, Olsson T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Sciences, Local Discovery Research Area CNS and Pain
Control, AstraZeneca AB, Södertälje, Sweden. dan.sunnemark@astrazeneca.com

Chemokines are important for the recruitment of immune cells into sites of
inflammation. To better understand their functional roles during inflammation we 
have here studied the in vivo expression of receptors for the chemokines
CCL3/CCL5/CCL7 (MIP-1alpha/RANTES/MCP-3) and CX3CL1 (fractalkine), CCR1 and
CX3CR1, respectively, in rat myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein-induced
experimental autoimmune encephalomyelitis. Combined in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry demonstrated intensely upregulated CCR1 mRNA expression in
early, actively demyelinating plaques, whereas CX3CR1 displayed a more
generalized expression pattern. CX3CR1 mRNA expressing cells were identified as
microglia on the basis of their cellular morphology and positive GSA/B4 lectin
staining. In contrast, CCR1 mRNA was preferentially expressed by ED1+ GSA/B4+
macrophages. The notion of differential chemokine receptor expression in
microglia and monocyte-derived macrophages was corroborated at the protein level 
by extraction and flow cytometric sorting of cells infiltrating the spinal cord
using gating for the surface markers CD45, ED-2 and CD11b. These observations
suggest a differential receptor expression between microglia and monocyte-derived
macrophages and that mainly the latter cell type is responsible for active
demyelination. This has great relevance for the possibility of therapeutic
intervention in demyelinating diseases such as multiple sclerosis, for example by
targeting signaling events leading to monocyte recruitment.

PMID: 14655765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Hepatology. 2003 Dec;38(6):1331-47.

Transcription factors in liver development, differentiation, and regeneration.

Costa RH(1), Kalinichenko VV, Holterman AX, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics University of Illinois at
Chicago, College of Medicine, Chicago, IL 60607-7170, USA. Robcosta@uic.edu

PMID: 14647040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Gene. 2003 Dec 11;322:145-56.

Common carp insulin-like growth factor-I gene: complete nucleotide sequence and
functional characterization of the 5'-flanking region.

Vong QP(1), Chan KM, Leung K, Cheng CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, N.T.,
Hong Kong, China.

Insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) plays an important role in the growth and
development of fish. To understand the molecular mechanism which controls the
transcription of the IGF-I gene in common carp, we have cloned and completely
sequenced the IGF-I gene and the 5'-flanking region from a local tropical fish,
the common carp (Cyprinus carpio), and characterized its promoter activity by
transfection into human embryonic kidney (293GHR) cells which express the human
growth hormone (GH) receptor. The common carp gene is the smallest IGF-I gene
known so far, spanning approximately 13 kb, and is consisted of five exons and
four introns. The sequence of the gene is consistent with the single type of
IGF-I cDNA that we have isolated previously from a common carp liver cDNA
library. The expression pattern of IGF-I is similar between juvenile carp and
adult carp. While liver was found to be the major site of IGF-I gene expression
in common carp, the expression levels in other tissues are relatively low. Like
many other IGF-I gene promoters, there are no apparent TATA box and CCAAT box
upstream of the transcription initiation site. However, sequence analysis of the 
common carp IGF-I promoter region identified several consensus liver-enriched
transcription factor binding sites, including HNF-1alpha, HNF-3beta, C/EBP, and
one STAT5. We have analyzed the promoter activity of the 5'-flanking region of
the common carp IGF-I gene by performing luciferase reporter assays in
transfected 293GHR cells. Addition of human GH to the transfected cells led to an
increased expression of the reporter gene, indicating that the cloned genomic
fragment possessed promoter activity. This was confirmed by the lack of promoter 
activity of a construct in which the putative promoter was cloned in a reverse
orientation upstream of the reporter gene. The liver-specific transcription
factor, hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, was also found to be involved in the
regulation of the common carp IGF-I transcription. Transfection results from a
set of deletion mutants helped to map the locations of the responsive elements on
the promoter responsible for the GH effect and for the interaction with
HNF-1alpha. These observations provide information for delineating the
transcriptional regulation of IGF-I gene expression in common carp.

PMID: 14644506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Diabetes. 2003 Dec;52(12):2989-95.

Regulation of apolipoprotein M gene expression by MODY3 gene hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha: haploinsufficiency is associated with reduced serum apolipoprotein
M levels.

Richter S(1), Shih DQ, Pearson ER, Wolfrum C, Fajans SS, Hattersley AT, Stoffel
M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, Rockefeller University, New York, New York
10021, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a (HNF-1alpha) is a transcription factor that plays an
important role in regulation of gene expression in pancreatic beta-cells,
intestine, kidney, and liver. Heterozygous mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene are
responsible for maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3), which is
characterized by pancreatic beta-cell-deficient insulin secretion. HNF-1alpha is 
a major transcriptional regulator of many genes expressed in the liver. However, 
no liver defect has been identified in individuals with HNF-1alpha mutations. In 
this study, we show that Hnf-1alpha is a potent transcriptional activator of the 
gene encoding apolipoprotein M (apoM), a lipoprotein that is associated with the 
HDL particle. Mutant Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice completely lack expression of apoM in
the liver and the kidney. Serum apoM levels in Hnf-1alpha(+/-) mice are reduced
approximately 50% compared with wild-type animals and are absent in the HDL and
HDLc fractions of Hnf-1alpha(-/-). We analyzed the apoM promoter and identified a
conserved HNF-1 binding site. We show that Hnf-1alpha is a potent activator of
the apoM promoter, that a specific mutation in the HNF-1 binding site abolished
transcriptional activation of the apoM gene, and that Hnf-1alpha protein can bind
to the Hnf-1 binding site of the apoM promoter in vitro. To investigate whether
patients with mutations in HNF-1alpha mutations (MODY3) have reduced serum apoM
levels, we measured apoM levels in the serum of nine HNF-1alpha/MODY3 patients,
nine normal matched control subjects (HNF-1alpha(+/+)), and nine HNF-4alpha/MODY1
subjects. Serum levels of apoM were decreased in HNF-1alpha/MODY3 subjects when
compared with control subjects (P < 0.02) as well as with HNF-4alpha/MODY1
subjects, indicating that HNF-1alpha haploinsufficiency rather than hyperglycemia
is the primary cause of decreased serum apoM protein concentrations. This study
demonstrates that HNF-1alpha is required for apoM expression in vivo and that
heterozygous HNF-1alpha mutations lead to an HNF-1alpha-dependent impairment of
apoM expression. ApoM levels may be a useful serum marker for the identification 
of MODY3 patients.

PMID: 14633861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Diabetes Care. 2003 Dec;26(12):3358-9.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) mutation in type 2 diabetes and
latent autoimmune diabetes of the adult.

McKinney J, Cao H, Behme MT, Mahon JL, Hegele RA.

Comment on
    Diabetes Care. 2003 Jul;26(7):2088-93.

PMID: 14633836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Mol Biol Cell. 2004 Feb;15(2):543-51. Epub 2003 Nov 14.

Transcriptional activation of a constitutive heterochromatic domain of the human 
genome in response to heat shock.

Rizzi N(1), Denegri M, Chiodi I, Corioni M, Valgardsdottir R, Cobianchi F, Riva
S, Biamonti G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Genetica Molecolare, Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, 27100
Pavia, Italy.

Heat shock triggers the assembly of nuclear stress bodies that contain heat shock
factor 1 and a subset of RNA processing factors. These structures are formed on
the pericentromeric heterochromatic regions of specific human chromosomes, among 
which chromosome 9. In this article we show that these heterochromatic domains
are characterized by an epigenetic status typical of euchromatic regions.
Similarly to transcriptionally competent portions of the genome, stress bodies
are, in fact, enriched in acetylated histone H4. Acetylation peaks at 6 h of
recovery from heat shock. Moreover, heterochromatin markers, such as HP1 and
histone H3 methylated on lysine 9, are excluded from these nuclear districts. In 
addition, heat shock triggers the transient accumulation of RNA molecules,
heterogeneous in size, containing the subclass of satellite III sequences found
in the pericentromeric heterochromatin of chromosome 9. This is the first report 
of a transcriptional activation of a constitutive heterochromatic portion of the 
genome in response to stress stimuli.

PMCID: PMC329232
PMID: 14617804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Endocrinology. 2004 Feb;145(2):650-8. Epub 2003 Nov 14.

A potential role for fructose-2,6-bisphosphate in the stimulation of hepatic
glucokinase gene expression.

Wu C(1), Okar DA, Stoeckman AK, Peng LJ, Herrera AH, Herrera JE, Towle HC, Lange 
AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Molecular Biology and Biophysics, University of
Minnesota Medical School, 321 Church Street SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

The effects of fructose-2,6-bisphosphate (F-2,6-P(2)) on hepatic glucokinase (GK)
and glucose-6-phosphatase (G-6-Pase) gene expression were investigated in
streptozotocin-treated mice, which exhibited undetectable levels of insulin.
Hepatic F-2,6-P(2) levels were manipulated by adenovirus-mediated overexpression 
of 6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase. Streptozotocin treatment
alone or with infusion of control adenovirus leads to a dramatic decrease in
hepatic F-2,6-P(2) content compared with normal nondiabetic mice. This is
accompanied by a 14-fold decrease in GK and a 3-fold increase in G-6-Pase protein
levels, consistent with a diabetic phenotype. Streptozotocin-treated mice that
were infused with adenovirus-overexpressing an engineered
6-phosphofructo-2-kinase/fructose-2,6-bisphosphatase with high kinase activity
and little bisphosphatase activity showed high levels of hepatic F-2,6-P(2).
Surprisingly, these mice had a 13-fold increase in GK protein and a 2-fold
decrease in G-6-Pase protein compared with diabetic controls. The restoration of 
GK is associated with increases in the phosphorylation of Akt upon increasing
hepatic F-2,6-P(2) content. Moreover, the changes in levels of F-2,6-P(2) and Akt
phosphorylation revealed a pattern similar to that of streptozotocin mice treated
with insulin, indicating that increasing hepatic content of F-2,6-P(2) mimics the
action of insulin. Because G-6-Pase gene expression was down-regulated only after
the restoration of euglycemia, the effect of F-2,6-P(2) was indirect. Also, the
lowering of blood glucose by high F-2,6-P(2) was associated with an increase in
hepatic nuclear factor 1-alpha protein, a transcription factor involved in
G-6-Pase gene expression. In conclusion, F-2,6-P(2) can stimulate hepatic GK gene
expression in an insulin-independent manner and can secondarily affect G-6-Pase
gene expression by lowering the level of plasma glucose.

PMID: 14617577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2003 Nov 28;210(1-2):63-75.

Amylin gene expression mediated by cAMP/PKA and transcription factors HNF-1 and
NFY.

Cluck MW(1), Murphy LO, Olson J, Knezetic JA, Adrian TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, University of Southern California, 1200
North State Street, GNH 3900, Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA.

The regulation of amylin gene expression is not clearly understood. In this
study, we used the pancreatic beta cell line, INS-1, to evaluate the regulation
of amylin gene expression. When INS-1 cells were cultured in media containing
IBMX, the ratio of amylin secretion to insulin secretion increased by 200%. This 
coincided with an increase in amylin mRNA content. Moreover, there was a three to
four-fold increase in amylin promoter activity which was inhibited by the
specific protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor, H89. Electrophoretic mobility shift
assays (EMSA) demonstrated that IBMX induced protein-DNA binding to the FLAT and 
CAAT elements of the amylin promoter. Competitive EMSA experiments revealed that 
these proteins are likely to be HNF-1 and NFY, respectively. IBMX-induced amylin 
promoter activity was inhibited by mutations in the FLAT and CAAT elements. These
results indicate that amylin is positively regulated by cAMP and PKA through the 
transcription factors HNF-1 and NFY.

PMID: 14615061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Endocr J. 2003 Oct;50(5):491-9.

Regulation of pancreatic beta-cell function by the HNF transcription network:
lessons from maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY).

Yamagata K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Japan.

PMID: 14614204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 23;279(4):2623-31. Epub 2003 Nov 10.

The transcription factors HIF-1 and HNF-4 and the coactivator p300 are involved
in insulin-regulated glucokinase gene expression via the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase/protein kinase B pathway.

Roth U(1), Curth K, Unterman TG, Kietzmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekulare Zellbiologie, Georg-August-Universität, 
Humboldtallee 23, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.

Glucokinase plays a key role in the regulation of glucose utilization in liver
and its expression is strongly enhanced by insulin and modulated by venous pO(2).
In primary rat hepatocytes, pO(2) modulated insulin-dependent glucokinase (GK)
gene expression was abolished by wortmannin an inhibitor of phosphatidylinositol 
3-kinase (PI3K). Transfection of vectors encoding the p110 catalytic subunit of
PI3K or constitutively active protein kinase B (PKB) stimulated GK mRNA and
protein expression. The transfection of GK promoter constructs together with
expression vectors for p110 or constitutively active PKB revealed that the GK
promoter region -87/-80 mediates the response to PI3K/PKB. Transfection
experiments and gel shift assays show that this element is able to bind
hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) in a hypoxia- and PKB-dependent manner. The
ability of HIF-1alpha to activate the GK promoter was enhanced by hepatocyte
nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha), acting via the sequence -52/-39, and by the
coactivator p300. Stimulation of the GK promoter by insulin was dependent on the 
intact -87/-80 region and maximal stimulation was achieved when HIF-1alpha,
HNF-4, and p300 were cotransfected with the -1430 GK promoter Luc construct in
primary hepatocytes. Maximal stimulation of GK promoter activity by insulin was
inhibited when a p300 vector was used containing a mutation within a PKB
phosphorylation site. Thus, a regulatory transcriptional complex consisting of
HIF-1, HNF-4, and p300 appears to be involved in insulin-dependent GK gene
activation.

PMID: 14612449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Biochem Pharmacol. 2003 Nov 15;66(10):2011-20.

Hepatic expression of cytochrome P450s in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-alpha
(HNF1alpha)-deficient mice.

Cheung C(1), Akiyama TE, Kudo G, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1alpha) is a liver enriched
homeodomain-containing transcription factor that has been shown to transactivate 
the promoters of several cytochrome P450 (CYP) genes, including CYP2E1, CYP1A2,
CYP7A1, and CYP27, in vitro. In humans, mutations in HNF1alpha are linked to the 
occurrence of maturity onset diabetes of the young type 3, an autosomal dominant 
form of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in which afflicted subjects
generally develop hyperglycemia before 25 years of age. Mice lacking HNF1alpha
also develop similar phenotypes reminiscent of non-insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus. To investigate a potential role for HNF1alpha in the regulation of CYPs
in vivo, the expression of major CYP genes from each family was examined in the
livers of mice lacking HNF1alpha. Analysis of CYP gene expression revealed marked
reductions in expression of Cyp1a2, Cyp2c29 and Cyp2e1, and a moderate reduction 
of Cyp3a11. In contrast Cyp2a5, Cyp2b10 and Cyp2d9 expression were elevated.
There are also significant changes in the expression of genes encoding CYPs
involved in fatty acid and bile acid metabolism characterized by a reduction in
the expression of Cyp7b1, and Cyp27 as well as elevations in Cyp4a1/3, Cyp7a1,
Cyp8b1, and Cyp39a1 expression. These results point to a critical role for
HNF1alpha in the regulation of CYPs in vivo and suggest that this transcription
factor may have an important influence on drug metabolism as well as lipid and
bile acid homeostasis in maturity onset diabetes of the young type 3 diabetics.

PMID: 14599559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Gastroenterology. 2003 Nov;125(5):1470-5.

Familial liver adenomatosis associated with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
inactivation.

Bacq Y(1), Jacquemin E, Balabaud C, Jeannot E, Scotto B, Branchereau S, Laurent
C, Bourlier P, Pariente D, de Muret A, Fabre M, Bioulac-Sage P, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatogastroenterology, Centre Hospitalier de Tours, Hôpital
Trousseau, 37044 Tours Cedex, France. bacq@med.univ-tours.fr

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Germline mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
(TCF1/HNF-1alpha) are associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3
(MODY3), and somatic biallelic inactivations of the gene are found in
hepatocellular adenomas and liver adenomatosis. This study investigated
cosegregation of HNF-1alpha germline mutations with diabetes and liver
adenomatosis in 2 families.
METHODS: Two unrelated patients with liver adenomatosis and harboring HNF-1alpha 
germline and somatic mutations were studied. Subsequently, we screened 9
relatives in the 2 independent families for diabetes, hepatocellular adenomas,
and HNF-1alpha germline mutations.
RESULTS: In family A, a father and his son presented with an intraperitoneal
hemorrhagic rupture of a liver adenomatosis without diabetes. A heterozygous
R229X germline mutation was identified in HNF-1alpha in the father and his son
and also in his second 27-year-old son without hepatocellular adenomas. In family
B, a diagnosis of liver adenomatosis was made fortuitously in a 14-year-old girl.
A heterozygous G55fsX57 germline mutation in HNF-1alpha was identified in this
patient, her diabetic father, and her 2 sisters. Systematic exploration showed
liver adenomatosis in the 2 sisters. Somatic inactivation of the second
HNF-1alpha allele was found in liver tumors in both families.
CONCLUSIONS: This study describes familial liver adenomatosis and shows the
association with germline HNF-1alpha mutations in adults and children. It also
highlights the importance of screening for hepatocellular adenomas, diabetes, and
HNF-1alpha germline mutations in relatives of patients with liver adenomatosis.
Finally, prevalence of liver adenomatosis remains to be evaluated in MODY3
subjects.

PMID: 14598263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Gene. 2003 Nov 13;319:177-87.

Characterization of the mouse lysosomal sialidase promoter.

Champigny MJ(1), Johnson M, Igdoura SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

Lysosomal sialidase is required for the catabolism of sialoglycoconjugates such
as gangliosides and deficiency in this enzyme results in the autosomal recessive 
disease sialidosis. Furthermore, we have shown that overexpression of human
sialidase is sufficient to clear accumulated ganglioside in Tay-Sachs neuroglia
[Hum. Mol. Genet. 8 (1999) 1111]. In this paper, we have characterized the 5'
regulatory region of the mouse lysosomal sialidase gene in order to understand
the molecular mechanisms regulating its expression. We used bioinformatic
approaches to identify a transcriptional initiation site at -45 bp relative to
the ATG and significant sequence homology with the rat and human promoters.
Expression by the promoter was found to be cell-type restricted and required at
least 750 bp upstream of the ATG for high-level expression. DNAse I footprinting 
analysis and reporter gene assays indicated that the promoter is responsive to
Sp-1. We discovered a CCAAT box and four E-boxes within the mouse upstream region
and demonstrated that CCAAT displacement protein as well as the muscle regulatory
factors MyoD and Myf-5 influence sialidase expression. Taken together, these
results identify cis- and trans-acting factors involved in the regulation of
sialidase and point to mechanisms of gene upregulation.

PMID: 14597183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Med Sci (Paris). 2003 Aug-Sep;19(8-9):854-9.

[MODY, a model of genotype/phenotype interactions in type 2 diabetes].

[Article in French]

Velho G(1), Bellanné-Chantelot C, Timsit J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U.561, 82, avenue Denfert-Rochereau, 75014 Paris, France.
gvelho@infobiogen.fr

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a subtype of familial diabetes
mellitus characterised by early onset, autosomal dominant inheritance and primary
defects of insulin secretion. Mutations in six known genes (the enzyme
glucokinase and five transcription factors expressed in pancreatic beta-cells)
cause most of the MODY cases. This genetic heterogeneity is associated with
metabolic and clinical heterogeneity making MODY an interesting model of
genotype/phenotype interaction in diabetes.

PMID: 14593617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Hum Genet. 2003;48(11):594-7. Epub 2003 Oct 29.

Characterization of six base pair deletion in the putative HNF1-binding site of
human PXR promoter.

Uno Y(1), Sakamoto Y, Yoshida K, Hasegawa T, Hasegawa Y, Koshino T, Inoue I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetic Diagnosis, Institute of Medical Science, University of
Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo 108-8639, Japan.

Pregnane X receptor (PXR) regulates transcription of drug metabolism genes such
as CYP3A4 and MDR1. Several species of PXR transcripts have been reported,
including hPAR-2 with an extended amino-terminus. Database search identified a
6-bp deletion at the putative HNF1 binding element on the proximal region
flanking to the hPAR-2 transcription start site. Aspirin-induced asthma (AIA) is 
a typical drug-induced phenotype due to aspirin or nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
drugs, and these drugs are metabolized by CYP2C9 and UGT1A6, which are regulated 
by PXR. We examined a possible association between the 6-bp deletion variant and 
AIA; 129 AIA patients and 117 controls were genotyped, and no allelic association
was observed. Characterization of the hPAR-2 promoter revealed that the proximal 
region of 1.5-kb from the transcription start site conferred a promoter activity 
and that the 6-bp deletion diminished the activity. These results suggest that
the putative HNF1 binding element is essential for the transcriptional activity
of hPAR-2 and also, that substantial numbers of Japanese are in a deficient
state. Because of the biological significance of the 6-bp deletion of PXR, the
variant might potentially associate with as yet unknown phenotype.

PMID: 14586772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Gene. 2003 Oct 30;318:177-84.

The transcriptional regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene in the
kidney requires the HNF-1 binding site of the gene.

Cassuto H(1), Olswang Y, Heinemann S, Sabbagh K, Hanson RW, Reshef L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biochemistry, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical
School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

The transcription of the cytosolic form of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase
(PEPCK-C) gene is differentially regulated in each of the several
PEPCK-C-expressing tissues. In the kidney, it is regulated by glucocorticoids and
acidosis. Previously, we reported that in LLC-PK1 and derived kidney cell lines, 
mutation of the hepatic nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1) binding site in PEPCK-C gene
promoter markedly reduced both the basal activity of the gene promoter and its
response to acidic pH. Using the same kidney cell line, we now report that
nuclear receptors robustly stimulate transcription from the PEPCK-C gene
promoter. This stimulation is markedly reduced by mutation of the accessory
factor 1 (AF1) site in the glucocorticoid responsive unit (GRU) residing within
the glucocorticoid-responsive domain. The stimulation is likewise reduced by
mutation of the HNF-1 site, residing outside the nuclear receptor-responsive
domain of the PEPCK-C gene promoter. There is no binding similarity between HNF-1
and AF1 binding sites, as is evident from gel shift assays showing a lack of
competition of either site for the binding of renal nuclear proteins to the
other. We further assessed that the regulation of PEPCK-C gene transcription by
acidosis is not mediated by nuclear receptors. This became evident from studies
of transgenic mice harboring a rat PEPCK-C transgene driven by truncated 5'
flanking region of the gene, which contains the HNF-1 site but lacks the
glucocorticoid responsive domain. The full transcriptional response of this
transgene to acidosis establishes that the truncated 5' flanking region (362 bp) 
of the PEPCK-C gene contains the information required for the acidosis-mediated
regulation independent of the glucocorticoid domain. Taking together the previous
and present results, it appears that acidosis and nuclear receptors regulate the 
renal transcription of the PEPCK-C gene via two independent domains in the 5'
flanking region of the gene. These two modulations, as well as the basal activity
of the gene, require intact HNF-1 binding site in the gene promoter.

PMID: 14585510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Diabetes Care. 2003 Nov;26(11):3191-2.

No deterioration in glycemic control in HNF-1alpha maturity-onset diabetes of the
young following transfer from long-term insulin to sulphonylureas.

Shepherd M, Pearson ER, Houghton J, Salt G, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

PMID: 14578267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Lancet. 2003 Oct 18;362(9392):1275-81.

Genetic cause of hyperglycaemia and response to treatment in diabetes.

Pearson ER(1), Starkey BJ, Powell RJ, Gribble FM, Clark PM, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, UK.

BACKGROUND: Type 2 diabetes shows evidence of underlying heterogeneity. No
studies have assessed whether different causes for diabetes change the response
to oral hypoglycaemic therapy. In a few cases, patients with diabetes caused by
mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene have been
described as sensitive to the hypoglycaemic effects of sulphonylureas. We aimed
to see whether the glycaemic response to the sulphonylurea gliclazide and the
biguanide metformin differed in HNF-1alpha diabetes and type 2 diabetes, and to
investigate the mechanism for differences in sulphonylurea sensitivity.
METHODS: We did a randomised crossover trial of glicazide and metformin in 36
patients, either with diabetes caused by HNF-1alpha mutations or type 2 diabetes,
who were matched for body-mass index and fasting plasma glucose. The primary
outcome was reduction in fasting plasma glucose. Analysis was by intention to
treat. We assessed possible mechanisms for sulphonylurea sensitivity through
insulin sensitivity, insulin secretory response to glucose and tolbutamide, and
tolbutamide clearance.
FINDINGS: Patients with HNF-1alpha diabetes had a 5.2-fold greater response to
gliclazide than to metformin (fasting plasma glucose reduction 4.7 vs 0.9 mmol/L,
p=0.0007) and 3.9-fold greater response to gliclazide than those with type 2
diabetes (p=0.002). Patients with HNF-1alpha diabetes had a strong insulin
secretory response to intravenous tolbutamide despite a small response to
intravenous glucose, and were more insulin sensitive than those with type 2
diabetes. Sulphonylurea metabolism was similar in both patient groups.
INTERPRETATION: The cause of hyperglycaemia changes the response to hypoglycaemic
drugs; HNF-1alpha diabetes has marked sulphonylurea sensitivity. This
pharmacogenetic effect is consistent with models of HNF-1alpha deficiency, which 
show that the beta-cell defect is upstream of the sulphonylurea receptor.
Definition of the genetic basis of hyperglycaemia has implications for patient
management.

PMID: 14575972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Nov 7;311(1):233-40.

HNF1alpha upregulates the human AE2 anion exchanger gene (SLC4A2) from an
alternate promoter.

Malumbres R(1), Lecanda J, Melero S, Ciesielczyk P, Prieto J, Medina JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, Division of Hepatology and Gene Therapy,
CIMA, University Clinic and Medical School, University of Navarra, E-31008
Pamplona, Spain.

The human AE2 gene (SLC4A2) is transcribed in a widespread fashion from the
upstream promoter, the resultant full-length transcript AE2a being encountered in
most tissues. Moreover, alternate promoter sequences within intron 2 may drive
tissue-restricted expression of variants AE2b(1) and AE2b(2), mainly in liver and
kidney. AE2b(2) proximal promoter sequences are highly active in transfected
liver-derived HepG2 cells and contain an HNF1 motif. Mutation-disruption of this 
motif dramatically decreased alternate promoter activity in HepG2 cells but not
in prostate-derived PC-3 cells. Electromobility shift and supershift assays
indicated that HNF1alpha from HepG2 nuclear extracts binds the HNF1 sequence.
Transactivation studies in PC-3 cells showed enhanced activity of the wild-type
construct upon cotransfection with an HNF1alpha expression plasmid, while
activity of the HNF1-mutated construct remained unaffected. Since liver AE2 is
putatively involved in the biliary secretion of bicarbonate, HNF1alpha may have a
role in increasing bicarbonate secretion in response to certain stimuli.

PMID: 14575719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Biochem J. 2004 Feb 1;377(Pt 3):763-8.

Decreased expression levels of rat liver glutathione S-transferase A2 and albumin
during the acute phase response are mediated by HNF1 (hepatic nuclear factor 1)
and IL6DEX-NP.

Whalen R(1), Voss SH, Boyer TD.

Author information: 
(1)Liver Research Institute, University of Arizona School of Medicine, AHSC
245136, 1501 N. Campbell Ave., Tucson, AZ 85724-5136, U.S.A.
rwhalen@u.arizona.edu

The acute phase response is characterized by positive and negative regulation of 
many liver proteins including GSTs (glutathione S-transferases) and albumin. The 
expression of albumin and some GSTs are dependent on HNF1 (hepatic nuclear factor
1). Interleukin 6 plus dexamethasone induce a nuclear protein (IL6DEX-NP) in rat 
hepatocytes in vitro that binds to a promoter element adjacent to the HNF1 site
of rGSTA2 and decreases its expression. We determined how HNF1 and IL6DEX-NP
regulate rGSTA2 and albumin expression in rats during the acute phase response
after LPS (lipopolysaccharide) treatment. Expression of rGSTA2 and albumin mRNA
decreased 3 h after LPS treatment and remained low for 48 h. Transcription rates 
showed a similar pattern but albumin transcription was less affected. HNF1 and
IL6DEX-NP binding to the rGSTA2 promoter was present in control livers but was
absent at 3 and 6 h after LPS. By 12 h, HNF1 and IL6DEX-NP binding to the rGSTA2 
promoter reappeared and increased to above normal at 48 h. The patterns of HNF1
and IL6DEX-NP binding to the albumin promoter were similar. Affinity of IL6DEX-NP
for the albumin promoter was less than that for the rGSTA2 promoter and changes
in the transcription rates were consistent with the difference. Early decreases
in rGSTA2 and albumin during the acute phase response are due to decreased
binding of HNF1. Later persistent decreases in transcriptional rate of rGSTA2 and
to a lesser extent albumin are due to increased IL6DEX-NP binding. IL6DEX-NP
appears to be an important negative regulator of gene expression in vitro and in 
vivo.

PMCID: PMC1223894
PMID: 14561216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Oct;88(10):4897-903.

The pathophysiology of diabetes involves a defective amplification of the
late-phase insulin response to glucose by glucose-dependent insulinotropic
polypeptide-regardless of etiology and phenotype.

Vilsbøll T(1), Knop FK, Krarup T, Johansen A, Madsbad S, Larsen S, Hansen T,
Pedersen O, Holst JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine F, Gentofte Hospital, DK-2900 Hellerup,
Denmark. tivi@gentoftehosp.kbhamt.dk

The effect of the insulinotropic incretin hormone, glucagon-like peptide-1
(GLP-1), is preserved in typical middle-aged, obese, insulin-resistant type 2
diabetic patients, whereas a defective amplification of the so-called late-phase 
plasma insulin response (20-120 min) to glucose by the other incretin hormone,
glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), is seen in these patients.
The aim of the present investigation was to evaluate plasma insulin and C-peptide
responses to GLP-1 and GIP in five groups of diabetic patients with etiology and 
phenotype distinct from the obese type 2 diabetic patients. We studied (six in
each group): 1) patients with diabetes mellitus secondary to chronic
pancreatitis; 2) lean type 2 diabetic patients (body mass index < 25 kg/m(2)); 3)
patients with latent autoimmune diabetes in adults; 4) diabetic patients with
mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene [maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)3]; 
and 5) newly diagnosed type 1 diabetic patients. All participants underwent three
hyperglycemic clamps (2 h, 15 mM) with continuous infusion of saline, 1 pmol
GLP-1 (7-36)amide/kg body weight.min or 4 pmol GIP pmol/kg body weight.min. The
early-phase (0-20 min) plasma insulin response tended to be enhanced by both GIP 
and GLP-1, compared with glucose alone, in all five groups. In contrast, the
late-phase (20-120 min) plasma insulin response to GIP was attenuated, compared
with the plasma insulin response to GLP-1, in all five groups. Significantly
higher glucose infusion rates were required during the late phase of the GLP-1
stimulation, compared with the GIP stimulation. In conclusion, lack of GIP
amplification of the late-phase plasma insulin response to glucose seems to be a 
consequence of diabetes mellitus, characterizing most, if not all, forms of
diabetes.

PMID: 14557471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2003 Dec;307(3):1205-12. Epub 2003 Oct 13.

Rapid transcriptional suppression of rat cytochrome P450 genes by endotoxin
treatment and its inhibition by curcumin.

Cheng PY(1), Wang M, Morgan ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Down-regulation of constitutive hepatic cytochrome P450 (P450) mRNAs by bacterial
endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide, LPS) or other inflammatory stimuli has been
documented extensively, but the contribution of transcriptional suppression to
this effect is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that the rates of
transcription of the CYP2C11, CYP3A2, and CYP2E1 genes are reduced to 20, 30, and
10% of control levels, respectively, in rat liver within 1 to 2 h of injection of
LPS (1 mg/kg). The magnitude and rapidity of these effects indicate that
transcriptional suppression is a primary reason for the decline in P450 mRNAs.
Injection of curcumin significantly inhibited the rapid transcriptional
suppression of CYP2E1, and blocked that of CYP3A2. These effects seemed to be
independent of inhibition of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation by
curcumin, because induction of known NF-kappaB-regulated genes was not
attenuated. One hour after LPS injection, the DNA-binding activities of
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1alpha, HNF3beta, and HNF4alpha were reduced to
73, 72, and 53%, respectively, of control values. The nuclear abundances of Sp1, 
liver-enriched transcriptional inhibitory protein (LIP), HNF1alpha, and HNF3beta 
were unchanged, whereas the abundance of HNF4alpha was reduced to 87% of control 
levels. We conclude that changes in Sp1 or LIP do not contribute significantly to
the early suppression of P450 transcription in the acute phase rat liver.
Although changes in DNA-binding activities of HNF1alpha, HNF3beta, and HNF4alpha 
are too small individually to explain the observed changes in P450 transcription,
the role of each factor in concert with other factors remains to be determined.

PMID: 14557382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Mol Cell. 2003 Aug;12(2):509-16.

Transcription within a functional human centromere.

Saffery R(1), Sumer H, Hassan S, Wong LH, Craig JM, Todokoro K, Anderson M,
Stafford A, Choo KH.

Author information: 
(1)The Murdoch Childrens Research Institute, Royal Children's Hospital,
Flemington Road, Melbourne, 3052, Australia.

Recent data in yeast and Drosophila suggest a domain-like centromere structure
with a modified chromatin core and flanking regions of heterochromatin. We have
analyzed a functional human centromere and defined a region of increased
chromosome scaffold/matrix attachment that overlaps three other distinct and
nonoverlapping domains for constitutive centromere proteins CENP-A and CENP-H,
and heterochromatin protein HP1. Transcriptional competency is intact throughout 
the S/MAR-enriched region and within the CENP-A- and CENP-H-associated chromatin.
These results provide insights into the relationship between centromeric
chromatin and transcriptional competency in vivo, highlighting the permissibility
of transcription within the constitutively modified, nonheterochromatic chromatin
of a functional eukaryotic centromere.

PMID: 14536089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Oct 17;310(2):464-9.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 negatively regulates amylin gene expression.

Green J(1), Naot D, Cooper G.

Author information: 
(1)M.E. Müller-Institute for Structural Biology, Biozentrum, University of Basel,
Klingelbergstrasse 70, 4056 Basel, Switzerland. janelle.green@unibas.ch

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic subtype of Type 2
diabetes, defined as having an early age of onset, with a dominant inheritance
pattern. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1), which is encoded by the MODY3 gene, 
has been shown to bind the insulin promoter. Since the promoters of three
pancreas-specific genes involved in glucose homeostasis-insulin, glucokinase, and
amylin bind similar transcription factors, we were interested in whether HNF1
could also regulate amylin expression. In the present study, we used the
electrophoretic mobility shift assay, to demonstrate that the HNF1 transcription 
factor can specifically bind to the amylin promoter. Moreover, co-transfection of
an HNF1 expression vector with an amylin-CAT reporter plasmid decreased the
activity of the amylin promoter by 85%. These data support the hypothesis that
the amylin gene is regulated by HNF1 in a negative manner and may explain
partially how HNF1 mutations result in diabetes.

PMID: 14521933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. Rev Invest Clin. 2003 May-Jun;55(3):305-7.

[Early-onset diabetes in the Mexican population: prevalence, genetic and
metabolic features].

[Article in Spanish]

Lerman Garber I(1).

Author information: 
(1)lerman@netservice.com.mx

PMID: 14515676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Cancer Sci. 2003 Sep;94(9):757-63.

Expression of HNFs and C/EBP alpha is correlated with immunocytochemical
differentiation of cell lines derived from human hepatocellular carcinomas,
hepatoblastomas and immortalized hepatocytes.

Ishiyama T(1), Kano J, Minami Y, Iijima T, Morishita Y, Noguchi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of
Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki-shi, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

Objective assessment of the differentiation grade of hepatocellular carcinomas
(HCCs) is important for evaluation of the pathological diagnosis, prognosis and
therapeutic treatment. Differentiation of hepatocytes is reflected by their
expression of hepatic functional proteins in the mouse embryo, and liver-enriched
transcription factors (LETFs) have been shown to regulate hepatic functional
genes strictly. Previous reports demonstrated that the level of LETF expression
is altered in HCC or preneoplastic nodules compared with noncancerous tissues.
Therefore, LETF expression levels might be useful as a measure of HCC maturation.
In this study, to clarify the correlation between the expression of LETFs and the
differentiation grade of HCCs, we performed a quantitative analysis of the mRNA
expressions of HNFs and C/EBP alpha using real-time reverse-transcription PCR and
immunocytochemical analysis for hepatic functional proteins in twelve cell lines.
Furthermore, we examined orthotopic transplantations of the HCC cell lines in
C.B-17/Icrj-scid/scid mice and characterized the histologic and cytologic
differentiation of the tumors that developed. Our results showed that
comprehensive expressions of HNF-3beta, HNF-4 alpha, HNF-1 alpha, and C/EBP alpha
were specific to HCCs with well-differentiated function and morphology.
Furthermore, among these four transcription factors, HNF-4 alpha and HNF-1 alpha 
expressions showed synchronism and had a close relation with HCC differentiation.
These in vitro results were confirmed in tumors developed in SCID mice in vivo.
These findings suggested that HNF-4 alpha and HNF-1 alpha are useful markers to
assess the degree of HCC differentiation, which we suggest could be evaluated
objectively by the quantitative analysis of HNFs and C/EBP alpha in HCCs.

PMID: 12967472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2003 Sep 1;191(2):156-66.

Differential regulation of alternate UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A6 gene
promoters by hepatic nuclear factor-1.

Auyeung DJ(1), Kessler FK, Ritter JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of Virginia Campus 
of Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A6 (UGT1A6) is a major UGT contributing to the
glucuronidation of small phenolic compounds. The gene for rat 1A6 is expressed
using two promoters, a distal promoter P1 and a proximal promoter P2. Transcripts
from P2 are high in liver, gastrointestinal tract, and kidney, whereas P1
transcripts predominate in other tissues. Here we report evidence for primary
control of the P2 promoter by hepatic nuclear factor 1 (HNF1). Transient
transfection of a P2 reporter plasmid, p(-1354/+65) 1A6P2-luc, resulted in
enhanced luciferase activity in HepG2 but not Hepa1 cells compared to cells
transfected with pGL3-Basic control vector. A truncated reporter under the
control of -224 to +65 exhibited comparable activity. Footprint analysis of the
-224/+65 fragment revealed specific binding by rat liver nuclear protein to a
region between bases -60 and -37. The binding activity was also observed with
HepG2 cell but not Hepa1 cell extract. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were
consistent with the presence of HNF1 in the binding complexes. The functionality 
of an HNF1-binding site at -51/-37 is also supported by (1) marked decreases in
the activity of P2 reporter plasmids containing a three-base substitution in the 
proposed HNF1 binding site and (2) the enhancement of P2 reporter activity
following cotransfection of an HNF1alpha expression plasmid. The UGT1A6 P1
promoter lacks an HNF1 binding site in the analogous position and showed little
response to HNF1 overexpression. Although these data do not strictly rule out an 
interaction between the P1 promoter and HNF1 bound to -51/-37 of P2, the results 
suggest a mechanism for the more abundant expression of P2-derived UGT1A6
transcripts in liver and other HNF1-enriched tissues.

PMID: 12946651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Hunan Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2003 Apr;28(2):93-4.

[Relationship between Ala98Val variant of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha gene 
and late-onset type 2 diabetes in Han nationality].

[Article in Chinese]

Deng H(1), Tang WL, Liu Z.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Genetics, Central South University, Changsha
410078, China.

OBJECTIVE: To ascertain whether Ala98Val variant in exon 1 of hepatocyte nuclear 
factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) gene is associated with late-onset Type 2 diabetes
in Chinese Han nationality.
METHODS: We selected 150 patients with late-onset Type 2 diabetes and 155
controls, and detected Ala98Val variant with polymerase chain reaction-single
strand conformational polymorphism(PCR-SSCP) and direct sequencing.
RESULTS: None of Ala98Val variant was found in all of the subjects.
CONCLUSION: The Ala98Val variant doesn't play an important role in late-onset
Type 2 diabetes in Chinese Han nationality.

PMID: 12934344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Thromb Haemost. 2003 Aug;1(8):1688-98.

Functional characterization of transcription factor binding sites for HNF1-alpha,
HNF3-beta (FOXA2), HNF4-alpha, Sp1 and Sp3 in the human prothrombin gene
enhancer.

Ceelie H(1), Spaargaren-Van Riel CC, De Jong M, Bertina RM, Vos HL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, the
Netherlands. hceelie@lumc.nl

BACKGROUND: Prothrombin is a key component in blood coagulation. Overexpression
of prothrombin leads to an increased risk of venous thrombosis. Therefore, the
study of the transcriptional regulation of the prothrombin gene may help to
identify mechanisms of overexpression.
OBJECTIVES: The aim of our study was to localize the regions within the
prothrombin enhancer responsible for its activity, to identify the proteins
binding to these regions, and to establish their functional importance.
METHODS: We constructed a set of prothrombin promoter 5' deletion constructs
containing the firefly luciferase reporter gene, which were transiently
transfected in HepG2, HuH7 and HeLa cells. Putative transcription factor (TF)
binding sites were evaluated by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. The
functional importance of each TF binding site was evaluated by site directed
mutagenesis and transient transfection of the mutant constructs.
RESULTS: We confirmed the major contribution of the enhancer region to the
transcriptional activity of the prothrombin promoter. Analysis of this region
revealed putative binding sites for hepatocyte nuclear factor HNF4, HNF3-beta and
specificity protein(Sp)1. We identified six different TFs binding to three
evolutionary conserved sites in the enhancer: HNF4-alpha (site 1), HNF1-alpha,
HNF3-beta and an as yet unidentified TF (site 2) and the ubiquitously expressed
TFs Sp1 and Sp3 (site 3). Mutagenesis studies showed that loss of binding of
HNF3-beta resulted in a considerable decrease of enhancer activity, whereas loss 
of HNF4-alpha or Sp1/Sp3 resulted in milder reductions.
CONCLUSIONS: The prothrombin enhancer plays a major role in regulation of
prothrombin expression. Six different TFs are able to bind to this region. At
least three of these TFs, HNF4-alpha, HNF3-beta and Sp1/Sp3, are important in
regulation of prothrombin expression.

PMID: 12911579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 2003 Jul;78(4):339-47.

[Studies of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha, HNF-4 alpha and HNF-1 beta
genes in juvenile onset diabetes mellitus without obesity].

[Article in Japanese]

Kagami M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hokkaido University Graduate School of Medicine, Sapporo 060-8638, Japan.

PMID: 12911009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2003 Jun;64(3 Suppl):S17-21.

[MODY in clinical practice. When and why to consider it?].

[Article in French]

Velho G(1).

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U. 561, Hôpital Saint-Vincent-de-Paul F-75674 PARIS Cedex 14.
gvelho@infobiogen.fr

It is important to consider in clinical practice the diagnosis of MODY and to
characterise the MODY sub-type. Indeed, evolution, clinical consequences and
treatment of these forms of diabetes will be different according to the genetic
origin of MODY. The main characteristics and consequences in clinical practice of
these genetic abnormalities are briefly described, with a particular emphasis on 
the two most frequent sub-types, MODY-2 and MODY-3, caused by mutations of the
enzyme glucokinase and of the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
alpha (HNF-1a) respectively.

PMID: 12910054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Ann Endocrinol (Paris). 2003 Jun;64(3 Suppl):S12-6.

[Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY): the history of its dismemberment].

[Article in French]

Froguel P(1).

Author information: 
(1)CNRS-UPRESA 8090, Institut Pasteur F-59019 LILLE Cedex.
froguel@mail-good.pasteur-lille.fr

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is a complex multifactorial disease. Genetic susceptibility
is clearly needed, but in most cases, is not sufficient to induce T2D.
Environmental factors are determinant in most patients to develop T2D. Monogenic 
forms of diabetes such as the maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)
represent a model to study the genetic basis of T2D. Studies in MODY individuals 
and families lead to a genetic definition of MODY subtypes with profound
implications for our understanding of gene mutations involved in the development 
of T2D through our understanding on the major role of these genes and on their
transcriptional activity on b-cell development and function; and on the
regulation of glucose and insulin metabolism. Our current knowledge on the
heterogeneity of MODY diabetes and contribution to our comprehension of the
molecular mechanisms involved in T2D are described.

PMID: 12910053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Pancreas. 2003 Aug;27(2):e23-8.

New insulin sensitivity adjusted beta cell indices: validation according to a
genetic study.

Chiu KC(1), Martinez DS, Lee NP, Saad MF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Hypertension, University of
California, Los Angeles, School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California, USA.
kchiu@mednet.ucla.edu

PURPOSE: The role of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF1alpha) in the
maturity-onset diabetes of the young 3 (MODY3) is well established. A common
polymorphism, I27L that is not linked to MODY3, has been demonstrated to affect
beta cell function. To facilitate the identification of subjects with a low beta 
cell reserve, we developed beta cell indices and validated according to a genetic
study.
METHODS: Insulin sensitivity index (ISI), 1st phase insulin response (1stIR), and
2nd phase insulin response (2ndIR) were assessed in 60 glucose tolerant subjects 
using hyperglycemic clamps. Delta1stIR and delta2ndIR were defined as differences
between 1stIR (or 2ndIR) and the ISI-adjusted 1stIR (or 2ndIR). The genotypes
were determined from genomic DNA.
RESULTS: Delta1stIR (P = 0.0130) and delta2ndIR (P = 0.0482) differed among the 3
genotypic groups. Multivariate analysis confirmed the independent influence of
the I27L polymorphism on delta1stIR (P = 0.0130) and delta2ndIR (P = 0.0369).
Within the LL group, 75% and 63% of the subjects were within the lowest quartile 
of delta1stIR (P = 0.0011) and delta2ndIR (P = 0.0277), respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: With new beta cell indices, we demonstrated the independent impact
of the I27L polymorphism on beta cell function. The new beta cell indices will
facilitate the identification of glucose tolerant subjects with reduced beta cell
reserve.

PMID: 12883275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Diabetes. 2003 Aug;52(8):2182-6.

Genetic modifiers of the age at diagnosis of diabetes (MODY3) in carriers of
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha mutations map to chromosomes 5p15, 9q22, and
14q24.

Kim SH(1), Ma X, Klupa T, Powers C, Pezzolesi M, Warram JH, Rich SS, Krolewski
AS, Doria A.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha (MODY3) account for the
largest proportion of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) cases in the
U.S. This form of diabetes is characterized by impaired insulin secretion in
response to glucose, but wide variability exists in the severity of hyperglycemia
and in the age at which it becomes clinically manifest. We have previously shown 
that the age at onset of diabetes in MODY3 families is influenced by familial
factors (including modifying genes) and exposure to diabetes in utero. To
identify genes influencing the onset of MODY3, we conducted a genome scan in 13
extended MODY families in which diabetes segregates with an HNF-1alpha mutation. 
Linkage with age at onset of diabetes was assessed by genetic variance component 
analysis using SOLAR. The locus with the strongest evidence of linkage was on
chromosome 14q24 (D14S588; logarithm of odds [LOD] = 2.58, P = 0.0004). This
location overlaps with IDDM11 and includes SEL1L, a negative regulator of the
Notch pathway that may control islet development. Linkage evidence also supported
loci on 5p15 (D5S817; LOD = 2.44, P = 0.0004) and 9q22 (D9S910; LOD = 2.02, P =
0.0018). The latter matches a region linked to 2-h insulin levels in Pima
Indians. Less strong linkage evidence was observed at three other regions:
chromosomes 3p24 (LOD = 1.44), 7q21 (1.20), and 16q23 (1.51). Our data are
consistent with the existence of multiple loci that contribute to the expression 
of the MODY3 phenotype. Identification of these genes will offer new insights
into the pathophysiology of MODY that may, in turn, increase our understanding of
the cellular events underlying more common forms of diabetes.

PMID: 12882939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Aug 8;307(4):1070-4.

Transcriptional regulation of human beta-galactoside alpha2,6-sialyltransferase
(hST6Gal I) gene in colon adenocarcinoma cell line.

Xu L(1), Kurusu Y, Takizawa K, Tanaka J, Matsumoto K, Taniguchi A.

Author information: 
(1)Bionic Materials Technology Group, Biomaterials Center, National Institute for
Materials Science, 1-1 Namiki, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-0044, Japan.

Previous studies have shown that hST6Gal I mRNA is overexpressed in colorectal
cancer tissues compared with non-malignant or benign tissue. Moreover, Form 1
(hepatic form) mRNA isoform had a marked tendency to accumulate in colon cancer
[Int. J. Cancer 88 (2000) 58-65]. These findings suggest that the transcriptional
regulation of Form 1 is altered during malignant transformation. We report here
transcriptional regulation of the hST6Gal I gene in colon adenocarcinoma cell
lines. We characterized P1 promoter region, which regulates Form 1 mRNA
expression, using luciferase assays. The result indicates that the nt-156 to -1
region is important for transcriptional activity of hST6Gal I gene in colon
adenocarcinoma cell lines. The nt-156 to -1 region contains HNF1 recognition
element. Mutation of the HNF1 site reduced luciferase activity by about 80%
compared with the wild-type construct, suggesting that HNF1 site is involved in
the transcription of Form 1 mRNA in colon cancer cells.

PMID: 12878221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 17;278(42):40933-42. Epub 2003 Jul 14.

Functions of HNF1 family members in differentiation of the visceral endoderm cell
lineage.

Haumaitre C(1), Reber M, Cereghini S.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 423 INSERM, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 149 Rue de Sèvres, 75015
Paris, France.

The two members of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) transcription factor
family, HNF1 and variant HNF1 (vHNF1), show a strong homology in their atypical
POU-homeodomain and dimerization domain but differ in their transactivation
domains. Moreover, two vHNF1 isoforms generated by alternative splicing are
present in all tissues expressing this gene. vHnf1-deficient mouse embryos die
soon after implantation due to defective visceral endoderm formation, an
extraembryonic tissue essential for development and survival of the embryo
proper. In contrast, invalidation of Hnf1, which is expressed at later
developmental stages than vHnf1, does not lead to embryonic lethality or
developmental defects. To examine the specific or potential equivalent functions 
of vHNF1 isoforms and HNF1 during the process of visceral endoderm
differentiation, we stably reexpressed these factors in vHnf1-deficient embryonic
stem cells. Analysis of these embryonic stem cells upon differentiation into
embryoid bodies shows that vHNF1 isoforms exhibit specific behaviors depending on
particular target genes and cooperate in the establishment of a functional
visceral endoderm. Furthermore, forced expression of HNF1 in vHnf1-deficient
embryonic stem cells fully restores the formation of a mature visceral endoderm
with the correct expression profile of early and late markers of this lineage.
Thus, in this context, HNF1 functionally replaces both vHNF1 isoforms, suggesting
that the different developmental functions of these transcription factors are
mainly due to the acquisition of novel expression patterns.

PMID: 12860991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. J Biol Chem. 2003 Sep 19;278(38):36611-20. Epub 2003 Jul 10.

Lewis type 1 antigen synthase (beta3Gal-T5) is transcriptionally regulated by
homeoproteins.

Isshiki S(1), Kudo T, Nishihara S, Ikehara Y, Togayachi A, Furuya A, Shitara K,
Kubota T, Watanabe M, Kitajima M, Narimatsu H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Institute of Life Science, Soka University,
Tangi-cho, Hachioji, Tokyo 192-8577, Japan.

The type 1 carbohydrate chain, Galbeta1-3GlcNAc, is synthesized by
UDP-galactose:beta-N-acetylglucosamine beta1,3-galactosyltransferase
(beta3Gal-T). Among six beta3Gal-Ts cloned to date, beta3Gal-T5 is an essential
enzyme for the synthesis of type 1 chain in epithelium of digestive tracts or
pancreatic tissue. It forms the type 1 structure on glycoproteins produced from
such tissues. In the present study, we found that the transcriptional regulation 
of the beta3Gal-T5 gene is controlled by homeoproteins, i.e. members of
caudal-related homeobox protein (Cdx) and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)
families. We found an important region (-151 to -121 from the transcription
initiation site), named the beta3Gal-T5 control element (GCE), for the promoter
activity. GCE contained the consensus sequences for members of the Cdx and HNF
families. Mutations introduced into this sequence abolished the transcriptional
activity. Four factors, Cdx1, Cdx2, HNF1alpha, and HNF1beta, could bind to GCE
and transcriptionally activate the beta3Gal-T5 gene. Transcriptional regulation
of the beta3Gal-T5 gene was consistent with that of members of the Cdx and HNF1
families in two in vivo systems. 1) During in vitro differentiation of Caco-2
cells, transcriptional up-regulation of beta3Gal-T5 was observed in correlation
with the increase in transcripts for Cdx2 and HNF1alpha. 2) Both transcript and
protein levels of beta3Gal-T5 were determined to be significantly reduced in
colon cancer. This down-regulation was correlated with the decrease of Cdx1 and
HNF1beta expression in cancer tissue. This is the first finding that a
glycosyltransferase gene is transcriptionally regulated under the control of
homeoproteins in a tissue-specific manner. beta3Gal-T5, controlled by the
intestinal homeoproteins, may play an important role in the specific function of 
intestinal cells by modifying the carbohydrate structure of glycoproteins.

PMID: 12855703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Int J Oncol. 2003 Aug;23(2):469-76.

Difference in responsiveness of human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma lines to
epidermal growth factor for MMP-7 expression.

Xu H(1), Tanimoto A, Murata Y, Kimura S, Wang KY, Sasaguri Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Cell Biology, School of Medicine, University of
Occupational Environmental Health, Kitakyushu 807-8555, Japan.

Expression of MMP-7 in human esophageal squamous cell carcinoma lines (TE-9 and
-10) was investigated. Under normal culture conditions, immunocytochemical
staining and enzymography demonstrated the production of MMP-7 in their cytoplasm
and its gelatinolytic activity in the medium of TE-9 and -10 cell cultures. When 
EGF was added to the cultures, Western blotting and RT-PCR analysis showed a
dose-dependent increase in the amount of MMP-7 synthesized in the TE-9 cells,
whereas in TE-10 cells, EGF failed to stimulate MMP-7 production. For luciferase 
reporter analysis of MMP-7 transcription, pMMP7LucWI (1132-bp) and pMMP7LucWII
(334-bp) were cloned in the luciferase pGL3-basic vector. The promoter activity
was enhanced from 1.5- to 2-fold by the addition of EGF to TE-9 cells transfected
with pMMP7LucWI or WII, even though the response was low as compared with that of
12-O-tetra-decanoyl-phorbol-13-acetate (TPA); and in TE-10 cells, only TPA
enhanced the promoter activity of MMP-7. Luciferase promoter analysis using a
pMMP7WII mutant series revealed that the AP-1 site was essential for
transcription of the MMP-7 gene in TE-9 cells, and Tcf-I was also an important
site, and that to a lesser degree, Tcf-II and PEA3s participated in the
transcription of the MMP-7 gene in these cells. Unlike the results with TE-9
cells, in TE-10 cells, EGF failed to stimulate transcription of the MMP-7 gene;
and up-regulation of the promoter activity by TPA was dependent on the AP-1 site 
and to lesser degree, on Tcf-I and Tcf-II. These results suggest that EGF plays
also an important role in MMP-7 production of TE-9 cells and that there is a
difference not only in EGF-intracellular signaling system but also in regulation 
mechanisms of MMP-7 transcription by beta-catenin-Tcf and/or PEA3 system between 
these 2 carcinoma lines.

PMID: 12851697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Jul 9;1628(1):22-9.

Identification of functional regulatory regions of the connexin32 gene promoter.

Field JM(1), Tate LA, Chipman JK, Minchin SD.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biosciences, The University of Birmingham, Edgbaston, B15 2TT,
Birmingham, UK.

Connexin32 (Cx32) is the predominant gap junction protein expressed in adult rat 
hepatocytes. This study investigated transcriptional regulation of the rat Cx32
gene in MH(1)C(1) rat hepatoma cells using transient expression assays in
conjunction with promoter mutagenesis and 5' nested deletion analysis.
Site-directed mutagenesis of the -736 and -187 hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
(HNF-1) sites, the -196 and -116 Sp1 sites, and the -729 and -329 Yin Yang 1
(YY1) sites all significantly reduced promoter activity. We have defined the
contribution of each individual site to promoter activity in the intact cell. A
novel upstream region of the Cx32 promoter (-1042 to -758) was cloned and shown
to contain negative regulatory elements. The transcription factors HNF-1 and Sp1 
have important functional roles in the transcriptional regulation of basal and
cell-specific Cx32 expression. The multifunctional transcription factor YY1 is
also implicated.

PMID: 12850269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Immunol. 2003 Jul 15;171(2):769-75.

Initiation and limitation of Ly-49A NK cell receptor acquisition by T cell
factor-1.

Ioannidis V(1), Kunz B, Tanamachi DM, Scarpellino L, Held W.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne Branch, University of Lausanne,
Epalinges, Switzerland.

The establishment of clonally variable expression of MHC class I-specific
receptors by NK cells is not well understood. The Ly-49A receptor is used by
approximately 20% of NK cells, whereby most cells express either the maternal or 
paternal allele and few express simultaneously both alleles. We have previously
shown that NK cells expressing Ly-49A were reduced or almost absent in mice
harboring a single or no functional allele of the transcription factor T cell
factor-1 (TCF-1), respectively. In this study, we show that enforced expression
of TCF-1 in transgenic mice yields an expanded Ly-49A subset. Even though the
frequencies of Ly-49A(+) NK cells varied as a function of the TCF-1 dosage, the
relative abundance of mono- and biallelic Ly-49A cells was maintained. Mono- and 
biallelic Ly-49A NK cells were also observed in mice expressing exclusively a
transgenic TCF-1, i.e., expressing a fixed amount of TCF-1 in all NK cells. These
findings suggest that Ly-49A acquisition is a stochastic event due to limiting
TCF-1 availability, rather than the consequence of clonally variable expression
of the endogenous TCF-1 locus. Efficient Ly-49A acquisition depended on the
expression of a TCF-1 isoform, which included a domain known to associate with
the TCF-1 coactivator beta-catenin. Indeed, the proximal Ly-49A promoter was
beta-catenin responsive in reporter gene assays. We thus propose that Ly-49A
receptor expression is induced from a single allele in occasional NK cells due to
a limitation in the amount of a transcription factor complex requiring TCF-1.

PMID: 12847244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. J Biol Chem. 2003 Oct 3;278(40):38254-9. Epub 2003 Jul 1.

Neurogenin3 and hepatic nuclear factor 1 cooperate in activating pancreatic
expression of Pax4.

Smith SB(1), Gasa R, Watada H, Wang J, Griffen SC, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
California 94143, USA.

During fetal development, paired/homeodomain transcription factor Pax4 controls
the formation of the insulin-producing beta cells and the somatostatin-producing 
delta cells in the islets of Langerhans in the pancreas. Targeting of Pax4
expression to the islet lineage in the fetal pancreas depends on a short sequence
located approximately 2 kb upstream of the transcription initiation site of the
PAX4 gene. This short sequence contains binding sites for homeodomain
transcription factors PDX1 and hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)1, nuclear receptor
HNF4alpha, and basic helix-loop-helix factor Neurogenin3. In the current study we
demonstrate that the HNF1alpha and Neurogenin3 binding sites are critical for
activity of the region through synergy between the two proteins. Synergy involves
a physical interaction between the factors and requires the activation domains of
both factors. Furthermore, exogenous expression of Neurogenin3 is sufficient to
induce expression of the endogenous pax4 gene in the mouse pancreatic ductal cell
line mPAC, which already expresses HNF1alpha, whereas expression of both
Neurogenin3 and HNF1alpha are necessary to activate the pax4 gene in the
fibroblast cell line NIH3T3. These data demonstrate how Neurogenin3 and HNF1alpha
activate the pax4 gene during the cascade of gene expression events that control 
pancreatic endocrine cell development.

PMID: 12837760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Diabetes Care. 2003 Jul;26(7):2088-93.

Etiological investigation of diabetes in young adults presenting with apparent
type 2 diabetes.

Owen KR(1), Stride A, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine,
Exeter, Devon, UK. k.r.owen@exeter.ac.uk

Comment in
    Diabetes Care. 2003 Dec;26(12):3358-9.

OBJECTIVE: Young adults with newly diagnosed apparent type 2 diabetes present the
clinician with a wide differential diagnosis of possible etiology, including
autoimmune and genetic causes as well as young-onset type 2 diabetes (YT2D). The 
characteristics of these groups have been described, but it is not known in which
subjects investigation for etiology may be beneficial.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 268 unselected U.K. Caucasian subjects
diagnosed at ages 18-45 years and not treated with permanent insulin for < or =6 
months were studied. All subjects underwent clinical assessment and screening for
GAD antibodies (GADA) and tyrosine phosphatase IA-2 antibodies (IA-2A). Screening
for a common mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) gene
and the common mitochondrial mutation was performed in the antibody-negative
subjects. Subjects without insulin resistance were selected for sequencing of the
HNF-1 alpha gene.
RESULTS: A specific etiology was defined in 11.6% of the 268 subjects and in
24.7% of the lean subjects. Twenty-six subjects (9.7%) were positive for a
beta-cell antibody, one subject had familial partial lipodystrophy and the lamin 
A/C mutation R482W, and two subjects had the mitochondrial mutation A3243G. Two
of 15 selected subjects had HNF-1 alpha mutations, the novel missense mutation
A501T, and the previously reported R583Q.
CONCLUSIONS: This unselected series shows that there is considerable
heterogeneity in apparent YT2D. beta-Cell autoantibodies should be performed in
all those presenting at ages 18-45 years. Genetic investigations can be targeted 
to phenotypically defined subjects. The finding of a specific etiology will allow
individualization of management and give patients valuable information about
their condition.

PMID: 12832318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Rev Invest Clin. 2003 Mar-Apr;55(2):172-6.

Genetic defects of beta cell function: (MODY) application of molecular biology to
clinical medicine.

Gómez-Pérez FJ(1), Mehta R.

Author information: 
(1)fgomezp@prodigy.net.mx

PMID: 12827922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Oncogene. 2003 Jun 26;22(26):4062-73.

Hepatocyte growth factor induces apoptosis through the extrinsic pathway in
hepatoma cells: favouring role of hypoxia-inducible factor-1 deficiency.

Matteucci E(1), Modora S, Simone M, Desiderio MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Milano, via 
L. Mangiagalli, 31-20133 Milano, Italy.

Two hepatocarcinoma cell lines, the Hepa-1 wild-type (c1c7) and the beta-subunit 
mutated (c4) lacking hypoxia-inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) activity, were
differentially susceptible to apoptosis by hepatocyte growth factor (HGF). The c4
cells were 40% apoptotic 48 h after HGF treatment. On the contrary, the wild-type
c1c7 cells showed modest signs of apoptosis only at 72 h. The revertant vT[2]
cells, consisting of c4 cells stably transfected with HIF-1beta expression
vector, behaved as the parental cells. To understand the mechanisms of this
different sensitivity, we examined a panel of genes involved in apoptosis:
ornithine decarboxylase, c-Myc and p53 protein levels progressively decreased
while JNK1, caspase 8 and 3 activities persistently increased in c4 cells
undergoing apoptosis. Distinct time-related events in c1c7 cells were the
transient activations of JNK1 and caspase 8 followed by the accumulation of ODC
and c-Myc proteins. The proapoptotic effect of HGF in c4 hepatocarcinoma cells
seems to be related to HIF-1 deficiency with loss of cytoprotective and
signalling functions. This may contribute to the triggering of the extrinsic
pathway consisting in caspase 8 activation, which in turn causes BID cleavage and
cytochrome c release. The effector caspase 3 is also activated.

PMID: 12821940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Dev Dyn. 2003 Jul;227(3):347-56.

435-bp liver regulatory sequence in the liver fatty acid binding protein (L-FABP)
gene is sufficient to modulate liver regional expression in transgenic zebrafish.

Her GM(1), Yeh YH, Wu JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Marine Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan, Republic of China.

Liver fatty acid binding protein (L-FABP) is a small protein that is thought to
play an important role in the intracellular binding and trafficking of long chain
fatty acids in the liver. Expression of the gene encoding the zebrafish liver
fatty acid binding protein is regulated by a 435-bp distal region (-1944 to
-1510) of the L-FABP promoter. The 435-bp sequence is sufficient for gene
activation in the liver primordia (or bud) and continues to be active in the
adult liver when positioned adjacent to the SV40 basal promoter and linked
directly to green fluorescent protein. The 435-bp sequence region has two
distinct liver regulatory elements, A (-1944 to -1623) and B (-1622 to -1510),
and contains multiple putative consensus binding sites. The element A sequence
includes two consensus HFH and one HNF-1alpha site and the element B sequence
includes one consensus HNF-3beta site. Deletion of an internal 435-bp fragment
(-1944 to -1510) including the A and B elements totally ablated the
liver-specific activity of the zebrafish L-FABP gene promoter. Deletion of either
of the two elements reduces the liver activity. Mutation of the HNF-1alpha site
or either of the two HFH sites in the A element or the HNF-3beta site in the B
element significantly altered specificity in the liver primordia of transient
expression embryos. The importance of the HNF-1alpha consensus binding site in
the A element and the HNF-3beta consensus binding site in the B element within
the 435-bp distal region of the L-FABP promoter region suggests that
combinatorial interactions between multiple regulatory factors are responsible
for the gene expression of L-FABP in the liver.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12815620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Immunol. 2003 Jun 15;170(12):6048-56.

Hepatocyte NF-1 and STAT6 cooperate with additional DNA-binding factors to
activate transcription of the human polymeric Ig receptor gene in response to
IL-4.

Schjerven H(1), Brandtzaeg P, Johansen FE.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Immunohistochemistry and Immunopathology, Institute of
Pathology, University of Oslo, Rikshospitalet, Oslo, Norway.

Secretory IgA and IgM, which protect the mucosal surfaces, are generated by
selective transport of locally produced polymeric (p)Igs through the epithelial
barrier by the pIgR. The expression of this receptor, and hence the generation of
secretory Igs, is modulated by numerous extracellular factors. We have previously
identified a STAT6 site in intron 1 of the human pIgR gene that is required for
the slow and de novo protein synthesis-dependent IL-4-mediated transcriptional
activation of the gene. In this study, we show that this intronic IL-4-responsive
enhancer is confined to a 250-bp region that is highly conserved in the murine
pIgR gene. The enhancer was dependent on the cooperation between the STAT6 site
and at least four additional DNA elements. EMSA experiments demonstrated binding 
by hepatocyte NF-1 to one of these DNA elements. Extensive overlap in the tissue 
distribution of hepatocyte NF-1 and pIgR suggests that this transcription factor 
contributes to tissue-specific pIgR expression. Changing the helical phase
between the STAT6 site and downstream DNA elements greatly reduced the strength
of the IL-4 response, suggesting that the precise organization of this enhancer
is important for its proper function. Thus, several transcription factors
cooperate in this enhanceosome to mediate IL-4 responsiveness in HT-29 epithelial
cells.

PMID: 12794133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Jun;88(6):2548-51.

Association of I27L polymorphism of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha gene with
high-density lipoprotein cholesterol level.

Babaya N(1), Ikegami H, Fujisawa T, Nojima K, Itoi-Babaya M, Inoue K, Nakura J,
Abe M, Yamamoto M, Jin JJ, Wu Z, Miki T, Fukuda M, Ogihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

The serum level of high-density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-c), which protects
against the development of atherosclerosis, is under genetic control. However,
the genetic components responsible for the serum HDL-c level are yet to be
determined. A recent knockout mouse study demonstrated that hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) is an essential transcriptional regulator of HDL-c
metabolism. In this study, the association of an HNF-1 alpha gene polymorphism,
isoleucine (Ile) 27 leucine (Leu), with lipid parameters, in particular with
serum HDL-c level, was studied in 356 unrelated Japanese men. Though no
significant difference was observed in total cholesterol and triglyceride levels 
among the three genotypes, the serum HDL-c level was significantly associated
with the genotype (P < 0.01, trend test). Subjects with the Ile/Ile genotype had 
low serum HDL-c levels, and those with the Leu/Leu genotype had high serum HDL-c 
levels. These results demonstrate that the HNF-1 alpha gene locus is associated
with serum HDL-c level and suggest that the Ile27 allele is a risk marker for
atherosclerosis.

PMID: 12788852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Eur J Endocrinol. 2003 Jun;148(6):641-7.

Comparison of the impact of the I27L polymorphism of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha on estimated and measured beta cell indices.

Chiu KC(1), Chuang LM, Chu A, Yoon C, Wang M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Hypertension, University of
California-Los Angeles School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
kchiu@mednet.ucla.edu

OBJECTIVE: We investigated the impact of the I27L polymorphism of the hepatocyte 
nuclear factor-1alpha gene on measured and estimated beta cell indices. We also
examined the conservation of this amino acid among different species.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Estimated first and second phase insulin responses (1stPH(S) 
and 2ndPH(S)) were estimated from oral glucose tolerance tests in 78 glucose
tolerant subjects. Among these subjects, first and second phase insulin responses
(1stIR and 2ndIR) were measured in 60 subjects. The I27L genotypes were
determined from genomic DNA. We also reviewed the published peptide sequence data
on this polymorphism.
RESULTS: The estimated beta cell indices correlated well with the measured
indices. Although the impact of this polymorphism was noted in the measured
indices (P<0.01 for 1stIR and P=0.04 for 2ndIR) from 60 subjects, the differences
in the estimated indices were only noted in the extended sample set with 78
subjects (P=0.05 for 1stPH(S) and P=0.04 for 2ndPH(S)). This polymorphism occurs 
in the dimerization domain, which is completely conserved within human, rat,
mouse and hamster. This amino acid is also conserved in chicken and zebrafish,
but not in the frog. This conservation suggests a possible biological importance 
of this amino acid.
CONCLUSIONS: By increasing the sample size, we demonstrated the role of the I27L 
polymorphism in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes by using estimated beta cell 
indices. The conservation among species suggests a possible biological importance
of this amino acid. Analysis of the published data confirms a modest role of this
polymorphism in type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 12773136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. In Silico Biol. 2003;3(1-2):57-70. Epub 2002 Dec 25.

Combining genome and mouse knockout expression data to highlight binding sites
for the transcription factor HNF1alpha.

Lockwood CR(1), Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Peninsular Medical School,
University of Exeter, Barrack Rd, Exeter EX2 5AX, United Kingdom.
lockwood@bioinf.man.ac.uk

The identification of regulatory elements in silico is an important method for
inferring function from sequence data, but it is uncertain which methods are
best. We used a novel combination of expression data from a TCF1 knockout mouse
(TCF1 codes for the transcription factor HNF1a), and human and mouse genome
sequences, to search 2kb upstream of 28 genes downregulated in TCF1 null mice
compared to wild type mice. We wrote software (http://www.BindGene.org) to search
for and assign p-values to potential binding sites. This identified 8 genes as
candidates for being directly regulated by HNF1a: LIPC, CRP, F13B, PRODH2,
HSD17B2, SCL7A9, SLC16A7, PAH. There was evidence for conservation between human 
and mouse for all these regions identified as containing putative binding sites. 
For three of the genes identified there was experimental evidence for an HNF1a
binding site. For comparison we also examined 25 genes up-regulated in TCF1 null 
mice; only one gene was selected and there was little evidence for conservation
of this putative binding site between human and mouse. This result was consistent
with HNF1a being a gene transcription activator. Another 6 up-regulated genes had
unexpectedly high p-values, suggesting that possibly HNF1a sites have been
suppressed from these genes. In conclusion, gene expression data from transgenic 
animals lacking a transcription factor can be used to identify DNA binding sites 
for that factor.

PMID: 12762846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2003 Jun;18(6):705-11.

Alterations in the DNA binding activity of transcriptional factors activator
protein-1, Sp1, and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 in rat jejunum during starvation 
and refeeding.

Ihara T(1), Tsujikawa T, Fujiyama Y, Bamba T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Vice President, Shiga University of Medical
Science, Seta, Otsu, Japan.

BACKGROUND: The molecular processes leading to mucosal atrophy, regrowth, and
functional changes with starvation and refeeding are largely unknown. There are
many transcriptional factors that might be related to mucosal atrophy and
proliferation. In contrast, we previously reported that H+/peptide transporter
and aminopeptidase N messenger RNA in the intestinal mucosa were upregulated
during starvation. Therefore, we selected and studied three transcriptional
factors: activator protein (AP)-1, Sp1, and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1,
which not only play important roles for enterocytes proliferation, but also exist
in promoter lesions of the brush border enzymes and peptide transporter.
METHODS: In the present study, we performed electrophoretic mobility shift assays
employing AP-1, Sp1, and HNF-1, and evaluated the changes in the DNA binding
activities in rat jejunum during starvation and refeeding.
RESULTS: Two days after starvation, the Sp1 binding activity was significantly
decreased to 61.8% as compared with the control level, whereas AP-1 was 121.4%
and HNF-1 was 77.5%. Two hours after refeeding, the AP-1 activity was
significantly increased to 175.0% as compared with the control level, and the
HNF-1 activity was significantly increased to 180.2%. In contrast, the decreased 
SP1 level did not recover until 24 h after refeeding.
CONCLUSIONS: The DNA binding activities of these three transcriptional factors
were significantly changed in the rat jejunum during starvation and refeeding.
Our results provide insight into the molecular mechanisms of the transcriptional 
regulations associated with mucosal atrophy, regrowth, and functional changes of 
the jejunal epithelium in response to starvation and refeeding.

PMID: 12753154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Diabetologia. 2003 May;46(5):728-9. Epub 2003 May 13.

The polymorphism Gly574Ser in the transcription factor HNF-1alpha is not a marker
of adult-onset ketosis-prone atypical diabetes in Afro-Caribbean patients.

Mauvais-Jarvis F, Boudou P, Sobngwi E, Riveline JP, Kevorkian JP, Villette JM,
Porcher R, Vexiau P, Gautier JF.

PMID: 12743700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Eur J Immunol. 2003 May;33(5):1393-8.

Redundant functions of TCF-1 and LEF-1 during T and NK cell development, but
unique role of TCF-1 for Ly49 NK cell receptor acquisition.

Held W(1), Clevers H, Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne Branch and University of
Lausanne, Epalinges, Switzerland. wheld@isrec.unil.ch

Members of the TCF/LEF (T cell factor / lymphoid enhancer factor) family of
DNA-binding factors play important roles during embryogenesis, the establishment 
and/or maintenance of self-renewing tissues such as the immune system and for
malignant transformation. Specifically, it has been shown that TCF-1 is required 
for T cell development. A role for LEF-1 became apparent when mice harbored two
hypomorphic TCF-1 alleles and consequently expressed low levels of TCF-1. Here we
show that NK cell development is similarly regulated by redundant functions of
TCF-1 and LEF-1, whereby TCF-1 contributes significantly more to NK cell
development than LEF-1. Despite this role for NK cell development, LEF-1 is not
required for the establishment of a repertoire of MHC class I-specific Ly49
receptors on NK cells. The proper formation of this repertoire depends to a large
extent on TCF-1. These findings suggest common and distinct functions of TCF-1
and LEF-1 during lymphocyte development.

PMID: 12731066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Gastroenterology. 2003 May;124(5):1311-4.

Frequent mutations of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 in colorectal cancer with
microsatellite instability.

Laurent-Puig P(1), Plomteux O, Bluteau O, Zinzindohoué F, Jeannot E, Dahan K,
Kartheuser A, Chapusot C, Cugnenc PH, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 434, CEPH Fondation Jean Dausset, Paris.
pierre.laurent-puig@biomedicale.univ-paris5.fr

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The TCF1 gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha
(HNF1), a transcription factor germline mutated in patients with maturity-onset
diabetes of the young type 3, was recently found to be frequently inactivated by 
biallelic alterations in liver adenoma and in rare hepatocellular carcinomas. The
impact of HNF1 in colorectal carcinogenesis has not been studied until now.
Colorectal cancer is characterized by the existence of different molecular
mechanisms known as microsatellite stable or unstable tumors.
METHODS: At first, a series of 10 adenomas and 29 colon cancers regardless of
microsatellite instability status were screened for TCF1 mutations on the entire 
coding sequence.
RESULTS: Three mutations in microsatellite instability high (MSI-H) tumors were
found in the exon 4 polymorphic poly-cytosin (C)(8) or (C)(9) tract and consisted
of a cytosin deletion at position 291. To further characterize the prevalence of 
TCF1 mutations in the subgroup of MSI-H tumors, 52 additional MSI-H samples were 
screened for exon 4 alterations; 23% of MSI-H tumors (95% confidence interval,
14%-36%) were found to harbor frameshift at the poly-cytosin tract. The (C)(9)
allele was significantly more frequently mutated than the (C)(8) allele (22% vs. 
8%; P = 0.03), showing a higher instability of the longer repetition.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show a role for HNF1 in MSI-H colorectal
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 12730871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Clin Biochem. 2003 May;36(3):163-70.

Genes, environment and Oji-Cree type 2 diabetes.

Hegele RA(1), Zinman B, Hanley AJ, Harris SB, Barrett PH, Cao H.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute (RAH, HC), London, ON, Canada. hegele@robarts.ca

The prevalence of type 2 diabetes in Canadian Oji-Cree is among the highest in
the world. Our research has uncovered genetic determinants of Oji-Cree type 2
diabetes and related metabolic traits. The most important genetic discovery by
far was the private G319S mutation in transcription factor HNF-1alpha, encoded by
the HNF1A gene. HNF1A G319S was discovered by candidate gene sequencing and would
have been missed using the currently favored strategy of genome-wide scanning.
G319S was associated with increased odds of having type 2 diabetes across the
whole study sample and in all subgroups, including adolescent Oji-Cree.
Furthermore, G319S had specificity and positive predictive value of 97% and 95%, 
respectively, for developing type 2 diabetes by age 50. The protein bearing the
G319S mutation had impaired function in vitro. Sigmoidal modeling showed that
each dose of the G319S allele accelerated the median age of diabetes onset by
about 7 yr. This approach also showed that environment more strongly accelerated 
the median age-of-onset of Oji-Cree diabetes onset than did G319S, which could
have implications for intervention strategies to reduce the burden of this
epidemic. There is also evidence for genetic determination of related metabolic
traits in the Oji-Cree.

PMID: 12726923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Diabetologia. 2003 May;46(5):721-7. Epub 2003 Apr 24.

Identification and functional characterization of a novel mutation of hepatocyte 
nuclear factor-1alpha gene in a Korean family with MODY3.

Kim KA(1), Kang K, Chi YI, Chang I, Lee MK, Kim KW, Shoelson SE, Lee MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School
of Medicine, Irwon-dong 50, Kangnam-ku, Seoul 135-710, Korea.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: After screening 16 Korean families with early onset Type 2
diabetes in search for hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) -1alpha gene mutation, we 
identified a novel missense mutation (R263L) associated with MODY phenotype. We
studied the biological characteristics of the mutation and the potential
functional consequences based on the crystallographic structure of HNF-1alpha in 
complex with DNA.
METHODS: DNA from subjects with a familial form of early onset diabetes was
isolated and HNF-1alpha was sequenced. The R263L substitution was generated by
PCR-based sited-directed mutagenesis. Functional and biochemical studies were
conducted by reporter assay using glucose-transporter type 2 (GLUT2) or insulin
promoters and electrophoretic mobility shift assay, respectively.
RESULTS: Transfection of wild-type HNF-1alpha increased the reporter activities
of GLUT2 and insulin promoters in NIH3T3 and SK-Hep1 cells, while R263L mutant
was defective in transactivation of those promoters. Both wild-type HNF-1alpha
and R263L mutant could not transactivate GLUT2 and insulin promoters in MIN6N8
insulinoma cells. R263L mutant had a defective cooperation with its heterodimeric
partner HNF-1beta or coactivator p300. R263L mutant protein displayed greatly
reduced DNA binding ability, despite its comparable protein stability to the
wild-type HNF-1alpha.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: These results suggest that the mutation of HNF-1alpha 
at codon 263 from arginine to leucine leads to the development of MODY3 through
decreased insulin production and defective glucose sensing. These findings are in
good agreement with the crystal structure in which R263 makes hydrogen bonds with
phosphorus atoms of DNA backbone to mediate the stable binding of HNF-1alpha
homeodomain to the promoter.

PMID: 12712243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Biochem J. 2003 Aug 1;373(Pt 3):993-7.

Effects of dietary glycerol on the expression of pterin carbinolamine dehydratase
in the rat.

Connolly E(1), Donlon J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.

Earlier studies have shown that the abundance of hepatic phenyl-alanine
hydroxylase (PAH) diminishes to 60% of control values in rats fed with a diet
composed of 40% (w/w) glycerol [Guerin, Walsh, Donlon and Kaufman (1998) Int. J. 
Biochem. Cell Biol. 30, 1047-1054]. In this experimental model, there are
corresponding decreases in the hepatic concentrations of both the hydroxylase
cofactor, tetrahydrobiopterin, and the nucleotide guanosine triphosphate. We now 
show that the cytoplasmic activities of hepatic pterin-4a-carbinolamine
dehydratase (PCD) are also lower in these animals, by approx. 50% compared with
control values. Immunoblotting confirmed a diminution of protein abundance in
vivo. PCD also functions as a dimerization cofactor (DCoH) for the hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) and the relative abundance of PCD/DCoH in the
nucleus is also decreased. There is a small reduction in the mRNA levels for PAH 
and for PCD/DCoH in the glycerol-fed animals. In the kidney, there is also a
diminution in the abundance of both PAH and PCD proteins. Hepatic GTP
cyclohydrolase I activity was not altered and the abundance of hepatic HNF1alpha 
remained unchanged. HNF1alpha is required for the expression of PAH in the liver 
and our results support a role for PCD/DCoH, through its interaction with
HNF1alpha, in regulating the expression of PAH.

PMCID: PMC1223523
PMID: 12683953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Diabet Med. 2003 Mar;20(3):225-30.

Transcription factor 1 and beta-cell function in glucose-tolerant subjects.

Chiu KC(1), Chuang LM, Chu A, Wang M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Hypertension, Department of Medicine,
University of California, Los Angeles School of Medicine, USA.
kchiu@mednet.ucla.edu

AIMS: Although beta-cell dysfunction and insulin resistance are observed in
patients with Type 2 diabetes, beta-cell dysfunction plays a crucial role in the 
development of the disease. Mutations of transcription factor 1 (TCF1, or
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha) affect beta-cell function. We examined the
impact of amino acid polymorphisms of this gene on beta-cell function in 60
glucose-tolerant Caucasians.
METHODS: Insulin sensitivity index (ISI) and 1st and 2nd phase insulin responses 
(1stIR, 2ndIR) were measured using the hyperglycaemic clamp. The genotypes were
determined from genomic DNA and their impact on beta-cell function was
investigated.
RESULTS: Among three polymorphisms (I27L, A98V, and S487N), significant impact on
beta-cell function was found in the I27L polymorphism. Univariate analyses
revealed differences for the I27L polymorphism in both 1stIR (P = 0.0052) and
2ndIR (P = 0.0432). Multivariate analysis revealed that the I27L polymorphism (P 
= 0.0124) with ISI accounted for 32% of the variation in 1stIR and had a marginal
impact on 2ndIR (P = 0.0343), accounting for 52% of the variation with ISI and
age. By dissecting out the impact of other covariate(s), the I27L polymorphism
independently explained 12% of the variation in 1stIR and 6% of the variation in 
2ndIR.
CONCLUSION: The I27L polymorphism of TCF1 is an independent determinant of
beta-cell function by affecting both 1st and 2nd phase insulin response. This
polymorphism could play a role in the pathogenesis of Type 2 diabetes. A
large-scale association study (approx. 2000 subjects) will be required to
demonstrate the genetic susceptibility of this polymorphism to Type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 12675668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Diabetes Care. 2003 Apr;26(4):1295-6.

Intrauterine hyperglycemia modifying the development of (monogenic) diabetes?

Tuomi T(1), Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Helsinki University Central Hospital, Helsinki,
Finland. tiinamaija.tuomi@hus.fi

PMID: 12663611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2003 Jul;285(1):G62-72. Epub 2003 Mar
19.

HNF-1alpha and endodermal transcription factors cooperatively activate Fabpl:
MODY3 mutations abrogate cooperativity.

Divine JK(1), McCaul SP, Simon TC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology and Biomedical Sciences, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha plays a central role in intestinal and
hepatic gene regulation and is required for hepatic expression of the liver fatty
acid binding protein gene (Fabpl). An Fabpl transgene was directly activated
through cognate sites by HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta, as well as five other
endodermal factors: CDX-1, C/EBPbeta, GATA-4, FoxA2, and HNF-4alpha. HNF-1alpha
activated the Fabpl transgene by as much as 60-fold greater in the presence of
the other five endodermal factors than in their absence, accounting for up to
one-half the total transgene activation by the group of six factors. This degree 
of synergistic interaction suggests that multifactor cooperativity is a critical 
determinant of endodermal gene activation by HNF-1alpha. Mutations in HNF-1alpha 
that result in maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY3) provide evidence for 
the in vivo significance of these synergistic interactions. An R131Q HNF-1alpha
MODY3 mutant exhibits complete loss of synergistic activation in concert with the
other endodermal transcription factors despite wild-type transactivation ability 
in their absence. Furthermore, whereas wild-type HNF-1alpha exhibited pairwise
cooperative synergy with each of the other five factors, the R131Q mutant could
synergize only with GATA-4 and C/EBPbeta. Selective loss of synergy with other
endodermal transcription factors accompanied by retention of native
transactivation ability in an HNF-1alpha MODY mutant suggests in vivo
significance for cooperative synergy.

PMID: 12646418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Curr Diab Rep. 2002 Apr;2(2):125-34.

Molecular etiologies of MODY and other early-onset forms of diabetes.

Shih DQ(1), Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, Rockefeller University, 1230 York Avenue,
Box 292, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) are monogenic forms of type 2
diabetes that are characterized by an early disease onset, autosomal-dominant
inheritance, and defects in insulin secretion. Genetic studies have identified
mutations in at least eight genes associated with different forms of MODY. The
majority of the MODY subtypes are caused by mutations in transcription factors
that include hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4 alpha, HNF-1 alpha, PDX-1, HNF-1
beta, and NEURO-DI/BETA-2. In addition, genetic defects in the glucokinase gene, 
the glucose sensor of the pancreatic beta cells, and the insulin gene also lead
to impaired glucose tolerance. Biochemical and genetic studies have demonstrated 
that the MODY genes are functionally related and form an integrated
transcriptional network that is important for many metabolic pathways.

PMID: 12643132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Diabetologia. 2003 Feb;46(2):291-5. Epub 2003 Jan 8.

Genetic epidemiology of MODY in the Czech republic: new mutations in the MODY
genes HNF-4alpha, GCK and HNF-1alpha.

Pruhova S(1), Ek J, Lebl J, Sumnik Z, Saudek F, Andel M, Pedersen O, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University,
Vinohradska 159, 100-81 Prague 10, Czech Republic.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The aim of this study was to examine the prevalence and nature
of mutations in HNF4alpha/MODY1, GCK/MODY2 and HNF-1alpha/MODY3 genes in Czech
subjects with clinical diagnosis of MODY.
METHODS: We studied 61 unrelated index probands of Czech origin (28 males, 33
females) with a clinical diagnosis of MODY and 202 family members. The mean age
of probands was 22.7+/-12.0 years (range, 6-62) and the mean age at the first
recognition of hyperglycaemia was 14.7+/-6.0 years (range, 1-25). The promotor
and coding regions inclusive intron exon boundaries of the HNF-4alpha, GCK and
HNF-1alpha genes were examined by PCR-dHPLC (HNF-1alpha and GCK) and direct
sequencing.
RESULTS: We identified 20 different mutations in the HNF-4alpha, GCK and
HNF-1alpha in 29 families (48% of all families studied), giving a relative
prevalence of 5% of MODY1, 31% of MODY2 and 11.5% of MODY3 among the Czech
kindred with MODY. Three of 3, 10 of 11 and 1 of 6 of the mutations identified in
HNF-4alpha, GCK and HNF-1alpha respectively, were new.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Of the families 48% carried mutations in the MODY1-3
genes and of the identified mutations 70% were new. In 52% of Czech families with
clinical characteristics of MODY, no mutations were found in the analysed genes. 
This finding shows that the majority of MODY mutations in a central European
population are local and that other MODY genes could be responsible for autosomal
dominant transmission of diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 12627330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2003 Mar;4(1):43-51.

Newly defined genetic diabetes syndromes: maturity onset diabetes of the young.

Winter WE(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida, Box 100275, Gainesville, FL 32610-0275, USA. winter@pathology.ufl.edu

PMID: 12618559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Mol Genet Metab. 2003 Feb;78(2):145-51.

In silico searching of human and mouse genome data identifies known and unknown
HNF1 binding sites upstream of beta-cell genes.

Lockwood CR(1), Bingham C, Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Peninsular Medical School, Exeter, UK.

HNF1-alpha is a transcription factor present in beta-cells. Mutations in the
HNF1-alpha gene cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), but the exact 
mechanism is not known. Several studies have highlighted genes down-regulated in 
beta-cells lacking this gene, but it is not clear if these are directly regulated
by HNF1-alpha. To better understand this, we used human and mouse genome data to 
examine 29 genes expressed in the beta-cell. Using an in silico approach (with
software available at www.BindGene.org) we examined 2kb upstream of each gene for
possible HNF1 binding sequences. In five genes we also examined 100kb upstream of
each gene, but only the portions strongly conserved between humans and mice. We
identified nine putative HNF1 binding sites upstream of seven genes (p<0.1 and
good alignment between species or p<0.05). Six of these nine sites had some
experimental corroboratory evidence and included the recently identified sites 6 
and 45kb upstream of HNF4-alpha. Three novel sites were identified. These were
92bp upstream of SLC3A1, 52bp upstream of PCBD (DCOH), and 42202bp upstream of
TCF2(HNF1-beta). In conclusion, our computer search identified some known HNF1
sites, and suggested three novel sites indicating these genes are very likely to 
be directly activated by HNF1. This should help in designing experiments to
discover the mechanisms of beta-cell dysfunction due to HNF1 disruption.

PMID: 12618086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Diabetes. 2003 Mar;52(3):872-81.

A genome-wide scan in families with maturity-onset diabetes of the young:
evidence for further genetic heterogeneity.

Frayling TM(1), Lindgren CM, Chevre JC, Menzel S, Wishart M, Benmezroua Y, Brown 
A, Evans JC, Rao PS, Dina C, Lecoeur C, Kanninen T, Almgren P, Bulman MP, Wang Y,
Mills J, Wright-Pascoe R, Mahtani MM, Prisco F, Costa A, Cognet I, Hansen T,
Pedersen O, Ellard S, Tuomi T, Groop LC, Froguel P, Hattersley AT, Vaxillaire M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Postgraduate School of Medicine 
and Health Science, University of Exeter, Exeter, U.K.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a heterogeneous single gene
disorder characterized by non-insulin-dependent diabetes, an early onset and
autosomal dominant inheritance. Mutations in six genes have been shown to cause
MODY. Approximately 15-20% of families fitting MODY criteria do not have
mutations in any of the known genes. These families provide a rich resource for
the identification of new MODY genes. This will potentially enable further
dissection of clinical heterogeneity and bring new insights into mechanisms of
beta-cell dysfunction. To facilitate the identification of novel MODY loci, we
combined the results from three genome-wide scans on a total of 23 families
fitting MODY criteria. We used both a strict parametric model of inheritance with
heterogeneity and a model-free analysis. We did not identify any single novel
locus but provided putative evidence for linkage to chromosomes 6 (nonparametric 
linkage [NPL]score 2.12 at 71 cM) and 10 (NPL score 1.88 at 169-175 cM), and to
chromosomes 3 (heterogeneity LOD [HLOD] score 1.27 at 124 cM) and 5 (HLOD score
1.22 at 175 cM) in 14 more strictly defined families. Our results provide
evidence for further heterogeneity in MODY.

PMID: 12606533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Med Clin (Barc). 2003 Feb 8;120(4):121-4.

[Clinical, metabolic, immunologic and genotypic characteristics in non-pediatric 
patients with type 1A diabetes mellitus. Onset and short-term prognosis].

[Article in Spanish]

Aguilera E(1), Recasens M, Morínigo RA, Casamitjana R, Oriola J, Ercilla G,
Conget I.

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Endocrinología y Diabetes. Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques
August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS). Hospital Clínic i Universitari. Barcelona. Spain.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Around 50% of new cases of type 1 diabetes mellitus
(DM1) are seen in subjects aged above 15 years. It is of particular interest the 
characterization of such a population.
THE AIMS OF OUR STUDY WERE: a) to characterize a group of non-pediatric subjects 
with DM1 at the onset of the disease; b) to evaluate the prognosis of the disease
under conventional intensive insulin therapy, and c) to investigate the presence 
of mutations in the HNF-1* gene in those subjects who did not display pancreatic 
autoimmune markers.
SUBJECTS AND METHOD: All subjects with an age >= 15 and 35 years recently
diagnosed DM1 (1998-2001) were included in the study. Pancreatic cell function
was assessed by glucagon test (at onset and at 12 months). The presence of
pancreatic autoantibodies, GAD, IA2 and IAA was evaluated. HLA class II genes and
the 10 exons of HNF-1* gene were analyzed from genomic DNA.
RESULTS: We studied 86 subjects (32 women, 23.9 [5.3] year-old). Eighty percent
of subjects were positive for any of the studied autoantibodies. Alone or in
combination, GAD was positive in 68.6% of subjects, IA2 in 45.3% and IAA in 27.9%
of them. Most frequent haplotype was DRB1*0301-DQA1*0501-DQB*0201. There were no 
differences with regard to clinical, metabolic or genetic characteristics among
those subjects with or without presence of pancreatic autoantibodies (at onset
and at 12 months). We did not find mutations in the HNF-1* gene in any of the
subjects included in our study. After 12 months of follow-up, cell function
remained unaltered in comparison with that observed at the onset of the disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical, immunological and HLA characteristics of a non-pediatric
DM1 population are in agreement with expected results. The absence of pancreatic 
autoimmune markers neither rules out the existence of type 1A diabetes mellitus
nor is associated with mutations in the MODY-3 gene. A therapeutic programme
using conventional intensified insulin treatment prevents the impairment of
insulin secretory capacity for a short-term follow-up.

PMID: 12605834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2003 Mar;304(3):1048-54.

Mechanisms of down-regulation of CYP2E1 expression by inflammatory cytokines in
rat hepatoma cells.

Hakkola J(1), Hu Y, Ingelman-Sundberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland. 
jukka.hakkola@oulu.fi

CYP2E1 is one of the major cytochrome P450 forms whose expression is strongly
inhibited by inflammatory cytokines in humans and rodents. In the present study, 
we have used the Fao rat hepatoma cell line that constitutively expresses CYP2E1 
enzyme to investigate mechanisms of cytokine action. The cells were treated with 
interleukin (IL)-1beta, tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNFalpha), or IL-6 for 24 or
72 h, and the expression of CYP2E1 was monitored at the transcriptional, mRNA,
and protein levels. All three cytokines decreased the CYP2E1 mRNA levels after 24
h, and the effect was even stronger after 72 h. In contrast, significant
inhibition of CYP2E1 protein was seen only after 72 h. In transfection assays
using a CYP2E1 5' -3685 to +29-luciferase construct, it was found that IL-6
inhibited gene transcription after 24 h, but a similar effect by IL-1beta and
TNFalpha was registered only after 72 h. Using 5' deletions of the CYP2E1
5'-reporter construct a responsive region for the IL-6 effect was located to -669
to -507 base pairs in the CYP2E1 5'-flanking region. Interestingly, IL-1beta, but
not TNFalpha, was found to reduce hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha binding 
to the CYP2E1 promotor. However, the transactivation function of HNF-1alpha was
found to be impaired in Fao cells. In mouse primary hepatocytes, IL-1beta
decreased HNF-1alpha-mediated transactivation. In conclusion, our data indicate
that inflammatory cytokines inhibit CYP2E1 expression by multiple mechanisms,
including control of HNF-1alpha function and regulation of other transcriptional 
factors acting on the CYP2E1 5'-upstream regulatory region. In addition,
regulation of factors of importance for the CYP2E1 mRNA stability may be
involved.

PMID: 12604681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Hepatology. 2003 Mar;37(3):622-31.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha: a key mediator of the effect of bile acids on 
gene expression.

Jung D(1), Kullak-Ublick GA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital, 
Zurich, Switzerland.

Bile acids regulate the expression of genes involved in cholesterol homeostasis. 
They are ligands of the farnesoid X receptor, which induces small heterodimer
partner (SHP)-1, a transcriptional repressor of bile acid synthetic enzymes. In
cholestatic liver disease, hepatic bile acid concentrations are elevated and
expression of the major Na+-independent bile acid uptake system, organic anion
transporting polypeptide (OATP)-C (solute carrier gene family SLC21A6), is
markedly decreased. Because the OATP-C gene is transcriptionally dependent on the
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1 alpha, we hypothesized that bile acids decrease
OATP-C expression through direct repression of HNF1 alpha. To test this
hypothesis, we studied the regulation of the human HNF1 alpha gene by bile acids.
HNF1 alpha expression in cultured hepatoma cells was decreased approximately 50% 
after 12 hours' exposure to 100 micromol/L chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA).
Characterization of the human HNF1 alpha gene promoter identified a consensus
bile acid response element that binds and is activated by HNF4 alpha. Mutagenesis
of the HNF4 alpha site abolished baseline HNF1 alpha promoter activity. The
central mechanism by which bile acids repress HNF1 alpha is decreased activation 
by HNF4 alpha. SHP directly inhibits HNF4 alpha-mediated transactivation of the
HNF1 alpha promoter in cotransfection assays. In addition, HNF4 alpha nuclear
binding activity is decreased by CDCA and the human HNF4 alpha gene promoter is
repressed by CDCA through an SHP-independent mechanism. In conclusion, we show
that repression of HNF1 alpha is an important new mechanism by which bile acids
regulate the expression of HNF1 alpha-dependent genes in man. This explains the
suppressive effect of bile acids on the OATP-C gene promoter, leading to
decreased expression in cholestatic liver disease.

PMID: 12601360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Gene. 2003 Feb 13;305(1):101-11.

An enhancer activates the pig lactase phlorizin hydrolase promoter in intestinal 
cells.

Troelsen JT(1), Mitchelmore C, Olsen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Biochemical Laboratory C, The
Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 N Copenhagen,
Denmark. troelsen@imbg.ku.dk

Lactase phlorizin hydrolase is a small intestinal-specific brush border protein
commonly used as a specific marker of differentiated enterocytes. A number of
transcription factors involved in the enterocyte-specific expression of lactase
phlorizin hydrolase have been identified. An upstream regulatory region, which we
have named the "LPH enhancer", located at position -894 to -798 in the porcine
lactase phlorizin hydrolase gene, is necessary for high differentiation-dependent
LPH expression in intestinal cells. The LPH enhancer was studied by mutation
analysis, transfection experiments and electrophoretical mobility shift assays.
The LPH enhancer is active in intestinal cells (Caco-2) and not in non-intestinal
cells (HeLa). The LPH enhancer is only able to enhance expression when it is
located in front of an intestinal-specific promoter such as the lactase phlorizin
hydrolase promoter or the sucrase-isomaltase promoter. In front of an
SV40-derived promoter the LPH enhancer has no stimulatory effect. In addition to 
the lack of promoter-promiscuity, the LPH enhancer is not a classical enhancer in
the sense that it is not orientation-independent and it cannot function when
located 3' of a reporter gene. The LPH enhancer contains at least three
cis-elements (at -894 to -880, -880 to -875 and -833 to -814) with functional
importance for the LPH enhancer activity.

PMID: 12594046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Feb;88(2):920-31.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha gene mutations and diabetes in Norway.

Bjørkhaug L(1), Sagen JV, Thorsby P, Søvik O, Molven A, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, Haukeland University
Hospital, N-5021 Bergen, Norway.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha gene cause
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), type 3. To estimate the prevalence
of MODY3 in Norwegian diabetic pedigrees, we screened a total of 130 families for
HNF-1 alpha mutations; 42 families with clinical MODY, 75 with suspected MODY,
and 13 pedigrees with multiplex type 1 diabetes. Twenty-two families with
clinical MODY, 15 families with suspected MODY, and one family with type 1
diabetes multiplex harbored HNF-1 alpha mutations. Thus, in about half of
Norwegian families with clinical MODY, mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene could be
detected. Eight of the 18 different mutations identified were novel (G47E,
T196fsdelCCAA, IVS3-1G>A, S256T, A276D, S445fsdelAG, M522V, and S531T).
Haplotypes were determined for recurrent mutations, indicating a founder effect
in Norway for the hot-spot mutation P291fsinsC and possibly also for P112L and
R131W. To examine the molecular mechanisms underlying MODY3, we investigated the 
functional properties of 13 HNF-1 alpha mutations. Two mutant HNF-1 alpha
proteins (R171X, R263C) were unable to bind DNA and at least five mutants (R131W,
R171X, P379fsdelCT, S445fsdelAG, and Q466X) showed defective nuclear
translocation. Transcriptional activation was reduced for most of the
MODY3-associated mutants. Accordingly, the functional studies of HNF-1 alpha
mutants indicate that beta-cell dysfunction in MODY3 is caused by
loss-of-function mechanisms like reduced DNA binding, impaired transcriptional
activation, and defects in subcellular localization.

PMID: 12574234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Feb 17;1619(3):223-34.

Regulation of P450 genes by liver-enriched transcription factors and nuclear
receptors.

Akiyama TE(1), Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Institutes of Health, 9000 Rockville Pike, 
Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Cytochrome P450s (P450s) constitute a superfamily of heme-proteins that play an
important role in the activation of chemical carcinogens, detoxification of
numerous xenobiotics as well as in the oxidative metabolism of endogenous
compounds such as steroids, fatty acids, prostaglandins, and leukotrienes. In
addition, some P450s have important roles in physiological processes, such as
steroidogenesis and the maintenance of bile acid and cholesterol homeostasis.
Given their importance, the molecular mechanisms of P450 gene regulation have
been intensely studied. Direct interactions between transcription factors,
including nuclear receptors, with the promoters of P450 genes represent one of
the primary means by which the expression of these genes is controlled. In this
review, several liver-enriched transcription factors that play a role in the
tissue-specific, developmental, and temporal regulation of P450s are discussed.
In addition, the nuclear receptors that play a role in the fine control of
cholesterol and bile acid homeostasis, in part, through their modulation of
specific P450s, are discussed.

PMID: 12573481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Cancer Res. 2003 Feb 1;63(3):696-704.

The variant hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 activates the P1 promoter of the human
alpha-folate receptor gene in ovarian carcinoma.

Tomassetti A(1), Mangiarotti F, Mazzi M, Sforzini S, Miotti S, Galmozzi E, Elwood
PC, Canevari S.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Therapies, Department of Experimental Oncology, Istituto
Nazionale Tumori, 20133 Milan, Italy. antonella.tomassetti@istitutotumori.mi.it

The alpha folate receptor (alpha FR) is a membrane glycoprotein that binds
folates, and mediates their uptake and that of antifolate drugs. alpha FR is
absent on ovarian surface epithelium (OSE) but is detectable during early
transforming events in this epithelium, with increasing expression levels in
association with tumor progression. Analysis of transcriptional regulation of the
alpha FR gene have revealed two promoter regions, P1 and P4, flanking exons 1 and
4, respectively, and a requirement for three SP1 sites and an INR element for
optimal P4 activity. Here, we focused on the P1 transcription regulation in
ovarian carcinoma cells. RNase protection assay indicated that the
5'-untranslated region is heterogeneous because of different start sites and
alternative splicing of exon 3. A core region of the P1 promoter was sufficient
for maximal promoter activity in ovarian carcinoma cell lines but not in OSE
cells or in alpha FR-nonexpressing cell lines. Deletion and mutation analysis of 
this core promoter identified a cis-regulatory element at position +27 to +33 of 
the untranslated exon 1, which is responsible for maximum P1 activity. This
element formed an abundant DNA-protein complex with nuclear proteins from ovarian
cancer cells but not from other cell lines or OSE cells. Competition experiments 
and supershift assays demonstrated binding of the P1 cis-regulatory element by a 
transcription factor involved in embryonic development, the variant hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 (vHNF1). Analysis of RNA from various cell lines and surgical
specimens confirmed that vHNF1 is expressed in ovarian carcinomas. Thus, vHNF1
regulates tissue-specific transcription in ovarian carcinoma.

PMID: 12566316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Feb 7;301(2):610-6.

In situ and in vitro evidence for DCoH/HNF-1 alpha transcription of tyrosinase in
human skin melanocytes.

Schallreuter KU(1), Kothari S, Hasse S, Kauser S, Lindsey NJ, Gibbons NC,
Hibberts N, Wood JM.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Experimental Dermatology, Department of Biomedical Sciences,
University of Bradford, Bradford, West Yorkshire BD7 1DP, UK.
K.Schallreuter@bradford.ac.uk

Human epidermal melanocytes hold the full capacity for autocrine de novo
synthesis/regulation/recycling of the essential cofactor 6-tetrahydrobiopterin
(6BH(4)) for conversion of L-phenylalanine via phenylalanine hydroxylase to
L-tyrosine and for production of L-Dopa via tyrosine hydroxylase to initiate both
pigmentation and catecholamine synthesis in these neural crest-derived cells.
Earlier we have demonstrated pterin-4a-carbinolamine dehydratase (PCD) mRNA and
enzyme activities in epidermal melanocytes and keratinocytes. This protein
dimerises also the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1),
leading to activation of multiple genes. This study demonstrates for the first
time DCoH/HNF-1 alpha expression and transcriptional activity in human epidermal 
melanocytes in vitro and in situ and identified tyrosinase, the key enzyme for
pigmentation, as a new transcriptional target. Specific binding of DCoH/HNF-1
complex to the human tyrosinase promoter was confirmed by gel shift analysis.
These results provide a novel mechanism in the regulation of skin pigmentation.

PMID: 12565907  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Shock. 2003 Jan;19(1):45-9.

Transcription factors C/EBP-alpha and HNF-1alpha are associated with decreased
expression of liver-specific genes in sepsis.

Haaxma CA(1), Kim PK, Andrejko KM, Raj NR, Deutschman CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anesthesia, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Previous studies have demonstrated sepsis-specific changes in the transcription
of key hepatic genes. However, the role of hepatic transcription factors in
sepsis-associated organ dysfunction has not been well established. We hypothesize
that the binding activities of C/EBPalpha and beta, HNF-1alpha, and HNF-3
transiently decrease during mild sepsis but persistently decrease after fulminant
sepsis, and that the decrease in this binding activity correlates in time and
severity with previously described decreases in the transcription of key hepatic 
genes. Male C57/BL6 mice had nonlethal sepsis induced by cecal ligation and
single puncture (CLP) and fulminant sepsis via cecal ligation and double puncture
(2CLP). Sham-operated and unoperated animals served as controls. Transcription
factor binding activity was assessed with electrophoretic mobility shift assays. 
C/EBP-a and HNF-1alpha binding activity decreased transiently after CLP and
persistently after 2CLP. Binding activity of both C/EBP-beta and HNF-3 were
unchanged. The decrease in C/EBP-a and HNF-1alpha binding activities correlated
in time and magnitude with the decreased hepatic gene transcription previously
observed in sepsis. Furthermore, the loss of activity after 2CLP correlated in
time with outcome. Sepsis decreases DNA binding activities of C/EBPalpha and
HNF-1alpha, two key hepatocyte transcription factors, in a time course consistent
with down-regulation of their target hepatic genes. Therefore, alterations in
transcription factor binding are likely important in the transcriptional
modulation that is characteristic of hepatic dysfunction in sepsis.

PMID: 12558143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Diabetes Care. 2003 Feb;26(2):333-7.

Identifying hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha mutations in children and young adults 
with a clinical diagnosis of type 1 diabetes.

Lambert AP(1), Ellard S, Allen LI, Gallen IW, Gillespie KM, Bingley PJ,
Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Metabolism, Division of Medicine, University of
Bristol, UK. a.p.Lambert@bristol.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: HNF-1alpha gene mutations (MODY3) present with marked hyperglycemia in
lean young adults and may, therefore, be mistaken for type 1 diabetes, with
implications for individual treatment and risk of diabetes in other family
members. We examined the prevalence of HNF-1alpha mutations in families with
three generations of diabetes identified in a population-based study of childhood
diabetes, representing a subpopulation in which misclassification was likely.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: In a study population of 1,470 families, 36 families
(2.4%) with three affected generations were identified. In the 18 families in
whom DNA samples were available, islet autoantibody testing, HLA class II
genotyping, and HNF-1alpha sequencing were performed.
RESULTS: At least one islet autoantibody was found in 13 of 14 probands, and
diabetes-associated HLA class II haplotypes were found in 17 of 18. One proband, 
who had no islet autoantibodies and was homozygous for the protective HLA
haplotype DRB1*02-DQB1*0602, had a novel HNF-1alpha heterozygous nonsense
mutation (R54X). This mutation cosegregated with diabetes in the family. The
proband, his brother, mother, and maternal grandmother were diagnosed with type 1
diabetes aged 14-18 years and treated with insulin (0.39-0.74 units/kg) from
diagnosis. The mother has since been successfully transferred to sulfonylurea
treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Family history alone is of limited value in identification of
individuals with HNF-1alpha mutations, and we propose a stepwise approach that
restricts sequencing of the HNF-1alpha gene to those with a family history of
diabetes who also test negative for islet autoantibodies.

PMID: 12547858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. J Hepatol. 2003 Feb;38(2):148-55.

Down-regulation of the Na+/taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide during
pregnancy in the rat.

Arrese M(1), Trauner M, Ananthanarayanan M, Pizarro M, Solís N, Accatino L,
Soroka C, Boyer JL, Karpen SJ, Miquel JF, Suchy FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile,
School of Medicine, Marcoleta # 367, Santiago 6510260, Chile. marrese@med.puc.cl

BACKGROUND: Experimental studies have shown decreased bile acid (BA) uptake and
reduced excretion of cholephilic compounds in pregnant rodents.
AIM: To assess the expression and function of the main BA importer, the
Na(+)/taurocholate cotransporting polypeptide (Ntcp) in pregnant rats.
METHODS: BA uptake and Ntcp expression were studied in control and timed-pregnant
rats in late gestation. Ntcp protein, messenger RNA (mRNA) expression, and Ntcp
tissue localization were determined by Northern blotting, Western analysis, and
tissue immunofluorescence. The activity of three transactivators of the Ntcp
promoter: hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-alpha (HNF1-alpha), nuclear receptor
heterodimer retinoid X receptor:retinoid acid receptor (RXR:RAR) and signal
transducer and activator of transcription 5 (Stat5) was assessed using gel
electrophoretic mobility shift assays.
RESULTS: A significantly reduced BA uptake and decreased Ntcp mRNA levels (-40%) 
and protein mass (-60%) was observed in pregnant rats. Nuclear extracts from
pregnant rats showed a marked decrease of HNF1-alpha and RXR:RAR binding
activities by -80 and -40% of basal activity, respectively. In contrast, binding 
activity of Stat-5 was increased by 50% in nuclear extracts from pregnant rats.
CONCLUSIONS: Pregnancy is associated with reduced Ntcp expression and function in
the rat. Our findings suggest that Ntcp down-regulation during pregnancy occurs
primarily at the transcriptional level.

PMID: 12547402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Pharmacogenetics. 2003 Jan;13(1):49-53.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha/gamma and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha as 
causal factors of interindividual difference in the expression of human
dihydrodiol dehydrogenase 4 mRNA in human livers.

Ozeki T(1), Takahashi Y, Nakayama K, Funayama M, Nagashima K, Kodama T, Kamataki 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism, Division of Pharmacobio-dynamics, Graduate
School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Hokkaido University, Sapporo, Japan.
ozeki-tky@umin.ac.jp

Human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (DD) catalyses the oxidation of
trans-dihydrodiols of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons and the reduction of
several ketone-containing drugs. About 40-fold interindividual difference in DD
activities has been noted. Recently, we found that transcriptional factors,
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha, HNF-4 alpha and HNF-4 gamma were
essential for the expression of DD4 mRNA, which is a major form of DDs. Thus, to 
clarify a possible mechanism(s) underlying the interindividual difference in DD
activities, we investigated the sequences of genes and the expression levels of
mRNA for DD4 and HNFs in human livers. We found no clear relationship between the
genotypes of DD4 and HNF genes and the expression levels of DD4 mRNA in the
subjects. The expression level of DD4 mRNA significantly correlated with that of 
HNF-1 alpha, HNF-4 alpha or HNF-4 gamma. These results suggest that the
expression level of DD4 mRNA is cooperatively regulated by the amounts of HNF-1
alpha, HNF-4 alpha and HNF-4 gamma.

PMID: 12544512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Biol Chem. 2002 Nov;383(11):1691-700.

Evidence for haploinsufficiency of the human HNF1alpha gene revealed by
functional characterization of MODY3-associated mutations.

Thomas H(1), Badenberg B, Bulman M, Lemm I, Lausen J, Kind L, Roosen S, Ellard S,
Hattersley AT, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Essen, Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung),
Hufelandstrasse 55, D-45122 Essen, Germany.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1alpha is a homeo-domain-containing transcription 
factor participating in the regulation of gene expression in liver, kidney, gut
and pancreas of vertebrates. In humans mutations in the HNF1 gene are responsible
for one form of maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY3). To define the
molecular mechanism underlying MODY3 we investigated the functional properties of
seven MODY3-associated mutations representing the spectrum of different kinds of 
mutations affecting all functional domains of the protein. The mutations
introduced into an expression vector encoding human HNF1alpha include in-frame
deletion (AN127), nonsense (Q7X, R171X), frameshift (P291fsinsC) and missense
(R229Q, P447L, T6201) mutations. Gel retardation and reporter gene assays showed 
that the functional properties of these mutants differ dramatically, but none of 
these mutants act in a dominant negative manner. Moreover, the mRNA stability of 
the mutants AN127, R171X, P291fsinsC and T547E548fsdelTG is impaired compared to 
the wild-type sequence in transfected cells. This decreased RNA stability is
independent of the presence of an intron in the expression vector and thus
differs from mechanisms known to be involved in nonsense-mediated decay (NMD).
Our results suggest that haploinsufficiency of HNF1alpha is responsible for the
pathogenesis of MODY3.

PMID: 12530534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Feb;23(3):923-32.

Liver-specific reactivation of the inactivated Hnf-1alpha gene: elimination of
liver dysfunction to establish a mouse MODY3 model.

Lee YH(1), Magnuson MA, Muppala V, Chen SS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia
Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan. mbying@ccvax.sinica.edu.tw

Mice deficient in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1alpha) develop
dwarfism, liver dysfunction, and type 2 diabetes mellitus. Liver dysfunction in
HNF-1alpha-null mice includes severe hepatic glycogen accumulation and
dyslipidemia. The liver dysfunction may appear as soon as 2 weeks after birth.
Since the HNF-1alpha-null mice become diabetic 2 weeks after birth, the early
onset of the liver dysfunction is unlikely to be due to the diabetic status of
the mice. More likely, it is due directly to the deficiency of HNF-1alpha in
liver. Although the HNF-1alpha-null mice have an average life span of 1 year, the
severe liver phenotype has thwarted attempts to study the pathogenesis of
maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) and to examine therapeutic
strategies for diabetes prevention and treatment in these mice. To circumvent
this problem, we have generated a new Hnf-1alpha mutant mouse line,
Hnf-1alpha(kin/kin), using gene targeting to inactivate the Hnf-1alpha gene and
at the same time, to incorporate the Cre-loxP DNA recombination system into the
locus for later revival of the Hnf-1alpha gene in tissues by tissue-specifically 
expressed Cre recombinase. The Hnf-1alpha(kin/kin) mice in which the expression
of HNF-1alpha was inactivated in germ line cells were indistinguishable from the 
HNF-1alpha-null mice with regard to both the diabetes and liver phenotypes.
Intriguingly, when the inactivated Hnf-1alpha gene was revived in liver (hepatic 
Hnf-1alpha revived) by the Cre recombinase driven by an albumin promoter, the
Hnf-1alpha(kin/kin) mice, although severely diabetic, grew normally and did not
develop any of the liver dysfunctions. In addition, we showed that the expression
of numerous genes in pancreas, including a marker gene for pancreas injury, was
affected by liver dysfunction but not by the deficiency of HNF-1alpha in
pancreas. Thus, our hepatic-Hnf-1alpha-revived mice may serve as a useful mouse
model to study the human MODY3 disorder.

PMCID: PMC140695
PMID: 12529398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Diabetologia. 2002 Dec;45(12):1713-8. Epub 2002 Nov 12.

Identification of three new mutations of the HNF-1 alpha gene in Japanese MODY
families.

Ikema T(1), Shimajiri Y, Komiya I, Tawata M, Sunakawa S, Yogi H, Shimabukuro M,
Takasu N.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, University of the Ryukyus School of
Medicine, Nishihara, Okinawa, Japan.

AIM/HYPOTHESIS: We analysed Japanese MODY patients for mutations in the HNF-1
alpha gene.
METHODS: Fifty unrelated Japanese patients with early-onset diabetes (diagnosed
at 25 years of age or younger) or with a strong family history of diabetes were
screened for mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene. Functional studies of the mutant 
HNF-1alpha were carried out.
RESULTS: We identified three new mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene in the
families with a strong family history for diabetes. One mutation (L518P519fsTCC
--> A) was identified in three unrelated families, while the other two mutations 
(T521I and V617I) were identified in one family. We also identified the A site of
the promoter (+102G-to-C), which was reported previously. We examined the
functional properties of the mutant HNF-1alpha. By increasing the amount of
L518P519fsTCC-->A-HNF-1alpha, increasing inhibition of the transcription of human
transthyretin (TTR) was observed (up to 61% of the control). Increasing amounts
of T521I-HNF-1alpha or V617I-HNF-1alpha mutant proteins increased TTR promoter
transcription up to 4.3-fold and 2.4-fold, respectively, whereas both increased
transcription up to 12.4-fold of the control.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The L518P519fsTCC --> A was identified for the first
time and this mutation might be a common cause of Japanese MODY3 in Okinawa area.
In addition, both the T521I and V617I mutations were present in two patients in
the same family. Since the prevalence of these mutations is relatively high (10%,
5/50), the HNF-1 alpha gene needs to be screened for mutations in patients either
with early-onset diabetes or with a strong family history for diabetes.

PMID: 12488962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Diabetologia. 2002 Dec;45(12):1709-12. Epub 2002 Nov 16.

High frequency of mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene in non-obese patients with
diabetes of youth in Japanese and identification of a case of digenic
inheritance.

Tonooka N(1), Tomura H, Takahashi Y, Onigata K, Kikuchi N, Horikawa Y, Mori M,
Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Gunma University, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: There is an emerging epidemic of Type II (non-insulin-dependent)
diabetes mellitus of youth in Japan and in many other developed countries. The
aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of mutations in the hepatocyte 
nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha gene (TCF1) in a large group of Japanese patients
with early-onset non-Type I (insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus. Since
approximately 20% of Caucasian patients with HNF-1alpha mutations have been shown
to be obese or overweight, we also examined the association of genetic variations
in TCF1 with body weight in Japanese subjects.
METHODS: We examined 203 patients with non-Type 1 diabetes who had been diagnosed
before they reached 15 years of age. Ten exons and flanking introns of TCF1 of
these patients were directly sequenced for mutations.
RESULTS: We found 14 different mutations in 18 patients (8.9%), including one
that was found to be de novo. The patients with the mutations had lower BMI
(20.1+/-3.0 kg/m(2)) at diagnosis than the patients without them (24.5+/-6.0
kg/m(2)) (p=0.0024). All of the patients with the mutations, except for one,
Y120, had normal body weight (BMI<25 kg/m(2)); the frequency of HNF-1alpha
mutations in the non-obese patients of this study was 17% (17/101). Patient Y120,
who had atypical symptoms of mild obesity and insulin resistance at diagnosis,
was found to have inherited an additional mutation in an obesity-related gene.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: A considerable number of non-obese Japanese patients
with non-Type 1 diabetes of youth have HNF-1alpha-deficient diabetes. Lack of
obesity could well be a characteristic feature of this form of diabetes.

PMID: 12488961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Diabetologia. 2002 Dec;45(12):1703-8. Epub 2002 Oct 19.

Characterization of a naturally occurring mutation (L107I) in the HNF1 alpha
(MODY3) gene.

Cervin C(1), Orho-Melander M, Ridderstråle M, Lehto M, Barg S, Groop L, Cilio CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Wallenberg Laboratory, Malmö University Hospital,
Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Maturity onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) is a
monogenic form of diabetes mellitus caused by mutations in the gene encoding for 
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha, HNF1 alpha. In this study we have examined the
in vivo and in vitro effects of a mutation (L107I) outside the DNA binding and
dimerization domains in the N terminal part of the HNF1 alpha gene.
METHODS: Beta-cell function of the affected family members was assessed by an
oral glucose tolerance test. Functional tests were carried out to explain the
role of the mutation in vitro by transcriptional activity assay, Western
blotting, DNA-binding assays and subcellular localization experiments.
RESULTS: Affected family members showed an 86% decreased insulin response to
glucose when compared to age-matched healthy control subjects. In vitro the
mutation showed a 79% decrease in transcriptional activity as compared to wild
type HNF1 alpha in HeLa cells lacking HNF1 alpha. The transcriptional activity
was not suppressed when the mutant was co-expressed with wild type HNF1 alpha
suggesting that the decreased activity was not mediated by a dominant negative
mechanism. The L107I/HNF1alpha protein showed normal nuclear targeting but
impaired binding to an HNF1 alpha consensus sequence.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that the L107I substitution
represents a MODY3 mutation which impairs beta-cell function by a
loss-of-function mechanism.

PMID: 12488960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Pediatr Nephrol. 2002 Dec;17(12):1021-6. Epub 2002 Nov 14.

De novo HNF-1 beta gene mutation in familial hypoplastic glomerulocystic kidney
disease.

Mache CJ(1), Preisegger KH, Kopp S, Ratschek M, Ring E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graz University Medical School, Auenbruggerplatz 30,
8036 Graz, Styria, Austria. Christoph.mache@kfunigraz.ac.at

Mutations in the gene encoding the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-1 beta are associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (type V),
non-diabetic renal disease, and occasionally genital malformations in females.
Recently, familial hypoplastic glomerulocystic kidney disease (GCKD) has been
added to the clinical spectrum of HNF-1 beta gene mutations. Familial hypoplastic
GCKD is a rare, dominantly inherited disorder characterized by small kidneys
containing glomerular cysts, abnormal pelvicalyceal anatomy, and chronic renal
failure. A family with hypoplastic GCKD occurring in the father and the daughter 
was screened for mutations in the HNF-1 beta gene. The sequence of exon 4 of the 
HNF-1 beta gene revealed a C insertion at codon 334 resulting in a frameshift
mutation (P334fsinsC) in two family members. The P334fsinsC allele co-segregated 
with hypoplastic GCKD in the family. Oral glucose tolerance testing was normal in
the 11-year-old girl. In her 38-year-old father, impaired glucose tolerance was
detected. These studies provide further evidence that familial hypoplastic GCKD
is associated with HNF-1 beta gene mutations. HNF-1 beta gene mutation screening 
may prove useful in patients with small cystic kidneys and chronic renal failure,
in whom a definite renal diagnosis could otherwise only be established by renal
biopsy.

PMID: 12478351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Diabetes. 2002 Dec;51 Suppl 3:S343-8.

Decreased glibenclamide uptake in hepatocytes of hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha-deficient mice: a mechanism for hypersensitivity to sulfonylurea
therapy in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 3 (MODY3).

Boileau P(1), Wolfrum C, Shih DQ, Yang TA, Wolkoff AW, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, the Rockefeller University, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Diabetes in subjects with hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha gene mutations
(maturity-onset diabetes of the young [MODY]-3) is characterized by impaired
insulin secretion. Surprisingly, MODY3 patients exhibit hypersensitivity to the
hypoglycemic actions of sulfonylurea therapy. To study the pharmacogenetic
mechanism(s), we have investigated glibenclamide-induced insulin secretion,
glibenclamide clearance from the blood, and glibenclamide metabolism in wild-type
and Hnf-1alpha-deficient mice. We show that despite a profound defect in
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, diabetic Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice have a robust
glibenclamide-induced insulin secretory response. We demonstrate that the
half-life (t(1/2)) of glibenclamide in the blood is increased in Hnf-1alpha(-/-) 
mice compared with wild-type littermates (3.9 +/- 1.3 vs. 1.5 +/- 1.8 min, P <or=
0.05). The clearance of glibenclamide from the blood during the first hours after
intravenous administration was reduced approximately fourfold in Hnf-1alpha(-/-) 
mice compared with Hnf-1alpha(+/+) littermates. Glibenclamide uptake into
hepatocytes was dramatically decreased in vivo and in vitro. To study the
metabolism of glibenclamide in Hnf-1alpha(-/-) animals, we analyzed liver
extracts from [(3)H]glibenclamide-injected animals by reverse-phase
chromatography. We found that the ratio of the concentrations of glibenclamide
and its metabolites was moderately increased in livers of Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice,
suggesting that hepatic glibenclamide metabolism was not impaired in animals with
Hnf-1alpha deficiency. Our data demonstrate that high serum glibenclamide
concentrations and an increased t(1/2) of glibenclamide in the blood of
Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice are caused by a defect in hepatic uptake of glibenclamide.
This suggests that hypersensitivity to sulfonylureas in MODY3 patients may be due
to impaired hepatic clearance and elevated plasma concentrations of the drug.

PMID: 12475773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Diabetes. 2002 Dec;51 Suppl 3:S333-42.

Experimental models of transcription factor-associated maturity-onset diabetes of
the young.

Wang H(1), Hagenfeldt-Johansson K, Otten LA, Gauthier BR, Herrera PL, Wollheim
CB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Clinical Biochemistry, University
Medical Centre, Geneva, Switzerland.

Six monogenic forms of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) have been
identified to date. Except for MODY2 (glucokinase), all other MODY subtypes have 
been linked to transcription factors. We have established a MODY3 transgenic
model through the beta-cell-targeted expression of dominant-negative HNF-1alpha
either constitutively (rat insulin II promoter) or conditionally (Tet-On system).
The animals display either overt diabetes or glucose intolerance. Decreased
insulin secretion and reduced pancreatic insulin content contribute to the
hyperglycemic state. The conditional approach in INS-1 cells helped to define new
molecular targets of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha. In the cellular
system, nutrient-induced insulin secretion was abolished because of impaired
glucose metabolism. Conditional suppression of HNF-4alpha, the MODY1 gene, showed
a similar phenotype in INS-1 cells to HNF-1alpha. The existence of a regulatory
circuit between HNF-4alpha and HNF-1alpha is confirmed in these cell models. The 
MODY4 gene, IPF-1 (insulin promoter factor-1)/PDX-1 (pancreas duodenum
homeobox-1), controls not only the transcription of insulin but also expression
of enzymes involved in its processing. Suppression of Pdx-1 function in INS-1
cells does not alter glucose metabolism but rather inhibits insulin release by
impairing steps distal to the generation of mitochondrial coupling factors. The
presented experimental models are important tools for the elucidation of the
beta-cell pathogenesis in MODY syndromes.

PMID: 12475772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Diabetes Care. 2002 Dec;25(12):2292-301.

Determinants of the development of diabetes (maturity-onset diabetes of the
young-3) in carriers of HNF-1alpha mutations: evidence for parent-of-origin
effect.

Klupa T(1), Warram JH, Antonellis A, Pezzolesi M, Nam M, Malecki MT, Doria A,
Rich SS, Krolewski AS.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the distribution of the age at onset of diabetes
(maturity-onset diabetes of the young-3 [MODY3]) and to identify determinants of 
the onset of diabetes in carriers of HNF-1alpha mutations.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Extended families (n = 104) with type 2 diabetes
inherited in a dominant pattern were recruited and screened for diabetes-causing 
mutations in HNF-1alpha.
RESULTS: HNF-1alpha mutations cosegregated with diabetes in only 13 families, all
with a mean age at onset <35 years. Insulin secretion was diminished or absent in
mutation carriers (n = 101), and diabetes developed in 65% by age 25 years and in
100% by age 50 years. If the mutation was inherited from the mother, diabetes
onset was very young in those exposed to diabetes in utero; 57 +/- 8% were
affected by age 15 years as compared with 0.0% in those not exposed (P < 7 x
10(-6)). By age 25 years, the difference was reduced (85 +/- 6 and 55 +/- 12%,
respectively; P = 0.02). If the mutation was inherited from the father, diabetes 
developed in 52 +/- 8% by age 25 years. Age at diagnosis was shown to be highly
heritable (h(2) = 0.47, P = 0.003). When parent of origin was included in the
analyses, the magnitude of genetic contribution increased markedly (h(2) = 0.91).
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in HNF-1alpha accounts for diabetes in a small proportion 
of families with a dominant pattern of inheritance. Age at onset of diabetes in
MODY3 families varied widely and was influenced by familial factors (including
modifying genes) and parent of origin (whether a mutation carrier was exposed to 
diabetes in utero).

PMID: 12453976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Diabetes Care. 2002 Dec;25(12):2287-91.

Intrauterine hyperglycemia is associated with an earlier diagnosis of diabetes in
HNF-1alpha gene mutation carriers.

Stride A(1), Shepherd M, Frayling TM, Bulman MP, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, University of Exeter, Devon, UK.

OBJECTIVE: In animals, experimentally induced maternal hyperglycemia during
pregnancy results in hyperglycemic offspring. Similarly, Pima Indian offspring
with mothers who are diabetic at the time of pregnancy have increased risk of
early-onset diabetes. We hypothesized that exposure to hyperglycemia in utero
would decrease the age at diagnosis of diabetes in patients with maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) due to a mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We analyzed the affect of maternal diabetes on age
at diagnosis of diabetes in 150 HNF-1alpha gene mutation carriers from 55
families.
RESULTS: Age at diagnosis in HNF-1alpha mutation carriers was younger when the
mother was diagnosed before pregnancy compared with when the mother was diagnosed
after pregnancy (15.5 +/- 5.4 vs. 27.5 +/- 13.1 years, P < 0.0001). This is
unlikely to represent a generalized familial decrease in age at diagnosis due to 
a more severe mutation, because no difference was seen in age of the offspring at
diagnosis of diabetes when the father was diagnosed at a young age, and a similar
trend was seen when only the single common mutation, P291fsinsC, was analyzed.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that maternal hyperglycemia during pregnancy probably
increases the penetrance of HNF-1alpha mutations. The potential role of exposure 
to hyperglycemia in utero in a monogenic diabetic subgroup warrants prospective
study.

PMID: 12453975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Diabetes Care. 2002 Dec;25(12):2202-6.

The prevalence of the HNF-1alpha G319S mutation in Canadian aboriginal youth with
type 2 diabetes.

Sellers EA(1), Triggs-Raine B, Rockman-Greenberg C, Dean HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Child Health, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg,
Canada. esellers@exchange.hsc.mb.ca

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the prevalence of the unique HNF-1alpha G319S mutation 
in a population of aboriginal youth with type 2 diabetes and to describe the
relationship between clinical and historical characteristics and the presence or 
absence of the HNF-1alpha G319S mutation.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Participating youth were genotyped for the G319S
mutation of the HNF-1alpha gene. Clinical, laboratory, and historical data were
collected via chart review (blinded to genotype results). Comparison data were
derived from another study involving young nondiabetic pregnant aboriginal women.
RESULTS: A total of 51 youth seen sequentially in a type 2 diabetes clinic
participated in this study. Of these, 21 (41.2%) had at least one copy of the
mutant allele. The allele frequency in the study population was 0.29 (95% CI
0.20-0.38), which was significantly different from the allele frequency of 0.13
in the comparison population (chi(2) = 6.78, P = 0.009). The frequency of the
homozygous mutation (S319/S319) was 0.18. Mean BMI was significantly lower (P =
0.002), mean HbA(1c) was significantly higher (P = 0.02), and acanthosis
nigricans was significantly less frequent (P = 0.004) in those with the mutation 
compared with the wild type. Mean insulin levels were lower and insulin
sensitivity (assessed by homeostasis model assessment [HOMA]) was greater in the 
homozygote group compared with the wild-type group (P = 0.002 and P = 0.0007,
respectively). A dose-dependent gradient was observed for these characteristics.
CONCLUSIONS: These data support the association between the HNF-1alpha G319S
mutation and early-onset type 2 diabetes in this population. Those with the
mutation lacked clinical characteristics of insulin resistance (e.g., obesity and
acanthosis nigricans) and had lower insulin levels, suggesting that an
insulin-secretory and/or -production defect plays an important role in the
development of diabetes in this group. Further investigation of the
pathophysiology of the S319 homo- and heterozygote is needed because it may
impact treatment and/or prevention of this disease.

PMID: 12453961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. Mol Cell. 2002 Nov;10(5):1129-37.

Diabetes mutations delineate an atypical POU domain in HNF-1alpha.

Chi YI(1), Frantz JD, Oh BC, Hansen L, Dhe-Paganon S, Shoelson SE.

Author information: 
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center, Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Mutations in Hnf-1alpha are the most common Mendelian cause of diabetes mellitus.
To elucidate the molecular function of a mutational hotspot, we cocrystallized
human HNF-1alpha 83-279 with a high-affinity promoter and solved the structure of
the complex. Two identical protein molecules are bound to the promoter. Each
contains a homeodomain and a second domain structurally similar to POU-specific
domains that was not predicted on the basis of amino acid sequence. Atypical
elements in both domains create a stable interface that further distinguishes
HNF-1alpha from other flexible POU-homeodomain proteins. The numerous
diabetes-causing mutations in HNF-1alpha thus identified a previously
unrecognized POU domain which was used as a search model to identify additional
POU domain proteins in sequence databases.

PMID: 12453420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Ai Zheng. 2002 Apr;21(4):369-72.

[Matrine affects early expression of proto-oncogenes in K562 cells].

[Article in Chinese]

He YJ(1), Jiang JK, Ou YH, Liu BZ, Liu XS, Zhang Y, Ma LD, Tu ZG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Bio-chemistry, Chongqing University of Medical
Sciences, Chongqing 400016, P. R. China. hyj2753@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: It has been reported that matrine had the anti-tumor
activity, and our previous study have provided that matrine had the effects of
inhibiting proliferation and inducing differentiation in K562 cell line, but its 
molecular mechanism is unknown yet.
METHOD: The expression of several proto-oncogenes(c-myc, c-jun, H-ras, p21, and
HNF-1 alpha) in K562 cell line treated by 0.2 mg/ml matrine were measured by
RT-PCR.
RESULT: The c-myc, c-jun, and HNF-1 alpha mRNA of K562 cells treated by 0.2 mg/ml
matrine were dramatically decreased at the early stage (3 h), while the H-ras and
p21 mRNA were increased obviously at the same time.
CONCLUSION: The changes of several proto-oncogenes in K562 cells treated by 0.2
mg/ml matrine may be related to inhibiting proliferation and inducing
differentiation.

PMID: 12452013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Biochem J. 2003 Mar 15;370(Pt 3):771-84.

Genomic organization and transcriptional analysis of the human l-glutaminase
gene.

Pérez-Gómez C(1), Matés JM, Gómez-Fabre PM, del Castillo-Olivares A, Alonso FJ,
Márquez J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Bioquímica, Laboratorio de Química de
Proteínas, Facultad de Ciencias, Universidad de Málaga, 29071 Málaga, Spain.

In mammals, glutaminase (GA) is expressed in most tissues, but the regulation of 
organ-specific expression is largely unknown. Therefore, as an essential step
towards studying the regulation of GA expression, the human liver-type GA (hLGA) 
gene has been characterized. LGA genomic sequences were isolated using the genome
walking technique. Analysis and comparison of these sequences with two LGA cDNA
clones and the Human Genome Project database, allowed the determination of the
genomic organization of the LGA gene. The gene has 18 exons and is approx. 18 kb 
long. All exon/intron junction sequences conform to the GT/AG rule. Progressive
deletion analysis of LGA promoter-luciferase constructs indicated that the core
promoter is located between nt -141 and +410, with several potential regulatory
elements: CAAT, GC, TATA-like, Ras-responsive element binding protein and
specificity protein 1 (Sp1) sites. The minimal promoter was mapped within +107
and +410, where only an Sp1 binding site is present. Mutation experiments
suggested that two CAAT recognition elements near the transcription-initiation
site (-138 and -87), play a crucial role for optimal promoter activity.
Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays confirmed the importance of CAAT- and
TATA-like boxes to enhance basal transcription, and demonstrated that HNF-1 motif
is a significant distal element for transcriptional regulation of the hLGA gene.

PMCID: PMC1223212
PMID: 12444921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Hum Mutat. 2002 Dec;20(6):478-9.

GCK and HNF1A mutations in Canadian families with maturity onset diabetes of the 
young (MODY).

Cao H(1), Shorey S, Robinson J, Metzger DL, Stewart L, Cummings E, Hegele RA.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically heterogeneous form
of type 2 diabetes that is characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, onset
in early adulthood and a primary defect in insulin secretion. Mutations in at
least six genes have been shown to underlie MODY, including mutations in GCK
(encoding glucokinase, also called MODY2) and mutations in HNF1A (encoding
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha, also called MODY3). We sequenced genomic DNA
from probands of seven Canadian MODY families. In four probands, we detected four
novel GCK mutations, namely IVS2-7G>A, G72R, T206R and S263P. In three other
probands, we detected three HNF1A mutations, of which two were novel, namely
1051delCA and Q250X, and one had been previously reported, namely R131Q. The
novel mutations expand the spectrum of MODY mutations. In addition, knowledge of 
the specific defect can be used to pre-symptomatically identify family members at
risk for developing MODY.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12442280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jan 31;278(5):2997-3005. Epub 2002 Nov 15.

Critical reduction in beta-cell mass results in two distinct outcomes over time. 
Adaptation with impaired glucose tolerance or decompensated diabetes.

Laybutt DR(1), Glandt M, Xu G, Ahn YB, Trivedi N, Bonner-Weir S, Weir GC.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Islet Transplantation and Cell Biology, Joslin Diabetes Center,
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

We have proposed that hyperglycemia-induced dedifferentiation of beta-cells is a 
critical factor for the loss of insulin secretory function in diabetes. Here we
examined the effects of the duration of hyperglycemia on gene expression in
islets of partially pancreatectomized (Px) rats. Islets were isolated, and mRNA
was extracted from rats 4 and 14 weeks after Px or sham Px surgery. Px rats
developed different degrees of hyperglycemia; low hyperglycemia was assigned to
Px rats with fed blood glucose levels less than 150 mg/dl, and high hyperglycemia
was assigned above 150 mg/dl. beta-Cell hypertrophy was present at both 4 and 14 
weeks. At the same time points, high hyperglycemia rats showed a global
alteration in gene expression with decreased mRNA for insulin, IAPP,
islet-associated transcription factors (pancreatic and duodenal homeobox-1,
BETA2/NeuroD, Nkx6.1, and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha), beta-cell metabolic
enzymes (glucose transporter 2, glucokinase, mitochondrial glycerol phosphate
dehydrogenase, and pyruvate carboxylase), and ion channels/pumps (Kir6.2, VDCC
beta, and sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca(2+)-ATPase 3). Conversely, genes normally
suppressed in beta-cells, such as lactate dehydrogenase-A, hexokinase I,
glucose-6-phosphatase, stress genes (heme oxygenase-1, A20, and Fas), and the
transcription factor c-Myc, were markedly increased. In contrast, gene expression
in low hyperglycemia rats was only minimally changed at 4 weeks but significantly
changed at 14 weeks, indicating that even low levels of hyperglycemia induce
beta-cell dedifferentiation over time. In addition, whereas 2 weeks of correction
of hyperglycemia completely reverses the changes in gene expression of Px rats at
4 weeks, the changes at 14 weeks were only partially reversed, indicating that
the phenotype becomes resistant to reversal in the long term. In conclusion,
chronic hyperglycemia induces a progressive loss of beta-cell phenotype with
decreased expression of beta-cell-associated genes and increased expression of
normally suppressed genes, these changes being present with even minimal levels
of hyperglycemia. Thus, both the severity and duration of hyperglycemia appear to
contribute to the deterioration of the beta-cell phenotype found in diabetes.

PMID: 12438314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Biochem J. 2003 Jan 1;369(Pt 1):17-22.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha mediates the stimulatory effect of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma co-activator-1 alpha (PGC-1 alpha) on
glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit gene transcription in H4IIE cells.

Boustead JN(1), Stadelmaier BT, Eeds AM, Wiebe PO, Svitek CA, Oeser JK, O'Brien
RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

It has recently been shown that adenoviral-mediated expression of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma co-activator-1 alpha (PGC-1 alpha) in
hepatocytes stimulates glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit (G6Pase) gene
expression. A combination of fusion gene, gel retardation and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed that, in H4IIE cells, PGC-1 alpha mediates
this stimulation through an evolutionarily conserved region of the G6Pase
promoter that binds hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha.

PMCID: PMC1223073
PMID: 12416993  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2002 Nov 15;407(2):160-7.

Positive regulation of connexin32 transcription by hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha.

Koffler LD(1), Fernstrom MJ, Akiyama TE, Gonzalez FJ, Ruch RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical College of Ohio, 3055 Arlington Avenue,
Toledo, OH 43614, USA.

Connexin32 (Cx32) encodes the predominant gap junction protein expressed by
hepatocytes. We investigated the transcriptional control of Cx32 in expressing
and nonexpressing rat liver cell lines and hypothesized that a putative
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) binding site (centered at mp -187) in the
liver-active, P1 promoter is essential for transcription of Cx32. HNF-1alpha was 
expressed by Cx32-expressing rat liver cell lines and bound the promoter at the
-187 site, but was not expressed by non-Cx32-expressing hepatic lines. Stable
transfection of non-Cx32-expressing WB-F344 rat liver epithelial cells with
HNF-1alpha stimulated a transfected Cx32 promoter element (mp -244 to -33),
binding of HNF-1alpha to the -187 site, and expression of endogenous Cx32.
Site-directed mutagenesis of this HNF-1 binding site abolished HNF-1alpha binding
and proximal promoter activity. Hepatic Cx32 expression was also significantly
decreased in HNF-1alpha(-/-) mice. These data indicate that HNF-1alpha is a
positive regulator of Cx32 expression in hepatic cells.

PMID: 12413486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Pol Arch Med Wewn. 2001;105 Suppl:351-5.

[MODY diabetes: differences in the clinical picture caused by genetic
heterogeneity in clinical practice].

[Article in Polish]

Malecki MT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Klinika Chorób Metabolicznych, Collegium Medicum UJ, Kraków.

PMID: 12412267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Mol Ther. 2002 Nov;6(5):653-63.

Long-term and tight control of gene expression in mouse skeletal muscle by a new 
hybrid human transcription factor.

Roscilli G(1), Rinaudo CD, Cimino M, Sporeno E, Lamartina S, Ciliberto G,
Toniatti C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Istituto di Ricerche di Biologia
Molecolare, I.R.B.M.-P. Angeletti, Pomezia, Roma, Italy.

Diseases requiring frequent and lifelong injections of recombinant proteins would
be more efficaciously treated by intramuscular delivery of genes encoding
secretable proteins. However, the success of this approach largely depends on our
capability to temporally regulate transcription of delivered genes. Therefore, we
sought to generate a humanized transcription factor to regulate transgene
expression in muscle. A novel 4-hydroxytamoxifen (4-OHT)-dependent
transcriptional regulator (called HEA-3) was constructed by fusing in-frame the
DNA binding domain of the human hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF1alpha),
which is not expressed in muscle cells, a G(521)R mutant of the ligand binding
domain of human estrogen receptor-alpha (ERalpha), and the activation domain
derived from human nuclear factor-kappaB p65 subunit (NF-kappaB p65). We
demonstrate that an artificial promoter containing multimeric HNF1alpha binding
sites is silent in muscles and in cell lines that lack endogenous HNF1alpha.
HEA-3 stimulated transcription from this target promoter in a stringent
4-OHT-dependent manner. The dynamic range of transgene regulation was high,
because of the low basal activity and high inducibility of the system. Ex vivo,
HEA-3 increased expression of the transfected reporter gene by more than
1000-fold in a ligand-dependent manner. In vivo, HEA-3 stimulated by more than
100-fold, the expression of secreted alkaline phosphatase after delivery as
plasmid DNA into mouse muscles. Moreover, long-term modulation of the expression 
of intramuscularly delivered mouse erythropoietin was achieved in immunocompetent
mice.

PMID: 12409264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Drug Metab Dispos. 2002 Nov;30(11):1186-93.

Down-regulation of alpha class glutathione S-transferase by interleukin-1beta in 
human intestinal epithelial cells (Caco-2) in culture.

Romero L(1), Higgins MA, Gilmore J, Boudreau K, Maslen A, Barker HJ, Kirby GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Guelph, Guelph, Ontario,
Canada.

The influence of pro-inflammatory cytokines on alpha class glutathione
S-transferase A1 and A2 (GSTA1/A2) expression was examined in human colonic
epithelial cells (Caco-2) in culture. Dose-dependent reductions in GSTA1/A2 mRNA,
protein, and activity levels occurred in Caco-2 cells cultured in conditioned
medium (CM) from lipopolysaccharide-stimulated murine monocyte-macrophage cells
(RAW 264.7). Neutralizing anti-interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) antibodies attenuated
this repression of GSTA1/A2 expression by CM. Moreover, recombinant human
IL-1beta reduced GSTalpha expression at the mRNA, protein, and activity levels in
a dose-related fashion. Reduction of GSTA1/A2 mRNA levels by IL-1beta was
attenuated by pretreatment with IL-1 receptor antagonist. GSTA1/A2 mRNA
half-lives were similar in control and IL-1beta-treated cells, indicating that
IL-1beta has no effect on mRNA stability. In reporter gene studies, IL-1beta
caused a dose-related reduction of luciferase activity in Caco-2 cells
transfected with the full-length GSTA1 promoter-luciferase construct. Using
truncated constructs, IL-1beta responsiveness was mapped to a region 286 base
pairs upstream to the coding region. Deletion of a hepatic nuclear factor 1
(HNF-1) site in this region abrogated the IL-1beta-mediated repression of GSTA1
promoter activity. These results demonstrate that IL-1beta down-regulates
GSTA1/A2 expression in cultured human enterocytes by a transcriptional mechanism 
involving an HNF-1 site.

PMID: 12386123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Diabetologia. 2002 Oct;45(10):1463-7. Epub 2002 Sep 11.

Abnormal splicing of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha in maturity-onset diabetes
of the young.

Bulman MP(1), Harries LW, Hansen T, Shepherd M, Kelly WF, Hattersley AT, Ellard
S.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Genetics, School of Postgraduate Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter EX2 5AX, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene result in maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY); an early-onset, dominantly inherited form of
diabetes caused by pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. Splice site mutations
represent approximately 10% of reported HNF-1 alpha mutations. No studies to date
have investigated the effect of splice site mutations on mRNA processing because 
the tissues with abundant HNF-1alpha expression (liver, pancreas, kidney and gut)
are not easily accessible for analysis. This study aimed to define the pathogenic
mechanism in three novel splice site mutations by analysing illegitimate
transcripts.
METHODS: To assess the consequence of potential HNF-1 alpha splice site mutations
we developed a nested reverse transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) assay for the
amplification of illegitimate HNF-1 alpha transcripts in Epstein Barr virus
transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines.
RESULTS: Sequencing the illegitimate HNF-1 alpha transcripts showed that the
splice donor site mutation IVS8nt+1G>A leads to complete skipping of exon 8, the 
splice acceptor site mutation IVS4nt-2A>G causes skipping of exon 5 with the
recruitment of a cryptic splice acceptor site within intron 5 and the cryptic
splice acceptor site mutation (IVS7nt-6G>A) resulted in the skipping of exon 7.
All three changes are predicted to result in premature termination of the
HNF-1alpha protein, providing further evidence for their role as pathogenic
mutations.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: We conclude that the sequencing of illegitimate
transcripts from lymphoblastoid cell lines is helpful in the assessment of
intronic variation in HNF-1 alpha that could alter splicing. This analysis of the
mRNA is required to define mutational mechanisms and confirm pathogenic status.

PMID: 12378390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Mol Biol. 2002 Oct 4;322(5):929-41.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha controls renal expression of the Npt1-Npt4
anionic transporter locus.

Cheret C(1), Doyen A, Yaniv M, Pontoglio M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité Expression Génétique et Maladies, Unité de Recherche Associée 1644 du
Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), Département de Biologie du
Développement, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1alpha) is a transcription factor that is
expressed in liver, pancreas, kidney and intestine. Mice lacking HNF1alpha are
born normally but suffer from several defects including hyperphenylalaninemia,
defective bile acid and cholesterol metabolism, an insulin secretion defect and
renal Fanconi syndrome. The renal phenotype involves a defect in renal proximal
tubule reabsorption, leading to polyuria, glucosuria, aminoaciduria and
phosphaturia. We investigated the expression of genes encoding members of the
sodium/phosphate cotransporter (Na(+)/Pi) family (namely Npt1, Npt2, Npt4 and
Ram1). We show that Npt1 and Npt4 genes were expressed at reduced levels in the
kidneys of HNF1alpha -/- mice, whereas the expression of Npt2, the major renal
phosphate transporter, was not affected. Analysis of the Npt1 genomic sequence
revealed the existence of several alternative promoters activated in liver and/or
in kidney. All of these were down-regulated in the kidneys of HNF1alpha -/-
animals. Several HNF1alpha binding sites (BS) play an important role in the
transcriptional control of this locus, including low-affinity HNF1 BSs localised 
in a DNase I hypersensitivity site (HSS3). Transient transfection experiments
confirmed that HNF1alpha directly transactivates the Npt1 promoter and that the
HSS3 region contributes to this activation.

PMID: 12367519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Mol Genet Metab. 2002 Sep-Oct;77(1-2):35-43.

The role of transcription factors in maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Mitchell SM(1), Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, University of Exeter, Barrack
Road, EX2 5AX, Exeter, UK. s.m.s.mitchell@exeter.ac.uk

The study of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), an autosomal dominant
form of early-onset diabetes mellitus characterised by defective insulin
secretion has been extremely successful in two ways. Firstly it has enabled
definitive diagnosis for patients. This allows more accurate prediction of
disease and treatment requirements. Secondly it has facilitated an increased
understanding of the genes and pathways that are crucial for normal beta-cell
function. Five of the six MODY genes, TCF1 (encoding HNF-1alpha), TCF2 (encoding 
HNF-1beta) HNF4A, insulin promoter factor (IPF)1, and NEUROD1, are transcription 
factors that operate in a complex network of gene regulation. Several genes have 
been shown to be regulated by the MODY transcription factors in a beta-cell
specific manner. This includes the co-regulation of HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha by 
each other. The exact mechanism of how mutations in these transcription factors
result in diabetes in humans remains unknown. However, current opinion favours
pleiotropic adverse effects on many genes; extensive in vitro and in vivo studies
of these genes has highlighted their importance in both glucose sensing-insulin
secretion coupling and maintaining the fully differentiated beta-cell phenotype.

PMID: 12359128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. Nihon Rinsho. 2002 Aug;60 Suppl 8:290-2.

[Gateway to analysis of diabetogenic genes].

[Article in Japanese]

Oka Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Metabolism and Diabetes, Department of Internal
Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of Medicine.

PMID: 12355761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. Nat Genet. 2002 Oct;32(2):312-5. Epub 2002 Sep 23.

Bi-allelic inactivation of TCF1 in hepatic adenomas.

Bluteau O(1), Jeannot E, Bioulac-Sage P, Marqués JM, Blanc JF, Bui H, Beaudoin
JC, Franco D, Balabaud C, Laurent-Puig P, Zucman-Rossi J.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U434, Fondation Jean Dausset, 27 rue Juliette Dodu, 75010 Paris,
France.

Liver adenomas are benign tumors at risk of malignant transformation. In a
genome-wide search for loss of heterozygosity (LOH) associated with liver
adenomas, we found a deletion in chromosome 12q in five of ten adenomas. In most 
cases, LOH at 12q was the only recurrent genetic alteration observed, suggesting 
the presence of a tumor-suppressor gene in that region. A minimal common region
of deletion was defined in 12q24 that included the gene TCF1 (transcription
factor 1), encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1; refs 1,2). Heterozygous
germline mutations of TCF1 have been identified in individuals affected with
maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3; ref. 3). Bi-allelic
inactivation of TCF1 was found in 10 of 16 screened adenomas, and heterozygous
germline mutation were present in three affected individuals. Furthermore, 2
well-differentiated hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) occurring in normal liver
contained somatic bi-allelic mutations of 30 screened HCCs. These results
indicate that inactivation of TCF1, whether sporadic or associated with MODY3, is
an important genetic event in the occurrence of human liver adenoma, and may be
an early step in the development of some HCCs.

PMID: 12355088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Hepatology. 2002 Oct;36(4 Pt 1):794-804.

Inducible differentiation and morphogenesis of bipotential liver cell lines from 
wild-type mouse embryos.

Strick-Marchand H(1), Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, FRE 2364 du CNRS, Institut Pasteur, 
Paris, France.

This work shows that hepatic cell lines reproducibly can be derived from E14
embryos of many mouse inbred strains. These bipotential mouse embryonic liver
(BMEL) cell lines present a mixed morphology, containing both epithelial and
palmate-like cells, and an uncoupled phenotype, expressing hepatocyte
transcription factors (HNF1alpha, HNF4alpha, GATA4) but not functions
(apolipoproteins, albumin). BMEL cells are bipotential: under inducing conditions
they express hepatocyte and bile duct functions. In addition, they can undergo
morphogenesis in Matrigel culture to form bile duct units. When returned to basal
culture conditions, the differentiated cells revert, within a few days, to an
undifferentiated state. The ensemble of markers expressed by BMEL cells implies
that they originate from hepatoblasts, the endodermal precursors of the liver. In
conclusion, the establishment of a simple and reproducible method to isolate from
any mouse embryo bipotential hepatic cell lines that exhibit the properties of
transit stem cells provides a novel paradigm for investigation of hepatic cell
lineage relationships.

PMID: 12297826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. J Mol Biol. 2002 Sep 27;322(4):697-706.

Searching for DNA-protein interactions by lambda phage display.

Cicchini C(1), Ansuini H, Amicone L, Alonzi T, Nicosia A, Cortese R, Tripodi M,
Luzzago A.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biotecnologie Cellulari ed Ematologia, Sezione di Genetica
Molecolare, Fondazione Istituto Pasteur-Cenci Bolognetti, Università La Sapienza,
00161, Rome, Italy.

We applied phage display technology to DNA-protein interaction studies. A cDNA
expression library displayed on the surface of bacteriophage lambda was generated
from the highly differentiated MMH E14 murine hepatic cell line. Selection of
this library using the promoter sequence of the liver-enriched transcription
factor HNF1alpha gene as ligate identified DNA-binding domains specifically
interacting with different regions of this regulatory sequence. One of the
selected phage showed 100% identity to a DNA-binding domain shared by
differentiation specific element-binding protein, vasoactive intestinal peptide
receptor-repressor protein and replication factor C and was further investigated.
Specific binding of the selected protein domain was confirmed in a
phage-independent context. By combining ELISA and South-Western assays using the 
selected phage and a bacterially expressed glutathione-S-transferase protein
fused to the encoded DNA-binding domain, an array of multiple adjacent
DNA-binding sites sharing a common consensus motif was identified. The strategy
described represents a powerful tool to identify proteins that bind to DNA
regulatory elements.

PMID: 12270707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. Nihon Rinsho. 2002 Jul;60 Suppl 7:648-52.

[MODY genes].

[Article in Japanese]

Okada T(1), Ito Y, Yasuda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Disorder, Research Institute, International Medical
Center of Japan.

PMID: 12238113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Nihon Rinsho. 2002 Jul;60 Suppl 7:159-64.

[The regulation of insulin gene transcription by transcription factors].

[Article in Japanese]

Inada A(1), Seino Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolism and Clinical Nutrition, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University.

PMID: 12238042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. J Clin Invest. 2002 Sep;110(6):827-33.

Genetic evidence that HNF-1alpha-dependent transcriptional control of HNF-4alpha 
is essential for human pancreatic beta cell function.

Hansen SK(1), Párrizas M, Jensen ML, Pruhova S, Ek J, Boj SF, Johansen A, Maestro
MA, Rivera F, Eiberg H, Andel M, Lebl J, Pedersen O, Ferrer J, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark.
toha@dadlnet.dk

Mutations in the genes encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha) and
HNF-1alpha impair insulin secretion and cause maturity onset diabetes of the
young (MODY). HNF-4alpha is known to be an essential positive regulator of
HNF-1alpha. More recent data demonstrates that HNF-4alpha expression is dependent
on HNF-1alpha in mouse pancreatic islets and exocrine cells. This effect is
mediated by binding of HNF-1alpha to a tissue-specific promoter (P2) located 45.6
kb upstream from the previously characterized Hnf4alpha promoter (P1). Here we
report that the expression of HNF-4alpha in human islets and exocrine cells is
primarily mediated by the P2 promoter. Furthermore, we describe a G --> A
mutation in a conserved nucleotide position of the HNF-1alpha binding site of the
P2 promoter, which cosegregates with MODY. The mutation results in decreased
affinity for HNF-1alpha, and consequently in reduced HNF-1alpha-dependent
activation. These findings provide genetic evidence that HNF-1alpha serves as an 
upstream regulator of HNF-4alpha and interacts directly with the P2 promoter in
human pancreatic cells. Furthermore, they indicate that this regulation is
essential to maintain normal pancreatic function.

PMCID: PMC151122
PMID: 12235114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Oncogene. 2002 Sep 19;21(42):6446-57.

Inactivation of Apc perturbs mammary development, but only directly results in
acanthoma in the context of Tcf-1 deficiency.

Gallagher RC(1), Hay T, Meniel V, Naughton C, Anderson TJ, Shibata H, Ito M,
Clevers H, Noda T, Sansom OJ, Mason JO, Clarke AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Edinburgh, Medical School,
Teviot Place, Edinburgh EH8 9AG, UK.

Apc (adenomatous polyposis coli) encodes a tumour suppressor gene that is mutated
in the majority of colorectal cancers. Recent evidence has also implicated Apc
mutations in the aetiology of breast tumours. Apc is a component of the canonical
Wnt signal transduction pathway, of which one target is Tcf-1. In the mouse,
mutations of both Apc and Tcf-1 have been implicated in mammary tumorigenesis. We
have conditionally inactivated Apc in both the presence and absence of Tcf-1 to
examine the function of these genes in both normal and neoplastic development.
Mice harbouring mammary-specific mutations in Apc show markedly delayed
development of the mammary ductal network. During lactation, the mice develop
multiple metaplastic growths which, surprisingly, do not spontaneously progress
to neoplasia up to a year following their induction. However, additional
deficiency of Tcf-1 completely blocks normal mammary development and results in
acanthoma.

PMID: 12226748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2002 Sep 15;405(2):185-90.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4 alpha/gamma, HNF-1 alpha, and vHNF-1 regulate
the cell-specific expression of the human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (DD)4/AKR1C4 
gene.

Ozeki T(1), Takahashi Y, Nakayama K, Kamataki T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Hokkaido University, Sapporo, 060-0812, Hokkaido, Japan. ozeki-tky@umin.ac.jp

Recently, we found a region A (a hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4-binding site
from nucleotides -701 to -684) and a region B (an HNF-1-binding site from
nucleotides -682 to -666) as cis-acting elements necessary for the
transcriptional activation of the human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (DD)4 gene in
human hepatoblastoma HepG2 cells, which express DD4 mRNA. Thus, to investigate
the mechanism(s) responsible for the cell-type-specific expression of DD4 mRNA,
we constructed a reporter plasmid, pDD4 Foot A+B: -95/+28, in which regions A and
B were linked to the human DD4 minimal promoter (-95 to +28) fused to the
luciferase gene. The luciferase activity was detectable in HepG2 cells but not in
human renal adenocarcinoma ACHN cells transfected with the pDD4 Foot A+B:
-95/+28, which do not express DD4 mRNA. A supershift assay using antibodies to
HNF-4 alpha, -4 gamma, -1 alpha, or valiant HNF (vHNF)-1 revealed that HNF-4
alpha, -4 gamma, and -1 alpha recognized regions A and B in HepG2 cells and that 
only vHNF-1 bound to regions A and B in ACHN cells. Semiquantitative
reverse-transcribed polymerase chain reaction showed that a large amount of
vHNF-1-C, which lacked transcriptional activation domain, was expressed in ACHN
cells. Transfection of ACHN cells with an expression plasmid of vHNF-1-C did not 
activate the pDD4 Foot A+B: -95/+28 reporter gene. Taken together, we conclude
that the cell-type-specific expression of DD4 mRNA is regulated by vHNF-1-C.

PMID: 12220531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2002 Oct;283(4):F839-51.

Regulation of kidney-specific Ksp-cadherin gene promoter by hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1beta.

Bai Y(1), Pontoglio M, Hiesberger T, Sinclair AM, Igarashi P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, 75390, USA.

Kidney-specific cadherin (Ksp-cadherin) is a tissue-specific member of the
cadherin family that is expressed exclusively in the kidney and developing
genitourinary tract. Recent studies have shown that the proximal 250 bp of the
Ksp-cadherin gene promoter are sufficient to direct tissue-specific gene
expression in vivo and in vitro. The proximal 120 bp of the promoter are
evolutionarily conserved between mouse and human and contain a DNase I
hypersensitive site that is kidney cell specific. At position -55, the promoter
contains a consensus recognition site for hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1).
Mutations of the consensus HNF-1 site and downstream GC-boxes inhibit promoter
activity in transfected cells. HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta bind specifically to the 
-55 site, and both proteins transactivate the promoter directly. Expression of
Ksp-cadherin is not altered in the kidneys of HNF-1alpha-deficient mice. However,
expression of a gain-of-function HNF-1beta mutant stimulates Ksp-cadherin
promoter activity in transfected cells, whereas expression of a dominant-negative
mutant inhibits activity. These studies identify Ksp-cadherin as the first
kidney-specific promoter that has been shown to be regulated by HNF-1beta.
Mutations of HNF-1beta, as occur in humans with inherited renal cysts and
diabetes, may cause dysregulated Ksp-cadherin promoter activity.

PMID: 12217876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Diabet Med. 2002 Sep;19(9):758-61.

Heterogeneity in young adult onset diabetes: aetiology alters clinical
characteristics.

Owen KR(1), Shepherd M, Stride A, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Genetics, School of Postgraduate Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK. K.R.Owen@exeter.ac.uk

AIMS: To describe the characteristics of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1 alpha 
mutation carriers diagnosed with diabetes after 25 years and compare them with
young-onset Type 2 diabetic patients (YT2D) diagnosed at the same age.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We studied 44 (21 male, 23 female) patients with HNF-1
alpha mutations diagnosed with diabetes at ages 25-45 years and 44 YT2D subjects 
matched for sex and age of diagnosis.
RESULTS: Median age of onset of diabetes was 35 years in both groups. The HNF-1
alpha group demonstrated: lower body mass index (25.1 vs. 30.7 kg/m2; P < 0.001) 
and lower fasting triglycerides (1.37 vs. 2.96 mmol/l; P = 0.001) with similar
fasting cholesterol level. They had lower glycated haemoglobin A1c (7.3 vs. 8.5%;
P = 0.015) despite greater duration of diabetes (24 vs. 16 years; P = 0.02) and
less frequent treatment with insulin (21% vs. 55%; P = 0.002). They were less
likely to be treated for hypertension (13.3% vs. 56.3%; P = 0.009). Importantly, 
no difference was observed in reported parental history of diabetes between the
two groups (65.9% vs. 63.6%; P = 0.92). Logistic regression showed that
triglyceride levels and presence of anti-hypertensive treatment were the most
important independent variables.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with HNF-1 alpha mutations may present with diabetes as
young adults between the ages of 25-45 years. In this age range a wide
differential diagnosis of diabetes is observed. Conventional criteria of age of
onset and family history will not differentiate HNF-1 alpha mutation carriers
from YT2D subjects in this age range, but features of the metabolic syndrome, in 
particular fasting triglycerides and hypertension, are helpful. In patients
diagnosed before 45 years without features of insulin resistance the diagnosis of
HNF-1 alpha should be considered.

PMID: 12207813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Diabetologia. 2002 Aug;45(8):1142-53. Epub 2002 Jun 28.

Expression profile of MODY3/HNF-1alpha protein in the developing mouse pancreas.

Nammo T(1), Yamagata K, Hamaoka R, Zhu Q, Akiyama TE, Gonzalez FJ, Miyagawa J,
Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: One subtype of MODY (MODY3) results from the heterozygous
mutation of a hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha. The pattern of HNF-1alpha
expression in the normal pancreas has not been determined. This study aimed to
clarify the profile of HNF-1alpha protein expression in the developing mouse
pancreas.
METHODS: Double immunofluorescence staining was carried out for HNF-1alpha and
pancreatic hormones or transcription factors (PDX-1, Pax6, Isl1, and Nkx2.2). The
expression of these transcription factors was also studied in the beta cells of
HNF-1 alpha mutant mice.
RESULTS: HNF-1alpha was expressed by both endocrine and exocrine cells of the
pancreas. Double immunofluorescence staining showed that HNF-1alpha was expressed
in the nuclei of alpha cells, beta cells, delta cells, and pancreatic polypeptide
(PP) cells. HNF-1alpha was first detected in most pancreatic epithelial cells on 
embryonic day 10.5 (E10.5), and hormone-positive endocrine cells and
amylase-positive cells expressed HNF-1alpha on E15.5. Most of the Pax6-, Isl1-,
or PDX-1-positive cells showed co-expression of HNF-1alpha. However, HNF-1alpha
immunoreactivity was not observed in 36.0% of Nkx2.2-positive cells. Expression
of Nkx2.2, Isl1 and Pax6 seemed to be normal in the beta cells of transgenic mice
with dominant negative overexpression of HNF-1alpha. Expression of PDX-1 did not 
change in the beta cells of pre-diabetic HNF-1 alpha (-/-) mice, but expression
was markedly decreased in the diabetic stage.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: HNF-1alpha is expressed by both endocrine cells and
exocrine cells of the pancreas from the foetal stage along with other
transcription factors, so HNF-1alpha might play a role during development.

PMID: 12189445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Inflammation. 2002 Aug;26(4):183-91.

Normal transcription of the C1 inhibitor gene is dependent upon a
polypurine-polypyrimidine region within the promoter.

Zahedi K(1), Prada AE, Mulligan A, Prada JA, Davis AE 3rd.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA. zahek0@chmcc.org

Analysis of the transcriptional activity of C1 inhibitor (CIINH) promoter
reporter constructs with mutations in the R-Y region indicate that triplex
formation by this region is not a predictor of transcriptional activity and that 
normal promoter function depends on the interaction of trans acting factors with 
specific elements within this region. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA)
of Hep3B nuclear extracts using the wild type promoter probe (nucleotides -98 to 
-9) yielded four major bands. Incubation of the same extracts with probes lacking
the HNF-1 site resulted in the disappearance of one band. Supershift assays
indicate that HNF-1alpha is the only previously identified protein that is
present in the EMSA bands. Southwestern blot analysis detected four bands (M(r)s 
-130, 75, 65 and 20 kDa). These data suggest that the -98 to -9 region of the
C1INH promoter interacts with at least four proteins, one of which is HNF-1alpha.

PMID: 12184632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Ann Med. 2002;34(3):207-16.

Different genes, different diabetes: lessons from maturity-onset diabetes of the 
young.

Stride A(1), Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, University of Exeter, Devon, UK.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetic subgroup of diabetes
characterised by an autosomal dominant inheritance and early onset, non-insulin
dependent diabetes. This results from a monogenic defect causing beta-cell
dysfunction. The defining of five genes in which mutations cause MODY has allowed
us to understand the clinical heterogeneity seen in this condition and can guide 
clinical management. Mutations in the glucokinase gene lead to stable
hyperglycaemia, complications are unusual and treatment is rarely needed.
Glucokinase patients are often detected during screening in pregnancy. While
maternal mutations increase birth weight by increasing maternal glycaemia, fetal 
mutations reduce birth weight by reducing fetal insulin secretion. Patients with 
mutation in genes encoding the transcription factors, hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)- 1alpha, HNF-4alpha, HNF-1beta and insulin promoter factor 1 (IPF-1) have a
common progressive beta-cell failure resulting in increasing hyperglycaemia and
treatment requirements. These patients are at risk of developing microvascular
complications. They show a pharmacogenetic effect with a specific sensitivity to 
sulphonylureas. Patients with transcription factor mutations have a range of
discrete extra-pancreatic phenotypes including a low renal threshold for glucose 
with HNF-1alpha mutations, altered lipids and lipoproteins with HNF-4alpha
mutations and a variety of cystic renal diseases and uterine and genital
developmental disorders with HNF-1beta mutations. Molecular genetic testing is
now available in routine clinical practice. This allows confirmation of a
diagnosis of MODYand defines the subgroup. Differences in prognosis and treatment
strongly support the increased use of molecular genetic testing in diabetes.

PMID: 12173691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Diabet Med. 2002 Aug;19(8):697-8.

Reduced prevalence of late-diabetic complications in MODY3 with early diagnosis.

Sagen JV, Njølstad PR, Søvik O.

Comment on
    Diabet Med. 2001 Nov;18(11):889-94.
    Diabet Med. 2001 Oct;18(10):811-5.

PMID: 12147154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Diabetes. 2002 Aug;51(8):2355-62.

A genetic switch in pancreatic beta-cells: implications for differentiation and
haploinsufficiency.

Ferrer J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Clínic i Universitari, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain.
jferrer@medicina.ub.es

Heterozygous mutations in the genes encoding transcriptional regulators
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and HNF-4alpha cause a form of diabetes
known as maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). Haploinsufficiency of
HNF-1alpha or HNF-4alpha results in MODY because of defective function of
pancreatic islet cells. In contrast, homozygous null mutations in mouse models
lead to widespread and profound gene expression defects in multiple cell types.
Thus, it is not surprising that HNF-1alpha function is now known to have distinct
properties in pancreatic beta-cells. It controls a complex tissue-selective
genetic network that is activated when pancreatic cells differentiate, and allows
these cells to maintain critical specialized functions. The network contains an
indispensable core component formed by a positive cross-regulatory feedback
circuit between HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha. This type of circuit configuration can
exhibit a switch-like behavior with two stable states. In the default active
state, it can serve to perpetuate network activity in differentiated beta-cells. 
However, the loss of one HNF-1alpha or HNF-4alpha allele can increase the
probability that the feedback circuit is permanently switched off, resulting in
decreased expression of all four alleles selectively in beta-cells. Such a model 
can serve to rationalize key aspects of the pathogenic mechanism in MODY.

PMID: 12145145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Hepatol. 2002 Aug;37(2):198-205.

Hepatobiliary organic anion transporters are differentially regulated in acute
toxic liver injury induced by carbon tetrachloride.

Geier A(1), Kim SK, Gerloff T, Dietrich CG, Lammert F, Karpen SJ, Stieger B,
Meier PJ, Matern S, Gartung C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, University of Technology, Pauwelsstrasse 
30, 52074 Aachen, Germany.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Hepatobiliary transporters are down-regulated in cholestasis,
but their expression in acute, non-cholestatic, cytokine-mediated liver injury is
unknown. Thus we studied the molecular mechanisms, by which sodium taurocholate
cotransporting polypeptide (Ntcp), organic anion transporting polypeptide 1
(Oatp1), Oatp2, Oatp4, multidrug-resistance protein 2 (Mrp2) and bile salt export
pump (Bsep) are regulated in liver injury induced by carbon tetrachloride
(CCl(4)).
METHODS: mRNA and protein levels were determined in rats 24 and 72h after CCl(4) 
injection. Transporter gene transcription and binding activities of Ntcp and Mrp2
transactivators were assessed by nuclear runoff and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays.
RESULTS: mRNA levels significantly declined to 41+/-44% for Ntcp, 65+/-41% for
Oatp1 and 64+/-28% for Oatp2, but remained unchanged for Oatp4, canalicular Mrp2 
and Bsep. Protein levels declined only for Oatp4 (-50+/-17%) and Ntcp (-23+/-13%)
at 24h. Reduced mRNA levels (Ntcp, Oatp1, Oatp2) were associated with decreased
transcriptional activities. Binding activity of Ntcp transactivators (hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1alpha) and CAAT enhancer binding protein alpha
(C/EBPalpha) were reduced by 24h, whereas retinoid X receptor alpha
(RXRalpha):retinoid acid receptor alpha (RARalpha) as transactivator of both Ntcp
and Mrp2 remained unaltered. Recovery of acute hepatitis and changes in gene
expression occurred after 72h.
CONCLUSIONS: Acute liver injury results in down-regulation of basolateral organic
anion transporters similar to liver regeneration after partial hepatectomy, but
in contrast to endotoxin-induced cholestasis. Maintained binding activity of
RXRalpha:RARalpha may explain differences in Mrp2 expression.

PMID: 12127424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Diabetologia. 2002 May;45(5):747.

Why is the ADA classification of diabetes mellitus not always applied?

Prisco F, Iafusco D.

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2001 Oct;44(10):1326-9.

PMID: 12120622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Diabetologia. 2002 May;45(5):744-6. Epub 2002 Apr 3.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in Chinese MODY families: 
prevalence and functional analysis.

Xu JY(1), Chan V, Zhang WY, Wat NM, Lam KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, China.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young is an autosomal dominant
form of diabetes characterised by an early age of onset (usually <25 years). We
investigated the prevalence and trans-activating activity of hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF) -1 alpha mutations in southern Chinese families with MODY.
METHODS: We screened for mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene in 50 unrelated
southern Chinese families, which fulfilled the minimum criteria for MODY.
Functional properties of the mutant proteins were investigated using
site-directed mutagenesis and luciferase reporter assay.
RESULTS: Five of the 50 (10%) families were found to have mutations in the coding
region, including a new nonsense mutation Q176X and four reported mutations
(frameshift mutation P379fsdelCT, nonsense mutation R171X, missense mutations
G20R and P112L). These mutations had decreased trans-activating activity on the
human insulin gene promoter. We also detected a new intronic sequence variation
IVS7nt-6 G-->A, which co-segregated with diabetes. The intronic variation creates
a potential splice acceptor site and might alter the splicing of the HNF-1 alpha 
mRNA.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene seem to be an
important cause of MODY in southern Chinese. The mutations could affect normal
islet function by altering the expression of target genes.

PMID: 12107757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Biochem. 2002 Jul;132(1):37-44.

Human hypoxic signal transduction through a signature motif in hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4.

Tsuchiya T(1), Kominato Y, Ueda M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Research Center for Molecular Medical
Science, 35-1 Shimo, Fussa, Tokyo 197-0023, Japan. rcmms@v004.vaio.ne.jp

We identified a human hypoxic signal transduction pathway acting through a
signature motif in the carboxyl terminal of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF-4), 
by functional comparison of the transcriptional and protein-protein interaction
activities of the wild type and mutants. It was previously shown that HNF-4
functions as a tissue-specific and hypoxia-activated transcription factor for the
erythropoietin (Epo) gene. Human HNF-4 (465 amino acid residues) has DNA-binding,
ligand-binding, and transactivation domains. The deletion mutant without the
carboxyl terminal transactivation domain (amino acids 369-465) has been shown to 
be a dominant-negative mutant that repressed Epo transcriptional activity in
hypoxia. Further characterization of the hypoxia-responsive domain by
site-directed mutagenesis indicated that a TKQE motif of the carboxyl terminal
(amino acids 460-463) in HNF-4 was essential for hypoxia-inducible Epo gene
expression. We also found, by means of immunoprecipitation and a mammalian
two-hybrid system, direct interactions between HNF-4 and hypoxia-inducible factor
1 (HIF-1), a heterodimer composed of alpha and beta subunits. HNF-4 was observed 
to interact with HIF-1alpha and HIF-1beta (arylhydrocarbon receptor nuclear
translocator, ARNT) during hypoxia. In addition, the TKQE motif of HNF-4 was
essential for protein-protein interactions with HIF-1alpha and ARNT. These
results indicate that the human hypoxic signal of HIF-1 is transduced through
interactions with the signature TKQE motif of the carboxyl terminal of HNF-4,
resulting in Epo gene expression as a response to hypoxia.

PMID: 12097158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Mol Pharmacol. 2002 Jul;62(1):154-61.

The homeodomain Pbx2-Prep1 complex modulates hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha-mediated activation of the UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2B17 gene.

Gregory PA(1), Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University School of Medicine,
Flinders Medical Centre, Adelaide, Australia.

UDP glucuronosyltransferases (UGT) are expressed in a wide range of tissues in
which their levels of expression and distribution are dependent on cell-type
specific regulatory mechanisms. The presence of a hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)
1 binding site in the proximal promoters of several UGT2B genes has been shown to
contribute to their expression in liver cells and possibly other HNF1-containing 
cell types. In some of these UGT2B genes, a putative pre-B cell homeobox (Pbx)
transcription factor binding site is found directly adjacent to the functional
HNF1 site. To determine whether this putative Pbx site contributes to the
regulation of UGT2B expression, we chose the UGT2B17 gene and investigated the
capacity of its Pbx site to bind specific transcription factors and alter
promoter activity. The UGT2B17 Pbx site matches a consensus Pbx site known to
bind members of the Pbx, Hox, Meis, and Prep1 families of homeodomain-containing 
proteins and has previously been shown to bind nuclear proteins in DNaseI
footprint assays. In this study, we used gel shift and functional assays to show 
that a Pbx2-Prep1 heterodimer can bind to the UGT2B17 Pbx site and interfere with
the binding of HNF1alpha to its site adjacent to the Pbx site. This interaction
of Pbx2-Prep1 and HNF1alpha results in down-regulation of HNF1alpha-mediated
activation of the UGT2B17 promoter. Modulation of transcription by restricting
the binding of transcriptional effectors to their target site is a novel role for
Pbx2-Prep1 complexes.

PMID: 12065766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 30;277(35):31909-17. Epub 2002 Jun 11.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha, GATA-4, and caudal related homeodomain protein
Cdx2 interact functionally to modulate intestinal gene transcription. Implication
for the developmental regulation of the sucrase-isomaltase gene.

Boudreau F(1), Rings EH, van Wering HM, Kim RK, Swain GP, Krasinski SD, Moffett
J, Grand RJ, Suh ER, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Sucrase-isomaltase (SI), an intestine-specific gene, is induced in the
differentiated small intestinal villous epithelium during the suckling-weaning
transition in mice. We have previously identified cis-acting elements within a
short evolutionarily conserved SI promoter. However, the nature and profile of
expression of the interacting proteins have not been fully characterized during
this developmental transition. Herein, we show that hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
alpha (HNF-1 alpha), GATA-4, and caudal related homeodomain proteins Cdx2 and
Cdx1 are the primary transcription factors from the adult mouse intestinal
epithelium to interact with the SIF3, GATA, and SIF1 elements of the SI promoter.
We wanted to study whether HNF-1 alpha, GATA-4, and Cdx2 can cooperate in the
regulation of SI gene expression. Immunolocalization experiments revealed that
HNF-1 alpha is detected in rare epithelial cells of suckling mice and becomes
progressively more expressed in the villous epithelial cells during the
suckling-weaning transition. GATA-4 protein is expressed exclusively in villous
differentiated epithelial cells of the proximal small intestine, decreases in
expression in the ileum, and becomes undetectable in the colon. HNF-1 alpha,
GATA-4, and Cdx2 interact in vitro and in vivo. These factors activate SI
promoter activity in cotransfection experiments where GATA-4 requires the
presence of both HNF-1 alpha and Cdx2. These findings imply a combinatory role of
HNF-1 alpha, Cdx2, and GATA-4 for the time- and position-dependent regulation of 
SI transcription during development.

PMID: 12060663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 23;277(34):30559-66. Epub 2002 Jun 7.

Human apical sodium-dependent bile salt transporter gene (SLC10A2) is regulated
by the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha.

Jung D(1), Fried M, Kullak-Ublick GA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Division of Clinical 
Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Hospital, CH-8091 Zurich, Switzerland.

The apical sodium-dependent bile salt transporter (ASBT/SLC10A2), also called the
ileal bile acid transporter, mediates the intestinal absorption of bile salts.
The efficiency of this transport process is a determinant of hepatic bile salt
synthesis from cholesterol and of serum triglyceride levels. Our aim was to
characterize the human ASBT gene promoter with respect to regulatory mechanisms
that coordinately affect ASBT expression and hepatic lipid and bile salt
metabolism. The minimal construct that confers full promoter activity contains
three functional hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) recognition sites, 
explaining the dependence of ASBT gene expression upon HNF1alpha. A nuclear
receptor binding site arranged as a direct hexanucleotide repeat (DR1 motif) is
localized approximately 1.6 kb upstream of the transcription initiation site.
Constructs containing this element were transactivated by WY14643 and
ciprofibrate, ligands of the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha
(PPARalpha), in Caco2 cells. The DR1 element was shown to bind the
PPARalpha/9-cis-retinoic acid receptor heterodimer, and targeted mutagenesis of
the DR1 motif abolished PPARalpha responsiveness. Ciprofibrate treatment of
SK-ChA cholangiocytes increased ASBT mRNA levels, suggesting a physiologic role
for PPARalpha-mediated ASBT gene regulation. This study identifies PPARalpha as a
novel link between ileal bile salt absorption and hepatic lipid metabolism.

PMID: 12055195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2002 Jun 1;181(2):79-88.

Aroclor 1254 modulates gene expression of nuclear transcription factors:
implications for albumin gene transcription and protein synthesis in rat
hepatocyte cultures.

Borlak J(1), Dangers M, Thum T.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Drug Research and Medical Biotechnology, Fraunhofer Institute of
Toxicology and Aerosol Research, Germany. Borlak@ita.fhg.de

Human exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) may lead to increased albumin 
serum levels, but little is known about the underlying events. Certain PCBs are
also ligands for the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (Ahr) and this receptor regulates 
transcriptional activation of many different genes, including CYP1A1. We tested
our hypothesis that expression of certain nuclear transcription factors is
altered upon treatment of rat hepatocyte cultures with Aroclor 1254 and we
studied the gene expression of albumin and liver-enriched transcription factors
simultaneously. We correlate albumin gene expression with protein synthesis and
we used CYP1A1 gene expression and enzyme activity as a surrogate endpoint for
aryl hydrocarbon receptor activation. We found mRNA transcripts of CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein alpha and gamma, hepatic nuclear factor 1, and hepatic nuclear
factor 4 to be increased up to 62-fold, whereas albumin gene expression and
secretion was increased 3-fold. Noticeably, expression of c-fos, c-jun (AP-1),
HNF-6, CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta and delta, tissue-specific enhancer-1,
Ah-receptor, and albumin D-site-binding protein was unchanged. We show coordinate
albumin gene expression and protein secretion in primary rat hepatocyte cultures 
and propose a relationship between induction of certain liver-enriched
transcription factors and of the albumin gene via an Ahr-mediated mechanism.

PMID: 12051991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jun;87(6):2532-9.

Nine novel mutations in maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) candidate
genes in 22 Spanish families.

Barrio R(1), Bellanné-Chantelot C, Moreno JC, Morel V, Calle H, Alonso M,
Mustieles C.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Diabetes Unit, Ramón y Cajal Hospital, University of Alcalá,
Carretera Comenar Viejo Km. 9.4, 28034 Madrid, Spain. rbarrio@hrc.insalud.es

The aims of this study were to estimate the prevalence of major maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) subtypes in Spanish MODY families and to analyze
genotype-phenotype correlations. Twenty-two unrelated pediatric MODY patients and
97 relatives were screened for mutations in the coding region of the glucokinase 
(GCK), hepatic nuclear factor- HNF-1alpha and HNF4alpha genes using PCR-single
strand conformation polymorphism and/or direct sequencing. In families carrying
GCK mutations, the influence of genetic defects on fetal growth was investigated 
by comparing the birth weights of 32 offspring discordant for the mutations.
Mutations in MODY genes were identified in 64% of the families. GCK/MODY2
mutations were the most frequently found, in 41%: seven novel (R369P, S411F,
M298K, C252Y, Y108C, A188E, and S383L) and 2 already described mutations. Four
pedigrees (18%) harbored mutations in the HNF-1alpha/MODY3 gene, including a
previously unreported change (R271G). One family (4%) carried a novel mutation in
the HNF-4alpha gene (IVS5-2delA), representing the first report of a MODY1
pedigree in the Spanish population. The age at diagnosis was prepubertal in MODY2
index patients and pubertal in MODY3 patients. Overt diabetes was rare in MODY2
and was invariably present in MODY3 index patients. Chronic complications of
diabetes were absent in the MODY2 population and were present in more than 40% of
all relatives of MODY3. Birth weight was lower in the presence of a GCK fetal
mutation when the mutation was of paternal origin. The MODY1 patient was
diagnosed at 15 yr of age. She developed intermittent microalbuminuria despite
good metabolic control, and severe late-onset complications were common within
her family. Mutations in the GCK/MODY2 gene are the most common cause of MODY in 
our population as recruited from pediatric and adolescent index patients. The
inheritance of GCK defects by the fetus results in a reduction of birth weight.
Clinical expression of MODY3 and MODY1 mutations, the second and third groups of 
defects found, was more severe, including the frequent development of chronic
complications.

PMID: 12050210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Diabetes. 2002 Jun;51(6):1785-92.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha modulates pancreatic beta-cell growth by
regulating the expression of insulin-like growth factor-1 in INS-1 cells.

Yang Q(1), Yamagata K, Fukui K, Cao Y, Nammo T, Iwahashi H, Wang H, Matsumura I, 
Hanafusa T, Bucala R, Wollheim CB, Miyagawa J, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Biomedical Research
Center, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) is characterized by impaired 
insulin secretion. Heterozygous mutations in the gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-1alpha are the cause of MODY3. Transgenic mice overexpressing
dominant-negative HNF-1alpha mutant in pancreatic beta-cells and HNF-1alpha
knockout mice are animal models of MODY3. These mice exhibit defective
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion and have reduced beta-cell mass and
beta-cell proliferation rate. Here we examined the effect of HNF-1alpha on
beta-cell proliferation by overexpressing a human naturally occurring dominant-
negative mutation P291fsinsC in INS-1 cells under the control of
doxycycline-induction system. INS-1 cells overexpressing P291fsinsC showed
apparent growth impairment. The proliferation rate estimated by [(3)H]thymidine
incorporation was significantly reduced in P291fsinsC-expressing INS-1 cells
compared with noninduced or wild-type HNF-1alpha-overexpressing INS-1 cells.
Growth inhibition occurred at the transition from G1 to S cell cycle phase, with 
reduced expression of cyclin E and upregulation of p27. cDNA array analysis
revealed that the expression levels of IGF-1, a major growth factor for
beta-cells, and macrophage migration inhibitory factor (MIF), a cytokine
expressed in pancreatic beta-cells, were reduced in
P291fsinsC-HNF-1alpha-expressing INS-1 cells. Although MIF seemed to have
proliferative function, blockade of MIF action by anti-MIF antibody stimulated
INS-1 cell proliferation, excluding its direct role in the growth impairment.
However, addition of IGF-1 to P291fsinsC-expressing INS-1 cells rescued the
growth inhibition. Our data suggest that HNF-1alpha is critical for modulating
pancreatic beta-cell growth by regulating IGF-1 expression. IGF-1 might be a
potential therapeutic target for the treatment of MODY3.

PMID: 12031966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Drug Metab Dispos. 2002 Jun;30(6):613-5.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha is a causal factor responsible for
interindividual differences in the expression of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 2B7 
mRNA in human livers.

Toide K(1), Takahashi Y, Yamazaki H, Terauchi Y, Fujii T, Parkinson A, Kamataki
T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Kansas Medical
Center, Kansas City, Kansas, USA.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 2B7 is one of the most important UGT isozymes
expressed in human livers. This enzyme is reported to show more than 10-fold
interindividual differences in its enzyme activities. Thus, the amounts of UGT2B7
mRNA in 12 human livers were quantified by quantitative reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction. The amounts of UGT2B7 mRNA in the
subjects ranged from 0.22 to 2.63 copies/10(3) copies of beta-actin. A novel
point mutation (-253G to A) found in this study did not affect the level of
UGT2B7 mRNA in the subjects. To clarify a causal factor(s) determining the
expression level of UGT2B7 mRNA, we examined the correlation between the amounts 
of mRNAs for UGT2B7 and hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, which regulates
the expression of UGT2B7 gene. HNF-1alpha mRNA was expressed at a level ranging
from 2.99 to 24.76 copies/10(6) copies of beta-actin in the subjects. The amounts
of mRNAs for UGT2B7 expressed in these individual liver samples were highly
associated with the amount of mRNA for HNF-1alpha (r = 0.786, p = 0.002),
suggesting that HNF-1alpha is a factor limiting the expression of UGT2B7 mRNA and
a causal factor responsible for an interindividual difference in human livers.

PMID: 12019184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Virol. 2002 Jun;76(12):5875-81.

Regulation of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 activity by wild-type and mutant
hepatitis B virus X proteins.

Li J(1), Xu Z, Zheng Y, Johnson DL, Ou JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Keck School of Medicine, 
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California 90033, USA.

The hepatitis B virus (HBV) core promoter regulates the transcription of two
related RNA products named precore RNA and core RNA. Previous studies indicate
that a double-nucleotide mutation that occurs frequently during chronic HBV
infection converts a nuclear receptor binding site in the core promoter to the
binding site of the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) and 
specifically suppresses the transcription of the precore RNA. This mutation also 
changes two codons in the overlapping X protein coding sequence. In this report, 
we demonstrate that the X protein and its mutant X(mt) can physically bind to
HNF-1 both in vitro and in vivo. Further analyses indicate that both X and X(mt) 
can enhance the gene transactivation and the DNA binding activities of HNF-1.
This finding demonstrates for the first time that the X protein can stimulate the
DNA binding activity of a homeodomain transcription factor. Interestingly, while 
both X and X(mt) can stimulate the HNF-1 activities, they differ in their
effects: a smaller amount of X(mt) is needed to generate greater transactivation 
and DNA binding activities of HNF-1. This functional difference between X and
X(mt) may have important implications in HBV pathogenesis and is apparently why
they have different effects on the core promoter bearing the HNF-1 binding site.

PMCID: PMC136206
PMID: 12021320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 9;277(32):28884-91. Epub 2002 May 13.

Hyperphenylalaninemia and impaired glucose tolerance in mice lacking the
bifunctional DCoH gene.

Bayle JH(1), Randazzo F, Johnen G, Kaufman S, Nagy A, Rossant J, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and the Department Pathology, Beckman Center
for Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Stanford University, Stanford, California
94305, USA.

The bifunctional protein DCoH (Dimerizing Cofactor for HNF1) acts as an enzyme in
intermediary metabolism and as a binding partner of the HNF1 family of
transcriptional activators. HNF1 proteins direct the expression of a variety of
genes in the liver, kidney, pancreas, and gut and are critical to the regulation 
of glucose homeostasis. Mutations of the HNF1alpha gene underlie maturity onset
diabetes of the young (MODY3) in humans. DCoH acts as a cofactor for HNF1 that
stabilizes the dimeric HNF1 complex. DCoH also catalyzes the recycling of
tetrahydrobiopterin, a cofactor of aromatic amino acid hydroxylases. To examine
the roles of DCoH, a targeted deletion allele of the murine DCoH gene was
created. Mice lacking DCoH are viable and fertile but display
hyperphenylalaninemia and a predisposition to cataract formation. Surprisingly,
HNF1 function in DCoH null mice is only slightly impaired, and mice are mildly
glucose-intolerant in contrast to HNF1alpha null mice, which are diabetic. DCoH
function as it pertains to HNF1 activity appears to be partially complemented by 
a newly identified homolog, DCoH2.

PMID: 12011081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Biol Chem. 2002 Aug 2;277(31):27659-67. Epub 2002 May 14.

Physical interaction between GATA-5 and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha results 
in synergistic activation of the human lactase-phlorizin hydrolase promoter.

van Wering HM(1), Huibregtse IL, van der Zwan SM, de Bie MS, Dowling LN, Boudreau
F, Rings EH, Grand RJ, Krasinski SD.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Children's
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

GATA-4, -5, and -6 zinc finger and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) 
homeodomain transcription factors are expressed in the intestinal epithelium and 
synergistically activate the promoter of intestinal genes. Here, we demonstrate
that GATA-5 and HNF-1alpha physically associate both in vivo and in vitro and
that this interaction is necessary for cooperative activation of the
lactase-phlorizin hydrolase promoter. Furthermore, physical association is
mediated by the C-terminal zinc finger of GATA factors and the homeodomain of
HNF-1alpha. Deletion of HNF-1alpha activation domains or interruption of
HNF-1-binding sites in the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase promoter resulted in a
complete loss of cooperativity, whereas deletion of GATA-5 activation domains or 
interruption of GATA-binding sites resulted in a reduction, but not an
elimination, of cooperativity. We hypothesize that GATA/HNF-1alpha cooperativity 
is mediated by HNF-1alpha through its activation domains, which are oriented for 
high levels of activation through binding to DNA and physical association with
GATA factors. These data suggest a paradigm whereby intestine-specific gene
expression is regulated by unique interactions among tissue-restricted
transcription factors coexpressed in the intestine. Parallel mechanisms in other 
tissues as well as in Drosophila suggest that zinc finger/homeodomain
interactions are an efficient pathway of cooperative activation of gene
transcription that has been conserved throughout evolution.

PMID: 12011060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Science. 2002 May 10;296(5570):1034-5.

Transcription. Chromatin control--a place for E2F and Myc to meet.

La Thangue NB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Institute of Biomedical and
Life Sciences, Davidson Building, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.
n.lathangue@bio.gla.ac.uk

Comment on
    Science. 2002 May 10;296(5570):1132-6.

PMID: 12004105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Ugeskr Laeger. 2002 Apr 8;164(15):2017-22.

[Maturity-onset diabetes of the young--MODY. Molecular-genetic,
pathophysiological and clinical characteristics].

[Article in Danish]

Hansen T(1), Urhammer SA, Pedersen OB.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Niels Steensens Vej 2, DK-2820 Gentofte.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically and clinically
heterogeneous subtype of type 2 diabetes characterised by an early onset, an
autosomal dominant inheritance, and a primary defect in insulin secretion. MODY
comprises 2-5% of cases of type 2 diabetes. So far, six MODY genes have been
identified (MODY1-6): hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF-4 alpha), glucokinase, HNF-1
alpha, HNF-1 beta, insulin promoter factor 1(IPF-1), and neurogenic
differentiation factor 1 (NEUROD1). MODY2 and MODY3 are the most common forms of 
MODY. Mutations in glucokinase/MODY2 result in a mild form of diabetes. In
contrast, MODY3 and some of the other MODY forms are characterised by major
insulin secretory defects and severe hyperglycaemia associated with microvascular
complications. About 25% of known MODY is caused by mutations in yet unknown
genes and present results suggest that other monogenic forms of type 2 diabetes
might exist. The diagnosis of MODY has implications for the clinical management
of the patient's diabetes. The identification of MODY genes also opens new
perspectives in the understanding of the molecular basis of diabetes and may
probably contribute to the definition of novel targets for drug development and
gene therapy.

PMID: 11984998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25040-6. Epub 2002 Apr 29.

Mirk protein kinase is activated by MKK3 and functions as a transcriptional
activator of HNF1alpha.

Lim S(1), Jin K, Friedman E.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology Department, Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New York 13210,
USA.

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2004 Feb 6;279(6):5047.

Mirk/Dyrk1B is an arginine-directed serine/threonine protein kinase that is
expressed at low levels in most normal tissues but at elevated levels in many
tumor cell lines and in normal skeletal muscle. Colon carcinoma cell lines stably
overexpressing Mirk proliferated in serum-free medium, but the mechanism of Mirk 
action is unknown. DCoHm (dimerization cofactor of hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha ( HNF1alpha) from muscle), a novel gene of the DCoH family with 78% amino 
acid identity to DCoH, was identified as a Mirk-binding protein by yeast
two-hybrid analysis and cloned. Mirk co-immunoprecipitated with DCoHm and bound
to DCoHm in glutathione S-transferase pull-down assays. DCoH stabilizes HNF1alpha
as a dimer and enhances its transcriptional activity on the beta-fibrinogen
promoter reporter, and DCoHm had similar activity. Mirk enhanced HNF1alpha
transcriptional activity in a dose-dependent manner, whereas two kinase-inactive 
Mirk mutants and a Mirk N-terminal deletion mutant did not. Mirk, DCoHm, and
HNF1alpha formed a complex. Mirk bound to a specific region within the
CREB-binding protein-binding region of HNF1alpha and phosphorylated HNF1alpha at 
a site adjacent to the Mirk-binding region. Conversely, the HNF1alpha binding
domain was located within the first five conserved kinase subdomains of Mirk.
Mirk co-immunoprecipitated with the MAPK kinase MKK3, an upstream activator of
p38. MKK3 enhanced Mirk kinase activity and the transcriptional activation of
HNF1alpha by Mirk, suggesting that Mirk, like p38, is activated by certain
environmental stress agents. The Mirk-binding protein DCoH has been shown to be
selectively expressed in colon carcinomas but not in normal tissue. Mirk may
function as an HNF1alpha transcriptional activator in response to an
MKK3-mediated stress signal, and the selective expression of DCoH could restrict 
the Mirk response to carcinoma cells.

PMID: 11980910  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2002 Apr 13;146(15):726-9.

[High sensitivity to sulphonylurea treatment in 2 patients with maturity-onset
diabetes of the young type 3].

[Article in Dutch]

Bosselaar M(1), Hattersley AT, Tack CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Universitair Medisch Centrum St Radboud, afd. Algemeen Interne Geneeskunde,
Postbus 9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen.

In 2 patients, a 26-year-old woman and a 47-year-old man, diabetes mellitus was
diagnosed during their teens, although they had (almost) no symptoms at the time.
Since then, the disease was well controlled in both patients with the use of
tolbutamide at a low dose. Diabetes occurred in at least 3 generations of both
patients' families, inherited as an autosomal dominant trait. Genetic screening
in both individuals revealed two separate mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene,
confirming maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY-3). MODY-3 patients 
are unusually sensitive to the hypoglycaemic effects of sulphonylureas. These
agents remain effective in these patients for years, even at low doses.

PMID: 11980375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Diabetes. 2002 May;51(5):1409-18.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha recruits the transcriptional co-activator p300
on the GLUT2 gene promoter.

Ban N(1), Yamada Y, Someya Y, Miyawaki K, Ihara Y, Hosokawa M, Toyokuni S, Tsuda 
K, Seino Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolism and Clinical Nutrition, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Kyoto University, Japan.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha gene have been linked to 
subtype 3 of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), a disease characterized
by a primary defect in insulin secretion. Here we show that the human GLUT2 gene 
is closely regulated by HNF-1alpha via sequences downstream of the
transcriptional start site by interaction with transcriptional co-activator p300.
The promoter region of the human GLUT2 gene was subcloned into luciferase
expression plasmids that were transfected together with HNF-1alpha expression
plasmid into a pancreatic beta-cell line, HIT-T15, to evaluate transcriptional
activities. HNF-1alpha enhanced human GLUT2 promoter activity sixfold.
Site-direct mutagenesis and footprint analyses showed that the HNF-1alpha binding
site (+200 to +218) is critical in human GLUT2 gene expression. Furthermore,
mammalian two-hybrid and immunoprecipitation studies revealed the transactivation
domain of HNF-1alpha (amino acids 391-540) to interact with both the
NH(2)-terminal region (amino acids 180-662) and the COOH-terminal region (amino
acids 1,818-2,079) of p300. These findings demonstrated that HNF-1alpha binds to 
the 5'-untranslated region of GLUT2 and that p300 acts as a transcriptional
co-activator for HNF-1alpha. In addition, these results provided new insight into
the regulatory function of HNF-1alpha by suggesting a molecular basis for human
GLUT2 gene expression.

PMID: 11978637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 28;277(26):23367-73. Epub 2002 Apr 23.

NADPH-cytochrome P-450 reductase in the plasma membrane modulates the activation 
of hypoxia-inducible factor 1.

Osada M(1), Imaoka S, Sugimoto T, Hiroi T, Funae Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemical Biology, Osaka City University Medical School, 1-4-3
Asahimatchi, Abeno-ku, Osaka 545-8585, Japan.

Hypoxia induces a group of physiologically important genes that include
erythropoietin (EPO) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF).
Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 (HIF-1) was identified as a hypoxia-activated
transcription factor; however, the molecular mechanisms that underlie hypoxia
signal transduction in mammalian cells remain undefined. In this study, we found 
that a flavoprotein, NADPH-P450 reductase (NPR), could regulate the induction of 
EPO mRNA under hypoxic conditions. Hypoxic EPO mRNA induction in Hep3B cells was 
inhibited by diphenyleneiodonium chloride, which is an inhibitor of
NADPH-dependent enzymes. NPR antisense cDNA was transfected into Hep3B cells, and
NPR-deficient hepatocyte cells (NPR(-) cells) were established. NPR(-) cells
lacked EPO induction under hypoxia, and HIF-1alpha in NPR(-) cells did not
respond to either transcriptional activation or translocation to the nucleus
based on electrophoretic mobility shift assays and reporter gene assay including 
hypoxia response element. In contrast, NPR overexpression in Hep3B cells enhanced
the DNA binding activity of HIF-1alpha by luciferase reporter gene assay. A study
with HeLa S3 cells produced the same results. Furthermore, anti-NPR IgG inhibited
EPO induction. EPO induction inhibited by diphenyleneiodonium chloride was
recovered by bovine serum albumin-NADPH (a covalent binding complex of bovine
serum albumin and NADPH) as well as NADPH. These results suggested that NPR
located at the plasma membrane regulates EPO expression in hypoxia, including
HIF-1 activation and translocation. We further studied the expression of NPR and 
VEGF mRNAs in human tumor tissues and found that the NPR mRNA levels were
correlated with the VEGF mRNA levels, suggesting that NPR might be an important
factor in the hypoxic induction of genes such as VEGF in vivo.

PMID: 11971899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Diabetologia. 2002 Feb;45(2):286-7; author reply 287-8.

To: Lindner T, Cockburn BN, Bell GI (1999). Molecular genetics of MODY in
Germany. Diabetologia 42: 121-123.

Ziemssen F, Bellanné-Chantelot C, Osterhoff M, Schatz H, Pfeiffer AF.

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 1999 Jan;42(1):121-3.

PMID: 11942313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Diabetes Metab. 2002 Feb;28(1):39-44.

Prevalence of the missense mutation Gly574Ser in the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha in Africans with diabetes.

Collet C(1), Ducorps M, Mayaudon H, Dupuy O, Ceppa F, Boutin P, Froguel P,
Bauduceau B.

Author information: 
(1)Service d'Endocrinologie, Hôpital d'Instruction des Armées Bégin, 94160 Saint 
Mandé, France.

BACKGROUND: Clinical presentation and natural history of diabetes are somewhat
different in Black Africans compared to Caucasians. This peculiar disease course 
could be at least partly related to a specific genetic profile that has not been 
studied in this population.
METHODS: Medical backgrounds, anthropometric and biologic parameters were
obtained from 69 diabetic subjects in Dakar, Senegal, in 1998. Blood anti GAD and
Islet Cell Antibodies were studied, using RIA and immunofluorescence assay. The
HNF-1alpha gene was sequenced searching the Gly574Ser mutation, previously
described in MODY 3.
RESULTS: Among these 69 diabetic patients, 11 (16%) were found to have the G574S 
mutation affecting the HNF-1alpha. These 11 patients carrying the mutation were
compared respectively with the 58 non carriers. Mean age (57.5 yr. +/- 11 vs 51.1
yr. +/- 15) and duration of diabetes (11.9 vs 6.7 yr), were similar in the two
groups. BMI was not different in patients with the mutation (26.3 vs 23.3,
p=0.06). Metabolic control (Glycosylated hemoglobin) was poor in the two groups
(9.5% vs 9.2%). Chronic complications were equally found in the patients, but no 
mutation carrier had macroangiopathy. None of the anti GAD positive or ICA
positive patients had the mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: The HNF-1alpha Gly574Ser mutation was found in 16% of cases in a 69 
diabetic patients group in Senegal. Diabetes was as severe as in non carriers of 
mutation. This mutation has been implicated in atypical diabetes of Afro-American
children. The study confirms its prevalence in Africans with diabetes.

PMID: 11938027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jun 14;277(24):21361-70. Epub 2002 Apr 4.

Cloning of the human claudin-2 5'-flanking region revealed a TATA-less promoter
with conserved binding sites in mouse and human for caudal-related homeodomain
proteins and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha.

Sakaguchi T(1), Gu X, Golden HM, Suh E, Rhoads DB, Reinecker HC.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Department of Medicine, Center for the Study of
Inflammatory Bowel Disease, Massachusetts General Hospital & Harvard Medical
School, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Claudin-2 is a structural component of tight junctions in the kidneys, liver, and
intestine, but the mechanisms regulating its expression have not been defined.
The 5'-flanking region of the claudin-2 gene contains binding sites for
intestine-specific Cdx homeodomain proteins and hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-1, which are conserved in human and mouse. Both Cdx1 and Cdx2 activated the
claudin-2 promoter in the human intestinal epithelial cell line Caco-2.
HNF-1alpha augmented the Cdx2-induced but not Cdx1-induced transcriptional
activation of the human claudin-2 promoter. In mice, HNF-1alpha was required for 
claudin-2 expression in the villus epithelium of the ileum and within the liver
but not in the kidneys, indicating an organ-specific function of HNF-1alpha in
the regulation of claudin-2 gene expression. Tight junction structural
components, which determine epithelial polarization and intestinal barrier
function, can be regulated by homeodomain proteins that control the
differentiation of the intestinal epithelium.

PMID: 11934881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Eur J Immunol. 2002 Apr;32(4):967-71.

Wnt-1 and Wnt-4 regulate thymic cellularity.

Mulroy T(1), McMahon JA, Burakoff SJ, McMahon AP, Sen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana Farber Cancer Institute, Boston 02115, 
USA.

Thymic primordium, formed by cells derived from the endoderm, the ectoderm and
the neural crest-derived mesenchyme, receive fetal liver derived lymphoid
precursors. Reciprocal cell-cell interactions between thymic stromal cells and
lymphoid precursors are critical in the expansion and maturation of thymocytes.
Transcription factor TCF-1 is critical for the expansion of thymocytes because
deletion of TCF-1 results in a significant decrease in the number of thymocytes
without affecting the developmental pattern. In this report we show that Wnt-1
and Wnt-4 are expressed in the thymus and the deletion of Wnt-1 or Wnt-4 result
in a substantial decrease in the number of thymocytes without affecting the
pattern of maturation. Wnt-1 and Wnt-4 both regulate developing thymocytes
because a double deficiency results in a significantly greater decrease of
immature and mature thymocytes compared to deficiency in either Wnt-1 or Wnt-4.

PMID: 11920562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Hematol J. 2000;1(1):3-6.

Tcf/Lef transcription factors during T-cell development: unique and overlapping
functions.

Staal FJ(1), Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Utrecht Medical Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.
f.staal@lab.azu.nl

The founding members of the TCF family are T-cell factor-1 (Tcf-1) and lymphoid
enhancing factor-1 (Lef-1). In adult mammals, Tcf-1 is uniquely expressed in T
lymphocytes, while Lef-1 is expressed in T cells and early B cells. During murine
development, however, expression of Tcf-1 and Lef-1 occurs in complex overlapping
patterns in many tissues. The unique in vivo function of Tcf-1 and Lef-1 have
been explored by gene disruption experiments. Tcf-1-/- knockout mice are severely
impaired in the generation of T cells, but are otherwise normal. Lef-1-/- mice
lack hair, teeth, mammary glands and trigeminal nuclei and as a consequence die
around birth. As deduced from direct analyses and from transplantation
experiments, the Lef-1 mutation has no major effects on the immune system. In
Tcf-1/Lef-1 double knockout mice, development of T cells is completely abrogated,
indicating that Lef-1 can substitute for Tcf-1 in T-cell differentiation. Factors
of the TCF/LEF HMG domain family (TCFs) exist throughout the animal kingdom. It
has become evident that the TCFs interact with the vertebrate Wnt effector
beta-catenin to mediate axis formation in Xenopus. Likewise, Armadillo (the
Drosophila ortholog of beta-catenin) is genetically upstream of Drosophila TCF in
the Wingless pathway. Upon Wingless/Wnt signaling, Armadillo/beta-catenin
associate with nuclear TCFs and contribute a trans-activation domain to the
resulting bipartite transcription factor. In the absence of Wnt signaling, Tcf
factors associate with proteins of the Groucho family of transcriptional
repressors to strongly repress target gene transcription.

PMID: 11920163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Diabetologia. 2002 Mar;45(3):427-35.

The genetic abnormality in the beta cell determines the response to an oral
glucose load.

Stride A(1), Vaxillaire M, Tuomi T, Barbetti F, Njølstad PR, Hansen T, Costa A,
Conget I, Pedersen O, Søvik O, Lorini R, Groop L, Froguel P, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Postgraduate School of Medicine 
and Health Science, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We assessed how the role of genes genetic causation in causing
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) alters the response to an oral
glucose tolerance test (OGTT).
METHODS: We studied OGTT in 362 MODY subjects, from seven European centres; 245
had glucokinase gene mutations and 117 had Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor -1 alpha (
HNF-1alpha) gene mutations.
RESULTS: BMI and age were similar in the genetically defined groups. Fasting
plasma glucose (FPG) was less than 5.5 mmol/l in 2 % glucokinase subjects and 46 
% HNF-1 alpha subjects ( p < 0.0001). Glucokinase subjects had a higher FPG than 
HNF-1 alpha subjects ([means +/- SD] 6.8 +/- 0.8 vs 6.0 +/- 1.9 mmol/l, p <
0.0001), a lower 2-h value (8.9 +/- 2.3 vs 11.2 +/- 5.2 mmol/l, p < 0.0001) and a
lower OGTT increment (2-h - fasting) (2.1 +/- 2.3 vs 5.2 +/- 3.9 mmol/l, p <
0.0001). The relative proportions classified as diabetic depended on whether
fasting (38 % vs 22 %, glucokinase vs HNF-1 alpha) or 2-h values (19 % vs 44 %)
were used. Fasting and 2-h glucose values were not correlated in the glucokinase 
subjects ( r = -0.047, p = 0.65) but were strongly correlated in HNF-1 alpha
subjects ( r = 0.8, p < 0.001). Insulin concentrations were higher in the
glucokinase subjects throughout the OGTT.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The genetic cause of the beta-cell defect results in
clear differences in both the fasting glucose and the response to an oral glucose
load and this can help diagnostic genetic testing in MODY. OGTT results reflect
not only the degree of hyperglycaemia but also the underlying cause.

PMID: 11914749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2002 Feb 25;188(1-2):99-109.

Stimulation of the alpha-fetoprotein promoter by unliganded thyroid hormone
receptor in association with protein deacetylation.

Van Reeth T(1), Gabant P, Szpirer C, Szpirer J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement, Dept. de Biologie Moleculaire, IBMM,
Université Libre de Bruxelles,Rue Profs. Jeener & Brachet 12, B-6041 Gosselies,
Belgium.

alpha-Fetoprotein (AFP) is a serum protein expressed during fetal life, the
expression of which is shut off after birth. The activity of the mouse Afp gene
promoter region comprised between -80 and -38 bp is regulated by the thyroid
hormone receptor (T3R): negatively in the presence of T3 and positively in the
absence of T3. The stimulating effect of unliganded T3R is, unexpectedly,
antagonized by cofactors that have histone-acetyl-transferase activity, or by
sodium butyrate, which inhibits histone acetylases (HDACs). The unliganded T3R
stimulating activity effect is thus associated with protein deacetylation,
contrary to the usual situation. In combination with previous results, our
observations suggest that T3-mediated down regulation of the Afp promoter is due 
to T3-induced protein acetylation leading to loss of a nucleosomal structure
(required for promoter activity) and chromatin opening.

PMID: 11911950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Mar 19;99(6):3818-23.

Profound defects in pancreatic beta-cell function in mice with combined
heterozygous mutations in Pdx-1, Hnf-1alpha, and Hnf-3beta.

Shih DQ(1), Heimesaat M, Kuwajima S, Stein R, Wright CV, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Defects in pancreatic beta-cell function contribute to the development of type 2 
diabetes, a polygenic disease that is characterized by insulin resistance and
compromised insulin secretion. Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) -1alpha, -3beta,
-4alpha, and Pdx-1 contribute in the complex transcriptional circuits within the 
pancreas that are involved in beta-cell development and function. In mice, a
heterozygous mutation in Pdx-1 alone, but not Hnf-1alpha(+/-), Hnf-3beta(+/-), or
Hnf-4alpha(+/-), causes impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in mice. To
investigate the possible functional relationships between these transcription
factors on beta-cell activity in vivo, we generated mice with the following
combined heterozygous mutations: Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-),
Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-), Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-4alpha(+/-),
Hnf-1alpha(+/-)/Hnf-4alpha(+/-), and Hnf-3beta(+/-)/Hnf-4alpha(+/-). The greatest
loss in function was in combined heterozygous null alleles of Pdx-1 and
Hnf-1alpha (Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-)), or Pdx-1 and Hnf-3beta
(Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-)). Both double mutants develop progressively impaired
glucose tolerance and acquire a compromised first- and second-phase insulin
secretion profile in response to glucose compared with Pdx-1(+/-) mice alone. The
loss in beta-cell function in Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-) mice was associated with 
decreased expression of Nkx-6.1, glucokinase (Gck), aldolase B (aldo-B), and
insulin, whereas Nkx2.2, Nkx-6.1, Glut-2, Gck, aldo-B, the liver isoform of
pyruvate kinase, and insulin expression was reduced in Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-)
mice. The islet cell architecture was also abnormal in Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-3beta(+/-) 
and Pdx-1(+/-)/Hnf-1alpha(+/-) mice, with glucagon-expressing cells scattered
throughout the islet, a defect that may be connected to decreased E-cadherin
expression. Our data suggest that functional interactions between key islet
regulatory factors play an important role in maintaining islet architecture and
beta-cell function. These studies also established polygenic mouse models for
investigating the mechanisms contributing to beta-cell dysfunction in diabetes.

PMCID: PMC122607
PMID: 11904435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 2;99(7):4614-9. Epub 2002 Mar 19.

HNF-1alpha G319S, a transactivation-deficient mutant, is associated with altered 
dynamics of diabetes onset in an Oji-Cree community.

Triggs-Raine BL(1), Kirkpatrick RD, Kelly SL, Norquay LD, Cattini PA, Yamagata K,
Hanley AJ, Zinman B, Harris SB, Barrett PH, Hegele RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Medical Genetics, University of Manitoba,
Winnipeg, MB, Canada R3E 0W3.

The prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus in the Oji-Cree of northwestern
Ontario is the third highest in the world. A private mutation, G319S, in HNF1A,
which encodes hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha), was associated with
Oji-Cree type 2 diabetes and was found in approximately 40% of affected subjects.
The G319S mutation reduced the in vitro ability of HNF-1alpha to activate
transcription by approximately 50%, with no effect on DNA binding or protein
stability. There was no evidence of a dominant negative effect of the mutant
protein. The impact of the G319S mutation at the population level was assessed by
classifying subjects with type 2 diabetes according to HNF1A genotype and
plotting the cumulative age of onset of diabetes. Disease onset was modeled
satisfactorily by two-parameter sigmoidal functions for all diabetic subjects and
all three HNF1A genotypes. Pairwise statistical comparisons showed significant
between-genotype differences in t50 (all P < 0.00001), corresponding to the age
at which half the subjects had become diabetic. Each dose of G319S accelerated
median disease onset by approximately 7 years. Thus, the
transactivation-deficient HNF1A G319S mutation affects the dynamics of disease
onset. The demonstration of a functional consequence for HNF1A G319S provides a
mechanistic basis for its strong association with Oji-Cree type 2 diabetes and
its unparalleled specificity for diabetes prediction in these people, in whom
diabetes presents a significant public health dilemma. The findings also show
that HNF1A mutations can be associated with typical adult-onset insulin-resistant
obesity-related diabetes in addition to maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

PMCID: PMC123696
PMID: 11904371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2002 Apr;282(4):L757-65.

Cell-specific involvement of HNF-1beta in alpha(1)-antitrypsin gene expression in
human respiratory epithelial cells.

Hu C(1), Perlmutter DH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
Missouri 63110, USA.

The synergistic action of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and HNF-4 plays 
an important role in expression of the alpha(1)-antitrypsin (alpha(1)-AT) gene in
human hepatic and intestinal epithelial cells. Recent studies have indicated that
the alpha(1)-AT gene is also expressed in human pulmonary alveolar epithelial
cells, a potentially important local site of the lung antiprotease defense. In
this study, we examined the possibility that alpha(1)-AT gene expression in a
human pulmonary epithelial cell line H441 was also directed by the synergistic
action of HNF-1alpha and HNF-4 and/or by the action of HNF-3, which has been
shown to play a dominant role in gene expression in H441 cells. The results show 
that alpha(1)-AT gene expression in H441 cells is predominantly driven by
HNF-1beta, even though HNF-1beta has no effect on alpha(1)-AT gene expression in 
human hepatic Hep G2 and human intestinal epithelial Caco-2 cell lines.
Expression of alpha(1)-AT and HNF-1beta was also demonstrated in primary cultures
of human respiratory epithelial cells. HNF-4 has no effect on alpha(1)-AT gene
expression in H441 cells, even when it is cotransfected with HNF-1beta or
HNF-1alpha. HNF-3 by itself has little effect on alpha(1)-AT gene expression in
H441, Hep G2, or Caco-2 cells but tends to have an upregulating effect when
cotransfected with HNF-1 in Hep G2 and Caco-2 cells. These results indicate the
unique involvement of HNF-1beta in alpha(1)-AT gene expression in a cell line and
primary cultures derived from human respiratory epithelium.

PMID: 11880302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 17;277(20):17564-70. Epub 2002 Mar 1.

Foxa2 (HNF3beta ) controls multiple genes implicated in metabolism-secretion
coupling of glucose-induced insulin release.

Wang H(1), Gauthier BR, Hagenfeldt-Johansson KA, Iezzi M, Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Biochemistry, Department of Internal Medicine, University
Medical Center, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Haiyan.Wang@medicine.unige.ch

The transcription factor Foxa2 is implicated in blood glucose homeostasis.
Conditional expression of Foxa2 or its dominant-negative mutant DN-Foxa2 in INS-1
cells reveals that Foxa2 regulates the expression of genes important for glucose 
sensing in pancreatic beta-cells. Overexpression of Foxa2 results in blunted
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, whereas induction of DN-Foxa2 causes a left
shift of glucose-induced insulin release. The mRNA levels of GLUT2 and
glucokinase are drastically decreased after induction of Foxa2. In contrast, loss
of Foxa2 function leads to up-regulation of hexokinase (HK) I and II and
glucokinase (HK-IV) mRNA expression. The glucokinase and the low K(m) hexokinase 
activities as well as glycolysis are increased proportionally. In addition,
induction of DN-Foxa2 also reduces the expression of beta-cell K(ATP) channel
subunits Sur1 and Kir6.2 by 70%. Furthermore, in contrast to previous reports,
induction of Foxa2 causes pronounced decreases in the HNF4alpha and HNF1alpha
mRNA levels. Foxa2 fails to regulate the expression of Pdx1 transcripts. The
expression of insulin and islet amyloid polypeptide is markedly suppressed after 
induction of Foxa2, while the glucagon mRNA levels are significantly increased.
Conversely, Foxa2 is required for glucagon expression in these INS-1-derived
cells. These results suggest that Foxa2 is a vital transcription factor evolved
to control the expression of genes essential for maintaining beta-cell glucose
sensing and glucose homeostasis.

PMID: 11875061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Acta Diabetol. 2001;38(3):123-7.

Mutation in hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha is not a common cause of MODY and
early-onset type 2 diabetes in Korea.

Lee HJ(1), Ahn CW, Kim SJ, Song YD, Lim SK, Kim KR, Lee HC, Huh KB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal Medicine, Yonsei University 
College of Medicine, Sudaemungu, Seoul, Korea.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)-3 with a mutation in hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha has been identified in most races, but the prevalence
of Korean MODY and early-onset type 2 diabetes with a mutation in this gene is
unknown. To determine the prevalence of MODY and early-onset type 2 diabetes with
the mutation of HNF-1alpha gene in Korea, we analyzed this gene in 69 Korean
early-onset type 2 diabetics and in 35 healthy persons using the single-strand
conformation polymorphism (SSCP) technique and direct sequencing. We identified
one mutation in exon 4 (C900A) in only one of the 69 Korean subjects with
early-onset type 2 diabetes; this mutation was silent and did not change the
amino acid (Pro300). Additionally, we identified four polymorphisms: S487N,
AAC-->AGC, intron 2 (nt -23), intron 7: (nt +7) and intron 9 (nt -24). However,
there was no significant difference in frequencies of the four polymorphisms
between the type 2 diabetes and control groups. Among type 2 diabetics, codon 487
variant showed no relationship to age at onset, body mass index, fasting blood
glucose, HbA1c, lipid profile, basal C-peptide and 2 hour C-peptide. We concluded
that this genetic mutation in HNF-1alpha gene may not be a common contributor to 
MODY and early-onset type 2 diabetes susceptibility in Korea.

PMID: 11827432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Mol Genet Genomics. 2002 Jan;266(5):832-7. Epub 2001 Nov 7.

A role for HNF-3 in the regulation of the HNF-1 gene of the Atlantic salmon.

Stenson-Cox C(1), McNair A, Curley M, Smith T, Gannon F.

Author information: 
(1)National Diagnostics Centre/BioResearch Ireland, National University of
Ireland, Galway. catherine.m.stenson@nuigalway.ie

Hepatocyte nuclear factors -1 (HNF-1) and -3 (HNF-3) are hepatocyte-enriched
transcription factors that are central to the establishment and maintenance of
the liver phenotype in vertebrates. In the present study we demonstrate that, in 
the Atlantic salmon, asHNF-3 regulates the expression of the gene for asHNF-1.
Multiple putative binding sites for asHNF-3 were identified within the 5'
flanking region of the HNF-1 gene using a computer-based algorithm, and these
were confirmed to be functional by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. In
transient transfection assays it was shown that co-expression of asHNF-3 leads to
a decrease in the promoter activity of the 5' flanking region of the asHNF-1
gene.

PMID: 11810258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Diabetes Nutr Metab. 2001 Oct;14(5):288-91.

Identification of a new mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in 
a Polish family with early-onset type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Malecki MT(1), Klupa T, Frey J, Cyganek K, Galicka-Stankowska D, Wanic K,
Sieradzki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Medical College, Jagiellonian University,
Krakow, Poland.

Recently, several genes associated with early-onset, autosomal dominant Type 2
diabetes (MODY) have been identified. Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 
(HNF)-1alpha gene seem to account for a substantial proportion of this type of
diabetes in several populations. However, it is still of interest to estimate the
frequency of HNF-1alpha mutations in various ethnic groups. The aim of our study 
was to determine the contribution of the HNF-1alpha gene to the development of
MODY in a Polish population. We selected 15 families with MODY for this project. 
The 10 exons and promoter region of the gene were screened for sequence
differences by direct sequencing of probands DNA. We detected 7 previously
described polymorphisms that were not associated with diabetes. However, one
sequence difference, a deletion of a cytosine in codon 225 in exon 3 (designated 
S225fdelC), was a new mutation resulting in a frame shift and synthesis of a
nonsense peptide from amino acid 225 to 232 followed by the stop codon. Thus, the
S225fdelC mutation effectively caused the loss of a part of the DNA binding
domain and the entire transactivation domain. This mutation was present in 4
affected members of the family. They developed diabetes at an early age (mean age
at diagnosis 23 yr) and were characterized by severely impaired insulin
secretion. In addition, one family member who was not a carrier of the S225fdelC 
mutation was diagnosed with diabetes. Thus, he represents an example of
phenocopy. In conclusion, we have identified a new HNF-1alpha variant that
represents the first MODY mutation described in a Polish population. MODY3
mutations, including those in the exon 4 "hot spot", do not appear to be a very
common cause of MODY in the Polish population.

PMID: 11806470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. J Hepatol. 2002 Jan;36(1):142-5.

HNF-1 alpha: have bile acid transport genes found their "master"?

Arrese M(1), Karpen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Catholic University of Chile School of
Medicine, Santiago, Chile.

PMID: 11804680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Differentiation. 2001 Oct;68(4-5):254-69.

Genomic expression analysis implicates Wnt signaling pathway and extracellular
matrix alterations in hepatic specification and differentiation of murine hepatic
stem cells.

Plescia C(1), Rogler C, Rogler L.

Author information: 
(1)Marion Bessin Liver Research Center, Department of Medicine, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

HBC-3 hepatic stem cells maintained in the undifferentiated state can be induced 
to differentiate along the hepatocyte lineage in response to DMSO (Rogler, 1997).
In order to understand the complex transcriptional regulatory mechanisms
associated with the differentiation of these somatic stem cells and to identify
novel candidate stem cell and differentiation associated genes, we have begun to 
characterize the transcriptome of HBC-3 cells during a 7-day differentiation
protocol. This analysis showed that differentiating HBC-3 cells undergo biphasic 
bursts of gene regulation peaking at 3 hours and 120 hours of DMSO treatment. In 
the undifferentiated state, HBC-3 cells express muscle, neuron, myeloid, and
lymphoid specific genes that are rapidly downregulated during hepatocytic
differentiation. Cluster analysis has revealed large groups of genes with
different temporal regulation profiles demonstrating complex and widespread
transcriptional changes. Specifically, we discovered a multifaceted
downregulation of the Wnt/beta-catenin pathway accompanied by the repression of
TCF target genes during HBC-3 differentiation. In addition, there is
downregulation of cellular receptors for fibronectin and laminin and other
extracellular matrix molecules indicative of widespread cell surface alterations.
DMSO induces cell cycle arrest, and this is reflected in upregulation of growth
inhibitory proteins such as cyclin I and p18 and downregulation of cyclins B1 and
D. Genes needed for hepatocytic functions, such as apolipoprotein C-IV,
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, alcohol dehydrogenase, and asialoglycoprotein 
receptor were upregulated. Finally, transcriptional regulators including Twist,
Snail, HNF1a, and GATA6 were upregulated during differentiation of HBC-3 cells.
The significance of these findings is that our genome-based approach has allowed 
the parallel identification of multiple regulatory pathways that is needed to
begin to fully understand the complex differentiation process.

PMID: 11776478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Genetika. 2001 Oct;37(10):1330-9.

[Suppression of alpha-fetoprotein gene expression in somatic hybrids of
AFP-positive and AFP-negative clones of rat hepatoma].

[Article in Russian]

Kustova IF(1), Varga EV, Eraizer TL, Lazarevich NL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Carcinogenesis, Blokhin Cancer Research Center, Russian Academy
of Medical Sciences, Moscow, 115478 Russia.

The presented study is devoted to investigation of molecular mechanisms
regulating alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene expression at transcriptional level. The 
study was carried out on AFP-positive and AFP-negative clones of rat hepatoma
McA-RH 7777 that also differ in hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF) 1 and 4
transcription levels. To examine a hypothesis of existence in AFP-non-producing
clones a transcriptional factor that downregulates this gene expression, we have 
obtained somatic hybrids of AFP-positive and AFP-negative clones. In the obtained
hybrids AFP gene expression is decreased while expression of HNF1, one of the
main AFP promoter activators, is maintained. These data indicate an existence of 
a repressor in AFP-negative clones that determines AFP gene downregulation
regardless of the HNF1 expression level.

PMID: 11761608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Diabetes. 2002 Jan;51(1):114-23.

Overexpression of dominant-negative mutant hepatocyte nuclear fctor-1 alpha in
pancreatic beta-cells causes abnormal islet architecture with decreased
expression of E-cadherin, reduced beta-cell proliferation, and diabetes.

Yamagata K(1), Nammo T, Moriwaki M, Ihara A, Iizuka K, Yang Q, Satoh T, Li M,
Uenaka R, Okita K, Iwahashi H, Zhu Q, Cao Y, Imagawa A, Tochino Y, Hanafusa T,
Miyagawa J, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Osaka, Japan. kazu@imed2.osaka-u.ac.jp

One subtype of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)-3 results from
mutations in the gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha. We
generated transgenic mice expressing a naturally occurring dominant-negative form
of human HNF-1 alpha (P291fsinsC) in pancreatic beta-cells. A progressive
hyperglycemia with age was seen in these transgenic mice, and the mice developed 
diabetes with impaired glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. The pancreatic
islets exhibited abnormal architecture with reduced expression of glucose
transporter (GLUT2) and E-cadherin. Blockade of E-cadherin-mediated cell adhesion
in pancreatic islets abolished the glucose-stimulated increases in intracellular 
Ca(2+) levels and insulin secretion, suggesting that loss of E-cadherin in
beta-cells is associated with impaired insulin secretion. There was also a
reduction in beta-cell number (50%), proliferation rate (15%), and pancreatic
insulin content (45%) in 2-day-old transgenic mice and a further reduction in
4-week-old animals. Our findings suggest various roles for HNF-1 alpha in normal 
glucose metabolism, including the regulation of glucose transport, beta-cell
growth, and beta-cell-to-beta-cell communication.

PMID: 11756330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Exp Med. 2001 Dec 3;194(11):1683-9.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha controls the expression of terminal complement
genes.

Pontoglio M(1), Pausa M, Doyen A, Viollet B, Yaniv M, Tedesco F.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique URA
1644, Département de Biotechnologie, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris cedex 15,
France. marcop@pasteur.fr

The terminal components of the complement system contribute to host defense by
forming the multiprotein membrane attack complex (MAC) which is responsible for
cell lysis and several noncytotoxic effects. Most of the complement proteins are 
synthesized in the liver, but the mechanisms controlling their tissue-specific
expression have not been elucidated. In this study we show that mice lacking the 
hepatic transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) fail to
transcribe C5 and C8A complement genes. In addition, mRNAs encoding for several
other terminal complement components or subunits are expressed at lower levels,
including C8beta, C8gamma, and C9. We next used a reconstitution assay involving 
human sera with selective complement deficiencies to assess mouse complement
activity. Sera from HNF1alpha-deficient mice showed negligible hemolytic activity
of both C5 and C8alpha-gamma subunits. The activity of C8beta was severely
affected despite only a 50% reduction in C8beta mRNA levels in the liver. This is
reminiscent of C8alpha-gamma-deficient patients who accumulate extremely low
levels of the C8beta subunit. Our results demonstrate that HNF1alpha plays a key 
role in the expression of C5 and C8A genes, two terminal complement component
genes that are essential for the assembly of MAC as a result of complement
activation.

PMCID: PMC2193531
PMID: 11733582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 4;98(25):14189-91.

Dissecting the transcriptional network of pancreatic islets during development
and differentiation.

Shih DQ(1), Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, The Rockefeller University, 1230 York
Avenue, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Comment on
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 4;98(25):14481-6.

PMCID: PMC64655
PMID: 11734636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mech Dev. 2001 Dec;109(2):437-40.

Expression of Tcf/Lef and sFrp and localization of beta-catenin in the developing
mouse lung.

Tebar M(1), Destrée O, de Vree WJ, Ten Have-Opbroek AA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pulmonology, Leiden University Medical Center, NL-2300 RC,
Leiden, The Netherlands.

Recent evidence that Wnts and other genes in the Wnt signaling pathway are
expressed in embryonic and adult mouse lung suggests that this pathway is
important for cell fate decisions and differentiation of lung cell types. We
therefore examined the expression and protein distribution of several Wnt pathway
components during prenatal mouse lung development using whole-mount in situ
hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Between embryonic days 10.5 and 17.5
(E10.5-E17.5), beta-catenin was localized in the cytoplasm, and often also the
nucleus, of the undifferentiated primordial epithelium (PE), differentiating
alveolar epithelium (AE; present from E14.5 onward), and adjacent mesenchyme.
Tcf1, Lef1, Tcf3, Tcf4, sFrp1, sFrp2 and sFrp4 were also expressed in the PE, AE,
and adjacent mesenchyme in specific spatio-temporal patterns.

PMID: 11731265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Chin Med J (Engl). 2001 Nov;114(11):1147-50.

An automated fluorescent single strand conformation polymorphism technique for
high throughput mutation screening.

Weng J(1), Lehto M, Berglund A, Groop LC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yet-San
University of Medical Sciences, Guangzhou 510080, China.
gzwengjp@public.guangzhou.gd.cn

OBJECTIVE: To develop a high throughput mutational detection method by multiple
fluorescence-labeled polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products.
METHODS: A total of 27 known mutations including 22 substitutions, 3 insertions
(1, 2 and 7 bp) and 2 deletions (1 and 2 bp) in the hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-4 alpha, glucokinase and HNF-1 alpha genes were tested. During nested PCR, 
amplified fragments were labeled with three fluorescent dyes. PCR products were
visualized with an ABI-377 fluorescence sequencer using 5% glycerol or 10%
sucrose in non-denaturing gel conditions.
RESULTS: Twenty-five of 27 variants (93%) could be detected by combining 5%
glycerol and 10% sucrose gel matrix conditions. Twenty-two of 27 (82%) and 18 of 
27 (67%) variants were identified using 5% glycerol and 10% sucrose conditions,
respectively.
CONCLUSION: This fluorescence-based PCR single strand conformation polymorphism
technique represents a simple, non-hazardous, time-saving and sensitive method
for high throughput mutation detection.

PMID: 11729508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 22;277(8):6413-21. Epub 2001 Nov 27.

Dominant-negative suppression of HNF-1 alpha results in mitochondrial
dysfunction, INS-1 cell apoptosis, and increased sensitivity to ceramide-, but
not to high glucose-induced cell death.

Wobser H(1), Düssmann H, Kögel D, Wang H, Reimertz C, Wollheim CB, Byrne MM,
Prehn JH.

Author information: 
(1)Interdisciplinary Center for Clinical Research (IZKF), Research Group
Apoptosis and Cell Death, Westphalian Wilhelms-University, D-48149 Münster,
Germany.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) 3 is a monogenic form of diabetes
caused by mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1
alpha. We investigated the involvement of apoptotic events in INS-1 insulinoma
cells overexpressing wild-type HNF-1 alpha (WT-HNF-1 alpha) or a
dominant-negative mutant (DN-HNF-1 alpha) under control of a
doxycycline-dependent transcriptional activator. Forty-eight h after induction of
DN-HNF-1 alpha, INS-1 cells activated caspase-3 and underwent apoptotic cell
death, while cells overexpressing WT-HNF-1 alpha remained viable. Mitochondrial
cytochrome c release and activation of caspase-9 accompanied DN-HNF-1
alpha-induced apoptosis, suggesting the involvement of the mitochondrial
apoptosis pathway. Activation of caspases was preceded by mitochondrial
hyperpolarization and decreased expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-xL. 
Transient overexpression of Bcl-xL was sufficient to rescue INS-1 cells from
DN-HNF-1 alpha-induced apoptosis. Both WT- and DN-HNF-1 alpha-expressing cells
demonstrated similar increases in apoptosis when cultured at high glucose (25
mm). In contrast, induction of DN-HNF-1 alpha highly sensitized cells to ceramide
toxicity. In cells cultured at low glucose, DN-HNF-1 alpha induction also caused 
up-regulation of the cell cycle inhibitor p27(KIP1). Therefore, our data indicate
that increased sensitivity to the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway and decreased
cell proliferation may account for the progressive loss of beta-cell function
seen in MODY 3 subjects.

PMID: 11724785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 Dec;60(6):1421-30.

Regulation of flavin-containing monooxygenase 1 expression by ying yang 1 and
hepatic nuclear factors 1 and 4.

Luo Z(1), Hines RN.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics and Pharmacology and Toxicology, Birth Defects
Research Center, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226-4801,
USA.

The flavin-containing monooxygenases (FMOs) are important for the oxidation of a 
variety of environmental toxicants, natural products, and therapeutics.
Consisting of six family members (FMO1-5), these enzymes exhibit distinct but
broad and overlapping substrate specificity and are expressed in a highly tissue-
and species-selective manner. Corresponding to previously identified regulatory
domains, a YY1 binding site was identified at the major rabbit FMO1 promoter,
position -8 to -2, two overlapping HNF1alpha sites, position -132 to -105, and
two HNF4alpha sites, position -467 to -454 and -195 to -182. Cotransfection
studies with HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha expression vectors demonstrated a major role
for each of these factors in enhancing FMO1 promoter activity. In contrast, YY1
was shown by site-directed mutagenesis to be dispensable for basal promoter
activity but suppressed the ability of the upstream domains to enhance
transcription. Finally, comparisons between rabbit and human FMO1 demonstrated
conservation of each of these regulatory elements. With the exception of the most
distal HNF4alpha site, each of the orthologous human sequences also was able to
compete with rabbit FMO1 cis-elements for specific protein binding. These data
are consistent with these same elements being important for regulating human FMO1
developmental- and tissue-specific expression.

PMID: 11723251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Diabetologia. 2001 Nov;44(11):2098-103.

MODY in Iceland is associated with mutations in HNF-1alpha and a novel mutation
in NeuroD1.

Kristinsson SY(1), Thorolfsdottir ET, Talseth B, Steingrimsson E, Thorsson AV,
Helgason T, Hreidarsson AB, Arngrimsson R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Iceland,
Reykjavik, Iceland.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Five different types of maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) have been identified until now but mutation screening suggests that more
MODY genes exist. Mutations in genes encoding transcription factors essential for
normal development and function of pancreatic beta cells has recently become
important in studying the genetics of Type II (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes
mellitus. Patients with MODY and their families in Iceland were screened for
mutations in the transcription factor genes.
METHODS: Clinical and biochemical information on individuals with MODY was
collected and their family trees constructed. Linkage analysis was carried out on
chromosomal regions known to harbour genes previously shown to be associated with
MODY. Mutations were identified by direct sequencing.
RESULTS: Three families were identified. Two of these showed linkage to
chromosome 12 and carried mutations in exon 4 of the HNF-1alpha gene (290fsdelC
and R272C). However, the third family showed no linkage to the previously
described MODY genes but shared a novel mutation in the NeuroD1 gene on
chromosome 2q32. This mutation, a glutamate to lysine substitution at codon 110, 
resides in the basic domain of the protein.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Mutations in MODY subjects have been identified in the
Icelandic population. In addition this study identified the NeuroD1 gene as the
gene responsible for the sixth type of MODY.

PMID: 11719843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 4;98(25):14481-6. Epub 2001 Nov 20.

A transcription factor regulatory circuit in differentiated pancreatic cells.

Boj SF(1), Parrizas M, Maestro MA, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Hormonal Biochemistry Units, Hospital Clinic Universitari,
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Villarroel 170, 08036
Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 4;98(25):14189-91.

Mutations in the human genes encoding hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF) 1alpha,
1beta, 4alpha, and IPF1(PDX1/IDX1/STF1) result in pancreatic beta cell
dysfunction and diabetes mellitus. In hepatocytes, hnf4alpha controls the
transcription of hnf1alpha, suggesting that this same interaction may operate in 
beta cells and thus account for the common diabetic phenotype. We show that, in
pancreatic islet and exocrine cells, hnf4alpha expression unexpectedly depends on
hnf1alpha. This effect is tissue-specific and mediated through direct occupation 
by hnf1alpha of an alternate promoter located 45.6 kb from the previously
characterized hnf4alpha promoter. Hnf1alpha also exerts direct control of
pancreatic-specific expression of hnf4gamma and hnf3gamma. Hnf1alpha dependence
of hnf4alpha, hnf4gamma, hnf3gamma, and two previously characterized distal
targets (glut2 and pklr) is established only after differentiated cells arise
during pancreatic embryonic development. These studies define an unexpected
hierarchical regulatory relationship between two genes involved in human
monogenic diabetes in the cells, which are relevant to its pathophysiology.
Furthermore, they indicate that hnf1alpha is an essential component of a
transcription factor circuit whose role may be to maintain differentiated
functions of pancreatic cells.

PMCID: PMC64707
PMID: 11717395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Endocrinology. 2001 Dec;142(12):5311-20.

Beta-cell-targeted expression of a dominant-negative hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 
alpha induces a maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)3-like phenotype in
transgenic mice.

Hagenfeldt-Johansson KA(1), Herrera PL, Wang H, Gjinovci A, Ishihara H, Wollheim 
CB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Biochemistry, Department of Internal Medicine, University
Medical Center, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1
alpha) cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young 3, a severe form of diabetes
characterized by pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. We have used targeted
expression of a dominant-negative mutant of HNF-1 alpha to specifically suppress 
HNF-1 alpha function in beta-cells of transgenic mice. We show that males
expressing the mutant protein became overtly diabetic within 6 wk of age, whereas
females displayed glucose intolerance. Transgenic males exhibited impaired
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, detected both in vivo and in the perfused
pancreas. Pancreatic insulin content was markedly decreased in diabetic animals, 
whereas the glucagon content was increased. Postnatal islet development was
altered, with an increased alpha-cell to beta-cell ratio. beta-Cell
ultrastructure showed signs of severe beta-cell damage, including mitochondrial
swelling. This animal model of maturity-onset diabetes of the young 3 should be
useful for the further elucidation of the mechanism by which HNF-1 alpha
deficiency causes beta-cell dysfunction in this disease.

PMID: 11713231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2001 Dec;281(6):F1082-91.

Murine and human type I Na-phosphate cotransporter genes: structure and promoter 
activity.

Soumounou Y(1), Gauthier C, Tenenhouse HS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University-Montreal Children's Hospital Research Institute, McGill
University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H3Z 2Z3.

Na-phosphate (P(i)) cotransporters in the apical membrane of renal proximal
tubular cells play a major role in the maintenance of P(i) homeostasis. Although 
two such cotransporters, Npt1 and Npt2, have been identified, little is known
about the function and regulation of Npt1. We cloned and characterized the murine
(Npt1) and human (NPT1) genes, isolated the 5'-flanking region of Npt1, and
analyzed its promoter activity. Npt1 is approximately 29 kb with 12 exons,
whereas NPT1 is approximately 49 kb with one additional exon. The Npt1 promoter
has a TATA-like box but no CAAT box, and the transcription start site was
identified by primer extension and 5'-rapid amplification of cDNA ends.
Transfection of opossum kidney cells with Npt1 promoter-reporter gene constructs 
demonstrated significant activity in a 570-bp fragment that was completely
inhibited by cotransfection with the transcription factor, hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-3 beta. Deletion of 200 bp from the 3'-end of the 570-bp fragment
abrogated its promoter activity. In addition, promoter activity of a 4.5-kb
fragment, but not the 570-bp fragment, was stimulated fourfold by cotransfection 
with HNF-1 alpha. Other well-characterized cis-acting elements were identified in
the Npt1 promoter. We suggest that Npt1 expression is transcriptionally regulated
and provide a basis for the investigation of Npt1 function by targeted
mutagenesis.

PMID: 11704559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Pharm Pharmacol. 2001 Oct;53(10):1365-71.

The effect of endotoxin on hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 nuclear protein binding:
potential implications on CYP2E1 expression in the rat.

Roe AL(1), Poloyac SM, Howard G, Shedlofsky SI, Blouin RA.

Author information: 
(1)Procter & Gamble Pharmaceuticals, Drug Safety Assessment, Health Care Research
Center, Mason, OH 45040-9462, USA. roeal@pg.com

The purpose of this study was to determine if changes in nuclear protein binding 
of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1) occur after lipopolysaccharide (LPS)
administration. In addition, the time-course of alterations in CYP2E1 regulation 
were evaluated. Rats were injected with 2.0 mg LPS and euthanized over a 72-h
period. Nuclear protein binding to a consensus HNF-1 oligonucleotide was assessed
by the electrophoretic mobility shift assay. CYP2E1 activity was analysed using
chlorzoxazone as a substrate (60H-CLZ), and CYP2E1 protein concentration was
determined by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. Endotoxin treatment resulted in 
decreased nuclear protein binding to an HNF-1 element as early as 1 h after
treatment and returned to control levels by 72 h. This reduced binding persisted 
for 24 h and returned to control values 48 h after LPS administration. In
addition, the reduction in binding was primarily attributable to a HNF-1alpha
immunoreactive protein. The observed reduction in HNF-1 binding was followed in
the time-course by decreases in CYP2E1 activity and protein content with maximal 
decreases to 50 and 67% of control, respectively, at 48 h after LPS
administration. Endotoxin is a potent inducer of the acute phase response (APR). 
The APR stimulation by endotoxin administration reduced HNF-1alpha binding and
decreased the expression of CYP2E1 in the rat liver. The time-course of
alterations in HNF-1 and CYP2E1 lend support to the possibility that HNF-1alpha
may play a role in the down-regulation of genes that require HNF-1alpha for their
constitutive expression. These data serve as an important precedent for future
studies evaluating the direct association of decreased HNF-1alpha binding and
reduced gene expression after LPS administration.

PMID: 11697544  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Diabetologia. 2001 Oct;44(10):1326-9.

Early-onset Type II diabetes mellitus in Italian families due to mutations in the
genes encoding hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha and glucokinase.

Gragnoli C(1), Cockburn BN, Chiaramonte F, Gorini A, Marietti G, Marozzi G,
Signorini AM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology and Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
cgragnoli@partners.org

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2002 May;45(5):748.
    Diabetologia. 2002 May;45(5):747.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Maturity-onset-diabetes of the young (MODY) is caused by
mutations in at least five different genes. Our aim was to determine the
prevalence of the most common MODY genes in Italian families with early-onset
Type II (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: We screened 28 Italian early-onset Type II diabetic families (diagnosis 
< 35 years) for mutations in the hepatic nuclear factor-4 alpha, (MODY1),
glucokinase (MODY2) and hepatic nuclear factor-1 alpha (MODY3). Both strands of
exons, flanking introns and minimal promoter regions of the above-mentioned genes
were amplified using polymerase chain reaction and were sequenced directly.
RESULTS: We identified four different mutations, three of which are not
described, (W113X, G42P43fsCC --> A, H514R) and four new polymorphisms (G184G,
T513T, IVS3-nt47delG, IVS1- nt53C --> G) in the hepatic nuclear factor-1 alpha
gene, two new potential mutations (G44S, IVS4nt + 7C --> T) and three new
polymorphisms (promoter-nt84C --> G, IVS9 + nt8C --> T, IVS9 + nt49G --> A) in
the glucokinase gene, and a new polymorphism (IVS1c-nt11T --> G) in the hepatic
nuclear factor-4 alpha gene.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Mutations in the hepatic nuclear factor-1 alpha and
glucokinase are associated with Type II diabetes in 14 % and 7 % of Italian
families, respectively. Our findings provide an impetus for screening Italian
MODY and early-non Type II diabetic families for mutations in the above mentioned
genes to identify relatives at risk who could benefit from primary prevention
care. [

PMID: 11692182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Hepatology. 2001 Nov;34(5):979-89.

Lipopolysaccharide results in a marked decrease in hepatocyte nuclear factor 4
alpha in rat liver.

Wang B(1), Cai SR, Gao C, Sladek FM, Ponder KP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO, USA.

The acute-phase response can result in decreased liver-specific functions and
death as a result of liver failure. We show here that lipopolysaccharide (LPS),
an endotoxin that induces the acute-phase response, results in a marked decrease 
in the major isoforms of the transcription factor, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4
alpha (HNF-4 alpha), in livers of rats. HNF-4 alpha is a nuclear receptor that is
critical for the expression of several liver-specific genes. This decrease in
HNF-4 alpha is primarily the result of a posttranscriptional mechanism, because
mRNA levels are normal, and there are no major changes in the splicing patterns. 
This decrease was of functional significance, because expression of a gene that
is highly dependent on HNF-4 alpha, HNF-1 alpha, was reduced. Interleukin-1 beta 
(IL-1 beta) is a cytokine whose levels are increased in vivo in response to LPS. 
IL-1 beta resulted in a decrease in HNF-4 alpha levels in HepG2 cells. This IL-1 
beta-induced decrease was likely caused by degradation via the proteasome,
because it was prevented by the addition of the proteasome inhibitor, MG132. We
conclude that the decrease in HNF-4 alpha that occurs in vivo after the
administration of LPS may be the result of IL-1 beta-induced degradation, and
likely contributes to the liver insufficiency that occurs. IL-1 beta antagonists 
or proteasome inhibitors might increase HNF-4 alpha protein levels in the
acute-phase response, which could result in increased liver function and
survival.

PMID: 11679969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Diabetes. 2001 Nov;50(11):2472-80.

Loss of HNF-1alpha function in mice leads to abnormal expression of genes
involved in pancreatic islet development and metabolism.

Shih DQ(1), Screenan S, Munoz KN, Philipson L, Pontoglio M, Yaniv M, Polonsky KS,
Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, the Rockefeller University, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

Mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF-1alpha) lead to maturity-onset
diabetes of the young type 3 as a result of impaired insulin secretory response
in pancreatic beta-cells. The expression of 50 genes essential for normal
beta-cell function was studied to better define the molecular mechanism
underlying the insulin secretion defect in Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice. We found
decreased steady-state mRNA levels of genes encoding glucose transporter 2
(Glut2), neutral and basic amino acid transporter, liver pyruvate kinase (L-Pk), 
and insulin in Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice. In addition, we determined that the
expression of several islet-enriched transcription factors, including Pdx-1,
Hnf-4alpha, and Neuro-D1/Beta-2, was reduced in Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice. These
changes in pancreatic islet mRNA levels were already apparent in newborn animals,
suggesting that loss of Hnf-1alpha function rather than chronic hyperglycemia is 
the primary cause of the altered gene expression. This expression profile was
pancreatic islet-specific and distinct from hepatocytes, where we found normal
expression of Glut2, L-Pk, and Hnf-4alpha in the liver of Hnf-1alpha(-/-) mice.
The expression of small heterodimer partner (Shp-1), an orphan receptor that can 
heterodimerize with Hnf-4alpha and inhibit its transcriptional activity, was also
reduced in Hnf-1alpha(-/-) islets. We characterized a 0.58-kb Shp-1 promoter and 
determined that the decreased expression of Shp-1 may be indirectly mediated by a
downregulation of Hnf-4alpha. We further showed that Shp-1 can repress its own
transcriptional activation by inhibiting Hnf-4alpha function, thereby
establishing a feedback autoregulatory loop. Our results indicate that loss of
Hnf-1alpha function leads to altered expression of genes involved in
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, insulin synthesis, and beta-cell
differentiation.

PMID: 11679424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Gene. 2001 Aug 22;274(1-2):283-91.

Conserved as well as divergent regulatory elements account for expression of the 
human and rodent phenylalanine hydroxylase genes.

Bristeau A(1), Catherin A, Weiss MC, Faust DM.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, FRE 2364, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, 25
rue du Docteur Roux, 75724 Paris, France.

We have uncovered a fundamental difference in the regulation of the rodent and
the human phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) genes: expression of human PAH is
independent of glucocorticoids and/or cAMP in contrast to the mouse gene which is
not only highly inducible but dependent upon hormones for expression.
Nevertheless, the two genes do exhibit similarities: DNaseI hypersensitive sites 
are identically located in the regulatory regions, and the sequences around these
sites are partially conserved and associated with regulatory elements sharing
similar function. In transient transfections, the human proximal promoter is
tissue-specific and presents significant activity compared to the extremely low
and ubiquitous activity of the mouse promoter. DNA fragments corresponding to the
two upstream hypersensitive sites of both genes have enhancer activity that
depends upon the liver-enriched transcription factor binding sites for hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF) 1 and/or CCAAT/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP). While
expression of the rodent gene relies upon two modules in the HSIII enhancer, one 
activated by HNF1 and C/EBP and the other required for the hormone response, the 
human equivalent has conserved only the liver-specific transcription factor
binding module. Even though the more proximal enhancer is not necessary for full 
reporter gene activity in transient transfection assays in Pah-expressing
hepatoma cells, this enhancer could be required in both species for activation
during development.

PMID: 11675021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Hum Mutat. 2001 Oct;18(4):345-51.

Analysis of a non-functional HNF-1alpha (TCF1) mutation in Japanese subjects with
familial type 1 diabetes.

Yoshiuchi I(1), Yamagata K, Yoshimoto M, Zhu Q, Yang Q, Nammo T, Uenaka R,
Kinoshita E, Hanafusa T, Miyagawa Ji, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha; gene symbol TCF1) cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 
(MODY3), a form of diabetes mellitus characterized by autosomal dominant
inheritance, early onset, and pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. Recent genetic
studies, however, also found mutations in patients diagnosed with idiopathic
(non-autoimmune based) type 1 diabetes. We identified a novel frameshift mutation
(142delG) in the TCF1 gene in a family with a strong family history of type 1
diabetes and examined the functional properties of the mutant HNF 1alpha. The
expression of the mutant protein was not detected in COS-7 cells by Western blot 
analysis after transfection of the mutant cDNA. This is the first case of an
unstable mutant HNF-1alpha protein. Reporter gene analysis indicated that the
mutant HNF-1alpha had no transactivation activity in HeLa and MIN6 cells.
Haploinsufficiency for HNF-1alpha may lead to severe forms of diabetes like type 
1 diabetes.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11668618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Int J Mol Med. 2001 Nov;8(5):481-7.

Reactivation of liver-specific gene expression in an immortalized human
hepatocyte cell line by introduction of the human HNF4alpha2 gene.

Inoue Y(1), Miyazaki M, Tsuji T, Sakaguchi M, Fukaya K, Huh NH, Namba M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biology,
Okayama University Medical School, 2-5-1 Shikata, Okayama 700-8558, Japan.

An immortalized human hepatocyte cell line (OUMS-29) was established from fetal
liver by transfection with the SV-40 large T antigen gene that has certain
liver-specific functions such as albumin production and enzyme activities of
CYP1A1, 1A2, and 2E1. To make OUMS-29 cells express other liver-specific
functions, the human hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha2 (HNF4alpha2) gene was
introduced into the cells, because this gene was found to be markedly
down-regulated. The transduced HNF4alpha2 was overexpressed in the nuclei of the 
transfected cells, and its DNA-binding activity was also detected. The
liver-specific genes such as apolipoprotein AI, CII, CIII, blood coagulation
factor X, alpha1-antitrypsin, and HNF1alpha were up-regulated. Thus, this cell
line is expected to be a useful tool for studying the differentiated human
hepatocyte functions.

PMID: 11605014  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Gene. 2001 Oct 17;277(1-2):121-7.

HNF-1 regulates the liver-specific transcription of the chipmunk HP-20 gene.

Ono M(1), Hosoe Y, Azuma S, Shoji M, Nara K, Kondo N, Shiba T, Takamatsu N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosciences, School of Science, Kitasato University, 1-15-1
Kitasato, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan.

The chipmunk hibernation-specific protein HP-20 is a component of the 140 kDa
complex that drastically decreases in the blood during hibernation, and its gene 
is expressed specifically in the liver. To reveal molecular mechanisms underlying
the liver-specific transcription of the HP-20 gene, we isolated chipmunk HP-20
genomic clones. The HP-20 gene spans approximately 6 kb, and consists of three
exons. The transcription start site, as determined by 5' RACE-PCR analysis, was
found to be 160 bp upstream of the translation initiation codon. Transient
transfection studies in HepG2 cells revealed that the 57 bp 5' flanking sequence 
was sufficient for the liver-specific promoter activity. A database search
revealed that this region contains a potential binding site for hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1). In a gel retardation assay, in vitro-synthesized HNF-1 
bound to the 5' flanking sequence from -52 to -26. A similar shifted band was
also observed with HepG2 nuclear extracts, and this complex was super-shifted by 
an anti-(HNF-1) Ig. When transfected into COS-7 cells, HNF-1 transactivated
transcription from the HP-20 gene promoter, and this activity was abolished by a 
mutation of the HNF-1 binding site, indicating that HNF-1 plays an important role
in HP-20 gene expression.

PMID: 11602349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Biol Chem. 2001 Dec 21;276(51):47775-84. Epub 2001 Oct 5.

The role of hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha and PDX-1 in transcriptional
regulation of the pdx-1 gene.

Gerrish K(1), Cissell MA, Stein R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37215, USA.

The PDX-1 homeodomain transcription factor regulates pancreatic development and
adult islet beta cell function. Expression of the pdx-1 gene is almost
exclusively localized to beta cells within the adult endocrine pancreas. Islet
beta cell-selective transcription is controlled by evolutionarily conserved
subdomain sequences (termed Areas I (-2839 to -2520 base pairs (bp)), II (-2252
to -2023 bp), and III (-1939 to -1664 bp)) found within the 5'-flanking region of
the pdx-1 gene. Areas I and II are independently capable of directing beta
cell-selective reporter gene activity in transfection assays, with Area
I-mediated stimulation dependent upon binding of hepatic nuclear factor 3 beta
(HNF3 beta), a key regulator of islet beta cell function. To identify other
transactivators of Area I, highly conserved sequence segments within this
subdomain were mutagenized, and their effect on activation was determined.
Several of the sensitive sites were found by transcription factor data base
analysis to potentially bind endodermally expressed transcription factors,
including HNF1 alpha (-2758 to -2746 bp, Segment 2), HNF4 (-2742 to -2730 bp,
Segment 4; -2683 to -2671 bp, Segment 7-8), and HNF6 (-2727 to -2715 bp, Segment 
5). HNF1 alpha, but not HNF4 and HNF6, binds specifically to Area I sequences in 
vitro. HNF1 alpha was also shown to specifically activate Area I-driven
transcription through Segment 2. In addition, PDX-1 itself was found to stimulate
Area I activation. The chromatin immunoprecipitation assay performed with PDX-1
antisera also demonstrated that this factor bound to Area I within the endogenous
pdx-1 gene in beta cells. Our results indicate that regulatory factors binding to
Area I conserved sequences contribute to the selective transcription pattern of
the pdx-1 gene and that control is mediated by endodermal regulators like HNF1
alpha, HNF3 beta, and PDX-1.

PMID: 11590182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Somat Cell Mol Genet. 1999 Jul;25(4):207-21.

Partial activation of gene activity and chromatin remodeling of the human 14q32.1
serpin gene cluster by HNF-1 alpha and HNF-4 in fibroblast microcell hybrids.

Rollini P(1), Xu L, Fournier RE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
Washington 98109-1024, USA.

The genes encoding alpha 1-antitrypsin (alpha 1AT, gene symbol P I) and
corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG) are part of a cluster of serine protease
inhibitor (serpin) genes on human chromosome 14q32.1. Both genes are highly
expressed in the liver and in cultured hepatoma cells, and the approximately
100-kb region around these genes contains an extensive array of
expression-associated DNase I-hypersensitive sites (DHSs). Activation of human
alpha 1AT and CBG transcription occurred when human chromosome 14 was transferred
from nonexpressing cells to rat hepatoma cells. This activation event was
accompanied by long-range chromatin reorganization of the entire region and the
de novo formation of 17 expression-associated DHSs. Both gene activation and
chromatin remodeling in hepatic cells required the liver-enriched transactivators
hepatocyte nuclear factors-1 alpha and -4 (HNF-1 alpha and HNF-4). In this study,
we tested whether ectopic expression of HNF-1 alpha and HNF-4 in nonexpressing
cells could activate alpha 1AT and/or CBG transcription, and we monitored the
chromatin structure of the locus in stably transfected fibroblasts. We report
that both alpha 1AT and CBG mRNAs were expressed in fibroblast transfectants that
stably expressed HNF-1 alpha and HNF-4, but expression was only approximately
1-10% of that observed in hepatic cells. Gene activation in these cells was
accompanied by partial chromatin remodeling, as 6 of 17 expression-associated
DHSs were formed. The potential implications of these results are discussed.

PMID: 11586788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Oct 5;287(4):852-8.

Hormone response of rodent phenylalanine hydroxylase requires HNF1 and the
glucocorticoid receptor.

Bristeau A(1), Catherin AM, Weiss MC, Faust DM.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, FRE 2364, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, 25 rue du Docteur Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

Expression of the rodent phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene is dependent upon
hormones. Induction by glucocorticoids and cAMP occurs slowly and maximal
stimulation is obtained by a synergistic effect of the two compounds. Hormone
responsiveness is conferred by the tissue-specific HSIII enhancer and involves
(i) protein kinase A mediating the cAMP response, even though a consensus
sequence for binding of the cAMP response element binding protein is not present;
(ii) other serine/threonine kinases as deduced from inhibitor studies; (iii)
glucocorticoid receptor protein bound to glucocorticoid response element half
sites; and (iv) binding of the liver-enriched transcription factor hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) to sites in the enhancer. Glucocorticoid receptor and
HNF1, bound to their cognate sites, cooperatively increase the glucocorticoid
response of the PAH gene, this response being synergistically enhanced by cAMP
after long-term treatment.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11573942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Journ Annu Diabetol Hotel Dieu. 2001:151-8.

[Management of the MODY type diabetes].

[Article in French]

Timsit J(1), Velho G.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Diabétologie, Service d'Immunologie Clinique, Hôpital Necker-Enfants 
Malades, 161 rue de Sèvres, 75015 Paris.

PMID: 11565457  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2001 Oct;12(10):2175-80.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta: a new kindred with renal cysts and diabetes and 
gene expression in normal human development.

Kolatsi-Joannou M(1), Bingham C, Ellard S, Bulman MP, Allen LI, Hattersley AT,
Woolf AS.

Author information: 
(1)Nephro-Urology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London, 30 
Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta (HNF-1beta) transcription factor controls
endoderm development. Human mutations cause early-onset diabetes mellitus and
have recently been associated with dysplastic, hypoplastic, and glomerulocystic
kidneys. A new kindred with this "renal cysts and diabetes" syndrome is
described, and nephrogenic HNF-1beta expression is defined. The proband had
congenital cystic kidneys: over the next 12 yr, his renal function was impaired, 
but he was normoglycemic. His mother developed diabetes during pregnancy: renal
ultrasonography at age 24 yr was normal, but she subsequently developed cysts.
Both subjects have a heterozygous frameshift mutation in HNF-1beta that results
from a 1-bp insertion in exon 5 (Y352fsinsA). When reverse-transcription PCR and 
in situ hybridization were used, HNF-1beta mRNA was detected in normal human
metanephroi, with the highest levels of transcripts localized to fetal medullary 
and cortical collecting ducts and low levels of expression in nephrogenic cortex 
mesenchyme, primitive nephron tubules, and immature glomeruli. These results
constitute the first demonstration of HNF-1beta expression during human
nephrogenesis and emphasize a disease spectrum associated with HNF-1beta
mutation.

PMID: 11562418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Best Pract Res Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Sep;15(3):309-23.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young: from clinical description to molecular
genetic characterization.

Owen K(1), Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Genetics, School of Postgraduate Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Exeter, Barrack Road, Exeter, EX2 5AX, UK.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young is a heterogeneous group of autosomal
dominantly inherited, young-onset beta-cell disorders. At least two consecutive
generations are affected with a family member diagnosed before 25 years of age.
Diabetes is caused either by mutations in the glucokinase gene (glucokinase MODY)
or by mutations in transcription factors (transcription factor MODY). Glucokinase
maturity-onset diabetes of the young is a mild, non-progressive hyperglycaemia
caused by a resetting of the pancreatic glucose sensor. It is treated with diet, 
and complications are rare. Pregnancies affected by glucokinase mutations have
specific management strategies and prognosis. Transcription factor maturity-onset
diabetes of the young, caused by mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor genes
HNF-1alpha, HNF-4alpha and HNF-1beta, and in insulin promoter factor-1 results in
a progressive beta-cell defect with increasing treatment requirements and
diabetic complications. Cystic renal disease is a prominent feature of HNF-1beta 
mutations. Further maturity-onset diabetes of the young genes remain to be
identified. MODY is part of the differential diagnosis of diabetes presenting in 
the first to third decades of life. Diagnostic molecular genetic testing is
available for the more common genes involved.

Copyright 2001 Harcourt Publishers Ltd.

PMID: 11554773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Tumour Biol. 2001 Sep-Oct;22(5):310-7.

Severe hypoxia specifically downregulates hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 gene
expression in HepG2 human hepatoma cells.

Mazure NM(1), Nguyen TL, Danan JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche sur l'Endocrinologie Moléculaire et le Développement
CNRS-UPR 9078, Meudon-Bellevue, France.

The liver is one of the organs in which hypoxia helps to regulate gene expression
under normal physiological conditions and in diseases such as cirrhosis and
cancer. We postulated that the expression/activity of some of the
'liver-enriched' transcription factors, which control liver-specific genes, was
sensitive to hypoxia. We tested hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), HNF-3 and
HNF-4, which play key roles in differentiation, development and hepatic gene
expression, using HepG2 human hepatoma cells cultured under hypoxic conditions.
Severe hypoxia/anoxia downregulated HNF-4 DNA-binding activity while DNA-binding 
activity of HNF-1 and HNF-3 remained unaffected. These hypoxic conditions also
strongly and specifically decreased cell contents of HNF-4 protein, indicating
that the decrease in HNF-4 DNA-binding activity was due to the lower amount of
protein and not to decreased DNA-binding affinity. Northern analysis indicated
that the expression of the hnf-4 gene was also downregulated in HepG2 cells
cultured under hypoxic conditions. These results provide evidence that hypoxic
stress triggers a cascade of events that inhibits the transactivation potential
of HNF-4 in HepG2 cells. This step may be crucial in modulating the expression of
a subset of liver genes that are targets for this nuclear receptor. This
relationship provides a new route for the investigation of the effects of hypoxia
on the liver cell.

Copyright 2001 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11553861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Carcinogenesis. 2001 Sep;22(9):1363-71.

Hepatocyte growth factor signalling stimulates hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1)
activity in HepG2 hepatoma cells.

Tacchini L(1), Dansi P, Matteucci E, Desiderio MA.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of General Pathology and CNR Center for Research on Cell Pathology, 
University of Milan, via L.Mangiagalli, 31-20133 Milan, Italy.

Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF), a multifunctional cytokine of mesenchymal origin,
activates the DNA binding of hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) in the HepG2 cell
line: the activated complex contained the inducible alpha subunit. An increased
expression of HIF-1alpha (mRNA and nuclear protein levels) was observed. To
investigate the molecular basis of the HIF-1 response under this non-hypoxic
condition, we evaluated first the expression of putative target genes. We found a
time-dependent increase in steady-state mRNA levels of heme oxygenase and
urokinase plasminogen activator at 4 h, followed by that of urokinase receptor at
10 h. The enhanced expression of these genes might confer the invasive phenotype,
since HGF is a proliferative and scatter factor. Second, we examined some aspects
of HIF-1 activity regulation in HGF-treated cells with the following findings:
(i) the activation of HIF-1 DNA binding was prevented by proteasome blockade,
probably because stabilization of the cytosolic alpha-subunit protein level is
not sufficient to generate a functional form: also under these conditions nuclear
protein level of HIF-1alpha did not increase; (ii) N-acetylcysteine, a free
radical scavenger, strongly decreased HIF-1 activation suggesting a role of
reactive oxygen species in this process; (iii) the thiol reducing agent
dithiothreitol was ineffective. Third, consistent with these data,
N-acetylcysteine reduced the stimulatory effect of HGF on stress kinase
activities, while p42/44 mitogen activated kinase (MAPK) was unmodified,
suggesting an involvement of c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK) and p38 MAPK in HIF-1 
activation. Finally, LY 294002 induced the blockade of phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3K), one of the principal transducers of HGF/Met receptor signalling,
prevented the enhancement of HIF-1 DNA binding and JNK activity, but the
inhibition of p42/44 MAPK phosphorylation with PD 98059 was ineffective. In
conclusion, we suggest that HGF triggers a signal transduction cascade involving 
PI3K and ultimately activates HIF-1.

PMID: 11532856  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Nucleic Acids Res. 2001 Sep 1;29(17):3495-505.

An enhancer element 6 kb upstream of the mouse HNF4alpha1 promoter is activated
by glucocorticoids and liver-enriched transcription factors.

Bailly A(1), Torres-Padilla ME, Tinel AP, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, FRE 2364 du CNRS, Institut Pasteur, 
25 Rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

We have characterized a 700 bp enhancer element around -6 kb relative to the
HNF4alpha1 transcription start. This element increases activity and confers
glucocorticoid induction to a heterologous as well as the homologous promoters in
differentiated hepatoma cells and is transactivated by HNF4alpha1, HNF4alpha7,
HNF1alpha and HNF1beta in dedifferentiated hepatoma cells. A 240 bp sub-region
conserves basal and hormone-induced enhancer activity. It contains HNF1, HNF4,
HNF3 and C/EBP binding sites as shown by DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays using nuclear extracts and/or recombinant HNF1alpha and
HNF4alpha1. Mutation analyses showed that the HNF1 site is essential for
HNF1alpha transactivation and is required for full basal enhancer activity, as is
the C/EBP site. Glucocorticoid response element consensus sites which overlap the
C/EBP, HNF4 and HNF3 sites are crucial for optimal hormonal induction. We present
a model that accounts for weak expression of HNF4alpha1 in the embryonic liver
and strong expression in the newborn/adult liver via the binding sites identified
in the enhancer.

PMCID: PMC55877
PMID: 11522818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Diabetes. 2001 Sep;50(9):2047-52.

The generalized aminoaciduria seen in patients with hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha mutations is a feature of all patients with diabetes and is
associated with glucosuria.

Bingham C(1), Ellard S, Nicholls AJ, Pennock CA, Allen J, James AJ, Satchell SC, 
Salzmann MB, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine and Diabetes Research, School of Postgraduate 
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, Devon, UK.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) mutations are the most common cause
of maturity-onset diabetes of the young. HNF-1alpha homozygous knockout mice
exhibit a renal Fanconi syndrome with glucosuria and generalized aminoaciduria in
addition to diabetes. We investigated glucosuria and aminoaciduria in patients
with HNF-1alpha mutations. Sixteen amino acids were measured in urine samples
from patients with HNF-1alpha mutations, age-matched nondiabetic control
subjects, and age-matched type 1 diabetic patients, type 2 diabetic patients, and
patients with diabetes and chronic renal failure. The HNF-1alpha patients had
glucosuria at lower glycemic control (as shown by HbA1c) than type 1 and type 2
diabetic patients, consistent with a lower renal glucose threshold. The
HNF-1alpha patients had a generalized aminoaciduria with elevated levels of 14 of
16 amino acids and an increased mean Z score for all amino acids compared with
control subjects (0.66 vs. 0.00; P < 0.0005). Generalized aminoaciduria was also 
present in type 1 diabetic (Z score, 0.80; P < 0.0001), type 2 diabetic (Z score,
0.71; P < 0.0002), and chronic renal failure (Z score, 0.65; P < 0.01) patients. 
Aminoaciduria was not associated with microalbuminuria or proteinuria but was
associated with glucosuria (1.00 glucosuria vs. 0.19 no glucosuria; P = 0.002).
In type 1 diabetic patients, urine samples taken on the same day showed
significantly more aminoaciduria when glucosuria was present compared with when
it was absent (P < 0.01). In conclusion, HNF-1alpha mutation carriers have a
mutation-specific defect of proximal tubular glucose transport, resulting in
increased glucosuria. In contrast, the generalized aminoaciduria seen in patients
with HNF-1alpha mutations is a general feature of patients with diabetes and
glucosuria. Glucose may depolarize and dissipate the electrical gradient of the
sodium-dependent amino acid transporters in the proximal renal tubule, causing a 
reduction in amino acid resorption.

PMID: 11522670  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Aug 31;286(4):673-7.

Sphingosine kinase regulates hepatoma cell differentiation: roles of hepatocyte
nuclear factor and retinoid receptor.

Osawa Y(1), Nagaki M, Banno Y, Nozawa Y, Moriwaki H, Nakashima S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Gifu University School of Medicine,
Tsukasamachi-40, Gifu 500-8705, Japan.

In hepatoma Huh-7 cells, inhibition of sphingosine kinase (SphK) activity by
N,N-dimethylsphingosine (DMS) resulted in up-regulated production of
liver-specific serum proteins including albumin and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). The 
changes in these protein levels coincided well with those of two liver-enriched
transcription factors, hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 and -4, which regulate a
number of liver-specific genes at the transcriptional level. Moreover, DMS
induced the expression of retinoic acid receptor-alpha and retinoid X
receptor-alpha. In DMS-treated cells, 9-cis retinoic acid (RA) further enhanced
HNF-4alpha and albumin expression but it inhibited AFP accumulation. These
results suggest that activation of SphK disengages cells from their
liver-specific phenotype, and that 9-cis RA further induces differentiation of
hepatoma cells when SphK activity is inhibited.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11520048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. J Biol Chem. 2001 Oct 5;276(40):37206-14. Epub 2001 Aug 1.

Characterization of the human OATP-C (SLC21A6) gene promoter and regulation of
liver-specific OATP genes by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha.

Jung D(1), Hagenbuch B, Gresh L, Pontoglio M, Meier PJ, Kullak-Ublick GA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, University Hospital, CH-8091
Zurich, Switzerland .

OATP-C (SLC21A6) is the predominant Na(+)-independent uptake system for bile
salts and bilirubin of human liver and is expressed exclusively at the
basolateral (sinusoidal) hepatocyte membrane. To investigate the basis of
liver-specific expression of OATP-C, we studied promoter function in the two
hepatocyte-derived cell lines HepG2 and Huh7 and in nonhepatic HeLa cells. OATP-C
promoter constructs containing from 66 to 950 nucleotides of 5'-regulatory
sequence were active in HepG2 and Huh7 but not HeLa cells, indicating that
determinants of hepatocyte-specific expression reside within the minimal
promoter. Deoxyribonuclease I footprint analysis revealed a single region that
was protected by HepG2 and Huh7 but not HeLa cell nuclear extracts. The
liver-enriched transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1
alpha) was shown by mobility shift assays to bind within this footprint.
Coexpression of HNF1 alpha stimulated OATP-C promoter activity 30-fold in HepG2
and 49-fold in HeLa cells. Mutation of the HNF1 site abolished promoter function,
indicating that HNF1 alpha is critical for hepatocyte-specific OATP-C gene
expression. The human OATP8 (SLC21A8) and mouse Oatp4 (Slc21a6) promoters were
also responsive to HNF1 alpha coexpression in HepG2 cells. These data support a
role for HNF1 alpha as a global regulator of liver-specific bile salt and organic
anion transporter genes.

PMID: 11483603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Nat Immunol. 2001 Aug;2(8):691-7.

The beta-catenin--TCF-1 pathway ensures CD4(+)CD8(+) thymocyte survival.

Ioannidis V(1), Beermann F, Clevers H, Held W.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne Branch, University of Lausanne,
155 Ch. des Boveresses, 1066 Epalinges, Switzerland.

The association of trans-acting T cell factors (TCFs) or lymphoid enhancer factor
1 (LEF-1) with their coactivator beta-catenin mediates transient transcriptional 
responses to extracellular Wnt signals. We show here that T cell maturation
depends on the presence of the beta-catenin--binding domain in TCF-1. This domain
is necessary to mediate the survival of immature CD4(+)CD8(+) double-positive
(DP) thymocytes. Accelerated spontaneous thymocyte death in the absence of TCF-1 
correlates with aberrantly low expression of the anti-apoptotic protein Bcl-x(L).
Increasing anti-apoptotic effectors in thymocytes by the use of a Bcl-2 transgene
rescued TCF-1-deficient DP thymocytes from apoptosis. Thus, TCF-1, upon
association with beta-catenin, transiently ensures the survival of immature T
cells, which enables them to generate and edit T cell receptor (TCR) alpha chains
and attempt TCR-mediated positive selection.

PMID: 11477404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. J Immunol. 2001 Aug 1;167(3):1654-62.

CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein beta (C/EBP beta) activates CCR5 promoter:
increased C/EBP beta and CCR5 in T lymphocytes from HIV-1-infected individuals.

Rosati M(1), Valentin A, Patenaude DJ, Pavlakis GN.

Author information: 
(1)Human Retrovirus Section, Basic Research Laboratory, National Cancer
Institute-Frederick, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

C/EBPbeta is a member of a family of leucine zipper transcription factors that
are involved in regulating the expression of several cytokines, including IL-1,
IL-6, IL-8, TNF, and macrophage-inflammatory protein-1alpha. We identified
multiple C/EBPbeta binding sites within the gene for CCR5, suggesting that
C/EBPbeta may be involved in its regulation. Transient transfection experiments
in both myeloid and lymphoid cells showed an increase in CCR5 promoter-driven
green fluorescent protein production in the presence of C/EBPbeta. Deletion
analysis identified two C/EBPbeta-responsive regions in the CCR5 gene, one in the
promoter region and one at the 3' part of the intron. We provide evidence that,
in myeloid cells (U937), C/EBPbeta independently activates CCR5 expression
through sites located either in the promoter region or in the intron of the CCR5 
gene. In contrast, in lymphoid cells (Jurkat) the presence of the intronic
cis-regulatory regions is required for C/EBPbeta-mediated activation. In
agreement with the functional data, EMSA demonstrated that in both myeloid and
lymphoid cells C/EBPbeta binds specifically to sites present in the intron,
whereas interaction with the sites located in the promoter was cell type specific
and was detected only in myeloid cells. Analysis of C/EBPbeta in primary PBMCs
obtained from HIV-1-infected individuals revealed a significant increase in
C/EBPbeta expression. The enhanced C/EBPbeta activity correlated with a higher
frequency of circulating CCR5(+) lymphocytes in AIDS patients and with a decline 
in CD4 lymphocyte numbers. Taken together, these results suggest that C/EBPbeta
is an important regulator of CCR5 expression and may play a relevant role in the 
pathogenesis of HIV disease.

PMID: 11466389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Aug;27(1):11-29.

Mutations in the human genes encoding the transcription factors of the hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)1 and HNF4 families: functional and pathological
consequences.

Ryffel GU(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Essen, Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung),
Hufelandstrasse 55, D-45122 Essen, Germany. gerhart.ryffel@uni-essen.de

Mutations in the human genes encoding the tissue-specific transcription factors
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1alpha, HNF1beta and HNF4alpha are responsible for
maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY), a monogenic dominant inherited form 
of diabetes mellitus characterized by defective insulin secretion of the
pancreatic beta-cells. In addition, the mutated HNF1beta gene causes defective
development of the kidney and genital malformation. This review summarizes the
main features of these transcription factors and discusses potential events
leading to the specific disease phenotypes.

PMID: 11463573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Exp Mol Med. 2001 Jun 30;33(2):59-63.

HNF1 and/or HNF3 may contribute to the tissue specific expression of glucokinase 
gene.

Cha JY(1), Kim HI, Im SS, Li TZ, Ahn YH.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Institute of Genetic
Science, College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

A possible role of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) or HNF3, a predominant
trans-acting factors of hepatic or pancreatic beta-cells, was examined on the
tissue specific interdependent expression of glucokinase (GK) in liver, H4IIE,
HepG2, HIT-T15 and MIN6 cell line. The tissues or cell lines known to express GK 
showed abundant levels of HNF1 and HNF3 mRNA as observed in liver, H4IIE, HepG2, 
HIT-T15 and MIN6 cells, whereas they were not detected in brain, heart, NIH 3T3, 
HeLa cells. The promoter of glucokinase contains several HNF3 consensus sequences
and are well conserved in human, mouse and rat. Transfection of the glucokinase
promotor linked with luciferase reporter to liver or pancreatic beta cell lines
showed high interacting activities with HNF1 and HNF3, whereas minimal activities
were detected in the cells expressing very low levels of HNFs. The binding of
HNF1 or HNF3 to the GK promoter genes was confirmed by electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA). From these data, we propose that the expression of HNF1
and/or HNF3 may, in part, contribute to the tissue specific expression of GK

PMID: 11460882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Diabetologia. 2001 Jun;44(6):775-8.

Routine mutation screening of HNF-1alpha and GCK genes in MODY diagnosis: how
effective are the techniques of DHPLC and direct sequencing used in combination?

Boutin P(1), Vasseur F, Samson C, Wahl C, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics-CNRS UPRES, CHRU, Pasteur Institute, Lille,
France.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and
glucokinase (GCK) genes are the major causes of monogenic forms of Type II
(non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus (Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young
subtypes, MODY). We evaluated the effectiveness of fluorescent single-strand
conformation polymorphism (F-SSCP), denaturing high-performance liquid
chromatography (DHPLC) and sequencing based mutation detection in the molecular
diagnosis of MODY. Our goal is to identify a rapid, efficient and cost effective 
mutation detection method for the molecular diagnosis of MODY and other human
genetic disorders.
METHODS: We evaluated the accuracy of DHPLC in screening for MODY 2 and 3
mutations. In addition, we compared the sensitivity, specificity, cost, handling 
time and analysis time of fluorescent single-strand conformation polymorphism,
denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography and direct sequencing screening
methods.
RESULTS: Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography is a recently
developed method for mutation detection. It is cost effective, powerful and
reliable and quite suitable for 22 out of the 24 fragments required for MODY 2
and 3 testing. However, exons 1 and 7 of the HNF-1alpha gene are very polymorphic
and so direct sequencing is faster as well as more efficient and reliable.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Our results suggest that combining denaturing
high-performance liquid chromatography and direct sequencing is a good approach
for the routine detection of HNF-1alpha and GCK mutations in MODY families.
Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography appears to be a powerful tool
in genetic testing and the method could be applied to the molecular diagnosis of 
other human genetic diseases.

PMID: 11440371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Mol Biol. 2001 Jul 13;310(3):635-58.

The dimerization domain of HNF-1alpha: structure and plasticity of an intertwined
four-helix bundle with application to diabetes mellitus.

Narayana N(1), Hua Q, Weiss MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid
Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4935, USA.

Maturity-onset diabetes mellitus of the young (MODY) is a human genetic syndrome 
most commonly due to mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha). 
Here, we describe the crystal structure of the HNF-1alpha dimerization domain at 
1.7 A resolution and assess its structural plasticity. The crystal's low solvent 
content (23%, v/v) leads to tight packing of peptides in the lattice. Two
independent dimers, similar in structure, are formed in the unit cell by a 2-fold
crystallographic symmetry axis. The dimers define a novel intertwined four-helix 
bundle (4HB). Each protomer contains two alpha-helices separated by a sharp
non-canonical turn. Dimer-related alpha-helices form anti-parallel coiled-coils, 
including an N-terminal "mini-zipper" complementary in structure, symmetry and
surface characteristics to transcriptional coactivator dimerization cofactor of
HNF-1 (DCoH). A confluence of ten leucine side-chains (five per protomer) forms a
hydrophobic core. Isotope-assisted NMR studies demonstrate that a similar
intertwined dimer exists in solution. Comparison of structures obtained in
multiple independent crystal forms indicates that the mini-zipper is a stable
structural element, whereas the C-terminal alpha-helix can adopt a broad range of
orientations. Segmental alignment of the mini-zipper (mean pairwise
root-mean-square difference (rmsd) in C(alpha) coordinates of 0.29 A) is
associated with a 2.1 A mean C(alpha) rmsd displacement of the C-terminal
coiled-coil. The greatest C-terminal structural variation (4.1 A C(alpha) rmsd
displacement) is observed in the DCoH-bound peptide. Diabetes-associated
mutations perturb distinct structural features of the HNF-1alpha domain. One
mutation (L12H) destabilizes the domain but preserves structural specificity.
Adjoining H12 side-chains in a native-like dimer are predicted to alter the
functional surface of the mini-zipper involved in DCoH recognition. The other
mutation (G20R), by contrast, leads to a dimeric molten globule, as indicated by 
its 1H-NMR features and fluorescent binding of 1-anilino-8-naphthalene sulfonate.
We propose that a glycine-specific turn configuration enables specific
interactions between the mini-zipper and the C-terminal coiled-coil.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11439029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Endocr Res. 2001 Feb-May;27(1-2):63-74.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha inhibits insulin promoter factor 1-dependent
transactivation of the human insulin gene.

Yamakawa K(1), Yamasaki H, Ozaki M, Yamauchi MD, Fujita N, Abe T, Miyazoe H, Sera
Y, Uotani S, Kawasaki E, Takino H, Yamaguchi Y, Eguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki University School of Medicine,
Sakamoto, Japan.

To investigate the regulational interaction of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha) and insulin promoter factor 1 (IPF1) on insulin gene expression,
either or both of the expression vectors carrying each transcription factor were 
transiently transfected into HeLa cells, RINm5F cells and MIN6 cells together
with the luciferase reporter construct driven by a human preproinsulin gene
promoter (-1998 to +237) designated as, pINS-1998/luc. IPF1-transfection into
HeLa cells strongly stimulated the luciferase activity to 725 fold that of the
basal level. In contrast, HNF-1alpha-transfection resulted in only a 6.7 fold
increase. In co-transfection experiments, increasing the amount of HNF-1alpha
resulted in an 84.5% and 74.4% decrease in IPF1-stimulated luciferase activity in
HeLa and RINm5F cells, respectively. Deletion constructs designated as
pINS-248/luc, pINS-213/luc and pINS-185/luc were transfected into RINm5F cells to
determine the role of the A3 element and its 5' flanking sequence in the
inhibitory effect of HNF-1alpha. The results showed that the inhibiting effects
of HNF-1alpha with pINS-213/luc and pINS-185/luc were significantly smaller than 
those with both pINS-1998/luc and pINS-248/luc. Transfection into MN6 cells with 
pINS-1998/luc in the absence of IPF1 resulted in constitutional transactivation
of the insulin gene, and this transactivation was abolished by the
co-transfection with HNF-1alpha. The present data indicate that IPF1 rather than 
HNF-1alpha predominantly transactivates the insulin gene, and that HNF-1alpha
inhibits IPF1-dependent insulin gene transactivation mediated through the 5'
flanking sequence of the A3 element. It is suggested that HNF-1alpha may be
involved in insulin gene expression as a negative regulator.

PMID: 11428722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Dan Med Bull. 2001 May;48(2):49-76.

Studies of the molecular genetics of impaired insulin secretion and obesity. Two 
intermediary phenotypes predisposing to type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Urhammer S.

PMID: 11414121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2001 Jul;281(1):G69-84.

Differential activation of intestinal gene promoters: functional interactions
between GATA-5 and HNF-1 alpha.

Krasinski SD(1), Van Wering HM, Tannemaat MR, Grand RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Department of
Pediatrics, The Floating Hospital for Children, New England Medical Center, and
Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA.

The effects of GATA-4, -5, and -6, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1
alpha) and -beta, and Cdx-2 on the rat and human lactase-phlorizin hydrolase
(LPH) and human sucrase-isomaltase (SI) promoters were studied using transient
cotransfection assays in Caco-2 cells. GATA factors and HNF-1 alpha were strong
activators of the LPH promoters, whereas HNF-1 alpha and Cdx-2 were strong
activators of the SI promoter, although GATA factors were also necessary for
maximal activation of the SI gene. Cotransfection of GATA-5 and HNF-1 alpha
together resulted in a higher activation of all three promoters than the sum of
the activation by either factor alone, demonstrating functional cooperativity. In
the human LPH promoter, an intact HNF-1 binding site was required for functional 
synergy. This study is the first to demonstrate 1) differential activation of the
LPH and SI promoters by multiple transcription factors cotransfected singly and
in combination and 2) that GATA and HNF-1 transcription factors cooperatively
activate intestinal gene promoters. Synergistic activation is a mechanism by
which higher levels of tissue-specific expression might be attained by
overlapping expression of specific transcription factors.

PMID: 11408257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 10;276(32):30118-26. Epub 2001 Jun 13.

In vivo and in vitro regulation of sterol 27-hydroxylase in the liver during the 
acute phase response. potential role of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1.

Memon RA(1), Moser AH, Shigenaga JK, Grunfeld C, Feingold KR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco and the
Metabolism Section, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco,
California 94121, USA. rmemon@itsa.ucsf.edu

The host response to infection is associated with several alterations in lipid
metabolism that promote lipoprotein production. These changes can be reproduced
by lipopolysaccharide (LPS) administration. LPS stimulates hepatic cholesterol
synthesis and suppresses the conversion of cholesterol to bile acids. LPS
down-regulates hepatic cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase, the rate-limiting enzyme
in the classic pathway of bile acid synthesis. We now demonstrate that LPS
markedly decreases the activity of sterol 27-hydroxylase, the rate-limiting
enzyme in the alternate pathway of bile acid synthesis, in the liver of Syrian
hamsters. Moreover, LPS progressively decreases hepatic sterol 27-hydroxylase
mRNA levels by 75% compared with controls over a 24-h treatment period. LPS also 
decreases oxysterol 7alpha-hydroxylase mRNA levels in mouse liver. In vitro
studies in HepG2 cells demonstrate that tumor necrosis factor and interleukin
(IL)-1 decrease sterol 27-hydroxylase mRNA levels by 48 and 80%, respectively,
whereas IL-6 has no such effect. The IL-1-induced decrease in sterol
27-hydroxylase mRNA expression occurs early, is sustained for 48 h, and requires 
very low doses. In vivo IL-1 treatment also lowers hepatic sterol 27-hydroxylase 
mRNA levels in Syrian hamsters. Studies investigating the molecular mechanisms of
LPS-induced decrease in sterol 27-hydroxylase show that LPS markedly decreases
mRNA and protein levels of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), a transcription
factor that regulates sterol 27-hydroxylase, in the liver. Moreover, LPS
decreases the binding activity of HNF-1 by 70% in nuclear extracts in hamster
liver, suggesting that LPS may down-regulate sterol 27-hydroxylase by decreasing 
the binding of HNF-1 to its promoter. Coupled with our earlier studies on
cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase, these data indicate that LPS suppresses both the 
classic and alternate pathways of bile acid synthesis. A decrease in bile acid
synthesis in liver would reduce cholesterol catabolism and thereby contribute to 
the increase in hepatic lipoprotein production that is induced by LPS and
cytokines.

PMID: 11406622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 24;276(34):32122-8. Epub 2001 Jun 6.

Sucrase-isomaltase gene transcription requires the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
(HNF-1) regulatory element and is regulated by the ratio of HNF-1 alpha to HNF-1 
beta.

Boudreau F(1), Zhu Y, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

The mouse sucrase-isomaltase (SI) gene is an enterocyte-specific gene expressed
in a complex developmental pattern. We previously reported that a short,
evolutionarily conserved gene promoter regulates developmental expression of SI
in mouse small intestine. Herein, we investigated the role of a hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) cis-acting element to regulate SI gene expression in
vivo. Transgenic SI gene constructs with a mutated HNF-1 element (SIF3) revealed 
a strong reduction in promoter activity in comparison with a wild-type construct 
in mice and during Caco-2 cell differentiation. Nuclear proteins isolated from
enterocytes showed increased binding of the HNF-1 alpha complex with a
concomitant decrease in the HNF-1 beta-containing complex to the SIF3 element
both during the suckling-weaning developmental transition and Caco-2 cell
differentiation. These changes coincided with a strong induction of SI gene
transcription. In transfection experiments, HNF-1 alpha activated the SI promoter
via the SIF3 element, and co-expression of HNF-1 beta impaired this
transcriptional activation. These findings demonstrate the essential role of the 
HNF-1 regulatory element to support SI gene transcription in vivo and suggest
that the ratio of HNF-1 alpha to HNF-1 beta plays a role in the transcriptional
activity of this gene during intestinal development.

PMID: 11395488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2001;14 Suppl 1:611-7.

Diagnosis of MODY in the offspring of parents with insulin-dependent and
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus.

Guazzarotti L(1), Fumelli P, Testa I, Pecora R, Panicari F, Bellanné-Chantelot C,
Bartolotta E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, S. Lucia Hospital, Recanati, MC, Italy.
guazza@yahoo.com

Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY) is an autosomal dominant monogenic
form of type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) representing 5% of youth-onset DM in the
Caucasian population. In young adults the disease can be present as either
non-insulin dependent or insulin-dependent DM. The diagnosis of this genetic
disorder in children and adolescents is rare because of the mild glucose
metabolism disorder at this time. We performed a metabolic, autoimmune and
genetic study in 40 offspring of young parents affected by insulin-dependent DM
(Group A) and in 35 offspring of young parents affected by early-onset
non-insulin-dependent DM (Group B). Two children of Group A (5%) were found to be
affected by fasting hyperglycemia and carry a GCK gene mutation that in one case 
was present also in the diabetic father. Eighteen offspring of Group B (51%) were
positive for GCK or HNF-1alpha gene mutations present in the affected parents.
All but two of these young patients had impaired fasting glucose (IFG) or
impaired glucose tolerance (IGT). Eleven of them were younger than 16 years. We
conclude that screening for DM in youth should be extended to MODY in young
families with both non-insulin-dependent and insulin-dependent DM. The
sensitivity of the metabolic tests will precede the genetic diagnosis.

PMID: 11393552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Endocrinology. 2001 Jun;142(6):2707-18.

Cross-talk between the signals hypoxia and glucose at the glucose response
element of the L-type pyruvate kinase gene.

Krones A(1), Jungermann K, Kietzmann T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biochemie und Molekulare Zellbiologie, Georg-August-Universität, 
Humboldtallee 23, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.

The signals oxygen and glucose play an important role in metabolism,
angiogenesis, tumorigenesis, and embryonic development. Little is known about an 
interaction of these two signals. We demonstrate here the cross-talk between
oxygen and glucose in the regulation of L-type pyruvate kinase (L-PK) gene
expression in the liver. In the liver the periportal to perivenous drop in O(2)
tension was proposed to be an endocrine key regulator for the zonated gene
expression. In primary rat hepatocyte cultures the expression of the L-PK gene on
mRNA and on protein level was induced by venous pO(2), whereas its
glucose-dependent induction occurred predominantly under arterial pO(2). It was
shown by transient transfection of L-PK promoter luciferase and glucose response 
element (Glc(PK)RE) SV40 promoter luciferase gene constructs that the modulation 
by O(2) of the glucose-dependent induction occurred at the Glc(PK)RE in the L-PK 
gene promoter. The reduction of the glucose-dependent induction of the L-PK gene 
expression under venous pO(2) appeared to be mediated via an interference between
hypoxia inducible factor-1 (HIF-1) and upstream stimulating factor at the
Glc(PK)RE. The glucose response element also functioned as an hypoxia response
element which was confirmed in cotransfection assays with Glc(PK)RE luciferase
gene constructs and HIF-1alpha expression vectors. Furthermore, it was found by
gel shift and supershift assay that HIF-1alpha and USF-1 or USF-2 could bind to
the Glc(PK)RE. Our findings implicate that the cross-talk between oxygen and
glucose might have a fundamental role in the regulation of several physiological 
and pathophysiological processes.

PMID: 11356723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. J Immunol. 2001 May 15;166(10):6181-7.

Positive and negative roles of the trans-acting T cell factor-1 for the
acquisition of distinct Ly-49 MHC class I receptors by NK cells.

Kunz B(1), Held W.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, Lausanne Branch, University of Lausanne,
Epalinges, Switzerland.

Members of the Ly-49 gene family code for class I MHC-specific receptors that
regulate NK cell function. Due to a combinatorial distribution of Ly-49
receptors, NK cells display considerable clonal heterogeneity. The acquisition of
one Ly-49 receptor, Ly-49A is strictly dependent on the transcriptional
trans-acting factor T cell-specific factor-1 (TCF-1). Indeed, TCF-1 binds to two 
sites in the Ly-49a promoter and regulates its activity, suggesting that the
Ly-49a gene is a direct TCF-1 target. TCF-1 deficiency resulted in the altered
usage of additional Ly-49 receptors. We show in this study, using TCF-1
beta(2)-microglobulin double-deficient mice, that these repertoire alterations
are not due to Ly-49/MHC class I interactions. Our findings rather suggest a
TCF-1-dependent, cell autonomous effect on the acquisition of multiple Ly-49
receptors. Besides reduced receptor usage (Ly-49A and D), we also observed no
effect (Ly-49C) and significantly expanded (Ly-49G and I) receptor usage in the
absence of TCF-1. These effects did not in all cases correlate with the presence 
of TCF binding sites in the respective proximal promoter. Therefore, besides
TCF-1 binding to the proximal promoter, Ly-49 acquisition may also be regulated
by TCF-1 binding to more distant cis-acting elements and/or by regulating the
expression of additional trans-acting factors. Consistent with the observed
differential, positive or negative role of TCF-1 for Ly-49 receptor acquisition, 
reporter gene assays revealed the presence of an inducing as well as a repressing
TCF site in certain proximal Ly-49 promoters. These findings reveal an important 
role of TCF-1 for the formation of the NK cell receptor repertoire.

PMID: 11342639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jun;21(11):3662-70.

Embryonic but not postnatal reexpression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
(HNF1alpha) can reactivate the silent phenylalanine hydroxylase gene in
HNF1alpha-deficient hepatocytes.

Viollet B(1), Yaniv M, Pontoglio M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, CNRS URA 1644, Département des Biotechnologies,
Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris cedex 15, France.

The failure to transcribe the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene in the liver
of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha)-deficient mice correlated with
DNA hypermethylation and the presence of an inactive chromatin structure (M.
Pontoglio, D. M. Faust, A. Doyen, M. Yaniv, and M. C. Weiss, Mol. Cell. Biol.
17:4948-4956, 1997). To evaluate the precise role played by HNF1alpha, DNA
methylation, or histone acetylation in PAH gene silencing, we examined conditions
that could restore PAH gene expression in HNF1alpha-deficient hepatocytes. We
show that reactivation of PAH transcription can be achieved by reexpression of
HNF1alpha in embryonic (i.e., embryonic day 12.5 [e12.5] to e13.5) hepatocytes
but not in fetal (e17.5), newborn, and adult HNF1alpha-deficient hepatocytes.
This defines a temporal competence window during which HNF1alpha can act to
(re)program PAH gene transcription. We also show that PAH gene silencing can be
partially relieved in HNF1alpha-deficient hepatocytes by treatment with the
demethylating agent 5-azacytidine, even in the absence of HNF1alpha. Treatment
using 5-azacytidine combined with trichostatin, a histone deacetylase inhibitor, 
resulted in a synergistic reactivation of the silenced PAH gene in adult
hepatocytes, but this activity was not further increased by HNF1alpha
reexpression. These results suggest that the HNF1alpha homeoprotein is involved
in stage-specific developmental control of the methylation state and chromatin
remodeling of the PAH gene.

PMCID: PMC86995
PMID: 11340160  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Diabetes. 2001 May;50(5):928-36.

Regulation of the pancreatic pro-endocrine gene neurogenin3.

Lee JC(1), Smith SB, Watada H, Lin J, Scheel D, Wang J, Mirmira RG, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, University of
California, San Francisco 94143, USA.

Erratum in
    Diabetes 2001 Jun;50(6):1512.

Neurogenin3 (ngn3), a basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factor,
functions as a pro-endocrine factor in the developing pancreas: by itself, it is 
sufficient to force undifferentiated pancreatic epithelial cells to become islet 
cells. Because ngn3 expression determines which precursor cells will
differentiate into islet cells, the signals that regulate ngn3 expression control
islet cell formation. To investigate the factors that control ngn3 gene
expression, we mapped the human and mouse ngn3 promoters and delineated
transcriptionally active sequences within the human promoter. Surprisingly, the
human ngn3 promoter drives transcription in all cell lines tested, including
fibroblast cell lines. In contrast, in transgenic animals the promoter drives
expression specifically in regions of ngn3 expression in the developing pancreas 
and gut; and the addition of distal sequences greatly enhances transgene
expression. Within the distal enhancer, binding sites for several pancreatic
transcription factors, including hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 and HNF-3,
form a tight cluster. HES1, an inhibitory bHLH factor activated by Notch
signaling, binds to the proximal promoter and specifically blocks promoter
activity. Together with previous genetic data, these results suggest a model in
which the ngn3 gene is activated by the coordinated activities of several
pancreatic transcription factors and inhibited by Notch signaling through HES1.

PMID: 11334435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Diabetes Care. 2001 Apr;24(4):663-71.

Familial early-onset type 2 diabetes in Chinese patients: obesity and genetics
have more significant roles than autoimmunity.

Ng MC(1), Lee SC, Ko GT, Li JK, So WY, Hashim Y, Barnett AH, Mackay IR, Critchley
JA, Cockram CS, Chan JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, SAR. maggieng@cuhk.edu.hk

OBJECTIVE: We examined the prevalence of different forms of diabetes in Hong Kong
Chinese patients with familial early-onset type 2 diabetes and compared their
clinical features with patients with familial late-onset type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 145 young patients with early-onset
diabetes (age and age at diagnosis < or = 40 years) and a family history of
diabetes were studied. They were screened for mutations in the genes encoding
glucokinase, hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha, and HNF-1alpha. The
mitochondrial DNA A-->G at nucleotide 3243 (mt3243) and amyLin S20G mutations
were studied, and antibodies to GAD (anti-GADs) were also examined.
RESULTS: The prevalence of putative diabetogenic gene mutations and autoimmune
markers were 4% for glucokinase, 0% for HNF-4alpha, 5% for HNF-1alpha, 3% for
mt3243, 2% for amylin 520G, and 4% for anti-GAD. Compared with late-onset
patients, the patients with early-onset diabetes had a higher prevalence of a
parental history of diabetes and were generally more obese. When classified by
obesity indexes (BMI and waist circumference), the obese patients, especially
those with early-onset diabetes, had a clustering of cardiovascular risk factors 
and increased rates of retinopathy and albuminuria. CONCLUSIONS; Genetic factors 
(up to 14%) and obesity (55%) play more significant roles than autoimmunity (4%) 
in familial type 2 diabetes in young Chinese patients. The significance of
obesity-related genes and other gene-gene and gene-environment interactions in
these young patients remains to be determined.

PMID: 11315828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Rinsho Byori. 2001 Feb;49(2):161-4.

[Diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Japanese]

Iwasaki N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Shinjyuku-ku, Tokyo
162-8666.

Diabetes mellitus is a group of metabolic disorders characterized by
hyperglycemia resulting from defects in insulin secretion, insulin action or
both. Genetic factors contribute to the development of diabetes. Some forms such 
as the condition called maturity-onset diabetes of the young(MODY) result from
mutations in a single gene. Other forms such as type 1 or type 2 diabetes are
multifactorial in origin with different combinations of genes together with
non-genetic factors contributing to the development of hyperglycemia. MODY has
been a good model for studying the genetics and pathophysiology of diabetes. This
form of diabetes can result from mutations in at least seven different genes:
hepatocyte nuclear factor(HNF)-4 alpha/MODY1, glucokinase/MODY2, HNF-1
alpha/MODY3, insulin promoter factor(IPF-1)/MODY4, HNF-1 beta/MODY5,
NeuroD1/MODY6 and Islet(Isl)-1/MODY7. Mutations in HNF-1 alpha/MODY3 are the most
common cause of MODY in Japanese identified to date accounting for about 15% of
cases of MODY. Mutations in the HNF-4 alpha/MODY1, glucokinase/MODY2, HNF-1
beta/MODY5 and Isl-1/MODY7 genes have also been found in Japanese; however, they 
are rare causes of MODY. Clinical studies indicate that patients with MODY are
generally not obese and that all forms of MODY are characterized by pancreatic
beta-cell dysfunction. Patients who have mutations in the HNF-1 beta/MODY5 gene
have non-diabetic kidney dysfunction including renal cysts. Female carriers may
also exhibit abnormalities in the upper vagina and uterus. Genetic approach for
type 2 diabetes had done by using non-parameteric linkage analysis such as
sibpair analysis which worked well and NIDDM1 and NIDDM2 have been identified to 
date. The responsible gene for NIDDM1 was recently identified to be Calpain 10,
and SNP43 in this gene could explain all of the evidence for linkage in Mexican
American type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 11307309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Cancer Res. 2001 Apr 1;61(7):3176-81.

Expression profiling suggested a regulatory role of liver-enriched transcription 
factors in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xu L(1), Hui L, Wang S, Gong J, Jin Y, Wang Y, Ji Y, Wu X, Han Z, Hu G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai.

By using a cDNA array representing 14,000 cDNA clusters, we studied the
expression profiles in paired clinical hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) samples and
the distal nontumorous liver tissues from the same patients. Despite the
significant heterogeneity among the clinical samples, 72 genes (including 30
novel genes) were down-regulated and 84 genes (including 48 novel genes) were
up-regulated in >50% of the cancer samples that were identified. The alterations 
in gene expression levels were confirmed by Northern blot and
reverse-transcription PCR in all of 4 randomly selected genes. It was conspicuous
that 21 of 38 hepatocarcinoma (HCC) down-regulated genes studied previously were 
reportedly regulated by a group of liver-enriched transcription factors (LETFs), 
and 12 of 36 HCC up-regulated genes studied previously were involved in protein
translation. Reexamination of the cDNA array data further revealed that most of
the genes known to be regulated by LETFs were down-regulated in at least a
portion of the HCC samples. Among the LETFs, the expression level of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) alpha was down-regulated in cancer,
whereas hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1), HNF-3beta, HNF-4alpha, and
HNF-4gamma were up-regulated. The expression profiling thus suggested multiple
regulatory pathways involved in HCC, especially that related to LETFs.

PMID: 11306505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Exp Hematol. 2001 Apr;29(4):499-506.

T-cell factor-1 expression during human natural killer cell development and in
circulating CD56(+) bright natural killer cells.

Toor AA(1), Lund TC, Miller JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Minnesota Cancer Center, Harvard Street 
at East River Road, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Transcription factors are essential to govern differentiation along the lymphoid 
lineage from uncommitted hematopoietic stem cells. Although many of these
transcription factors have putative roles based on murine knockout experiments,
their function in human lymphoid development is less known and was studied
further. Transcription factor expression in fresh and cultured adult human bone
marrow and umbilical cord blood progenitors was evaluated. We found that fresh
CD34(+)Lin(-) cells that are human leukocyte antigen (HLA)-DR(-) or CD38(-)
constitutively express GATA-3 but not T-cell factor-1 (TCF-1) or Id-3. Culture
with the murine fetal liver cell line AFT024 and defined cytokines was capable of
inducing TCF-1 mRNA. However, no T-cell receptor gene rearrangement was
identified in cultured progeny. Id-3, a basic helix loop helix factor with
dominant negative function for T-cell differentiation transcription factors, also
was upregulated and may explain unsuccessful T-cell maturation. To better
understand the developmental link between natural killer (NK) cells derived from 
progenitors, we studied NK cell subsets circulating in blood. CD56(+bright), but 
not CD56(+dim), NK cells constitutively express TCF-1 by reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction and Western blot analysis. The TCF-1 isoform found in
CD56(+bright) cells, which express lectin but not immunoglobulin class I
recognizing inhibitory receptors, was identical to that induced in NK cell
differentiation culture and was distinctly different from isoforms in T cells.
These results suggest that TCF-1 does not target human killer immunoglobulin
receptor genes, TCF-1 is uniquely expressed in circulating CD56(+bright) NK
cells, and specific TCF-1 isoforms may play an important role in regulating NK
differentiation from a common NK/T-cell progenitor.

PMID: 11301190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Arch Mal Coeur Vaiss. 2000 Dec;93 Spec No 4:7-12.

[Genetics of type II diabetes].

[Article in French]

Froguel P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institut de biologie-CNRS 8090, institut Pasteur de Lille, 1, rue du
Professeur-Calmette, BP 245, 59019 Lille.

Type 2 diabetes is a multifactorial disease composed of subtypes strongly
associated with environmental factors at one end of the spectrum and highly
genetic forms at the other hand. The former forms have been largely elucidated in
the last years by the identification of the 5 genes responsible for the autosomal
dominant MODY subtype: glucokinase, and 4 transcription factors which play a key 
role in the development of the endocrine pancreas or in the expression of glucose
metabolism genes. Apart from the monogenic forms of type 2 diabetes little is
known about the nature of the genetic factors involved. Minor contributors
include insulin, sulfamide receptor and some others. Genome scans of diabetic
families have revealed susceptibility loci on chromosome 1q, 2p, 2q (where the
gene calpain 10 was recently cloned), 3q, 12q and 20. The identification of
diabetes susceptibility gene is the first step to define targets of new drugs
against diabetes.

PMID: 11296466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. EMBO J. 2001 Apr 17;20(8):1984-92.

Transcription factor-dependent regulation of CBP and P/CAF histone
acetyltransferase activity.

Soutoglou E(1), Viollet B, Vaxillaire M, Yaniv M, Pontoglio M, Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology Hellas, PO Box 1527, 711 10 Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

CREB-binding protein (CBP) and CBP-associated factor (P/CAF) are coactivators
possessing an intrinsic histone acetyltransferase (HAT) activity. They are
positioned at promoter regions via association with sequence-specific DNA-binding
factors and stimulate transcription in a gene-specific manner. The current view
suggests that coactivator function depends mainly on the strength and specificity
of transcription factor-coactivator interactions. Here we show that two
dominant-negative mutants of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha), P447L
and P519L, occurring in maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY3) patients,
exhibit paradoxically stronger interactions than the wild-type protein with
either CBP or P/CAF. However, CBP and P/CAF recruited by these mutants lack HAT
activity. In contrast, wild-type HNF-1alpha and other transcription factors, such
as Sp1 or HNF-4, stimulated the HAT activity of CBP. The results suggest a more
dynamic role for DNA-binding proteins in the transcription process than was
considered previously. They are not only required for the recruitment of
coactivators to the promoter but they may also modulate their enzymatic activity.

PMCID: PMC125231
PMID: 11296231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Przegl Lek. 2000;57 Suppl 3:13-8.

[Molecular background and clinical characteristics of autosomal dominant type 2
diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Polish]

Malecki M(1), Krolewski AS.

Author information: 
(1)Katedra i Klinika Chorób Metabolicznych, Collegium Medicum Uniwersytetu
Jagiellonskiego w Krakowie.

Type 2 diabetes is a complex disease and genetic as well as environmental factors
play a role in its pathogenesis. Six different genes have been identified so far 
to be responsible for rare forms of autosomal dominant, early onset type 2
diabetes mellitus. All but one are transcription factors which influence
expression of the other genes through the regulation of mRNA synthesis. These are
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4 alpha, HNF-1 alpha, insulin promoter factor
(IPF)-1 and HNF-1 beta, which are associated with MODY1, 3, 4, 5 respectively.
MODY1 is a relatively rare and usually severe form of diabetes. It is associated 
with progressive hyperglycemia and frequent chronic complications. The HNF-4
alpha gene is localized on chromosome 20q. Similar clinical characteristics apply
to the MODY3 form, however the latter is much more frequent among early onset,
autosomal dominant type 2 diabetes (20-40%). HNF-1 alpha gene is localized on
chromosome 12q. HNF-1 beta (MODY5 locus on chromosome 17q) is a protein which
forms heterodimers with HNF-1 alpha. This rare form of diabetes has a clinical
picture similar to MODY1 and MODY3. It is sometimes accompanied by symptoms of
early kidney damage which are independent from diabetes. The other two
transcription factors responsible for the development of autosomal dominant type 
2 diabetes are proteins which bind directly to the insulin promoter. MODY4
(IPF-1, chromosome 13q) is a rare form and of a typical middle and late onset
type 2 diabetes. BETA 2/Neurod1 has been recently associated with MODY by Dr
Krolewski's group from Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA, USA. BETA 2 is
responsible for about 2% of autosomal dominant type 2 diabetes. The clinical
characteristics depend on the localization of the mutations in the specific
functional domains of the protein. Mutations identified in the glucokinase gene
are associated with the MODY2 form. Glucokinase is an enzyme involved in the
first level of glucose metabolism in b-cells-enzymatic phosphorylation. MODY2 is 
a modest form of diabetes. It is characterized by mild hyper-glycemia, mainly
fasting, and the chronic complications are very rare. Glucokinase gene is
localized on chromosome 7p. It is expected that in the nearest future more type 2
susceptibility genes will be identified.

PMID: 11293229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Diabetes Care. 2001 Mar;24(3):472-8.

Role of common sequence variants in insulin secretion in familial type 2 diabetic
kindreds: the sulfonylurea receptor, glucokinase, and hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha genes.

Elbein SC(1), Sun J, Scroggin E, Teng K, Hasstedt SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Central Arkansas Veterans Healthcare System and
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, USA.
elbeinstevenc@exchange.uams.edu

OBJECTIVE: We have demonstrated high heritability of insulin secretion measured
as acute insulin response to glucose times insulin sensitivity (disposition
index). Furthermore, we showed that obese normoglycemic family members of a type 
2 diabetic proband failed to compensate for the insulin resistance of obesity by 
increasing insulin secretion. In this study, we tested the primary hypotheses
that previously described variants in the pancreatic sulfonylurea receptor gene
(SUR1 or ABCC8), glucokinase (GCK) gene, or hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
(TCF1 or HNF1alpha) gene contribute to the inherited deficiencies of insulin
secretion and beta-cell compensation to insulin resistance, as well as the
secondary hypotheses that these variants altered insulin sensitivity.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We typed 124 nondiabetic members of 26 familial type
2 diabetic kindreds who had undergone tolbutamide-modified intravenous glucose
tolerance tests for two variants of the ABCC8 (sulfonylurea) gene, two variants
of the GCK gene, and one common amino acid variant in the TCF1 (HNF1alpha) gene. 
All family members were classified as normal or having impaired glucose tolerance
based on oral glucose tolerance testing. We used minimal model analysis to
calculate the insulin sensitivity index (S1) and glucose effectiveness (SG), and 
acute insulin response to glucose was calculated as the mean insulin excursion
above baseline during the first 10 min after the glucose bolus. Disposition index
(DI), a measure of beta-cell compensation for insulin sensitivity, was calculated
as insulin sensitivity times acute insulin response. Effects of polymorphisms
were determined using mixed effects models that incorporated family membership
and by a likelihood analysis that accounted for family structure through
polygenic inheritance.
RESULTS: An intronic variant of the ABCC8 gene just upstream of exon 16 was a
significant determinant of both DI and an analogous index based on acute insulin 
response to tolbutamide. Surprisingly, heterozygous individuals showed the lowest
indexes, whereas the DI in the two homozygous states did not differ
significantly. Neither the exon 18 variant nor the variants in the GCK and TCF1
genes were significant in this model. However, combined genotypes of ABCC8 exon
16 and 18 variants again significantly predicted both indexes of glucose and
tolbutamide-stimulated insulin secretion. Unexpectedly, a variant in the 3'
untranslated region of the GCK gene interacted significantly with BMI to predict 
insulin sensitivity.
CONCLUSIONS: The exon 16 variant of the ABCC8 gene reduced beta-cell compensation
to the decreased insulin sensitivity in the heterozygous state. This may explain 
the observation from several groups of an association of the ABCC8 variants in
diabetes and is consistent with other studies showing a role of ABCC8 variants in
pancreatic beta-cell function. However, our study focused on individuals from
relatively few families. Ascertainment bias, family structure, and other
interacting genes might have influenced our unexpected result. Additional studies
are needed to replicate our observed deficit in beta-cell compensation in
individuals heterozygous for ABCC8 variants. Likewise, the role of the GCK 3'
variant in the reduced insulin sensitivity of obesity will require further study.

PMID: 11289470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 May;21(9):3234-43.

Hepatic nuclear factor 1-alpha directs nucleosomal hyperacetylation to its
tissue-specific transcriptional targets.

Párrizas M(1), Maestro MA, Boj SF, Paniagua A, Casamitjana R, Gomis R, Rivera F, 
Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Hormonal Biochemistry units, Hospital Clínic, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain 08036.

Mutations in the gene encoding hepatic nuclear factor 1-alpha (HNF1-alpha) cause 
a subtype of human diabetes resulting from selective pancreatic beta-cell
dysfunction. We have analyzed mice lacking HNF1-alpha to study how this protein
controls beta-cell-specific transcription in vivo. We show that HNF1-alpha is
essential for the expression of glut2 glucose transporter and L-type pyruvate
kinase (pklr) genes in pancreatic insulin-producing cells, whereas in liver,
kidney, or duodenum tissue, glut2 and pklr expression is maintained in the
absence of HNF1-alpha. HNF1-alpha nevertheless occupies the endogenous glut2 and 
pklr promoters in both pancreatic islet and liver cells. However, it is
indispensable for hyperacetylation of histones in glut2 and pklr promoter
nucleosomes in pancreatic islets but not in liver cells, where glut2 and pklr
chromatin remains hyperacetylated in the absence of HNF1-alpha. In contrast, the 
phenylalanine hydroxylase promoter requires HNF1-alpha for transcriptional
activity and localized histone hyperacetylation only in liver tissue. Thus,
different HNF1-alpha target genes have distinct requirements for HNF1-alpha in
either pancreatic beta-cells or liver cells. The results indicate that HNF1-alpha
occupies target gene promoters in diverse tissues but plays an obligate role in
transcriptional activation only in cellular- and promoter-specific contexts in
which it is required to recruit histone acetylase activity. These findings
provide genetic evidence based on a live mammalian system to establish that a
single activator can be essential to direct nucleosomal hyperacetylation to
transcriptional targets.

PMCID: PMC86965
PMID: 11287626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Curr Atheroscler Rep. 2001 May;3(3):216-21.

Genes and environment in type 2 diabetes and atherosclerosis in aboriginal
Canadians.

Hegele RA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Blackburn Cardiovascular Genetics Laboratory, John P. Robarts Research
Institute, 406-100 Perth Drive, London, Ontario, N6A 5K8, Canada.
robert.hegele@rri.on.ca

The incidence of coronary heart disease (CHD) among aboriginal people in northern
Ontario has tripled over the past 20 years. This is inextricably linked to the
remarkably high prevalence of type 2 diabetes in these native communities.
Approximately 40% of the Oji-Cree of northern Ontario have typical
obesity-related type 2 diabetes, which represents a drastic increase from
virtually unreportable levels 50 years ago. The Oji-Cree have a private mutation 
in the HNF1A gene, namely G319S, which is absent from other ethnic groups and
aboriginal populations. The most compelling reasons that HNF1A S319 is a
diabetes-susceptibility allele are its consistent statistical association with
the presence and severity of diabetes. Also, HNF1A S319 has specificity and
positive predictive values of 97% and 95%, respectively, for the development of
diabetes in the Oji-Cree by 50 years of age. This makes the HNF1A G319S genotype 
the most specific predictive genetic test for diabetes in any human population.
HNF1A S319 has all the attributes of a thrifty allele in the Oji-Cree. It is
possible that the recent increase in CHD in the aboriginal people of northern
Ontario is the result of the expression of diabetes susceptibility due to HNF1A
S319 as a consequence of rapid changes in environment and lifestyle.

PMID: 11286643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Biochem J. 2001 Apr 15;355(Pt 2):537-44.

Co-operative regulation of the transcription of human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase
(DD)4/aldo-keto reductase (AKR)1C4 gene by hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-4alpha/gamma and HNF-1alpha.

Ozeki T(1), Takahashi Y, Kume T, Nakayama K, Yokoi T, Nunoya K, Hara A, Kamataki 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0812, Japan.

Human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (DD) 4/aldo-keto reductase (AKR) 1C4 is a major
isoform of hepatic DD that oxidizes trans-dihydrodiols of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons to reactive and redox-active o-quinones and that reduces several
ketone-containing drugs. To investigate the mechanism of transcriptional
regulation of the human DD4 gene, the 5'-flanking region of the gene was fused to
the luciferase gene. The results of luciferase assays using HepG2 cells and of
1,10-phenanthroline-copper footprinting indicated that two positive regulatory
regions were located in regions from -701 to -684 and from -682 to -666. The
former region contained a putative hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4 binding
motif, and the latter region contained an HNF-1 consensus binding sequence. DNA
fragments of the HNF-4 or HNF-1 motif gave a shifted band in a gel-shift assay
with nuclear extracts from HepG2 cells. The formation of the DNA-protein complex 
was inhibited by the HNF-4 or HNF-1 motif of the alpha(1)-antitrypsin gene. A
supershift assay using antibodies to human HNF-4alpha, HNF-4gamma and HNF-1alpha 
showed that HNF-4alpha and HNF-4gamma bound to the HNF-4 motif, and that
HNF-1alpha interacted with the HNF-1 motif. Introduction of mutations into the
HNF-4 or HNF-1 motif lowered the luciferase activity to 10 or 8% respectively of 
that seen with the intact human DD4 gene. These results indicate that HNF-4alpha,
HNF-4gamma and HNF-1alpha regulate co-operatively the transcription of the human 
DD4 gene in HepG2 cells.

PMCID: PMC1221767
PMID: 11284743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Nat Genet. 2001 Apr;27(4):375-82.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha is an essential regulator of bile acid and
plasma cholesterol metabolism.

Shih DQ(1), Bussen M, Sehayek E, Ananthanarayanan M, Shneider BL, Suchy FJ,
Shefer S, Bollileni JS, Gonzalez FJ, Breslow JL, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorie of Metabolic Diseases, The Rockefeller University, New York, New
York, USA.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) is caused by
haploinsufficiency of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (encoded by TCF1). Tcf1-/-
mice have type 2 diabetes, dwarfism, renal Fanconi syndrome, hepatic dysfunction 
and hypercholestrolemia. Here we explore the molecular basis for the
hypercholesterolemia using oligonucleotide microchip expression analysis. We
demonstrate that Tcf1-/- mice have a defect in bile acid transport, increased
bile acid and liver cholesterol synthesis, and impaired HDL metabolism. Tcf1-/-
liver has decreased expression of the basolateral membrane bile acid transporters
Slc10a1, Slc21a3 and Slc21a5, leading to impaired portal bile acid uptake and
elevated plasma bile acid concentrations. In intestine and kidneys, Tcf1-/- mice 
lack expression of the ileal bile acid transporter (Slc10a2), resulting in
increased fecal and urinary bile acid excretion. The Tcf1 protein (also known as 
HNF-1alpha) also regulates transcription of the gene (Nr1h4) encoding the
farnesoid X receptor-1 (Fxr-1), thereby leading to reduced expression of small
heterodimer partner-1 (Shp-1) and repression of Cyp7a1, the rate-limiting enzyme 
in the classic bile acid biosynthesis pathway. In addition, hepatocyte bile acid 
storage protein is absent from Tcf1-/- mice. Increased plasma cholesterol of
Tcf1-/- mice resides predominantly in large, buoyant, high-density lipoprotein
(HDL) particles. This is most likely due to reduced activity of the HDL-catabolic
enzyme hepatic lipase (Lipc) and increased expression of HDL-cholesterol
esterifying enzyme lecithin:cholesterol acyl transferase (Lcat). Our studies
demonstrate that Tcf1, in addition to being an important regulator of insulin
secretion, is an essential transcriptional regulator of bile acid and
HDL-cholesterol metabolism.

PMID: 11279518  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. J Biol Chem. 2001 May 18;276(20):17533-40. Epub 2001 Feb 5.

A pancreatic beta -cell-specific enhancer in the human PDX-1 gene is regulated by
hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta (HNF-3beta ), HNF-1alpha, and SPs transcription
factors.

Ben-Shushan E(1), Marshak S, Shoshkes M, Cerasi E, Melloul D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Hebrew University Hadassah Medical
Center, 91120 Jerusalem, Israel.

The PDX-1 transcription factor plays a key role in pancreas development. Although
expressed in all cells at the early stages, in the adult it is mainly restricted 
to the beta-cell. To characterize the regulatory elements and potential
transcription factors necessary for human PDX-1 gene expression in beta-cells, we
constructed a series of 5' and 3' deletion fragments of the 5'-flanking region of
the gene, fused to the luciferase reporter gene. In this report, we identify by
transient transfections in beta- and non-beta-cells a novel beta-cell-specific
distal enhancer element located between -3.7 and -3.45 kilobases. DNase I
footprinting analysis revealed two protected regions, one binding the
transcription factors SP1 and SP3 and the other hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta
(HNF-3beta) and HNF-1alpha. Cotransfection experiments suggest that HNF-3beta,
HNF-1alpha, and SP1 are positive regulators of the herein-described human PDX-1
enhancer element. Furthermore, mutations within each motif abolished the binding 
of the corresponding factor(s) and dramatically impaired the enhancer activity,
therefore suggesting cooperativity between these factors.

PMID: 11278466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Diabetes. 2001 Feb;50 Suppl 1:S94-100.

beta-cell genes and diabetes: molecular and clinical characterization of
mutations in transcription factors.

Frayling TM(1), Evans JC, Bulman MP, Pearson E, Allen L, Owen K, Bingham C,
Hannemann M, Shepherd M, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Genetics, School of Postgraduate Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Exeter, Devon, UK. t.m.frayling@exeter.ac.uk

beta-Cell transcription factor genes are important in the pathophysiology of the 
beta-cell, with mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, HNF-4alpha, 
insulin promoter factor (IPF)-1, HNF-1beta, and NeuroD1/BETA2, all resulting in
early-onset type 2 diabetes. We assessed the relative contribution of these genes
to early-onset type 2 diabetes using linkage and sequencing analysis in a cohort 
of 101 families (95% U.K. Caucasian). The relative distribution of the 90
families fitting maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) criteria was 63%
HNF-1alpha, 2% HNF-4alpha, 0% IPF-1, 1% HNF-1beta, 0% NeuroD1/ BETA2, and 20%
glucokinase. We report the molecular genetic and clinical characteristics of
these patients including 29 new families and 8 novel HNF-1alpha gene mutations.
Mutations in the transactivation domain are more likely to be protein truncating 
rather than result in amino acid substitutions, suggesting that a relatively
severe disruption of this domain is necessary to result in diabetes. Mutations in
the different transcription factors result in clinical heterogeneity. IPF-1
mutations are associated with a higher age at diagnosis (42.7 years) than
HNF-1alpha (20.4 years), HNF-1beta (24.2 years), or HNF-4alpha (26.3 years) gene 
mutations. Subjects with HNF-1beta mutations, in contrast to the other
transcription factors, frequently present with renal disease. A comparison of age
at diagnosis between subjects with different types and locations of HNF-1alpha
mutations did not reveal genotype-phenotype correlations. In conclusion,
mutations in transcription factors expressed in the beta-cell are the major cause
of MODY, and the phenotype clearly varies with the gene that is mutated. There is
little evidence to indicate that different mutations within the same gene have
different phenotypes.

PMID: 11272211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Diabetes. 2001 Feb;50 Suppl 1:S101-7.

beta-cell genes and diabetes: quantitative and qualitative differences in the
pathophysiology of hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha and glucokinase mutations.

Pearson ER(1), Velho G, Clark P, Stride A, Shepherd M, Frayling TM, Bulman MP,
Ellard S, Froguel P, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine and Diabetes Research, School of Postgraduate 
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, Devon, UK.

Mutations in the beta-cell genes encoding the glycolytic enzyme glucokinase (GCK)
and the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha are the most 
common causes of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). Studying patients
with mutations in these genes gives insights into the functions of these two
critical beta-cell genes in humans. We studied 178 U.K. and French MODY family
members, including 45 GCK mutation carriers and 40 HNF-1alpha mutation carriers. 
Homeostasis model assessment of fasting insulin and glucose showed reduced
beta-cell function in both GCK (48% controls, P<0.0001) and HNF-1alpha (42%
controls, P<0.0001). Insulin sensitivity was similar to that of control subjects 
in the GCK subjects (93% controls, P = 0.78) but increased in the HNF-1alpha
subjects (134.5% controls, P = 0.005). The GCK patients showed a similar
phenotype between and within families with mild lifelong fasting hyperglycemia
(fasting plasma glucose [FPG] 5.5-9.2 mmol/l, interquartile [IQ] range 6.6-7.4), 
which declined slightly with age (0.017 mmol/l per year) and rarely required
pharmacological treatment (17% oral hypoglycemic agents, 4% insulin). HNF-1alpha 
patients showed far greater variation in fasting glucose both between and within 
families (FPG 4.1-18.5 mmol/l, IQ range 5.45-10.4), with a marked deterioration
with age (0.06 mmol/l per year), and 59% of patients required treatment with
tablets or insulin. Proinsulin-to-insulin ratios are increased in HNF-1alpha
subjects (29.5%) but not in GCK (18.5%) subjects. In an oral glucose tolerance
test, the 0- to 120-min glucose increment was small in GCK patients (2.4+/-1.8
mmol/l) but large in HNF-1alpha patients (8.5+/-3.0 mmol/l, P< 0.0001). This
comparison shows that the clear clinical differences in these two genetic
subgroups of diabetes reflect the quantitative and qualitative differences in
beta-cell dysfunction. The defect in GCK is a stable defect of glucose sensing,
whereas the HNF-1alpha mutation causes a progressive defect that alters beta-cell
insulin secretion directly rather than the sensing of glucose.

PMID: 11272165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. EMBO Rep. 2000 Oct;1(4):359-65.

HNF1alpha controls renal glucose reabsorption in mouse and man.

Pontoglio M(1), Prié D, Cheret C, Doyen A, Leroy C, Froguel P, Velho G, Yaniv M, 
Friedlander G.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, URA 1644 CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies,
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. marcop@pasteur.fr

Recently it has been shown that dominant mutations in the human hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) gene, encoding for a homeoprotein that is
expressed in liver, kidney, pancreas and intestine, result in maturity onset
diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3). HNF1alpha-null mice are diabetic, but at
the same time suffer from a renal Fanconi syndrome characterized by urinary
glucose loss. Here we show that MODY3 patients are also characterized by a
reduced tubular reabsorption of glucose. The renal murine defect is due to
reduced expression of the low affinity/high capacity glucose cotransporter
(SGLT2). Our results show that HNF1alpha directly controls SGLT2 gene expression.
Together these data indicate that HNF1alpha plays a key role in glucose
homeostasis in mammals.

PMCID: PMC1083745
PMID: 11269503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Eur J Immunol. 2001 Jan;31(1):285-93.

Wnt signaling is required for thymocyte development and activates Tcf-1 mediated 
transcription.

Staal FJ(1), Meeldijk J, Moerer P, Jay P, van de Weerdt BC, Vainio S, Nolan GP,
Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center for Biomedical Genetics, Utrecht Medical
Center, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

T cell factor / lymphocyte enhancer factor (Tcf/Lef) transcription factors
complex with the transcriptional co-activator beta-catenin to transduce Wnt
signals in a variety of developmental systems. The prototypic family member Tcf-1
is highly expressed in T lineage cells. Tcf1-/- mice are defective in cell
cycling of early thymocyte stages. Here, we show that the interaction of
beta-catenin with Tcf-1 is required for full thymocyte development. This
interaction may be established by signals mediated by Wnt1 and Wnt4, leading to
increased Tcf-dependent transcriptional activity in thymocytes, as demonstrated
in Tcf-LacZ reporter mice. Transduction of fetal thymocytes with Wnt1 and Wnt4
results in increased survival in an in vitro cell culture system. Retroviral
expression of soluble Wnt receptor mutants that block Wnt signaling inhibits
thymocyte development. These results imply an important role for the Wnt cascade 
in thymocyte development.

PMID: 11265645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Nature. 2001 Mar 1;410(6824):116-20.

Methylation of histone H3 lysine 9 creates a binding site for HP1 proteins.

Lachner M(1), O'Carroll D, Rea S, Mechtler K, Jenuwein T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Molecular Pathology, The Vienna Biocenter, Vienna,
Austria.

Distinct modifications of histone amino termini, such as acetylation,
phosphorylation and methylation, have been proposed to underlie a chromatin-based
regulatory mechanism that modulates the accessibility of genetic information. In 
addition to histone modifications that facilitate gene activity, it is of similar
importance to restrict inappropriate gene expression if cellular and
developmental programmes are to proceed unperturbed. Here we show that mammalian 
methyltransferases that selectively methylate histone H3 on lysine 9 (Suv39h
HMTases) generate a binding site for HP1 proteins--a family of heterochromatic
adaptor molecules implicated in both gene silencing and supra-nucleosomal
chromatin structure. High-affinity in vitro recognition of a methylated histone
H3 peptide by HP1 requires a functional chromo domain; thus, the HP1 chromo
domain is a specific interaction motif for the methyl epitope on lysine9 of
histone H3. In vivo, heterochromatin association of HP1 proteins is lost in
Suv39h double-null primary mouse fibroblasts but is restored after the
re-introduction of a catalytically active SWUV39H1 HMTase. Our data define a
molecular mechanism through which the SUV39H-HP1 methylation system can
contribute to the propagation of heterochromatic subdomains in native chromatin.

PMID: 11242053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biochem J. 2001 Mar 15;354(Pt 3):645-53.

Differential expression of chicken dimerization cofactor of hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 (DcoH) and its novel counterpart, DcoHalpha.

Kim H(1), You S, Foster LK, Farris J, Choi YJ, Foster DN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Minnesota, St. Paul, MN 55108,
USA.

We have used differential display PCR to study altered gene expression in
immortalized chicken embryo fibroblasts (CEFs) that have been established in our 
laboratory. This technique resulted in the cloning of a novel counterpart of the 
previously cloned chicken dimerization cofactor of hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-1 (cDcoH), which was identified as cDcoHalpha. The steady-state mRNA levels
of cDcoHalpha were up-regulated in all immortal CEFs tested compared with primary
CEF cells. cDcoH and cDcoHalpha showed opposite patterns of mRNA expression due
to differential regulation of transcription rates, but not mRNA half-lives, in
primary and immortal CEFs. Expression of cDcoHalpha increased in the late G1 and 
early S phases of the cell cycle, while cDcoH mRNA increased in the late S and
G2/M phases. In contrast with consistent expression of both genes in primary
quiescent cells, cDcoH mRNA, but not cDcoHalpha mRNA, was dramatically decreased 
in primary senescent cells. The highest levels of cDcoHalpha mRNA were found in
the kidney, liver, heart and ovarian follicles, while the major tissues
expressing cDcoH were hypothalamus, kidney and liver. cDcoH and cDcoHalpha probes
did not cross-hybridize to human hepatocyte mRNA. When transfected into human
HepG2 cells, both cDcoH and cDcoHalpha showed similar functional activity as
measured by increased expression of a reporter gene, as well as alpha-fetoprotein
and albumin genes that both contain HNF-1 binding elements in their promoters.
Our results suggest that the novel chicken DcoHalpha might function as a
transcriptional cofactor for HNF-1 in specific cellular-environmental states.

PMCID: PMC1221696
PMID: 11237869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Jan;86(1):220-6.

Early-onset type 2 diabetes: metabolic and genetic characterization in the
mexican population.

Aguilar-Salinas CA(1), Reyes-Rodríguez E, Ordóñez-Sánchez ML, Torres MA,
Ramírez-Jiménez S, Domínguez-López A, Martínez-Francois JR, Velasco-Pérez ML,
Alpizar M, García-García E, Gómez-Pérez F, Rull J, Tusié-Luna MT.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Medicina y Unidad de Genética de la Nutrición del Instituto de 
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico.
caas@aztlan.innsz.mx

The objective of this study was to investigate possible defects in the insulin
sensitivity and/or the acute insulin response in a group of Mexican patients
displaying early-onset type 2 diabetes and to evaluate the contribution of
mutations in three of the genes linked to maturity-onset diabetes of the young.
We studied 40 Mexican patients with an age of diagnosis between 20 and 40 yr in
which the insulin sensitivity as well as the insulin secretory response were
measured using the minimal model approach. A partial screening for possible
mutations in 3 of the 5 genes linked to maturity-onset diabetes of the young was 
carried out by PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism analysis. A low
insulin secretory capacity (AIRg = 68.5 +/- 5 muU/mL.min) and a near-normal
insulin sensitivity (3.43 +/- 0.2 min/muU.mL x 10(4)) were found in these
patients. Among this group we found two individuals carrying missense mutations
in exon 4 of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-4alpha) gene
(Asp(126)-->His/Tyr and Arg(154)-->Gln, respectively) and one carrying a nonsense
mutation in exon 7 of the HNF-1alpha gene (Gln(486)-->stop codon); 7.5% had
positive titers for glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies. Thirty-five percent
of cases had insulin resistance; these subjects had the lipid abnormalities seen 
in the metabolic syndrome. A defect in insulin secretion is the hallmark in
Mexican diabetic patients diagnosed between 20 and 40 yr of age. Mutations in
either the HNF-1alpha or the HNF-4alpha genes are present among the individuals
who develop early-onset diabetes in our population. These particular sequence
changes have not been previously reported and therefore represent putative new
mutations. Even in the absence of endogenous hyperinsulinemia, insulin resistance
is associated with an adverse lipid profile.

PMID: 11232004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Cell Sci. 2001 Mar;114(Pt 6):1205-12.

A common regulatory locus affects both HNF4/HNF1alpha pathway activation and
sensitivity to LPS-mediated apoptosis in rat hepatoma cells.

Bulla GA(1), Givens E, Brown S, Oladiran B, Kraus D.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Research Institute, St Louis University Health Sciences Center, and 
Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital, Pediatric Research Institute, St Louis, MO 
63110, USA. bullaga@slu.ed

Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) has been shown to protect certain cultured mammalian
cells from undergoing programmed cell death (apoptosis) when exposed to tumor
necrosis factor (TNF). However, LPS has also been reported to induce apoptosis in
cultured endothelial cells, suggesting that apoptotic response mechanisms may be 
dependent upon cell type. In order to understand the influence of tissue-specific
gene expression on apoptosis, we compared LPS-induced apoptosis in hepatoma cells
with dedifferentiated hepatoma variant cells that have been selected for the loss
of the liver-enriched HNF4/HNF1alpha transcriptional activation pathway. We
report here that while human, rat and mouse hepatoma cell lines are resistant to 
LPS-mediated cell death, the HNF4-/HNF1alpha- rat hepatoma variant cells undergo 
rapid apoptosis (as determined by morphological analysis, DNA laddering and the
TUNEL assay) upon exposure to LPS. Genetic rescue experiments show that
restoration of the HNF4/HNF1alpha pathway via chromosome transfer render the
hepatoma variant cells resistant to LPS-mediated apoptosis. However, the
introduction of HNF1alpha alone failed to alter the apoptotic phenotype,
suggesting that the defect(s) in the hepatoma variant cells that influence
apoptotic responses lies upstream of HNF4/HNF1alpha expression. This study
provides for the first time direct evidence of a common regulatory locus involved
in activation of hepatic gene expression and sensitivity to LPS-mediated
apoptosis.

PMID: 11228163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Virol. 2001 Mar;75(6):2900-11.

Nuclear covalently closed circular viral genomic DNA in the liver of hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 alpha-null hepatitis B virus transgenic mice.

Raney AK(1), Eggers CM, Kline EF, Guidotti LG, Pontoglio M, Yaniv M, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

The role of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1 alpha) in the regulation of
hepatitis B virus (HBV) transcription and replication in vivo was investigated
using a HNF1 alpha-null HBV transgenic mouse model. HBV transcription was not
measurably affected by the absence of the HNF1 alpha transcription factor.
However, intracellular viral replication intermediates were increased two- to
fourfold in mice lacking functional HNF1 alpha protein. The increase in
encapsidated cytoplasmic replication intermediates in HNF1 alpha-null HBV
transgenic mice was associated with the appearance of nonencapsidated nuclear
covalently closed circular (CCC) viral genomic DNA. Viral CCC DNA was not readily
detected in HNF1 alpha-expressing HBV transgenic mice. This indicates the
synthesis of nuclear HBV CCC DNA, the proposed viral transcriptional template
found in natural infection, is regulated either by subtle alterations in the
levels of viral transcripts or by changes in the physiological state of the
hepatocyte in this in vivo model of HBV replication.

PMCID: PMC115916
PMID: 11222715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2000;13 Suppl 6:1411-7.

Diagnosis of maturity-onset diabetes of the young in the pediatric diabetes
clinic.

Hattersley AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medicine 
and Health Sciences, Exeter, UK. A.T.Hattersley@exeter.ac.uk

The diagnosis of pediatric diabetes mellitus (DM) traditionally is not considered
a diagnostic specialty. However, considerable heterogeneity in the etiology of DM
is seen among children and adolescents, making the recognition of discrete
subgroups of DM very important for determining prognosis and appropriate
treatment. The subgroups that result in non-insulin-dependent DM in children are 
as follows: the 'honeymoon' phase of type 1 DM, type 2 DM, genetic syndromes
accompanied by DM, and maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). The relative 
prevalence of these different subgroups depends on the population being studied. 
In the UK, in pediatric clinics where most patients are Caucasian, MODY is over
10 times more prevalent than type 2 DM. However, type 2 DM would predominate in a
clinic where most children are from populations with a high prevalence of this
condition (e.g. Asian Indians). It should be emphasized that MODY comprises two
discrete clinical syndromes: glucokinase diabetes and transcription factor
diabetes, the latter of which results from mutations in the genes encoding
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, HNF-1beta, HNF-4alpha and insulin
promoter factor-1.

PMID: 11202217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Pharmacogenetics. 2000 Dec;10(9):809-20.

Tissue specific differences in the regulation of the UDP glucuronosyltransferase 
2B17 gene promoter.

Gregory PA(1), Hansen AJ, Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders University School of Medicine,
Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park, SA, Australia.

The human UDP glucuronosyltransferase UGT2B17, glucuronidates androgens and is
expressed in the liver and the prostate. Although evidence suggests that
variations in UGT2B17 expression between tissues may be a critical determinant of
androgen response, the factors that regulate UGT2B17 expression in the liver and 
prostate are unknown. In this study, we have isolated a 596 bp promoter of the
UGT2B17 gene and studied its regulation in the liver cell line, HepG2 and the
prostate cell line, LNCaP. The transcription start site of UGT2B17 was mapped and
proteins that bound to the proximal promoter were detected by DNase1 footprint
analysis. A region (-40 to -52 bp) which resembled a hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 
(HNF1) binding site bound proteins in nuclear extracts from HepG2 cells, but did 
not bind proteins from LNCaP nuclear extracts. In HepG2 cells, HNF1alpha bound to
this region and activated the UGT2B17 promoter, as assessed by functional and gel
shift assays. HNF1alpha activation of the promoter was prevented by mutation or
deletion of the putative HNF1 site. The related transcription factor HNF1beta,
which is present in HepG2 cells, did not activate the promoter. The UGT2B17
promoter could also be activated by exogenous HNF1alpha in LNCaP cells. However, 
because these cells do not contain HNF1alpha, other transcription factors must
regulate the UGT2B17 promoter. Cotransfection experiments showed that HNF1beta,
elevates promoter activity in LNCaP cells. This activation did not involve the
putative HNF1 region (-40 to -52 bp) since mutation of this region did not affect
promoter activation by HNF1beta. These results suggest that the UGT2B17 promoter 
is regulated by different factors in liver-derived HepG2 and prostate-derived
LNCaP cells.

PMID: 11191885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Eur J Endocrinol. 2001 Jan;144(1):45-9.

Counterregulatory responses to hypoglycemia in patients with maturity-onset
diabetes of the young caused by HNF-1alpha gene mutations (MODY3).

Guenat E(1), Seematter G, Philippe J, Temler E, Jéquier E, Tappy L.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Physiologie, Université de Lausanne, Switzerland.

Mutations of HNF-1alpha lead to severe beta cell dysfunction, resulting in
decreased glucose-induced insulin secretion. HNF-1alpha is also expressed in
liver, kidney and pancreatic alpha cells, but the functional consequences of
HNF-1alpha mutations in these organs remain unknown. We therefore assessed the
counterregulatory responses to hypoglycemia in six patients with HNF-1alpha
mutations (MODY3), five patients with non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
(NIDDM) and in nine healthy controls. Plasma glucagon concentrations and
endogenous glucose production were measured every 15 min during a
hyperinsulinemic clamp with progressive hypoglycemia. Plasma glucagon
concentrations were similar at basal glycemia (73+/-6, 69+/-5 and 69+/-7 ng/l)
and reached peak values of 88+/-9, 88+/-11 and 89+/-7 ng/l at a glycemia of 3.6
mmol/l in MODY3 patients, patients with NIDDM and controls respectively (NS).
Suppression of endogenous glucose production by insulin was blunted in MODY3
patients (3.3+/-1.2 micromol/kg per min) and in patients with NIDDM (4.4+/-0.6
micromol/kg per min) compared with controls (1.7+/-0.5 micromol/kg per min,
P<0.05 compared with both MODY3 patients and patients with NIDDM). During
hypoglycemia, endogenous glucose production increased to 8.6+/-2.1, 8.8+/-0.7 and
7.0+/-1.0 micromol/kg per min in MODY3 patients, patients with NIDDM and controls
respectively (all NS). These data indicate that mutations of HNF-1alpha in MODY3 
do not result in a decreased glucagon secretion or alterations of glucose
production during hypoglycemia.

PMID: 11174836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Biochem J. 2001 Mar 1;354(Pt 2):301-8.

Activity of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta 
isoforms is differently affected by the inhibition of protein phosphatases 1/2A.

Carrière V(1), Lacasa M, Rousset M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U505, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 15 rue de l'école de Médecine, 
75006 Paris, France. veronique.carriere-u505@bhdc.jussieu.fr

Phosphorylation/dephosphorylation processes are known to control the activity of 
several transcription factors. The nutrition-dependent expression of
sucrase-isomaltase and Na+/glucose co-transporter 1, two proteins implicated in
the intestinal absorption of glucose, has been shown to be closely related to
modifications of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) activity. This study was
conducted to determine whether phosphorylation/dephosphorylation processes could 
control HNF1 activity. We show that expression of the gene encoding
sucrase-isomaltase is inhibited in the enterocytic Caco-2 clone TC7 by okadaic
acid at a concentration that is known to inhibit protein phosphatases 1/2A and
that does not affect cell viability. At the same concentration, phosphorylation
of the HNF1alpha and HNF1beta isoforms is greatly enhanced and their DNA-binding 
capacity is decreased. The phosphorylation state of HNF1beta isoforms directly
affects their DNA-binding capacity. In contrast, the decreased DNA-binding
activity of the HNF1alpha isoforms, which was observed after the inhibition of
protein phosphatases 1/2A, is due to a net decrease in their total cellular and
nuclear amounts. Such an effect results from a decrease in both the HNF1alpha
mRNA levels and the half-life of the protein. This is the first evidence for the 
implication of protein phosphatases 1/2A in the control of the activity of HNF1
isoforms. Moreover, these results emphasize a physiological role for the balance 
between phosphatases and kinases in the nutrition-dependent regulation of
HNF1-controlled genes.

PMCID: PMC1221656
PMID: 11171107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Dec 29;279(3):792-8.

MODY associated with two novel hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha loss-of-function 
mutations (P112L and Q466X).

Bjørkhaug L(1), Ye H, Horikawa Y, Søvik O, Molven A, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Medical Genetics and Molecular Medicine, University of Bergen,
Bergen, N-5021, Norway.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is an autosomal dominant form of
diabetes characterized by early onset of pancreatic dysfunction. MODY type 3 is
caused by mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha. During a
screening of Norwegian patients with suspected MODY we identified two novel
HNF-1alpha mutations, P112L and Q466X. The molecular mechanisms underlying the
disease were studied by analyzing the DNA binding properties, transcriptional
activation, and subcellular localization of HNF-1alpha P112L and Q466X compared
to wild type HNF-1alpha. P112L had reduced ability to bind an HNF1 consensus
sequence and to activate transcription. Q466X did not differ from wild type
HNF-1alpha in DNA binding activity. Transactivation, however, was markedly
reduced. When both mutants were coexpressed with wild type HNF-1alpha in HeLa
cells, transcriptional activity appeared unaffected, suggesting that a
dominant-negative mechanism was not present. Immunolocalization experiments
showed that P112L HNF-1alpha was correctly targeted to nuclei in HeLa cells. In
contrast, some Q466X HNF-1alpha protein was retained in the cytoplasm, which
indicated that the mechanism for nuclear localization was disturbed. Thus, the
HNF-1alpha mutations P112L and Q466X both seem to impair pancreatic beta-cell
function by loss-of-function mechanisms; P112L by reduced DNA binding and reduced
ability to transactivate, and Q466X by reduced transactivation and incomplete
nuclear targeting.

PMID: 11162430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 20;276(16):13136-44. Epub 2001 Jan 5.

The mouse fetoprotein transcription factor (FTF) gene promoter is regulated by
three GATA elements with tandem E box and Nkx motifs, and FTF in turn activates
the Hnf3beta, Hnf4alpha, and Hnf1alpha gene promoters.

Pare JF(1), Roy S, Galarneau L, Belanger L.

Author information: 
(1)Le Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, L'Hôtel-Dieu de 
Québec, Département de Biologie Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Québec G1R 2J6,
Canada.

Fetoprotein transcription factor (FTF) is an orphan nuclear receptor that
activates the alpha(1)-fetoprotein gene during early liver developmental growth. 
Here we sought to define better the position of FTF in transcriptional cascades
leading to hepatic differentiation. The mouse FTF gene was isolated and assigned 
to chromosome 1 band E4 (one mFTF pseudogene was also found). Exon/intron mapping
shows an mFTF gene structure similar to that of its close homologue SF1, with two
more N-terminal exons in the mFTF gene; exon mapping also delimits several FTF
mRNA 5'- and 3'-splice variants. The mFTF transcription initiation site was
located in adult liver at 238 nucleotides from the first translation initiator
codon, with six canonical GATA, E box, and Nkx motifs clustered between -50/-140 
base pairs (bp) from the cap site; DNA/protein binding assays also pinpointed an 
HNF4-binding element at +36 bp and an FTF-binding element at -257 bp.
Transfection assays and point mutations showed that the mFTF promoter is
activated by GATA, HNF4alpha, FTF, Nkx, and basic helix-loop-helix factors, with 
marked cooperativity between GATA and HNF4alpha. A tandem GATA/E box activatory
motif in the proximal mFTF promoter is strikingly similar to a composite motif
coactivated by differentiation inducers in the hematopoietic lineage; a tandem
GATA-Nkx motif in the distal mFTF promoter is also similar to a composite motif
transducing differentiation signals from transforming growth factor-beta-like
receptors in the cardiogenic lineage. Three genes encoding transcription factors 
critical to early hepatic differentiation, Hnf3beta, Hnf4alpha, and Hnf1alpha,
each contain dual FTF-binding elements in their proximal promoters, and all three
promoters are activated by FTF in transfection assays. Direct DNA binding action 
and cooperativity was demonstrated between FTF and HNF3beta on the Hnf3beta
promoter and between FTF and HNF4alpha on the Hnf1alpha promoter. These combined 
results suggest that FTF is an early intermediary between endodermal
specification signals and downstream genes that establish and amplify the hepatic
phenotype.

PMID: 11145965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Diabetologia. 2000 Dec;43(12):1476-83.

Insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity in diabetic subgroups: studies in the
prediabetic and diabetic state.

Tripathy D(1), Carlsson AL, Lehto M, Isomaa B, Tuomi T, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Wallenberg Laboratory, Department of Endocrinology, Lund University, Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: To evaluate insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion in
prediabetic and diabetic subjects with mutations in MODY1 (HNF-4 alpha) and MODY3
(HNF-1 alpha) genes, in subjects with GAD antibodies, latent autoimmune diabetes 
in adults and in subjects with the common form of Type II (non-insulin-dependent)
diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: Insulin secretion was measured as the incremental 30-min insulin (I30)
and insulin glucose ratio (I:G30) during OGTT whereas insulin sensitivity was
measured as the insulin sensitivity index during OGTT in 131 carriers of MODY
mutations [NGT = 38, IFG/IGT = 21, diabetes mellitus (DM) = 72], in 293 subjects 
with GADA (NGT = 47, IFG/IGT = 29, DM = 217) and in 2961 subjects with a family
history of the common form of Type II diabetes but without MODY mutations or GADA
(NGT = 1360, IFG/IGT = 857, DM = 744). A subgroup of the subjects underwent a
euglycaemic clamp (n = 210) and intravenous glucose tolerance test (n = 337) for 
the estimation of insulin sensitivity and first-phase insulin secretion.
RESULTS: Non-diabetic subjects with MODY mutations had pronounced impaired
insulin secretion (I30, I:G30) compared with the two other groups (p = 0.005).
Normal or non-diabetic glucose tolerance was maintained by enhanced insulin
sensitivity compared with the other two groups (p < 0.05 and p < 0.005). In
contrast to patients with Type II diabetes and with adult latent autoimmune
diabetes, MODY patients showed only a modest deterioration in insulin sensitivity
at onset of diabetes. The 2-h glucose values inversely correlated with insulin
sensitivity in subjects with GADA (r = -0.447, p < 0.001) and subjects from Type 
II diabetic families (r = -0.426, p < 0.001), whereas no such relation was
observed in subjects with MODY mutations (r = 0.151, p = NS). There were no
statistically significant differences in insulin secretion or insulin sensitivity
between subjects with GADA or subjects with a family history of Type II diabetes,
either at the NGT or the IFG/IGT stage.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Glucose-tolerant carriers of MODY mutations are
characterised by a severe impairment in insulin secretion. Enhanced insulin
sensitivity is the most likely explanation for the normal glucose tolerance.
Whereas subjects with positive GADA or Type II diabetes have impaired insulin
sensitivity with increasing glucose concentrations, MODY mutation carriers seem
to be protected from the effect of glucose toxicity.

PMID: 11151756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Hum Genet. 2000 Nov;107(5):458-65.

Identification of an intronic regulatory element in the human protein C (PROC)
gene.

Shamsher MK(1), Chuzhanova NA, Friedman B, Scopes DA, Alhaq A, Millar DS, Cooper 
DN, Berg LP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Mt Sinai School of Medicine, New York, USA.

Regulatory DNA elements responsible for human protein C (PROC) gene expression
have previously been identified in the upstream promoter region and first
(untranslated) exon of the gene. Here we show that an additional sequence element
located more than 500 bp downstream of the core promoter within intron 1 further 
enhances PROC promoter-driven reporter gene expression in human hepatoma cells.
In common with core promoter constructs used in previous studies, the activity of
this 3'-extended regulatory region is diminished by a naturally occurring
promoter mutation. However, in contrast to constructs lacking intronic sequence, 
the promoter/intron regulatory region is repressed rather than activated by the
transcription factor HNF-1. Using both conventional alignment procedures and
complexity analysis to study the human and canine PROC sequences, we identified
two conserved intronic regions, which were tested for their involvement in gene
regulation. High-level gene expression from the intron-coupled promoter was
dependent upon the integrity of a 142 bp sequence element, a duplicate copy of
which is located in an upstream region of the PROC gene that possesses enhancer
activity. These findings emphasise the potential importance of intragenic
sequences for gene regulation and serve to illustrate that the results of PROC
promoter/reporter gene experiments are critically dependent upon the sequence
context. The identification of such intragenic elements is relevant to the
analysis of human genetic disease since it will facilitate the detection and
functional evaluation of regulatory mutations and polymorphisms.

PMID: 11140943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jan;21(2):414-24.

Interleukin-6-induced STAT3 and AP-1 amplify hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-mediated
transactivation of hepatic genes, an adaptive response to liver injury.

Leu JI(1), Crissey MA, Leu JP, Ciliberto G, Taub R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Following hepatic injury or stress, gluconeogenic and acute-phase response genes 
are rapidly upregulated to restore metabolic homeostasis and limit tissue damage.
Regulation of the liver-restricted insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1
(IGFBP-1) gene is dramatically altered by changes in the metabolic state and
hepatectomy, and thus it provided an appropriate reporter to assess the
transcriptional milieu in the liver during repair and regeneration. The cytokine 
interleukin-6 (IL-6) is required for liver regeneration and repair, and it
transcriptionally upregulates a vast array of genes during liver growth by
unknown mechanisms. Evidence for a biologic role of IL-6 in IGFBP-1 upregulation 
was demonstrated by increased expression of hepatic IGFBP-1 in IL-6 transgenic
and following injection of IL-6 into nonfasting animals and its reduced
expression in IL-6(-/-) livers posthepatectomy. In both hepatic and nonhepatic
cells, IL-6 -mediated IGFBP-1 promoter activation was via an intact hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1) site and was dependent on the presence of endogenous
liver factor HNF-1 and induced factors STAT3 and AP-1 (c-Fos/c-Jun). IL-6 acted
through the STAT3 pathway, as dominant negative STAT3 completely blocked
IL-6-mediated stimulation of the IGFBP-1 promoter via the HNF-1 site. HNF-1/c-Fos
and HNF-1/STAT3 protein complexes were detected in mouse livers and in hepatic
and nonhepatic cell lines overexpressing STAT3/c-Fos/HNF-1. Similar regulation
was demonstrated using glucose-6-phosphatase and alpha-fibrinogen promoters,
indicating that HNF-1/IL-6/STAT3/AP-1-mediated transactivation of hepatic gene
expression is a general phenomenon after liver injury. These results demonstrate 
that the two classes of transcription factors, growth induced (STAT3 and AP-1)
and tissue specific (HNF-1), can interact as an adaptive response to liver injury
to amplify expression of hepatic genes important for the homeostatic response
during organ repair.

PMCID: PMC86585
PMID: 11134330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. J Biol Chem. 2001 Mar 16;276(11):7963-7. Epub 2000 Dec 19.

A molecular link between the common phenotypes of type 1 glycogen storage disease
and HNF1alpha-null mice.

Hiraiwa H(1), Pan CJ, Lin B, Akiyama TE, Gonzalez FJ, Chou JY.

Author information: 
(1)Heritable Disorders Branch, NICHD, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda,
Maryland 20892, USA.

The clinical manifestations of type 1 glycogen storage disease (GSD-1) in
patients deficient in the glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) system (e.g. growth
retardation, hepatomegaly, hyperlipidemia, and renal dysfunction) are shared by
Hnf1alpha(-/-) mice deficient of a transcriptional activator, hepatocyte nuclear 
factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha). However, the molecular mechanism is unknown. The
G6Pase system, essential for the maintenance of glucose homeostasis, is comprised
of glucose 6-phosphate transporter (G6PT) and G6Pase. G6PT translocates G6P from 
the cytoplasm to the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum where it is metabolized
by G6Pase to glucose and phosphate. Deficiencies in G6Pase and G6PT cause GSD-1a 
and GSD-1b, respectively. Hnf1alpha(-/-) mice also develop noninsulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus caused by defective insulin secretion. In this study, we sought
to determine whether there is a molecular link between HNF1alpha deficiency and
function of the G6Pase system. Transactivation studies revealed that HNF1alpha is
required for transcription of the G6PT gene. Hepatic G6PT mRNA levels and
microsomal G6P transport activity are also markedly reduced in Hnf1alpha(-/-)
mice as compared with Hnf1alpha(+/+) and Hnf1alpha(+/-) littermates. On the other
hand, hepatic G6Pase mRNA expression and activity are up-regulated in
Hnf1alpha(-/-) mice, consistent with observations that G6Pase expression is
increased in diabetic animals. Taken together, the results strongly suggest that 
metabolic abnormalities in HNF1alpha-null mice are caused in part by G6PT
deficiency and by perturbations of the G6Pase system.

PMID: 11121425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mech Dev. 2001 Jan;100(1):75-8.

Variant hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 expression in the mouse genital tract.

Reber M(1), Cereghini S.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 423, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, 75743 Paris, Cedex 15,
France.

Variant Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 (vHNF1/HNF1beta) is a homeodomain-containing 
transcription factor first expressed in the primitive endoderm and its
derivatives, the visceral and parietal endoderm. It is subsequently expressed in 
epithelial cells of different organs, including the primitive gut and derivatives
(liver, pancreas, lung), the kidney, and transiently, in the neural tube. We
report here new data concerning vHnf1 expression in the mouse genital tract,
using both RNA analyses and our vHnf1 heterozygous mutant mouse line, in which
the first coding exon of the vHnf1 gene is replaced by the NLSLacZ reporter gene.
Both beta-galactosidase activity and vHnf1 transcripts are detected in
epididymus, vas deferens, seminal vesicle, prostate, uterus and oviduct. RNA
analysis and in situ hybridization studies demonstrate that vHnf1 transcripts are
restricted to the germinal cells of the testis. Unexpectedly, no
beta-galactosidase activity is detected in the testis. We further show that, in
addition to the somatic transcript, two more abundant vHnf1 transcript variants, 
which lack exons 1-4, appear in this organ after meiosis.

PMID: 11118887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Biochemistry. 2000 Dec 12;39(49):15062-70.

High-resolution structure of the HNF-1alpha dimerization domain.

Rose RB(1), Endrizzi JA, Cronk JD, Holton J, Alber T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, 229 Stanley Hall #3206, University
of California, Berkeley, California 94720-3206, USA.

Erratum in
    Biochemistry 2001 Mar 13;40(10):3242.

The N-terminal dimerization domain of the transcriptional activator hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) is essential for DNA binding and association
of the transcriptional coactivator, DCoH (dimerization cofactor of HNF-1). To
investigate the basis for dimerization of HNF-1 proteins, we determined the 1.2 A
resolution X-ray crystal structure of the dimerization domain of HNF-1alpha
(HNF-p1). Phasing was facilitated by devising a simple synthesis for
Fmoc-selenomethionine and substituting leucine residues with selenomethionine.
The HNF-1 dimerization domain forms a unique, four-helix bundle that is preserved
with localized conformational shifts in the DCoH complex. In three different
crystal forms, HNF-p1 displays subtle shifts in the conformation of the
interhelix loop and the crossing angle between the amino- and carboxyl-terminal
helices. In all three crystal forms, the HNF-p1 dimers pair through an exposed
hydrophobic surface that also forms the binding site for DCoH. Conserved core
residues in the dimerization domain of the homologous transcriptional regulator
HNF-1beta rationalize the functional heterodimerization of the HNF-1alpha and
HNF-1beta proteins. Mutations in HNF-1alpha are associated with maturity-onset
diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3), and the structure of HNF-p1 provides
insights into the effects of three MODY3 mutations.

PMID: 11106484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Biochem J. 2000 Dec 1;352 Pt 2:557-64.

Synergistic activation of the Atlantic salmon hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1
promoter by the orphan nuclear receptors HNF4 and chicken ovalbumin upstream
promoter transcription factor I (COUP-TFI).

McNair A(1), Cereghini S, Brand H, Smith T, Breillat C, Gannon F.

Author information: 
(1)National Diagnostics Centre, University College Galway, Ireland.
Alan.Mcnair@unifr.ch

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) is a liver-enriched transcription factor that 
plays an important role in transcriptional networks involved in liver function.
The promoters of mammalian HNF1 genes contains a single binding site for another 
liver-enriched transcription factor, the nuclear hormone receptor HNF4. A
transcriptional hierarchy involving HNF4-mediated activation of the HNF1 promoter
has been proposed to be of crucial importance in maintaining the differentiated
hepatocyte phenotype. Here we present evidence that the Atlantic salmon HNF1
promoter contains three nuclear-hormone-receptor-binding sequences. Gel-shift
assays showed that these motifs are recognized with different affinities by HNF4 
and the orphan nuclear receptors chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter
transcription factors COUP-TFI and COUP-TFII. In hepatoma cells, the site showing
highest affinity for HNF4 appears to be crucial for promoter activity.
Transfection experiments in non-hepatic cells indicated that the salmon HNF1
promoter was activated by both HNF4 and COUP-TFs. We also identified a promoter
fragment encompassing the two more distal nuclear-hormone-binding sites that was 
activated by HNF4, unaffected by COUP-TF and showed a strong synergistic
activation by HNF4/COUP-TF. Results are presented detailing these interactions in
relation to the salmon HNF1 promoter architecture.

PMCID: PMC1221489
PMID: 11085951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 Dec;20(23):8676-83.

Inhibitor of the tissue-specific transcription factor HNF4, a potential regulator
in early Xenopus development.

Peiler G(1), Böckmann B, Nakhei H, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Essen, Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung),
D-45122 Essen, Germany.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is an orphan receptor of the nuclear
receptor superfamily and expressed in vertebrates as a tissue-specific
transcription factor in liver, kidney, intestine, stomach, and pancreas. It also 
plays a crucial role in early embryonic development and has been identified as a 
maternal component in the Xenopus egg. We now report on an activity present in
Xenopus embryos that inhibits the DNA binding of HNF4. This HNF4 inhibitor
copurifies with a 25-kDa protein under nondenaturing conditions but can be
separated from this protein by sodium dodecyl sulfate treatment. Protease
treatment of the inhibitor results in a core fragment of about 5 kDa that retains
full inhibitory activity. The activity of the HNF4 inhibitor can also be
monitored in the absence of DNA, as it alters the mobility of the HNF4 protein in
native polyacrylamide gels and the accessibility of antibodies. Comparing the
activity of the HNF4 inhibitor with acyl coenzyme A's, recently proposed to be
ligands of HNF4, we observe a more stringent specificity for the HNF4 inhibitor
activity. Using deletion constructs of the HNF4 protein, we could show that the
potential ligand-binding domain of HNF4 is not required, and thus the HNF4
inhibitor does not represent a classical ligand as defined for the nuclear
receptor superfamily. Based on our previous finding that maternal HNF4 is
abundantly present in Xenopus embryos but the target gene HNF1alpha is only
marginally expressed, we propose that the HNF4 inhibitor functions in the embryo 
to restrict the activity of the maternal HNF4 proteins.

PMCID: PMC86478
PMID: 11073969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2000 Nov;11 Suppl 16:S140-3.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1, a transcription factor at the crossroads of glucose 
homeostasis.

Pontoglio M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Oncogenic Virus Unit, CNRS URA 1644, Biotechnology Department, Pasteur
Institute, Paris, France. marcop@pasteur.fr

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) is a transcription factor involved in the
regulation of a large set of hepatic genes, including albumin, beta-fibrinogen,
and alpha1-antitrypsin. HNF1 is expressed in the liver, digestive tract,
pancreas, and kidney. Mice lacking HNF1 exhibit hepatic, pancreatic, and renal
dysfunctions. HNF1-deficient mice fail to express the hepatic phenylalanine
hydroxylase gene, giving rise to hyperphenylalaninemia. Renal proximal tubular
reabsorption of glucose, phosphate, arginine, and other metabolites is affected, 
producing severe renal glucosuria, phosphaturia, and amino aciduria. Homozygous
mutant mice also exhibit a dramatic insulin secretion defect. This dysfunction
resembles that exhibited by patients with maturity-onset diabetes mellitus of the
young type 3, who carry mutations in the human HNF1 gene in the heterozygous
state. These data show that HNF1 is a major regulator of glucose homeostasis,
regulating the expression of genes that are expressed in the liver, kidney, and
pancreas.

PMID: 11065346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Hum Mutat. 2000 Nov;16(5):377-85.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) mutations in maturity-onset
diabetes of the young.

Ellard S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine and Diabetes Research, School of Postgraduate 
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.
S.Ellard@exeter.ac.uk

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes
mellitus characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, early age of onset (<25
years) and pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. MODY is genetically heterogeneous
with five different genes identified to date: hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha
(HNF-4 alpha) [MODY1]; glucokinase [MODY2]; hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha
(HNF-1 alpha) [MODY3]; insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF-1) [MODY4]; and hepatocyte 
nuclear factor-1 beta (HNF-1 beta) [MODY5]. Mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene
represent a common cause of MODY in the majority of populations studied.
Sixty-five different mutations have been described in a total of 116 families.
The most common mutation is a C-insertion (P291fsinsC) in the polyC tract of exon
4, which has been reported in 22 families. The identification of an HNF-1 alpha
gene mutation in a patient with type 2 diabetes confirms the diagnosis of MODY
and has important implications for clinical management.

PMID: 11058894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Oct 5;276(3):837-42.

Identification of retinoic acid-responsive elements on the HNF1alpha and
HNF4alpha genes.

Qian A(1), Cai Y, Magee TR, Wan YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California,
90509, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) and HNF4alpha are liver-selective
transcription factors and are essential for hepatocyte differentiation. This
study demonstrates that HNF1alpha as well as HNF4alpha genes contain a direct
repeat with a space of one nucleotide (DR1)-retinoic acid (RA) response element
that can be bound and regulated by RA and retinoid x receptor alpha (RXRalpha)
complex. Transient transfection experiments showed that RA increased the promoter
activity of the HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha genes in Hep3B cells. Overexpression of
RXRalpha further enhanced the activities of both genes. Two putative RXRalpha
binding sites on the HNF1alpha (-295 to -276) and HNF4alpha (-418 to -399) genes 
have been characterized. By transient transfection, both sites positively
responded to RA, and overexpression of RXRalpha in Hep3B cells increased the
regulatory effect. Gel mobility shift assay demonstrated that these two DR-1
sites could be bound by RXRalpha specifically. These data suggest that the
differentiation effect of RA on hepatocyte may be due to direct interaction of
RXRalpha with the RA-responsive elements on the HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha genes.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11027556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Diabetes Care. 2000 Oct;23(10):1533-8.

Variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha and -4alpha genes in Finnish and
Chinese subjects with late-onset type 2 diabetes.

Rissanen J(1), Wang H, Miettinen R, Kärkkäinen P, Kekäläinen P, Mykkänen L,
Kuusisto J, Karhapää P, Niskanen L, Uusitupa M, Laakso M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Kuopio, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the role of the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha
and HNF-4alpha genes in the etiology of late-onset type 2 diabetes in Finnish and
Chinese subjects.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The whole coding regions of the genes encoding for
HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha, including approximately 800 bp of the HNF-1alpha
promoter, were investigated in 40 Finnish subjects (fasting C-peptide 50-570
pmol/l) and 47 Chinese subjects with type 2 diabetes by single-strand
conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. Frequencies of the variants of these
genes were analyzed by restriction fragment-length polymorphism analysis in
additional samples of 100 Finnish diabetic patients and 82 Finnish control
subjects and in 58 Chinese diabetic patients and 51 Chinese control subjects.
RESULTS: No previously reported gene defects were detected, but one novel
functionally silent GCC-->GCG variant (nucleotide 73, exon 10) was observed in
the HNF-4alpha gene in a Chinese diabetic patient. Interestingly, the Ala98Val
substitution of the HNF-1alpha gene occurred at a significantly higher frequency 
in 140 Finnish diabetic patients compared with 82 control subjects (P = 0.014).
The Ala98Val variant was not, however, associated with abnormalities in insulin
secretion evaluated by oral and intravenous glucose tolerance tests in subjects
with normal (n = 295) or impaired (n = 38) glucose tolerance.
CONCLUSIONS: Variants in the HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha genes are unlikely to play
a major role in the pathogenesis of late-onset type 2 diabetes in Finnish and
Chinese subjects. However, the association of the Ala98Val variant of the
HNF-1alpha gene with type 2 diabetes in Finnish subjects may indicate a
diabetogenic locus close to the HNF-1alpha gene.

PMID: 11023148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Cell Sci. 2000 Oct;113 ( Pt 20):3639-47.

Inhibition of MMH (Met murine hepatocyte) cell differentiation by TGF(beta) is
abrogated by pre-treatment with the heritable differentiation effector FGF1.

Spagnoli FM(1), Cicchini C, Tripodi M, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, URA 1773 du CNRS, Institut Pasteur, 
75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

MMH (Met murine hepatocyte) liver cells derived from transgenic mice expressing a
truncated constitutively active form of human c-Met are non-transformed
immortalized cell lines. We have previously shown that they harbor: (1)
epithelial cells that express the liver-enriched transcription factors HNF4 and
HNF1(alpha), and that can be stably induced by FGF1 to express liver functions,
and (2) fibroblast-like bi-potential palmate cells that can differentiate into
bile duct-like structures in Matrigel cultures, or into epithelial cells
competent to express hepatic functions. Low concentrations of TGF(beta) have been
found to inhibit growth and differentiation of MMH cells. The factor stabilized
the palmate cell phenotype, and it provoked epithelial cells to acquire
palmate-like morphological characteristics, in parallel with down-regulation of
expression of HNF4 and HNF1(alpha) and activation of Snail transcripts. The
effects of TGF(beta) were dominant if it was added with FGF1, but the effects on 
differentiation were abrogated if cells had been pre-treated with FGF1. This work
identifies TGF(beta) as a factor that could be implicated in maintaining
bi-potential precursor cells in the liver, FGF1 as one that could over-ride the
TGF(beta) effects and Snail as a candidate for mediation of the signal.

PMID: 11017879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Horm Metab Res. 2000 Sep;32(9):373-7.

A novel dominant-negative mutation of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene
in Japanese early-onset type 2 diabetes.

Tanaka S(1), Kobayashi T, Tomura H, Okubo M, Nakanishi K, Takeda J, Murase T.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Toranomon Hospital, and Okinaka
Memorial Institute for Medical Research, Tokyo, Japan. tetsuro@po.sphere.ne.jp

We investigated the presence and the function of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha) mutations in 26 Japanese subjects with type 2 diabetes. The subjects
were between 20 and 39 years of age on diagnosis and had diabetic first-degree
relatives. Two different frameshift mutations were found in 2 subjects (8 %). One
novel mutation, T539fsdelC (deletion of C in codon 539 for Thr), is predicted to 
generate a protein of normal 539 residues at the N-terminus followed by an
abnormal 119 amino acid protein. The mutation, P291fsinsC (insertion of C in
codon 291 for Pro) should lead to production of a truncated protein of 315 amino 
acids. Transfection reporter assay using MIN6 and HepG2 cells revealed both
mutations to have null function in the transactivation of reporter gene
expression. When transfected with wild-type gene, these mutations behaved as
dominant-negative regulators in both cells. An equimolar amount of T539fsdelC
reduced wild-type activity by approximately 80% in MIN6 cells, while the same
concentration of P291fsinsc reduced it by 30%. The sequences responsible for the 
transactivation activity of HNF-1alpha are confined largely to amino acids
547-628, so that the T539fsdelC mutation, which affects this entire region,
replacing amino acids 540-631 with an abnormal 119 amino acid protein, may
acquire a potent dominant-negative function.

PMID: 11014387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Hum Mutat. 2000 Sep;16(3):273.

Proposed mechanism for a novel insertion/deletion frameshift mutation
(I414G415ATCG-->CCA) in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) gene 
which causes maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY).

Ellard S(1), Bulman MP, Frayling TM, Shepherd M, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine and Diabetes Research, School of Postgraduate 
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, UK.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic subgroup of
non-insulin dependent diabetes (NIDDM) characterized by an early age of diagnosis
(usually < 25 years) and an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. Mutations in 
the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1alpha) [MODY3] gene represent the
most common cause of MODY in the UK and a common cause of MODY in many other
populations. Sixty-three different mutations have been described in a total of
112 families worldwide. This report describes two families, not known to be
related, who carry a novel insertion/deletion mutation (I414G415ATCG-->CCA) and a
6bp intronic deletion of the HNF-1alpha gene in cis. We propose that the
insertion/deletion mutation has arisen by formation of a hairpin loop due to the 
presence of a quasi-palindromic sequence, followed by insertion of CC and
deletion of TCG resulting in the increased stability of the hairpin loop.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10980542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. J Biol Chem. 2000 Dec 1;275(48):37604-11.

An alternative, human SRC promoter and its regulation by hepatic nuclear
factor-1alpha.

Bonham K(1), Ritchie SA, Dehm SM, Snyder K, Boyd FM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Unit, Health Research Division, Saskatchewan Cancer Agency and
the Division of Oncology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan,
S7N 4H4, Canada. kbonham@scf.sk.ca

The SRC gene encodes the proto-oncogene pp60(c-)(src), a tyrosine kinase
implicated in numerous signal transduction pathways. In addition, the SRC gene is
differentially expressed, developmentally regulated, and frequently overexpressed
in human neoplasia. However, the mechanisms regulating its expression have not
been completely explored. Here we describe the isolation of a new distal SRC
promoter and associated exon, designated 1alpha, which we mapped to a position
1.0 kilobase upstream of the previously described SRC1A housekeeping promoter.
Differential use of these promoters and their associated exons coupled with
subsequent splicing to a common downstream exon results in c-Src transcripts with
different 5' ends but identical coding regions. Promoter analysis following
transient transfections into HepG2 cells mapped the minimal 1alpha promoter to a 
region 145 bp upstream of the major transcription start site. This region
contained a consensus binding site for hepatic nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), a
liver-enriched transcription factor implicated in the regulation of a number of
genes in liver, kidney, stomach, intestine, and pancreas. Subsequent mobility
shift assays confirmed that HNF-1alpha isoform was the predominant factor
interacting with this region of the promoter. Mutation of the HNF-1 site resulted
in a dramatic reduction in SRC promoter activity. Cotransfection studies
demonstrated the promoter could be strongly transactivated by the HNF-1alpha
isoform but not by the related HNF-1beta factor. Consistent with these results,
we demonstrated that transcripts originating from the SRC1alpha promoter display 
a tissue restricted pattern of expression with highest levels present in stomach,
kidney, and pancreas. These results indicate that SRC transcriptional regulation 
is much more complex than previously realized and implicates HNF-1 in both the
tissue-specific regulation of the SRC gene in normal tissues and the
overexpression of c-Src in certain human cancers.

PMID: 10978326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Diabet Med. 2000 Jul;17(7):543-5.

Sensitivity to sulphonylureas in patients with hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
gene mutations: evidence for pharmacogenetics in diabetes.

Pearson ER(1), Liddell WG, Shepherd M, Corrall RJ, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medicine 
and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, UK.

INTRODUCTION: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is characterized by
autosomal dominantly inherited, early-onset, non-insulin-dependent diabetes.
Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha gene are the commonest
cause of MODY. Individual patients with HNF-1alpha mutations have been reported
as being unusually sensitive to the hypoglycaemic effects of sulphonylurea
therapy. We report three patients, attending a single clinic, with HNF-1alpha
mutations that show marked hypersensitivity to sulphonylureas.
CASE REPORTS: In cases 1 and 2 there were marked changes in HbA1c on cessation
(4.4% and 5.8%, respectively) and reintroduction (5.0% and 2.6%) of
sulphonylureas. Case 3 had severe hypoglycaemic symptoms on the introduction of
sulphonylureas despite poor glycaemic control and was shown with a test dose of
2.5 mg glibenclamide to have symptomatic hypoglycaemia (blood glucose 2 mmol/l)
after 4 h despite eating.
CONCLUSIONS: HNF-1alpha MODY diabetic subjects are more sensitive to
sulphonylureas than Type 2 diabetic subjects and this is seen in different
families, with different mutations and may continue up to 13 years from
diagnosis. This is an example of pharmacogenetics, with the underlying
aetiological genetic defect altering the pharmacological response to treatment.
The present cases suggest that in HNF-1alpha MODY patients: (i) sulphonylureas
can dramatically improve glycaemic control and should be considered as initial
treatment for patients with poor glycaemic control on an appropriate diet; (ii)
hypoglycaemia may complicate the introduction of sulphonylureas and therefore
very low doses of short acting sulphonylureas should be used initially; and (iii)
cessation of sulphonylureas should be undertaken cautiously as there may be
marked deterioration in glycaemic control.

PMID: 10972586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Nat Struct Biol. 2000 Sep;7(9):744-8.

Structural basis of dimerization, coactivator recognition and MODY3 mutations in 
HNF-1alpha.

Rose RB(1), Bayle JH, Endrizzi JA, Cronk JD, Crabtree GR, Alber T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California, Berkeley, 
California 94720-3206, USA.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3) results from mutations in the
transcriptional activator hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha). Several 
MODY3 mutations target the HNF-1alpha dimerization domain (HNF-p1), which binds
the coactivator, dimerization cofactor of HNF-1 (DCoH). To define the mechanism
of coactivator recognition and the basis for the MODY3 phenotype, we determined
the cocrystal structure of the DCoH-HNF-p1 complex and characterized
biochemically the effects of MODY3 mutations in HNF-p1. The DCoH-HNF-p1 complex
comprises a dimer of dimers in which HNF-p1 forms a unique four-helix bundle.
Through rearrangements of interfacial side chains, a single, bifunctional
interface in the DCoH dimer mediates both HNF-1alpha binding and formation of a
competing, transcriptionally inactive DCoH homotetramer. Consistent with the
structure, MODY3 mutations in HNF-p1 reduce activator function by two distinct
mechanisms.

PMID: 10966642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord. 2000 Aug;24(8):1062-4.

Gender, obesity, hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha G319S and the age-of-onset of type
2 diabetes in Canadian Oji-Cree.

Hegele RA(1), Cao H, Harris SB, Zinman B, Hanley AJ, Anderson CM.

Author information: 
(1)John P Robarts Research Institute, London, Ontario, Canada.
robert.hegele@rri.on.ca

Among the Oji-Cree of northern Ontario, women have both a higher prevalence and
an earlier onset of type 2 diabetes compared to men. We studied the relationship 
between HNF1A S319 and both the presence of and the age-of-onset of type 2
diabetes in women and men separately. We found that: 1) in women, there was a
significant difference in the mean age-of-onset of type 2 diabetes according to
HNF1A genotype; and 2) in men, there was no difference in the mean age-of-onset
of type 2 diabetes according to HNF1A genotype. The findings indicate that HNF1A 
S319 is associated with increased susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in both men
and women, but with earlier age-of-onset in women only. One factor that might
account for the gender difference in the onset of HNF1A S319-associated type 2
diabetes is the greater prevalence and severity, and earlier onset of, obesity
among female Oji-Cree.

PMID: 10951547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Aug;85(8):2951-3.

Variability of the insulin receptor substrate-1, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha), HNF-4alpha, and HNF-6 genes and size at birth in a population-based
sample of young Danish subjects.

Rasmussen SK(1), Urhammer SA, Hansen T, Almind K, Møller AM, Borch-Johnsen K,
Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark.

Reduced size at birth has been proposed to be a risk factor for insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes. It is, however, not known whether this
association is explained by unfavorable intrauterine environment or by specific
susceptibility genotypes predisposing for both reduced fetal growth and insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes. The present study was performed to evaluate
whether previously identified amino acid polymorphisms of genes that from animal 
models have been suggested to play important roles during fetal development are
associated with alterations in size at birth. The study population comprised 380 
subjects randomly recruited from a population of young Danish Caucasian
individuals, aged 18-32 yr. The original data of birth length and weight for 331 
of 380 subjects were obtained from the midwife records. The Gly/Arg972 of insulin
receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), the Thr/Ile130 of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha), the Pro/Ala75 of HNF-6, and the Ile/Leu27, Ala/Val93,
and Ser/Asn4s7 polymorphisms of the HNF-lalpha gene were examined for association
with birth weight and length and the ponderal index. Using a generalized linear
model, including gender and the genotype as fixed variables, and applying
Bonferroni correction for multiple testing, we could not demonstrate any
significant differences in these estimates among wild-type, heterozygous, and
homozygous carriers with respect to any of the gene variants. In conclusion,
common variability in the genes encoding the IRS-1, HNF-lalpha, HNF-4alpha, and
HNF-6 proteins can be excluded as major factors influencing size at birth among
Danish Caucasian subjects.

PMID: 10946909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. EMBO J. 2000 Aug 15;19(16):4257-64.

Molecular targets of a human HNF1 alpha mutation responsible for pancreatic
beta-cell dysfunction.

Wang H(1), Antinozzi PA, Hagenfeldt KA, Maechler P, Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Division de Biochimie Clinique et de Diabétologie Expérimentale, Départment de
Médecine interne, Centre Médical Universitaire, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

The reverse tetracycline-dependent transactivator system was employed in
insulinoma INS-1 cells to achieve controlled inducible expression of hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1 alpha)-P291fsinsC, the most common mutation
associated with subtype 3 of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3).
Nuclear localized HNF1 alpha-P291fsinsC protein exerts its dominant-negative
effects by competing with endogenous HNF1 alpha for the cognate DNA-binding site.
HNF1 alpha controls multiple genes implicated in pancreatic beta-cell function
and notably in metabolism- secretion coupling. In addition to reduced expression 
of the genes encoding insulin, glucose transporter-2, L-pyruvate kinase, aldolase
B and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme A reductase, induction of HNF1
alpha-P291fsinsC also significantly inhibits expression of mitochondrial
2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase (OGDH) E1 subunit mRNA and protein. OGDH enzyme
activity and [(14)C]pyruvate oxidation were also reduced. In contrast, the mRNA
and protein levels of mitochondrial uncoupling protein-2 were dramatically
increased by HNF1 alpha-P291fsinsC induction. As predicted from this altered gene
expression profile, HNF1 alpha-P291fsinsC also inhibits insulin secretory
responses to glucose and leucine, correlated with impaired nutrient-evoked
mitochondrial ATP production and mitochondrial membrane hyperpolarization. These 
unprecedented results suggest the molecular mechanism of HNF1 alpha-P291fsinsC
causing beta-cell dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC302029
PMID: 10944108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Mol Pharmacol. 2000 Aug;58(2):319-27.

Involvement of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 in the regulation of the
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A7 (UGT1A7) gene in rat hepatocytes.

Metz RP(1), Auyeung DJ, Kessler FK, Ritter JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University,
Medical College of Virginia, Richmond, Virginia 23298-0613, USA.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A7 (UGT1A7) is a major UGT contributing to the
glucuronidation of xenobiotic phenols in rats. Its expression in rat liver is
tightly regulated, with low constitutive and high inducible expression in
response to aryl hydrocarbon receptor ligands and oltipraz. Previously, we
reported the absence of 3-methylcholanthrene- or oltipraz-responsive elements in 
the 1.6-kbp region flanking the UGT1A7 promoter. However, potential binding sites
were noted for several liver-enriched transcription factors. Here we show that
deletion of the hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)3, HNF4, and CCAAT-enhancer binding
protein-like binding sites had no effect on the expression of a UGT1A7 reporter
plasmid, p(-965/+56)1A7-Luc, in primary rat hepatocytes. The full activity of the
promoter was contained in the region between bases -157 and +76. Two sites of
binding by rat liver nuclear proteins were detected in this region by DNase
footprinting. PR-1 corresponded to the HNF1-like binding site between bases -52
and -38, whereas PR-2 was located between -30 to -6. Gel retardation studies
supported the presence of HNF1alpha in the PR-1 DNA-liver nuclear protein
complex. Mutation of PR-1 inhibited binding in the gel shift assay, prevented
activation by overexpressed HNF1 in human embryonic kidney cells, and reduced by 
>80% the maximal luciferase activities expressed from basal and
3-methylcholanthrene-responsive UGT1A7 gene reporter constructs in primary rat
hepatocytes. These data provide evidence for an important stimulatory role of
HNF1 in promoting UGT1A7 gene expression in rat liver.

PMID: 10908299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Diabetologia. 2000 Jun;43(6):818-9.

A simple test for the high-frequency P291fsinsC mutation in the HNF1 alpha/MODY3 
gene.

Bjørkhaug L, Søvik O, Bell GI, Njølstad PR, Molven A.

PMID: 10907131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Diabetologia. 2000 Jun;43(6):816-8.

Nature or nurture: an insightful illustration from a Chinese family with
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha diabetes (MODY3)

Ng MC, Li JK, So WY, Critchley JA, Cockram CS, Bell GI, Chan JC.

PMID: 10907130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Diabet Med. 2000 May;17(5):390-3.

A novel mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha/MODY3 gene in Chinese
subjects with early-onset Type 2 diabetes mellitus in Taiwan.

Jap TS(1), Wu YC, Chiou JY, Kwok CF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Veterans General
Hospital-Taipei, National Yang-Ming University, Taiwan, ROC. tsjap@vghtpe.gov.tw

AIMS: The goal of this study was to determine the frequency of mutation in
hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, a gene recently implicated as causing
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and to analyse the respective
clinical presentations in an ethnically Chinese population.
METHODS: Fifteen unrelated subjects (nine females and six males) aged less than
35 years who had early-onset diabetes were analysed to test the possibility that 
mutation of the HNF-1alpha gene was responsible for this disorder. Genomic DNA
extraction, polymerase chain reaction and DNA sequence analysis were performed
accordingly.
RESULTS: One patient with MODY had a novel missense mutation in exon 3 of the
HNF-1alpha gene (Y218C) in a region of the protein that corresponds to a
predicted DNA binding domain.
CONCLUSIONS: A Y218C mutation in HNF-1alpha gene was identified in one family in 
Taiwan.

PMID: 10872540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 25;275(34):26649-60.

The nuclear matrix protein CDP represses hepatic transcription of the human
cholesterol-7alpha hydroxylase gene.

Antes TJ(1), Chen J, Cooper AD, Levy-Wilson B.

Author information: 
(1)Palo Alto Medical Foundation Research Institute, Palo Alto, California 94301, 
USA.

To date, the molecular mechanisms that govern hepatic-specific transcription of
the human cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) gene are poorly understood. We 
recently reported that the region extending from -1888 to +46, which includes the
promoter, is not capable of conferring expression to human CYP7A1 promoter lacZ
transgenes in the livers of mice, but that expression is observed with transgenes
containing the entire structural gene. To locate liver-specific elements in other
segments of the human gene, DNase I hypersensitivity studies were performed with 
transcriptionally active, liver-derived HepG2 cells and with transcriptionally
inactive HeLa cells. Three DNase I hypersensitivity sites were detected within
the first intron of the human CYP7A1 gene, but only in HepG2 cells. Transient
transfection experiments with HepG2 cells revealed a transcriptional repressor
within intron 1. Five binding sites for the CAAT displacement protein (CDP) were 
detected within intron 1. Since CDP is a nuclear matrix protein, two methods were
employed to localize nuclear matrix attachment sites within intron 1 of the human
CYP7A1 gene. A matrix attachment site was found throughout the entirety of intron
1. Gel retardation experiments and cell transfection studies provided evidence
for the repression mechanism. Repression is achieved by displacement by CDP of
two hepatic activators, namely HNF-1alpha and C/EBPalpha, that bind to three
different sites within intron 1. Additionally, CDP represses transactivation
mediated by these two activators.

PMID: 10869351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Diabetes Care. 2000 Mar;23(3):424-5.

A severe clinical phenotype results from the co-inheritance of type 2
susceptibility genes and a hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha mutation.

Tack CJ, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

PMID: 10868881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Diabetes Care. 2000 Mar;23(3):302-4.

Mutations in the genes for hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, -4alpha,
-1beta, and -3beta; the dimerization cofactor of HNF-1; and insulin promoter
factor 1 are not common causes of early-onset type 2 diabetes in Pima Indians.

Baier LJ(1), Permana PA, Traurig M, Dobberfuhl A, Wiedrich C, Sutherland J,
Thuillez P, Luczy-Bachman G, Hara M, Horikawa Y, Hinokio Y, Hanson RL, Bogardus
C.

Author information: 
(1)Phoenix Epidemiology and Clinical Research Branch, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Arizona 85016, USA. lbaier@phx.niddk.nih.gov

OBJECTIVE: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically
heterogeneous subtype of type 2 diabetes characterized by an early age at onset
and autosomal dominant inheritance. MODY can result from heterozygous mutations
in at least five genes. The purpose of this study was to determine whether
alterations in known MODY genes and two MODY candidate genes contribute to the
development of early-onset type 2 diabetes in Pima Indians.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The coding regions of the known MODY genes
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, HNF-4alpha, HNF-1beta, and insulin
promoter factor 1 and the coding regions of two MODY candidate genes, HNF-3beta
and the dimerization cofactor of HNF-1, were sequenced in genomic DNA from Pima
Indians. The primary "affected" study population consisted of 46 Pima Indians
whose age at onset of type 2 diabetes was < or =20 years. DNA sequence variants
identified in the affected group were then analyzed in a group of 80 "unaffected"
Pima Indians who were at least 40 years old and had normal glucose tolerance.
RESULTS: A total of 11 polymorphisms were detected in these genes. However, none 
of the polymorphisms differed in frequency among Pima Indians with an early age
at onset of diabetes compared with older Pima Indians with normal glucose
tolerance.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in these known MODY or MODY candidate genes are not a
common cause of early-onset diabetes in Pima Indians.

PMID: 10868855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. J Biol Chem. 2000 Sep 1;275(35):27117-22.

Regulation of the liver fatty acid-binding protein gene by hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha). Alterations in fatty acid homeostasis in
HNF1alpha-deficient mice.

Akiyama TE(1), Ward JM, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland
20892, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha)-null mice have enlarged fatty livers
and alterations in the expression of genes encoding enzymes involved in the
synthesis, catabolism, and transport of fatty acids. Elevations in the expression
of genes encoding fatty acid synthetic enzymes (fatty acid synthase and acyl-CoA 
carboxylase) and peroxisomal beta-oxidation enzymes (CYP4A3, bifunctional enzyme,
and thiolase) were observed in the livers of HNF1alpha-null mice, whereas hepatic
mitochondrial beta-oxidation gene (medium and short chain acyl-CoA dehydrogenase)
expression levels remain unchanged relative to HNF1alpha-heterozygous controls.
An elevation in the levels of fatty acid transporter gene expression was also
observed. In contrast, there was a marked reduction of liver fatty acid-binding
protein (l-FABP) gene expression in the livers of HNF1alpha-null mice. Isolation 
and sequence analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the mouse l-FABP gene revealed
the presence of two HNF1alpha regulatory elements. The results of transient
transfection studies indicate that HNF1alpha is required to trans-activate the
expression of the l-FABP promoter. Taken together, these data define a critical
role for HNF1alpha in the pathogenesis of a phenotype marked by fatty
infiltration of the liver and in the regulation of the l-FABP gene, the
expression of which may have a direct impact on the maintenance of fatty acid
homeostasis.

PMID: 10852923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Jun;85(6):2178-83.

The I27L amino acid polymorphism of hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha is associated
with insulin resistance.

Chiu KC(1), Chuang LM, Ryu JM, Tsai GP, Saad MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California School of Medicine, Los
Angeles 90095, USA. kchiu@mednet.ucla.edu

Mutations of the hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene have been found 
in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young. We examined the relation
between the I27L polymorphism of HNF-1alpha and insulin sensitivity and beta-cell
function assessed by a hyperglycemic clamp. This study included 52 healthy
glucose-tolerant and normotensive subjects (age, 19-40 yr; body mass index,
17.58-35.61 kg/m2; waist/hip ratio, 0.65-1.03). We identified 19 LL subjects, 24 
IL, and 9 II subjects. No difference was noted in the demographic features among 
the three genotypes. The LL group had the highest postchallenge insulin levels at
30 and 90 min (P = 0.038 and P = 0.015, respectively) and also the highest
insulin area under curve (P = 0.009) among the three genotypes. The LL group was 
more insulin resistant than the IL and II groups (P = 0.042 for insulin
sensitivity index). After adjusting for age, gender, obesity, and ethnicity, the 
I27L polymorphism was an independent determinant of the insulin sensitivity index
(P = 0.001). However, it had no impact on either the first or second phase
insulin response. Therefore, we conclude that the I27L polymorphism is associated
with insulin resistance, but not beta-cell function. The mechanism of this
association is unclear, but HNF-1alpha may play a role in regulating hepatic
glucose metabolism.

PMID: 10852449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 May;85(5):2014-9.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma2 P12A and type 2 diabetes in
Canadian Oji-Cree.

Hegele RA(1), Cao H, Harris SB, Zinman B, Hanley AJ, Anderson CM.

Author information: 
(1)Blackburn Cardiovascular Genetics Laboratory, John P. Robarts Research
Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada. robert.hegele@rri.on.ca

Among the Oji-Cree of northern Ontario, we previously identified a novel variant 
in the HNF1A gene, namely G319S, that was strongly associated with type 2
diabetes. However, the majority of subjects with diabetes did not have the HNF1A 
S319 variant, suggesting that there might be other genetic determinants of
diabetes susceptibility. In the course of sequencing candidate genes in diabetic 
subjects who were homozygous for HNF1A G319/G319, we found that some of them had 
the PPARG A12 variant. After genotyping PPARG in the entire adult Oji-Cree
population, we found that: 1) PPARG A12 was strongly associated with type 2
diabetes in women, but not men; 2) among women, the odds of being affected for
carriers of PPARG A12 compared with noncarriers was 2.3 (95% confidence interval,
1.4-3.8); and 3) among women, affected carriers of PPARG A12 had a significantly 
earlier age-of-onset and/or age-at-diagnosis compared with noncarriers. When
taken together with the previously reported association of diabetes with HNF1A in
both men and women, the gender-specific association with PPARG A12 confirms that 
type 2 diabetes is etiologically complex in the Oji-Cree and that at least two
genes are involved in determining susceptibility to the disease in these people.

PMID: 10843190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Diabetes Care. 2000 Jun;23(6):775-8.

Clinical utility of HNF1A genotyping for diabetes in aboriginal Canadians.

Hegele RA(1), Cao H, Hanley AJ, Zinman B, Harris SB, Anderson CM.

Author information: 
(1)John P. Robarts Research Institute, and Department of Medicine, University of 
Western Ontario, London, Canada. robert.hegele@rri.on.ca

OBJECTIVE: To determine the diagnostic performance characteristics of HNF1A
genotyping for diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) in Canadian Oji-Cree
Indians.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We studied all Oji-Cree subjects > or = 50 years of 
age (96 subjects) who had participated in a community-wide prevalence survey for 
type 2 diabetes. Subjects were classified either as having "disease," which
included type 2 diabetes and IGT, or not. All subjects were genotyped for the
HNF1A G319S mutation.
RESULTS: The prevalence of disease in this group was 65.7%, of whom 71.4% had
type 2 diabetes. For a carrier of HNF1A S319, the specificity, sensitivity, and
positive and negative predictive values were 97.0, 30.1, 95.0, and 42.1%,
respectively. When the pretest disease prevalence was accounted for, the
probability of disease after a positive test was 97.2%, and the probability of
disease after a negative test was 42.2%. The values were very similar for the
subgroup of subjects with type 2 diabetes alone.
CONCLUSIONS: The HNF1A genotype appears to be the most specific genetic test yet 
reported for the prediction of a common multifactorial disease by applying
present-day standards of clinical epidemiology in molecular genetics. A positive 
test result had particular diagnostic value in the Oji-Cree: a subject with HNF1A
S319 was virtually certain of having diabetes or IGT by 50 years of age. In
contrast, a subject without HNF1A S319 had a reduced risk compared with the
age-specific prevalence but was not totally risk-free. Because HNF1A S319 was not
the only predisposing factor for diabetes in the Oji-Cree, subjects without HNF1A
S319 were still at some risk for diabetes or IGT.

PMID: 10840995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. J Hum Genet. 2000;45(3):184-7.

Disparity between association and linkage analysis for HNF1A G319S in type 2
diabetes in Canadian Oji-Cree.

Hegele RA(1), Hanley AJ, Zinman B, Harris SB, Anderson CM.

Author information: 
(1)Blackburn Cardiovascular Genetics Laboratory, John P Roberts Research
Institute, London, Ontario, Canada. robert.hegele@rri.on.ca

In parallel experiments designed to find the genetic determinants of type 2
diabetes in Oji-Cree, we identified several linked chromosomal regions, using
genomic scanning, in addition to a private diabetes-associated mutation, namely
HNF1A G319S, using candidate gene sequencing. The genome scan did not identify
the region harboring HNF1A as being linked with diabetes. Also, the HNF1A
mutation, when used directly in sib-pair linkage analysis, was not linked with
diabetes. However, HNF1A G319S was very strongly associated with diabetes,
predicted the clinical severity of diabetes, and performed well as a diagnostic
predictive test for diabetes in the Oji-Cree. Despite the failure of linkage
analysis to identify HNF1A as a determinant of type 2 diabetes, we feel justified
in interpreting that G319S has a very important pathogenic role in Oji-Cree
diabetes, based upon the highly suggestive association studies. The probable
etiologic heterogeneity of type 2 diabetes in the Oji-Cree created a situation in
which association analysis was much more sensitive to detect a relationship
between HNF1A S319 and diabetes than was linkage analysis. The effectiveness of
linkage analysis will probably be limited in study samples that have an even
greater complexity of genetic background and/or disease etiology. Thus, the
absence of linkage does not always mean that a genomic variant is not an
important determinant of a complex disease. Furthermore, our experience confirms 
the value of using several complementary strategies to identify susceptibility
genes for a complex disease.

PMID: 10807546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2000 Apr;48(1):67-70.

Follow up of a HNF-1alpha mutant carrier with a severely impaired beta cell
function.

Costa A, Rodriguez C, Gomis R, Conget I, Casamitjana R, Bescos M.

PMID: 10798892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Am J Hum Genet. 2000 Jun;66(6):1871-81. Epub 2000 May 2.

Genomewide search for type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes in four American
populations.

Ehm MG(1), Karnoub MC, Sakul H, Gottschalk K, Holt DC, Weber JL, Vaske D, Briley 
D, Briley L, Kopf J, McMillen P, Nguyen Q, Reisman M, Lai EH, Joslyn G, Shepherd 
NS, Bell C, Wagner MJ, Burns DK; American Diabetes Association GENNID Study
Group. Genetics of NIDDM.

Author information: 
(1)Glaxo Wellcome, Inc., Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.
mge37216@glaxowellcome.com

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet 2002 Jan;70(1):284.

Type 2 diabetes is a serious, genetically influenced disease for which no fully
effective treatments are available. Identification of biochemical or regulatory
pathways involved in the disease syndrome could lead to innovative therapeutic
interventions. One way to identify such pathways is the genetic analysis of
families with multiple affected members where disease predisposing genes are
likely to be segregating. We undertook a genomewide screen (389-395
microsatellite markers) in samples of 835 white, 591 Mexican American, 229 black,
and 128 Japanese American individuals collected as part of the American Diabetes 
Association's GENNID study. Multipoint nonparametric linkage analyses were
performed with diabetes, and diabetes or impaired glucose homeostasis (IH).
Linkage to diabetes or IH was detected near markers D5S1404 (map position 77 cM, 
LOD = 2.80), D12S853 (map position 82 cM, LOD = 2.81) and GATA172D05
(X-chromosome map position 130 cM, LOD = 2.99) in whites, near marker D3S2432
(map position 51 cM, LOD = 3.91) in Mexican Americans, and near marker D10S1412
(map position 14 cM, LOD = 2.39) in African Americans mainly collected in phase 1
of the study. Further analyses showed evidence for interactions between the
chromosome 5 locus and region on chromosome 12 containing the MODY 3 gene (map
position 132 cM) and between the X-chromosome locus and region near D12S853 (map 
position 82 cM) in whites. Although these results were not replicated in samples 
collected in phase 2 of the GENNID study, the region on chromosome 12 was
replicated in samples from whites described by Bektas et al. (1999).

PMCID: PMC1378057
PMID: 10793009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Mol Pharmacol. 2000 May;57(5):940-7.

Octamer transcription factor-1 enhances hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha-mediated
activation of the human UDP glucuronosyltransferase 2B7 promoter.

Ishii Y(1), Hansen AJ, Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park,
South Australia, Australia.

The human UDP glucuronosyltransferase, UGT2B7, is expressed in the liver and
gastrointestinal tract, where it catalyzes the glucuronidation of steroids and
bile acids. In this study, the UGT2B7 gene was isolated and its proximal promoter
was analyzed. The UGT2B7 gene consists of 6 exons and extends over 16 kilobases
(kb). It does not contain a canonical TATA box but has a region (-2 to -40)
adjacent to the transcription start site that binds nuclear proteins. This region
contains a consensus hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF1alpha)-binding site and
an overlapping AT-rich segment. Varying lengths of the UGT2B7 gene promoter, with
and without these sites, were fused to the firefly luciferase reporter gene and
transfected into HepG2 cells. UGT2B7 promoter activity with the HNF1/AT-rich
element was stimulated by cotransfection with HNF1alpha. Additional activation
was observed when HNF1alpha and octamer transcription factor-1 (Oct-1) were
cotransfected simultaneously. However, Oct-1 alone did not stimulate promoter
activity and did not bind to the promoter in the absence of HNF1alpha. Deletion
of the HNF1/AT-rich region, or mutations in this region, abolished UGT2B7 gene
promoter activity and prevented HNF1alpha-mediated increases in promoter
activity. The presence of HNF1alpha and octamer transcription factor-1 (Oct-1) in
the protein complex that bound to the HNF1/AT-rich region was demonstrated by gel
shift analyses with antibodies specific to HNF1alpha and Oct-1 protein. These
results strongly suggest that the liver-enriched factor HNF1alpha binds to, and
activates, the UGT2B7 gene promoter and that the ubiquitous transcription factor,
Oct-1, enhances this activation by directly interacting with HNF1alpha. This
interaction between HNF1alpha and Oct-1 may fine-tune UGT2B7 expression.

PMID: 10779377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biol Chem. 2000 Apr 28;275(17):12515-20.

Transcriptional activation by hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 requires synergism
between multiple coactivator proteins.

Soutoglou E(1), Papafotiou G, Katrakili N, Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology Hellas, 711 10 Herakleion Crete, Greece.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) plays an important role in the regulation of 
a large number of genes expressed in the liver, kidney, and pancreatic
beta-cells. In exploring the molecular mechanism involved in HNF-1-dependent gene
activation in the in vivo chromatin context, we found that HNF-1 can physically
interact with the histone acetyltransferases (HATs) CREB-binding protein (CBP),
p300/CBP-associated factor (P/CAF), Src-1, and RAC3. The transcriptional
activation potential of HNF-1 on a genome integrated promoter was strictly
dependent on the synergistic action of CBP and P/CAF, which can independently
interact with the N-terminal and C-terminal domain of HNF-1, respectively.
Moreover, the HAT activity of both coactivators was important, as opposed to the 
selective requirement for the HAT activity of P/CAF in activation from a
transiently transfected reporter. Interaction of CBP with the N-terminal domain
of HNF-1 greatly increased the binding affinity for P/CAF with the C-terminal
activation domain, which may represent the molecular basis for the observed
functional synergism. The results support a model that involves the combined
action of multiple coactivators recruited by HNF-1, which activate transcription 
by coupling nucleosome modification and recruitment of the general transcription 
machinery.

PMID: 10777539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Diabetologia. 2000 Mar;43(3):265-77.

Beta-cell mitochondria in the regulation of insulin secretion: a new culprit in
type II diabetes.

Wollheim CB(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University Medical Centre, Geneva,
Switzerland.

Insulin is stored in secretory granules in the beta-cell and is secreted by
exocytosis. This process is precisely controlled to achieve blood glucose
homeostasis. Many forms of diabetes mellitus display impaired glucose-induced
insulin secretion. This has been shown to be the primary cause of the disease in 
the various forms of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and has also
been implicated in adult-onset Type II (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus.
Glucose generates ATP and other metabolic coupling factors in the beta-cell
mitochondria. By plasma membrane depolarisation ATP promotes Ca2+ influx, which
raises cytosolic Ca2+ and triggers insulin exocytosis. Through hyperpolarisation 
of the mitochondrial membrane glucose also increases the Ca2+ concentration in
the mitochondrial matrix activating Ca(2+)-sensitive dehydrogenases in the
tricarboxylic acid cycle. The resulting generation of glutamate participates in
Ca(2+)-stimulated exocytosis. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) encodes some of the
polypeptides of the respiratory chain enzyme complexes. Mutations in mtDNA lead
to maternally inherited diabetes mellitus characterised by impaired insulin
secretion. The impact of altered mtDNA on insulin secretion has been shown in
mtDNA-deficient beta-cell lines which have lost glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion but retain a Ca(2+)-induced insulin secretion. A cellular model of
MODY3 expressing dominant-negative hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1
alpha) also displayed deletion of glucose-induced but not Ca(2+)-induced insulin 
secretion. Reduced mitochondrial metabolism explains this secretory pattern.
Thus, genetically manipulated beta-cell lines are essential tools in the
investigation of the molecular basis of beta-cell dysfunction in diabetes and
should explain the role of other transcription factors in the disease.

PMID: 10768087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Biol Chem. 2000 Apr 21;275(16):12108-18.

Differential role of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 in the regulation of
glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit gene transcription by cAMP in liver- and 
kidney-derived cell lines.

Streeper RS(1), Svitek CA, Goldman JK, O'Brien RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

In liver and kidney, the terminal step in gluconeogenesis is catalyzed by
glucose-6-phosphatase. To examine the effect of the cAMP signal transduction
pathway on transcription of the gene encoding the catalytic subunit of
glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase), G6Pase-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT)
fusion genes were transiently transfected into either the liver-derived HepG2 or 
kidney-derived LLC-PK cell line. Co-transfection of an expression vector encoding
the catalytic subunit of cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) markedly stimulated 
G6Pase-CAT fusion gene expression, and mutational analysis of the G6Pase promoter
revealed that multiple regions are required for this PKA response in both the
HepG2 and LLC-PK cell lines. A sequence in the G6Pase promoter that resembles a
cAMP response element is required for the full PKA response in both HepG2 and
LLC-PK cells. However, in LLC-PK cells, but not in HepG2 cells, a hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) binding site was critical for the full induction of
G6Pase-CAT expression by PKA. Changing this HNF-1 motif to that for the yeast
transcription factor GAL4 reduces the PKA response in LLC-PK cells to the same
degree as deleting the HNF-1 site. However, co-transfection of this mutated
construct with chimeric proteins comprising the GAL4-DNA binding domain ligated
to the coding sequence for HNF-1alpha, HNF-1beta, HNF-3, or HNF-4 completely
restored the PKA response. Thus, we hypothesize that, in LLC-PK cells, HNF-1 is
acting as an accessory factor to enhance PKA signaling through the cAMP response 
element by altering G6Pase promoter conformation or accessibility rather than
specifically affecting some component of the PKA signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 10766845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2000 Apr;278(4):G591-603.

Regulation of the human Na(+)-glucose cotransporter gene, SGLT1, by HNF-1 and
Sp1.

Martín MG(1), Wang J, Solorzano-Vargas RS, Lam JT, Turk E, Wright EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, UCLA School of
Medicine, Los Angeles 90095-1751, USA. mmartin@mednet.ucla.edu

The Na(+)-glucose cotransporter (SGLT1) is expressed primarily by small
intestinal epithelial cells and transports the monosaccharides glucose and
galactose across the apical membrane. Here we describe the isolation and
characterization of 5.3 kb of the 5'-flanking region of the SGLT1 gene by
transiently transfecting reporter constructs into a variety of epithelial cell
lines. A fragment (nt -235 to +22) of the promoter showed strong activity in the 
intestinal cell line Caco-2 but was inactive in a nonintestinal epithelial cell
line (Chinese hamster ovary). Within this region, three cis-elements, a
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) and two GC box sites are critical for
maintaining the gene's basal level of expression. The two GC boxes bind to
several members of the Sp1 family of transcription factors and, in the presence
of HNF-1, synergistically upregulate transactivation of the promoter. A novel
16-bp element just downstream of one GC box was also shown to influence the
interaction of Sp1 to its binding site. In summary, we report the identification 
and characterization of the human SGLT1 minimal promoter and the critical role
that HNF-1 and Sp1-multigene members have in enhancing the basal level of its
transcription in Caco-2 cells.

PMID: 10762614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Apr 25;1491(1-3):107-22.

Liver cell-specific transcriptional regulation of connexin32.

Piechocki MP(1), Toti RM, Fernstrom MJ, Burk RD, Ruch RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Medical College of Ohio, 3055 Arlington Avenue,
Toledo, OH, USA.

Gap junctional intercellular communication facilitates liver homeostasis and
growth control in the liver. The major gap junction protein expressed by
hepatocytes is connexin32 (Cx32) and non-parenchymal hepatic cells do not express
this gene. We investigated the regulation of Cx32 transcription by
trans-activating factors in liver cells. Transient transfection assays using
deletions of the rat Cx32 promoter (nt -753 to -33) linked to the luciferase gene
were performed in MH1C1 rat hepatoma cells that express endogenous Cx32 compared 
with WB-F344 rat liver epithelial cells that do not. The basal promoter element
was located within nt -134 to -33 and was 1.4-fold more active in MH1C1 cells
than WB-F344 cells whereas the entire promoter fragment (nt -754 to -33) was
four-fold more active in MH1C1 cells. Specific nuclear protein-DNA complexes that
bound to Sp1 consensus sites within the basal promoter were formed using nuclear 
extracts from both types of cells. Additional promoter sequences increased
promoter activity more strongly in MH1C1 cells than WB-F344 cells and this was
correlated with the binding of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) to two HNF-1
consensus sites centered at -187 and -736. Expression of HNF-1 and binding to
these elements was only observed with MH1C1 cells. Other specific protein-DNA
complexes were formed, however, that included YY-1- and NF-1-containing
complexes, but these were not related to promoter activity. Dexamethasone
increased Cx32 promoter activity and expression in MH1C1 cells, but had little
effect in WB-F344 cells and did not alter protein-DNA complex formation. These
data suggest that Sp1 is responsible for Cx32 promoter basal activity, that HNF-1
determines the cell-specific expression of Cx32, and that dexamethasone increases
Cx32 expression through other mechanisms.

PMID: 10760574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Eur J Endocrinol. 2000 Apr;142(4):380-6.

Genetic and clinical characterisation of maturity-onset diabetes of the young in 
Spanish families.

Costa A(1), Bescós M, Velho G, Chêvre J, Vidal J, Sesmilo G, Bellanné-Chantelot
C, Froguel P, Casamitjana R, Rivera-Fillat F, Gomis R, Conget I.

Author information: 
(1)Servei d'Endocrinologia i Diabetis, IDIBAPS, Hospital Clínic, Facultat de
Medicina, Universitat de Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the frequencies of the major maturity-onset diabetes of
the young (MODY) subtypes in a panel of Spanish families and to assess phenotypic
differences in patients with the different subtypes of MODY.
METHODS: Forty-eight subjects from twenty families with clinical diagnosis of
MODY were studied. They underwent a standardised clinical examination and a 75-g 
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) was performed. Estimations of insulin
sensitivity (%S) and insulin secretion capacity (%B) were calculated by the
computer-solved homeostasis model assessment (HOMA). Mutations in the coding
regions of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha/MODY1, glucokinase (GCK/MODY2) 
and HNF-1alpha/MODY3 genes were investigated by single strand comformation
polymorphism and sequencing analysis.
RESULTS: Mutations in the GCK and HNF-1alpha genes were observed in 5 (25%) and 7
(35%) families respectively. Novel mutations included R385X, M238fsdelT,
V226fsdelTinsAA and S418-7del11 in the GCK gene, and S121fsdelC, V133M, R159Q and
V259D in the HNF-1alpha gene. No MODY1 families were found. Subjects which were
neither MODY2 nor MODY3 (MODY-X) had a higher fasting glucose than subjects in
the other groups. Insulin secretion capacity was similar in the three groups and 
the insulin sensitivity was decreased in MODY-X subjects. Glucose levels were
significantly higher and insulin levels significantly lower, throughout the OGTT,
in MODY3 compared with MODY2 subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in the GCK/MODY2 and HNF-1alpha/MODY3 genes account for
the majority of cases in a panel of Spanish MODY families, with MODY3 being the
most frequent subtype. The relative frequencies and the clinical characteristics 
of these MODY subtypes are in agreement with data previously reported in other
European populations. MODY-X patients seem to present a heterogeneous clinical
profile.

PMID: 10754480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 16;275(24):18358-65.

Identification of transacting factors responsible for the tissue-specific
expression of human glucose transporter type 2 isoform gene. Cooperative role of 
hepatocyte nuclear factors 1alpha and 3beta.

Cha JY(1), Kim H, Kim KS, Hur MW, Ahn Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and the Institute of Genetic 
Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, 134 Shinchon-dong, Seodaemun-gu, 
Seoul 120-752, South Korea.

We investigated transacting factors binding to the cis-element important in
tissue-specific expression of the human glucose transporter type 2 isoform
(GLUT2) gene. By transient transfection assay, we determined that the 227-base
pair fragment upstream of the ATG start site contained promoter activity and that
the region from +87 to +132 (site C) was responsible for tissue-specific
expression. DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift assay
indicated that site C contained one binding site for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 
(HNF1) and two binding sites for HNF3. The mutations at positions +101 and +103, 
which are considered to be critical in binding HNF1 and HNF3, resulted in a 53%
decrease in promoter activity, whereas the mutation of the proximal HNF3 binding 
site (+115 and +117) reduced promoter activity by 28%. The mutations of these
four sites resulted in marked decrease (70%) in promoter activity as well as
diminished bindings of HNF1 and HNF3. A to G mutation, which causes conversion of
the HNF1 and HNF3 binding sequence to the NF-Y binding site, resulted in a 22%
decrease in promoter activity. We identified that both HNF1 and HNF3 function as 
transcriptional activators in GLUT2 gene expression. Coexpression of the pGL+74
(+74 to +301) construct with the HNF1alpha and HNF3beta expression vectors in NIH
3T3 cells showed the synergistic effect on GLUT2 promoter activity compared with 
the expression of HNF1alpha, HNF3beta, or a combination of HNF1beta and HNF3beta.
These data suggest that HNF1alpha and HNF3beta may be the most important players 
in the tissue-specific expression of the human GLUT2 gene.

PMID: 10748140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Apr 2;270(1):235-9.

Role of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha and 1beta in the transcriptional
regulation of human dipeptidyl peptidase IV during differentiation of Caco-2
cells.

Erickson RH(1), Lai RS, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Research Laboratory, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, San Francisco, California 94121, USA. neko@itsa.ucsf.edu

Caco-2 cells undergo differentiation to an enterocytic-like cell when maintained 
in a post-confluent state for 1-2 weeks. During this period Caco-2 cells begin to
express high levels brush border membrane associated enzymes such as dipeptidyl
peptidase IV. Using the dipeptidyl peptidase IV gene promoter in electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays, we have shown for the first time that levels of hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1alpha increase three- to fourfold during Caco-2 cell
differentiation. Transient cotransfection experiments with 3T3 cells using
dipeptidyl peptidase IV promoter constructs and expression vectors containing
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha and beta show that the ratio of alpha and beta
modulates reporter gene expression. These results suggest that the increase in
levels of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha that occur during intestinal cell
differentiation, are important for expression of dipeptidyl peptidase IV and
other intestinal proteins.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10733933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Biochem J. 2000 Mar 1;346 Pt 2:529-35.

Interaction between the homeodomain proteins Cdx2 and HNF1alpha mediates
expression of the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase gene.

Mitchelmore C(1), Troelsen JT, Spodsberg N, Sjöström H, Norén O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Biochemical Laboratory C, The
Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 Copenhagen N,
Denmark. mitch@imbg.ku.dk

Lactase-phlorizin hydrolase is a brush-border enzyme which is specifically
expressed in the small intestine where it hydrolyses lactose, the main
carbohydrate found in milk. We have previously demonstrated in transgenic mice
that the tissue-specific and developmental expression of lactase is controlled by
a 1 kb upstream region of the pig lactase gene. Two homeodomain transcription
factors, caudal-related homeodomain protein (Cdx2) and hepatic nuclear factor
1alpha (HNF1alpha), are known to bind to regulatory cis elements in the promoters
for several intestine-specific genes, including lactase, and are present in
mammalian intestinal epithelia from an early stage in development. In the present
study, we examined whether Cdx2 and HNF1alpha physically interact and
co-operatively activate transcription from the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase
promoter. We show that the presence of both factors leads to a much higher level 
of transcription than the sum of the activation by either factor alone. The
N-terminal activation domain of Cdx2 is required for maximal synergy with
HNF1alpha. With the use of pull-down assays, we demonstrate a direct
protein-protein interaction between Cdx2 and HNF1alpha. The interaction domain
includes the homeodomain region of both proteins. This is the first demonstration
of a functional interaction between two transcription factors involved in the
activation of a number of intestine-specific genes. Synergistic interaction
between tissue-restricted factors is likely to be an important mechanism for
reinforcing developmental and tissue-specific gene expression within the
intestine.

PMCID: PMC1220882
PMID: 10677375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Hum Genet. 2000;45(2):98-9.

Human hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta (HNF1B) 1968A/G polymorphism.

Cao H(1), Hegele RA.

Author information: 
(1)Blackburn Cardiovascular Genetics Laboratory, John P. Robarts Research
Institute, London, Ontario, Canada.

We found a novel A-->G change at nucleotide 1968 within the 3'-untranslated
region of the HNF1B gene encoding the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta. The HNF1B
1968A/G polymorphism could be detected by digestion with endonuclease MspI. The
frequency of the HNF1B 1968G allele was 0.060 in Caucasians and 0.129 in Canadian
Oji-Cree. Because of the importance of the HNF1B gene product in the regulation
of transcription of several hepatic proteins, this polymorphism may be useful in 
the study of associations with metabolic phenotypes such as diabetes.

PMID: 10721673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Kidney Int. 2000 Mar;57(3):898-907.

Abnormal nephron development associated with a frameshift mutation in the
transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta.

Bingham C(1), Ellard S, Allen L, Bulman M, Shepherd M, Frayling T, Berry PJ,
Clark PM, Lindner T, Bell GI, Ryffel GU, Nicholls AJ, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine and Diabetes Research, School of Postgraduate 
Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, England, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Kidney Int. 2000 Mar;57(3):1202-3.

BACKGROUND: The transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 beta
functions as a homodimer or as a heterodimer with the structurally related
protein HNF-1 alpha. Both are expressed sequentially in rat kidney development,
with HNF-1 beta being detected from the earliest inductory phases. HNF-1 beta
gene mutations are associated with a unique disorder characterized by
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and early-onset and progressive
nondiabetic renal dysfunction, which may lead to chronic renal failure.
METHODS: The HNF-1 beta gene was screened for mutations in six subjects with
early-onset diabetes and a history of renal dysfunction in the subjects or their 
families.
RESULTS: A novel frameshift mutation in exon 4 of the HNF-1 beta gene and a
deletion of CCTCT at codons 328 to 329 were detected in one subject. She was
diagnosed as diabetic at the age of 21 in her second pregnancy. Glucose tolerance
rapidly deteriorated over 18 months as a result of beta-cell dysfunction. The
HNF-1 beta mutation arose de novo on a paternal chromosome and cosegregated with 
renal abnormalities in her family. The proband had bilateral small cysts in
normal-sized kidneys and a reduced creatinine clearance of 66 mL/min (NR 80-120).
Her first pregnancy was terminated at 17 weeks following an ultrasound diagnosis 
of bilateral, nonfunctioning cystic kidneys. Her first-born child had a small
multicystic, dysplastic right kidney and a dysplastic left kidney with a reduced 
creatinine clearance (40 mL/min per 1.73 m2). Histologic examination of the large
(5.8 vs. 1.4 g), polycystic fetal kidneys showed no normal nephrogenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies indicate that HNF-1 beta plays a central role in
normal kidney development and pancreatic beta-cell function, and suggest that one
mechanism by which HNF-1 beta gene mutations may cause renal dysfunction are by
their effects on nephron development.

PMID: 10720943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Mech Dev. 2000 Mar 1;91(1-2):53-60.

Ectopic pigmentation in Xenopus in response to DCoH/PCD, the cofactor of HNF1
transcription factor/pterin-4alpha-carbinolamine dehydratase.

Pogge v Strandmann E(1), Senkel S, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Essen, Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung),
Hufelandstrasse 55, D-45122, Essen, Germany. pogge.v.strandmann@uni-essen.de

DCoH, the dimerization cofactor of the HNF-1 homeodomain proteins (hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1alpha and beta), is involved in gene expression by associating
with these transcription factors. The protein also called PCD for
pterin-4alpha-carbinolamine dehydratase is a bifunctional factor as it catalyzes 
also the regeneration of tetrahydrobiopterin. This coenzyme is used by the enzyme
phenylalanine hydroxylase, which generates tyrosine, the precursor of
catecholamines and melanin. DCoH/PCD presumably cooperates with other partners,
because it is expressed earlier than HNF1 and phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) in 
early vertebrate development. It is also found in cells lacking HNF1 and PAH like
skin, brain and the pigmented epithelium of the eye suggesting a yet unknown
function. We show that the overexpression of DCoH/PCD in Xenopus induces the
formation of ectopic pigment cells in the epidermis, that are visible earlier
than the endogenous pigmentation and broader distributed. This ectopic
pigmentation is accompanied by an increase in tyrosinase activity and the amount 
of melanin. Overexpression of DCoH/PCD induces the appearance of pigment cells
also in animal cap explants, that normally differentiate into atypical epidermis.
DCoH/PCD mutants with impaired carbinolamine dehydratase activity retain the
potential to induce pigmentation and we propose therefore that DCoH/PCD is not
simply an essential enzyme for melanin biosynthesis, but also a regulator for the
differentiation of pigment producing cells.

PMID: 10704830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Feb 29;97(5):1999-2004.

Diabetes-associated mutations in a beta-cell transcription factor destabilize an 
antiparallel "mini-zipper" in a dimerization interface.

Hua QX(1), Zhao M, Narayana N, Nakagawa SH, Jia W, Weiss MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Case Western Reserve University, 10900 Euclid
Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106-4935, USA.

Erratum in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 2001 Nov 6;98(23):13472.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young, a monogenic form of Type II diabetes
mellitus, is most commonly caused by mutations in hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha
(HNF-1alpha). Here, the dimerization motif of HNF-1alpha is shown to form an
intermolecular four-helix bundle. One face contains an antiparallel coiled coil
whereas the other contains splayed alpha-helices. The "mini-zipper" is
complementary in structure and symmetry to the top surface of a transcriptional
coactivator (dimerization cofactor of homeodomains). The bundle is destabilized
by a subset of mutations associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young.
Impaired dimerization of a beta-cell transcription factor thus provides a
molecular mechanism of metabolic deregulation in diabetes mellitus.

PMCID: PMC15743
PMID: 10696112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Metabolism. 2000 Feb;49(2):280-4.

Molecular scanning analysis of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (TCF1) gene in
typical familial type 2 diabetes in African Americans.

Elbein SC(1), Teng K, Eddings K, Hargrove D, Scroggin E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Central Arkansas Veterans Health System and
University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, USA.

Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) is strongly inherited, but the major genes for
this disease have been elusive. In contrast, early-onset, autosomal-dominant
diabetes results from at least 5 loci, of which hepatocyte nuclear factor 1a
(HNF1alpha or TCF1) is the most common cause. Mutations in HNF1alpha also cause
later-onset diabetes in some Caucasian populations, but the role of these
mutations has not been tested in African American populations. We used a variety 
of screening methods, including both single-strand conformation polymorphism
(SSCP) analysis and dideoxy fingerprint analysis, to search for mutations in 51
African American subjects with onset of diabetes before age 50 years. Potential
mutations were confirmed by direct sequencing. We identified 21 different
variants, of which 11 were unique to African Americans. Four mutations either
altered the amino acid sequence (Gly52Ala and Gly574Ser) or were close to a
splice site (intron 1 and intron 10). A 5-nucleotide insertion in intron 1 was
present in both diabetic members of a small family, but Gly52Ala, Gly574Ser, and 
the intron 10 mutation did not segregate with diabetes. Gly574Ser was present in 
2 large families and 5% of controls, all of which appeared to share the same
common HNF1alpha haplotype. Surprisingly, radioactive SSCP analysis under 2
room-temperature conditions performed as well as methods using fluorescent
labeling that were expected to be more sensitive. We conclude that in African
American individuals under age 50, variation in the HNF1a gene is common but
unlikely to be a significant cause of T2DM.

PMID: 10690959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Feb;85(2):853-7.

No evidence for linkage at candidate type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci on
chromosomes 12 and 20 in United Kingdom Caucasians.

Frayling TM(1), McCarthy MI, Walker M, Levy JC, O'Rahilly S, Hitman GA, Rao PV,
Bennett AJ, Jones EC, Menzel S, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medicine 
and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, United Kingdom.
t.m.frayling@exeter.ac.uk

Several studies have identified evidence for linkage between type 2 diabetes and 
the regions on chromosomes 12 and 20 containing the maturity-onset diabetes of
the young (MODY) genes, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) and
HNF-4alpha. Two studies examining the HNF-1alpha region have demonstrated
evidence for linkage at genome-wide levels of significance, whereas four studies 
examining the HNF-4alpha locus have resulted in evidence for linkage at more
suggestive levels of significance. The demonstration of linkage to these regions 
in additional patient series will strengthen the evidence that susceptibility
alleles exist at these loci. We therefore assessed the evidence for linkage to
these regions using a large cohort of United Kingdom Caucasian type 2
diabetes-affected sibling pairs. A maximum total of 315 affected full sibling
pairs were typed for microsatellite markers across the MODY regions and, in a
subset of families, for markers spanning the whole of chromosome 20. Evidence for
linkage was assessed using a multipoint, mode of inheritance-free method. Linkage
analysis did not reveal any significant evidence for excess allele sharing at any
of the regions studied. Loci contributing sibling recurrence risks, relative to
the general population risk, of 1.75 and 1.25 could be excluded for the
HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha regions, respectively. We have not confirmed in United 
Kingdom Caucasians the evidence for linkage previously reported on 12q and 20q.
Our results highlight further the problems of replicating previous positive
linkage results across different ethnic groups.

PMID: 10690901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Diabetologia. 2000 Jan;43(1):121-4.

Cloning of cDNA and the gene encoding human hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3
beta and mutation screening in Japanese subjects with maturity-onset diabetes of 
the young.

Yamada S(1), Zhu Q, Aihara Y, Onda H, Zhang Z, Yu L, Jin L, Si YJ, Nishigori H,
Tomura H, Inoue I, Morikawa A, Yamagata K, Hanafusa T, Matsuzawa Y, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Gunma University, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Molecular defects of the genes for transcription factors,
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4 alpha, HNF-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta and insulin
promoter factor-1 cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY1, 3, 5, and 4,
respectively). This suggests the HNF-related transcription cascade is important
in insulin secretion which is induced by glucose. These genes and the gene
encoding glycolytic enzyme glucokinase (MODY2) are, however, responsible for only
15-20% of cases of MODY in the Japanese. Searching for a novel form of MODY in
this population, we cloned a new candidate gene encoding human HNF-3 beta, a
winged helix transcription factor, which also belongs to the same
HNF-transcription cascade.
METHODS: The cDNA clone for human HNF-3 beta was isolated from a liver cDNA
library. The gene was also cloned from a genomic library and its organization and
chromosomal localization were determined. We screened 68 Japanese subjects with
MODY/early-onset diabetes for mutations in this gene.
RESULTS: Human HNF-3 beta is composed of 457 amino acids. The human gene, which
was mapped to the segment 30 cR from SHGC-37039 on chromosome 20p by radiation
hybrid mapping, spans approximately 4.5 kb and consists of three exons. Direct
sequencing of the exons and flanking regions identified one missense mutation
A328 V and seven polymorphisms, although the functional significance of the
mutation in the pathogenesis of diabetes is not known.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The characterization of the structure of the HNF-3
beta gene and its mapping in the framework of markers will be helpful in genetic 
studies of the various forms of diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 10672453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Hum Mutat. 2000;15(2):201-3.

Big Dye terminator cycle sequencing chemistry: accuracy of the dilution process
and application for screening mutations in the TCF1 and GCK genes.

Boutin P, Wahl C, Samson C, Vasseur F, Laget F, Froguel P.

PMID: 10649499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Hum Mutat. 2000;15(2):173-80.

Identification of seven novel nucleotide variants in the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (TCF1) promoter region in MODY patients.

Godart F(1), Bellanné-Chantelot C, Clauin S, Gragnoli C, Abderrahmani A, Blanché 
H, Boutin P, Chèvre JC, Froguel P, Bailleul B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie de Lille, Lille, France.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a heterogeneous subtype of type II
diabetes mellitus. To date, five MODY genes have been identified. Mutations in
the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene are associated with MODY3.
In the present work, we implemented the HNF-1alpha promoter region in the
screening of MODY-suspect patients and identified seven variants not detected in 
control subjects. The family was available for the -119delG variant, and
segregration between MODY and the variant is observed. Most of these variants are
located in highly conserved regions and may alter HNF-1alpha expression through
binding alteration of nuclear factors or other mechanisms. We demonstrate by
functional studies that the transcriptional activity of the -283A>C and -218T>C
variant promoters were 30% and 70% of the wild type activity, respectively. These
data suggest that HNF-1alpha promoter variants could be diabetogenic mutations,
and emphasize that the accurate HNF-1alpha expression is important for the
maintenance of normal pancreatic beta cell function.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10649494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2000 Jan;20(1):217-22.

The private hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha G319S variant is associated with
plasma lipoprotein variation in Canadian Oji-Cree.

Hegele RA(1), Cao H, Harris SB, Hanley AJ, Zinman B, Connelly PW.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute, London, UK. robert.hegele@rri.on.ca

We previously showed an extremely strong association between type 2 diabetes and 
a private polymorphism, namely G319S, in the hepatocyte nuclear transcription
factor (HNF)-1alpha. Because HNF-1alpha is involved in the transcription of
several apolipoprotein genes, we tested for an association between the private
HNF1A G319S variant and plasma lipoproteins in a sample of 55 unrelated Oji-Cree 
subjects with type 2 diabetes and 175 unrelated Oji-Cree subjects without type 2 
diabetes. In Oji-Cree subjects with type 2 diabetes, we found that the HNF1A
G319S genotype was significantly associated with lower plasma concentrations of
total cholesterol, low density lipoprotein cholesterol, and apolipoprotein (apo) 
B. In Oji-Cree subjects without type 2 diabetes, we found that the HNF1A G319S
genotype was significantly associated with higher plasma concentrations of high
density lipoprotein cholesterol and apo AI. There were no associations with
plasma triglycerides or lipoprotein(a). Regression analysis indicated that the
HNF1A genotype accounted for approximately 10% of the variation in the apo
B-related traits in the diabetic subjects and for approximately 5% of the
variation in the apo AI-related traits in the nondiabetic subjects. Furthermore, 
the regression model indicated that the HNF1A S319 allele affected these traits
in a dominant manner in subjects with and without type 2 diabetes. These findings
provide the first evidence that a rare variant in a nuclear transcription factor 
is associated with variation in plasma lipoprotein traits.

PMID: 10634821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Jan;85(1):331-5.

Identification and functional analysis of mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha gene in anti-islet autoantibody-negative Japanese patients with
type 1 diabetes.

Kawasaki E(1), Sera Y, Yamakawa K, Abe T, Ozaki M, Uotani S, Ohtsu N, Takino H,
Yamasaki H, Yamaguchi Y, Matsuura N, Eguchi K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Nagasaki University School of Medicine,
Japan. f1196@cc.nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene are the cause
of maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY 3), which is characterized
by a severe impairment of insulin secretion and early onset of the disease.
Although the majority of patients with type 1 diabetes have type 1A,
immune-mediated diabetes, there is a significant percentage of the patients who
have no evidence of an autoimmune disorder at the onset of disease. The aim of
this study was to estimate the prevalence of MODY 3 in antiislet autoantibody
negative patients with type 1 diabetes. From a large population-based sample of
unrelated Japanese patients with type 1 diabetes, 28 patients who lacked
autoantibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase, islet cell antigen
512/insulinoma-associated antigen-2, phogrin (phosphate homolog of granules of
insulinoma)/insulinoma-associated antigen-2beta, and insulin at the onset of type
1 diabetes were examined by PCR-based direct sequencing of the 10 exons, flanking
introns, and the promoter region of the HNF-1alpha gene. Two (7.1%) of 28
autoantibody-negative patients with type 1 diabetes were identified as carrying
mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene. One patient carried a frameshift mutation
(Pro379fsdelCT) in exon 6, and another patient carried a novel 2-bp substitution 
at nucleotides +45 (G to A) and +46 (C to A) from the transcriptional site of the
promoter region. These mutations were identified in heterozygous form and were
not identified in 64 unrelated healthy control subjects or 54 unrelated islet
autoantibody-positive patients with type 1 diabetes. Functional analysis of the
mutant HNF-1alpha gene indicated that the Pro379fsdelCT mutation had no
transcriptional trans-activation activity and acted in a dominant negative
manner. The +45/46 GC to AA mutation in the promoter region showed reduced
promoter activity by 10-20% compared to the wild-type sequence. In conclusion,
about 7% of Japanese diabetic patients lacking antiislet autoantibodies initially
classified as having type 1 diabetes could have diabetes caused by mutations in
the HNF-1alpha gene.

PMID: 10634407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Mol Pharmacol. 2000 Jan;57(1):93-100.

The role of HNF-1alpha in controlling hepatic catalase activity.

Muppala V(1), Lin CS, Lee YH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology, Academia Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan.

Mice deficient in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF-1alpha) develop Laron
dwarfism and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (Lee et al., 1998).
Oxidative stress was present in the diabetic HNF-1alpha-null mice. To understand 
the mechanism underlying the oxidative stress in HNF-1alpha-null mice, we
examined whether HNF-1alpha deficiency affects the integrity of the cellular
defense system against oxidative stress. The glutathione level and activities of 
superoxide dismutase and glutathione reductase in liver and other tissues
examined were not affected by HNF-1alpha deficiency. However, activities of
cytosolic glutathione peroxidase and catalase, two enzymes responsible for
detoxification of hydrogen peroxide within cells, were reduced specifically in
liver of HNF-1alpha-null mice. The mRNA and protein levels of hepatic catalase in
HNF-1alpha-null mice did not differ from those in normal mice. The loss of
hepatic catalase activity in HNF-1alpha-null mice is probably caused by an
insufficient heme pool in liver cells, because the mRNA level of ferrochelatase, 
the enzyme that catalyzes the last step of heme biosynthesis, was significantly
reduced in liver, and the daily hemin treatment restored partial catalase
activity in liver of HNF-1alpha-null mice. Furthermore, our results of cell
transfection and luciferase reporter assay indicated that the mouse
ferrochelatase promoter could be trans-activated directly by HNF-1alpha.

PMID: 10617683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mol Med Today. 1999 Oct;5(10):425-7.

In Orvieto: new insights into liver biopsy and disease therapy. 8th Biennial
International Congress on Liver Development, Gene Regulation and Disease.
Orvieto, Italy, 2-5 June 1999.

Taub R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia 
19104, USA. taubra@mail.med.upenn.edu

PMID: 10610199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Endocrinol Metab Clin North Am. 1999 Dec;28(4):765-85.

Monogenic diabetes mellitus in youth. The MODY syndromes.

Winter WE(1), Nakamura M, House DV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, University of Florida College of
Medicine, Gainesville, USA. winter.pathology@mail.health.ufl.edu

Maturity onset diabetes of the young is characterized by early onset diabetes
inherited in an autosomal dominant pattern. Classic MODY occurs predominantly in 
Caucasians and presents before age 25, is nonketotic, and is generally not
insulin-requiring. Less than 5% of cases of childhood diabetes in Caucasians are 
caused by MODY. ADM is a subtype of MODY that occurs in approximately 10% of
African-Americans with youth onset diabetes. In contrast to MODY in Caucasians,
ADM presents clinically as acute onset diabetes often associated with weight
loss, ketosis, and even diabetic ketoacidosis. Approximately 50% of patients with
ADM are obese. Therefore, based strictly on clinical grounds, at onset, ADM
cannot be distinguished from type 1 diabetes. Months to years following
diagnosis, a non-insulin-dependent clinical course develops in patients with ADM 
that is clearly different from type 1 diabetes. Mutations in five genes can cause
MODY. These genes encode hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF-4 alpha, MODY1), 
glucokinase (MODY2), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha, MODY3),
insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF-1, MODY4), and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta
(HNF-1 beta, MODY5). These monogenic forms of MODY have been used as model
systems to investigate the inheritance and pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes.
Clinicians, should be able to diagnose MODY. Type 1 diabetes, the most common
form of diabetes in Caucasians, is always insulin-requiring for control and
survival, whereas patients with MODY do not usually require long-term insulin for
survival. Diagnostic confusion can lead to inappropriate management and patient
expectations. Primary care physicians must be alert to avoid therapeutic
confusion when patients with ADM enter into the non-insulin-dependent stage. An
approach to the diagnosis of childhood diabetes is offered in Table 4. The
majority of youth onset diabetes remains type 1; however, the frequency of type 2
diabetes is rising in obese children and adolescents and especially in obese
minority youth. The diagnosis of MODY can be made through a careful review of the
patient's clinical course, severity of hyperglycemia, and family history. The
identification of islet autoantibodies is confirmatory evidence of autoimmune
(type 1) diabetes. Because testing for MODY mutations is expensive and is
performed at a select number of research laboratories only, routine molecular
genetic studies to search for the various MODY mutations should be limited to
research investigations. In the future, the availability of gene chip technology 
may allow rapid screening of mitochondrial and MODY mutations.

PMID: 10609119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Eur J Endocrinol. 1999 Dec;141(6):609-18.

Insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity in diabetic and non-diabetic subjects
with hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha (maturity-onset diabetes of the young-3)
mutations.

Vaxillaire M(1), Pueyo ME, Clément K, Fiet J, Timsit J, Philippe J, Robert JJ,
Tappy L, Froguel P, Velho G.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS EP-10, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate insulin secretion and sensitivity in affected (diabetes
mellitus or impaired glucose tolerance; n=7) and in unaffected (normal glucose
tolerance; n=3) carriers of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (maturity-onset
diabetes of the young-3 (MODY3)) gene mutations.
METHODS: Insulin secretion was assessed by an i.v. glucose tolerance test
(IVGTT), hyperglycemic clamp and arginine test, and insulin sensitivity by an
euglycemic hyperinsulinemic clamp. Results were compared with those of diabetic
MODY2 (glucokinase-deficient) and control subjects.
RESULTS: The amount of insulin secreted during an IVGTT was decreased in affected
MODY3 subjects (46+/-24 (s.d.) pmol/kg body weight (BW)) as compared with values 
in MODY2 (120+/-49pmol/kg BW) and control (173+/-37pmol/kg BW; P=0.0004)
subjects. The amount of insulin secreted during a 10mmol/l glucose clamp was
decreased in affected MODY3 subjects (171+/-78pmol/kg BW) and MODY2 subjects
(302+/-104pmol/kg BW) as compared with control subjects (770+/-199pmol/kg BW;
P=0.0001). Insulin secretion in response to arginine was decreased in affected
MODY3 subjects. Milder and heterogeneous defects were observed in the unaffected 
MODY3 subjects; the amount of insulin secreted during the hyperglycemic clamp was
40-79% of that of controls. The response to arginine was abnormally delayed.
Insulin sensitivity was decreased in diabetic but not in non-diabetic MODY3
subjects.
CONCLUSIONS: Beta-cell dysfunction in response to glucose and arginine is
observed in affected and unaffected MODY3 subjects. The MODY3 and MODY2 subtypes 
present different insulin secretion profiles. Secondary insulin resistance might 
contribute to the chronic hyperglycemia of MODY3 patients and modulate their
glucose tolerance.

PMID: 10601964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jan 15;28(2):430-7.

Naturally occurring mutations in the human HNF4alpha gene impair the function of 
the transcription factor to a varying degree.

Lausen J(1), Thomas H, Lemm I, Bulman M, Borgschulze M, Lingott A, Hattersley AT,
Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55,
D-45122 Essen, Germany.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)4alpha, a member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily, regulates genes that play a critical role in embryogenesis and
metabolism. Recent studies have shown that mutations in the human HNF4alpha gene 
cause a rare form of type 2 diabetes, maturity onset diabetes of the young
(MODY1). To investigate the properties of these naturally occurring HNF4alpha
mutations we analysed five MODY1 mutations (R154X, R127W, V255M, Q268X and E276Q)
and one other mutation (D69A), which we found in HepG2 hepatoma cells. Activation
of reporter genes in transfection assays and DNA binding studies showed that the 
MODY1-associated mutations result in a variable reduction in function, whereas
the D69A mutation showed an increased activity on some promoters. None of the
MODY mutants acted in a dominant negative manner, thus excluding inactivation of 
the wild-type factor as a critical event in MODY development. A MODY3-associated 
mutation in the HNF1alpha gene, a well-known target gene of HNF4alpha, results in
a dramatic loss of the HNF4 binding site in the promoter, indicating that
mutations in the HNF4alpha gene might cause MODY through impaired HNF1alpha gene 
function. Based on these data we propose a two-hit model for MODY development.

PMCID: PMC102517
PMID: 10606640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 1999 Nov;44(15 Suppl):2478-84.

[Erythropoietin and hypoxia responsive system].

[Article in Japanese]

Imagawa S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Jichi Medical School, Kawachi-gun, Japan.
simagawa@jichi.ac.jp

PMID: 10586703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mech Dev. 2000 Jan;90(1):65-75.

Distinct promoter elements mediate endodermal and mesodermal expression of the
HNF1alpha promoter in transgenic Xenopus.

Ryffel GU(1), Lingott A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung) Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Hufelandstrasse 55, D-45122, Essen, Germany. gerhart.ryffel@uni-essen.de

The gene encoding the tissue specific transcription factor HNF1alpha is expressed
in vertebrates in tissues of endodermal origin such as the liver and the gut as
well as in the kidney, a mesoderm derived organ. Using a 6 kb HNF1alpha promoter 
fragment linked to GFP we observed green fluorescence in transgenic embryos
restricted to the liver and gut as well as to the pronephros, the embryonic
kidney. By deletion and mutation analysis of the HNF1alpha promoter we succeeded 
in dissecting the HNF1alpha promoter into two entities that are either active in 
the endoderm or the mesoderm. In conclusion, our data establish that the
generation of transgenic Xenopus allows the functional dissection of promoters in
the context of the entire organism.

PMID: 10585563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Diabet Med. 1999 Nov;16(11):956-63.

Molecular genetics of diabetes mellitus in Chinese subjects: identification of
mutations in glucokinase and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha genes in patients
with early-onset type 2 diabetes mellitus/MODY.

Ng MC(1), Cockburn BN, Lindner TH, Yeung VT, Chow CC, So WY, Li JK, Lo YM, Lee
ZS, Cockram CS, Critchley JA, Bell GI, Chan JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Prince of Wales
Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong. b770727@mailserv.cuhk.edu.hk

AIMS: To examine the prevalence of identified MODY-related genes in Chinese
subjects with early onset Type 2 diabetes mellitus and a positive family history 
of diabetes and to look for possible associations between the gene mutations and 
the development of diabetes.
METHODS: Ninety-two unrelated Chinese subjects with diabetes diagnosed before the
age of 40 years who had a positive family history of diabetes were screened for
mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha) and
glucokinase genes by direct sequencing. The family members of patients with
mutations and 100 healthy controls were also examined.
RESULTS: Mutations in the HNF-1alpha and the glucokinase genes were found in 5%
and 3% of the diabetic subjects, respectively but no mutations were found in the 
coding region of the HNF-4alpha gene. Three mutations found in the glucokinase
gene were novel missense mutations (I110T, A119D and G385V). The mutations in the
HNF-1alpha gene were also new and included four missense mutations (G20R, R203H, 
S432C, I618M) and one splice acceptor site mutation (IVS2nt-1G-->A). Patients
with mutations in these genes were clinically heterogeneous with respect to
phenotype and basal pancreatic beta cell function.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic factors such as mutations in the HNF-1alpha and glucokinase 
genes may be important in the development of diabetes in Chinese people,
especially when the disease is of early onset.

PMID: 10588527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Diabetes Care. 1999 Dec;22(12):2095-6.

Youth-onset type 2 diabetes (Y2DM) associated with HNF1A S319 in aboriginal
Canadians.

Hegele RA, Hanley AJ, Zinman B, Harris SB, Anderson CM.

PMID: 10587858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Biol Chem. 1999 Dec 10;274(50):35639-46.

Anatomy of a homeoprotein revealed by the analysis of human MODY3 mutations.

Vaxillaire M(1), Abderrahmani A, Boutin P, Bailleul B, Froguel P, Yaniv M,
Pontoglio M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, Unité de Recherche Associée 1644, Centre National
de la Recherche Scientifique, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, 
25 rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) is an atypical dimeric
homeodomain-containing protein that is expressed in liver, intestine, stomach,
kidney, and pancreas. Mutations in the HNF1alpha gene are associated with an
autosomal dominant form of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus called
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3). More than 80 different mutations
have been identified so far, many of which involve highly conserved amino acid
residues among vertebrate HNF1alpha. In the present work, we investigated the
molecular mechanisms by which MODY3 mutations could affect HNF1alpha function.
For this purpose, we analyzed the properties of 10 mutants resulting in amino
acid substitutions or protein truncation. Some mutants have a reduced protein
stability, whereas others are either defective in the DNA binding or impaired in 
their intrinsic trans-activation potential. Three mutants, characterized by a
complete loss of trans-activation, behave as dominant negatives when transfected 
with the wild-type protein. These data define a clear causative relationship
between MODY3 mutations and functional defects in HNF1alpha trans-activation. In 
addition, our analysis sheds new light on the structure of a homeoprotein playing
a key role in pancreatic beta cell function.

PMID: 10585442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Dec 9;266(1):196-202.

Structure/function studies of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha, a
diabetes-associated transcription factor.

Yang Q(1), Yamagata K, Yamamoto K, Miyagawa J, Takeda J, Iwasaki N, Iwahashi H,
Yoshiuchi I, Namba M, Miyazaki J, Hanafusa T, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, 565-0871, Japan.

Mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha) cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3), a form of
diabetes mellitus characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, early onset,
and pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. We have examined the effects of five
diabetes-associated mutations (L12H, G191D, R263C, P379fsdelCT, and
L584S585fsinsTC) on HNF-1alpha function including DNA binding ability,
intracellular localization, and transactivation activity. L12H, P379fsdelCT, and 
L584S585fsinsTC mutations were found in patients with a clinical diagnosis of
MODY, while G191D and R263C mutations were identified in patients diagnosed with 
type 2 diabetes. These mutations had diverse effects on the functional properties
of HNF-1alpha. Comparison of the functional data with clinical information
suggested that transactivation activity of mutant HNF-1alpha in beta cells like
MIN6 may be the primary determinants of the phenotypic differences observed among
diabetic patients with HNF-1alpha mutations.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10581189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Trends Cardiovasc Med. 1999 Apr-May;9(3-4):82-5.

Type-I protein-C deficiency caused by disruption of a hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-6/HNF-1 binding site in the human protein-C gene promoter.

Spek A(1), Reitsma P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

The level and tissue specificity of eukaryotic gene transcription is determined
by the binding of specific transcription factors to DNA sequence elements located
around the transcription start site. The availability and activity of specific
transcription factors depends on a variety of developmental and environmental
cues and, therefore, varies from cell type to cell type. For instance, liver
tissue, the principal site of expression of the coagulation inhibitor protein C, 
expresses a heterogeneous group of transcription factors called hepatocyte
nuclear factors (HNFs). Some of these HNFs are essential players in protein-C
gene expression. This review discusses the significance of HNF-1 and HNF-6 in
regulating the transcription of the protein-C gene and gives directions for
future research.

PMID: 10578522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Mech Dev. 1999 Dec;89(1-2):211-3.

Expression of the vHNF1/HNF1beta homeoprotein gene during mouse organogenesis.

Coffinier C(1), Barra J, Babinet C, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, CNRS URA 1644, Institut Pasteur, 25 rue du Dr Roux,
F-75724, Paris, France.

Formation of tubular structures from an epithelial tissue is a process common to 
many morphogenetic events during organogenesis. We report here new data
concerning the expression pattern of the vHNF1/HNF1beta gene during this process 
in the mouse. vHNF1 (variant Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1) is a member of the HNF1
homeoprotein family. Its expression domain includes organs such as the liver, the
kidney, the lung and the pancreas, but is restricted to the epithelial cells of
these organs. To follow vHNF1 expression during organogenesis, we have introduced
a NLS-lacZ gene under the control of vHNF1 regulatory regions by homologous
recombination. Detection of the beta-galactosidase activity in heterozygous mice 
demonstrates that this gene is expressed in numerous tubular epitheliums as soon 
as they appear and all along development.

PMID: 10559500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Exp Nephrol. 1999 Sep-Dec;7(5-6):407-12.

Renal tubular cells cultured from genetically modified animals.

Friedlander G(1), Runembert I, Vrtovsnik F, Terzi F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U 426 and Department of Physiology, Faculté de Médecine Xavier-Bichat, 
Université Denis-Diderot, Paris, France.

The culture of renal tubular cells from genetically modified animals opens the
opportunity of biochemical, cell biology and physiological studies under strictly
controlled conditions. Either primary cultures or cell lines can be used. Through
two examples of primary cultures of proximal tubular cells obtained from
knock-out mice, important information about the function of proteins were
obtained. Mice lacking vimentin, an intermediate filament normally reexpressed in
tubular cells during regeneration and culture, have a normal tubular function
under basal conditions. Proximal cells grown from these animals exhibit a defect 
in sodium-glucose cotransport activity, most likely related to alterations in the
dimer/monomer ratio of the transporter in the apical membranes. These alterations
may be important in terms of tubular function during the recovery phase following
acute tubular necrosis. The situation is strikingly different with regard to mice
lacking HNF-1, a transactivator involved in the transcription of multiple genes. 
These animals suffer from severe Fanconi syndrome related to decreased expression
of proximal transporters including isoforms of sodium-glucose (SGLT2) and
sodium-phosphate (NPT1) cotransporters. Whereas transport defects are observed in
isolated tubules, they are no longer apparent in cultured proximal cells because 
the expression of these isoforms is suppressed under culture conditions. These
observations illustrate the interest and limits of the in vitro models for
studying renal function in transgenic animals.

Copyright 1999 S. Karger AG,Basel

PMID: 10559638  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Immunity. 1999 Oct;11(4):433-42.

Clonal acquisition of the Ly49A NK cell receptor is dependent on the trans-acting
factor TCF-1.

Held W(1), Kunz B, Lowin-Kropf B, van de Wetering M, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research Lausanne Branch, University of Lausanne, 
Epalinges, Switzerland. wheld@isrec.unil.ch

Families of clonally expressed major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class
I-specific receptors provide specificity to and regulate the function of natural 
killer (NK) cells. One of these receptors, mouse Ly49A, is expressed by 20% of NK
cells and inhibits the killing of H-2D(d) but not D(b)-expressing target cells.
Here, we show that the trans-acting factor TCF-1 binds to two sites in the Ly49A 
promoter and regulates its activity. Moreover, we find that TCF-1 determines the 
size of the Ly49A NK cell subset in vivo in a dosage-dependent manner. We propose
that clonal Ly49A acquisition during NK cell development is regulated by TCF-1.

PMID: 10549625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Nihon Ika Daigaku Zasshi. 1999 Oct;66(5):329-31.

[Maturity-onset diabetes of the young associated with mutations in
HNF-transcription factors].

[Article in Japanese]

Takeda J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Gunma University.

PMID: 10548003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Oct 28;1447(2-3):160-74.

Functional activity of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 is specifically decreased in
amino acid-limited hepatoma cells.

Marten NW(1), Hsiang CH, Yu L, Stollenwerk NS, Straus DS.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Sciences Division and Biology Department, University of California,
Riverside, CA 92521-0121, USA.

Limitation of cultured rat hepatoma cells for an essential amino acid results in 
a specific decrease in expression of several genes that are preferentially
expressed in the liver, including the serum albumin and transthyretin genes. In
the work presented here, we examined whether the coordinate repression of these
genes is caused by decreased activity of one or more of the liver-enriched
transcription factors, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), HNF-3, HNF-4 or
C/EBP. To address this question, HepG2 human hepatoma cells were transiently
transfected with luciferase reporter constructs containing multiple copies of
individual transcription factor binding sites. Limitation for an essential amino 
acid resulted in specific repression of a construct in which luciferase
expression was directed by HNF-1. A single HNF-1 binding site located adjacent to
the TATA box plays a major role in transcription directed by the serum albumin
promoter in transient transfection assays. Amino acid limitation of cells
transfected with an albumin promoter/luciferase reporter construct resulted in
specific repression of promoter activity. In addition, bacterial methylation or
site-directed mutagenesis of the HNF-1 binding site in the albumin proximal
promoter region eliminated the regulation of an albumin promoter-luciferase
reporter construct under conditions of amino acid limitation. These results
demonstrated that the HNF-1 binding site played a major role in regulation of the
albumin promoter by amino acid availability. Deletion analysis of the albumin
promoter confirmed regulation through the HNF-1 binding site and also identified 
a second amino acid regulatory element in the upstream region of the albumin
promoter, which has been shown previously to contain a functional binding site
for HNF-3. The repression of albumin promoter and HNF-1 reporter constructs in
amino acid-limited cells occurred without a change in the DNA binding activity of
HNF-1. Moreover, HNF-3 DNA binding activity was also not decreased in amino
acid-limited cells. These results suggest that the regulation of transcription by
amino acids occurs at the level of transcriptional activation by HNF-1 and HNF-3,
rather than by alteration of the DNA binding activity of either factor.

PMID: 10542313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1999 Jul-Aug;70(1-3):1-14.

Down-regulation of the rat hepatic sterol 27-hydroxylase gene by bile acids in
transfected primary hepatocytes: possible role of hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha.

Rao YP(1), Vlahcevic ZR, Stravitz RT, Mallonee DH, Mullick J, Avadhani NG,
Hylemon PB.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Virginia, Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond 23298,
USA.

In vitro and in vivo studies have shown that the sterol 27-hydroxylase (CYP27)
gene is transcriptionally repressed by hydrophobic bile acids. The molecular
mechanism(s) of repression of CYP27 by bile acids is unknown. To identify the
bile acid responsive element (BARE) and transcription factor(s) that mediate the 
repression of CYP27 by bile acids, constructs of the CYP27 5'-flanking DNA were
linked to either the CAT or luciferase reporter gene and transiently transfected 
into primary rat hepatocytes. Taurocholate (TCA), taurodeoxycholate (TDCA) and
taurochenodeoxycholate (TCDCA) significantly reduced CAT activities of the
-840/+23, -329/+23, and -195/+23 mCAT constructs. A -76/+23 construct showed no
regulation by bile acids. When a DNA fragment (-110/-86) from this region was
cloned in front of an SV 40 promoter it showed down-regulation by TDCA.
'Super'-electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) indicated that both
HNF1alpha and C/EBP bind to the -110 to -86 bp DNA fragment. Recombinant rat
HNF1alpha and C/EBPalpha competitively bound to this DNA fragment. 'Super'-EMSA
showed that TDCA addition to hepatocytes in culture decreased HNF1alpha, but not 
C/EBP, binding to the -110/-86 bp DNA fragment. A four base pair substitution
mutation (-103 to -99) in this sequence eliminated TCA and TDCA regulation of the
(-840/+23) construct. The substitution mutation also eliminated (>95%) HNF1alpha,
but not C/EBP, binding to this DNA fragment. We conclude that bile acids repress 
CYP27 transcription through a putative BARE located between -110 and -86 bp of
the CYP27 promoter. The data suggest that bile acids repress CYP27
transcriptional activity by decreasing HNF1alpha binding to the CYP27 promoter.

PMID: 10528998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1999 Oct 29;1424(2-3):M23-37.

TCF transcription factors: molecular switches in carcinogenesis.

Roose J(1), Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Center for Biomedical Genetics, University Medical
Center Utrecht, 3508 GA, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Although originally cloned as lymphoid transcription factors, members of the
T-cell factor (Tcf) family are now well recognized as key activators/repressors
in many developmental processes. Transcriptionally inert Tcf factors become
potent transactivators upon interaction with the Wnt signaling product
beta-catenin or its Drosophila counterpart Armadillo. In contrast, Tcf proteins
mediate repression when bound to members of the Groucho family of transcriptional
repressors, CBP and CtBP. Recently, Tcf factors have been reported as tumor
inducers, aberrantly activating their target genes as a result of elevated
beta-catenin levels in many types of cancer. These abnormal beta-catenin levels
are usually caused by stabilizing mutations in beta-catenin itself or truncating 
mutations in the adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) tumor suppressor gene. In this 
review, we will give a chronological overview of the Tcf factors and the
phenotypes of Tcf mutant mice, as well as Tcf-binding partners. We will discuss
Tcf signaling upon interaction with different partners, resulting in activator
and repressor roles of Tcf factors in the light of carcinogenic events.

PMID: 10528152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Development. 1999 Nov;126(21):4785-94.

Essential role for the homeoprotein vHNF1/HNF1beta in visceral endoderm
differentiation.

Coffinier C(1), Thépot D, Babinet C, Yaniv M, Barra J.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, CNRS URA 1644, and Unité de Biologie du
Développement, CNRS URA 1960, Institut Pasteur, F-75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.
yaniv@pasteur.fr.

vHNF1/HNF1beta, a member of the divergent HNF1/vHNF1 homeoprotein family, is
expressed in polarized epithelia of several adult organs and may participate in
controlling the transcription of specific genes. In addition to this late
requirement, vHNF1 may play earlier roles during development, as it is first
expressed in the visceral endoderm at the onset of gastrulation. In order to shed
light on its function during embryogenesis, we have inactivated the murine gene
by homologous recombination. The homozygous mutation results in embryonic
lethality by day 7.5 of development and vHNF1(-)(/)(-) embryos display a
disorganized visceral endoderm and a significantly reduced size. Studies of ES
cell differentiation and aggregation with tetraploid morulae establish that vHNF1
expression is essential for visceral endoderm differentiation, both in vitro and 
in vivo. Analysis of differentiation markers confirms that vHNF1 is part of a
genetic network that directs the expression of HNF4 and downstream endodermal
genes. Furthermore, the complementation of the mutant embryos with wild-type
visceral endoderm rescues the day 7.5 lethality and reveals an additional
phenotype linked to vHNF1 later expression. The examination of chimeric embryos
suggests that vHNF1 expression might be cell-autonomously required in the gut for
the proper morphogenesis of the embryo.

PMID: 10518495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Diabet Med. 1999 Sep;16(9):788-91.

Can molecular genetics help in the clinic?

Hattersley A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medicine and
Health Sciences, University of Exeter, UK.

PMID: 10510959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Diabet Med. 1999 Sep;16(9):731-5.

Impaired maximum microvascular hyperaemia in patients with MODY 3 (hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1alpha gene mutations).

Lee BC(1), Appleton M, Shore AC, Tooke JE, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine, Postgraduate Medical School, University of
Exeter, UK.

AIMS: Functional abnormalities of blood flow and capillary pressure may be
involved in the pathogenesis of diabetic microangiopathy. Important differences
in microvascular behaviour are observed between Type 1 and Type 2 diabetes
mellitus, raising the possibility that the pathogenesis of microangiopathy may
differ between these. MODY3 patients have hyperglycaemia as a result of genetic
defect of beta-cell function rather than increased insulin resistance and are
susceptible to microvascular complications and offer an opportunity to examine
microvascular behaviour in this setting.
METHODS: The maximum microvascular hyperaemic response to local heating of the
skin was studied in 12 MODY3 patients and age and sex-matched control subjects
using laser Doppler fluximetry.
RESULTS: Maximum hyperaemia was reduced in MODY3 patients (median 1.17 (range
0.88-1.92)V vs. 1.70 (1.07-2.19)V normal control subjects; P=0.03) and thus was
negatively associated with duration of diabetes (r(s)=-0.79; P = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that the duration of diabetes is a determinant
of impaired microvascular hyperaemia in MODY3 patients. The pattern of
vasodilatory impairment is similar to that observed in Type 1 diabetes mellitus
and differs from that seen in Type 2 diabetes. This provides support for the
concept that beta cell dysfunction and insulin resistance may have differing
effects on microvascular behaviour.

PMID: 10510948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Hum Genet. 1999;44(5):293-9.

Transitional change in interaction between HIF-1 and HNF-4 in response to
hypoxia.

Zhang W(1), Tsuchiya T, Yasukochi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, Japan. 
yyasmgen@mri.tmd.ac.jp

The roles of the erythropoietin (Epo) 3' enhancer in the activation of gene
expression in response to hypoxia were investigated. The enhancer contains
hypoxia-inducible enhancer binding site 1 (HIF-1 element) and two direct repeats 
of hexanucleotide consensus nuclear receptor half site (HNF-4 element). HIF-1,
which is a heterodimeric complex of HIF-1 alpha and aryl hydrocarbon receptor
nuclear translecator (ARNT), binds to HIF-1 element. HNF-4 binds to HNF-4 element
as a homodimeric complex. Studies on mutant reporter plasmids demonstrated that
both HIF-1 alpha and HNF-4 elements were necessary for augmentation of the
enhancer activity, since mutation of either the HIF-1 or the HNF-4 element caused
loss of inducibility under hypoxic conditions. Mammalian two-hybrid experiments
in vivo revealed that transitional change took place from the interaction of
HNF-4 with ARNT to that with HIF-1 alpha in response to hypoxia. Such interactive
domains were identified in amino acids 369-465 containing the C-terminal of HNF-4
and amino acids 1-458 containing basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) and
Per-ARNT-AHR-Sim (PAS) domains of ARNT in normoxia. Also, an extended sequence
containing ligand and dimerization domains, and the C-terminal of HNF-4 (amino
acids 135-465), and the PAS domain (amino acids 106-526) of HIF-1 alpha were used
for the interaction between the two transcription factors in hypoxia. From these 
data, the functional significance of the transitional change in the augmentation 
of gene expression by the Epo enhancer in hypoxia is discussed.

PMID: 10496070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Sep 24;263(2):566-9.

Human insulin gene is a target gene of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha) and HNF-1beta.

Okita K(1), Yang Q, Yamagata K, Hangenfeldt KA, Miyagawa J, Kajimoto Y, Nakajima 
H, Namba M, Wollheim CB, Hanafusa T, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Osaka University,
Osaka, Japan.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes
characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, early-onset, and impaired
insulin secretion. The type 3 and type 5 forms of MODY result from mutations in
the genes encoding the transcription factor, hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-1alpha and HNF-1beta, respectively. The mechanism by which mutations in one
allele of the HNF-1 gene impair pancreatic beta cell function is unclear. We
studied the effects of wild-type and four mutant (L12H, R263C, P379fsdelCT, and
L584S585fsinsTC) HNF-1alpha, which were identified in Japanese subjects with
MODY3 on human insulin gene transcription. Both wild-type (WT) HNF-1alpha and
HNF-1beta bound to the oligonucleotide containing the A3 element sequence in the 
human insulin promoter and transactivated the insulin-luciferase reporter gene by
30- and 31-fold, respectively. In contrast, binding of L12H, R263C and
L584S585fsinsTC-HNF-1alpha to the probe was impaired. Transactivation activity by
the four mutant HNF-1alpha was reduced (4.3 to 43.3% of WT). These data suggest
that the insulin gene is a candidate target gene of HNF-1alpha/HNF-1beta and the 
impairment of insulin gene transcription by mutations in the HNF-1 gene might be 
involved in the pathogenesis of MODY.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10491332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Science. 1999 Sep 17;285(5435):1923-6.

Synergy between tumor suppressor APC and the beta-catenin-Tcf4 target Tcf1.

Roose J(1), Huls G, van Beest M, Moerer P, van der Horn K, Goldschmeding R,
Logtenberg T, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology and Center for Biomedical Genetics, Department of
Pathology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Post Office Box 85500, 3508 GA
Utrecht, Netherlands.

Mutations in APC or beta-catenin inappropriately activate the transcription
factor Tcf4, thereby transforming intestinal epithelial cells. Here it is shown
that one of the target genes of Tcf4 in epithelial cells is Tcf1. The most
abundant Tcf1 isoforms lack a beta-catenin interaction domain. Tcf1(-/-) mice
develop adenomas in the gut and mammary glands. Introduction of a mutant APC
allele into these mice substantially increases the number of these adenomas. Tcf1
may act as a feedback repressor of beta-catenin-Tcf4 target genes and thus may
cooperate with APC to suppress malignant transformation of epithelial cells.

PMID: 10489374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Eur J Hum Genet. 1999 Sep;7(6):729-32.

Non-penetrance in a MODY 3 family with a mutation in the hepatic nuclear factor
1alpha gene: implications for predictive testing.

Miedzybrodzka Z(1), Hattersley AT, Ellard S, Pearson D, de Silva D, Harvey R,
Haites N.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics, University of Aberdeen Medical School, Scotland, UK.
zosia@abdn.ac.uk

The most common cause of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a
mutation in the hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) gene (MODY3). We
describe a family in which a missense mutation causing a Thr-Ile substitution at 
codon 620 has been found in all affected members. The mutation is not fully
penetrant as two family members aged 87 and 46 have the mutation but do not have 
diabetes. The severity and age of diagnosis of diabetes varies widely within the 
family, and most presented over the age of 25. HNF1alpha mutation screening
should be considered in any family with autosomal dominant inheritance of
diabetes where one member has presented with diabetes before the age of 25.
Predictive testing is now possible within the majority of MODY families, and is
of clinical benefit, but the possibility of non-penetrance should be addressed
during counselling and interpretation of results.

PMID: 10482964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Anticancer Res. 1999 May-Jun;19(3A):2105-10.

Loss of function of the tissue specific transcription factor HNF1 alpha in renal 
cell carcinoma and clinical prognosis.

Anastasiadis AG(1), Lemm I, Radzewitz A, Lingott A, Ebert T, Ackermann R, Ryffel 
GU, Schulz WA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Heinrich-Heine-University, Düsseldorf, Germany.
anastasi@uni-duesseldorf.de

BACKGROUND: Human renal cell carcinogenesis is associated with loss of expression
of tissue-specific genes and loss of function of tissue-specific transcription
factors such as HNF(hepatic nuclear factor)1 alpha.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study HNF1 alpha DNA-binding activities and
protein amounts were determined by gel retardation assay and Western blot
analysis, respectively, in 42 non-metastasized renal cell carcinomas and paired
normal tissues.
RESULTS: 36 tumors out of 42 (86%) showed diminished binding activity of HNF1
alpha. In most cases (26 out of 42) this appeared to be due to decreased amounts 
of HNF1 alpha protein, but 10 tumors contained equal or even higher amounts of
HNF1 alpha, in spite of reduced binding to DNA. Only 6 tumors out of 42 had
unaltered HNF1 alpha binding activity. A clinical follow-up was obtained for 40
patients. Over an average follow-up period of 39 months no significant
differences in the survival rate were observed between patients having lost or
retained HNF1 alpha function. However, since most of the patients with retained
function are still alive, long-term follow-up might be warranted.
CONCLUSIONS: The very high incidence of loss of HNF1 alpha function indicates the
important biological role of this change in renal cell carcinoma.

PMID: 10470156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Aug 31;96(18):10308-13.

The HNF-4/HNF-1alpha transactivation cascade regulates gene activity and
chromatin structure of the human serine protease inhibitor gene cluster at
14q32.1.

Rollini P(1), Fournier RE.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Sciences, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle,
WA 98109, USA.

Hepatocyte-specific expression of the alpha1-antitrypsin (alpha1AT) gene requires
the activities of two liver-enriched transactivators, hepatocyte nuclear factors 
1alpha and 4 (HNF-1alpha and HNF-4). The alpha1AT gene maps to a region of human 
chromosome 14q32.1 that includes a related serine protease inhibitor (serpin)
gene encoding corticosteroid-binding globulin (CBG), and the chromatin
organization of this approximately 130-kb region, as defined by DNase
I-hypersensitive sites, has been described. Microcell transfer of human
chromosome 14 from fibroblasts to rat hepatoma cells results in activation of
alpha1AT and CBG transcription and chromatin reorganization of the entire locus. 
To assess the roles of HNF-1alpha and HNF-4 in gene activation and chromatin
remodeling, we transferred human chromosome 14 from fibroblasts to rat hepatoma
cell variants that are deficient in expression of HNF-1alpha and HNF-4. The
variant cells failed to activate either alpha1AT or CBG transcription, and
chromatin remodeling failed to occur. However, alpha1AT and CBG transcription
could be rescued by transfecting the cells with expression plasmids encoding
HNF-1alpha or HNF-4. In these transfectants, the chromatin structure of the
entire alpha1AT/CBG locus was reorganized to an expressing cell-typical state.
Thus, HNF-1alpha and HNF-4 control both chromatin structure and gene activity of 
two cell-specific genes within the serpin gene cluster at 14q32.1.

PMCID: PMC17884
PMID: 10468604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Mol Pharmacol. 1999 Sep;56(3):526-36.

Activation of the mouse TATA-less and human TATA-containing
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 promoters by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1.

Bernard P(1), Goudonnet H, Artur Y, Desvergne B, Wahli W.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie Animale, Bâtiment de Biologie, Université de Lausanne,
Lausanne, Switzerland.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A1 (UGT1A1) catalyzes the glucuronidation of
bilirubin in liver. Among all UGT isoforms identified to date, it is the only
relevant bilirubin-glucuronidating enzyme in human. Because glucuronoconjugation 
is the major route of bilirubin elimination, any genetic alteration that affects 
bilirubin glucuronosyltransferase activity may result in a more or less severe
hyperbilirubinemia. In this study, we report the cloning and characterization of 
the transcriptional regulation of the mouse UGT1A1 gene. Primary-structure
analysis of the mouse Thymidine Adevice promoter revealed marked differences with
its human homolog. First, the mouse promoter lacks the highly polymorphic
thymidine/adenine repeat occurring in the human promoter, which has been
associated with some forms of hyperbilirubinemia. Second, an L1 transposon
element, which is absent in the human promoter, is found 480 bp upstream of the
transcription start site in mouse. Using the electromobility shift and DNase I
footprinting experiments, we have identified a hepatocyte nuclear factor
1-binding site in the mouse UGT1A1 promoter that confers responsiveness to both
factors HNF1alpha and HNF1beta in HEK293 cells. Furthermore, we show that this
element, which is conserved in the human promoter, also confers strong HNF1
responsiveness to the human UGT1A1 gene. Together, these results provide evidence
for a major regulatory function of this liver-enriched transcription factor in
UGT1A1 activity in both rodents and human.

PMID: 10462540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Diabetologia. 1999 Sep;42(9):1131-7.

High frequency of mutations in MODY and mitochondrial genes in Scandinavian
patients with familial early-onset diabetes.

Lehto M(1), Wipemo C, Ivarsson SA, Lindgren C, Lipsanen-Nyman M, Weng J, Wibell
L, Widén E, Tuomi T, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital MAS, University of Lund,
Malmö, Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: To investigate the contribution of mutations in maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) and mitochondrial genes to early-onset diabetes with
a strong family history of diabetes in a cohort with a high prevalence of Type I 
(insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: Screening for sequence variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-4alpha (MODY1), glucokinase (MODY2), HNF-1alpha (MODY3) genes and
mitochondrial DNA was carried out in 115 Finnish and Swedish patients with
early-onset ( </= 40 years) diabetes using the single strand conformation
polymorphism (SSCP) technique and direct sequencing. Allele frequencies were
compared with 118 patients with onset of diabetes Type II (non-insulin-dependent)
diabetes mellitus after the age of 40 and 92 non-diabetic control subjects
without a family history of diabetes.
RESULTS: In total 52 sequence variants were found in the HNF-1alpha, HNF-4alpha
and glucokinase genes, 12 of which were considered as MODY mutations. Three
families had the A3243G mutation in the mitochondrial tRNA(Leu) gene, which
resulted in an overall prevalence of these mutations of 13 %.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Among 115 Scandinavian families, mutations in the
HNF-1alpha gene represented the most common cause of familial early-onset ( </=
40 years) diabetes: MODY3 (5.2 %) more than MODY2 (3.5 %) more than MIDD (2.6 %) 
more than MODY1 (1.7 %).

PMID: 10447526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Diabetologia. 1999 Jul;42(7):887-91.

Overexpression of dominant negative mutant hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha
inhibits arginine-induced insulin secretion in MIN6 cells.

Tanizawa Y(1), Ohta Y, Nomiyama J, Matsuda K, Tanabe K, Inoue H, Matsutani A,
Okuya S, Oka Y.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Yamaguchi University, School of
Medicine, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: To explain the mechanisms whereby mutations in the HNF-1alpha
gene cause insulin secretory defects.
METHODS: A truncated mutant HNF-1alpha (HNF-1alpha288t) was overexpressed in
hepatoma cells (HepG2) and murine insulinoma cells (MIN6) using a recombinant
adenovirus system and expression of the HNF-1alpha target genes and insulin
secretion were examined.
RESULTS: Expression of phenylalanine hydroxylase and alpha1-antitrypsin genes,
the target genes of HNF-1alpha, was suppressed in HepG2 cells by overexpression
of HNF-1alpha288t. In MIN6 cells, overexpression of HNF-1alpha288t did not change
insulin secretion stimulated by glucose (5 mmol/l and 25 mmol/l) or leucine (20
mmol/l). Potentiation of insulin secretion by arginine (20 mmol/l, in the
presence of 5 mmol/l or 25mmol/l glucose) was, however, reduced (p < 0.0001 and p
= 0.027, respectively). Similarly reduced responses were observed when stimulated
with homoarginine. Expression of the cationic amino acid transporter-2 was not
reduced and insulin secretory response to membrane depolarization by 50 mmol/l
KCl was intact.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The HNF-1alpha288 t, which is structurally similar to 
the mutant HNF-1alpha expressed from the common MODY3 allele, P291fsinsC, exerts 
a dominant negative effect. Suppression of HNF-1alpha in MIN6 cells severely
impaired potentiation of insulin secretion by arginine, whereas
glucose-stimulated and leucine-stimulated insulin secretion was intact. Our
findings delineate the complex nature of beta-cell failure in patients with
MODY3. This cell model will be useful for further investigation of the mechanism 
of insulin secretory defects in these patients.

PMID: 10440133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Jul-Aug;12(4):487-97.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY): a new challenge for pediatric
diabetologists.

Guazzarotti L(1), Bartolotta E, Chiarelli F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, S. Lucia Hospital, Recanati, MC, Italy.

The differential diagnosis of hyperglycemia in childhood and adolescence has to
take into consideration early-onset non-insulin-dependent diabetes, defined as
maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY). To date, mutations in genes of five 
proteins have been shown to cause MODY: glucokinase (MODY2), hepatic nuclear
factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) (MODY3), hepatic nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF-4
alpha) (MODY1), insulin promoter factor 1 (IPF-1) (MODY4) and hepatic nuclear
factor-1 beta (HNF-1 beta) (MODY5), but other MODY genes still await elucidation.
Clinical and metabolic heterogeneity of these subtypes of type 2 diabetes need to
be defined, as deficiency of each factor has its own phenotype. Pediatric
diabetologists should be aware of the increasing importance of MODY as a possible
cause of hyperglycemia in children and adolescents. This will allow for the early
diagnosis of these metabolic conditions and for the appropriate follow-up and
treatment.

PMID: 10417964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Jul 14;260(3):829-34.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 binds to and transactivates the human but not the rat
CYP7A1 promoter.

Chen J(1), Cooper AD, Levy-Wilson B.

Author information: 
(1)Palo Alto Medical Foundation Research Institute, Palo Alto, California, 94301,
USA.

Cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1), a liver-specific enzyme, catalyzes the
rate-limiting step in the degradation pathway of cholesterol to bile acids, and
thus plays a key role in cholesterol homeostasis. To elucidate the mechanisms
that control hepatic expression of the human CYP7A1 gene, we are studying the
promoter region. Initially, we observed that up to 40% of the overall
transcriptional activity of the promoter in HepG2 cells was associated with DNA
sequences from -65 to -1 of the human gene. Within this region, a binding site
for the liver-enriched transcription factor HNF-1 (-56 to -49) has been
identified. Binding of HNF-1 to this site leads to transcriptional activation of 
the human promoter. The corresponding segment from the rat CYP7A1 gene does not
bind HNF-1; instead, it is bound by the orphan receptors ARP-1 (COUP-TFII) and
LXRalpha, that are implicated in dietary regulation.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10403849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Mol Biol (Mosk). 1999 Mar-Apr;33(2):273-81.

[Expression of alpha-fetoprotein and hepatocyte nuclear factors in rat hepatoma
clones: effect of retinoic acid].

[Article in Russian]

Varga EV, Kustova IF, Lazarevich NL.

PMID: 10377574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Diabetes Care. 1999 Feb;22(2):253-61.

Phenotypic characteristics of early-onset autosomal-dominant type 2 diabetes
unlinked to known maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) genes.

Doria A(1), Yang Y, Malecki M, Scotti S, Dreyfus J, O'Keeffe C, Orban T, Warram
JH, Krolewski AS.

Author information: 
(1)Section on Genetics, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
adoria@joslin.harvard.edu

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether there are forms of early-onset
autosomal-dominant type 2 diabetes that are distinct from typical maturity-onset 
diabetes of the young (MODY) and to characterize their phenotypic
characteristics.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The study included 220 affected subjects from 29
families in which early-onset type 2 diabetes occurred in multiple generations
and was not linked to known MODY genes (MODY gene-negative families). All
individuals underwent an oral glucose tolerance test and other clinical
measurements aimed at investigating the underlying metabolic defect and the
presence of diabetic complications. For comparison, 79 affected carriers of MODY3
(hepatocyte nuclear factor [HNF]-1 alpha) mutations were similarly examined.
RESULTS: Subjects from MODY gene-negative pedigrees were diagnosed with diabetes 
at an older age (36 +/- 17 vs. 21 +/- 10 years, P = 0.0001) and were more
frequently obese (52 vs. 18%, P = 0.0001) than MODY3 individuals. MODY
gene-negative patients who were insulin treated required more exogenous insulin
than did MODY3 subjects (0.7 +/- 0.4 vs. 0.45 +/- 0.2 U.kg-1.day-1, P = 0.04),
despite similar C-peptide levels. Among subjects not treated with insulin, MODY
gene-negative subjects had significantly higher serum insulin levels, both
fasting (16.5 +/- 15 vs. 6.5 +/- 5 microU/ml, P = 0.027) and 2 h after a glucose 
load (53 +/- 44 vs. 11 +/- 10, P = 0.002). They also had higher serum
triglycerides (P = 0.02), higher cholesterol levels (P = 0.02), more hypertension
(P = 0.0001), and more nephropathy (P = 0.001). Differences persisted when
families were matched for age at diagnosis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate the existence of forms of early-onset
autosomal-dominant type 2 diabetes that are distinct from MODY and are frequently
characterized by insulin resistance, similar to later-onset type 2 diabetes.
Because of the Mendelian pattern of inheritance, the goal of identifying the
genes involved in these forms of diabetes appears to be particularly feasible.

PMID: 10333942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Diabetologia. 1999 May;42(5):621-6.

Three new mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in Japanese
subjects with diabetes mellitus: clinical features and functional
characterization.

Yoshiuchi I(1), Yamagata K, Yang Q, Iwahashi H, Okita K, Yamamoto K, Oue T,
Imagawa A, Hamaguchi T, Yamasaki T, Horikawa Y, Satoh T, Nakajima H, Miyazaki J, 
Higashiyama S, Miyagawa J, Namba M, Hanafusa T, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Suita, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene are a
common cause of the type 3 form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young. We
examined the clinical features and molecular basis of hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) diabetes.
METHODS: Thirty-seven Japanese subjects with early onset Type II
(non-insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus and 45 with Type I (insulin-dependent) 
diabetes mellitus were screened for mutations in this gene. Functional properties
of mutant HNF-1alpha were also investigated.
RESULTS: Three new mutations [G415R, R272C and A site of the promoter (+
102G-to-C)] were found. Insulin secretion was impaired in the three subjects.
Insulin and glucagon secretory responses to arginine in the subject with the
R272C mutation were also diminished. Molecular biological studies indicated that 
the G415R mutation generated a protein with about 50% of the activity of
wild-type HNF-1alpha. The R272C mutation had no transactivating or DNA binding
activity and acted in a dominant negative manner. The + 102 G-to-C mutation in
the A site of the promoter activity was associated with an increase in promoter
activity and it had 42-75% more activity than the wild-type sequence.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene may affect the normal
islet function by different molecular mechanisms.

PMID: 10333057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Diabetes Care. 1999 May;22(5):867-8.

A case of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha diabetes/MODY3 masquerading as type 1
diabetes in a Mexican-American adolescent and responsive to a low dose of
sulfonylurea.

Hathout EH, Cockburn BN, Mace JW, Sharkey J, Chen-Daniel J, Bell GI.

PMID: 10332709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Diabetes. 1999 May;48(5):1162-7.

Functional study of the E276Q mutant hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha found in
type 1 maturity-onset diabetes of the young: impaired synergy with chicken
ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor II on the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 promoter.

Suaud L(1), Hemimou Y, Formstecher P, Laine B.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 459 INSERM, Laboratory of Cell Biology, University of Medicine H.
Warembourg, Lille, France.

Seven mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha gene have been
shown to correlate with type 1 maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY 1), a
monogenic form of type 2 diabetes. Up to now, only the functional properties of
two MODY 1 HNF-4alpha mutants, Q268X and V393I, have been investigated to address
how the mutations in the HNF-4alpha gene, found by genetic studies, can give rise
to impaired activities of mutated HNF-4alpha proteins and can cause this disease.
The E276Q mutation results in a nonconservative substitution occurring in the
HNF-4alpha E domain, which is involved in dimerization and transactivation
activities as well as in protein-protein interactions with other transcription
factors or coactivators. Using the mutated human HNF-4alpha2, we have found that,
in the absence of chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor II
(COUP TFII), the E276Q substitution does not significantly affect the
dimerization and transactivating activities of HNF-4alpha, at least on the
promoters studied herein. On the other hand, in the presence of COUP TFII, the
substitution impairs the enhancement of HNF-4-mediated activation of HNF-1
promoter. The impaired synergy between COUP TFII and HNF-4 on the HNF-1 promoter 
results from an alteration of their interaction. HNF-1 expression plays a crucial
role in transactivation of insulin promoter and of numerous genes coding for
enzymes involved in glucose homeostasis. Therefore, its downregulation resulting 
from the E276Q mutation in HNF-4alpha gene most probably impairs the function of 
pancreatic beta-cells.

PMID: 10331424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Am J Physiol. 1999 May;276(5 Pt 1):G1181-94.

Regulation of alpha1-antitrypsin gene expression in human intestinal epithelial
cell line caco-2 by HNF-1alpha and HNF-4.

Hu C(1), Perlmutter DH.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Pediatrics, Cell Biology, and Physiology, Washington University
School of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Nutrition, St. Louis
Children's Hospital, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

There is still relatively limited information about mechanisms of gene expression
in enterocytes and mechanisms by which gene expression is regulated during
enterocyte differentiation. Using the human intestinal epithelial cell line
Caco-2, which spontaneously differentiates from a cryptlike to a villouslike
enterocyte, we have previously shown that there is a marked increase in
transcription of the well-characterized alpha1-antitrypsin (alpha1-AT) gene
during enterocyte differentiation. In this study we examined the possibility of
identifying the cis-acting elements and trans-acting DNA-binding proteins
responsible for expression of the alpha1-AT gene in Caco-2 cells during
differentiation. Footprint analysis and electrophoretic mobility shift assays
showed that hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha), HNF-1beta, and HNF-4
from nuclear extracts of Caco-2 cells specifically bound to two regions in the
proximal promoter of the alpha1-AT gene. Cotransfection studies showed that
HNF-1alpha and HNF-4 had a synergistic effect on alpha1-AT gene expression. RNA
blot analysis showed that HNF-1alpha and HNF-4 mRNA levels and electrophoretic
mobility shift assays showed that HNF-1alpha binding activity increase
coordinately with alpha1-AT mRNA levels during differentiation of Caco-2 cells.
Finally, overexpression of antisense ribozymes for HNF-1alpha in Caco-2 cells
resulted in a selective decrease in endogenous alpha1-AT gene expression.
Together, these results provide evidence that HNF-1alpha and HNF-4 play a role in
the mechanism by which the alpha1-AT gene is upregulated during enterocyte
differentiation in the model Caco-2 cell system.

PMID: 10330009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Mol Carcinog. 1999 Apr;24(4):305-14.

Loss of HNF1alpha function in human renal cell carcinoma: frequent mutations in
the VHL gene but not the HNF1alpha gene.

Lemm I(1), Lingott A, Pogge v Strandmann E, Zoidl C, Bulman MP, Hattersley AT,
Schulz WA, Ebert T, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Germany.

Human renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is a common malignant disease of the kidney
characterized by dedifferentiation of renal epithelial cells. Our previous
experiments showed that most RCCs have a loss of function of the tissue-specific 
transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1alpha. Detailed analyses of
the 10 exons encoding HNF1alpha in 32 human RCCs by single-strand conformation
polymorphism analysis and direct DNA sequencing revealed no tumor-associated
mutation, whereas with the same probes we frequently found mutations in the von
Hippel-Lindau tumor suppressor gene. No mutation leading to loss of HNF1alpha
function was detected by analyzing the integrity of the HNF1alpha transcripts in 
the RNA derived from RCCs by the protein truncation test. Investigating human RCC
cell lines by western blotting and gel retardation assays showed a dramatic loss 
in the expression of the tissue-specific transcription factor HNF1alpha in eight 
of 10 cell lines. As the HNF1alpha-related transcription factor HNF1beta was
expressed in all these tumor cell lines, the loss of HNF1alpha expression was a
specific event and was maintained in RCC cell lines. The loss of HNF1alpha
expression in RCC cell lines on the RNA level was confirmed by reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction. We propose that tumor-associated
mutations in the HNF1alpha gene do not occur in human RCC and that the loss of
function is partially due to a transcriptional inactivation of the HNF1alpha
gene.

PMID: 10326868  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Nephrologie. 1999;20(2):59-63.

[What have we learned thanks to genetics in type II diabetes and its
complications?].

[Article in French]

Froguel P.

Genetic and environmental factors contribute to the development of type 2
diabetes. However, type 2 diabetes appears to be an heterogeneous syndrome
composed of sub-types strongly associated with environmental factors at one end
of the spectrum, and highly genetic forms at the other end. Therefore, a first
approach has been to differentiate the potential monogenic forms of diabetes, as 
a paradigm for genetic studies, such as maturity onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) which is characterized by an early age of onset and autosomal dominant
inheritance. Recent studies have shown mutations in four transcription factors,
members of the hepatocyte nuclear factor family. Furthermore, some data suggest
that non-MODY monofactorial forms of late-onset NIDDM, due to islet transcription
factors defects exist. The positional cloning of type 2 diabetes susceptibility
genes is in progress, and will help to understand the molecular basis of
diabetes, first step to identify targets of new drugs that will provide a better 
care to diabetic patients.

PMID: 10227025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Apr 13;257(2):533-7.

Isolation and characterization of a genomic region upstream from the ovine
Na+/d-glucose cotransporter (SGLT1) cDNA.

Wood IS(1), Allison GG, Shirazi-Beechey SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Preclinical Sciences, University of Liverpool,
Brownlow Hill, L69 3BX, United Kingdom.

d-Glucose and non-metabolisable analogues of D-glucose regulate the expression of
intestinal SGLT1 at both transcriptional and post-transcriptional levels. In
order to investigate the molecular mechanisms involved in the transcriptional
regulation of the ovine intestinal SGLT1 gene, we have isolated an upstream
element of about 1 kb in size. This DNA fragment contains a TATA box motif, 48 bp
upstream of the transcriptional start site and includes transcription factor
binding sites for HNF-1 and AP-2. We have shown that the ovine SGLT1 promoter
fragment can drive the transcription of a reporter gene when transfected into the
epithelial cell lines STC-1 and LLC-PK1, which endogenously express SGLT1.
Deletion analyses of the promoter indicate that -66/+21 bp proximal sequence
directs the highest level of reporter gene activity. There are one and possibly
two sites of transcriptional suppression.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10198246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Diabetes. 1999 Apr;48(4):921-3.

Allelic drop-out in exon 2 of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene hinders
the identification of mutations in three families with maturity-onset diabetes of
the young.

Ellard S(1), Bulman MP, Frayling TM, Allen LI, Dronsfield MJ, Tack CJ, Hattersley
AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medicine 
and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, UK. s.ellard@exeter.ac.uk

PMID: 10102714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Diabetes Care. 1999 Mar;22(3):524.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha G319S. A private mutation in Oji-Cree
associated with type 2 diabetes.

Hegele RA, Cao H, Harris SB, Hanley AJ, Zinman B.

PMID: 10097940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Diabetologia. 1999 Mar;42(3):380-1.

Missense mutation Gly574Ser in the transcription factor HNF-1alpha is a marker of
atypical diabetes mellitus in African-American children.

Boutin P, Gresh L, Cisse A, Hara M, Bell G, Babu S, Eisenbarth G, Froguel P.

PMID: 10096793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Gastroenterology. 1999 Apr;116(4):842-54.

Transcriptional regulation of pig lactase-phlorizin hydrolase: involvement of
HNF-1 and FREACs.

Spodsberg N(1), Troelsen JT, Carlsson P, Enerbäck S, Sjöström H, Norén O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Biochemical Laboratory C, The
Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: One-kilobase sequence of the upstream fragment of the pig
lactase-phlorizin hydrolase gene has been shown to control small
intestinal-specific expression and postweaning decline of lactase-phlorizin
hydrolase in transgenic mice. The aim of this study was to identify the
regulatory DNA elements and transcription factors controlling lactase-phlorizin
hydrolase expression.
METHODS: The activity of different lactase-phlorizin hydrolase promoter fragments
was investigated by transfection experiments using Caco-2 cells. Electrophoretic 
mobility shift assays and supershift analyses were used to characterize the
interaction between intestinal transcription factors and the identified
regulatory elements.
RESULTS: Functional analysis revealed three previously undescribed regulatory
regions in the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase promoter: a putative enhancer between 
-894 and -798 binding hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 at position -894 to -880;
a repressor-binding element between -278 to -264 to which an HNF-3-like factor is
able to bind; and an element between -178 to -164 that binds an activating
transcription factor.
CONCLUSIONS: Identification of three new regulatory regions and HNF-1 and
HNF-3-like transcription factor as players in the regulation of lactase-phlorizin
hydrolase gene transcription has an impact on the understanding of the molecular 
mechanisms behind age-dependent, tissue-specific, differentiation-dependent, and 
regional regulation of expression in the intestine.

PMID: 10092306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Genes Dev. 1999 Mar 15;13(6):709-17.

Wnt3a-/--like phenotype and limb deficiency in Lef1(-/-)Tcf1(-/-) mice.

Galceran J(1), Fariñas I, Depew MJ, Clevers H, Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Departments of Microbiology and
Biochemistry, University of California, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Members of the LEF-1/TCF family of transcription factors have been implicated in 
the transduction of Wnt signals. However, targeted gene inactivations of Lef1,
Tcf1, or Tcf4 in the mouse do not produce phenotypes that mimic any known Wnt
mutation. Here we show that null mutations in both Lef1 and Tcf1, which are
expressed in an overlapping pattern in the early mouse embryo, cause a severe
defect in the differentiation of paraxial mesoderm and lead to the formation of
additional neural tubes, phenotypes identical to those reported for
Wnt3a-deficient mice. In addition, Lef1(-/-)Tcf1(-/-) embryos have defects in the
formation of the placenta and in the development of limb buds, which fail both to
express Fgf8 and to form an apical ectodermal ridge. Together, these data provide
evidence for a redundant role of LEF-1 and TCF-1 in Wnt signaling during mouse
development.

PMCID: PMC316557
PMID: 10090727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Mar;84(3):1077-82.

The hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha G319S variant is associated with early-onset
type 2 diabetes in Canadian Oji-Cree.

Hegele RA(1), Cao H, Harris SB, Hanley AJ, Zinman B.

Author information: 
(1)Robarts Research Institute, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.
robert.hegele@rri.on.ca

Mutations in the gene encoding hepatic nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) have
been found in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young. We identified a
new variant in the HNF-1alpha gene, namely G319S, in Ontario Oji-Cree with type 2
diabetes. G319S is within the proline II-rich domain of the trans-activation site
of HNF-1alpha and alters a glycine residue that is conserved throughout
evolution. S319 was absent from 990 alleles taken from subjects representing six 
other ethnic groups, suggesting that it is private for Oji-Cree. We found that 1)
the S319 allele was significantly more prevalent in diabetic than nondiabetic
Oji-Cree (0.209 vs. 0.087; P = 0.000001); 2) S319/S319 homozygotes and S319/G319 
heterozygotes, respectively, had odds ratios for type 2 diabetes of 4.00 (95%
confidence interval, 2.65-6.03) and 1.97 (95% confidence interval, 1.44-2.70)
compared with G319/G319 homozygotes; 3) there was a significant difference in the
mean age of onset of type 2 diabetes, with G319/G319, S319/G319, and S319/S319
subjects affected in the fifth, fourth, and third decades of life, respectively. 
In subjects with type 2 diabetes, we also found significantly lower body mass
index and significantly higher post-challenge plasma glucose in S319/S319 and
S319/G319 compared with G319/G319 subjects. Finally, among nondiabetic subjects, 
S319/G319 heterozygotes had significantly lower plasma insulin than G319/G319
homozygotes. The presence of the private HNF-1alpha G319S variant in a large
number of Oji-Cree with type 2 diabetes and its strong association with type 2
diabetes susceptibility are unique among human populations. Also, G319S is
associated with a distinct form of type 2 diabetes, characterized by onset at an 
earlier age, lower body mass, and a higher postchallenge plasma glucose.

PMID: 10084598  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Diabetes. 1999 Mar;48(3):645-8.

Identification of mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in
Japanese subjects with early-onset NIDDM and functional analysis of the mutant
proteins.

Yamada S(1), Tomura H, Nishigori H, Sho K, Mabe H, Iwatani N, Takumi T, Kito Y,
Moriya N, Muroya K, Ogata T, Onigata K, Morikawa A, Inoue I, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Regulation,
Gunma University, Maebashi, Japan.

PMID: 10078571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. FEBS Lett. 1999 Feb 12;444(2-3):155-9.

Growth hormone induces insulin-like growth factor-I gene transcription by a
synergistic action of STAT5 and HNF-1alpha.

Metón I(1), Boot EP, Sussenbach JS, Steenbergh PH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

Salmon insulin-like growth factor-I (sIGF-I) expression is, as in mammals,
induced by growth hormone (GH). To elucidate the mechanism by which GH stimulates
the transcription of the IGF-I gene, we transiently transfected Hep3B cells
expressing the rat GH receptor with a sIGF-I promoter-luciferase reporter
construct. Activation of the construct by GH added to the medium of the
transfected cells was observed when two specific transcription factors, STAT5 and
HNF-1alpha, were simultaneously overexpressed in these cells. This finding
demonstrates for the first time a GH-dependent activation of an IGF-I promoter
construct in an immortalized laboratory cell line.

PMID: 10050749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Diabetologia. 1999 Jan;42(1):120-1.

UKPDS 31: Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (the MODY3 gene) mutations in late
onset Type II diabetic patients in the United Kingdom. United Kingdom prospective
diabetes study.

Cox RD, Southam L, Hashim Y, Horton V, Mehta Z, Taghavi J, Lathrop M, Turner R.

PMID: 10027593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Biochem J. 1999 Feb 15;338 ( Pt 1):91-7.

Regulation of the gene for human dipeptidyl peptidase IV by hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 alpha.

Erickson RH(1), Gum JR, Lotterman CD, Hicks JW, Lai RS, Kim YS.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Research Laboratory, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical
Center, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 was identified as the transcription factor binding to
a 20 bp (-150 to -131) region of the gene for human dipeptidyl peptidase IV,
which has been shown to be important for the expression of dipeptidyl peptidase
IV in the human intestinal and hepatic epithelial cell lines Caco-2 and HepG2.
Functional analysis of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 site was performed with
two minimal dipeptidyl peptidase IV promoter constructs (-250 to -41, and -150 to
-41) with and without a 3 bp mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1
sequence, and used in transient transfection experiments with Caco-2 cells. The
results show that the mutated constructs were able to drive transcription at only
5-10% of the activity of the non-mutated controls. Co-transfection of 3T3 cells
with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (alpha or beta) and dipeptidyl peptidase IV
promoter constructs (-250 to -41 or -150 to -41) resulted in a 2.5-6-fold
increase in transcription over controls with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha
but not with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 beta. The results of this study show
that hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 binds to the -150 to -131 region of the human
dipeptidyl peptidase IV promoter and is necessary for transcriptional activation 
of the gene for dipeptidyl peptidase IV.

PMCID: PMC1220029
PMID: 9931303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Nucleic Acids Res. 1999 Feb 15;27(4):1190-7.

Extinction of alpha1-antitrypsin expression in cell hybrids is independent of
HNF1alpha and HNF4 and involves both promoter and internal DNA sequences.

Bulla GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Research Institute, St Louis University Health Sciences Center and
Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital, Pediatric Research Institute, St Louis, MO 
63110, USA. bullaga@slu.edu

In rat hepatoma x fibroblast somatic cell hybrids, extinction of rat
alpha1-antitrypsin (alpha1AT) gene expression is accompanied by the loss of
liver-enriched transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1alpha) and 
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4). Previous analysis showed that forced
expression of functional HNF1alpha failed to prevent extinction of the rat
alpha1AT locus in cell hybrids. Here I show that ectopic co-expression of
HNF1alpha plus HNF4 fails to prevent extinction of either rat or human alpha1AT
genes in cell hybrids. A 40 kb human alpha1AT minilocus integrated into the rat
genome is fully silenced in cell hybrids in the presence of transacting factors. 
The integrated alpha1AT promoter, but not a viral or ubiquitously active
promoter, is repressed 35-fold in the cell hybrids. In addition, position effects
also contributed to extinction of many integrated transgenes in a cell
type-dependent manner. Finally, internal DNA sequences within the human alpha1AT 
gene contributed dramatically to the extinction phenotype, resulting in a further
10- to 30-fold reduction in alpha1AT gene expression in cell hybrids. Thus,
multiple mechanisms contribute to silencing of tissue-specific gene expression of
the alpha1AT gene in cell hybrids.

PMCID: PMC148302
PMID: 9927755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Nutrition. 1999 Jan;15(1):18-22.

Effect of parenteral and enteral nutrition on hepatic albumin synthesis in rats.

Tsujinaka T(1), Morimoto T, Ogawa A, Kishibuchi M, Yano M, Shiozaki H, Monden M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.

The route of nutrient delivery may alter the production of albumin and induce
changes at the molecular level. Donryu rats (n = 75) were divided into the
following three groups. The oral feeding (OR) group received a non-purified solid
diet ad libitum, the parenteral nutrition (PN) group received a total parenteral 
nutrition (TPN) solution intravenously, and the enteral nutrition (EN) group
received intragastric infusions of the TPN solution for 7 d. Serum albumin and
glucocorticoid levels were measured and messenger RNA (mRNA) levels of albumin
and hepatic specific transcription factors in the liver were analyzed. Serum
albumin and albumin mRNA levels in the PN group became significantly decreased
compared to those in the OR group, whereas the EN group did not show a
significant difference compared to the OR group. mRNA levels of DBP, D-site
binding transcription factor for the albumin gene, showed a circadian rhythm in
the OR and EN groups, but not in the PN group, as indicated by a DBP mRNA level
at 2200 h in the PN group that was significantly lower than that in the OR group.
mRNA levels of C/EBP alpha, CCAAT-enhancer binding protein alpha, were highest in
the OR group and lowest in the PN group. In contrast, mRNA levels of C/EBP beta
were highest in the PN group and lowest in the OR group. Serum glucocorticoid
level showed a circadian rhythm in the OR group, highest at 2200 h and lowest at 
1000 h, whereas such a rhythm was not found in either the PN or the EN group.
Albumin synthesis was down-regulated in PN in association with changes in
transcription factors. A loss of circadian rhythm reflected in changes of DBP
mRNA and serum glucocorticoid level may play a role. Down-regulation of albumin
was improved by enteral feeding, indicating that EN is more advantageous for
albumin synthesis than PN.

PMID: 9918057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Schweiz Med Wochenschr. 1998 Dec 5;128(49):1936-9.

Nuclear factors and type 2 diabetes.

Froguel P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Pasteur Institute, Lille, France.
froguel@xenope.pasteur-lille.fr

Recent studies have shown that mutations in four transcription factors,
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF-4 alpha), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
alpha (HNF-1 alpha), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta (HNF-1 beta), and insulin
promoter factor-1 (IPF-1), are responsible for maturity onset diabetes of the
young (MODY) which is characterised by an early age of onset and autosomal
dominant inheritance. MODY is not an uncommon disorder and in fact could account 
for about 2 to 5% of all cases of type 2 diabetes. Moreover, mutations in HNF-1
beta, which functions as a homodimer or a heterodimer with HNF-1 alpha, have been
identified in a few families with MODY and severe kidney disease. Mutations in
the coding regions or in the promotors of these nuclear factors are responsible
for severe insulin secretory defects and for major hyperglycaemia associated with
microvascular complications. The role of transcription factors in the development
of the more common late-onset type 2 diabetes is still under investigation. Some 
mutations in HNF-1 alpha were identified in subjects with atypical forms of
insulin-dependent diabetes, and a mutation in HNF-4 alpha and several mutations
in IPF-1 were found in type 2 diabetic families with typical late-onset NIDDM.
Altogether, these data suggest that non-MODY monofactorial forms of late-onset
NIDDM, due to islet transcription factor defects, exist.

PMID: 9887471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Pathol Biol (Paris). 1998 Nov;46(9):713-4.

The genetics of complex traits: from diabetes mellitus to obesity.

[Article in English, French]

Froguel P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Département de Génétique Humaine, Institut de Biologie de Lille-CNRS, France.

PMID: 9885827  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. J Virol. 1999 Feb;73(2):1239-44.

Mechanism of suppression of hepatitis B virus precore RNA transcription by a
frequent double mutation.

Li J(1), Buckwold VE, Hon MW, Ou JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, University of Southern
California School of Medicine, Los Angeles, California, USA.

A double mutation which converts nucleotide 1765 from A to T and nucleotide 1767 
from G to A is frequently found in the hepatitis B virus (HBV) genome isolated
from HBV patients with chronic hepatitis symptoms. This double mutation is
located in the core promoter that controls the transcription of the precore RNA
and the core RNA. In addition, this double mutation also resides in the X protein
coding sequence, converting codon 130 from Lys to Met and codon 131 from Val to
Ile. Previous studies indicate that this double mutation removes a nuclear
receptor binding site in the core promoter, suppresses specifically precore RNA
transcription, and enhances viral replication. In this study, we further
investigated how this double mutation suppresses precore RNA transcription. We
found that this double mutation not only removed the nuclear receptor binding
site but also created an HNF1 transcription factor binding site. Further
transfection studies using Huh7 hepatoma cells indicate that the removal of the
nuclear receptor binding site has no effect on the transcription of HBV RNAs, the
two-codon change in the X protein sequence suppresses the transcription of both
precore and core RNAs, and the creation of the HNF1 binding site restores the
core RNA level. Hence, the specific suppression of precore RNA transcription by
this frequent double-nucleotide mutation is the combined result of multiple
factors.

PMCID: PMC103946
PMID: 9882327  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Genomics. 1998 Dec 15;54(3):398-407.

Rescue of the HNF4 --> HNF1alpha pathway in hepatoma variant cells containing
human chromosome 12.

Bulla GA(1), Batanian JR, Young HM, Bradley N, Kazi N, Haddad BR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pediatric Research Institute, St. Louis University
Health Sciences Center and Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital, St. Louis,
Missouri, 63110, USA. bullaga@slu.edu

Expression of liver-enriched trans-acting hepatocyte nuclear factors 1alpha
(HNF1alpha) and 4 (HNF4) is correlated with the hepatic phenotype in cultured rat
hepatoma cells. We have used a hepatoma variant cell line, H11, that specifically
lacks the HNF4 --> HNF1alpha pathway as a model to understand mechanisms
controlling hepatic gene expression. We have introduced randomly marked human
chromosomes into H11 cells and have isolated a number of microcell hybrids that
have rescued hepatic gene expression, including HNF4, HNF1alpha, and
alpha1-antitrypsin. Chromosomal analysis of cell hybrids showed that the rescued 
hepatic phenotype correlated closely with the presence of human chromosome 12p
sequences. Although the gene encoding HNF1alpha is located on chromosome 12q24,
its retention was not required to rescue the hepatic phenotype. Thus, we suggest 
that a locus on human chromosome 12p plays an important role in maintenance of
hepatic gene expression through activation of the HNF4 --> HNF1alpha pathway.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9878242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Diabetologia. 1998 Dec;41(12):1528-31.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in Caucasian families
originally classified as having Type I diabetes.

Møller AM(1), Dalgaard LT, Pociot F, Nerup J, Hansen T, Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene are the cause
of maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3 (MODY3), which is characterised by
a severe impairment of insulin secretion and an early onset of the disease. Also 
at onset of diabetes some MODY patients show similar clinical symptoms and signs 
as patients with Type I (insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus. The objective of
this study was to estimate the prevalence of MODY3 patients misclassified as Type
I diabetic patients. From a large population-based sample of unrelated Danish
Caucasian Type I diabetic patients with an affected first degree relative, 39
patients (6.7%) who did not carry any high-risk HLA-haplotypes, i.e. DR3 or DR4
or both were examined by single-strand conformational polymorphism scanning and
direct sequencing of the coding region and the minimal promoter of the HNF-1alpha
gene. Four of the 39 Type I diabetic patients (10%) were identified as carrying
mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene. One patient carried a missense mutation
(Glu48Lys) in exon 1, two patients carried a missense mutation (Cys241Gly) in
exon 4 and one patient carried a frameshift mutation (Pro291fsdelA) in exon 4.
The mutations were all identified in heterozygous form, segregated with diabetes,
and were not identified in 84 unrelated, healthy subjects. Furthermore, family
history in three of the four families showed diabetes in four consecutive
generations, suggestive of an autosomal dominant inheritance. In conclusion,
about 10% of Danish diabetic patients without a high-risk HLA-haplotype,
originally classified as having Type I diabetes could have diabetes caused by
mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene. Clinical awareness of family history of
diabetes and mode of inheritance might help to identify and reclassify these
diabetic subjects as MODY3 patients.

PMID: 9867222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 1998 Oct 10;142(41):2252-6.

[A Dutch family with an autosomal dominant form of diabetes mellitus as a result 
of a mutation in the HNF1 alpha-gene (MODY3)].

[Article in Dutch]

Tack CJ(1), Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Afd. Algemene Interne Geneeskunde, Academisch Ziekenhuis St. Radboud,
Nijmegen.

OBJECTIVE: To study the molecular genetic basis of an autosomal dominant form of 
diabetes mellitus in a Dutch family.
DESIGN: Descriptive.
SETTING: Academic Hospital Nijmegen, the Netherlands and Laboratories for
Molecular Genetics, Birmingham and Exeter, Great Britain.
METHODS: A large pedigree with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) was
studied by taking a history and by performing laboratory analysis; DNA was
isolated from peripheral blood lymphocytes and linkage analysis was carried out
using genetic markers near known MODY loci. As linkage to the MODY3 gene
(encoding for the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1 alpha)
was suggested, all exons of the gene were sequenced for mutation detection.
RESULTS: Of the 27 family members 13 were affected by diabetes. Diabetes was
diagnosed at a mean age of 36.7 years, with four family members diagnosed before 
the age of 25. Nearly all patients were treated with diet/oral antidiabetics.
Diabetic family members had lower fasting (specific) insulin concentrations than 
normoglycaemic family members (53.8 (SD: 5.4) versus 90.4 (SD: 12.9) pmol/l; p < 
0.05). Linkage to the MODY3 gene was established. Further investigation showed a 
mutation in exon 2 of the gene.
CONCLUSION: This Dutch family suffered from an autosomal form of diabetes
mellitus caused by a mutation in the HNFI alpha gene (MODY3). Phenotypically, the
diabetes appeared to be relatively mild; it was characterised by impaired insulin
secretion.

PMID: 9864503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998 Dec;83(12):4506-9.

The Ala/Val98 polymorphism of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene
contributes to the interindividual variation in serum C-peptide response during
an oral glucose tolerance test: evidence from studies of 231 glucose-tolerant
first degree relatives of type 2 diabetic probands.

Urhammer SA(1), Hansen T, Ekstrøm CT, Eiberg H, Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Department of Medical
Genetics, University of Copenhagen, Denmark.

The third form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young is caused by mutations in 
the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene. Recently, we demonstrated an
association between a prevalent polymorphism at codon 98, Ala/Val98, of this gene
and a 20% decreased insulin release during an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) 
in middle-aged glucose-tolerant Danish Caucasian subjects. The major objective of
the present study was to replicate this finding among glucose-tolerant first
degree relatives of type 2 diabetic patients of the same ethnic origin. All
participants, 231 glucose-tolerant offspring of 62 type 2 diabetic probands,
underwent an OGTT with measurements of plasma glucose, serum insulin, and serum C
peptide during the test. Thirty-three heterozygous carriers of the Ala/Val
variant were identified, whereas no subjects had the variant in its homozygous
form. Ala/Val carriers had a 20% reduction in serum C peptide at 30 min during
the OGTT (1225+/-636 vs. 1507+/-624 pmol/L; P=0.02) compared to wild-type
carriers. No significant differences in serum insulin levels during the OGTT were
observed between carriers of the variant and Ala/Ala homozygotes. In conclusion, 
among Danish glucose-tolerant first degree relatives of type 2 diabetic patients 
the Ala/Val98 polymorphism of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene is
associated with a decreased serum C-peptide secretion during an OGTT. This
finding confirms our previously reported observation of the functional importance
of the variant to insulin secretion during an OGTT among middle-aged healthy
subjects.

PMID: 9851800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Acta Diabetol. 1998 Oct;35(3):150-3.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
in the Japanese population.

Babaya N(1), Ikegami H, Kawaguchi Y, Fujisawa T, Nakagawa Y, Hamada Y, Hotta M,
Ueda H, Shintani M, Nojima K, Kawabata Y, Ono M, Yamada K, Shen GQ, Fukuda M,
Ogihara T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, Suita,
Japan.

Recently, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha(HNF-1alpha, which is encoded by the
TCF1 gene) mutations were reported in a subset of patients with maturity onset
diabetes of the young (MODY3). We studied the contribution of TCF1 to genetic
susceptibility to common non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (type 2) in
Japanese subjects by investigating allelic association with type 2 diabetes use
of three markers. We also studied the frequency of the G191D mutation, the only
mutation of TCF1 reported so far in late-onset type 2 diabetes. A total of 356
subjects were studied. There were no significant differences in allele frequency 
of the three markers between patients with type 2 diabetes and control subjects. 
A G191D mutation was not found in the subjects studied, giving a frequency of
less than 0.4% in common type 2 diabetes. The lack of association of type 2
diabetes with three markers in and near TCF1 suggests that mutations in TCF1
derived from a limited number of founders are not a major cause of common type 2 
diabetes even in the genetically homogeneous Japanese population. The data also
indicate that the G191D mutation in TCF1 plays little, if any, role in
susceptibility to common type 2 diabetes in the Japanese.

PMID: 9840451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. DNA Cell Biol. 1998 Nov;17(11):967-74.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha is an accessory factor required for activation
of glucose-6-phosphatase gene transcription by glucocorticoids.

Lin B(1), Morris DW, Chou JY.

Author information: 
(1)Heritable Disorders Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Deficiency of glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase), a key enzyme in glucose
homeostasis, causes glycogen storage disease type 1a (GSD-1a), also know as von
Gierke disease. Expression of the G6Pase gene is regulated by multiple hormones, 
including glucocorticoids. The synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone increased
G6Pase mRNA abundance and gene transcription in H4-IIE hepatoma cells. Transient 
transfection assays demonstrated that the G6Pase promoter was active in H4-IIE
cells only in the presence of dexamethasone. The minimal G6Pase promoter was
contained within nucleotides -234/+3, which has two putative glucocorticoid
response elements (GREs) at nucleotides -178/-164 (site 1) and -154/-140 (site
2). Electromobility shift and transient transfection assays showed that only GRE 
site 1 was required for glucocorticoid-activated transcription from the G6Pase
promoter. Deletion analysis demonstrated that the DNA elements absolutely
essential for glucocorticoid-stimulated transcription from the G6Pase promoter
were contained within nucleotides -234/-212, encompassing binding motifs for
hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) 1 (-226/-212) and 4 (-231/-220).
Electromobility shift and cotransfection assays showed that HNF1alpha bound to
its cognate site and mediated transcription activation of the G6Pase gene by
glucocorticoids.

PMID: 9839806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Diabetes Care. 1998 Dec;21(12):2144-8.

Liver and kidney function in Japanese patients with maturity-onset diabetes of
the young.

Iwasaki N(1), Ogata M, Tomonaga O, Kuroki H, Kasahara T, Yano N, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Heterozygous mutations in the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta, and HNF-4 alpha are associated with
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and are believed to cause this form
of diabetes by impairing pancreatic beta-cell function. The HNFs also play a
central role in the tissue-specific regulation of gene expression in liver and
kidney, suggesting that patients with MODY due to a mutation in HNF-1 alpha,
HNF-1 beta, or HNF-4 alpha may exhibit abnormal liver or kidney function. Here,
we have examined liver and kidney function in a series of Japanese patients with 
HNF-4 alpha/MODY1, HNF-1 alpha/MODY3, and HNF-1 beta/MODY5 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Clinical and biochemical data were obtained from
Japanese subjects with HNF-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta, and HNF-4 alpha diabetes. The
clinical data included information on BMI, age at diagnosis, current treatment,
and the presence and nature of any complications. The biochemical studies
examined liver and kidney function and included measures of alanine and aspartate
aminotransferase, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine,
uric acid, total and HDL cholesterol, triglycerides, and 17 serum proteins.
RESULTS: The present age and duration of diabetes were similar in patients with
HNF-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta, or HNF-4 alpha diabetes, as was the age at diagnosis of 
diabetes in the youngest generation. All subjects were lean. Of the subjects with
HNF-1 alpha and HNF-4 alpha diabetes, 50% were treated with insulin, as were all 
three subjects with HNF-1 beta diabetes. Retinopathy was present in patients with
each form of diabetes. None of the subjects with HNF-4 alpha diabetes had
evidence of nephropathy, whereas 36% of the patients with HNF-1 alpha diabetes
and 100% of those with HNF-1 beta diabetes showed diminished kidney function. The
three subjects with HNF-1 beta diabetes also had abnormally high serum
creatinine, uric acid, and blood urea nitrogen levels, which are consistent with 
impaired kidney function, and one of seven subjects with HNF-1 alpha diabetes had
a mild elevation in creatinine and blood urea nitrogen levels. These values were 
within the normal range in the three patients with HNF-4 alpha diabetes. Although
the HNFs play a role in regulating the expression of the genes for most, if not
all, serum proteins, there was no decrease in the levels of any of the 17 serum
proteins examined, and most were within or slightly above the normal range.
Lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] levels were elevated in the three patients with HNF-4
alpha diabetes and in one patient with HNF-1 beta diabetes, and in a second
patient with HNF-1 beta diabetes, Lp(a) was at the upper limit of normal.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that as in white patients, MODY resulting from 
mutations in the HNF-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta, and HNF-4 alpha genes in Japanese
patients may be a severe disease similar to classic type 2 diabetes. In addition,
they suggest that patients with HNF-1 beta diabetes may be characterized by
diminished kidney function and perhaps abnormal liver function. Further studies
are needed to determine whether tests of liver and kidney function will be useful
in the diagnosis and subclassification of MODY.

PMID: 9839108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Dec 15;26(24):5602-8.

The embryonic expression of the tissue-specific transcription factor HNF1alpha in
Xenopus: rapid activation by HNF4 and delayed induction by mesoderm inducers.

Nastos A(1), Pogge von Strandmann E, Weber H, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Essen, Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung),
Hufelandstrasse 55, D-45122 Essen, Germany.

The tissue-specific transcription factor HNF1alpha is expressed in kidney, liver,
intestine and stomach of Xenopus. We show that the HNF1alpha gene is
transcriptionally activated at the onset of zygotic gene transcription and that
this transcription is maintained throughout development. Ectodermal explants of
blastulae (animal caps) express HNF1alpha mRNA upon stimulation with the mesoderm
inducers activin A and BMP4 as well as on overexpression of Smad2 and Smad1, the 
corresponding members of the intracellular TGF-beta signal transducers,
respectively. Beside these factors that mediate their response through
serine/threonine kinase receptors, bFGF, which acts via tyrosine kinase
receptors, leads to HNF1alpha expression, too. These embryonic inducers result in
a delayed appearance of HNF1alpha mRNA, excluding a direct activation of
HNF1alpha. In contrast, the maternally expressed nuclear receptors HNF4alpha and 
HNF4beta activate the initial HNF1alpha transcription, since overexpression of
HNF4 leads to a rapid expression of HNF1alpha mRNA in animal caps. Similarly, in 
entire neurulae HNF4 overexpression results in increased HNF1alpha transcription.
Therefore, we assume that the initial activation is dependent on maternal
HNF4alpha and HNF4beta transcription factors whereas HNF1alpha induction by
growth factors reflects the property of these factors to induce the
differentiation of mesodermal and entodermal cell types expressing HNF1alpha.

PMCID: PMC148025
PMID: 9837989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. EMBO J. 1998 Nov 16;17(22):6701-13.

Dominant-negative suppression of HNF-1alpha function results in defective insulin
gene transcription and impaired metabolism-secretion coupling in a pancreatic
beta-cell line.

Wang H(1), Maechler P, Hagenfeldt KA, Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Division de Biochimie Clinique et de Diabétologie Expérimentale, Centre
Médical Universitaire, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) have been linked
to subtype 3 of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3), which is
characterized by a primary defect in insulin secretion. The role of HNF-1alpha in
the regulation of pancreatic beta-cell function was investigated. Gene
manipulation allowed graded overexpression of HNF-1alpha and controlled
dominant-negative suppression of HNF-1alpha function in insulinoma INS-1 cells.
We show that HNF-1alpha is essential for insulin gene transcription, as
demonstrated by a pronounced decrease in insulin mRNA expression and in insulin
promoter activity under dominant-negative conditions. The expression of genes
involved in glucose transport and metabolism including glucose transporter-2 and 
L-type pyruvate kinase is also regulated by HNF-1alpha. Loss of HNF-1alpha
function leads to severe defects in insulin secretory responses to glucose and
leucine, resulting from impaired glucose utilization and mitochondrial oxidation.
The nutrient-evoked ATP production and subsequent changes in plasma membrane
potential and intracellular Ca2+ were diminished by suppression of HNF-1alpha
function. These results suggest that HNF-1alpha function is essential for
maintaining insulin storage and nutrient-evoked release. The defective
mitochondrial oxidation of metabolic substrates causes impaired insulin
secretion, indicating a molecular basis for the diabetic phenotype of MODY3
patients.

PMCID: PMC1171015
PMID: 9822613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998 Nov;83(11):3992-5.

The effect of two frequent amino acid variants of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha gene on estimates of the pancreatic beta-cell function in Caucasian
glucose-tolerant first-degree relatives of type 2 diabetic patients.

Urhammer SA(1), Møller AM, Nyholm B, Ekstrøm CT, Eiberg H, Clausen JO, Hansen T, 
Pedersen O, Schmitz O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark.

The objective of the present study was to investigate whether the frequent amino 
acid polymorphisms, Ile/Leu27 and Ser/Asn487, of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha gene were associated with alterations in glucose-induced serum
C-peptide and serum insulin responses among glucose-tolerant first-degree
relatives of type 2 diabetic patients. The study comprised 2 independent Danish
cohorts. Among 74 unrelated type 2 diabetic relatives, 12 homozygous carriers of 
the Ile/Leu27 polymorphism had a 32% decrease in the 30-min serum C-peptide level
(P = 0.01), as well as a 39% decrease in the 30-min serum insulin level (P =
0.02) during an oral glucose tolerance test. Ten homozygous carriers of the
Ile/Leu27 variant did, however, not differ from wild-type carriers, with respect 
to the acute circulating insulin and serum C-peptide responses during an i.v.
glucose tolerance test in the same study cohort. In a larger (more than 3-fold)
study group of 230 glucose tolerant offspring of 62 type 2 diabetic probands, 33 
homozygous carriers of the Ile/Leu27 variant did not differ, with respect to
either serum insulin and serum C-peptide levels during an oral glucose tolerance 
test or acute serum insulin and serum C-peptide responses during an i.v. glucose 
tolerance test. We therefore consider the former positive finding as a
statistical type I error. There were no differences in the above mentioned
variables between carriers of the Ser/Asn487 polymorphism and wild-type carriers 
within any of the 2 study populations. Nor did carriers of combined genotypes,
i.e. carriers of both the Ile/Leu27 and the Ser/Asn487 variants, show any
associations with the examined variables. In conclusion, the Ile/Leu27 and Ser/
Asn487 polymorphisms of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene have apparently
no major impact on the pancreatic beta-cell function, after an oral and i.v.
glucose challenge, in Caucasian first-degree relatives of type 2 diabetic
patients.

PMID: 9814481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Nov 9;252(1):269-73.

Stable transfection of retinoblastoma gene promotes contact inhibition of cell
growth and hepatocyte nuclear factor-1-mediated transcription in human hepatoma
cells.

Awazu S(1), Nakata K, Hida D, Sakamoto T, Nagata K, Ishii N, Kanematsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Nagasaki University School of Medicine, Nagasaki,
852-8501, Japan.

The retinoblastoma (Rb) gene is a key factor involved in cell cycle regulation.
In the present study, alterations in cell growth and expression of the
alpha-fetoprotein and albumin genes by the stable transfection of the Rb gene
were analyzed in HuH-7 human hepatoma cells. Cell growth was almost similar in
the Rb gene-transfected and nontransfected cells at the sparse cell density.
However, under a confluent condition, contact inhibition of cell growth was
stimulated by the Rb gene transfection. By Northern blotting, the levels of the
alpha-fetoprotein and albumin mRNA as well as the transcript of hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), a liver-specific transcriptional factor regulating both
genes, were apparently elevated in the Rb gene-transfected cells, compared with
the nontransfected cells. These results suggest that the Rb gene transduction
promotes contact growth inhibition in conjunction with the enhanced
HNF-1-mediated liver-specific gene transcription in human hepatoma cells.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9813181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Biochem J. 1998 Nov 15;336 ( Pt 1):115-23.

Two HNF-1 binding sites govern the glucose repression of the human
sucrase-isomaltase promoter.

Rodolosse A(1), Carriere V, Rousset M, Lacasa M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U178, Unité de Recherches sur la Différenciation Cellulaire
Intestinale, 16 avenue Paul-Vaillant-Couturier, 94807 Villejuif cedex, France.

We have previously shown, using the Caco-2 clone PF11, that glucose represses
transcription of the human sucrase-isomaltase (SI) gene and that the -370/+30
fragment of the SI gene conferred glucose-regulated expression on a heterologous 
gene. Different fragments beginning at the already characterized SI footprint
(SIF) 1 (-53/-37), SIFR (-153/-129) or SIF3 (-176/-156) elements [Wu, Chen,
Forslund and Traber (1994) J. Biol. Chem. 269, 17080-17085] were tested, in
comparison with the -370/+30 fragment, for their capacity to inhibit reporter
gene expression under high-glucose (25 mM) conditions. Unlike SIF1 and SIFR, the 
addition of the HNF (hepatocyte nuclear factor)-1-binding element SIF3 to the
promoter fragment was required for repression under high-glucose conditions. This
effect was enhanced when the SI promoter was extended to position -370,
indicating that the -370/-176 region contains elements that may co-operate with
SIF3 to increase the metabolic control of the SI promoter. We have characterized 
an additional HNF-1-binding site near to and upstream from SIF3; SIF4. By
mutagenesis of the three HNF-1-binding elements we show that the two distal
HNF-1-recognition sites are the most important for the glucose regulation of the 
SI gene. Moreover, this glucose regulation was abolished in PF11 cells
overexpressing vHNF-1C (variant HNF, an isoform of the HNF-1 family). We thus
propose that the differential binding of HNF-1-family proteins to their DNA
targets on the SI promoter constitutes the molecular mechanism that controls the 
glucose regulation of the SI gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC1219849
PMID: 9806892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Int Immunol. 1998 Oct;10(10):1519-27.

Expression of Tcf-1 mRNA and surface TCR-CD3 complexes are reduced during
apoptosis of T cells.

Jeon SH(1), Jeong S, Lee C, Kim JK, Kim YS, Chung HY, Park SD, Seong RH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Biology and Genetics and Department of Molecular
Biology, Seoul National University, Korea.

When a T cell hybridoma, 70.7, was treated with a Ca2+ ionophore (A23187),
apoptotic cell death was induced. Interestingly, we observed that the expression 
of Tcf-1, a T cell-specific transcription factor, mRNA was reduced by
approximately 5-fold in the A23187-treated apoptotic cells compared to an
ethanol-treated control. The hybridoma cells, however, did not display such a
reduced expression of Tcf-1 mRNA upon treatment with buthionine sulfoxide, which 
is known to induce a necrosis-like cell death. When another T cell hybridoma,
KMIs-8.3.5, was treated with A23187 and phorbol myristate acetate, which leads to
activation-induced apoptosis, Tcf-1 expression was again greatly reduced.
However, a mutant line (KCIT1-8.5) derived from KMIs-8.3.5, which produces IL-2
upon activation and is resistant to apoptosis, did not show such reduction in
Tcf-1 expression. We also showed that the reduced expression level of CD3epsilon 
mRNA and surface TCR-CD3 complex in apoptotic T cells is caused by the reduced
expression of Tcf-1. When 70.7 cells were transfected with a plasmid DNA
pSVtcf-1, in which Tcf-1 gene expression is driven by the SV40 promoter, such
reduction of the Tcf-1 mRNA and the surface expression of the TCR-CD3 complex
were not observed upon apoptosis induction. Our results suggest that the reduced 
expression of Tcf-1 is specific for the apoptotic, but not for the activating,
process of T cells and is also responsible for the reduced surface expression of 
the TCR-CD3 in apoptotic T cells.

PMID: 9796919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Diabet Med. 1998 Oct;15(10):816-20.

A low renal threshold for glucose in diabetic patients with a mutation in the
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene.

Menzel R(1), Kaisaki PJ, Rjasanowski I, Heinke P, Kerner W, Menzel S.

Author information: 
(1)Klinikum Karlsburg, Germany. ruth.menzel@greifswald.netsurf.de

One form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young, Type 3 (MODY3), results from
mutations in the gene coding for hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha), a
transcription factor first described in the liver. MODY3 is characterized by a
defective glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Earlier observations of
glycosuria with normal blood glucose levels in some MODY families suggest an
additional renal manifestation of the respective genetic defect. We measured the 
renal threshold for glucose in five diabetic carriers of a missense mutation (Arg
272 His) in HNF-1alpha and, for comparison, in eight Type 1 diabetic patients,
applying a non-invasive protocol of frequent parallel blood and urine sampling
during a slow shift in blood glucose levels. We found that the mean renal
threshold for glucose was lowered in the HNF-1alpha diabetic patients compared to
those with Type 1 diabetes (6.5 +/- 0.9 mmol l(-1) vs 10.7 +/- 0.5 mmol l(-1); p 
< 0.01). This lowered glucose threshold might be an indication of an
extra-pancreatic effect of HNF-1alpha gene mutations in humans. Defects in
HNF-1alpha may lead to an altered tubular glucose reabsorption, possibly due to
decreased expression of the renal glucose transporter proteins involved in
reabsorption of glucose from the urine.

PMID: 9796880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Immunol. 1998 Nov 1;161(9):4591-8.

A mouse carrying genetic defect in the choice between T and B lymphocytes.

Tokoro Y(1), Sugawara T, Yaginuma H, Nakauchi H, Terhorst C, Wang B, Takahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University of Tsukuba, Tennodai, Japan.

Transgenic mice with human CD3epsilon gene have been shown to exhibit early
arrest of T cell development in the thymus. The present study shows that, instead
of T cells, B cells are generated in the thymus of a line, tg epsilon26, of the
human CD3epsilon transgenic mice. The accumulation of mature B cells in the
thymus was found only in tg epsilon26 mice, not in other human CD3epsilon
transgenic mouse lines or other T cell-deficient mice, including CD3-epsilon
knockout mice and TCR-beta/TCR-delta double knockout mice. Hanging drop-mediated 
transfer into 2-deoxyguanosine-treated thymus lobes showed that lymphoid
progenitor cells rather than thymus stromal cells were responsible for abnormal B
cell development in tg epsilon26 thymus, and that tg epsilon26 fetal liver cells 
were destined to become B cells in normal thymus even in the presence of normal
progenitor cells undergoing T cell development. These results indicate that
lymphoid progenitor cells in tg epsilon26 mice are genetically defective in
thymic choice between T cells and B cells, generating B cells even in normal
thymus environment. Interestingly, tg epsilon26 thymocytes expressed GATA-3 and
TCF-1, but not LEF-1 and PEBP-2alpha, among T cell-specific transcription factors
that are involved in early T cell development, indicating that GATA-3 and TCF-1
expressed during thymocyte development do not necessarily determine the cell fate
into T cell lineage. Thus, tg epsilon26 mice provide a novel mouse model in that 
lineage choice between T and B lymphocytes is genetically defective.

PMID: 9794386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. J Biol Chem. 1998 Nov 6;273(45):30024-32.

Retinoic acid mediates down-regulation of the alpha-fetoprotein gene through
decreased expression of hepatocyte nuclear factors.

Magee TR(1), Cai Y, El-Houseini ME, Locker J, Wan YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California
90509, USA.

alpha-Fetoprotein (AFP), a protein highly induced during fetal liver development,
is down-regulated by retinoids in the human hepatoma cell line Hep3B, in contrast
to up-regulation observed in other cell types. Previously, we have documented
that such up-regulation involves direct effects through cis-retinoid X
receptor-binding sites in the AFP enhancer. In this report, we show a distinctive
effect of all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) in Hep3B cells. RA caused a marked
decrease in AFP transcripts. Deletion analysis of the upstream regulatory region 
of the AFP gene revealed that cis-acting sites required for down-regulation
resided near the promoter. Gel mobility shift assays for factors binding to key
elements in the AFP promoter region demonstrated that hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF) 1 binding was diminished in nuclear extracts from RA-treated cells. In
addition, HNF4, which is not known to bind to the AFP promoter but does regulate 
HNF1, was also diminished. The levels of HNF1 and HNF4 mRNA were also decreased
following RA treatment. AFP promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase transient 
transfection assays demonstrated that the level of HNF1 had a direct impact on
basal transcription as well as RA-mediated down-regulation of the AFP gene, and
that co-transfection of HNF1 and HNF4, but not transfection of either factor
alone, reversed the RA-mediated inhibition. Taken together these data point to an
interaction among the RA, HNF1, and HNF4 signals, which is reflected in decreased
expression of AFP.

PMID: 9792724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Diabetes. 1998 Nov;47(11):1793-6.

Novel susceptibility gene for late-onset NIDDM is localized to human chromosome
12q.

Shaw JT(1), Lovelock PK, Kesting JB, Cardinal J, Duffy D, Wainwright B, Cameron
DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Princess Alexandra Hospital,
Brisbane, Queensland, Australia.

NIDDM has a substantial genetic component, but the nature of the genetic
susceptibility is largely unknown. Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is
a genetically heterogeneous monogenic form of NIDDM characterized by an early age
of onset and autosomal dominant inheritance, and linkage studies have identified 
genes that are mutated in different MODY pedigrees on chromosome 20 (MODY1 locus,
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha [HNF-4alpha] gene), chromosome 7 (MODY2 locus,
glucokinase gene), and chromosome 12 (MODY3 locus, HNF-1alpha gene). We studied
an extended pedigree in which multiple members are affected by late-onset NIDDM
associated with insulin resistance and performed linkage analysis with four
microsatellite markers in the MODY3 region of chromosome 12q. We found
significant evidence for linkage between NIDDM and the MODY3 locus (logarithm of 
odds score 3.65 at theta = 0.008 telomeric to marker D12S321), but sequencing of 
the 10 exons and promoter of HNF-1alpha did not identify any causative mutation
in this gene. Our results indicate that the region of chromosome 12q close to
MODY3 harbors a novel susceptibility gene or genes for NIDDM.

PMID: 9792550  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Nihon Rinsho. 1998 Sep;56(9):2419-26.

[Mutations in the genes of the HNF-family cause maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY)].

[Article in Japanese]

Takeda J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Gunma University.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) characterized by an early age of 
onset, often in childhood or adolescence and usually < 25 years of age, and
autosomal dominant inheritance. Clinical characterization of patients with MODY
indicates that impaired insulin secretion is the primary defect responsible for
the hyperglycemia in these patients. Genetic studies have thus far identified
five MODY susceptibility genes, four of which encode transcription factors; HNF
(hepatocyte nuclear factor)-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta, HNF-4 alpha, and IPF1. The
association of mutations in the genes for these transcription factors with
early-onset familial diabetes indicates the importance of the HNF-regulatory
network in determining pancreatic beta-cell function.

PMID: 9780731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Immunol. 1998 Oct 15;161(8):3984-91.

Critical involvement of Tcf-1 in expansion of thymocytes.

Schilham MW(1), Wilson A, Moerer P, Benaissa-Trouw BJ, Cumano A, Clevers HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Leiden University Medical Center, The Netherlands.
mschilham@kindjc.azl.nl

T cell maturation in Tcf-1(-/-) mice deteriorates progressively and halts
completely around 6 mo of age. During fetal development thymocyte subpopulations 
seem normal, although total cell numbers are lower. By 4 to 6 wk of age, obvious 
blockades in the differentiation of CD4- 8- thymocytes are observed at two
distinct stages (CD44+ 25+ and CD44- 25-), both of which are normally
characterized by extensive proliferation. This lack of thymocyte expansion and/or
differentiation was also observed when Tcf-1(-/-) progenitor cells from the
aorta-gonad-mesonephros region (embryonic day 11.5), fetal liver (embryonic day
12.5/14.5), and fetal bone marrow (embryonic day 18.5) were allowed to
differentiate in normal thymic lobes (fetal thymic organ cultures) or were
injected intrathymically into normal recipients. Despite these apparent defects
in thymocyte differentiation and expansion, adult Tcf-1(-/-) mice are
immunocompetent, as they generate virus neutralizing Abs at normal titers.
Furthermore, their peripheral T cells have an activated phenotype (increased CD44
and decreased CD62L expression) and proliferate normally in response to Ag or
mitogen, suggesting that these cells may have arisen from the early wave of
development during embryogenesis and are either long lived or have subsequently
been maintained by peripheral expansion. As Tcf-1 is a critical component in the 
Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway, these data suggest that Wnt-like factors play
a role in the expansion of double-negative thymocytes.

PMID: 9780167  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. J Biol Chem. 1998 Oct 23;273(43):28408-18.

Vitamin D-binding protein gene transcription is regulated by the relative
abundance of hepatocyte nuclear factors 1alpha and 1beta.

Song YH(1), Ray K, Liebhaber SA, Cooke NE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Genetics, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Vitamin D-binding protein (DBP)/Gc-globulin, the major carrier of vitamin D and
its metabolites in blood, is synthesized predominantly in the liver in a
developmentally regulated fashion. By transient transfection analysis, we
identified three regions in the 5'-flanking region of the rat DBP gene, segments 
F-2, B, and A, that contain tissue-specific transcriptional determinants. Gel
mobility shift and DNase I footprinting analyses showed that all three regions
contained binding sites for the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1), a
transcriptional regulator composed of HNF1alpha and HNF1beta hetero- and
homodimers. The activity of the most proximal segment A (coordinates -141 to -43)
was DBP promoter-specific, position-dependent, and positively controlled by
HNF1alpha. In contrast, the two more distal determinants (segments F-2 and B;
coordinates -1844 to -1621 and -254 to -140, respectively) acted as classical
enhancers in transfected hepatocyte-derived HepG2 cells; their activities were
promoter- and orientation-independent, and disruption of their respective
HNF1-binding sites resulted in marked loss of DBP gene expression. Remarkably,
the activities of these two distal elements depended upon the relative levels of 
HNF1alpha and HNF1beta; HNF1alpha had a major stimulatory effect, whereas
HNF1beta acted as a trans-dominant inhibitor of HNF1alpha-mediated enhancer
activity. These results suggested that the net expression of the DBP gene
reflected a balance between the two major HNF1 species; the relative abundance of
HNF1alpha and HNF1beta proteins in a cell may thus play a critical role in
determining the pattern of gene expression.

PMID: 9774468  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Diabetologia. 1998 Sep;41(9):1017-23.

Mutation screening in 18 Caucasian families suggest the existence of other MODY
genes.

Chèvre JC(1), Hani EH, Boutin P, Vaxillaire M, Blanché H, Vionnet N, Pardini VC, 
Timsit J, Larger E, Charpentier G, Beckers D, Maes M, Bellanné-Chantelot C, Velho
G, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie de Lille, CNRS EP-10, France.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a heterogeneous subtype of
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus characterised by early onset, autosomal
dominant inheritance and a primary defect in insulin secretion. To date five MODY
genes have been identified: hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha
(HNF-4alpha/MODY1/TCF14) on chromosome 20q, glucokinase (GCK/MODY2) on chromosome
7p, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1alpha/MODY3/TCF1) on chromosome 12q, 
insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF1/MODY4) on chromosome 13q and hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 beta (HNF-1beta/MODY5/TCF2) on chromosome 17cen-q. We have screened the 
HNF-4alpha, HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta genes in members of 18 MODY kindreds who
tested negative for glucokinase mutations. Five missense (G31D, R159W, A161T,
R200W, R271W), one substitution at the splice donor site of intron 5 (IVS5nt +
2T-->A) and one deletion mutation (P379fsdelT) were found in the HNF-1alpha gene,
but no MODY-associated mutations were found in the HNF-4alpha and HNF-1beta
genes. Of 67 French MODY families that we have now studied, 42 (63%) have
mutations in the glucokinase gene, 14 (21%) have mutations in the HNF-1alpha
gene, and 11 (16%) have no mutations in the HNF-4alpha, IPF1 and HNF-1beta genes.
Eleven families do not have mutations in the five known MODY genes suggesting
that there is at least one additional locus that can cause MODY.

PMID: 9754819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 18;273(38):24457-64.

Defective pancreatic beta-cell glycolytic signaling in hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha-deficient mice.

Dukes ID(1), Sreenan S, Roe MW, Levisetti M, Zhou YP, Ostrega D, Bell GI,
Pontoglio M, Yaniv M, Philipson L, Polonsky KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Endocrinology, Glaxo Wellcome Research Institute,
Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene cause
maturity onset diabetes of the young type 3, a form of type 2 diabetes mellitus. 
In mice lacking the HNF-1alpha gene, insulin secretion and intracellular calcium 
([Ca2+]i) responses were impaired following stimulation with nutrient
secretagogues such as glucose and glyceraldehyde but normal with non-nutrient
stimuli such as potassium chloride. Patch clamp recordings revealed ATP-sensitive
K+ currents (KATP) in beta-cells that were insensitive to suppression by glucose 
but normally sensitive to ATP. Exposure to mitochondrial substrates suppressed
KATP, elevated [Ca2+]i, and corrected the insulin secretion defect. NAD(P)H
responses to glucose were substantially reduced, and inhibitors of glycolytic
NADH generation reproduced the mutant phenotype in normal islets. Flux of glucose
through glycolysis in islets from mutant mice was reduced, as a result of which
ATP generation in response to glucose was impaired. We conclude that hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1alpha diabetes results from defective beta-cell glycolytic
signaling, which is potentially correctable using substrates that bypass the
defect.

PMID: 9733737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Diabetes Care. 1998 Sep;21(9):1569-71.

A novel missense mutation in the homeodomain of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha/maturity-onset diabetes of the young 3 in a Japanese early-onset
type 2 diabetic patient and time-course of glucose-stimulated insulin secretion.

Awata T, Kurihara S, Inoue K, Inoue I, Takei S, Ishii C, Negishi K, Namai K,
Kanazawa Y, Kuzuya T, Katayama S.

PMID: 9727913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Diabetes. 1998 Sep;47(9):1459-63.

Glucose utilization and production in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of
the young caused by a mutation of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene.

Surmely JF(1), Guenat E, Philippe J, Dussoix P, Schneiter P, Temler E, Vaxillaire
M, Froguel P, Jéquier E, Tappy L.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Physiology, University of Lausanne, Switzerland.

Mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha gene cause impaired
insulin secretion and hyperglycemia in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of
the young (MODY)3. Whether these mutations also affect glucose metabolism in
tissues other than the beta-cell has not yet been documented. We therefore
assessed, in five MODY3 patients and a dozen healthy control subjects, insulin
secretion, oxidative and nonoxidative glucose disposal, and glucose production
during a two-step hyperglycemic clamp and a euglycemic hyperinsulinemic (0.4 mU x
kg(-1) x min(-1)) clamp. Compared with healthy control subjects, MODY3 patients
had higher fasting plasma glucose (+100%) but similar rates of fasting glucose
production and oxidation. Both the early and late phases of insulin secretion
were virtually abolished during the hyperglycemic clamp, and glucose production
was suppressed by only 43% in MODY3 patients vs. 100% in healthy control
subjects. The rate of glucose infusion required to produce a 5 mmol/l increase
above basal glycemia was reduced by 30%, net nonoxidative glucose disposal (which
is equal to net glycogen deposition) was inhibited by 39%, and net carbohydrate
oxidation during hyperglycemia was 25% lower in MODY3 patients compared with
control subjects. Insulin-stimulated glucose utilization and oxidation measured
during the hyperinsulinemic clamp (at approximately 200 pmol/l insulin) were
identical in MODY3 patients and in healthy control subjects, indicating that
peripheral insulin sensitivity was not altered. Suppression of endogenous glucose
production was, however, mildly impaired. It is concluded that MODY3 patients
have severely depressed glucose-induced insulin secretion. The development of
hyperglycemia in these patients appears to be caused by a decreased stimulation
of glucose utilization, oxidation, and nonoxidative glucose disposal as well as
by a blunted suppression of endogenous glucose output. These phenomena are
essentially secondary to insulinopenia, whereas insulin sensitivity remains
intact.

PMID: 9726235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. J Biol Chem. 1998 Aug 21;273(34):21856-66.

Tissue-specific and androgen-repressible regulation of the rat
dehydroepiandrosterone sulfotransferase gene promoter.

Song CS(1), Jung MH, Kim SC, Hassan T, Roy AK, Chatterjee B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Structural Biology, The University of Texas Health 
Science Center at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78284-7762, USA.

Dehydroepiandrosterone sulfotransferase (Std) catalyzes sulfonation of androgenic
steroids and certain aromatic procarcinogens. In rats, this enzyme is selectively
expressed in the liver, and its expression is strongly repressed by androgens.
DNase I footprinting and electrophoretic mobility shift analyses revealed two
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF1), three CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP),
and one consensus palindromic thyroid hormone response elements within the first 
215 base pairs (bp) of the promoter sequence of rat Std. This promoter is
normally inactive in fibroblast-derived NIH 3T3 cells. However, overexpression of
HNF1 and C/EBP resulted in synergistic activation of the Std promoter in this
cell type, indicating essential roles of these two trans-regulators in
liver-selective expression of the rat Std gene. On the other hand, point
mutations at any one of five cis elements proximal to the -215 bp region markedly
reduced reporter gene expression, suggesting that all of these sites are
important for overall promoter function. Androgenic repression of the Std gene in
rat liver can be recapitulated in androgen receptor (AR)-negative HepG2 hepatoma 
cells after cotransfection with an AR expression plasmid. Functional assay of a
nested set of 5'-deleted promoters mapped the negative androgen response region
between positions -235 and -310. Antibody supershift and oligonucleotide
competition identified three OCT-1 and two C/EBP elements between bp -231 and
-292. An additional OCT-1 site was found to overlap with a C/EBP element at the
-262/-252 position. Mutational inactivation of any one of five cis elements
within the -231/-292 region abolished negative androgen response. However, none
of these cis elements showed DNase I protection by recombinant AR in footprinting
assay, suggesting the absence of a direct AR-DNA interaction. Thus, these studies
on rat Std promoter function indicate that (i) HNF1 and C/EBP are responsible for
liver specificity of the rat Std gene; (ii) androgenic repression of the gene
requires the presence of all of the OCT-1 and C/EBP elements between positions
-231 and -292; and (iii) AR may exert its negative regulatory effect indirectly
through transcriptional interference of OCT-1 and C/EBP rather than through a
direct DNA-AR interaction.

PMID: 9705324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Diabetes. 1998 Aug;47(8):1354-5.

Frameshift mutation, A263fsinsGG, in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1beta gene
associated with diabetes and renal dysfunction.

Nishigori H(1), Yamada S, Kohama T, Tomura H, Sho K, Horikawa Y, Bell GI,
Takeuchi T, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Recognition, 
Gunma University School of Medicine, Gunma University, Maebashi, Japan.

PMID: 9703339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Diabetes. 1998 Aug;47(8):1231-5.

Mutation P291fsinsC in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha 
is dominant negative.

Yamagata K(1), Yang Q, Yamamoto K, Iwahashi H, Miyagawa J, Okita K, Yoshiuchi I, 
Miyazaki J, Noguchi T, Nakajima H, Namba M, Hanafusa T, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Second Department of Internal Medicine, Osaka University Medical School,
Suita, Japan. kazu@imed2.med.osaka-u.ac.jp

The type 3 form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3) results from
mutations in the gene encoding the transcription factor, hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha). The mechanism by which mutations in only one allele
of the HNF-1alpha gene impair pancreatic beta-cell function is unclear. The
functional form of HNF-1alpha is a dimer--either a homodimer or a heterodimer
with the structurally related protein HNF-1beta--that binds to and activates
transcription of the genes whose expression it regulates. HNF-1alpha is composed 
of three functional domains: an amino-terminal dimerization domain (amino acids
1-32), a DNA-binding domain with POU-like and homeodomain-like motifs (amino
acids 150-280), and a COOH-terminal transactivation domain (amino acids 281-631).
Because the dimerization domain is intact in many of the mutant forms of
HNF-1alpha found in MODY subjects, these mutant proteins may impair pancreatic
beta-cell function by forming nonproductive dimers with wild-type protein,
thereby inhibiting its activity; that is, they are dominant-negative mutations.
This hypothesis was tested by comparing the functional properties of the
frameshift mutation P291fsinsC, the most common mutation identified to date in
MODY3 patients, and wild-type HNF-1alpha. P291fsinsC-HNF-1alpha showed no
transcriptional transactivation activity in HeLa cells, which lack endogenous
HNF-1alpha. Overexpression of P291fsinsC-HNF-1alpha in MIN6 cells, a mouse
beta-cell line, resulted in an approximately 40% inhibition of the endogenous
HNF-1alpha activity in a dosage-dependent manner. Furthermore, heterodimer
formation between wild-type and P291fsinsC mutant proteins were observed by
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. These data suggest that the P291fsinsC
mutation in HNF-1alpha functions as a dominant-negative mutation. However, other 
mutations, such as those in the promoter region and dimerization domain, may
represent loss of function mutations. Thus mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene may
lead to beta-cell dysfunction by two different mechanisms.

PMID: 9703322  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Aug 4;95(16):9208-13.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 acts as an accessory factor to enhance the inhibitory
action of insulin on mouse glucose-6-phosphatase gene transcription.

Streeper RS(1), Eaton EM, Ebert DH, Chapman SC, Svitek CA, O'Brien RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biophysics, Vanderbilt University
Medical School, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.

Glucose-6-phosphatase catalyzes the terminal step in the gluconeogenic and
glycogenolytic pathways. Transcription of the gene encoding the
glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit (G6Pase) is stimulated by cAMP and
glucocorticoids whereas insulin strongly inhibits both this induction and basal
G6Pase gene transcription. Previously, we have demonstrated that the maximum
repression of basal G6Pase gene transcription by insulin requires two distinct
promoter regions, designated A (from -271 to -199) and B (from -198 to -159).
Region B contains an insulin response sequence because it can confer an
inhibitory effect of insulin on the expression of a heterologous fusion gene. By 
contrast, region A fails to mediate an insulin response in a heterologous
context, and the mutation of region B within an otherwise intact promoter almost 
completely abolishes the effect of insulin on basal G6Pase gene transcription.
Therefore, region A is acting as an accessory element to enhance the effect of
insulin, mediated through region B, on G6Pase gene transcription. Such an
arrangement is a common feature of cAMP and glucocorticoid-regulated genes but
has not been previously described for insulin. A combination of fusion gene and
protein-binding analyses revealed that the accessory factor binding region A is
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1. Thus, despite the usually antagonistic effects of
cAMP/glucocorticoids and insulin, all three agents are able to use the same
factor to enhance their action on gene transcription. The potential role of
G6Pase overexpression in the pathophysiology of MODY3 and 5, rare forms of
diabetes caused by hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 mutations, is discussed.

PMCID: PMC21317
PMID: 9689059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Science. 1998 Jul 31;281(5377):692-5.

Regulation of a transcription factor network required for differentiation and
metabolism.

Duncan SA(1), Navas MA, Dufort D, Rossant J, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Molecular Cell Biology and Metabolic Diseases, Rockefeller
University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) are a heterogeneous class of evolutionarily
conserved transcription factors that are required for cellular differentiation
and metabolism. Mutations in HNF-1alphaand HNF-4alpha genes impair insulin
secretion and cause type 2 diabetes. Regulation of HNF-4/HNF-1 expression by
HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta was studied in embryoid bodies in which one or both
HNF-3alpha or HNF-3beta alleles were inactivated. HNF-3beta positively regulated 
the expression of HNF-4alpha/HNF-1alpha and their downstream targets, implicating
a role in diabetes. HNF-3beta was also necessary for expression of HNF-3alpha. In
contrast, HNF-3alpha acts as a negative regulator of HNF-4alpha/HNF-1alpha
demonstrating that HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta have antagonistic transcriptional
regulatory functions in vivo. HNF-3alpha does not appear to act as a classic
biochemical repressor but rather exerts its negative effect by competing for
HNF-3 binding sites with the more efficient activator HNF-3beta. In addition, the
HNF-3alpha/HNF-3beta ratio is modulated by the presence of insulin, providing
evidence that the HNF network may have important roles in mediating the action of
insulin.

PMID: 9685261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. J Cell Sci. 1998 Aug;111 ( Pt 16):2411-21.

Phenotypic effects of the forced expression of HNF4 and HNF1alpha are conditioned
by properties of the recipient cell.

Bailly A(1), Späth G, Bender V, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, URA 1773 du CNRS, Institut Pasteur, 
75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.

Tagged versions of HNF4 or HNF1alpha cDNAs in expression vectors have been
introduced by transient and stable transfection into three cell lines of hepatic 
origin that all fail to express these two liver-enriched transcription factors
and hepatic functions. C2 and H5 cells are dedifferentiated rat hepatoma variants
and WIF12-E cells are human fibroblast-rat hepatoma hybrids with a reduced
complement of human chromosomes. Transfectants were analyzed for the expression
state of the endogenous genes coding for these transcription factors and for
hepatic functions. Each cell line showed a different response to the forced
expression of the transcription factors. In C2 cells, no measurable effect was
observed, either upon transitory or stable expression. H5 cells reexpressed the
endogenous HNF4 gene only upon transient HNF1alpha transfection, and the
endogenous HNF1alpha gene only in stable HNF4 transfectants. WIF12-E cells
responded to the forced transient or stable expression of either HNF1alpha or
HNF4 by cross-activation of the corresponding endogenous gene. In addition, the
stable transfectants reexpress HNF3alpha and C/EBPalpha, as well as all of the
hepatic functions examined. Hybrid cells similar to WIF12-E had previously been
observed to show pleiotropic reexpression of the hepatic phenotype in parallel
with loss of human chromosome 2. For the stable WIF12-E transfectants, it was
verified that reexpression of the hepatic phenotype was not due to loss of human 
chromosome 2. The demonstration of reciprocal cross-regulation between HNF4 and
HNF1alpha in transient as well as stable transfectants implies that direct
effects are involved.

PMID: 9683635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Jul 20;248(2):432-5.

Human white blood cells and hair follicles are good sources of mRNA for the
pterin carbinolamine dehydratase/dimerization cofactor of HNF1 for mutation
detection.

Lei XD(1), Kaufman S.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, 
Maryland, 20892, USA.

Pterin carbinolamine dehydratase/dimerization cofactor of HNF1 (PCD/DCoH) is a
protein that has a dual function. It is a pterin 4alpha-carbinolamine dehydratase
that is involved in the regeneration of the cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin during
the phenylalanine hydroxylase- catalyzed hydroxylation of phenylalanine. In
addition, it is the dimerization cofactor of HNF1 that is able to activate the
transcriptional activity of HNF1. Deficiencies in the gene for this dual
functional protein result in hyperphenylalaninemia. Here we report for the first 
time that the PCD/DCoH mRNA is present in human white blood cells and hair
follicles. Taking advantage of this finding, a sensitive, rapid and convenient
method for screening mutations occurring in the coding region of this gene has
been described.

Copyright 1998 Academic Press.

PMID: 9675155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Aug;18(8):4819-32.

Differential importin-alpha recognition and nuclear transport by nuclear
localization signals within the high-mobility-group DNA binding domains of
lymphoid enhancer factor 1 and T-cell factor 1.

Prieve MG(1), Guttridge KL, Munguia J, Waterman ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, University of California,
Irvine, Irvine, California 92697-4025, USA.

The transcription factor lymphoid enhancer factor 1 (LEF-1) is directed to the
nucleus by a nine-amino-acid nuclear localization signal (NLS; KKKKRKREK) located
in the high-mobility-group DNA binding domain. This NLS is recognized by two
armadillo repeat proteins (pendulin/Rch1/alpha-P1/hSrp1alpha and
Srp1/karyopherin-alpha/alpha-S1/NPI-1) which function in nuclear transport as the
importin-alpha subunit of NLS receptors. T-cell factor 1 (TCF-1), a related
transcription factor, contains a similar sequence (KKKRRSREK) in the identical
position within its HMG DNA binding domain. We show that this sequence functions 
as an NLS in vivo but is not recognized by these two importin-alpha subtypes in a
yeast two-hybrid assay and only weakly recognized in an in vitro binding assay.
Transfer of the LEF-1 NLS to TCF-1 can confer pendulin/Rch1 binding,
demonstrating that the NLS is the primary determinant for recognition. We have
constructed a set of deletion mutations in pendulin/Rch1 to examine the
differential NLS recognition more closely. We find that the entire armadillo
repeat array of pendulin/Rch1 is necessary to maintain high affinity and
specificity for the LEF-1 NLS versus the TCF-1 NLS. Importin-beta, the second
subunit of the NLS receptor complex, does not influence in vitro NLS binding
affinity or specificity. To test whether this differential recognition is
indicative of distinct mechanisms of nuclear transport, the subcellular
localization of LEF-1 and TCF-1 fused to green fluorescent protein (GFP)) was
examined in an in vitro nuclear transport assay. GFP-LEF-1 readily localizes to
the nucleus, whereas GFP-TCF-1 remains in the cytoplasm. Thus, LEF-1 and TCF-1
differ in several aspects of nuclear localization.

PMCID: PMC109067
PMID: 9671491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Aug;18(8):4698-706.

Role of tissue-specific transcription factor LFB3 in a cyclic AMP-responsive
enhancer of the urokinase-type plasminogen activator gene in LLC-PK1 cells.

Soubt MK(1), Marksitzer R, Menoud PA, Nagamine Y.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute, Basel, Switzerland.

A cyclic AMP (cAMP)-inducible enhancer in the pig urokinase-type plasminogen
activator gene located 3.4 kb upstream of the transcription initiation site is
composed of three protein-binding domains, A, B, and C. Domains A and B each
contain a CRE (cAMP response element)-like sequence but require the adjoining C
domain for full cAMP responsiveness. A tissue-specific transcription factor,
LFB3/HNF1beta/vHNF1, binds to the C domain. Mutation analyses suggest that the
imperfect CRE and LFB3-binding sequences are required for tight coupling of
hormonal and tissue-specific regulation. CREB and ATF1 bind to domains A and B,
and this binding is enhanced upon phosphorylation by cAMP-dependent protein
kinase (protein kinase A [PKA]). Analysis in a mammalian two-hybrid system
revealed that CREB/ATF1 and LFB3 interact and that transactivation potential is
enhanced by PKA activation. Interestingly, however, phosphorylation of CREB at
Ser-133 does not contribute to its interaction with LFB3. The region of LFB3
involved in its interaction with CREB/ATF1 lies, at least partly, between amino
acids 400 and 450. Deletion of this region removed the ability of LFB3 to mediate
cAMP induction of the ABC enhancer but did not impair its basal transactivation
activity on the albumin promoter. Thus, the two activities are distinct functions
of LFB3.

PMCID: PMC109056
PMID: 9671480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. J Virol. 1998 Aug;72(8):6608-13.

In vivo effects of mutations in woodchuck hepatitis virus enhancer II.

Wei Y(1), Tennant B, Ganem D.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Microbiology and Medicine, University of California, San
Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHV) enhancer II (EnII) is located upstream of the
major pregenomic RNA promoter and is thought to play an important role in the
insertional activation of the N-myc2 gene during WHV hepatocarcinogenesis. WHV
EnII is recognized by at least three host transcription factors: HNF-1, HNF-4,
and Oct-1. Here, the roles of these EnII-binding factors in viral transcription
and replication have been further examined. In HepG2 cells transiently
transfected with a chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene whose expression 
is dependent upon EnII, mutations in either the HNF-1 or the HNF-4 site strongly 
reduced CAT activity, while ablation of the Oct-1 site decreased CAT expression
only twofold. Mutations in more than one site completely abolished reporter
expression. These same mutations were also tested in an overlength WHV genome for
their impact on viral replication and gene expression. In transfected HepG2
cells, lesions in the HNF-1 site inactivated pregenomic RNA expression and viral 
reverse transcription, with only minimal effects on the expression of other viral
mRNAs. By contrast, Oct-1 site lesions had no effect on either viral RNA
synthesis or DNA replication, and HNF-4 site lesions produced a modest reduction 
of pregenomic RNA but had no impact on viral DNA synthesis. Testing of the
mutants in susceptible woodchucks revealed that, as expected, viruses with
lesions in the HNF-1 site were nearly noninfectious, while mutants with lesions
at the Oct-1 site were fully replication competent. HNF-4 site mutants were
replication competent but may display reduced levels of replication in the intact
animal host. We conclude that (i) EnII is primarily devoted to the regulation of 
pregenomic RNA in WHV, (ii) HNF-1 is essential for EnII function in vivo, and
(iii) HNF-4 plays a demonstrable but adjunctive role in EnII function.

PMCID: PMC109844
PMID: 9658106  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Diabetes. 1998 Jul;47(7):1152-4.

Mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1beta are not a common cause of
maturity-onset diabetes of the young in the U.K.

Beards F(1), Frayling T, Bulman M, Horikawa Y, Allen L, Appleton M, Bell GI,
Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, Institute of Clinical Science, University of
Exeter, Devon, UK.

PMID: 9648841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Diabetologia. 1998 May;41(5):607-8.

Hyperexcitability to sulphonylurea in MODY3.

Søvik O, Njølstad P, Følling I, Sagen J, Cockburn BN, Bell GI.

PMID: 9628283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1998 Jun;83(6):2059-65.

Linkage and molecular scanning analyses of MODY3/hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
alpha gene in typical familial type 2 diabetes: evidence for novel mutations in
exons 8 and 10.

Elbein SC(1), Teng K, Yount P, Scroggin E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, John L. McClellan Memorial Veterans 
Hospital, Little Rock, Arkansas 72205, USA. sce@nidgene1.uams.edu

Mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1 alpha) gene are an
important cause of autosomal dominant diabetes with onset before age 25 yr
[maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)], and some regions of the HNF1 alpha
gene appear to be hot spots for mutations. To evaluate the role of HNF1 alpha in 
the more common familial type 2 diabetes, we studied 62 families of Northern
European origin by linkage analysis and molecular screening. Linkage was rejected
under dominant models consistent with either late-onset type 2 diabetes or
early-onset dominant diabetes. We used single strand conformation polymorphism
analysis to screen 53 diabetic members of 36 families who reported diabetes
diagnosed before age 40 yr, 9 members of 2 Utah families with typical MODY, and
24 additional members of families with possible linkage. One MODY family showed
the previously reported frameshift mutation (P291fsinsC) in exon 4. Among the
individuals with more typical type 2 diabetes, we identified the previously
reported common polymorphisms, a new intronic polymorphism, and 3 common amino
acid variants. We also identified 2 novel missense mutations that segregated with
type 2 diabetes in 1 family each: lysine for glutamic acid substitution at codon 
619 in exon 10 (E619K), and an arginine for threonine substitution at codon 537
in exon 8 (R537T) in a second family. The exon 8 mutation showed relatively low
penetrance, and the role in this family remains uncertain. No coding mutations
were identified in the family members screened on the basis of linkage but
without early-onset diabetes. Although HNF1 alpha mutations are not a common
cause of familial type 2 diabetes, they may account for 5% of families in which
at least 1 member has onset of type 2 diabetes before age 40 yr. Incomplete
penetrance and a high sporadic frequency make linkage an inefficient screening
tool.

PMID: 9626139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Hum Genet. 1998;43(2):107-10.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha gene (MODY3) are not a major
cause of early-onset non-insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes mellitus in
Japanese.

Nishigori H(1), Yamada S, Kohama T, Utsugi T, Shimizu H, Takeuchi T, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Gunma University, Japan.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3), a monogenic subtype of
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) with an early age of onset, is
characterized by a primary defect in insulin secretion. Recently, it has been
shown that mutations of the gene encoding the transcription factor hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) cause MODY3. Since NIDDM in Japanese is
characterized by insulin secretory defects due to primary beta-cell dysfunction, 
we screened 60 Japanese nonobese subjects with early-onset NIDDM for mutations in
this gene, 45 of whom had a first-degree relative with NIDDM. Direct sequencing
of the ten exons and flanking introns of the gene in these subjects identified
eight nucleotide substitutions including two amino acid changes, Ile-27-Leu and
Ser-487-Asn, the frequencies of which were not significantly different in
subjects with early-onset NIDDM and nondiabetic subjects. These results suggest
that mutations in the HNF-1 alpha gene are not a major cause of early-onset NIDDM
in Japanese.

PMID: 9621514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. J Pathol. 1998 Mar;184(3):272-8.

Expression of HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta in various histological differentiations
of hepatocellular carcinoma.

Wang W(1), Hayashi Y, Ninomiya T, Ohta K, Nakabayashi H, Tamaoki T, Itoh H.

Author information: 
(1)First Division of Pathology, Kobe University School of Medicine, Japan.

Hepatic nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1) regulates genes in a hepatocyte-specific manner.
It has been previously reported that the ratio of HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta mRNA
is related to histological differentiation hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In
this study, the expression levels of the HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta proteins were
analysed relatively and quantitatively in various histologically differentiated
HCC and surrounding non-cancerous tissues, and HNF-1 alpha binding activity for
the AT element of the B domain of the human alpha-fetoprotein enhancer was
examined. Western blot analysis demonstrated that HNF-1 alpha protein was
expressed at a higher level in well-differentiated HCC tissues than in the
surrounding non-HCC tissues; on the other hand, the HNF-1 alpha protein was
expressed at lower levels in moderately and poorly differentiated HCCs than in
the surrounding non-HCC tissues. The levels of HNF-1 beta expression in
well-differentiated and poorly differentiated HCCs were similar to and higher
than those found in the respective surrounding non-cancerous portions. In binding
assays, HNF-1 binding activity was high in well-differentiated HCC and lower in
moderately and poorly differentiated HCCs. Most well-differentiated HCC cases
showed immunohistochemical expression of HNF-1 alpha. These findings show that
poor histological differentiation of HCC correlates with decreases in the level
and activity of HNF-1 alpha proteins.

PMID: 9614379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Diabetes. 1998 Jun;47(6):967-9.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha coding mutations are an uncommon contributor to 
early-onset type 2 diabetes in Ashkenazi Jews.

Behn PS(1), Wasson J, Chayen S, Smolovitch I, Thomas J, Glaser B, Permutt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Metabolism, Endocrinology and Diabetes, Washington University
Medical School, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

PMID: 9604876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 24;273(17):10168-73.

Type I protein C deficiency caused by disruption of a hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-6/HNF-1 binding site in the human protein C gene promoter.

Spek CA(1), Lannoy VJ, Lemaigre FP, Rousseau GG, Bertina RM, Reitsma PH.

Author information: 
(1)Hemostasis and Thrombosis Research Center, Department of Hematology,
University Hospital, 2300 RC Leiden, The Netherlands. C.A.SPEK@AMC.UVA.NL

Protein C is a vitamin K-dependent zymogen of a serine protease that inhibits
blood coagulation by proteolytic inactivation of factors Va and VIIIa.
Individuals affected by protein C deficiency are at risk for venous thrombosis.
One such affected individual was shown earlier to carry a -14 T --> C mutation in
the promoter region of the protein C gene. It is shown here that the region
around this mutation corresponds to a binding site for the transcription factor
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-6 and that this site completely overlaps an HNF-1
binding site. HNF-6 and HNF-1 bound in a mutually exclusive manner. The -14 T -->
C mutation reduced HNF-6 binding. In transient transfection experiments, HNF-6
transactivated the wild-type protein C promoter and introduction of the mutation 
abolished transactivation by HNF-6. Similar experiments showed that wild-type
protein C promoter activity was reduced by cotransfection of an HNF-1 expression 
vector. This inhibiting effect of HNF-1 was reversed to a stimulatory effect when
promoter sequences either upstream or downstream of the HNF-6/HNF-1 site were
deleted. It is concluded that HNF-6 is a major determinant of protein C gene
activity. Moreover, this is the first report describing the putative involvement 
of HNF-6 and of an HNF-6 binding site in human pathology.

PMID: 9553065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Res Virol. 1998 Mar-Apr;149(2):99-108.

HNF1 is critical for the liver-specific function of HBV enhancer II.

Wang WX(1), Li M, Wu X, Wang Y, Li ZP.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry, Academia Sinica, China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a hepatotropic virus and its gene expression is highly
liver-specific. It has been reported that the function of enhancer II (ENII) and 
the core and the core promoter (Cp) of HBV has a hepatocyte preference. To
understand the effects of liver-specific nuclear factors on ENII, in this report,
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) was investigated for its possible action on
ENII function. It was found that HNF1 transactivates ENII/Cp in HeLa cells, and
antisense HNF1 suppresses it in HepG2 cells. Deletion analysis revealed that the 
B element of ENII is the target region responsible for the regulation of HNF1.
Sequence alignment suggested the presence of the potential HNF1 binding sites in 
the B element of ENII. The results of electrophoresis mobility shift assay
indicated that the B2 region could specifically bind a GST-HNF1 fusion protein
and could compete with binding of HNF1 to the consensus motif in the rat
beta-fibrinogen promoter, suggesting that the major binding site of HNF1 is
located in the B2 region. Our results demonstrate that HNF1 is one of the
important regulatory factors for the liver-specific function of HBV and that it
transregulates ENII activity via direct binding to B2.

PMID: 9602504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Clin Invest. 1998 May 15;101(10):2215-22.

Defective insulin secretion in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha-deficient mice.

Pontoglio M(1), Sreenan S, Roe M, Pugh W, Ostrega D, Doyen A, Pick AJ, Baldwin A,
Velho G, Froguel P, Levisetti M, Bonner-Weir S, Bell GI, Yaniv M, Polonsky KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department des Biotechnologies, Unité de Recherche Associée 1644 du Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique, Institut Pasteur, 75015 Paris, France.

Mutations in the gene for the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF) 1alpha cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) 3, a form of
diabetes that results from defects in insulin secretion. Since the nature of
these defects has not been defined, we compared insulin secretory function in
heterozygous [HNF-1alpha (+/-)] or homozygous [HNF-1alpha (-/-)] mice with null
mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene with their wild-type littermates [HNF-1alpha
(+/+)]. Blood glucose concentrations were similar in HNF-1alpha (+/+) and (+/-)
mice (7.8+/-0.2 and 7.9+/-0.3 mM), but were significantly higher in the
HNF-1alpha (-/-) mice (13.1+/-0.7 mM, P < 0.001). Insulin secretory responses to 
glucose and arginine in the perfused pancreas and perifused islets from
HNF-1alpha (-/-) mice were < 15% of the values in the other two groups and were
associated with similar reductions in intracellular Ca2+ responses. These defects
were not due to a decrease in glucokinase or insulin gene transcription. beta
cell mass adjusted for body weight was not reduced in the (-/-) animals, although
pancreatic insulin content adjusted for pancreas weight was slightly lower
(0.06+/-0.01 vs. 0.10+/-0.01 microg/mg, P < 0.01) than in the (+/+) animals. In
summary, a null mutation in the HNF-1alpha gene in homozygous mice leads to
diabetes due to alterations in the pathways that regulate beta cell responses to 
secretagogues including glucose and arginine. These results provide further
evidence in support of a key role for HNF-1alpha in the maintenance of normal
beta cell function.

PMCID: PMC508809
PMID: 9593777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. J Clin Invest. 1998 May 15;101(10):2092-100.

Endotoxin downregulates rat hepatic ntcp gene expression via decreased activity
of critical transcription factors.

Trauner M(1), Arrese M, Lee H, Boyer JL, Karpen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Sodium-dependent uptake of bile acids across the hepatic basolateral membrane is 
rapidly and profoundly diminished during sepsis, thus contributing to the
pathogenesis of sepsis-associated cholestasis. This effect is mediated by
endotoxin or effector cytokines, which reduce expression of several hepatobiliary
transporters, including the sodium-dependent bile acid transporter gene, ntcp. We
test here the hypothesis that endotoxin treatment leads to impaired binding
activity of ntcp promoter trans-acting factors, resulting in reduction of ntcp
mRNA expression. After endotoxin administration, ntcp mRNA levels reached their
nadir by 16 h, and nuclear run-on assays demonstrated a marked reduction in ntcp 
gene transcription. At 16 h after treatment, nuclear binding activities of two
key factors that transactivate the ntcp promoter, hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)
1 and Footprint B binding protein (FpB BP), decreased to 44 and 47% of
pretreatment levels, respectively, while levels of the other known ntcp promoter 
transactivator, signal transducer and activator of transcription 5, were
unaffected. In contrast, the universal inflammatory response factors nuclear
factor kappaB and activating protein 1 were both upregulated significantly.
Examination of nuclear extracts obtained at sequential time points revealed that 
the maximal decrease in nuclear activities of both HNF1 and FpB BP preceded the
nadir of ntcp mRNA expression by 6-10 h. Furthermore, these two nuclear factors
returned towards normal levels before the recovery of ntcp mRNA levels observed
by 48 h. Since HNF1alpha mRNA levels were unchanged at all time points, HNF1 is
likely to be regulated posttranscriptionally by endotoxin. We conclude that the
downregulation of ntcp gene expression by endotoxin is mediated at the level of
transcription through tandem reductions in the nuclear binding activity of two
critical transcription factors. These findings provide new insight into the
coordinated downregulation of hepatobiliary transporters during sepsis.

PMCID: PMC508797
PMID: 9593765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 22;273(21):13297-306.

The HOXC11 homeodomain protein interacts with the lactase-phlorizin hydrolase
promoter and stimulates HNF1alpha-dependent transcription.

Mitchelmore C(1), Troelsen JT, Sjöström H, Norén O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, Biochemical Laboratory C, The
Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen, Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 Copenhagen N,
Denmark. mitch@biobase.dk

The lactase-phlorizin hydrolase (LPH) gene is expressed specifically in the
enterocytes of the small intestine. LPH levels are high in newborn mammals, but
decrease after weaning. We have previously suggested that the promoter element
CE-LPH1, located at -40 to -54, plays an important role in this down-regulation, 
because the DNA binding activity of a nuclear factor that binds to this site is
present specifically in small intestinal extracts and is down-regulated after
weaning. In an effort to clone CE-LPH1-binding factors, a yeast one-hybrid
genetic selection was used, resulting in the isolation of a partial cDNA encoding
the human homeodomain protein HOXC11. The full-length HOXC11 sequence was
obtained by rapid amplification of cDNA ends. It was shown in a yeast assay and
by electrophoretic mobility shift assay that HOXC11 binds to the CE-LPH1 element 
with similar specificity to the endogenous intestinal factor. Two HOXC11
transcript sizes were identified by Northern blot analysis. The larger transcript
(2.1 kilobase pairs) is likely to contain a translational start site in good
context and is present in HeLa cells. The shorter 1.7-kilobase pair transcript,
present in HeLa and Caco-2 cells, probably encodes a protein lacking 114 amino
acids at the N-terminal end. Both forms of HOXC11 potentiate transcriptional
activation of the LPH promoter by HNF1alpha. The expression of HOXC11 mRNA in
human fetal intestine suggests a role in early intestinal development.

PMID: 9582375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Biol Chem. 1998 Apr 17;273(16):9510-6.

Circadian periodicity of intestinal Na+/glucose cotransporter 1 mRNA levels is
transcriptionally regulated.

Rhoads DB(1), Rosenbaum DH, Unsal H, Isselbacher KJ, Levitsky LL.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrine Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114, USA. rhoads@helix.mgh.harvard.edu

Intestinal expression of the high affinity Na+/glucose cotransporter 1 (SGLT1),
which absorbs dietary glucose and galactose, exhibits both circadian periodicity 
in its activity and induction by dietary carbohydrate. Because the daily
variation in SGLT1 activity is established by the feeding schedule (whether ad
libitum or imposed) and persists in the absence of food, this variation has been 
described as anticipatory. To delineate the mechanisms regulating SGLT1, its
expression was examined in rats maintained in a 12-h photoperiod with free access
to chow. SGLT1 mRNA levels varied significantly, with the maximum abundance
occurring near the onset of dark and the minimum near the onset of light. The
SGLT1 transcription rate was 7-fold higher in the morning (1000-1100 h) than in
the afternoon (1600-1700 h). An element for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1)
was identified in the SGLT1 promoter that formed different complexes with small
intestinal nuclear extracts, depending on the time when the source animal was
killed. Serological tests indicated that HNF-1alpha was present in complexes
throughout the day, while HNF-1beta binding exhibited circadian periodicity. We
propose that exchange of HNF-1 dimerization partners contributes to circadian
changes in SGLT1 transcription. Because SGLT1 mRNA levels also varied in rhesus
monkeys (offset by approximately one-half day from rats), a similar mechanism
appears to be present in primates.

PMID: 9545279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 May;18(5):3059-68.

Laron dwarfism and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus in the Hnf-1alpha
knockout mouse.

Lee YH(1), Sauer B, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA. mbying@ccvax.sinica.edu.tw

Mice deficient in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1alpha) were produced by
use of the Cre-loxP recombination system. HNF-1alpha-null mice are viable but
sterile and exhibit a phenotype reminiscent of both Laron-type dwarfism and
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM). In contrast to an earlier
HNF-1alpha-null mouse line that had been produced by use of standard gene
disruption methodology (M. Pontoglio, J. Barra, M. Hadchouel, A. Doyen, C. Kress,
J. P. Bach, C. Babinet, and M. Yaniv, Cell 84:575-585, 1996), these mice
exhibited no increased mortality and only minimal renal dysfunction during the
first 6 months of development. Both dwarfism and NIDDM are most likely due to the
loss of expression of insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) and lower levels of
insulin, resulting in stunted growth and elevated serum glucose levels,
respectively. These results confirm the functional significance of the HNF-1alpha
regulatory elements that had previously been shown to reside in the promoter
regions of both the IGF-I and the insulin genes.

PMCID: PMC110684
PMID: 9566924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Diabetologia. 1998 Apr;41(4):467-73.

Chronic diabetic complications in patients with MODY3 diabetes.

Isomaa B(1), Henricsson M, Lehto M, Forsblom C, Karanko S, Sarelin L, Häggblom M,
Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Jakobstad Hospital, Finland.

MODY3 diabetes, which is caused by a mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha gene (HNF-1alpha) on chromosome 12, represents a relatively common 
monogenic form of diabetes in Finland. Age at onset of the disease can vary from 
10 to 60 years, but little is known about the natural course of the disease,
particularly the development of diabetes-related chronic complications. The
availability of genetic markers now allows description of the clinical course of 
the disease. In order to examine the prevalence of chronic diabetic complications
in MODY3, we examined 57 carriers with HNF-1alpha mutations for the presence of
micro- and macrovascular complications. Thirty-four percent of the MODY patients 
had mild and 13% had severe non-proliferative or proliferative retinopathy; this 
figure did not differ from the figures in insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
(IDDM) and non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) patients matched for
duration and glycaemic control but not for age. Neither did the prevalence of
microalbuminuria differ between MODY3 and IDDM or NIDDM patients (19 vs 24 and
23%). Neuropathy was observed with the same frequency as previously reported in
IDDM. Hypertension was less frequent in MODY3 and IDDM than in NIDDM (24.5 and 19
vs 53.7%; p < 0.001). Coronary heart disease was more common in MODY3 than in
IDDM (16 vs 4.5%; p < 0.02) but less common than in the older NIDDM patients
(33.3%; p < 0.02). In a multiple logistic regression analysis, poor glycaemic
control was an independent risk factor for retinopathy (p = 0.03),
microalbuminuria (p < 0.04) and neuropathy (p = 0.03). In conclusion,
microangiopathic complications are observed with the same frequency in patients
with MODY3 diabetes as in IDDM and NIDDM and are strongly related to poor
glycaemic control.

PMID: 9562352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Eur J Endocrinol. 1998 Mar;138(3):233-9.

Genetic, metabolic and clinical characteristics of maturity onset diabetes of the
young.

Velho G(1), Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-342, Hôpital Saint Vincent de Paul, Paris, France.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically and clinically
heterogeneous subtype of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM)
characterised by early onset, autosomal dominant inheritance and a primary defect
in insulin secretion. To date, three MODY genes have been identified on
chromosomes 20q (MODY1/hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha), 7p
(MODY2/glucokinase) and 12q (MODY3/HNF-1alpha). Mutations in MODY2/glucokinase
result in mild chronic hyperglycaemia as a result of reduced pancreatic beta-cell
responsiveness to glucose, and decreased net accumulation of hepatic glycogen and
increased hepatic gluconeogenesis after meals. In contrast, MODY1 and MODY3 are
characterised by severe insulin secretory defects, and by major hyperglycaemia
associated with microvascular complications. The role of the three known MODY
genes in susceptibility to the more common late-onset NIDDM remain uncertain.
Genetic studies seem to exclude a role as major susceptibility genes, but leave
unresolved whether they may have a minor role in a polygenic context or an
important role in particular populations.

PMID: 9539292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 1998 Mar 10;118(7):1054-7.

[Non-insulin dependent diabetes in children and adolescents].

[Article in Norwegian]

Njølstad PR(1), Søvik O, Bell GI, Cockburn BN, Følling I, Sagen J.

Author information: 
(1)Barneklinikken, Haukeland Sykehus, Bergen. [Non-insulin dependent diabetes in 
children and adolescents]

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a clinically and genetically
heterogenous disorder characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance with onset 
usually before 25 years of age, and a primary defect in glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion. Genetic analyses have shown that mutations in at least five
different genes can cause MODY. These are the genes encoding the glycolytic
enzyme glucokinase, three liver-enriched transcription factors, hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta and HNF-4 alpha, and the gene encoding
the transcription factor, insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF-1). Patients with MODY3 
run a considerable risk of developing diabetic eye disease. MODY2, related to
glucokinase deficiency, is a relatively benign disorder which does not usually
require insulin. Experiences with the three other MODY forms have so far been
restricted to very few families. We present the first Norwegian family with
MODY2. Furthermore, a previously published Norwegian family is shown to be MODY3.
Subjects who fulfil the criteria of MODY can, by genetic testing, gain
information important for prognosis and perhaps also for therapy.

PMID: 9531829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Biochimie. 1997 Dec;79(12):707-15.

A set of polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies reveals major differences in
post-translational modification of the rat HNF1 and vHNF1 homeoproteins.

Chouard T(1), Jeannequin O, Rey-Campos J, Yaniv M, Traincard F.

Author information: 
(1)URA 1644 du CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies, Paris, France.

The related homeodomain-containing transcription factors HNF1 (HNF1 alpha) and
vHNF1 (HNF1 beta) recognise common target DNA sequences in the regulatory regions
of many genes and are expressed in several parenchymal cell types, predominantly 
in liver, kidney, intestine and pancreas. HNF1-null mutant mice, with a wild-type
vHNF1 gene, develop normally, but die within a few weeks of birth with severe
liver and kidney failure. Humans with a mutation in the HNF1 alpha gene develop
non-insulin dependent diabetes on maturity (MODY 3). To determine distinctive
roles for each of these proteins we produced a set of polyclonal sera and
monoclonal antibodies, directed against different parts of the rat HNF1 and vHNF1
proteins. These antibodies reveal that HNF1 is present in vivo as a heterogeneous
mixture of 92-98 kDa molecular mass polypeptides, a mass higher than that
expected from its amino acid sequence. vHNF1 is present in the form of two
isoforms of roughly the expected molecular masses, 65 and 68 kDa. In addition,
some antibodies prepared against bacterially-produced HNF1 recognise vHNF1 but
not HNF1, in liver and kidney extracts. Hence, we present the first evidence for 
differential post-translational modification of HNF1 and vHNF1 proteins.

PMID: 9523012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Nihon Rinsho. 1998 Jan;56 Suppl 3:566-72.

[MODY (maturity-on-set diabetes of the young)].

[Article in Japanese]

Yasuda K(1), Kadowaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Diabetes Care and Research, Asahi Life Foundation.

PMID: 9513479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Feb 17;95(4):1500-4.

Identification of hepatic nuclear factor 1 binding sites in the 5' flanking
region of the human phenylalanine hydroxylase gene: implication of a dual
function of phenylalanine hydroxylase stimulator in the phenylalanine
hydroxylation system.

Lei XD(1), Kaufman S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry, National Institute of Mental Health, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Phenylalanine hydroxylase stimulator (PHS) is a component of the phenylalanine
hydroxylation system that is involved in the regeneration of the cofactor
tetrahydrobiopterin. It is also identical to the dimerization cofactor of
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) (DCoH) that is able to enhance the
transcriptional activity of HNF1. Moreover, it has the structural potential for
binding macromolecules such as proteins and nucleic acids, consistent with its
involvement in gene expression. We investigated whether PHS/DCoH could enhance
the expression of phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH). Cotransfection assays showed
that DCoH itself could not transactivate the 9-kb human PAH 5' flanking fragment.
However, this 9-kb fragment was transactivated by HNF1 in a dose-dependent manner
with a maximum of nearly 8-fold activation; DCoH potentiated this transactivation
by another 1.6-fold. The HNF1 binding sites were located at -3.5 kb in a region
that is 77.5% identical to the mouse liver-specific hormone-inducible PAH gene
enhancer. This study suggests a possible dual function of PHS in vivo in the
human phenylalanine hydroxylation system: it is involved in the regeneration of
the cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin and can also enhance the expression of the human
PAH gene.

PMCID: PMC19063
PMID: 9465044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Clin Invest. 1998 Feb 1;101(3):521-6.

A missense mutation in hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha, resulting in a reduced 
transactivation activity, in human late-onset non-insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus.

Hani EH(1), Suaud L, Boutin P, Chèvre JC, Durand E, Philippi A, Demenais F,
Vionnet N, Furuta H, Velho G, Bell GI, Laine B, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) EP10-Institute of Biology,
Pasteur Institute of Lille & CHRU-Lille, 59019 Lille, France.

Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) is a heterogeneous disorder
characterized by hyperglycemia resulting from defects in insulin secretion and
action. Recent studies have found mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4
alpha gene (HNF-4alpha) in families with maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY), an autosomal dominant form of diabetes characterized by early age at
onset and a defect in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. During the course of 
our search for susceptibility genes contributing to the more common late-onset
NIDDM forms, we observed nominal evidence for linkage between NIDDM and markers
in the region of the HNF-4alpha/MODY1 locus in a subset of French families with
NIDDM diagnosed before 45 yr of age. Thus, we screened these families for
mutations in the HNF-4alpha gene. We found a missense mutation, resulting in a
valine-to-isoleucine substitution at codon 393 in a single family. This mutation 
cosegregated with diabetes and impaired insulin secretion, and was not present in
119 control subjects. Expression studies showed that this conservative
substitution is associated with a marked reduction of transactivation activity, a
result consistent with this mutation contributing to the insulin secretory defect
observed in this family.

PMCID: PMC508593
PMID: 9449683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 1997 Nov;38(2):139-41.

A case of type-1 diabetes mellitus formerly diagnosed as maturity-onset diabetes 
of the young (MODY) carrying suggestive MODY3 gene.

Miura J, Sanaka M, Ikeda Y, Watanabe C, Nakagami T, Iwasaki N, Uchigata Y,
Takahashi C, Omori Y, Iwamoto Y.

PMID: 9483378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Diabet Med. 1998 Jan;15(1):15-24.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young: clinical heterogeneity explained by genetic
heterogeneity.

Hattersley AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine (Diabetes Research), Postgraduate Medical
School, Exeter, UK.

Erratum in
    Diabet Med 1998 May;15(5):437.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) can be defined by the clinical
characteristics of early-onset Type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes and
autosomal dominant inheritance. Mutations in four genes have been shown to cause 
MODY: glucokinase, hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1alpha), hepatic nuclear
factor 4 alpha (HNF4alpha) and insulin promoter [corrected] factor 1 (IPF1). In
white Caucasians it is now possible to define the gene in most patients with a
clinical diagnosis of MODY. Each gene involved in MODY has its own specific
clinical and physiological characteristics. Patients with mutations of the
glucokinase gene have mild fasting hyperglycaemia throughout life, and rarely
require medication or develop microvascular complications. The principle
pathophysiology is stable beta-cell dysfunction characterized by reduced sensing 
of glucose by the pancreas. Patients with mutations in HNF1alpha have normal
glucose tolerance in early childhood and usually present with symptomatic
diabetes in their late teens or early adulthood. They show increasing
hyperglycaemia and treatment requirements with frequent microvascular
complications. The underlying defect is progressive beta-cell failure, with the
early lesion characterized by failure to increase insulin secretion with
increasing glucose levels. Patients with HNF4alpha and IPF1 mutations show a
similar clinical picture to HNF1alpha although diabetes may be diagnosed later.
There are other patients with MODY in whom the genetic defect is still unknown.
Molecular genetic testing in patients with diabetes offers the possibility of
making a firm diagnosis of MODY and allows prediction of the future clinical
course. The role of predictive testing in non-diabetic subjects within families
is uncertain at present. Preliminary evidence suggests that maintaining insulin
sensitivity by avoiding obesity and regular physical exercise may help delay the 
onset of diabetes.

PMID: 9472859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. J Cell Physiol. 1998 Mar;174(3):273-84.

Alteration of expression of liver-enriched transcription factors in the
transition between growth and differentiation of primary cultured rat
hepatocytes.

Mizuguchi T(1), Mitaka T, Hirata K, Oda H, Mochizuki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical University
School of Medicine, Japan.

In the present study, we showed the role of the liver-enriched transcription
factors in the transition during which proliferating hepatocytes become
quiescent. We used primary rat hepatocytes cultured in modified L-15 medium. The 
cells proliferated and, after the addition of 2% dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) from
day 4, they stopped growing and gradually differentiated. During hepatic
proliferation, expression of hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF)1alpha, HNF4, C/EBP 
alpha, and C/EBP beta mRNAs was depressed, whereas that of HNF3alpha and HNF3beta
transcripts was enhanced. After the addition of DMSO, the expression of
HNF1alpha, HNF3gamma, and HNF4 returned to the level in isolated cells and
HNF1beta mRNA expression gradually increased. However, expression of C/EBP alpha 
and C/EBP beta mRNAs was partially recovered. The mitoinhibitory agents,
IL-1beta, IL-6, TGF-beta, and activin A, were examined to determine whether they 
could induce differentiation of proliferating hepatocytes as shown in cells
treated with DMSO. Although these factors inhibited cell growth, the cells did
not differentiate. The expression pattern of HNF3gamma mRNA was quite different
in the cells cultured with DMSO and those cultured with cytokines. Therefore,
hepatic differentiation requires not only inhibition of DNA synthesis but also
induction of appropriate transcription factors. Thus, expression of HNF3gamma,
C/EBP alpha, and C/EBP beta may be necessary for hepatocytes to acquire highly
differentiated functions in addition to coexpression of certain amounts of
transcripts of HNF1alpha, HNF1beta, HNF3alpha, HNF3beta, and HNF4 as well as
suppression of C/EBP delta.

PMID: 9462689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Immunity. 1998 Jan;8(1):11-20.

Redundant regulation of T cell differentiation and TCRalpha gene expression by
the transcription factors LEF-1 and TCF-1.

Okamura RM(1), Sigvardsson M, Galceran J, Verbeek S, Clevers H, Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Microbiology, University of
California, San Francisco 94143-0414, USA.

Lymphoid enhancer factor 1 (LEF-1) and T cell factor 1 (TCF-1) are closely
related transcription factors that are both expressed during murine T cell
differentiation and that regulate the T cell receptor alpha (TCRalpha) enhancer
in transfection assays. Targeted gene disruption of either the Tcf1 or Lef1 gene 
in mice did not affect TCRalpha gene expression and resulted in an incomplete
defect or no defect in thymocyte differentiation. Here, we examine a potential
redundancy of these transcription factors by analyzing double-mutant mice. In
fetal thymic organ cultures from Lef1-/- Tcf1-/- mice, alpha/beta T cell
differentiation is completely arrested at the immature CD8+ single-positive (CD8+
ISP) stage and is markedly impaired at an earlier stage. In addition, we find
that sorted CD8+ ISP cells from Lef1-/- Tcf1-/- mice express TCRbeta but show a
severely reduced level of TCRalpha gene transcription. Together, these data show 
that LEF-1 and TCF-1 are redundant in the regulation of T cell differentiation
and gene expression.

PMID: 9462507  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Hum Genet. 1997 Dec;101(3):351-4.

A rapid screening method for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha frameshift
mutations; prevalence in maturity-onset diabetes of the young and late-onset
non-insulin dependent diabetes.

Frayling TM(1), Bulman MP, Appleton M, Hattersley AT, Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, University of Exeter, UK.

Non-insulin dependent diabetes (NIDDM) is a polygenic heterogeneous disorder of
glucose homeostasis. Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic
subtype of NIDDM characterised by early-onset (< 25 years) and autosomal dominant
inheritance. Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha)
gene have recently been shown to cause MODY. The incidence of mutations in this
gene in MODY and late-onset NIDDM is not known. We have developed a rapid
specific polymerase chain reaction test for HNF-1 alpha mutations; this test
involves the use of fluorescently labelled forward primers and modified reverse
primers to detect length polymorphisms resulting from frameshift mutations. With 
this method, we have screened 102 MODY probands, viz. 60 defined according to
strict diagnostic criteria (autosomal dominant inheritance and at least one
member diagnosed age < 25 years) and 95 late-onset NIDDM probands (diagnosed
35-70 years with > or = 1 affected relative), for the presence of 9 known HNF-1
alpha frameshift mutations, including 6 that occur at two sites for recurring
mutation (residues 291/292 and 379). Mutations were detected in 11 of the
strictly defined MODY probands and one mutation was also found in a single
subject with early-onset NIDDM but no family history of the disease. The HNF-1
alpha frameshift mutations were not detected in any late-onset NIDDM subjects,
suggesting these mutations do not have a major role in the pathogenesis of NIDDM.
Our results indicate that the prevalence of the nine frameshift mutations in
strictly defined UK MODY is 18%, with the P291fsinsC mutation alone having a
frequency of 13%.

PMID: 9439666  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Nihon Rinsho. 1997 Nov;55 Suppl:362-8.

[Development of prediction for NIDDM from a view point of genetics].

[Article in Japanese]

Sanke T(1).

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Wakayama University of Medical Science.

PMID: 9434495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;16(12):1419-28.

Comparison of intestinal phospholipase A/lysophospholipase and sucrase-isomaltase
genes suggest a common structure for enterocyte-specific promoters.

Taylor JK(1), Boll W, Levy T, Suh E, Siang S, Mantei N, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, USA.

Intestinal phospholipase A/lysophospholipase (IPAL) is an intestine-specific
brush-border enzyme expressed during development and along the intestinal
crypt-villus axis in a pattern similar to another well characterized brush-border
enzyme, sucrase-isomaltase (SI). A tissue-specific DNase I hypersensitive site
was identified in chromatin from intestinal nuclei immediately upstream from the 
transcriptional start site of the IPAL gene. Footprinting analysis showed that
two DNA elements within the IPAL promoter were protected by intestinal nuclear
proteins. The IPAL-FP1 element was shown to be a monomer binding site for Cdx1
and Cdx2, intestine-specific homeobox proteins. Moreover, this site was important
for transcriptional activation of the promoter in intestinal cell lines via
interaction with Cdx proteins. Nuclear proteins from both liver and intestine
interacted with the IPAL-FP2 element, forming a complex consistent with binding
to HNF1. Cdx and HNF1 binding sites have also been shown to be the two major
regulatory elements responsible for transcriptional activation of the SI gene
promoter, which directs intestine-specific transcription in transgenic mice.
These findings suggest that enterocyte genes that are expressed in similar
developmental patterns may be regulated by the interaction of common DNA elements
and their associated transcription factors.

PMID: 9428790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Dec;16(12):1407-18.

Liver-enriched transcription factors, HNF-1, HNF-3, and C/EBP, are major
contributors to the strong activity of the chicken CYP2H1 promoter in chick
embryo hepatocytes.

Dogra SC(1), May BK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Adelaide, South Australia.

Chicken CYP2H1 promoter constructs express strongly in chick embryo hepatocytes
at a level comparable with that of Rous sarcoma viral promoter. We have
identified the transcription factors responsible for the active CYP2H1 promoter. 
Binding sites for transcription factors were located within the first 160 bp of
promoter sequence using promoter deletion experiments and DNase I footprint
analysis. Sequence analysis revealed characteristic sites for the liver-enriched 
transcription factors of the HNF-1, HNF-3, and C/EBP families and for the
ubiquitous factor, USF. Protein binding to these sites was established by gel
mobility shift assays. Mutagenesis and transient transfection experiments
demonstrated that these sites, in combination, were responsible for the strong
promoter activity with a substantial contribution from HNF-1 and HNF-3. The
promoter was also active in mammalian HepG2 and COS-1 cell lines where expression
was dependent on the identified transcription factor binding sites but promoter
activity in the HeLa cells was low. Transactivation experiments revealed that
promoter expression could be activated through the appropriate binding sites by
exogenously expressed rat HNF-1alpha or HNF-1beta, rat HNF-3alpha or HNF-3beta
and chicken C/EBP alpha. Transcriptional synergism between HNF-1 and C/EBP was
observed in these transactivation experiments. A Barbie box-like sequence
overlapped the USF element but was not functional. The results demonstrate that
liver-enriched transcription factors and USF direct strong expression of the
CYP2H1 promoter in transiently transfected cells. By comparison, in vivo
expression of this gene in uninduced chick embryo hepatocytes is low but markedly
increased by phenobarbital. Drug induction may therefore substantially reflect
derepression of this inherently active promoter.

PMID: 9428789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Biochemistry. 1997 Nov 18;36(46):14096-106.

The role of HNF1alpha, HNF3gamma, and cyclic AMP in glucose-6-phosphatase gene
activation.

Lin B(1), Morris DW, Chou JY.

Author information: 
(1)Heritable Disorders Branch, National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The gene for glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase), the key enzyme in glucose
homeostasis, is expressed in a tissue-specific manner in the liver and kidney. To
understand the molecular mechanisms regulating liver-specific expression of the
G6Pase gene, we characterized G6Pase promoter activity by transient expression
assays. The G6Pase promoter is active in HepG2 hepatoma cells, but inactive in
JEG3 choriocarcinoma or 3T3 cells. DNA elements essential for optimal and
liver-specific expression of the G6Pase gene were contained within nucleotides
-234 to +3. Deletion analysis revealed that the G6Pase promoter contained three
activation elements (AEs) at nucleotides -234 to -212 (AE-I), -146 to -125
(AE-II), and -124 to -71 (AE-III). AE-I contains binding sites for hepatocyte
nuclear factors (HNF) 1 and 4. Electromobility shift and cotransfection assays
demonstrated that HNF1alpha, but not HNF4, bound to its cognate site and
transactivated G6Pase gene expression. The G6Pase promoter contained five HNF3
motifs, 1 (-180/-174), 2 (-139/-133), 3 (-91/-85), 4 (-81/-75), and 5 (-72/-66), 
and all five sites bound HNF3gamma with high affinity. Transient expression and
cotransfection assays showed that HNF3 site 1 is not required for basal promoter 
activity, but is essential for HNF3gamma-activated transcription from the G6Pase 
promoter. We further showed that HNF3 sites 3, 4, and 5 were essential for basal 
G6Pase promoter activity and transactivation by HNF3gamma. AE-II contains, in
addition to a HNF3 motif, a cAMP-response element (CRE) and a C/EBP half-site.
The G6Pase(-146/-116) DNA containing AE-II formed multiple protein-DNA complexes 
with HepG2 nuclear extracts, including HNF3gamma, CRE-binding protein (CREB),
C/EBPalpha, and C/EBPbeta. We showed that AE-II mediated transcription activation
of the G6Pase gene by cAMP.

PMID: 9369482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Nat Genet. 1997 Dec;17(4):384-5.

Mutation in hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta gene (TCF2) associated with MODY.

Horikawa Y, Iwasaki N, Hara M, Furuta H, Hinokio Y, Cockburn BN, Lindner T,
Yamagata K, Ogata M, Tomonaga O, Kuroki H, Kasahara T, Iwamoto Y, Bell GI.

PMID: 9398836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Diabetes. 1997 Dec;46(12):2108-9.

An automated fluorescent single-strand conformation polymorphism technique for
screening mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene (maturity-onset 
diabetes of the young).

Boutin P(1), Chèvre JC, Hani EH, Gomis R, Pardini VC, Guillausseau PJ, Vaxillaire
M, Velho G, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National Recherche Scientifique, EP10, Institut Pasteur de Lille and
CHU, France.

PMID: 9392505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Mol Endocrinol. 1997 Nov;11(12):1822-31.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 and the glucocorticoid receptor synergistically
activate transcription of the rat insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1
gene.

Suh DS(1), Rechler MM.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Endocrinology Branch, National Institute of Diabetes
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The insulin-like growth factor (IGF) binding proteins (IGFBPs) are a family of
proteins that bind IGF-I and IGF-II and modulate their biological activities.
IGFBP-1 is distinctive among the IGFBPs in its rapid regulation in response to
metabolic and hormonal changes. The synthetic glucocorticoid, dexamethasone,
increases IGFBP-1 mRNA abundance and gene transcription in rat liver and in
H4-II-E rat hepatoma cells. A glucocorticoid response element (GRE) located at
nucleotide (nt) -91/-77 is required for dexamethasone to stimulate rat IGFBP-1
promoter activity in transient transfection assays in H4-II-E cells. In addition 
to the GRE, three accessory regulatory sites [a putative hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 (HNF-1) site (nt -62/-50), an insulin-response element (nt -108/-99),
and an upstream site (nt -252/-236)] are involved in dexamethasone stimulation
under some, but not all, circumstances. The present study begins to address the
mechanism by which transcription factors bound to the putative HNF-1 site act
synergistically with the glucocorticoid receptor (GR) bound to the GRE. In gel
shift assays, HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta in H4-II-E extracts bind to the
palindromic HNF-1 site. Both half-sites are required. Overexpression of HNF-1beta
enhances dexamethasone-stimulated promoter activity. Both the HNF-1 site and the 
GRE must be intact for stimulation to occur. By contrast, overexpression of
HNF-1alpha does not enhance dexamethasone-stimulated promoter activity, although,
as also observed with overexpression of HNF-1beta, it inhibits basal promoter
activity. Thus, the synergistic effects of HNF-1beta and the GR on
dexamethasone-stimulated promoter activity require that they are bound to the
HNF-1 site and the GRE, respectively, and may involve protein-protein
interactions between the transcription factors, or between them and the basal
transcription machinery or a steroid receptor coactivator. Synergy between the
ubiquitously expressed GR and HNF-1, which is developmentally regulated and
expressed in a limited number of tissues, provides a possible mechanism for
tissue- and development-specific regulation of glucocorticoid action.

PMID: 9369450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Am J Physiol. 1997 Oct;273(4 Pt 1):G833-41.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha regulates transcription of the guanylin gene.

Hochman JA(1), Sciaky D, Whitaker TL, Hawkins JA, Cohen MB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and Nutrition, Children's Hospital
Medical Center and the University of Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

To study the molecular mechanisms controlling guanylin expression, we have cloned
the mouse guanylin gene, including 2.7 kb of upstream sequence. We show that the 
first 133 base pairs (bp) of the upstream guanylin promoter are sufficient to
drive near maximal (6-fold over basal) luciferase reporter gene expression in
Caco-2 intestinal cells; at least 300 bp of upstream promoter are required for
reporter gene expression in HT-29 intestinal cell lines. Using electromobility
shift assays, we demonstrate that nuclear proteins bind to the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 (HNF-1) consensus sequence in the guanylin promoter. The HNF-1 consensus
sequence, located in the immediate 5' flanking region, is required for
transcriptional activation of the guanylin gene in both intestinal cell lines.
Mutagenesis of the HNF-1 consensus sequence abolishes transcriptional activation 
of guanylin promoter-luciferase reporter gene constructs. Cotransfection of these
constructs with HNF-1alpha augments transcriptional initiation of the reporter
gene. In contrast, HNF-1beta has no significant effect on transcription of the
reporter gene. These experiments demonstrate that HNF-1alpha is an important
regulatory element in the transcriptional activation of guanylin.

PMID: 9357824  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Nov;17(11):6311-20.

Liver-enriched transcription factors uncoupled from expression of hepatic
functions in hepatoma cell lines.

Chaya D(1), Fougère-Deschatrette C, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 0321 du CNRS, Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, France.

Among the liver-enriched transcription factors identified to date, only
expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 
(HNF1) is in strict correlation with hepatic differentiation in cultured rat
hepatoma cells. Indeed, differentiated hepatoma cells that stably express an
extensive set of adult hepatic functions express liver-enriched transcription
factors, while dedifferentiated cells that have lost expression of all these
hepatic functions no longer express HNF4 and HNF1. We describe a new heritable
phenotype, designated as uncoupled, in which there is a spontaneous dissociation 
between the expression of these transcription factors and that of the hepatic
functions. Cells presenting this phenotype, isolated from differentiated hepatoma
cells, cease to accumulate all transcripts coding for hepatic functions but
nevertheless maintain expression of HNF4 and HNF1. Transitory transfection
experiments indicate that these two factors present in these cells have
transcriptional activity similar to that of differentiated hepatoma cells.
Characterization of the appropriate intertypic cell hybrids demonstrates that
this new phenotype is recessive to the dedifferentiated state and fails to be
complemented by differentiated cells. These results indicate the existence of
mechanisms that inhibit transcription of genes coding for hepatocyte functions in
spite of the presence of functional HNF4 and HNF1. Cells of the uncoupled
phenotype present certain properties of oval cells described for pathological
states of the liver.

PMCID: PMC232482
PMID: 9343392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Diabetes. 1997 Oct;46(10):1652-7.

Organization and partial sequence of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha/MODY1 
gene and identification of a missense mutation, R127W, in a Japanese family with 
MODY.

Furuta H(1), Iwasaki N, Oda N, Hinokio Y, Horikawa Y, Yamagata K, Yano N,
Sugahiro J, Ogata M, Ohgawara H, Omori Y, Iwamoto Y, Bell GI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF-4 alpha) is a member of the nuclear
receptor superfamily, a class of ligand-activated transcription factors. A
nonsense mutation in the gene encoding this transcription factor was recently
found in a white family with one form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young,
MODY1. Here, we report the exon-intron organization and partial sequence of the
human HNF-4 alpha gene. In addition, we have screened the 12 exons, flanking
introns and minimal promoter region for mutations in a group of 57 unrelated
Japanese subjects with early-onset NIDDM/MODY of unknown cause. Eight nucleotide 
substitutions were noted, of which one resulted in the mutation of a conserved
arginine residue, Arg127 (CGG)-->Trp (TGG) (designated R127W), located in the
T-box, a region of the protein that may play a role in HNF-4 alpha dimerization
and DNA binding. This mutation was not found in 214 unrelated nondiabetic
subjects (53 Japanese, 53 Chinese, 51 white, and 57 African-American). The R127W 
mutation was only present in three of five diabetic members in this family,
indicating that it is not the only cause of diabetes in this family. The
remaining seven nucleotide substitutions were located in the proximal promoter
region and introns. They are not predicted to affect the transcription of the
gene or mRNA processing and represent polymorphisms and rare variants. The
results suggest that mutations in the HNF-4 alpha gene may cause early-onset
NIDDM/MODY in Japanese but they are less common than mutations in the HNF-1
alpha/MODY3 gene. The information on the sequence of the HNF-4 alpha gene and its
promoter region will facilitate the search for mutations in other populations and
studies of the role of this gene in determining normal pancreatic beta-cell
function.

PMID: 9313765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Diabetes. 1997 Oct;46(10):1648-51.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young due to a mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear 
factor-4 alpha binding site in the promoter of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
alpha gene.

Gragnoli C(1), Lindner T, Cockburn BN, Kaisaki PJ, Gragnoli F, Marozzi G, Bell
GI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Recent studies have shown that mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha are the cause of one form of maturity-onset diabetes
of the young (MODY3). These studies have identified mutations in the mRNA and
protein coding regions of this gene that result in the synthesis of an abnormal
mRNA or protein. Here, we report an Italian family in which an A-->C substitution
at nucleotide-58 of the promoter region of the HNF-1 alpha gene cosegregates with
MODY. This mutation is located in a highly conserved region of the promoter and
disrupts the binding site for the transcription factor HNF-4 alpha, mutations in 
the gene encoding HNF-4 alpha being another cause of MODY (MODY1). This result
demonstrates that decreased levels of HNF-1 alpha per se can cause MODY.
Moreover, it indicates that both the promoter and coding regions of the HNF-1
alpha gene should be screened for mutations in subjects thought to have MODY
because of mutations in this gene.

PMID: 9313764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Diabetes. 1997 Oct;46(10):1643-7.

Identification of mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha gene
in Japanese subjects with IDDM.

Yamada S(1), Nishigori H, Onda H, Utsugi T, Yanagawa T, Maruyama T, Onigata K,
Nagashima K, Nagai R, Morikawa A, Takeuchi T, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, School of Medicine, Gunma University,
Maebashi, Japan.

One form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young, MODY3, is characterized by a
severe insulin secretory defect, compared with MODY2, a glucokinase-deficient
diabetes. It has recently been shown that mutations of the gene encoding the
transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha cause MODY3. Because
of the rapid progress to overt diabetes and the high prevalence of required
insulin treatment in patients with MODY3, we screened the HNF-1 alpha gene for
mutations in Japanese subjects with IDDM. Ten exons and flanking introns of the
HNF-1 alpha gene in these subjects were amplified by polymerase chain reaction
and direct sequencing of the products. Mutations were identified in three (5.5%) 
of the 55 unrelated subjects with IDDM. A missense mutation of R272H (replacement
of Arg by His in codon 272) in the DNA binding domain of HNF-1 alpha was found in
a subject who developed IDDM 1 year after diagnosis of NIDDM at 8 years of age. A
frameshift mutation of P291 fsinsC (insertion of a C in a polyC tract around
codon 291 for Pro), which would generate a mutant truncated protein of 340 amino 
acids, was found in a subject who started insulin treatment when hyperglycemia
and ketonuria were noticed at 13 years of age. A missense mutation of R583G
(replacement of Arg by Gly in codon 583) in the transactivation domain of HNF-1
alpha was found in a subject with sudden-onset IDDM at 20 years of age. None of
these mutations were present in 100 nondiabetic subjects (200 normal
chromosomes). These results indicate that the HNF-1 alpha gene defects could lead
to the development of not only early-onset NIDDM but also IDDM, implicating the
importance of subclassification of HNF-1 alpha-deficient IDDM from a classical
type of autoimmune-based IDDM in Japanese.

PMID: 9313763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Diabetes. 1997 Sep;46(9):1512-3.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene (MODY3) are not a major
cause of late-onset NIDDM in Japanese subjects.

Yamada S(1), Nishigori H, Onda H, Takahashi K, Kitano N, Morikawa A, Takeuchi T, 
Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Institute for Molecular and Cellular
Regulation, Gunma University, Maebashi, Japan.

PMID: 9287055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Diabetes. 1997 Sep;46(9):1504-8.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha/MODY3 gene in Japanese subjects
with early- and late-onset NIDDM.

Iwasaki N(1), Oda N, Ogata M, Hara M, Hinokio Y, Oda Y, Yamagata K, Kanematsu S, 
Ohgawara H, Omori Y, Bell GI.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, Tokyo Women's Medical College, Japan.

Recent studies have shown that mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-1alpha gene are the cause of maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 3
(MODY3). We have screened 193 unrelated Japanese subjects with NIDDM for
mutations in this gene: 83 with early-onset NIDDM (diagnosis at <30 years of age)
and 110 with late-onset NIDDM (diagnosis > or = 30 years of age). All of the
members of the latter group also had at least one sibling with NIDDM. The 10
exons, flanking introns, and promoter region were amplified using polymerase
chain reaction and were sequenced directly. Mutations were found in 7 of the 83
(8%) unrelated subjects with early-onset NIDDM. The mutations were each different
and included four missense mutations (L12H, R131Q, K205Q, and R263C) and three
frameshift mutations (P379fsdelCT, T392fsdelA, and L584S585fsinsTC). One of the
110 subjects with late-onset NIDDM was heterozygous for the missense mutation
G191D. This subject, who was diagnosed with NIDDM at 64 years of age, also had a 
brother with NIDDM (age at diagnosis, 54 years) who carried the same mutation,
suggesting that this mutation contributed to the development of NIDDM in these
two siblings. None of these mutations were present in 50 unrelated subjects with 
normal glucose tolerance (100 normal chromosomes). Mutations in the HNF-1alpha
gene occur in Japanese subjects with NIDDM and appear to be an important cause of
early-onset NIDDM in this population. In addition, they are present in about 1%
of subjects with late-onset NIDDM.

PMID: 9287053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Sep;17(9):4948-56.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha gene inactivation impairs chromatin remodeling
and demethylation of the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene.

Pontoglio M(1), Faust DM, Doyen A, Yaniv M, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, URA 1644 du Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1alpha) is a homeoprotein that is expressed
in the liver, kidney, pancreas, and digestive tract. Its inactivation in mouse
resulted in decreased transcription of known target genes such as albumin and
alpha1-antitrypsin. In contrast, the phenylalanine hydroxylase (PAH) gene was
totally silent and unresponsive to normal inducers like glucocorticoids and
cyclic AMP in the liver. DNase I and micrococcal nuclease digestion of liver
nuclei showed that HNF1alpha inactivation had drastic effects on the chromatin
structure of the PAH regulatory regions. Three DNase I-hypersensitive sites
(HSSI, HSSII, and HSSIII), typical of the actively transcribed PAH gene, were
undetectable in liver from HNF1alpha-deficient animals. Both HSSII and HSSIII
elements harbor HNF1 sites, but only the latter has detectable enhancer activity 
in transient-transfection assays. In addition, the PAH promoter in livers of
HNF1alpha-deficient animals was methylated. These results suggest that HNF1alpha 
could activate transcription through two mechanisms. One implies participation in
the recruitment of the general transcription machinery to the promoter, and the
second involves the remodeling of chromatin structure and demethylation that
would allow transcription factors to interact with their cognate cis-acting
elements.

PMCID: PMC232346
PMID: 9271373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Gene. 1997 Aug 22;195(2):121-6.

Cloning and characterization of the human mitochondrial
3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA synthase gene.

Boukaftane Y(1), Mitchell GA.

Author information: 
(1)Service de génétique médicale, Hôpital Ste-Justine, Université de Montréal,
Québec, Canada.

We report the characterization of lambda and P1 phage clones containing the
entire human mitochondrial 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl CoA synthase (mHS) gene.
The human mHS locus (HMGCS2) on chromosome 1p12-13 spans 25 kb and contains 10
exons. Exon 1 contains most of the mitochondrial leader, consistent with a recent
hypothesis of the evolution of the ketogenic pathway. By primer extension and
cDNA amplification (RACE-PCR) we localized the transcription start point (tsp) to
60 bp upstream of the initiation codon. Nine blocks of conserved sequence were
identified by comparing the 5' flanking regions of the mHS genes of human and
rat. The 5' flanking region contains potential binding sites for TATA-binding
protein, Sp1, nuclear factor 1 (NF1), CAAT-box binding protein (C/EBP),
hepatocyte nuclear factors 1 and 5 (HNF1, HNF5) and activator proteins 1 and 2
(AP1, AP2).

PMID: 9305755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. FEBS Lett. 1997 Aug 4;412(3):597-602.

Involvement of HNF-1 in the regulation of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene 
expression in the kidney.

Cassuto H(1), Olswang Y, Livoff AF, Nechushtan H, Hanson RW, Reshef L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biochemistry, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical
School, Jerusalem, Israel.

The cytosolic form of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (GTP) (PEPCK) gene is
differentially expressed in several tissues. A specific set of regulatory
elements in the promoter are responsible for the control of PEPCK gene
transcription and, in turn, determine its distinct metabolic role in each tissue.
DNase I footprinting analysis of the PEPCK promoter, using nuclear proteins from 
tissues which express the gene for PEPCK, and transient expression assays in
renal cell lines have demonstrated that the HNF-1 recognition motif (P2) in the
PEPCK promoter characterizes kidney-specific expression. This site is required
also for the response to acidosis. Since the P2 site is not involved in the
expression of the PEPCK gene in the liver, we propose that its critical role in
the kidney stems from a combination of abundance of HNF-1 together with low
concentrations of members of the C/EBP family in this tissue.

PMID: 9276474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Diabetes. 1997 Aug;46(8):1364-7.

Pancreatic islet expression studies and polymorphic DNA markers in the genes
encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4gamma, and -6.

Vaisse C(1), Kim J, Espinosa R 3rd, Le Beau MM, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, Rockefeller University, New York, New York
10021, USA.

The genes encoding the functionally related hepatocyte nuclear factors HNF-1alpha
and HNF-4alpha play a critical role in normal pancreatic beta-cell function.
Mutations in these liver-enriched transcription factors result in two forms of
early-onset type 2 diabetes (maturity-onset diabetes of the young [MODY]), MODY3 
and MODY1, which are characterized by impaired glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion, early disease onset, and autosomal dominant inheritance. The
transcriptional hierarchy of HNFs suggests that other proteins of the regulatory 
cascade might be responsible for other forms of MODY and/or late-onset type 2
diabetes. In this study, we show that HNF-3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4gamma, and
-6 are expressed in pancreatic beta-cells. We report the identification and
characterization of simple tandem repeat DNA polymorphisms in the genes encoding 
HNF-3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4gamma, and -6 and the mapping of HNF-6 to
chromosome bands 15q21.1-21.2 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. These
markers will be useful to study the role of genetic variation in these genes in
the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 9231664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Science. 1997 Jul 4;277(5322):109-12.

Modulation of hepatic gene expression by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1.

Ktistaki E(1), Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology-Hellas, Post Office Box 1527, 711 10 Heraklion, Crete, Greece.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1 and 4 (HNF-1 and HNF-4) are liver-enriched
transcription factors that function in the regulation of several liver-specific
genes. HNF-1 activates genes containing promoters with HNF-1 binding sites.
However, this factor negatively regulates its own expression and that of other
HNF-4-dependent genes that lack HNF-1 binding sites in their promoter region.
This repression is exerted by a direct interaction of HNF-1 with AF2, the main
activation domain of HNF-4. The dual functions of gene activation and repression 
suggest that HNF-1 is a global regulator of the transcriptional network involved 
in the maintenance of hepatocyte-specific phenotype.

PMID: 9204893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Eur J Biochem. 1997 Jul 1;247(1):148-59.

Structural and functional analysis of the promoter of the hepatic lipase gene.

Chang SF(1), Scharf JG, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der
Universität Hamburg, Germany.

Hepatic lipase (HL) gene transcription is almost exclusively limited to
hepatocytes. Here we have studied sequences and transcription factors regulating 
basal and hepatocyte-restricted HL promoter activity. Sequencing of a cloned
3.4-kb HL promoter fragment revealed three Alu repeat sequences and a consensus
hepatocyte-enriched nuclear transcription factor 1 (HNF1) binding site located
upstream of one major and one minor transcription initiation site. By
transfection of cell lines of hepatic and non-hepatic origin and of primary
hepatocyte cultures, sequences controlling basic HL promoter activity and
negative elements located downstream and upstream thereof which extinguish or
enhance this activity were defined. Some HL-promoter fragments with internal
deletions were active only in primary hepatocyte cultures. Human HNF1 protein was
shown to bind to the HL-specific HNF1 response element and the activity of a
heterologous promoter was enhanced by HL-HNF1 in rat primary hepatocyte cultures 
but not in the context of the authentic 3.4-kb HL promoter sequences. In cell
lines the presence of HNF4 but not of HNF1 and vHNF1 mRNA was found to correlate 
with HL gene expression although no perfect consensus HNF4 binding motif was
detected in the promoter region tested. Taken together, these data indicate that 
hepatocyte-specific HL gene transcription is controlled by positive and negative 
transcription regulatory proteins which bind to sequence motifs within and
outside of the proximal 3.4-kb promoter fragment studied. For the elucidation of 
the control of HL promoter activity in vivo the use of primary hepatocyte
cultures is essential.

PMID: 9249021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Diabetologia. 1997 Jul;40(7):859-62.

A missense mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha gene in a UK
pedigree with maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Bulman MP(1), Dronsfield MJ, Frayling T, Appleton M, Bain SC, Ellard S,
Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, University of Exeter, UK.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic subgroup of
non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) characterised bylan early age of 
onset (< 25 years) and an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. MODY is
genetically heterogeneous with three different genes identified to date;
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF-4 alpha) [MODY1], glucokinase [MODY2] and 
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) [MODY3]. A nonsense mutation in
the HNF-4 alpha gene has recently been shown to cause MODY in a single large
North American pedigree (RW). We screened a large UK Caucasian MODY family which 
showed weak evidence of linkage to the MODY1 locus on chromosome 20q (lod score
for ADA 0.68 at theta = 0) for mutations in the coding region of the HNF-4 alpha 
gene by direct sequencing. A missense mutation resulting in the substitution of
glutamine for glutamic acid was identified in exon 7 (E276Q). The mutation was
present in all of the diabetic members of the pedigree plus two unaffected
subjects and was not detected in 75 normal control subjects or 95 UK Caucasian
subjects with late-onset NIDDM. This is the first missense mutation to be
described in the HNF-4 alpha gene.

PMID: 9243109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. EMBO J. 1997 Jul 1;16(13):3995-4006.

Transcriptional regulation in endoderm development: characterization of an
enhancer controlling Hnf3g expression by transgenesis and targeted mutagenesis.

Hiemisch H(1), Schütz G, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology of the Cell I Division, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

The hepatic nuclear factor 3gamma (Hnf3g) is a member of the winged helix gene
family of transcription factors and is thought to be involved in
anterior-posterior regionalization of the primitive gut. In this study,
cis-regulatory elements essential for the expression of Hnf3g in vivo have been
characterized. To this end, a 170 kb yeast artificial chromosome (YAC) carrying
the entire Hnf3g locus was isolated and modified with a lacZ reporter gene. The
two mouse lines carrying the unfragmented Hnf3g-lacZ YAC showed tissue-specific, 
copy number-dependent and position-independent expression, proving that 170 kb of
the Hnf3g locus contain all elements important in the regulation of Hnf3g.
Cis-regulatory elements necessary for expression of Hnf3g were identified in a
three-step procedure. First, DNase I hypersensitive site mapping was used to
delineate important chromatin regions around the gene required for
tissue-specific activation of Hnf3g. Second, plasmid-derived transgenes and gene 
targeting of the endogenous Hnf3g gene locus were used to demonstrate that the
3'-flanking region of the gene is necessary and sufficient to direct reporter
gene expression in liver, pancreas, stomach and small intestine. Third, a binding
site for HNF-1alpha and beta, factors expressed in organs derived from the
endoderm such as liver, gut and pancreas, was identified in this 3'-enhancer and 
shown to be crucial for enhancer function in vitro. Based on its expression
pattern we inferred that HNF-1beta is a likely candidate for directly activating 
Hnf3g gene expression during development.

PMCID: PMC1170023
PMID: 9233809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Jun 27;235(3):820-5.

mRNA expression of HNF-4 isoforms and of HNF-1alpha/HNF-1beta variants and
differentiation of human cell lines that mimic highly specialized phenotypes of
intestinal epithelium.

Suaud L(1), Joseph B, Formstecher P, Laine B.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 459 INSERM, Laboratoire de Biochimie Structurale, Faculté de Médecine de
Lille, France.

The mRNA expression of HNF-4 isoforms and the ratio of HNF-1alpha/HNF-1beta
variants in cell lines representing highly specialized phenotypes of human
intestinal epithelium were studied by RT-PCR. A strong rise in expression of
HNF-4 isoforms alpha2, alpha4 and gamma correlates with commitment into highly
differentiated enterocyte-like phenotype of Caco-2 cells which best mimic
enterocytes, whereas only isoform alpha4 expression is high in the less
differentiated HT-29 G- cells. These increased expressions are not encountered in
the highly differentiated mucous-secreting HT-29 MTX cells. Differentiation into 
highly specialized enterocyte-like Caco-2 cells and mucous-secreting HT-29 MTX
cells is accompanied by a moderate rise in HNF-1 without change in the ratio of
its variants. Our data corroborate those of Spath et al. (Mol. Cell. Biol., 1997,
17, 1913) in hepatoma cells and suggest that HNF-4 isoforms alpha2, alpha4 and
gamma play a major role in the differentiation of enterocytes.

PMID: 9207245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Jun 15;25(12):2501-8.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 prevents silencing of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
expression in hepatoma x fibroblast cell hybrids.

Bulla GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Research Institute, St Louis University Health Sciences Center and
Cardinal Glennon Children's Hospital, 3662 Park Avenue, St Louis, MO 63110, USA. 
bullaga@sluvca.slu.edu

Hepatocyte nuclear factors-1alpha (HNF1alpha) and -4 (HNF4) are components of a
liver-enriched transcription activation pathway which is thought to play a
critical role in hepatocyte-specific gene expression, including activation of
alpha1-antitrypsin gene expression. HNF1alpha, HNF4 and alpha1-antitrypsin
(alpha1AT) genes are extinguished in hepatoma/fibroblast somatic cell hybrids,
suggesting that fibroblasts contain a repressor-like activity. To determine the
molecular basis for silencing of these genes in cell hybrids, ectopic expression 
of HNF1alpha and HNF4 was used. Results show that constitutive expression of HNF4
prevents extinction of HNF1alpha gene expression in hepatoma/fibroblast hybrids. 
In contrast, forced HNF1alpha expression failed to prevent extinction of the HNF4
locus in cell hybrids. Likewise, the alpha1AT gene remained silent in the
presence of both HNF1alpha and HNF4. These results suggest that extinction of
HNF1alpha is a simple lack-of-activation phenotype, whereas extinction of HNF4
andalpha1AT loci is more complex, perhaps involving negative regulation.

PMCID: PMC146744
PMID: 9171105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Mech Dev. 1997 Jun;64(1-2):7-17.

Patterning the expression of a tissue-specific transcription factor in
embryogenesis: HNF1 alpha gene activation during Xenopus development.

von Strandmann EP(1), Nastos A, Holewa B, Senkel S, Weber H, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätskinikum Essen, Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung),
Germany.

Tissue-specific transcription factors play an essential role in establishing cell
identity during development. We review our knowledge of the molecular events
involved in the activation of the gene encoding the tissue-specific transcription
factor HNF1 alpha (LFB1). The available data suggest that the maternal factors
OZ-1, HNF4 alpha and HNF4 beta act as initial activators of the HNF1 alpha
promoter. We present evidence suggesting that the mesoderm-inducing factor
activin A plays a critical role by acting through the HNF4 binding site of the
HNF1 alpha promoter. The activity of this embryonic morphogen seems to form a
gradient opposing the distribution of the maternal HNF4 proteins that are
concentrated at the animal pole of the egg. After zygotic gene transcription the 
HNF1 alpha-related transcription factor HNF1 beta accumulates faster than HNF1
alpha itself and thus is likely to contribute to the activation of the HNF1 alpha
transcription via the HNF1 binding site. The cofactor of the HNF1 proteins (DCoH)
is present throughout development and thus cannot limit the activation potential 
of HNF1 alpha in early development. Our results provide a detailed description of
setting up the expression pattern of a tissue-specific transcription factor
during embryogenesis.

PMID: 9232592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Jun;16(6):725-36.

Regulation of the hepatic CYP 2E1 gene during chronic alcohol exposure: lack of
an ethanol response element in the proximal 5'-flanking sequence.

McGehee RE Jr(1), Ronis MJ, Badger TM.

Author information: 
(1)University of Arkansas for Medical Sciences, Arkansas Children's Hospital
Research Institute, Department of Pediatrics, Little Rock 72205, USA.

Chronic exposure to ethanol is known to cause a dramatic increase in the level of
CYP 2E1 apoprotein. More recently it has been demonstrated that under certain
conditions the mRNA encoding cytochrome P450 2E1(CYP 2E1) is inducible; however, 
the mechanisms by which these increases occur are not well understood. In the
current study, DNase I footprinting assays performed on the first kilobase of the
CYP 2E1 5'-flanking sequences resulted in the identification of 13
sequence-specific protected regions using rat liver nuclear extracts isolated
from either control or ethanol-treated animals. No differences were observed in
the DNase I footprint patterns produced by the two different nuclear extracts. In
addition, analysis by electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) revealed that 
with one exception, there were no differences in the level of binding complexes
between the two extracts. However, EMSA analysis with an oligonucleotide to one
footprint site (designated Site C) revealed that in nuclear extracts isolated
from ethanol-treated animals there was a 2.9-fold increase in this binding
complex when compared to control nuclear extracts. This site was previously shown
to contain an HNF-1alpha binding site, and here we demonstrate that bacterially
expressed HNF-1alpha in footprint assays bind Site C sequences and that
HNF-1alpha transactivates the CYP 2E1 promoter in co-transfection experiments
with HNF-1alpha expression plasmid and plasmids containing CYP 2E1 promoter
sequences coupled to the chloramphenicol acetyl transferase gene. Furthermore, in
contrast to the increase observed by EMSA in Site C binding, no increase was
detected in the CYP 2E1 transcriptional rate supported by nuclear extracts from
ethanol-treated animals over controls using in vitro transcription assays,
suggesting that the increase by ethanol in CYP 2E1 transcription is not mediated 
through the HNF-1alpha site.

PMID: 9212166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Hepatology. 1997 Jun;25(6):1507-15.

A hepatitis B virus mutant with a new hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 binding site
emerging in transplant-transmitted fulminant hepatitis B.

Pult I(1), Chouard T, Wieland S, Klemenz R, Yaniv M, Blum HE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University Hospital, Zürich, Switzerland.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) DNA was cloned from serum of a heart transplant recipient
who died from fulminant hepatitis B transmitted by the donor. Restriction enzyme 
analyses of the clones obtained by conventional cloning yielded six HBV variants:
a major species (pF-1) representing 88% and five minor species (pF-2 to pF-6),
each representing 2% to 4% of the clones. The complete nucleotide sequence of
these six variants revealed that five of the six viral genomes, including pF-1,
carried a novel 11 base pair (bp) insertion in the core promoter region as well
as an 18 bp and an 108 bp in-frame deletion in the pre-S1 region not present in
the donor. One genome was identical to the sequence of the donor. Functional
analyses of HBV clones generated by in vitro mutagenesis and cassette exchange
showed that the 11 bp insertion is a strong binding site for hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 (HNF-1). In transient transfection experiments, the novel HNF-1 sequence
motif was shown to result in enhanced viral replication. Immunohistochemical
analyses revealed high levels of cytoplasmic and nuclear hepatitis B core antigen
(HBcAg) and only scattered hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) expression in the 
liver. The data in our immunosuppressed patient showed that HBV variants can
rapidly accumulate in severe hepatitis B and suggest that the novel HNF-1 binding
site may have contributed to the fulminant clinical course, possibly via enhanced
viral replication.

PMID: 9185776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Diabetes. 1997 Jun;46(6):1081-6.

Novel mutations and a mutational hotspot in the MODY3 gene.

Glucksmann MA(1), Lehto M, Tayber O, Scotti S, Berkemeier L, Pulido JC, Wu Y, Nir
WJ, Fang L, Markel P, Munnelly KD, Goranson J, Orho M, Young BM, Whitacre JL,
McMenimen C, Wantman M, Tuomi T, Warram J, Forsblom CM, Carlsson M, Rosenzweig J,
Kennedy G, Duyk GM, Thomas JD, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Millennium Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Cambridge, Massachusetts 02139, USA.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young 3 (MODY3) is a type of NIDDM caused by
mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha) located on chromosome 12q. We have identified four novel HNF-1alpha 
missense mutations in MODY3 families. In four additional and unrelated families, 
we observed an identical insertion mutation that had occurred in a polycytidine
tract in exon 4. Among those families, one exhibited a de novo mutation at this
location. We propose that instability of this sequence represents a general
mutational mechanism in MODY3. We observed no HNF-1alpha mutations among 86
unrelated late-onset diabetic patients with relative insulin deficiency. Hence
mutations in this gene appear to be most strongly associated with early-onset
diabetes.

PMID: 9166684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jun;17(6):3013-20.

Distinct retinoid X receptor-retinoic acid receptor heterodimers are
differentially involved in the control of expression of retinoid target genes in 
F9 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Chiba H(1), Clifford J, Metzger D, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Illkirch, France.

The F9 murine embryonal carcinoma cell line represents a well-established system 
for the study of retinoid signaling in vivo. We have investigated the functional 
specificity of different retinoid X receptor (RXR)-retinoic acid (RA) receptor
(RAR) isotype pairs for the control of expression of endogenous RA-responsive
genes, by using wild-type (WT), RXR alpha(-/-), RAR alpha(-/-), RAR gamma(-/-),
RXR alpha(-/-)-RAR alpha(-/-), and RXR alpha(-/-)-RAR gamma(-/-) F9 cells, as
well as panRXR and RAR isotype (alpha, beta, and gamma)-selective retinoids. We
show that in these cells the control of expression of different sets of
RA-responsive genes is preferentially mediated by distinct RXR-RAR isotype
combinations. Our data support the conclusion that RXR-RAR heterodimers are the
functional units transducing the retinoid signal and indicate in addition that
these heterodimers exert both specific and redundant functions on the expression 
of particular sets of RA-responsive genes. We also show that the presence of a
given receptor isotype can hinder the activity of another isotype and therefore
that functional redundancy between retinoid receptor isotypes can be
artifactually generated by gene knockouts.

PMCID: PMC232153
PMID: 9154799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Somat Cell Mol Genet. 1997 May;23(3):185-201.

Selective loss of the hepatic phenotype due to the absence of a transcriptional
activation pathway.

Bulla GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, St. Louis University Health Sciences Center,
Missouri, USA.

Liver-enriched trans-acting factors hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1
alpha) and -4 (HNF4) are components of a transcriptional activation pathway that 
is thought to play a major role in hepatic gene activation. We previously
described the isolation and characterization of distinct classes of hepatoma
variants which lack the HNF4-->HNF1 alpha pathway (1). In order to determine the 
influence of the HNF4-->HNF1 alpha pathway on hepatic gene expression, genetic
rescue experiments were done using hepatoma variant line H11 as a model system.
Results suggest that this pathway is required for basal expression of a number of
endogenous hepatocyte-specific genes. Complementation groups were established by 
fusion of H11 cells with other variant lines. Lastly, introduction of human
chromosome 20 (containing the HNF4 locus) or randomly-marked human chromosomes
into H11 cells failed to rescue the hepatic phenotype, suggesting that what
appears to be a 'simple' defect may involve multiple genetic loci.

PMID: 9330630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Eur J Endocrinol. 1997 May;136(5):469-70.

Transcription factors in the pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus.

Hussain MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston 02114, USA.

PMID: 9186265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 May;16(5):569-77.

Synergistic transactivation of HNF-1alpha, HNF-3, and NF-I contributes to the
activation of the liver-specific protein C gene.

Tsay W(1), Lee YM, Lee SC, Shen MC, Chen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine, Taipei, Republic of China.

We have previously characterized the functional cis elements of the protein C
promoter. One hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) site, three HNF-3 sites, and at
least two NF-I sites have been identified within the 140-bp basal transcriptional
unit of this promoter. Here we present evidence that either HNF-1alpha or HNF-3
can cooperate with each other in binding to their cis elements. The results from 
the co-transfection assays in HeLa cells showed a novel synergistic
transactivation between HNF-1alpha and HNF-3. Our data further indicate that the 
unique overlapping of the HNF-3 sites, the specific spatial relationship of the
sites, and the co-activator C/EBP all contributed to the synergistic interaction.
Although NF-I itself has a weak transactivating effect, it apparently coordinates
the transactivation complex formation. NF-I can synergistically enhance the
transactivation of HNF-1alpha or HNF-3. Taken together, the combinatorial
interplay of HNF-1alpha, HNF-3, and NF-I make a significant contribution to the
activation of the liver-specific protein C gene.

PMID: 9174162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Diabetes. 1997 May;46(5):912-6.

A prevalent amino acid polymorphism at codon 98 in the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha gene is associated with reduced serum C-peptide and insulin
responses to an oral glucose challenge.

Urhammer SA(1), Fridberg M, Hansen T, Rasmussen SK, Møller AM, Clausen JO,
Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) gene cause the
type 3 form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3), which is
characterized by a severe impairment of insulin secretion. In addition to
disease-associated mutations, three common amino acid polymorphisms have been
identified in the HNF-1alpha gene: Ile/Leu27, Ala/Val 98, and Ser/Asn487. We have
addressed the question of whether these variants of the HNF-1alpha gene are
associated with altered glucose-induced C-peptide and insulin responses or
late-onset NIDDM. Among 245 NIDDM patients, the allelic frequency of the Val 98
variant was 3.7% (95% CI 2.0-5.4%) vs. 4.4% (2.6-6.2%) among 240 glucose tolerant
control subjects (NS). Studies of genotype-phenotype interactions in 240
middle-aged control subjects showed, however, that heterozygous subjects (i.e.,
genotype Ala/Val 98) had an 18% decrease in 30-min serum C-peptide level (P =
0.004) as well as a 23% decrease in 30-min serum insulin level (P = 0.03) during 
an oral glucose tolerance test. One Val 98 homozygote subject had a more severe
reduction in stimulated insulin and C-peptide levels. The impact of the
homozygous carrier status was similar in a study of 377 healthy young subjects.
In contrast, the Ile/Leu27 and Ser/Asn487 polymorphisms were not associated with 
altered C-peptide and insulin release or NIDDM. In conclusion, 8% of white
subjects of Danish ancestry are heterozygous for the Ala/Val 98 polymorphism in
the HNF-1alpha gene, which in middle-aged subjects is associated with a
approximately 20% reduction in serum C-peptide and insulin responses 30 min after
an oral glucose challenge. Val 98 homozygotes may exhibit a more severe defect in
the early glucose-induced insulin response.

PMID: 9133564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 May;17(5):2790-7.

Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factors act as auxiliary
cofactors for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 and enhance hepatic gene expression.

Ktistaki E(1), Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology Hellas, Herakleion, Crete, Greece.

Chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factors (COUP-TFs) strongly
inhibit transcriptional activation mediated by nuclear hormone receptors,
including hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF-4). COUP-TFs repress HNF-4-dependent
gene expression by competition with HNF-4 for common binding sites found in
several regulatory regions. Here we show that promoters, such as the HNF-1
promoter, which are recognized by HNF-4 but not by COUP-TFs are activated by
COUP-TFI and COUP-TFII in conjunction with HNF-4 more than 100-fold above basal
levels, as opposed to about 8-fold activation by HNF-4 alone. This enhancement
was strictly dependent on an intact HNF-4 E domain. In vitro and in vivo evidence
suggests that COUP-TFs enhance HNF-4 activity by a mechanism that involves their 
physical interaction with the amino acid 227 to 271 region of HNF-4. Our results 
indicate that in certain promoters, COUP-TFs act as auxiliary cofactors for
HNF-4, orienting the HNF-4 activation domain in a more efficient configuration to
achieve enhanced transcriptional activity. These findings provide new insights
into the regulatory functions of COUP-TFs, suggesting their involvement in the
initial activation and subsequent high-level expression of hepatic regulators, as
well as in the positive and negative modulation of downstream target genes.

PMCID: PMC232130
PMID: 9111350  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1997 Apr 28;233(3):631-6.

Extrahepatic expression of NAD(P)H:menadione oxidoreductase, UDP
glucuronosyltransferase-1A6, microsomal aldehyde dehydrogenase, and hepatic
nuclear factor-1 alpha mRNAs in ch/ch and 14CoS/14CoS mice.

Vasiliou V(1), Reuter SF, Nebert DW.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental Genetics, University of Cincinnati Medical Center,
Ohio 45267-0056, USA.

Oxidative stress-induced gene expression in liver of the untreated newborn
c14CoS/c14CoS mouse, as compared with that in the cch/cch wild-type mouse,
appears to be caused by homozygous loss of the fumarylacetoacetate hydrolase
(Fah) gene on Chr 7 and absence of the FAH enzyme, which leads to increased
levels of endogenous reactive oxygenated metabolites (ROMs) formed in the
tyrosine degradative pathway. In these mice almost all studies to date have been 
carried out in liver. We have examined the extrahepatic expression of four genes.
Two genes are members of the [Ah] battery and induced by ROM-mediated oxidative
stress: NAD(P)H:menadione oxidoreductase (Nmo1) and UDP
glucuronosyltransferase-1A6 (Ugt1a6). The other two genes are decreased in the
livers of 14CoS/ 14CoS mice as compared with that in ch/ch mice: microsomal
aldehyde dehydrogenase (Ahd3) and hepatocyte-specific nuclear factor-1 alpha
HNF-1 alpha (Hnf1 alpha). In liver plus nine extrahepatic tissues of untreated
newborn 14CoS/14CoS mutant and ch/ch wild-type mice, we compared NMO1, UGT1A6,
AHD3 and HNF-1 alpha mRNA levels. Our results show a wide variation in
extrahepatic tissue-specific expression of all four transcripts and indicate that
numerous differences exist in the extrahepatic expression of these genes between 
14CoS/14CoS and ch/ch mice.

PMID: 9168903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Nucleic Acids Res. 1997 Apr 15;25(8):1476-84.

The bifunctional DCOH protein binds to HNF1 independently of its
4-alpha-carbinolamine dehydratase activity.

Sourdive DJ(1), Transy C, Garbay S, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, URA 1644 du CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies, 
U163 INSERM, Institut Pasteur, 25, rue du Dr Roux, 75724 Paris cedex 15, France.

HNF1 is a liver enriched atypical homeoprotein isolated from vertebrates which is
involved in the transcriptional activation of liver, kidney, intestine and
pancreas specific genes. HNF1 contains an N-terminal dimerisation and a POU-like 
domain both essential together with the homeodomain for DNA specific recognition.
Using the yeast two-hybrid system we searched for proteins interacting with HNF1.
We repeatedly obtained cDNA clones encoding DCOH/4-alpha-carbinolamine
dehydratase, an enzyme involved in the oxidation of aromatic amino acids that was
shown to bind to and stabilise HNF1 dimers. Using the yeast system, we show that 
the enzymatic activity of DCOH is not essential for HNF1 binding and that the
HNF1 dimerisation domain is sufficient for DCOH binding. Furthermore we
demonstrate that both proteins co-localise in co-transfected cells.

PMCID: PMC146627
PMID: 9092652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Mol Biol. 1997 Apr 4;267(3):673-83.

The NMR solution structure of the non-classical homeodomain from the rat liver
LFB1/HNF1 transcription factor.

Schott O(1), Billeter M, Leiting B, Wider G, Wüthrich K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Biophysik, Eidgenössische Technische
Hochschule-Hönggerberg, Zurich, Switerland.

The nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) solution structure of the non-classical
homeodomain from the rat liver LFB1/HNF1 transcription factor was determined with
the program DIANA from an input of 1356 nuclear Overhauser enhancement (NOE)
upper distance constraints and 228 dihedral angle constraints collected using
experiments with the unlabelled, the uniformly 15N-labelled and the uniformly
13C-labelled protein. Out of a group of 50 independently calculated conformers
the 20 conformers with the smallest residual DIANA target function values were
refined by energy minimization with the program OPAL and are used to represent
the NMR structure. The average of the pairwise root-mean-square deviations
(r.m.s.d.) of these 20 individual NMR conformers relative to the mean coordinates
is 0.73 A (1 A = 0.1 nm) for the backbone atoms N, C(alpha) and C' of residues 15
to 82. The chain-terminal polypeptide segments 1-14 and 90-99 are disordered in
solution. The globular fold contains three well-defined helices comprising the
residues 19 to 29, 37 to 53 and 71 to 81, and the third helix is extended by a
less well-ordered fourth helix with residues 82 to 89, which coincides with
corresponding observations in "classical" homeodomains. Side-chain analysis
resulted in 33 "best-defined" side-chains, with global displacements smaller than
1.1 A, and addition of these side-chains to the global superposition of residues 
15 to 82 resulted in a r.m.s.d of 0.81 A. The protein contains two hydrophobic
cores, one of which corresponds to the helical packing seen in classical
homeodomains, while the other one stabilizes the conformation of the 21-residue
insertion between helices II and III. The individual helices and their relative
spatial arrangements are stabilized by a variety of structural motifs, which
include medium-range and long-range hydrogen bonds and salt bridges. Detailed
comparison with the Antennapedia homeodomain, and studies of the complex
formation with an operator DNA half-site provided initial information on the
DNA-binding mode of the LFB1/HNF1 homeodomain.

PMID: 9126845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Apr;17(4):1913-22.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 expression overcomes repression of the hepatic
phenotype in dedifferentiated hepatoma cells.

Späth GF(1), Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, URA 1149, Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

The capacity of the liver-enriched transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor
4 (HNF4) to direct redifferentiation of dedifferentiated rat hepatoma cells was
investigated by stable transfection of epitope-tagged HNF4 cDNA into H5 variant
cells. HNF4-producing cells expressed the previously silent HNF1 gene and showed 
activation of some hepatic functions, including alpha1-antitrypsin,
beta-fibrinogen, and transthyretin, but not of the endogenous HNF4 gene.
Expression of the other hepatocyte-enriched transcription factors was not
modified. Treatment of the HNF4tag-expressing cells with dexamethasone induced
expression of the transgene by 10-fold, resulting in enhanced expression of
target genes of both glucocorticoid hormones and HNF4. The set of activated
hepatic genes was extended by treatment of cells with the demethylating agent
5-azacytidine followed by selection in dexamethasone-containing glucose-free
medium. Some of the colonies that developed reexpressed the entire set of hepatic
functions tested. Fusion of HNF4tag-producing H5 cells with well-differentiated
Fao cells showed that only those hybrids which maintained expression of HNF4tag
were protected from complete extinction, including that of the Fao HNF4 gene.
Thus, H5 cells must produce an extinguisher of the HNF4 gene. In addition, this
result implies that HNF4 itself, or its target HNF1, is a positive regulator of
HNF4. In conclusion, HNF4tag expression overcomes repression of the hepatic
phenotype of the H5 cell without abolishing its potential to extinguish an active
genome. Taken together, these results predict that expression of HNF4 should be
sufficient to establish heritable expression of many parameters of the hepatic
differentiated state.

PMCID: PMC232038
PMID: 9121439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Diabetologia. 1997 Apr;40(4):473-5.

Genetic variation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha gene in Danish
Caucasians with late-onset NIDDM.

Urhammer SA(1), Rasmussen SK, Kaisaki PJ, Oda N, Yamagata K, Møller AM, Fridberg 
M, Hansen L, Hansen T, Bell GI, Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) is a phenotypically and
genetically heterogeneous disorder. A recent random genome mapping study has
localized a locus termed NIDDM2 that maps to the region of chromosome 12 that
includes MODY3, one of the three genes responsible for maturity-onset diabetes of
the young, a monogenic form of NIDDM characterized by early age of onset and
autosomal dominant inheritance. These findings suggest that NIDDM2 and MODY3 may 
represent different alleles of the same gene. MODY3 has recently been shown to be
the gene encoding the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha
(HNF-1 alpha) thereby allowing us to determine whether mutations in the HNF-1
alpha gene are present in subjects with late-onset NIDDM. We screened 84 white
NIDDM patients of Danish ancestry and found four nucleotide substitutions that
changed the sequence of HNF-1 alpha, Ile27-->Leu, Ala98-->Val, Ser487-->Asn and
Arg583-->Gln, five nucleotide substitutions that were silent and did not change
the amino acid, Leu17, Gly288, Leu459 and Thr515, and five substitutions in the
intron regions. The frequencies of the codon 27, 98 and 487 amino acid variants
were similar in 245 unrelated NIDDM patients and 242 age-matched control
subjects. The Arg583-->Gln mutation was found in 2 of 245 NIDDM patients and in
none of the control subjects. Thus, genetic variation in the HNF-1 alpha gene is 
not a common factor contributing to NIDDM susceptibility in white subjects of
Danish ancestry.

PMID: 9112026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Hum Mol Genet. 1997 Apr;6(4):583-6.

Identification of nine novel mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha
gene associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3).

Vaxillaire M(1), Rouard M, Yamagata K, Oda N, Kaisaki PJ, Boriraj VV, Chevre JC, 
Boccio V, Cox RD, Lathrop GM, Dussoix P, Philippe J, Timsit J, Charpentier G,
Velho G, Bell GI, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS EP10, Institut Pasteur de Lille & CHU de Lille, France.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically heterogeneous
subtype of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) characterised by early
onset, autosomal dominant inheritance and a primary defect in insulin secretion. 
Recent studies have shown that mutations in the two functionally related
transcription factors, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF-4alpha) and
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1alpha) are associated with the MODY1 and 
MODY3 forms of diabetes respectively, whereas mutations in the enzyme glucokinase
are the cause of the MODY2 form. We have examined 10 unrelated Caucasian families
in which MODY/NIDDM co-segregated with markers for MODY3 for mutations in the
HNF-1alpha gene (TCF1). Ten different mutations were observed in these families, 
all of which co-segregated with diabetes. There were no obvious relationships
between the nature of the mutations observed (i.e. frameshift, nonsense, or
missense) or their location in the gene with clinical features of diabetes (age
at onset, severity) in these families. The mechanisms by which mutations in the
HNF-1alpha gene cause diabetes mellitus are unclear but might include abnormal
pancreatic islet development during foetal life thereby limiting their later
function, as well as impaired transcriptional regulation of genes that play a key
role in normal pancreatic beta cell function.

PMID: 9097962  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Am J Clin Nutr. 1997 Apr;65(4):994-9.

Effects of cyclic and continuous parenteral nutrition on albumin gene
transcription in rat liver.

Morimoto T(1), Tsujinaka T, Ogawa A, Kishibuchi M, Morita S, Yano M, Shiozaki H, 
Monden M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery II, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.

Comment in
    Am J Clin Nutr. 1997 Apr;65(4):1078-9.

To evaluate schedule-dependent effects of parenteral nutrition on albumin gene
expression and regulation, mRNA levels for albumin and its promoter-binding
nuclear factors in the liver were measured in rats receiving cyclic or continuous
parenteral nutrition. Rats were divided into three groups: the control group (n =
5) received a nonpurified diet, the continuous parenteral nutrition group (n = 5)
received a continuous infusion of a defined parenteral nutrition formula, and the
cyclic parenteral nutrition group (n = 5) received a cyclic (between 2000 and
0800) infusion of the same formula. After 7 d, rats were killed to obtain serum
and liver. The serum albumin concentrations were 44 +/- 3 g/L in the controls, 31
+/- 2 g/L in the continuous parenteral nutrition group, and 33 +/- 3 g/L in the
cyclic parenteral nutrition group. The mRNA for albumin and D site binding
protein (DBP) was more abundant and mRNA for CCAAT/enhancer binding protein beta 
(C/EBP beta) was less abundant in the cyclic parenteral nutrition group than in
the continuous parenteral nutrition group. Gel-shift assay for D site and
gel-shift Western blotting of DBP carried out using another three rats in each
group revealed an increase of DBP in rats receiving cyclic parenteral nutrition
compared with continuous parenteral nutrition. In conclusion, although parenteral
nutrition decreases serum albumin concentrations, cyclic parenteral nutrition
maintains transcription of the albumin gene to a greater extent than does
continuous parenteral nutrition. Cyclic parenteral nutrition, in contrast with
continuous parenteral nutrition, sustains the mRNA and concentrations of DBP.

PMID: 9094884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Diabetes. 1997 Apr;46(4):726-30.

Novel MODY3 mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene: evidence for 
a hyperexcitability of pancreatic beta-cells to intravenous secretagogues in a
glucose-tolerant carrier of a P447L mutation.

Hansen T(1), Eiberg H, Rouard M, Vaxillaire M, Møller AM, Rasmussen SK, Fridberg 
M, Urhammer SA, Holst JJ, Almind K, Echwald SM, Hansen L, Bell GI, Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagendorn Research Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark.

One form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3) results from mutations
in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha gene, located on chromosome
12q24.2. The primary objective of the present study was to search for genetic
variation in the HNF-1alpha gene in nine nonrelated Danish Caucasian subjects
with MODY. Direct sequencing of the coding region and intron-exon boundaries of
the HNF-1alpha gene revealed 2 novel and 1 previously reported missense mutations
and 2 novel frameshift mutations in five of nine MODY subjects. These five
mutations were found in neither 84 NIDDM patients nor 84 control subjects. One
glucose-tolerant lean male with a P447L missense mutation, which in his relatives
caused MODY, underwent an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), a tolbutamide
modified frequently sampled intravenous glucose tolerance test, and a glucagon
test to examine for a possible early beta-cell abnormality. He had a low insulin 
secretion rate during an OGTT, but a twofold increase in pancreatic beta-cell
response after intravenous glucose and a 2.5- to 4-fold increase in beta-cell
response after either intravenous tolbutamide or intravenous glucagon loads. In
conclusion, 1) mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene are common in Danish Caucasian
MODY patients, and 2) early stages in the pathogenesis of MODY3 caused by the
P447L mutation may be characterized by a hyperexcitability of beta-cells to
intravenous secretagogues.

PMID: 9075819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Diabetes. 1997 Apr;46(4):720-5.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene are a common cause of
maturity-onset diabetes of the young in the U.K.

Frayling TM(1), Bulamn MP, Ellard S, Appleton M, Dronsfield MJ, Mackie AD, Baird 
JD, Kaisaki PJ, Yamagata K, Bell GI, Bain SC, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Science, University of Exeter, Devon, U.K.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF1alpha) gene have recently 
been shown to cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). We have examined
15 U.K. MODY families for mutations in the coding region of the HNF-1alpha gene. 
Eight different mutations, three frameshift (P291fsinsC, P379fsdelCT, and
A443fsdelCA) and five missense mutations (P129T, R131W, R159W, P519L, and T620I),
were identified in eleven families (73%). The previously reported mutation
P291fsinsC was found in four pedigrees. A screen of a further 32 probands with
early onset (<40 years of age) NIDDM showed the mutation in two additional
families. This common mutation was present on at least three different
haplotypes, suggesting that its high frequency is due to recurrent mutation
rather than a founder effect. We have demonstrated that mutations in the
HNF-1alpha gene are a common cause of MODY in U.K. families and result in early
onset NIDDM with a progressive clinical course. Mutation-based genetic counseling
can now be considered for the majority of patients with MODY.

PMID: 9075818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Diabetes Metab. 1997 Mar;23 Suppl 2:34-7.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), MODY genes and non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus.

Velho G(1), Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-358, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France. gvelho@infobiogen.fr

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically and clinically
heterogeneous subtype of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM)
characterised by early onset, autosomal dominant inheritance and a primary defect
in insulin secretion. To date, three MODY genes have been identified on
chromosomes 20q [hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF-4 alpha)/MODY1], 7p
(glucokinase/MODY2) and 12q (HNF-1 alpha/MODY3). Mutations in glucokinase/MODY2
result in mild chronic hyperglycaemia due to reduced pancreatic beta-cell
responsiveness to glucose as well as decreased net accumulation of hepatic
glycogen and increased hepatic gluconeogenesis following meals. In contrast,
MODY1 and MODY3 are characterised by severe insulin secretory defects and major
hyperglycaemia associated with microvascular complications. The role of the three
known MODY genes in susceptibility to the more common late-onset from of NIDDM
remains uncertain. Genetic studies seem to exclude any function as major
susceptibility genes, although they may play a minor role in a polygenic context 
or a major role in particular populations.

PMID: 9162575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Diabetes. 1997 Mar;46(3):528-35.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in MODY and early-onset
NIDDM: evidence for a mutational hotspot in exon 4.

Kaisaki PJ(1), Menzel S, Lindner T, Oda N, Rjasanowski I, Sahm J, Meincke G,
Schulze J, Schmechel H, Petzold C, Ledermann HM, Sachse G, Boriraj VV, Menzel R, 
Kerner W, Turner RC, Yamagata K, Bell GI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry, University of
Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Erratum in
    Diabetes 1997 Jul;46(7):1239.

We have recently shown that mutations in the gene encoding the transcription
factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha are the cause of one form of
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY3). Here, we report the exon-intron
organization and partial sequence of the human HNF-1alpha gene. In addition, we
have screened the ten exons and flanking introns of this gene for mutations in a 
group of 25 unrelated white subjects from Germany who presented with NIDDM before
35 years of age and had a first-degree relative with NIDDM. Mutations were
identified in nine of these individuals, suggesting that mutations in the
HNF-1alpha gene are a common cause of diabetes in German subjects with
early-onset NIDDM and a family history of diabetes. Thus, screening for mutations
in this gene may be indicated in subjects with early-onset NIDDM. Interestingly, 
three of the nine mutations occurred at the same site in exon 4 with insertion of
a C in a polyC tract, centered around codon 290 (designated Pro291fsinsC),
thereby resulting in a frameshift during translation and premature termination.
Analyses of linked DNA polymorphisms in the HNF-1alpha gene indicated that the
Pro291fsinsC mutation was present on a different haplotype in each subject,
implying that the polyC tract represents a mutational hot spot. We have also
identified the mutation in the HNF-1alpha gene in the Jutland pedigree, one of
the original MODY pedigrees reported in the literature, as being a T-->G
substitution in codon 241, resulting in the replacement of a conserved Cys by Gly
(C241G). The information on the sequence of the HNF-1alpha gene and its promoter 
region will facilitate the search for mutations in other subjects and studies of 
the role of the gene in determining normal beta-cell functions.

PMID: 9032114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Mol Biol. 1997 Feb 21;266(2):231-45.

Analysis of the distribution of binding sites for a tissue-specific transcription
factor in the vertebrate genome.

Tronche F(1), Ringeisen F, Blumenfeld M, Yaniv M, Pontoglio M.

Author information: 
(1)Unite des virus Oncogenes, URA 1644 du CNRS, Departement des Biotechnologies, 
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) is a dimeric homeoprotein expressed in
hepatocytes and in a few other epithelial cells where it helps regulate the
expression of a specific subset of genes. In an attempt to identify novel target 
genes for HNF1 and to assess the distribution of its target sites within the
vertebrate genome, we performed a computer-assisted search within the available
databases using a weighted matrix. Several hundred potential target sequences
were identified within the GenBank and EMBL data banks. DNA binding assays
demonstrated that more than 95%, of the new sites tested (52 sites among 54)
bound HNF1. Surprisingly many HNF1 target sites were found in genes that are
transcribed in cell types that do not contain the protein. On the other hand
these sites are 2.5 to five times more frequent in hepatic genes than expected.
It seems that the presence of HNF1 sites in liver-specific genes was favoured,
but that no counter-selection occurred within the rest of the genome. HNF1
binding sites in liver genes are more often associated in clusters with sites for
other transcription factors and the enrichment is more pronounced in promoter
regions. We identified more than 100 liver specific genes that are potentially
regulated by HNF1.

PMID: 9047360  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1997 Feb 15;338(2):220-6.

Identification of positive and negative regulatory elements of the human
cytochrome P4501A2 (CYP1A2) gene.

Chung I(1), Bresnick E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Molecular Toxicology, University of
Massachusetts Medical Center, Worcester, Massachusetts, 01655, USA.

We previously demonstrated an enhancer-like positive regulatory element within a 
259-bp sequence (-2352 to -2094 bp) of the human CYP1A2 gene in HepG2 cells.
Three protein binding sites were identified by DNase I footprinting analyses
within the 259-bp sequence: protected region A PRA; -2283 to -2243 bp), PRB
(-2218 to -2187 bp), and PRC (-2124 to -2098 bp) (I. Chung and E. Bresnick, Mol. 
Pharmacol. 47, 677-685, 1995). In the present study, the functional significance 
of those protected regions was examined. Transfection experiments with deletion
and substitution mutants defined the PRB and PRC as containing positive and
negative regulatory elements, respectively. Human breast carcinoma MCF-7 cells
were cotransfected with a hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) expression vector
and CYP1A2 promoter- or thymidine kinase promoter-luciferase reporter gene
constructs. HNF-1, which contributes to the liver specificity of genes, enhanced 
reporter gene activity in a PRC sequence-dependent manner. These results
suggested that PRC could exist bound to a repressor which was displaceable by
other transcription factors such as HNF-1. Results obtained by transfection of
HepG2 hepatoma cells with various PRB substitution mutant-luciferase gene fusion 
constructs indicated that the entire sequence of PRB was necessary for promoter
activity. Consequently, the regulation of CYP1A2 expression is very complex,
requiring a number of both positive and negative regulatory factors.

PMID: 9028875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. DNA Cell Biol. 1997 Feb;16(2):207-14.

HNF1 alpha activates the rat UDP glucuronosyltransferase UGT2B1 gene promoter.

Hansen AJ(1), Lee YH, Gonzalez FJ, Mackenzie PI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Flinders Medical Centre, Bedford Park,
South Australia.

The rat UDP glucuronosyltransferase UGT2B1 is expressed mainly in the liver where
it glucuronidates steroids and environmental toxins and carcinogens. A region
between -42 and -55 bp upstream from the UGT2B1 gene transcription start site was
previously identified as sharing sequence similarity with the hepatocyte nuclear 
factor 1 (HNF1) consensus binding site. In this study, the importance of this
region in the regulation of the UGT2B1 gene was confirmed by functional and DNA
binding assays. A minimal UGT2B1 gene promoter containing the putative HNF1
binding site was fused to the CAT reporter gene and transfected into HepG2 cells.
Only low levels of CAT activity were detected. This activity was increased
50-fold when an HNF1 alpha expression vector was co-transfected with the UGT2B1
promoter CAT construct but was not altered when a HNF1 beta expression vector was
used. A UGT2B1 promoter construct with the HNF1-like region deleted was not
activated by either co-transfected HNF1 expression vector. DNase 1 footprinting
and gel-shift analysis demonstrated that nuclear proteins present in both HepG2
cells and rat liver bind to the HNF1-like element. The presence of HNF1 alpha in 
these nuclear proteins that bind to the HNF1-like element was confirmed by
supershift analysis with antisera to HNF1 alpha. Specific binding of nuclear
proteins to the HNF1-like element was not seen in extracts from three cell lines 
derived from nonhepatic tissues. These data strongly suggest that the
liver-enriched factor HNF1 alpha binds to, and activates, the UGT2B1 gene
promoter

PMID: 9052741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Kidney Int. 1997 Feb;51(2):548-52.

Erythropoietin gene regulation depends on heme-dependent oxygen sensing and
assembly of interacting transcription factors.

Huang LE(1), Ho V, Arany Z, Krainc D, Galson D, Tendler D, Livingston DM, Bunn
HF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Dana Farber
Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Studies on erythropoietin (Epo) gene expression have been useful in investigating
the mechanism by which cells and tissues sense hypoxia. Both in vivo and in Hep3B
cells. Epo production is induced not only by hypoxia but also by certain
transition metal (cobalt and nickel) and by iron chelation. When Hep3B cells were
incubated in an iron deficient medium, Epo mRNA expression was enhanced fourfold 
compared to Hep3B cells in iron enriched medium. Epo induction by cobalt was
inversely related to iron concentration in the medium, indicating competition
between the two metals. Under hyperbaric oxygen, cobalt induction of
erythropoietin mRNA was modestly suppressed while nickel induction was markedly
enhanced. These recent observations support the proposal that the oxygen sensor
is a heme protein in which cobalt and nickel can substitute for iron in the
porphyrin ring. The up-regulation of Epo gene transcription by hypoxia depends on
at least two known DNA binding transcription factors, HIF-1 and HNF-4, which bind
to cognate response elements in a critical approximately 50 bp 3' enhancer.
Hypoxia induces HIF-1 binding. HNF-4, an orphan nuclear receptor constitutively
expressed in kidney and liver, binds downstream of HIF-1 and cooperates with
HIF-1, contributing importantly to high level and perhaps tissue specific
expression. The C-terminal activation domain of HNF-4 binds to the beta subunit
of HIF-1. The C-terminal portion of the alpha subunit of HIF-1 binds specifically
to p300, a general transcriptional activator. Hypoxic induction of the endogenous
Epo gene in Hep3B cells as well as an Epo-reporter gene was fully inhibited by
E1A, an adenovirus protein that binds to and inactivates p300, but only slightly 
by a mutant E1A that fails to bind to p300. Moreover, overexpression of p300
enhanced hypoxic induction. Thus, it is likely that in hypoxic cells, p300 or a
related family member plays a critical role in forming a macromolecular assembly 
with HIF-1 and HNF-4, enabling transduction from the Epo 3' enhancer to the
apparatus on the promoter responsible for the initiation of transcription.

PMID: 9027736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Mol Biol. 1997 Jan 10;265(1):20-9.

The bifunctional protein DCoH modulates interactions of the homeodomain
transcription factor HNF1 with nucleic acids.

Rhee KH(1), Stier G, Becker PB, Suck D, Sandaltzopoulos R.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Programme, EMBL, Heidelberg, Germany.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF1) is a homeodomain transcription factor that
binds DNA as a dimer. HNF1 dimers associate with two molecules of DCoH, a
bifunctional protein that also has an enzymatic function in the
tetrahydrobiopterin regeneration, to form stable heterotetramers also capable of 
DNA binding. Employing purified, recombinant HNF1, HNF1/DCoH heterotetramers and 
DCoH homotetramers we investigated whether DCoH affects interactions of HNF1 with
nucleic acids. Although we detected no direct binding of DCoH to DNA or RNA, DCoH
stabilized HNF1/DNA complexes and promoted interactions with sub-optimal DNA
target sequences such as the human alpha1-antitrypsin TATA box region.
Importantly, we also observed interactions of HNF1 with RNA, but these
interactions were completely abolished when HNF1 was complexed with DCoH.
Interestingly, DCoH retains its enzymatic activity while complexed with HNF1. Our
results document intermolecular regulation of HNF1 binding to nucleic acids by
DCoH.

PMID: 8995521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. J Biochem. 1997 Jan;121(1):172-7.

Suppressed expression of the urea cycle enzyme genes in the liver of
carnitine-deficient juvenile visceral steatosis (JVS) mice in infancy and during 
starvation in adulthood.

Tomomura M(1), Tomomura A, Musa DA, Horiuchi M, Takiguchi M, Mori M, Saheki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Medicine, Kagoshima University.

Systemic carnitine-deficient juvenile visceral steatosis (JVS) mice exhibit
decreased expression of some liver-selective genes including those for the urea
cycle enzymes during the infantile period. At 25 days, carbamoylphosphate
synthetase (CPS) mRNA level was remarkably low in the liver of JVS mice, and the 
HNF-4 and C/EBP-alpha mRNA contents were also reduced. HNF-3 alpha and C/EBP-beta
mRNAs were slightly higher in the liver of JVS mice, and HNF-1 mRNA remained
normal. These results, together with the developmental changes of these
transcription factor mRNA levels, suggest that HNF-4 and C/EBP-alpha are involved
in the suppression of CPS expression. If JVS mice survived the crisis at 4-5
weeks, their body weight caught up with that of control mice around 7 weeks. The 
steady-state levels of CPS and argininosuccinate synthetase (ASS) mRNAs in the
liver of JVS mice were normalized by no later than 8 weeks. Starvation for 48 h
caused an increase of about twofold in CPS and ASS mRNA levels in the liver of
control mice, while the same treatment failed to increase their levels in the
liver of JVS mice. The starvation similarly caused increases in HNF-4 and
C/EBP-beta mRNA levels in the liver of both control and JVS mice, but the
increases were significantly less in JVS mice than in control mice. Thus, the
lack of induction of CPS and ASS mRNAs during development and under starvation in
JVS mice correlated with the lower induction of HNF-4 and C/EBP-alpha mRNAs, and 
of HNF-4 and C/ EBP-beta mRNAs, respectively. Furthermore, all these changes
seemed to correlate with the presence of fatty liver and the high serum free
fatty acid levels, suggesting that disturbance of fatty acid metabolism affects
nitrogen metabolism at least in part via altered gene expression of transcription
factors such as HNF-4, C/EBP-alpha, and C/EBP-beta.

PMID: 9058209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Dec 15;24(24):5034-44.

An enhancer LEF-1/TCF-1 site is essential for insertion site-independent
transgene expression in thymus.

Haynes TL(1), Thomas MB, Dusing MR, Valerius MT, Potter SS, Wiginton DA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Transcriptional activation of eukaryotic genes involves assembly of specific
multiprotein complexes on the promoters and enhancers of the genes. Recently, it 
has been proposed that the role of some of the proteins in the complex may be
architectural, involving DNA bending, orchestration of protein-protein
interaction and modulation of nucleosome structure. This role has been proposed
for the HMG proteins LEF-1 and TCF-1. We examined the role of a LEF-1/TCF-1
binding site in the human adenosine deaminase (ADA) thymic enhancer. Mutational
analysis demonstrated that a functional LEF-1/TCF-1 binding site is not required 
for enhancer-mediated transcriptional activation in transient transfection
studies, but is essential for enhancer function in the in vivo chromatin context 
of transgenic mice. Mutation of the LEF-1/TCF-1 site destroyed the ability of the
ADA enhancer/locus control region to specify high level, insertion
site-independent transgene expression in thymus. DNase I and DpnII accessibility 
experiments indicated dramatic changes in the chromatin organization of the ADA
enhancer in transgenic mice with a mutated LEF-1/TCF-1 site. This supports the
hypothesis that factors binding the LEF-1/TCF-1 site play an architectural role
during the in vivo activation of the ADA enhancer, possibly involving chromatin
modification.

PMCID: PMC146351
PMID: 9016677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):458-60.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha gene in maturity-onset diabetes
of the young (MODY1)

Yamagata K(1), Furuta H, Oda N, Kaisaki PJ, Menzel S, Cox NJ, Fajans SS,
Signorini S, Stoffel M, Bell GI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The University of Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):407-8.

The disease maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically
heterogeneous monogenic form of non-insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes mellitus 
(NIDDM), characterized by early onset, usually before 25 years of age and often
in adolescence or childhood, and by autosomal dominant inheritance. It has been
estimated that 2-5% of patients with NIDDM may have this form of diabetes
mellitus. Clinical studies have shown that prediabetic MODY subjects have normal 
insulin sensitivity but suffer from a defect in glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion, suggesting that pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction rather than insulin
resistance is the primary defect in this disorder. Linkage studies have localized
the genes that are mutated in MODY on human chromosomes 20 (MODY1), 7 (MODY2) and
12 (MODY3), with MODY2 and MODY3 being allelic with the genes encoding
glucokinase, a key regulator of insulin secretion, and hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha), a transcription factor involved in tissue-specific
regulation of liver genes but also expressed in pancreatic islets, insulinoma
cells and other tissues. Here we show that MODY1 is the gene encoding HNF-4alpha 
(gene symbol, TCF14), a member of the steroid/thyroid hormone receptor
superfamily and an upstream regulator of HNF-1alpha expression.

PMID: 8945471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):455-8.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha gene in maturity-onset diabetes
of the young (MODY3)

Yamagata K(1), Oda N, Kaisaki PJ, Menzel S, Furuta H, Vaxillaire M, Southam L,
Cox RD, Lathrop GM, Boriraj VV, Chen X, Cox NJ, Oda Y, Yano H, Le Beau MM, Yamada
S, Nishigori H, Takeda J, Fajans SS, Hattersley AT, Iwasaki N, Hansen T, Pedersen
O, Polonsky KS, Bell GI, et al.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The University of Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):407-8.

The disease non-insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) is
characterized by abnormally high blood glucose resulting from a relative
deficiency of insulin. It affects about 2% of the world's population and
treatment of diabetes and its complications are an increasing health-care burden.
Genetic factors are important in the aetiology of NIDDM, and linkage studies are 
starting to localize some of the genes that influence the development of this
disorder. Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), a single-gene disorder
responsible for 2-5% of NIDDM, is characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance
and an age of onset of 25 years or younger. MODY genes have been localized to
chromosomes 7, 12 and 20 (refs 5, 7, 8) and clinical studies indicate that
mutations in these genes are associated with abnormal patterns of
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. The gene on chromosome 7 (MODY2) encodes
the glycolytic enzyme glucokinases which plays a key role in generating the
metabolic signal for insulin secretion and in integrating hepatic glucose uptake.
Here we show that subjects with the MODY3-form of NIDDM have mutations in the
gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha, which is encoded by
the gene TCF1). HNF-1alpha is a transcription factor that helps in the
tissue-specific regulation of the expression of several liver genes and also
functions as a weak transactivator of the rat insulin-I gene.

PMID: 8945470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):407-8.

Transcribing diabetes.

Todd JA.

Comment on
    Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):455-8.
    Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):458-60.

PMID: 8945461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Nucleic Acids Res. 1996 Dec 1;24(23):4783-90.

Crosslinking of double-stranded oligonucleotides containing O-methyl-substituted 
pyrophosphate groups to the HNF1 transcription factor in nuclear cell extract.

Kuznetsova SA(1), Clusel C, Ugarte E, Elias I, Vasseur M, Blumenfeld M, Shabarova
ZA.

Author information: 
(1)Joint Laboratory GENSET-Laboratory of Nucleic Acid Chemistry, Moscow State
University, Russia. kuznetsova@biorg.chem.msu.su

Probing of the HNF1 (hepatocyte nuclear factor I) DNA-binding region using a set 
of DNA duplexes containing pyrophosphate or O-methyl-substituted pyrophosphate
internucleotide groups at different positions of the HNF1 recognition sequence
was performed. The histidine-tagged HNF1/1-281 DNA binding domain and nuclear
extract from rat liver were used. We showed that HNF1 from these species
specifically binds to modified DNA duplexes. A correlation in binding affinity of
both types of duplexes was detected. Crosslinking of the HNF1 DNA-binding domain 
and HNF1 in nuclear liver extract to DNA duplexes carrying O-methyl-substituted
pyrophosphate groups was observed. The crosslinking efficiency of HNF1 in liver
extract to substituted pyrophosphate-modified DNA duplex, containing a reactive
internucleotide group between nucleotides G and T of the GT dinucleotide
immediately 5' to the TAAT recognition sequence, amounts to 40% of the efficiency
of non-covalent association. Nonspecific crosslinking of the reactive DNA
duplexes to other components of nuclear extract was not observed. These results
indicate that DNA duplexes carrying substituted pyrophosphate internucleotide
groups can specifically bind and crosslink with DNA-binding proteins, especially 
transcription factors in crude preparations and could constitute a potential tool
to control the expression of disease-causing genes.

PMCID: PMC146322
PMID: 8972866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Virol. 1996 Dec;70(12):8571-83.

The HNF1/HNF4-dependent We2 element of woodchuck hepatitis virus controls viral
replication and can activate the N-myc2 promoter.

Fourel G(1), Ringeisen F, Flajolet M, Tronche F, Pontoglio M, Tiollais P, Buendia
MA.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recombinaison et Expression Génétique, INSERM U163, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, France.

Transcriptional activation of myc family proto-oncogenes through the insertion of
viral sequences is the predominant mechanism by which woodchuck hepatitis virus
(WHV) induces liver tumors in chronically infected animals. The main target is
N-myc2, a functional retroposon of the N-myc gene, but c-myc and N-myc are also
marginally involved. Here we identify a major, liver-specific regulatory element 
in the WHV genome (We2) which efficiently activates the N-myc2 promoter in
cultured hepatoma cells. In the context of the episomal viral genome, We2 governs
the production of pregenomic RNA and thus plays a central role in the control of 
viral replication. We2 activity is primarily controlled by the liver-enriched
HNF1 and HNF4 transcription factors, although NF1 and Oct proteins were also
shown to bind in a central region. The expression of HNF1 and HNF4 appears to be 
maintained in woodchuck tumors. Thus, We2 is a prime candidate for controlling
myc gene cis activation during WHV-induced hepatocarcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC190950
PMID: 8970982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Virol. 1996 Dec;70(12):8318-31.

Type, prevalence, and significance of core promoter/enhancer II mutations in
hepatitis B viruses from immunosuppressed patients with severe liver disease.

Günther S(1), Piwon N, Iwanska A, Schilling R, Meisel H, Will H.

Author information: 
(1)Heinrich-Pette-Institut für Experimentelle Virologie und Immunologie an der
Universität Hamburg, Federal Republic of Germany.

Little is known about the functional significance of hepatitis B virus (HBV)
sequence heterogeneity. Here we analyzed the type, frequency, and function of
mutations in the core promoter/enhancer II region of HBV in immunosuppressed
patients. The major HBV population in immunosuppressed patients with severe liver
disease had deletions, insertions, and/or base changes in this region. Such
mutations were not found in immunosuppressed patients with mild disease. Except
for two mutations, all created a hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) binding site 
or a potential HNF3 binding site. Occasionally, known binding sites for C/EBP and
HNF4 were additionally duplicated. Eleven mutated core promoter prototype
sequences were functionally tested in the context of a wild-type genome by
transfection in Huh7 cells. Despite the diversity of mutations tested, all
decreased steady-state levels of pre-C mRNA drastically and increased those of
the C mRNA/ pregenomic RNA. This correlated with reduced levels of secreted
hepatitis B e antigen and increased intracellular levels of core and Pol proteins
and replicative HBV DNA intermediates. The levels of secreted HBV DNA-containing 
particles were also increased although most of the mutations reduced the levels
of pre-S/S mRNA and pre-S1, and pre-S2 proteins as well as secretion of hepatitis
B surface antigen. These data reveal a novel class of HBV variants with HNF1
binding sites in the core promoter which are characterized by a defect in
hepatitis B e antigen expression, enhanced replication, and altered protein
levels, all probably mediated by altered transcription factor binding. The
phenotype of these variants and their prevalence only in immunosuppressed
patients with severe liver disease may indicate that they play a role in
pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC190919
PMID: 8970951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Exp Cell Res. 1996 Nov 25;229(1):27-34.

Endoderm-specific gene expression in embryonic stem cells differentiated to
embryoid bodies.

Abe K(1), Niwa H, Iwase K, Takiguchi M, Mori M, Abé SI, Abe K, Yamamura KI.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Embryology and Genetics, Department of Developmental
Genetics, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, Japan.

Mouse embryonic stem cells can differentiate into various cell types within cell 
aggregates called embryoid bodies (EBs). This structure consists of ectodermal,
mesodermal, and endodermal tissues, which resemble the embryo of egg-cylinder
stage. After 8-10 days in culture, about half of the EBs expand into large cystic
structures homologous to visceral yolk sac of postimplantation embryos. To study 
endoderm differentiation at molecular level, we examined expression of endoderm
marker genes during the processes of EB development. alpha-Fetoprotein (AFP) and 
transthyretin (TTR) transcripts increased at the stage when embryoid bodies began
to form yolk-sac-like structures and were expressed strongly thereafter.
Expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4, a variant form of HNF1 (also
called HNF1beta), and HNF3beta started before the onset of AFP and TTR
expression. HNF1 (also called HNF1alpha) expression began a few days after the
onset of the expression of the transcription factors described above. Serum
albumin (ALB) transcript was only found in late large cystic EBs. Also, AFP gene 
expression preceded ALB gene expression. These results suggest that the patterns 
of endoderm gene expression during EB development reflect the order found during 
mouse development in vivo, and EB formation may serve as an in vitro system to
study the differentiation process.

PMID: 8940246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. J Lipid Res. 1996 Nov;37(11):2324-31.

Identification of promoter sequences in the 5' untranslated region of the baboon 
apolipoprotein[a] gene.

Hixson JE(1), Jett C, Birnbaum S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Southwest Foundation for Biomedical Research, San
Antonio, TX 78228-0147, USA.

Like humans, baboons possess apolipoprotein[a] (apo[a]), a unique protein
component of the atherogenic lipoprotein [a] (Lp[a]) particle. Baboon apo[a] also
exhibits extensive variation with respect to size and serum levels. In this
report, we have cloned the 5' flanking region of the baboon apo[a] gene (I
isoform) and performed promoter mapping studies to identify sequences that
control apo[a] transcription. The sequence of the baboon apo[a] 5' flanking
region is similar to the human gene, and contains two Alu repeats that
distinguish the apo[a] gene from plasminogen and other apo[a]-like genes. The
transcription start site for the baboon apo[a]gene is located 85 bp upstream from
the major start site for the human apo[a] gene. For promoter mapping studies, we 
constructed two sets of deletion clones (5' to 3' and 3' to 5') in luciferase
reporter plasmids for transfection of hepatic cell lines (HepG2 and HUh7). These 
experiments showed that the 5' untranslated region (5' UTR) contains a positive
promoter element with 85% identity to the consensus binding site for hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha), and a negative element that is functional
in HepG2 cells, but not Huh7 cells. Transfection assays with HeLa cells showed
that the positive promoter element acts in an hepatocyte-specific manner. We also
cloned the 5' flanking region from a baboon carrying a null allele that produced 
no detectable hepatic transcripts or serum isoforms in vivo. Surprisingly, the 5'
flanking regions of the null allele possessed a promoter that was functional in
transfection assays. We conclude that the baboon apo[a] gene 5'UTR contains
hepatocyte-specific promoter elements, but that other unknown sequences must
influence apo[a] expression in vivo.

PMID: 8978484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Gene. 1996 Oct 10;175(1-2):35-41.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4) binding sites in the salmon HNF1 promoter.

Deryckere F(1), McNair A, Gannon F.

Author information: 
(1)National Diagnostics Centre/Bio Research Ireland, Department of Microbiology, 
University College Galway, Ireland.

We report the isolation and sequencing of a 1100-bp DNA fragment containing the
salmon Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1 gene (sHNF1) promoter. The sHNF1 promoter
cloned upstream of the chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT) encoding gene is 
shown to be active in two cell lines of hepatic origin. DNasel footprint analysis
of the proximal 400 bp reveals several protein-binding sites, including a CCAAT
box, a potential site for Sp1, and three potential HNF4 binding sites. The
sequence does not contain any canonical TATA box or initiator and sHNF1
transcription is initiated at four different sites spanning a region of 56 bp.
Sequence comparison with the Xenopus laevis HNF1 promoter sequence did not show
any significant similarity except in the region overlapping two of the potential 
HNF4 binding sites.

PMID: 8917073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. J Hepatol. 1996 Oct;25(4):445-53.

Expression ratio of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 to variant hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 in differentiation of hepatocellular carcinoma and hepatoblastoma.

Ninomiya T(1), Hayashi Y, Saijoh K, Ohta K, Yoon S, Nakabayashi H, Tamaoki T,
Kasuga M, Itoh H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Pathology, Kobe University School of Medicine, Japan.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Liver-specific protein genes have multiple cis-/trans-acting
elements, but those accountable for hepatocytic differentiation are unclear. An
AT-rich core sequence (AT motif) is essential as a cis-acting element for the
hepatic transcription. Homologous proteins hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1)
and variant HNF-1 (vHNF-1) bind to this motif. The ratio of HNF-1 to vHNF-1 mRNA 
was examined in various liver tissues with respect to their differentiation.
METHODS: The competitive reverse transcriptional polymerase chain reaction was
employed to amplify HNF-1 and vHNF-1 mRNA simultaneously and to examine their
expression ratio in total RNA extracted from frozen liver tissues of 37 patients 
with hepatocellular carcinoma, five patients with hepatoblastoma, and 15
non-neoplastic liver tissues.
RESULTS: The ratio of HNF-1 to vHNF-1 mRNA was higher in well-differentiated
cases than in poorly-differentiated and undifferentiated cases, except that one
poorly-differentiated hepatoblastoma displayed a high ratio. Non-neoplastic liver
tissues had low ratios similar to poorly-differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma,
the reason for which remained unknown. However, chronic hepatitis and liver
cirrhosis cases also demonstrated low ratios, and hence degenerative changes
themselves displayed no obvious influence on such ratios. Thus, the gene
expression of HNF-1 and vHNF-1 seemed to be differentially regulated in
neoplastic and non-neoplastic hepatocytes.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggested that the ratio of HNF-1 to vHNF-1 mRNA
correlated with histological differentiation of HCC and hepatoblastoma.

PMID: 8912143  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Protein Sci. 1996 Oct;5(10):1963-72.

High-resolution structures of the bifunctional enzyme and transcriptional
coactivator DCoH and its complex with a product analogue.

Cronk JD(1), Endrizzi JA, Alber T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cell Biology, University of California at Berkeley
94720-3206, USA.

DCoH, the dimerization cofactor of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1), functions
as both a transcriptional coactivator and a pterin dehydratase. To probe the
relationship between these two functions, the X-ray crystal structures of the
free enzyme and its complex with the product analogue 7,8-dihydrobiopterin were
refined at 2.3 A resolution. The ligand binds at four sites per tetrameric
enzyme, with little apparent conformational change in the protein. Each
active-site cleft is located in a subunit interface, adjacent to a prominent
saddle motif that has structural similarities to the TATA binding protein. The
pterin binds within an arch of aromatic residues that extends across one dimer
interface. The bound ligand makes contacts to three conserved histidines, and
this arrangement restricts proposals for the enzymatic mechanism of dehydration. 
The dihedral symmetry of DCoH suggests that binding to the dimerization domain of
HNF-1 likely involves the superposition of two-fold rotation axes of the two
proteins.

PMCID: PMC2143270
PMID: 8897596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Exp Med. 1996 Sep 1;184(3):1137-47.

Involvement of transcription factors TCF-1 and GATA-3 in the initiation of the
earliest step of T cell development in the thymus.

Hattori N(1), Kawamoto H, Fujimoto S, Kuno K, Katsura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Kyoto University, Japan.

Flow cytometric and immunocytochemical analyses of murine fetal thymus (FT) cells
with antibodies to various surface markers and transcription factors reveal that 
the synthesis of TCF-1 and GATA-3 protein begins simultaneously in a fraction of 
the most immature population of FT cells, which have the phenotype of
CD4-CD8-CD44+CD25-. No TCF-1-producing cells is found in the fetal liver (FL). In
CD44+CD25- FT cells, the production of TCF-1 is immediately followed by
intracellular expression of CD3 epsilon. It is also found that the T cell
development from FL, but not FT, progenitors in the FT organ culture system is
severely inhibited by the addition of antisense oligonucleotides for either TCF-1
or GATA-3. These results strongly suggest that TCF-1 and GATA-3 play essential
roles in the initiation of the earliest steps of T cell development in the
thymus.

PMCID: PMC2192786
PMID: 9064330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Diabetes. 1996 Sep;45(9):1217-22.

Phlorizin or vanadate treatment reverses impaired expression of albumin and
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 in diabetic rats.

Barrera-Hernandez G(1), Wanke IE, Wong NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.

Diabetes decreases transcription of the albumin gene. The role of hyperglycemia
in mediating this suppression of albumin gene activity is unclear. To study the
effect of glucose in vivo, we treated diabetic rats with phlorizin or vanadate,
two agents that ameliorate hyperglycemia without increasing the levels of
circulating insulin. When glucose was normalized in diabetic rats with either
agent, the hepatic levels of albumin mRNA became indistinguishable from those in 
nondiabetic animals. In light of our previous observation that diabetes decreases
the abundance of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1), the predominant factor
increasing albumin gene transcription, we wondered whether glucose normalization 
in diabetes would alter HNF1. Both the levels and DNA binding activity of HNF1
were restored to control values when phlorizin or vanadate was administered to
diabetic rats. These findings suggest that hyperglycemia is integrally involved
in mediating the suppression of albumin gene expression in diabetes. The effect
of hyperglycemia on HNF1 suggests that glucose affects albumin expression at the 
level of transcription.

PMID: 8772725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Trends Genet. 1996 Aug;12(8):323.

It's a knockout!

Anagnostopoulos AV(1).

Author information: 
(1)Johns Hopkins University, School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.
anna@gdb.org

PMID: 8783944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Biochemistry. 1996 Jul 16;35(28):9060-8.

Regulation of human C-reactive protein gene expression by two synergistic IL-6
responsive elements.

Li SP(1), Goldman ND.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Allergenic Products and Parasitology, Center for Biologics
Evaluation and Research, Food and Drug Administration, Rockville, Maryland
20852-1448, USA.

To study the mechanism of interleukin-6 (IL-6) induction of human C-reactive
protein (CRP) gene expression, we have utilized a human hepatoma (PLC/PRF/5) cell
culture system to analyze the trans-acting factors which bind to the 300 bp
5'-flanking region of human CRP gene. In vitro gel mobility shift analyses and
methylation interference assays demonstrated that NFIL-6 alpha interacted with
two IL-6 responsive elements, and HNF-1 alpha and HNF-3/Octamer-like factors
interacted with the downstream IL-6 responsive element in the human CRP promoter.
In vivo functional analysis by transient transfection of plasmid constructs
containing site-specific mutations in one or two IL-6 responsive elements in the 
CRP promoter fused to a reporter gene, chloramphenicol acetyl transferase (CAT), 
demonstrated that the binding of NFIL-6 alpha to two IL-6 responsive elements
resulted in synergistic induction of the gene. When HNF-1 alpha or
HNF-3/Octamer-like factors were independently bound to their corresponding sites,
they had either a positive or negative effect, respectively, on IL-6 inducible
transcriptional activity.

PMID: 8703909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Virol. 1996 Jul;70(7):4714-23.

Cellular factors controlling the activity of woodchuck hepatitis virus enhancer
II.

Ueda K(1), Wei Y, Ganem D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Howard Medical Institute,
University of California Medical Center, San Francisco, California 94143, USA.

Woodchuck hepatitis virus (WHV) efficiently induces hepatocellular carcinoma in
chronically infected hosts. A key step in hepatocarcinogenesis by WHV is
insertional activation of the cellular N-myc gene by integrated viral DNA. WHV
enhancer II (En II) is the major cis-acting element involved in this activation. 
Here we characterize this viral enhancer element and define the cellular factors 
involved in its activity. WHV En II activity is strongly liver specific and maps 
to an 88-nucleotide DNA segment (nucleotides 1772 to 1859) located 5' to the
pregenomic RNA start site. Genetic analyses and electrophoretic mobility shift
assays indicate that the enhancer contains three subregions important to its
activity. The core elements of the enhancer are recognition sites for the
liver-enriched factors HNF1 and HNF4; together, these signals account for the
bulk of En II activity as well as its strong liver specificity. Multimerization
of either recognition site produced strong activity even in the absence of other 
En II sequences. 5' to these elements is a binding site for the ubiquitous Oct-1 
transcription factor, which further augments enhancer activity ca. twofold.

PMCID: PMC190408
PMID: 8676498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. FEBS Lett. 1996 Jun 24;389(1):35-9.

Structure and function of PCD/DCoH, an enzyme with regulatory properties.

Suck D(1), Ficner R.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Structural Biology Programme,
Heidelberg, Germany.

The bifunctional protein PCD/DCoH is both an enzyme involved in the phenylalanine
hydroxylation system and a transcription coactivator forming a 2:2
heterotetrameric complex with the nuclear transcription factor HNF1. The
discovery of a bacterial homologue and the expression pattern during Xenopus
embryogenesis suggest a regulatory function not only restricted to HNF1. The
crystal structures of the tetrameric rat and the dimeric bacterial PCD/DCoH have 
led to the proposal of substrate and HNF1 binding sites. The saddle-shaped
beta-sheet surfaces of the DCoH dimers likely represent binding sites for as yet 
unknown macromolecular interaction partners. Possible mechanisms for DCoH-induced
transcriptional regulation are discussed in the light of the three-dimensional
structures.

PMID: 8682201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Jun 1;238(2):400-9.

trans-Acting factors, detoxication enzymes and hepatitis B virus replication in a
novel set of human hepatoma cell lines.

Le Jossic C(1), Glaise D, Corcos L, Diot C, Dezier JF, Fautrel A,
Guguen-Guillouzo C.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U49, Hôpital Pontchaillou, Rennes, France.

A panel of four novel human hepatoma cell lines was isolated from a single tumor 
from a male individual. BC1, B16 and B16A2 lines were well differentiated, while 
cells of the B9 line were only poorly differentiated, being essentially negative 
for the functions analyzed. These cell lines have been surveyed for expression of
a large set of plasma proteins, accumulation of liver-specific mRNAs and
DNA-binding activity of ubiquitous and liver-enriched transcription factors. BC1 
cells expressed the highest levels of albumin mRNA, whereas B16 and B16A2 cells
accumulated the largest amounts of haptoglobin mRNA. In addition, B16 and B16A2
cells were unique in that they expressed CYP2E1 mRNA, a species absent from the
available human liver cells, including HepG2 hepatoma cells, and
3-methylcholanthrene-inducible CYP1A2 mRNA. The activities of genes encoding
transcription factors were evidenced in all four cell lines which expressed mRNAs
for nuclear factor interleukin 6 and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF) together
with the DNA-binding activity of NFY and AP1 nuclear proteins. Strikingly, HNF-1 
and HNF-4-like DNA-binding activities were restricted to BC1, B16 and B16A2
cells, supporting the idea of the potential role of these (or closely related)
factors in the maintenance and/or in the establishment of the differentiated
phenotype. B9 cells contained variant HNF1-like DNA-binding activity, similar to 
dedifferentiated rat hepatoma cells of the H5 line. CCAAT/enhancer-binding
protein and HNF-3-like activities were found in all cell lines, although at a
lower level and/or activity in B9 cells. Finally, transfection experiments of
plasmids containing the whole hepatitis-B virus genome demonstrated that B16
cells, but not B9 cells, were able to support hepatitis-B virus replication and
virion production, in agreement with the notion that HNF-1 activity is necessary 
for viral replication. We believe that the specific complement of transcription
factors expressed in the differentiated BC1, B16 and B16A2 cells, and in the
poorly differentiated B9 cells, will allow studies on the regulation of hepatic
gene expression in these human lines, and will also aid the analysis of
xenobiotic metabolism and the biology of hepatitis-B virus replication.

PMID: 8681951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Development. 1996 Jun;122(6):1975-84.

Mesoderm and endoderm differentiation in animal cap explants: identification of
the HNF4-binding site as an activin A responsive element in the Xenopus HNF1alpha
promoter.

Weber H(1), Holewa B, Jones EA, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Essen, Institut für Zellbiologie, Germany.

The gene encoding the tissue-specific transcription factor HNF1alpha (LFB1) is
transcriptionally activated shortly after mid-blastula transition in Xenopus
embryos. We have now shown that the HNF1alpha protein is localized in the nuclei 
of the liver, gall bladder, gut and pronephros of the developing larvae. In
animal cap explants treated with activin A together with retinoic acid, we
induced HNF1alpha in pronephric tubules and epithelial gut cells, i.e. in
mesodermal as well as in endodermal tissues. HNF1alpha can also be induced by
activin A, but not by retinoic acid alone. To define the promoter element
responding to the activin A signal, we injected various HNF1alpha promoter
luciferase constructs into fertilized eggs and cultured the isolated animal caps 
in the presence of activin A. From the activity profiles of the promoter mutants 
used, we identified the HNF4-binding site as an activin-A-responsive element. As 
HNF4 is a maternal protein in Xenopus and localized in an animal-to-vegetal
gradient in the cleaving embryo, we speculate that the activin A signal emanating
from the vegetal pole cooperates with the maternal transcription factor HNF4 to
define the embryonic regions expressing HNF1alpha.

PMID: 8674436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 May;16(5):1936-45.

Role of the liver-enriched transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 in
transcriptional regulation of the factor V111 gene.

McGlynn LK(1), Mueller CR, Begbie M, Notley CR, Lillicrap D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

Coagulation factor VIII is an essential cofactor required for normal hemostatic
function. A deficiency in factor VIII results in the bleeding disorder hemophilia
A. Despite the fact that the factor VIII gene was cloned a decade ago, the
mechanisms which control its transcription remain unresolved. In our studies, we 
have characterized 12 protein binding sites within the factor VIII promoter by
DNase I protection assays performed with rat liver nuclear extracts. Three of
these elements (sites 1 to 3) are situated within the 5' untranslated region of
the gene, while three other sites (sites 4 to 6) lie within the first 100 bp
upstream of the transcriptional start site. We have identified an additional site
(site 7) approximately 300 bp upstream from site 6, as well as a cluster of five 
sites in a 250-bp region which terminates approximately 1 kb from the
transcriptional start site. Seven of these binding sites (sites 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 9,
and 10) bind members of the C/EBP family of transcription factors. DBP also binds
to five of these sites (sites 3, 4, 6, 7, and 9). Utilizing transient
transfection studies in HepG2 cells, we have shown that deletion of the factor
VIII promoter sequences distal to nucleotide -44 results in a significant but
small increase in promoter activity. The activity of each of the various 5'
deletion constructs is significantly enhanced by cotransfection of C/EBPalpha and
D-site-binding protein expression plasmids, while cotransfection of both
C/EBPalpha and C/EBPbeta plasmids resulted in a further enhancement of
transactivation. These studies also provide evidence of a repressor element
located between nucleotides -740 and -1002. Since the minimal promoter sequence
(-44 to +148) maintains the transcriptional activity of the full-length promoter 
sequence, we proceeded to identify additional factors binding to sites 1 to 4.
Competition studies revealed that a ubiquitous transcription factor, NF-Y, binds 
to site 4, while the liver-enriched transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear
factor I (HNF-1) binds to site 1. Mutation analysis of the minimal promoter
demonstrated that HNF-1 is critical for activating transcription of the factor
VIII gene in vitro. Our results also suggest that the multiple upstream elements 
that we have identified may act as a backup regulatory region in the event of
disruption of the HNF-1 element in the 5' untranslated region.

PMCID: PMC231181
PMID: 8628260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Biol Chem. 1996 Apr 26;271(17):9969-75.

Effects of diabetes mellitus on hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 decrease albumin gene
transcription.

Barrera-Hernandez G(1), Wanke IE, Wong NC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N-4N1,
Canada.

We have previously reported that albumin gene transcription is reduced in
diabetes mellitus (DM). The present study explored the mechanism by which albumin
gene transcription is down-regulated in DM. Deletional studies and displacement
of factors binding to site B of the albumin promoter indicated that the
repressive effects of DM are mediated by nuclear factors binding to this site.
Since hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) activates albumin promoter activity and 
is the predominant factor binding to site B, we examined HNF1. The abundance and 
binding activity of HNF1 were reduced in hepatonuclear extracts from diabetic
compared to control rats. However, HNF1 mRNA levels were unchanged, suggesting
that the effect of DM on HNF1 is at the post-transcriptional level. Extracts from
diabetic animals also contained another protein, distinct from HNF1 and vHNF1,
which bound to site B in gel retardation studies. In summary, our studies
demonstrate that the reduced abundance and binding activity of HNF1 correlates
with decreased albumin gene transcription in DM.

PMID: 8626635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Cancer Lett. 1996 Mar 29;101(2):205-10.

Human renal cell carcinogenesis is accompanied by a coordinate loss of the tissue
specific transcription factors HNF4 alpha and HNF1 alpha.

Sel S(1), Ebert T, Ryffel GU, Drewes T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Germany.

Human renal cell carcinogenesis is usually accompanied by dedifferentiation
processes including the loss of expression of tissue specifically expressed
genes. Based on the hypothesis that these dedifferentiation processes might be
attributed to a functional change in tissue specific transcription factors, we
have analyzed the expression and function of the tissue specific transcription
factor HNF4 alpha in human renal cell carcinomas. By Western blot analysis and
gel retardation assay using HNF4 alpha specific antibodies, we observed that in
most cases the amount as well as the binding activity of HNF4 is reduced in the
tumor samples compared to the corresponding normal tissues. Furthermore, we found
a clear correlation between the HNF4 alpha binding activity and the amount of
another transcription factor (HNF1 alpha), which is thought to be
transcriptionally activated by HNF4 alpha. We therefore speculate that disruption
of the HNF4 alpha/HNF1 alpha pathway of kidney specific gene expression might be 
an important molecular mechanism in renal cell carcinogenesis.

PMID: 8620471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Curr Opin Hematol. 1996 Mar;3(2):156-62.

Molecular basis of hypoxia-induced erythropoietin expression.

Wang GL(1), Semenza GL.

Author information: 
(1)Otsuka America Pharmaceutical, Inc., St. Petersburg, FL 33701, USA.

Erythropoietin gene (EPO) expression is activated by tissue hypoxia in renal
peritubular interstitial fibroblasts and, to a lesser extent, in hepatocytes and 
ito cells of the liver. A hypoxia-inducible enhancer spanning approximately 50 bp
within the 3'-flanking region of the EPO gene is required for transcriptional
activation in hypoxic cells. Hypoxia-inducible factor 1 is a basic
helix-loop-helix protein that binds at the 5' end of the enhancer. The binding of
hypoxia-inducible factor 1 is absolutely required for enhancer function.
Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 is an orphan receptor that binds at the 3' end of the
enhancer. The binding of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 augments hypoxia-inducible
transcription mediated by the enhancer but is not absolutely required for
enhancer function. Factors binding to the enhancer may interact synergistically
with factors binding to the EPO promoter to activate transcription in hypoxic
cells. Indirect evidence suggests that oxygen tension may be sensed by a
hemoprotein. In one model, the putative hemoprotein adopts different
conformational states depending on whether O2 is bound. Another model proposes
that the hemoprotein converts O2 to H2O2. The protein tyrosine kinase c-Src,
GTP-binding protein Ras, and MAP kinase signal pathways have been implicated in
hypoxia signal transduction, but no direct evidence links these pathways to EPO
transcriptional activation.

PMID: 9372067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Carcinogenesis. 1996 Mar;17(3):609-12.

Expression of hepatocyte-enriched nuclear transcription factors in mouse liver
tumours.

Kalkuhl A(1), Kaestner K, Buchmann A, Schwarz M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Toxicology, University of Tübingen, Germany.

Preneoplastic and neoplastic lesions in rodent liver show alterations in the
expression of various enzymes which can be used for their identification. To
address the question whether these enzymatic alterations result from specific
changes in the levels of hepatocyte-enriched nuclear factors (HNF), we analysed
the mRNA levels of six different HNFs (HNF-1alpha, beta, HNF-3alpha, beta, gamma,
and HNF-4) by RNase protection assay in chemically induced liver tumours and
corresponding normal liver tissue from mice of three different strains. When
compared with the normal liver tissue, HNF-1beta, HNF-3alpha and HNF-3beta showed
unchanged expression levels in the various liver tumours, which HNF-1alpha and
HNF-4 mRNAs were lowered by 20-30%, and HNF-3gamma mRNA was increased by 50%.
There were no significant differences in HNF-expression between tumours
harbouring point mutations at codon 61 of the Ha-ras protooncogene and tumours
without detectable Ha-ras mutations.

PMID: 8631153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Mar;16(3):745-52.

Extensive alternative splicing and dual promoter usage generate Tcf-1 protein
isoforms with differential transcription control properties.

Van de Wetering M(1), Castrop J, Korinek V, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Previously, we reported the isolation of cDNA clones representing four
alternative splice forms of TCF-1, a T-cell-specific transcription factor. In the
present study, Western blotting (immunoblotting) yielded a multitude of TCF-1
proteins ranging from 25-55 kDa, a pattern not simply explained from the known
splice alternatives. Subsequent cDNA cloning, PCR amplification, and analysis by 
rapid amplification of 5' cDNA ends revealed (i) the presence of an alternative
upstream promoter, which extended the known N terminus by 116 amino acids, (ii)
the presence of four alternative exons, and (iii) the existence of a second
reading frame in the last exon encoding an extended C terminus. Inclusion of the 
extended N terminus into the originally reported protein resulted in a striking
similarity to the lymphoid factor Lef-1. Several of the TCF-1 isoforms, although 
less potent, mimicked Lef-1 in transactivating transcription through the T-cell
receptor alpha-chain (TCR-alpha) enhancer. These data provide a molecular basis
for the complexity of the expressed TCF-1 proteins and establish the existence of
functional differences between these isoforms. Furthermore, the functional
redundancy between Tcf-1 and Lef-1 explains the apparently normal TCR-alpha
expression in single Tcf-1 or Lef-1 knockout mice despite the firm in vitro
evidence for the importance of the Tcf/Lef site in the TCR-alpha enhancer.

PMCID: PMC231054
PMID: 8622675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Eur J Biochem. 1996 Mar 1;236(2):373-82.

Motifs resembling hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 and activator protein 3 mediate the
tissue specificity of the human plasminogen gene.

Meroni G(1), Buraggi G, Mantovani R, Taramelli R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Genetica e di Biologia dei Microrganismi, Milan, Italy.

Plasminogen is one of the key elements in the fibrinolytic process. Like most of 
the gene products that participate in such reactions and which interact with
plasminogen, the site of its synthesis is mainly confined to the hepatocyte.
Plasminogen RNA has additionally been detected in kidney and very low amounts
also in testes. Deletional analysis has indicated that two 5' sequences located
within 2.5 kb of the first ATG are responsible for the transcriptional activation
and the tissue specificity of the expression of the gene. By DNase protection and
gel mobility shift assays with HepG2 nuclear extracts, the two sequences were
localized and found to be the recognition sites for the widely known hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1) a trans-acting factor, and a nuclear factor like
activator protein 3 (AP-3). The first one lies in a rather unusual position, i.e.
within the 5'-untranslated region. The latter is located further upstream in a
region between --2200 and --2100 from the plasminogen mRNA cap site. Moreover,
site-directed mutagenesis coupled by functional experiments in HepG2 cells has
demonstrated a synergism between these two positively acting elements in
controlling the transcription of the human plasminogen gene.

PMID: 8612605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. J Biol Chem. 1996 Feb 23;271(8):4528-38.

Tissue-specific expression of the nonneuronal promoter of the aromatic L-amino
acid decarboxylase gene is regulated by hepatocyte nuclear factor 1.

Aguanno A(1), Afar R, Albert VR.

Author information: 
(1)Roche Institute of Molecular Biology, Nutley, New Jersey 07110, USA.

The rat aromatic l-amino acid decarboxylase (AADC) gene contains alternative
promoters which direct expression of neuronal and nonneuronal mRNAs that differ
only in their 5'-untranslated regions (UTRs). We have analyzed the expression of 
the nonneuronal promoter of the rat AADC gene in the kidney epithelial cell line 
LLC-PK1 and in cells which do not express the nonneuronal form of AADC by
transient transfection. These studies revealed that the first 1.1 kilobases of
the nonneuronal promoter, including the nonneuronal-specific 5'-UTR (Exon 1),
contains sufficient information to direct tissue-specific expression. Serial
deletions of this promoter localized the cis-active element to a region between
-52 and -28 base pairs upstream of the nonneuronal transcription start site. An
A/T-rich sequence, within this region which we have termed KL-1, was found to
bind a kidney and liver-specific factor by DNase footprint analysis and was
capable of directing tissue-specific expression from a heterologous promoter.
Moreover, when the KL-1 sequence was mutated in the context of the entire
promoter sequence, all transcriptional activity was abolished. DNA sequence
comparison revealed that the KL-1 fragment is highly homologous to the binding
site for hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1). Mobility shift studies utilizing an
antibody to HNF-1 demonstrated binding of HNF-1 to the KL-1 fragment and
cotransfection of HNF-1 cDNA into cells which do not express the nonneuronal form
of AADC resulted in activation of transfected AADC nonneuronal promoter
constructs. These results strongly suggest that the transcription factor which
regulates the tissue-specific expression of the nonneuronal form of AADC mRNA is 
HNF-1.

PMID: 8626808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Cell. 1996 Feb 23;84(4):575-85.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 inactivation results in hepatic dysfunction,
phenylketonuria, and renal Fanconi syndrome.

Pontoglio M(1), Barra J, Hadchouel M, Doyen A, Kress C, Bach JP, Babinet C, Yaniv
M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, Département des Biotechnologies, InstitutPasteur,
Paris, France.

HNF1 is a transcriptional activator of many hepatic genes including albumin,
alpha1-antitrypsin, and alpha- and beta-fibrinogen. It is related to the homeobox
gene family and is predominantly expressed in liver and kidney. Mice lacking HNF1
fail to thrive and die around weaning after a progressive wasting syndrome with a
marked liver enlargement. The transcription rate of genes like albumin and
alpha1-antitrypsin is reduced, while the gene coding for phenylalanine
hydroxylase is totally silent, giving rise to phenylketonuria. Mutant mice also
suffer from severe Fanconi syndrome caused by renal proximal tubular dysfunction.
The resulting massive urinary glucose loss leads to energy and water wasting.
HNF1-deficient mice may provide a model for human renal Fanconi syndrome.

PMID: 8598044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Int J Dev Biol. 1996 Feb;40(1):297-304.

Regulation and function of the tissue-specific transcription factor HNF1 alpha
(LFB1) during Xenopus development.

Weber H(1), Strandmann EP, Holewa B, Bartkowski S, Zapp D, Zoidl C, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum, Essen,
Germany.

We review the data available on the structure, developmental appearance and
embryonic regulation of the tissue-specific transcription factor HNF1 alpha
(LFB1) in Xenopus. The expression of the HNF1 alpha gene starts early in
embryogenesis shortly after mid-blastula transition and the protein accumulates
in the region of the embryo where liver, pronephros and gut--tissues that contain
HNF1 alpha in the adult--are developing. The cofactor DCoH, known to stabilize
dimer formation of HNF1 alpha, is present as a maternal factor in the egg and has
a partially distinct tissue distribution compared to HNF1 alpha. This implies
that DCoH does not only modulate HNF1 alpha dimerization but may also cooperate
with other transcription factors. By injecting HNF1 alpha promoter CAT constructs
into fertilized Xenopus eggs we obtained activation of the injected gene
restricted to the region of the developing larvae expressing endogenous HNF1
alpha. Deletion analysis allowed to define the OZ-element that is essential for
embryonic activation. This element also occurs in other promoters activated at
mid-blastula transition in the embryo and interacts with the maternal factor
OZ-1. As the HNF1 alpha promoter also contains functional binding sites for HNF4 
and HNF1, we postulate that all of these transcription factors contribute to the 
cascade leading to proper embryonic activation of the HNF1 alpha gene.

PMID: 8735941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. FASEB J. 1996 Feb;10(2):267-82.

Liver-enriched transcription factors and hepatocyte differentiation.

Cereghini S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hôpital Necker Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Liver-specific gene expression in adult hepatocytes relies on four families of
evolutionary conserved transcription factors that are liver-enriched but not
restricted to this tissue. These factors function in unique combinations, often
synergistically, to stimulate cell-specific transcription. Each family is
composed of several members displaying similar, if not identical, DNA recognition
properties and sharing structural homology in their DNA binding domains. The
homo- and heterodimerization between members of a particular transcription factor
family adds an additional level of complexity in gene regulation. The
consequences of inactivating different family members in the mouse by homologous 
recombination, together with recent studies of their regulation, suggest a model 
for liver differentiation involving a regulatory network rather than a completely
hierarchical genetic circuitry. These studies also indicate that individual
regulators appear to serve multiple developmental functions. Their possible role 
in the progression through different stages of hepatic cell commitment and
differentiation is discussed.

PMID: 8641560  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Eur J Immunol. 1996 Feb;26(2):351-5.

Selectively impaired development of intestinal T cell receptor gamma delta+ cells
and liver CD4+ NK1+ T cell receptor alpha beta+ cells in T cell
factor-1-deficient mice.

Ohteki T(1), Wilson A, Verbeek S, MacDonald HR, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Ludwig Institute for Cancer Research, University of Lausanne, Epalinges,
Switzerland.

T cell factor-1 (Tcf-1) is a transcription factor that binds to a sequence motif 
present in several T cell-specific enhancer elements. In Tcf-1-deficient
(Tcf-1-/-) mice, thymocyte development is partially blocked at the transition
from the CD4-8+ immature single-positive stage to the CD4+8+ double-positive
stage, resulting in a marked decrease of mature peripheral T cells in lymph node 
and spleen. We report here that the development of most intestinal TCR gamma
delta+ cells and liver CD4+ NK1.1+TCR alpha beta+ (NK1+T) cells, which are
believed to be of extrathymic origin, is selectively impaired in Tcf-1-/- mice.
In contrast, thymic and thymus-derived (splenic) TCR gamma delta+ cells are
present in normal numbers in Tcf-1-/- mice, as are other T cell subsets in
intestine and liver. Collectively, our data suggest that Tcf-1 is differentially 
required for the development of some extrathymic T cell subsets, including
intestinal TCR gamma delta+ cells and liver CD4+ NK1+T cells.

PMID: 8617303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Mech Dev. 1996 Jan;54(1):45-57.

Transcriptional hierarchy in Xenopus embryogenesis: HNF4 a maternal factor
involved in the developmental activation of the gene encoding the tissue specific
transcription factor HNF1 alpha (LFB1).

Holewa B(1), Strandmann EP, Zapp D, Lorenz P, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Essen, Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung),
Germany.

The tissue specific transcription factor HNF1 alpha (LFB1) expressed in liver,
kidney, stomach and gut gets transcriptionally activated in Xenopus shortly after
zygotic transcription starts. By microinjection into fertilized Xenopus eggs, a
HNF1 alpha promoter fragment is activated in the middle part of developing
larvae, reflecting the activation pattern of the endogenous HNF1 alpha gene.
Mutational analysis of the HNF1 alpha promoter shows that HNF1 and HNF4 binding
sites are essential for proper embryonic regulation. Since by injecting HNF4 mRNA
into fertilized eggs the endogenous HNF1 alpha gene is activated ectopically and 
HNF4 is present as a maternal protein within an animal to vegetal gradient in the
embryo, we assume that HNF4 initiates a transcriptional hierarchy involved in
determination of different cell fates.

PMID: 8808405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Am J Pathol. 1995 Dec;147(6):1633-48.

Transcription factor and liver-specific mRNA expression in facultative epithelial
progenitor cells of liver and pancreas.

Dabeva MD(1), Hurston E, Shafritz DA.

Author information: 
(1)Marion Bessin Liver Research Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, New York 10461, USA.

The pattern of mRNA expression for liver-specific proteins and liver-enriched
transcription factors was studied in two models of facultative gut epithelial
progenitor cells activation: D-galactosamine (GalN)-induced liver injury and
dietary copper depletion leading to pancreatic acinar atrophy. After 5 weeks of
copper deficiency (CuD), pancreatic acini of Fischer 344 rats underwent atrophy, 
associated with intense proliferation of small duct-like cells with oval-shaped
nuclei. These cells resemble morphologically epithelial progenitor cells of the
liver that proliferate after GalN administration. Activated pancreatic epithelial
cells express mRNAs for liver-specific genes normally expressed in fetal liver,
including alpha-fetoprotein, albumin, alpha-1 antitrypsin, glucose-6-phosphatase,
and others, but not genes that are turned on after birth such as serine
dehydratase, tyrosine aminotransferase, and multidrug resistance gene-1b. They
express mRNAs for liver-enriched transcription factors including HNF-1 alpha,
HNF-3 beta and gamma, HNF-4, and members of the CCAAT-enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP) family. The only mRNA for a liver-enriched transcription factor not
detected in the pancreas of CuD animals was HNF-3 alpha. Expression of HNF-3
alpha, beta, and gamma, and C/EBP-beta mRNA was highly activated in proliferating
liver epithelial cells on days 2 and 3 after GalN injury. Increased expression of
C/EBP-delta was observed first in the liver on day 1 after GalN administration
and in the pancreas at 4 weeks after initiating CuD. We suggest that C/EBP-delta 
could be involved in the initial activation of epithelial progenitor cells and
that HNF-3 alpha, beta, and gamma, and C/EBP-beta might participate in their
maturation. We conclude further that pancreatic epithelial progenitor cells
undertake differentiation through the hepatocyte lineage but cannot complete the 
differentiation program within the pancreatic milieu.

PMCID: PMC1869941
PMID: 7495289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Biol Chem. 1995 Nov 24;270(47):28342-9.

Characterization of the 5'-flanking region of the gene for the alpha chain of
human fibrinogen.

Hu CH(1), Harris JE, Davie EW, Chung DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of Washington, Seattle 98195-7350, USA.

The 5'-flanking region of the gene coding for the alpha chain of human fibrinogen
was isolated, sequenced, and characterized. The principal site of transcription
initiation was determined by primer extension analysis and the RNase protection
assay and shown to be at an adenine residue located 55 nucleotides upstream from 
the initiator methionine codon, or 13,399 nucleotides down-stream from the
polyadenylation site of the gene coding for the gamma chain. Transient expression
of constructs containing sequentially deleted 5'-flanking sequences of the alpha 
chain gene fused to the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene showed
that the promoter was liver-specific and inducible by interleukin 6 (IL-6). The
shortest DNA fragment with significant promoter activity and full response to
IL-6 stimulation encompassed the region from -217 to +1 base pairs (bp). Although
six potential IL-6 responsive sequences homologous to the type II IL-6 responsive
element were present, a single sequence of CTGGGA localized from -122 to -127 bp 
was shown to be a functional element in IL-6 induction. A hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 (HNF-1) binding site, present from -47 to -59 bp, in combination with
other upstream elements, was essential for liver-specific expression of the gene.
A functional CCAAT/enhancer binding protein site (C/EBP, -134 to -142 bp) was
also identified within 217 bp from the transcription initiation site. An
additional positive element (-1393 to -1133 bp) and a negative element (-1133 to 
-749 bp) were also found in the upstream region of the alpha-fibrinogen gene.

PMID: 7499335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Mol Endocrinol. 1995 Nov;9(11):1488-99.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha activates promoter 1 of the human insulin-like 
growth factor I gene via two distinct binding sites.

Nolten LA(1), Steenbergh PH, Sussenbach JS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Physiological Chemistry, Utrecht University, The Netherlands.

Expression of the human insulin-like growth factor I (hIGF-I) gene is regulated
in a tissue- and developmental stage-specific manner. The hIGF-I gene has two
promoters, P1 and P2. P1 is the more active promoter by far in adult liver, the
main endocrine source of IGF-I. Recently, we described the involvement of the
CAAT/enhancer binding protein family of liver-enriched transcription factors in
the regulation of the expression of IGF-I in adult liver. In this study we report
on the role of another family of liver-enriched transcription factors in the
regulation of IGF-I expression. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha)
is shown to transactivate IGF-I P1 in transient transfection experiments
performed in Hep3B cells. Bandshift experiments reveal that two distinct regions 
in P1, located 119 and 282 nucleotides upstream of the transcription start site, 
can bind HNF-1 alpha with relatively high affinity. Both HNF-1-binding sites are 
evolutionary well conserved, emphasizing the importance of HNF-1 in the
regulation of the IGF-I gene expression. Mutational analysis of the binding sites
indicates that both sites are essential for maximal stimulation of P1 by HNF-1
alpha, although the largest contribution stems from the more downstream of the
two HNF-1-binding sites. The latter site completely overlaps the previously
described CAAT/enhancer binding protein binding site in P1. The colocalization of
the binding sites, to which binding of the respective factors seems to be
mutually exclusive, is suggestive of a regulatory hotspot to which members of
different transcription factor families may bind depending on developmental stage
and nutritional status.

PMID: 8584026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Virology. 1995 Oct 20;213(1):231-40.

Interplay between a new HNF3 and the HNF1 transcriptional factors in the duck
hepatitis B virus enhancer.

Crescenzo-Chaigne B(1), Pillot J, Lilienbaum A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

We identified a new hepatocyte nuclear factor 3 (HNF3) binding site in the DHBV
enhancer. This site is close to the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) binding
site, responsible for most of the enhancing activity. No differences in the
migrating properties were found between this new site and the two other HNF3
sites recently described in this enhancer. Factor HNF1 strongly inhibits binding 
of the HNF3 factor in this newly characterized site. The two factors were never
detected simultaneously on the DNA fragment, even when their respective
concentrations were modified. Competition persisted after enlarging by 5 and 10
nucleotides the space between the two sites. On the contrary, when the HNF3
binding site was changed into the perfect consensus site, binding of the HNF3
factor was not inhibited any longer by HNF1 and a supershift, corresponding to
the binding of both factors, was observed. Thus a limited mismatching appears to 
modulate the interaction between transcriptional proteins and DNA and allows a
second transcriptional protein to interplay with the former one.

PMID: 7483267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Blood. 1995 Oct 15;86(8):3050-9.

The human TCF-1 gene encodes a nuclear DNA-binding protein uniquely expressed in 
normal and neoplastic T-lineage lymphocytes.

Castrop J(1), van Wichen D, Koomans-Bitter M, van de Wetering M, de Weger R, van 
Dongen J, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The TCF-1 gene encodes a putative transcription factor with affinity for a
sequence motif occurring in a number of T-cell enhancers. TCF-1 mRNA was
originally found to be expressed in a T cell-specific fashion within a set of
human and mouse cell lines. In contrast, expression reportedly occurs in multiple
nonlymphoid tissues during murine embryogenesis. We have now raised a monoclonal 
antibody to document expression and biochemistry of the human TCF-1 protein. As
expected, the TCF-1 protein was detectable only in cell lines of T lineage. Its
expression was always restricted to the nucleus. Immunohistochemistry on a panel 
of human tissues revealed that the TCF-1 protein was found exclusively in
thymocytes and in CD3+ T cells in peripheral lymphoid tissues. Western blotting
yielded a set of bands ranging from 25 kD to 55 kD, resulting from extensive
alternative splicing. The TCF-1 protein was detectable in all samples of a set of
22 T-cell malignancies of various stages of maturation, but was absent from a
large number of other hematologic neoplasms. These observations imply a T
cell-specific function for TCF-1, a notion corroborated by recent observations on
Tcf-1 knock-out mice. In addition, these results indicate that nuclear TCF-1
expression can serve as a pan-T-lineage marker in the diagnosis of lymphoid
malignancies.

PMID: 7579399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Nature. 1995 Aug 31;376(6543):791-5.

Structural basis for DNA bending by the architectural transcription factor LEF-1.

Love JJ(1), Li X, Case DA, Giese K, Grosschedl R, Wright PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla,
California 92037, USA.

Lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (LEF-1) and the closely related T-cell factor 1 
(TCF-1) are sequence-specific and cell-type-specific DNA-binding proteins that
play important regulatory roles in organogenesis and thymocyte differentiation.
LEF-1 participates in regulation of the enhancer associated with the T cell
receptor (TCR)-alpha gene by inducing a sharp bend in the DNA and facilitating
interactions between Ets-1, PEBP2-alpha, and ATF/CREB, transcription factors
bound at sites flanking the LEF-1 site. It seems that LEF-1 plays an
architectural role in the assembly and function of this regulatory nucleoprotein 
complex. LEF-1 recognizes a specific nucleotide sequence through a
high-mobility-group (HMG) domain. Proteins containing HMG domains bind DNA in the
minor groove, bend the double helix, and recognize four-way junctions and other
irregular DNA structures. Here we report the solution structure of a complex of
the LEF-1 HMG domain and adjacent basic region with its cognate DNA. The
structure reveals the HMG domain bound in the widened minor groove of a markedly 
distorted and bent double helix. The basic region binds across the narrowed major
groove and contributes to DNA recognition.

PMID: 7651541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Eur J Biochem. 1995 Jul 15;231(2):414-23.

Human pterin-4 alpha-carbinolamine dehydratase/dimerization cofactor of
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha. Characterization and kinetic analysis of
wild-type and mutant enzymes.

Köster S(1), Thöny B, Macheroux P, Curtius HC, Heizmann CW, Pfleiderer W, Ghisla 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Konstanz, Germany.

Pterin-4a-carbinolamine dehydratase/dimerization cofactor for hepatocyte nuclear 
factor-1 alpha is a protein with two different functions. We have overexpressed
and purified the human wild-type protein, and its Cys81Ser and Cys81Arg mutants. 
The Cys81Arg mutant has been proposed to be causative in a hyperphenylalaninaemic
patient [Citron, B. A., Kaufman, S., Milstien, S., Naylor, E. W., Greene, C. L. &
Davis, M. D. (1993) Am. J. Hum. Genet. 53, 768-774]. The dehydratase behaves as a
tetramer on gel filtration, while cross-linking experiments showed mono-, di-,
tri-, and tetrameric forms, irrespective of the presence of the single Cys81.
Sulfhydryl-modifying reagents did not affect the activity, but rather showed that
Cys81 is exposed. Various pterins bind and quench the tryptophan fluorescence
suggesting the presence of a specific binding site. The fluorescence is destroyed
upon light irradiation. Wild-type and the Cys81Ser protein enhance the rate of
the phenylalanine hydroxylase assay approximately 10-fold, a value similar to
that of native dehydratase from rat liver; the Cys81Arg mutant, in contrast, has 
significantly lower activity. This is compatible with the hypothesis that the
dehydratase is a rate-limiting factor for the in vivo phenylalanine hydroxylase
reaction. The three proteins enhance the spontaneous dehydration of the synthetic
substrate 6,6-dimethyl-7,8-dihydropterin-4a-carbinolamine approximately
50-70-fold at 4 degrees C and pH 8.5. The results are discussed in view of the
recently solved three-dimensional structure of the enzyme [Ficner, R., Sauer, U. 
W., Stier, G. & Suck, D. (1995) EMBO J. 14, 2032-2042].

PMID: 7635153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Immunobiology. 1995 Jul;193(2-4):281-7.

Circumvention of tolerance for the nuclear T cell protein TCF-1 by immunization
of TCF-1 knock-out mice.

Castrop J(1), Verbeek S, Hofhuis F, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Molecular events that underlie the well-defined phenotypic changes of the
differentiating thymocyte are poorly understood. A candidate gene to control
thymocyte differentiation, T cell factor-1 (TCF-1)* encodes a DNA-binding
protein. Its mRNA expression pattern is complex during embryogenesis, yet
restricted to lymphocytes postnatally. Expression studies on TCF-1 protein have
been hampered by the difficulty to raise antibodies due to extreme evolutionary
conservation. TCF-1 knock-out mice, generated recently in our laboratory, have
strongly decreased numbers of thymocytes, but are otherwise normal. We have used 
these mice to generate anti-TCF-1 antibodies. By immunization with a recombinant 
fusion protein, we show that TCF-1 knock-out mice readily yield antiserum titers 
against human and mouse TCF-1 protein. Wild-type littermates remain unresponsive 
to TCF-1 while they mount a high-titer antibody response to the fusion protein,
Maltose Binding Protein (MBP). Subsequently, TCF-1-specific hybridomas could be
prepared from the spleens of immunized knock-out mice. This study illustrates the
almost complete tolerance of mice for human TCF-1 and demonstrates that this
tolerance is readily broken by gene knock-out. Furthermore, the usefulness of
knock-out mice for the generation of monoclonal antibodies against the gene
product of interest is underscored.

PMID: 8530156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Biochem J. 1995 Jul 1;309 ( Pt 1):243-8.

Vitamin B6 modulates expression of albumin gene by inactivating tissue-specific
DNA-binding protein in rat liver.

Oka T(1), Komori N, Kuwahata M, Okada M, Natori Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, School of Medicine, University of Tokushima, Japan.

The level of albumin mRNA in the liver of vitamin B6-deficient rats was found to 
be 7-fold higher than that of control rats. Since the transcriptional activity of
the albumin gene, as measured by a nuclear run-on assay, was increased 5-fold in 
vitamin B6 deficiency, the higher concentration of albumin mRNA in the liver of
vitamin-deficient rats could be attributed to the enhanced rate of transcription.
The promoter proximal sequences of the albumin gene interact with a number of
tissue-specific transcription factors including HNF-1 and C/EBP. We determined
the binding activities of liver nuclear extracts to the HNF-1- and C/EBP-binding 
sites by gel mobility-shift assay and found that the activities of the extract
prepared from liver of vitamin B6-deficient rats were greater than those of
controls. As the concentrations of C/EBP in nuclear extracts from control and
vitamin-deficient rats, estimated by Western-blot analysis, were essentially the 
same, the lower binding activity of the extract from control liver is probably
due to inactivation of tissue-specific factors by pyridoxal phosphate and/or its 
analogues. We therefore examined the effect of pyridoxal phosphate and its
analogues on the binding activity of nuclear extract in vitro and found that only
pyridoxal phosphate effectively inhibited the binding. These observations
indicate that vitamin B6 modulates albumin gene expression through a novel
mechanism that involves inactivation of tissue-specific transcription factors by 
direct interaction with pyridoxal phosphate.

PMCID: PMC1135826
PMID: 7619063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Bull Cancer. 1995 Jul;82(7):541-50.

[Several transcription factors participate in the functioning of the
alpha-fetoprotein gene promoter].

[Article in French]

Bois-Joyeux B(1), Thomassin H, Richard F, Ikonomova R, Denissenko M, Danan JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche sur l'endocrinologie moléculaire et le développement,
CNRS, UPR 1511 Meudon, France.

The oncodevelopmentally regulated alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene offers a very good
model system to better understand the molecular mechanisms which dictate the
specificity of gene expression in liver and control its tight modulation in the
course of development and carcinogenesis. Transcription factors of the
CCAAT/enhance-binding protein (C/EBP), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), and
nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) families can bind in vitro to the promoter of the rat AFP
gene, which makes the expression of the AFP gene specific to the liver. We have
evaluated the influence of some of these factors on the activity of the AFP
promoter by transfection of HepG2 hepatoma cells with the appropriate expression 
vector plus a CAT plasmid under the control of the AFP promoter. A similar
plasmid bearing the rat albumin promoter was used as a control. C/EBP alpha, and 
C/EBP beta acted as transactivators on the AFP promoter, while LIP, a truncated
form of C/EBP beta, was a potent negative regulator of the promoter.
Interestingly, HNF-1 beta was found to be more potent than HNF-1 alpha in
activating the AFP promoter in the HepG2 cells. This effect was highly promoter
and cell specific since it did not occur with the rat albumin promoter or in
Chinese hamster ovary cells. HNF-1 beta, which is produced earlier than HNF-1
alpha during liver development, would thus have the greater influence on the AFP 
promoter in early development. Our results pointed to a key role that NF1 might
play in the functioning of the AFP promoter. Indeed, overexpression of NF1
induced a specific decrease in the activity of the AFP promoter. Competition
between NF1 and HNF-1 for binding to their overlapping binding sites on the AFP
promoter would be critical for modulating its activity.

PMID: 7549116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Biochem J. 1995 Jun 1;308 ( Pt 2):613-21.

Expression of the human gene coding for the alpha-chain of C4b-binding protein,
C4BPA, is controlled by an HNF1-dependent hepatic-specific promoter.

Arenzana N(1), Rodríguez de Córdoba S, Rey-Campos J.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Inmunología, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas, CSIC,
Madrid, Spain.

C4b-binding protein (C4BP) is an abundant oligomeric plasma glycoprotein which
controls the activation of the complement cascade through the classical pathway. 
In humans, the majority form of C4BP is composed of seven alpha-chains and one
beta-chain, covalently linked by their C-termini. C4BP is mainly expressed in the
liver. We have previously cloned and characterized the structure of the genes
encoding the alpha and beta chains, C4BPA and C4BPB, respectively. Here we
addressed the characterization of the mechanisms controlling the hepatic
restricted expression of the C4BPA gene. We found that the C4BPA promoter is
contained within the first 369 bp upstream of the transcription start site. The
activity of this promoter is restricted to hepatic cells in transfection
experiments. The hepatic transcription factor HNF1 interacts with a region of
this promoter at -38 bp. This region is absolutely required for the activity of
this promoter, suggesting that HNF1 is essential for the hepatic activity of the 
C4BPA promoter. We speculate that this extreme requirement of HNF1 for the
activity of the human C4BPA promoter is related to the fact that this promoter
lacks a TATA box.

PMCID: PMC1136970
PMID: 7772049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 May 5;210(1):38-43.

Regulation of hepatic genes and liver transcription factors in rat hepatocytes by
extracellular matrix.

Nagaki M(1), Shidoji Y, Yamada Y, Sugiyama A, Tanaka M, Akaike T, Ohnishi H,
Moriwaki H, Muto Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Gifu University School of Medicine,
Japan.

Culturing hepatocytes on different extracellular matrix (ECM) substrata including
tissue culture plastic, type I collagen, Engelbreth-Holm-Swarm (EHS) gel and
poly-N-p-vinylbenzyl-D-lactonamide (PVLA) regulated levels of mRNAs for
cytoskeleton and liver-specific genes. In hepatocytes on EHS gel, the ratio of
albumin/beta-actin in mRNA levels was high and serially increased during the
culture period, while the ratio was low and declined in cells on plastic
substratum, collagen or PVLA. The changes in cellular levels of albumin mRNA
which were regulated by ECM corresponded with those in two liver-specific
transcription factors, hepatocyte nuclear factors-1 and -4, which control the
transcription of liver-specific genes. These results suggest that cell-matrix
interaction may determine and maintain the differentiated phenotype of
hepatocytes by regulating liver-specific transcription factors.

PMID: 7741747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. EMBO J. 1995 May 1;14(9):2034-42.

Three-dimensional structure of the bifunctional protein PCD/DCoH, a cytoplasmic
enzyme interacting with transcription factor HNF1.

Ficner R(1), Sauer UH, Stier G, Suck D.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Structural Biology Programme, Heidelberg, Germany.

The bifunctional protein pterin-4a-carbinolamine dehydratase (PCD)/dimerization
cofactor of HNF1 (DCoH) is a cytoplasmic enzyme involved in the
tetrahydrobiopterin regeneration and is found in complex with the transcription
factor HNF1 in liver cell nuclei. An atypical hyperphenylalaninemia and the
depigmentation disorder vitiligo are related to a deficiency of PCD/DCoH
activity. The crystal structure of PCD/DCoH was solved by multiple isomorphous
replacement and refined to a crystallographic R-factor of 20.5% at 2.7 A
resolution. The single domain monomer comprises three alpha-helices packed
against one side of a four-stranded, antiparallel beta-sheet. The functional
enzyme is a homo-tetramer of 222 symmetry where each of the monomers contributes 
one helix to a central four helix bundle. In the tetramer two monomers form an
eight-stranded, antiparallel beta-sheet with six helices packing against it from 
one side. The concave, hydrophobic surface of the eight-stranded beta-sheet with 
its two protruding loops at either end is reminiscent of the saddle-like shape
seen in the TATA-box binding protein. PCD/DCoH binds as a dimer to the helical
dimerization domain of dimeric HNF1 forming a hetero-tetramer possibly through a 
mixed four helix bundle.

PMCID: PMC398303
PMID: 7744010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. DNA Cell Biol. 1995 Apr;14(4):285-93.

Role of the liver-enriched transcription factor HNF-1 alpha in expression of the 
CYP2E1 gene.

Liu SY(1), Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

The role of the trans-acting factor HNF-1 alpha in activating CYP2E1 gene
expression was confirmed by transient co-transfection of an HNF-1 alpha
expression plasmid and the CYP2E1 promoter fused to the chloramphenicol acetyl
transferase (CAT) reporter gene. Only HNF-1 alpha, and not HNF-1 beta, HNF-4,
C/EBP alpha, C/EBP beta, or DBP, was able to activate the CYP2E1 promoter. The
extent of activation was proportional to the number of copies of the HNF-1
binding sequence upstream of the promoter. Removal or mutation of the HNF-1
binding sequence led to inactivation of the promoter in response to HNF-1 alpha. 
Gel-shift Western blot analysis using a synthetic HNF-1 binding sequence derived 
from CYP2E1 and rat liver nuclear extract revealed that the protein-DNA complex
obtained with adult rat liver nuclear extract consisted of both HNF-1 alpha and
HNF-1 beta proteins. The shifted bands produced by nuclear extracts from adult,
where the endogenous CYP2E1 gene is active, and fetal rat liver, where the gene
is inactive, were found to migrate differently, suggesting that the population of
factors, possibly including different ratios of HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta
proteins, may change during development. However, the co-transfection study did
not show cooperativity between the two factors. Elements upstream of the HNF-1
binding site were found to affect the activity of the promoter negatively in the 
transfection assay. DNase I hypersensitive site mapping revealed a hypersensitive
site in this inhibiting element in the adult rat liver sample but not in liver
from newborn animals.

PMID: 7710685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Genes Dev. 1995 Mar 15;9(6):700-13.

Lymphoid enhancer factor 1 directs hair follicle patterning and epithelial cell
fate.

Zhou P(1), Byrne C, Jacobs J, Fuchs E.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell
Biology, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

T cell-specific transcription factor (TCF-1) and lymphoid enhancer factor 1
(LEF-1) have been implicated exclusively in the regulation of T cell-specific
genes. The only adult tissue other than thymus known to express these factors is 
spleen and lymph node, which contain low levels of LEF-1 and no TCF-1. We noticed
that genes involved in hair-specific gene expression possess LEF-1/TCF-1
consensus motifs located in similar positions relative to their TATA box. We show
that of the two factors only LEF-1 is expressed in hair follicles; it can be
cloned in both splice forms from human skin keratinocytes and it can bind to
these sites in the hair promoters. We show that LEF-1 mRNA is present in
pluripotent ectoderm, and it is up-regulated in a highly restricted pattern just 
before the formation of underlying mesenchymal condensates and commitment of
overlying ectodermal cells to invaginate and become hair follicles. New waves of 
ectodermal LEF-1 spots appear concomitant with new waves of follicle
morphogenesis. To test whether LEF-1 patterning might be functionally important
for hair patterning and morphogenesis, we used transgenic technology to alter the
patterning and timing of LEF-1 over the surface ectoderm. Striking abnormalities 
arose in the positioning and orientation of hair follicles, leaving a marked
disruption of this normally uniform patterning. This provides the first direct
evidence that ectodermal cues are critical in establishing these developmental
processes, which at later stages are known to be influenced by underlying
mesenchyme. Remarkably, elevated LEF-1 in the lip furrow epithelium of developing
transgenic animals triggered these cells to invaginate, sometimes leading to the 
inappropriate adoption of hair follicle and tooth cell fates. Collectively, our
findings demonstrate that ectodermal expression of LEF-1 plays a central role in 
gene expression, pattern formation, and other developmental processes involving
epithelial-mesenchymal associations.

PMID: 7537238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Nature. 1995 Mar 2;374(6517):70-4.

An HMG-box-containing T-cell factor required for thymocyte differentiation.

Verbeek S(1), Izon D, Hofhuis F, Robanus-Maandag E, te Riele H, van de Wetering
M, Oosterwegel M, Wilson A, MacDonald HR, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Two candidate genes for controlling thymocyte differentiation, T-cell factor-1
(Tcf-1) and lymphoid enhancer-binding factor (Lef-1), encode closely related
DNA-binding HMG-box proteins. Their expression pattern is complex and largely
overlapping during embryogenesis, yet restricted to lymphocytes postnatally. Here
we generate two independent germline mutations in Tcf-1 and find that thymocyte
development in (otherwise normal) mutant mice is blocked at the transition from
the CD8+, immature single-positive to the CD4+/CD8+ double-positive stage. In
contrast to wild-type mice, most of the immature single-positive cells in the
mutants are not in the cell cycle and the number of immunocompetent T cells in
peripheral lymphoid organs is reduced. We conclude that Tcf-1 controls an
essential step in thymocyte differentiation.

PMID: 7870176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Nucleic Acids Res. 1995 Feb 11;23(3):395-404.

Hierarchy and positive/negative interplays of the hepatocyte nuclear factors
HNF-1, -3 and -4 in the liver-specific enhancer for the human
alpha-1-microglobulin/bikunin precursor.

Rouet P(1), Raguenez G, Tronche F, Mfou'ou V, Salier JP.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 78, Boisguillaume, France.

Alpha-1-microglobulin and bikunin are two plasma glycoproteins encoded by an
alpha-1-microglobulin/bikunin precursor (AMBP) gene. The strict liver-specific
expression of the AMBP gene is controlled by a potent enhancer made of six
clustered boxes numbered 1-6 that have been reported to be proven or potential
binding sites for the hepatocyte-enriched nuclear factors HNF-1, -4, -3, -1, -3, 
-4, respectively. In the present study, electromobility shift assays of wild-type
or mutated probes demonstrated that the boxes 1-5 have a binding capacity for
their cognate HNF protein. Box 5 is also a target for another, as yet
unidentified, factor. A functional analysis of the wild-type or mutated enhancer,
driving its homologous promoter and a reporter CAT gene in the HepG2 hepatoma
cell line, demonstrated that all six boxes participate in the enhancer activity, 
with the primary influence of box 4 (HNF-1) and box 2 (HNF-4). A similar analysis
in the HNF-free CHO cell line co-transfected with one or several HNF factors
further demonstrated various interplays between boxes: box 3 (HNF-3 alpha and
beta) has a negative influence over the major HNF-4 box 2 as well as a positive
influence over the major HNF-1 box 4.

PMCID: PMC306689
PMID: 7533900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Mol Carcinog. 1995 Feb;12(2):103-9.

Expression of the liver-enriched transcription factors C/EBP alpha, C/EBP beta,
HNF-1, and HNF-4 in preneoplastic nodules and hepatocellular carcinoma in rat
liver.

Flodby P(1), Liao DZ, Blanck A, Xanthopoulos KG, Hällström IP.

Author information: 
(1)Center for BioTechnology, Huddinge University Hospital, Sweden.

The expression patterns of the liver-enriched transcription factors
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) alpha and beta and hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-1 and HNF-4 were studied in liver nodules and hepatocellular
carcinomas from male rats treated according to the resistant hepatocyte (RH)
model. C/EBP alpha expression was lower at the transcriptional, mRNA, and protein
levels in persistent nodules than in the respective surrounding livers.
Expression was further decreased in the tumors. Transcriptional downregulation of
C/EBP alpha gene expression was observed already in very early nodules, isolated 
3 wk after partial hepatectomy in the RH model. However, no detectable changes
were observed in preneoplastic nodules in the transcription or in steady-state
mRNA levels of C/EBP beta, HNF-1, and HNF-4. A slight decrease in C/EBP beta
protein and a more pronounced attenuation of HNF-1 and HNF-4 levels was observed 
in nodules, being 67%, 37%, and 46% of the levels in the corresponding
surrounding livers, respectively. In conclusion, differential regulation of
several transcription factors that are associated with the maintenance of the
differentiated state of the hepatocytes was observed in preneoplastic and
neoplastic liver lesions. This could have an impact on the regulation of a wide
array of genes during liver carcinogenesis. Furthermore, the attenuation of C/EBP
alpha expression, regarded as a negative growth regulator, could contribute to
the proliferative advantage of nodules during liver carcinogenesis.

PMID: 7662115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. J Biol Chem. 1995 Jan 20;270(3):1068-73.

The promoter of the salmon insulin-like growth factor I gene is activated by
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1.

Kulik VP(1), Kavsan VM, van Schaik FM, Nolten LA, Steenbergh PH, Sussenbach JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biosynthesis of Nucleic Acids, Ukrainian Academy of Sciences,
Kiev.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1) was found to have a potent stimulatory action
on the activity of the promoter of the salmon insulin-like growth factor I
(IGF-I) gene in transient transfection experiments. This liver-enriched
transcription factor was shown to bind to an element in the proximal region of
the promoter with distinct nucleotide sequence homology to the HNF-1 consensus
binding sequence. Mutating this sequence to a variant no longer capable of HNF-1 
binding resulted in the loss of the stimulatory effect. Since the sequence of the
HNF-1 binding site is conserved in all mammalian, avian, and amphibian species
from which the IGF-I promoter sequences have been derived to date, we propose
that HNF-1 may be an important regulator of IGF-I gene expression in all of these
species.

PMID: 7836361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. FEBS Lett. 1995 Jan 2;357(1):62-4.

Crystallization and preliminary crystallographic studies of recombinant
dimerization cofactor of transcription factor HNF1/pterin-4 alpha-carbinolamine
dehydratase from liver.

Ficner R(1), Sauer UH, Ceska TA, Stier G, Suck D.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Structural Biology Programme, Heidelberg, Germany.

The bi-functional protein dimerization cofactor of HNF1 (DCoH)/pterin-4
alpha-carbinolamine dehydratase (PCD) is found in liver cell nuclei bound to the 
transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) as well as in the
cytoplasm acting as an enzyme involved in the phenylalanine hydroxylation system.
Deficiency of DCoH/PCD activity in liver causes an atypical hyperphenylalaninemia
and deficiency in human epidermis is related to the depigmentation disorder
vitiligo. DCoH/PCD from rat liver, which is identical to the human protein, was
expressed in E. coli, purified to homogeneity and crystallized. The crystals
belong to the trigonal space group P3(1)21 (or P3(2)21) with unit cell dimensions
of a = b = 106.2 A, c = 197.1 A. Native crystals diffract to a resolution of 2.5 
A.

PMID: 8001680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Prog Growth Factor Res. 1995;6(2-4):131-40.

Dexamethasone stimulation of rat insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1
(IGFBP-1) promoter activity involves the interaction of multiple transcription
factors.

Suh DS(1), Zhou Y, Ooi GT, Rechler MM.

Author information: 
(1)Growth and Development Section, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive
and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-1758, USA.

Using an improved procedure for transient transfection of H4-II-E rat hepatoma
cells, we characterized the cis elements in the proximal promoter of the rat
insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (rat IGFBP-1) gene that are required
for basal (unstimulated) and dexamethasone-stimulated promoter activity. Three
sites are required for optimal basal promoter activity: an AP-2 site (nt -286 to 
-293), the M4 region of the insulin response element (nt -108 to -99), and a
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) site (nt -62 to -50). In addition to the
glucocorticoid response element (nt -91 to -77), participation of two of three
accessory sites is required for optimal stimulation by dexamethasone: the M4 and 
HNF-1 sites, and a third site located between nt -252 and -236. Further study
will focus on how the interactions of tissue-specific and hormonally-responsive
transcription factors are integrated.

PMID: 8817654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Carcinogenesis. 1995 Jan;16(1):143-5.

The DNA binding activity of the liver transcription factors LFB1 (HNF1) and HNF4 
varies coordinately in rat hepatocellular carcinoma.

Stumpf H(1), Senkel S, Rabes HM, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Germany.

As renal cell carcinomas are characterized by the disappearance of the
transcription factor LFB1, which is known to be primarily involved in gene
regulation in the liver, we have measured the presence of LFB1 in rat
hepatocellular carcinomas induced by diethylnitrosamine. The level of LFB1
binding activity in adenoid-cystic as well as trabecular tumours shows some
variation and may either be lower or higher than in the non-tumorous tissue. The 
amount of LFB1 binding activity correlates with the binding activity of HNF4, a
transcription factor reported to stimulate LFB1 expression. As the levels of LFB1
and HNF4 binding activity differ extensively in various hepatocellular
carcinomas, it is unlikely that these transcription factors play a general role
in hepatocarcinogenesis. This is in contrast to renal carcinogenesis where a
dramatic loss of LFB1 is a consistent feature.

PMID: 7834800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Hum Mol Genet. 1994 Dec;3(12):2147-52.

Disruption of a binding site for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 in the protein C
gene promoter is associated with hereditary thrombophilia.

Berg LP(1), Scopes DA, Alhaq A, Kakkar VV, Cooper DN.

Author information: 
(1)Charter Molecular Genetics Laboratory, Thrombosis Research Institute, London, 
UK.

A heterozygous T-->C transition was detected in the putative promoter region of
the protein C (PROC) gene in a patient with type I protein C deficiency and a
history of recurrent venous thrombosis. This mutation occurred 14 bp upstream of 
the transcription initiation site and within a sequence strongly homologous to
the consensus binding site for the liver-enriched transcription factor,
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1). Transfection experiments demonstrated that a
CAT reporter gene construct containing 626 bp of the putative PROC gene promoter 
was capable of driving CAT expression in HepG2 hepatoma cells. Levels of CAT
expression from constructs bearing the mutation were found to be drastically
reduced by comparison with the wild-type, consistent with the reduced plasma
protein C antigen levels observed in the patient. Gel retardation and
cotransfection experiments demonstrated that the mutation abolished both the
binding and the transactivating ability of HNF-1 observed with the wild-type PROC
gene promoter. Further, the ability of the mutation to disrupt HNF-1 binding
appears to be a function not only of the nature of the nucleotide substitution
and its position within the recognition sequence, but also of the relative
affinity of the wild-type binding site for HNF-1. This analysis is therefore
indicative of a vital role for HNF-1 in the expression of the PROC gene in vivo. 
Taken together with the identification of a human hepatoma cell line which
contains HNF-1 but which does not express protein C, these findings are
consistent with the view that HNF-1 is necessary although not sufficient for PROC
gene expression in the liver.

PMID: 7881411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Exp Cell Res. 1994 Nov;215(1):189-98.

Hepatocytic transcription factor expression in human embryonal carcinoma and yolk
sac carcinoma cell lines: expression of HNF-3 alpha in models of early endodermal
cell differentiation.

Roach S(1), Schmid W, Pera MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, Oxford University, United Kingdom.

Retinoic acid treatment of the multipotent human embryonal carcinoma cell line
GCT 27 X-1 induced differentiation into an epithelial cell type which
morphologically resembled rodent visceral endoderm in vitro. The differentiated
cells expressed some markers characteristic of yolk sac, such as cytokeratin 19
and extracellular matrix proteins, but none of the secreted serum proteins
produced by normal yolk sac or liver. HNF-3 alpha expression increased upon
retinoic acid-induced GCT 27 X-1 differentiation. This increase in HNF-3 alpha
expression may characterize an early stage in the differentiation of
extraembryonic endoderm. In support of this hypothesis, we found that a yolk sac 
carcinoma cell line with a phenotype similar to rodent visceral endoderm
expressed transcripts for HNF-1 alpha, -1 beta, -3 alpha, -3 beta, -3 gamma, and 
4, whereas yolk sac carcinoma cell lines resembling rodent parietal endoderm
expressed transcripts for HNF-3 alpha. The results support the conclusion that
hepatocytic transcription factors, particularly HNF-3 alpha, may play an
important role in early endodermal differentiation in man.

PMID: 7957668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Nov;14(11):7124-33.

Transcriptional regulation of the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase gene by
cooperation between hepatic nuclear factors.

Yanuka-Kashles O(1), Cohen H, Trus M, Aran A, Benvenisty N, Reshef L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biochemistry, Hebrew University-Hadassah Medical
School, Jerusalem, Israel.

To study the transcriptional regulation of the liver gluconeogenic phenotype, the
underdifferentiated mouse Hepa-1c1c7 (Hepa) hepatoma cell line was used. These
cells mimicked the fetal liver by appreciably expressing the alpha-fetoprotein
and albumin genes but not the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) gene.
Unlike the fetal liver, however, Hepa cells failed to express the early-expressed
factors hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) and HNF-4 and the
late-expressed factor C/EBP alpha, thereby providing a suitable system for
examining possible cooperation between these factors in the transcriptional
regulation of the PEPCK gene. Transient transfection assays of a chimeric
PEPCK-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase construct showed a residual PEPCK
promoter activity in the Hepa cell line, which was slightly stimulated by
cotransfection with a single transcription factor from either the C/EBP family or
HNF-1 alpha but not at all affected by cotransfection of HNF-4. In contrast,
cotransfection of the PEPCK construct with members from the C/EBP family plus
HNF-1 alpha resulted in a synergistic stimulation of the PEPCK promoter activity.
This synergistic effect depended on the presence in the PEPCK promoter region of 
the HNF-1 recognition sequence and on the presence of two C/EBP recognition
sequences. The results demonstrate a requirement for coexistence and cooperation 
between early and late liver-enriched transcription factors in the
transcriptional regulation of the PEPCK gene. In addition, the results suggest
redundancy between members of the C/EBP family of transcription factors in the
regulation of PEPCK gene expression.

PMCID: PMC359246
PMID: 7935427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Nov;14(11):7086-94.

Genetic analysis of a transcriptional activation pathway by using hepatoma cell
variants.

Bulla GA(1), Fournier RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington 98104, USA.

A hierarchy of liver-enriched transcription factors plays an important role in
activating expression of many hepatic genes. In particular, hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4 (HNF-4) is a major activator of the gene encoding HNF-1, and HNF-1
itself activates expression of more than 20 liver genes. To dissect this
activation pathway genetically, we prepared somatic cell variants that were
deficient in expression of the liver-specific alpha 1-antitrypsin (alpha 1AT)
gene, which requires both HNF-1 and HNF-4 for high-level gene activity. This was 
accomplished in two steps. First, hepatoma transfectants that stably expressed
two selectable markers under alpha 1AT promoter control were prepared; second,
variant sublines that could no longer express either transgene were isolated by
direct selection. In this report, we demonstrate that the variants contain
defects in the HNF-4/HNF-1 activation pathway. These defects functioned in trans,
as expression of many liver genes was affected, but the variant phenotypes were
recessive to wild type in somatic cell hybrids. Three different variant classes
could be discriminated by their phenotypic responses to ectopic expression of
either HNF-4 or HNF-1. Two variant clones appeared specifically deficient in
HNF-4 expression, as transfection with an HNF-4 expression cassette fully
restored their hepatic phenotypes. Another line activated HNF-1 in response to
forced HNF-4 expression, but activation of downstream genes failed to occur. One 
clone was unresponsive to either HNF-1 or HNF-4. Using the variants, we
demonstrate further that the chromosomal genes encoding alpha 1AT, aldolase B,
and alpha-fibrinogen display strict requirements for HNF-1 activation in vivo,
while other liver genes were unaffected by the presence or absence of HNF-1 or
HNF-4. We also provide evidence for the existence of an autoregulatory loop in
which HNF-1 regulates its own expression through activation of HNF-4.

PMCID: PMC359242
PMID: 7935424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Nov;14(11):7276-84.

Tissue-specific regulation of mouse hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 expression.

Zhong W(1), Mirkovitch J, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Cell Biology, Rockefeller University, New York, New
York 10021.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF-4) is a liver-enriched transcription factor and 
a member of the steroid hormone receptor superfamily. HNF-4 is required for the
hepatoma-specific expression of HNF-1 alpha, another liver-enriched transcription
factor, suggesting the early participation of HNF-4 in development. To prepare
for further study of HNF-4 in development, the tissue-specific expression of the 
mouse HNF-4 gene was studied by analyzing the promoter region for required DNA
elements. DNase-hypersensitive sites in the gene in liver and kidney tissues were
found in regions both distal and proximal to the RNA start that were absent in
tissues in which HNF-4 expression did not occur. By use of reporter constructs in
transient-transfection assays and with transgenic mice, a region sufficient to
drive liver-specific expression of HNF-4 was identified. While an HNF-1 binding
site between bp -98 and -68 played an important role in the hepatoma-specific
promoter activity of HNF-4 in transient-transfection assays, it was not
sufficient for the liver-specific expression of a reporter gene in transgenic
mice. Distal enhancer elements indicated by the presence of DNase
I-hypersensitive sites at kb -5.5 and -6.5, while not functional in
transient-transfection assays, were required for the correct expression of the
mouse HNF-4 gene in animals.

PMCID: PMC359262
PMID: 7523862  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 Oct 11;22(20):4284-90.

LFB1/HNF1 acts as a repressor of its own transcription.

Piaggio G(1), Tomei L, Toniatti C, De Francesco R, Gerstner J, Cortese R.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Regina Elena Centro Ricerca Sperimentale, Laboratorio Oncogenesi
Molecolare, Rome, Italy.

LFB1/HNF1 is a hepatocyte-enriched trans-activator involved in the regulation of 
many liver-specific genes. We report the cloning and characterization of a rat
genomic DNA fragment containing about 3.5 kb of the LFB1/HNF1 gene 5'-flanking
region. This DNA segment is capable of directing the liver-specific expression of
a reporter gene in transfection assays. More interestingly, the basal activity of
the LFB1/HNF1 promoter in cultured hepatoma cell lines is down-regulated by
exogenously added LFB1/HNF1 protein itself. The ability to repress transcription 
starting from its own promoter requires the integrity of the N-terminal LFB1/HNF1
DNA-binding domain. Contrary to the expectations, in vitro binding experiments
failed to demonstrate any specific and functional interaction of purified
LFB1/HNF1 with the -3.5 kb promoter sequence. In addition to the DNA-binding
domain, a 60 aa region contained in the C-terminus of the protein and distinct
from the previously characterized activation domains, is also required for the
repressing function.

PMCID: PMC331944
PMID: 7937157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. J Gen Virol. 1994 Oct;75 ( Pt 10):2671-9.

Characterization of the minimal elements of the hepatitis B virus large surface
antigen promoter.

Raney AK(1), Easton AJ, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Scripps Research Institute,
La Jolla, California 92037.

It has been demonstrated that the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) binding site
is critical for the majority of the hepatitis B virus (HBV) large surface antigen
promoter activity in differentiated hepatoma cell lines. Examination of a series 
of clustered point mutations in the minimal large surface antigen promoter
demonstrated that the HNF1 and TATA box binding sites are the major regulatory
elements required for transcription from this promoter. Synthetic promoter
constructs containing the large surface antigen promoter HNF1 binding site and
TATA box element upstream of the luciferase open reading frame were tested for
their transcriptional activities in HepG2. 1 cells in the absence or presence of 
an HNF1 expression vector. These synthetic promoter constructs displayed a
similar level of transcriptional activity and induction by HNF1 in comparison
with the full-length large surface antigen promoter, suggesting that additional
HBV sequences are dispensable for full transcriptional activity. The distance
between the HNF1 binding site and TATA box element in the synthetic promoter
constructs appeared to influence the transcriptional activity modestly and in a
periodic manner.

PMID: 7931153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Eur J Biochem. 1994 Oct 1;225(1):441-8.

Estrogen-inducible derivatives of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4, hepatocyte nuclear
factor-3 and liver factor B1 are differently affected by pure and partial
antiestrogens.

Drewes T(1), Clairmont A, Klein-Hitpass L, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Germany.

The tissue-specific transcription factors of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4
(HNF4), hepatocyte nuclear factor-3 (HNF3), and liver factor B1 (LFB1) families
are thought to play a role in the development of internal organs and in the
tissue-specific expression of many distinct genes. We have now constructed
derivatives of these proteins by introducing the hormone-binding domain of the
estrogen receptor and show that in transient transfections these chimeric
proteins act as estrogen-inducible transcription factors with the DNA sequence
specificity of the original factors. These chimeric transcription factors are
differently affected by the partial estrogen antagonist 4-hydroxytamoxifen and
the pure antiestrogen N-n-butyl-11-(3,17-dihydroxy-estra-1,3,5(10)-trien- 7
alpha-yl)N-methyl-undecamide (ICI 164384); 4-hydroxytamoxifen activates, at least
partially, all the chimeric factors and the estrogen receptor, while ICI 164384
surprisingly activates the transcription factors derived from HNF3 and LFB1 and
inhibits only the estrogen receptor and the HNF4 derivative. Together with the
DNA-sequence-binding specificity, the different response to estrogen and
anti-estrogens makes our estrogen receptor fusion proteins useful tools for the
investigation of the roles of HNF4, HNF3 and LFB1 in gene expression,
differentiation and developmental processes.

PMID: 7925467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Biochemistry. 1994 Aug 23;33(33):9889-97.

Transactivation of the rat CYP2C13 gene promoter involves HNF-1, HNF-3, and
members of the orphan receptor subfamily.

Legraverend C(1), Eguchi H, Ström A, Lahuna O, Mode A, Tollet P, Westin S,
Gustafsson JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Nutrition, Karolinska Institute, Huddinge, Sweden.

The rat CYP2C13 gene (2C13) encodes one of the constitutive male forms of
cytochrome P-450 that are involved in steroid metabolism. In addition to being
developmentally regulated, the expression of 2C13 is restricted to the liver and 
suppressed by the female pattern of growth hormone (GH) secretion at the
transcriptional initiation level. In this study, we show that the liver-specific 
expression, but not the regulation by GH, can be reconstituted with 117 bp to 2
kb of 2C13 5' flank. Transactivation of the 2C13 promoter requires both HNF-1 and
HNF-3 and is influenced by members of the orphan receptor subfamily of
transcription factors. Although HNF-4, ARP-1, EAR-2, and COUP-TF bind to the 2C13
promoter in vitro, overexpression of EAR-2 and COUP-TF, but not of HNF-4 or
ARP-1, results in the potentiation of the HNF-3- and HNF-1-supported activity in 
non-liver cells.

PMID: 8060996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Aug 16;91(17):7985-9.

Regulation in vitro of an L-CAM enhancer by homeobox genes HoxD9 and HNF-1.

Goomer RS(1), Holst BD, Wood IC, Jones FS, Edelman GM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA 92037.

Previous studies have shown that in vitro expression of the neural cell adhesion 
molecule (N-CAM) can be regulated by the products of homeobox genes HoxB9, -B8,
and -C6. N-CAM is a Ca(2+)-independent immunoglobulin-related CAM that plays an
important role in neural development. In the present study, we investigated
whether the liver cell adhesion molecule (L-CAM) a member of the Ca(2+)-dependent
CAM family (cadherins) is also regulated by homeobox-containing genes. In
transient cotransfection experiments of NIH 3T3 cells, we observed that both
HoxD9 and liver-enriched POU-homeodomain transcription factor, HNF-1, activated
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene reporter constructs containing the L-CAM
promoter and an enhancer present in the second intron of the chicken L-CAM gene. 
Using electrophoretic mobility-shift assays, we found that components of cell
extracts from NIH 3T3 cells transfected with HoxD9 bound to a small region of the
L-CAM enhancer having a consensus sequence that is a putative binding site for
HNF-1. Components of extracts from the chicken hepatoma cell line LMH that had
been transfected with an HNF-1 expression vector also bound to this same site. In
nuclear run-on experiments with nuclei from LMH cells that were transfected with 
expression vectors for HoxD9 or HNF-1, L-CAM RNA levels were increased 33-fold
and 4-fold respectively. Using the same run-on procedure, it was confirmed that
nuclei prepared from normal embryonic chicken liver cells expressed the RNAs for 
HoxD9, HNF-1, and L-CAM. Taken together with previous observations, these data
raise the possibility that homeobox-containing genes will have a widespread role 
in the place-dependent expression of CAMs belonging both to
immunoglobulin-related and to cadherin families.

PMCID: PMC44529
PMID: 7914699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Biol Chem. 1994 Aug 5;269(31):19757-65.

Apolipoprotein(a) gene transcription is regulated by liver-enriched trans-acting 
factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha.

Wade DP(1), Lindahl GE, Lawn RM.

Author information: 
(1)Falk Cardiovascular Research Center, Stanford University Medical School,
California 94305.

Elevated levels of lipoprotein(a) (Lp(a)) in the plasma are a risk factor for
coronary artery disease and stroke. Plasma Lp(a) concentrations are highly
heritable and predominantly determined by the liver-specific apolipoprotein(a)
(apo(a)) gene. In this report we show by deletion analysis that sequences from
-98 to +130 of the apo(a) gene are sufficient to direct liver-specific
transcription. DNase I protection analysis of this region using HepG2 nuclear
extracts revealed six major protein-binding sites, designated A to F. A mutation 
within footprint C, situated in the 5'-untranslated region of the gene, resulted 
in a marked reduction of luciferase expression from a reporter construct to 12%
of wild type. This was not due to a decrease in mRNA stability. Gel mobility
shift assays demonstrated that site C binds hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha
(HNF-1 alpha), and overexpression of HNF-1 alpha in HepG2 cells resulted in a
significant stimulation of transcription from this promoter fragment. Mutation of
footprint B resulted in a 2-fold enhancement of transcription. These results show
that positive regulation of transcription of the apo(a) gene is dependent on the 
binding of HNF-1 alpha to a regulatory element situated downstream of the mRNA
start site, and suggest that an as yet unidentified protein may negatively
regulate apo(a) transcription by binding to a discrete sequence within the
5'-untranslated region.

PMID: 8051057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Surgery. 1994 Aug;116(2):285-92; discussion 292-3.

Rapid modulation of liver-specific transcription factors after injury.

Burke PA(1), Drotar M, Luo M, Yaffe M, Forse RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, New England Deaconess Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02215.

BACKGROUND: The reaction to injury is a well-orchestrated physiologic response
involving the coordinated actions of multiple integrated systems. It initially
occurs at the molecular level and involves changes in gene transcription. We
hypothesized that the molecular mechanisms regulating the generation of an
inflammatory response are similar to those orchestrating developmental and
tissue-specific expression of proteins and, in the case of the acute phase
response, occur through manipulation of liver-specific transcription factors and 
their binding activity.
METHODS: Female BALB/c mice, 7 to 8 weeks old, were subjected to a 15% body
surface area burn. Total and polyadenylated liver RNA was isolated, and Northern 
blot analysis was performed to determine the kinetics of the acute phase proteins
albumin and fibrinogen and the liver-specific transcriptional factors
CCAAT-enhancer binding protein (C/EBP) alpha, hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1
alpha, and HNF-4.
RESULTS: Induction of the injury response was shown by an increase in fibrinogen 
messenger RNA levels and a decrease in albumin mRNA levels. The liver-specific
transcription factor C/EBP alpha decreased after injury and remained
significantly lower than control at 3 hours. HNF-4 mRNA levels fell more slowly, 
reaching significantly lower levels at 6 hours and remaining suppressed at 34
hours. HNF-1 alpha showed the most rapid fall in mRNA levels at 30 minutes after 
injury and remained significantly below control levels at 34 hours.
CONCLUSIONS: The minimal burn injury model leads to the molecular induction of
the acute phase response and induces significant and rapid changes in the
liver-specific transcription factors C/EBP alpha, HNF-1 alpha, and HNF-4. These
changes may represent a mechanism through which the organ-specific response to
injury is mediated.

PMID: 8047996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. J Cell Biol. 1994 Jul;126(1):223-33.

Expression of hepatic transcription factors during liver development and oval
cell differentiation.

Nagy P(1), Bisgaard HC, Thorgeirsson SS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute,
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-0037.

The oval cells are thought to be the progeny of a liver stem cell compartment and
strong evidence now exists indicating that these cells can participate in liver
regeneration by differentiating into different hepatic lineages. To better
understand the regulation of this process we have studied the expression of
liver-enriched transcriptional factors (HNF1 alpha and HNF1 beta, HNF3 alpha,
HNF3 beta, and HNF3 gamma, HNF4, C/EBP, C/EBP beta, and DBP) in an experimental
model of oval cell proliferation and differentiation and compared the expression 
of these factors to that observed during late stages of hepatic ontogenesis. The 
steady-state mRNA levels of four (HNF1 alpha, HNF3 alpha, HNF4, and C/EBP beta)
"liver-enriched" transcriptional factors gradually decrease during the late
period of embryonic liver development while three factors (HNF1 beta, HNF3 beta, 
and DBP) increase. In the normal adult rat liver the expression of all the
transcription factors are restricted to the hepatocytes. However, during early
stages of oval cell proliferation both small and large bile ducts start to
express HNF1 alpha and HNF1 beta, HNF3 gamma, C/EBP, and DBP but not HNF4. At the
later stages all of these factors are also highly expressed in the proliferating 
oval cells. Expression of HNF4 is first observed when the oval cells
differentiate morphologically and functionally into hepatocytes and form
basophilic foci. At that time the expression of some of the other factors is also
further increased. Based on these data we suggest that the upregulation of the
"establishment" factors (HNF1 and -3) may be an important step in oval cell
activation. The high levels of these factors in the oval cells and embryonic
hepatoblasts further substantiates the similarity between the two cell
compartments. Furthermore, the data suggest that HNF4 may be responsible for the 
final commitment of a small portion of the oval cells to differentiate into
hepatocytes which form the basophilic foci and eventually regenerate the liver
parenchyma.

PMCID: PMC2120103
PMID: 8027180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Mol Carcinog. 1994 Jul;10(3):151-8.

Positive and negative regulations of albumin gene expression by retinoids in
human hepatoma cell lines.

Yamada Y(1), Shidoji Y, Fukutomi Y, Ishikawa T, Kaneko T, Nakagama H, Imawari M, 
Moriwaki H, Muto Y.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Gifu University School of Medicine,
Japan.

All-trans-3,7,11,15-tetramethyl-2,4,6,10,14-hexadecapentaenoic acid (designated
"acyclic retinoid") induced upregulation of the albumin gene expression at its
transcriptional level, whereas all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) induced
downregulation of the expression in both PLC/PRF/5 and HuH7 human hepatoma cell
lines. These up- and down regulations of the albumin gene expression coordinated 
with high and low levels of mRNA for hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1), which
is one of the most potent transcription factors for the albumin gene, implying
that retinoids may regulate albumin gene expression through HNF-1 expression in
opposite ways. The PLC/PRF/5 and HuH7 hepatoma cell lines expressed retinoid X
receptor-alpha (RXR alpha) mRNA, whose expression was constitutive. Acyclic
retinoid and all-trans-RA both induced upregulation of retinoic acid
receptor-beta (RAR beta), and both suppressed cell proliferation-related
phenotypic expressions by the alpha-fetoprotein gene and the c-myc oncogene.
9-cis-RA, whose receptor is known to be RXR alpha, also induced upregulation of
albumin and HNF-1 expression. These results suggest that acyclic retinoid may act
through both RXR alpha and RAR beta, whereas all-trans-RA conveys only RAR
beta-mediated functions, at least in these two hepatoma cell lines.

PMID: 7519016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Biochem J. 1994 Jul 1;301 ( Pt 1):49-55.

Members of the CAAT/enhancer-binding protein, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 and
nuclear factor-1 families can differentially modulate the activities of the rat
alpha-fetoprotein promoter and enhancer.

Bois-Joyeux B(1), Danan JL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche sur l'Endocrinologie Moléculaire et le Développement, CNRS
UPR 1511, Meudon, France.

The promoter of the rat alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene, which makes the expression 
of the developmentally regulated AFP gene specific to the liver, is a putative
target for transcription factors of the CAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP),
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) and nuclear factor-1 (NF-1) families. We have
evaluated the influence of these factors on the activity of the AFP promoter by
transfection of HepG2 hepatoma cells with the appropriate expression vector plus 
a CAT plasmid under the control of the AFP promoter. A similar plasmid bearing
the rat albumin promoter was used as a control. C/EBP alpha, C/EBP beta and
D-binding protein (DBP) acted as trans-activators on the AFP promoter, whereas
liver inhibitory protein (LIP), a truncated form of C/EBP beta, was a potent
negative regulator of the promoter. C/EBP alpha also bound to and stimulated the 
activity of the AFP enhancer at -2.5 kb. Interestingly, HNF-1 beta was found to
be more potent than HNF-1 alpha in activating the AFP promoter. This effect was
specific, as it did not occur with the rat albumin promoter. HNF-1 beta, which is
produced earlier than HNF-1 alpha during liver development, would thus have the
greater influence on the AFP promoter in early development. Both HNF-1s allowed
expression of the AFP promoter in cells of nonhepatic origin. Overexpression of
NF-1 induced a specific decrease in the activity of the AFP promoter. This
strongly suggests that competition between NF-1 and HNF-1 for binding to their
overlapping binding sites on the AFP promoter is critical for modulating its
activity. Thus changing combinations of these trans-acting factors may tightly
modulate the AFP promoter activity in the course of liver development and
carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1137141
PMID: 7518671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jun 24;269(25):17080-5.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) and HNF-1 beta regulate
transcription via two elements in an intestine-specific promoter.

Wu GD(1), Chen L, Forslund K, Traber PG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Pennsylvania Medical School,
Philadelphia 19104-6144.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) and HNF-1 beta are transcription 
factors that contain a divergent homeodomain, bind to DNA as homo- or
heterodimers, and act to regulate transcription of many genes that are expressed 
primarily in liver. We show that HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta act as regulatory
factors for transcription of sucrase-isomaltase (SI), the gene for which is
expressed exclusively in absorptive enterocytes of the small intestine. HNF-1
alpha and HNF-1 beta bind to two evolutionarily conserved sites in the SI
promoter, previously named SIF2 and SIF3, with different relative affinities.
HNF-1 alpha binds to the SIF3 element with greater affinity than to the SIF2
element, whereas HNF-1 beta binds to both elements equally. Co-transfection
experiments demonstrated that HNF-1 alpha is able to increase transcriptional
initiation from a minimal SI intestine-specific promoter. In contrast, HNF-1 beta
has no functional effect on transcription of the SI promoter. The functional and 
DNA binding differences of HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta on elements in the SI
promoter suggest that these transcription factors may play a role in the complex 
spatial patterns of SI gene expression in the intestine.

PMID: 8006012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Nucleic Acids Res. 1994 May 11;22(9):1583-92.

Expression from the tyrosine aminotransferase promoter (nt -350 to +1) is
liver-specific and dependent on the binding of both liver-enriched and ubiquitous
trans-acting factors.

Schweizer-Groyer G(1), Groyer A, Cadepond F, Grange T, Baulieu EE, Pictet R.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS, Institut Jacques Monod, Paris, France.

The rat tyrosine aminotransferase(TAT) gene promoter (nucleotides -350 to +1;
TAT0.35) was able to sustain liver-specific expression both ex vivo in transient 
transfection (TAT-expressing H411EC3 hepatoma cells vs. TAT non-expressing CCL1.2
fibroblasts) and in in vitro transcription (rat liver vs. spleen crude nuclear
extracts). In either case, the index of tissue specificity (6.2 and 6.7 in ex
vivo and in vitro experiments, respectively) was close to that obtained with 10
Kb of TAT gene 5'-flanking sequences in transient transfection. Using
computer-assisted search of homologies, DNase I footprinting, gel retardation and
methylation interference assays, we showed that TAT0.35 sequences spanning nt
-156 to -175 and nt -268 to -281 interacted with the liver enriched NF-1Liver (a 
member of the NF1 gene family) and HNF1 respectively, whereas those encompassing 
nt -57 to -85 and nt -283 to -288 interacted with the ubiquitous NF-Y and with
ubiquitous 'CCAAT'-box binding factor(s), respectively. Competition studies in in
vitro transcription carried out with wild type and mutated oligonucleotides,
demonstrated that NF-Y cis-elements were crucial for basal TAT promoter activity,
both in liver and spleen whereas NF1Liver and HNF1 were only efficient in the
liver (supported approximately 60% and 30% of basal TAT0.35 activity
respectively). Altogether, these results support the conclusion that TAT0.35 was 
able to sustain at least part of the liver specificity of TAT gene expression.

PMCID: PMC308033
PMID: 7911235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. FEBS Lett. 1994 Apr 11;342(3):325-8.

HNF1 alpha activates the aminopeptidase N promoter in intestinal (Caco-2) cells.

Olsen J(1), Laustsen L, Troelsen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Panum Institute, University of Copenhagen,
Denmark.

The importance of HNF1 binding proteins for intestinal aminopeptidase N
expression was investigated using the Caco-2 cell-line. Aminopeptidase N promoter
activity in Caco-2 cells depends on the HNF1 element (positions -85 to -58) and
co-transfection with an HNF1 alpha expression vector demonstrates a direct
activation of the promoter by HNF1 alpha through this element. Electrophoretic
mobility shift assays using nuclear extracts from Caco-2 cells show the presence 
of high amounts of HNF1 binding proteins irrespective of their state of
differentiation.

PMID: 7908650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Biol Chem. 1994 Mar 25;269(12):8944-51.

Expression of the L-type pyruvate kinase gene and the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4
transcription factor in exocrine and endocrine pancreas.

Miquerol L(1), Lopez S, Cartier N, Tulliez M, Raymondjean M, Kahn A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, Institut National de la Santé et de 
la Recherche Médicale (INSERM) Unité 129, Paris, France.

The L-pyruvate kinase (L-PK) gene is slightly active in normal and tumoral
endocrine pancreatic tissues while, in vivo, this gene is not transcribed in the 
exocrine pancreas. Nevertheless, the L-PK gene is re-expressed at a very low
level in cultured 266.6 cells derived from an exocrine pancreas carcinoma. The
L-PK gene is early activated in endodermal tissues, e.g. yolk sac and primitive
intestine; it remains transcribed in fetal pancreas. In adult, L-PK gene
expression is restricted to some endocrine cells. Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)
1 and HNF4 are the main tissue-restricted transcription factors involved in
tissue-specific expression of the L-PK gene. HNF1 concentration is similar in
liver and all pancreatic cells. HNF4 concentration is high in liver, much lower
in islets of Langerhans, endocrine pancreatic tumors, and cultured insulinoma
cells, and is scarcely detectable in adult exocrine pancreas. This distribution
of HNF4 parallels the expression of the L-PK gene. In vivo footprinting
experiments show that the HNF1 binding site is similarly occupied in both adult
liver and adult pancreas, in which this gene is practically inactive. In this
latter tissue, however, the HNF4 binding site is differently occupied with
respect to the liver. Since the chromatin structure remains open around the L-PK 
promoter in pancreas, the L-PK gene can probably be re-expressed under certain
circumstances, for instance in cancerous pancreatic cells.

PMID: 8132632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Genomics. 1994 Mar 15;20(2):223-6.

Localization of the gene for DNA polymerase epsilon (POLE) to human chromosome
12q24.3 and rat chromosome 12 by somatic cell hybrid panels and fluorescence in
situ hybridization.

Szpirer J(1), Pedeutour F, Kesti T, Riviere M, Syväoja JE, Turc-Carel C, Szpirer 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Universite Libre de Bruxelles, Belgium.

DNA polymerase epsilon [DNA pol epsilon (EC 2.7.7.7)] is one of the four nuclear 
DNA polymerases in eukaryotic cells. The mammalian enzyme is involved in DNA
repair and possibly also in replication of chromosomal DNA. The gene encoding pol
epsilon (POLE) was assigned to human and rat chromosomes 12 by Southern blot
analysis of genomic DNA from mouse-human and mouse-rat somatic cell hybrid panels
using human cDNA probe. The human gene was then regionally localized to band
12q24.3 by fluorescence in situ hybridization of metaphase spreads of chromosomes
from human lymphocytes using genomic DNA probe. POLE is closely linked to HNF1A, 
a gene encoding a liver-enriched transcription factor, HNF1 alpha. The two genes 
thus define a new synteny group retained on human and rat chromosomes 12. Another
gene mapping to the same or close-by region as human POLE is a gene for inherited
disorder tuberous sclerosis 3, TSC3.

PMID: 8020968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Cancer Res. 1994 Mar 1;54(5):1319-23.

Lowered amounts of the tissue-specific transcription factor LFB1 (HNF1) correlate
with decreased levels of glutathione S-transferase alpha messenger RNA in human
renal cell carcinoma.

Clairmont A(1), Ebert T, Weber H, Zoidl C, Eickelmann P, Schulz WA, Sies H,
Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Germany.

Human renal cell carcinoma is characterized by the loss of differentiation
markers such as glutathione S-transferase alpha (GST-alpha). In this paper we
show that the promoter of a GST-alpha gene contains a functional binding site for
the cell-specific transcription factor LFB1 (HNF1). To investigate the potential 
role of LFB1 in the down-regulation of GST-alpha expression, we have compared the
amount and the binding activity of the LFB1 protein between normal kidney and
tumor tissue. By Western analysis and gel retardation assay using a monoclonal
antibody specific for LFB1 we show that in 11 of 14 carcinomas the amount of LFB1
is clearly reduced compared to the corresponding normal tissue and that in all 14
renal carcinomas LFB1 binding activity is diminished. As in the same samples the 
abundance of GST-alpha mRNA is lower than in the normal tissue, we postulate that
the loss of LFB1 binding activity might be responsible for the decreased
expression of the GST-alpha gene in renal cell carcinoma.

PMID: 8118822  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Feb;14(2):1395-401.

ATBF1, a multiple-homeodomain zinc finger protein, selectively down-regulates
AT-rich elements of the human alpha-fetoprotein gene.

Yasuda H(1), Mizuno A, Tamaoki T, Morinaga T.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute of Life Science, Snow Brand Milk Products Co. Ltd, Tochigi,
Japan.

ATBF1 is a 306-kDa protein containing four homeodomains, 17 zinc finger motifs,
and several segments potentially involved in transcriptional regulation (T.
Morinaga, H. Yasuda, T. Hashimoto, K. Higashio, and T. Tamaoki, Mol. Cell. Biol. 
11:6041-6049, 1991). At least one of the homeodomains of ATBF1 binds to an
AT-rich element in the human alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) enhancer (enhancer AT
motif). In the present work, we analyzed the transcriptional regulatory activity 
of ATBF1 with respect to the enhancer AT motif and similar AT-rich elements in
the human AFP promoter and the human albumin promoter and enhancer. Gel
retardation assays showed that ATBF1 binds to the AFP enhancer AT motif
efficiently; however, it binds weakly or not at all to other AT-rich elements in 
the AFP and albumin regulatory regions studied. Alterations of the enhancer AT
motif by site-specific mutagenesis resulted in the loss of binding of ATBF1.
Cotransfection experiments with an ATBF1 expression plasmid and the
chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) gene fused to AFP promoter or enhancer
fragments showed that ATBF1 suppressed the activity of AFP enhancer and promoter 
regions containing AT-rich elements. This suppression was reduced when the
mutated AT motifs with low affinity to ATBF1 were linked to the CAT gene. The
ATBF1 suppression of AFP promoter and enhancer activities appeared to be due, at 
least in part, to competition between ATBF1 and HNF1 for the same binding site.
In contrast to the AFP promoter and enhancer, the albumin promoter and enhancer
were not affected by ATBF1, although they contain homologous AT-rich elements.
These results show that ATBF1 is able to distinguish AFP and albumin AT-rich
elements, leading to selective suppression of the AFP promoter and enhancer
activities.

PMCID: PMC358494
PMID: 7507206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. J Biol Chem. 1994 Jan 14;269(2):1177-82.

The transcription factor HNF1 acts with C/EBP alpha to synergistically activate
the human albumin promoter through a novel domain.

Wu KJ(1), Wilson DR, Shih C, Darlington GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

HNF1 and C/EBP alpha are transcription factors that bind to and trans-activate
the human albumin gene proximal promoter. Various 5' deletions of the human
albumin promoter were coupled to a luciferase reporter gene (alb-luc constructs) 
and co-electroporated with HNF1 and/or C/EBP alpha expression vectors into HeLa
cells. Luciferase activities from co-electroporation of the HNF1 and C/EBP alpha 
expression vectors with the alb-luc constructs were approximately 10-fold greater
than the sum of the activities achieved with HNF1 and C/EBP alpha alone. Analysis
of COOH-terminal or internal deletions of the HNF1 expression vector revealed
that the domain important for collaborative interaction with C/EBP alpha could be
localized to a 157 amino acid region not previously described. This domain is
proline and glutamine-rich and is highly homologous (66%) to a portion of vHNF1, 
an evolutionarily related gene first identified in dedifferentiated hepatoma
cells. A construct linking the negatively charged activation domain of herpes
simplex virus protein VP16 to the DNA-binding domain of HNF1 showed that it could
also synergize with C/EBP alpha to trans-activate the human albumin gene
promoter. Our studies delineate a domain in HNF1 important for synergistic
activation with C/EBP alpha.

PMID: 8288579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Jan 4;91(1):182-6.

Homeostatic regulation of hepatocyte nuclear transcription factor 1 expression in
cultured hepatoma cells.

Pietrangelo A(1), Shafritz DA.

Author information: 
(1)Marion Bessin Liver Research Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine,
Bronx, NY 10461.

Serum colloid osmotic pressure is believed to control the hepatic output of
plasma proteins, including albumin. The present study was aimed at identifying
the molecular basis for feedback control of albumin gene expression in highly
differentiated hepatoma cells. The steady-state level of albumin mRNA and the
activity of a 282-bp albumin promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter 
gene in cells incubated in the presence of increasing amounts of serum albumin or
dextran were significantly and selectively decreased. When nuclear extracts from 
cells exposed to 5% (wt/vol) serum albumin were tested in a gel-retardation assay
with six oligonucleotide probes containing DNA elements of the albumin promoter, 
only the element B-retarded band, which contains the nucleotide recognition
sequence for hepatocyte nuclear transcription factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha), was
consistently decreased as compared to nuclear extract from cells not exposed to
serum albumin. Moreover, the activity of a reporter gene with a basal
TATA-promoter driven by multiple HNF-1 alpha recognition elements was selectively
inhibited in cells incubated in the presence of 5% serum albumin. A reduction of 
HNF-1 alpha mRNA appears to be responsible for this response to a change in the
level of macromolecules in the incubation medium. These results indicate that
activity of a dominant liver transcription factor, HNF-1 alpha, controlling the
transcription of several liver-specific genes, is modulated by a fluctuation in
the level of oncotically active macromolecules.

PMCID: PMC42910
PMID: 8278361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Histochem J. 1994 Jan;26(1):20-31.

Developmental changes in the expression of the liver-enriched transcription
factors LF-B1, C/EBP, DBP and LAP/LIP in relation to the expression of albumin,
alpha-fetoprotein, carbamoylphosphate synthase and lactase mRNA.

Van den Hoff MJ(1), Vermeulen JL, De Boer PA, Lamers WH, Moorman AF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Embryology, University of Amsterdam, The
Netherlands.

Expression of alpha-fetoprotein, carbamoylphosphate synthase and albumin, that
are generally accepted markers for the hepatic phenotype, require a distinct set 
of transcription factors. We investigated by in situ hybridization whether this
set of transcription factors, LF-B1, C/EBP, DBP and LAP/LIP, is expressed
coordinately in the liver during embryonic development and to what extent they
are also expressed elsewhere. Our results demonstrate that mRNA levels of all
transcription factors tested are significantly above background in the whole
embryo and are either reduced or enhanced in expression during subsequent
development. Interestingly, cardiac mesoderm, which induces prehepatic endoderm
to liver formation, is temporarily permissive to its own signals, showing
enhanced expression of these transcription factors and, as a result, the
hepatocyte-specific genes alpha-fetoprotein and carbamoylphosphate synthase. In
addition, these transcription factors and many liver-specific structural genes
rise concomitantly in intestine and kidney just before birth, suggesting the
expression of hepatogenic factors in these tissues as well. Despite the
extrahepatic expression of these transcription factors, expression of albumin
remains confined to the liver at all developmental stages.

PMID: 7513319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Dec 25;21(25):5882-9.

An indirect negative autoregulatory mechanism involved in hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 gene expression.

Kritis AA(1), Ktistaki E, Barda D, Zannis VI, Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology, Crete, Greece.

Recent studies have revealed that hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF-4) is an
essential positive regulator of another liver enriched transcription factor
HNF-1, defining a transcriptional hierarchy between the two factors operating in 
hepatocytes. To assess the possible autoregulation of the HNF-1 gene we have
examined the effect of HNF-1 on its own transcription. In transient transfection 
assays, HNF-1 strongly down-regulated transcription driven by its own promoter in
HepG2 cells. In addition HNF-1 also repressed the activity of HNF-4 dependent
ApoCIII and ApoAI promoters. The same effect was observed using vHNF-1, a
distinct but highly related protein to HNF-1. Both HNF-1 and vHNF-1 downregulated
HNF-4 activated transcription from intact and chimeric promoter constructs
carrying various HNF-4 binding sites implying that they act by impeding HNF-4
binding or activity. DNA binding and cell free transcription experiments however 
failed to demonstrate any direct or indirect interaction of HNF-1 and vHNF-1 with
the above regulatory regions. Both factors repressed HNF-4 induced transcription 
of the ApoCIII and HNF-1 genes in HeLa cells, arguing against the requirement of 
a hepatocyte specific function. These findings define an indirect negative
autoregulatory mechanism involved in HNF-1 gene expression, which in turn may
affect HNF-4 dependent transcription of other liver specific genes.

PMCID: PMC310469
PMID: 8290348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Dec 15;197(2):599-605.

Alteration of transcription factor mRNAs during the isolation and culture of rat 
hepatocytes suggests the activation of a proliferative mode underlies their
de-differentiation.

Padgham CR(1), Boyle CC, Wang XJ, Raleigh SM, Wright MC, Paine AJ.

Author information: 
(1)DH Department of Toxicology, St Bartholomew's Hospital Medical College, West
Smithfield, London, U.K.

The commonly observed loss of liver specific phenotype regularly described in rat
hepatocyte culture is typified by the loss of total cytochrome P450 (CYP) content
and the altered abundance of CYP mRNAs. The current work shows that these changes
are preceded by the induction of the mRNA encoding the transcription factor c-jun
during the hepatocyte isolation procedure. Then as the hepatocytes attach to the 
substratum the induced expression of c-jun subsides and two patterns of CYP mRNA 
loss are observed. The mRNAs encoding CYPs 2C11, 2C13, 2E1, 3A1, 3A2 and 4A1
continuously decline while CYP 1A2, 2A1/2 and 2B1/2 mRNAs are temporarily
stabilised for 2 to 2.5 hours at a reduced level before declining further. The
loss of CYP1A2 and 2B1/2 mRNAs parallels the loss of the mRNAs encoding the liver
specific transcription factors C/EBP alpha and HNF-1. The early and rapid
increase in c-jun mRNA followed by a decline in C/EBP alpha mRNA are
characteristic of the changes in the expression of these transcription factor
mRNAs following the stimulation of hepatocyte proliferation after partial
hepatectomy. The finding that the rate of loss of total P450 following partial
hepatectomy parallels that in rat hepatocyte culture suggests that the commonly
employed hepatocyte isolation procedure "primes" the normally quiescent
hepatocytes to enter the cell cycle and de-differentiate especially as both
systems lose the major constitutively expressed CYP2C11 isozyme.

PMID: 8267596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Gene. 1993 Dec 8;134(2):251-6.

Genomic structure of the Xenopus laevis liver transcription factor LFB1.

Zapp D(1), Bartkowski S, Zoidl C, Klein-Hitpass L, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Germany.

Liver factor B1 [LFB1, also called hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1)] is a
tissue-specific vertebrate transcription factor that is present in the liver,
intestine, stomach and kidney. The LFB1 protein contains an unusual homeobox that
is characterized by an insertion of 21 amino acids (aa) not found in any other
homeodomain protein. We have isolated and characterized the genomic sequences
encoding the LFB1 of Xenopus laevis. By comparing the genomic sequences with the 
cDNA clones, we could identify nine exons. In general, the position of the
introns is identical to the one previously found in the rat. However, the
C-terminal activation domain of LFB1 contains, in each species, an exon that is
split in two in the other species. The homeobox of the X. laevis LFB1 contains an
intron at exactly the position where the 21 aa typical for LFB1 are inserted.
This is in agreement with the structure found in the rat gene and supports the
notion that the LFB1 homeobox evolved separately from the other genes encoding
homeodomain proteins.

PMID: 8262383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. J Biol Chem. 1993 Dec 5;268(34):25706-11.

The transactivation potential of variant hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 is modified 
by alternative splicing.

Ringeisen F(1), Rey-Campos J, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, UA 1644 du CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies,
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Two forms of the transcription factor vHNF1 (HNF1 beta or LFB3) have been
previously described, derived by alternative splicing from a common premessenger 
RNA, and have been called vHNF1-A and vHNF1-B. vHNF1 proteins share a homologous 
homeo-related DNA-binding domain with the HNF1 protein, initially characterized
as a liver-restricted transcription factor, and bind to a similar sequence motif.
Here we demonstrate that vHNF1-A is a stronger transactivator than vHNF1-B when
assayed in transient transfections using two different promoters. vHNF1-A also
binds DNA with a higher affinity suggesting that a region of the protein located 
immediately upstream of the homeodomain can modulate the protein/DNA interaction 
and transactivation. Both vHNF1 transcripts were found at a constant ratio in
every tissue where vHNF1 expression could be detected, using a quantitative
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction.

PMID: 8245006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Exp Cell Res. 1993 Dec;209(2):307-16.

Influence of the content in transcription factors on the phenotype of mouse
hepatocyte-like cell lines (mhAT).

Levrat F(1), Vallet V, Berbar T, Miquerol L, Kahn A, Antoine B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Génétique Moléculaire, INSERM U129, CHU Cochin, Paris,
France.

We have described new well-differentiated mouse hepatocyte-like cell lines (mhAT)
derived from transgenic mice expressing simian virus 40 large T antigen under the
control of antithrombin III gene promoter (Exp. Cell Res. (1992) 200, 175-185).
In an attempt to understand the phenotypic variations of the different cell
lines, we analyzed their content in liver-specific transcription factors at the
level of both the proteins, by gel shift analysis, and the mRNA, by quantitative 
reverse-transcription PCR. Moreover, the transactivating ability of endogenous
HNF1 alpha and C/EBP alpha was also evaluated by measuring the activity of
transfected synthetic promoters consisting of DNA element homopolymers upstream
of a TATA box. High levels of HNF1, HNF3, and HNF4 transcription factors were
maintained in mhAT cells. In contrast, C/EBP alpha was much more variable between
the different cell lines and was less abundant than it was in vivo, in the liver.
We investigated the influence of HNF1 alpha and C/EBP alpha on the activity of
transfected liver-specific promoters. HNF1 alpha was not limiting for the
activity of transfected liver-type pyruvate kinase and albumin promoters. In
contrast, the activity of the albumin promoter in the different lines was clearly
dependent on the C/EBP alpha content, which seems, therefore, to be an essential 
factor modulating the expression of this gene in HNF1 alpha-containing cells.
This work shows that the correlations between promoter activities and transacting
factor contents in a panel of well-differentiated cultured cells can be used to
determine the respective role of transcription factors on the strength of some
promoters.

PMID: 8262148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Biochemistry. 1993 Nov 2;32(43):11627-37.

Transcriptional regulation of the Xenopus laevis B beta fibrinogen subunit gene
by glucocorticoids and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1: analysis by transfection into
primary liver cells.

Roberts LR(1), Nichols LA, Holland LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Missouri School of Medicine, Columbia 
65212.

The blood-clotting protein fibrinogen is composed of three subunits, designated A
alpha, B beta, and gamma, which are encoded by a family of related genes. As part
of the acute-phase response, expression of the fibrinogen genes is coordinately
regulated in the liver by glucocorticoids. To understand the factors underlying
this hormonal response, we have examined control of transcription from fibrinogen
gene fragments transfected into hepatocytes from the frog Xenopus laevis. This
analysis is the first in any species to define transcriptional regulatory
elements for the fibrinogen genes by transfection into primary liver cells,
rather than liver-derived cell lines. A transfection vector was constructed
containing the Xenopus B beta gene transcription start site and 1293 bp of the 5'
flanking sequence linked to the firefly luciferase gene. When this construct was 
transfected into primary liver parenchymal cells, luciferase expression was
induced approximately 14-fold by glucocorticoids, an increase similar to the
transcriptional stimulation of the endogenous B beta subunit gene. DNA fragments 
with as little as 284 bases of upstream sequence retained full hormone
responsiveness. This region contains a sequence resembling the canonical
glucocorticoid response element (GRE) at bases -148 to -162. Deletions or
specific point mutations eliminating this putative GRE led to complete loss of
glucocorticoid inducibility. Physical association of the steroid hormone receptor
with this functional GRE was demonstrated with a truncated form of the rat
glucocorticoid receptor containing the DNA-binding domain. A second possible GRE 
at positions -526 to -540 was not hormone-responsive, in either the presence or
the absence of the more proximal GRE. The regulatory region also has a sequence
similar to the binding site for a liver-specific transcription factor, hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1), at positions -120 to -132. Specific point mutations in 
the HNF-1-binding site, in a construct containing a wild-type GRE, reduced
promoter activity by a factor of 10, while stimulation by glucocorticoids was
retained. Binding studies confirmed specific interaction between this site and
the transcription factor HNF-1 alpha from mouse. Thus, we have identified a GRE
sufficient to account for full glucocorticoid inducibility and an HNF-1 site
close to the promoter that are major determinants of transcriptional control of
the Xenopus fibrinogen B beta subunit gene in cells from normal liver tissue.

PMID: 8218230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. EMBO J. 1993 Nov;12(11):4229-42.

More potent transcriptional activators or a transdominant inhibitor of the HNF1
homeoprotein family are generated by alternative RNA processing.

Bach I(1), Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité des Virus Oncogènes, UA 1644 du CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies,
Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Erratum in
    EMBO J 1994 Jan 15;13(2):492.

We report the isolation of cDNAs from human liver encoding several isoforms of
the hepatocyte nuclear factor homeoproteins HNF1 and vHNF1 generated by the
differential use of polyadenylation sites and by alternative splicing. In the
novel isoforms intron sequences that are excised in the previously described
forms are translated in the same frame as exon sequences until the first
termination codon is encountered. Hence, the newly found isoforms all contain
different C-terminal domains. For HNF1 it has been shown that its C-terminal
region is responsible for the activation of transcription. In transient
transfection assays the two novel HNF1 isoforms, HNF1-B and -C, transactivate
5-fold better than the previously described HNF1 protein (HNF1-A). The newly
isolated isoform of vHNF1, designated vHNF1-C, is unable to transactivate and
behaves as a transdominant repressor when cotransfected with HNF1-A, -B or -C.
All of the different isoforms of HNF1 and vHNF1 can form homo- and heterodimers
and their mRNAs are differentially expressed in fetal and adult human liver,
kidney and intestine, suggesting distinct roles during development. Our studies
show that the transactivation domain of the members of the HNF1 homeoprotein
family is organized in modules which can be exchanged to generate either more
potent transcriptional activators or a transdominant repressor.

PMCID: PMC413717
PMID: 7900999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Biochem J. 1993 Oct 15;295 ( Pt 2):379-86.

Cloning and tissue-specific expression of the gene for mouse C-reactive protein.

Ku NO(1), Mortensen RF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Ohio State University, Columbus 43210-1292.

C-reactive protein is a serum acute-phase reactant that increases several
thousand-fold in concentration during inflammation in most mammals. However,
mouse C-reactive protein is considered to be a minor acute-phase reactant, since 
its blood level increases only from approx. 0.1 to 1-2 micrograms/ml. A mouse
genomic clone of approximately 5 kb was obtained to determine the molecular basis
for the regulation of the expression of mouse C-reactive protein. Several
cis-acting elements in the 5' flanking region that potentially regulate
transcription were identified: two glucocorticoid-responsive elements, two
CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein C (C/EBP) consensus elements that are required for
the interleukin-1 responsiveness of some acute-phase reactant genes, an
interleukin-6-responsive element, two hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1)
elements and a single heat-shock element. Transfection of the hepatoma cell line 
Hep 3B.2 with a pCAT expression vector containing the 5' flanking sequence from
-1083 to -3 bp from the transcriptional start site, and truncations of this
sequence, localized elements that control the tissue-specific expression of mouse
C-reactive protein to the two HNF-1 elements and a C/EBP,
interleukin-1-responsive element located between -220 and -153, and -90 and -50
bp from the transcriptional start site. A constitutive nuclear protein from
mouse-liver hepatocytes specifically binds to the HNF-1 elements. These findings 
explain the tissue-specific expression of the gene, as well as its limited
expression during the acute-phase response.

PMCID: PMC1134892
PMID: 7916620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1993 Oct 15;196(1):480-6.

Interplay of the liver-enriched trans-acting factors, DBP and HNF1, in the
transactivation of human IGFBP-1 promoter.

Babajko S(1), Groyer A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherches sur la Régulation de la Croissance, Institut National de
la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U.142, Hôpital Saint-Antoine, Paris, France.

In the liver, expression of insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1
(IGFBP-1) is regulated essentially at the transcriptional level, at least in part
by HNF1. In this study, the functional role of DBP and C/EBP (which have several 
potential binding sites on the IGFBP-1 proximal promoter) have been investigated.
Transient co-transfection of the reporter plasmid, pBP-1341 and eukaryotic
expression vectors which code for DBP and C/EBP in human cell lines Hep3B, HepG2 
and C33 showed that IGFBP-1 promoter activity was unchanged by C/EBP, but
increased between 2 and 7 times by DBP (depending on the cell line). In addition,
DBP and HNF1 were capable of functional co-operation in activating the IGFBP-1
promoter. Our results support the notion of DBP being involved in limited tissue 
specificity of IGFBP-1 expression.

PMID: 7692852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Oct;13(10):6416-26.

Elements and factors involved in tissue-specific and embryonic expression of the 
liver transcription factor LFB1 in Xenopus laevis.

Zapp D(1), Bartkowski S, Holewa B, Zoidl C, Klein-Hitpass L, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Germany.

LFB1 (HNF1) is a tissue-specific transcription factor found in the livers,
stomachs, intestines, and kidneys of vertebrates. By analyzing the promoter of
the Xenopus LFB1 gene, we identified potential autoregulation by LFB1 and
regulation by HNF4, a transcription factor with a tissue distribution similar to 
that of LFB1. Injection of LFB1 promoter-chloramphenicol acetyltransferase
constructs into Xenopus eggs revealed embryonic activation that is restricted to 
the region of the developing larvae expressing endogeneous LFB1. Proper embryonic
activation was also observed with a rat LFB1 promoter. Deletion analysis of the
Xenopus and rat promoters revealed that in both promoters embryonic activation is
absolutely dependnet on the presence of an element that contains CCNCTCTC as the 
core consensus sequence. Since this element is recognized by the maternal factor 
OZ-1 previously described by N. Ovsenek, A. M. Zorn, and P. A. Krieg (Development
115:649-655, 1992), we might have identified the main constituents of a hierarchy
that leads via LFB1 to the activation of tissue-specific genes during
embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC364700
PMID: 8413240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Exp Cell Res. 1993 Sep;208(1):248-56.

Differential patterns of expression of three C/EBP isoforms, HNF-1, and HNF-4
after partial hepatectomy in rats.

Flodby P(1), Antonson P, Barlow C, Blanck A, Porsch-Hällström I, Xanthopoulos KG.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Biotechnology, Karolinska Institute, NOVUM, Huddinge, Sweden.

Regenerating liver provides a system for studying the mechanisms controlling
regulated proliferation of differentiated hepatocytes. A set of transcription
factors termed hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF-1, -3, -4) and CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein (C/EBP) isoforms are known to regulate several genes
predominantly expressed in the liver. To assess whether these factors might be
involved in the hepatocyte proliferation program, we have studied the expression 
of the three C/EBP isoforms C/EBP alpha, C/EBP beta, and C/EBP delta and the two 
hepatocyte-enriched transcription factors, HNF-1 and HNF-4, in rat liver at
various time points after partial hepatectomy and sham operations using
transcriptional "run-on" assays and Northern blot and Western blot experiments.
We report here that partial hepatectomy in rats leads to dramatic changes in the 
pattern of expression of some of these genes. The three C/EBP isoforms are
differentially regulated in response to partial hepatectomy and are likely to
play different roles in determining the proliferation/differentiation state of
hepatocytes. In particular, C/EBP alpha expression is rapidly down-regulated,
whereas C/EBP delta is induced. C/EBP beta expression is also increased, although
an increase is also observed after sham operation. The drastic decrease in C/EBP 
alpha under these conditions of active DNA synthesis and rapid cell proliferation
further supports the concept of a potential incompatibility between high C/EBP
alpha protein levels and cell proliferation. The patterns of transcriptional
rates of HNF-1 and HNF-4 during the different stages of the regenerative process 
are similar. However, HNF-1 steady-state mRNA and protein levels are
significantly changed while HNF-4 remains virtually unaffected, indicating that
post-transcriptional mechanisms are also involved in the regulation of HNF-1 gene
expression.

PMID: 8359219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Am J Hum Genet. 1993 Sep;53(3):768-74.

Mutation in the 4a-carbinolamine dehydratase gene leads to mild
hyperphenylalaninemia with defective cofactor metabolism.

Citron BA(1), Kaufman S, Milstien S, Naylor EW, Greene CL, Davis MD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry, National Institute of Mental Health, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892.

Hyperphenylalaninemias represent a major class of inherited metabolic disorders. 
They are most often caused by mutations in the phenylalanine hydroxylase gene
and, less frequently but with usually more serious consequences, in genes
necessary for the synthesis and regeneration of the cofactor,
tetrahydrobiopterin. This cofactor is absolutely required for all aromatic amino 
acid hydroxylations, and, recently, nitric oxide production from L-arginine has
also been found to be dependent on tetrahydrobiopterin. Phenylalanine hydroxylase
catalyzes a coupled reaction in which phenylalanine is converted to tyrosine and 
in which tetrahydrobiopterin is converted to the unstable carbinolamine,
4a-hydroxytetrahydrobiopterin. The enzyme, carbinolamine dehydratase, catalyzes
the dehydration of the carbinolamine to quinonoid dihydropterin. A decreased rate
of dehydration of this compound has been hypothesized to be responsible for the
production of 7-biopterin found in certain mildly hyperphenylalaninemic
individuals. We have now identified nonsense and missense mutations in the
4a-carbinolamine dehydratase gene in a hyperphenylalaninemic child who excretes
large amounts of 7-biopterin. This finding is consistent with the role of the
carbinolamine dehydratase in the phenylalanine hydroxylation reaction. Together
with previously identified inherited disorders in phenylalanine hydroxylase and
dihydropteridine reductase, there are now identified mutations in the three
enzymes involved in the phenylalanine hydroxylation system. In addition, the
genetics of this system may have broader implications, since the product of the
dehydratase gene has previously been shown to play an additional role (as
dimerization cofactor for hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha) in the regulation of
transcription, through interaction with hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha.

PMCID: PMC1682436
PMID: 8352282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Exp Cell Res. 1993 Sep;208(1):241-7.

Activation of albumin and other liver-specific gene expression in
fibroblast-pancreatic cell hybrids: different roles of transcription factors.

Wu KJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77030.

HNF1 and C/EBP-related proteins are transcription factors important for the
activation of albumin gene expression. Fusion of mouse fibroblast (L) cells with 
rat pancreatic cells (AR42J) unexpectedly activated mouse albumin gene expression
in the hybrid cells. In addition, several liver-specific genes such as tyrosine
amino-transferase (TAT) and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxy-kinase (PEPCK) were also 
activated in the fibroblast-pancreatic hybrids. RNase protection assays using rat
HNF1 riboprobes showed that AR42J cells and fibroblast-pancreatic hybrids
expressed rat HNF1 transcripts. However, mouse or rat C/EBP alpha transcripts
were not expressed in the fibroblast-pancreatic hybrids by RNase protection
assays. Transfection of HNF1 expression vector alone was able to activate an
albumin promoter (-1 kb, 5' flanking) promoted GPT construct in L cells, but not 
in HeLa cells, suggesting that different factors in L cells might interact with
HNF1 to mediate activation. These results showed the global activation of
liver-specific genes (including albumin, TAT, and PEPCK) in somatic cell hybrids.
The presence of HNF1 in the hybrids may play a causal role. The absence of C/EBP 
alpha in the hybrids suggested its non-essential role in the activation of
liver-specific gene expression. The other mechanisms responsible for the
activation were also discussed.

PMID: 8102976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Am J Physiol. 1993 Sep;265(3 Pt 1):G506-13.

HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta expression in mouse intestinal crypts.

Serfas MS(1), Tyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Illinois College of Medicine, Chicago
60612.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1 alpha and 1 beta (HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta) are
homologous homeodomain-containing transcription factors that form homodimers or
heterodimers that bind the same consensus sequence in the promoters of several
genes expressed in liver. Many of these genes, including the mouse
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) gene, are also expressed in the intestinal epithelium.
AFP expression is restricted to the enteroendocrine cell lineage in the adult
small intestine, and we have investigated the distribution of HNF-1 alpha and
HNF-1 beta mRNA in the mouse intestine to determine whether expression of either 
of these regulatory factors colocalizes with AFP. We found that transcripts
encoding both factors are expressed at the highest levels in crypts of small and 
large intestine. Quantitation shows that the relative ratio of HNF-1 alpha to
HNF-1 beta mRNAs appears lower in the colon, where AFP is not expressed.
Alterations in the ratio of HNF-1 alpha to HNF-1 beta along the length of the
intestine may influence HNF-1 dimer formation and expression of target genes.
Although HNF-1 is necessary for transcription of the AFP gene, other factors must
be involved in eliciting the cell type-specific pattern of AFP expression in the 
intestine.

PMID: 7692743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Biol Chem. 1993 Aug 25;268(24):18076-82.

Chimeric liver transcription factors LFB1 (HNF1) containing the acidic activation
domain of VP16 act as positive dominant interfering mutants.

Denecke B(1), Bartkowski S, Senkel S, Klein-Hitpass L, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung),
Universität-Gesamthochschule-Essen, Germany.

The transcription factor LFB1 (HNF1) involved in the expression of liver-specific
genes is characterized by a serine/threonine-rich activation domain whose
transactivation potential differs between mammals and Xenopus. Exchanging the
activation domain between the Xenopus and rat LFB1, we produced chimeric
transactivators whose activities are primarily determined by the origin of the
activation domain. By replacing the serine/threonine-rich activation domain of
LFB1 with the acidic activation domain of VP16, we generated transcription
factors that act as dominant positive interfering mutants on endogenous LFB1 in
differentiated hepatoma cells. As these LFB1/VP16 chimeras show no
self-squelching as observed with wild-type LFB1 and increase the activity of
saturating LFB1, we postulate that acidic and serine/threonine-rich activation
domains use different targets of the basal transcription machinery. Stable
transfection of various LFB1 derivatives, including those containing the VP16
transactivation domain, into the dedifferentiated C2 hepatoma cell resulted in
cell clones stably expressing LFB1 function. However, as in none of these clones 
the chromosomal albumin genes are activated, we conclude that the presence of
functional LFB1 may not be sufficient to reactivate liver-specific functions lost
in dedifferentiated hepatoma cells.

PMID: 8394359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Aug 11;21(16):3731-6.

Analysis of the rat hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1 gene promoter: synergistic 
activation by HNF4 and HNF1 proteins.

Miura N(1), Tanaka K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1 is a key transcription factor involved in the
expression of many liver-specific genes. We have isolated and characterized the
promoter region of the rat HNF1 gene. Transfection experiments revealed that a
short region between -118 and -8 is crucial for cell type-specific expression of 
the HNF1 gene in the hepatoma cell line, HepG2 cells. This region contains two
positive cis-elements: site A, to which the transcription factor HNF4 protein can
bind, and site B, to which the HNF1 protein can bind. Mutational analyses of
these sites and cotransfection assays suggested that the HNF4 protein and HNF1
protein can transactivate the HNF1 gene.

PMCID: PMC309877
PMID: 8367288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Mol Endocrinol. 1993 Aug;7(8):1049-60.

Human thyroxine-binding globulin gene: complete sequence and transcriptional
regulation.

Hayashi Y(1), Mori Y, Janssen OE, Sunthornthepvarakul T, Weiss RE, Takeda K,
Weinberg M, Seo H, Bell GI, Refetoff S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Illinois 60637-1470.

T4-binding globulin (TBG) is a glycoprotein of hepatic origin which transports
thyroid hormone in serum. To characterize the human TBG (hTBG) gene, we studied
its genomic organization, promoter activity, and regulation. To this purpose, we 
isolated from liver a complete hTBG cDNA clone containing the 5'-untranslated
region and localized the transcription start site (TSS). The analysis of genomic 
clones revealed that the hTBG gene consists of five exons and that its
exon-intron organization is similar to that of other members of the serine
protease inhibitor family. The first exon (exon 0) is a short noncoding sequence 
located 1.62 kilobase pairs (kbp) upstream from exon 1. Potential cis-acting
transcriptional regulatory elements including a TATA box, a CAAT box, and a
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 binding motif were identified in the upstream region.
A reporter gene in which 3.2 kbp of the 5'-flanking region, including exon 0, was
inserted upstream of the bacterial chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene showed 
significant activity when transfected into a hepatblastoma-derived (HepG2) cell
line. The phorbol ester, 12-O-tetradecanoylphorbol-13-acetate, down-regulated the
promoter activity by more than 80% and completely inhibited hTBG synthesis,
whereas thyroid hormone, glucocorticoid, estrogen, and nicotinic acid had little,
if any, effect. A series of 5'-deletions revealed that the fragment -218 to +4
from the TSS had the highest promoter activity, nearly 1000-fold greater than the
promoterless chloramphenicol acetyltransferase construct. When
nonhepatocyte-derived cell lines (CV-1 and CHO) were tested, promoter activity
was reduced by a factor of 100, showing that the promoter works in liver-specific
manner. The region -218 to -102 contains liver-specific enhancer elements, since 
deletion to nucleotide -101 resulted in a profound reduction of the promoter
activity in HepG2 cells but not in CV-1 or CHO cells. On the other hand,
mutational disruption of the putative hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 site (located
65 bp upstream of the TSS) completely abolished the promoter activity in all cell
lines, indicating that this site is absolutely required for the transcription of 
the hTBG gene.

PMID: 8232304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Jul 25;21(15):3405-11.

Ex vivo regulation of specific gene expression by nanomolar concentration of
double-stranded dumbbell oligonucleotides.

Clusel C(1), Ugarte E, Enjolras N, Vasseur M, Blumenfeld M.

Author information: 
(1)GENSET, Paris, France.

Inhibition of specific transcriptional regulatory proteins is a new approach to
control gene expression. Transcriptional activity of DNA-binding proteins can be 
inhibited by the use of double-stranded (ds) oligodeoxynucleotides that compete
for the binding to their specific target sequences in promoters and enhancers. As
a model, we used phosphodiester dumbbell oligonucleotides containing a binding
site for the liver-enriched transcription factor HNF-1 (Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor
1). Binding affinity of HNF-1 to dumbbell oligonucleotides was the same as that
to ds oligonucleotides, as determined by gel retardation assays. HNF-1 dumbbells 
specifically inhibited in vitro transcription driven by the albumin promoter by
more than 90%. HNF-1-dependent activation of a CAT reporter plasmid was
specifically inhibited when the HNF-1 dumbbell oligonucleotide was added at nM
concentration to transiently transfected C33 cells. On the contrary, HNF-1 ds
oligonucleotides, which displayed the same activity as the dumbbell
oligonucleotides in the in vitro assays, were no more effective in the ex vivo
experiments. These results might reflect the increased stability of the circular 
dumbbell oligonucleotides towards cellular nuclease degradation, as shown in
vitro with nucleolytic enzymes. Dumbbell oligonucleotides containing unmodified
phosphodiester bonds may efficiently compete for binding of specific
transcription factors within cells, then providing a potential therapeutic tool
to control disease-causing genes.

PMCID: PMC331438
PMID: 7688452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Biol Chem Hoppe Seyler. 1993 Jul;374(7):419-25.

Genomic structure of the POU-related hepatic transcription factor HNF-1 alpha.

Hörlein A(1), Grajer KH, Igo-Kemenes T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Physikalische Biochemie und Zellbiologie, 
Universität München.

Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) is a vertebrate transcriptional
regulatory protein which plays a prominent role in the activation of a large
family of hepatocyte-specific genes. It is the prototype of a new subfamily of
POU-related proteins important in embryogenesis and cell-type specification. Here
we report on the genomic structure and DNA sequence of HNF-1 alpha of the hen.
Functional domains are non-uniformly conserved between hen and mammals consistent
with the notion of functions in the hen oviduct that were lost in mammals after
avian mammalian separation. The unusual homeo-related DNA-binding domain is well 
preserved between birds and mammals. The exon/intron pattern of the gene changed 
during evolution. The rat gene consists of 9 exons, the chicken gene of 10. In
mammals one intron was eliminated that in hens subdivides the serine-rich
transactivation domain. Comparison of the sequences at this junction indicates
the involvement of elements of the V(D)J recombination system in the process of
intron elimination.

PMID: 8105803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Development. 1993 Jun;118(2):439-48.

Differential expression of the HMG box factors TCF-1 and LEF-1 during murine
embryogenesis.

Oosterwegel M(1), van de Wetering M, Timmerman J, Kruisbeek A, Destree O,
Meijlink F, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, University Hospital, Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The recent identification of a number of T lymphocyte-specific enhancers has
allowed the cloning of several novel transcription factors. Two of these, TCF-1
and LEF-1, contain a virtually identical DNA-binding domain of the High Mobility 
Group (HMG-1) box type. TCF-1 and LEF-1 originate from a recent gene duplication 
event as evidenced by comparison with the chicken homologue, chTCF. We have now
analyzed the differential expression of these two transcription factors. In a
panel of lymphoid cell lines, TCF-1 was exclusively expressed in the T cell
lineage. In contrast, LEF-1 mRNA was detected at equivalent levels in pro- and
pre-B cells and in all T lineage cells. In situ hybridization on murine embryos
revealed that TCF-1 and LEF-1 were widely expressed at day 7.5 of gestation. At
later stages, the expression patterns were complex and only partially
overlapping. The expression of TCF-1 and LEF-1 coincided until day 10.5, when
mRNAs were detected in limb buds, neural crest, pharyngeal arches and nasal
process. At later time points (day 13.5 to 14.5), sites of overlapping expression
included lung, the urogenital system, tooth buds, thymus and choroid plexus.
Unique expression sites for TCF-1 included Reichert's membrane and
trophectoderm-derived cells, the ribs and thoracic prevertebrae, craniofacial
structures, the adrenal gland and meninges. Unique LEF-1 expression was observed 
in the tail prevertebrae, brain and inner ear. Postnatally, expression of both
genes could only be detected in lymphoid tissues. These observations suggest that
TCF-1 and LEF-1 exert differential functions during murine embryogenesis.

PMID: 8223271  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. J Cell Biol. 1993 May;121(4):887-98.

HNF4 and HNF1 as well as a panel of hepatic functions are extinguished and
reexpressed in parallel in chromosomally reduced rat hepatoma-human fibroblast
hybrids.

Griffo G(1), Hamon-Benais C, Angrand PO, Fox M, West L, Lecoq O, Povey S, Cassio 
D, Weiss M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, URA Centre National de la Recherche 
Scientifique 1149, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Rat hepatoma-human fibroblast hybrids of two independent lineages containing only
8-11 human chromosomes show pleiotropic extinction of thirteen out of fifteen
hepatic functions examined. Reexpression of the entire group of functions most
often occurs in a block, and except for one discordant subclone, correlates with 
loss of human chromosome 2. The extinguished cells and their reexpressing
derivatives have been examined for the expression of seven liver-enriched
transcription factors. C/EBP, LAP, DBP, HNF3, and vHNF1 expression are not
systematically extinguished in parallel with the hepatic functions. However, HNF1
and HNF4 show a perfect correlation with phenotype: these factors are expressed
only in the cells showing pleiotropic reexpression. Since recent evidence
indicates that HNF4 controls HNF1 expression, it can be proposed that the HNF4
gene is the primary target of the pleiotropic extinguisher.

PMCID: PMC2119800
PMID: 8491780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. EMBO J. 1993 May;12(5):1805-10.

The X-ray structure of an atypical homeodomain present in the rat liver
transcription factor LFB1/HNF1 and implications for DNA binding.

Ceska TA(1), Lamers M, Monaci P, Nicosia A, Cortese R, Suck D.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Biological Structures and Biocomputing Programme, Heidelberg, Germany.

The transcription factor LFB1/HNF1 from rat liver nuclei is a 628 amino acid
protein that functions as a dimer binding to the inverted palindrome
GTTAATN-ATTAAC consensus site. We have crystallized a 99 residue protein
containing the homeodomain portion of LFB1, and solved its structure using X-ray 
diffraction data to 2.8 A resolution. The topology and orientation of the helices
is essentially the same as that found in the engrailed, MAT alpha 2 and
Antennapedia homeodomains, even though the LFB1 homeodomain contains 21 more
residues. The 21 residue insertion is found in an extension of helix 2 and
consequent lengthening of the connecting loop between helix 2 and helix 3.
Comparison with the engrailed homeodomain-DNA complex indicates that the mode of 
interaction with DNA is similar in both proteins, with a number of conserved
contacts in the major groove. The extra 21 residues of the LFB1 homeodomain are
not involved in DNA binding. Binding of the LFB1 dimer to a B-DNA palindromic
consensus sequence requires either a conformational change of the DNA (presumably
bending), or a rearrangement of the subunits relative to the DNA.

PMCID: PMC413399
PMID: 8491173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. EMBO J. 1993 May;12(5):1797-803.

The three-dimensional NMR-solution structure of the polypeptide fragment 195-286 
of the LFB1/HNF1 transcription factor from rat liver comprises a nonclassical
homeodomain.

Leiting B(1), De Francesco R, Tomei L, Cortese R, Otting G, Wüthrich K.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie und Biophysik, Eidgenössische Technische
Hochschule-Hönggerberg, Zürich, Switzerland.

The three-dimensional backbone fold of a polypeptide fragment from the rat
LFB1/HNF1 transcription factor was determined by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR)
spectroscopy in solution. This fragment contains an amino acid sequence that is
approximately 22% homologous to the well known homeodomains, but which contains
81 amino acid residues as compared with 60 residues in 'typical' homeodomains.
For the present studies we used a recombinant 99 amino acid polypeptide
containing this sequence in positions 10-90, which was uniformly labelled with
15N and also doubly labelled with 15N and 13C. The NMR structure of this
polypeptide contains three alpha-helices comprising the residues 18-29, 36-50 and
71-84, a loop formed by residues 30-35, and a long stretch of non-regular
secondary structure linking the second and third helices. The relative location
and orientation of the helices is very similar to that in the Antennapedia (Antp)
homeodomain structure, despite the fact that helix II is elongated by about one
turn. This confirms a recently advanced hypothesis based on sequence comparisons 
that this polypeptide segment of LFB1/HNF1 might represent a homeodomain-like
structural element. The helix-turn-helix motif, which has been shown to comprise 
the DNA recognition helix in the Antp homeodomain, can readily be recognized in
the LFB1/HNF1 homeodomain, in spite of an extensive modification of the primary
structure. The two residues of the tight turn in the Antp homeodomain are
replaced by a 23 residue linker region between the two helices in LFB1/HNF1,
which bulges out from the rest of the molecule and thus enables the formation of 
a non-classical helix--turn--helix motif.

PMCID: PMC413398
PMID: 8491172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Biol Chem Hoppe Seyler. 1993 May;374(5):319-26.

Hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) is expressed in the oviduct of hens 
and interacts with regulatory elements of the lysozyme gene.

Grajer KH(1), Hörlein A, Igo-Kemenes T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Physikalische Biochemie und Zellbiologie, 
Universität München.

HNF-1 alpha is a nuclear transcriptional regulatory protein required for the
expression of a variety of liver-specific genes. This factor was previously
considered liver-specific but later shown to be expressed also in a few other
mammalian tissues. Here we report on the occurrence of HNF-1 alpha in the avian
oviduct. This finding is of particular interest because HNF-1 alpha is not
expressed in female reproductive organs of mammals. The avian oviduct is the site
of assembly for the avian egg and the site of tissue-specific synthesis of the
major egg white proteins, such as lysozyme. We also demonstrate that the chicken 
lysozyme gene contains HNF-1 recognition sites within two of its important
upstream regulatory elements. The presence of HNF-1 recognition elements in
functionally significant regulatory sites of the lysozyme gene and high levels of
HNF-1 alpha in the oviduct is a strong indication for the involvement of HNF-1
alpha in the control of the lysozyme gene and possibly other egg white protein
genes in the chicken oviduct. Apparently, HNF-1 alpha performs functions in the
avian oviduct that were lost upon development from birds to mammals.

PMID: 7687846  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. DNA Cell Biol. 1993 May;12(4):283-9.

HNF1 activates transcription of the human gene for insulin-like growth factor
binding protein-1.

Powell DR(1), Suwanichkul A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030.

Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) is expressed primarily in 
the liver, kidney, and uterus. Basal IGFBP-1 promoter activity in human HEP G2
hepatoma cells is dependent upon a proximal promoter element that binds hepatic
nuclear factor 1 (HNF1), a protein that is likely to be an important factor
regulating the expression of many genes in liver and kidney. To test whether HNF1
activates IGFBP-1 transcription, HEP G2 cells and HeLa cells were cotransfected
transiently with HNF1 expression vectors and with IGFBP-1
promoter/chloramphenicol acetyltransferase reporter gene constructs. HNF1
increased IGFBP-1 promoter activity in both HEP G2 and HeLa cells. Gel
mobility-shift assays and additional transfections in HeLa cells showed that
expressed full-length and carboxy-terminal truncated forms of HNF1 could each
bind the HNF1 cis element of the IGFBP-1 promoter; however, significant
trans-activation only occurred in the presence of the full-length HNF1 protein,
similar to past experience with these two HNF1 forms and the albumin promoter.
Further studies showed that IGFBP-1 promoter constructs containing mutations with
high or low affinity for HNF1 responded to HNF1 expression with increased or
decreased activity, respectively, relative to the native promoter. These studies 
suggest that HNF1 and/or related proteins play a role in hepatic, and perhaps
also renal, expression of IGFBP-1.

PMID: 7684229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. J Biol Chem. 1993 Apr 15;268(11):8140-5.

Enhancement of human hepatocyte growth factor production by interleukin-1 alpha
and -1 beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha by fibroblasts in culture.

Tamura M(1), Arakaki N, Tsubouchi H, Takada H, Daikuhara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Kagoshima University Dental School, Japan.

Human hepatocyte growth factor (hHGF) was first purified from plasma of patients 
with fulminant hepatic failure (Gohda, E., Tsubouchi, H., Nakayama, H., Hirono,
S., Sakiyama, O., Takahashi, K., Miyazaki, H., Hashimoto, S., and Daikuhara, Y.
(1988) J. Clin. Invest. 81, 414-419) and is now identified to be the same protein
as the scatter factor (Weidner, K. M., Arakaki, N., Hartmann, G., Vandekerckhove,
J., Weingart, S., Rieder, H., Fonatsch, C., Tsubouchi, H., Hishida, T.,
Daikuhara, Y., and Birchmeier, W. (1991) Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. 88,
7001-7005) and tumor cytotoxic factor (Shima, N., Nakao, M., Ogaki, F., Tsuda,
E., Murakami, A., and Higashio, K. (1991) Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun. 180,
1151-1158), and it is known to be produced by fibroblasts in culture. Here we
report that inflammatory cytokines such as interleukin-1 (IL-1) and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF) stimulate production of hHGF from human embryonic lung
fibroblasts, MRC-5, and human gingival fibroblasts, GF-5. Recombinant human IL-1 
alpha (rhIL-1 alpha) and recombinant human TNF-alpha (rhTNF-alpha) increased hHGF
levels in culture supernatants of MRC-5 and GF-5 cells dose-dependently as
determined by an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for hHGF. The half-maximal
stimulatory concentrations of rhIL-1 alpha and rhTNF-alpha were about 1ng/ml and 
10 units/ml, respectively. rhIL-1 beta showed almost the same effect as IL-1
alpha on stimulation of production of immunoreactive hHGF from the two cell
lines. However, rhIL-6 failed to show the stimulatory effect on hHGF production
by the cells in the range of 2-200 units/ml. Human interferon-beta and -gamma
also did not show the stimulatory activity. Stimulation of hHGF production was
observed 6-12 h after addition of rhIL-1 alpha or rhTNF-alpha and lasted at least
48 h, and the observed stimulation of hHGF production by cytokines was suppressed
by addition of corresponding antiserum. hHGF mRNA levels of MRC-5 cells increased
by addition of rhIL-1 alpha and rhTNF-alpha in a dose-dependent manner as
determined by Northern blot analysis using cDNA for hHGF as a probe. In addition,
results from nuclear run-off transcription experiments showed that the two
cytokines regulated increasing hHGF gene expression at transcriptional levels
rather than a change in mRNA stability. These observations indicate that the
inflammatory cytokines modulate the production and secretion of hHGF by
fibroblasts and may play an important role for tissue repair and regeneration.

PMID: 7681834  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Curr Opin Genet Dev. 1993 Apr;3(2):246-53.

Regulation of the HNF-1 homeodomain proteins by DCoH.

Hansen LP(1), Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Beckman Center for Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Stanford University Medical
School, CA 94305.

The pattern of expression of homeodomain proteins often exceeds their apparent
domain of activity. Tissue-specific proteins that modulate the in vivo activity
of homeodomain proteins have been proposed to account for this functional
restriction. The first identified example of such an accessory protein is DCoH,
which confers transcriptional activity to the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 and
provides a model of how other accessory factors might modulate the function of
homeodomain proteins.

PMID: 8504250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Genomics. 1993 Apr;16(1):292-5.

Genes for the dimerization cofactor of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (DCOH)
are on human and murine chromosomes 10.

Milatovich A(1), Mendel DB, Crabtree GR, Francke U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University, California 94305.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha; gene symbol, TCF1) forms dimers
with itself as well as with HNF-1 beta and regulates the expression of several
liver-specific genes. Recently, a dimerization cofactor of hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 alpha, called DCOH, has been identified. Here, we report the chromosomal
localization of the genes for this cofactor to chromosomes 10 in both humans and 
mice by Southern blot analyses of somatic cell hybrids.

PMID: 8486378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. DNA Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;12(3):199-208.

A bipartite activation domain is responsible for the activity of transcription
factor HNF1/LFB1 in cells of hepatic and nonhepatic origin.

Toniatti C(1), Monaci P, Nicosia A, Cortese R, Ciliberto G.

Author information: 
(1)I.R.B.M.-Istituto di Ricerche di Biologia Molecolare P. Angeletti, Rome,
Italy.

HNF1/LFB1 is a transcription factor that controls the expression of several
liver-specific genes. Previous in vitro experiments allowed us to identify two
different regions in the carboxy-terminal portion of the protein responsible for 
most of the transcription activation potential: the first, ADI, between amino
acids 546 and 628 and the second, ADII, between amino acids 281 and 318. To
characterize the molecular anatomy of HNF1/LFB1 better, we have analyzed its
trans-activating properties in vivo. Several HNF1/LFB1 deletion mutants were
tested for their ability to induce transcription from HNF1/LFB1-dependent
synthetic promoters in cells of hepatic and nonhepatic origin. These last
recipient cells provide an HNF1/LFB1-deficient environment that is useful for a
precise quantification of the recombinant protein. Our results confirm the
importance of ADI and indicate that no activating property can be assigned to
ADII in vivo. Moreover, a novel glutamine/proline-rich activation domain (ADIII) 
has been identified between amino acids 440 and 506. These findings are confirmed
by domain-swapping experiments, carried out with the heterologous GAL4
DNA-binding domain, which also show that the activity of each individual
activation domain is influenced by combining adjacent HNF1/LFB1 sequences. The
data presented indicate that HNF1/LFB1 transcription activating potential relies 
on a complex structure and also provide important clues to understanding the
different functions exerted by transcription factors of this family.

PMID: 8466643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Eur J Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;60(2):376-82.

Immunological characterization of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 protein: appearance
of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 protein in developing mouse embryos.

Miura N(1), Iwai K, Miyamoto I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular and Cellular Biology, Osaka University, Japan.

PMID: 8330635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. J Biol Chem. 1993 Mar 5;268(7):4828-31.

Phenylalanine hydroxylase-stimulating protein/pterin-4 alpha-carbinolamine
dehydratase from rat and human liver. Purification, characterization, and
complete amino acid sequence.

Hauer CR(1), Rebrin I, Thöny B, Neuheiser F, Curtius HC, Hunziker P, Blau N,
Ghisla S, Heizmann CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Zürich, Switzerland.

Phenylalanine hydroxylase-stimulating protein, also known as pterin-4
alpha-carbinolamine dehydratase (PHS/PCD), was purified from rat and, for the
first time, from human liver. We obtained their complete protein primary sequence
using a combination of liquid secondary ionization mass spectrometry/tandem
quadrupole mass spectrometry, electrospray ionization mass spectrometry, and
Edman microsequence analysis. The amino acid sequences of human and rat PHS/PCD
were found to be identical. Surprisingly, the primary structure of PHS/PCD is
also essentially identical to a protein of the cell nucleus, named dimerization
cofactor of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha, recently reported to be involved
in transcription (Mendel, D. M., Khavari, P. A., Conley, P. B., Graves, M. K.,
Hansen, L. P., Admon, A., and Crabtree, G. R. (1991) Science 254, 1762-1767).

PMID: 8444860  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Growth Regul. 1993 Mar;3(1):17-20.

Characterization of cis-acting elements and transacting factors involved in the
tissue-specific and developmental regulation of IGFBP-1 gene expression.

Babajko S(1), Binoux M, Groyer A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherches sur la Régulation de la Croissance, INSERM U142, Hôpital
Saint Antoine, Paris.

The liver-specificity of insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1)
gene promoter activity has been studied by transient transfection in rat hepatoma
cell lines, rat fibroblasts and human cervical carcinoma cells, and shown to be
dependent on HNF1. Regulation of IGFBP-1 gene expression has also been studied in
rat liver by Northern blot and run-on assays during development, specifically
during the perinatal period. The results suggest (1) that the increases in mRNA
at birth and +1 day post-natally result from increased transcription and (2) that
no decrease in transcription activity accompanies the rapid IGFBP-1 mRNA decay
during the neonatal period, arguing for post-transcriptional regulation. Support 
for transcriptional regulation during the neonatal period was obtained from in
vitro footprinting experiments and gel shift data. Three trans-acting factors
interact with the h-IGFBP-1 promoter between nt -265 and -305. Two of these, Pc
and PHS, were expressed throughout development, as well as during adulthood, and 
interacted with cis-elements spanning nt -295 to -305 and -265 to -285,
respectively. The third, Pa, was expressed only when IGFBP-1 gene expression was 
high, and interacted with cis-elements spanning nt -285 to -295.

PMID: 7683517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Mar;13(3):1619-33.

Functional analysis of developmentally regulated chromatin-hypersensitive domains
carrying the alpha 1-fetoprotein gene promoter and the albumin/alpha
1-fetoprotein intergenic enhancer.

Bernier D(1), Thomassin H, Allard D, Guertin M, Hamel D, Blaquière M, Beauchemin 
M, LaRue H, Estable-Puig M, Bélanger L.

Author information: 
(1)Le Centre de recherche en cancérologie, Université Laval, L'Hôtel-Dieu de
Québec, Canada.

During liver development, the tandem alpha 1-fetoprotein (AFP)/albumin locus is
triggered at the AFP end and then asymmetrically enhanced; this is followed by
autonomous repression of the AFP-encoding gene. To understand this regulation
better, we characterized the two early developmental stage-specific DNase
I-hypersensitive (DH) sites so far identified in rat liver AFP/albumin chromatin:
an intergenic DH-enhancer site and the AFP DH-promoter site.
Mutation-transfection analyses circumscribed the DH-enhancer domain to a 200-bp
DNA segment stringently conserved among species. Targeted mutations,
DNA-protein-binding assays, and coexpression experiments pinpointed C/EBP as the 
major activatory component of the intergenic enhancer. Structure-function
relationships at the AFP DH-promoter site defined a discrete
glucocorticoid-regulated domain activated cooperatively by HNF1 and a highly
specific AFP transcription factor, FTF, which binds to a steroid receptor
recognition motif. The HNF1/FTF/DNA complex is deactivated by glucocorticoid
receptors or by the ubiquitous factor NF1, which eliminates HNF1 by competition
at an overlapping, high-affinity binding site. We propose that the HNF1-NF1 site 
might serve as a developmental switch to direct autonomous AFP gene repression in
late liver development. We also conclude that the intergenic enhancer is driven
by C/EBP alpha primarily to fulfill albumin gene activation functions at early
developmental stages. Factor FTF seems to be the key regulator of AFP
gene-specific functions in carcinoembryonic states.

PMCID: PMC359474
PMID: 7680097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Nucleic Acids Res. 1993 Feb 25;21(4):897-903.

Competition between transcription factors HNF1 and HNF3, and alternative
cell-specific activation by DBP and C/EBP contribute to the regulation of the
liver-specific aldolase B promoter.

Gregori C(1), Kahn A, Pichard AL.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin de Genetique Moleculaire, U. 129 de l'INSERM, ICGM CHU Cochin,
Paris, France.

The aldolase B proximal promoter is controlled by at least five elements spanning
from -190 to -103 bp with respect to the start site of transcription. From 5' to 
3', we found: a negative DE element, an activating C/EBP-DBP binding site, a
CCAAT box binding NFY that seems to play a negative role, and an activating
element consisting of two overlapping binding sites for HNF-1 and HNF-3.
Contransfection experiments of aldolase B/CAT constructs and of expression
vectors for different transcription factors were carried out in human hepatoma
Hep G2 cells. We found that DBP and HNF-1 are strong transactivators of the
aldolase B promoter while C/EBP and vHNF-1 are only weak activators and HNF-3
alone does not modify such activity. Deletion of the distal negative element
results in a similar transactivation by C/EBP and DBP, enhanced for the former
and reduced for the latter. In hepatocytes in primary culture, the strong
transactivator is C/EBP while DBP is essentially inactive. This
tissue-specificity of C/EBP and DBP action could depend on interaction with
tissue-specific proteins bound to a neighbouring site, probably DE. Finally, HNF3
behaves as a very strong anti-activator of the aldolase B promoter. It
competitively antagonizes transactivation by HNF-1 and non-competitively
transactivation by DBP. This negative effect of HNF-3 and tissue-specificity of
the transactivation potential of DBP and C/EBP are unique features of the
aldolase B promoter.

PMCID: PMC309222
PMID: 8383844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Feb;13(2):1183-93.

The human beta fibrinogen promoter contains a hepatocyte nuclear factor
1-dependent interleukin-6-responsive element.

Dalmon J(1), Laurent M, Courtois G.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire et Structurale, INSERM Unité 217,
Grenoble, France.

Acute-phase reactants are liver proteins whose synthesis is positively or
negatively regulated during inflammation. The main mediators of this phenomenon
are glucocorticoids and interleukin-6 (IL-6), a pleiotropic cytokine that also
controls hematopoiesis. Functional analysis of several acute-phase reactant
promoter regions has identified two major DNA motifs used by IL-6-regulated
genes. The first one corresponds to a CTGG(G/A)AA sequence, and the other is a
binding site for members of the C/EBP family of nuclear proteins. We have
previously shown that the human beta fibrinogen (beta Fg) promoter contains an
IL-6-responsive region, located between bp -150 and -67 (P. Huber, M. Laurent,
and J. Dalmon, J. Biol. Chem. 265:5695-5701, 1990). In this study, using DNase I 
footprinting, mobility shift assays, and mutagenesis, we demonstrate that at
least three subdomains of this region are necessary to observe a full response to
IL-6. The most distal contains a CTGGGAA motif, and its mutation inhibits IL-6
stimulation. Another, which is able to interact with several distinct nuclear
proteins, among them members of the C/EBP family, is dispensable for IL-6
induction but plays an important role in the constitutive expression of beta Fg. 
Finally, a proximal hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 binding site, already described
as the major determinant of beta Fg tissue-specific expression, is also required 
for IL-6 stimulation. These results indicate a complex interplay between nuclear 
proteins within the beta Fg IL-6-responsive region and suggest a tight functional
coupling between the tissue-specific and inducible elements.

PMCID: PMC359003
PMID: 8423785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Mol Biol Cell. 1993 Jan;4(1):59-69.

Regulation of albumin gene expression in hepatoma cells of fetal phenotype:
dominant inhibition of HNF1 function and role of ubiquitous transcription
factors.

Rollier A(1), DiPersio CM, Cereghini S, Stevens K, Tronche F, Zaret K, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, URA CNRS 1149, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, France.

Two widely used hepatoma cell lines, mouse BW1J and human HepG2, express gene
products characteristic of fetal hepatocytes, including serum albumin, whereas
reporter genes driven by the albumin promoter are expressed at very low levels
compared with highly differentiated hepatoma cells. We have investigated the low 
albumin promoter activity in BW1J cells to understand differences in liver gene
regulation between fetal and adult cells. Addition of the albumin upstream
enhancer, or any other fragment of the albumin gene, failed to modify expression 
of the transfected promoter in BW1J cells. Analysis of cis elements of the
albumin promoter showed that, in contrast to highly differentiated H4II cells, in
BW1J cells the activity largely depends on ubiquitous transcription factors. Both
BW1J and HepG2 cells produce the liver-enriched transcription factor HNF1;
dimerization and DNA binding properties are identical to those of liver HNF1, yet
the protein fails to show the anticipated transcriptional stimulatory activity. A
transfected HNF1 expression vector strongly trans-activates the albumin promoter 
in HepG2 but only weakly in BW1J cells, and in hybrids (BW1J x Fao), inefficient 
HNF1 function is dominant. We conclude that hepatoma cells of the fetal phenotype
are deficient in the use of HNF1 to drive transcription of the albumin gene and
that they harbor a dominant modulator of HNF1 function.

PMCID: PMC300900
PMID: 8443410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Jan;13(1):421-31.

Developmental regulation and tissue distribution of the liver transcription
factor LFB1 (HNF1) in Xenopus laevis.

Bartkowski S(1), Zapp D, Weber H, Eberle G, Zoidl C, Senkel S, Klein-Hitpass L,
Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Germany.

The transcription factor LFB1 (HNF1) was initially identified as a regulator of
liver-specific gene expression in mammals. It interacts with the promoter element
HP1, which is functionally conserved between mammals and amphibians, suggesting
that a homologous factor, XLFB1, also exists in Xenopus laevis. To study the role
of LFB1 in early development, we isolated two groups of cDNAs coding for this
factor from a Xenopus liver cDNA library by using a rat LFB1 cDNA probe. A
comparison of the primary structures of the Xenopus and mammalian proteins shows 
that the myosin-like dimerization helix, the POU-A-related domain, the
homeo-domain-related region, and the serine/threonine-rich activation domain are 
conserved between X. laevis and mammals, suggesting that all these features
typical for LFB1 are essential for function. Using monoclonal antibodies, we
demonstrate that XLFB1 is present not only in the liver but also in the stomach, 
intestine, colon, and kidney. In an analysis of the expression of XLFB1 in the
developing Xenopus embryo, XLFB1 transcripts appear at the gastrula stage. The
XLFB1 protein can be identified in regions of the embryo in which the liver
diverticulum, stomach, gut, and pronephros are localized. The early appearance of
XLFB1 expression during embryogenesis suggests that the tissue-specific
transcription factor XLFB1 is involved in the determination and/or
differentiation of specific cell types during organogenesis.

PMCID: PMC358922
PMID: 8417340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. C R Acad Sci III. 1993;316(4):385-94.

The HNF1 C-terminal domain contributes to transcriptional activity and modulates 
nuclear localisation.

Sourdive DJ(1), Chouard T, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UA 1644, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

HNF1 is a homeoprotein that regulates the expression of a large number of liver
specific genes. By performing transient expression assays with a series of
C-terminal deletion mutants and with a LexA-HNF1 fusion protein, we show that the
C-terminal half of HNF1 is necessary and sufficient for in vivo transcriptional
activity, and we map the residues essential for this activity. However, since our
data for some mutants showed discrepancies with previous in vitro studies, we
undertook a more careful analysis of the mutant proteins using gel retardation
assays and immunoblots made with nuclear extracts from transfected cells. We show
that progressive C-terminal deletions drastically increase the amount of protein 
that accumulates in transfected cells. Immunofluorescence microscopy reveals that
mutants containing between 348 and 416 residues accumulate outside the nuclear
membrane, while longer mutants are nuclear like the 628 amino acid long wild type
HNF1. A mutant with 289 residues is predominantly nuclear. Since the only obvious
candidate for a nuclear localisation signal is located within this last mutant,
we suggest that certain C-terminal deletions expose a sequence that blocks
nuclear transport.

PMID: 8402264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1993;338:97-102.

The isolation and characterization of clones of 4a-hydroxytetrahydrobiopterin
dehydratase.

Kaufman S(1), Citron BA, Davis M, Milstien S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry, National Institute of Mental Health, Betheada,
MD 20892.

PMID: 8304232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1993;338:103-6.

Molecular cloning and recombinant expression of the human liver phenylalanine
hydroxylase stimulating factor revealed structural and functional identity to the
dimerization cofactor for the nuclear transcription factor HNF-1 alpha.

Thöny B(1), Neuheiser F, Hauer CR, Heizmann CW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Chemistry, University Children's Hospital, Zürich,
Switzerland.

PMID: 8304090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Jan 1;90(1):272-6.

Liver-specific expression of human insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1: 
functional role of transcription factor HNF1 in vivo.

Babajko S(1), Tronche F, Groyer A.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Recherches sur la Régulation de la Croissance, Institut National de
la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U.142, Hôpital Saint Antoine, Paris, France.

Tissue-specific expression of insulin-like growth factor binding protein 1
(IGFBP-1) in the liver has been studied using differentiated (H4II and C2Rev7)
and dedifferentiated (H5 and C2) rat hepatoma cell lines. Northern blot analysis 
showed that endogenous IGFBP-1 mRNA was expressed only in the differentiated cell
lines. The first 341 base pairs 5' to the transcription initiation site of the
human IGFBP-1 gene were inserted upstream of the chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase reporter gene (pBP-1(341)). Expression of this gene from the
human IGFBP-1 promoter was 10-16 times more efficient in the H4II line than in
the other hepatoma cell lines and 40 and approximately 12 times more so than in
rat fibroblasts (FR3T3) and a human cervical carcinoma cell line (C33),
respectively. Cotransfection of pBP-1(341) and pRSV-HNF1 and/or pRSV-v-HNF1
(eukaryotic expression vectors that drive the synthesis of the liver-enriched
trans-acting factor HNF1 or of v-HNF1, a related form) in C33 recipient cells
yielded a 6-fold increase in IGFBP-1 promoter activity by HNF1 and a 2-fold
increase by v-HNF1. These increases were dependent on the integrity of an HNF1
binding site located 58-74 nucleotides upstream of the cap site. Stimulation of
promoter activity by cotransfection of both HNF1 and v-HNF1 fell between these
values. Our results indicate that HNF1 is instrumental in human IGFBP-1 promoter 
activity in vivo and that v-HNF1 modulates this functional role.

PMCID: PMC45642
PMID: 7678342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Dec 15;89(24):11891-4.

Identity of 4a-carbinolamine dehydratase, a component of the phenylalanine
hydroxylation system, and DCoH, a transregulator of homeodomain proteins.

Citron BA(1), Davis MD, Milstien S, Gutierrez J, Mendel DB, Crabtree GR, Kaufman 
S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurochemistry, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda,
MD 20892.

The principal pathway for the metabolism of phenylalanine in mammals is via
conversion to tyrosine in a tetrahydrobiopterin-dependent hydroxylation reaction 
occurring predominantly in the liver. Recently, the proposal that certain
hyperphenylalaninemic children may have a deficiency of carbinolamine
dehydratase, a component of the phenylalanine hydroxylation system, has widened
the interest in this area of metabolism. Upon cloning and sequencing the
dehydratase, we discovered that this protein is identical to DCoH, the cofactor
which regulates the dimerization of hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha, a homeodomain
transcription factor. The identity of the nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins is
demonstrated by size, immunoblotting, stimulation of phenylalanine hydroxylase,
and dehydratase activity. The evolution of the dual functions of regulation of
phenylalanine hydroxylation activity and transcription activation in a single
polypeptide is unprecedented.

PMCID: PMC50663
PMID: 1465414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Biochemistry. 1992 Dec 15;31(49):12469-76.

The human prothrombin gene: transcriptional regulation in HepG2 cells.

Bancroft JD(1), McDowell SA, Degen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Basic Science Research, Children's Hospital Research Foundation,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229.

The human prothrombin gene is expressed predominantly in hepatocytes. Previous
work indicated that this tissue specificity is transcriptionally regulated. In
order to identify the cis-acting regulatory elements in the 5' flanking region of
the human prothrombin gene which may direct the expression of prothrombin in
hepatocytes, a series of hybrid plasmids were constructed linking portions of the
5' flanking region of the human prothrombin gene to the bacterial chloramphenicol
acetyltransferase gene. Expression of these hybrid plasmids was examined in
calcium phosphate-mediated transient transfections of HepG2 cells, a human
hepatoblastoma cell line which expresses prothrombin, and HeLa cells, an
adenocarcinoma cell line which does not express detectable amounts of
prothrombin. Both the prothrombin promoter and an upstream regulatory region
containing sequence homologous to the hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1) binding
site (nucleotides -919 to -790 relative to the prothrombin transcription
initiation site) were required for expression in HepG2 cells. The upstream region
also exhibited non-tissue-specific enhancer activity. Gel mobility shift assays
confirmed cell-type-specific differences in the protein-DNA interactions between 
proteins in HepG2 or HeLa nuclear extracts and either the promoter region or the 
upstream regulatory region of the gene.

PMID: 1463733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Protein Eng. 1992 Dec;5(8):749-57.

The dimerization domain of LFB1/HNF1 related transcription factors: a hidden four
helix bundle?

Pastore A(1), De Francesco R, Castiglione Morelli MA, Nalis D, Cortese R.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Germany.

LFB1/HNF1 alpha and LFB3/HNF1 beta bind DNA as dimers and form heterodimers
together in vivo and in vitro. The dimerization domain has been located in both
proteins in the 32 N-terminal residues. In previous papers we have described the 
conformational stability as determined by CD and the secondary structure by NMR
studies of a peptide with the amino acid sequence of the dimerization domain of
LFB1/HNF1 alpha. This study presents a more complete characterization of similar 
synthetic peptides spanning the LFB3/HNF1 beta dimerization domain and the
alpha/beta heterodimer. The HNF1 peptides represent an example of structures
which cannot be determined by NOE data alone because they are not sufficient to
define one unique solution. An approach is presented which combines NMR data, the
protein structure database and structural analyses according to known principles 
of protein structure. On this basis we are able to determine possible solutions
and to identify a four helix bundle as the structure most consistent with the
experimental evidence.

PMID: 1337605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Development. 1992 Nov;116(3):783-97.

Expression patterns of vHNF1 and HNF1 homeoproteins in early postimplantation
embryos suggest distinct and sequential developmental roles.

Cereghini S(1), Ott MO, Power S, Maury M.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, UA 1149 du CNRS, Institut Pasteur,
Paris, France.

The homeoproteins HNF1 (LFB1/HNF1-A) and vHNF1 (LFB3/HNF1 beta) interact with an 
essential control element of a group of liver-specific genes. During development,
these putative target genes are initially expressed in the visceral endoderm of
the yolk sac and subsequently in fetal liver. To assess the possible involvement 
of HNF1 and/or vHNF1 as transcriptional regulators in the early steps of visceral
endoderm differentiation, we have analyzed the expression pattern of both factors
both in vitro during differentiation of murine F9 embryonal carcinoma cells and
in vivo during early postimplantation mouse development. We show here that
differentiation of F9 cells into either visceral or parietal endoderm is
accompanied by a sharp induction in vHNF1 mRNA and protein. By contrast, only low
levels of aberrantly sized HNF1 transcripts, but not DNA-binding protein, are
found in F9 cells and its differentiated derivatives. At 6-7.5 days of gestation,
high levels of vHNF1 mRNA are present in the visceral extraembryonic endoderm,
which co-localize with transcripts of the transthyretin gene. HNF1 transcripts
are first detected in the yolk sac roughly two embryonic days later, after the
developmental onset of transcription of target genes. As development proceeds,
discrepancies are observed between the level of transcripts of both vHNF1 and
HNF1 and their respective nuclear binding proteins, notably in the yolk sac and
embryonic kidney. In addition, we show that two alternative spliced isoforms of
vHNF1 mRNA, vHNF-A and vHNF1-B, are expressed in both embryonic and adult
tissues. Taken together, these data suggest that vHNF1 participates as a
regulatory factor in the initial transcriptional activation of the target genes
in the visceral endoderm of the yolk sac, whereas the later appearance of HNF1
could be required for maintenance of their expression. Our results also provide
evidence of a posttranscriptional level of control of vHNF1 and HNF1 gene
expression during development, in addition to the spatial restriction in
transcription.

PMID: 1363228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. EMBO J. 1992 Nov;11(11):4119-29.

A POU-A related region dictates DNA binding specificity of LFB1/HNF1 by orienting
the two XL-homeodomains in the dimer.

Tomei L(1), Cortese R, De Francesco R.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Ricerche di Biologia Molecolare P. Angeletti, Roma, Italy.

LFB1/HNF1 regulates the hepatocyte-specific transcription of several genes,
binding as a dimer to cis-acting elements that match the inverted palindrome
GTTAATNATTAAC. The DNA binding domain of LFB1/HNF1 is characterized by a unique
tripartite structure that includes an unusually long homeodomain (domain C), a
region related to the POU-specific A-box (domain B) and a short N-terminal
dimerization domain (domain A). We report that a recombinant peptide
corresponding to the isolated homeodomain of LFB1/HNF1 binds as a monomer to a
half-palindrome binding site, but shows diminished sequence specificity. Domain
B, in addition to the homeodomain, is required and sufficient for proper
recognition of LFB1/HNF1-responsive sites. A protein consisting of only these
latter two domains is a monomer in solution, but forms dimers upon DNA binding.
The protein-protein contacts established within the bound dimer restrain the
orientation of the two homeodomains with respect to one another, thus
contributing in a critical fashion to the recognition of the dyad
symmetry-related LFB1/HNF1 sites. The DNA-independent dimerization domain (domain
A) is required to increase the affinity of DNA binding, but does not influence
the dimer geometry.

PMCID: PMC556922
PMID: 1356766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Oct 25;20(20):5321-8.

Trans-dominant inhibition of transcription activator LFB1.

Nicosia A(1), Tafi R, Monaci P.

Author information: 
(1)IRBM, Istituto di Ricerche di Biologia Molecolare P. Angeletti, Pomezia, Rome,
Italy.

Liver-enriched factor LFB1 (also named HNF1) is a dimeric transcription activator
which is essential for the expression of many hepatocyte-specific genes. Here we 
demonstrate that LFB1 mutants in the POU A-like or in the homeo domains inhibit
wild-type DNA binding by forming inactive heterodimeric complexes.
Co-transfection of one of these mutants with wild-type LFB1 in HeLa cells
eliminated LFB1 DNA binding and transcriptional activities through a
trans-dominant mechanism. Expression of the same dominant negative mutant in
human hepatoma HepG2 cells only partially inhibited endogenous LFB1 activity, due
to stabilization of LFB1 dimers in these cells. Dimer stabilization in hepatoma
cells is mediated by a heat-labile association with an 11kD polypeptide,
analogous to the DCoH cofactor identified in rat liver by Mendel et al. (1). The 
property of stabilizing LFB1 dimers is also shared by HeLa cells which produce a 
HeLa homolog of DCoH. These results demonstrate that LFB1 dimer stabilization as 
well as the synthesis of 'stabilizing factors' are not restricted to cells
expressing LFB1 or other members of its family.

PMCID: PMC334337
PMID: 1331985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. DNA Cell Biol. 1992 Sep;11(7):559-66.

The down-regulation of albumin transcription during regeneration is due to the
loss of HNF-1 and the D-site transcription factors.

Mueller CR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Laboratories, Queen's University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada.

Liver regeneration has served as an important in vivo model for studying the
control of differentiation. The molecular mechanisms responsible for the negative
regulation of the albumin promoter during regeneration have not been examined
previously. Changes in the proteins interacting with the albumin promoter were
characterized using nuclear extracts prepared from the livers of rats undergoing 
chemically induced regeneration. Reduction in the activities of both hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 (HNF-1) and factors binding to the D site are responsible for
the loss of albumin transcription during regeneration. No evidence for the
involvement of a transcriptional repressor in this process was found.

PMID: 1388728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Bioessays. 1992 Sep;14(9):579-87.

HNF1, a homeoprotein member of the hepatic transcription regulatory network.

Tronche F(1), Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, France.

Numerous liver specific genes are transcriptionally activated by the binding to
their promoter or enhancer of Hepatic Nuclear Factor 1 (HNF1). HNF1 contains a
variant homeo-domain and binds to DNA as either a homodimer or a heterodimer with
the vHNF1 protein. Surprisingly, HNF1 is not restricted to hepatocytes but is
expressed in epithelial cells of several endoderm derived organs and in mesoderm 
derived kidney tubules. Hence, HNF1 alone can not account for the differentiated 
state of the hepatic cells. In fact, several other liver-enriched transcription
factors have been cloned. The hepatic phenotype could result from the
combinatorial expression of these regulators. Possible involvement of these
trans-acting factors in liver organogenesis and hepatic differentiation is
discussed.

PMID: 1365913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Nucleic Acids Res. 1992 Aug 25;20(16):4199-204.

Structure of the gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1).

Bach I(1), Pontoglio M, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)UA 1149 du CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

Genomic clones have been isolated that cover the entire gene for the
transcription factor HNF1 (hepatocyte nuclear factor 1). This protein governs the
expression of many genes, synthesized in the liver in a tissue-specific manner.
We have determined the intron/exon structure of the HNF1 gene, which is strictly 
conserved between rat and mouse and estimate that it spans not more than 40kb in 
the rat genome. Whereas most homeoprotein genes do not contain introns within the
homeodomain, HNF1 displays an intron between the regions encoding the second and 
the third helices. We discuss possible evolutionary mechanisms leading to this
homeobox intron/exon pattern.

PMCID: PMC334126
PMID: 1354855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Biol Chem. 1992 Aug 25;267(24):17375-83.

Transcriptional regulation of the human insulin receptor promoter.

Cameron KE(1), Resnik J, Webster NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093.

The ability of the human insulin receptor promoter to direct expression of a
linked chloramphenicol acetyltransferase gene was assessed in transient
transfections into HepG2 and Hela cells. A 5'-deletional analysis of the promoter
showed that regions between -646 and -489 were important for the activity of the 
proximal promoter. In addition, a possible negative regulatory element was
identified between -1311 and -877 and a positive element between -1823 and -1311.
DNase I footprint and gel retardation analysis showed that multiple factors bind 
to the human insulin receptor promoter. In particular, DNase I protection
patterns were observed over the Sp1 sites at -620 to -599 and -438 to -392, a TC 
box at -533, four homopyrimidine/homopurine sites clustered around -1150, and a
site at -1420 that contains the motif TGGCCC which has been shown to bind the
liver-specific transcription factor LF-A1.

PMID: 1324934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1992 Aug 15;89(16):7300-4.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha is expressed in a hamster insulinoma line and
transactivates the rat insulin I gene.

Emens LA(1), Landers DW, Moss LG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030.

Systematic mutational analysis previously identified two primary regulatory
elements within a minienhancer (-247 to -198) of the rat insulin I promoter that 
are critical for transcriptional activity. The Far box (-241 to -232) and the
FLAT element (-222 to -208) synergistically upregulate transcription and,
together, are sufficient to confer tissue-specific and glucose-responsive
transcriptional activity on a heterologous promoter. Detailed analysis of the
FLAT element further revealed that, in addition to the positive regulatory
activity it mediates in tandem with the Far box, it is a site for negative
regulatory control. A portion of the FLAT element bears considerable sequence
similarity to the consensus binding site for hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha
(HNF1 alpha; LF-B1) a liver-enriched homeodomain-containing transcription factor.
Here we show that the HNF1-like site within the FLAT element exhibited positive
transcriptional activity in both HepG2 and HIT cells and bound similar, but
distinguishable, nuclear protein complexes in the respective nuclear extracts.
Screening of a hamster insulinoma cDNA library with a PCR-derived probe
encompassing the DNA-binding domain of rat HNF1 alpha resulted in isolation of a 
hamster HNF1 alpha (hHNF1 alpha) cDNA homolog. Specific antiserum identified the 
HNF1 alpha protein as one component of a specific FLAT-binding complex in HIT
nuclear extracts. Expression of the hHNF1 alpha cDNA in COS cells resulted in
transactivation of reporter constructs containing multimerized segments of the
rat insulin I minienhancer. Thus, HNF1 alpha, one component of a DNA-binding
complex involved in transcriptional regulation of the rat insulin I gene, may
play a significant role in nonhepatic as well as hepatic gene transcription.

PMCID: PMC49697
PMID: 1380153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. J Mol Endocrinol. 1992 Aug;9(1):19-29.

The function of conserved elements in the promoter of the mouse angiotensinogen
gene.

Congiu M(1), Clouston WM, Fernley RT, Richards RI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Florey Institute of Experimental Physiology and Medicine, University of
Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

The angiotensinogen gene encodes the precursor protein for the potent
vasoconstrictor angiotensin II. Although the gene is expressed in several
tissues, the liver is the major source of circulating protein. In previous
in-vivo studies we have found that a mini-gene containing 750 bp of 5'-flanking
sequence is transcribed in a manner which largely parallels the expression of the
endogenous gene. In this report, we characterized conserved elements in the
promoter region, in order to determine their role in the transcription of the
angiotensinogen gene. Constructs fused to the chloramphenicol acetyl transferase 
(CAT) reporter gene were transfected into hepatocarcinoma Hep G2 cells as well as
into nonhepatic cell lines. We found that 5'-deletion mutant constructs,
containing sequences from +25 to -90 bp and -321 to -750 bp, were each able to
activate transcription. These constructs contain the TATA box and core promoter
sequences, including an Sp1-binding site, and two glucocorticoid responsive
elements respectively. In the non-hepatic cell lines, HeLa and Jeg-3, we found
that the constructs were transcribed at a much lower rate when compared with the 
expression of a plasmid containing the Rous sarcoma virus long terminal repeat
fused to the CAT gene. Constructs which included sequence 5' to -244 were
oestrogen inducible. An element which is conserved between rodent and human
angiotensinogen promoters is contained within a sequence which is oestrogen
responsive, while another binds the liver-enriched transcriptional activator
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1. However, the role of this transactivator in the
transcription of angiotensinogen remains uncertain.

PMID: 1515023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Jul;12(7):3023-31.

Temporal expression of the human alcohol dehydrogenase gene family during liver
development correlates with differential promoter activation by hepatocyte
nuclear factor 1, CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha, liver activator protein, 
and D-element-binding protein.

van Ooij C(1), Snyder RC, Paeper BW, Duester G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Colorado State University, Fort Collins 80523.

The human class I alcohol dehydrogenase (ADH) gene family consists of ADH1, ADH2,
and ADH3, which are sequentially activated in early fetal, late fetal, and
postnatal liver, respectively. Analysis of ADH promoters revealed differential
activation by several factors previously shown to control liver transcription. In
cotransfection assays, the ADH1 promoter, but not the ADH2 or ADH3 promoter, was 
shown to respond to hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1), which has previously
been shown to regulate transcription in early liver development. The ADH2
promoter, but not the ADH1 or ADH3 promoter, was shown to respond to
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBP alpha), a transcription factor
particularly active during late fetal liver and early postnatal liver
development. The ADH1, ADH2, and ADH3 promoters all responded to the liver
transcription factors liver activator protein (LAP) and D-element-binding protein
(DBP), which are most active in postnatal liver. For all three promoters, the
activation by LAP or DBP was higher than that seen by HNF-1 or C/EBP alpha, and a
significant synergism between C/EBP alpha and LAP was noticed for the ADH2 and
ADH3 promoters when both factors were simultaneously cotransfected. A hierarchy
of ADH promoter responsiveness to C/EBP alpha and LAP homo- and heterodimers is
suggested. In all three ADH genes, LAP bound to the same four sites previously
reported for C/EBP alpha (i.e., -160, -120, -40, and -20 bp), but DBP bound
strongly only to the site located at -40 bp relative to the transcriptional
start. Mutational analysis of ADH2 indicated that the -40 bp element accounts for
most of the promoter regulation by the bZIP factors analyzed. These studies
suggest that HNF-1 and C/EBP alpha help establish ADH gene family transcription
in fetal liver and that LAP and DBP help maintain high-level ADH gene family
transcription in postnatal liver.

PMCID: PMC364516
PMID: 1620113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Genomics. 1992 Jun;13(2):293-300.

Chromosomal localization in man and rat of the genes encoding the liver-enriched 
transcription factors C/EBP, DBP, and HNF1/LFB-1 (CEBP, DBP, and transcription
factor 1, TCF1, respectively) and of the hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor 
gene (HGF).

Szpirer C(1), Riviere M, Cortese R, Nakamura T, Islam MQ, Levan G, Szpirer J.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Université Libre de Bruxelles,
Rhode-St-Genèse, Belgium.

By means of somatic cell hybrids segregating either human or rat chromosomes, we 
determined the chromosome localization of three genes encoding transcription
factors expressed in hepatocytes, namely, C/EBP (CCAAT/enhancer binding protein),
DBP (D site of albumin promoter binding protein), and HNF1/LFB-1 (designated
transcription factor 1, gene symbol: TCF1), and of the hepatocyte growth factor
gene, which is identical to the mitogenic and chemotactic factor designated
scatter factor (gene symbol:HGF). The CEBP and DBP genes, encoding two related
transcription factors, were found to be syntenic both on human chromosome 19 and 
on rat chromosome 1. These results provide further evidence for conservation of
synteny on these two chromosomes (and on mouse chromosome 7). The TCF1 gene was
found to be located on chromosome 12 in both man and rat, thereby defining a new 
segment of homology between these two species (and a segment of mouse chromosome 
5). The HGF gene was mapped to rat chromosome 4, confirming homology between this
chromosome and human chromosome 7, which carries the human HGF gene.

PMID: 1535333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


481. Mol Cell Biol. 1992 Mar;12(3):1134-48.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 and C/EBP are essential for the activity of the human
apolipoprotein B gene second-intron enhancer.

Brooks AR(1), Levy-Wilson B.

Author information: 
(1)Gladstone Institute of Cardiovascular Disease, Cardiovascular Research
Institute, San Francisco, California.

The tissue-specific transcriptional enhancer of the human apolipoprotein B gene
contains multiple protein-binding sites spanning 718 bp. Most of the enhancer
activity is found in a 443-bp fragment (+621 to +1064) that is located entirely
within the second intron of the gene. Within this fragment, a 147-bp region (+806
to +952) containing a single 97-bp DNase I footprint exhibits significant
enhancer activity. We now report that this footprint contains four distinct
protein-binding sites that have the potential to bind nine distinct liver nuclear
proteins. One of these proteins was identified as hepatocyte nuclear factor 1
(HNF-1), which binds with relatively low affinity to the 5' half of a 20-bp
palindrome located at the 5' end of the large footprint. A binding site for C/EBP
(or one of the related proteins that recognize similar sequences) was identified 
in the center of the 97-bp footprint. This binding site is coincident or overlaps
with the binding sites for five other proteins, two of which appear to be
distinct from the C/EBP-related family of proteins. The binding site for a
nuclear factor designated protein I is located between the HNF-1 and C/EBP
binding sites. Finally, the 3'-most 15 bp of the footprinted sequence contain a
binding site for another nuclear protein, which we have called protein II.
Mutations that abolish the binding of either HNF-1, protein II, or the
C/EBP-related proteins severely reduce enhancer activity. However, deletion
experiments demonstrated that neither the HNF-1-binding site alone, nor the
combination of binding sites for HNF-1, protein I, and C/EBP, nor the
C/EBP-binding site plus the protein II-binding site is sufficient to enhance
transcription from a strong apolipoprotein B promoter. Rather, HNF-1 and C/EBP
act synergistically with protein II to enhance transcription of the
apolipoprotein B gene.

PMCID: PMC369545
PMID: 1545795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 1992 Mar;41(3-8):747-52.

Two liver-enriched trans-acting factors support the tissue-specific basal
transcription from the rat tyrosine aminotransferase promoter.

Schweizer-Groyer G(1), Groyer A, Cadepond F, Grange T, Baulieu EE, Pictet R.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U. 33, Le Kremlin-Bicêtre, France.

The rat tyrosine aminotransferase gene (TAT) is a glucocorticoid-inducible gene, 
specifically expressed in liver. Using gel retardation assays, we have shown that
its promoter (nt + 1 to -350; TAT.35) binds a combination of both ubiquitous and 
liver-specific trans-acting factors. Cis-acting sequences spanning: (i) nt -65 to
-85 bound NF-Y, an ubiquitous "AACCAAT" box binding factor; (ii) nt -157 to -171 
bound a liver-enriched member of the NF1 gene family [NF1Liver (NF1L hereafter)];
(iii) nt -266 to -281 bound the liver specific factor HNF1; and (iv) nt -283 to
-288 bound ubiquitous "CCAAT" box binding factor(s). Moreover, the TAT gene
promoter was able to drive liver-specific basal transcription, even in an in
vitro assay using TAT-expressing (liver) vs non-expressing (spleen) crude nuclear
extracts (NEs). Competition studies in transcription with both unmutated and
mutated ds-oligonucleotides (ds-oligos) demonstrated that NF1L and HNF1 supported
approx. 60 and 25% of the basal transcriptional activity sustained by TAT.35 in
the liver, respectively. Neither of these oligos affected the very low level of
transcription sustained by spleen NEs. This suggests a minor role for HNF1 in
liver-specific basal TAT gene expression, consistent with previous observations
with dedifferentiated C2 hepatoma cells (which does not express HNF1)
[Deschatrette and Weiss. Biochimie 56 (1974) 1603-1611 and Cereghini et al. EMBO 
Jl9 (1990) 2257-2263]. Competition studies in liver-specific in vitro
transcription with ds-oligo -265/-290 yielded a 90% inhibition, suggesting either
that sequences spanning nt -283 to -288 sequester "CCAAT-box" binding factor(s)
that may be relevant elsewhere for TAT promoter function (e.g. NF-Y which
interacts with nt -65 to -85), or that such a factor interacts functionally with 
HNF1.

PMID: 1348627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. J Biol Chem. 1992 Feb 15;267(5):3466-72.

Regulated expression of alpha 2,6-sialyltransferase by the liver-enriched
transcription factors HNF-1, DBP, and LAP.

Svensson EC(1), Conley PB, Paulson JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, UCLA School of Medicine 90024.

Tissue-specific carbohydrate structures are thought to result from the selective 
expression of specific terminal glycosyltransferases responsible for their
synthesis. However, little is known about the regulation of the expression of
these enzymes. Previous analysis of the distribution of one such enzyme,
beta-galactoside alpha 2,6-sialyltransferase, revealed that its expression is
tissue restricted, with highest levels being found in the liver. Examination of
the gene suggested that its expression is regulated at the level of transcription
by multiple promoters, one of which is strongly active in the liver. In this
present work, an analysis of the liver-restricted promoter was undertaken to
identify the promoter elements necessary for liver-restricted expression.
Footprinting studies, 5' deletion analysis, and site-directed mutagenesis
identified two cis-elements which were potentially important in the
tissue-specific expression of this promoter. One of these elements contains a
consensus binding site for the liver-enriched transcription factor hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 alpha, while the other is a consensus binding site for the
liver-specific factors D-binding protein and liver-enriched transcriptional
activator protein. Expression vectors containing cDNAs of these factors are
capable of trans-activating transcription of the alpha 2,6ST promoter,
demonstrating their ability to regulate transcription of this promoter. Together,
these results suggest that tissue-specific glycosylation can be regulated at the 
level of transcription by the same factors involved in the expression of a number
of other tissue-specific genes.

PMID: 1737800  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Nature. 1992 Jan 30;355(6359):457-61.

A transcriptional hierarchy involved in mammalian cell-type specification.

Kuo CJ(1), Conley PB, Chen L, Sladek FM, Darnell JE Jr, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University School of Medicine,
California 94305-5425.

Although transcriptional hierarchies have been extensively studied in
invertebrates, their involvement in mammalian cell-type specification is poorly
understood. Here we report a hepatocyte transcriptional cascade suggested by the 
expression patterns of hepatic transcription factors in dedifferentiated
hepatomas and hepatocyte: fibroblast hybrids in which the liver phenotype was
extinguished. These results indicated that the homeoprotein hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha), and HNF-4, a member of the steroid hormone receptor
superfamily, were regulated coordinately or in a hierarchy by a higher-order
locus, independently of other hepatic transactivators. HNF-4 was implicated as an
essential positive regulator of HNF-1 alpha, as deletion of an HNF-4 binding site
in the HNF-1 alpha promoter abolished promoter activity, and HNF-4 potently
transactivated the HNF-1 alpha promoter in cotransfection assays. Moreover,
genetic complementation of dedifferentiated hepatomas with HNF-4 complementary
DNA rescued expression of endogenous HNF-1 alpha messenger RNA and DNA-binding
activity. Our studies therefore define an HNF-4----HNF-1 alpha (4----1 alpha)
transcriptional hierarchy operative in differentiated hepatocytes but selectively
inhibited by an extinguishing locus and somatic mutations which antagonize the
liver phenotype.

PMID: 1734282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Genes Dev. 1992 Feb;6(2):316-27.

Extinction of alpha 1-antitrypsin gene expression in somatic cell hybrids:
evidence for multiple controls.

Bulla GA(1), DeSimone V, Cortese R, Fournier RE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, Washington 98104.

Expression of the liver-specific alpha 1-antitrypsin (alpha 1AT) gene is
extinguished in hepatoma/fibroblast hybrids. To define the mechanism of
extinction, we identified DNA sequences involved in this process by transiently
transfecting mutant alpha 1AT promoters into parental and hybrid cells. The
wild-type alpha 1AT promoter (-554 to +44 bp) was highly expressed in rat
hepatoma cells, but activity was 100-fold less in fibroblasts or cell hybrids.
Mutations in this region failed to activate alpha 1AT expression in nonhepatic
cells, but mutations in the binding site for liver factor B1 (LF-B1) reduced
hepatic-specific expression greater than 100-fold. Furthermore, the hybrid cells 
failed to express LF-B1-binding activity and mRNA. This suggested that alpha 1AT 
extinction in hybrids might be an indirect, lack-of-activation phenotype mediated
primarily through repression of LF-B1. To test this possibility, we stably
transfected an LF-B1 expression cassette into parental and hybrid cells and
monitored expression of transfected and endogenous alpha 1AT genes. Surprisingly,
although constitutive LF-B1 expression could activate alpha 1AT-CAT transgenes in
these cells, it neither prevented nor reversed extinction of the chromosomal
alpha 1AT genes. We conclude that although extinction of the LF-B1
trans-activator accompanies alpha 1AT extinction in cell hybrids, it does not
play a causal role in this process.

PMID: 1737621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. Development. 1992 Feb;114(2):469-79.

LFB1 and LFB3 homeoproteins are sequentially expressed during kidney development.

Lazzaro D(1), De Simone V, De Magistris L, Lehtonen E, Cortese R.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Heidelberg, FRG.

LFB1 (HNF-1/HNF-1 alpha/APF) and LFB3 (vHNF-1/HNF-1 beta) are two homeoproteins
involved in the transcriptional regulation of several liver-specific genes. Both 
genes are expressed in the polarized epithelia of a wide range of tissues,
including liver, the digestive tract and kidney. We have analyzed the expression 
pattern of LFB1 and LFB3 in the developing rat kidney by in situ hybridization.
Our results show that LFB3 transcripts can be detected in mesoderm-derived cells 
as soon as they are induced to differentiate into a polarized epithelium, while
LFB1 transcripts appear only at a later stage when the three different segments
of the nephron become apparent. LFB1 transcripts are restricted to the proximal
and distal tubules, whereas LFB3 is also detected in the collecting ducts.
Neither LFB1 nor LFB3 are expressed in the glomeruli or in the transition
epithelia of the ureters and of the urinary bladder, none of which are involved
in active transport mechanisms. The sequential activation of these two genes is
also observed in transfilter organ cultures of nephrogenic mesenchyme at
different stages after induction. This expression pattern suggests that LFB3 and 
LFB1 play a role in two critical stages of the developmentally regulated
conversion of the nephric mesenchyme into a polarized epithelium: the early
inductory phase (LFB3) and the postinductory phase (LFB1+LFB3).

PMID: 1350532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. Mamm Genome. 1992;3(3):184-5.

The gene coding for variant hepatic nuclear factor 1 (Tcf-2), maps between the
Edp-1 and Erba genes on mouse chromosome 11.

Karolyi IJ(1), Guénet JL, Rey-Campos J, Camper SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor
48109-0618.

PMID: 1352161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Science. 1991 Dec 20;254(5039):1762-7.

Characterization of a cofactor that regulates dimerization of a mammalian
homeodomain protein.

Mendel DB(1), Khavari PA, Conley PB, Graves MK, Hansen LP, Admon A, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, CA 94305.

Dimerization among transcription factors has become a recurrent theme in the
regulation of eukaryotic gene expression. Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha
(HNF-1 alpha) is a homeodomain-containing protein that functions as a dimer. A
dimerization cofactor of HNF-1 alpha (DCoH) was identified that displayed a
restricted tissue distribution and did not bind to DNA, but, rather, selectively 
stabilized HNF-1 alpha dimers. The formation of a stable tetrameric DCoH-HNF-1
alpha complex, which required the dimerization domain of HNF-1 alpha, did not
change the DNA binding characteristics of HNF-1 alpha, but enhanced its
transcriptional activity. However, DCoH did not confer transcriptional activation
to the GAL4 DNA binding domain. These results indicate that DCoH regulates
formation of transcriptionally active tetrameric complexes and may contribute to 
the developmental specificity of the complex.

PMID: 1763325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Dec 11;19(23):6383-9.

Liver specific transcription factors of the HNF3-, C/EBP- and LFB1-families
interact with the A-activator binding site.

Drewes T(1), Klein-Hitpass L, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen, FRG.

The A-activator binding site (AABS), present in the Xenopus A2 vitellogenin gene 
and several mammalian liver specifically expressed genes, interacts with
different liver specific transcription factors including LFB1- and
C/EBP-isobinders. We have now isolated some additional proteins interacting with 
AABS and show that they are HNF3-isobinders. The interactions between AABS and
members of the HNF3 family are confirmed by binding studies using bacterially
made HNF3-alpha protein. Thus a short DNA module of 24 bp is able to bind
proteins of three different families of liver specific transcription factors.
Competition experiments in the cell free in vitro transcription show that AABS
dependent transcriptional activation is mediated by transcription factors
belonging to at least two different families, the C/EBP- and the HNF3-isobinders.
Being able to mediate the action of several distinct transactivators, AABS may
thus be a prototype for a novel kind of tissue specific promoter modules with
unique regulatory capacities.

PMCID: PMC329182
PMID: 1754374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Mech Dev. 1991 Dec;36(1-2):47-58.

vHNF1 is expressed in epithelial cells of distinct embryonic origin during
development and precedes HNF1 expression.

Ott MO(1), Rey-Campos J, Cereghini S, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

HNF1 (Hepatic Nuclear Factor 1) and vHNF1 are transcriptional regulators
containing a highly divergent homeodomain. The first was initially found in liver
nuclear extracts and is crucial for the transcription of albumin and many other
hepatocyte specific genes, while the second was found in dedifferentiated
hepatoma cells. Both recognize the same DNA binding site and can form homo and
heterodimers in vitro and in vivo. In situ hybridization analyses have been
performed to delineate the spatial and temporal pattern of expression of vHNF1
relative to HNF1 during mouse embryogenesis. The results show that accumulation
of vHNF1 mRNAs expression is detected in several tissues of the embryo of both
endodermal and mesodermal origin. Expression occurs in the yolk sac, the
primitive gut, the liver primordium, and at different stages of kidney
development in polarized epithelial structures and usually precedes that of HNF1.
vHNF1 expression seems particularly prevalent with morphogenetic events in the
kidney and may be a marker for certain polarized epithelium.

PMID: 1685890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Nov 25;19(22):6145-53.

Interplay of an original combination of factors: C/EBP, NFY, HNF3, and HNF1 in
the rat aldolase B gene promoter.

Raymondjean M(1), Pichard AL, Gregori C, Ginot F, Kahn A.

Author information: 
(1)ICGM, INSERM U. 129, Paris, France.

The rat aldolase B 5' flanking region (nucleotides - 194 to +41) contains
sufficient information for liver-specific expression. A detailed investigation of
factors binding to the rat aldolase B 5' flanking region has allowed us to
identify three distinct factors that filled different sites of this region (A, B,
C). The liver-enriched C/EBP or related factors bind to box C, as demonstrated by
the specific interaction with bacterially expressed C/EBP protein. Box B bearing 
the CCAAT sequence binds the ubiquitous factor NFY. Surprisingly, Box A is able
to bind two liver enriched factors, namely HNF1 and HNF3. However, in the context
of the intact promoter, as shown by footprinting competition experiments, HNF3
binds solely to this sequence. HNF3, but not HNF1 is a transcriptional activator 
as demonstrated in the in vitro transcription assay.

PMCID: PMC329108
PMID: 1956774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Nov 11;19(21):5929-36.

One base pair change abolishes the T cell-restricted activity of a kB-like
proto-enhancer element from the interleukin 2 promoter.

Briegel K(1), Hentsch B, Pfeuffer I, Serfling E.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Virologie und Immunbiologie, Universität Würzburg, FRG.

The inducible, T cell-specific enhancers of murine and human Interleukin 2 (Il-2)
genes contain the kB-like sequence GGGATTTCACC as an essential cis-acting
enhancer motif. When cloned in multiple copies this so-called TCEd (distal T cell
element) acts as an inducible proto-enhancer element in E14 T lymphoma cells, but
not in HeLa cells. In extracts of induced, Il-2 secreting El4 cells three
individual protein factors bind to TCEd DNA. The binding of the most prominent
factor, named TCF-1 (T cell factor 1), is correlated with the proto-enhancer
activity of TCEd. TCF-1 consists of two polypeptides of about 50 kD and 105 kD;
the former seems to be related to the 50 kD polypeptide of NF-kB. Purified NF-kB 
is also able to bind to the TCEd, but TCF-1 binds stronger than NF-kB to TCEd
DNA. The conversion of the TCEd to a 'perfect' NF-kB binding site leads to a
tighter binding of NF-kB to TCEd DNA and, as a functional consequence, to the
activity of the 'converted' TCEd motifs in HeLa cells. Thus, the substitution of 
the underlined A residue to a C within the GGGATTTCACC motif abolishes its T
cell-restricted activity and leads to its functioning in both El4 cells and HeLa 
cells. These results indicate that lymphocyte-specific factors binding to the
TCEd are involved in the control of T cell specific-transcription of the Il-2
gene.

PMCID: PMC329049
PMID: 1945879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. J Mol Biol. 1991 Nov 5;222(1):31-43.

NFY or a related CCAAT binding factor can be replaced by other transcriptional
activators for co-operation with HNF1 in driving the rat albumin promoter in
vivo.

Tronche F(1), Rollier A, Sourdive D, Cereghini S, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)Departement des Biotechnologies, UA1149 CNRS Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Like many eukaryotic genes, the rat albumin promoter contains a CCAAT consensus
motif at position -80. In transfected H4II hepatoma cells the strength of this
promoter depends to a large extent on the integrity of a hepatic nuclear factor 1
(HNF1) binding site located at position -60 and to a lesser extent on the CCAAT
element. However, if the affinity for HNF1 is reduced, the CCAAT-box becomes
essential for high, and tissue specific, promoter activity. We wished to
determine which, among the different CCAAT binding factors co-existing in
eukaryotic cells, was responsible for this co-operativity with HNF1. To this end 
we prepared a series of mutants of the CCAAT sequence and compared their effects 
on albumin promoter activity in vivo and on the binding of different CCAAT
binding factors in vitro. Our results strongly suggest that a ubiquitous factor
NFY (also designated CBF, ACF, CP1) interacts with this CCAAT element in vivo. We
propose that during development NFY could facilitate transcription of the albumin
gene in hepatocytes when the concentration of HNF1 is limiting. This
co-operativity in transcriptional activation is not due to strict co-operativity 
in DNA binding between the two proteins and is not limited to NFY or a closely
related factor, as the CCAAT-box can be replaced by AP1, SP1 or E2 target sites
without significantly affecting the final activity.

PMID: 1942067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. EMBO J. 1991 Nov;10(11):3177-82.

Disruption of the LF-A1 and LF-B1 binding sites in the human alpha-1-antitrypsin 
gene has a differential effect during development in transgenic mice.

Tripodi M(1), Abbott C, Vivian N, Cortese R, Lovell-Badge R.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biopatologia umana, Università la Sapienza, Policlinico Umbert
I, Roma, Italy.

Previous work in transfected cell lines and in nuclear extracts has led to the
identification of two cis-acting elements important for transcription of the
human alpha-1-antitrypsin (A1AT) gene, which bind to two liver specific
trans-acting factors, LF-A1 and LF-B1. Mutations EM3 and PM1, which abolish the
binding of LF-A1 and LF-B1 respectively, drastically reduce transcription
activity of the A1AT gene in vitro and in cell culture. The same mutants have now
been introduced in a larger DNA context and their effect has been tested in
transgenic mice. A stretch of DNA was constructed which carries two
transcriptional units: 18 kb of the human retinol binding protein (RBP) gene,
driving the expression of the bacterial chloramphenicol acetyl transferase,
linked to 17.5 kb containing the entire A1AT coding sequence with additional 5'
and 3' flanking sequences. Transcription from the RBP promoter was shown to
predominate in liver, and could be used as an internal marker of 'active copy
number'. Mutations in the A1AT gene promoter were introduced by homologous
recombination in bacterial cells. The results show that base pair substitutions
in the binding site for LF-A1 and LF-B1 drastically reduce transcription in
non-hepatic adult tissues, yolk sac, and fetal liver, whereas only LF-B1 binding 
site mutations have a marked, albeit variable, effect in adult liver.

PMCID: PMC453040
PMID: 1717262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Virol. 1991 Nov;65(11):5774-81.

Promoter-specific transactivation of hepatitis B virus transcription by a
glutamine- and proline-rich domain of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1.

Raney AK(1), Easton AJ, Milich DR, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Research Institute of
Scripps Clinic, La Jolla, California 92037.

The cloned transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) transactivates
transcription from the hepatitis B virus (HBV) large surface antigen promoter but
does not influence the transcriptional activities of the other three HBV
promoters. This indicates that this transcription factor can differentially
influence the activities of the HBV promoter. By using a transient-transfection
system, the major domain of the HNF1 polypeptide involved in transcriptional
activation of the large surface antigen promoter in the human hepatoma cell line 
HepG2.1 has been mapped to a region that is rich in glutamine and proline
residues (9 of 18) and is different from the previously identified regions of
this factor responsible for in vitro transcriptional activation of a promoter
containing human albumin promoter HNF1 binding sites. The human albumin promoter 
HNF1 binding site mediates transcriptional activation through the same HNF1
polypeptide domain as the HBV large surface antigen promoter HNF1 binding site in
transient-transfection assays with HepG2.1 cells, suggesting that HNF1 may
possess multiple transcriptional activation domains.

PMCID: PMC250238
PMID: 1656070  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Biochem. 1991 Oct;110(4):559-65.

Genetic polymorphisms in the 5'-flanking region change transcriptional regulation
of the human cytochrome P450IIE1 gene.

Hayashi S(1), Watanabe J, Kawajiri K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Saitama Cancer Center Research Institute.

We identified genetic polymorphisms in the 5'-flanking region of the human
cytochrome P450IIE1 gene and investigated the effect of these polymorphisms on
the transcriptional regulation of the gene. PCR direct sequencing of the two
homozygous alleles [types A (c1/c1) and C (c2/c2)] revealed the existence of
several point mutations in the distal 5'-flanking region of the gene, but no
differences in the proximal promoter region. The DNA segment (-1372 to -960)
placed upstream of SV40 promoter and the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) 
gene enhanced the expression of the gene, and the enhancement of expression by
type C DNA was about 10 times that by its type A counterpart. DNase I
footprinting analysis showed at least one protected region in which one of the
polymorphic loci (RsaI polymorphism) was located. The DNase I sensitivities and
protection profiles of the two genotypes were different. The protected region had
high homology to the consensus sequence of the binding region of liver specific
transcription factor HNF1 (LF-B1), and this was confirmed by gel retardation
assay. These results indicate that genetic polymorphisms in the 5'-flanking
region of the human P450IIE1 gene affect its binding of trans-acting factor and
change its transcriptional regulation. This may lead to inter-individual
differences of microsomal drug oxidation activity.

PMID: 1778977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Development. 1991 Oct;113(2):589-99.

Hepatic nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) shows a wider distribution than products of its
known target genes in developing mouse.

Blumenfeld M(1), Maury M, Chouard T, Yaniv M, Condamine H.

Author information: 
(1)UA 1149 du CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

Hepatic nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) is a highly diverged homeoprotein that is crucial
for transcription of many liver-specific genes including albumin. In particular, 
a minimal promoter, consisting of an HNF1-binding-site and a TATA box, is highly 
active only in hepatoma cell lines. The expression of the HNF1 and albumin genes 
has been examined in mouse embryos by in situ hybridization. At 10.5 days of
gestation, the HNF1 mRNA was detected in both the hepatic primordia and visceral 
endoderm of the yolk sac whereas the albumin transcript was present only in the
nascent liver. At later stages of development, HNF1 was detected in liver, in the
epithelial cells of most of the digestive tract and in the cortex of the kidney, 
whereas albumin was again found only in the liver. The presence of HNF1 protein
in adult kidney was demonstrated by immunodetection in gel-retardation assays and
western blot analysis. These experiments show that, even though the HNF1
homeo-protein is essential for expression of many liver-specific genes, it
cannot, by itself, force high expression levels of these genes, in non-hepatic
tissues.

PMID: 1685988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Aug 11;19(15):4139-45.

Site-directed mutagenesis of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) binding sites in the
mouse transthyretin (TTR) promoter reveal synergistic interactions with its
enhancer region.

Costa RH(1), Grayson DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry (M/C 536), University of Illinois, College of
Medicine, Chicago 60612.

The transthyretin (TTR) gene is regulated by two DNA regions which elicit
hepatocyte-specific expression: a proximal promoter and distal enhancer. The TTR 
promoter and enhancer are composed of at least eight DNA binding sites for three 
different hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF), CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP), and AP-1/cJun. Site directed mutations within each of the HNF binding
sites in the TTR promoter were introduced to evaluate their contribution to
transcriptional activity in hepatoma cells. The data indicate that the strong
affinity HNF-3-S binding site (-106 to -94) is absolutely required for TTR
promoter activity since several mutations in this site eliminate TTR expression
in the context of its enhancer. Conversion of a second weak affinity HNF3-W site 
(-140 to -131) in the TTR promoter to a high affinity site resulted in higher
levels of expression. TTR mutations that disrupted several weak affinity sites
(HNF1, HNF3-W, and HNF4) only slightly diminished expression levels in the
presence of the TTR enhancer. In contrast, when we deleted the TTR enhancer from 
these HNF mutant constructs, TTR expression decreased to undetectable levels.
This result suggests cooperation between the factors binding to the TTR promoter 
and enhancer regions. These results also demonstrate that the HNF3-S site alone
is not sufficient to activate TTR transcription, but rather requires the
participation of three cell-specific factors to elicit minimal promoter activity.
The complexity of this promoter design and the requirement for a minimal number
of cell-specific factors to achieve transcription allows us to propose a model
which may explain the maintenance of tissue-specific expression of TTR.

PMCID: PMC328553
PMID: 1870969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. EMBO J. 1991 Aug;10(8):2231-6.

Independent regulation of HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta by retinoic acid in F9
teratocarcinoma cells.

Kuo CJ(1), Mendel DB, Hansen LP, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, eckman Center, Stanford University School of 
Medicine, CA 94305-5425.

Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) and HNF-1 beta are
homeodomain-containing transcription factors which interact with the
GTTAATNATTAAC motif essential to the function of more than 15 promoters
selectively expressed in the liver. These homeoproteins can form homo- and
heterodimers in solution and share identical DNA-binding domains but have
different transcriptional activation properties. During retinoic acid (RA)
induced differentiation of F9 embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells, which stimulates
aspects of pre-implantation embryogenesis, both HNF-1 beta mRNA and
immunoreactive DNA-binding activity are strongly induced approximately 24 h post 
RA-treatment. In contrast, HNF-1 alpha mRNA increases approximately 4-fold after 
5 days, concomitant with elevation of HNF-1 alpha DNA-binding activity and
expression of the HNF-1 target gene alpha-fetoprotein. These results indicate
that HNF-1 alpha and -1 beta expression can be controlled by regulatory
hierarchies downstream of primary RA-response genes, and suggest that independent
regulatory mechanisms for these factors can confer distinct and interactive
developmental functions.

PMCID: PMC452912
PMID: 2065662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Jul 11;19(13):3553-9.

Two members of an HNF1 homeoprotein family are expressed in human liver.

Bach I(1), Mattei MG, Cereghini S, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)UA 041149 du CNRS, Département des Biotechnologies, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

HNF1 is a transcriptional activator, required for the liver-specific expression
of a variety of genes, that binds to DNA as a dimer via the most diverged
homeodomain known so far. We were interested to examine whether HNF1 is a unique 
homeoprotein example or whether it is the prototype of a new subfamily of
homeodomain containing proteins. In this work we describe the isolation of a cDNA
clone from a human liver library encoding a protein, highly homologous to HNF1 in
three regions, including the homeo- and dimerization domains. We show that this
protein can heterodimerize with human HNF1 in vitro. Sequence comparison of our
clone with a rat variant HNF1 (vHNF1) clone, isolated in parallel in our
laboratory from the dedifferentiated H5 hepatoma cell line, identified our cDNA
as human vHNF1. vHNF1 is a nuclear protein recognizing the same binding site as
HNF1 and previously thought to occur only in dedifferentiated hepatoma cells that
fail to express most liver specific genes. Nevertheless, we show by Northern blot
analysis that vHNF1 transcripts are present in differentiated human HepG2
hepatoma cells as well as in rat liver and that this transcript level is 10-20
fold lower than that of HNF1. We assigned the vHNF-1 gene to human chromosome 17 
and murine chromosome 11. These chromosomal localizations differ from that of the
HNF-1 gene indicating that both genes are not clustered on the genome.

PMCID: PMC328379
PMID: 1677179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Genes Dev. 1991 Jun;5(6):1042-56.

HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta (vHNF-1) share dimerization and homeo domains, but not
activation domains, and form heterodimers in vitro.

Mendel DB(1), Hansen LP, Graves MK, Conley PB, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Beckman Center for Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Stanford University Medical School, California 94305.

HNF-1 alpha (previously referred to as HNF-1, LPB1, and APF) is a vertebrate
transcription factor that contains a divergent homeo domain and plays a prominent
role in regulating genes that have the common characteristic of being expressed
in hepatocytes and a complex group of endodermally and mesodermally derived
tissues. HNF-1 alpha is unique among the vertebrate homeo domain-containing
proteins in that it dimerizes in the absence of its DNA recognition sequence,
suggesting the possibility that the function of HNF-1 alpha may be diversified by
forming heterodimers with other related proteins. We report the initial
characterization of HNF-1 beta, which is closely related to HNF-1 alpha and is
able to form heterodimers with HNF-1 alpha in vitro. Although HNF-1 alpha, but
not HNF-1 beta, is expressed in the liver, HNF-1 alpha and HNF-1 beta are
coexpressed in the murine Hepa1A cell line and in the mammalian kidney where a
subset of hepatocyte genes are expressed. In contrast, exclusive expression of
HNF-1 beta is associated with repression of a subset of hepatocyte-specific genes
in the dedifferentiated hepatocyte cell line C2, differentiated F9 cells, in
somatic hybrids between hepatocytes and fibroblasts, and in the lung. The extent 
of heterodimerization may be regulated in a tissue-specific way because freely
exchangeable heterodimers are formed in Jurkat T cells transfected with HNF-1
alpha and HNF-1 beta, whereas in liver cells stable homodimers are present. These
studies define a pair of homeo domain proteins that have the potential to
interact to produce an embryologically complex pattern of gene expression.

PMID: 2044952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1991 May 15;176(3):1074-8.

Alteration in L-type pyruvate kinase gene expression is not associated with the
LF-B1 mRNA level.

Imai E(1), Noguchi T, Takenaka M, Yamada K, Matsuda T, Monaci P, Nicosia A,
Tanaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Physiological Chemistry, Osaka University Medical 
School, Japan.

The relation of expression of the LF-B1 gene with the L-type pyruvate kinase
(L-PK) mRNA level in rat liver and hepatoma cells was investigated. The L-PK mRNA
level in rat liver changed after partial hepatectomy, during development and on
intake of a high carbohydrate diet, while the level of LF-B1 mRNA remained
unchanged or altered reciprocally. Dedifferentiated AH-130 cells, which did not
express L-PK mRNA, expressed LF-B1 mRNA. These results suggest that transcription
of the pyruvate kinase L gene is not simply regulated by the level of LF-B1 mRNA.

PMID: 2039490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1991 May 1;88(9):3807-11.

The different tissue transcription patterns of genes for HNF-1, C/EBP, HNF-3, and
HNF-4, protein factors that govern liver-specific transcription.

Xanthopoulos KG(1), Prezioso VR, Chen WS, Sladek FM, Cortese R, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021-6399.

The transcription factors that act in hepatocyte-specific gene expression include
proteins that are present mainly in liver cells (HNF-1/LFB1, C/EBP, HNF-3, HNF-4)
(HNF, hepatocyte nuclear factor; C/EBP, rat enhancer binding protein) and
proteins that are widely distributed (AP-1, NF-1, NF-Y/ACF). We show here that
the genes encoding each of these liver-enriched factors exhibit different
patterns of transcriptional control in different tissues. In addition, there were
several instances in which transcription was detected (e.g., for HNF-1) when no
mRNA or specific DNA binding protein was found, suggesting the importance of
posttranscriptional control in some instances for these factors. These
experiments identify C/EBP, HNF-3, and HNF-4, and perhaps also HNF-1, as targets 
for the study of cascades of transcriptionally controlled transcription factors
in differentiated cells.

PMCID: PMC51542
PMID: 2023930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. New Biol. 1991 Mar;3(3):289-96.

Differential regulation of hepatocyte-enriched transcription factors explains
changes in albumin and transthyretin gene expression among hepatoma cells.

Herbst RS(1), Nielsch U, Sladek F, Lai E, Babiss LE, Darnell JE Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021.

To investigate the regulation of genes whose expression is enriched in liver we
studied expression of the albumin and transthyretin (TTR) genes in a series of
rat hepatoma cell lines (FaO, C2, C2rev7, and H5) that express these genes at
different rates. The level of expression of albumin and TTR was compared to the
expression and DNA-binding activity of four transcription factors, HNF1/LFB1,
C/EBP, HNF3, and HNF4, that are found at high concentrations in liver. We
conclude that the levels of these factors are controlled both transcriptionally
(HNF-3, HNF-4, and C/EBP) and post-transcriptionally (HNF-1/LFB1), and that the
cellular concentration of these DNA-binding proteins helps explain the level of
transcriptional activity observed for the genes they regulate.

PMID: 1878351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Mar 11;19(5):1139-46.

The transcription factor LF-A1 interacts with a bipartite recognition sequence in
the promoter regions of several liver-specific genes.

Ramji DP(1), Tadros MH, Hardon EM, Cortese R.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, FRG.

The transcription factors LF-A1 and LF-B1 are required for the cell-specific
expression of the human alpha 1-antitrypsin gene in hepatocytes. We report here
the purification and preliminary characterization of LF-A1. This protein,
purified to homogeneity from calf liver nuclei by site-specific DNA affinity
chromatography and reverse-phase HPLC, has a molecular mass of 40 kDa. Binding
sites of LF-A1 are present in the promoter regions of several genes expressed in 
the liver (alpha 1-antitrypsin, apolipoproteins A1, B1, A4 and pyruvate kinase). 
Interestingly, the binding site of LF-A1 is bipartite and consists of two short
sequence motifs (consensus: TGGACT/CT/C and TGGCCC) separated by a variable
'spacer' region. Insertion or deletion of 1-4 nucleotides in the 'spacer' region 
of the site in the alpha 1-antitrypsin promoter does not abolish DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC333792
PMID: 2020548  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Mar;11(3):1353-9.

The ubiquitous transcription factor Oct-1 and the liver-specific factor HNF-1 are
both required to activate transcription of a hepatitis B virus promoter.

Zhou DX(1), Yen TS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California School of Medicine, San
Francisco 94143-0506.

The liver-specific transcription factor HNF-1 activates transcription of several 
mammalian hepatocyte-specific genes. The hepatitis B virus preS1 promoter shows
hepatocyte specificity, which has been ascribed to binding of HNF-1 to a cognate 
DNA sequence upstream of the TATA box. We show here that there is an adjacent
site that binds the ubiquitous transcription factor Oct-1. Both the Oct-1 and
HNF-1 sites are necessary for liver-specific transcription of the preS1 promoter,
but neither site alone activates transcription. The Oct-1 site is also necessary 
for activation of the preS1 promoter in HeLa cells, expressing transfected HNF-1.
Our results show that while Oct-1 is not restricted to hepatocytes, it
nevertheless can play a critical role in the expression of a liver-specific gene.

PMCID: PMC369406
PMID: 1996097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Feb;11(2):773-84.

Extracellular signals that regulate liver transcription factors during hepatic
differentiation in vitro.

Liu JK(1), DiPersio CM, Zaret KS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Biochemistry, Box G, Brown University, Providence, Rhode Island
02912.

A complex cell culture environment has been shown to maintain the differentiated 
state of hepatocytes, yet the mechanisms by which environmental cues selectively 
maintain liver-specific gene transcription have been unknown. In this paper we
show that the hepatic environment regulates the activities of at least three
liver-enriched transcription factors, eE-TF, eG-TF/HNF3, and eH-TF, that activate
the mouse serum albumin enhancer. eE-TF is a heat-stable factor that has a
DNA-binding specificity similar to that of the liver transcription factor C/EBP, 
but is a distinct protein. eG-TF/HNF3 contributes to the liver-specific
transcription of several other serum protein genes. eH-TF binds to a TGTTTGC
sequence that occurs at regulatory sites of the albumin promoter, the hepatitis B
virus enhancer, and other hepatic genes. eE-TF, eG-TF/HNF3, and eH-TF are
regulated by different combinations of the following cell culture conditions: a
hormonally defined serum-free medium; an extracellular matrix gel; and a
transformation-competent simian virus 40 large T antigen. We propose a regulatory
network model to explain how cues from the cell lineage and the extracellular
environment coordinately help maintain the activities of transcription factors
involved in hepatocyte differentiation.

PMCID: PMC359729
PMID: 1990282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. J Biol Chem. 1991 Jan 15;266(2):677-80.

HNF-1, a member of a novel class of dimerizing homeodomain proteins.

Mendel DB(1), Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Beckman Center for Molecular and Genetic Medicine, Howard Hughes Institute,
Stanford University 94305.

PMID: 1985954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Biochemistry. 1991 Jan 8;30(1):148-53.

1H resonance assignment and secondary structure determination of the dimerization
domain of transcription factor LFB1.

Pastore A(1), De Francesco R, Barbato G, Castiglione Morelli MA, Motta A, Cortese
R.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Federal Republic of
Germany.

We have started the structure determination of the dimerization domain of LFB1 in
solution by nuclear magnetic resonance in order to elucidate the way that the
LFB1 protein dimerizes and then interacts with DNA. A 32 amino acid peptide was
synthesized, and full assignment of the NMR resonances in acidic solution was
achieved. The secondary structure determination is presented here. Three
structurally distinct regions can be distinguished. The N-terminal region from
residues 1 to 6 is extended. Two helical regions span from residues 7 to 18 and
from 23 to 32. The absence of dipolar effects involving residues more than four
positions apart in the sequence excludes the possibilities both of a four-helix
bundle formed by two hairpins and of an antiparallel dimer; the domain must
therefore be arranged as a parallel dimer formed by kinked monomers. This
structural solution presents important differences from the leucine zipper-type
structure observed in other transcriptional activators. Although further studies 
are still necessary to determine the 3D structure of the peptide, we can exclude 
the possibility of a coiled-coil structure.

PMID: 1988016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Biochemistry. 1991 Jan 8;30(1):143-7.

Circular dichroism study on the conformational stability of the dimerization
domain of transcription factor LFB1.

De Francesco R(1), Pastore A, Vecchio G, Cortese R.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Federal Republic of
Germany.

LFB1, a dimeric DNA binding protein, is a major determinant of
hepatocyte-specific transcription. The thermal and chemical equilibrium unfolding
of a 32-residue alpha-helical peptide comprising its dimerization domain (B1-Dim)
was monitored by circular dichroism spectroscopy. The conformational stability of
this peptide is shown to be concentration dependent, and the unfolding reaction
is described as a two-state transition between folded dimers and unfolded
monomers. The thermodynamic parameters associated with the unfolding reaction
were determined under the two-state assumption by the van't Hoff procedure. The
enthalpy of unfolding increases linearly with temperature, and the corresponding 
value of delta Cp, the difference in heat capacity between the unfolded and the
folded forms of the peptide, is estimated to be ca. 0.7 kcal mol-1 K-1. The
dimeric folded structure of the peptide is stabilized, at 25 degrees C, by a
delta G of about 11.5 kcal mol-1, which is equivalent to a dimerization constant 
greater than 10(8) mol-1. These results indicate that the dimerization domain of 
LFB1 can fold and dimerize independently of the rest of the protein, with a
thermodynamic stability comparable to that of a small globular protein.

PMID: 1988015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Mol Cell Biol. 1991 Jan;11(1):93-101.

Liver-specific gene expression: A-activator-binding site, a promoter module
present in vitellogenin and acute-phase genes.

Kaling M(1), Kugler W, Ross K, Zoidl C, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Kernforschungszentrum Karlsruhe, Institut für Genetik und Toxikologie, Federal
Republic of Germany.

The A2 vitellogenin gene of Xenopus laevis, which is expressed liver
specifically, contains an A-activator-binding site (AABS) that mediates high in
vitro transcriptional activity in rat liver nuclear extracts. Footprint
experiments with DNase I and gel retardation assays revealed the binding of
several proteins to AABS. Using binding sites of known DNA-binding proteins as
competitors in the gel retardation assay, we found that the transcription factor 
C/EBP and/or one of its "iso-binders" as well as LFB1/HNF1 bound AABS. These
interactions were confirmed by in vitro transcription experiments using various
oligonucleotides as competitors. However, saturating amounts of C/EBP- and
LFB1/HNF1-binding sites as competitors only partially blocked AABS-mediated
transcriptional activity. This finding implies that at least a third distinct
transcription factor interacts with AABS. In vitro transcription experiments
revealed that AABS was present not only in the closely related Xenopus A1
vitellogenin gene but also in acute-phase genes as a liver-specific regulatory
element known to confer the interleukin-6 response. Both AABS and the
interleukin-6 response element are promoter modules interacting with at least
three distinct transcription factors, including C/EBP and LFB1/HNF1.

PMCID: PMC359595
PMID: 1702515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1990 Dec 31;173(3):1337-43.

Two different HNF1-like transcription activators in the liver bind to the same
region of the rat aldolase B promoter.

Ito K(1), Tanaka T, Tsutsumi R, Ishikawa K, Tsutsumi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Japan.

Coexistence of two different HNF1-like factors (AlF-A1 and AlF-A2) in rat liver
is described. The two factors had similar molecular weight and the same
sequence-specificity in DNA-binding. One of these factors AlF-A1 was retained on 
wheat germ agglutinin-sepharose column and eluted from it with
N-acetylglucosamine, while AlF-A2 was not, suggesting that AlF-A1 is
glycosylated. Using rat brain nuclear extract, both factors stimulated
transcription in vitro, but their stimulatory effects differed from each other.

PMID: 2268334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Science. 1990 Dec 21;250(4988):1732-5.

Dominant negative regulation of the mouse alpha-fetoprotein gene in adult liver.

Vacher J(1), Tilghman SM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biology, Princeton University, 
NJ 08544.

Transcription of the mouse alpha-fetoprotein gene is activated in the developing 
fetal liver and gut and repressed in both tissues shortly after birth. With
germline transformation in mice, a cis-acting element was identified upstream of 
the transcription initiation site of the alpha-fetoprotein gene that was
responsible for repression of the gene in adult liver. This negative element acts
as a repressor in a position-dependent manner.

PMID: 1702902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Biol Chem. 1990 Dec 5;265(34):21185-93.

The promoter of the human gene for insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1. 
Basal promoter activity in HEP G2 cells depends upon liver factor B1.

Suwanichkul A(1), Cubbage ML, Powell DR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas 77054.

Characterization of the human insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1
(IGFBP-1) promoter was initiated to facilitate study of developmental and
hormonal factors regulating IGFBP-1 production. The region immediately 5' to the 
IGFBP-1 mRNA capsite is typical of a eukaryotic promoter, with a TATA sequence
beginning 28 base pairs (bp) and a CCAAT promoter element beginning 72 bp
upstream from this capsite. A 1.3-kilobase insert containing the IGFBP-1 capsite 
and 1205 bp of this putative IGFBP-1 promoter region directs expression of the
reporter gene chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT) in an orientation-specific 
manner in transfected HEP G2 cells, and the capsite identified for the CAT mRNA
is identical to that identified for native IGFBP-1 mRNA. These observations
suggest that the 1.3-kilobase insert contains the IGFBP-1 promoter. This promoter
was further characterized by deletion analysis, site-directed mutagenesis, gel
mobility shift assays, and DNaseI protection assays. These studies identify the
CCAAT box region as the major cis element involved in basal IGFBP-1 promoter
activity in HEP G2 cells, demonstrate that increased basal promoter activity is
associated with the binding of at least one HEP G2 nuclear factor to the CCAAT
box region, and indicate that the DNA binding factor(s) responsible for increased
basal promoter activity is related to liver factor B1. These observations suggest
that liver B1 is the major trans-acting factor stimulating basal IGFBP-1 promoter
activity in HEP G2 cells.

PMID: 1701175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. EMBO J. 1990 Dec;9(13):4467-75.

Synergistic trans-activation of the human C-reactive protein promoter by
transcription factor HNF-1 binding at two distinct sites.

Toniatti C(1), Demartis A, Monaci P, Nicosia A, Ciliberto G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartmento di Biochimica e Biotecnologie Mediche, II Facoltà di Medicina e
Chirurgia, Napoli, Italy.

The promoter region of the human C-reactive protein (CRP) gene comprises two
distinct regions (APREs, for Acute Phase Responsive Elements) each one containing
information necessary and sufficient for liver specific and IL-6 inducible
expression in human hepatoma Hep3B cells. In this paper we show that both APREs
contain a low affinity binding site for the liver specific transcription factor
HNF-1/LF-B1. The two sites are separated by approximately 80 bp. Mutations in
either of the two sites abolish inducible expression. The same effect is
specifically obtained in cotransfection competition experiments when the human
albumin HNF-1 site is used as competitor. However, HNF-1 is not the intranuclear 
mediator of IL-6 because synthetic promoters formed by multimerized copies of
different HNF-1 binding sites are not transcriptionally activated by this
cytokine. An expression vector encoding full length HNF-1 is capable of
trans-activating transcription from the wild-type CRP promoter but not from
mutants which have lost the ability to bind HNF-1. Moreover, the level of
trans-activation observed with the natural promoter containing both HNF-1 binding
sites is far greater than the level of mutated variants containing only one of
the two sites. This result strongly suggests that two HNF-1 molecules bound
simultaneously to sites distant from each other can act synergistically to
activate gene expression.

PMCID: PMC552239
PMID: 2265613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Cell Biol. 1990 Dec;10(12):6283-9.

Interleukin-1-mediated enhancement of mouse factor B gene expression via NF kappa
B-like hepatoma nuclear factor.

Nonaka M(1), Huang ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Kanazawa University, Japan.

Complement factor B, a serine protease playing a pivotal role in alternative
pathway activation, is an acute-phase plasma protein. Previous studies have
revealed that interleukin-1 (IL-1) mediates, at least in part, the acute-phase
induction of factor B expression and that the IL-1-responsive element resides in 
the region between -553 and -478 relative to the transcription initiation site of
the mouse factor B gene. In this paper, we demonstrate a specific binding site
for a nuclear factor of human hepatoma HepG2 cells in this region of the factor B
gene, using gel shift and methylation interference analysis. The nucleotide
sequence of the binding site is closely similar to the NF kappa B or H2TF1
binding motif. The binding activity of HepG2 showed very similar specificity to
that of NF kappa B or H2TF1, as shown by a competition binding assay, and was
induced by IL-1 alpha treatment. A synthetic oligonucleotide corresponding to
this binding site, as well as a similar sequence found in another class III
complement C4 gene, conferred IL-1 responsiveness on the minimal factor B
promoter. In contrast, a mutated oligonucleotide that could not bind to the HepG2
nuclear factor did not confer IL-1 responsiveness. These results suggest that
IL-1 induces factor B expression via NF kappa B or a closely related factor in
hepatocyte nuclei.

PMCID: PMC362903
PMID: 2174104  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Nucleic Acids Res. 1990 Oct 11;18(19):5853-63.

A distal dimerization domain is essential for DNA-binding by the atypical HNF1
homeodomain.

Chouard T(1), Blumenfeld M, Bach I, Vandekerckhove J, Cereghini S, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)UA 1149, CNRS, Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, Paris,
France.

Hepatic Nuclear Factor 1 (HNF1, also referred to as LFB1, HP1 or APF) is a
liver-specific transcription factor required for the expression of many
hepatocyte specific genes. We report here the purification of this rat liver
nuclear protein and the cloning of its cDNA using a PCR-derived approach. Seven
independent clones reveal 3 alternative polyadenylation sites and a unique open
reading frame. Both a motif homologous to the homeodomain and a distal
dimerization domain are required for specific DNA binding. Sequence comparisons
reveal several atypical features at key positions in the segment corresponding to
helices III and IV of the Antaennapedia homeodomain as well as a potential 24
amino acid loop in place of the universal turn between helices II and III.
Together with its property to dimerize in the presence or absence of DNA, these
features place HNF1 as the prototype of a novel subclass of transcription factors
distantly related to homeoproteins.

PMCID: PMC332325
PMID: 2216777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Genomics. 1990 Sep;8(1):165-7.

Mapping of the gene TCF2 coding for the transcription factor LFB3 to human
chromosome 17 by polymerase chain reaction.

Abbott C(1), Piaggio G, Ammendola R, Solomon E, Povey S, Gounari F, De Simone V, 
Cortese R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Biometry, University College London, United
Kingdom.

A human clone corresponding to the gene for the DNA-binding factor LFB3, a
protein highly homologous to the liver-specific transcription factor LFB1, has
been isolated and partially sequenced. This gene is designated TCF2.
Oligonucleotide primers have been designed for LFB3 and used to amplify
specifically the human gene in human/rodent somatic cell hybrids using the
polymerase chain reaction. By this means, the human LFB3 gene has been mapped to 
the long arm of chromosome 17, between the centromere and the APL breakpoint.

PMID: 2081590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Genomics. 1990 Sep;8(1):155-64.

Cloning of human hepatic nuclear factor 1 (HNF1) and chromosomal localization of 
its gene in man and mouse.

Bach I(1), Galcheva-Gargova Z, Mattei MG, Simon-Chazottes D, Guénet JL, Cereghini
S, Yaniv M.

Author information: 
(1)UA 041149 du CNRS, Département de Biologie Moléculaire, Paris, France.

HNF1 is a transcription factor that is required for hepatocyte-specific
expression of several genes, including albumin and fibrinogen. Rat HNF1-encoding 
cDNAs have recently been cloned, revealing that this factor is a distant member
of the homeoprotein family. We have now isolated HNF1 clones from a human liver
cDNA library by using a rat HNF1 cDNA-derived probe. The longest clone, HCL20,
contains a sequence corresponding to the intact rat HNF1-coding region followed
by a 3' nontranslated region and a poly(A) tail, hence representing an almost
full-length HNF1 cDNA. Alignment of the human and rat sequences shows that HNF1
is highly conserved between the two species. The HNF1 gene was mapped by in situ 
hybridization and by RFLP analysis of interspecific mouse backcrosses to
chromosomes 12q24.3 and 5F in human and mouse, respectively, establishing a new
segmental homology between these two chromosomes.

PMID: 1707031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. EMBO J. 1990 Jul;9(7):2257-63.

Hepatocyte dedifferentiation and extinction is accompanied by a block in the
synthesis of mRNA coding for the transcription factor HNF1/LFB1.

Cereghini S(1), Yaniv M, Cortese R.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de virus oncogenes, UA 1149 de CNRS, Département de Biologie
Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, Paris, FRG.

The promoter proximal sequences of a group of liver-specific genes including that
of albumin interact with the same hepato-specific factor named HNF1, LFB1, APF or
HP1, a distant member of the homeoprotein family. A distinct protein, termed
variant HNF1 (vHNF1), of lower mol. wt but displaying identical sequence
specificity is found both in dedifferentiated variants and in an extinguished
somatic hybrid that fail to express most or all of the tissue-specific traits,
including albumin. We show here that HNF1 transcripts are present only in
differentiated hepatoma cells. No transcripts are detected in dedifferentiated
variants or in the extinguished cell hybrid, strongly suggesting that the vHNF1
protein is encoded by a distinct gene. Finally, HNF1 transcripts reappear in
revertants to the hepatic phenotype. Run-on transcription analysis in isolated
nuclei demonstrates that the expression of HNF1 in these cell lines is regulated 
primarily at the transcriptional level. Contrary to HNF1, the mRNAs coding for
two other nuclear factors involved in albumin transcription, C/EBP and NF1, do
not follow the distribution of albumin transcripts in these cell lines. These
results indicate that extinction in somatic hybrids or loss of expression upon
dedifferentiation of liver-specific genes possessing an HNF1 recognition site is 
caused, at least in part, by a block in HNF1 gene expression.

PMCID: PMC551950
PMID: 2357969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Cell. 1990 Jun 29;61(7):1225-36.

A myosin-like dimerization helix and an extra-large homeodomain are essential
elements of the tripartite DNA binding structure of LFB1.

Nicosia A(1), Monaci P, Tomei L, De Francesco R, Nuzzo M, Stunnenberg H, Cortese 
R.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Federal Republic of
Germany.

The transcription activator LFB1 is a major determinant of hepatocyte-specific
expression of many genes. To study the mechanisms underlying LFB1 transcriptional
selectivity, we have initiated its biochemical characterization. By in vitro
complementation assays we have defined two distinct regions required for high
levels of transcription, which resemble previously described activation domains. 
In contrast, the region of LFB1 necessary for DNA binding displays several novel 
features. The DNA binding domain is tripartite, including a homeodomain of
unusual length (81 amino acids) and an N-terminal helix similar to part of
myosin. This helical region mediates dimerization, which is shown to be essential
for DNA binding.

PMID: 2364427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Virol. 1990 May;64(5):2360-8.

Differentiation-specific transcriptional regulation of the hepatitis B virus
large surface antigen gene in human hepatoma cell lines.

Raney AK(1), Milich DR, Easton AJ, McLachlan A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Experimental Medicine, Research Institute of
Scripps Clinic, La Jolla, California 92037.

The transcriptional activities of the four hepatitis B virus promoters were
compared in three differentiated hepatoma cell lines, HepG2, Hep3B, and
PLC/PRF/5; a dedifferentiated subline of HepG2, HepG2.1; a human cervical
carcinoma cell line, HeLa S3; and a mouse fibroblast cell line, NIH 3T3. The
plasmid constructs, which contain the complete hepatitis B virus genome directing
the expression of the luciferase reporter gene, were analyzed by transient
transfection assays. The relative orders of the levels of the transcriptional
activities of the four promoters were similar in each of the cell lines. The
major surface antigen and X-gene promoters displayed the highest activity levels,
the core promoter activity level was less than or similar to the activity levels 
of these two promoters, and the large surface antigen promoter had the lowest
activity level in all of the cell lines examined. The core promoter demonstrated 
an approximately 2- to 20-fold higher relative level of expression in the
differentiated hepatoma cell lines, suggesting that this promoter might be
preferentially active in these cells. The relative level of activity of the large
surface antigen promoter in the differentiated hepatoma cell lines was
approximately 5 to 90 times greater than that observed in the other cell lines,
indicating that the activity of this promoter is highly specific for
differentiation state and cell type. Deletion analysis of the large surface
antigen promoter demonstrated that the sequence element responsible for the
differentiation state-specific expression from this promoter is located between
nucleotides 2719 and 2733 (-90 and -76). Within this sequence element is a
binding site (GTTAATCATTACT) for the liver-specific transcription factor
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF1). This indicates that the preferential
expression from the large surface antigen promoter in the differentiated hepatoma
cell lines is probably mediated by HNF1 or an HNF1-related transcription factor.

PMCID: PMC249397
PMID: 2157890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Genes Dev. 1990 Mar;4(3):372-9.

HNF-1 shares three sequence motifs with the POU domain proteins and is identical 
to LF-B1 and APF.

Baumhueter S(1), Mendel DB, Conley PB, Kuo CJ, Turk C, Graves MK, Edwards CA,
Courtois G, Crabtree GR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford University, California 94305-5428.

The coordinate expression of genes during development and differentiation is
thought to be accomplished by common transcription factors operating on the
promoters of families of coexpressed genes. HNF-1 is a transcriptional factor
involved in the expression of genes in the liver and was originally defined as
playing a major role in coordinating the expression of the linked fibrinogen
genes. We have isolated cDNA clones for HNF-1 using oligonucleotides prepared to 
the sequence of the purified protein. The sequence of HNF-1 shares homeo domain, 
as well as short acidic and basic sequences with the POU family of
transcriptional activators. Peptides from the protein interacting with the
albumin proximal element, or B box (APF), and the factor interacting with the
alpha 1-antitrypsin promoter (LF-B1) are found in the predicted sequence of
HNF-1. HNF-1 mRNA is not present in the dedifferentiated hepatoma variant, C2,
but reappears upon selection for gluconeogenesis coincident with the
re-expression of liver-specific genes. Finally, the mRNA is not present in
somatic cell hybrids in which liver-specific gene expression is extinguished. In 
contrast to earlier published results, we find that in addition to being present 
in the liver, HNF is expressed in the kidney, intestine, and spleen, but not in
other tissues. This pattern of expression mirrors the complex pattern of
expression of many genes, such as alpha-fetoprotein, alpha 1-antitrypsin, and
fibrinogen, whose promoters contain HNF-1 sites. These data indicate that HNF-1
is a more broadly acting transcription factor than has been indicated by previous
work.

PMID: 1970973  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Cell. 1990 Jan 12;60(1):5-6.

The homeodomain of the transcription factor LF-B1 has a 21 amino acid loop
between helix 2 and helix 3.

Finney M.

PMID: 1967225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Princess Takamatsu Symp. 1990;21:157-64.

Transcriptional and posttranscriptional regulation of CYP2E1, an
N-nitrosodimethylamine demethylase.

Gonzalez FJ(1), Gelboin HV.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Carcinogenesis, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

CYP2E1 is a cytochrome P-450 that is well conserved in many species and carries
out oxidation of both endogenous and numerous foreign chemicals. This enzyme is
the primary component of the methylglyoxal and propandiol pathways of
gluconeogenesis. It is also the principal P-450 involved in metabolism of many
small molecular weight chemicals that are found in solvents and in the
environment. Among important drugs metabolized by CYP2E1 are anesthetic agents
such as halothane, the analgesic acetaminophen, and the muscle relaxant
chlorzoxazone. Most importantly CYP2E1 is capable of converting certain
procarcinogenic nitrosamines to their active DNA-binding metabolites. The CYP2E1 
gene becomes transcriptionally active in the liver soon after birth. Although the
physiological stimulus for this increase is still unknown, the molecular basis of
CYP2E1 gene activation is becoming clear. Transcription of the CYP2E1 gene is
primarily due to the binding of the hepatocyte-specific transcription factor
HNF-1 to a segment of DNA just upstream of the start site for RNA synthesis. In
adult animals, CYP2E1 is posttranscriptionally regulated through mRNA and protein
stabilization. Stabilization of CYP2E1 protein is due to interaction of the
enzyme with its own substrate.

PMID: 2134674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cell Growth Differ. 1990 Jan;1(1):47-52.

Transcriptional activators in hepatocytes.

Johnson PF(1).

Author information: 
(1)NCI-Frederick Cancer Research Facility BRI-Basic Research Program, Maryland
21701.

PMID: 2078499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Cell. 1989 Oct 6;59(1):145-57.

The liver-specific transcription factor LF-B1 contains a highly diverged homeobox
DNA binding domain.

Frain M(1), Swart G, Monaci P, Nicosia A, Stämpfli S, Frank R, Cortese R.

Author information: 
(1)European Molecular Biology Laboratory, Heidelberg, Federal Republic of
Germany.

The nuclear protein LF-B1 (also referred to as HNF-1) is a transcription
activator required for the expression of several liver-specific genes. LF-B1 has 
been purified to homogeneity from rat liver nuclear extracts. The sequence of the
protein has been partially determined and, subsequently, overlapping cDNA clones 
containing the entire open reading frame of LF-B1 were isolated. The full-length 
cDNA encodes a 628 amino acid protein and directs the synthesis in vitro of a
protein capable of binding DNA with the same specificity as LF-B1. The cDNA was
recombined into a vaccinia virus vector and active LF-B1 was obtained from
infected HeLa cells. Addition of the vaccinia recombinant protein to rat spleen
extracts results in activation of transcription of an LF-B1-dependent promoter.
The DNA binding domain of LF-B1 is located in the amino-terminal part of the
protein and displays distant structural similarity to the homeobox domain. The
distribution of LF-B1 mRNA is restricted to liver, which correlates with the
tissue-specific expression of its target genes.

PMID: 2571419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. J Immunol. 1988 Feb 1;140(3):974-7.

Transcriptional regulation of the interferon-beta 2/B cell differentiation factor
BSF-2/hepatocyte-stimulating factor gene in human fibroblasts by other cytokines.

Walther Z(1), May LT, Sehgal PB.

Author information: 
(1)Rockefeller University, New York 10021.

Levels of mRNA for IFN-beta 2/B cell differentiation
factor2/hepatocyte-stimulating factor (IFN-beta 2) in confluent quiescent
cultures of human diploid fibroblasts (FS-4 strain) are enhanced by TNF, IL-1
alpha and beta, platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF) and IFN-beta 1. Of these
cytokines, IL-1 alpha and beta cause a particularly strong increase in the
accumulation of IFN-beta 2 mRNA in fibroblasts. We have evaluated whether the
IFN-beta 2 gene is regulated at the transcriptional level by using nuclear run-on
transcription assays. We observed that the IFN-beta 2 gene is transcribed at a
low level in uninduced FS-4 cells and that this transcriptional activity is
increased 2- to 3-fold in cycloheximide-treated cells, 20- to 35-fold in IL-1
alpha-treated cells, and 5- to 15-fold in TNF-treated cells. PDGF and IFN-beta 1 
enhance transcription across the IFN-beta 2 gene 2- to 3-fold. The enhancing
effect of IL-1 alpha on IFN-beta 2 gene transcription, but not that of TNF, PDGF,
or IFN-beta 1, is inhibited by cycloheximide, suggesting that newly-synthesized
protein is involved in the increase in IFN-beta 2 transcription in response to
IL-1 alpha but not in the response to the other stimuli. Furthermore, the
enhancement of IFN-beta 2 transcription is sustained for up to 14 h after IL-1
alpha induction but is transient and declines to base line levels within 6 h
after TNF addition. These observations suggest that there are important
differences in the mechanisms by which IL-1 alpha and TNF increase IFN-beta 2
gene transcription in fibroblasts.

PMID: 3276786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


