
61. PLoS One. 2015 May 28;10(5):e0125493. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0125493.
eCollection 2015.

Hepatic proliferation and angiogenesis markers are increased after portal
deprivation in rats: a study of molecular, histological and radiological changes.

Guérin F(1), Wagner M(2), Liné A(3), Zappa M(2), Fasseu M(4), Paradis V(5),
Vilgrain V(2), Van Beers BE(2), Legagneux J(6), Moreau R(7), Lettéron P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris-Sud (Bicêtre), 
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Université Paris Sud-Paris11, Le
Kremlin Bicêtre, France; Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale (INSERM): Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 1149, Centre de Recherche sur
l'Inflammation, Faculté de Médecine Xavier Bichat, Université Denis Diderot-Paris
7, Paris, France; Laboratoire de Microchirurgie, Agence Générale des Equipements 
et Produits de Santé (AGEPS), Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP),
Paris, France. (2)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale
(INSERM): Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 1149, Centre de Recherche sur
l'Inflammation, Faculté de Médecine Xavier Bichat, Université Denis Diderot-Paris
7, Paris, France; Department of Radiology, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris Nord Val
de Seine (Beaujon), Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Université
Denis Diderot-Paris 7, Clichy, France. (3)Institut National de la Santé et de la 
Recherche Médicale (INSERM): Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 1149, Centre de
Recherche sur l'Inflammation, Faculté de Médecine Xavier Bichat, Université Denis
Diderot-Paris 7, Paris, France; Laboratoire de Microchirurgie, Agence Générale
des Equipements et Produits de Santé (AGEPS), Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de
Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France. (4)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale (INSERM): Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 1149, Centre de Recherche sur
l'Inflammation, Faculté de Médecine Xavier Bichat, Université Denis Diderot-Paris
7, Paris, France. (5)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale
(INSERM): Unité Mixte de Recherche (UMR) 1149, Centre de Recherche sur
l'Inflammation, Faculté de Médecine Xavier Bichat, Université Denis Diderot-Paris
7, Paris, France; Department of Pathology, Hôpitaux Universitaires
Paris-Nord-Val-de-Seine (Beaujon), Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP),
Université Denis Diderot-Paris 7, Clichy, France. (6)Laboratoire de
Microchirurgie, Agence Générale des Equipements et Produits de Santé (AGEPS),
Assistance Publique Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France. (7)Institut
National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM): Unité Mixte de
Recherche (UMR) 1149, Centre de Recherche sur l'Inflammation, Faculté de Médecine
Xavier Bichat, Université Denis Diderot-Paris 7, Paris, France; Department of
Hepatology, Hôpitaux Universitaires Paris-Nord-Val-de-Seine (Beaujon), Assistance
Publique Hôpitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Université Denis Diderot-Paris 7, Clichy,
France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: To determine the pathogenesis of liver nodules, and lesions
similar to obliterative portal venopathy, observed after portosystemic shunts or 
portal vein thrombosis in humans.
METHODS: We conducted an experimental study comparing portacaval shunt (PCS),
total portal vein ligation (PVL), and sham (S) operated rats. Each group were
either sacrificed at 6 weeks (early) or 6 months (late). Arterial liver perfusion
was studied in vivo using CT, and histopathological changes were noted. Liver
mRNA levels were quantified by RT-QPCR for markers of inflammation (Il10, Tnfa), 
proliferation (Il6st, Mki67, Hgf, Hnf4a), angiogenesis: (Vegfa, Vegfr 1, 2 and 3;
Pgf), oxidative stress (Nos2, and 3, Hif1a), and fibrosis (Tgfb). PCS and PVL
were compared to the S group.
RESULTS: Periportal fibrosis and arterial proliferation was observed in late PCS 
and PVL groups. CT imaging demonstrated increased arterial liver perfusion in the
PCS group. RT-QPCR showed increased inflammatory markers in PCS and PVL early
groups. Tnfa and Il10 were increased in PCS and PVL late groups respectively. All
proliferative markers increased in the PCS, and Hnf4a in the PVL early groups.
Mki67 and Hnf4a were increased in the PCS late group. Nos3 was increased in the
early and late PCS groups, and Hif1a was decreased in the PVL groups. Markers of 
angiogenesis were all increased in the early PCS group, and Vegfr3 and Pgf in the
late PCS group. Only Vegfr3 was increased in the PVL groups. Tgf was increased in
the PCS groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Portal deprivation in rats induces a sustained increase in
intrahepatic markers of inflammation, angiogenesis, proliferation, and fibrosis.

PMCID: PMC4447332
PMID: 26020934  [PubMed - in process]


62. World J Gastroenterol. 2015 May 21;21(19):5856-66. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v21.i19.5856.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a induces a tendency of differentiation and activation
of rat hepatic stellate cells.

Liu K(1), Guo MG(1), Lou XL(1), Li XY(1), Xu Y(1), Ji WD(1), Huang XD(1), Yang
JH(1), Duan JC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Kai Liu, Xiao-Ya Li, Yang Xu, Wei-Dan Ji, Jia-He Yang, Ji-Cheng Duan,
Department of Molecular Oncology and Laparoscopic Surgery, Eastern Hepatobiliary 
Surgical Hospital and National Center of Liver Cancer, Second Military Medical
University, Shanghai 200438, China.

AIM: To investigate the effect of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) on the
differentiation and transformation of hepatic stellate cells (HSCs).
METHODS: By constructing the recombinant adenovirus vector expressing HNF4a and
HNF4a shRNA vector, and manipulating HNF4a expression in HSC-T6 cells, we
explored the influence of HNF4a and its induction capacity in the differentiation
of rat HSCs into hepatocytes.
RESULTS: With increased expression of HNF4a mediated by AdHNF4a, the relative
expression of Nanog was downregulated in HSC-T6 cells (98.33 ± 12.33 vs 41.33 ±
5.67, P < 0.001). Consequently, the expression of G-P-6 and PEPCK was upregulated
(G-P-6: 14.34 ± 3.33 vs 42.53 ± 5.87, P < 0.01; PEPCK: 10.10 ± 4.67 vs 56.56 ±
5.25, P < 0.001), the expression of AFP and ALB was positive, and the expression 
of Nanog, Type I collagen, a-SMA, and TIMP-1 was significantly decreased. HNF4a
also downregulated vimentin expression and enhanced E-cadherin expression. The
ultrastructure of HNF4a-induced cells had more mitochondria and ribosomes
compared with the parental cells. After silencing HNF4a expression, EPCK,
E-cadherin, AFP, and ALB were downregulated and a-SMA and vimentin were
upregulated.
CONCLUSION: HNF4a can induce a tendency of differentiation of HSCs into
hepatocyte-like cells. These findings may provide an effective way for the
treatment of liver diseases.

PMCID: PMC4438019
PMID: 26019449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Aug;1849(8):919-29. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.05.005.
Epub 2015 May 21.

Epigenetic control of EMT/MET dynamics: HNF4a impacts DNMT3s through miRs-29.

Cicchini C(1), de Nonno V(2), Battistelli C(2), Cozzolino AM(3), De Santis
Puzzonia M(2), Ciafrè SA(4), Brocker C(5), Gonzalez FJ(5), Amicone L(2), Tripodi 
M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Department of Cellular
Biotechnologies and Hematology, Section of Molecular Genetics, Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: cicchini@bce.uniroma1.it.
(2)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Department of Cellular
Biotechnologies and Hematology, Section of Molecular Genetics, Sapienza
University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (3)National Institute for Infectious Diseases L.
Spallanzani, IRCCS, Rome, Italy. (4)Department of Biomedicine and Prevention,
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy. (5)Laboratory of Metabolism, Center 
for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, MD, USA. (6)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Department of
Cellular Biotechnologies and Hematology, Section of Molecular Genetics, Sapienza 
University of Rome, Rome, Italy; National Institute for Infectious Diseases L.
Spallanzani, IRCCS, Rome, Italy. Electronic address: tripodi@bce.uniroma1.it.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and the reverse
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET) are manifestations of cellular
plasticity that imply a dynamic and profound gene expression reprogramming. While
a major epigenetic code controlling the coordinated regulation of a whole
transcriptional profile is guaranteed by DNA methylation, DNA methyltransferase
(DNMT) activities in EMT/MET dynamics are still largely unexplored. Here, we
investigated the molecular mechanisms directly linking HNF4a, the master effector
of MET, to the regulation of both de novo of DNMT 3A and 3B.
METHODS: Correlation among EMT/MET markers, microRNA29 and DNMT3s expression was 
evaluated by RT-qPCR, Western blotting and immunocytochemical analysis.
Functional roles of microRNAs and DNMT3s were tested by anti-miRs, microRNA
precursors and chemical inhibitors. ChIP was utilized for investigating HNF4a DNA
binding activity.
RESULTS: HNF4a silencing was sufficient to induce positive modulation of DNMT3B, 
in in vitro differentiated hepatocytes as well as in vivo hepatocyte-specific
Hnf4a knockout mice, and DNMT3A, in vitro, but not DNMT1. In exploring the
molecular mechanisms underlying these observations, evidence have been gathered
for (i) the inverse correlation between DNMT3 levels and the expression of their 
regulators miR-29a and miR-29b and (ii) the role of HNF4a as a direct regulator
of miR-29a-b transcription. Notably, during TGFß-induced EMT, DNMT3s' pivotal
function has been proved, thus suggesting the need for the repression of these
DNMTs in the maintenance of a differentiated phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: HNF4a maintains hepatocyte identity by regulating miR-29a and -29b
expression, which in turn control epigenetic modifications by limiting DNMT3A and
DNMT3B levels.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26003733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2015 May 20;10(5):e0124544. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124544.
eCollection 2015.

Integrative genomic signatures of hepatocellular carcinoma derived from
nonalcoholic Fatty liver disease.

Frades I(1), Andreasson E(2), Mato JM(3), Alexandersson E(2), Matthiesen R(4),
Martínez-Chantar ML(3).

Author information: 
(1)Metabolomics Unit, CIC bioGUNE, Centro de Investigación Cooperativa en
Biociencias, Bizkaia Technology Park, Derio, Bizkaia, Spain; Department of Plant 
Protection Biology, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Alnarp, Sweden. 
(2)Department of Plant Protection Biology, Swedish University of Agricultural
Sciences, Alnarp, Sweden. (3)Metabolomics Unit, CIC bioGUNE, Centro de
Investigación Cooperativa en Biociencias, Bizkaia Technology Park, Derio,
Bizkaia, Spain. (4)Department of Human genetics, National Health Institute Doutor
Ricardo Jorge, Lisboa, Portugal.

Nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) is a risk factor for Hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC), but he transition from NAFLD to HCC is poorly understood.
Feature selection algorithms in human and genetically modified mice NAFLD and HCC
microarray data were applied to generate signatures of NAFLD progression and HCC 
differential survival. These signatures were used to study the pathogenesis of
NAFLD derived HCC and explore which subtypes of cancers that can be investigated 
using mouse models. Our findings show that: (I) HNF4 is a common potential
transcription factor mediating the transcription of NAFLD progression genes (II) 
mice HCC derived from NAFLD co-cluster with a less aggressive human HCC subtype
of differential prognosis and mixed etiology (III) the HCC survival signature is 
able to correctly classify 95% of the samples and gives Fgf20 and Tgfb1i1 as the 
most robust genes for prediction (IV) the expression values of genes composing
the signature in an independent human HCC dataset revealed different HCC subtypes
showing differences in survival time by a Logrank test. In summary, we present
marker signatures for NAFLD derived HCC molecular pathogenesis both at the gene
and pathway level.

PMCID: PMC4439034
PMID: 25993042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Diabetol Metab Syndr. 2015 Feb 18;7:5. doi: 10.1186/1758-5996-7-5. eCollection
2015.

Clinical and molecular data from 61 Brazilian cases of Congenital
Hyperinsulinemic Hypoglycemia.

Del Roio Liberatore R Jr(1), Ramos PM(1), Guerra G Jr(2), Manna TD(3), Silva
IN(4), Martinelli CE Jr(1).

Author information: 
(1)Ribeirão Preto Medical School, University of São Paulo, Rua Elzira Sammarco
Palma, 400/43, Ribeirão Preto, SP Brazil. (2)Department of Pediatrics, School of 
Medical Sciences, State University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Campinas, SP Brazil.
(3)Pediatric Endocrine Unit, Instituto da Criança-Hospital das Clínicas,
Universidade de São Paulo (USP), São Paulo, SP Brazil. (4)Pediatrics Department, 
Medical School/ Hospital das Clínicas, Universidade Federal de Minas Gerais, Belo
Horizonte, Brazil.

OBJECTIVE: To study the clinical and molecular characteristics of a sample of
Brazilian patients with Congenital Hyperinsulinemic Hypoglycemia (CHH).
METHODS: Electronic message was sent to members from Endocrinology Department-
Brazilian Society of Pediatrics requesting clinical data for all cases of CHH. A 
whole blood sample from living patients was requested for DNA extraction followed
by a search for mutations of the genes ABCC8, KCNJ11, GCK, GLUD1, HADH, SLC16A1
and HNF4A.
RESULTS: Of the 61 patients evaluated, 36 (59%) were boys, and only 16 (26%) were
born by normal delivery. Gestational age ranged from 32 to 41 weeks
(mean<U+2009>=<U+2009>37 weeks and 6 days). Birth weight ranged from 1590 to 5250 g
(mean<U+2009>=<U+2009>3430 g). Macrossomia occurred in 14 cases (28%). Age at diagnosis ranged 
from 1 to 1080 days (mean<U+2009>=<U+2009>75 days). DNA for molecular analysis was obtained
from 53 of the 61 patients. Molecular changes in the ABCC8 gene were detected in 
15 (28%) of these 53 cases, and mutations in the KCNJ11 gene were detected in 6
(11%). Mutations in the GLUD1 gene were detected in 9 cases (17%) of the total
series. Mutations of the GCK gene in heterozygosis were detected in 3 cases. No
mutations were detected in the sequencing of genes HADH, SLC16A1 and HNF4A.
CONCLUSION: The present study conducted in Brazil permitted the collaborative
compilation of an important number of CHH cases and showed that the present
clinical and molecular data are similar to those of published global series.

PMCID: PMC4429972
PMID: 25972930  [PubMed]


66. Clin Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Aug;98(2):205-15. doi: 10.1002/cpt.145.

Age-Related Changes in MicroRNA Expression and Pharmacogenes in Human Liver.

Burgess KS(1,)(2), Philips S(2), Benson EA(2), Desta Z(2), Gaedigk A(3), Gaedigk 
R(3), Segar MW(4), Liu Y(4,)(5), Skaar TC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA. (2)Department of Medicine, Division of
Clinical Pharmacology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana, USA. (3)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutic
Innovation, Children's Mercy Hospital, Kansas City, and School of Medicine,
University of Missouri-Kansas City, Kansas City, Missouri, USA. (4)Center for
Computational Biology and Bioinformatics, Indiana University School of Medicine, 
Indianapolis, Indiana, USA. (5)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

Developmental changes in the liver can significantly impact drug disposition. Due
to the emergence of microRNAs (miRNAs) as important regulators of drug
disposition gene expression, we studied age-dependent changes in miRNA
expression. Expression of 533 miRNAs was measured in 90 human liver tissues
(fetal, pediatric [1-17 years], and adult [28-80 years]; n<U+2009>=<U+2009>30 each). In all,
114 miRNAs were upregulated and 72 were downregulated from fetal to pediatric,
and 2 and 3, respectively, from pediatric to adult. Among the developmentally
changing miRNAs, 99 miRNA-mRNA interactions were predicted or experimentally
validated (e.g., hsa-miR-125b-5p-CYP1A1; hsa-miR-34a-5p-HNF4A). In human liver
samples (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10 each), analyzed by RNA-sequencing, significant negative
correlations were observed between the expression of >1,000 miRNAs and mRNAs of
drug disposition and regulatory genes. Our data suggest a mechanism for the
marked changes in hepatic gene expression between the fetal and pediatric
developmental periods, and support a role for these age-dependent miRNAs in
regulating drug disposition.

© 2015 American Society for Clinical Pharmacology and Therapeutics.

PMCID: PMC4512918 [Available on 2016-08-01]
PMID: 25968989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. PLoS Comput Biol. 2015 May 11;11(5):e1004176. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1004176. 
eCollection 2015.

Extensive decoupling of metabolic genes in cancer.

Reznik E(1), Sander C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Computational Biology Program, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, New York, United States of America.

Tumorigenesis requires the re-organization of metabolism to support malignant
proliferation. We examine how the altered metabolism of cancer cells is reflected
in the rewiring of co-expression patterns among metabolic genes. Focusing on
breast and clear-cell kidney tumors, we report the existence of key metabolic
genes which act as hubs of differential co-expression, showing significantly
different co-regulation patterns between normal and tumor states. We compare our 
findings to those from classical differential expression analysis, and
counterintuitively observe that the extent of a gene's differential co-expression
only weakly correlates with its differential expression, suggesting that the two 
measures probe different features of metabolism. Focusing on this discrepancy, we
use changes in co-expression patterns to highlight the apparent loss of
regulation by the transcription factor HNF4A in clear cell renal cell carcinoma, 
despite no differential expression of HNF4A. Finally, we aggregate the results of
differential co-expression analysis into a Pan-Cancer analysis across seven
distinct cancer types to identify pairs of metabolic genes which may be
recurrently dysregulated. Among our results is a cluster of four genes, all
components of the mitochondrial electron transport chain, which show significant 
loss of co-expression in tumor tissue, pointing to potential mitochondrial
dysfunction in these tumor types.

PMCID: PMC4427321
PMID: 25961905  [PubMed - in process]


68. Iran J Public Health. 2015 Mar;44(3):396-403.

Frequency of HNF4A-P.I463V Variant in the Tunisian North-African Population and
Its Relation with Diabetes Mellitus.

Amara A(1), Ben Charfeddine I(2), Ghédir H(2), Mamaï O(2), Jemni-Yacoub S(3),
Chaieb L(4), Saad A(5), Chadli-Chaieb M(6), Gribaa M(5).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Endocrinology, Sousse Faculty of Medicine, University of
Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia ; Laboratory of Human Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics
and Reproductive Biology, Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia ;
Higher Institute of Biotechnology of Monastir, University of Monastir, Tunisia.
(2)Laboratory of Human Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics and Reproductive Biology,
Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia ; Higher Institute of
Biotechnology of Monastir, University of Monastir, Tunisia. (3)Regional Center of
Blood Transfusion of Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia. (4)Dept. of Endocrinology and
Diabetology, Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia. (5)Laboratory of
Human Cytogenetics, Molecular Genetics and Reproductive Biology, Farhat Hached
University Hospital, Sousse, Tunisia. (6)Unit of Molecular Endocrinology, Sousse 
Faculty of Medicine, University of Sousse, Sousse, Tunisia ; Dept. of
Endocrinology and Diabetology, Farhat Hached University Hospital, Sousse,
Tunisia.

BACKGROUND: HNF4A-p.I463Vvariant, reported previously in two distinct families
suspected of MODY-1, is assessed in this report to determine whether it is a
mutation or a polymorphism (frequency >1%).
METHODS: 200 Tunisian healthy people were screened for the presence of
HNF4A-p.I463V variant, using RFLP-PCR technique and sequencing. Then, the
frequency of this variant was estimated in the Tunisian population and compared
to other populations registered in genetic databases. We also performed in-silico
analysis using PolyPhen2 and Mutation T@sting softwares to assess the probable
effect of HNF4A-p.I463V variant.
RESULTS: HNF4A-p.I463V had a rare frequency in different populations and was
found in 3 control subjects (1.5%) of the studied population. PolyPhen2 predicted
that it is a polymorphism, whereas mutation T@sting suggested a probably affected
mutant protein.
CONCLUSION: HNF4A-p.I463V has a relatively high frequency (>1%) in our control
cohort. It is also present in different ethnicities and in- silico analysis
showed conflicting results. For these reasons, HNF4A-p.I463V should not be
considered as a mutation responsible for MODY-1.

PMCID: PMC4402419
PMID: 25905084  [PubMed]


69. Cells Tissues Organs. 2014;200(2):132-40. doi: 10.1159/000380762. Epub 2015 Apr
16.

Induction of Functional Hepatocyte-Like Cells by Overexpression of FOXA3 and
HNF4a in Rat Bone Marrow Mesenchymal Stem Cells.

Dai K(1), Chen R, Ding Y, Niu Z, Fan J, Xu C.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory Cultivation Base for Cell Differentiation Regulation,
Henan Normal University, Xinxiang, PR China.

Liver regeneration has always been of great therapeutic interest, particularly to
generate hepatocytes from other types of cells including adult stem cells and
induced pluripotent stem cells. In this study, it was found that overexpression
of both FOXA3 and HNF4a can convert rat bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
(BMSCs) to functional hepatocyte-like cells (HLCs). The results show that these
HLCs had the typical hepatocyte morphology with unique hepatocyte markers such as
ALB, G6P, KRT18, TAT, TTR, KRT19 and AFP. Simultaneously, they also exhibited
hepatic functions such as glycogen storage, indocyanine green absorption, and
cytoplasmic accumulation of neutral triglycerides and lipids. In addition to
that, these functions could be maintained in the process of cell culture, thus
suggesting that FOXA3 and HNF4a are powerful transcription factors for inducing
rat BMSCs to differentiate into functional HLCs, and this study will provide a
novel method to generate HLCs.

© 2015 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 25896100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Nat Med. 2015 May;21(5):512-7. doi: 10.1038/nm.3828. Epub 2015 Apr 20.

Inhibition of the glucose transporter SGLT2 with dapagliflozin in pancreatic
alpha cells triggers glucagon secretion.

Bonner C(1), Kerr-Conte J(2), Gmyr V(3), Queniat G(3), Moerman E(3), Thévenet
J(3), Beaucamps C(1), Delalleau N(3), Popescu I(4), Malaisse WJ(4), Sener A(4),
Deprez B(5), Abderrahmani A(6), Staels B(7), Pattou F(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] European Genomic Institute for Diabetes, Lille, France. [2] INSERM UMR
1190, Lille, France. [3] Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire, Lille,
France. (2)1] European Genomic Institute for Diabetes, Lille, France. [2] INSERM 
UMR 1190, Lille, France. [3] Centre Hospitalier Régional Universitaire, Lille,
France. [4] Université de Lille, Lille, France. (3)1] European Genomic Institute 
for Diabetes, Lille, France. [2] INSERM UMR 1190, Lille, France. [3] Université
de Lille, Lille, France. (4)Laboratory of Experimental Hormonology, Medical
School, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Brussels, Belgium. (5)1] Université de
Lille, Lille, France. [2] INSERM UMR 1177, Lille, France. [3] Institut Pasteur de
Lille, Lille, France. (6)1] European Genomic Institute for Diabetes, Lille,
France. [2] Université de Lille, Lille, France. [3] CNRS UMR 8199, Lille, France.
(7)1] European Genomic Institute for Diabetes, Lille, France. [2] Université de
Lille, Lille, France. [3] Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, France. [4] INSERM
UMR 1011, Lille, France.

Comment in
    Trends Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Jul;26(7):337-8.
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2015 Jul;11(7):382.

Type 2 diabetes (T2D) is characterized by chronic hyperglycemia resulting from a 
deficiency in insulin signaling, because of insulin resistance and/or defects in 
insulin secretion; it is also associated with increases in glucagon and
endogenous glucose production (EGP). Gliflozins, including dapagliflozin, are a
new class of approved oral antidiabetic agents that specifically inhibit
sodium-glucose co-transporter 2 (SGLT2) function in the kidney, thus preventing
renal glucose reabsorption and increasing glycosuria in diabetic individuals
while reducing hyperglycemia. However, gliflozin treatment in subjects with T2D
increases both plasma glucagon and EGP by unknown mechanisms. In spite of the
rise in EGP, T2D patients treated with gliflozin have lower blood glucose levels 
than those receiving placebo, possibly because of increased glycosuria; however, 
the resulting increase in plasma glucagon levels represents a possible concerning
side effect, especially in a patient population already affected by
hyperglucagonemia. Here we demonstrate that SGLT2 is expressed in
glucagon-secreting alpha cells of the pancreatic islets. We further found that
expression of SLC5A2 (which encodes SGLT2) was lower and glucagon (GCG) gene
expression was higher in islets from T2D individuals and in normal islets exposed
to chronic hyperglycemia than in islets from non-diabetics. Moreover, hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 4-a (HNF4A) is specifically expressed in human alpha cells, in
which it controls SLC5A2 expression, and its expression is downregulated by
hyperglycemia. In addition, inhibition of either SLC5A2 via siRNA-induced gene
silencing or SGLT2 via dapagliflozin treatment in human islets triggered glucagon
secretion through KATP channel activation. Finally, we found that dapagliflozin
treatment further promotes glucagon secretion and hepatic gluconeogenesis in
healthy mice, thereby limiting the decrease of plasma glucose induced by fasting.
Collectively, these results identify a heretofore unknown role of SGLT2 and
designate dapagliflozin an alpha cell secretagogue.

PMID: 25894829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Mol Med. 2015 Apr 14;21:285-95. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2014.00173.

Developmental Stage-Specific Hepatocytes Induce Maturation of HepG2 Cells by
Rebuilding the Regulatory Circuit.

Li Y(1), Liu D(2), Zong Y(2), Qi J(2), Li B(2), Liu K(2), Xiao H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Hebei Key Laboratory of Laboratory Animal,
Hebei Medical University, Shijiazhuang, China. (2)Department of Biochemistry,
Hebei Key Laboratory of Medical Biotechnology, Hebei Medical University,
Shijiazhuang, China.

On the basis of their characteristics, we presume that developmental
stage-specific hepatocytes should have the ability to induce maturation of
hepatoma cells. A regulatory circuit formed by hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-4a, HNF-1a, HNF-6 and the upstream stimulatory factor (USF-1) play a key
role in the maturation of embryonic hepatocytes; however, it is unclear whether
the regulatory circuit mediates the embryonic induction of hepatoma cell
maturation. In this study, 12.5-d to 15.5-d mouse embryonic hepatocytes or their 
medium were used to coculture or treat HepG2 cells, and the induced maturation
was evaluated in vitro and in vivo. In the induced HepG2 cells, the components of
the regulatory circuit were detected, their cross-regulation was evaluated and
HNF-4a RNA interference was performed. We found that 13.5-d to 14.5-d embryonic
hepatocytes could induce HepG2 cell maturation, demonstrated by morphological
changes, increased maturation markers and decreased c-Myc and a-fetoprotein (AFP)
in vitro. The majority of HepG2 tumors were eliminated by 13.5-d embryonic
induction in vivo. All components of the regulatory circuit were upregulated and 
the binding of HNF-4a, HNF-1a, HNF-6 and USF-1 to their target sites was promoted
to rebuild the regulatory circuit in the induced HepG2 cells. Moreover, RNA
interference targeting HNF-4a, which is the core of the regulatory circuit,
attenuated the induced maturation of HepG2 cells with downregulation of the
regulatory circuit. These results revealed that developmental stage-specific
hepatocytes could induce the maturation of HepG2 cells by rebuilding the
regulatory circuit.

PMCID: PMC4503656
PMID: 25879626  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Toxicology. 2015 Jul 3;333:53-62. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2015.04.004. Epub 2015 Apr
11.

Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) affects distinct molecular signalling pathways in
human primary hepatocytes.

Buhrke T(1), Krüger E(2), Pevny S(2), Rößler M(2), Bitter K(2), Lampen A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, Department of Food Safety,
Max-Dohrn-Str. 8-10, 10589 Berlin, Germany. Electronic address:
thorsten.buhrke@bfr.bund.de. (2)Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, Department
of Food Safety, Max-Dohrn-Str. 8-10, 10589 Berlin, Germany.

Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) was shown to damage the liver of rodents and to
impair embryonic development. At the molecular level, the hepatotoxic effects
were attributed to the PFOA-mediated activation of peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARa). In general, PPARa-dependent
effects are less pronounced in humans than in rodents, and the hazard potential
of PFOA for humans is controversially discussed. To analyse the effects of PFOA
in human hepatocytes, a microarray analysis was conducted to screen for
PFOA-mediated alterations in the transcriptome of human primary hepatocytes. A
subsequent network analysis revealed that PFOA had an impact on several
signalling pathways in addition to the well-known activation of PPARa. The
microarray data confirmed earlier findings that PFOA: (i) affects the estrogen
receptor ERa, (ii) activates the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPAR<U+03B3>), and (iii) inhibits the function of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a
(HNF4a) which is an essential factor for liver development and embryogenesis.
Finally, as a novel finding, PFOA was shown to stimulate gene expression of the
proto-oncogenes c-Jun and c-Fos. This was confirmed by using the HepG2 cell line 
as a model for human hepatocytes. PFOA stimulated cellular proliferation and the 
metabolic activity of the cells, and upregulated the expression of various
cyclins which have a central function in the regulation of cell cycle control.
Functional studies, however, indicated that PFOA had no impact on c-Jun and c-Fos
phosphorylation and on AP-1-dependent gene transcription, thus demonstrating that
PFOA-induced proliferation occurs largely independent of c-Jun and c-Fos.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25868421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. FEBS Lett. 2015 Apr 28;589(10):1112-8. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2015.03.022. Epub
2015 Mar 30.

Negative regulation of hepatitis B virus replication by forkhead box protein A in
human hepatoma cells.

Okumura N(1), Ikeda M(2), Satoh S(3), Dansako H(3), Sugiyama M(4), Mizokami M(4),
Kato N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Tumor Virology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, 
Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama
700-8558, Japan; Department of Persistent and Oncogenic Viruses, Center for
Chronic Viral Disease, Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and Dental
Sciences, 8-35-1 Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan. (2)Department of Tumor
Virology, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama 700-8558, Japan;
Department of Persistent and Oncogenic Viruses, Center for Chronic Viral Disease,
Kagoshima University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, 8-35-1
Sakuragaoka, Kagoshima 890-8544, Japan. Electronic address:
maikeda@m3.kufm.kagoshima-u.ac.jp. (3)Department of Tumor Virology, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry, and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Kita-ku, Okayama 700-8558, Japan. (4)The Research Center for
Hepatitis and Immunology, National Center for Global Health and Medicine, 1-7-1
Konodai, Ichikawa, Chiba 272-8516, Japan.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) replication is controlled by liver-enriched
transcriptional factors, including forkhead box protein A (FOXA) members. Here,
we found that FOXA members are directly and indirectly involved in HBV
replication in human hepatic cells. HBV replication was elevated in HuH-7 treated
with individual FOXA members-specific siRNA. Reciprocally, the downregulation of 
HBV replication was observed in FOXA-induced HuH-7. However, the mechanism of
downregulation is different among FOXA members at the level of HBV RNA
transcription, such as precore/pg RNA and 2.1 kb RNA. In addition, FOXA1 and
FOXA2 suppressed nuclear hormone receptors, such as HNF4a, that are related to
HBV replication.

Copyright © 2015 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25836733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Diabetes. 2015 Aug;64(8):2744-56. doi: 10.2337/db14-0993. Epub 2015 Mar 31.

Glucose Tolerance Is Improved in Mice Invalidated for the Nuclear Receptor
HNF-4<U+03B3>: A Critical Role for Enteroendocrine Cell Lineage.

Baraille F(1), Ayari S(1), Carrière V(1), Osinski C(1), Garbin K(2), Blondeau
B(1), Guillemain G(1), Serradas P(1), Rousset M(1), Lacasa M(2), Cardot P(3),
Ribeiro A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Sorbonne Universités, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, UMR_S 1138, Centre de 
Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France INSERM, UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche
des Cordeliers, Paris, France Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France Institute of
Cardiometabolism and Nutrition, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France.
(2)Sorbonne Universités, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, UMR_S 1138, Centre de 
Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France INSERM, UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche
des Cordeliers, Paris, France Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité,
UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France. (3)Sorbonne
Universités, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche
des Cordeliers, Paris, France INSERM, UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche des
Cordeliers, Paris, France Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, UMR_S 
1138, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France UMR_S 1158,
Neurophysiologie Respiratoire Expérimentale et Clinique, Paris, France
agnes.ribeiro-pillet@crc.jussieu.fr philippe.cardot@upmc.fr. (4)Sorbonne
Universités, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche
des Cordeliers, Paris, France INSERM, UMR_S 1138, Centre de Recherche des
Cordeliers, Paris, France Université Paris Descartes, Sorbonne Paris Cité, UMR_S 
1138, Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Paris, France Institute of
Cardiometabolism and Nutrition, Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris, France
agnes.ribeiro-pillet@crc.jussieu.fr philippe.cardot@upmc.fr.

Intestine contributes to energy homeostasis through the absorption, metabolism,
and transfer of nutrients to the organism. We demonstrated previously that
hepatocyte nuclear receptor-4a (HNF-4a) controls intestinal epithelium
homeostasis and intestinal absorption of dietary lipids. HNF-4<U+03B3>, the other HNF-4 
form highly expressed in intestine, is much less studied. In HNF-4<U+03B3> knockout
mice, we detect an exaggerated insulin peak and improvement in glucose tolerance 
during oral but not intraperitoneal glucose tolerance tests, highlighting the
involvement of intestine. Moreover, the enteroendocrine L-type cell lineage is
modified, as assessed by the increased expression of transcription factors Isl1, 
Foxa1/2, and Hnf4a, leading to an increase of both GLP-1-positive cell number and
basal and stimulated GLP-1 plasma levels potentiating the glucose-stimulated
insulin secretion. Using the GLP-1 antagonist exendin (9-39), we demonstrate a
direct effect of GLP-1 on improved glucose tolerance. GLP-1 exerts a trophic
effect on pancreatic ß-cells, and we report an increase of the ß-cell fraction
correlated with an augmented number of proliferative islet cells and with
resistance to streptozotocin-induced diabetes. In conclusion, the loss of HNF-4<U+03B3> 
improves glucose homeostasis through a modulation of the enteroendocrine cell
lineage.

© 2015 by the American Diabetes Association. Readers may use this article as long
as the work is properly cited, the use is educational and not for profit, and the
work is not altered.

PMID: 25829452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Oncotarget. 2015 Mar 16. [Epub ahead of print]

Increased liver carcinogenesis and enrichment of stem cell properties in livers
of Dickkopf 2 (Dkk2) deleted mice.

Maass T(1), Marquardt J(2), Lee JS(3), Krupp M(4), Scholz-Kreisel P(2), Mogler
C(5), Schirmacher P(5), Müller M(1), Westphal H(6), Galle PR(2), Teufel A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine I, University of Regensburg, Regensburg,
Germany. (2)I. Department of Medicine, University Medical Center Mainz, Mainz,
Germany. (3)Cancer Biology Program, MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. 
(4)Department of Informatics, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Mainz,
Germany. (5)Institute of Pathology, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg,
Germany. (6)Laboratory of Mammalian Genes and Development, National Institute of 
Child Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, 
USA.

Dkk2 a antagonist of the Wnt/ß-catenin-signaling pathway was shown to be silenced
in diverse cancers. More recent data indicate that Dkk family members may also
possess functions independent of Wnt-signaling during carcinogenesis. The
detailed biological function of Dkks and its relevance for liver cancer is
unknown. We analyzed the effects of a genetic deletion of Dkk2 (Dkk2-/-) in a
hepatocarcinogenesismodel using DEN/Phenobarbital. Untreated Dkk2-/- animals,
showed considerable atypia with variation of hepatocytesize and chromatin
density. In livers of Dkk2-/- mice nodule formation was seen at 9 months of age
with focal loss of trabecular architecture and atypical hepatocytes and after DEN
induction Dkk2-/- mice developed significantly more livertumors compared to
controls. Whole transcriptome analysis of untreated Dkk2-/- livertissue revealed 
a Dkk2-dependent genetic network involving Wnt/ß-Catenin but also multiple
additional oncogenic factors, such as e.g. Pdgf-b, Gdf-15 and Hnf4a. Dkk2-/-
tumorcells showed a significant deregulation of stemness genes associated with
enhanced colony forming properties. Integration of the Dkk2-/- signature into
human data was strongly associated with patients survival. Dkk2 deletion results 
in alterations of liver morphology leading to an increased frequency of
livercancer. The associated genetic changes included factors not primarily
related to Wnt/ß-Catenin-signaling and correlated with the clinical outcome of
HCC-patients.

PMID: 25826080  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


76. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2015 Jun;108(3):e53-5. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2015.03.005. Epub 2015 Mar 13.

Two patients with HNF4A-related congenital hyperinsulinism and renal tubular
dysfunction: A clinical variation which includes transient hepatic dysfunction.

Numakura C(1), Hashimoto Y(2), Daitsu T(3), Hayasaka K(3), Mitsui T(3), Yorifuji 
T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University School of Medicine, Yamagata,
Japan. Electronic address: cnumakur@med.id.yamagata-u.ac.jp. (2)Department of
Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Children's Medical Center, Osaka City
General Hospital, Osaka, Japan. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Yamagata University 
School of Medicine, Yamagata, Japan.

The HNF4A p.R76W mutation causes congenital hyperinsulinism with Fanconi
syndrome. Here, we report two cases who also presented with increased urinary
calcium excretion and one had a transient hepatic dysfunction with hepatomegaly. 
Clinical variations including transient liver dysfunction is a likely
mutation-specific clinical characteristic.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25819479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Am J Physiol Renal Physiol. 2015 May 15;308(10):F1135-45. doi:
10.1152/ajprenal.00563.2014. Epub 2015 Mar 18.

Impairment of hepatic nuclear factor-4a binding to the Stim1 promoter contributes
to high glucose-induced upregulation of STIM1 expression in glomerular mesangial 
cells.

Wang Y(1), Chaudhari S(1), Ren Y(2), Ma R(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Physiology and Cardiovascular Research Institute,
University of North Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas; and.
(2)Department of Endocrinology, The Second Affiliated Hospital of Zhejiang
University College of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (3)Department of
Integrative Physiology and Cardiovascular Research Institute, University of North
Texas Health Science Center, Fort Worth, Texas; and rong.ma@unthsc.edu.

The present study was carried out to investigate if hepatic nuclear factor
(HNF)4a contributed to the high glucose-induced increase in stromal interacting
molecule (STIM)1 protein abundance in glomerular mesangial cells (MCs). Western
blot and immunofluorescence experiments showed HNF4a expression in MCs. Knockdown
of HNF4a using a small interfering RNA approach significantly increased mRNA
expression levels of both STIM1 and Orai1 and protein expression levels of STIM1 
in cultured human MCs. Consistently, overexpression of HNF4a reduced expressed
STIM1 protein expression in human embryonic kidney-293 cells. Furthermore, high
glucose treatment did not significantly change the abundance of HNF4a protein in 
MCs but significantly attenuated HNF4a binding activity to the Stim1 promoter.
Moreover, knockdown of HNF4a significantly augmented store-operated Ca(2+) entry,
which is known to be gated by STIM1 and has recently been found to be
antifibrotic in MCs. In agreement with those results, knockdown of HNF4a
significantly attenuated the fibrotic response of high glucose. These results
suggest that HNF4a negatively regulates STIM1 transcription in MCs. High glucose 
increases STIM1 expression levels by impairing HNF4a binding activity to the
Stim1 promoter, which subsequently releases Stim1 transcription from HNF4a
repression. Since the STIM1-gated store-operated Ca(2+) entry pathway in MCs has 
an antifibrotic effect, inhibition of HNF4a in MCs might be a potential
therapeutic option for diabetic kidney disease.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4437002 [Available on 2016-05-15]
PMID: 25786776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 16;10(3):e0119021. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0119021.
eCollection 2015.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha is a key factor related to depression and
physiological homeostasis in the mouse brain.

Yamanishi K(1), Doe N(2), Sumida M(3), Watanabe Y(4), Yoshida M(4), Yamamoto
H(5), Xu Y(5), Li W(5), Yamanishi H(4), Okamura H(5), Matsunaga H(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, 
Japan; Hirakata General Hospital for Developmental Disorders, Hirakata, Osaka,
Japan. (2)Laboratory of Neurogenesis and CNS Repair, Hyogo College of Medicine,
Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan; Section of Behavioral Science, Kouiken Co., Ltd.,
Akashi, Hyogo, Japan. (3)Section of Behavioral Science, Kouiken Co., Ltd.,
Akashi, Hyogo, Japan. (4)Hirakata General Hospital for Developmental Disorders,
Hirakata, Osaka, Japan. (5)Laboratory of Tumor Immunology and Cell Therapy, Hyogo
College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan. (6)Department of Neuropsychiatry,
Hyogo College of Medicine, Nishinomiya, Hyogo, Japan.

Major depressive disorder (MDD) is a common psychiatric disorder that involves
marked disabilities in global functioning, anorexia, and severe medical
comorbidities. MDD is associated with not only psychological and sociocultural
problems, but also pervasive physical dysfunctions such as metabolic,
neurobiological and immunological abnormalities. Nevertheless, the mechanisms
underlying the interactions between these factors have yet to be determined in
detail. The aim of the present study was to identify the molecular mechanisms
responsible for the interactions between MDD and dysregulation of physiological
homeostasis, including immunological function as well as lipid metabolism,
coagulation, and hormonal activity in the brain. We generated depression-like
behavior in mice using chronic mild stress (CMS) as a model of depression. We
compared the gene expression profiles in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) of CMS and
control mice using microarrays. We subsequently categorized genes using two
web-based bioinformatics applications: Ingenuity Pathway Analysis and The
Database for Annotation, Visualization, and Integrated Discovery. We then
confirmed significant group-differences by analyzing mRNA and protein expression 
levels not only in the PFC, but also in the thalamus and hippocampus. These web
tools revealed that hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (Hnf4a) may exert direct
effects on various genes specifically associated with amine synthesis, such as
genes involved in serotonin metabolism and related immunological functions.
Moreover, these genes may influence lipid metabolism, coagulation, and hormonal
activity. We also confirmed the significant effects of Hnf4a on both mRNA and
protein expression levels in the brain. These results suggest that Hnf4a may have
a critical influence on physiological homeostasis under depressive states, and
may be associated with the mechanisms responsible for the interactions between
MDD and the dysregulation of physiological homeostasis in humans.

PMCID: PMC4361552
PMID: 25774879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Clin Invest. 2015 Apr;125(4):1533-44. doi: 10.1172/JCI73137. Epub 2015 Mar 16.

Resetting the transcription factor network reverses terminal chronic hepatic
failure.

Nishikawa T, Bell A, Brooks JM, Setoyama K, Melis M, Han B, Fukumitsu K, Handa K,
Tian J, Kaestner KH, Vodovotz Y, Locker J, Soto-Gutierrez A, Fox IJ.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2015 May;12(5):250.

The cause of organ failure is enigmatic for many degenerative diseases, including
end-stage liver disease. Here, using a CCl4-induced rat model of irreversible and
fatal hepatic failure, which also exhibits terminal changes in the extracellular 
matrix, we demonstrated that chronic injury stably reprograms the critical
balance of transcription factors and that diseased and dedifferentiated cells can
be returned to normal function by re-expression of critical transcription
factors, a process similar to the type of reprogramming that induces somatic
cells to become pluripotent or to change their cell lineage. Forced re-expression
of the transcription factor HNF4a induced expression of the other
hepatocyte-expressed transcription factors; restored functionality in terminally 
diseased hepatocytes isolated from CCl4-treated rats; and rapidly reversed fatal 
liver failure in CCl4-treated animals by restoring diseased hepatocytes rather
than replacing them with new hepatocytes or stem cells. Together, the results of 
our study indicate that disruption of the transcription factor network and
cellular dedifferentiation likely mediate terminal liver failure and suggest
reinstatement of this network has therapeutic potential for correcting organ
failure without cell replacement.

PMCID: PMC4396487
PMID: 25774505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cell Rep. 2015 Mar 10. pii: S2211-1247(15)00173-4. doi:
10.1016/j.celrep.2015.02.027. [Epub ahead of print]

YAP Inhibition Restores Hepatocyte Differentiation in Advanced HCC, Leading to
Tumor Regression.

Fitamant J(1), Kottakis F(1), Benhamouche S(2), Tian HS(3), Chuvin N(3),
Parachoniak CA(1), Nagle JM(3), Perera RM(1), Lapouge M(3), Deshpande V(4), Zhu
AX(5), Lai A(6), Min B(6), Hoshida Y(7), Avruch J(8), Sia D(9), Campreciós G(7), 
McClatchey AI(4), Llovet JM(10), Morrissey D(6), Raj L(6), Bardeesy N(11).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Center , Massachusetts General Hospital, 185 Cambridge Street, Boston, 
MA 02114, USA; Center for Regenerative Medicine , Massachusetts General Hospital,
185 Cambridge Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Department of Medicine, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (2)Cancer Center , Massachusetts General
Hospital, 185 Cambridge Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Department of Pathology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Inserm U1053, University of
Bordeaux, 146 rue Leo Saignat, 33076 Bordeaux Cedex, France. (3)Cancer Center ,
Massachusetts General Hospital, 185 Cambridge Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA;
Center for Regenerative Medicine , Massachusetts General Hospital, 185 Cambridge 
Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (4)Cancer Center , Massachusetts General Hospital,
185 Cambridge Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Department of Pathology, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (5)Cancer Center , Massachusetts General
Hospital, 185 Cambridge Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Department of Medicine,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. (6)Novartis Institutes of
Biomedical Research Inc., 250 Massachusetts Avenue, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
(7)Liver Cancer Program, Tisch Cancer Institute, Division of Liver Diseases,
Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY
10029, USA. (8)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital,
185 Cambridge Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Department of Medicine, Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Electronic address:
avruch@molbio.mgh.harvard.edu. (9)Liver Cancer Program, Tisch Cancer Institute,
Division of Liver Diseases, Department of Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at
Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; Gastrointestinal Surgery and Liver
Transplantation Unit, National Cancer Institute, Milan 20133, Italy. (10)Liver
Cancer Program, Tisch Cancer Institute, Division of Liver Diseases, Department of
Medicine, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY 10029, USA; HCC
Translational Research Laboratory, BCLC Group, Liver Unit, IDIBAPS, Hospital
Clínic, CIBERehd, Universitat de Barcelona, 08036 Barcelona, Catalonia, Spain;
Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats (ICREA), 08010 Barcelona,
Catalonia, Spain. (11)Cancer Center , Massachusetts General Hospital, 185
Cambridge Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA; Center for Regenerative Medicine ,
Massachusetts General Hospital, 185 Cambridge Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA;
Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02114, USA. Electronic
address: bardeesy.nabeel@mgh.harvard.edu.

Defective Hippo/YAP signaling in the liver results in tissue overgrowth and
development of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Here, we uncover mechanisms of
YAP-mediated hepatocyte reprogramming and HCC pathogenesis. YAP functions as a
rheostat in maintaining metabolic specialization, differentiation, and quiescence
within the hepatocyte compartment. Increased or decreased YAP activity reprograms
subsets of hepatocytes to different fates associated with deregulation of the
HNF4A, CTNNB1, and E2F transcriptional programs that control hepatocyte
quiescence and differentiation. Importantly, treatment with small interfering
RNA-lipid nanoparticles (siRNA-LNPs) targeting YAP restores hepatocyte
differentiation and causes pronounced tumor regression in a genetically
engineered mouse HCC model. Furthermore, YAP targets are enriched in an
aggressive human HCC subtype characterized by a proliferative signature and
absence of CTNNB1 mutations. Thus, our work reveals Hippo signaling as a key
regulator of the positional identity of hepatocytes, supports targeting of YAP
using siRNA-LNPs as a paradigm of differentiation-based therapy, and identifies
an HCC subtype that is potentially responsive to this approach.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4565791 [Available on 2016-09-10]
PMID: 25772357  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


81. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 13;10(3):e0118859. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0118859.
eCollection 2015.

Pleiotropy among common genetic loci identified for cardiometabolic disorders and
C-reactive protein.

Ligthart S(1), de Vries PS(1), Uitterlinden AG(2), Hofman A(1); CHARGE
Inflammation working group, Franco OH(1), Chasman DI(3), Dehghan A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center, Rotterdam, the 
Netherlands. (2)Department of Epidemiology, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, the Netherlands; Department of Internal Medicine, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, the Netherlands. (3)Division of Preventive Medicine,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA, United States of America.

Pleiotropic genetic variants have independent effects on different phenotypes.
C-reactive protein (CRP) is associated with several cardiometabolic phenotypes.
Shared genetic backgrounds may partially underlie these associations. We
conducted a genome-wide analysis to identify the shared genetic background of
inflammation and cardiometabolic phenotypes using published genome-wide
association studies (GWAS). We also evaluated whether the pleiotropic effects of 
such loci were biological or mediated in nature. First, we examined whether 283
common variants identified for 10 cardiometabolic phenotypes in GWAS are
associated with CRP level. Second, we tested whether 18 variants identified for
serum CRP are associated with 10 cardiometabolic phenotypes. We used a Bonferroni
corrected p-value of 1.1×10-04 (0.05/463) as a threshold of significance. We
evaluated the independent pleiotropic effect on both phenotypes using individual 
level data from the Women Genome Health Study. Evaluating the genetic overlap
between inflammation and cardiometabolic phenotypes, we found 13 pleiotropic
regions. Additional analyses showed that 6 regions (APOC1, HNF1A, IL6R, PPP1R3B, 
HNF4A and IL1F10) appeared to have a pleiotropic effect on CRP independent of the
effects on the cardiometabolic phenotypes. These included loci where individuals 
carrying the risk allele for CRP encounter higher lipid levels and risk of type 2
diabetes. In addition, 5 regions (GCKR, PABPC4, BCL7B, FTO and TMEM18) had an
effect on CRP largely mediated through the cardiometabolic phenotypes. In
conclusion, our results show genetic pleiotropy among inflammation and
cardiometabolic phenotypes. In addition to reverse causation, our data suggests
that pleiotropic genetic variants partially underlie the association between CRP 
and cardiometabolic phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC4358943
PMID: 25768928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Mol Endocrinol. 2015 Apr;54(2):R119-29. doi: 10.1530/JME-15-0016. Epub 2015 Mar
2.

Molecular mechanisms of congenital hyperinsulinism.

Rahman SA(1), Nessa A(1), Hussain K(2).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Genomic MedicineUCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford
Street, London WC1N 1EH, UKDepartment of Paediatric EndocrinologyGreat Ormond
Street Hospital for Children NHS, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.
(2)Genetics and Genomic MedicineUCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford
Street, London WC1N 1EH, UKDepartment of Paediatric EndocrinologyGreat Ormond
Street Hospital for Children NHS, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK
Genetics and Genomic MedicineUCL Institute of Child Health, 30 Guilford Street,
London WC1N 1EH, UKDepartment of Paediatric EndocrinologyGreat Ormond Street
Hospital for Children NHS, 30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK
Khalid.Hussain@ucl.ac.uk.

Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is a complex heterogeneous condition in which
insulin secretion from pancreatic ß-cells is unregulated and inappropriate for
the level of blood glucose. The inappropriate insulin secretion drives glucose
into the insulin-sensitive tissues, such as the muscle, liver and adipose tissue,
leading to severe hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia (HH). At a molecular level,
genetic abnormalities in nine different genes (ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK, HNF4A, 
HNF1A, SLC16A1, UCP2 and HADH) have been identified which cause CHI. Autosomal
recessive and dominant mutations in ABCC8/KCNJ11 are the commonest cause of
medically unresponsive CHI. Mutations in GLUD1 and HADH lead to leucine-induced
HH, and these two genes encode the key enzymes glutamate dehydrogenase and short 
chain 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase which play a key role in amino acid and
fatty acid regulation of insulin secretion respectively. Genetic abnormalities in
HNF4A and HNF1A lead to a dual phenotype of HH in the newborn period and maturity
onset-diabetes later in life. This state of the art review provides an update on 
the molecular basis of CHI.

© 2015 Society for Endocrinology.

PMID: 25733449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 11;10(2):e0117238. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0117238.
eCollection 2015.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha polymorphisms and the metabolic syndrome in
French-Canadian youth.

Marcil V(1), Amre D(2), Seidman EG(3), Boudreau F(4), Gendron FP(4), Ménard D(4),
Beaulieu JF(4), Sinnett D(2), Lambert M(2), Levy E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, McGill University, Montreal, Quebec, Canada, H3G 1A4.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, CHU-Sainte-Justine, Université de Montréal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada, H3T 1C5. (3)Research Institute, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada, H3G 1A4; Canadian Institutes for Health Research Team
on the Digestive Epithelium, Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Faculty 
of Medicine and Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec,
Canada, J1H 5N4. (4)Canadian Institutes for Health Research Team on the Digestive
Epithelium, Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Medicine and
Health Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada, J1H 5N4.
(5)Canadian Institutes for Health Research Team on the Digestive Epithelium,
Department of Anatomy and Cellular Biology, Faculty of Medicine and Health
Sciences, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada, J1H 5N4;
Department of Nutrition, CHU-Sainte-Justine, Université de Montréal, Montreal,
Quebec, Canada, H3T 1C5.

OBJECTIVES: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4a) is a transcription factor
involved in the regulation of serum glucose and lipid levels. Several HNF4A gene 
variants have been associated with the risk of developing type 2 diabetes
mellitus. However, no study has yet explored its association with insulin
resistance and the cardiometabolic risk in children. We aimed to investigate the 
relationship between HNF4A genetic variants and the presence of metabolic
syndrome (MetS) and metabolic parameters in a pediatric population.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Our study included 1,749 French-Canadians aged 9, 13 and 16
years and evaluated 24 HNF4A polymorphisms that were previously identified by
sequencing.
RESULTS: Analyses revealed that, after correction for multiple testing, one SNP
(rs736824; P<0.022) and two haplotypes (P1 promoter haplotype
rs6130608-rs2425637; P<0.032 and intronic haplotype rs736824-rs745975-rs3212183; 
P<0.025) were associated with the risk of MetS. Additionally, a significant
association was found between rs3212172 and apolipoprotein B levels (coefficient:
-0.14 ± 0.05; P<0.022). These polymorphisms are located in HNF4A P1 promoter or
in intronic regions.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study demonstrates that HNF4a genetic variants are associated
with the MetS and metabolic parameters in French Canadian children and
adolescents. This study, the first exploring the relation between HNF4A genetic
variants and MetS and metabolic variables in a pediatric cohort, suggests that
HNF4a could represent an early marker for the risk of developing type 2 diabetes 
mellitus.

PMCID: PMC4325000
PMID: 25671620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. PLoS One. 2015 Feb 9;10(2):e0116928. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0116928.
eCollection 2015.

Perturbations of fibroblast growth factors 19 and 21 in type 2 diabetes.

Roesch SL(1), Styer AM(1), Wood GC(1), Kosak Z(1), Seiler J(1), Benotti P(1),
Petrick AT(2), Gabrielsen J(2), Strodel WE(2), Gerhard GS(3), Still CD(1),
Argyropoulos G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Obesity, Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA, United States of 
America. (2)Department of Surgery, Geisinger Health System, Danville, PA, United 
States of America. (3)Institute of Obesity, Geisinger Health System, Danville,
PA, United States of America; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
and Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Pennsylvania State
University, Hershey, PA, United States of America.

Fibroblast growth factors 19 and 21 (FGF19 and FGF21) have been implicated,
independently, in type 2 diabetes (T2D) but it is not known if their circulating 
levels correlate with each other or whether the associated hepatic signaling
mechanisms that play a role in glucose metabolism are dysregulated in diabetes.
We used a cross-sectional, case/control, experimental design involving Class III 
obese patients undergoing Roux-en-Y bariatric surgery (RYGB), and measured FGF19 
and FGF21 serum levels and hepatic gene expression (mRNA) in perioperative liver 
wedge biopsies. We found that T2D patients had lower FGF19 and higher FGF21 serum
levels. The latter was corroborated transcriptionally, whereby, FGF21, as well as
CYP7A1, ß-Klotho, FGFR4, HNF4a, and glycogen synthase, but not of SHP or FXR mRNA
levels in liver biopsies were higher in T2D patients that did not remit diabetes 
after RYGB surgery, compared to T2D patients that remitted diabetes after RYGB
surgery or did not have diabetes. In a Phenome-wide association analysis using
205 clinical variables, higher FGF21 serum levels were associated with higher
glucose levels and various cardiometabolic disease phenotypes. When serum levels 
of FGF19 were < 200 mg/mL and FGF21 > 500 mg/mL, 91% of patients had diabetes.
These data suggest that FGF19/FGF21 circulating levels and hepatic gene
expression of the associated signaling pathway are significantly dysregulated in 
type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4321834
PMID: 25664662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2015 Oct;26(10):2388-97. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2014070665. Epub 2015
Feb 4.

Diabetes Induces Aberrant DNA Methylation in the Proximal Tubules of the Kidney.

Marumo T(1), Yagi S(2), Kawarazaki W(3), Nishimoto M(3), Ayuzawa N(3), Watanabe
A(3), Ueda K(3), Hirahashi J(4), Hishikawa K(5), Sakurai H(6), Shiota K(2),
Fujita T(7).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Epigenetics, Research Center for Advanced Science and
Technology, CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Tokyo, Japan;
(2)Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Animal Resource
Sciences/Veterinary Medical Sciences, and. (3)Division of Clinical Epigenetics,
Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology. (4)Apheresis and Dialysis
Center, School of Medicine, Keio University, Tokyo, Japan; and. (5)Department of 
Advanced Nephrology and Regenerative Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan; (6)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Kyorin University,
Tokyo, Japan. (7)Division of Clinical Epigenetics, Research Center for Advanced
Science and Technology, CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency, Tokyo, Japan;
Toshiro.FUJITA@rcast.u-tokyo.ac.jp tmarumo-npr@umin.ac.jp.

Epigenetic mechanisms may underlie the progression of diabetic kidney disease.
Because the kidney is a heterogeneous organ with different cell types, we
investigated DNA methylation status of the kidney in a cell type-specific manner.
We first identified genes specifically demethylated in the normal proximal
tubules obtained from control db/m mice, and next delineated the candidate
disease-modifying genes bearing aberrant DNA methylation induced by diabetes
using db/db mice. Genes involved in glucose metabolism, including Sglt2, Pck1,
and G6pc, were selectively hypomethylated in the proximal tubules in control
mice. Hnf4a, a transcription factor regulating transporters for reabsorption, was
also selectively demethylated. In diabetic mice, aberrant hypomethylation of Agt,
Abcc4, Cyp4a10, Glut5, and Met and hypermethylation of Kif20b, Cldn18, and
Slco1a1 were observed. Time-dependent demethylation of Agt, a marker of diabetic 
kidney disease, was accompanied by histone modification changes. Furthermore,
inhibition of DNA methyltransferase or histone deacetylase increased Agt mRNA in 
cultured human proximal tubular cells. Aberrant DNA methylation and concomitant
changes in histone modifications and mRNA expression in the diabetic kidney were 
resistant to antidiabetic treatment with pioglitazone. These results suggest that
an epigenetic switch involving aberrant DNA methylation causes persistent mRNA
expression of select genes that may lead to phenotype changes of the proximal
tubules in diabetic kidney disease.

Copyright © 2015 by the American Society of Nephrology.

PMCID: PMC4587689 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 25653098  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Proteomics. 2015 Jun;15(11):1793-800. doi: 10.1002/pmic.201400275. Epub 2015 Mar 
18.

Transcriptome and proteome of human hepatocellular carcinoma reveal shared
metastatic pathways with significant genes.

Shen H(1,)(2), Zhong F(1), Zhang Y(1), Yu H(1), Liu Y(1,)(3), Qin L(1,)(3), He
F(1,)(4), Tang Z(1,)(3), Yang P(1,)(2,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology for Medicine and Institutes of Biomedical
Sciences, Shanghai Medical College, Fudan University, Shanghai, P. R. China.
(2)Department of Chemistry, Fudan University, Shanghai, P. R. China. (3)Zhongshan
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, P. R. China. (4)State Key Laboratory of
Proteomics, Beijing Proteome Research Center, Beijing, P. R. China. (5)Children
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, P. R. China.

Previously isolated pathways screened from individual genes were investigated at 
either the transcriptional or translational level; however, the consistency
between the pathways screened at the gene expression levels was obscure in
metastatic human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). To elucidate this question, we
performed a transcriptomic (16,353 genes) and proteomic (7861 proteins) analysis 
simultaneously on six metastatic HCC cell lines against two nonmetastatic HCC
cell lines, with all HBV traceable and close genetic-backgrounds for a
comparative study. The quantitative and integrated results showed that
significant genes were screened differentially with 351 transcripts from the
transcriptome and 304 proteins from the proteome, with limited overlapping genes 
(7%). However, we discovered that these discrete 351 transcripts and 304 proteins
screened share extrusive significant-pathways/networks with a 77% overlap,
including active TGF-ß, RAS, NF<U+03BA>B, and Wnt, and inactive HNF4A, which are
responsible for HCC metastasis. We conclude that the discrete, but significant
genes predicted by either ome play intrinsically important roles in the linkage
of responsible pathways shared by both omes in HCC metastasis.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25652264  [PubMed - in process]


87. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Jun;1849(6):731-42. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.01.005.
Epub 2015 Jan 31.

Enhancer cooperativity as a novel mechanism underlying the transcriptional
regulation of E-cadherin during mesenchymal to epithelial transition.

Alotaibi H(1), Basilicata MF(2), Shehwana H(3), Kosowan T(2), Schreck I(2),
Braeutigam C(2), Konu O(3), Brabletz T(4), Stemmler MP(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Embryology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology and 
Epigenetics, Stuebeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany; Izmir Biomedicine and
Genome Center, Dokuz Eylül University, Inciralti, 35340 Izmir, Turkey.
(2)Department of Molecular Embryology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology and 
Epigenetics, Stuebeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany. (3)Department of Molecular 
Biology and Genetics, Bilkent University, 06800 Ankara, Turkey. (4)Department of 
Visceral Surgery, University Medical Center Freiburg, Hugstetter Str. 55, D-79106
Freiburg, Germany; Comprehensive Cancer Center Freiburg, University Medical
Center Freiburg, D-79106 Freiburg, Germany; BIOSS Centre for Biological Signaling
Studies, Albert-Ludwigs-University Freiburg, D-79104 Freiburg, Germany; Institute
of Experimental Medicine I, Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for Molecular Medicine,
University Erlangen-Nürnberg, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany. (5)Department of
Molecular Embryology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology and Epigenetics,
Stuebeweg 51, D-79108 Freiburg, Germany; Department of Visceral Surgery,
University Medical Center Freiburg, Hugstetter Str. 55, D-79106 Freiburg,
Germany; Institute of Experimental Medicine I, Nikolaus-Fiebiger-Center for
Molecular Medicine, University Erlangen-Nürnberg, D-91054 Erlangen, Germany.
Electronic address: marc.stemmler@fau.de.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and mesenchymal-epithelial transition
(MET) highlight crucial steps during embryogenesis and tumorigenesis. Induction
of dramatic changes in gene expression and cell features is reflected by
modulation of Cdh1 (E-cadherin) expression. We show that Cdh1 activity during MET
is governed by two enhancers at +7.8 kb and at +11.5 kb within intron 2 that are 
activated by binding of Grhl3 and Hnf4a, respectively. Recruitment of Grhl3 and
Hnf4a to the enhancers is crucial for activating Cdh1 and accomplishing MET in
non-tumorigenic mouse mammary gland cells (NMuMG). Moreover, the two enhancers
cooperate via Grhl3 and Hnf4a binding, induction of DNA-looping and clustering at
the promoter to orchestrate E-cadherin re-expression. Our results provide novel
insights into the cellular mechanisms whereby cells respond to MET signals and
re-establish an epithelial phenotype by enhancer cooperativity. A general
importance of our findings including MET-mediated colonization of metastasizing
tumor cells is suggested.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25652130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Feb 17;112(7):2257-62. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1423573112. Epub 2015 Feb 2.

Network-based metaanalysis identifies HNF4A and PTBP1 as longitudinally dynamic
biomarkers for Parkinson's disease.

Santiago JA(1), Potashkin JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology Department, Chicago Medical School,
Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL 60064.
(2)Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology Department, Chicago Medical School,
Rosalind Franklin University of Medicine and Science, North Chicago, IL 60064
judy.potashkin@rosalindfranklin.edu.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 14;112(28):E3638.
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 28;112(30):E3975.
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 28;112(30):E3976.
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Jul 14;112(28):E3637.

Environmental and genetic factors are likely to be involved in the pathogenesis
of Parkinson's disease (PD), the second most prevalent neurodegenerative disease 
among the elderly. Network-based metaanalysis of four independent microarray
studies identified the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4A), a transcription
factor associated with gluconeogenesis and diabetes, as a central regulatory hub 
gene up-regulated in blood of PD patients. In parallel, the polypyrimidine tract 
binding protein 1 (PTBP1), involved in the stabilization and mRNA translation of 
insulin, was identified as the most down-regulated gene. Quantitative PCR assays 
revealed that HNF4A and PTBP1 mRNAs were up- and down-regulated, respectively, in
blood of 51 PD patients and 45 controls nested in the Diagnostic and Prognostic
Biomarkers for Parkinson's Disease. These results were confirmed in blood of 50
PD patients compared with 46 healthy controls nested in the Harvard Biomarker
Study. Relative abundance of HNF4A mRNA correlated with the Hoehn and Yahr stage 
at baseline, suggesting its clinical utility to monitor disease severity. Using
both markers, PD patients were classified with 90% sensitivity and 80%
specificity. Longitudinal performance analysis demonstrated that relative
abundance of HNF4A and PTBP1 mRNAs significantly decreased and increased,
respectively, in PD patients during the 3-y follow-up period. The inverse
regulation of HNF4A and PTBP1 provides a molecular rationale for the altered
insulin signaling observed in PD patients. The longitudinally dynamic biomarkers 
identified in this study may be useful for monitoring disease-modifying therapies
for PD.

PMCID: PMC4343174
PMID: 25646437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Toxicol Sci. 2015 Apr;144(2):382-92. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfv008. Epub 2015 Jan
22.

Suppression of the pregnane X receptor during endoplasmic reticulum stress is
achieved by down-regulating hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a and up-regulating
liver-enriched inhibitory protein.

Vachirayonsti T(1), Ho KW(1), Yang D(1), Yan B(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Center for
Pharmacogenomics and Molecular Therapy, University of Rhode Island, Kingston,
Rhode Island 02881. (2)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Center for Pharmacogenomics and Molecular Therapy, University of Rhode Island,
Kingston, Rhode Island 02881 byan@uri.edu.

Endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress is recognized as a common theme in the
development of metabolic syndrome and other diseases. Chronic liver diseases
develop ER stress and also show decreased capacity of drug metabolism. The
pregnane X receptor (PXR) is a master regulator of genes involved in drug
elimination. This study was performed to determine whether ER stress condition
decreases the expression of PXR and whether the decrease alters the induction of 
cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4). Human primary hepatocytes and HepG2 cell line
(human hepatocellular carcinoma) were treated with brefeldin A and thapsigargin, 
2 well-established ER stressors. Without exceptions, both stressors significantly
decreased the expression of PXR. The decrease led to reduced induction of CYP3A4.
Reporter dissection study, electrophoretic mobility shift assay, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation located in the PXR promoter region 2 adjacent elements
recognized by hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a (HNF-4a) and
cytidine-cytidine-adenosine-adenosine-thymidine enhanced binding proteins
(C/EBPs), respectively. Additional studies demonstrated that HNF-4a was
down-regulated during ER stress but the expression of C/EBPß varied depending on 
a particular form of C/EBPß. Liver-enriched activator protein (LAP) was
down-regulated but liver-enriched inhibitory protein (LIP) was highly induced.
Nevertheless, over-expression of HNF-4a or LAP restored the expression of PXR.
Interestingly, the very same sequence also responded to interleukin-6 (IL-6), and
primary hepatocytes treated with thapsigargin significantly increased the level
of IL-6<U+2009>mRNA. These findings establish a functional interconnection between ER
stress and signaling of proinflammatory cytokines in the regulation of PXR
expression.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Society 
of Toxicology. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMCID: PMC4372669
PMID: 25616597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Diabetes Res. 2014;2014:961732. doi: 10.1155/2014/961732. Epub 2014 Dec 24.

Sodium meta-arsenite ameliorates hyperglycemia in obese diabetic db/db mice by
inhibition of hepatic gluconeogenesis.

Lee YS(1), Lee EK(1), Oh HH(1), Choi CS(2), Kim S(3), Jun HS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Lee Gil Ya Cancer and Diabetes Institute, Gachon University, 7-45 Songdo-dong,
Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 406-840, Republic of Korea. (2)Lee Gil Ya Cancer and Diabetes 
Institute, Gachon University, 7-45 Songdo-dong, Yeonsu-gu, Incheon 406-840,
Republic of Korea ; Endocrinology, Internal Medicine, Gachon University Gil
Medical Center, Namdong-gu, Guwol-dong 1198, Incheon 405-760, Republic of Korea ;
Gachon Medical Research Institute, Gil Hospital, Incheon 405-760, Republic of
Korea. (3)Komipharm International Co. Ltd., 3188 Seongnam-dong, Jungwon-gu,
Seongnam-si, Gyeonggi-do 462-827, Republic of Korea. (4)Lee Gil Ya Cancer and
Diabetes Institute, Gachon University, 7-45 Songdo-dong, Yeonsu-gu, Incheon
406-840, Republic of Korea ; Gachon Medical Research Institute, Gil Hospital,
Incheon 405-760, Republic of Korea ; College of Pharmacy and Gachon Institute of 
Pharmaceutical Science, Gachon University, 7-45 Songdo-dong, Yeonsu-gu, Incheon
406-840, Republic of Korea.

Sodium meta-arsenite (SA) is implicated in the regulation of hepatic
gluconeogenesis-related genes in vitro; however, the effects in vivo have not
been studied. We investigated whether SA has antidiabetic effects in a type 2
diabetic mouse model. Diabetic db/db mice were orally intubated with SA
(10<U+2009>mg<U+2009>kg(-1) body weight/day) for 8 weeks. We examined hemoglobin A1c (HbA1c),
blood glucose levels, food intake, and body weight. We performed glucose,
insulin, and pyruvate tolerance tests and analyzed glucose production and the
expression of gluconeogenesis-related genes in hepatocytes. We analyzed energy
metabolism using a comprehensive animal metabolic monitoring system. SA-treated
diabetic db/db mice had reduced concentrations of HbA1c and blood glucose levels.
Exogenous glucose was quickly cleared in glucose tolerance tests. The mRNA
expressions of genes for gluconeogenesis-related enzymes, glucose 6-phosphatase
(G6Pase), and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) were significantly
reduced in the liver of SA-treated diabetic db/db mice. In primary hepatocytes,
SA treatment decreased glucose production and the expression of G6Pase, PEPCK,
and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF-4a) mRNA. Small heterodimer partner
(SHP) mRNA expression was increased in hepatocytes dependent upon the SA
concentration. The expression of Sirt1 mRNA and protein was reduced, and
acetylated forkhead box protein O1 (FoxO1) was induced by SA treatment in
hepatocytes. In addition, SA-treated diabetic db/db mice showed reduced energy
expenditure. Oral intubation of SA ameliorates hyperglycemia in db/db mice by
reducing hepatic gluconeogenesis through the decrease of Sirt1 expression and
increase in acetylated FoxO1.

PMCID: PMC4290036
PMID: 25610880  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Biochem Pharmacol. 2015 Mar 1;94(1):46-52. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2015.01.001. Epub
2015 Jan 15.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4a transactivation of cytochrome P450 (Cyp) 2d40 
promoter is enhanced during pregnancy in mice.

Ning M(1), Koh KH(2), Pan X(3), Jeong H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of
Illinois at Chicago, 833 S. Wood St. (MC 865), Chicago, IL 60612, USA. Electronic
address: mning2@uic.edu. (2)Department of Pharmacy Practice, College of Pharmacy,
University of Illinois at Chicago, 833 S. Wood St. (MC 886), Chicago, IL 60612,
USA. Electronic address: noble.koh@gmail.com. (3)Department of Biopharmaceutical 
Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago, 833 S. Wood St.
(MC 865), Chicago, IL 60612, USA. Electronic address: xpan9@uic.edu.
(4)Department of Biopharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of
Illinois at Chicago, 833 S. Wood St. (MC 865), Chicago, IL 60612, USA; Department
of Pharmacy Practice, College of Pharmacy, University of Illinois at Chicago, 833
S. Wood St. (MC 886), Chicago, IL 60612, USA. Electronic address: yjeong@uic.edu.

We have recently reported that transactivation of cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6
promoter by hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4a is enhanced during pregnancy, and 
this is triggered in part by altered expression of small heterodimer partner
(SHP) and Krüppel-like factor 9 (KLF9). The objective of this study is to
determine whether this is conserved for mouse endogenous Cyp2d gene(s). Among the
eight Cyp2d homologs of mouse we examined, only Cyp2d40 expression was found
induced (by 6-fold) at term pregnancy as compared to pre-pregnancy level. In mice
where hepatic Hnf4a was knocked-down, the pregnancy-mediated increase in Cyp2d40 
expression was abrogated. Results from transient transfection, promoter reporter 
assays, and electrophoretic mobility shift assays indicated that HNF4a
transactivates Cyp2d40 promoter via direct binding to -117/-105 of the gene.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed a 2.3-fold increase in HNF4a
recruitment to Cyp2d40 promoter during pregnancy. Results from mice treated with 
an SHP inducer (i.e., GW4064) and HepG2 cells co-transfected with KLF9 suggest
that neither SHP nor KLF9 is involved in the increased HNF4a transactivation of
Cyp2d40 promoter during pregnancy. Together, our results indicate that while the 
underlying molecular mechanism is different from that for CYP2D6, Cyp2d40 is
induced during pregnancy through enhanced transactivation by HNF4a.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4331259
PMID: 25598084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Cancer Lett. 2015 Apr 10;359(2):187-97. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2015.01.008. Epub
2015 Jan 12.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha promotes the invasion, metastasis and
angiogenesis of neuroblastoma cells via targeting matrix metalloproteinase 14.

Xiang X(1), Zhao X(1), Qu H(1), Li D(1), Yang D(1), Pu J(1), Mei H(1), Zhao J(2),
Huang K(3), Zheng L(4), Tong Q(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China.
(2)Burnett School of Biomedical Sciences, College of Medicine, University of
Central Florida, Orlando, FL, USA. (3)Clinical Center of Human Genomic Research, 
Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and
Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China. (4)Clinical Center of Human Genomic
Research, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science 
and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China; Department of Pathology, Union
Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 
Wuhan, Hubei Province, China. Electronic address: ld_zheng@hotmail.com.
(5)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province, China;
Clinical Center of Human Genomic Research, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei Province,
China. Electronic address: qs_tong@hotmail.com.

Matrix metalloproteinase 14 (MMP-14) is the only membrane-anchored MMP that plays
critical roles in tumorigenesis and aggressiveness. However, the regulatory
mechanisms underlying the high MMP-14 expression in neuroblastoma (NB), a highly 
malignant tumor in childhood, still remain unclear. Herein, we applied an
integrative approach to analyze the public datasets, and identified hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4a) as a crucial transcription factor facilitating the
MMP-14 expression in NB. In clinical NB tissues, HNF4a was up-regulated and
positively correlated with MMP-14 expression, and was an independent prognostic
factor for unfavorable outcome of patients. Luciferase reporter and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays indicated that HNF4a directly targeted the binding
site within the MMP-14 promoter to facilitate its transcription. Knockdown of
HNF4a suppressed the invasion, metastasis and angiogenesis of NB cells in vitro
and in vivo. Conversely, ectopic expression of HNF4a promoted the invasion,
metastasis and angiogenesis of NB cells. Importantly, restoration of MMP-14
expression prevented the tumor cells from HNF4a-mediated changes in these
biological features. Taken together, HNF4a exhibits oncogenic activity that
affects the aggressiveness and angiogenesis of NB through activating the
transcription of MMP-14.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25592038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2015 Mar;28(3-4):251-63. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2014-0384.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY): an update.

Anik A, Çatli G, Abaci A, Böber E.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a group of monogenic disorders
characterized by autosomal dominantly inherited non-insulin dependent form of
diabetes classically presenting in adolescence or young adults before the age of 
25 years. MODY is a rare cause of diabetes (1% of all cases) and is frequently
misdiagnosed as Type 1 diabetes (T1DM) or Type 2 diabetes (T2DM). A precise
molecular diagnosis is essential because it leads to optimal treatment of the
patients and allows early diagnosis for their asymptomatic family members.
Mutations in the glucokinase (GCK) (MODY 2) and hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)1A/4A (MODY 3 and MODY 1) genes are the most common causes of MODY. GCK
mutations cause a mild, asymptomatic, and stable fasting hyperglycemia usually
requiring no specific treatment. However, mutations in the HNF1A and HNF4A cause 
a progressive pancreatic ß-cell dysfunction and hyperglycemia that can result in 
microvascular complications. Sulfonylureas are effective in these patients by
acting on adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-sensitive potassium channels, although
insulin therapy may be required later in life. Mutations in the HNF1B (MODY 5) is
associated with pancreatic agenesis, renal abnormalities, genital tract
malformations, and liver dysfunction. Compared to MODY 1, 2, 3, and 5, the
remaining subtypes of MODY have a much lower prevalence. In this review, we
summarize the main clinical and laboratory characteristics of the common and
rarer causes of MODY.

PMID: 25581748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Cell Biol Int. 2015 May;39(5):600-10. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10431. Epub 2015 Jan 26.

Lineage specific expression of Polycomb Group Proteins in human embryonic stem
cells in vitro.

Pethe P(1), Pursani V, Bhartiya D.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology Department, National Institute for Research in Reproductive 
Health (NIRRH), Jehangir Merwanji Street, Parel, Mumbai, 400012, India.

Human embryonic (hES) stem cells are an excellent model to study lineage
specification and differentiation into various cell types. Differentiation
necessitates repression of specific genes not required for a particular lineage. 
Polycomb Group (PcG) proteins are key histone modifiers, whose primary function
is gene repression. PcG proteins form complexes called Polycomb Repressive
Complexes (PRCs), which catalyze histone modifications such as H2AK119ub1,
H3K27me3, and H3K9me3. PcG proteins play a crucial role during differentiation of
stem cells. The expression of PcG transcripts during differentiation of hES cells
into endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm lineage is yet to be shown. In-house
derived hES cell line KIND1 was differentiated into endoderm, mesoderm, and
ectoderm lineages; followed by characterization using RT-PCR for HNF4A, CDX2,
MEF2C, TBX5, SOX1, and MAP2. qRT-PCR and western blotting was performed to
compare expression of PcG transcripts and proteins across all the three lineages.
We observed that cells differentiated into endoderm showed upregulation of
RING1B, BMI1, EZH2, and EED transcripts. Mesoderm differentiation was
characterized by significant downregulation of all PcG transcripts during later
stages. BMI1 and RING1B were upregulated while EZH2, SUZ12, and EED remained low 
during ectoderm differentiation. Western blotting also showed distinct expression
of BMI1 and EZH2 during differentiation into three germ layers. Our study shows
that hES cells differentiating into endoderm, mesoderm, and ectoderm lineages
show distinct PcG expression profile at transcript and protein level.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 25572667  [PubMed - in process]


95. Mol Genet Metab. 2015 Mar;114(3):451-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2014.12.304. Epub
2014 Dec 20.

Molecular genetic testing of patients with monogenic diabetes and
hyperinsulinism.

Bennett JT(1), Vasta V(1), Zhang M(1), Narayanan J(1), Gerrits P(2), Hahn SH(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle
Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA 98105, USA. (2)Department of Pediatric
Endocrinology, Beaumont Children's Hospital, Royal Oak, MI 48073, USA.
(3)Department of Pediatrics, University of Washington School of Medicine, Seattle
Children's Hospital, Seattle, WA 98105, USA. Electronic address: sihahn@uw.edu.

Genetic sequencing has become a critical part of the diagnosis of certain forms
of pancreatic beta cell dysfunction. Despite great advances in the speed and cost
of DNA sequencing, determining the pathogenicity of variants remains a challenge,
and requires sharing of sequence and phenotypic data between laboratories. We
reviewed all diabetes and hyperinsulinism-associated molecular testing done at
the Seattle Children's Molecular Genetics Laboratory from 2009 to 2013. 331
probands were referred to us for molecular genetic sequencing for Neonatal
Diabetes (NDM), Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young (MODY), or Congenital
Hyperinsulinism (CHI) during this period. Reportable variants were identified in 
115 (35%) patients with 91 variants in one of 6 genes: HNF1A, GCK, HNF4A, ABCC8, 
KCNJ11, or INS. In addition to identifying 23 novel variants, we identified
unusual mechanisms of inheritance, including mosaic and digenic MODY
presentations. Re-analysis of all reported variants using more recently available
databases led to a change in variant interpretation from the original report in
30% of cases. These results represent a resource for molecular testing of
monogenic forms of diabetes and hyperinsulinism, providing a mutation spectrum
for these disorders in a large North American cohort. In addition, they highlight
the importance of periodic review of molecular testing results.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25555642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. J Hepatol. 2015 May;62(5):1171-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2014.12.006. Epub 2014 Dec 
19.

Thyroid-stimulating hormone regulates hepatic bile acid homeostasis via
SREBP-2/HNF-4a/CYP7A1 axis.

Song Y(1), Xu C(1), Shao S(1), Liu J(2), Xing W(1), Xu J(1), Qin C(3), Li C(2),
Hu B(1), Yi S(4), Xia X(5), Zhang H(1), Zhang X(1), Wang T(1), Pan W(1), Yu C(1),
Wang Q(6), Lin X(6), Wang L(7), Gao L(8), Zhao J(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shandong Provincial Hospital
affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250021, China; Institute of
Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shandong Academy of Clinical Medicine, Jinan,
Shandong 250021, China. (2)Department of Organ Transplantation Surgery, Shandong 
Provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250021,
China. (3)Department of General Surgery, Shandong Provincial Hospital affiliated 
to Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250021, China. (4)Center for Transplant
and Renal Research, Westmead Millennium Institute, University of Sydney at
Westmead Hospital, Sydney, Australia. (5)Genomic Medicine and Center for Diabetes
Research, The Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Weill Cornell Medical
College, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (6)Department of Pathology, Shandong Provincial 
Hospital affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250021, China.
(7)Scientific Center, Shandong Provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong
University, Jinan, Shandong 250021, China. (8)Scientific Center, Shandong
Provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250021,
China; Institute of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shandong Academy of Clinical
Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250021, China. Electronic address:
gaoling1@medmail.com.cn. (9)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shandong 
Provincial Hospital affiliated to Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong 250021,
China; Institute of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Shandong Academy of Clinical
Medicine, Jinan, Shandong 250021, China. Electronic address:
jjzhao@medmail.com.cn.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2015 May;62(5):1005-7.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Bile acids (BAs) play a crucial role in dietary fat digestion 
and in the regulation of lipid, glucose, and energy metabolism.
Thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) is a hormone produced by the anterior pituitary
gland that directly regulates several metabolic pathways. However, the impact of 
TSH on BA homeostasis remains largely unknown.
METHODS: We analyzed serum BA and TSH levels in healthy volunteers under strict
control of caloric intake. Thyroidectomized rats were administered thyroxine and 
injected with different doses of TSH. Tshr(-/-) mice were supplemented with
thyroxine, and C57BL/6 mice were injected with Tshr-siRNA via the tail vein. The 
serum BA levels, BA pool size, and fecal BA excretion rate were measured. The
regulation of SREBP-2, HNF-4a, and CYP7A1 by TSH were analyzed using luciferase
reporter, RNAi, EMSA, and CHIP assays.
RESULTS: A negative correlation was observed between the serum levels of TSH and 
the serum BA levels in healthy volunteers. TSH administration led to a decrease
in BA content and CYP7A1 activity in thyroidectomized rats supplemented with
thyroxine. When Tshr was silenced in mice, the BA pool size, fecal BA excretion
rate, and serum BA levels all increased. Additionally, we found that HNF-4a acts 
as a critical molecule through which TSH represses CYP7A1 activity. We further
confirmed that the accumulation of mature SREBP-2 protein could impair the
capacity of nuclear HNF-4a to bind to the CYP7A1 promoter, a mechanism that
appears to mediate the effects of TSH.
CONCLUSIONS: TSH represses hepatic BA synthesis via a SREBP-2/HNF-4a/CYP7A1
signaling pathway. This finding strongly supports the notion that TSH is an
important pathophysiological regulator of liver BA homeostasis independently of
thyroid hormones.

Copyright © 2015 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25533663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. PLoS One. 2014 Dec 19;9(12):e114263. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114263.
eCollection 2014.

Integrated analysis of whole genome and transcriptome sequencing reveals diverse 
transcriptomic aberrations driven by somatic genomic changes in liver cancers.

Shiraishi Y(1), Fujimoto A(2), Furuta M(3), Tanaka H(4), Chiba K(1), Boroevich
KA(5), Abe T(5), Kawakami Y(6), Ueno M(7), Gotoh K(8), Ariizumi S(9), Shibuya
T(4), Nakano K(3), Sasaki A(3), Maejima K(3), Kitada R(3), Hayami S(7), Shigekawa
Y(7), Marubashi S(8), Yamada T(8), Kubo M(10), Ishikawa O(8), Aikata H(6),
Arihiro K(11), Ohdan H(12), Yamamoto M(9), Yamaue H(7), Chayama K(6), Tsunoda
T(5), Miyano S(13), Nakagawa H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of DNA Information Analysis, Human Genome Center, The Institute of 
Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 108-8639, Japan. (2)Laboratory
for Genome Sequencing Analysis, RIEKN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences,
Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan; Laboratory for Medical Science Mathematics, RIEKN
Center for Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan. (3)Laboratory
for Genome Sequencing Analysis, RIEKN Center for Integrative Medical Sciences,
Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan. (4)Laboratory of Sequence Analysis, Human Genome
Center, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
108-8639, Japan. (5)Laboratory for Medical Science Mathematics, RIEKN Center for 
Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan. (6)Department of
Medicine & Molecular Science, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, Hiroshima,
734-8551, Japan. (7)Second Department of Surgery, Wakayama Medical University,
Wakayama, 641-8510, Japan. (8)Department of Surgery, Osaka Medical Center for
Cancer and Cardiovascular Diseases, Osaka, 537-8511, Japan. (9)Department of
Surgery, Institute of Gastroenterology, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Tokyo, 
162-8666, Japan. (10)Laboratory for Genotyping Development, RIEKN Center for
Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, 230-0045, Japan. (11)Department of
Anatomical Pathology, Hiroshima University School of Medicine, Hiroshima,
734-8551, Japan. (12)Department of Gastroenterological Surgery, Hiroshima
University School of Medicine, Hiroshima, 734-8551, Japan. (13)Laboratory of DNA 
Information Analysis, Human Genome Center, The Institute of Medical Science, The 
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, 108-8639, Japan; Laboratory of Sequence Analysis,
Human Genome Center, The Institute of Medical Science, The University of Tokyo,
Tokyo, 108-8639, Japan.

Recent studies applying high-throughput sequencing technologies have identified
several recurrently mutated genes and pathways in multiple cancer genomes.
However, transcriptional consequences from these genomic alterations in cancer
genome remain unclear. In this study, we performed integrated and comparative
analyses of whole genomes and transcriptomes of 22 hepatitis B virus
(HBV)-related hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) and their matched controls.
Comparison of whole genome sequence (WGS) and RNA-Seq revealed much evidence that
various types of genomic mutations triggered diverse transcriptional changes. Not
only splice-site mutations, but also silent mutations in coding regions, deep
intronic mutations and structural changes caused splicing aberrations. HBV
integrations generated diverse patterns of virus-human fusion transcripts
depending on affected gene, such as TERT, CDK15, FN1 and MLL4. Structural
variations could drive over-expression of genes such as WNT ligands, with/without
creating gene fusions. Furthermore, by taking account of genomic mutations
causing transcriptional aberrations, we could improve the sensitivity of
deleterious mutation detection in known cancer driver genes (TP53, AXIN1, ARID2, 
RPS6KA3), and identified recurrent disruptions in putative cancer driver genes
such as HNF4A, CPS1, TSC1 and THRAP3 in HCCs. These findings indicate genomic
alterations in cancer genome have diverse transcriptomic effects, and integrated 
analysis of WGS and RNA-Seq can facilitate the interpretation of a large number
of genomic alterations detected in cancer genome.

PMCID: PMC4272259
PMID: 25526364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Genome Biol. 2014 Dec 3;15(12):522. doi: 10.1186/s13059-014-0522-z.

Sex differences in the genome-wide DNA methylation pattern and impact on gene
expression, microRNA levels and insulin secretion in human pancreatic islets.

Hall E, Volkov P, Dayeh T, Esguerra JL, Salö S, Eliasson L, Rönn T, Bacos K, Ling
C.

BACKGROUND: Epigenetic factors regulate tissue-specific expression and
X-chromosome inactivation. Previous studies have identified epigenetic
differences between sexes in some human tissues. However, it is unclear whether
epigenetic modifications contribute to sex-specific differences in insulin
secretion and metabolism. Here, we investigate the impact of sex on the
genome-wide DNA methylation pattern in human pancreatic islets from 53 males and 
34 females, and relate the methylome to changes in expression and insulin
secretion.
RESULTS: Glucose-stimulated insulin secretion is higher in female versus male
islets. Genome-wide DNA methylation data in human islets clusters based on sex.
While the chromosome-wide DNA methylation level on the X-chromosome is higher in 
female versus male islets, the autosomes do not display a global methylation
difference between sexes. Methylation of 8,140 individual X-chromosome sites and 
470 autosomal sites shows sex-specific differences in human islets. These include
sites in/near AR, DUSP9, HNF4A, BCL11A and CDKN2B. 61 X-chromosome genes and 18
autosomal genes display sex-specific differences in both DNA methylation and
expression. These include NKAP, SPESP1 and APLN, which exhibited lower expression
in females. Functional analyses demonstrate that methylation of NKAP and SPESP1
promoters in vitro suppresses their transcriptional activity. Silencing of Nkap
or Apln in clonal beta-cells results in increased insulin secretion. Differential
methylation between sexes is associated with altered levels of microRNAs miR-660 
and miR-532 and related target genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Chromosome-wide and gene-specific sex differences in DNA methylation
associate with altered expression and insulin secretion in human islets. Our data
demonstrate that epigenetics contribute to sex-specific metabolic phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC4256841
PMID: 25517766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 16;290(3):1850-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.620211. Epub 2014 
Dec 8.

Transcription factors GATA4 and HNF4A control distinct aspects of intestinal
homeostasis in conjunction with transcription factor CDX2.

San Roman AK(1), Aronson BE(2), Krasinski SD(3), Shivdasani RA(4), Verzi MP(5).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Medical Oncology and Center for Functional Cancer
Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, the
Graduate Program in Biological and Biomedical Sciences, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115. (2)the Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and
Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115, Emma Children's Hospital, Academic Medical Center, 1105 AZ
Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (3)the Division of Pediatric Gastroenterology and
Nutrition, Department of Medicine, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts 02115. (4)From the Department of Medical Oncology and Center for
Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, the Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital and
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, and
ramesh_shivdasani@dfci.harvard.edu. (5)From the Department of Medical Oncology
and Center for Functional Cancer Epigenetics, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, the Department of Genetics, Rutgers, The State
University of New Jersey, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854 verzi@biology.rutgers.edu.

Distinct groups of transcription factors (TFs) assemble at tissue-specific
cis-regulatory sites, implying that different TF combinations may control
different genes and cellular functions. Within such combinations, TFs that
specify or maintain a lineage and are therefore considered master regulators may 
play a key role. Gene enhancers often attract these tissue-restricted TFs, as
well as TFs that are expressed more broadly. However, the contributions of the
individual TFs to combinatorial regulatory activity have not been examined
critically in many cases in vivo. We address this question using a genetic
approach in mice to inactivate the intestine-specifying and intestine-restricted 
factor CDX2 alone or in combination with its more broadly expressed partner
factors, GATA4 and HNF4A. Compared with single mutants, each combination produced
significantly greater defects and rapid lethality through distinct anomalies.
Intestines lacking Gata4 and Cdx2 were deficient in crypt cell replication,
whereas combined loss of Hnf4a and Cdx2 specifically impaired viability and
maturation of villus enterocytes. Integrated analysis of TF binding and of
transcripts affected in Hnf4a;Cdx2 compound-mutant intestines indicated that this
TF pair controls genes required to construct the apical brush border and absorb
nutrients, including dietary lipids. This study thus defines combinatorial TF
activities, their specific requirements during tissue homeostasis, and modules of
transcriptional targets in intestinal epithelial cells in vivo.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4340426
PMID: 25488664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cell Cycle. 2014;13(20):3176-82. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.965054.

IDH mutations in liver cell plasticity and biliary cancer.

Saha SK(1), Parachoniak CA, Bardeesy N.

Author information: 
(1)a Cancer Center and Center for Regenerative Medicine; Massachusetts General
Hospital; Department of Medicine; Harvard Medical School , Boston , MA USA.

Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) is an aggressive cancer associated with the
bile ducts within the liver. These tumors are characterized by frequent
gain-of-function mutations in the isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 and 2 (IDH1 and
IDH2) genes-that are also common in subsets of neural, haematopoietic and bone
tumors, but rare or absent in the other types of gastrointestinal malignancy.
Mutant IDH acts through a novel mechanism of oncogenesis, producing high levels
of the metabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate, which interferes with the function of
a-ketoglutarate-dependent enzymes that regulate diverse cellular processes
including histone demethylation and DNA modification. Recently, we used in vitro 
stem cell systems and genetically engineered mouse models (GEMMs) to demonstrate 
that mutant IDH promotes ICC formation by blocking hepatocyte differentiation and
increasing pools of hepatic progenitors that are susceptible to additional
oncogenic hits leading to ICC. We found that silencing of HNF4A-encoding a master
transcriptional regulator of hepatocyte identity and quiescence-was critical to
mutant IDH-mediated inhibition of liver differentiation. In line with these
findings, human ICC with IDH mutations are characterized by a hepatic progenitor 
cell transcriptional signature suggesting that they are a distinct ICC subtype as
compared to IDH wild type tumors. The role of mutant IDH in controlling hepatic
differentiation state suggests the potential of newly developed inhibitors of the
mutant enzyme as a form of differentiation therapy in a solid tumor.

PMCID: PMC4614372
PMID: 25485496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Genomics. 2014 Dec;104(6 Pt B):477-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2014.10.010. Epub
2014 Oct 31.

Gene expression alterations in chronic hypoxic MCF7 breast cancer cell line.

Hamdan FH(1), Zihlif MA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, The University of Jordan,
Amman 11942, Jordan. (2)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, The
University of Jordan, Amman 11942, Jordan. Electronic address:
m.zihlif@ju.edu.jo.

Hypoxia plays a significant role in tumor progression and aggressiveness and
implicated in resistance to radiotherapy and chemotherapy. This study aims to
characterize the changes in gene expression associated with chronic hypoxia in
MCF7 breast cancer cell line and identify a possible biomarker for hypoxia in
breast cancer. Breast cancer cells (MCF7) were exposed to 8-hour hypoxic episodes
(<1% oxygen) three times a week for a total of 38 episodes. Gene expression
changes were profiled using RT- PCR array after 19 and 38 episodes of hypoxia and
compared to normoxic cells. Chemoresistance of hypoxic cells toward doxorubicin
was assessed using MTT cell proliferation assay. Marked gene expression changes
were indentified after 19 and 38 episodes of hypoxia. Only few changes were
common in both stages with most genes rebounding at the level of 38 episodes. A
notable gene (HNF4A) has been up-regulated by 2 folds after 19 hypoxic shots and 
further up-regulated by 6.43 folds after 38 hypoxic shots. The half maximal
inhibitory concentration (IC50) of doxorubicin in MCF7 cells has increased in a
trend proportional to the number of hypoxic episodes then totally rebounded after
incubation under normoxia for 3 weeks. This study provides evidence that exposing
cells to prolonged periods of hypoxia (weeks) results in different expression
changes than those induced by short-term hypoxia (less than 72h).

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25449175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Life Sci. 2014 Dec 5;119(1-2):34-9. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2014.10.009. Epub 2014 Oct
30.

Competitive regulation of human intestinal ß-carotene 15,15'-monooxygenase 1
(BCMO1) gene expression by hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1a and HNF-4a.

Yamaguchi N(1), Sunto A(2), Goda T(2), Suruga K(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nutritional Physiology, Graduate School of Human Health
Sciences, University of Nagasaki Siebold, Nagasaki 851-2195, Japan. (2)Laboratory
of Nutritional Physiology, Graduate School of Nutritional and Environmental
Sciences and Global COE, University of Shizuoka, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan.
(3)Laboratory of Nutritional Physiology, Graduate School of Human Health
Sciences, University of Nagasaki Siebold, Nagasaki 851-2195, Japan. Electronic
address: suruga@sun.ac.jp.

AIM: Among the pro-vitamin A carotenoids, ß-carotene is an excellent source of
vitamin A. ß-Carotene 15,15'-monooxygenase 1 (BCMO1) is a critical enzyme
involved in the conversion of ß-carotene into vitamin A (retinal) in the small
intestine of many vertebrates. In the present study, we investigated the
regulation of human BCMO1 gene expression using human intestinal Caco-2 BBe
cells.
MAIN METHODS: We performed electrophoretic mobility shift assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays to investigate the binding properties of hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1a and HNF-4a to the proximal promoter of the human BCMO1
gene. Caco-2 BBe cells were also transfected with HNF-1a and HNF-4a siRNAs, and
BCMO1 gene expression levels and promoter activity were analyzed by real-time
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction and luciferase reporter assays,
respectively.
KEY FINDINGS: We identified overlapping binding sites for HNF-1a and HNF-4a in
the human BCMO1 gene proximal promoter. Endogenous nuclear HNF-1a and HNF-4a
proteins competitively bound these sites in Caco-2 BBe cells. BCMO1 gene
expression levels and promoter activity were significantly decreased in HNF-1a
siRNA-transfected Caco-2 BBe cells. In contrast, HNF-4a siRNA-transfected cells
exhibited a significant increase in BCMO1 gene expression and promoter activity. 
Mutation of these overlapping binding sites dramatically decreased BCMO1 promoter
activity.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our study indicates that the competitive actions of HNF-1a and
HNF-4a on their overlapping binding sites in the human BCMO1 gene promoter
oppositely regulate BCMO1 gene expression in the human small intestine.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25445224  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 9;290(2):1170-85. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.601203. Epub 2014
Nov 24.

Decreased expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (Hnf4a)/microRNA-122
(miR-122) axis in hepatitis B virus-associated hepatocellular carcinoma enhances 
potential oncogenic GALNT10 protein activity.

Wu Q(1), Liu HO(1), Liu YD(1), Liu WS(1), Pan D(1), Zhang WJ(2), Yang L(1), Fu
Q(1), Xu JJ(3), Gu JX(4).

Author information: 
(1)From the Key Laboratory of Glycoconjugate Research, Ministry of Health,
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and. (2)Department of
Immunology, School of Basic Medical Sciences, Shanghai Medical College of Fudan
University, Shanghai 200032, China. (3)From the Key Laboratory of Glycoconjugate 
Research, Ministry of Health, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology
and jjxufdu@fudan.edu.cn. (4)From the Key Laboratory of Glycoconjugate Research, 
Ministry of Health, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology and
jxgu@shmu.edu.cn.

MicroRNA-122 (miR-122), a mammalian liver-specific miRNA, has been reported to
play crucial roles in the control of diverse aspects of hepatic function and
dysfunction, including viral infection and hepatocarcinogenesis. In this study,
we explored the clinical significance, transcriptional regulation, and direct
target of miR-122 in hepatitis B virus (HBV)-associated hepatocellular carcinoma.
Reduced expression of miR-122 in patients with HBV-associated hepatocellular
carcinoma was correlated with venous invasion and poor prognosis. Furthermore,
UDP-N-acetyl-a-D-galactosamine:polypeptide N-acetylgalactosaminyltransferase-10
(GALNT10) was identified as a bona fide target of miR-122 in hepatoma cells.
Ectopic expression and knockdown studies showed that GALNT10 indeed promotes
proliferation and apoptosis resistance of hepatoma cells in a
glycosyltransferase-dependent manner. Critically, adverse correlation between
miR-122 and GALNT10, a poor prognosticator of clinical outcome, was demonstrated 
in hepatoma patients. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (Hnf4a), a liver-enriched
transcription factor that activates miR-122 gene transcription, was suppressed in
HBV-infected hepatoma cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay showed
significantly reduced association of Hnf4a with the miR-122 promoter in
HBV-infected hepatoma cells. Moreover, GALNT10 was found to intensify
O-glycosylation following signal activation of the epidermal growth factor
receptor. In addition, in a therapeutic perspective, we proved that GALNT10
silencing increases sensitivity to sorafenib and doxorubicin challenge. In
summary, our results reveal a novel Hnf4a/miR-122/GALNT10 regulatory pathway that
facilitates EGF miR-122 activation and hepatoma growth in HBV-associated
hepatocarcinogenesis.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4294483
PMID: 25422324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Diabetes Care. 2014 Dec;37(12):e258-60. doi: 10.2337/dc14-1788.

Low prevalence of HNF1A mutations after molecular screening of multiple MODY
genes in 58 Italian families recruited in the pediatric or adult diabetes clinic 
from a single Italian hospital.

Delvecchio M(1), Ludovico O(2), Menzaghi C(3), Di Paola R(3), Zelante L(4),
Marucci A(3), Grasso V(5), Trischitta V(6), Carella M(4), Barbetti F(7), Gallo F,
Coccioli MS, Zecchino C, Faienza MF, Cardinale G, Franzese A, Mozzillo E, Iafusco
D, Zanfardino A.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatrics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy mdelvecchio75@gmail.com fabrizio.barbetti@uniroma2.it.
(2)Endocrine Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy. (3)Research Unit of Diabetes and Endocrine Diseases, IRCCS Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy. (4)Medical
Genetics Unit, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni
Rotondo, Italy. (5)Bambino Gesù Children's Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy.
(6)Research Unit of Diabetes and Endocrine Diseases, IRCCS Casa Sollievo della
Sofferenza Hospital, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy Department of Experimental
Medicine, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy. (7)Bambino Gesù Children's
Hospital, IRCCS, Rome, Italy Department of Experimental Medicine and Surgery,
University of Rome Tor Vergata, Rome, Italy mdelvecchio75@gmail.com
fabrizio.barbetti@uniroma2.it.

PMID: 25414397  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Dec 16;42(22):13646-61. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku1225. Epub
2014 Nov 20.

The mechanisms of genome-wide target gene regulation by TCF7L2 in liver cells.

Norton L(1), Chen X(2), Fourcaudot M(2), Acharya NK(2), DeFronzo RA(2), Heikkinen
S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Division, University of Texas Health Science Center, San Antonio, TX 
78229, USA nortonl@uthscsa.edu. (2)Diabetes Division, University of Texas Health 
Science Center, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA. (3)Institute of Biomedicine,
University of Eastern Finland, Kuopio 70211, Finland nortonl@uthscsa.edu.

In the liver Wnt-signaling contributes to the metabolic fate of hepatocytes, but 
the precise role of the TCF7L2 in this process is unknown. We employed a temporal
RNA-Seq approach to examine gene expression 3-96 h following Tcf7l2 silencing in 
rat hepatoma cells, and combined this with ChIP-Seq to investigate mechanisms of 
target gene regulation by TCF7L2. Silencing Tcf7l2 led to a time-dependent
appearance of 406 differentially expressed genes (DEGs), including key regulators
of cellular growth and differentiation, and amino acid, lipid and glucose
metabolism. Direct regulation of 149 DEGs was suggested by strong proximal TCF7L2
binding (peak proximity score > 10) and early mRNA expression changes (= 18 h).
Indirect gene regulation by TCF7L2 likely occurred via alternate transcription
factors, including Hnf4a, Foxo1, Cited2, Myc and Lef1, which were differentially 
expressed following Tcf7l2 knock-down. Tcf7l2-silencing enhanced the expression
and chromatin occupancy of HNF4a, and co-siRNA experiments revealed that HNF4a
was required for the regulation of a subset of metabolic genes by TCF7L2,
particularly those involved in lipid and amino-acid metabolism. Our findings
suggest TCF7L2 is an important regulator of the hepatic phenotype, and highlight 
novel mechanisms of gene regulation by TCF7L2 that involve interplay between
multiple hepatic transcriptional pathways.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4267646
PMID: 25414334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Dis Markers. 2014;2014:231736. doi: 10.1155/2014/231736. Epub 2014 Oct 15.

Prediabetes is associated with HNF-4 a P2 promoter polymorphism rs1884613: a
case-control study in Han Chinese population and an updated meta-analysis.

Wang C(1), Chen S(1), Zhang T(1), Chen Z(1), Liu S(1), Peng X(1), Ma J(1), Zhong 
X(2), Yan Y(2), Tang L(3), Mai Y(3), Han L(4), Duan S(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shenzhen Nanshan Center for Chronic Disease Control, Shenzhen 518054, China.
(2)Shenzhen Shekou People's Hospital, Shenzhen 518067, China. (3)The Affiliated
Hospital, School of Medicine, Ningbo University, Ningbo, Zhejiang 315000, China. 
(4)School of Medicine, Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Pathophysiology,
Diabetes Center, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315211, China.

BACKGROUND: Controversy remains for the association between hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4a (HNF-4a) P2 promoter polymorphism rs1884613 and type 2 diabetes (T2D). 
There was no association test of this polymorphism with prediabetes and T2D in
the Chinese population. Moreover, an updated meta-analysis in various ethnic
groups is needed to establish the contribution of rs1884613 to T2D risk.
METHODS: Using the Sequenom MassARRAY platform approach, we genotyped rs1884613
of HNF-4a in the P2 promoter region among 490 T2D patients, 471 individuals with 
prediabetes, and 575 healthy controls. All the individuals were recruited from 16
community health service centers in Nanshan district in Shenzhen province. Using 
STATA 11.0 software, meta-analysis was performed to summarize the overall
contribution of rs1884613 to T2D risk.
RESULTS: Polymorphism rs1884613 was associated with genetic susceptibility to
prediabetes in the whole samples (OR = 1.40, 95% CI = 1.16-1.68, P = 0.0001) and 
the female subgrouped samples (OR = 1.48, 95% CI = 1.14-1.92, P = 0.003) after
adjusting for age and body mass index (BMI). In contrast, there was no
association of rs1884613 with T2D in the whole samples and male in our
case-control study and meta-analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that rs1884613 contributes to susceptibility to 
prediabetes, whereas this polymorphism may not play an important role in the
development of T2D.

PMCID: PMC4226192
PMID: 25400315  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2014 Nov 14. [Epub ahead of print]

Exploring the Genomic Roadmap and Molecular Phylogenetics Associated with MODY
Cascades Using Computational Biology.

Chakraborty C(1), Bandyopadhyay S, Doss CG, Agoramoorthy G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, School of Computer and Information Sciences,
Galgotias University, Noida, India.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a metabolic and genetic disorder. 
It is different from type 1 and type 2 diabetes with low occurrence level (1-2 %)
among all diabetes. This disorder is a consequence of ß-cell dysfunction. Till
date, 11 subtypes of MODY have been identified, and all of them can cause gene
mutations. However, very little is known about the gene mapping, molecular
phylogenetics, and co-expression among MODY genes and networking between
cascades. This study has used latest servers and software such as VarioWatch,
ClustalW, MUSCLE, G Blocks, Phylogeny.fr, iTOL, WebLogo, STRING, and KEGG PATHWAY
to perform comprehensive analyses of gene mapping, multiple sequences alignment, 
molecular phylogenetics, protein-protein network design, co-expression analysis
of MODY genes, and pathway development. The MODY genes are located in
chromosomes-2, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12, 13, 17, and 20. Highly aligned block shows Pro,
Gly, Leu, Arg, and Pro residues are highly aligned in the positions of 296, 386, 
437, 455, 456 and 598, respectively. Alignment scores inform us that HNF1A and
HNF1B proteins have shown high sequence similarity among MODY proteins.
Protein-protein network design shows that HNF1A, HNF1B, HNF4A, NEUROD1, PDX1,
PAX4, INS, and GCK are strongly connected, and the co-expression analyses between
MODY genes also show distinct association between HNF1A and HNF4A genes. This
study has used latest tools of bioinformatics to develop a rapid method to assess
the evolutionary relationship, the network development, and the associations
among eleven MODY genes and cascades. The prediction of sequence conservation,
molecular phylogenetics, protein-protein network and the association between the 
MODY cascades enhances opportunities to get more insights into the less-known
MODY disease.

PMID: 25395195  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


108. J Biol Chem. 2015 Jan 23;290(4):2264-78. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.579474. Epub 2014 
Nov 12.

Epigenetic modification of histone 3 lysine 27: mediator subunit MED25 is
required for the dissociation of polycomb repressive complex 2 from the promoter 
of cytochrome P450 2C9.

Englert NA(1), Luo G(1), Goldstein JA(2), Surapureddi S(1).

Author information: 
(1)From the Laboratory of Toxicology and Pharmacology, NIEHS, National Institutes
of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709. (2)From the Laboratory
of Toxicology and Pharmacology, NIEHS, National Institutes of Health, Research
Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709 goldste1@niehs.nih.gov.

The Mediator complex is vital for the transcriptional regulation of eukaryotic
genes. Mediator binds to nuclear receptors at target response elements and
recruits chromatin-modifying enzymes and RNA polymerase II. Here, we examine the 
involvement of Mediator subunit MED25 in the epigenetic regulation of human
cytochrome P450 2C9 (CYP2C9). MED25 is recruited to the CYP2C9 promoter through
association with liver-enriched HNF4a, and we show that MED25 influences the
H3K27 status of the HNF4a binding region. This region was enriched for the
activating marker H3K27ac and histone acetyltransferase CREBBP after MED25
overexpression but was trimethylated when MED25 expression was silenced. The
epigenetic regulator Polycomb repressive complex (PRC2), which represses
expression by methylating H3K27, plays an important role in target gene
regulation. Silencing MED25 correlated with increased association of PRC2 not
only with the promoter region chromatin but with HNF4a itself. We confirmed the
involvement of MED25 for fully functional preinitiation complex recruitment and
transcriptional output in vitro. Formaldehyde-assisted isolation of regulatory
elements (FAIRE) revealed chromatin conformation changes that were reliant on
MED25, indicating that MED25 induced a permissive chromatin state that reflected 
increases in CYP2C9 mRNA. For the first time, we showed evidence that a
functionally relevant human gene is transcriptionally regulated by HNF4a via
MED25 and PRC2. CYP2C9 is important for the metabolism of many exogenous
chemicals including pharmaceutical drugs as well as endogenous substrates. Thus, 
MED25 is important for regulating the epigenetic landscape resulting in
transcriptional activation of a highly inducible gene, CYP2C9.

© 2015 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4303677
PMID: 25391650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biol Pharm Bull. 2014;37(11):1782-7.

Human hepatocarcinoma functional liver cell-4 cell line exhibits high expression 
of drug-metabolizing enzymes in three-dimensional culture.

Kato R(1), Shigemoto K, Akiyama H, Ieda A, Ijiri Y, Hayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Pharmacotherapy and Toxicology, Osaka University 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences.

The expression levels of CYP and uridine diphosphate-glucuronosyl transferase
(UGT) are lower in hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines than in human primary
hepatocytes. However, a functional liver cell (FLC)-4 cell line that has a
greater capacity to secrete liver-specific proteins than other hepatocellular
carcinoma cells has recently been established. A three-dimensional culture using 
Engelbreth-Holm-Swan (EHS) gel induces the secretion of liver-specific proteins
via the induction of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a (HNF-4a). The aim of this study
was to evaluate the mRNA expression of the enzymes CYP and UGT in FLC-4 and HepG2
cells in monolayer and three-dimensional cultures using EHS gel. The mRNA levels 
of HNF-4a, albumin, pregnane X receptor (PXR), constitutive androstane receptor
(CAR), CYPs (1A2, 2E1, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, and 3A4) and UGTs (1A1, 1A6, 1A9, and
2B7) were determined using real-time reverse transcription (RT) PCR. In a
monolayer culture, the mRNA expression levels of HNF-4a, albumin, PXR, CAR, CYPs 
(2E1, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6, and 3A4) and UGTs (1A1, 1A6, and 1A9) were higher in FLC-4 
cells than in HepG2 cells. In FLC-4 cells, the mRNA expression levels of HNF-4a, 
albumin, PXR, CAR, CYPs (2E1, 2C8, 2C19, and 3A4) and UGTs (1A1, 1A6, 1A9, and
2B7) significantly increased in three-dimensional culture. FLC-4 cells cultured
in EHS gel showed significantly increased expression levels of CYPs and UGTs. The
results of this study suggest that human hepatocellular carcinoma FLC-4 cells
cultured in EHS gel show potential for use in studying in vitro drug metabolism.

PMID: 25366484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. J Investig Med. 2014 Dec;62(8):968-74. doi: 10.1097/JIM.0000000000000114.

Early-onset type 2 diabetes mellitus is associated to HNF4A T130I polymorphism in
families of central Spain.

Cieza-Borrella C(1), Díaz-Soto G, Martínez-Pino I, Puig-Domingo M,
González-Sarmiento R.

Author information: 
(1)From the *Unidad de Medicina Molecular, Departamento de Medicina, IBSAL and
IBMCC, Universidad de Salamanca-CSIC, Salamanca; Servicio de Endocrinología, U. 
Diabetes, Hospital Clínico Universitario de Valladolid, IEN-UVa, Valladolid;
Centro Nacional de Epidemiología, ISCIII, CIBERESP, Madrid; and §Servicio de
Endocrinología y Nutrición, Hospital Germans Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain.

PURPOSE: Type 2 diabetes mellitus (type 2 DM) and maturity-onset diabetes of the 
young present some similar clinical and biochemical characteristics that make
them difficult to differentiate. Currently, the polymorphism T130I (rs1800961) in
the HNF4A (hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A) gene has been described as a risk factor
to type 2 DM and shows an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern associated to
ß-cell function decrease. The aim of the present work was to characterize the
phenotypic profile of the T130I carrier and noncarrier relatives included in 3
unrelated families.
METHODS: We studied GCK, HNF1A, and HNF4A genes by polymerase chain reaction and 
sequencing in 3 unrelated subjects from Valladolid, Spain, in which
maturity-onset diabetes of the young was suspected. We collected genetic,
clinical, and biochemical data from these subjects and their relatives in order
to check the presence of the T130I polymorphism.
RESULTS: The heterozygous T130I mutation was the unique functional gene variation
that could explain diabetes phenotype. We observed significant differences in
glucose metabolism, lipid profile, and Homeostasis Model Assessment index when we
compared T130I mutation carriers and noncarriers. Diabetes diagnosed in T130I
mutation carriers was related to stressful situations in an earlier age and
tightly associated with gestational diabetes. Fasting plasma glucose and HbA(1c) 
levels increased with age in all carriers (r = 0.69 and r = 0.66, P < 0.01),
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study supports the T130I variant in HNF4A as a major
susceptibility genotype associated with early-onset type 2 DM. Healthy carriers
of this mutation require a stricter control in the population of central Spain.

PMID: 25361053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2015 Jan;25(1):38-40. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0000000000000103.

Combined effects of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a and constitutive androstane
receptor on stable warfarin doses.

Moon JY(1), Lee KE, Chang BC, Jeong E, Jeong H, Gwak HS.

Author information: 
(1)aDivision of Life and Pharmaceutical Sciences & College of Pharmacy, Ewha
Womans University bDepartment of Thoracic & Cardiovascular Surgery, Yonsei
University Medical Center, Seoul cCollege of Pharmacy, Chungbuk National
University, Chungbuk, Korea.

A possible association between the combination of genetic variations in
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) and constitutive androstane receptor (CAR)
and the stable doses of warfarin was examined in patients from the Ewha-Severance
Treatment (EAST) Group of Warfarin. Around 42.5% of the overall interindividual
variability in warfarin dose requirements was explained by the multivariate
regression model; the vitamin K epoxide reductase complex 1 (VKORC1) genotype
accounted for 29.6%, the cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2C9 genotype for 4.3%, age for
3.6%, the CYP4F2 genotype for 3.3%, and CAR/HNF4a (rs2501873/rs3212198) for 1.7%.
Our results showed that the combination of CAR and HNF4a genotypes could be
determinants of stable warfarin doses.

PMID: 25356900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Virol. 2015 Jan 15;89(2):999-1012. doi: 10.1128/JVI.02440-14. Epub 2014 Oct 29.

The hepatitis B virus (HBV) HBx protein activates AKT to simultaneously regulate 
HBV replication and hepatocyte survival.

Rawat S(1), Bouchard MJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Program in Molecular and Cellular Biology and Genetics, Drexel
University College of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA. (2)Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Drexel University College of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA michael.bouchard@drexelmed.edu.

Chronic infection with hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a risk factor for developing
liver diseases such as hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). HBx is a multifunctional
protein encoded by the HBV genome; HBx stimulates HBV replication and is thought 
to play an important role in the development of HBV-associated HCC. HBx can
activate the phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)/AKT signaling pathway in some
cell lines; however, whether HBx regulates PI3K/AKT signaling in normal
hepatocytes has not been evaluated. In studies described here, we assessed HBx
activation of PI3K/AKT signaling in an ex vivo model of cultured primary
hepatocytes and determined how this HBx activity affects HBV replication. We
report that HBx activates AKT in primary hepatocytes and that the activation of
AKT decreases HBV replication and HBV mRNA and core protein levels. We show that 
the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) is a target of
HBx-regulated AKT, and we link HNF4a to HBx-regulated AKT modulation of HBV
transcription and replication. Although we and others have shown that HBx
stimulates and is likely required for HBV replication, we now report that HBx
also activates signals that can diminish the overall level of HBV replication.
While this may seem counterintuitive, we show that an important effect of HBx
activation of AKT is inhibition of apoptosis. Consequently, our studies suggest
that HBx balances HBV replication and cell survival by stimulating signaling
pathways that enhance hepatocyte survival at the expense of higher levels of HBV 
replication.IMPORTANCE: Chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a common
cause of the development of liver cancer. Regulation of cell signaling pathways
by the HBV HBx protein is thought to influence the development of HBV-associated 
liver cancer. HBx stimulates, and may be essential for, HBV replication. We show 
that HBx activates AKT in hepatocytes to reduce HBV replication. While this seems
contradictory to an essential role of HBx during HBV replication, HBx activation 
of AKT inhibits hepatocyte apoptosis, and this may facilitate persistent,
noncytopathic HBV replication. AKT regulates HBV replication by reducing the
activity of the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a). HBx
activation of AKT may contribute to the development of liver cancer by
facilitating persistent HBV replication, augmenting the dedifferentiation of
hepatocytes by inhibiting HNF4a functions, and activating AKT-regulated oncogenic
pathways. AKT-regulated factors may provide therapeutic targets for inhibiting
HBV replication and the development of HBV-associated liver cancer.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4300660
PMID: 25355887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. J Proteome Res. 2015 Jan 2;14(1):51-8. doi: 10.1021/pr500990w. Epub 2014 Nov 11.

Elucidating the molecular basis of adverse health effects from exposure to
anthropogenic polyfluorinated compounds using toxicoproteomic approaches.

Hansmeier N(1), Chao TC, Herbstman JB, Goldman LR, Witter FR, Halden RU.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Osnabrück , Barbarastrasse 11, Osnabrück 
49076, Germany.

Linear, short-chain polyfluorinated and perfluorinated alkyl compounds, often
referred to as PFCs, have been in worldwide use as surfactants and polymer
precursors for decades, and environmental dispersal of these highly persistent
compounds represents a public health threat. Whereas ubiquitous low-level
exposure to these compounds has been demonstrated in human populations from
around the world, the exact mechanisms of toxicity and their toxic potency remain
subject to investigation and scientific dispute. As with other environmental
exposures, a major hurdle for gaining a better understanding of their human
health impacts is the limited utility of cell culture and animal models serving
as convenient, yet imperfect proxies to human physiology and disease. The present
communication provides a brief overview of the current understanding of potential
health effects of PFC exposure and examines how new toxicoproteomic methodologies
can provide insight into the molecular mechanism of PFC exposure. Furthermore, we
showcase an exemplary data set to illustrate how toxicoproteomic, population-wide
studies might overcome limitations of animal models to more fully understand the 
metabolism and effects of PFCs and other environmental stressors where it matters
most, in human populations experiencing real-world, chronic, low-level exposures.

PMID: 25350270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. BMC Genomics. 2014 Oct 4;15:860. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-15-860.

Genetic and epigenetic regulation of gene expression in fetal and adult human
livers.

Bonder MJ, Kasela S, Kals M, Tamm R, Lokk K, Barragan I, Buurman WA, Deelen P,
Greve JW, Ivanov M, Rensen SS, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Wolfs MG, Fu J, Hofker
MH, Wijmenga C, Zhernakova A, Ingelman-Sundberg M, Franke L(1), Milani L.

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen, Department of
Genetics, Hanzeplein 1, 9700 RB Groningen, the Netherlands. lude@ludesign.nl.

BACKGROUND: The liver plays a central role in the maintenance of homeostasis and 
health in general. However, there is substantial inter-individual variation in
hepatic gene expression, and although numerous genetic factors have been
identified, less is known about the epigenetic factors.
RESULTS: By analyzing the methylomes and transcriptomes of 14 fetal and 181 adult
livers, we identified 657 differentially methylated genes with adult-specific
expression, these genes were enriched for transcription factor binding sites of
HNF1A and HNF4A. We also identified 1,000 genes specific to fetal liver, which
were enriched for GATA1, STAT5A, STAT5B and YY1 binding sites. We saw strong
liver-specific effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms on both methylation
levels (28,447 unique CpG sites (meQTL)) and gene expression levels (526 unique
genes (eQTL)), at a false discovery rate (FDR)<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05. Of the 526 unique eQTL
associated genes, 293 correlated significantly not only with genetic variation
but also with methylation levels. The tissue-specificities of these associations 
were analyzed in muscle, subcutaneous adipose tissue and visceral adipose tissue.
We observed that meQTL were more stable between tissues than eQTL and a very
strong tissue-specificity for the identified associations between CpG methylation
and gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our analyses generated a comprehensive resource of factors involved 
in the regulation of hepatic gene expression, and allowed us to estimate the
proportion of variation in gene expression that could be attributed to genetic
and epigenetic variation, both crucial to understanding differences in drug
response and the etiology of liver diseases.

PMCID: PMC4287518
PMID: 25282492  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Ann Saudi Med. 2014 May-Jun;34(3):217-21. doi: 10.5144/0256-4947.2014.217.

Clinical and molecular characterization of maturity onset-diabetes of the young
caused by hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha mutation: red flags for prediction of
the diagnosis.

Mohamed S(1), Elkholy S, El-Meleagy E, Abu-Amero K, Hellani AM.

Author information: 
(1)Sarar Mohamed, Department of Pediatrics,, College of Medicine,, King Saud
University,, PO Box 2925, Riyadh 11461,, Saudi Arabia, T: +966541235272, F:
+966114691512, sararmohamed@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: The prevalence of maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) in Saudi population remains unknown, and data on molecular etiology of
this condition is limited. Therefore, the present study was undertaken to
elucidate clinical and molecular characteristics of a Saudi family with MODY 1.
DESIGN AND SETTINGS: This is a case series study conducted at Saad Specialist
Hospital in Alkhobar, Saudi Arabia.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A 12-year-old female presented to us with symptoms
suggestive of diabetes. Investigations revealed hyperglycemia, glycosuria, and
ketonuria without acidosis. Pancreatic antibodies were negative. She responded
well to subcutaneous insulin. Her family history revealed that 2 of her siblings 
were diagnosed with type 1 diabetes (T1DM), while her father and mother had type 
2 diabetes (T2DM). In view of this strong family history, the possibility of
monogenic diabetes was raised, and the 2 genes consistent with this phenotype,
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1a) and hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha
(HNF4a), were studied. Accordingly, genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral
blood lymphocytes of the 8 members of this family, polymerase chain reaction was 
carried out, and sequencing of the whole HNF4a and HNF1a genes was done.
RESULTS: DNA study of the proband revealed a heterozygous substitution in intron 
1 (IVS1b C > T-5)(c.50-5C > T) of the HNF1a gene. This mutation was identified in
other 5 members of the family.
CONCLUSION: This study alerts physicians to suspect MODY in patients who have a
strongly positive family history of diabetes over a few generations with negative
pancreatic antibodies and absence of ketoacidosis and obesity.

PMID: 25266181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. PLoS One. 2014 Sep 29;9(9):e108717. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0108717.
eCollection 2014.

Short and long-term impact of lipectomy on expression profile of hepatic anabolic
genes in rats: a high fat and high cholesterol diet-induced obese model.

Ling BL(1), Chiu CT(1), Lu HC(2), Lin JJ(3), Kuo CY(1), Chou FP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Biotechnology, College of Medicine, Chung Shan
Medical University, Taichung City, Taiwan. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, 
China Medical University Hospital, Taichung City, Taiwan; Institute of
Biotechnology, HungKuang University, Taichung City, Taiwan. (3)Genomics Research 
Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei City, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Biochemistry and
Biotechnology, College of Medicine, Chung Shan Medical University, Taichung City,
Taiwan; Clinical Laboratory, Chung Shan Medical University Hospital, Taichung
City, Taiwan.

OBJECTIVE: To understand the molecular basis of the short and long-term effects
of an immediate shortage of energy storage caused by lipectomy on expression
profile of genes involved in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism in high fat and
high cholesterol diet-induced obese rats.
METHODS: The hepatic mRNA levels of enzymes, regulator and transcription factors 
involved in glucose and lipid metabolism were analyzed by quantitative real time 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-qPCR) ten days and eight weeks after lipectomy in
obese rats. Body and liver weights and serum biochemical parameters, adiponectin,
leptin and insulin were determined.
RESULTS: No significant difference was observed on the food intake between the
lipectomized and sham-operated groups during the experimental period. Ten days
after the operation, the lipectomized animals showed significant higher
triacylglycerol, glucose and insulin levels, a lower adiponectin concentration
than the sham-operated rats, along with significant higher hepatic mRNA levels of
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) and the enzymes involved in lipogenesis,
sterol biosynthesis and gluconeogenesis. The results of immunohistochemical (IHC)
analysis also confirmed increased levels of lipogenic enzymes in the liver of
lipectomized versus sham-operated animals. The lipectomized group had a
significantly lower adiponectin/leptin ratio that was positively correlated to
the level of LDL (r<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.823, P<0.05) and negatively to glucose and insulin
(r<U+200A>=<U+200A>-0.821 and -0.892 respectively, P<0.05). Eight weeks after the operation,
the lipectomized animals revealed significant higher body and liver weights,
weight gain, liver to body weight ratio, hepatic triacylglycerol and serum
insulin level.
CONCLUSIONS: In response to lipectomy a short term enhancement of the expression 
of hepatic anabolic genes involved in lipid and carbohydrate metabolism was
triggered that might eventually lead to the final extra weight gain. These
metabolic changes could be the results of reduced circulating adiponectin that
further influences the functions of insulin and hepatic HNF4a.

PMCID: PMC4181868
PMID: 25264921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cell Rep. 2014 Oct 9;9(1):261-71. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2014.08.046. Epub 2014
Sep 25.

Hippo signaling influences HNF4A and FOXA2 enhancer switching during hepatocyte
differentiation.

Alder O(1), Cullum R(1), Lee S(1), Kan AC(1), Wei W(1), Yi Y(1), Garside VC(1),
Bilenky M(2), Griffith M(2), Morrissy AS(2), Robertson GA(2), Thiessen N(2), Zhao
Y(2), Chen Q(3), Pan D(3), Jones SJ(4), Marra MA(5), Hoodless PA(6).

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC V5Z1L3, Canada.
(2)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC
V5Z1L3, Canada. (3)Department of Molecular Biology and Genetics, Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. (4)Canada's Michael
Smith Genome Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC V5Z1L3, Canada;
Department of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Simon Fraser University,
Burnaby, BC V5A1S6, Canada; Department of Medical Genetics, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, BC V5Z4H4, Canada. (5)Canada's Michael Smith Genome Sciences
Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC V5Z1L3, Canada; Department of Medical
Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V5Z4H4, Canada. (6)Terry 
Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC V5Z1L3, Canada; Department of
Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC V5Z4H4, Canada.
Electronic address: hoodless@bccrc.ca.

Cell fate acquisition is heavily influenced by direct interactions between master
regulators and tissue-specific enhancers. However, it remains unclear how
lineage-specifying transcription factors, which are often expressed in both
progenitor and mature cell populations, influence cell differentiation. Using in 
vivo mouse liver development as a model, we identified thousands of enhancers
that are bound by the master regulators HNF4A and FOXA2 in a
differentiation-dependent manner, subject to chromatin remodeling, and associated
with differentially expressed target genes. Enhancers exclusively occupied in the
embryo were found to be responsive to developmentally regulated TEAD2 and
coactivator YAP1. Our data suggest that Hippo signaling may affect hepatocyte
differentiation by influencing HNF4A and FOXA2 interactions with temporal
enhancers. In summary, transcription factor-enhancer interactions are not only
tissue specific but also differentiation dependent, which is an important
consideration for researchers studying cancer biology or mammalian development
and/or using transformed cell lines.

Copyright © 2014 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4612615
PMID: 25263553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Oncol Rep. 2014 Dec;32(6):2387-96. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3501. Epub 2014 Sep 19.

CXCR7 correlates with the differentiation of hepatocellular carcinoma and
suppresses HNF4a expression through the ERK pathway.

Xue TC(1), Jia QA(1), Bu Y(1), Chen RX(1), Cui JF(1), Tang ZY(1), Ye SL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Liver Cancer Institute, Zhongshan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, P.R.
China.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is a malignancy with dysregulated differentiation.
However, effective differentiation therapy for HCC is lacking. Previous evidence 
suggests that CXCR7 is associated with the differentiation of embryonic stem
cells. Here, we evaluated the potential role of CXCR7 in the differentiation of
HCC. In HCC cell lines, the expression of cancer stem cell-related markers was
assessed by flow cytometry and confirmed by western blot and immunofluorescence
analyses. Dimethyl sulfoxide, oncostatin M and dexamethasone were used to induce 
the differentiation of HCC. Immunohistochemical assay was performed on a tissue
microarray based on 112 HCC cases that received hepatectomy. Ligand activation,
inhibition assays and RNA interference were used to analyze the regulation of
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) by the CXCR7 pathway. Huh7 and HCCLM3 cell
lines were screened for differentiation induction based on biomarkers of hepatic 
cancer stem cells. CXCR7 was found to be closely associated with the
differentiation of HCC, and an inverse expression trend between CXCR7 and HNF4a
was found upon induced differentiation. Clinically, high CXCR7 expression was
negatively correlated with HNF4a expression in patients with relatively
well-differentiated HCC. Moreover, high CXCR7 expression was correlated with poor
overall survival and accelerated post-resection metastasis in HCC with a low
HNF4a level. Mechanistically, CXCR7 signaling inhibited HNF4a through
extracellular regulated protein kinase (ERK) activation, which was inhibited by
U0126, an inhibitor of MAPK/ERK kinases 1 and 2. Knockdown of CXCR7 further
confirmed that CXCR7 signaling can regulate HNF4a expression. Taken together, our
findings indicate that CXCR7 participates in the differentiation of HCC by
regulating HNF4a. The CXCR7-ERK-HNF4a cascade represents a new target for the
differentiation therapy of HCC.

PMID: 25242412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Dec;99(12):E2780-8. doi: 10.1210/jc.2014-2640.

Sex hormone-binding globulin gene expression and insulin resistance.

Winters SJ(1), Gogineni J, Karegar M, Scoggins C, Wunderlich CA, Baumgartner R,
Ghooray DT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Diabetes (S.J.W., J.G., M.K.,
D.T.G.), Division of Surgical Oncology (C.S.), Clinical Pathology Associates,
Norton Healthcare (C.A.W.), and Department of Epidemiology and Population Health 
(R.B.), University of Louisville, Louisville, Kentucky 40202.

CONTEXT: The plasma level of sex hormone binding globulin (SHBG), a glycoprotein 
produced by hepatocytes, is subject to genetic, hormonal, metabolic, and
nutritional regulation, and is a marker for the development of the metabolic
syndrome and diabetes.
OBJECTIVE: Because the mechanism for these associations is unclear, and no
studies of SHBG gene expression in humans have been published, SHBG mRNA was
measured in human liver samples and related to anthropometric data.
SETTING: Inpatients at a private, nonprofit, university-associated hospital were 
studied.
PARTICIPANTS: Subjects were fifty five adult men and women undergoing hepatic
resection as treatment for cancer.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: Main outcome measures were SHBG mRNA and serum SHBG
levels.
RESULTS: SHBG mRNA was a strong predictor of serum SHBG with higher levels of the
mRNA and protein in women than in men. The relationship between SHBG mRNA and
circulating SHBG differed in males and females consistent with a sex difference
in post-transcriptional regulation. A strong positive correlation was found
between the level of the mRNA for the transcription factor HNF4a and SHBG mRNA.
Insulin resistance (IR), assessed by homeostatis model assessment, was related
inversely to SHBG mRNA and to HNF4a mRNA as well as to circulating SHBG levels.
These mRNAs, as well as serum SHBG, were higher when the hepatic triglyceride
concentration was low, and decreased with increasing body mass index but were
unrelated to age.
CONCLUSIONS: Fat accumulation in liver and IR are important determinants of SHBG 
gene expression and thereby circulating SHBG levels that are perhaps mediated
through effects on the transcription factor HNF4a. These findings provide a
potential mechanism to explain why low SHBG predicts the development of type 2
diabetes.

PMID: 25226295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Jan 5;399:50-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.09.009. Epub
2014 Sep 16.

In vitro reprogramming of pancreatic alpha cells towards a beta cell phenotype
following ectopic HNF4a expression.

Sangan CB(1), Jover R(2), Heimberg H(3), Tosh D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Regenerative Medicine, University of Bath, Bath, UK.
(2)Experimental Hepatology Unit. Hosp. La Fe & Dep. Biochemistry, University of
Valencia. CIBERehd, Spain. (3)Diabetes Research Center, Vrije Universiteit
Brussel, Brussels, Belgium. (4)Centre for Regenerative Medicine, University of
Bath, Bath, UK. Electronic address: D.Tosh@bath.ac.uk.

There is currently a shortage of organ donors available for pancreatic beta cell 
transplantation into diabetic patients. An alternative source of beta cells is
pre-existing pancreatic cells. While we know that beta cells can arise directly
from alpha cells during pancreatic regeneration we do not understand the
molecular basis for the switch in phenotype. The aim of the present study was to 
investigate if hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4a), a transcription factor 
essential for a normal beta cell phenotype, could induce the reprogramming of
alpha cells towards potential beta cells. We utilised an in vitro model of
pancreatic alpha cells, the murine aTC1-9 cell line. We initially characterised
the aTC1-9 cell line before and following adenovirus-mediated ectopic expression 
of HNF4a. We analysed the phenotype at transcript and protein level and assessed 
its glucose-responsiveness. Ectopic HNF4a expression in the aTC1-9 cell line
induced a change in morphology (1.7-fold increase in size), suppressed glucagon
expression, induced key beta cell-specific markers (insulin, C-peptide,
glucokinase, GLUT2 and Pax4) and pancreatic polypeptide (PP) and enabled the
cells to secrete insulin in a glucose-regulated manner. In conclusion, HNF4a
reprograms alpha cells to beta-like cells.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25224487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 10;9(1):e84925. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084925. eCollection
2014.

Alterations of epigenetic signatures in hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a deficient
mouse liver determined by improved ChIP-qPCR and (h)MeDIP-qPCR assays.

Zhang Q(1), Lei X(1), Lu H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, New
York, United States of America.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) is a liver-enriched transcription factor
essential for liver development and function. In hepatocytes, HNF4a regulates a
large number of genes important for nutrient/xenobiotic metabolism and cell
differentiation and proliferation. Currently, little is known about the
epigenetic mechanism of gene regulation by HNF4a. In this study, the global and
specific alterations at the selected gene loci of representative histone
modifications and DNA methylations were investigated in Hnf4a-deficient female
mouse livers using the improved MeDIP-, hMeDIP- and ChIP-qPCR assay. Hnf4a
deficiency significantly increased hepatic total IPed DNA fragments for histone
H3 lysine-4 dimethylation (H3K4me2), H3K4me3, H3K9me2, H3K27me3 and H3K4
acetylation, but not for H3K9me3, 5-methylcytosine,or 5-hydroxymethylcytosine. At
specific gene loci, the relative enrichments of histone and DNA modifications
were changed to different degree in Hnf4a-deficient mouse liver. Among the
epigenetic signatures investigated, changes in H3K4me3 correlated the best with
mRNA expression. Additionally, Hnf4a-deficient livers had increased mRNA
expression of histone H1.2 and H3.3 as well as epigenetic modifiers Dnmt1, Tet3, 
Setd7, Kmt2c, Ehmt2, and Ezh2. In conclusion, the present study provides
convenient improved (h)MeDIP- and ChIP-qPCR assays for epigenetic study. Hnf4a
deficiency in young-adult mouse liver markedly alters histone methylation and
acetylation, with fewer effects on DNA methylation and 5-hydroxymethylation. The 
underlying mechanism may be the induction of epigenetic enzymes responsible for
the addition/removal of the epigenetic signatures, and/or the loss of HNF4a per
se as a key coordinator for epigenetic modifiers.

PMCID: PMC3888413
PMID: 24427299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. World J Gastroenterol. 2014 Jan 7;20(1):22-30. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v20.i1.22.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha involvement in liver and intestinal
inflammatory networks.

Babeu JP(1), Boudreau F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Jean-Philippe Babeu, François Boudreau, Département d'Anatomie et de Biologie 
Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des Sciences de la Santé, Université de
Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke J1E 4K8, Québec, Canada.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF4-a) is a nuclear receptor regulating
metabolism, cell junctions, differentiation and proliferation in liver and
intestinal epithelial cells. Mutations within the HNF4A gene are associated with 
human diseases such as maturity-onset diabetes of the young. Recently, HNF4A has 
also been described as a susceptibility gene for ulcerative colitis in
genome-wide association studies. In addition, specific HNF4A genetic variants
have been identified in pediatric cohorts of Crohn's disease. Results obtained
from knockout mice supported that HNF4-a can protect the intestinal mucosae
against inflammation. However, the exact molecular links behind HNF4-a and
inflammatory bowel diseases remains elusive. In this review, we will summarize
the current knowledge about the role of HNF4-a and its isoforms in inflammation. 
Specific nature of HNF4-a P1 and P2 classes of isoforms will be summarized.
HNF4-a role as a hepatocyte mediator for cytokines relays during liver
inflammation will be integrated based on documented examples of the literature.
Conclusions that can be made from these earlier liver studies will serve as a
basis to extrapolate correlations and divergences applicable to intestinal
inflammation. Finally, potential functional roles for HNF4-a isoforms in
protecting the intestinal mucosae from chronic and pathological inflammation will
be presented.

PMCID: PMC3886012
PMID: 24415854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Pharmacol Rep. 2013;65(5):1322-35.

Glucocorticoid receptor regulates organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1, SLC22A1)
expression via HNF4a upregulation in primary human hepatocytes.

Rulcova A(1), Krausova L, Smutny T, Vrzal R, Dvorak Z, Jover R, Pavek P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy in Hradec
Kralove, Charles University in Prague, Heyrovskeho 1203, Hradec Kralove, CZ-500
05, Czech Republic. petr.pavek@faf.cuni.cz.

BACKGROUND: Organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1, SLC22A1) is a membrane
transporter that is important for therapeutic effect of the antidiabetic drug
metformin. Its liver-specific expression in hepatocytes is strongly controlled by
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a (HNF4a). HNF4a expression and transcriptional
activity have been demonstrated to be augmented by glucocorticoid receptor (GR)
in human hepatocytes and rodent livers.
METHODS: It was examined whether GR activation indirectly induces OCT1 gene
expression via HNF4a up-regulation in primary human hepatocytes. We also examined
which other transcription factors are involved in OCT1 gene expression and
whether they are regulated by dexamethasone using qRT-PCR and gene reporter
assays.
RESULTS: We found that dexamethasone significantly up-regulates OCT1 mRNA and
protein in normal primary human hepatocytes, but not in hepatocyte-derived tumor 
cell lines HepG2 and MZ-Hep1. Consistently, we observed that HNF4a is induced by 
dexamethasone in primary human hepatocytes, but not in hepatocyte tumor-derived
cell lines. Viral transduction of MZ-Hep1 cells with the expression constructs
for HNF4a, CCAAT/enhancer binding proteins ß (C/EBPß) and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-<U+03B3> coactivator 1a (PGC1a) demonstrated significant
roles of the transcription factors in OCT1 gene regulation. We found that
expression of OCT1 mRNA in human livers significantly correlates with C/EBPß and 
HNF4a mRNAs expression and that C/EBPß co-transfection stimulates OCT1 gene
reporter construct in HepG2 cells. Nevertheless, neither C/EBPß nor PGC1a were
upregulated in human hepatocytes by dexamethasone.
CONCLUSION: We can conclude that GR-induced expression of HNF4a may contribute to
indirect OCT1 gene up-regulation by dexamethasone in primary human hepatocytes,
but not in hepatocyte-derived tumor cell lines.

PMID: 24399729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. J Physiol. 2014 Mar 15;592(6):1325-40. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2013.264002. Epub
2014 Jan 6.

Exercise training decreases mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-3
expression and suppresses hepatic gluconeogenesis in obese mice.

Souza Pauli LS(1), Ropelle EC, de Souza CT, Cintra DE, da Silva AS, de Almeida
Rodrigues B, de Moura LP, Marinho R, de Oliveira V, Katashima CK, Pauli JR,
Ropelle ER.

Author information: 
(1)School of Applied Science, University of Campinas (UNICAMP), Limeira, São
Paulo, Brazil. eduardoropelle@gmail.com.

Insulin plays an important role in the control of hepatic glucose production.
Insulin resistant states are commonly associated with excessive hepatic glucose
production, which contributes to both fasting hyperglycaemia and exaggerated
postprandial hyperglycaemia. In this regard, increased activity of phosphatases
may contribute to the dysregulation of gluconeogenesis. Mitogen-activated protein
kinase phosphatase-3 (MKP-3) is a key protein involved in the control of
gluconeogenesis. MKP-3-mediated dephosphorylation activates FoxO1 (a member of
the forkhead family of transcription factors) and subsequently promotes its
nuclear translocation and binding to the promoters of gluconeogenic genes such as
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase). In 
this study, we investigated the effects of exercise training on the expression of
MKP-3 and its interaction with FoxO1 in the livers of obese animals. We found
that exercised obese mice had a lower expression of MKP-3 and FoxO1/MKP-3
association in the liver. Further, the exercise training decreased FoxO1
phosphorylation and protein levels of Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
gamma coactivator 1-alpha (PGC-1a) and gluconeogenic enzymes (PEPCK and G6Pase). 
These molecular results were accompanied by physiological changes, including
increased insulin sensitivity and reduced hyperglycaemia, which were not caused
by reductions in total body mass. Similar results were also observed with
oligonucleotide antisense (ASO) treatment. However, our results showed that only 
exercise training could reduce an obesity-induced increase in HNF-4a protein
levels while ASO treatment alone had no effect. These findings could explain, at 
least in part, why additive effects of exercise training treatment and ASO
treatment were not observed. Finally, the suppressive effects of exercise
training on MKP-3 protein levels appear to be related, at least in part, to the
reduced phosphorylation of Extracellular signal-regulated kinases (ERK) in the
livers of obese mice.

PMCID: PMC3961090
PMID: 24396063  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2014 Jan;37(1):354-64. doi:
10.1016/j.etap.2013.12.008. Epub 2013 Dec 22.

Alteration of the microRNA-122 regulatory network in rat models of
hepatotoxicity.

Lardizábal MN(1), Rodríguez RE(2), Nocito AL(3), Daniele SM(4), Palatnik JF(5),
Veggi LM(6).

Author information: 
(1)IFISE, CONICET-UNR, Rosario, S2002LRL, Argentina. Electronic address:
lardizabal@ifise-conicet.gov.ar. (2)IBR, CONICET-UNR, Rosario, S2002LRL,
Argentina. Electronic address: rrodriguez@ibr-conicet.gov.ar. (3)Facultad de
Ciencias Médicas, Universidad Nacional de Rosario (UNR), Rosario, S2002LRL,
Argentina. Electronic address: alnocito@gmail.com. (4)Facultad de Ciencias
Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas, UNR, Rosario, S2002LRL, Argentina. Electronic
address: stelladaniele@arnet.com.ar. (5)IBR, CONICET-UNR, Rosario, S2002LRL,
Argentina. Electronic address: palatnik@ibr.gov.ar. (6)IFISE, CONICET-UNR,
Rosario, S2002LRL, Argentina; Facultad de Ciencias Bioquímicas y Farmacéuticas,
UNR, Rosario, S2002LRL, Argentina. Electronic address:
veggi@ifise-conicet.gov.ar.

MicroRNAs are small RNA molecules that post-transcriptionally regulate gene
expression. MicroRNA-122 is the most abundant and specific liver microRNA.
Hepatotoxicity involves a significant alteration of liver gene expression. The
aim of this work was to evaluate the microRNA-122 regulatory network in models of
hepatotoxicity induced by thioacetamide or carbon tetrachloride. We report that
the toxins decreased the expression of microRNA-122, which corresponded with an
increase in two target genes: Cyclin G1 and the cationic amino acid transporter
CAT-1. We found a decreased expression of its precursor, pri-microRNA-122, and of
the transcription factors that specifically bind its promoter:
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha, and members of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor family. Therefore, microRNA-122 expression levels are under
transcriptional control during hepatotoxicity. We propose that the changes
observed are associated with the liver response to cope with the injury caused by
the hepatotoxins, likely through a cell proliferation process to repair the
damaged tissue.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24388909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2014 Mar;24(3):162-71. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0000000000000030.

Pregnane X receptor and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a polymorphisms are
cooperatively associated with carbamazepine autoinduction.

Saruwatari J(1), Yoshida S, Tsuda Y, Okada Y, Ogusu N, Yoshida K, Oniki K,
Yasui-Furukori N, Kaneko S, Ishitsu T, Nakagawa K.

Author information: 
(1)aDivision of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences bCenter for Clinical Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University,
Kumamoto cDepartment of Neuropsychiatry, Hirosaki University School of Medicine, 
Hirosaki dKumamoto Saishunso National Hospital, Koshi, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: We attempted to clarify the influence of polymorphisms of nuclear
receptors on carbamazepine therapy.
PARTICIPANTS AND METHODS: The common polymorphisms of nuclear receptors--a
tentative pregnane X receptor (PXR)*1B, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a)
rs2071197 (c.115+308G>A), and cytochrome P450 3A5*3 polymorphisms--were genotyped
in 168 Japanese patients with epilepsy. The associations of these polymorphisms
with the disposition, clinical efficacy, and incidence of adverse effects of
carbamazepine treatment were retrospectively investigated in 104 patients treated
with carbamazepine alone. The associations with disposition were also assessed in
64 patients treated with carbamazepine and other antiepileptic drugs, which
constituted the internal replication group, and in the combined 168 patients.
RESULTS: Neither polymorphism alone affected the carbamazepine disposition, but a
significant interactive effect of PXR*1B and HNF4a rs2071197 polymorphisms on the
concentration-to-dose (C/D) ratios was observed (P=0.027). The C/D ratios among
patients with the HNF4a G/G genotype were higher in PXR*1B carriers than in
PXR*1B noncarriers, which was confirmed in the internal replication and combined 
groups. In patients with the HNF4a G/G genotype, the rate of freedom from
seizures until 3 months after starting carbamazepine therapy was significantly
greater and the time required to reach the dose required for seizure freedom was 
shorter in PXR*1B carriers than in PXR*1B noncarriers.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that PXR*1B, in combination with HNF4a
rs2071197, might be associated with the C/D ratios and the duration to reach the 
maintenance dose of carbamazepine therapy, thus indicating an influence upon the 
autoinduction of the carbamazepine metabolism.

PMID: 24384557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Stem Cell Reports. 2013 Nov 27;1(6):545-59. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2013.10.006.
eCollection 2013.

Identification of transcription factors for lineage-specific ESC differentiation.

Yamamizu K(1), Piao Y(1), Sharov AA(1), Zsiros V(2), Yu H(1), Nakazawa K(2),
Schlessinger D(1), Ko MS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA. (2)Unit on Genetics of Cognition and Behavior, 
National Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 
20892, USA. (3)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National
Institutes of Health, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA ; Department of Systems Medicine, 
Sakaguchi Laboratory, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo 160-8582, Japan ;
Japan Science and Technology Agency, CREST, Tokyo160-8582, Japan.

A network of transcription factors (TFs) determines cell identity, but identity
can be altered by overexpressing a combination of TFs. However, choosing and
verifying combinations of TFs for specific cell differentiation have been
daunting due to the large number of possible combinations of ~2,000 TFs. Here, we
report the identification of individual TFs for lineage-specific cell
differentiation based on the correlation matrix of global gene expression
profiles. The overexpression of identified TFs-Myod1, Mef2c, Esx1, Foxa1, Hnf4a, 
Gata2, Gata3, Myc, Elf5, Irf2, Elf1, Sfpi1, Ets1, Smad7, Nr2f1, Sox11, Dmrt1,
Sox9, Foxg1, Sox2, or Ascl1-can direct efficient, specific, and rapid
differentiation into myocytes, hepatocytes, blood cells, and neurons.
Furthermore, transfection of synthetic mRNAs of TFs generates their appropriate
target cells. These results demonstrate both the utility of this approach to
identify potent TFs for cell differentiation, and the unanticipated capacity of
single TFs directly guides differentiation to specific lineage fates.

PMCID: PMC3871400
PMID: 24371809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Hepatol. 2014 May;60(5):1002-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2013.12.017. Epub 2013 Dec 
21.

Fibroblast growth factor signaling regulates the expansion of A6-expressing
hepatocytes in association with AKT-dependent ß-catenin activation.

Utley S(1), James D(2), Mavila N(2), Nguyen MV(2), Vendryes C(2), Salisbury
SM(2), Phan J(2), Wang KS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Saban Research Institute, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA
90027, USA; Integrative Biology of Diseases, Keck School of Medicine, University 
of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA. (2)Saban Research Institute, 
Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA. (3)Saban Research
Institute, Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90027, USA.
Electronic address: kwang@chla.usc.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Fibroblast Growth Factors (FGFs) promote the proliferation and
survival of hepatic progenitor cells (HPCs) via AKT-dependent ß-catenin
activation. Moreover, the emergence of hepatocytes expressing the HPC marker A6
during 3,5-diethoxycarbonyl-1,4-dihydrocollidine (DDC)-induced liver injury is
mediated partly by FGF and ß-catenin signaling. Herein, we investigate the role
of FGF signaling and AKT-mediated ß-catenin activation in acute DDC liver injury.
METHODS: Transgenic mice were fed DDC chow for 14days concurrent with either
Fgf10 over-expression or inhibition of FGF signaling via expression of soluble
dominant-negative FGF Receptor (R)-2IIIb.
RESULTS: After 14days of DDC treatment, there was an increase in periportal cells
expressing FGFR1, FGFR2, and AKT-activated phospho-Serine 552 (pSer552) ß-Catenin
in association with up-regulation of genes encoding the FGFR2IIIb ligands, Fgf7, 
Fgf10, and Fgf22. In response to Fgf10 over-expression, there was an increase in 
the number of pSer552-ß-Catenin((positive)+ive) periportal cells as well as cells
co-positive for A6 and hepatocyte marker, Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor-4a (HNF4a). A
similar expansion of A6(+ive) cells was observed after Fgf10 over-expression with
regular chow and after partial hepatectomy during ethanol toxicity. Inhibition of
FGF signaling increased the periportal A6(+ive)HNF4a(+ive) cell population while 
reducing centrolobular A6(+ive) HNF4a(+ive) cells. AKT inhibition with Wortmannin
attenuated FGF10-mediated A6(+ive)HNF4a(+ive) cell expansion. In vitro analyses
using FGF10 treated HepG2 cells demonstrated AKT-mediated ß-Catenin activation
but not enhanced cell migration.
CONCLUSIONS: During acute DDC treatment, FGF signaling promotes the expansion of 
A6-expressing liver cells partly via AKT-dependent activation of ß-Catenin
expansion of A6(+ive) periportal cells and possibly by reprogramming of
centrolobular hepatocytes.

Copyright © 2013 European Association for the Study of the Liver. All rights
reserved.

PMCID: PMC3995894
PMID: 24365171  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Biomaterials. 2014 Feb;35(7):2162-71. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2013.11.063.
Epub 2013 Dec 12.

Molecular mechanisms underlying the enhanced functions of three-dimensional
hepatocyte aggregates.

Chang TT(1), Hughes-Fulford M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA;
Liver Center, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. Electronic 
address: tammy.chang@ucsf.edu. (2)Department of Medicine, University of
California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Northern California Institute for
Research and Education, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

Three-dimensional (3D) culture of hepatocytes leads to improved and prolonged
synthetic and metabolic functions, but the underlying molecular mechanisms are
unknown. In order to investigate the role of 3D cell-cell interactions in
maintaining hepatocyte differentiated functions ex vivo, primary mouse
hepatocytes were cultured either as monolayers on tissue culture dishes (TCD) or 
as 3D aggregates in rotating wall vessel (RWV) bioreactors. Global gene
expression analyses revealed that genes upregulated in 3D culture were distinct
from those upregulated during liver development and liver regeneration. Instead, 
they represented a diverse array of hepatocyte-specific functional genes with
significant over-representation of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (Hnf4a) binding
sites in their promoters. Expression of Hnf4a and many of its downstream target
genes were significantly increased in RWV cultures as compared to TCD.
Conversely, there was concomitant suppression of mesenchymal and cytoskeletal
genes in RWV cultures that were induced in TCDs. These findings illustrate the
importance of 3D cell-cell interactions in maintaining fundamental molecular
pathways of hepatocyte function and serve as a basis for rational design of
biomaterials that aim to optimize hepatocyte functions ex vivo for biomedical
applications.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4012541
PMID: 24332390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Diabet Med. 2014 Jan;31(1):1. doi: 10.1111/dme.12364.

The variable faces of monogenic diabetes.

Hitman GA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Diabetic Medicine.

Comment on
    Diabet Med. 2014 Jan;31(1):e1-5.

PMID: 24330066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Diabetologia. 2014 Mar;57(3):480-4. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-3119-2. Epub 2013 Dec
10.

De novo mutations of GCK, HNF1A and HNF4A may be more frequent in MODY than
previously assumed.

Stanik J(1), Dusatkova P, Cinek O, Valentinova L, Huckova M, Skopkova M,
Dusatkova L, Stanikova D, Pura M, Klimes I, Lebl J, Gasperikova D, Pruhova S.

Author information: 
(1)DIABGENE Laboratory, Institute of Experimental Endocrinology, Slovak Academy
of Sciences, Vlarska 3, SK-833 06, Bratislava, Slovakia.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: MODY is mainly characterised by an early onset of diabetes and a
positive family history of diabetes with an autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance. However, de novo mutations have been reported anecdotally. The aim
of this study was to systematically revisit a large collection of MODY patients
to determine the minimum prevalence of de novo mutations in the most prevalent
MODY genes (i.e. GCK, HNF1A, HNF4A).
METHODS: Analysis of 922 patients from two national MODY centres (Slovakia and
the Czech Republic) identified 150 probands (16%) who came from pedigrees that
did not fulfil the criterion of two generations with diabetes but did fulfil the 
remaining criteria. The GCK, HNF1A and HNF4A genes were analysed by direct
sequencing.
RESULTS: Mutations in GCK, HNF1A or HNF4A genes were detected in 58 of 150
individuals. Parents of 28 probands were unavailable for further analysis, and in
19 probands the mutation was inherited from an asymptomatic parent. In 11
probands the mutations arose de novo.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: In our cohort of MODY patients from two national
centres the de novo mutations in GCK, HNF1A and HNF4A were present in 7.3% of the
150 families without a history of diabetes and 1.2% of all of the referrals for
MODY testing. This is the largest collection of de novo MODY mutations to date,
and our findings indicate a much higher frequency of de novo mutations than
previously assumed. Therefore, genetic testing of MODY could be considered for
carefully selected individuals without a family history of diabetes.

PMID: 24323243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Biol Chem. 2014 Feb 7;289(6):3105-13. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.526798. Epub 2013
Dec 6.

Altered expression of small heterodimer partner governs cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2D6
induction during pregnancy in CYP2D6-humanized mice.

Koh KH(1), Pan X, Shen HW, Arnold SL, Yu AM, Gonzalez FJ, Isoherranen N, Jeong H.

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacy Practice and.

Substrates of a major drug-metabolizing enzyme CYP2D6 display increased
elimination during pregnancy, but the underlying mechanisms are unknown in part
due to a lack of experimental models. Here, we introduce CYP2D6-humanized
(Tg-CYP2D6) mice as an animal model where hepatic CYP2D6 expression is increased 
during pregnancy. In the mouse livers, expression of a known positive regulator
of CYP2D6, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a), did not change during pregnancy.
However, HNF4a recruitment to CYP2D6 promoter increased at term pregnancy,
accompanied by repressed expression of small heterodimer partner (SHP). In HepG2 
cells, SHP repressed HNF4a transactivation of CYP2D6 promoter. In transgenic
(Tg)-CYP2D6 mice, SHP knockdown led to a significant increase in CYP2D6
expression. Retinoic acid, an endogenous compound that induces SHP, exhibited
decreased hepatic levels during pregnancy in Tg-CYP2D6 mice. Administration of
all-trans-retinoic acid led to a significant decrease in the expression and
activity of hepatic CYP2D6 in Tg-CYP2D6 mice. This study provides key insights
into mechanisms underlying altered CYP2D6-mediated drug metabolism during
pregnancy, laying a foundation for improved drug therapy in pregnant women.

PMCID: PMC3916516
PMID: 24318876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Science. 2013 Dec 6;342(6163):1186. doi: 10.1126/science.1247569.

Science & SciLifeLab Prize. Evolution of vertebrate transcriptional regulator
binding.

Schmidt D(1).

Author information: 
(1)L.E.K. Consulting, 40 Grosvenor Place, London, SW1X 7JL, UK.

PMID: 24311678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Diabet Med. 2014 Mar;31(3):e11-5. doi: 10.1111/dme.12369.

HNF4A mutation: switch from hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia to maturity-onset
diabetes of the young, and incretin response.

Arya VB(1), Rahman S, Senniappan S, Flanagan SE, Ellard S, Hussain K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for
Children NHS, Trust, London; The Institute of Child Health, University College
London, Exeter, UK.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4A) is a member of the nuclear
receptor family of ligand-activated transcription factors. HNF4A mutations cause 
hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia in early life and maturity-onset diabetes of the 
young. Regular screening of HNF4A mutation carriers using the oral glucose
tolerance test has been recommended to diagnose diabetes mellitus at an early
stage. Glucagon-like peptide-1 and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide
are incretin hormones, responsible for up to 70% of the secreted insulin after a 
meal in healthy individuals. We describe, for the first time, gradual alteration 
of glucose homeostasis in a patient with HNF4A mutation after resolution of
hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia, on serial oral glucose tolerance testing. We
also measured the incretin response to a mixed meal in our patient.
CASE REPORT: Our patient was born with macrosomia and developed hyperinsulinaemic
hypoglycaemia in the neonatal period. Molecular genetic analysis confirmed HNF4A 
mutation (p.M116I, c.317G>A) as an underlying cause of hyperinsulinaemic
hypoglycaemia. Serial oral glucose tolerance testing, after the resolution of
hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia, confirmed the diagnosis of maturity-onset
diabetes of the young at the age of 10 years. Interestingly, the intravenous
glucose tolerance test revealed normal glucose disappearance rate and first-phase
insulin secretion. Incretin hormones showed a suboptimal rise in response to the 
mixed meal, potentially explaining the discrepancy between the oral glucose
tolerance test and the intravenous glucose tolerance test.
CONCLUSIONS: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young can develop as early as the
first decade of life in persons with an HNF4A mutation. Impaired incretin
response might be contributory in the early stages of HNF4A maturity-onset
diabetes of the young.

© 2013 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2013 Diabetes UK.

PMCID: PMC4305198
PMID: 24299156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Med Genet. 2014 Mar;51(3):165-9. doi: 10.1136/jmedgenet-2013-102066. Epub 2013 
Nov 27.

The HNF4A R76W mutation causes atypical dominant Fanconi syndrome in addition to 
a ß cell phenotype.

Hamilton AJ(1), Bingham C, McDonald TJ, Cook PR, Caswell RC, Weedon MN, Oram RA, 
Shields BM, Shepherd M, Inward CD, Hamilton-Shield JP, Kohlhase J, Ellard S,
Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, University of Exeter Medical
School, Exeter, Devon, UK.

BACKGROUND: Mutation specific effects in monogenic disorders are rare. We
describe atypical Fanconi syndrome caused by a specific heterozygous mutation in 
HNF4A. Heterozygous HNF4A mutations cause a beta cell phenotype of neonatal
hyperinsulinism with macrosomia and young onset diabetes. Autosomal dominant
idiopathic Fanconi syndrome (a renal proximal tubulopathy) is described but no
genetic cause has been defined.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We report six patients heterozygous for the p.R76W HNF4A
mutation who have Fanconi syndrome and nephrocalcinosis in addition to neonatal
hyperinsulinism and macrosomia. All six displayed a novel phenotype of proximal
tubulopathy, characterised by generalised aminoaciduria, low molecular weight
proteinuria, glycosuria, hyperphosphaturia and hypouricaemia, and additional
features not seen in Fanconi syndrome: nephrocalcinosis, renal impairment,
hypercalciuria with relative hypocalcaemia, and hypermagnesaemia. This was
mutation specific, with the renal phenotype not being seen in patients with other
HNF4A mutations. In silico modelling shows the R76 residue is directly involved
in DNA binding and the R76W mutation reduces DNA binding affinity. The target(s) 
selectively affected by altered DNA binding of R76W that results in Fanconi
syndrome is not known.
CONCLUSIONS: The HNF4A R76W mutation is an unusual example of a mutation specific
phenotype, with autosomal dominant atypical Fanconi syndrome in addition to the
established beta cell phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3932761
PMID: 24285859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Transl Med. 2013 Oct 1;11:239. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-239.

Quantitative proteomic analysis in HCV-induced HCC reveals sets of proteins with 
potential significance for racial disparity.

Dillon ST, Bhasin MK, Feng X, Koh DW, Daoud SS.

BACKGROUND: The incidence and mortality of hepatitis C virus (HCV)-induced
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is higher in African Americans (AA) than other
racial/ethnic groups in the U.S., but the reasons for this disparity are unknown.
There is an urgent need for the discovery of novel molecular signatures for HCV
disease progression to understand the underlying biological basis for this cancer
rate disparity to improve the clinical outcome.
METHODS: We performed differential proteomics with isobaric labeling tags for
relative and absolute quantitation (iTRAQ) and MS/MS analysis to identify
proteins differentially expressed in cirrhotic (CIR) and HCC as compared to
normal tissues of Caucasian American (CA) patients. The raw data were analyzed
using the ProteinPilot v3.0. Searches were performed against all known sequences 
populating the Swiss-Prot, Refseq, and TrEMBL databases. Quality control analyses
were accomplished using pairwise correlation plots, boxplots, principal component
analysis, and unsupervised hierarchical clustering. Supervised analysis was
carried out to identify differentially expressed proteins. Candidates were
validated in independent cohorts of CA and AA tissues by qRT-PCR or Western
blotting.
RESULTS: A total of 238 unique proteins were identified. Of those, around 15%
were differentially expressed between normal, CIR & HCC groups. Target validation
demonstrates racially distinct alteration in the expression of certain proteins. 
For example, the mRNA expression levels of transferrin (TF) were 2 and18-fold
higher in CIR and HCC in AA as compared to CA. Similarly; the expression of
Apolipoprotein A1 (APOA1) was 7-fold higher in HCC of AA. This increase was
mirrored in the protein expression levels. Interestingly, the level of hepatocyte
nuclear factor4a (HNF4a) protein was down regulated in AA, whereas repression of 
transcription is seen more in CA compared to AA. These data suggest that racial
disparities in HCC could be a consequence of differential dysregulation of HNF4a 
transcriptional activity.
CONCLUSION: This study identifies novel molecular signatures in HCV-induced HCC
using iTRAQ-based tissue proteomics. The proteins identified will further enhance
a molecular explanation to the biochemical mechanism(s) that may play a role in
HCC racial disparities.

PMCID: PMC3850534
PMID: 24283668  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Pharmacogenomics. 2013 Dec;14(16):2035-54. doi: 10.2217/pgs.13.214.

Pharmacogenetics of the nuclear hormone receptors: the missing link between
environment and drug effects?

De Mattia E(1), Dreussi E, Cecchin E, Toffoli G.

Author information: 
(1)Experimental & Clinical Pharmacology Unit, Centro di Riferimento
Oncologico-National Cancer Institute, Via Franco Gallini, 2, 33081, Aviano,
Italy.

In the last decade, genetic variations in ABC/SLC transporters and phase I/II
enzymes have raised pharmacogenetic markers as being predictive to the attention 
of researchers in the field of personalized medicine in oncology. However, it is 
becoming evident that the sequence variations in these genes cannot address by
themselves the sharp interindividual variability in drug effects. Recently,
nuclear receptors (NRs), including pregnane X receptor, constitutive androstane
receptor, retinoid X receptor, farnesoid X receptor, liver X receptor, vitamin D 
receptor, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors and HNF4A, have
demonstrated key roles in regulating transporter and metabolic gene expression in
response to xeno/endobiotics, as well as antineoplastic drugs. These findings
attracted interest to the genetics of the NRs for their possible role in
influencing the metabolism and pharmacological profiles of chemotherapeutics. In 
this review, we aim to summarize the most recent findings in the innovative field
of NR pharmacogenetics and findings in how they could integrate with more
traditional markers in order to improve drug treatment personalization.

PMID: 24279858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. BMC Genomics. 2013 Nov 22;14:817. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-817.

Transcriptional responses to temperature and low oxygen stress in Atlantic salmon
studied with next-generation sequencing technology.

Olsvik PA(1), Vikeså V, Lie KK, Hevrøy EM.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Nutrition and Seafood Research, Nordnesboder 1-2, N-5005
Bergen, Norway. pal.olsvik@nifes.no.

BACKGROUND: Warmer seawater as a result of climate change may impose
environmental challenges for Atlantic salmon aquaculture in its southernmost
geographic range. Seawater temperatures above optimal level for growth may be
reached in the warmest summer weeks. Caged fish can experience temperature and
low oxygen saturation stress during such episodes, raising fish welfare and
productivity concerns. In this work we compare the transcriptional responses in
Atlantic salmon exposed to chronic high temperature (19°C) and low oxygen
saturation (4-5 mg/L) stress.
RESULTS: We used next-generation sequencing and RT-qPCR to screen for effects,
and focused on growth regulation and oxidative stress in fish exposed to
sub-optimal conditions. Both prolonged temperature (45 days) and low oxygen
(120 days) stress had a significant negative effect on growth. The main effect of
heat stress appears to be a general reduced transcriptional rate in salmon liver,
while mechanisms typically associated with responses induced by chemical drugs
were stimulated. Heat stress significantly down-regulated several transcripts
encoding proteins involved in the protection against oxidative stress, including 
CuZn SOD, Mn SOD, GPx1 and GR, as well as additional stress markers HIF1A, CYP1A,
MTOR and PSMC2 (RT-qPCR data). In salmon held at low oxygen concentration for
four months protein ubiquitination (protein catabolism) was the most strongly
affected pathway. According to the RT-qPCR data, low oxygen stress significantly 
up-regulated the transcriptional levels of IGFBP1B and down-regulated the levels 
of GR. Pathway analysis suggests that high temperature and low oxygen saturation 
stress affects many similar mechanisms in Atlantic salmon. Based on the gene
lists, six out of the top ten predicted upstream transcriptional regulators,
1,2-dithiol-3-thione sirolimus, CD437, 5-fluorouracil, HNF4A and NFE2L2, were
similar between the two treatments.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, temperature and low oxygen saturation stress affect
many identical mechanisms in liver cells resulting in a metabolic depression, but
these effects are not necessarily mediated through altered transcription of the
same genes.

PMCID: PMC4046827
PMID: 24261939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Mol Cell Biochem. 2014 Feb;387(1-2):241-50. Epub 2013 Nov 15.

The expression of Apoc3 mRNA is regulated by HNF4a and COUP-TFII, but not acute
retinoid treatments, in primary rat hepatocytes and hepatoma cells.

Howell M, Li R, Zhang R, Li Y, Chen W, Chen G.

Vitamin A status regulates obesity development, hyperlipidemia, and hepatic
lipogenic gene expression in Zucker fatty (ZF) rats. The development of
hyperlipidemia in acne patients treated with retinoic acid (RA) has been
attributed to the induction of apolipoprotein C-III expression. To understand the
role of retinoids in the development of hyperlipidemia in ZF rats, the expression
levels of several selected RA-responsive genes in the liver and isolated
hepatocytes from Zucker lean (ZL) and ZF rats were compared using real-time PCR. 
The Rarb and Srebp-1c mRNA levels are higher in the liver and isolated
hepatocytes from ZF than ZL rats. The Apoc3 mRNA level is only higher in the
isolated hepatocytes from ZF than ZL rats. To determine whether dynamic RA
production acutely regulates Apoc3 expression, its mRNA levels in response to
retinoid treatments or adenovirus-mediated overexpression of hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4 alpha (HNF4a) and chicken ovalbumin upstream-transcription factor II
(COUP-TFII) were analyzed. Retinoid treatments for 2-6 h did not induce the
expression of Apoc3 mRNA. The overexpression of HNF4a or COUP-TFII induced or
inhibited Apoc3 expression, respectively. We conclude that short-term retinoid
treatments could not induce Apoc3 mRNA expression, which is regulated by HNF4a
and COUP-TFII in hepatocytes.

PMID: 24234421  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. J Hum Genet. 2014 Jan;59(1):54-6. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2013.116. Epub 2013 Nov 7.

Genetic association study between the detected risk variants based upon type II
diabetes GWAS and psychotic disorders in the Japanese population.

Kajio Y(1), Kondo K(1), Saito T(1), Iwayama Y(2), Aleksic B(3), Yamada K(2),
Toyota T(2), Hattori E(2), Ujike H(4), Inada T(5), Kunugi H(6), Kato T(7),
Yoshikawa T(2), Ozaki N(3), Ikeda M(1), Iwata N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Fujita Health University School of Medicine,
Toyoake, Japan. (2)Laboratory for Molecular Psychiatry, RIKEN Brain Science
Institute, Wako, Japan. (3)Department of Psychiatry, Nagoya University Graduate
School of Medicine, Nagoya, Japan. (4)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Okayama
University Graduate School of Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Science,
Okayama, Japan. (5)Department of Psychiatry, Institute of Neuropsychiatry, Seiwa 
Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (6)Department of Mental Disorder Research, National
Institute of Neuroscience, National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, 
Japan. (7)Laboratory for Molecular Dynamics of Mental Disorders, RIKEN Brain
Science Institute, Wako, Japan.

Several epidemiological and genetic studies have suggested that the risk of type 
II diabetes (T2D) is likely to overlap with the susceptibility to psychotic
disorders such as schizophrenia (SCZ) and bipolar disorder (BD). In this study,
we aimed to examine the association of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
detected in previous T2D genome-wide association studies (GWAS) with SCZ, BD and 
psychosis (SCZ plus BD). A total of 37 SNPs were selected from the literature. A 
two-stage analysis was conducted using a first set of screening samples (total
N=3037) and a second set of replication samples (N=4950). None of the SNPs showed
a significant association to the screening samples after correction for multiple 
testing. To avoid type II error, we genotyped the top three SNPs in BCL11A,
HMG20A and HNF4A showing associations with any of the phenotypes (Puncorrected
<0.01) using independent samples to replicate the nominal associations. However, 
we were unable to find any significant associations based on the screening
results (Puncorrected>0.05). Our findings did not support the shared genetic risk
between T2D and psychotic disorders in the Japanese population. However, further 
replication using a larger sample size is required.

PMID: 24196380  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Exp Gerontol. 2013 Dec;48(12):1518-25. doi: 10.1016/j.exger.2013.10.011. Epub
2013 Oct 29.

HNF4a contributes to glucose formation in aged rat hepatocytes.

Park EY(1), Lee CH, Lee EK, Kim JH, Cova A, Lee SK, Cho SC, Kwak CS, Song KY,
Park SC, Jun HS, Kim KT.

Author information: 
(1)College of Pharmacy and Gachon Institute of Pharmaceutical Science, Gachon
University, Yeonsu-ku, Incheon 406-840, South Korea; Lee Gil Ya Cancer and
Diabetes Institute, Gachon University, Yeonsu-ku, Incheon 406-840, South Korea.

Aging-dependent physiological conditions are attributed to parenchymal structural
changes to cellular functions in aged organisms. Compared to the young animals,
the primary hepatocytes from old rats showed a higher glucose output and a higher
expression of the key gluconeogenesis-regulating enzyme, phosphoenol pyruvate
carboxykinase (PEPCK). The primary hepatocytes from old rats showed a higher
glucose output and a higher expression of the key gluconeogenesis-regulating
enzyme, phosphoenol pyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK), compared with those from the 
young animals. The in situ hybridization study showed increased PEPCK mRNA
expression in the aged liver tissues. The livers from old rats showed loosened
hexagonal hepatic lobular structures, increased collagen accumulation, and high
expression of the hypoxia marker hypoxia-inducible factor 1a (HIF1a). Hypoxia
increased the PEPCK mRNA and protein expression levels in accordance with the
HIF1a expression. PEPCK promoter luciferase reporter assay showed that hypoxia
increased PEPCK through transcriptional activation. Furthermore, the hepatocyte
nuclear factor a (HNF4a) protein, but not the HNF4a mRNA level, increased in
parallel with the PEPCK mRNA expression under hypoxic conditions. Glucose
production increased under hypoxic conditions, but this increment diminished by
HNF4a siRNA in young hepatocytes. Moreover, increased glucose production from old
rat hepatocytes was reversed by the down-regulation of HNF4a through a specific
siRNA. This study suggests that the mild hypoxic conditions in response to
aging-dependent hepatic structural changes may contribute to the induction of the
gluconeogenic enzyme PEPCK through HNF4a protein stabilization.

© 2013.

PMID: 24177414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Life Sci. 2013 Nov 19;93(22):805-13. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2013.10.011. Epub 2013
Oct 21.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1a/4a and forkhead box A2 regulate the solute carrier 
2A2 (Slc2a2) gene expression in the liver and kidney of diabetic rats.

David-Silva A(1), Freitas HS, Okamoto MM, Sabino-Silva R, Schaan BD, Machado UF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Institute of Biomedical Sciences,
University of São Paulo, São Paulo (SP), Brazil.

AIMS: Solute carrier 2a2 (Slc2a2) gene codifies the glucose transporter GLUT2, a 
key protein for glucose flux in hepatocytes and renal epithelial cells of
proximal tubule. In diabetes mellitus, hepatic and tubular glucose output has
been related to Slc2a2/GLUT2 overexpression; and controlling the expression of
this gene may be an important adjuvant way to improve glycemic homeostasis. Thus,
the present study investigated transcriptional mechanisms involved in the
diabetes-induced overexpression of the Slc2a2 gene.
MAIN METHODS: Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1a and 4a (HNF-1a and HNF-4a), forkhead 
box A2 (FOXA2), sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c (SREBP-1c) and the
CCAAT-enhancer-binding protein (C/EBPß) mRNA expression (RT-PCR) and binding
activity into the Slc2a2 promoter (electrophoretic mobility assay) were analyzed 
in the liver and kidney of diabetic and 6-day insulin-treated diabetic rats.
KEY FINDINGS: Slc2a2/GLUT2 expression increased by more than 50% (P<0.001) in the
liver and kidney of diabetic rats, and 6-day insulin treatment restores these
values to those observed in non-diabetic animals. Similarly, the mRNA expression 
and the binding activity of HNF-1a, HNF-4a and FOXA2 increased by 50 to 100%
(P<0.05 to P<0.001), also returning to values of non-diabetic rats after insulin 
treatment. Neither the Srebf1 and Cebpb mRNA expression, nor the SREBP-1c and
C/EBP-ß binding activity was altered in diabetic rats.
SIGNIFICANCE: HNF-1a, HNF-4a and FOXA2 transcriptional factors are involved in
diabetes-induced overexpression of Slc2a2 gene in the liver and kidney. These
data point out that these transcriptional factors are important targets to
control GLUT2 expression in these tissues, which can contribute to glycemic
homeostasis in diabetes.

© 2013.

PMID: 24157454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. FEBS Lett. 2013 Nov 29;587(23):3787-91. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2013.09.043. Epub 
2013 Oct 15.

Liver-type fatty acid binding protein interacts with hepatocyte nuclear factor
4a.

McIntosh AL(1), Petrescu AD, Hostetler HA, Kier AB, Schroeder F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University, TVMC, College
Station, TX 77843-4466, United States.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) regulates liver type fatty acid binding
protein (L-FABP) gene expression. Conversely as shown herein, L-FABP structurally
and functionally also interacts with HNF4a. Fluorescence resonance energy
transfer (FRET) between Cy3-HNF4a (donor) and Cy5-L-FABP (acceptor) as well as
FRET microscopy detected L-FABP in close proximity (~80 Å) to HNF4a, binding with
high affinity Kd ~250-300 nM. Circular dichroism (CD) determined that the
HNF4a/L-FABP interaction altered protein secondary structure. Finally, L-FABP
potentiated transactivation of HNF4a in COS7 cells. Taken together, these data
suggest that L-FABP provides a signaling path to HNF4a activation in the nucleus.

Copyright © 2013 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3889205
PMID: 24140341  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 22;288(47):33813-23. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.482760. Epub
2013 Oct 11.

Enterocyte-specific regulation of the apical nutrient transporter SLC6A19
(B(0)AT1) by transcriptional and epigenetic networks.

Tümer E(1), Bröer A, Balkrishna S, Jülich T, Bröer S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Research School of Biology, Australian National University, Canberra,
Australian Capital Territory 0200, Australia.

Enterocytes are specialized to absorb nutrients from the lumen of the small
intestine by expressing a select set of genes to maximize the uptake of
nutrients. They develop from stem cells in the crypt and differentiate into
mature enterocytes while moving along the crypt-villus axis. Using the Slc6a19
gene as an example, encoding the neutral amino acid transporter B(0)AT1, we
studied regulation of the gene by transcription factors and epigenetic factors in
the intestine. To investigate this question, we used a fractionation method to
separate mature enterocytes from crypt cells and analyzed gene expression.
Transcription factors HNF1a and HNF4a activate transcription of the Slc6a19 gene 
in villus enterocytes, whereas high levels of SOX9 repress expression in the
crypts. CpG dinucleotides in the proximal promoter were highly methylated in the 
crypt and fully de-methylated in the villus. Furthermore, histone modification
H3K27Ac, indicating an active promoter, was prevalent in villus cells but barely 
detectable in crypt cells. The results suggest that Slc6a19 expression in the
intestine is regulated at three different levels involving promoter methylation, 
histone modification, and opposing transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3837124
PMID: 24121511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Drug Metab Dispos. 2014 Jan;42(1):44-61. doi: 10.1124/dmd.113.052670. Epub 2013
Oct 8.

MicroRNA-561 promotes acetaminophen-induced hepatotoxicity in HepG2 cells and
primary human hepatocytes through downregulation of the nuclear receptor
corepressor dosage-sensitive sex-reversal adrenal hypoplasia congenital critical 
region on the X chromosome, gene 1 (DAX-1).

Li M(1), Yang Y, He ZX, Zhou ZW, Yang T, Guo P, Zhang X, Zhou SF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of
South Florida, Tampa, Florida (M.L., Z.W.Z., S.F.Z.); Department of Hepatobiliary
Surgery, General Hospital of Ningxia Medical University, Yinchuan City, Ningxia
Hui Autonomous Region, China (Y.Y.); Guizhou Provincial Key Laboratory for
Regenerative Medicine, Stem Cell and Tissue Engineering Research Center, Guiyang 
Medical University, Guiyang, Guizhou, China (Z.X.H.); Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Utah and Salt Lake Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Salt 
Lake City, Utah (T.Y.); Nanobiotechnology Center and Markey Cancer Center,
College of Pharmacy, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky (P.G.); Research
Center for Bioengineering and Sensing Technology, University of Science and
Technology Beijing, Beijing, China (X.Z.).

One of the major mechanisms involved in acetaminophen (APAP)-induced
hepatotoxicity is hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a)-mediated activation of
pregnane X receptor (PXR) and constitutive androstane receptor (CAR). In the
present study, we investigated the role of miR-561 and its target gene DAX-1
encoding a corepressor of HNF4a in the process of APAP-induced hepatotoxicity. We
used both human hepatocellular liver carcinoma cell line (HepG2) cells and
primary human hepatocytes in this study and monitored the levels of reactive
oxygen species, lactate dehydrogenase, and glutathione. Our bioinformatics study 
suggests an association between miR-561 and DAX-1, but not HNF4a. Treatment of
HepG2 cells with APAP significantly reduced the expression of DAX-1 in a
concentration-dependent manner. miR-561 was induced by APAP treatment in HepG2
cells. Transfection of HepG2 cells with an miR-561 mimic exacerbated APAP-induced
hepatotoxicity. HNF4a is physically associated with DAX-1 in HepG2 cells. A
decreased protein level of DAX-1 by APAP treatment was also enhanced by miR-561
mimic transfection in HepG2 cells and primary human hepatocytes. The basal and
APAP-induced expression of PXR and CAR was enhanced by miR-561 mimic
transfection; however, transfection of HepG2 cells or primary human hepatocytes
with a miR-561 inhibitor or DAX-1 small interfering RNA reversed these effects.
Additionally, the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay revealed that recruitment
of DAX-1 onto the PXR promoter was inversely correlated with the recruitment of
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-a coactivator-1a and HNF4a on APAP
treatment. These results indicate that miR-561 worsens APAP-induced
hepatotoxicity via inhibition of DAX-1 and consequent transactivation of nuclear 
receptors.

PMID: 24104199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Diabet Med. 2014 Apr;31(4):466-71. doi: 10.1111/dme.12314. Epub 2013 Oct 16.

Positivity for islet cell autoantibodies in patients with monogenic diabetes is
associated with later diabetes onset and higher HbA1c level.

Urbanová J(1), Rypácková B, Procházková Z, Kucera P, Cerná M, Andel M, Heneberg
P.

Author information: 
(1)Charles University in Prague, Third Faculty of Medicine, Prague, Czech
Republic.

AIMS: Islet cell autoantibodies are associated with autoimmune insulitis and
belong to the diagnostic criteria of type 1 diabetes mellitus. However, growing
evidence suggests that autoantibodies are present in other types of diabetes.
Here, we focus on the autoantibody incidence in Czech patients with
maturity-onset diabetes of the young and analyse their functional relevance in
terms of diabetes onset and control.
METHODS: Autoantibodies against glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) 65 and protein 
tyrosine phosphatase islet antigen 2 (IA-2) were measured in a cohort of 28 Czech
patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young, all confirmed by genetic
testing. Selected clinical data were correlated to the status and kinetics of
autoantibodies.
RESULTS: One quarter of patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young
examined (7/28; 25%) was positive for GAD or IA-2 autoantibodies. GAD
autoantibodies were more prevalent (7/7) than IA-2 autoantibodies (1/7). The
incidence of autoantibodies did not correlate with human leukocyte antigen
status. The patients who were positive for the autoantibodies developed diabetes 
later than those who were autoantibody-negative, but had worse glycaemic control 
(increased HbA1c ). Expression of autoantibodies decreased with any improvement
of diabetes compensation. Only one patient did not correspond to the above and
displayed signs of combined signs of maturity-onset diabetes of the young and
Type 1 diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: The data suggest transient but highly prevalent islet cell
autoantibody expression in Czech patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the
young. The autoantibodies were found in patients with delayed diabetes onset, and
in times of insufficient diabetes control. As improvement of glycaemic control
was associated with a decrease in levels of autoantibodies, their presence may
reflect the kinetics of ß-cell destruction induced by causes other than
autoimmune ones.

© 2013 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2013 Diabetes UK.

PMID: 24102923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Cell Sci. 2013 Dec 15;126(Pt 24):5692-703. doi: 10.1242/jcs.135053. Epub 2013
Oct 7.

A double-negative feedback loop between Wnt-ß-catenin signaling and HNF4a
regulates epithelial-mesenchymal transition in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Yang M(1), Li SN, Anjum KM, Gui LX, Zhu SS, Liu J, Chen JK, Liu QF, Ye GD, Wang
WJ, Wu JF, Cai WY, Sun GB, Liu YJ, Liu RF, Zhang ZM, Li BA.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cellular Stress Biology, Innovation Center for Cell
Biology Research, School of Life Sciences, Xiamen University, Xiamen, 361102,
China.

Wnt-ß-catenin signaling participates in the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) in a variety of cancers; however, its involvement in hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) and downstream molecular events is largely undefined. HNF4a is
the most prominent and specific factor maintaining the differentiation of hepatic
lineage cells and a potential EMT regulator in HCC cells. However, the molecular 
mechanisms by which HNF4a maintains the differentiated liver epithelium and
inhibits EMT have not been completely defined. In this study, we systematically
explored the relationship between Wnt-ß-catenin signaling and HNF4a in the EMT
process of HCC cells. Our results indicated that HNF4a expression was negatively 
regulated during Wnt-ß-catenin signaling-induced EMT through Snail and Slug in
HCC cells. In contrast, HNF4a was found to directly associate with TCF4 to
compete with ß-catenin but facilitate transcription co-repressor activities, thus
inhibiting expression of EMT-related Wnt-ß-catenin targets. Moreover, HNF4a may
control the switch between the transcriptional and adhesion functions of
ß-catenin. Overexpression of HNF4a was found to completely compromise the
Wnt-ß-catenin-signaling-induced EMT phenotype. Finally, we determined the
regulation pattern between Wnt-ß-catenin signaling and HNF4a in rat tumor models.
Our studies have identified a double-negative feedback mechanism controlling
Wnt-ß-catenin signaling and HNF4a expression in vitro and in vivo, which sheds
new light on the regulation of EMT in HCC. The modulation of these molecular
processes may be a method of inhibiting HCC invasion by blocking Wnt-ß-catenin
signaling or restoring HNF4a expression to prevent EMT.

PMID: 24101726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Nat Genet. 2013 Nov;45(11):1380-5. doi: 10.1038/ng.2794. Epub 2013 Oct 6.

Assessing the phenotypic effects in the general population of rare variants in
genes for a dominant Mendelian form of diabetes.

Flannick J(1), Beer NL, Bick AG, Agarwala V, Molnes J, Gupta N, Burtt NP, Florez 
JC, Meigs JB, Taylor H, Lyssenko V, Irgens H, Fox E, Burslem F, Johansson S,
Brosnan MJ, Trimmer JK, Newton-Cheh C, Tuomi T, Molven A, Wilson JG, O'Donnell
CJ, Kathiresan S, Hirschhorn JN, Njølstad PR, Rolph T, Seidman JG, Gabriel S, Cox
DR, Seidman CE, Groop L, Altshuler D.

Author information: 
(1)1] Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard and 
Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT), Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. [2]
Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [3] Diabetes Unit, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA. [4].

Genome sequencing can identify individuals in the general population who harbor
rare coding variants in genes for Mendelian disorders and who may consequently
have increased disease risk. Previous studies of rare variants in phenotypically 
extreme individuals display ascertainment bias and may demonstrate inflated
effect-size estimates. We sequenced seven genes for maturity-onset diabetes of
the young (MODY) in well-phenotyped population samples (n = 4,003). We filtered
rare variants according to two prediction criteria for disease-causing mutations:
reported previously in MODY or satisfying stringent de novo thresholds (rare,
conserved and protein damaging). Approximately 1.5% and 0.5% of randomly selected
individuals from the Framingham and Jackson Heart Studies, respectively, carry
variants from these two classes. However, the vast majority of carriers remain
euglycemic through middle age. Accurate estimates of variant effect sizes from
population-based sequencing are needed to avoid falsely predicting a substantial 
fraction of individuals as being at risk for MODY or other Mendelian diseases.

PMCID: PMC4051627
PMID: 24097065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 25;8(9):e76317. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076317. eCollection
2013.

Replication study for the association of 9 East Asian GWAS-derived loci with
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in a Japanese population.

Sakai K(1), Imamura M, Tanaka Y, Iwata M, Hirose H, Kaku K, Maegawa H, Watada H, 
Tobe K, Kashiwagi A, Kawamori R, Maeda S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Endocrinology, Metabolism and Kidney Diseases, RIKEN Center for
Integrative Medical Sciences, Yokohama, Japan ; Department of Internal Medicine, 
Division of Metabolism and Endocrinology, St. Marianna University School of
Medicine, Kawasaki, Japan.

AIMS: East Asian genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for type 2 diabetes
identified 8 loci with genome-wide significance, and 2 loci with a borderline
association. However, the associations of these loci except MAEA locus with type 
2 diabetes have not been evaluated in independent East Asian cohorts. We
performed a replication study to investigate the association of these
susceptibility loci with type 2 diabetes in an independent Japanese population.
METHODS: We genotyped 7,379 Japanese participants (5,315 type 2 diabetes and
2,064 controls) for each of the 9 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs),
rs7041847 in GLIS3, rs6017317 in FITM2-R3HDML-HNF4A, rs6467136 near GCCI-PAX4,
rs831571 near PSMD6, rs9470794 in ZFAND3, rs3786897 in PEPD, rs1535500 in KCNK16,
rs16955379 in CMIP, and rs17797882 near WWOX. Because the sample size in this
study was not sufficient to replicate single SNP associations, we constructed a
genetic risk score (GRS) by summing a number of risk alleles of the 9 SNPs, and
examined the association of the GRS with type 2 diabetes using logistic
regression analysis.
RESULTS: With the exception of rs1535500 in KCNK16, all SNPs had the same
direction of effect (odds ratio [OR]>1.0) as in the original reports. The GRS
constructed from the 9 SNPs was significantly associated with type 2 diabetes in 
the Japanese population (p = 4.0 × 10(-4), OR = 1.05, 95% confidence interval:
1.02-1.09). In quantitative trait analyses, rs16955379 in CMIP was nominally
associated with a decreased homeostasis model assessment of ß-cell function and
with increased fasting plasma glucose, but neither the individual SNPs nor the
GRS showed a significant association with the glycemic traits.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that 9 loci that were identified in the East 
Asian GWAS meta-analysis have a significant effect on the susceptibility to type 
2 diabetes in the Japanese population.

PMCID: PMC3783369
PMID: 24086726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. BMC Cancer. 2013 Sep 23;13:432. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-432.

The role of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha in metastatic tumor formation of
hepatocellular carcinoma and its close relationship with the
mesenchymal-epithelial transition markers.

Yao D(1), Peng S, Dai C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary and Splenic Surgery, Shengjing Hospital, China
Medical University, Shenyang 110004, Liaoning Province, China.
daicl@sj-hospital.org.

BACKGROUND: Mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) is now suggested to
participate in the process of metastatic tumor formation. However, in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) the process is still not well revealed.
METHODS: Paraffin-embedded tissue samples were obtained from 13 patients with HCC
in Shengjing Hospital of China Medical University. The expression of E-cadherin, 
Fibronectin, N-cadherin, Vimentin, Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha), 
Snail and Slug was assessed in primary tumors and their corresponding metastases 
by immunohistochemical staining. Next, the expression of HNF4alpha and E-cadherin
in four HCC cell lines was examined. Furthermore, SK-Hep-1 cells were transfected
with human HNF4alpha expression vector, and the change of E-cadherin expression
was assessed.
RESULTS: 45.2% (14/31) of the lesions in the metastases showed increased
E-cadherin expression compared with the primaries, suggesting the possible
occurrence of MET in metastatic tumor formation of HCC, as re-expression of
E-cadherin is proposed to be the important hallmark of MET. The occurrence of MET
was also confirmed by the reduced expression of Fibronectin (54.8%, 17/31),
N-cadherin (38.7%, 12/31) and Vimentin (61.3%, 19/31) in the metastases. 45.2%
(14/31) of the lesions in the metastases also showed increased HNF4alpha
expression, and 67.7% (21/31) and 48.4% (15/31) of metastases showed decreased
Snail and Slug expression respectively. Statistical results showed that the
expression of HNF4alpha was positively related with that of E-cadherin, and
negatively correlated with that of Snail, Slug and Fibronectin, suggesting that
the expression change of the MET markers in the metastatic lesions might be
associated with HNF4alpha. Among the four HCC cell lines, both HNF4alpha and
E-cadherin expressed high in Hep3B and Huh-7 cells, but low in SK-Hep-1 and
Bel-7402 cells. Furthermore, the expression of E-cadherin increased accordingly
when SK-Hep-1 cells were transfected with human HNF4alpha expression vector,
further confirming the role of HNF4alpha in the regulation of E-cadherin
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our clinical observations and experimental data indicate that
HNF4alpha might play a crucial role in the metastatic tumor formation of HCC, and
the mechanism may be related with the process of phenotype transition.

PMCID: PMC3852538
PMID: 24059685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Pharmacol. 2013 Dec;84(6):808-23. doi: 10.1124/mol.113.088229. Epub 2013 Sep 
13.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 4a and 1a regulate kidney developmental expression of 
drug-metabolizing enzymes and drug transporters.

Martovetsky G(1), Tee JB, Nigam SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics (G.M., S.K.N.), Department of Biomedical Sciences
(G.M.), Department of Medicine (S.K.N.), and Department of Cellular and Molecular
Medicine (S.K.N.), University of California at San Diego, La Jolla, California;
and Department of Pediatrics, Dalhousie University and IWK Health Centre,
Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada (J.B.T.).

The transcriptional regulation of drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters
(here collectively referred to as DMEs) in the developing proximal tubule (PT) is
not well understood. As in the liver, DME regulation in the PT may be mediated
through nuclear receptors, which are thought to "sense" deviations from
homeostasis by being activated by ligands, some of which are handled by DMEs,
including drug transporters. Systems analysis of transcriptomic data during
kidney development predicted a set of upstream transcription factors, including
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (Hnf4a) and Hnf1a, as well as Nr3c1 (Gr), Nfe2l2
(Nrf2), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor a (Ppara), and Tp53. Motif
analysis of cis-regulatory enhancers further suggested that Hnf4a and Hnf1a are
the main transcriptional regulators of DMEs in the PT. Available expression data 
from tissue-specific Hnf4a knockout tissues revealed that distinct subsets of
DMEs were regulated by Hnf4a in a tissue-specific manner. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation combined with massively parallel DNA sequencing was performed
to characterize the PT-specific binding sites of Hnf4a in rat kidneys at three
developmental stages (prenatal, immature, adult), which further supported a major
role for Hnf4a in regulating PT gene expression, including DMEs. In ex vivo
kidney organ culture, an antagonist of Hnf4a (but not a similar inactive
compound) led to predicted changes in DME expression, including among others
Fmo1, Cyp2d2, Cyp2d4, Nqo2, as well as organic cation transporters and organic
anion transporters Slc22a1 (Oct1), Slc22a2 (Oct2), Slc22a6 (Oat1), Slc22a8
(Oat3), and Slc47a1 (Mate1). Conversely, overexpression of Hnf1a and Hnf4a in
primary mouse embryonic fibroblasts, sometimes considered a surrogate for
mesenchymal stem cells, induced expression of several of these proximal tubule
DMEs, as well as epithelial markers and a PT-enriched brush border marker Ggt1.
These cells had organic anion transporter function. Taken together, the data
strongly supports a critical role for HNF4a and Hnf1a in the tissue-specific
regulation of drug handling and differentiation toward a PT-like cellular
identity. We discuss our data in the context of the "remote sensing and signaling
hypothesis" (Ahn and Nigam, 2009; Wu et al., 2011).

PMCID: PMC3834141
PMID: 24038112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Diabetes Care. 2014;37(1):202-9. doi: 10.2337/dc13-0410. Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Cost-effectiveness of MODY genetic testing: translating genomic advances into
practical health applications.

Naylor RN(1), John PM, Winn AN, Carmody D, Greeley SA, Philipson LH, Bell GI,
Huang ES.

Author information: 
(1)Corresponding author: Rochelle N. Naylor, rnaylor@bsd.uchicago.edu.

OBJECTIVE To evaluate the cost-effectiveness of a genetic testing policy for
HNF1A-, HNF4A-, and GCK-MODY in a hypothetical cohort of type 2 diabetic patients
25-40 years old with a MODY prevalence of 2%. RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS We used
a simulation model of type 2 diabetes complications based on UK Prospective
Diabetes Study data, modified to account for the natural history of disease by
genetic subtype to compare a policy of genetic testing at diabetes diagnosis
versus a policy of no testing. Under the screening policy, successful
sulfonylurea treatment of HNF1A-MODY and HNF4A-MODY was modeled to produce a
glycosylated hemoglobin reduction of -1.5% compared with usual care. GCK-MODY
received no therapy. Main outcome measures were costs and quality-adjusted life
years (QALYs) based on lifetime risk of complications and treatments, expressed
as the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) (USD/QALY). RESULTS The
testing policy yielded an average gain of 0.012 QALYs and resulted in an ICER of 
205,000 USD. Sensitivity analysis showed that if the MODY prevalence was 6%, the 
ICER would be ~50,000 USD. If MODY prevalence was >30%, the testing policy was
cost saving. Reducing genetic testing costs to 700 USD also resulted in an ICER
of ~50,000 USD. CONCLUSIONS Our simulated model suggests that a policy of testing
for MODY in selected populations is cost-effective for the U.S. based on
contemporary ICER thresholds. Higher prevalence of MODY in the tested population 
or decreased testing costs would enhance cost-effectiveness. Our results make a
compelling argument for routine coverage of genetic testing in patients with high
clinical suspicion of MODY.

PMCID: PMC3867988
PMID: 24026547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Arthritis Res Ther. 2013 Aug 30;15(4):R100. doi: 10.1186/ar4280.

Genomic characterization of remission in juvenile idiopathic arthritis.

Jiang K, Frank M, Chen Y, Osban J, Jarvis JN.

INTRODUCTION: The attainment of remission has become an important end point for
clinical trials in juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA), although we do not yet
have a full understanding of what remission is at the cell and molecular level.
METHODS: Two independent cohorts of patients with JIA and healthy child controls 
were studied. RNA was prepared separately from peripheral blood mononuclear cells
(PBMC) and granulocytes to identify differentially expressed genes using whole
genome microarrays. Expression profiling results for selected genes were
confirmed by quantitative, real-time polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: We found that remission in JIA induced by either methotrexate (MTX) or
MTX plus a TNF inhibitor (etanercept, Et) (MTX + Et) is characterized by numerous
differences in gene expression in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and in
granulocytes compared with healthy control children; that is, remission is not a 
restoration of immunologic normalcy. Network analysis of the differentially
expressed genes demonstrated that the steroid hormone receptor superfamily member
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4a) is a hub in several of the gene
networks that distinguished children with arthritis from controls. Confocal
microscopy revealed that HNF4a is present in both T lymphocytes and granulocytes,
suggesting a previously unsuspected role for this transcription factor in
regulating leukocyte function and therapeutic response in JIA.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings provide a framework from which to understand
therapeutic response in JIA and, furthermore, may be used to develop strategies
to increase the frequency with which remission is achieved in adult forms of
rheumatoid arthritis.

PMCID: PMC4062846
PMID: 24000795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. PLoS One. 2013 Aug 14;8(8):e70675. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0070675. eCollection
2013.

Role of PPARa and HNF4a in stress-mediated alterations in lipid homeostasis.

Konstandi M(1), Shah YM, Matsubara T, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America. mkonstan@cc.uoi.gr

Stress is a risk factor for several cardiovascular pathologies. PPARa holds a
fundamental role in control of lipid homeostasis by directly regulating genes
involved in fatty acid transport and oxidation. Importantly, PPARa agonists are
effective in raising HDL-cholesterol and lowering triglycerides, properties that 
reduce the risk for cardiovascular diseases. This study investigated the role of 
stress and adrenergic receptor (AR)-related pathways in PPARa and HNF4a
regulation and signaling in mice following repeated restraint stress or treatment
with AR-antagonists administered prior to stress to block AR-linked pathways.
Repeated restraint stress up-regulated Ppara and its target genes in the liver,
including Acox, Acot1, Acot4, Cyp4a10, Cyp4a14 and Lipin2, an effect that was
highly correlated with Hnf4a. In vitro studies using primary hepatocyte cultures 
treated with epinephrine or AR-agonists confirmed that hepatic AR/cAMP/PKA/CREB- 
and JNK-linked pathways are involved in PPARa and HNF4a regulation. Notably,
restraint stress, independent of PPARa, suppressed plasma triglyceride levels.
This stress-induced effect could be attributed in part to hormone sensitive
lipase activation in the white adipose tissue, which was not prevented by the
increased levels of perilipin. Overall, this study identifies a mechanistic basis
for the modification of lipid homeostasis following stress and potentially
indicates novel roles for PPARa and HNF4a in stress-induced lipid metabolism.

PMCID: PMC3743822
PMID: 23967086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Stem Cells. 2013 Nov;31(11):2396-407. doi: 10.1002/stem.1496.

Induction of ß-cell replication by a synthetic HNF4a antagonist.

Lee SH(1), Piran R, Keinan E, Pinkerton A, Levine F.

Author information: 
(1)Sanford Children's Health Research Center, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research
Institute, La Jolla, California, USA.

Increasing the number of ß cells is critical to a definitive therapy for
diabetes. Previously, we discovered potent synthetic small molecule antagonists
of the nuclear receptor transcription factor HNF4a. The natural ligands of HNF4a 
are thought to be fatty acids. Because obesity, in which there are high
circulating levels of free fatty acids, is one of the few conditions leading to
ß-cell hyperplasia, we tested the hypothesis that a potent HNF4a antagonist might
stimulate ß-cell replication. A bioavailable HNF4a antagonist was injected into
normal mice and rabbits and ß-cell ablated mice and the effect on ß-cell
replication was measured. In normal mice and rabbits, the compound induced ß-cell
replication and repressed the expression of multiple cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitors, including p16 that plays a critical role in suppressing ß-cell
replication. Interestingly, in ß-cell ablated mice, the compound induced a- and
d-cell, in addition to ß-cell replication, and ß-cell number was substantially
increased. Overall, the data presented here are consistent with a model in which 
the well-known effects of obesity and high fat diet on ß-cell replication occur
by inhibition of HNF4a. The availability of a potent synthetic HNF4a antagonist
raises the possibility that this effect might be a viable route to promote
significant increases in ß-cell replication in diseases with reduced ß-cell mass,
including type I and type II diabetes.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23922283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. J Biosci Bioeng. 2014 Jan;117(1):113-21. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiosc.2013.06.021. Epub 
2013 Jul 25.

Noninvasively measuring respiratory activity of rat primary hepatocyte spheroids 
by scanning electrochemical microscopy.

Takahashi R(1), Zhou Y(2), Horiguchi Y(2), Shiku H(2), Sonoda H(3), Itabashi
N(4), Yamamoto J(4), Saito T(5), Matsue T(6), Hisada A(7).

Author information: 
(1)Central Research Laboratory, Hitachi Ltd., Hatoyama, Saitama 350-0395, Japan. 
Electronic address: ryosuke.takahashi.jr@hitachi.com. (2)Graduate School of
Environmental Studies, Tohoku University, Aramaki-Aoba 6-6-11, Sendai 980-8579,
Japan. (3)Central Research Laboratory, Hitachi Ltd., Hatoyama, Saitama 350-0395, 
Japan; Social Innovation Business Project Div., Hitachi Ltd., Sotokanda, Chiyoda,
Tokyo 101-8608, Japan. (4)Central Research Laboratory, Hitachi Ltd.,
Higashi-koigakubo, Kokubunji, Tokyo 185-8601, Japan. (5)Social Innovation
Business Project Div., Hitachi Ltd., Sotokanda, Chiyoda, Tokyo 101-8608, Japan.
(6)Graduate School of Environmental Studies, Tohoku University, Aramaki-Aoba
6-6-11, Sendai 980-8579, Japan; WPI Advanced Institute for Materials Research,
Tohoku University, Kitahara 2-2-1, Sendai 980-8577, Japan. (7)Central Research
Laboratory, Hitachi Ltd., Hatoyama, Saitama 350-0395, Japan.

Construction of an in vitro drug screening method for evaluating drug metabolism 
and toxicity by using cells is required instead of the conventional in vivo one
that uses animals. In order to realize the in vitro study, analyzing the cellular
activity or viability noninvasively in advance of the screening is essential. The
aim of the current study is to establish a method that can evaluate the cellular 
activity depending on spheroid sizes by means of oxygen consumption and to
determine the valid diameter of hepatocyte spheroids. To measure the respiratory 
activity of the spheroids, which were formed on a nanopillar sheet, we applied
scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM). From the viewpoint of high
respiratory activity and its small variation, we determined that spheroids with
70 µm in diameter were adequate. We then performed a gene expression analysis by 
using a real-time PCR to evaluate the correlation with respiratory activity. As a
result, a higher expression level of Hnf4a, which is essential for hepatocytes to
fulfill many liver functions and is the indicator of well-differentiated
hepatocytes, showed relatively higher respiratory activity. We concluded that the
noninvasive SECM technique could evaluate the cellular activity of a single
spheroid. Noninvasively measuring cellular activity by SECM makes it possible to 
evaluate the cellular activity prior to a nonclinical test and enables the
continued monitoring of the drug response by using single spheroid. SECM becomes 
a powerful tool to satisfying the increasing demand for an in vitro system in the
course of new drug development.

Copyright © 2013 The Society for Biotechnology, Japan. Published by Elsevier B.V.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 23890543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Ann Clin Biochem. 2013 Sep;50(Pt 5):403-15. doi: 10.1177/0004563213483458. Epub
2013 Jul 22.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young: identification and diagnosis.

McDonald TJ(1), Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Biochemistry, Royal Devon and Exeter NHS Foundation
Trust, Exeter, UK.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic disorder that results 
in a familial, young-onset non-insulin dependent form of diabetes, typically
presenting in lean young adults before 25 years. Approximately 1% of diabetes has
a monogenic cause but this is frequently misdiagnosed as Type 1 or Type 2
diabetes. A correct genetic diagnosis is important as it often leads to improved 
treatment for those affected with diabetes and enables predictive genetic testing
for their asymptomatic relatives. An early diagnosis together with appropriate
treatment is essential for reducing the risk of diabetic complications in later
life. Mutations in the GCK and HNF1A/4<U+2009>A genes account for up to 80% of all MODY 
cases. Mutations in the GCK gene cause a mild, asymptomatic and non-progressive
fasting hyperglycaemia from birth usually requiring no treatment. In contrast,
mutations in the genes encoding the transcription factors HNF1A and HNF4A cause a
progressive insulin secretory defect and hyperglycaemia that can lead to vascular
complications. The diabetes in these patients is usually well controlled with
sulphonylurea tablets although insulin treatment may be required in later life.
In this review, we outline the key clinical and laboratory characteristics of the
common and rarer causes of MODY with the aim of raising awareness of this
condition amongst health-care scientists.

PMID: 23878349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 9;8(7):e68491. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068491. Print 2013.

Characterization of the mitochondrial localization of the nuclear receptor SHP
and regulation of its subcellular distribution by interaction with Bcl2 and
HNF4a.

Zhang Y(1), Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah School
of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah, United States of America.

The nuclear receptor small heterodimer partner SHP was shown recently to
translocate to the mitochondria, interact with Bcl2, and induce apoptosis in
liver cancer cells. However, the exact mitochondrial localization of SHP remains 
to be determined. In addition, the detailed interaction domains between SHP and
Bcl2 have not been characterized. Using biochemistry and molecular biology
approaches, we demonstrate that SHP is localized to the mitochondrial outer
membrane. Interestingly, compared with the full-length SHP, the N-terminal
deleted protein exhibits increased expression in the mitochondria and decreased
expression in the nucleus. GST pull-down assays demonstrate that the interaction 
domain of SHP shows the strongest interaction with Bcl2. Furthermore, the
interaction of Bcl2 with SHP is completely abolished by deletion of the Bcl2
transmembrane domain (TM), whereas deletion of the Bcl2 BH1 domain enhances the
interaction. As expected, AHPN, a synthetic SHP ligand, markedly augments the
direct protein-protein interaction between Bcl2 and SHP. Ectopic expression of
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4a) results in exclusive nuclear
translocation of SHP proteins that contain either the full-length or the
N-terminal domain, but has a minimal effect on the subcellular distribution of
SHP protein containing only the interaction domain or repression domain. These
results indicate that the N-terminal domain of SHP is important for its nuclear
translocation via HNF4a. Overall, this study provides novel insights into the
domains of SHP that are critical for its shutting between different subcellular
compartments.

PMCID: PMC3706418
PMID: 23874642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 16;8(7):e68335. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068335. Print 2013.

Comprehensive gene expression profiling reveals synergistic functional networks
in cerebral vessels after hypertension or hypercholesterolemia.

Ong WY(1), Ng MP, Loke SY, Jin S, Wu YJ, Tanaka K, Wong PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
wei_yi_ong@nuhs.edu.sg

Atherosclerotic stenosis of cerebral arteries or intracranial large artery
disease (ICLAD) is a major cause of stroke especially in Asians, Hispanics and
Africans, but relatively little is known about gene expression changes in vessels
at risk. This study compares comprehensive gene expression profiles in the middle
cerebral artery (MCA) of New Zealand White rabbits exposed to two stroke risk
factors i.e. hypertension and/or hypercholesterolemia, by the 2-Kidney-1-Clip
method, or dietary supplementation with cholesterol. Microarray and Ingenuity
Pathway Analyses of the MCA of the hypertensive rabbits showed up-regulated genes
in networks containing the node molecules: UBC (ubiquitin), P38 MAPK, ERK, NFkB, 
SERPINB2, MMP1 and APP (amyloid precursor protein); and down-regulated genes
related to MAPK, ERK 1/2, Akt, 26 s proteasome, histone H3 and UBC. The MCA of
hypercholesterolemic rabbits showed differentially expressed genes that are
surprisingly, linked to almost the same node molecules as the hypertensive
rabbits, despite a relatively low percentage of 'common genes' (21 and 7%)
between the two conditions. Up-regulated common genes were related to: UBC,
SERPINB2, TNF, HNF4A (hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A) and APP, and down-regulated
genes, related to UBC. Increased HNF4A message and protein were verified in the
aorta. Together, these findings reveal similar nodal molecules and gene pathways 
in cerebral vessels affected by hypertension or hypercholesterolemia, which could
be a basis for synergistic action of risk factors in the pathogenesis of ICLAD.

PMCID: PMC3712983
PMID: 23874591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Liver Int. 2014 Feb;34(2):281-95. doi: 10.1111/liv.12239. Epub 2013 Jul 9.

Overexpression of miR-122 promotes the hepatic differentiation and maturation of 
mouse ESCs through a miR-122/FoxA1/HNF4a-positive feedback loop.

Deng XG(1), Qiu RL, Wu YH, Li ZX, Xie P, Zhang J, Zhou JJ, Zeng LX, Tang J,
Maharjan A, Deng JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, The Memorial Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University, Guangzhou, China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: microRNA-122 is the only identified liver-specific miRNA and
plays a crucial role in liver development, maintenance of hepatic homeostasis as 
well as tumourigenesis. In our previous differentiation of ESCs into hepatocytes,
microRNA-122 (miR-122) was expressed at a relatively low level. Here, we aim to
elucidate the effect and underlying mechanisms of miR-122 during differentiation 
of ESCs into hepatocytes.
METHODS: Mouse ESCs were initially induced towards HPCs by activin A, FGF-4 and
sodium butyrate and were subsequently transfected with a recombinant adenovirus
expressing vector pAV.Ex1d-CMV>miR-122/IRES/eGFP 9 days after induction. Cells
were analysed by real-time PCR, immunofluorescence, flow cytometry, microscopy
and functional assays. Furthermore, microarray analysis was performed.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that overexpression of miR-122 could effectively promote
hepatic differentiation and maturation, as assessed by morphological and
functional tests. The microarray analysis revealed that 323 genes were
down-regulated, whereas 59 were up-regulated. Particularly, two liver-specific
transcription factors, FoxA1 and HNF4a, were significantly up-regulated.
Moreover, the expression of E-cadherin was dramatically increased and the
proliferation of HPCs was suppressed, whereas knockdown of FoxA1 reduced
E-cadherin expression and increased the proliferation of HPCs. In addition, the
expression levels of FoxA1, HNF4a and E-cadherin in time-course transfection
experiments with miR-122 were not significantly increased except in cells in
which transfection with miR-122 occurred 9 days after induction.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of miR-122 at an appropriate stage could promote
hepatic differentiation and maturation by regulating the balance between
proliferation and differentiation, as well as the balance between EMT and MET,
partially through a miR-122/FoxA1/HNF4a-positive feedback loop.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23834235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Toxicol In Vitro. 2014 Feb;28(1):113-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2013.06.014. Epub 2013
Jun 29.

Characterization of hepatic markers in human Wharton's Jelly-derived mesenchymal 
stem cells.

Buyl K(1), De Kock J, Najar M, Lagneaux L, Branson S, Rogiers V, Vanhaecke T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Center for Pharmaceutical Research (CePhaR), Vrije
Universiteit Brussel (VUB), Laarbeeklaan 103, 1090 Brussels, Belgium. Electronic 
address: karobuyl@vub.ac.be.

Stem cell technology could offer a unique tool to develop human-based in vitro
liver models that are applicable for testing of potential liver toxicity early
during drug development. In this context, recent research has indicated that
human Wharton's Jelly-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hWJs) represent an
interesting stem cell population to develop human hepatocyte-like cells. Here, an
in-depth analysis of the expression of liver-specific transcription factors and
other key hepatic markers in hWJs is evaluated at both the mRNA and protein
level. Our results reveal that transcription factors that are mandatory to
acquire and maintain an adult hepatic phenotype (HNF4A and HNF1A), as well as
adult hepatic markers (ALB, CX32, CYP1A1, CYP1A2, CYP2B6 and CYP3A4) are not
expressed in hWJs with the exception of K18. On the contrary, transcription
factors involved in liver development (GATA4, GATA6, SOX9 and SOX17) and liver
progenitor markers (DKK1, DPP4, DSG2, CX43 and K19) were found to be highly
expressed in hWJs. These findings provide additional indication that hWJs could
be a promising stem cell source to generate hepatocyte-like cells necessary for
the development of a functional human-based in vitro liver model.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23820183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. PLoS Genet. 2013 Jun;9(6):e1003513. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003513. Epub 2013 
Jun 20.

Integrated transcriptomic and epigenomic analysis of primary human lung
epithelial cell differentiation.

Marconett CN(1), Zhou B, Rieger ME, Selamat SA, Dubourd M, Fang X, Lynch SK,
Stueve TR, Siegmund KD, Berman BP, Borok Z, Laird-Offringa IA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California, USA.

Elucidation of the epigenetic basis for cell-type specific gene regulation is key
to gaining a full understanding of how the distinct phenotypes of differentiated 
cells are achieved and maintained. Here we examined how epigenetic changes are
integrated with transcriptional activation to determine cell phenotype during
differentiation. We performed epigenomic profiling in conjunction with
transcriptomic profiling using in vitro differentiation of human primary alveolar
epithelial cells (AEC). This model recapitulates an in vivo process in which AEC 
transition from one differentiated cell type to another during regeneration
following lung injury. Interrogation of histone marks over time revealed
enrichment of specific transcription factor binding motifs within regions of
changing chromatin structure. Cross-referencing of these motifs with pathways
showing transcriptional changes revealed known regulatory pathways of distal
alveolar differentiation, such as the WNT and transforming growth factor beta
(TGFB) pathways, and putative novel regulators of adult AEC differentiation
including hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4A), and the retinoid X receptor 
(RXR) signaling pathways. Inhibition of the RXR pathway confirmed its functional 
relevance for alveolar differentiation. Our incorporation of epigenetic data
allowed specific identification of transcription factors that are potential
direct upstream regulators of the differentiation process, demonstrating the
power of this approach. Integration of epigenomic data with transcriptomic
profiling has broad application for the identification of regulatory pathways in 
other models of differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3688557
PMID: 23818859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Transl Med. 2013 Jun 26;11:156. doi: 10.1186/1479-5876-11-156.

Effects of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1A and -4A on pancreatic stone
protein/regenerating protein and C-reactive protein gene expression: implications
for maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Kyithar MP(1), Bonner C, Bacon S, Kilbride SM, Schmid J, Graf R, Prehn JH, Byrne 
MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, 30
Eccles Street, Dublin 7, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: There is a significant clinical overlap between patients with
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1A and HNF4A maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY), two forms of monogenic diabetes. HNF1A and HNF4A are transcription
factors that control common and partly overlapping sets of target genes. We have 
previously shown that elevated serum pancreatic stone protein / regenerating
protein A (PSP/reg1A) levels can be detected in subjects with HNF1A-MODY. In this
study, we investigated whether PSP/reg is differentially regulated by HNF1A and
HNF4A.
METHODS: Quantitative real-time PCR (qPCR) and Western blotting were used to
validate gene and protein expression in cellular models of HNF1A- and HNF4A-MODY.
Serum PSP/reg1A levels and high-sensitivity C-reactive protein (hsCRP) were
measured by ELISA in 31 HNF1A- and 9 HNF4A-MODY subjects. The two groups were
matched for age, body mass index, diabetes duration, blood pressure, lipid
profile and aspirin and statin use.
RESULTS: Inducible repression of HNF1A and HNF4A function in INS-1 cells
suggested that PSP/reg induction required HNF4A, but not HNF1A. In contrast, crp 
gene expression was significantly reduced by repression of HNF1A, but not HNF4A
function. PSP/reg levels were significantly lower in HNF4A subjects when compared
to HNF1A subjects [9.25 (7.85-12.85) ng/ml vs. 12.5 (10.61-17.87) ng/ml, U-test
P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.025]. hsCRP levels were significantly lower in HNF1A-MODY [0.22 (0.17-0.35)
mg/L] compared to HNF4A-MODY group [0.81 (0.38-1.41) mg/L, U-test P<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.002],
Parallel measurements of serum PSP/reg1A and hsCRP levels were able to
discriminate HNF1A- and HNF4A-MODY subjects.
CONCLUSION: Our study demonstrates that two distinct target genes, PSP/reg and
crp, are differentially regulated by HNF1A and HNF4A, and provides clinical
proof-of-concept that serum PSP/reg1A and hsCRP levels may distinguish HNF1A-MODY
from HNF4A-MODY subjects.

PMCID: PMC3707779
PMID: 23803251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Diabet Med. 2014 Jan;31(1):e1-5. doi: 10.1111/dme.12259.

The evolving course of HNF4A hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia--a case series.

McGlacken-Byrne SM(1), Hawkes CP, Flanagan SE, Ellard S, McDonnell CM, Murphy NP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Children's University Hospital,
Dublin, Ireland.

Comment in
    Diabet Med. 2014 Jan;31(1):1.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4A) gene mutations have a
well-recognized role in maturity-onset diabetes of the young and have recently
been described in congenital hyperinsulinism. A biphasic phenotype has been
postulated, with macrosomia and congenital hyperinsulinism in infancy, and
diabetes in young adulthood. In this case series, we report three children with
HNF4A mutations (two de novo) and diazoxide-responsive congenital
hyperinsulinism, highlighting the potential for ongoing diazoxide requirement and
the importance of screening for these mutations even in the absence of family
history.
CASE REPORTS: All patients presented with macrosomia (mean birthweight 4.26 kg)
and hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia soon after birth (median age 1 day). All
three (age range 7 months to 11 years 10 months) remain on diazoxide therapy,
with dose requirements increasing in one patient. There was no prior family
history of diabetes, neonatal hypoglycaemia or macrosomia. Parents were screened 
for HNF4A mutations post-diagnosis and one father was subsequently found to have 
maturity-onset diabetes of the young.
CONCLUSIONS: This case series follows the evolving course of three patients with 
confirmed HNF4A-mediated congenital hyperinsulinism, highlighting (1) the
variable natural history of these mutations, (2) the potential for prolonged
diazoxide requirement, even into adolescence, and (3) the need for screening,
regardless of family history.

© 2013 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2013 Diabetes UK.

PMID: 23796040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. BMJ Open. 2013 May 28;3(5). pii: e002905. doi: 10.1136/bmjopen-2013-002905.

Development of an economic evaluation of diagnostic strategies: the case of
monogenic diabetes.

Peters JL(1), Anderson R, Hyde C.

Author information: 
(1)PenTAG/PenCLAHRC, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

OBJECTIVES: To describe the development process for defining an appropriate model
structure for the economic evaluation of test-treatment strategies for patients
with monogenic diabetes (caused by mutations in the GCK, HNF1A or HNF4A genes).
DESIGN: Experts were consulted to identify and define realistic test-treatment
strategies and care pathways. A systematic assessment of published diabetes
models was undertaken to inform the model structure.
SETTING: National Health Service in England and Wales.
PARTICIPANTS: Experts in monogenic diabetes whose collective expertise spans the 
length of the patient care pathway.
PRIMARY AND SECONDARY OUTCOMES: A defined model structure, including the
test-treatment strategies, and the selection of a published diabetes model
appropriate for the economic evaluation of strategies to identify patients with
monogenic diabetes.
RESULTS: Five monogenic diabetes test-treatment strategies were defined: no
testing of any kind, referral for genetic testing based on clinical features as
noted by clinicians, referral for genetic testing based on the results of a
clinical prediction model, referral for genetic testing based on the results of
biochemical and immunological tests, referral for genetic testing for all
patients with a diagnosis of diabetes under the age of 30 years. The systematic
assessment of diabetes models identified the IMS CORE Diabetes Model (IMS CDM) as
a good candidate for modelling the long-term outcomes and costs of the
test-treatment strategies for monogenic diabetes. The short-term test-treatment
events will be modelled using a decision tree which will feed into the IMS CDM.
CONCLUSIONS: Defining a model structure for any economic evaluation requires
decisions to be made. Expert consultation and the explicit use of critical
appraisal can inform these decisions. Although arbitrary choices have still been 
made, decision modelling allows investigation into such choices and the impact of
assumptions that have to be made due to a lack of data.

PMCID: PMC3657677
PMID: 23793674  [PubMed]


226. BMB Rep. 2013 Jun;46(6):322-7.

Cooperative transcriptional activation of ATP-binding cassette sterol
transporters ABCG5 and ABCG8 genes by nuclear receptors including
Liver-X-Receptor.

Back SS(1), Kim J, Choi D, Lee ES, Choi SY, Han K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Research Institute of Bioscience and
Biotechnology, Hallym University, Chunchon 200-702, Korea.

The ATP-binding cassette transporters ABCG5 and ABCG8 form heterodimers that
limit absorption of dietary sterols in the intestine and promote cholesterol
elimination from the body through hepatobiliary secretion. To identify
cis-regulatory elements of the two genes, we have cloned and analyzed
twenty-three evolutionary conserved region (ECR) fragments using the
CMV-luciferase reporter system in HepG2 cells. Two ECRs were found to be
responsive to the Liver-X-Receptor (LXR). Through elaborate deletion studies,
regions containing putative LXREs were identified and the binding of LXRa was
demonstrated by EMSA and ChIP assay. When the LXREs were inserted upstream of the
intergenic promoter, synergistic activation by LXRa/RXRa in combination with
GATA4, HNF4a, and LRH-1, which had been shown to bind to the intergenic region,
was observed. In conclusion, we have identified two LXREs in ABCG5/ABCG8 genes
for the first time and propose that these LXREs, especially in the ECR20, play
major roles in regulating these genes.

PMCID: PMC4133900
PMID: 23790976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Indian J Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jan;17(1):19-30. doi: 10.4103/2230-8210.107822.

The molecular mechanisms, diagnosis and management of congenital hyperinsulinism.

Senniappan S(1), Arya VB, Hussain K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for
Children NHS Trust WC1N 3JH and Institute of Child Health, University College
London, WC1N 1EH, United Kingdom.

Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is the result of unregulated insulin secretion
from the pancreatic ß-cells leading to severe hypoglycaemia. In these patients it
is important to make an accurate diagnosis and initiate the appropriate
management so as to avoid hypoglycemic episodes and prevent the potentially
associated complications like epilepsy, neurological impairment and cerebral
palsy. At a genetic level abnormalities in eight different genes (ABCC8, KCNJ11, 
GLUD1, GCK, HADH, SLC16A1, HNF4A and UCP2) have been reported with CHI. Loss of
function mutations in ABCC8/KCNJ11 lead to the most severe forms of CHI which are
usually medically unresponsive. At a histological level there are two major
subgroups, diffuse and focal, each with a different genetic etiology. The focal
form is sporadic in inheritance and is localized to a small region of the
pancreas whereas the diffuse form is inherited in an autosomal recessive (or
dominant) manner. Imaging using a specialized positron emission tomography scan
with the isotope fluroine-18 L-3, 4-dihydroxyphenyalanine (18F-DOPA-PET-CT) is
used to accurately locate the focal lesion pre-operatively and if removed can
cure the patient from hypoglycemia. Understanding the molecular mechanisms, the
histological basis, improvements in imaging modalities and surgical techniques
have all improved the management of patients with CHI.

PMCID: PMC3659902
PMID: 23776849  [PubMed]


228. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Oct;98(10):4055-62. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-1279. Epub
2013 Jun 14.

Prevalence, characteristics and clinical diagnosis of maturity onset diabetes of 
the young due to mutations in HNF1A, HNF4A, and glucokinase: results from the
SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth.

Pihoker C(1), Gilliam LK, Ellard S, Dabelea D, Davis C, Dolan LM, Greenbaum CJ,
Imperatore G, Lawrence JM, Marcovina SM, Mayer-Davis E, Rodriguez BL, Steck AK,
Williams DE, Hattersley AT; SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)MD, Department of Pediatrics/Division of Endocrinology, A5902, Seattle
Children's Hospital, 4800 Sand Point Way NE, Seattle, Washington 98105.
catherine.pihoker@seattlechildrens.org.

AIMS: Our study aims were to determine the frequency of MODY mutations (HNF1A,
HNF4A, glucokinase) in a diverse population of youth with diabetes and to assess 
how well clinical features identify youth with maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY).
METHODS: The SEARCH for Diabetes in Youth study is a US multicenter,
population-based study of youth with diabetes diagnosed at age younger than 20
years. We sequenced genomic DNA for mutations in the HNF1A, HNF4A, and
glucokinase genes in 586 participants enrolled in SEARCH between 2001 and 2006.
Selection criteria included diabetes autoantibody negativity and fasting
C-peptide levels of 0.8 ng/mL or greater.
RESULTS: We identified a mutation in one of three MODY genes in 47 participants, 
or 8.0% of the tested sample, for a prevalence of at least 1.2% in the pediatric 
diabetes population. Of these, only 3 had a clinical diagnosis of MODY, and the
majority was treated with insulin. Compared with the MODY-negative group,
MODY-positive participants had lower FCP levels (2.2 ± 1.4 vs 3.2 ± 2.1 ng/mL, P 
< .01) and fewer type 2 diabetes-like metabolic features. Parental history of
diabetes did not significantly differ between the 2 groups.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: In this systematic study of MODY in a large pediatric
US diabetes cohort, unselected by referral pattern or family history, MODY was
usually misdiagnosed and incorrectly treated with insulin. Although many type 2
diabetes-like metabolic features were less common in the mutation-positive group,
no single characteristic identified all patients with mutations. Clinicians
should be alert to the possibility of MODY diagnosis, particularly in
antibody-negative youth with diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3790621
PMID: 23771925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Otol Neurotol. 2013 Jul;34(5):961-70. doi: 10.1097/MAO.0b013e3182898272.

A comprehensive network and pathway analysis of human deafness genes.

Stamatiou GA(1), Stankovic KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Hippokration General Hospital, University of
Athens, Athens, Greece.

OBJECTIVE: To perform comprehensive network and pathway analyses of the genes
known to cause genetic hearing loss.
STUDY DESIGN: In silico analysis of deafness genes using ingenuity pathway
analysis (IPA).
METHODS: Genes relevant for hearing and deafness were identified through PubMed
literature searches and the Hereditary Hearing Loss Homepage. The genes were
assembled into 3 groups: 63 genes that cause nonsyndromic deafness, 107 genes
that cause nonsyndromic or syndromic sensorineural deafness, and 112 genes
associated with otic capsule development and malformations. Each group of genes
was analyzed using IPA to discover the most interconnected, that is, "nodal"
molecules, within the most statistically significant networks (p < 10).
RESULTS: The number of networks that met our criterion for significance was 1 for
Group 1 and 2 for Groups 2 and 3. Nodal molecules of these networks were as
follows: transforming growth factor beta1 (TGFB1) for Group 1, MAPK3/MAPK1 MAP
kinase (ERK 1/2) and the G protein coupled receptors (GPCR) for Group 2, and
TGFB1 and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4A) for Group 3. The nodal
molecules included not only those known to be associated with deafness (GPCR), or
with predisposition to otosclerosis (TGFB1), but also novel genes that have not
been described in the cochlea (HNF4A) and signaling kinases (ERK 1/2).
CONCLUSION: A number of molecules that are likely to be key mediators of genetic 
hearing loss were identified through three different network and pathway
analyses. The molecules included new candidate genes for deafness. Therapies
targeting these molecules may be useful to treat deafness.

PMID: 23770690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Nov;114(11):2531-41. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24604.

Induction of hepatocyte-like cells from mouse embryonic stem cells by
lentivirus-mediated constitutive expression of Foxa2/Hnf4a.

Liu T(1), Zhang S, Xiang D, Wang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Infectious Diseases, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing, China; Department of Internal Medicine 3, The Northern
Region of No. 401 Hospital, Qingdao, Shandong, China.

Hepatocytes can be generated from embryonic stem cells (ESCs) using inducers such
as chemical compounds and cytokines, but issues related to low differentiation
efficiencies remain to be resolved. Recent work has shown that overexpression of 
lineage-specific transcription factors can directly cause cells phenotypic
changes, including differentiation, trans-differentiation, and
de-differentiation. We hypothesized that lentivirus-mediated constitutive
expression of forkhead box A2 (Foxa2) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha
(Hnf4a) could promote inducing mouse ESCs to hepatocyte-likes cells. First, ESC
lines that stably expressed Foxa2, Hnf4a, or Foxa2/Hnf4a were constructed via
lentiviral expression vectors. Second, observations of cell morphology changes
were made during the cell culture process, followed by experiments examining
teratoma formation. Then, the effects of constitutive expression of Foxa2 and
Hnf4a on hepatic differentiation and maturation were determined by measuring the 
marker gene expression levels of Albumin, a-fetoprotein, Cytokeratin18, and
a1-antitrypsin. The results indicate that constitutive expression of Foxa2 and
Hnf4a does not affect ESCs culture, teratoma formation, or the expression levels 
of the specific hepatocyte genes under autonomous differentiation. However, with 
some assistance from inducing factors, Foxa2 significantly increased the hepatic 
differentiation of ESCs, whereas the expression of Hnf4a alone or Foxa2/Hnf4a
could not. Differentiated CCE-Foxa2 cells were more superior in expressing
several liver-specific markers and protein, storing glycogen than differentiated 
CCE cells. Therefore, our method employing the transduction of Foxa2 would be a
valuable tool for the efficient generation of functional hepatocytes derived from
ESCs.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23744720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Haemophilia. 2013 Nov;19(6):893-7. doi: 10.1111/hae.12186. Epub 2013 Jun 4.

Genotype and phenotype relationships in 10 Pakistani unrelated patients with
inherited factor VII deficiency.

Borhany M(1), Boijout H, Pellequer JL, Shamsi T, Moulis G, Aguilar-Martinez P,
Schved JF, Giansily-Blaizot M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Haemostasis & Thrombosis, National Institute of
Blood Disease & Bone Marrow Transplantation (NIBD), Karachi, Pakistan.

Inherited factor VII (FVII) deficiency is one of the commonest rare bleeding
disorders. It is characterized by a wide molecular and clinical heterogeneity and
an autosomal recessive pattern of inheritance. Factor VII-deficient patients are 
still scarcely explored in Pakistan although rare bleeding disorders became quite
common as a result of traditional consanguineous marriages. The aim of the study 
was to give a first insight of F7 gene mutations in Pakistani population. Ten
unrelated FVII-deficient patients living in Pakistan were investigated (median
FVII:C = 2%; range = 2-37%). A clinical questionnaire was filled out for each
patient and direct sequencing was performed on the coding regions, intron/exon
boundaries and 5' and 3' untranslated regions of the F7 gene. Nine different
mutations (eight missense mutations and one located within the F7 promoter) were 
identified on the F7 gene. Five of them were novel (p.Cys82Tyr, p.Cys322Ser,
p.Leu357Phe, p.Thr410Ala, c-57C>T, the last being predicted to alter the binding 
site of transcription factor HNF-4). Half of the patients had single mutations in
Cys residues involved in disulfide bridges. The p.Cys82Arg mutation was the most 
frequent in our series. Six of seven patients with FVII:C levels below 10% were
homozygous in connection with the high percentage of consanguinity in our series.
In addition, we graded the 10 patients according to three previously published
classifications for rare bleeding disorders. The use of the bleeding score
proposed by Tosetto and co-workers in 2006 appears to well qualify the bleeding
tendency in our series.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23731332  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1829(10):1000-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.05.003. Epub 2013 May 26.

Transcription of the human microsomal epoxide hydrolase gene (EPHX1) is regulated
by an HNF-4a/CAR/RXR/PSF complex.

Peng H(1), Zhu QS, Zhong S, Levy D.

Author information: 
(1)University of Southern California, Keck School of Medicine, Department of
Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, 2011 Zonal Avenue, Los Angeles, CA 90033,
USA.

Microsomal epoxide hydrolase (mEH) is a bifunctional protein that plays a central
role in the metabolism of numerous xenobiotics as well as mediating the
sodium-dependent transport of bile acids into hepatocytes where they are involved
in cholesterol excretion and metabolism, lipid digestion and regulating numerous 
signaling pathways. Previous studies have demonstrated the critical role of
GATA-4 and a C/EBPa-NF/Y complex in the regulation of the mEH gene (EPHX1). In
this study we show that HNF-4a and CAR/RXR also bind to the proximal promoter
region and regulate EPHX1 expression. Bile acids, which inhibit the expression of
HNF-4a also decrease the expression of EPHX1. Studies also established that the
binding of HNF-4a was essential for the activation of EPHX1 activity by CAR
suggesting the formation of a complex between these adjacent factors. The nature 
of this regulatory complex was further explored using a biotinylated
oligonucleotide of this region in conjunction with BioMag beads and mass
spectrometric analysis which demonstrated the presence of an additional
inhibitory factor (PSF), confirmed by co-immunoprecipitation and ChIP analyses,
which interacted with DNA-bound CAR/RXR/HNF-4a forming a 4-component regulatory
complex.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23714182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Oct;1829(10):987-99. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2013.05.001. Epub 2013 May 9.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a regulates the expression of the murine pyruvate
carboxylase gene through the HNF4-specific binding motif in its proximal
promoter.

Chavalit T(1), Rojvirat P, Muangsawat S, Jitrapakdee S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Faculty of Science, Mahidol University, Bangkok,
Thailand.

Pyruvate carboxylase (PC) is the first regulatory enzyme of gluconeogenesis. Here
we report that the proximal promoter of the murine PC gene contains three binding
sites for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a). These sites include the classical
direct repeat 1 (DR1) (-386/-374), non-perfect DR1 (-118/-106) and HNF4a-specific
binding motif (H4-SBM) (-26/-14). Under basal conditions, mutation of the
non-perfect DR1 decreased promoter activity by 50%, whereas mutation of neither
the DR1 nor the H4-SBM had any effect. In marked contrast, only mutation of the
H4-SBM decreased HNF4a-transactivation of the promoter activity by 65%. EMSA
revealed that HNF4a binds to the DR1site and H4-SBM with similar affinity while
it binds poorly to the non-perfect DR1. Interestingly, this non-perfect DR1 also 
coincides with two E-boxes. Mutation of the non-perfect DR1 together with the
nearby E-box reduced USF1- but not USF2-transactivation of promoter activity,
suggesting that USF1 partly contributes to the basal activity of the promoter.
Substitution of the H4-SBM with the DR1 marginally reduced the basal promoter
activity but did not eliminate HNF4a-transactivation, suggesting that HNF4a can
exert its effect via DR1 within this promoter context. ChIP-assay confirmed that 
HNF4a is associated with the H4-SBM. Suppression of HNF4a expression in AML12
cells down-regulated PC mRNA and PC protein by 60% and 50%, respectively,
confirming that PC is a target of HNF4a. We also propose a model for differential
regulation of P1 promoter of PC gene in adipose tissue and liver.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23665043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Horm Res Paediatr. 2013;79(4):236-42. doi: 10.1159/000350827. Epub 2013 May 1.

Genetic analysis of Italian patients with congenital hyperinsulinism of infancy.

Sogno Valin P(1), Proverbio MC, Diceglie C, Gessi A, di Candia S, Mariani B,
Zamproni I, Mangano E, Asselta R, Battaglia C, Caruso-Nicoletti M, Mora S,
Salvatoni A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, San Raffaele Scientific Institute, Milan, Italy.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Congenital hyperinsulinism of infancy is a rare disease that
needs prompt treatment to avoid brain damage. There are currently no data
regarding the clinical and molecular features of Italian patients.
METHODS: Thirty-three patients with HI and their parents were included.
Consanguinity was reported in six patients. Half of patients were macrosomic at
birth. None had raised 3-hydroxybutyrylcarnitine or hyperammonemia. Molecular
analysis of ABCC8 and KCNJ11 genes was performed in all patients, and subjects
with no mutation underwent analysis of HNF4A and GCK. GLUD1 and HADH genes were
analyzed in a patient with leucine sensitivity.
RESULTS: Mutations in the ABCC8 and KCNJ11 genes were found in 45% of the
patients (6 novel). No mutations in HNF4A, GLUD1 and GCK genes were found.
Recessive mode of inheritance was found in 21% of patients. A single heterozygous
mutation was identified in 24% of probands. 72% of the patients were responsive
to medical treatment, and 44% of the 17 patients with no identified mutation
achieved spontaneous remission. Nine children, unresponsive to medical therapy,
underwent pancreatectomy.
CONCLUSION: This is the first report on hyperinsulinism of infancy in Italy,
confirming the complexity of the clinical forms and the heterogeneity of the
genetic causes of the disease.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23652837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Horm Res Paediatr. 2013;79(4):220-6. doi: 10.1159/000350520. Epub 2013 May 1.

Detection and characterization of two novel mutations in the HNF4A gene in
maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 1 in two Japanese families.

Fujiwara M(1), Namba N, Miura K, Kitaoka T, Hirai H, Kondou H, Shimotsuji T,
Numakura C, Ozono K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a subgroup of
monogenic diabetes mellitus, of which MODY1, caused by HNF4A mutations, accounts 
for only 5% or less and has been rarely reported in East Asian countries. Here we
report two novel HNF4A mutations in two Japanese families with MODY1.
METHODS: Proband 1 is an 8-year-old girl and proband 2 is a 14-year-old girl.
Both were nonobese, demonstrated elevated HbA1c and negative serum anti-glutamic 
acid decarboxylase antibodies, and had a family history of diabetes. We directly 
sequenced HNF4A and performed functional analysis of the detected missense
mutation.
RESULTS: Proband 1 had a heterozygous missense mutation, c.824A>G (p.Asn275Ser). 
Luciferase assay demonstrated a significant reduction in transcriptional
activity. A heterozygous frame shift mutation, c.692-695delAGGA
(p.Lys231ThrfsX5), was detected in proband 2. Affected family members shared the 
same mutations, showing high penetrance. Both mutations reside in the HNF4a
dimerization domain and the corresponding amino acids are well conserved between 
species.
CONCLUSIONS: These two mutations are most likely the cause of MODY1 in these
families. Considering the effectiveness of sulfonylureas, it is important to
correctly diagnose MODY1.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23652628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. J Proteome Res. 2013 Jun 7;12(6):2732-41. doi: 10.1021/pr400085n. Epub 2013 May
15.

A combination of transcriptomics and metabolomics uncovers enhanced bile acid
biosynthesis in HepG2 cells expressing CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß),
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a), and constitutive androstane receptor (CAR).

Blazquez M(1), Carretero A, Ellis JK, Athersuch TJ, Cavill R, Ebbels TM, Keun HC,
Castell JV, Lahoz A, Bort R.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Hepatología Experimental, CIBERehd, Instituto de Investigación
Sanitaria La Fe, Valencia 46009, Spain.

The development of hepatoma-based in vitro models to study hepatocyte physiology 
is an invaluable tool for both industry and academia. Here, we develop an in
vitro model based on the HepG2 cell line that produces chenodeoxycholic acid, the
main bile acid in humans, in amounts comparable to human hepatocytes. A
combination of adenoviral transfections for CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß
(C/EBPß), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a), and constitutive androstane
receptor (CAR) decreased intracellular glutamate, succinate, leucine, and valine 
levels in HepG2 cells, suggestive of a switch to catabolism to increase lipogenic
acetyl CoA and increased anaplerosis to replenish the tricarboxylic acid cycle.
Transcripts of key genes involved in bile acid synthesis were significantly
induced by approximately 160-fold. Consistently, chenodeoxycholic acid production
rate was increased by more than 20-fold. Comparison between mRNA and bile acid
levels suggest that 12-alpha hydroxylation of 7-alpha-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one
is the limiting step in cholic acid synthesis in HepG2 cells. These data reveal
that introduction of three hepatocyte-related transcription factors enhance
anabolic reactions in HepG2 cells and provide a suitable model to study bile acid
biosynthesis under pathophysiological conditions.

PMID: 23641669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Gene. 2013 Jul 25;524(2):187-92. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.04.036. Epub 2013 Apr
26.

Hepatic nuclear factor 4a positively regulates complement C3 expression and does 
not interfere with TNFa-mediated stimulation of C3 expression in HepG2 cells.

Shavva VS(1), Mogilenko DA, Dizhe EB, Oleinikova GN, Perevozchikov AP, Orlov SV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Russian
Academy of Medical Sciences, St. Petersburg 197376, Russia. shavva@iem.sp.ru

Complement C3 is involved in various protective and regulatory mechanisms of
immune system. Recently it was established that C3 expression is regulated by
nuclear receptors. Hepatic nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) is a nuclear receptor
critical for hepatic development and metabolism. We have shown that HNF4a is a
positive regulator of C3 gene expression, realizing its effects through binding
to two HNF4-response elements within the C3 promoter in HepG2 cells. TNFa is a
well established positive regulator of C3 expression in hepatocytes during acute 
phase of inflammation. TNFa decreases the amount of HNF4a protein in HepG2 cells 
through NF-<U+03BA>B and MEK1/2 pathways thereby leading to a decrease in HNF4a bound to
the C3 promoter. TNFa and HNF4a act in a synergetic way resulting in the potent
activation of C3 transcription. These results suggest a novel mechanism of C3
regulation during acute phase response in HepG2 cells and display the mechanism
of interaction of TNFa-induced pathways and HNF4a in transcriptional regulation
of C3 gene.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23628799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Diabetologia. 2013 Jul;56(7):1512-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-013-2916-y. Epub 2013
Apr 27.

Prevalence of monogenic diabetes in the population-based Norwegian Childhood
Diabetes Registry.

Irgens HU(1), Molnes J, Johansson BB, Ringdal M, Skrivarhaug T, Undlien DE, Søvik
O, Joner G, Molven A, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)KG Jebsen Center for Diabetes Research, Department of Clinical Science,
University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Monogenic diabetes (MD) might be misdiagnosed as type 1
diabetes. The prevalence of MD among children with apparent type 1 diabetes has
not been established. Our aim was to estimate the prevalence of common forms of
MD in childhood diabetes.
METHODS: We investigated 2,756 children aged 0-14 years with newly diagnosed
diabetes who had been recruited to the nationwide population-based Norwegian
Childhood Diabetes Registry (NCDR), from July 2002 to March 2012. Completeness of
ascertainment was 91%. Children diagnosed with diabetes who were under12 months
of age were screened for mutations in KCNJ11, ABCC8 and INS. Children without GAD
and protein tyrosine phosphatase-like protein antibodies were screened in two
ways. Those who had a parent with diabetes were screened for mutations in HNF1A, 
HNF4A, INS and MT-TL1. Children with HbA1c <7.5% (<58 mmol/mol) and no insulin
requirement were screened for mutations in GCK. Finally, we searched the
Norwegian MODY Registry for children with genetically verified MD.
RESULTS: We identified 15 children harbouring a mutation in HNF1A, nine with one 
in GCK, four with one in KCNJ11, one child with a mutation in INS and none with a
mutation in MT-TL1. The minimum prevalence of MD in the NCDR was therefore 1.1%. 
By searching the Norwegian MODY Registry, we found 24 children with
glucokinase-MODY, 15 of whom were not present in the NCDR. We estimated the
minimum prevalence of MD among Norwegian children to be 3.1/100,000.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This is the first prevalence study of the common
forms of MD in a nationwide, population-based registry of childhood diabetes. We 
found that 1.1% of patients in the Norwegian Childhood Diabetes Registry had MD.

PMID: 23624530  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Toxicol In Vitro. 2013 Sep;27(6):1649-58. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2013.04.003. Epub
2013 Apr 16.

In vitro microarray analysis identifies genes in acute-phase response pathways
that are down-regulated in the liver of chicken embryos exposed in ovo to PFUdA.

O'Brien JM(1), Williams A, Yauk CL, Crump D, Kennedy SW.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Advanced Research in Environmental Genomics, Department of Biology,
University of Ottawa, 20 Marie-Curie, Ottawa, ON, Canada. jobri067@uottawa.ca

Perfluoroundecanoic acid (PFUdA) is one of the most highly detected
perfluoroalkyl compounds in wild bird tissues and eggs. Although PFUdA does not
affect hatching success, many PFCs are known to impair post-hatch development and
survival. Here we use microarrays to survey the transcriptional response of
cultured chicken embryonic hepatocytes (CEH) to PFUdA for potential targets of
PFUdA action that could lead to developmental deficiencies in exposed birds. At 1
µM and 10 µM PFUdA significantly altered the expression of 346 and 676
transcripts, respectively (fold-change>1.5, p<0.05, false discovery
rate-corrected). Using functional, pathway and interactome analysis we identified
several potentially important targets of PFUdA exposure, including the
suppression of the acute-phase response (APR). We then measured the expression of
five APR genes, fibrinogen alpha (fga), fibrinogen gamma (fgg), thrombin (f2),
plasminogen (plg), and protein C (proC), in the liver of chicken embryos exposed 
in ovo to PFUdA. The expression of fga, f2, and proC were down-regulated in
embryo livers (100 or 1000 ng/g, p<0.1) as predicted from microarray analysis,
whereas fibrinogen gamma (fgg) was up-regulated and plg was not significantly
affected. Our results demonstrate the utility of CEH coupled with transcriptome
analysis as an in vitro screening tool for identifying novel effects of toxicant 
exposure. Additionally, we identified APR suppression as a potentially important 
and environmentally relevant target of PFUdA. These findings suggest in ovo
exposure of birds to PFUdA may lead to post-hatch developmental deficiencies,
such as impaired inflammatory response.

Crown Copyright © 2013. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23602845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2013 Jun;92:94-103. doi: 10.1016/j.ecoenv.2013.02.019.
Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Transcriptional profiling in burbot (Lota lota) from Lake Mjøsa--a Norwegian Lake
contaminated by several organic pollutants.

Olsvik PA(1), Berg V, Lyche JL.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Nutrition and Seafood Research, Nordnesboder 1-2, N-5005
Bergen, Norway. pal.olsvik@nifes.no

Erratum in
    Ecotoxicol Environ Saf. 2015 Apr;114:365.

Lake Mjøsa is the largest freshwater repository in Norway, receiving runoff from 
a wide surrounding region of urban country. As a result of industrial activity,
large quantities of persistent organic pollutants (POPs) have been discharged
into Lake Mjøsa during the last century. The levels of PCBs, DDTs and PBDEs in
burbot from Lake Mjøsa (study population) exceed the corresponding levels in
burbot from Lake Losna (reference) by a factor of 3, 6 and 113, respectively. We 
used shotgun and suppression subtraction hybridization (SSH) cDNA libraries
followed by 454 FLX sequencing (957 303 reads sequenced in total) and RT-qPCR to 
study the effects of POPs in burbot from Lake Mjøsa. The gene list of putatively 
higher or lower expressed genes in liver of burbot from Lake Mjøsa compared to
liver of burbot from Lake Losna, generated from the SSH cDNA libraries, suggest
that mechanisms associated with drug metabolism and oxidative stress are enriched
in burbot from Lake Mjøsa (Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) top networks).
According to the IPA analyses, the top toxicity list ranking was "LXR/RXR
activation", "Negative/Positive acute phase response proteins",
"LPS/IL-1-mediated inhibition of RXR function" and "FXR/RXR activation".
Functional analyses further identified PPAR, HNF4A, dexamethasone and ß-estradiol
as potential upstream key regulator factors. Overall, the study shows that SSH
cDNA libraries coupled to next-generation sequencing (RNA-Seq) may be a valuable 
supplement or alternative to microarray technology in toxicogenomic discovery of 
environmental samples.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23582132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. J Korean Surg Soc. 2013 Apr;84(4):202-8. doi: 10.4174/jkss.2013.84.4.202. Epub
2013 Mar 26.

Successful mouse hepatocyte culture with sandwich collagen gel formation.

Choi HJ(1), Choi D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Soonchunhyang University Seoul Hospital, Soonchunhyang 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

PURPOSE: Primary mammalian hepatocytes largely retain their liver-specific
functions when they are freshly derived from donors. However, long-term cultures 
of functional hepatocytes are difficult to establish. To increase the longevity
and maintain the differentiated functions of hepatocytes in primary culture,
cells can be cultured in a sandwich configuration of collagen. In such a
configuration, hepatocytes can be cultured for longer periods compared with
cultures on single layers of collagen. However, research regarding mouse
hepatocytes in sandwich culture is lacking.
METHODS: Primary mouse hepatocytes were sandwiched between two layers of collagen
to maintain the stability of their liver-specific functions. After gelation, 2 mL
of hepatocyte culture medium was applied.
RESULTS: After 24 hours, 5, 10 days of culture, the collagen gel sandwich
maintained the cellular border and numbers of bile canaliculi more efficiently
than a single collagen coating in both high and low density culture dishes.
Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis of alpha-1-antitrypsin
(AAT), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4A), alphafetoprotein, albumin,
tryptophan oxygenase (TO), the tyrosine aminotransferase gene,
glucose-6-phosphatase, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase for mouse primary
hepatocytes cultured on collagen coated dishes and collagen gels showed superior 
hepatocyte-related gene expression in cells grown using the collagen gel sandwich
culture system. AAT, HNF4A, albumin, TO were found to be expressed in mouse
hepatocytes cultured on collagen gels for 5 and 10 days. In contrast, mouse
hepatocytes grown on collagen-coated dishes did not express these genes after 5
and 10 days of culture.
CONCLUSION: The collagen gel sandwich method is suitable for primary culture
system of adult mouse hepatocytes.

PMCID: PMC3616273
PMID: 23577314  [PubMed]


242. Meat Sci. 2013 Jul;94(3):328-35. doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2013.02.014. Epub 2013
Mar 1.

Association of bovine meat quality traits with genes included in the PPARG and
PPARGC1A networks.

Sevane N(1), Armstrong E, Cortés O, Wiener P, Wong RP, Dunner S; GemQual
Consortium.

Author information: 
(1)Dpto. de Producción Animal, Facultad de Veterinaria, Universidad Complutense, 
28040 Madrid, Spain.

Understanding which are the genetic variants underlying the nutritional and
sensory properties of beef, enables improvement in meat quality. The aim of this 
study is to identify new molecular markers for meat quality through an
association study using candidate genes included in the PPARG and PPARGC1A
networks given their master role in coordinating metabolic adaptation in fat
tissue, muscle and liver. Amongst the novel associations found in this study,
selection of the positive marker variants of genes such as BCL3, LPL, PPARG,
SCAP, and SCD will improve meat organoleptic characteristics and health by
balancing the n-6 to n-3 fatty acid ratio in meat. Also previous results on GDF8 
and DGAT1 were validated, and the novel ATF4, HNF4A and PPARGC1A associations,
although slightly under the significance threshold, are consistent with their
physiological roles. These data contribute insights into the complex
gene-networks underlying economically important traits.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23567132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Pediatr Diabetes. 2013 Nov;14(7):535-8. doi: 10.1111/pedi.12018. Epub 2013 Mar
31.

Digenic heterozygous HNF1A and HNF4A mutations in two siblings with
childhood-onset diabetes.

Shankar RK(1), Ellard S, Standiford D, Pihoker C, Gilliam LK, Hattersley A, Dolan
LM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH, USA.

Monogenic diabetes due to mutations in the transcription factor genes hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 1A (HNF1A) and HNF4A is characterized by islet cell antibody
negative, familial diabetes with residual insulin secretion. We report two
sisters with childhood onset diabetes who are both heterozygous for the most
common mutation in each of two transcription factors, HNF1A, and HNF4A. The
proband was diagnosed with diabetes at 7 yr of age and treated with insulin for 4
yr. Her genetic diagnosis resulted in transition to sulfonylureas for one and a
half years before insulin therapy was re-initiated due to declining glycemic
control. Her sister was diagnosed with diabetes at 14 yr of age, treated
initially with insulin but has been well controlled on oral sulfonylurea therapy 
for over 2 yr. Both sisters inherited the HNF4A gene mutation R127W from their
mother and the HNF1A gene mutation P291fsinsC (c.872dup) from their father. The
father was diagnosed with diabetes at 45 yr of age. Their brother is heterozygous
for the HNF4A R127W mutation. Both the brother and mother have normal glucose
tolerance at the ages of 16 and 46 yr, respectively. Digenic inheritance of HNF1A
and HNF4A mutations is very rare and has only been reported in two families where
conclusive evidence for the pathogenicity of their mutations was lacking.
Follow-up studies in this family co-segregating the two most commonly reported
HNF1A/HNF4A mutations will be informative for understanding the effect of digenic
inheritance upon phenotypic severity and response to sulfonylurea therapy.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4090307
PMID: 23551881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jun;33(11):2202-11. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01004-12. Epub 2013 Mar 
25.

Farnesoid X receptor inhibits the transcriptional activity of carbohydrate
response element binding protein in human hepatocytes.

Caron S(1), Huaman Samanez C, Dehondt H, Ploton M, Briand O, Lien F, Dorchies E, 
Dumont J, Postic C, Cariou B, Lefebvre P, Staels B.

Author information: 
(1)Université Lille Nord de France, Lille, France.

The glucose-activated transcription factor carbohydrate response element binding 
protein (ChREBP) induces the expression of hepatic glycolytic and lipogenic
genes. The farnesoid X receptor (FXR) is a nuclear bile acid receptor controlling
bile acid, lipid, and glucose homeostasis. FXR negatively regulates hepatic
glycolysis and lipogenesis in mouse liver. The aim of this study was to determine
whether FXR regulates the transcriptional activity of ChREBP in human hepatocytes
and to unravel the underlying molecular mechanisms. Agonist-activated FXR
inhibits glucose-induced transcription of several glycolytic genes, including the
liver-type pyruvate kinase gene (L-PK), in the immortalized human hepatocyte
(IHH) and HepaRG cell lines. This inhibition requires the L4L3 region of the L-PK
promoter, known to bind the transcription factors ChREBP and hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4a (HNF4a). FXR interacts directly with ChREBP and HNF4a proteins.
Analysis of the protein complex bound to the L4L3 region reveals the presence of 
ChREBP, HNF4a, FXR, and the transcriptional coactivators p300 and CBP at high
glucose concentrations. FXR activation does not affect either FXR or HNF4a
binding to the L4L3 region but does result in the concomitant release of ChREBP, 
p300, and CBP and in the recruitment of the transcriptional corepressor SMRT.
Thus, FXR transrepresses the expression of genes involved in glycolysis in human 
hepatocytes.

PMCID: PMC3648076
PMID: 23530060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Mol Cell. 2013 Apr 25;50(2):185-99. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.02.018. Epub 2013 
Mar 21.

Nkx2-1 represses a latent gastric differentiation program in lung adenocarcinoma.

Snyder EL(1), Watanabe H, Magendantz M, Hoersch S, Chen TA, Wang DG, Crowley D,
Whittaker CA, Meyerson M, Kimura S, Jacks T.

Author information: 
(1)Koch Institute for Integrative Cancer Research and Department of Biology,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2013 May;13(5):291.

Tissue-specific differentiation programs become dysregulated during cancer
evolution. The transcription factor Nkx2-1 is a master regulator of pulmonary
differentiation that is downregulated in poorly differentiated lung
adenocarcinoma. Here we use conditional murine genetics to determine how the
identity of lung epithelial cells changes upon loss of their master cell-fate
regulator. Nkx2-1 deletion in normal and neoplastic lungs causes not only loss of
pulmonary identity but also conversion to a gastric lineage. Nkx2-1 is likely to 
maintain pulmonary identity by recruiting transcription factors Foxa1 and Foxa2
to lung-specific loci, thus preventing them from binding gastrointestinal
targets. Nkx2-1-negative murine lung tumors mimic mucinous human lung
adenocarcinomas, which express gastric markers. Loss of the gastrointestinal
transcription factor Hnf4a leads to derepression of the embryonal proto-oncogene 
Hmga2 in Nkx2-1-negative tumors. These observations suggest that loss of both
active and latent differentiation programs is required for tumors to reach a
primitive, poorly differentiated state.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3721642
PMID: 23523371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Gene. 2013 May 25;521(1):160-5. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.03.021. Epub 2013 Mar
16.

Congenital hyperinsulinism: clinical and molecular analysis of a large Italian
cohort.

Faletra F(1), Athanasakis E, Morgan A, Biarnés X, Fornasier F, Parini R, Furlan
F, Boiani A, Maiorana A, Dionisi-Vici C, Giordano L, Burlina A, Ventura A,
Gasparini P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Maternal and Child Health-IRCCS "Burlo Garofolo", Trieste,
Italy. faletra@burlo.trieste.it

Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is a genetic disorder characterized by profound 
hypoglycemia related to an inappropriate insulin secretion. It is a heterogeneous
disease classified into two major subgroups: "channelopathies" due to defects in 
ATP-sensitive potassium channel, encoded by ABCC8 and KCNJ11 genes, and
"metabolopathies" caused by mutation of several genes (GLUD1, GCK, HADH, SLC16A1,
HNF4A and HNF1A) and involved in different metabolic pathways. To elucidate the
genetic etiology of CHI in the Italian population, we conducted an extensive
sequencing analysis of the CHI-related genes in a large cohort of 36 patients:
Twenty-nine suffering from classic hyperinsulinism (HI) and seven from
hyperinsulinism-hyperammonemia (HI/HA). Seventeen mutations have been found in
fifteen HI patients and five mutations in five HI/HA patients. Our data confirm
the major role of ATP-sensitive potassium channel in the pathogenesis of Italian 
cases (~70%) while the remaining percentage should be attributed to other. A
better knowledge of molecular basis of CHI would lead to improve strategies for
genetic screening and prenatal diagnosis. Moreover, genetic analysis might also
help to distinguish the two histopathological forms of CHI, which would lead to a
clear improvement in the treatment and in genetic counseling.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23506826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Nature. 2013 Mar 21;495(7441):394-8. doi: 10.1038/nature11966. Epub 2013 Mar 13.

Multidomain integration in the structure of the HNF-4a nuclear receptor complex.

Chandra V(1), Huang P, Potluri N, Wu D, Kim Y, Rastinejad F.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Signaling and Disease Program, Sanford-Burnham Medical Research
Institute, Orlando, Florida 32827, USA.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF-4a; also known as NR2A1) is a member of the
nuclear receptor (NR) family of transcription factors, which have conserved
DNA-binding domains and ligand-binding domains. HNF-4a is the most abundant
DNA-binding protein in the liver, where some 40% of the actively transcribed
genes have a HNF-4a response element. These regulated genes are largely involved 
in the hepatic gluconeogenic program and lipid metabolism. In the pancreas HNF-4a
is also a master regulator, controlling an estimated 11% of islet genes. HNF-4a
protein mutations are linked to maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 1
(MODY1) and hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia. Previous structural analyses of NRs,
although productive in elucidating the structure of individual domains, have
lagged behind in revealing the connectivity patterns of NR domains. Here we
describe the 2.9<U+2009>Å crystal structure of the multidomain human HNF-4a homodimer
bound to its DNA response element and coactivator-derived peptides. A convergence
zone connects multiple receptor domains in an asymmetric fashion, joining
distinct elements from each monomer. An arginine target of PRMT1 methylation
protrudes directly into this convergence zone and sustains its integrity. A
serine target of protein kinase C is also responsible for maintaining
domain-domain interactions. These post-translational modifications lead to
changes in DNA binding by communicating through the tightly connected surfaces of
the quaternary fold. We find that some MODY1 mutations, positioned on the
ligand-binding domain and hinge regions of the receptor, compromise DNA binding
at a distance by communicating through the interjunctional surfaces of the
complex. The overall domain representation of the HNF-4a homodimer is different
from that of the PPAR-<U+03B3>-RXR-a heterodimer, even when both NR complexes are
assembled on the same DNA element. Our findings suggest that unique quaternary
folds and interdomain connections in NRs could be exploited by small-molecule
allosteric modulators that affect distal functions in these polypeptides.

PMCID: PMC3606643
PMID: 23485969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2013 May;70(9):1575-95. doi: 10.1007/s00018-013-1297-1. Epub
2013 Mar 6.

Developmental and environmental epigenetic programming of the endocrine pancreas:
consequences for type 2 diabetes.

Sandovici I(1), Hammerle CM, Ozanne SE, Constância M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Metabolic Research Laboratories,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SW, UK. is299@cam.ac.uk

The development of the endocrine pancreas is controlled by a hierarchical network
of transcriptional regulators. It is increasingly evident that this requires a
tightly interconnected epigenetic "programme" to drive endocrine cell
differentiation and maintain islet function. Epigenetic regulators such as DNA
and histone-modifying enzymes are now known to contribute to determination of
pancreatic cell lineage, maintenance of cellular differentiation states, and
normal functioning of adult pancreatic endocrine cells. Persistent effects of an 
early suboptimal environment, known to increase risk of type 2 diabetes in later 
life, can alter the epigenetic control of transcriptional master regulators, such
as Hnf4a and Pdx1. Recent genome-wide analyses also suggest that an altered
epigenetic landscape is associated with the ß cell failure observed in type 2
diabetes and aging. At the cellular level, epigenetic mechanisms may provide a
mechanistic link between energy metabolism and stable patterns of gene
expression. Key energy metabolites influence the activity of epigenetic
regulators, which in turn alter transcription to maintain cellular homeostasis.
The challenge is now to understand the detailed molecular mechanisms that
underlie these diverse roles of epigenetics, and the extent to which they
contribute to the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes. In-depth understanding of the 
developmental and environmental epigenetic programming of the endocrine pancreas 
has the potential to lead to novel therapeutic approaches in diabetes.

PMID: 23463236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. J Dairy Sci. 2013 Apr;96(4):2201-13. doi: 10.3168/jds.2012-6036. Epub 2013 Feb
22.

Feed restriction, but not l-carnitine infusion, alters the liver transcriptome by
inhibiting sterol synthesis and mitochondrial oxidative phosphorylation and
increasing gluconeogenesis in mid-lactation dairy cows.

Akbar H(1), Bionaz M, Carlson DB, Rodriguez-Zas SL, Everts RE, Lewin HA, Drackley
JK, Loor JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana 61801, Illinois,
USA.

Abomasal carnitine infusion during acute feed restriction increases hepatic fatty
acid oxidation and decreases liver lipid in dairy cows. Eight mid-lactation
Holstein cows were used in a replicated 4×4 Latin square design with 14-d
periods. A 2×2 factorial arrangement was used to determine the effects of water
infusion+ad libitum dry matter intake (DMI), water infusion+restricted DMI (50%
of previous 5-d average), l-carnitine infusion (20 g/d)+ad libitum DMI, or
l-carnitine infusion+restricted DMI. Liver RNA from 7 healthy cows was used for
transcriptome profiling using a bovine microarray. An ANOVA with a false
discovery rate was used to identify treatment and interaction effects. A
substantial transcriptome change was observed only with DMI restriction,
resulting in 312 (155 downregulated, 157 upregulated) differentially expressed
genes. Quantitative PCR was performed to verify microarray data and measure
expression of additional genes not present on the microarray. The quantitative
PCR data confirmed the effect of feed restriction but not of l-carnitine
treatment. Feed restriction increased expression of GPX3 and of genes associated 
with gluconeogenesis (PC, PDK4), inflammation (SAA3), and signaling (ADIPOR2). In
contrast, feed restriction downregulated BBOX, a key for l-carnitine
biosynthesis, and the transcription factor HNF4A. The bioinformatics functional
analysis of genes affected by DMI restriction uncovered biosynthesis of
cholesterol and energy generation by mitochondrial respiration as the most
relevant and inhibited functions. The data also indicated an increase of flux
toward gluconeogenesis. We interpreted those results as a likely response of the 
liver to spare energy and provide glucose for the lactating mammary gland during 
feed deprivation.

Copyright © 2013 American Dairy Science Association. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 23462174  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2014 Apr;80(4):532-7. doi: 10.1111/cen.12187. Epub 2013
Apr 8.

Assessing the contribution of 38 genetic loci to the risk of type 2 diabetes in
the Saudi Arabian Population.

Al-Daghri NM(1), Alkharfy KM, Alokail MS, Alenad AM, Al-Attas OS, Mohammed AK,
Sabico S, Albagha OM.

Author information: 
(1)Biomarkers Research Program, Biochemistry Department, College of Science, King
Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Center of Excellence in Biotechnology
Research Centre, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Prince Mutaib Chair 
for Biomarkers of Osteoporosis, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

BACKGROUND: Previous genome-wide association studies have identified multiple
type 2 diabetes (T2D) genetic risk loci in many populations. However, the
contribution of these loci to T2D in the Middle Eastern populations with high T2D
prevalence is unknown.
METHODS: Here, we investigated the association of 38 T2D risk loci in the Saudi
Arabian population (1166 patients with T2D and 1235 healthy controls), which has 
one of the world's highest prevalence of T2D.
RESULTS: Eight common genetic variants showed a significant association with T2D 
in our study population. The effect sizes of these loci were comparable to those 
previously identified in other populations with the exception of HNF4A, which
showed a trend for larger effect size in our study population (OR = 1·27)
compared to that reported in South Asian populations (OR = 1·09; I(2) = 65·9).
Analysis of risk allele scores (RASs) defined by the 8 loci showed that subjects 
in the top RAS quintile (n = 480) had 2·5-fold increase in disease risk compared 
to those in the bottom quintile (n = 480; P = 9·5 × 10(-12)). RASs were also
associated with fasting glucose level (ß = 0·12; P = 2·2 × 10(-9)), but not with 
BMI (P = 0·19). Analysis of a subgroup of subjects with BMI=30 resulted in two
additional loci (SLC30A8; P = 0·03, HMG20A; P = 0·02) showing significant
association with T2D.
CONCLUSIONS: We have shown for the first time that variants at WFS1, JAZF1,
SLC30A8, CDKN2A/B, TCF7L2, KCNQ1, HMG20A, HNF4A and DUSP9 are associated with T2D
in the Saudi population. Our findings also suggest substantial overlap of T2D
risk loci across many ethnic groups regardless of disease prevalence.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 23448427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Aug;1836(1):27-41. doi: 10.1016/j.bbcan.2013.02.002.
Epub 2013 Feb 19.

Human height genes and cancer.

Tripaldi R(1), Stuppia L, Alberti S.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Cancer Pathology, Department of Neuroscience and Imaging and CeSI,
Foundation University G. d'Annunzio, Chieti, Italy.

Body development requires the ability to control cell proliferation and
metabolism, together with selective 'invasive' cell migration for organogenesis. 
These requirements are shared with cancer. Human height-associated loci have been
recently identified by genome-wide SNP-association studies. Strikingly, most of
the more than 100 genes found associated to height appear linked to neoplastic
growth, and impose a higher risk for cancer. Height-associated genes drive the
HH/PTCH and BMP/TGFß pathways, with p53, c-Myc, ERa, HNF4A and SMADs as central
network nodes. Genetic analysis of body-size-affecting diseases and evidence from
genetically-modified animals support this model. The finding that cancer is
deeply linked to normal, body-plan master genes may profoundly affect current
paradigms on tumor development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23428607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 May;1833(5):1190-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.01.023.
Epub 2013 Feb 5.

Control of mitogenic and motogenic pathways by miR-198, diminishing hepatoma cell
growth and migration.

Elfimova N(1), Sievers E, Eischeid H, Kwiecinski M, Noetel A, Hunt H, Becker D,
Frommolt P, Quasdorff M, Steffen HM, Nürnberg P, Büttner R, Teufel A, Dienes HP, 
Drebber U, Odenthal M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital of Cologne, Cologne, Germany.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the leading causes of cancer deaths,
worldwide. MicroRNAs, inhibiting gene expression by targeting various
transcripts, are involved in genomic dysregulation during hepatocellular
tumorigenesis. In previous studies, microRNA-198 (miR-198) was shown to be
significantly downregulated in HCV-positive hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
Herein, the function of miR-198 in hepatocellular carcinoma cell growth and gene 
expression was studied. In hepatoma cell-types with low levels of liver-specific 
transcription factor HNF1a indicating a low differentiation grade, miR-198
expression was most downregulated. However, miR-198 treatment did not restore the
expression of the liver-specific transcription factors HNF1a or HNF4a.
Importantly, overexpression of miR-198 in Pop10 hepatoma cells markedly reduced
cell growth. In agreement, comprehensive gene expression profiling by microarray 
hybridisation and real-time quantification revealed that central signal
transducers of proliferation pathways were downregulated by miR-198. In contrast,
genes mediating cellular adherence were highly upregulated by miR-198. Thus, the 
low expression of E-cadherin and claudin-1, involved in cell adhesion and
cell-cell contacts, was abolished in hepatoma cells after miR-198 overexpression.
This definite induction of both proteins by miR-198 was shown to be accompanied
by a significantly impaired migration activity of hepatoma Pop10 cells. In
conclusion, miR-198 acts as a tumor suppressor by repression of mitogenic and
motogenic pathways diminishing cell growth and migration.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23391410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Mar 1;432(1):111-5. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.01.076. Epub 2013 Jan 29.

Disrupted daily light-dark cycle induces the expression of hepatic gluconeogenic 
regulatory genes and hyperglycemia with glucose intolerance in mice.

Oishi K(1), Itoh N.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Clock Research Group, Biomedical Research Institute, National
Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology (AIST), Tsukuba, Ibaraki,
Japan. k-ooishi@aist.go.jp

We elucidated associations between metabolic disorders and the environmental
light-dark (LD) cycle that entrains the circadian clock located in the
suprachiasmatic nucleus of mammals. Mice were fed with a high-fat/high-sucrose
diet for eight weeks under a normal 12h light-12h dark cycle (LD 12:12) or an
ultradian 3h light-3h dark cycle (LD 3:3) that might perturb the central clock.
The circadian behavioral rhythms were gradually disturbed under LD 3:3.
Hyperglycemia with glucose intolerance and increases in diabetic markers,
glycated albumin and hemoglobin A1c, were significantly induced without affecting
body weight gain and food consumption in LD 3:3. Expression levels of hepatic
gluconeogenic regulatory genes such as Pck1, G6pc, Hnf4a, and Foxo1/3/4 genes
were increased under LD 3:3. Hypercholesterolemia with hepatic cholesterol
accumulation was also induced in LD 3:3. Ultradian LD 3:3 cycles did not affect
the adipose inflammation that is considered a major player in obesity-associated 
metabolic disorders. Our findings provide a link between metabolic disorders and 
environmental photoperiodic cycles in genetically normal animals.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23376072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Gastroenterol. 2013 Oct;48(10):1160-70. doi: 10.1007/s00535-012-0730-9. Epub
2013 Jan 11.

Association of genes involved in bile acid synthesis with the progression of
primary biliary cirrhosis in Japanese patients.

Inamine T(1), Higa S, Noguchi F, Kondo S, Omagari K, Yatsuhashi H, Tsukamoto K,
Nakamura M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapeutics, Nagasaki University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, 1-14 Bunkyo-machi, Nagasaki, 852-8521, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Patients with primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) exhibit a variety of
clinical manifestations and patterns of disease progression. The aim of this
study was to identify genetic determinants of PBC progression.
METHODS: A total of 52 tag single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of 11 candidate
genes involved in regulating bile acid synthesis were analyzed by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR)-restriction fragment length polymorphism, -high resolution
melting curve analysis, or -direct DNA sequencing in 315 Japanese patients with
PBC.
RESULTS: In this study, four tag SNPs of CYP7A1 (rs1457043, rs8192870, rs3808607,
and rs3824260), two tag SNPs of HNF4A (rs6017340 and 6031587), and one SNP of
PPARGC1A (rs8192678) showed a significant association with PBC progression. In
addition, a dual luciferase assay revealed that the polymorphism of rs3808607 in 
CYP7A1 altered the expression of CYP7A1 in HepG2. Specifically, the CYP7A1
promoter carrying the risk G allele for PBC progression induced higher expression
of CYP7A1 under both the normal and cholestatic conditions in vitro as compared
to another promoter carrying the non-risk T allele.
CONCLUSION: These results suggested that the genetic variants of CYP7A1 and its
transcriptional activators (HNF4A and PPARGC1A) may activate bile acid synthesis,
resulting in the accumulation of bile acids in hepatocytes and eventually leading
to the predisposition to PBC progression. Thus, the regulation of CYP7A1
expression may represent an attractive therapeutic target for cholestatic liver
diseases including PBC.

PMID: 23354620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53562. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053562. Epub 2013 Jan 17.

Transcriptomic analyses of sexual dimorphism of the zebrafish liver and the
effect of sex hormones.

Zheng W(1), Xu H, Lam SH, Luo H, Karuturi RK, Gong Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore.

The liver is one of the most sex-dimorphic organs in both oviparous and
viviparous animals. In order to understand the molecular basis of the difference 
between male and female livers, high-throughput RNA-SAGE (serial analysis of gene
expression) sequencing was performed for zebrafish livers of both sexes and their
transcriptomes were compared. Both sexes had abundantly expressed genes involved 
in translation, coagulation and lipid metabolism, consistent with the general
function of the liver. For sex-biased transcripts, from in addition to the high
enrichment of vitellogenin transcripts in spawning female livers, which
constituted nearly 80% of total mRNA, it is apparent that the female-biased genes
were mostly involved in ribosome/translation, estrogen pathway, lipid transport, 
etc, while the male-biased genes were enriched for oxidation reduction,
carbohydrate metabolism, coagulation, protein transport and localization, etc.
Sexual dimorphism on xenobiotic metabolism and anti-oxidation was also noted and 
it is likely that retinol x receptor (RXR) and liver x receptor (LXR) play
central roles in regulating the sexual differences of lipid and cholesterol
metabolisms. Consistent with high ribosomal/translational activities in the
female liver, female-biased genes were significantly regulated by two important
transcription factors, Myc and Mycn. In contrast, Male livers showed activation
of transcription factors Ppargc1b, Hnf4a, and Stat4, which regulate lipid and
glucose metabolisms and various cellular activities. The transcriptomic responses
to sex hormones, 17ß-estradiol (E2) or 11-keto testosterone (KT11), were also
investigated in both male and female livers and we found that female livers were 
relatively insensitive to sex hormone disturbance, while the male livers were
readily affected. E2 feminized male liver by up-regulating female-biased
transcripts and down-regulating male-biased transcripts. The information obtained
in this study provides comprehensive insights into the sexual dimorphism of
zebrafish liver transcriptome and will facilitate further development of the
zebrafish as a human liver disease model.

PMCID: PMC3547925
PMID: 23349717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Hum Mutat. 2013 May;34(5):669-85. doi: 10.1002/humu.22279. Epub 2013 Apr 2.

Mutations in the genes encoding the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 alpha and 4 alpha in maturity-onset diabetes of the young and
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia.

Colclough K(1), Bellanne-Chantelot C, Saint-Martin C, Flanagan SE, Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation Trust,
Exeter, UK.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic disorder characterized
by autosomal dominant inheritance of young-onset (typically <25 years),
noninsulin-dependent diabetes due to defective insulin secretion. MODY is both
clinically and genetically heterogeneous with mutations in at least 10 genes.
Mutations in the HNF1A gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha are the
most common cause of MODY in most adult populations studied. The number of
different pathogenic HNF1A mutations totals 414 in 1,247 families. Mutations in
the HNF4A gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha are a rarer cause of
MODY with 103 different mutations reported in 173 families to date. Sensitivity
to treatment with sulfonylurea tablets is a feature of both HNF1A and HNF4A
mutations. The HNF4A MODY phenotype has been expanded by the reports of
macrosomia in ~50% of babies, and more rarely, neonatal hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia. The identification of an HNF1A or HNF4A gene mutation has important
implications for clinical management in diabetes and pregnancy, but MODY is
significantly underdiagnosed. Current research is focused on identifying
biomarkers and developing probability models to identify those patients most
likely to have MODY, until next generation sequencing technology enables
cost-effective gene analysis for all patients with young onset diabetes.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23348805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Eur J Endocrinol. 2013 Mar 15;168(4):557-64. doi: 10.1530/EJE-12-0673. Print 2013
Apr.

Clinical and molecular characterisation of 300 patients with congenital
hyperinsulinism.

Kapoor RR(1), Flanagan SE, Arya VB, Shield JP, Ellard S, Hussain K.

Author information: 
(1)London Centre for Paediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Great Ormond Street
Hospital for Children NHS Trust, The Institute of Child Health, University
College London, London, UK.

BACKGROUND: Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is a clinically heterogeneous
condition. Mutations in eight genes (ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK, HADH, SLC16A1,
HNF4A and HNF1A) are known to cause CHI.
AIM: To characterise the clinical and molecular aspects of a large cohort of
patients with CHI.
METHODOLOGY: Three hundred patients were recruited and clinical information was
collected before genotyping. ABCC8 and KCNJ11 genes were analysed in all
patients. Mutations in GLUD1, HADH, GCK and HNF4A genes were sought in patients
with diazoxide-responsive CHI with hyperammonaemia (GLUD1), raised
3-hydroxybutyrylcarnitine and/or consanguinity (HADH), positive family history
(GCK) or when CHI was diagnosed within the first week of life (HNF4A).
RESULTS: Mutations were identified in 136/300 patients (45.3%). Mutations in
ABCC8/KCNJ11 were the commonest genetic cause identified (n=109, 36.3%). Among
diazoxide-unresponsive patients (n=105), mutations in ABCC8/KCNJ11 were
identified in 92 (87.6%) patients, of whom 63 patients had recessively inherited 
mutations while four patients had dominantly inherited mutations. A paternal
mutation in the ABCC8/KCNJ11 genes was identified in 23 diazoxide-unresponsive
patients, of whom six had diffuse disease. Among the diazoxide-responsive
patients (n=183), mutations were identified in 41 patients (22.4%). These include
mutations in ABCC8/KCNJ11 (n=15), HNF4A (n=7), GLUD1 (n=16) and HADH (n=3).
CONCLUSIONS: A genetic diagnosis was made for 45.3% of patients in this large
series. Mutations in the ABCC8 gene were the commonest identifiable cause. The
vast majority of patients with diazoxide-responsive CHI (77.6%) had no
identifiable mutations, suggesting other genetic and/or environmental mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3599069
PMID: 23345197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. BMC Genomics. 2013 Jan 16;14:4. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-4.

Comprehensive meta-analysis of Signal Transducers and Activators of Transcription
(STAT) genomic binding patterns discerns cell-specific cis-regulatory modules.

Kang K(1), Robinson GW, Hennighausen L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Physiology, National Institute of Diabetes and
Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health, 8 Center Drive,
Bethesda, MD 20892-0822, USA. kangk2@niddk.nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Cytokine-activated transcription factors from the STAT (Signal
Transducers and Activators of Transcription) family control common and
context-specific genetic programs. It is not clear to what extent cell-specific
features determine the binding capacity of seven STAT members and to what degree 
they share genetic targets. Molecular insight into the biology of STATs was
gained from a meta-analysis of 29 available ChIP-seq data sets covering
genome-wide occupancy of STATs 1, 3, 4, 5A, 5B and 6 in several cell types.
RESULTS: We determined that the genomic binding capacity of STATs is primarily
defined by the cell type and to a lesser extent by individual family members. For
example, the overlap of shared binding sites between STATs 3 and 5 in T cells is 
greater than that between STAT5 in T cells and non-T cells. Even for the top
1,000 highly enriched STAT binding sites, ~15% of STAT5 binding sites in mouse
female liver are shared by other STATs in different cell types while in T cells
~90% of STAT5 binding sites are co-occupied by STAT3, STAT4 and STAT6. In
addition, we identified 116 cis-regulatory modules (CRM), which are recognized by
all STAT members across cell types defining a common JAK-STAT signature. Lastly, 
in liver STAT5 binding significantly coincides with binding of the cell-specific 
transcription factors HNF4A, FOXA1 and FOXA2 and is associated with cell-type
specific gene transcription.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that genomic binding of STATs is primarily
determined by the cell type and further specificity is achieved in part by
juxtaposed binding of cell-specific transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3564941
PMID: 23324445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Hepatology. 2013 Jun;57(6):2480-90. doi: 10.1002/hep.26251.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha deletion promotes diethylnitrosamine-induced
hepatocellular carcinoma in rodents.

Walesky C(1), Edwards G, Borude P, Gunewardena S, O'Neil M, Yoo B, Apte U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology and Therapeutics, University of Kansas 
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4a), the master regulator of hepatocyte
differentiation, has been recently shown to inhibit hepatocyte proliferation by
way of unknown mechanisms. We investigated the mechanisms of HNF4a-induced
inhibition of hepatocyte proliferation using a novel tamoxifen (TAM)-inducible,
hepatocyte-specific HNF4a knockdown mouse model. Hepatocyte-specific deletion of 
HNF4a in adult mice resulted in increased hepatocyte proliferation, with a
significant increase in liver-to-body-weight ratio. We determined global gene
expression changes using Illumina HiSeq-based RNA sequencing, which revealed that
a significant number of up-regulated genes following deletion of HNF4a were
associated with cancer pathogenesis, cell cycle control, and cell proliferation. 
The pathway analysis further revealed that c-Myc-regulated gene expression
network was highly activated following HNF4a deletion. To determine whether
deletion of HNF4a affects cancer pathogenesis, HNF4a knockdown was induced in
mice treated with the known hepatic carcinogen diethylnitrosamine (DEN). Deletion
of HNF4a significantly increased the number and size of DEN-induced hepatic
tumors. Pathological analysis revealed that tumors in HNF4a-deleted mice were
well-differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and mixed
HCC-cholangiocarcinoma. Analysis of tumors and surrounding normal liver tissue in
DEN-treated HNF4a knockout mice showed significant induction in c-Myc expression.
Taken together, deletion of HNF4a in adult hepatocytes results in increased
hepatocyte proliferation and promotion of DEN-induced hepatic tumors secondary to
aberrant c-Myc activation.

Copyright © 2013 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3669646
PMID: 23315968  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Feb 8;431(2):158-63. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.01.004. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Transcriptional regulation of PCFT by KLF4, HNF4a, CDX2 and C/EBPa: implication
in its site-specific expression in the small intestine.

Furumiya M(1), Inoue K, Ohta K, Hayashi Y, Yuasa H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biopharmaceutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Nagoya City University, 3-1 Tanabe-dori, Nagoya 467-8603, Japan.

Proton-coupled folate transporter (PCFT), which is responsible for the intestinal
uptake of folates and analogs, is expressed only in the proximal region in the
small intestine. The present study was to examine its transcriptional regulation,
which may be involved in such a unique expression profile and potentially in its 
alteration, using dual-luciferase reporter assays in human embryonic kidney (HEK)
293 cells. The luciferase activity derived from the reporter construct containing
the 5'-flanking sequence of -1695/+96 of the human PCFT gene was enhanced most
extensively by the introduction of Krüppel-like factor 4 (KLF4). The KLF4-induced
luciferase activity was further enhanced by hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) 
synergistically. To the contrary, caudal-type homeobox transcription factor 2
(CDX2) and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a (C/EBPa) extensively suppressed the
luciferase activity induced by KLF4 alone and also that induced by KLF4 and
HNF4a. Western blot analysis using the rat small intestine indicated uniform
expression of KLF4 along the intestinal tract, proximal-oriented expression of
HNF4a, distal-oriented expression of CDX2 and C/EBPa. These results suggest that 
the activity of PCFT promoter is basically induced by KLF4 and the gradiented
expression profile of PCFT may be at least in part accounted for by those of
HNF4a, CDX2 and C/EBPa.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23313509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Cell Oncol (Dordr). 2013 Apr;36(2):155-67. doi: 10.1007/s13402-012-0123-3. Epub
2013 Jan 11.

Epigenetic control of HNF-4a in colon carcinoma cells affects MUC4 expression and
malignancy.

Algamas-Dimantov A(1), Yehuda-Shnaidman E, Peri I, Schwartz B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry, Food Science and Nutrition, The Robert H. Smith
Faculty of Agriculture, Food and Environment, The Hebrew University of Jerusalem,
P.O. Box 12, Rehovot, 76100, Israel.

BACKGROUND: We previously found that enhanced expression of hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4a (HNF-4a) is associated with hyper-proliferation of colon carcinoma
cells. Here, the effect of histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors on proliferation
and the expression of HNF-4a and its downstream target genes were assessed in
HM7, LS174T, HT29 and Caco-2 colon carcinoma cell lines.
RESULTS: HNF-4a expression was found to vary in the different colon carcinoma
cell lines tested, being highest in HM7. Additionally, a direct correlation with 
proliferation was observed. In HM7 cells, the weak HDAC inhibitor butyrate
significantly inhibited the transcription of HNF-4a, its downstream target gene
MUC4, and genes associated with proliferation, including the proliferating cell
nuclear antigen gene PCNA. siRNA-mediated silencing of HNF-4a exerted an effect
similar to butyrate on HM7 cell proliferation. The stronger HDAC inhibitor
trichostatin A (TSA) exerted an effect similar to that of siRNA-mediated HNF-4a
silencing and, concomitantly, inhibited the expression of the transcription
factor gene SP1. Also, siRNA-mediated silencing of HDAC3 and HDAC4 reduced HNF-4a
expression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays revealed that TSA induces
hyperacetylation of histones H3 and H4 and, concomitantly, inhibits SP1 binding
to the HNF-4a promoter. Subsequent electromobility shift assays supported these
latter findings.
CONCLUSIONS: HNF-4a transcriptional expression and activity are tightly
controlled by epigenetic mechanisms. HDAC inhibitor targeting of HNF-4a may serve
as an effective treatment for advanced colon carcinomas, since downstream
cancer-associated target genes such as MUC4 are significantly down-regulated by
this treatment.

PMID: 23307400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. J Biol Chem. 2013 Feb 22;288(8):5353-6. doi: 10.1074/jbc.C112.428979. Epub 2013
Jan 10.

Derivation of human induced pluripotent stem cells from patients with maturity
onset diabetes of the young.

Teo AK(1), Windmueller R, Johansson BB, Dirice E, Njolstad PR, Tjora E, Raeder H,
Kulkarni RN.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Islet Cell and Regenerative Biology, Joslin Diabetes Center,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, and Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is an autosomal dominant disease.
Despite extensive research, the mechanism by which a mutant MODY gene results in 
monogenic diabetes is not yet clear due to the inaccessibility of patient
samples. Induced pluripotency and directed differentiation toward the pancreatic 
lineage are now viable and attractive methods to uncover the molecular mechanisms
underlying MODY. Here we report, for the first time, the derivation of human
induced pluripotent stem cells (hiPSCs) from patients with five types of MODY:
MODY1 (HNF4A), MODY2 (GCK), MODY3 (HNF1A), MODY5 (HNF1B), and MODY8 (CEL) with a 
polycistronic lentiviral vector expressing a Cre-excisable human "stem cell
cassette" containing the four reprogramming factors OCT4, KLF4, SOX2, and CMYC.
These MODY-hiPSCs morphologically resemble human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs), 
express pluripotency markers OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, SSEA-4, and TRA-1-60, give rise
to derivatives of the three germ layers in a teratoma assay, and are
karyotypically normal. Overall, our MODY-hiPSCs serve as invaluable tools to
dissect the role of MODY genes in the development of pancreas and islet cells and
to evaluate their significance in regulating beta cell function. This knowledge
will aid future attempts aimed at deriving functional mature beta cells from
hPSCs.

PMCID: PMC3581399
PMID: 23306198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 May;1829(5):436-42. doi: 10.1016/j.bbagrm.2012.12.009.
Epub 2013 Jan 5.

The role of microRNAs in hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha expression and
transactivation.

Wang Z(1), Burke PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, MA 02118,
USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4a is a key member of the transcription factor
network regulating hepatocyte differentiation and function. Genetic and molecular
evidence suggests that expression of HNF-4a is mainly regulated at the
transcriptional level. Activation of HNF-4A gene involves the interaction of
distinct sets of transcription factors and co-transcription factors within
enhancer and promoter regions. Here we study the inhibitory effect of microRNAs
(miRNAs) on the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of HNF-4A mRNA. The potential
recognition elements of a set of miRNAs were identified utilizing bioinformatics 
analysis. The family members of miR-34 and miR-449, including miR-34a, miR-34c-5p
and miR-449a, share the same target elements located at two distinct locations
within the 3'-UTR of HNF-4A. The over-expression of miR-34a, miR-34c-5p or
miR-449a in HepG2 cells led to a significant decrease in the activity of
luciferase reporter carrying 3'-UTR of HNF-4A. The repressive effect on reporter 
activity was partially or fully eliminated when one or two of the binding site(s)
for miR-34a/miR-34c-5p/miR-449a were deleted within the 3'-UTR. The protein level
of HNF-4a was dramatically reduced by over-expression of miR-34a, miR-34c-5p and 
miR-449a, which correlates with a decrease in the binding activity of HNF-4a and 
transactivation of HNF-4a target genes. These results suggest that the
recognition sites of miR-34a, miR-34c-5p and miR-449a within 3'-UTR of HNF-4A are
functional. The mechanism of down-regulation of the binding activity and
transactivation of HNF-4a by the miRNAs involves the decrease in HNF-4a protein
level via miRNAs selectively targeting HNF-4A 3'-UTR, leading to the
translational repression of HNF-4a expression.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3625485
PMID: 23298640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mol Nutr Food Res. 2013 Jun;57(6):986-95. doi: 10.1002/mnfr.201200507. Epub 2013 
Jan 7.

Cocoa flavanol metabolites activate HNF-3ß, Sp1, and NFY-mediated transcription
of apolipoprotein AI in human cells.

Oleaga C(1), Ciudad CJ, Izquierdo-Pulido M, Noé V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, School of Pharmacy,
University of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

SCOPE: To identify the mechanisms by which cocoa induces HDL levels and since
apolipoprotein AI (ApoAI) is the major protein in HDLs, we analyzed, upon
incubation with cocoa metabolites, ApoAI mRNA levels, its transcriptional
regulation, and the levels of the transcription factors involved in this process.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Epicatechin and cocoa metabolites caused an increase in
ApoAI expression in HepG2 cells. Electrophoretic mobility shift assays revealed
the involvement of Sites A and B of the ApoAI promoter in the induction of ApoAI 
mRNA upon incubation with cocoa metabolites. Using supershift assays, we
demonstrated the binding of HNF-3ß, HNF-4, ER-a, and RXR-a to Site A and the
binding of HNF-3ß, NFY, and Sp1 to Site B. Luciferase assays performed with a
construct containing Site B confirmed its role in the upregulation of ApoAI by
cocoa metabolites. Incubation with 3-methyl-epicatechin led to an increase in
HNF-3ß mRNA, HNF-3ß, ER-a, Sp1, and NFY protein levels and the activation of
ApoAI transcription mediated by NFY, Sp1, and ER-a.
CONCLUSION: The activation of ApoAI transcription through Site B by cocoa
flavanol metabolites is mainly mediated by an increase in HNF-3ß, with a
significant contribution of Sp1 and NFY, as a mechanism for the protective role
of these compounds in cardiovascular diseases.

© 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 23293065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2013 Mar;23(3):175-9. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e32835de25e.

Effect of HNF4a genetic polymorphism G60D on the pharmacokinetics of CYP2D6
substrate tolterodine in healthy Korean individuals.

Jiang F(1), Yeo CW, Lee SS, Oh MK, Ghim JL, Shon JH, Kim HS, Kim EY, Kim DH, Shin
JG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and PharmacoGenomics Research Center, Inje
University College of Medicine, Busan, Republic of Korea.

Hepatocyte nuclear receptor 4a (HNF4a) plays a central role in regulating human
drug-metabolizing enzymes. Our previous study suggested that the newly identified
polymorphism G60D in the HNF4a gene may decrease its downstream CYP2D6 activity
in Asians. To confirm this effect in a clinical setting, we carried out a full
pharmacokinetic study of a single oral dose of CYP2D6 substrate tolterodine in 30
healthy Korean individuals (HNF4a wild type: n = 24; HNF4a G60D heterozygotes: n 
= 6) who were pregenotyped for CYP2D6. Our study showed HNF4a G60D to be an
independent predictor for increased AUC0-8, C max of tolterodine and increased
AUC0-8 of the active moiety (tolterodine+5-hydroxymethyl-tolterodine) (P<0.05). A
significant proportion of the variance in these parameters (R = 0.81, 0.59, and
0.63, respectively; P<0.01) was explained together by CYP2D6 and HNF4a genotypes.
Further investigation of HNF4a genetic polymorphisms may improve the
predictability of CYP2D6 activity in different populations.

PMID: 23292115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Feb;98(2):E355-63. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-2169. Epub 
2012 Dec 28.

Genotype and phenotype correlations in 417 children with congenital
hyperinsulinism.

Snider KE(1), Becker S, Boyajian L, Shyng SL, MacMullen C, Hughes N, Ganapathy K,
Bhatti T, Stanley CA, Ganguly A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, 415 Anatomy Chemistry
Building, 3620 Hamilton Walk, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

CONTEXT: Hypoglycemia due to congenital hyperinsulinism (HI) is caused by
mutations in 9 genes.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to correlate genotype with phenotype in 417 children
with HI.
METHODS: Mutation analysis was carried out for the ATP-sensitive potassium (KATP)
channel genes (ABCC8 and KCNJ11), GLUD1, and GCK with supplemental screening of
rarer genes, HADH, UCP2, HNF4A, HNF1A, and SLC16A1.
RESULTS: Mutations were identified in 91% (272 of 298) of diazoxide-unresponsive 
probands (ABCC8, KCNJ11, and GCK), and in 47% (56 of 118) of diazoxide-responsive
probands (ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, HADH, UCP2, HNF4A, and HNF1A). In
diazoxide-unresponsive diffuse probands, 89% (109 of 122) carried KATP mutations;
2% (2 of 122) had GCK mutations. In mutation-positive diazoxide-responsive
probands, 42% were GLUD1, 41% were dominant KATP mutations, and 16% were in rare 
genes (HADH, UCP2, HNF4A, and HNF1A). Of the 183 unique KATP mutations, 70% were 
novel at the time of identification. Focal HI accounted for 53% (149 of 282) of
diazoxide-unresponsive probands; monoallelic recessive KATP mutations were
detectable in 97% (145 of 149) of these cases (maternal transmission excluded in 
all cases tested). The presence of a monoallelic recessive KATP mutation
predicted focal HI with 97% sensitivity and 90% specificity.
CONCLUSIONS: Genotype to phenotype correlations were most successful in children 
with GLUD1, GCK, and recessive KATP mutations. Correlations were complicated by
the high frequency of novel missense KATP mutations that were uncharacterized,
because such defects might be either recessive or dominant and, if dominant, be
either responsive or unresponsive to diazoxide. Accurate and timely prediction of
phenotype based on genotype is critical to limit exposure to persistent
hypoglycemia in infants and children with congenital HI.

PMCID: PMC3565119
PMID: 23275527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Diabetes. 2013 Apr;62(4):1329-37. doi: 10.2337/db12-0880. Epub 2012 Dec 28.

Mutations in HNF1A result in marked alterations of plasma glycan profile.

Thanabalasingham G(1), Huffman JE, Kattla JJ, Novokmet M, Rudan I, Gloyn AL,
Hayward C, Adamczyk B, Reynolds RM, Muzinic A, Hassanali N, Pucic M, Bennett AJ, 
Essafi A, Polasek O, Mughal SA, Redzic I, Primorac D, Zgaga L, Kolcic I, Hansen
T, Gasperikova D, Tjora E, Strachan MW, Nielsen T, Stanik J, Klimes I, Pedersen
OB, Njølstad PR, Wild SH, Gyllensten U, Gornik O, Wilson JF, Hastie ND, Campbell 
H, McCarthy MI, Rudd PM, Owen KR, Lauc G, Wright AF.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Oxford, UK.

A recent genome-wide association study identified hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-a
(HNF1A) as a key regulator of fucosylation. We hypothesized that loss-of-function
HNF1A mutations causal for maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) would
display altered fucosylation of N-linked glycans on plasma proteins and that
glycan biomarkers could improve the efficiency of a diagnosis of HNF1A-MODY. In a
pilot comparison of 33 subjects with HNF1A-MODY and 41 subjects with type 2
diabetes, 15 of 29 glycan measurements differed between the two groups. The
DG9-glycan index, which is the ratio of fucosylated to nonfucosylated
triantennary glycans, provided optimum discrimination in the pilot study and was 
examined further among additional subjects with HNF1A-MODY (n = 188), glucokinase
(GCK)-MODY (n = 118), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-a (HNF4A)-MODY (n = 40), type 1
diabetes (n = 98), type 2 diabetes (n = 167), and nondiabetic controls (n = 98). 
The DG9-glycan index was markedly lower in HNF1A-MODY than in controls or other
diabetes subtypes, offered good discrimination between HNF1A-MODY and both type 1
and type 2 diabetes (C statistic = 0.90), and enabled us to detect three
previously undetected HNF1A mutations in patients with diabetes. In conclusion,
glycan profiles are altered substantially in HNF1A-MODY, and the DG9-glycan index
has potential clinical value as a diagnostic biomarker of HNF1A dysfunction.

PMCID: PMC3609552
PMID: 23274891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2013;28(3):278-88. Epub 2012 Dec 25.

Genetic variations of NR2A1 in Asian populations: implications in
pharmacogenetics studies.

Chew SC(1), Lim JS, Lee EJ, Chowbay B.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Pharmacology, Division of Medical Sciences, Humphrey
Oei Institute of Cancer Research, National Cancer Centre, Singapore.

HNF4a (encoded by gene NR2A1) is a dominant transcriptional regulator of various 
drug disposition genes. It forms a circuitry of molecular cross-talk with other
nuclear receptors such as PXR and CAR to synergistically initiate transcription. 
This study reports on the frequency, linkage disequilibrium pattern and tag-SNP
selection of NR2A1 polymorphisms in three local Asian populations, namely
Chinese, Malays and Indians (n = 56 subjects each). A total of 69 polymorphisms
were identified in the genomic region of NR2A1, of which thirty-three were novel 
polymorphisms with low allelic frequencies (<0.02). The exonic region of NR2A1
was highly conserved with only 4 novel and 1 reported SNPs identified at low
allelic frequencies of less than 0.02. Based on the criteria of MAF = 0.05 and
R(2) = 0.80, there were 19, 20 and 22 tag-SNPs selected to represent the genetic 
polymorphisms of NR2A1 in Chinese, Malays and Indians, respectively. In-silico
predictions suggested that some of these polymorphic variants may exert
functional effects through affecting the binding sites of transcription and
splicing factors. Our study provides valuable information on the genetic
variability of NR2A1 which would be useful for pharmacogenetics studies in the
local Asian populations.

PMID: 23268925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51302. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051302. Epub 2012 Dec 10.

Genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation differences in muscle and fat from
monozygotic twins discordant for type 2 diabetes.

Ribel-Madsen R(1), Fraga MF, Jacobsen S, Bork-Jensen J, Lara E, Calvanese V,
Fernandez AF, Friedrichsen M, Vind BF, Højlund K, Beck-Nielsen H, Esteller M,
Vaag A, Poulsen P.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center, Gentofte, Denmark. rrm@sund.ku.dk

BACKGROUND: Monozygotic twins discordant for type 2 diabetes constitute an ideal 
model to study environmental contributions to type 2 diabetic traits. We aimed to
examine whether global DNA methylation differences exist in major glucose
metabolic tissues from these twins.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Skeletal muscle (n = 11 pairs) and subcutaneous
adipose tissue (n = 5 pairs) biopsies were collected from 53-80 year-old
monozygotic twin pairs discordant for type 2 diabetes. DNA methylation was
measured by microarrays at 26,850 cytosine-guanine dinucleotide (CpG) sites in
the promoters of 14,279 genes. Bisulfite sequencing was applied to validate array
data and to quantify methylation of intergenic repetitive DNA sequences. The
overall intra-pair variation in DNA methylation was large in repetitive (LINE1,
D4Z4 and NBL2) regions compared to gene promoters (standard deviation of
intra-pair differences: 10% points vs. 4% points, P<0.001). Increased variation
of LINE1 sequence methylation was associated with more phenotypic dissimilarity
measured as body mass index (r = 0.77, P = 0.007) and 2-hour plasma glucose (r = 
0.66, P = 0.03) whereas the variation in promoter methylation did not associate
with phenotypic differences. Validated methylation changes were identified in the
promoters of known type 2 diabetes-related genes, including PPARGC1A in muscle
(13.9±6.2% vs. 9.0±4.5%, P = 0.03) and HNF4A in adipose tissue (75.2±3.8% vs.
70.5±3.7%, P<0.001) which had increased methylation in type 2 diabetic
individuals. A hypothesis-free genome-wide exploration of differential
methylation without correction for multiple testing identified 789 and 1,458 CpG 
sites in skeletal muscle and adipose tissue, respectively. These methylation
changes only reached some percentage points, and few sites passed correction for 
multiple testing.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our study suggests that likely acquired DNA methylation
changes in skeletal muscle or adipose tissue gene promoters are quantitatively
small between type 2 diabetic and non-diabetic twins. The importance of
methylation changes in candidate genes such as PPARGC1A and HNF4A should be
examined further by replication in larger samples.

PMCID: PMC3519577
PMID: 23251491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. BMC Genomics. 2012 Dec 18;13:709. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-13-709.

Pan-histone deacetylase inhibitors regulate signaling pathways involved in
proliferative and pro-inflammatory mechanisms in H9c2 cells.

Majumdar G(1), Adris P, Bhargava N, Chen H, Raghow R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 1030 Jefferson Avenue, Memphis,
TN 38104, USA.

BACKGROUND: We have shown previously that pan-HDAC inhibitors (HDACIs)
m-carboxycinnamic acid bis-hydroxamide (CBHA) and trichostatin A (TSA) attenuated
cardiac hypertrophy in BALB/c mice by inducing hyper-acetylation of cardiac
chromatin that was accompanied by suppression of pro-inflammatory gene networks. 
However, it was not feasible to determine the precise contribution of the
myocytes- and non-myocytes to HDACI-induced gene expression in the intact heart. 
Therefore, the current study was undertaken with a primary goal of elucidating
temporal changes in the transcriptomes of cardiac myocytes exposed to CBHA and
TSA.
RESULTS: We incubated H9c2 cardiac myocytes in growth medium containing either of
the two HDACIs for 6h and 24h and analyzed changes in gene expression using
Illumina microarrays. H9c2 cells exposed to TSA for 6h and 24h led to
differential expression of 468 and 231 genes, respectively. In contrast, cardiac 
myocytes incubated with CBHA for 6h and 24h elicited differential expression of
768 and 999 genes, respectively. We analyzed CBHA- and TSA-induced differentially
expressed genes by Ingenuity Pathway (IPA), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and
Genomes (KEGG) and Core_TF programs and discovered that CBHA and TSA impinged on 
several common gene networks. Thus, both HDACIs induced a repertoire of signaling
kinases (PTEN-PI3K-AKT and MAPK) and transcription factors (Myc, p53, NFkB and
HNF4A) representing canonical TGFß, TNF-a, IFN<U+03B3> and IL-6 specific networks. An
overrepresentation of E2F, AP2, EGR1 and SP1 specific motifs was also found in
the promoters of the differentially expressed genes. Apparently, TSA elicited
predominantly TGFß- and TNF-a-intensive gene networks regardless of the duration 
of treatment. In contrast, CBHA elicited TNF-a and IFN<U+03B3> specific networks at 6 h,
followed by elicitation of IL-6 and IFN<U+03B3>-centered gene networks at 24h.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that both CBHA and TSA induced similar, but not
identical, time-dependent, gene networks in H9c2 cardiac myocytes. Initially,
both HDACIs impinged on numerous genes associated with adipokine signaling,
intracellular metabolism and energetics, and cell cycle. A continued exposure to 
either CBHA or TSA led to the emergence of a number of apoptosis- and
inflammation-specific gene networks that were apparently suppressed by both
HDACIs. Based on these data we posit that the anti-inflammatory and
anti-proliferative actions of HDACIs are myocyte-intrinsic. These findings
advance our understanding of the mechanisms of actions of HDACIs on cardiac
myocytes and reveal potential signaling pathways that may be targeted
therapeutically.

PMCID: PMC3561284
PMID: 23249388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Tunis Med. 2012 Dec;90(12):882-7.

Familial early-onset diabetes is not a typical MODY in several Tunisian patients.

Amara A(1), Chadli-Chaieb M, Ghezaiel H, Philippe J, Brahem R, Dechaume A, Saad
A, Chaieb L, Froguel P, Gribaa M, Vaxillaire M.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Endocrinology, Sousse Faculty of Medicine, Tunisia.

Erratum in
    Tunis Med. 2013 Oct;91(10):604. Froguele, Philippe [corrected to Froguel,
Philippe].

BACKGROUND: MODY (Maturity-onset diabetes of the young), a dominantly inherited
form of early-onset diabetes, is clinically and genetically heterogeneous with
more than ten genetic subtypes described worldwide.
AIM: To evaluate the possible existence of MODY in 12 young diabetic Tunisian
patients by searching for mutations in the most prevalent MODY genes.
METHODS: Twelve patients with diabetes in 2-to-3 generations, all diagnosed
before age 31, were screened for mutations and deletions in HNF1A, HNF4A, INS,
IPF1, NEUROD1 and GCK genes by Sanger sequencing and by Multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification assay.
RESULTS: The patients had no evidence of autoimmunity and a mean age at diabetes 
diagnosis of 25.66 ± 3.96 years with severe overt diabetes (fasting glycaemia:
10.91 ± 3.55 mmol/ l; HbA1c: 10.46 ± 3.31 %). Two subjects were initially treated
with insulin. On the ten initially treated with OHA or on diet, eight converted
to insulin therapy (within 3 months to 20 years). Molecular analysis showed only 
one missense HNF4A mutation (I453V) in one family. No mutations in the studied
genes were detected in the other patients.
CONCLUSION: A molecular defect in known MODY genes has been excluded in 11
patients with early-onset diabetes suggesting that other genetic causes may
explain diabetes in these families. In such cases, new generation sequencing
approaches may be well appropriate to identify specific molecular etiologies from
extended families and to establish a strategy of molecular diagnostic of MODY in 
Tunisia.

PMID: 23247789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. PLoS One. 2012;7(12):e51320. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0051320. Epub 2012 Dec 7.

Complex interplay between the lipin 1 and the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 a
(HNF4a) pathways to regulate liver lipid metabolism.

Chen Z(1), Gropler MC, Mitra MS, Finck BN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis,
Missouri, United States of America.

Lipin 1 is a bifunctional protein that serves as a metabolic enzyme in the
triglyceride synthesis pathway and regulates gene expression through direct
protein-protein interactions with DNA-bound transcription factors in liver.
Herein, we demonstrate that lipin 1 is a target gene of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4a (HNF4a), which induces lipin 1 gene expression in cooperation with
peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> coactivator-1a (PGC-1a) through a
nuclear receptor response element in the first intron of the lipin 1 gene. The
results of a series of gain-of-function and loss-of-function studies demonstrate 
that lipin 1 coactivates HNF4a to activate the expression of a variety of genes
encoding enzymes involved in fatty acid catabolism. In contrast, lipin 1 reduces 
the ability of HNF4a to induce the expression of genes encoding apoproteins A4
and C3. Although the ability of lipin to diminish HNF4a activity on these
promoters required a direct physical interaction between the two proteins, lipin 
1 did not occupy the promoters of the repressed genes and enhances the intrinsic 
activity of HNF4a in a promoter-independent context. Thus, the induction of lipin
1 by HNF4a may serve as a mechanism to affect promoter selection to direct HNF4a 
to promoters of genes encoding fatty acid oxidation enzymes.

PMCID: PMC3517414
PMID: 23236470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2012 Dec 15;11(6):624-9.

Inhibiting the expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha attenuates
lipopolysaccharide/D-galactosamine-induced fulminant hepatic failure in mice.

Chen EQ(1), Gong DY, Leng XH, Bai L, Liu C, Wang LC, Tang H.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Infectious Diseases, West China Hospital and State Key Laboratory
of Biotherapy, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4alpha) plays an important role
in regulating cytokine-induced inflammatory responses. This study aimed to
investigate the role of HNF4alpha in the development of fulminant hepatic failure
(FHF) induced by lipopolysaccharide/D-galactosamine (LPS/D-GalN).
METHODS: The FHF model was induced by simultaneous intraperitoneal injection of
LPS/D-GalN in mice. Three days prior to LPS/D-GalN administration, HNF4alpha
short-hairpin interfering RNA expression plasmid or physiological saline was
injected via the tail vein with a hydrodynamics-based procedure. The degree of
hepatic damage and cumulative survival rate were subsequently assessed.
RESULTS: The expression of HNF4alpha was increased in the early stage after
LPS/D-GalN administration. Inhibiting the expression of HNF4alpha reduced serum
levels of alanine aminotransferase and aspartate aminotransferase, alleviated
histological injury, and improved the survival of mice with FHF. In addition,
both serum and hepatic tumor necrosis factor alpha expression were suppressed
when HNF4alpha expression was inhibited in mice with FHF.
CONCLUSION: Inhibiting HNF4alpha expression protects mice from FHF induced by
LPS/D-GalN, but the exact mechanism behind this needs further investigation.

PMID: 23232634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Br J Pharmacol. 2013 Apr;168(8):1923-32. doi: 10.1111/bph.12090.

The constitutive androstane receptor activator
4-[(4R,6R)-4,6-diphenyl-1,3-dioxan-2-yl]-N,N-dimethylaniline inhibits the
gluconeogenic genes PEPCK and G6Pase through the suppression of HNF4a and FOXO1
transcriptional activity.

Yarushkin AA(1), Kachaylo EM, Pustylnyak VO.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biophysics SB RAMS, Novosibirsk, Russia.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The dual role of the constitutive androstane receptor
(CAR) as both a xenosensor and a regulator of endogenous energy metabolism
(lipogenesis and gluconeogenesis) has recently gained acceptance. Here, we
investigated the effects of
4-[(4R,6R)-4,6-diphenyl-1,3-dioxan-2-yl]-N,N-dimethylaniline (transpDMA), an
effective CAR activator, on the gluconeogenic genes phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase (PEPCK) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) in rat livers.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: The effects of transpDMA were investigated in normal and
high-fat diet-fed Wistar rats using real-time PCR, Western blotting, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays (ChIP), glucose tolerance test and insulin tolerance
test.
KEY RESULTS: The expression of the gluconeogenic enzymes PEPCK and G6Pase was
repressed by transpDMA treatment under fasting conditions. Long-term CAR
activation by transpDMA significantly reduced fasting blood glucose levels and
improved glucose homeostasis and insulin sensitivity in high-fat diet-fed rats.
The metabolic benefits of CAR activation by transpDMA may have resulted from the 
inhibition of hepatic gluconeogenic genes. ChIP assays demonstrated that
transpDMA prevented the binding of forkhead box O1 (FOXO1) to insulin response
sequences in the PEPCK and G6Pase gene promoters in rat livers. Moreover,
transpDMA-activated CAR inhibited hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a (HNF4a)
transactivation by competing with HNF4a for binding to the specific binding
element (DR1-site) in the gluconeogenic gene promoters.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Our results provide evidence to support the
conclusion that transpDMA inhibits the gluconeogenic genes PEPCK and G6Pase
through suppression of HNF4a and FOXO1 transcriptional activity.

© 2012 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2012 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3623062
PMID: 23231652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Hepatology. 2013 Apr;57(4):1607-19. doi: 10.1002/hep.26165. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Constitutive Notch2 signaling induces hepatic tumors in mice.

Dill MT(1), Tornillo L, Fritzius T, Terracciano L, Semela D, Bettler B, Heim MH, 
Tchorz JS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, Hepatology Laboratory, University of Basel, Basel, 
Switzerland.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2013 Sep;58(3):1188.

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) and cholangiocarcinoma (CCC) are the most common
liver tumors and a leading cause for cancer-related death in men. Notch2
regulates cellular differentiation in the developing and adult liver. Although
aberrant Notch signaling is implicated in various cancers, it is still unclear
whether Notch2 regulates proliferation and differentiation in liver
carcinogenesis and thereby contributes to HCC and CCC formation. Here, we
investigated the oncogenic potential of constitutive Notch2 signaling in the
liver. We show that liver-specific expression of the intracellular domain of
Notch2 (N2ICD) in mice is sufficient to induce HCC formation and biliary
hyperplasia. Specifically, constitutive N2ICD signaling in the liver leads to
up-regulation of pro-proliferative genes and proliferation of hepatocytes and
biliary epithelial cells (BECs). Using the diethylnitrosamine (DEN) HCC
carcinogenesis model, we further show that constitutive Notch2 signaling
accelerates DEN-induced HCC formation. DEN-induced HCCs with constitutive Notch2 
signaling (DEN(N2ICD) HCCs) exhibit a marked increase in size, proliferation, and
expression of pro-proliferative genes when compared with HCCs from DEN-induced
control mice (DEN(ctrl) HCCs). Moreover, DEN(N2ICD) HCCs exhibit increased Sox9
messenger RNA (mRNA) levels and reduced Albumin and Alpha-fetoprotein mRNA
levels, indicating that they are less differentiated than DEN(ctrl) HCCs.
Additionally, DEN(N2ICD) mice develop large hepatic cysts, dysplasia of the
biliary epithelium, and eventually CCC. CCC formation in patients and DEN(N2ICD) 
mice is accompanied by re-expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a(HNF4a),
possibly indicating dedifferentiation of BECs.CONCLUSION: Our data establish an
oncogenic role for constitutive Notch2 signaling in liver cancer development.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 23175466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Diabetes Care. 2013 Mar;36(3):557-61. doi: 10.2337/dc12-1174. Epub 2012 Nov 12.

Heterogeneity in phenotype of usher-congenital hyperinsulinism syndrome: hearing 
loss, retinitis pigmentosa, and hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia ranging from severe
to mild with conversion to diabetes.

Al Mutair AN(1), Brusgaard K, Bin-Abbas B, Hussain K, Felimban N, Al Shaikh A,
Christesen HT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Endocrinology Division, King Abdulaziz Medical
City-Riyadh, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the phenotype of 15 children with congenital
hyperinsulinism (CHI) and profound hearing loss, known as Homozygous 11p15-p14
Deletion syndrome (MIM #606528).
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Prospective clinical follow-up and genetic analysis 
by direct sequencing, multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification, and
microsatellite markers.
RESULTS: Genetic testing identified the previous described homozygous deletion in
11p15, USH1C:c.(90+592)_ABCC8:c.(2694-528)del. Fourteen patients had severe CHI
demanding near-total pancreatectomy. In one patient with mild, transient neonatal
hypoglycemia and nonautoimmune diabetes at age 11 years, no additional mutations 
were found in HNF1A, HNF4A, GCK, INS, and INSR. Retinitis pigmentosa was found in
two patients aged 9 and 13 years. No patients had enteropathy or renal tubular
defects. Neuromotor development ranged from normal to severe delay with epilepsy.
CONCLUSIONS: The phenotype of Homozygous 11p15-p14 Deletion syndrome, or
Usher-CHI syndrome, includes any severity of neonatal-onset CHI and severe,
sensorineural hearing loss. Retinitis pigmentosa and nonautoimmune diabetes may
occur in adolescence.

PMCID: PMC3579360
PMID: 23150283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Hepatology. 2013 Apr;57(4):1632-43. doi: 10.1002/hep.26131. Epub 2013 Mar 19.

Preexisting epithelial diversity in normal human livers: a tissue-tethered
cytometric analysis in portal/periportal epithelial cells.

Isse K(1), Lesniak A, Grama K, Maier J, Specht S, Castillo-Rama M, Lunz J, Roysam
B, Michalopoulos G, Demetris AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, Pittsburgh, 
PA 15213, USA.

Routine light microscopy identifies two distinct epithelial cell populations in
normal human livers: hepatocytes and biliary epithelial cells (BECs).
Considerable epithelial diversity, however, arises during disease states when a
variety of hepatocyte-BEC hybrid cells appear. This has been attributed to
activation and differentiation of putative hepatic progenitor cells (HPC)
residing in the canals of Hering and/or metaplasia of preexisting mature
epithelial cells. A novel analytic approach consisting of multiplex labeling,
high-resolution whole-slide imaging (WSI), and automated image analysis was used 
to determine if more complex epithelial cell phenotypes preexist in normal adult 
human livers, which might provide an alternative explanation for disease-induced 
epithelial diversity. "Virtually digested" WSI enabled quantitative cytometric
analyses of individual cells displayed in a variety of formats (e.g.,
scatterplots) while still tethered to the WSI and tissue structure. We employed
biomarkers specifically associated with mature epithelial forms (HNF4a for
hepatocytes, CK19 and HNF1ß for BEC) and explored for the presence of cells with 
hybrid biomarker phenotypes. The results showed abundant hybrid cells in portal
bile duct BEC, canals of Hering, and immediate periportal hepatocytes. These
bipotential cells likely serve as a reservoir for the epithelial diversity of
ductular reactions, appearance of hepatocytes in bile ducts, and the rapid and
fluid transition of BEC to hepatocytes, and vice versa.CONCLUSION: Novel imaging 
and computational tools enable increased information extraction from tissue
samples and quantify the considerable preexistent hybrid epithelial diversity in 
normal human liver. This computationally enabled tissue analysis approach offers 
much broader potential beyond the results presented here.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3612393
PMID: 23150208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Diabetes. 2013 Feb;62(2):653-61. doi: 10.2337/db12-0827. Epub 2012 Nov 8.

Metabolite profiling reveals normal metabolic control in carriers of mutations in
the glucokinase gene (MODY2).

Spégel P(1), Ekholm E, Tuomi T, Groop L, Mulder H, Filipsson K.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Molecular Metabolism, Department of Clinical Sciences Malmö, Lund
University Diabetes Centre, Malmö, Sweden. peter.spegel@med.lu.se

Mutations in the gene encoding glucokinase (GCK) cause a mild hereditary form of 
diabetes termed maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)2 or GCK-MODY. The
disease does not progress over time, and diabetes complications rarely develop.
It has therefore been suggested that GCK-MODY represents a metabolically
compensated condition, but experimental support for this notion is lacking. Here,
we profiled metabolites in serum from patients with MODY1 (HNF4A), MODY2 (GCK),
MODY3 (HNF1A), and type 2 diabetes and from healthy individuals to characterize
metabolic perturbations caused by specific mutations. Analysis of four GCK-MODY
patients revealed a metabolite pattern similar to that of healthy individuals,
while other forms of diabetes differed markedly in their metabolite profiles.
Furthermore, despite elevated glucose concentrations, carriers of GCK mutations
showed lower levels of free fatty acids and triglycerides than healthy control
subjects. The metabolite profiling was confirmed by enzymatic assays and
replicated in a cohort of 11 GCK-MODY patients. Elevated levels of fatty acids
are known to associate with ß-cell dysfunction, insulin resistance, and increased
incidence of late complications. Our results show that GCK-MODY represents a
metabolically normal condition, which may contribute to the lack of late
complications and the nonprogressive nature of the disease.

PMCID: PMC3554352
PMID: 23139355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Jan;33(2):281-92. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01185-12. Epub 2012 Nov 5.

Intestinal master transcription factor CDX2 controls chromatin access for partner
transcription factor binding.

Verzi MP(1), Shin H, San Roman AK, Liu XS, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Jan;35(2):496.

Tissue-specific gene expression requires modulation of nucleosomes, allowing
transcription factors to occupy cis elements that are accessible only in selected
tissues. Master transcription factors control cell-specific genes and define
cellular identities, but it is unclear if they possess special abilities to
regulate cell-specific chromatin and if such abilities might underlie lineage
determination and maintenance. One prevailing view is that several transcription 
factors enable chromatin access in combination. The homeodomain protein CDX2
specifies the embryonic intestinal epithelium, through unknown mechanisms, and
partners with transcription factors such as HNF4A in the adult intestine. We
examined enhancer chromatin and gene expression following Cdx2 or Hnf4a excision 
in mouse intestines. HNF4A loss did not affect CDX2 binding or chromatin, whereas
CDX2 depletion modified chromatin significantly at CDX2-bound enhancers,
disrupted HNF4A occupancy, and abrogated expression of neighboring genes. Thus,
CDX2 maintains transcription-permissive chromatin, illustrating a powerful and
dominant effect on enhancer configuration in an adult tissue. Similar,
hierarchical control of cell-specific chromatin states is probably a general
property of master transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC3554120
PMID: 23129810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Alcohol Clin Exp Res. 2013 Apr;37(4):587-98. doi: 10.1111/acer.12013. Epub 2012
Nov 5.

Preservation of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a contributes to the beneficial effect
of dietary medium chain triglyceride on alcohol-induced hepatic lipid
dyshomeostasis in rats.

Li Q(1), Zhong W, Qiu Y, Kang X, Sun X, Tan X, Zhao Y, Sun X, Jia W, Zhou Z.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Biomedical Research , University of North Carolina at
Greensboro, Kannapolis, NC 28081, USA.

BACKGROUND: Alcohol consumption is a major cause of fatty liver, and dietary
saturated fats have been shown to protect against alcoholic fatty liver. This
study investigated the mechanisms of how dietary saturated fat may modulate
alcohol-induced hepatic lipid dyshomeostasis.
METHODS: Male Sprague Dawley rats were pair-fed with 3 isocaloric liquid diets,
control, alcohol, and medium chain triglyceride (MCT)/alcohol, respectively, for 
8 weeks. The control and alcohol diets were based on the Lieber-DeCarli liquid
diet formula with 30% total calories derived from corn oil (rich in unsaturated
long chain fatty acids). The corn oil was replaced by MCT, which consists of
exclusive saturated fatty acids, in the MCT/alcohol diet. HepG2 cell culture was 
conducted to test the effects of unsaturated fatty acids on hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4a (HNF4a) and the role of HNF4a in regulating hepatocyte lipid
homeostasis.
RESULTS: Alcohol feeding caused significant lipid accumulation, which was
attenuated by dietary MCT. The major effect of alcohol on hepatic gene expression
is the up-regulation of CYP4A1, CD36, and GPAT3, and down-regulation of
apolipoprotein B (ApoB). Dietary MCT further up-regulated CYP4A1 gene, normalized
ApoB gene, and up-regulated MTTP and SCD1 genes. The protein level of HNF4a, a
master transcription factor of the liver, was reduced by alcohol feeding, which
was normalized by dietary MCT. Fatty acid profiling demonstrated that alcohol
feeding dramatically increased hepatic unsaturated long chain fatty acyl species,
particularly linoleic acid and oleic acid, which was attenuated by dietary MCT.
Dietary MCT attenuated alcohol-reduced serum triglyceride level and modulated the
fatty acid composition of the serum triglycerides. Cell culture study
demonstrated polyunsaturated linoleic acid rather than monounsaturated oleic acid
inactivated HNF4a in HepG2 cells. Knockdown of HNF4a caused lipid accumulation in
HepG2 cells due to dysregulation of very low density lipoprotein secretion.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that dietary MCT prevents alcohol-induced hepatic
lipid accumulation, at least partially, through reducing hepatic polyunsaturated 
long chain fatty acids and preserving HNF4a.

Copyright © 2012 by the Research Society on Alcoholism.

PMCID: PMC3618617
PMID: 23126616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Am J Surg Pathol. 2013 Feb;37(2):211-8. doi: 10.1097/PAS.0b013e31826be303.

HNF4a as a marker for invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma of the lung.

Sugano M(1), Nagasaka T, Sasaki E, Murakami Y, Hosoda W, Hida T, Mitsudomi T,
Yatabe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Diagnostics, Aichi Cancer Center
Hospital, Nagoya, Japan.

A new lung adenocarcinoma classification was recently proposed by IASLC/ATS/ERS. 
In this classification, invasive mucinous adenocarcinoma (IMC) is placed in a new
category because of its unique radiologic, morphologic, and genetic
characteristics. Minimal cytologic atypia characterizes this tumor; thus, it is
occasionally difficult to make a diagnosis with a biopsy specimen. We used
immunohistochemistry to examine HNF4a expression in a tissue microarray
consisting of 278 lung adenocarcinoma specimens. In addition, we analyzed the
clinicopathologic features, including EGFR, KRAS, and ALK mutation status. HNF4a 
expression was detected in 33 of the 37 surgically resected IMCs. The tumor cells
were uniformly labeled with the molecule in all of the corresponding biopsy
specimens, whereas the normal cells were not. Although HNF4a was also expressed
in other lung adenocarcinoma subtypes, those with HNF4a expression shared IMC
features, including negative TTF-1 expression (P<0.001), positive CDX2 expression
(P<0.001), positive KRAS mutation status (P=0.001), and negative EGFR mutation
status (P<0.001). Although some ALK-positive adenocarcinomas showed IMC
morphology, the tumors were negative for HNF4a, suggesting that they belonged to 
a different group of tumors. We found that HNF4a labeled all of the IMC tumors
except the ALK-positive adenocarcinomas. Thus, HNF4a positivity could serve as a 
useful marker for overcoming the diagnostic difficulties caused by minimal
nuclear atypia and sparse tumor cells in small biopsy samples. Because other
adenocarcinoma subtypes with HNF4a expression share clinicopathologic features
with IMC, these adenocarcinomas, especially the columnar cell type of
acinar-predominant adenocarcinoma, might constitute a biological spectrum of IMC.

PMID: 23108025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Diabet Med. 2013 Mar;30(3):260-6. doi: 10.1111/dme.12038.

RD Lawrence lecture 2012: assessing aetiology in diabetes: how C-peptide, CRP and
fucosylation came to the party!

Owen KR(1).

Author information: 
(1)Katharine.owen@drl.ox.ac.uk

Assigning the correct aetiology in diabetes is important for treatment,
understanding prognosis and for follow-up of family members. Despite these
benefits, many are missing out on the opportunity to have testing for monogenic
forms of diabetes. This review gives the clinical features of the commoner forms 
of monogenic diabetes and examines which clinical and biological markers can be
used to identify those at highest risk of having Maturity onset diabetes of the
young (MODY). MODY is characterised by young-onset, familial diabetes which is
C-peptide positive, ß-cell antibody negative and not associated with metabolic
syndrome. Differentiating from type 1 and type 2 diabetes can be challenging due 
to the overlap of clinical features. In type 1 diabetes, insulin production
ceases after the honeymoon period. Thus C-peptide can be used to detect those
with persisting insulin secretion who might have a different cause for their
diabetes. In type 2 diabetes, most have insulin resistance, so absence of
metabolic syndrome could be used to identify those most likely to have MODY.
Another approach is to look for non-pancreatic features associated with mutations
in MODY genes. Following results from Genome-wide association studies, we have
shown that those with HNF1A mutations (the commonest form of MODY) have decreased
serum levels of highly-sensitive C-reactive protein (hsCRP) and altered patterns 
of plasma protein fucosylation. These features can differentiate HNF1A-MODY from 
common forms of diabetes with a high degree of discriminative accuracy. Using
combinations of clinical features and new biomarkers in diagnostic pathways will 
help increase diagnosis rates of MODY.

© 2012 The Author. Diabetic Medicine © 2012 Diabetes UK.

PMID: 23106207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2013 Jan 1;304(1):G26-37. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00064.2012. Epub 2012 Oct 25.

Hepatocyte-specific deletion of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a in adult mice
results in increased hepatocyte proliferation.

Walesky C(1), Gunewardena S, Terwilliger EF, Edwards G, Borude P, Apte U.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutics, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a (HNF4a) is known as the master regulator of
hepatocyte differentiation. Recent studies indicate that HNF4a may inhibit
hepatocyte proliferation via mechanisms that have yet to be identified. Using a
HNF4a knockdown mouse model based on delivery of inducible Cre recombinase via an
adeno-associated virus 8 viral vector, we investigated the role of HNF4a in the
regulation of hepatocyte proliferation. Hepatocyte-specific deletion of HNF4a
resulted in increased hepatocyte proliferation. Global gene expression analysis
showed that a majority of the downregulated genes were previously known HNF4a
target genes involved in hepatic differentiation. Interestingly, =500 upregulated
genes were associated with cell proliferation and cancer. Furthermore, we
identified potential negative target genes of HNF4a, many of which are involved
in the stimulation of proliferation. Using chromatin immunoprecipitation
analysis, we confirmed binding of HNF4a at three of these genes. Furthermore,
overexpression of HNF4a in mouse hepatocellular carcinoma cells resulted in a
decrease in promitogenic gene expression and cell cycle arrest. Taken together,
these data indicate that, apart from its role in hepatocyte differentiation,
HNF4a actively inhibits hepatocyte proliferation by repression of specific
promitogenic genes.

PMCID: PMC3543634
PMID: 23104559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Apr;114(4):831-43. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24424.

Tumor necrosis factor-a promotes bile ductular transdifferentiation of mature rat
hepatocytes in vitro.

Nishikawa Y(1), Sone M, Nagahama Y, Kumagai E, Doi Y, Omori Y, Yoshioka T,
Tokairin T, Yoshida M, Yamamoto Y, Ito A, Sugiyama T, Enomoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Tumor Pathology, Department of Pathology, Asahikawa Medical
University, Higashi 2-1-1-1 Midorigaoka, Asahikawa, Hokkaido 078-8510, Japan.
nishikwa@asahikawa-med.ac.jp

We previously showed that mature hepatocytes could transdifferentiate into bile
ductular cells when placed in a collagen-rich microenvironment. To explore the
mechanism of transdifferentiation, we examined whether inflammatory cytokines
affected the phenotype of hepatocytes in a three-dimensional culture system.
Spheroidal aggregates of rat hepatocytes were embedded within a type I collagen
gel matrix and cultured in the presence of various cytokines. In the control,
hepatocytes gradually lost expression of albumin, tyrosine aminotransferase, and 
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4a, while aberrantly expressed bile ductular
markers, including cytokeratin 19 (CK 19) and spermatogenic immunoglobulin
superfamily (SgIGSF). Among the cytokines examined, tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-a
inhibited expression of albumin and HNF-4a, both at mRNA and protein levels.
After culturing for 2 weeks with TNF-a, hepatocytic spheroids were transformed
into extensively branching tubular structures composed of CK 19- and
SgIGSF-positive small cuboidal cells. These cells responded to secretin with an
increase in secretion and expressed functional bile duct markers. TNF-a also
induced the phosphorylation of Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) and c-Jun, and the
morphogenesis was inhibited by SP600125, a specific JNK inhibitor. Furthermore,
in chronic rat liver injury induced by CCl(4) , ductular reaction in the
centrilobular area demonstrated strong nuclear staining of phosphorylated c-Jun. 
Our results demonstrate that TNF-a promotes the ductular transdifferentiation of 
hepatocytes and suggest a role of TNF-a in the pathogenesis of ductular reaction.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23097189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Biomed Pap Med Fac Univ Palacky Olomouc Czech Repub. 2013 Sep;157(3):214-21. doi:
10.5507/bp.2012.075. Epub 2012 Sep 5.

Construction and characterization of peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma co-activator 1 alpha (PGC-1a over-expressing cell line derived
from human hepatocyte carcinoma HepG2 cells).

Novotna A(1), Doricakova A, Pavek P, Dvorak Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Genetics, Faculty of Science, Palacky
University Olomouc, Czech Republic.

AIMS: The aim was develop stable human cell line stable over-expressing
transcription co-activator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
co-activator 1a (PGC-1a) with restored hepatospecific functions and increased
expression of major xenobiotic metabolizing enzymes.
METHODS: Six clones of HepG2-PGC-1a and one control clone HepG2-pcDNA3 were
isolated and analyzed for secretion of hepatospecific markers, fibrinogen,
albumin and alpha1-antitrypsin. Expression levels of protein and mRNA of
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF4a), pregnane X receptor (PXR) and aryl hydrocarbon
receptor (AhR) were determined. We measured basal and ligand inducible expression
of CYP1A1 and CYP3A4.
RESULTS: Stably transfected cell line HepG2-PGC-1a derived from HepG2 cells
over-expressing PGC-1a displayed increased secretion of fibrinogen, but not
albumin or alpha1-antitrypsin compared to parent HepG2 cells. We found increased 
levels of HNF4a, PXR and AhR proteins but not their mRNAs in HepG2-PGC1 cells.
Basal expression of CYP3A4 protein in HepG2-PGC-1a cells was increased but
rifampicin-inducible expression of CYP3A4 protein was lowered in comparison with 
parent HepG2 cells. Induction of CYP3A4 mRNA varied between 1.3 - 1.9 fold in
individual clones. Expression of TCDD-inducible CYP1A1 protein was lower in
HepG2-PGC-1a cells than in parent HepG2 cells. Induction of CYP1A1 mRNA by TCDD
in HepG2-PGC-1a cells was comparable with that in parent HepG2 cells and ranged
between 103 - 198 fold.
CONCLUSION: Stable expression of PGC-1a in HepG2 cells restores several
hepatospecific functions, such as secretion of fibrinogen, expression of HNF4a1
and xenoreceptors PXR and AhR. However, the expression and induction of key
drug-metabolizing enzymes (CYP1A1 and CYP3A4) were not improved.

PMID: 23073537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46941. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046941. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

Molecular phenotyping of immune cells from young NOD mice reveals abnormal
metabolic pathways in the early induction phase of autoimmune diabetes.

Wu J(1), Kakoola DN, Lenchik NI, Desiderio DM, Marshall DR, Gerling IC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Tennessee Health Science Center,
Memphis, TN, United States of America.

Islet leukocytic infiltration (insulitis) is first obvious at around 4 weeks of
age in the NOD mouse--a model for human type 1 diabetes (T1D). The molecular
events that lead to insulitis and initiate autoimmune diabetes are poorly
understood. Since TID is caused by numerous genes, we hypothesized that multiple 
molecular pathways are altered and interact to initiate this disease. We
evaluated the molecular phenotype (mRNA and protein expression) and molecular
networks of ex vivo unfractionated spleen leukocytes from 2 and 4 week-old NOD
mice in comparison to two control strains. Analysis of the global gene expression
profiles and hierarchical clustering revealed that the majority (~90%) of the
differentially expressed genes in NOD mice were repressed. Furthermore, analysis 
using a modern suite of multiple bioinformatics approaches identified abnormal
molecular pathways that can be divided broadly into 2 categories: metabolic
pathways, which were predominant at 2 weeks, and immune response pathways, which 
were predominant at 4 weeks. Network analysis by Ingenuity pathway analysis
identified key genes/molecules that may play a role in regulating these pathways.
These included five that were common to both ages (TNF, HNF4A, IL15,
Progesterone, and YWHAZ), and others that were unique to 2 weeks (e.g. MYC/MYCN, 
TGFB1, and IL2) and to 4 weeks (e.g. IFNG, beta-estradiol, p53, NFKB, AKT, PRKCA,
IL12, and HLA-C). Based on the literature, genes that may play a role in
regulating metabolic pathways at 2 weeks include Myc and HNF4A, and at 4 weeks,
beta-estradiol, p53, Akt, HNF4A and AR. Our data suggest that abnormalities in
regulation of metabolic pathways in the immune cells of young NOD mice lead to
abnormalities in the immune response pathways and as such may play a role in the 
initiation of autoimmune diabetes. Thus, targeting metabolism may provide novel
approaches to preventing and/or treating autoimmune diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3469658
PMID: 23071669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Cell Res. 2013 Jan;23(1):157-61. doi: 10.1038/cr.2012.144. Epub 2012 Oct 16.

Promotion of the efficient metabolic maturation of human pluripotent stem
cell-derived hepatocytes by correcting specification defects.

Zhao D, Chen S, Duo S, Xiang C, Jia J, Guo M, Lai W, Lu S, Deng H.

PMCID: PMC3541654
PMID: 23070301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Aquat Toxicol. 2013 Jan 15;126:424-34. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2012.08.019. Epub
2012 Sep 20.

Parental exposure to natural mixtures of POPs reduced embryo production and
altered gene transcription in zebrafish embryos.

Lyche JL(1), Grzes IM, Karlsson C, Nourizadeh-Lillabadi R, Berg V, Kristoffersen 
AB, Skåre JU, Alestrøm P, Ropstad E.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Food Safety and Infection Biology, Norwegian School of Veterinary
Science, Oslo, Norway. jan.l.lyche@nvh.no

Determination of toxicity of complex mixtures has been proposed to be one of the 
most important challenges for modern toxicology. In this study we performed
genome wide transcriptome profiling to assess potential toxicant induced changes 
in gene regulation in zebrafish embryos following parental exposure to two
natural mixtures of persistent organic pollutants (POPs). The mixtures used were 
extracted from burbot (Lota lota) liver originating from two lakes (Lake Mjøsa
and Lake Losna) belonging to the same freshwater system in Norway. The dominating
groups of contaminants were polybrominated diphenyl ethers (PBDEs),
polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) and dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane metabolites 
(DDTs). Because both mixtures used in the present study induced similar effects, 
it is likely that the same toxicants are involved. The Mjøsa mixture contains
high levels of PBDEs while this group of pollutants is low in the Losna mixture. 
However, both mixtures contain substantial concentrations of PCB and DDT
suggesting these contaminants as the predominant contributors to the toxicity
observed. The observed effects included phenotypic traits, like embryo production
and survival, and gene transcription changes corresponding with disease and
biological functions such as cancer, reproductive system disease, cardiovascular 
disease, lipid and protein metabolism, small molecule biochemistry and cell
cycle. The changes in gene transcription included genes regulated by HNF4A,
insulin, LH, FSH and NF-<U+03BA>B which are known to be central regulators of endocrine 
signaling, metabolism, metabolic homeostasis, immune functions, cancer
development and reproduction. The results suggest that relative low
concentrations of the natural mixtures of POPs used in the present study might
pose a threat to wild freshwater fish living in the lakes from which the POPs
mixtures originated.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23063069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Arch Toxicol. 2013 Jun;87(6):1001-12. doi: 10.1007/s00204-012-0948-6. Epub 2012
Oct 5.

Inhibition of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 and 4 alpha (HNF1a and HNF4a) as a
mechanism of arsenic carcinogenesis.

Pastoret A(1), Marcos R, Sampayo-Reyes A, Saucedo-Cardenas O, Lozano-Garza GH,
Hernandez A.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Genètica i de Microbiologia, Facultat de Biociències, Grup de
Mutagènesi, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Cerdanyola del Vallès,
Bellaterra, Spain.

Inorganic arsenic (i-As) is a naturally occurring toxic metalloid affecting
millions of people worldwide. It is known to be carcinogen, liver being a
potential target, and related to the prevalence of diabetes in arseniasis-endemic
areas. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 and 4 alpha (HNF1a and HNF4a) are key members 
of a transcriptional network essential for normal liver architecture. Changes in 
HNF1a and HNF4a expression are clearly associated with the development of liver
malignancies and diabetes in humans. In this work, hepatic HepG2 cells and golden
Syrian hamsters were exposed to sub-toxic, environmentally relevant doses of
sodium arsenite (SA; up to 10 µM in vitro, 15 mg/L in vivo) in order to evaluate 
whether arsenic is able to compromise the expression of hepatocyte nuclear
factors. Also, liver histopathological examination was carried out, and several
markers of hepatocyte differentiation and glucose metabolism status were
determined as a measure of i-As-induced effects. Results show a consistent
down-regulation of HNF1a and HNF4a under a scenario of exposure where HepG2 cells
(1) gained resistance to arsenic-induced toxicity/apoptosis, (2) attained loss of
tissue-specific features (as shown by the observed down-regulation of ALDOB,
PEPCK and CYP1A2, triggering of the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition program 
and the hypersecretion of matrix metalloproteinase-2 and 9), (3) failed to
maintain balanced expression of the "stemness" genes C-MYC, OCT3/4, LIN28 and
NOTCH2 and (4) showed glucose metabolism impairment. We conclude that the
i-As-induced down-regulation of HNF1a and HNF4a under chronic settings may play a
central role in the features of disease and cancer observed both in vivo and in
vitro.

PMID: 23052196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 30;287(49):41334-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.421834. Epub
2012 Oct 4.

Nuclear receptors HNF4a and LRH-1 cooperate in regulating Cyp7a1 in vivo.

Kir S(1), Zhang Y, Gerard RD, Kliewer SA, Mangelsdorf DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center at
Dallas, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.

Fibroblast growth factor 19 (FGF19) is a postprandial enterokine induced by the
nuclear bile acid receptor, FXR, in ileum. FGF19 inhibits bile acid synthesis in 
liver through transcriptional repression of cholesterol 7a-hydroxylase (CYP7A1)
via a mechanism involving the nuclear receptor SHP. Here, in a series of
loss-of-function studies, we show that the nuclear receptors HNF4a and LRH-1 have
dual roles in regulating Cyp7a1 in vivo. First, they cooperate in maintaining
basal Cyp7a1 expression. Second, they enable SHP binding to the Cyp7a1 promoter
and facilitate FGF19-mediated repression of bile acid synthesis. HNF4a and LRH-1 
promote active transcription histone marks on the Cyp7a1 promoter that are
reversed by FGF19 in a SHP-dependent manner. These findings demonstrate that both
HNF4a and LRH-1 are important regulators of Cyp7a1 transcription in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3510831
PMID: 23038264  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. J Clin Res Pediatr Endocrinol. 2012 Dec;4(4):169-81. doi: 10.4274/jcrpe.821. Epub
2012 Oct 2.

Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia:genetic mechanisms, diagnosis and management.

Mohamed Z(1), Arya VB, Hussain K.

Author information: 
(1)University College London, Institue of Child Health, Developmental
Endocrinology Research Clinical, Molecular Genetics Unit, London, United Kingdom.

Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia (HH) is characterized by unregulated insulin
secretion from pancreatic ß-cells. Untreated hypoglycaemia in infants can lead to
seizures, developmental delay, and subsequent permanent brain injury. Early
identification and meticulous managementof these patients is vital to prevent
neurological insult. Mutations in eight different genes (ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1,
CGK, HADH, SLC16A1, HNF4A and UCP2) have been identified to date in patients with
congenital forms of hyperinsulinism (CHI). The most severe forms of CHI are due
to mutations in ABCC8 and KCJN11, which encode the two components of pancreatic
ß-cell ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Recent advancement in understanding the
genetic aetiology, histological characterisation into focal and diffuse variety
combined with improved imaging (such as fluorine 18 L-3, 4-dihydroxyphenylalanine
positron emission tomography 18F-DOPA-PET scanning) and laparoscopic surgical
techniques have greatly improved management. In adults, HH can be due to an
insulinoma, pancreatogenous hypoglycaemic syndrome, post gastric-bypass surgery
for morbid obesity as well as to mutations in insulin receptor gene. This review 
provides an overview of the molecular basis of CHI and outlines the clinical
presentation, diagnostic criteria, and management of these patients.

PMCID: PMC3537282
PMID: 23032149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46263. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046263. Epub 2012 Sep 27.

A single nucleotide polymorphism within DUSP9 is associated with susceptibility
to type 2 diabetes in a Japanese population.

Fukuda H(1), Imamura M, Tanaka Y, Iwata M, Hirose H, Kaku K, Maegawa H, Watada H,
Tobe K, Kashiwagi A, Kawamori R, Maeda S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Endocrinology and Metabolism, RIKEN Center for Genomic
Medicine, Yokohama 230-0045, Japan.

AIMS: The DUSP9 locus on chromosome X was identified as a susceptibility locus
for type 2 diabetes in a meta-analysis of European genome-wide association
studies (GWAS), and GWAS in South Asian populations identified 6 additional
single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) loci for type 2 diabetes. However, the
association of these loci with type 2 diabetes have not been examined in the
Japanese. We performed a replication study to investigate the association of
these 7 susceptibility loci with type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population.
METHODS: We genotyped 11,319 Japanese participants (8,318 with type 2 diabetes
and 3,001 controls) for each of the 7 SNPs-rs5945326 near DUSP9, rs3923113 near
GRB14, rs16861329 in ST6GAL1, rs1802295 in VPS26A, rs7178572 in HMG20A, rs2028299
near AP3S2, and rs4812829 in HNF4A-and examined the association of each of these 
7 SNPs with type 2 diabetes by using logistic regression analysis.
RESULTS: All SNPs had the same direction of effect (odds ratio [OR]>1.0) as in
the original reports. One SNP, rs5945326 near DUSP9, was significantly associated
with type 2 diabetes at a genome-wide significance level (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>2.21×10(-8); OR
1.39, 95% confidence interval [CI]: 1.24-1.56). The 6 SNPs derived from South
Asian GWAS were not significantly associated with type 2 diabetes in the Japanese
population by themselves (p=0.007). However, a genetic risk score constructed
from 6 South Asian GWAS derived SNPs was significantly associated with Japanese
type 2 diabetes (p<U+200A>=<U+200A>8.69×10(-4), OR <U+200A>=<U+200A>1.06. 95% CI; 1.03-1.10).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: These results indicate that the DUSP9 locus is a
common susceptibility locus for type 2 diabetes across different ethnicities, and
6 loci identified in South Asian GWAS also have significant effect on
susceptibility to Japanese type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3459833
PMID: 23029454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Br J Pharmacol. 2013 Feb;168(4):988-1000. doi: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.2012.02222.x.

Inherent sex-dependent regulation of human hepatic CYP3A5.

Thangavel C(1), Boopathi E, Shapiro BH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Biochemistry, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: Expression of hepatic cytochromes P450 (CYP) in all
species examined, including humans, is generally sexually dimorphic. We examined 
the sex-dependent expression of CYP3A5 and the hormone-regulated molecular
mechanism(s) responsible for any dimorphism.
EXPERIMENTAL APPROACH: CYP3A5 levels as well as nuclear translocation and
promoter binding of transcription factors regulating CYP3A5 expression were
measured in primary hepatocyte cultures derived from men and women exposed to
physiological-like levels of growth hormone alone, dexamethasone alone and the
combined regimen.
KEY RESULTS: We observed a dramatic inherent CYP3A5 sexual dimorphism (women >
men) with all treatments as a result of a ~2-fold greater level of
hormone-induced activation and nuclear accumulation of hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4a (HNF-4a), pregnane X receptor (PXR) and retinoic X receptora (RXRa) in 
female hepatocytes. Furthermore, PXR : RXRa exhibited significantly higher DNA
binding levels to its specific binding motif on the CYP3A5 promoter in female
hepatocytes, inferring a possible explanation for the elevated expression of the 
isoform in women. Results from experiments using HepG2 cells treated with
siRNA-induced knockdown of HNF-4a and/or transfected with luciferase reporter
constructs containing the CYP3A5 promoter were in agreement with the basic
mechanism observed in primary hepatocytes of both sexes.
CONCLUSIONS AND IMPLICATIONS: Female-predominant expression of human CYP3A5 is
due to an inherent, sex-dependent suboptimal activation of the transcription
networks responsible for hormone-induced expression of the isoform in men.
Accordingly, in conjunction with previous studies of other human CYPs, men and
women are intrinsically unlikely to handle many drugs in the same way; thus, sex 
should be a requisite component factored into the design of personalized drug
therapies.

© 2012 The Authors. British Journal of Pharmacology © 2012 The British
Pharmacological Society.

PMCID: PMC3631386
PMID: 22994453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Oncogene. 2013 Aug 8;32(32):3782-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.401. Epub 2012 Sep 17.

Regulation of the tumor suppressor homeogene Cdx2 by HNF4a in intestinal cancer.

Saandi T(1), Baraille F, Derbal-Wolfrom L, Cattin AL, Benahmed F, Martin E,
Cardot P, Duclos B, Ribeiro A, Freund JN, Duluc I.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, Unité 682, Strasbourg, France.

The gut-specific homeotic transcription factor Cdx2 is a crucial regulator of
intestinal development and homeostasis, which is downregulated in colorectal
cancers (CRC) and exhibits a tumor suppressor function in the colon. We have
previously established that several endodermal transcription factors, including
HNF4a and GATA6, are involved in Cdx2 regulation in the normal gut. Here we have 
studied the role of HNF4a in the mechanism of deregulation of Cdx2 in colon
cancers. Crossing Apc(<U+0394>14/+) mice prone to spontaneous intestinal tumor
development with pCdx2-9LacZ transgenic mice containing the LacZ reporter under
the control of the 9.3-kb Cdx2 promoter showed that this promoter segment
contains sequences recapitulating the decrease of Cdx2 expression in intestinal
cancers. Immunohistochemistry revealed that HNF4a, unlike GATA6, exhibited a
similar decrease to Cdx2 in genetic (Apc(min/+) and Apc(<U+0394>14/+)) and chemically
induced (Azoxymethane (AOM) treatment) models of intestinal tumors in mice. HNF4a
and Cdx2 also exhibited a comparable deregulated pattern in human CRC. Correlated
patterns were observed between HNF4a and Cdx2 in several experimental models of
human colon cancer cell lines: xenografts in nude mice, wound healing and glucose
starvation. Furthermore, Cdx2 decreased by knocking down HNF4a in human colon
cancer cells using siRNA and in the colon of mice conditionally knocked out for
the Hnf4a gene in the adult intestine (Hnf4a(f/f);VilCre(ERT2) mice). Finally,
the conditionally knocked out mice Hnf4a(f/f);VilCre(ERT2) treated with the
carcinogen AOM developed colorectal tumors earlier than wild-type mice, as
previously reported for mice with a reduced Cdx2 expression. In conclusion, this 
study provides evidence that the downregulation of HNF4a is an important
determinant of the reduced expression of the Cdx2 tumor suppressor gene in
intestinal cancers. Consistently, similar to Cdx2, HNF4a exerts a tumor
suppressor function in the colon in that its loss of function facilitates tumor
progression.

PMID: 22986531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Curr Drug Metab. 2012 Dec;13(10):1436-53.

PPARa/HNF4a interplay on diversified responsive elements. Relevance in the
regulation of liver peroxisomal fatty acid catabolism.

Chamouton J(1), Latruffe N.

Author information: 
(1)Université de Bourgogne, Faculté des Sciences Gabriel, Laboratoire de
Biochimie (Bio-peroxIL), Dijon, F-21000, France.

In mammals, the liver is the major organ of fatty acid catabolism. This pathway
is involved in both mitochondria and peroxisome. While mitochondria breaks down
fatty acids with short, medium and long carbon chains, peroxisomes are involved
in the catabolism of very long and branched chain fatty acids, which are degraded
by three enzymes: acyl-CoA oxidase, multifunctional enzyme and thiolase enzyme.
The active pathway results mainly from a tight transcriptional control of these
gene-encoding enzymes. Two major nuclear receptors that are highly expressed in
this organ are involved in this control, e.g. PPARa (peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor, a isoform) and HNF4a (hepatic nuclear factor 4, 
a isotype). Both are key regulators of liver lipid metabolism. While numerous
papers have reported on the role of PPARa in liver lipid homeostasis, less is
known on the implication of HNF4a in this metabolism. Moreover, very few studies 
have taken an interest in the important question of the implication of these two 
receptors and most particularly their crosstalk. This review therefore presents
the current knowledge on the PPARa/HNF4a interplay in diversified DNA responsive 
elements and its relevance in the regulation fatty acid catabolism. It presents a
review of the properties of the nuclear receptors PPARa and HNF4a, then the genes
regulated by HNF4a and PPARa, particularly the peroxisomal enzyme target genes.
To conclude, the consequences of the regulation of these genes in the liver by
PPARa and HNF4a will be analyzed. The current data indicate the requirement of
PPARa and HNF4a for regulation in the liver of peroxisomal and mitochondrial
fatty acid ß-oxidation, cholesterol and bile acid metabolism, lipoprotein
metabolism and consequently the prevention of liver steatosis. However, several
questions remain unsolved. To show the interplay of PPARa and HNF4a in the
regulation of liver fatty acid metabolism, different strategies are proposed.

PMID: 22978398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. J Biochem. 2012 Dec;152(6):577-86. doi: 10.1093/jb/mvs101. Epub 2012 Sep 10.

Critical role of farnesoid X receptor for hepatocellular carcinoma cell
proliferation.

Fujino T(1), Takeuchi A, Maruko-Ohtake A, Ohtake Y, Satoh J, Kobayashi T, Tanaka 
T, Ito H, Sakamaki R, Kashimura R, Ando K, Nishimaki-Mogami T, Ohkubo Y, Kitamura
N, Sato R, Kikugawa K, Hayakawa M.

Author information: 
(1)School of Pharmacy, Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Science, Tokyo,
Japan. tfujino@ps.toyaku.ac.jp

Farnesoid X receptor (FXR), a pivotal factor maintaining bile acid homeostasis,
has been recently shown to be a critical factor required for liver regeneration. 
The elucidation of the mechanism how FXR controls the proliferation of
hepatocellular carcinoma cells is useful to establish the therapy for liver
cancer. Here, we show that FXR plays a crucial role in the proliferation of human
hepatocellular carcinoma cell line, HepG2, Huh7 and HLE. The treatment of HepG2
with FXR siRNA elevates the level of p16/INK4a expression resulting in the
inhibition of cell proliferation. By contrast, FXR activation reduces p16/INK4a
expression and stimulates the cell proliferation. The ectopic expression of the
active form of Ras that causes strong activation of extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (ERK) leads to the decrease in FXR expression, suggesting
that FXR expression is negatively regulated via Ras/ERK pathway. The elevation of
p16/INK4a expression and the inhibition of cell proliferation by FXR knockdown
are also observed in Huh7 and HLE. In this study, we have suggested a novel
mechanism by which hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation is regulated: FXR 
stimulates cell proliferation by suppressing the p16/INK4a expression, whereas
Ras/ERK pathway down-regulates the FXR expression, leading to the suppressed cell
proliferation in hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines.

PMID: 22969091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. J Hepatol. 2013 Jan;58(1):65-72. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2012.08.023. Epub 2012 Sep
4.

TGFß overrides HNF4a tumor suppressing activity through GSK3ß inactivation:
implication for hepatocellular carcinoma gene therapy.

Cozzolino AM(1), Alonzi T, Santangelo L, Mancone C, Conti B, Steindler C, Musone 
M, Cicchini C, Tripodi M, Marchetti A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Dipartimento di Biotecnologie
Cellulari ed Ematologia, University La Sapienza, Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The tumor fate derives from cell autonomous properties and
niche microenvironmental cues. The transforming growth factor ß (TGFß) is a major
microenvironmental factor for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) influencing tumor
dedifferentiation, induction of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
acquisition of metastatic properties. The loss of the transcriptional factor
HNF4a is a predominant mechanism through which HCCs progress to a more aggressive
phenotype; its re-expression, reducing tumor formation and repressing EMT
program, has been suggested as a therapeutic tool for HCC gene therapy. We
investigated the influence of TGFß on the anti-EMT and tumor suppressor HNF4a
activity.
METHODS: Cell motility and invasion were analyzed by wound healing and invasion
assays. EMT was evaluated by RT-qPCR and immunofluorescence. ChIP and EMSA assays
were utilized for investigation of the HNF4a DNA binding activity. HNF4a
post-translational modifications (PTMs) were assessed by 2-DE analysis. GSK3ß
activity was modulated by chemical inhibition and constitutive active mutant
expression.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that the presence of TGFß impairs the efficiency of
HNF4a as tumor suppressor. We found that TGFß induces HNF4a PTMs that correlate
with the early loss of HNF4a DNA binding activity on target gene promoters.
Furthermore, we identified the GSK3ß kinase as one of the TGFß targets mediating 
HNF4a functional inactivation: GSK3ß chemical inhibition results in HNF4a DNA
binding impairment while a constitutively active GSK3ß mutant impairs the
TGFß-induced inhibitory effect on HNF4a tumor suppressor activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data identify in the dominance of TGFß a limit for the
HNF4a-mediated gene therapy of HCC.

Copyright © 2012 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22960426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e44007. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0044007. Epub 2012 Aug 30.

MED25 is a mediator component of HNF4a-driven transcription leading to insulin
secretion in pancreatic beta-cells.

Han EH(1), Rha GB, Chi YI.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Structural Biology, Hormel Institute, University of Minnesota,
Austin, Minnesota, United States of America.

Unique nuclear receptor Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4a (HNF4a) is an essential
transcriptional regulator for early development and proper function of pancreatic
ß-cells, and its mutations are monogenic causes of a dominant inherited form of
diabetes referred to as Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young 1 (MODY1). As a
gene-specific transcription factor, HNF4a exerts its function through various
molecular interactions, but its protein recruiting network has not been fully
characterized. Here we report the identification of MED25 as one of the HNF4a
binding partners in pancreatic ß-cells leading to insulin secretion which is
impaired in MODY patients. MED25 is one of the subunits of the Mediator complex
that is required for induction of RNA polymerase II transcription by various
transcription factors including nuclear receptors. This HNF4a-MED25 interaction
was initially identified by a yeast-two-hybrid method, confirmed by in vivo and
in vitro analyses, and proven to be mediated through the MED25-LXXLL motif in a
ligand-independent manner. Reporter-gene based transcription assays and
siRNA/shRNA-based gene silencing approaches revealed that this interaction is
crucial for full activation of HNF4a-mediated transcription, especially
expression of target genes implicated in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion.
Selected MODY mutations at the LXXLL motif binding pocket disrupt these
interactions and cause impaired insulin secretion through a 'loss-of-function'
mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3431373
PMID: 22952853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43595. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043595. Epub 2012 Aug 27.

Biosignatures for Parkinson's disease and atypical parkinsonian disorders
patients.

Potashkin JA(1), Santiago JA, Ravina BM, Watts A, Leontovich AA.

Author information: 
(1)The Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology Department, Rosalind Franklin
University of Medicine and Science, The Chicago Medical School, North Chicago,
Illinois, United States of America. judy.potashkin@rosalindfranklin.edu

Diagnosis of Parkinson' disease (PD) carries a high misdiagnosis rate due to
failure to recognize atypical parkinsonian disorders (APD). Usually by the time
of diagnosis greater than 60% of the neurons in the substantia nigra are dead.
Therefore, early detection would be beneficial so that therapeutic intervention
may be initiated early in the disease process. We used splice variant-specific
microarrays to identify mRNAs whose expression is altered in peripheral blood of 
early-stage PD patients compared to healthy and neurodegenerative disease
controls. Quantitative polymerase chain reaction assays were used to validate
splice variant transcripts in independent sample sets. Here we report a PD
signature used to classify blinded samples with 90% sensitivity and 94%
specificity and an APD signature that resulted in a diagnosis with 95%
sensitivity and 94% specificity. This study provides the first discriminant
functions with coherent diagnostic signatures for PD and APD. Analysis of the PD 
biomarkers identified a regulatory network with nodes centered on the
transcription factors HNF4A and TNF, which have been implicated in insulin
regulation.

PMCID: PMC3428307
PMID: 22952715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Genome Biol. 2012 Sep 26;13(9):R52. doi: 10.1186/gb-2012-13-9-r52.

Cell type-specific binding patterns reveal that TCF7L2 can be tethered to the
genome by association with GATA3.

Frietze S(1), Wang R, Yao L, Tak YG, Ye Z, Gaddis M, Witt H, Farnham PJ, Jin VX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Norris Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90089, USA.

BACKGROUND: The TCF7L2 transcription factor is linked to a variety of human
diseases, including type 2 diabetes and cancer. One mechanism by which TCF7L2
could influence expression of genes involved in diverse diseases is by binding to
distinct regulatory regions in different tissues. To test this hypothesis, we
performed ChIP-seq for TCF7L2 in six human cell lines.
RESULTS: We identified 116,000 non-redundant TCF7L2 binding sites, with only
1,864 sites common to the six cell lines. Using ChIP-seq, we showed that many
genomic regions that are marked by both H3K4me1 and H3K27Ac are also bound by
TCF7L2, suggesting that TCF7L2 plays a critical role in enhancer activity.
Bioinformatic analysis of the cell type-specific TCF7L2 binding sites revealed
enrichment for multiple transcription factors, including HNF4alpha and FOXA2
motifs in HepG2 cells and the GATA3 motif in MCF7 cells. ChIP-seq analysis
revealed that TCF7L2 co-localizes with HNF4alpha and FOXA2 in HepG2 cells and
with GATA3 in MCF7 cells. Interestingly, in MCF7 cells the TCF7L2 motif is
enriched in most TCF7L2 sites but is not enriched in the sites bound by both
GATA3 and TCF7L2. This analysis suggested that GATA3 might tether TCF7L2 to the
genome at these sites. To test this hypothesis, we depleted GATA3 in MCF7 cells
and showed that TCF7L2 binding was lost at a subset of sites. RNA-seq analysis
suggested that TCF7L2 represses transcription when tethered to the genome via
GATA3.
CONCLUSIONS: Our studies demonstrate a novel relationship between GATA3 and
TCF7L2, and reveal important insights into TCF7L2-mediated gene regulation.

PMCID: PMC3491396
PMID: 22951069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Mol Neurobiol. 2013 Feb;47(1):228-40. doi: 10.1007/s12035-012-8335-0. Epub 2012
Sep 4.

Regulation of neural stem cell differentiation by transcription factors HNF4-1
and MAZ-1.

Wang J(1), Cheng H, Li X, Lu W, Wang K, Wen T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Neural Biology, School of Life Sciences, Shanghai
University, 99 Shang Da Road, Shanghai, 200444, China.

Neural stem cells (NSCs) are promising candidates for a variety of neurological
diseases due to their ability to differentiate into neurons, astrocytes, and
oligodentrocytes. During this process, Rho GTPases are heavily involved in
neuritogenesis, axon formation and dendritic development, due to their effects on
the cytoskeleton through downstream effectors. The activities of Rho GTPases are 
controlled by Rho-GDP dissociation inhibitors (Rho-GDIs). As shown in our
previous study, these are also involved in the differentiation of NSCs; however, 
little is known about the underlying regulatory mechanism. Here, we describe how 
the transcription factors hepatic nuclear factor (HNF4-1) and myc-associated zinc
finger protein (MAZ-1) regulate the expression of Rho-GDI<U+03B3> in the stimulation of 
NSC differentiation. Using a transfection of cis-element double-stranded
oligodeoxynucleotides (ODNs) strategy, referred to as "decoy" ODNs, we examined
the effects of HNF4-1 and MAZ-1 on NSC differentiation in the NSC line C17.2. Our
results show that HNF4-1 and MAZ-1 decoy ODNs significantly knock down Rho-GDI<U+03B3>
gene transcription, leading to NSC differentiation towards neurons. We observed
that HNF4-1 and MAZ-1 decoy ODNs are able enter to the cell nucleolus and
specifically bind to their target transcription factors. Furthermore, the
expression of Rho-GDI<U+03B3>-mediated genes was identified, suggesting that the
regulatory mechanism for the differentiation of NSCs is triggered by the
transcription factors MAZ-1 and HNF4-1. These findings indicate that HNF4-1 and
MAZ-1 regulate the expression of Rho-GDI<U+03B3> and contribute to the differentiation
of NSCs. Our findings provide a new perspective within regulatory mechanism
research during differentiation of NSCs, especially the clinical application of
transcription factor decoys in vivo, suggesting potential therapeutic strategies 
for neurodegenerative disease.

PMID: 22944911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Sep 7;91(3):502-12. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.07.023. Epub
2012 Aug 30.

Genome-wide association and population genetic analysis of C-reactive protein in 
African American and Hispanic American women.

Reiner AP(1), Beleza S, Franceschini N, Auer PL, Robinson JG, Kooperberg C,
Peters U, Tang H.

Author information: 
(1)Public Health Sciences Division, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center,
Seattle, WA 98109, USA. apreiner@u.washington.edu

C-reactive protein (CRP) is a systemic inflammation marker that predicts future
cardiovascular risk. CRP levels are higher in African Americans and Hispanic
Americans than in European Americans, but the genetic determinants of CRP in
these admixed United States minority populations are largely unknown. We
performed genome-wide association studies (GWASs) of 8,280 African American (AA) 
and 3,548 Hispanic American (HA) postmenopausal women from the Women's Health
Initiative SNP Health Association Resource. We discovered and validated a
CRP-associated variant of triggering receptors expressed by myeloid cells 2
(TREM2) in chromosomal region 6p21 (p = 10(-10)). The TREM2 variant associated
with higher CRP is common in Africa but rare in other ancestral populations. In
AA women, the CRP region in 1q23 contained a strong admixture association signal 
(p = 10(-17)), which appears to be related to several independent CRP-associated 
alleles; the strongest of these is present only in African ancestral populations 
and is associated with higher CRP. Of the other genomic loci previously
associated with CRP through GWASs of European populations, most loci (LEPR,
IL1RN, IL6R, GCKR, NLRP3, HNF1A, HNF4A, and APOC1) showed consistent patterns of 
association with CRP in AA and HA women. In summary, we have identified a common 
TREM2 variant associated with CRP in United States minority populations. The
genetic architecture underlying the CRP phenotype in AA women is complex and
involves genetic variants shared across populations, as well as variants specific
to populations of African descent.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3511984
PMID: 22939635  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Genes Immun. 2012 Oct;13(7):556-65. doi: 10.1038/gene.2012.37. Epub 2012 Aug 23.

Association between genetic variants in the HNF4A gene and childhood-onset
Crohn's disease.

Marcil V(1), Sinnett D, Seidman E, Boudreau F, Gendron FP, Beaulieu JF, Menard D,
Lambert M, Bitton A, Sanchez R, Amre D, Levy E.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Pediatrics, Research Institute, McGill University,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

Hepatocyte nuclear 4 alpha (HNF4a), involved in glucose and lipid metabolism, has
been linked to intestinal inflammation and abnormal mucosal permeability.
Moreover, in a genome-wide association study, the HNF4A locus has been associated
with ulcerative colitis. The objective of our study was to evaluate the
association between HNF4a genetic variants and Crohn's disease (CD) in two
distinct Canadian pediatric cohorts. The sequencing of the HNF4A gene in 40
French Canadian patients led to the identification of 27 single nucleotide
polymorphism (SNP)s with a minor allele frequency >5%. To assess the impact of
these SNPs on disease susceptibility, we first conducted a case-control discovery
study on 358 subjects with CD and 542 controls. We then carried out a replication
study in a separate cohort of 416 cases and 1208 controls. In the discovery
cohort, the genotyping of the identified SNPs revealed that six were
significantly associated with CD. Among them, rs1884613 was replicated in the
second CD cohort (odds ratio (OR): 1.33; P<0.012) and this association remained
significant when both cohorts were combined and after correction for multiple
testing (OR: 1.39; P<0.004). An 8-marker P2 promoter haplotype containing
rs1884613 was also found associated with CD (P<2.09 × 10(-4) for combined
cohorts). This is the first report showing that the HNF4A locus may be a common
genetic determinant of childhood-onset CD. These findings highlight the
importance of the intestinal epithelium and oxidative protection in the
pathogenesis of CD.

PMID: 22914433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. PLoS Comput Biol. 2012;8(8):e1002638. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1002638. Epub
2012 Aug 9.

High resolution genome wide binding event finding and motif discovery reveals
transcription factor spatial binding constraints.

Guo Y(1), Mahony S, Gifford DK.

Author information: 
(1)Computational and Systems Biology Program, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.

An essential component of genome function is the syntax of genomic regulatory
elements that determine how diverse transcription factors interact to orchestrate
a program of regulatory control. A precise characterization of in vivo spacing
constraints between key transcription factors would reveal key aspects of this
genomic regulatory language. To discover novel transcription factor spatial
binding constraints in vivo, we developed a new integrative computational method,
genome wide event finding and motif discovery (GEM). GEM resolves ChIP data into 
explanatory motifs and binding events at high spatial resolution by linking
binding event discovery and motif discovery with positional priors in the context
of a generative probabilistic model of ChIP data and genome sequence. GEM
analysis of 63 transcription factors in 214 ENCODE human ChIP-Seq experiments
recovers more known factor motifs than other contemporary methods, and discovers 
six new motifs for factors with unknown binding specificity. GEM's adaptive
learning of binding-event read distributions allows it to further improve upon
previous methods for processing ChIP-Seq and ChIP-exo data to yield unsurpassed
spatial resolution and discovery of closely spaced binding events of the same
factor. In a systematic analysis of in vivo sequence-specific transcription
factor binding using GEM, we have found hundreds of spatial binding constraints
between factors. GEM found 37 examples of factor binding constraints in mouse ES 
cells, including strong distance-specific constraints between Klf4 and other key 
regulatory factors. In human ENCODE data, GEM found 390 examples of spatially
constrained pair-wise binding, including such novel pairs as c-Fos:c-Jun/USF1,
CTCF/Egr1, and HNF4A/FOXA1. The discovery of new factor-factor spatial
constraints in ChIP data is significant because it proposes testable models for
regulatory factor interactions that will help elucidate genome function and the
implementation of combinatorial control.

PMCID: PMC3415389
PMID: 22912568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Sep 4;109(36):14568-73. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1211611109. Epub 2012 Aug 16.

Adiponectin regulates expression of hepatic genes critical for glucose and lipid 
metabolism.

Liu Q(1), Yuan B, Lo KA, Patterson HC, Sun Y, Lodish HF.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

The effects of adiponectin on hepatic glucose and lipid metabolism at
transcriptional level are largely unknown. We profiled hepatic gene expression in
adiponectin knockout (KO) and wild-type (WT) mice by RNA sequencing. Compared
with WT mice, adiponectin KO mice fed a chow diet exhibited decreased mRNA
expression of rate-limiting enzymes in several important glucose and lipid
metabolic pathways, including glycolysis, tricarboxylic acid cycle, fatty-acid
activation and synthesis, triglyceride synthesis, and cholesterol synthesis. In
addition, binding of the transcription factor Hnf4a to DNAs encoding several key 
metabolic enzymes was reduced in KO mice, suggesting that adiponectin might
regulate hepatic gene expression via Hnf4a. Phenotypically, adiponectin KO mice
possessed smaller epididymal fat pads and showed reduced body weight compared
with WT mice. When fed a high-fat diet, adiponectin KO mice showed significantly 
reduced lipid accumulation in the liver. These lipogenic defects are consistent
with the down-regulation of lipogenic genes in the KO mice.

PMCID: PMC3437840
PMID: 22904186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Nov;26(11):1917-27. doi: 10.1210/me.2012-1152. Epub 2012 Aug
17.

IL1ß down-regulation of sex hormone-binding globulin production by decreasing
HNF-4a via MEK-1/2 and JNK MAPK pathways.

Simó R(1), Barbosa-Desongles A, Hernandez C, Selva DM.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Metabolism Research Unit, Vall dHebron Institut de Recerca,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona and Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas (Instituto de Salud Carlos III),
08035 Barcelona, Spain.

Patients suffering from low-grade chronic inflammatory diseases, such as
rheumatoid arthritis, osteoarthritis, diabetes, and obesity, have low plasma sex 
hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) levels. These diseases are characterized among
other features by high plasma IL1ß levels. The aim of the present study is to
explore whether IL1ß could regulate hepatic SHBG production to account for low
SHBG levels in these diseases. We provide evidence that daily IL1ß treatment
reduces SHBG production in HepG2 cells by the down-regulation of HNF-4A via the
MAPK kinase (MEK)-1/2 and c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) MAPK signaling pathways
through the activation c-Jun transcription factors. The human SHBG promoter
sequence contains two putative activator protein 1 (AP1) binding sites recognized
by c-Jun transcription factors, but they are not necessary for the IL1ß-induced
down-regulation of SHBG promoter activity in luciferase reporter gene assays.
Daily treatment with IL1ß reduces hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-4a mRNA and
protein levels via the MEK-1/2 and JNK MAPK signaling pathways. Moreover, IL1ß
rapidly decreased HNF-4a mRNA and protein levels while increased phospho-c-Jun
protein levels after the treatment. Finally, daily IL1ß treatment of human SHBG
transgenic mice reduced plasma SHBG and SHBG mRNA levels. Moreover, IL1ß
treatment also reduced HNF-4a mRNA and protein levels while increased hepatic
phospho-c-Jun protein levels. Our results show that IL1ß reduces hepatic SHBG
production by decreasing HNF-4a via MEK-1/2 and JNK MAPK pathways. In addition,
our findings suggest that IL1ß could be involved the low plasma SHBG levels
reported in chronic low-grade inflammatory diseases.

PMID: 22902540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e42001. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042001. Epub 2012 Jul 31.

A comprehensive characterization of genome-wide copy number aberrations in
colorectal cancer reveals novel oncogenes and patterns of alterations.

Xie T(1), D' Ario G, Lamb JR, Martin E, Wang K, Tejpar S, Delorenzi M, Bosman FT,
Roth AD, Yan P, Bougel S, Di Narzo AF, Popovici V, Budinská E, Mao M, Weinrich
SL, Rejto PA, Hodgson JG.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Research, Pfizer Worldwide Research and Development, San Diego,
California, United States of America. tao.xie@pfizer.com

To develop a comprehensive overview of copy number aberrations (CNAs) in
stage-II/III colorectal cancer (CRC), we characterized 302 tumors from the
PETACC-3 clinical trial. Microsatellite-stable (MSS) samples (n = 269) had 66
minimal common CNA regions, with frequent gains on 20 q (72.5%), 7 (41.8%), 8 q
(33.1%) and 13 q (51.0%) and losses on 18 (58.6%), 4 q (26%) and 21 q (21.6%).
MSS tumors have significantly more CNAs than microsatellite-instable (MSI)
tumors: within the MSI tumors a novel deletion of the tumor suppressor WWOX at 16
q23.1 was identified (p<0.01). Focal aberrations identified by the GISTIC method 
confirmed amplifications of oncogenes including EGFR, ERBB2, CCND1, MET, and MYC,
and deletions of tumor suppressors including TP53, APC, and SMAD4, and gene
expression was highly concordant with copy number aberration for these genes.
Novel amplicons included putative oncogenes such as WNK1 and HNF4A, which also
showed high concordance between copy number and expression. Survival analysis
associated a specific patient segment featured by chromosome 20 q gains to an
improved overall survival, which might be due to higher expression of genes such 
as EEF1B2 and PTK6. The CNA clustering also grouped tumors characterized by a
poor prognosis BRAF-mutant-like signature derived from mRNA data from this
cohort. We further revealed non-random correlation between CNAs among unlinked
loci, including positive correlation between 20 q gain and 8 q gain, and 20 q
gain and chromosome 18 loss, consistent with co-selection of these CNAs. These
results reinforce the non-random nature of somatic CNAs in stage-II/III CRC and
highlight loci and genes that may play an important role in driving the
development and outcome of this disease.

PMCID: PMC3409212
PMID: 22860045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e42064. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0042064. Epub 2012 Jul 27.

Medulloblastoma exosome proteomics yield functional roles for extracellular
vesicles.

Epple LM(1), Griffiths SG, Dechkovskaia AM, Dusto NL, White J, Ouellette RJ,
Anchordoquy TJ, Bemis LT, Graner MW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Anschutz Medical Center, University of Colorado
Denver, Aurora, Colorado, United States of America.

Medulloblastomas are the most prevalent malignant pediatric brain tumors.
Survival for these patients has remained largely the same for approximately 20
years, and our therapies for these cancers cause significant health, cognitive,
behavioral and developmental sequelae for those who survive the tumor and their
treatments. We obviously need a better understanding of the biology of these
tumors, particularly with regard to their migratory/invasive behaviors, their
proliferative propensity, and their abilities to deflect immune responses.
Exosomes, virus-sized membrane vesicles released extracellularly from cells after
formation in, and transit thru, the endosomal pathway, may play roles in
medulloblastoma pathogenesis but are as yet unstudied in this disease. Here we
characterized exosomes from a medulloblastoma cell line with biochemical and
proteomic analyses, and included characterization of patient serum exosomes.
Further scrutiny of the proteomic data suggested functional properties of the
exosomes that are relevant to medulloblastoma tumor biology, including their
roles as proliferation stimulants, their activities as attractants for tumor cell
migration, and their immune modulatory impacts on lymphocytes. Aspects of this
held true for exosomes from other medulloblastoma cell lines as well.
Additionally, pathway analyses suggested a possible role for the transcription
factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4A); however, inhibition of the
protein's activity actually increased D283MED cell proliferation/clonogenecity,
suggesting that HNF4A may act as a tumor suppressor in this cell line. Our work
demonstrates that relevant functional properties of exosomes may be derived from 
appropriate proteomic analyses, which translate into mechanisms of tumor
pathophysiology harbored in these extracellular vesicles.

PMCID: PMC3407172
PMID: 22848702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Chem Biol. 2012 Jul 27;19(7):806-18. doi: 10.1016/j.chembiol.2012.05.014.

HNF4a antagonists discovered by a high-throughput screen for modulators of the
human insulin promoter.

Kiselyuk A(1), Lee SH, Farber-Katz S, Zhang M, Athavankar S, Cohen T, Pinkerton
AB, Ye M, Bushway P, Richardson AD, Hostetler HA, Rodriguez-Lee M, Huang L,
Spangler B, Smith L, Higginbotham J, Cashman J, Freeze H, Itkin-Ansari P, Dawson 
MI, Schroeder F, Cang Y, Mercola M, Levine F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla,
CA 92093, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)4a is a central regulator of gene expression in
cell types that play a critical role in metabolic homeostasis, including
hepatocytes, enterocytes, and pancreatic ß cells. Although fatty acids were found
to occupy the HNF4a ligand-binding pocket and were proposed to act as ligands,
there is controversy about both the nature of HNF4a ligands as well as the
physiological role of the binding. Here, we report the discovery of potent
synthetic HNF4a antagonists through a high-throughput screen for effectors of the
human insulin promoter. These molecules bound to HNF4a with high affinity and
modulated the expression of known HNF4a target genes. Notably, they were found to
be selectively cytotoxic to cancer cell lines in vitro and in vivo, although in
vivo potency was limited by suboptimal pharmacokinetic properties. The discovery 
of bioactive modulators for HNF4a raises the possibility that diseases involving 
HNF4a, such as diabetes and cancer, might be amenable to pharmacologic
intervention by modulation of HNF4a activity.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3447631
PMID: 22840769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Urol. 2012 Sep;188(3):1033-41. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2012.05.004. Epub 2012 Jul
21.

Gene expression changes induced by unilateral ureteral obstruction in mice.

Wu B(1), Brooks JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305-5118, USA.

PURPOSE: Loss of renal function is often the impetus for operative intervention
in renal obstruction cases. Obstructive nephropathy is characterized by discrete 
morphological and physiological changes, including tubular dilatation, apoptosis 
and atrophy as well as interstitial cellular infiltration and progressive
interstitial fibrosis. We hypothesized that gene expression alterations correlate
with obstructive nephropathy and could serve as biomarkers for early
intervention.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: C57BL/6 mice were subjected to unilateral ureteral
obstruction or sham surgery at postnatal day 21. Kidneys were harvested 1, 2, 5
and 9 days postoperatively. RNA was extracted from kidneys and comprehensive gene
expression profiling was performed with microarrays. IPA® pathway analysis
software was used to analyze the biological function and gene networks of gene
expression data.
RESULTS: Microarray analysis revealed more than 1,800 transcripts that were
up-regulated or down-regulated during days 1 through 9 after obstruction,
including many previously reported transcripts (FOS, CD44, CLU, SPP1 and EGF).
Pathway analysis showed significant enrichment of transcripts in cell
activation/differentiation, immune/inflammatory responses, cell cycle, metabolic 
process and transport. Network analysis using IPA showed that transcriptional
regulatory pathways involving CEBPB and HNF4A are involved in obstructive
nephropathy.
CONCLUSIONS: This data set provides a foundation for development of biomarkers
for obstructive nephropathy.

Copyright © 2012 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22819101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40796. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040796. Epub 2012 Jul 13.

Organic anion and cation SLC22 "drug" transporter (Oat1, Oat3, and Oct1)
regulation during development and maturation of the kidney proximal tubule.

Gallegos TF(1), Martovetsky G, Kouznetsova V, Bush KT, Nigam SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California at San Diego, La Jolla,
California, United States of America.

Proper physiological function in the pre- and post-natal proximal tubule of the
kidney depends upon the acquisition of selective permeability, apical-basolateral
epithelial polarity and the expression of key transporters, including those
involved in metabolite, toxin and drug handling. Particularly important are the
SLC22 family of transporters, including the organic anion transporters Oat1
(originally identified as NKT) and Oat3 as well as the organic cation transporter
Oct1. In ex vivo cultures of metanephric mesenchyme (MM; the embryonic progenitor
tissue of the nephron) Oat function was evident before completion of nephron
segmentation and corresponded with the maturation of tight junctions as measured 
biochemically by detergent extractability of the tight junction protein, ZO-1.
Examination of available time series microarray data sets in the context of
development and differentiation of the proximal tubule (derived from both in vivo
and in vitro/ex vivo developing nephrons) allowed for correlation of gene
expression data to biochemically and functionally defined states of development. 
This bioinformatic analysis yielded a network of genes with connectivity biased
toward Hnf4a (but including Hnf1a, hyaluronic acid-CD44, and notch pathways).
Intriguingly, the Oat1 and Oat3 genes were found to have strong temporal
co-expression with Hnf4a in the cultured MM supporting the notion of some
connection between the transporters and this transcription factor. Taken together
with the ChIP-qPCR finding that Hnf4a occupies Oat1, Oat3, and Oct1 proximal
promoters in the in vivo differentiating rat kidney, the data suggest a network
of genes with Hnf4a at its center plays a role in regulating the terminal
differentiation and capacity for drug and toxin handling by the nascent proximal 
tubule of the kidney.

PMCID: PMC3396597
PMID: 22808265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Oct;97(10):E2026-30. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-1356.
Epub 2012 Jul 16.

Novel presentations of congenital hyperinsulinism due to mutations in the MODY
genes: HNF1A and HNF4A.

Stanescu DE(1), Hughes N, Kaplan B, Stanley CA, De León DD.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Translational Research Center, The Children's Hospital of
Philadelphia, Department of Pediatrics, University of Pennsylvania School of
Medicine, 3615 Civic Center Boulevard, Abramson Research Center Room 802A,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

CONTEXT: Inactivating mutations in HNF1A and HNF4A cause the maturity-onset
diabetes of youth (MODY)-3 and MODY1 forms of monogenic diabetes, respectively.
Children carrying HNF4A (MODY1) mutations can present in early infancy with
macrosomia and diazoxide-responsive hyperinsulinism.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to describe three novel cases of hyperinsulinism
associated with MODY1 and MODY3 mutations.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Clinical data were obtained from chart review. Gene 
sequencing was performed on genomic DNA.
RESULTS: Case 1 was diagnosed at 20 months with persistent hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia and was found to have a novel MODY3 HNF1A mutation, carried by her
father who had diabetes. Case 2 was diagnosed with diazoxide-responsive
hyperinsulinism at 3 months of age and had complete resolution of hyperinsulinism
by 4 yr. She was found to have a novel MODY3 HNF1A missense mutation, also
carried by her father. Case 3 presented as a newborn with diazoxide-responsive
hyperinsulinism and later developed renal Fanconi syndrome, hypophosphatemic
rickets, and hepatic glycogenosis. Although the latter's features suggested
Fanconi-Bickel syndrome, sequencing of the SLC2A2 gene was normal. The patient
was found to have a known MODY1 mutation in HNF4A. In all cases, the
hyperinsulinism improved with age.
CONCLUSIONS: The first two cases demonstrate that mutations in HNF1A (MODY3) can 
cause hyperinsulinism early in life and diabetes later, similar to the phenotype 
recently reported for HNF4A (MODY1) mutations. Case 3 indicates that the effects 
of HNF4A mutations in infancy may extend beyond pancreatic ß-cells to produce a
disorder similar to glucose transporter 2 deficiency involving both liver
glycogen metabolism and renal tubular transport.

PMCID: PMC3674296
PMID: 22802087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Biol Chem. 2012 Aug 31;287(36):30181-90. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.370312. Epub
2012 Jul 12.

Mucroporin-M1 inhibits hepatitis B virus replication by activating the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway and down-regulating HNF4a in
vitro and in vivo.

Zhao Z(1), Hong W, Zeng Z, Wu Y, Hu K, Tian X, Li W, Cao Z.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Virology, College of Life Sciences, Wuhan University, 
Wuhan, Hubei, 430072, China.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a noncytopathic human hepadnavirus that causes acute, 
chronic hepatitis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). As the clinical utility of 
current therapies is limited, new anti-HBV agents and sources for such agents are
still highly sought after. Here, we report that Mucroporin-M1, a scorpion
venom-derived peptide, reduces the amount of extracellular HBsAg, HBeAg, and HBV 
DNA productions of HepG2.2.15 cells in a dose-dependent manner and inhibits HBV
capsid DNA, HBV intracellular RNA replication intermediates and the HBV Core
protein in the cytoplasm of HepG2.2.15 cells. Using a mouse model of HBV
infection, we found that HBV replication was significantly inhibited by
intravenous injection of the Mucroporin-M1 peptide. This inhibitory activity was 
due to a reduction in HBV promoter activity caused by a decrease in the binding
of HNF4a to the precore/core promoter region. Furthermore, we confirmed that
Mucroporin-M1 could selectively activate mitogen-activated protein kinases
(MAPKs) and lead to the down-regulation of HNF4a expression, which explains the
decreased binding of HNF4a to the HBV promoter. Moreover, when the protein
phosphorylation activity of the MAPK pathway was inhibited, both HNF4a expression
and HBV replication recovered. Finally, we proved that treatment with the
Mucroporin-M1 peptide increased phosphorylation of the MAPK proteins in
HBV-harboring mice. These results implicate Mucroporin-M1 peptide can activate
the MAPK pathway and then reduce the expression of HNF4a, resulting in the
inhibition of HBV replication in vitro and in vivo. Our work also opens new doors
to discovering novel anti-HBV agents or sources.

PMCID: PMC3436272
PMID: 22791717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Invest Dermatol. 2012 Dec;132(12):2709-17. doi: 10.1038/jid.2012.218. Epub 2012
Jul 5.

ABCC6 expression is regulated by CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein activating a
primate-specific sequence located in the first intron of the gene.

Ratajewski M(1), de Boussac H, Sachrajda I, Bacquet C, Kovács T, Váradi A,
Pulaski L, Arányi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Transcriptional Regulation, Institute of Medical Biology, Polish
Academy of Sciences, Lodz, Poland.

Pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), a rare recessive genetic disease causing skin,
eye, and cardiovascular lesions, is characterized by the calcification of elastic
fibers. The disorder is due to loss-of-function mutations of the ABCC6 gene, but 
the pathophysiology of the disease is still not understood. Here we investigated 
the transcriptional regulation of the gene, using DNase I hypersensitivity assay 
followed by luciferase reporter gene assay. We identified three DNase I
hypersensitive sites (HSs) specific to cell lines expressing ABCC6. These HSs are
located in the proximal promoter and in the first intron of the gene. We further 
characterized the role of the HSs by luciferase assay and demonstrated the
transcriptional activity of the intronic HS. We identified the
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein ß (C/EBPß) as a factor binding the second intronic
HS by chromatin immunoprecipitation and corroborated this finding by luciferase
assays. We also showed that C/EBPß interacts with the proximal promoter of the
gene. We propose that C/EBPß forms a complex with other regulatory proteins
including the previously identified regulatory factor hepatocyte nuclear factor
4a (HNF4a). This complex would account for the tissue-specific expression of the 
gene and might serve as a metabolic sensor. Our results point toward a better
understanding of the physiological role of ABCC6.

PMCID: PMC3509247
PMID: 22763786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Hepatology. 2012 Dec;56(6):2288-96. doi: 10.1002/hep.25919.

Liver X receptor ß and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor d regulate
cholesterol transport in murine cholangiocytes.

Xia X(1), Jung D, Webb P, Zhang A, Zhang B, Li L, Ayers SD, Gabbi C, Ueno Y,
Gustafsson JÅ, Alpini G, Moore DD, Lesage GD.

Author information: 
(1)Methodist Hospital Research Institute, Weill Cornell School of Medicine,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. xxia2@tmhs.org

Nuclear receptors (NRs) play crucial roles in the regulation of hepatic
cholesterol synthesis, metabolism, and conversion to bile acids, but their
actions in cholangiocytes have not been examined. In this study, we investigated 
the roles of NRs in cholangiocyte physiology and cholesterol metabolism and flux.
We examined the expression of NRs and other genes involved in cholesterol
homeostasis in freshly isolated and cultured murine cholangiocytes and found that
these cells express a specific subset of NRs, including liver X receptor (LXR) ß 
and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) d. Activation of LXRß
and/or PPARd in cholangiocytes induces ATP-binding cassette cholesterol
transporter A1 (ABCA1) and increases cholesterol export at the basolateral
compartment in polarized cultured cholangiocytes. In addition, PPARd induces
Niemann-Pick C1-like L1 (NPC1L1), which imports cholesterol into cholangiocytes
and is expressed on the apical cholangiocyte membrane via specific interaction
with a peroxisome proliferator-activated response element (PPRE) within the
NPC1L1 promoter.CONCLUSION: We propose that (1) LXRß and PPARd coordinate
NPC1L1/ABCA1-dependent vectorial cholesterol flux from bile through
cholangiocytes and (2) manipulation of these processes may influence bile
composition with important applications in cholestatic liver disease and
gallstone disease, two serious health concerns for humans.

Copyright © 2012 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMCID: PMC3469731
PMID: 22729460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Mol Pharmacol. 2012 Sep;82(3):529-40. doi: 10.1124/mol.112.078386. Epub 2012 Jun 
20.

Human CYP2C8 is post-transcriptionally regulated by microRNAs 103 and 107 in
human liver.

Zhang SY(1), Surapureddi S, Coulter S, Ferguson SS, Goldstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Toxicology and Pharmacology, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

The CYP2C genes are extensively regulated at the transcriptional stage. The
present study shows for the first time that CYP2Cs are also regulated
post-transcriptionally by microRNAs (miRNAs). By using online search engines, we 
found potential miRNA response elements (MREs) in the 3'-untranslated region
(3'-UTR) of the CYP2C mRNAs. Among these were a MRE for the miRNAs miR-103 and
miR-107 in the 3'-UTR of human CYP2C8. CYP2C8 protein levels (measured through
immunoblot analyses) did not correlate with CYP2C8 mRNA levels (measured through 
quantitative polymerase chain reaction analyses) in human liver samples. The
translation efficiency (protein/mRNA ratio) for CYP2C8 was inversely correlated
with the expression of miR-103 and miR-107. When three copies of the putative MRE
from CYP2C8 were inserted downstream from a luciferase expression reporter,
transfection with precursors for miR-103 or miR-107 decreased luciferase activity
in primary hepatocytes, whereas transfection with antisense oligonucleotides
(AsOs) for miR-103/miR-107 increased luciferase activity. As expected, there was 
no effect of the precursors or AsOs when three copies of the putative MRE were
inserted in the reverse orientation. When precursors for miR-103/miR-107 were
transfected into primary human hepatocytes, CYP2C8 protein levels were decreased,
whereas AsOs increased CYP2C8 protein levels. Neither precursors nor AsOs
affected CYP2C8 mRNA levels, which indicated that the effect was
post-transcriptional. Putative MRE motifs were also found in the 3'-UTRs of
CYP2C9 and CYP2C19, which suggested that the same miRNAs could regulate
translation of other members of the CYP2C family, although to a lesser degree
than CYP2C8. These results clearly show that CYP2Cs are regulated
post-transcriptionally by miR-103 and miR-107.

PMCID: PMC3422698
PMID: 22723340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38713. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038713. Epub 2012 Jun 15.

Prenatal arsenic exposure alters gene expression in the adult liver to a
proinflammatory state contributing to accelerated atherosclerosis.

States JC(1), Singh AV, Knudsen TB, Rouchka EC, Ngalame NO, Arteel GE, Piao Y, Ko
MS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Louisville,
Louisville, Kentucky, United States of America. jcstates@louisville.edu

The mechanisms by which environmental toxicants alter developmental processes
predisposing individuals to adult onset chronic disease are not well-understood. 
Transplacental arsenic exposure promotes atherogenesis in apolipoprotein
E-knockout (ApoE(-/-)) mice. Because the liver plays a central role in
atherosclerosis, diabetes and metabolic syndrome, we hypothesized that
accelerated atherosclerosis may be linked to altered hepatic development. This
hypothesis was tested in ApoE(-/-) mice exposed to 49 ppm arsenic in utero from
gestational day (GD) 8 to term. GD18 hepatic arsenic was 1.2 µg/g in dams and 350
ng/g in fetuses. The hepatic transcriptome was evaluated by microarray analysis
to assess mRNA and microRNA abundance in control and exposed pups at postnatal
day (PND) 1 and PND70. Arsenic exposure altered postnatal developmental
trajectory of mRNA and microRNA profiles. We identified an arsenic exposure
related 51-gene signature at PND1 and PND70 with several hubs of interaction
(Hspa8, IgM and Hnf4a). Gene ontology (GO) annotation analyses indicated that
pathways for gluconeogenesis and glycolysis were suppressed in exposed pups at
PND1, and pathways for protein export, ribosome, antigen processing and
presentation, and complement and coagulation cascades were induced by PND70.
Promoter analysis of differentially-expressed transcripts identified enriched
transcription factor binding sites and clustering to common regulatory sites.
SREBP1 binding sites were identified in about 16% of PND70
differentially-expressed genes. Western blot analysis confirmed changes in the
liver at PND70 that included increases of heat shock protein 70 (Hspa8) and
active SREBP1. Plasma AST and ALT levels were increased at PND70. These results
suggest that transplacental arsenic exposure alters developmental programming in 
fetal liver, leading to an enduring stress and proinflammatory response
postnatally that may contribute to early onset of atherosclerosis. Genes
containing SREBP1 binding sites also suggest pathways for diabetes mellitus and
rheumatoid arthritis, both diseases that contribute to increased cardiovascular
disease in humans.

PMCID: PMC3376138
PMID: 22719926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38104. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038104. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Modulation of mouse coagulation gene transcription following acute in vivo
delivery of synthetic small interfering RNAs targeting HNF4a and C/EBPa.

Safdar H(1), Cheung KL, Vos HL, Gonzalez FJ, Reitsma PH, Inoue Y, van Vlijmen BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Einthoven Laboratory for Experimental Vascular Medicine, Department of
Thrombosis and Hemostasis, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands. h.safdar@lumc.nl

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) and CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a
(C/EBPa) are important for the transcriptional control of coagulation factors. To
determine in vivo the direct role of HNF4a and C/EBPa in control of genes
encoding coagulation factors, a synthetic small interfering (si)RNA approach was 
used that enabled strong reduction of mouse hepatic HNF4a and C/EBPa under
conditions that minimized target-related secondary effects. For both HNF4a and
C/EBPa, intravenous injection of specific synthetic siRNAs (siHNF4a and siC/EBPa)
resulted in more than 75% reduction in their liver transcript and protein levels 
2 days post-injection. For siHNF4a, this coincided with marked and significantly 
reduced transcript levels of the coagulation genes Hrg, Proz, Serpina5, F11, F12,
F13b, Serpinf2, F5, and F9 (in order of magnitude of effect) as compared to
levels in control siRNA injected animals. Significant decreases in HNF4a target
gene mRNA levels were also observed at 5 days post-siRNA injection, despite a
limited level of HNF4a knockdown at this time point. Compared to HNF4a, C/EBPa
knockdown had a modest impact on genes encoding coagulation factors. A strong
reduction in C/EBPa transcript and protein levels resulted in significantly
affected transcript levels of the control genes Pck1 and Fasn and a modest
downregulation for coagulation genes Fba, Fbg and F5. F5 and F11 were the sole
coagulation genes that were significantly affected upon prolonged (5 day) C/EBPa 
knockdown. We conclude that in the mouse, HNF4a has a direct and essential
regulatory role for multiple hepatic coagulation genes, while a role for C/EBPa
is more restricted. In addition, this study demonstrates that synthetic siRNA
provides a simple and fast means for determining liver transcription factor
involvement in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3365905
PMID: 22675511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e38050. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038050. Epub 2012 May 25.

Exome sequencing and genetic testing for MODY.

Johansson S(1), Irgens H, Chudasama KK, Molnes J, Aerts J, Roque FS, Jonassen I, 
Levy S, Lima K, Knappskog PM, Bell GI, Molven A, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

CONTEXT: Genetic testing for monogenic diabetes is important for patient care.
Given the extensive genetic and clinical heterogeneity of diabetes, exome
sequencing might provide additional diagnostic potential when standard Sanger
sequencing-based diagnostics is inconclusive.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of the study was to examine the performance of exome
sequencing for a molecular diagnosis of MODY in patients who have undergone
conventional diagnostic sequencing of candidate genes with negative results.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We performed exome enrichment followed by
high-throughput sequencing in nine patients with suspected MODY. They were Sanger
sequencing-negative for mutations in the HNF1A, HNF4A, GCK, HNF1B and INS genes. 
We excluded common, non-coding and synonymous gene variants, and performed
in-depth analysis on filtered sequence variants in a pre-defined set of 111 genes
implicated in glucose metabolism.
RESULTS: On average, we obtained 45 X median coverage of the entire targeted
exome and found 199 rare coding variants per individual. We identified 0-4 rare
non-synonymous and nonsense variants per individual in our a priori list of 111
candidate genes. Three of the variants were considered pathogenic (in ABCC8,
HNF4A and PPARG, respectively), thus exome sequencing led to a genetic diagnosis 
in at least three of the nine patients. Approximately 91% of known heterozygous
SNPs in the target exomes were detected, but we also found low coverage in some
key diabetes genes using our current exome sequencing approach. Novel variants in
the genes ARAP1, GLIS3, MADD, NOTCH2 and WFS1 need further investigation to
reveal their possible role in diabetes.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate that exome sequencing can improve molecular
diagnostics of MODY when used as a complement to Sanger sequencing. However,
improvements will be needed, especially concerning coverage, before the full
potential of exome sequencing can be realized.

PMCID: PMC3360646
PMID: 22662265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. J Nutr Biochem. 2013 Jan;24(1):6-13. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2011.12.008. Epub
2012 May 30.

Maternal high-fat intake during pregnancy programs metabolic-syndrome-related
phenotypes through liver mitochondrial DNA copy number and transcriptional
activity of liver PPARGC1A.

Burgueño AL(1), Cabrerizo R, Gonzales Mansilla N, Sookoian S, Pirola CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Biology of Complex Diseases, Institute of
Medical Research A. Lanari-IDIM, University of Buenos Aires-National-Council of
Scientific and Technological Research (CONICET), Ciudad Autónoma de Buenos
Aires-1427, Argentina.

In this study, we contrasted the hypothesis that maternal diet during pregnancy
has an impact on fetal metabolic programming through changes in liver
mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) content and transcriptional activity of Ppargc1a and
that these effects are sex specific.METHODS: Rats were fed either high-fat (HFD) 
or standard chow diet (SCD) during gestation and lactation. The resulting adult
male and female offspring were fed either HFD or SCD for an 18-week period,
generating eight experimental groups.
RESULTS: Maternal HFD feeding during pregnancy is associated with a decreased
liver mtDNA copy number (P<.008). This effect was independent of the offspring
sex or diet, and was significantly associated with fatty liver when dams were fed
HFD (P<.05, adjusted by homeostasis model assessment of insulin resistance,
HOMA-IR). We also found that maternal HFD feeding results in a male-specific
significant reduction of the liver abundance of Ppargc1a mRNA (P<.004), which
significantly impacted peripheral insulin resistance. Liver expression of
Ppargc1a was inversely correlated with HOMA-IR (R=-0.53, P<.0003). Only male
offspring exposed to a chronic metabolic insult in adult life were insulin
resistant and hyperleptinemic, and showed abnormal liver and abdominal fat
accumulation. Liver abundance of Tfam, Nrf1, Hnf4a, Pepck and Ppparg mRNA was not
associated with maternal programming. In conclusion, maternal high-fat diet
feeding during pregnancy programs liver mtDNA content and the transcriptional
activity of Ppargc1a, which strongly modulates, in a sex-specific manner, glucose
homeostasis and organ fat accumulation in adult life after exposure to a
nutritional insult.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22658649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Diabetes Metab Syndr Obes. 2012;5:101-8. doi: 10.2147/DMSO.S23353. Epub 2012 May 
1.

Clinical features and treatment of maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY).

Gardner DS(1), Tai ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Singapore General Hospital, Singapore.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a heterogeneous group of disorders
that result in ß-cell dysfunction. It is rare, accounting for just 1%-2% of all
diabetes. It is often misdiagnosed as type 1 or type 2 diabetes, as it is often
difficult to distinguish MODY from these two forms. However, diagnosis allows
appropriate individualized care, depending on the genetic etiology, and allows
prognostication in family members. In this review, we discuss features of the
common causes of MODY, as well as the treatment and diagnosis of MODY.

PMCID: PMC3363133
PMID: 22654519  [PubMed]


322. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Jun 22;423(1):128-33. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.05.094. Epub 2012 May 24.

Identification and functional characterization of human glycerol-3-phosphate
acyltransferase 1 gene promoters.

Harada N(1), Fujimoto E, Okuyama M, Sakaue H, Nakaya Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute of Health Biosciences,
University of Tokushima Graduate School, 3-18-15, Kuramoto-cho, Tokushima
770-8503, Japan. harada@nutr.med.tokushima-u.ac.jp

Glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase 1 (GPAT1) acts as a rate limiting enzyme in 
triacylglycerol and phospholipid synthesis in mammals. GPAT1 regulates hepatic
lipid accumulation associated with metabolic disorders. Here we have identified
two transcriptional initiation sites and two promoters (promoter I and II)
required for expression of the human GPAT1 (hGPAT1) gene. Promoter I regulates
transcription of three alternative hGPAT1 mRNA variants, hGPAT1-V1, V2, and V3,
while promoter II induces expression of a fourth variant, hGPAT1-V4. RT-PCR
analysis and luciferase reporter assays revealed that promoter II acts in
lipogenic tissues like the liver (and liver-derived HepG2 cells), whereas
promoter I is differentially regulated and also acts in non-liver HeLa cells.
Among liver-enriched transcription factors, HNF4a and C/EBPa slightly activated
hGPAT1 promoter I, while factors including HNF1a altered promoter II activity.
The lipogenic transcription factor SREBP1c greatly increased promoter II activity
in HepG2 cells. The use of various truncated or mutated fragments of promoter II 
revealed that one sterol regulatory element-like motif and one inverted CCAAT box
on promoter II contributed to the SREBP1c response. These cis-acting elements and
trans-acting factors can be potential targets for manipulation of hepatic GPAT1
levels in humans.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22634312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Jul;33(7):1421-9. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs182. Epub 2012 May 
23.

A transcriptomics-based in vitro assay for predicting chemical genotoxicity in
vivo.

Magkoufopoulou C(1), Claessen SM, Tsamou M, Jennen DG, Kleinjans JC, van Delft
JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicogenomics, Faculty of Health, Medicine and Life Sciences,
Maastricht University, Universiteitssingel 50, 6229 ER Maastricht, the
Netherlands.

The lack of accurate in vitro assays for predicting in vivo toxicity of chemicals
together with new legislations demanding replacement and reduction of animal
testing has triggered the development of alternative methods. This study aimed at
developing a transcriptomics-based in vitro prediction assay for in vivo
genotoxicity. Transcriptomics changes induced in the human liver cell line HepG2 
by 34 compounds after treatment for 12, 24, and 48 h were used for the selection 
of gene-sets that are capable of discriminating between in vivo genotoxins (GTX) 
and in vivo nongenotoxins (NGTX). By combining transcriptomics with publicly
available results for these chemicals from standard in vitro genotoxicity
studies, we developed several prediction models. These models were validated by
using an additional set of 28 chemicals. The best prediction was achieved after
stratification of chemicals according to results from the Ames bacterial gene
mutation assay prior to transcriptomics evaluation after 24h of treatment. A
total of 33 genes were selected for discriminating GTX from NGTX for
Ames-positive chemicals and 22 for Ames-negative chemicals. Overall, this method 
resulted in 89% accuracy and 91% specificity, thereby clearly outperforming the
standard in vitro test battery. Transcription factor network analysis revealed
HNF3a, HNF4a, HNF6, androgen receptor, and SP1 as main factors regulating the
expression of classifiers for Ames-positive chemicals. Thus, the classical
bacterial gene mutation assay in combination with in vitro transcriptomics in
HepG2 is proposed as an upgraded in vitro approach for predicting in vivo
genotoxicity of chemicals holding a great promise for reducing animal
experimentations on genotoxicity.

PMID: 22623647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Toxicol Lett. 2012 Jul 20;212(2):106-12. doi: 10.1016/j.toxlet.2012.05.007. Epub 
2012 May 16.

Perfluorooctanoic acid affects the activity of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4
alpha (HNF4a).

Scharmach E(1), Buhrke T, Lichtenstein D, Lampen A.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Food Safety, Federal Institute for Risk Assessment, Max-Dohrn-Str.
8-10, 10589 Berlin, Germany.

Perfluorooctanoic acid (PFOA) is an industrial chemical that is a global
contaminant of water, soil and foodstuff. Numerous animal studies have revealed
that PFOA has embryotoxic and hepatotoxic effects in rodents. On the molecular
level, the adverse effects of PFOA have been correlated with the PFOA-mediated
activation of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARa), however, 
the toxicological relevance of this mode of action for humans is under debate. In
this study, a proteomic approach was chosen to screen for molecular targets
affected by PFOA in human liver cells. Treatment of the human liver cell line
HepG2 with 25 µM PFOA resulted in 51 deregulated proteins in a two-dimensional
gel experiment, and 36 of these proteins were identified by mass spectrometry.
Network analysis revealed that these proteins are primarily involved in lipid
metabolism and cancer. The hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a), but not PPARa,
was the key regulator of the network. Indeed, subsequent western blot analysis
revealed that the amount of HNF4a as well as of its target HNF1a was
downregulated in PFOA-treated HepG2 cells. Moreover, PFOA was shown to inhibit
HNF4a-dependent gene transcription. Thus, this study provides first experimental 
evidence that HNF4a is negatively affected by PFOA.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22609092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e35810. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0035810. Epub 2012 May 14.

Glucose-dependent regulation of NR2F2 promoter and influence of SNP-rs3743462 on 
whole body insulin sensitivity.

Boutant M(1), Ramos OH, Lecoeur C, Vaillant E, Philippe J, Zhang P, Perilhou A,
Valcarcel B, Sebert S, Jarvelin MR, Balkau B, Scott D, Froguel P, Vaxillaire M,
Vasseur-Cognet M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Cancer, Cochin Institute, CNRS
(UMR 8104), Paris, France.

BACKGROUND: The Nuclear Receptor 2F2 (NR2F2/COUP-TFII) heterozygous knockout mice
display low basal insulinemia and enhanced insulin sensitivity. We previously
established that insulin represses NR2F2 gene expression in pancreatic ß-cells.
The cis-regulatory region of the NR2F2 promoter is unknown and its influence on
metabolism in humans is poorly understood. The present study aimed to identify
the regulatory regions that control NR2F2 gene transcription and to evaluate the 
effect of NR2F2 promoter variation on glucose homeostasis in humans.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Regulation of the NR2F2 promoter was assessed
using gene reporter assays, ChIP and gel shift experiments. The effects of
variation at SNP rs3743462 in NR2F2 on quantitative metabolic traits were studied
in two European prospective cohorts. We identified a minimal promoter region that
down-regulates NR2F2 expression by attenuating HNF4a activation in response to
high glucose concentrations. Subjects of the French DESIR population, who carried
the rs3743462 T-to-C polymorphism, located in the distal glucose-responsive
promoter, displayed lower basal insulin levels and lower HOMA-IR index. The
C-allele at rs3743462 was associated with increased NR2F2 binding and decreased
NR2F2 gene expression.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The rs3743462 polymorphism affects glucose-responsive
NR2F2 promoter regulation and thereby may influence whole-body insulin
sensitivity, suggesting a role of NR2F2 in the control of glucose homeostasis in 
humans.

PMCID: PMC3351448
PMID: 22606236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Biol Chem. 2012 Jun 29;287(27):23236-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.368779. Epub
2012 May 15.

Anks4b, a novel target of HNF4a protein, interacts with GRP78 protein and
regulates endoplasmic reticulum stress-induced apoptosis in pancreatic ß-cells.

Sato Y(1), Hatta M, Karim MF, Sawa T, Wei FY, Sato S, Magnuson MA, Gonzalez FJ,
Tomizawa K, Akaike T, Yoshizawa T, Yamagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry, Faculty of Life Sciences, Kumamoto
University, Kumamoto 860-8556, Japan.

Mutations of the HNF4A gene cause a form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young 
(MODY1) that is characterized by impairment of pancreatic ß-cell function. HNF4a 
is a transcription factor belonging to the nuclear receptor superfamily (NR2A1), 
but its target genes in pancreatic ß-cells are largely unknown. Here, we report
that ankyrin repeat and sterile a motif domain containing 4b (Anks4b) is a target
of HNF4a in pancreatic ß-cells. Expression of Anks4b was decreased in both ßHNF4a
KO islets and HNF4a knockdown MIN6 ß-cells, and HNF4a activated Anks4b promoter
activity. Anks4b bound to glucose-regulated protein 78 (GRP78), a major
endoplasmic reticulum (ER) chaperone protein, and overexpression of Anks4b
enhanced the ER stress response and ER stress-associated apoptosis of MIN6 cells.
Conversely, suppression of Anks4b reduced ß-cell susceptibility to ER
stress-induced apoptosis. These results indicate that Anks4b is a HNF4a target
gene that regulates ER stress in ß-cells by interacting with GRP78, thus
suggesting that HNF4a is involved in maintenance of the ER.

PMCID: PMC3391104
PMID: 22589549  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Oncogene. 2013 Mar 21;32(12):1594-600. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.151. Epub 2012 May
7.

The Trop-2 signalling network in cancer growth.

Guerra E(1), Trerotola M, Aloisi AL, Tripaldi R, Vacca G, La Sorda R, Lattanzio
R, Piantelli M, Alberti S.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Cancer Pathology, Department of Oncology and Experimental Medicine and
CeSI, Foundation University 'G. d'Annunzio', Chieti, Italy.

Our findings show that upregulation of a wild-type Trop-2 has a key controlling
role in human cancer growth, and that tumour development is quantitatively driven
by Trop-2 expression levels. However, little is known about the regulation of
expression of the TROP2 gene. Hence, we investigated the TROP2 transcription
control network. TROP2 expression was shown to depend on a highly interconnected 
web of transcription factors: TP63/TP53L, ERG, GRHL1/Get-1 (grainyhead-like
epithelial transactivator), HNF1A/TCF-1 (T-cell factor), SPI1/PU.1, WT (Wilms'
tumour)1, GLIS2, AIRE (autoimmune regulator), FOXM1 (forkhead box M1) and FOXP3, 
with HNF4A as the major network hub. TROP2 upregulation was shown to subsequently
drive the expression and activation of CREB1 (cyclic AMP-responsive-element
binding protein), Jun, NF-<U+03BA>B, Rb, STAT1 and STAT3 through induction of the cyclin
D1 and ERK (extracellular signal regulated kinase)/MEK (MAPK/ERK kinase)
pathways. Growth-stimulatory signalling through NF-<U+03BA>B, cyclin D1 and ERK was
shown to require an intact Trop-2 cytoplasmic tail. Network hubs and interacting 
partners are co-expressed with Trop-2 in primary human tumours, supporting a role
of this signalling network in cancer growth.

PMID: 22562244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2012 Sep;97(3):483-91. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2012.03.012. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

Association of the PPARG Pro12Ala polymorphism with type 2 diabetes and incident 
coronary heart disease in a Hong Kong Chinese population.

Ho JS(1), Germer S, Tam CH, So WY, Martin M, Ma RC, Chan JC, Ng MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, 
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, Hong Kong.

AIMS: We examined the risk association between single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in eleven candidate genes with type 2 diabetes (T2D). T2D-associated
polymorphisms were also examined for prediction of incident CHD.
METHODS: 113 tagging SNPs were genotyped in stage 1 (467 T2D cases, 290
controls), and 15 SNPs were analyzed in the final cohort (1462 T2D cases, 600
controls). Three T2D-associated SNPs were further tested for prediction of CHD
within a subset of 1417 T2D cases free of CHD at enrolment.
RESULTS: In the case-control analysis, PPARG rs1801282 (Pro12Ala) (OR=1.48
(1.02-2.16)), ADIPOQ rs1063539 (OR=1.17 (1.01-1.35)), and HNF4A rs1884614
(OR=1.16 (1.00-1.32) were associated with T2D (P(allelic)<0.05). Joint analysis
of rs1801282-C, rs1063539-G, and rs1884614-T risk alleles showed an additive
dosage effect (P for trend=0.001). Moreover, carriers with two PPARG rs1801282-C 
risk alleles were associated with an increased risk of incident CHD (HR=4.38
(1.03-18.57), P=0.045) in T2D patients in the prospective analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: Genetic variants of PPARG, ADIPOQ and HNF4A were individually and
jointly associated with T2D in Hong Kong Chinese. The PPARG Pro12 risk allele
contributed to increased risk for both T2D and CHD.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22515931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. J Cell Sci. 2012 Aug 1;125(Pt 15):3630-5. Epub 2012 Apr 14.

SUMOylation of HNF4a regulates protein stability and hepatocyte function.

Zhou W(1), Hannoun Z, Jaffray E, Medine CN, Black JR, Greenhough S, Zhu L, Ross
JA, Forbes S, Wilmut I, Iredale JP, Hay RT, Hay DC.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Regenerative Medicine, University of
Edinburgh, Edinburgh Bio Quarter, 5 Little France Drive, Edinburgh EH16 4UU, UK.

The coordination of signalling pathways within the cell is vital for normal human
development and post-natal tissue homeostasis. Gene expression and function is
therefore tightly controlled at a number of levels. We investigated the role that
post-translational modifications play during human hepatocyte differentiation. In
particular, we examined the role of the small ubiquitin-like modifier (SUMO)
proteins in this process. We used a human embryonic stem cell (hESC)-based model 
of hepatocyte differentiation to follow changes in protein SUMOylation. Moreover,
to confirm the results derived from our cell-based system, we performed in vitro 
conjugation assays to characterise SUMO modification of a key liver-enriched
transcription factor, HNF4a. Our analyses indicate that SUMOylation plays an
important role during hepatocellular differentiation and this is mediated, in
part, through regulation of the stability of HNF4a in a ubiquitin-dependent
manner. Our study provides a better understanding of SUMOylation during human
hepatocyte differentiation and maturation. Moreover, we believe the results will 
stimulate interest in the differentiation and phenotypic regulation of other
somatic cell types.

PMCID: PMC3445325
PMID: 22505616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Zhongguo Ying Yong Sheng Li Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Jan;28(1):84-8.

[Zinc supplementation effects on alcoholic liver disease and the molecular
mechanism].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiao M(1), Liu CB, Sun W, Dong MW, Hu GX, Li JW.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Animal Center, Wenzhou Medical College, Wenzhou 325035, China.

OBJECTIVE: To examine dietary zinc supplementation could alleviate the damage of 
alcoholic liver disease and the relationship with the expression of hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha).
METHODS: 40 adult C57 BL/6 mice were randomly divided into four groups (n = 10): 
control, zinc, ethanol and zinc plus ethanol, which were sacrificed after fed
four different diets for 6 months. Zinc sulfate was added in the drinking water
of the Zinc and Zinc Plus Ethanol group and the content was 75 mg/L. Liver
regeneration was assessed by immunohistochemical staining of proliferating cell
nuclear antigen (PCNA), and the expression of HNF-4alpha was determined by RT-PCR
and Western blot. And as to assess the status of oxidative stress of the mice,
malondialdehyde (MDA) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) were detected.
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, the expression level of HNF-4alpha
decreased significantly in the ethanol group (P < 0.05), and the content of MDA
increased significantly in this group, while the content of SOD declined
significantly (P < 0.05). Compared with the ethanol group, the number of
PCNA-positive hepatocytes increased significantly, and the expression level of
HNF-4alpha also increased in the zinc plus ethanol group (P < 0.05), and the
content of SOD increased in this group, while MDA decreased significantly (P <
0.05).
CONCLUSION: Long term ethanol exposure can lead to oxidoreduction imbalances
which can be reversed by zinc supplementation. We suppose that zinc-enhanced
liver regeneration is associated with an increase in HNF-4alpha, suggesting that 
dietary zinc supplementation may have beneficial effects in alcoholic liver
disease.

PMID: 22493904  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2012 Apr;44(4):279-80. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gms021.

Establishing a cancer cell in the inflammatory tissue: an epigenetic circuit.

Mu W(1), Hui L.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Cell Biology, Shanghai Institute of Biochemistry and
Cell Biology, Shanghai Institute for Biological Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Sciences, Shanghai, China.

PMID: 22467139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Exp Oncol. 2012;34(1):57-63.

Gene expression profiling of B-CLL in Ukrainian patients in post-Chernobyl
period.

Savli H(1), Sunnetci D, Cine N, Gluzman DF, Zavelevich MP, Sklyarenko LM,
Nadgornaya VA, Koval SV.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Department, Medicine Faculty of Kocaeli University, Turkey.
hakansavli@yahoo.com

BACKGROUND: Genetic mechanisms that result in the development and progression of 
B-cell chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) are mainly unknown. We have analyzed 
gene expression patterns in Ukrainian B-CLL patients with the aim of identifying 
B-CLL involved / associated genes in order to shed light on the biology of this
pathological entity.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: The samples of the peripheral blood and bone marrow of 44
Ukrainian B-CLL patients with no characteristics indicative of unfavorable course
of the disease such as CD38 were analyzed morphologically and
immunocytochemically according to the new WHO classification. Total RNA was
isolated, and gene expression levels were determined by microarray method
comparing with the sample from 17 healthy donors.
RESULTS: We investigated interactions using the Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) 
software and found 1191 network eligible up-regulated genes and 3398
Functions/Pathways eligible up-regulated genes, 1225 network eligible
down-regulated genes and 2657 Functions/Pathways eligible down-regulated genes.
CONCLUSION: In B-CLL patients, gene networks around MYC, HNF1A and HNF4A, YWHAG, 
NF-<U+03BA>B1 and SP1 are identified as up-regulated; CEBPA, YWHAG, SATB1 and RB1 -- as 
down-regulated. G protein coupled receptor signaling, arachidonic acid and
linoleic acid metabolisms, calcium signaling, metabolism of xenobiotics by
cytochrome P450 are found out as significant up-regulated pathways. EIF2 and
Cdc42 signaling, regulation of eIF4 and p70S6k signaling, protein ubiquitination 
pathway and oxidative phosphorylation are the most significant down-regulated
pathways obtained in our study. The involvement of NF-<U+03BA>B gene network and
upregulated levels of G protein coupled receptor signaling pathway, which has an 
important role in transcription of NF-<U+03BA>B, are important and need further
examination.

PMID: 22453151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2012 Jun 1;302(11):E1431-9. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00619.2011. Epub 2012 Mar 20.

Developmental programming of neonatal pancreatic ß-cells by a maternal
low-protein diet in rats involves a switch from proliferation to differentiation.

Rodríguez-Trejo A(1), Ortiz-López MG, Zambrano E, Granados-Silvestre Mde L,
Méndez C, Blondeau B, Bréant B, Nathanielsz PW, Menjivar M.

Author information: 
(1)Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México. Av. Universidad 3000, Facultad de
Química, Mexico City, Mexico.

Maternal low-protein diets (LP) impair pancreatic ß-cell development, resulting
in later-life failure and susceptibility to type 2 diabetes (T2D). We
hypothesized that intrauterine and/or postnatal developmental programming seen in
this situation involve altered ß-cell structure and relative time course of
expression of genes critical to ß-cell differentiation and growth. Pregnant
Wistar rats were fed either control (C) 20% or restricted (R) 6% protein diets
during pregnancy (1st letter) and/or lactation (2nd letter) in four groups: CC,
RR, RC, and CR. At postnatal days 7 and 21, we measured male offspring ß-cell
fraction, mass, proliferation, aggregate number, and size as well as mRNA level
for 13 key genes regulating ß-cell development and function in isolated islets.
Compared with CC, pre- and postnatal LP (RR) decreased ß-cell fraction, mass,
proliferation, aggregate size, and number and increased Hnf1a, Hnf4a, Pdx1, Isl1,
Rfx6, and Slc2a2 mRNA levels. LP only in pregnancy (RC) also decreased ß-cell
fraction, mass, proliferation, aggregate size, and number and increased Hnf1a,
Hnf4a, Pdx1, Rfx6, and Ins mRNA levels. Postnatal LP offspring (CR) showed
decreased ß-cell mass but increased ß-cell fraction, aggregate number, and Hnf1a,
Hnf4a, Rfx6, and Slc2a2 mRNA levels. We conclude that LP in pregnancy sets the
trajectory of postnatal ß-cell growth and differentiation, whereas LP in
lactation has smaller effects. We propose that LP promotes differentiation
through upregulation of transcription factors that stimulate differentiation at
the expense of proliferation. This results in a decreased ß-cell reserve, which
can contribute to later-life predisposition to T2D.

PMCID: PMC3378070
PMID: 22436693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Diabetes Care. 2012 Jun;35(6):1206-12. doi: 10.2337/dc11-1243. Epub 2012 Mar 19.

Systematic assessment of etiology in adults with a clinical diagnosis of
young-onset type 2 diabetes is a successful strategy for identifying
maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Thanabalasingham G(1), Pal A, Selwood MP, Dudley C, Fisher K, Bingley PJ, Ellard 
S, Farmer AJ, McCarthy MI, Owen KR.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology andMetabolism, University of Oxford,
U.K

Comment in
    Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2012 Jun;8(6):319.

OBJECTIVE: Misdiagnosis of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) remains
widespread, despite the benefits of optimized management. This cross-sectional
study examined diagnostic misclassification of MODY in subjects with clinically
labeled young adult-onset type 1 and type 2 diabetes by extending genetic testing
beyond current guidelines.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Individuals were selected for diagnostic sequencing 
if they displayed features atypical for their diagnostic label. From 247 case
subjects with clinically labeled type 1 diabetes, we sequenced hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 a (HNF1A) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 a (HNF4A) in 20 with residual 
ß-cell function = 3 years from diagnosis (random or glucagon-stimulated C-peptide
= 0.2 nmol/L). From 322 with clinically labeled type 2 diabetes, we sequenced
HNF1A and HNF4A in 80 with diabetes diagnosed = 30 years and/or diabetes
diagnosed = 45 years without metabolic syndrome. We also sequenced the
glucokinase (GCK) in 40 subjects with mild fasting hyperglycemia.
RESULTS: In the type 1 diabetic group, two HNF1A mutations were found (0.8%
prevalence). In type 2 diabetic subjects, 10 HNF1A, two HNF4A, and one GCK
mutation were identified (4.0%). Only 47% of MODY case subjects identified met
current guidelines for diagnostic sequencing. Follow-up revealed a further 12
mutation carriers among relatives. Twenty-seven percent of newly identified MODY 
subjects changed treatment, all with improved glycemic control (HbA(1c) 8.8 vs.
7.3% at 3 months; P = 0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: The systematic use of widened diagnostic testing criteria doubled
the numbers of MODY case subjects identified compared with current clinical
practice. The yield was greatest in young adult-onset type 2 diabetes. We
recommend that all patients diagnosed before age 30 and with presence of
C-peptide at 3 years' duration are considered for molecular diagnostic analysis.

PMCID: PMC3357216
PMID: 22432108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Clin Invest. 2012 Apr;122(4):1262-70. doi: 10.1172/JCI61919. Epub 2012 Mar 19.

Regulation of hepatic LDL receptors by mTORC1 and PCSK9 in mice.

Ai D(1), Chen C, Han S, Ganda A, Murphy AJ, Haeusler R, Thorp E, Accili D, Horton
JD, Tall AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Columbia University, New York, New York 10032, USA.
da2424@columbia.edu

Individuals with type 2 diabetes have an increased risk of atherosclerosis. One
factor underlying this is dyslipidemia, which in hyperinsulinemic subjects with
early type 2 diabetes is typically characterized by increased VLDL secretion but 
normal LDL cholesterol levels, possibly reflecting enhanced catabolism of LDL via
hepatic LDLRs. Recent studies have also suggested that hepatic insulin signaling 
sustains LDLR levels. We therefore sought to elucidate the mechanisms linking
hepatic insulin signaling to regulation of LDLR levels. In WT mice, insulin
receptor knockdown by shRNA resulted in decreased hepatic mTORC1 signaling and
LDLR protein levels. It also led to increased expression of PCSK9, a known
post-transcriptional regulator of LDLR expression. Administration of the mTORC1
inhibitor rapamycin caused increased expression of PCSK9, decreased levels of
hepatic LDLR protein, and increased levels of VLDL/LDL cholesterol in WT but not 
Pcsk9-/- mice. Conversely, mice with increased hepatic mTORC1 activity exhibited 
decreased expression of PCSK9 and increased levels of hepatic LDLR protein
levels. Pcsk9 is regulated by the transcription factor HNF1a, and our further
detailed analyses suggest that increased mTORC1 activity leads to activation of
PKCd, reduced activity of HNF4a and HNF1a, decreased PCSK9 expression, and
ultimately increased hepatic LDLR protein levels, which result in decreased
circulating LDL levels. We therefore suggest that PCSK9 inhibition could be an
effective way to reduce the adverse side effect of increased LDL levels that is
observed in transplant patients taking rapamycin as immunosuppressive therapy.

PMCID: PMC3314476
PMID: 22426206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. J Endod. 2012 Apr;38(4):475-80. doi: 10.1016/j.joen.2011.12.011. Epub 2012 Jan
28.

High-purity hepatic lineage differentiated from dental pulp stem cells in
serum-free medium.

Ishkitiev N(1), Yaegaki K, Imai T, Tanaka T, Nakahara T, Ishikawa H, Mitev V,
Haapasalo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Health, Nippon Dental University, Tokyo, Japan.

INTRODUCTION: We have previously differentiated hepatocyte like cells from
deciduous tooth pulp stem and extracted third molar pulp stem cells with a
protocol that used fetal bovine serum, but it showed high contaminations of
nondifferentiated cells. Both the lower purity of hepatically differentiated
cells and usage of serum are obstacles for application of cell therapy or
regenerative medicine. Objective of this study was to investigate the capacity
for and purity of hepatocyte-like differentiation of CD117-positive dental pulp
stem cells without serum.
METHODS: Mesenchymal cells from human deciduous and extracted third molar pulp
were isolated and expanded in vitro. We separated CD117-positive cells by using a
magnetic-activated cell sorter. The cells were characterized immunofluorescently 
by using known stem cell markers. For hepatic differentiation, the media were
supplemented with hepatic growth factor, insulin-transferrin-selenium-x,
dexamethasone, and oncostatin M. Expression of hepatic markers alpha fetoprotein,
albumin, hepatic nuclear factor-4 alpha, insulin-like growth factor-1, and
carbamoyl phosphate synthetase was examined immunofluorescently after
differentiation. The amount of differentiated cells was assessed by using flow
cytometry. Glycogen storage and urea concentration in the medium were defined.
RESULTS: Both cell cultures demonstrated a number of cells positive for all
tested hepatic markers after differentiation, ie, albumin-positive cells were
almost 90% of differentiated deciduous pulp cells. The concentration of urea in
the media increased significantly after differentiation. Significant amount of
cytoplasmic glycogen storage was found in the cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Without serum both cell types differentiated into high-purity
hepatocyte-like cells. These cells offer a source for hepatocyte lineage
differentiation for transplantation in the future.

Copyright Â© 2012 American Association of Endodontists. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22414832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. J Recept Signal Transduct Res. 2012 Apr;32(2):96-101. doi:
10.3109/10799893.2012.660531. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

GSK3ß regulates gluconeogenic gene expression through HNF4a and FOXO1.

Sakamaki J(1), Daitoku H, Kaneko Y, Hagiwara A, Ueno K, Fukamizu A.

Author information: 
(1)Life Science Center, Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, Graduate School of
Life and Environmental Sciences, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, Japan.

Hepatic gluconeogenesis is important for the maintenance of blood glucose
homeostasis under fasting condition. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) and
FOXO1 transcription factors have implicated in this process through
transcriptional regulation of glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) and
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK), which are rate-limiting enzymes in
gluconeogenesis. In this study, we demonstrate that glycogen synthase kinase 3ß
(GSK3ß) regulates the expression of gluconeogenic genes through HNF4a and FOXO1. 
Silencing of GSK3ß leads to reduction in the expression of gluconeogenic genes,
including G6Pase, PEPCK, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>
coactivator-1a. We show that GSK3ß directly binds to both HNF4a and FOXO1.
Inhibition of GSK3 by SB-216763 abolishes HNF4a-mediated activation of G6Pase
promoter. We also found that overexpression of GSK3ß potentiates G6Pase promoter 
activation by FOXO1 in a manner dependent on its kinase activity. Treatment of
SB-216763 diminishes FOXO1-mediated activation of G6Pase promoter. Taken
together, these results reveal a previously unrecognized mechanism for the
regulation of gluconeogenic gene expression.

PMID: 22384829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jul;40(12):5343-56. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks190. Epub 2012
Mar 1.

Identification of a binding motif specific to HNF4 by comparative analysis of
multiple nuclear receptors.

Fang B(1), Mane-Padros D, Bolotin E, Jiang T, Sladek FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of California
Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

Nuclear receptors (NRs) regulate gene expression by binding specific DNA
sequences consisting of AG[G/T]TCA or AGAACA half site motifs in a variety of
configurations. However, those motifs/configurations alone do not adequately
explain the diversity of NR function in vivo. Here, a systematic examination of
DNA binding specificity by protein-binding microarrays (PBMs) of three closely
related human NRs--HNF4a, retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRa) and COUPTF2--reveals
an HNF4-specific binding motif (H4-SBM), xxxxCAAAGTCCA, as well as a previously
unrecognized polarity in the classical DR1 motif (AGGTCAxAGGTCA) for HNF4a, RXRa 
and COUPTF2 homodimers. ChIP-seq data indicate that the H4-SBM is uniquely bound 
by HNF4a but not 10 other NRs in vivo, while NRs PXR, FXRa, Rev-Erba appear to
bind adjacent to H4-SBMs. HNF4-specific DNA recognition and transactivation are
mediated by residues Asp69 and Arg76 in the DNA-binding domain; this combination 
of amino acids is unique to HNF4 among all human NRs. Expression profiling and
ChIP data predict  100 new human HNF4a target genes with an H4-SBM site,
including several Co-enzyme A-related genes and genes with links to disease.
These results provide important new insights into NR DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC3384313
PMID: 22383578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Gastroenterology. 2012 Apr;142(4):696-9. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2012.02.036. Epub 
2012 Feb 24.

Hepatitis B virus, a sex hormone-responsive virus.

Tong S.

Comment on
    Gastroenterology. 2012 Apr;142(4):989-998.e4.

PMID: 22370219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. J Lipid Res. 2012 May;53(5):901-8. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M025130. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

NR2F1 disrupts synergistic activation of the MTTP gene transcription by HNF-4a
and HNF-1a.

Dai K(1), Hussain MM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Cell Biology and Pediatrics, Program of Molecular and Cellular 
Biology, School of Graduate Studies, SUNY Downstate Medical Center, Brooklyn, NY,
USA.

Regulation of microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) expression mainly
occurs at the transcriptional level. We have previously shown that MTTP gene
expression was repressed in nondifferentiated intestinal cells by nuclear
receptor 2 family 1 (NR2F1). However, mechanisms involved in the repression of
MTP by NR2F1 were not elucidated. Here, we show that MTP expression requires
hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-4a transcription factor. Different HNF-1 proteins
synergistically enhance MTP promoter activity along with HNF-4a by binding to
different cis elements. NR2F1 does not alter individual effects of HNF-4a and
HNF-1 proteins on the MTTP gene promoter. However, NR2F1 suppresses synergistic
activation of the MTP promoter by HNF-4a/HNF-1a by binding to a direct repeat 1
(DR1) element. This suppression is further enhanced in the presence of nuclear
receptor corepressor 1. In short, these studies identified a novel mechanism of
MTP repression that involves binding of NR2F1 to the DR1 element and recruitment 
of corepressors. In this mechanism, NR2F1 does not affect activities of
individual transcription factors; instead, it abrogates synergistic activation by
HNF-4a and HNF-1 proteins.

PMCID: PMC3329389
PMID: 22357705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Mol Pharmacol. 2012 May;81(5):739-47. doi: 10.1124/mol.111.076406. Epub 2012 Feb 
21.

Time-dependent interaction between differentiated embryo chondrocyte-2 and
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein a underlies the circadian expression of CYP2D6 in 
serum-shocked HepG2 cells.

Matsunaga N(1), Inoue M, Kusunose N, Kakimoto K, Hamamura K, Hanada Y, Toi A,
Yoshiyama Y, Sato F, Fujimoto K, Koyanagi S, Ohdo S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.

Differentiated embryo chondrocyte-2 (DEC2), also known as bHLHE41 or Sharp1, is a
pleiotropic transcription repressor that controls the expression of genes
involved in cellular differentiation, hypoxia responses, apoptosis, and circadian
rhythm regulation. Although a previous study demonstrated that DEC2 participates 
in the circadian control of hepatic metabolism by regulating the expression of
cytochrome P450, the molecular mechanism is not fully understood. We reported
previously that brief exposure of HepG2 cells to 50% serum resulted in 24-h
oscillation in the expression of CYP3A4 as well as circadian clock genes. In this
study, we found that the expression of CYP2D6, a major drug-metabolizing enzyme
in humans, also exhibited a significant oscillation in serum-shocked HepG2 cells.
DEC2 interacted with CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBPa), accompanied by
formation of a complex with histone deacetylase-1, which suppressed the
transcriptional activity of C/EBPa to induce the expression of CYP2D6. The
oscillation in the protein levels of DEC2 in serum-shocked HepG2 cells was nearly
antiphase to that in the mRNA levels of CYP2D6. Transfection of cells with small 
interfering RNA against DEC2 decreased the amplitude of CYP2D6 mRNA oscillation
in serum-shocked cells. These results suggest that DEC2 periodically represses
the promoter activity of CYP2D6, resulting in its circadian expression in
serum-shocked cells. DEC2 seems to constitute a molecular link through which
output components from the circadian clock are associated with the time-dependent
expression of hepatic drug-metabolizing enzyme.

PMID: 22355045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Acta Diabetol. 2013 Oct;50(5):815-20. doi: 10.1007/s00592-012-0378-1. Epub 2012
Feb 19.

Cystatin C is not a good candidate biomarker for HNF1A-MODY.

Nowak N(1), Szopa M, Thanabalasingham G, McDonald TJ, Colclough K, Skupien J,
James TJ, Kiec-Wilk B, Kozek E, Mlynarski W, Hattersley AT, Owen KR, Malecki MT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Jagiellonian University Medical College, 15 
Kopernika Street, 31-501, Krakow, Poland.

Cystatin C is a marker of glomerular filtration rate (GFR). Its level is
influenced, among the others, by CRP whose concentration is decreased in
HNF1A-MODY. We hypothesized that cystatin C level might be altered in HNF1A-MODY.
We aimed to evaluate cystatin C in HNF1A-MODY both as a diagnostic marker and as 
a method of assessing GFR. We initially examined 51 HNF1A-MODY patients, 56
subjects with type 1 diabetes (T1DM), 39 with type 2 diabetes (T2DM) and 43
non-diabetic individuals (ND) from Poland. Subjects from two UK centres were used
as replication panels: including 215 HNF1A-MODY, 203 T2DM, 39 HNF4A-MODY, 170
GCK-MODY, 17 HNF1B-MODY and 58 T1DM patients. The data were analysed with
additive models, adjusting for gender, age, BMI and estimated GFR (creatinine).
In the Polish subjects, adjusted cystatin C level in HNF1A-MODY was lower
compared with T1DM, T2DM and ND (p < 0.05). Additionally, cystatin C-based GFR
was higher than that calculated from creatinine level (p < 0.0001) in HNF1A-MODY,
while the two GFR estimates were similar or cystatin C-based lower in the other
groups. In the UK subjects, there were no differences in cystatin C between
HNF1A-MODY and the other diabetic subgroups, except HNF1B-MODY. In UK HNF1A-MODY,
cystatin C-based GFR estimate was higher than the creatinine-based one
(p < 0.0001). Concluding, we could not confirm our hypothesis (supported by the
Polish results) that cystatin C level is altered by HNF1A mutations; thus, it
cannot be used as a biomarker for HNF1A-MODY. In HNF1A-MODY, the cystatin C-based
GFR estimate is higher than the creatinine-based one.

PMCID: PMC3898131
PMID: 22350134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2012;27(4):430-8. Epub 2012 Feb 14.

Lower expression of HNF4a and PGC1a might impair rifampicin-mediated CYP3A4
induction under conditions where PXR is overexpressed in human fetal liver cells.

Takezawa T(1), Matsunaga T, Aikawa K, Nakamura K, Ohmori S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Shinshu University Hospital, Matsumoto, Japan.

Pregnane X receptor (PXR) mRNA was detected in HepG2 cells by RT-PCR, but not in 
human fetal liver (HFL) cells. CYP3A4 was induced by rifampicin (RIF),
mifepristone (RU486), clotrimazole (CTZ), and dexamethasone (DEX) in HepG2 cells,
while these PXR ligands with the exception of DEX did not induce CYP3A4 mRNA
expression in HFL cells. Ad-PXR infection increased mRNA levels of PXR and CYP3A4
in both cells despite the absence of PXR ligands. Similar results were observed
in reporter gene assays. However, in HFL cells, RIF-mediated CYP3A4 induction was
insufficient compared with HepG2 cells, despite PXR overexpression. The
expression levels of five coactivators (HNF4a, PGC1a, SRC1, CBP, and P300)
related to CYP3A4 expression in HepG2, HFL cells, and human adult liver were
analyzed by RT-PCR. Expression levels of HNF4a and PGC1a in HFL cells were
downregulated to 20% of those in the human adult liver. On the other hand, the
expression level of HNF4a in HepG2 cells was higher than that in HFL cells,
although PGC1a expression level was almost the same as that in HFL cells. HNF4a
mRNA expression level in HepG2 cells was 57% of that in human adult liver, and
the level in HFL cells was 30% of that in HepG2 cells. These results suggested
that lower expression of HNF4a and PGC1a may impair RIF-mediated CYP3A4 induction
under conditions of PXR overexpression in HFL cells.

PMID: 22333269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Feb 14;109(7):2302-7. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1106799109. Epub 2012 Jan 30.

Src tyrosine kinase phosphorylation of nuclear receptor HNF4a correlates with
isoform-specific loss of HNF4a in human colon cancer.

Chellappa K(1), Jankova L, Schnabl JM, Pan S, Brelivet Y, Fung CL, Chan C, Dent
OF, Clarke SJ, Robertson GR, Sladek FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of California,
Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

Src tyrosine kinase has long been implicated in colon cancer but much remains to 
be learned about its substrates. The nuclear receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor
4a (HNF4a) has just recently been implicated in colon cancer but its role is
poorly defined. Here we show that c-Src phosphorylates human HNF4a on three
tyrosines in an interdependent and isoform-specific fashion. The initial
phosphorylation site is a Tyr residue (Y14) present in the N-terminal A/B domain 
of P1- but not P2-driven HNF4a. Phospho-Y14 interacts with the Src SH2 domain,
leading to the phosphorylation of two additional tyrosines in the ligand binding 
domain (LBD) in P1-HNF4a. Phosphomimetic mutants in the LBD decrease P1-HNF4a
protein stability, nuclear localization and transactivation function.
Immunohistochemical analysis of approximately 450 human colon cancer specimens
(Stage III) reveals that P1-HNF4a is either lost or localized in the cytoplasm in
approximately 80% of tumors, and that staining for active Src correlates with
those events in a subset of samples. Finally, three SNPs in the human HNF4a
protein, two of which are in the HNF4a F domain that interacts with the Src SH3
domain, increase phosphorylation by Src and decrease HNF4a protein stability and 
function, suggesting that individuals with those variants may be more susceptible
to Src-mediated effects. This newly identified interaction between Src kinase and
HNF4a has important implications for colon and other cancers.

PMCID: PMC3289305
PMID: 22308320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Mol Endocrinol. 2012 Mar;26(3):438-46. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-1321. Epub 2012 Feb
2.

Molecular Mechanism of TNFa-Induced Down-Regulation of SHBG Expression.

Simó R(1), Barbosa-Desongles A, Sáez-Lopez C, Lecube A, Hernandez C, Selva DM.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Metabolism Research Unit, Vall d'Hebron Institut de Recerca,
Passeig Vall d'Hebron 119-129, Barcelona, Spain.

The reason why obesity (a chronic low-grade inflammatory disease) is associated
with low levels of sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) remains to be elucidated. 
The present study provides evidence that TNFa (a proinflammatory cytokine
increased in obesity) reduces SHBG production by human HepG2 hepatoblastoma
cells. Although the human SHBG promoter contains one nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B)
binding site, the human SHBG promoter activity did not change after TNFa
treatment or transfection with either small interfering RNA against p65 or a p65 
expression vector in luciferase reporter gene assays. The effect of TNFa on human
SHBG expression was indirect, and it was mediated by NF-<U+03BA>B through the
down-regulation of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4A: a key SHBG transcriptional
regulator. Furthermore, the HNF-4A proximal promoter contains three putative
NF-<U+03BA>B binding sites. The HNF-4A promoter activity was decreased by the treatment 
with TNFa or the transfection of a p65 expression vector, and it was increased by
the treatment with small interfering RNA against NF-<U+03BA>B in luciferase reporter
gene assays. Finally, the TNFa treatment promotes the NF-<U+03BA>B binding to the HNF-4A
promoter in chromatin immunoprecipitation assays. We conclude that sustained
exposition to elevated levels of TNFa decreases SHBG production by reducing
hepatic HNF-4a levels via NF-<U+03BA>B activation in HepG2 cells.

PMID: 22301786  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2012 Apr;32(4):1005-14. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.111.238360. Epub 2012 Jan 26.

HNF4a increases liver-specific human ATP-binding cassette transporter A1
expression and cholesterol efflux to apolipoprotein A-I in response to
cholesterol depletion.

Ohoka N(1), Okuhira K, Cui H, Wu W, Sato R, Naito M, Nishimaki-Mogami T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Institute of Health
Sciences, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Hepatic ATP-binding cassette transporter A1 (ABCA1) plays the major
role in maintaining plasma high-density lipoprotein levels by producing
cholesterol-accepting nascent high-density lipoprotein, whereas peripheral ABCA1 
is responsible for releasing cellular cholesterol. We previously reported that in
rodents, cholesterol depletion reduces ABCA1 expression in peripheral but not
hepatic cells by increasing a liver-specific ABCA1 transcript via the sterol
regulatory element-binding protein-2 system. However, the regulatory element is
not conserved in humans. Here we investigated the mechanism of sterol-regulated
human hepatic ABCA1 gene expression.
METHODS AND RESULTS: ABCA1 mRNA variant type L3 is a novel and
human-liver-specific transcript accounting for 25% of total ABCA1 mRNA in the
liver and is induced by cellular cholesterol depletion. Specific knockdown or
forced expression revealed that type L3 produces functional ABCA1 protein in
cholesterol efflux. We identified a regulatory enhancer element for L3 expression
lying within intron 3 of the human ABCA1 gene, to which hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF) 4a binds in response to cholesterol depletion. HNF4a knockdown abolished
induction of liver-specific L3 and L2b transcripts (and consequently the
liver-type response of ABCA1 expression to cellular cholesterol status) and
diminished cholesterol efflux activity.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that HNF4a regulates human hepatic ABCA1
expression in response to cholesterol depletion.

PMID: 22282358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. J Biol Chem. 2012 Mar 2;287(10):7345-56. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.334599. Epub 2012 
Jan 12.

Suppression of hepatocyte proliferation by hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a in adult 
mice.

Bonzo JA(1), Ferry CH, Matsubara T, Kim JH, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) regulates genes involved in lipid and bile
acid synthesis, gluconeogenesis, amino acid metabolism, and blood coagulation. In
addition to its metabolic role, HNF4a is critical for hepatocyte differentiation,
and loss of HNF4a is associated with hepatocellular carcinoma. The
hepatocyte-specific Hnf4a knock-out mouse develops severe hepatomegaly and
steatosis resulting in premature death, thereby limiting studies of the role of
this transcription factor in the adult animal. In addition, gene compensation may
complicate analysis of the phenotype of these mice. To overcome these issues, an 
acute Hnf4a knock-out mouse model was generated through use of the
tamoxifen-inducible ErT2cre coupled to the serum albumin gene promoter.
Microarray expression analysis revealed up-regulation of genes associated with
proliferation and cell cycle control only in the acute liver-specific Hnf4a-null 
mouse. BrdU and ki67 staining confirmed extensive hepatocyte proliferation in
this model. Proliferation was associated with induction of the hepatomitogen Bmp7
as well as reduced basal apoptotic activity. The p53/p63 apoptosis effector gene 
Perp was further identified as a direct HNF4a target gene. These data suggest
that HNF4a maintains hepatocyte differentiation in the adult healthy liver, and
its loss may directly contribute to hepatocellular carcinoma development, thus
indicating this factor as a possible liver tumor suppressor gene.

PMCID: PMC3293558
PMID: 22241473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Gastroenterology. 2012 Apr;142(4):989-998.e4. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2011.12.045. 
Epub 2012 Jan 10.

Estrogen receptor a represses transcription of HBV genes via interaction with
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a.

Wang SH(1), Yeh SH, Lin WH, Yeh KH, Yuan Q, Xia NS, Chen DS, Chen PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, National Taiwan University College of Medicine,
Taipei, Taiwan.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2012 Apr;142(4):696-9.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Women with hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection usually have
lower viral loads than men, reducing their risk of liver cancer. There are 2
androgen-responsive elements in the HBV enhancer I that contribute to higher
viral titers in men. We investigated whether and how estrogen signaling affects
progression of HBV infection.
METHODS: Ovariectomy and estrogen supplementation were used to evaluate the
effect of estrogen on HBV titers in transgenic mice with replicating HBV in
hepatocytes. The effect of estrogen signaling on transcription of HBV genes, and 
the mechanisms of regulation, were studied in HepG2 cells.
RESULTS: HBV titers increased in female mice after ovariectomy and decreased in
male mice supplemented with estrogen. Hepatic expression of estrogen receptor
(ER)-a was increased by estrogen exposure. In HepG2 cells, up-regulation of ER-a 
reduced HBV transcription, which required a specific region within enhancer I.
Direct DNA binding of ER-a and histone deacetylase activity were not required for
ER-a-mediated repression of HBV genes. Overexpression of hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-4a, which binds to this region, overcame the repressive effect of
ER-a. ER-a did not repress transcription of an HBV replicon with a mutant HNF-4a 
binding site within enhancer I. Coimmunoprecipitation assays showed an
interaction between ER-a and HNF-4a; this interaction prevented HNF-4a binding to
enhancer I and activation of HBV transcription.
CONCLUSIONS: Estrogen can repress transcription of HBV genes by up-regulating
ER-a, which interacts with and alters binding of HNF-4a to the HBV enhancer I.
These findings might account for the lower viral load and reduced incidence of
liver cancer in HBV-infected women than men.

Copyright © 2012 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22240483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Drug Metab Dispos. 2012 Apr;40(4):726-33. doi: 10.1124/dmd.111.040329. Epub 2012 
Jan 9.

In silico and in vitro identification of microRNAs that regulate hepatic nuclear 
factor 4a expression.

Ramamoorthy A(1), Li L, Gaedigk A, Bradford LD, Benson EA, Flockhart DA, Skaar
TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana, USA.

Hepatic nuclear factor 4a (HNF4A) is a nuclear transcription factor that
regulates the expression of many genes involved in drug disposition. To identify 
additional molecular mechanisms that regulate HNF4A, we identified microRNAs
(miRNAs) that target HNF4A expression. In silico analyses suggested that HNF4A is
targeted by many miRNAs. We conducted in vitro studies to validate several of
these predictions. With use of an HNF4A 3'-untranslated region (UTR) luciferase
reporter assay, five of six miRNAs tested significantly down-regulated (~20-40%) 
the luciferase activity. In HepG2 cells, miR-34a and miR-449a also down-regulated
the expression of both the HNF4A protein and an HNF4A target gene, PXR (~30-40%).
This regulation appeared without reduction in HNF4A mRNA expression, suggesting
that they must be blocking HNF4A translation. Using additional bioinformatic
algorithms, we identified polymorphisms that are predicted to alter the miRNA
targeting of HNF4A. Luciferase assays indicated that miR-34a and miR-449a were
less effective in regulating a variant (rs11574744) than the wild-type HNF4A
3'-UTR. In vivo, subjects with the variant HNF4A had lower CYP2D6 enzyme
activity, although this result was not statistically significant (p = 0.16). In
conclusion, our findings demonstrate strong evidence for a role of miRNAs in the 
regulation of HNF4A.

PMCID: PMC3310421
PMID: 22232426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. J Inherit Metab Dis. 2012 Jul;35(4):589-601. doi: 10.1007/s10545-011-9441-2. Epub
2012 Jan 10.

Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia: genetic mechanisms, diagnosis and management.

Senniappan S(1), Shanti B, James C, Hussain K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Great Ormond Street Hospital for
Children NHS Trust WC1N 3JH and Institute of Child Health, University College
London, London, WC1N 1EH, UK.

Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia (HH) is due to the unregulated secretion of
insulin from pancreatic ß-cells. A rapid diagnosis and appropriate management of 
these patients is essential to prevent the potentially associated complications
like epilepsy, cerebral palsy and neurological impairment. The molecular basis of
HH involves defects in key genes (ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK, HADH, SLC16A1, HNF4A
and UCP2) which regulate insulin secretion. The most severe forms of HH are due
to loss of function mutations in ABCC8/KCNJ11 which encode the SUR1 and KIR6.2
components respectively of the pancreatic ß-cell K(ATP) channel. At a
histological level there are two major forms (diffuse and focal) each with a
different genetic aetiology. The diffuse form is inherited in an autosomal
recessive (or dominant) manner whereas the focal form is sporadic in inheritance 
and is localised to a small region of the pancreas. The focal form can now be
accurately localised pre-operatively using a specialised positron emission
tomography scan with the isotope Fluroine-18L-3, 4-dihydroxyphenyalanine
(18F-DOPA-PET). Focal lesionectomy can provide cure from the hypoglycaemia.
However the diffuse form is managed medically or by near total pancreatectomy
(with high risk of diabetes mellitus). Recent advances in molecular genetics,
imaging with 18F-DOPA-PET/CT and novel surgical techniques have changed the
clinical approach to patients with HH.

PMID: 22231386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Diabetes. 2012 Feb;61(2):372-82. doi: 10.2337/db11-0727. Epub 2011 Dec 30.

Potential role of tumor necrosis factor-a in downregulating sex hormone-binding
globulin.

Simó R(1), Barbosa-Desongles A, Lecube A, Hernandez C, Selva DM.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Metabolism Research Unit, Vall dHebron Institut de Recerca,
Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Diabetes y Enfermedades Metabólicas Asociadas (ISCIII), Barcelona, Spain.

Low plasma sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG) levels are associated with obesity
and predict the development of type 2 diabetes. The reason why obese individuals 
have low circulating SHBG has been attributed to hyperinsulinemia, but no
mechanistic evidence has been described. The aim of the current study is to
explore whether tumor necrosis factor-a (TNF-a) rather than insulin could be the 
main factor accounting for low SHBG levels in obesity. We performed in vitro and 
in vivo studies using human HepG2 cells and human SHBG transgenic mice. In
addition, a cross-sectional study to explore the relationship between TNF-a and
SHBG in obese patients and an interventional study to examine the effect of
insulin administration on circulating SHBG in type 2 diabetic patients were
performed. We provide evidence that TNF-a, but not insulin, is the main factor by
which SHBG is reduced in obesity. Plasma SHBG was significantly increased rather 
than decreased after insulin treatment in diabetic patients. TNF-a-induced
reduction of SHBG expression was mediated by downregulating HNF4A. Finally, a
negative and independent correlation was found between plasma TNF-a receptor 1
and SHBG levels in obese patients. Our results suggest that TNF-a plays an
important role downregulating SHBG in chronic low-grade inflammatory diseases
such as obesity and type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3266423
PMID: 22210320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Nat Genet. 2011 Dec 11;44(1):67-72. doi: 10.1038/ng.1019.

Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies identifies eight new loci for
type 2 diabetes in east Asians.

Cho YS(1), Chen CH, Hu C, Long J, Ong RT, Sim X, Takeuchi F, Wu Y, Go MJ,
Yamauchi T, Chang YC, Kwak SH, Ma RC, Yamamoto K, Adair LS, Aung T, Cai Q, Chang 
LC, Chen YT, Gao Y, Hu FB, Kim HL, Kim S, Kim YJ, Lee JJ, Lee NR, Li Y, Liu JJ,
Lu W, Nakamura J, Nakashima E, Ng DP, Tay WT, Tsai FJ, Wong TY, Yokota M, Zheng
W, Zhang R, Wang C, So WY, Ohnaka K, Ikegami H, Hara K, Cho YM, Cho NH, Chang TJ,
Bao Y, Hedman ÅK, Morris AP, McCarthy MI; DIAGRAM Consortium; MuTHER Consortium, 
Takayanagi R, Park KS, Jia W, Chuang LM, Chan JC, Maeda S, Kadowaki T, Lee JY, Wu
JY, Teo YY, Tai ES, Shu XO, Mohlke KL, Kato N, Han BG, Seielstad M.

Collaborators: Voight BF, Scott LJ, Steinthorsdottir V, Morris AP, Dina C, Welch 
RP, Zeggini E, Huth C, Aulchenko YS, Thorleifsson G, McCullch LJ, Ferreira T,
Grallert H, Amin N, Wu G, Willer CJ, Raychaudhuri S, McCarroll SA, Langenberg C, 
Hofmann OM, Dupuis J, Qi L, Segrè AV, van Hoek M, Navarro P, Ardlie K, Balkau B, 
Benediktsson R, Bennett AJ, Blagieva R, Boerwinkle E, Bonnycastle LL, Boström KB,
Bravenboer B, Bumpstead S, Burtt NP, Charpentier G, Chines PS, Cornelis M, Couper
DJ, Crawford G, Doney AS, Elliott KS, Elliott AL, Erdos MR, Fox CS, Franklin CS, 
Ganser M, Gieger C, Grarup N, Green T, Griffin S, Groves CJ, Guiducci C, Hadjadj 
S, assanali N, Herder C, Isomaa B, Jackson AU, Johnson PR, Jørgensen T, Kao WH,
Klopp N, Kong A, Kraft P, Kuusisto J, Lauritzen T, Li M, Lieverse A, Lindgren CM,
Lyssenko V, Marre M, Meitinger T, Midthjell K, Morken MA, Narisu N, Nilsson P,
Owen KR, Payne F, Perry JR, Petersen AK, Platou C, Proença C, Prokopenko I,
Rathmann W, Rayner NW, Robertson NR, Rocheleau G, Roden M, Sampson MJ, Saxena R, 
Shields BM, Shrader P, Sigurdsson G, Sparsø T, Strassburger K, Stringham HM, Sun 
Q, Swift AJ, Thorand B, Tichet J, Tuomi T, van Dam RM, van Haeften TW, van Herpt 
T, van Vliet-Ostaptchouk JV, Walters GB, Weedon MN, Wijmenga C, Witteman J,
Bergman RN, Cauchi S, Collins FS, Gloyn AL, Gyllensten U, Hansen T, Hide WA,
Hitman GA, Hofman A, Hunter DJ, Hveem K, Laakso M, Mohlke KL, Morris AD, Palmer
CN, Pramstaller PP, Rudan I, Sijbrands E, Stein LD, Tuomilehto J, Uitterlinden A,
Walker M, Wareham NJ, Watanabe RM, Abecasis GR, Boehm BO, Campbell H, Daly MJ,
Hattersley AT, Hu FB, Meigs JB, Pankow JS, Pedersen O, Wichmann HE, Barroso I,
Florez JC, Frayling TM, Groop L, Sladek R, Thorsteinsdottir U, Wilson JF, Illig
T, Froguel P, van Duijn CM, Stefansson K, Altshuler D, Boehnke M, McCarthy MI,
Ahmadi K, Ainali C, Barrett A, Bataille V, Bell JT, Buil A, Deloukas P,
Dermitzakis ET, Dimas A, Durbin R, Glass D, Grundberg E, Hammond C, Hassanali N, 
Hedman ÅK, Ingle C, Knowles D, Krestyaninova M, Lindgren C, Lowe C, McCarthy MI, 
di Meglio P, Montgomery S, Nestle F, Nica AC, Nisbet J, O'Rahilly S, Parts L,
Potter S, Sekowska M, Shin SY, Small KS, Soranzo N, Spector TD, Surdulescu G,
Travers M, Tsoka S, Tsaprouni L, Wilk A, Yang TP, Zondervan KT.

We conducted a three-stage genetic study to identify susceptibility loci for type
2 diabetes (T2D) in east Asian populations. We followed our stage 1 meta-analysis
of eight T2D genome-wide association studies (6,952 cases with T2D and 11,865
controls) with a stage 2 in silico replication analysis (5,843 cases and 4,574
controls) and a stage 3 de novo replication analysis (12,284 cases and 13,172
controls). The combined analysis identified eight new T2D loci reaching
genome-wide significance, which mapped in or near GLIS3, PEPD,
FITM2-R3HDML-HNF4A, KCNK16, MAEA, GCC1-PAX4, PSMD6 and ZFAND3. GLIS3, which is
involved in pancreatic beta cell development and insulin gene expression, is
known for its association with fasting glucose levels. The evidence of an
association with T2D for PEPD and HNF4A has been shown in previous studies.
KCNK16 may regulate glucose-dependent insulin secretion in the pancreas. These
findings, derived from an east Asian population, provide new perspectives on the 
etiology of T2D.

PMCID: PMC3582398
PMID: 22158537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Acta Biochim Biophys Sin (Shanghai). 2012 Feb;44(2):162-71. doi:
10.1093/abbs/gmr102. Epub 2011 Dec 7.

Two novel cis-elements involved in hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a regulation of
acyl-coenzyme A:cholesterol acyltransferase 2 expression.

Zhang Z(1), Liu J, Xi Y, Yang R, Chen H, Li Z, Liu D, Liang C.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Science, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.

Acyl-coenzyme A:cholesterol acyltransferase 2 (ACAT2) is important for
cholesterol ester synthesis and secretion. A previous study revealed that ACAT2
gene promoter activity was upregulated by hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a)
through two sites around -247 and -311 of ACAT2 gene promoter. Here, we
identified two novel cis-elements, site I (-1006 to -898) and site II (-38 to
-29), which are important for HNF4a effect. In HepG2 cells, mutation of site I
decreased ACAT2 gene promoter activity to one-fifth of that of the wild type,
while mutation of site II reduced promoter activity to less than one-tenth of
that of the wild type. In 293T cells, mutation of these two cis-elements
profoundly impaired the HNF4a induction effect. When either of these two elements
was inserted into pGL3-promoter, HNF4a induced promoter activity through the
inserted element, while mutation of the element impaired HNF4a induction effect. 
In electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin immunoprecipitation
experiment, HNF4a bound to these two elements. Thus, the two cis-elements are
important for HNF4a effect on ACAT2 gene transcription. We also showed that HNF4a
positively regulates ACAT2 gene expression at mRNA level. Overexpression of HNF4a
increased ACAT2 expression, whereas knockdown of HNF4a decreased ACAT2
expression. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator 1a
(PCG1a), a coactivator of HNF4a, increased ACAT2 expression, while small
heterodimer partner (SHP), a corepressor of HNF4a, decreased ACAT2 expression.
These results provide more insights into transcriptional regulation of ACAT2
expression.

PMID: 22155889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Cell. 2011 Dec 9;147(6):1233-47. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2011.10.043.

An HNF4a-miRNA inflammatory feedback circuit regulates hepatocellular
oncogenesis.

Hatziapostolou M(1), Polytarchou C, Aggelidou E, Drakaki A, Poultsides GA, Jaeger
SA, Ogata H, Karin M, Struhl K, Hadzopoulou-Cladaras M, Iliopoulos D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Immunology and AIDS, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2013 Feb 28;152(5):1196.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2012 Oct;57(4):910-2.
    Hepatology. 2012 Jul;56(1):382-4.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) is essential for liver development and
hepatocyte function. Here, we show that transient inhibition of HNF4a initiates
hepatocellular transformation through a microRNA-inflammatory feedback loop
circuit consisting of miR-124, IL6R, STAT3, miR-24, and miR-629. Moreover, we
show that, once this circuit is activated, it maintains suppression of HNF4a and 
sustains oncogenesis. Systemic administration of miR-124, which modulates
inflammatory signaling, prevents and suppresses hepatocellular carcinogenesis by 
inducing tumor-specific apoptosis without toxic side effects. As we also show
that this HNF4a circuit is perturbed in human hepatocellular carcinomas, our data
raise the possibility that manipulation of this microRNA feedback-inflammatory
loop has therapeutic potential for treating liver cancer.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3251960
PMID: 22153071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27438. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027438. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

A systematic analysis of the 3'UTR of HNF4A mRNA reveals an interplay of
regulatory elements including miRNA target sites.

Wirsing A(1), Senkel S, Klein-Hitpass L, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Universität Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

Dysfunction of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) has been linked to maturity
onset diabetes of the young (MODY1), diabetes type II and possibly to renal cell 
carcinoma (RCC). Whereas diabetes causing mutations are well known, there are no 
HNF4A mutations found in RCC. Since so far analyses have been constricted to the 
promoter and open reading frame of HNF4A, we performed a systematic analysis of
the human HNF4A 3'UTR. We identified a short (1724 nt) and long (3180 nt) 3'UTR
that are much longer than the open reading frame and conferred a repressive
effect in luciferase reporter assays in HEK293 and INS-1 cells. By dissecting the
3'UTR into several pieces, we located two distinct elements of about 400 nt
conferring a highly repressive effect. These negative elements A and B are
counteracted by a balancer element of 39 nt located within the 5' end of the
HNF4A 3'UTR. Dicer knock-down experiments implied that the HNF4A 3'UTR is
regulated by miRNAs. More detailed analysis showed that miR-34a and miR-21 both
overexpressed in RCC cooperate in downregulation of the HNF4A mRNA. One of the
identified miR-34a binding sites is destroyed by SNP rs11574744. The
identification of several regulatory elements within the HNF4A 3'UTR justifies
the analysis of the 3'UTR sequence to explore the dysfunction of HNF4a in
diabetes and RCC.

PMCID: PMC3227676
PMID: 22140441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Cell Death Differ. 2012 Jun;19(6):937-46. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2011.175. Epub 2011
Dec 2.

An epistatic mini-circuitry between the transcription factors Snail and HNF4a
controls liver stem cell and hepatocyte features exhorting opposite regulation on
stemness-inhibiting microRNAs.

Garibaldi F(1), Cicchini C, Conigliaro A, Santangelo L, Cozzolino AM, Grassi G,
Marchetti A, Tripodi M, Amicone L.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Department of Cellular
Biotechnologies and Haematology, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

Preservation of the epithelial state involves the stable repression of
epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition program, whereas maintenance of the stem
compartment requires the inhibition of differentiation processes. A simple and
direct molecular mini-circuitry between master elements of these biological
processes might provide the best device to keep balanced such complex phenomena. 
In this work, we show that in hepatic stem cell Snail, a transcriptional
repressor of the hepatocyte differentiation master gene HNF4a, directly represses
the expression of the epithelial microRNAs (miRs)-200c and -34a, which in turn
target several stem cell genes. Notably, in differentiated hepatocytes HNF4a,
previously identified as a transcriptional repressor of Snail, induces the
miRs-34a and -200a, b, c that, when silenced, causes epithelial dedifferentiation
and reacquisition of stem traits. Altogether these data unveiled Snail, HNF4a and
miRs-200a, b, c and -34a as epistatic elements controlling hepatic stem cell
maintenance/differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3354047
PMID: 22139130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Ugeskr Laeger. 2011 Nov 21;173(47):3026-31.

[Congenital hyperinsulinism--new causes and clinical variations].

[Article in Danish]

Bruun MF(1), Christoffersen SH, Brusgaard K, Detlefsen S, Christesen HT.

Author information: 
(1)Det Sundhedsvidenskabelige Fakultet, Syddansk Universitet, Denmark.

Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is a heterogeneous disease with variable onset, 
non- or hypoketotic hypoglycaemia, onset from birth to adulthood and a
persistent, intermittent, or transient course with possible later conversion to
non-autoimmune diabetes. Giving insights to beta cell function, CHI mutations are
now known in eight genes (ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, GCK, HADH, SLC16A1, HNF4A and
UCP2). However, 40-50% of the patients are still genetically unexplained. CHI can
be dominantly or recessively inherited or may occur de novo. A number of
syndromes can be associated with CHI.

PMID: 22118586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27009. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027009. Epub 2011 Nov 4.

Modeling the mechanism of action of a DGAT1 inhibitor using a causal reasoning
platform.

Enayetallah AE(1), Ziemek D, Leininger MT, Randhawa R, Yang J, Manion TB, Mather 
DE, Zavadoski WJ, Kuhn M, Treadway JL, des Etages SA, Gibbs EM, Greene N, Steppan
CM.

Author information: 
(1)Compound Safety Prediction Group, Pfizer Inc, Groton, Connecticut, United
States of America. Ahmed.Enayetallah@pfizer.com

Triglyceride accumulation is associated with obesity and type 2 diabetes. Genetic
disruption of diacylglycerol acyltransferase 1 (DGAT1), which catalyzes the final
reaction of triglyceride synthesis, confers dramatic resistance to high-fat diet 
induced obesity. Hence, DGAT1 is considered a potential therapeutic target for
treating obesity and related metabolic disorders. However, the molecular events
shaping the mechanism of action of DGAT1 pharmacological inhibition have not been
fully explored yet. Here, we investigate the metabolic molecular mechanisms
induced in response to pharmacological inhibition of DGAT1 using a recently
developed computational systems biology approach, the Causal Reasoning Engine
(CRE). The CRE algorithm utilizes microarray transcriptomic data and causal
statements derived from the biomedical literature to infer upstream molecular
events driving these transcriptional changes. The inferred upstream events (also 
called hypotheses) are aggregated into biological models using a set of
analytical tools that allow for evaluation and integration of the hypotheses in
context of their supporting evidence. In comparison to gene ontology enrichment
analysis which pointed to high-level changes in metabolic processes, the CRE
results provide detailed molecular hypotheses to explain the measured
transcriptional changes. CRE analysis of gene expression changes in high fat
habituated rats treated with a potent and selective DGAT1 inhibitor demonstrate
that the majority of transcriptomic changes support a metabolic network
indicative of reversal of high fat diet effects that includes a number of
molecular hypotheses such as PPARG, HNF4A and SREBPs. Finally, the CRE-generated 
molecular hypotheses from DGAT1 inhibitor treated rats were found to capture the 
major molecular characteristics of DGAT1 deficient mice, supporting a phenotype
of decreased lipid and increased insulin sensitivity.

PMCID: PMC3208573
PMID: 22073239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Mol Ther. 2012 Jan;20(1):127-37. doi: 10.1038/mt.2011.234. Epub 2011 Nov 8.

Efficient generation of functional hepatocytes from human embryonic stem cells
and induced pluripotent stem cells by HNF4a transduction.

Takayama K(1), Inamura M, Kawabata K, Katayama K, Higuchi M, Tashiro K, Nonaka A,
Sakurai F, Hayakawa T, Furue MK, Mizuguchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Hepatocyte-like cells from human embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and induced
pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) are expected to be a useful source of cells drug
discovery. Although we recently reported that hepatic commitment is promoted by
transduction of SOX17 and HEX into human ESC- and iPSC-derived cells, these
hepatocyte-like cells were not sufficiently mature for drug screening. To promote
hepatic maturation, we utilized transduction of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a 
(HNF4a) gene, which is known as a master regulator of liver-specific gene
expression. Adenovirus vector-mediated overexpression of HNF4a in hepatoblasts
induced by SOX17 and HEX transduction led to upregulation of epithelial and
mature hepatic markers such as cytochrome P450 (CYP) enzymes, and promoted
hepatic maturation by activating the mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition (MET). 
Thus HNF4a might play an important role in the hepatic differentiation from human
ESC-derived hepatoblasts by activating the MET. Furthermore, the hepatocyte
like-cells could catalyze the toxication of several compounds. Our method would
be a valuable tool for the efficient generation of functional hepatocytes derived
from human ESCs and iPSCs, and the hepatocyte-like cells could be used for
predicting drug toxicity.

PMCID: PMC3255576
PMID: 22068426  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Pediatr Diabetes. 2012 Feb;13(1):26-32. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-5448.2011.00827.x.
Epub 2011 Nov 8.

Comprehensive molecular analysis of Japanese patients with pediatric-onset
MODY-type diabetes mellitus.

Yorifuji T(1), Fujimaru R, Hosokawa Y, Tamagawa N, Shiozaki M, Aizu K, Jinno K,
Maruo Y, Nagasaka H, Tajima T, Kobayashi K, Urakami T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Children's Medical
Center, Osaka City General Hospital, 2-13-22 Miyakojima-Hondori, Miyakojima,
Osaka 534-0021, Japan. yorif@kuhp.kyoto-u.ac.jp

Erratum in
    Pediatr Diabetes. 2013 May;14(3):230.

BACKGROUND: In Asians, mutations in the known maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY) genes have been identified in only <15% of patients. These results
were obtained mostly through studies on adult patients.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the molecular basis of Japanese patients with
pediatric-onset MODY-type diabetes.
SUBJECTS: Eighty Japanese patients with pediatric-onset MODY-type diabetes.
METHODS: Mitochondrial 3243A>G mutation was first tested by the polymerase chain 
reaction restriction fragment length polymorphism analysis for maternally
inherited families. Then, all coding exons and exon-intron boundaries of the
HNF1A, HNF1B, GCK, and HNF4A genes were amplified from genomic DNA and directly
sequenced. Multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis was also
performed to detect whole-exon deletions.
RESULTS: After excluding one patient with a mitochondrial 3243A>G, mutations were
identified in 38 (48.1%) patients; 18 had GCK mutations, 11 had HNF1A mutations, 
3 had HNF4A mutations, and 6 had HNF1B mutations. In patients aged <8 yr,
mutations were detected mostly in GCK at a higher frequency (63.6%). In patients 
>9 yr of age, mutations were identified less frequently (45.1%), with HNF1A
mutations being the most frequent. A large fraction of mutation-negative patients
showed elevated homeostasis model assessment (HOMA) insulin-resistance and normal
HOMA-ß indices. Most of the HNF1B mutations were large deletions, and,
interestingly, renal cysts were undetectable in two patients with whole-gene
deletion of HNF1B.
CONCLUSION: In Japanese patients with pediatric-onset MODY-type diabetes,
mutations in known genes were identified at a much higher frequency than
previously reported for adult Asians. A fraction of mutation-negative patients
presented with insulin-resistance and normal insulin-secretory capacities
resembling early-onset type 2 diabetes.

© 2011 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 22060211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. J Toxicol Sci. 2011 Oct;36(5):625-33.

Expression of albumin and cytochrome P450 enzymes in HepG2 cells cultured with a 
nanotechnology-based culture plate with microfabricated scaffold.

Nakamura K(1), Kato N, Aizawa K, Mizutani R, Yamauchi J, Tanoue A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, National Research Institute for Child Health and
Development, Tokyo, Japan. knakamura@nch.go.jp

The Nanoculture plate (NCP) is a recently developed plate which essentially
consists of a textured surface with specific characteristics that induce spheroid
formation: microfabrications with a micro-square pattern on the culture surface. 
The NCP can be used to generate uniform adhesive spheroids of cancer cell lines
using conventional techniques without the need of any animal compounds. In this
study, we assessed the performance of human hepatoma cell line HepG2 cells
cultured with an NCP to evaluate the effects of the NCP on their
hepatocyte-specific functions. The NCP facilitated the formation of
three-dimensional (3D) HepG2 cell architecture. HepG2 cells cultured with an NCP 
exhibited enhanced mRNA expression levels of albumin and cytochrome P450 (CYP)
enzymes compared to those cultured with a two-dimensional (2D) conventional
plate. The expression levels of two specific liver-enriched transcription
factors, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein 
a (C/EBPa), were higher in HepG2 cells grown with the NCP than those in HepG2
cells grown with conventional plates before albumin and CYP enzymes expression
levels were increased. The inducibility of CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 mRNA following
exposure to inducers in HepG2 cells cultured with an NCP was comparable to that
in HepG2 cells cultured with conventional plates, while the expression levels of 
CYP1A2 and CYP3A4 mRNA following exposure to inducers were higher when using an
NCP than when using conventional plates. These results suggest that the use of an
NCP enhances the hepatocyte-specific functions of HepG2 cells, such as
drug-metabolizing enzyme expression, making the NCP/HepG2 system a useful tool
for evaluating drug metabolism in vitro.

PMID: 22008537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Diabetologia. 2012 Jan;55(1):123-7. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2319-x. Epub 2011 Oct
12.

Heterozygous ABCC8 mutations are a cause of MODY.

Bowman P(1), Flanagan SE, Edghill EL, Damhuis A, Shepherd MH, Paisey R,
Hattersley AT, Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula NIHR Clinical Research Facility, Peninsula Medical School,
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The ABCC8 gene encodes the sulfonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1)
subunit of the pancreatic beta cell ATP-sensitive potassium (K(ATP)) channel.
Inactivating mutations cause congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) and activating
mutations cause transient neonatal diabetes (TNDM) or permanent neonatal diabetes
(PNDM) that can usually be treated with sulfonylureas. Sulfonylurea sensitivity
is also a feature of HNF1A and HNF4A MODY, but patients referred for genetic
testing with clinical features of these types of diabetes do not always have
mutations in the HNF1A/4A genes. Our aim was to establish whether mutations in
the ABCC8 gene cause MODY that is responsive to sulfonylurea therapy.
METHODS: We sequenced the ABCC8 gene in 85 patients with a BMI <30 kg/m², no
family history of neonatal diabetes and who were deemed sensitive to
sulfonylureas by the referring clinician or were sulfonylurea-treated. All had
tested negative for mutations in the HNF1A and HNF4A genes.
RESULTS: ABCC8 mutations were found in seven of the 85 (8%) probands. Four
patients were heterozygous for previously reported mutations and four novel
mutations, E100K, G214R, Q485R and N1245D, were identified. Only four probands
fulfilled MODY criteria, with two diagnosed after 25 years and one patient, who
had no family history of diabetes, as a result of a proven de novo mutation.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: ABCC8 mutations can cause MODY in patients whose
clinical features are similar to those with HNF1A/4A MODY. Therefore, sequencing 
of ABCC8 in addition to the known MODY genes should be considered if such
features are present, to facilitate optimal clinical management of these
patients.

PMID: 21989597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Genome Med. 2011 Oct 10;3(10):65. doi: 10.1186/gm281.

Identification of cis-regulatory sequence variations in individual genome
sequences.

Worsley-Hunt R(1), Bernard V, Wasserman WW.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Medicine and Therapeutics at the Child and Family
Research Institute, Department of Medical Genetics, University of British
Columbia, 950 West 28th Avenue, Vancouver, BC V5Z 4H4, Canada. wyeth@cmmt.ubc.ca.

Functional contributions of cis-regulatory sequence variations to human genetic
disease are numerous. For instance, disrupting variations in a HNF4A
transcription factor binding site upstream of the Factor IX gene contributes
causally to hemophilia B Leyden. Although clinical genome sequence analysis
currently focuses on the identification of protein-altering variation, the impact
of cis-regulatory mutations can be similarly strong. New technologies are now
enabling genome sequencing beyond exomes, revealing variation across the
non-coding 98% of the genome responsible for developmental and physiological
patterns of gene activity. The capacity to identify causal regulatory mutations
is improving, but predicting functional changes in regulatory DNA sequences
remains a great challenge. Here we explore the existing methods and software for 
prediction of functional variation situated in the cis-regulatory sequences
governing gene transcription and RNA processing.

PMCID: PMC3239227
PMID: 21989199  [PubMed]


364. BMC Genomics. 2011 Oct 11;12:499. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-499.

Regional genome transcriptional response of adult mouse brain to hypoxia.

Xu H(1), Lu A, Sharp FR.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Research on Genomics and Global Health, National Human Genome
Research Institute, National Institutes of Health, 12 South Drive, Bethesda, MD
20892-5635, USA. huichun.xu@nih.gov

BACKGROUND: Since normal brain function depends upon continuous oxygen delivery
and short periods of hypoxia can precondition the brain against subsequent
ischemia, this study examined the effects of brief hypoxia on the whole genome
transcriptional response in adult mouse brain.
RESULT: Pronounced changes of gene expression occurred after 3 hours of hypoxia
(8% O(2)) and after 1 hour of re-oxygenation in all brain regions. The
hypoxia-responsive genes were predominantly up-regulated in hindbrain and
predominantly down-regulated in forebrain - possibly to support hindbrain
survival functions at the expense of forebrain cognitive functions. The
up-regulated genes had a significant role in cell survival and involved both
shared and unshared signaling pathways among different brain regions.
Up-regulation of transcriptional signaling including hypoxia inducible factor,
insulin growth factor (IGF), the vitamin D3 receptor/retinoid X nuclear receptor,
and glucocorticoid signaling was common to many brain regions. However, many of
the hypoxia-regulated target genes were specific for one or a few brain regions. 
Cerebellum, for example, had 1241 transcripts regulated by hypoxia only in
cerebellum but not in hippocampus; and, 642 (54%) had at least one hepatic
nuclear receptor 4A (HNF4A) binding site and 381 had at least two HNF4A binding
sites in their promoters. The data point to HNF4A as a major hypoxia-responsive
transcription factor in cerebellum in addition to its known role in regulating
erythropoietin transcription. The genes unique to hindbrain may play critical
roles in survival during hypoxia.
CONCLUSION: Differences of forebrain and hindbrain hypoxia-responsive genes may
relate to suppression of forebrain cognitive functions and activation of
hindbrain survival functions, which may coordinately mediate the neuroprotection 
afforded by hypoxia preconditioning.

PMCID: PMC3218040
PMID: 21988864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Biochem Genet. 2012 Apr;50(3-4):298-308. doi: 10.1007/s10528-011-9472-2. Epub
2011 Oct 9.

Association of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha polymorphisms with type 2
diabetes with or without metabolic syndrome in Malaysia.

Saif-Ali R(1), Harun R, Kamaruddin NA, Al-Jassabi S, Ngah WZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of Malaya,
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. reyadh70@yahoo.com

This study investigated the association of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4)
alpha single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with type 2 diabetes with or without
metabolic syndrome in Malaysia. Nine HNF4 alpha SNPs were genotyped in 390 type 2
diabetic subjects with metabolic syndrome, 135 type 2 diabetic subjects without
metabolic syndrome, and 160 control subjects. The SNPs rs4810424, rs1884613, and 
rs2144908 were associated with protection against type 2 diabetes without
metabolic syndrome (recessive P = 0.018, OR 0.32; P = 0.004, OR 0.25; P = 0.005, 
OR 0.24, respectively). The 6-SNP haplotype2 CCCGTC containing the risk genotype 
of these SNPs was associated with higher risk for type 2 diabetes with or without
metabolic syndrome (P = 0.002, OR 2.2; P = 0.004, OR 3.1). These data suggest
that HNF4 alpha SNPs and haplotypes contributed to increased type 2 diabetes risk
in the Malaysian population.

PMID: 21983932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. J Sci Food Agric. 2012 Mar 15;92(4):857-61. doi: 10.1002/jsfa.4658. Epub 2011 Oct
3.

Effects of Lens culinaris agglutinin on gene expression of gluconeogenic enzymes 
in the mouse intestine.

Pervin M(1), Paeng N, Yasui K, Imai S, Isemura M, Yokogoshi H, Nakayama T.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Nutritional and Environmental Sciences and Global COE,
University of Shizuoka, Yada, Shizuoka, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Lectins are proteins that bind specifically to the carbohydrate
moiety of glyco-conjugates. Japanese mistletoe lectin given intragastrically
affected cytokine gene expression in the mouse intestine. This study examines the
actions of Lens culinaris agglutinin (LCA) on the gene expression of
gluconeogenic enzymes in the intestine.
RESULTS: The results of quantitative real-time reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction indicated that LCA caused an up-regulation of the gene expression 
of glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK). 
This change was correlated with an increase in the expression of two
transcription factors, HNF1a and HNF4a. Experiments using human colonic cancer
Caco-2 cells demonstrated that LCA up-regulated the gene expression of G6Pase and
PEPCK whereas insulin had the opposite effect. In addition, the observed
up-regulation of HNF4a gene expression in the duodenum raises the possibility
that the lectin promotes the colorectal cancer.
CONCLUSION: Lentil beans should be cooked well to avoid unfavourable effects of
LCA.

Copyright © 2011 Society of Chemical Industry.

PMID: 21969243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Biol Pharm Bull. 2011;34(10):1644-7.

Interleukin-1 controls the constitutive expression of the Cyp7a1 gene by
regulating the expression of Cyp7a1 transcriptional regulators in the mouse
liver.

Kojima M(1), Ashino T, Yoshida T, Iwakura Y, Degawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Animal Genome Research Unit, Agrogenomics Research Center, National Institute 
of Agrobiological Sciences, Tsukuba 3058602, Japan. misaki@affrc.go.jp

Our previous study using interleukin-1a/ß-knockout (IL-1-KO) and wild-type (WT)
mice demonstrated that IL-1 acts as a positive factor for constitutive gene
expression of hepatic cytochrome P4507a1 (Cyp7a1). In this study, to clarify the 
role of IL-1 in the expression of the hepatic Cyp7a1 gene, we focused on Cyp7a1
transcriptional regulators such as a-fetoprotein transcription factor (FTF),
liver X receptor a (LXRa), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) and small
heterodimer partner (SHP) and examined the effects of IL-1 on their gene
expression by real-time reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction using
IL-1-KO and WT mice. We observed no significant differences between sex-matched
IL-1-KO and WT mice with regard to gene expression levels of FTF, LXRa, and
HNF4a, all of which are positive transcriptional regulators for the Cyp7a1 gene. 
However, interindividual differences in hepatic FTF and LXRa expression were
closely dependent on the gene expression level(s) of hepatic IL-1 and tumor
necrosis factor-a (TNF-a), while interindividual differences in hepatic HNF4a
were clearly correlated with the expression of IL-1, but not TNF-a. In contrast, 
the gene expression level of SHP, which is a negative transcriptional regulator
of the Cyp7a1 gene through inhibition of FTF function, was higher in IL-1-KO mice
than in sex-matched WT mice. These findings demonstrate that, like TNF-a, IL-1
positively controls the gene expression of Cyp7a1 transcriptional upregulators
but, in contrast to the previously reported action of TNF-a, IL-1 also acts to
downregulate SHP gene expression.

PMID: 21963511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Cell Physiol. 2012 Jul;227(7):2898-906. doi: 10.1002/jcp.23033.

A novel human hepatoma cell line, FLC-4, exhibits highly enhanced liver
differentiation functions through the three-dimensional cell shape.

Laurent T(1), Murase D, Tsukioka S, Matsuura T, Nagamori S, Oda H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nutritional Biochemistry, Department of Applied Molecular
Biosciences, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan.

We characterized three-dimensional human hepatoma cell lines, functional liver
cell (FLC) cell lines, to establish a highly differentiated hepatoma cell line.
We investigated the effect of extracellular matrix and cell morphology on
liver-specific gene expression in FLC cells. The hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a
(HNF-4a) and other liver-specific gene expressions were enhanced in spherical
FLC-4 cells on EHS-gel, but other human hepatoma cells such as HepG2 did not show
the enhancement. Importantly, the liver-specific gene expression levels in
spherical FLC-4 cells cultured on EHS-gel were comparable to those of human liver
and were much higher than those of other human hepatoma cell lines. The major
matrix components and growth factors in EHS-gel did not affect cell shape and
liver functions. To exclude any effect of the extracellular matrix, we made
spherical FLC-4 cells by actin filament disruption. The actin-disrupted spherical
cells also showed an enhanced liver-specific gene expression. We concluded that
three-dimensional cell shape per se is one of the most important determinants of 
liver differentiation functions in FLC-4 cells. Cell morphology-dependent
induction of liver-specific gene expression was mediated through microtubule
organization. In conclusion, differentiation of FLC-4 human hepatoma cell line
can be enhanced to a human liver-like level through the three-dimensional cell
shape in a microtubule-dependent manner.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21960466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Endocrinology. 2011 Dec;152(12):4813-24. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1274. Epub 2011 Sep
27.

Intrinsic sexually dimorphic expression of the principal human CYP3A4 correlated 
with suboptimal activation of GH/glucocorticoid-dependent transcriptional
pathways in men.

Thangavel C(1), Boopathi E, Shapiro BH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Biochemistry, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, 3800 Spruce Street, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104-6009, USA.

Cytochrome P450 (CYP)3A4 is the principal and most abundant human isoform of CYP 
responsible for the metabolism of more than 50% of all consumed drugs and
innumerable endogenous compounds. Expression of CYP3A4 is sexually dimorphic and 
regulated by the combined actions of GH and glucocorticoids. In the case of the
rat, nearly all of the CYPs are "intrinsically" or "inherently" sexually
dimorphic, meaning that the expressed sex differences are permanent and
irreversible. Using primary hepatocyte cultures derived from men and women
exposed to physiologic-like levels of continuous GH (the feminine circulating
profile) alone, dexamethasone alone, and the combined regimen, we observed a
dramatic inherent CYP3A4 sexual dimorphism (women more than men) with all
treatments. The molecular basis for this intrinsic sexually dimorphic expression 
of CYP3A4 appears to be due, at least in part, to a greater level of
hormone-dependent activation and nuclear translocation of both hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4a (HNF-4a) and pregnane X receptor in female hepatocytes. Furthermore,
these transcription factors exhibited significantly higher DNA binding levels to 
their specific motifs on the CYP3A4 promoter in female hepatocytes, inferring a
possible explanation for the elevated expression of CYP3A4 in women. Accordingly,
experiments using HepG2 cells treated with small inhibitory RNA-induced knockdown
of HNF-4a and/or transfected with luciferase reporter constructs containing a
CYP3A4 promoter lacking HNF-4a-binding motifs demonstrated that GH, to a greater 
extent dexamethasone, and to the greatest extent the combine hormone regimen,
stimulated HNF-4a and pregnane X receptor promoter transactivation, signifying
enhanced transcription of CYP3A4 and, thus, identifying a molecular mechanism
contributing to the intrinsic sexual dimorphic expression of human CYP3A4.

PMCID: PMC3230058
PMID: 21952236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2012 Feb;120(2):89-90. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1284378.
Epub 2011 Sep 15.

Monogenic diabetes in a family with 2 unknown HNF-4A gene mutations.

Motzkau M(1), Meyer P, Mertens PR, Klose S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nephrology and Hypertension, Diabetes and Endocrinology,
Otto-von-Guericke University of Magdeburg, Germany. markus.motzkau@med.ovgu.de

INTRODUCTION: Diabetes mellitus classified as Maturity Onset Diabetes of the
Young (MODY) is characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance with insulin
secretory disturbances.
CASE REPORT: In 2 siblings with diabetes mellitus manifestation at age under 25
years, low fasting glucose levels, severely elevated glucose levels upon glucose 
challenge and absent autoantibodies for IA2 and GAD clarification for MODY was
sought. Mutational screening for MODY 1-3 mutations was carried out by direct
sequencing followed by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA).
CONCLUSION: We identified a mutation within the hepatic nuclear factor 4A
(HNF-4A) gene hitherto unreported for MODY-1. A causative role of the mutation is
not proven, however in the 2 index patients similar phenotypes are present. These
cases underline the necessity to screen for MODY when the medical history and
lack of autoantibodies suggest alternative diagnoses beside type 1 diabetes.

© J. A. Barth Verlag in Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 21922456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Nat Genet. 2011 Aug 28;43(10):984-9. doi: 10.1038/ng.921.

Genome-wide association study in individuals of South Asian ancestry identifies
six new type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci.

Kooner JS(1), Saleheen D, Sim X, Sehmi J, Zhang W, Frossard P, Been LF, Chia KS, 
Dimas AS, Hassanali N, Jafar T, Jowett JB, Li X, Radha V, Rees SD, Takeuchi F,
Young R, Aung T, Basit A, Chidambaram M, Das D, Grundberg E, Hedman AK, Hydrie
ZI, Islam M, Khor CC, Kowlessur S, Kristensen MM, Liju S, Lim WY, Matthews DR,
Liu J, Morris AP, Nica AC, Pinidiyapathirage JM, Prokopenko I, Rasheed A, Samuel 
M, Shah N, Shera AS, Small KS, Suo C, Wickremasinghe AR, Wong TY, Yang M, Zhang
F; DIAGRAM; MuTHER, Abecasis GR, Barnett AH, Caulfield M, Deloukas P, Frayling
TM, Froguel P, Kato N, Katulanda P, Kelly MA, Liang J, Mohan V, Sanghera DK,
Scott J, Seielstad M, Zimmet PZ, Elliott P, Teo YY, McCarthy MI, Danesh J, Tai
ES, Chambers JC.

Author information: 
(1)National Heart and Lung Institute (NHLI), Imperial College London, Hammersmith
Hospital, London, UK. j.kooner@imperial.ac.uk

We carried out a genome-wide association study of type-2 diabetes (T2D) in
individuals of South Asian ancestry. Our discovery set included 5,561 individuals
with T2D (cases) and 14,458 controls drawn from studies in London, Pakistan and
Singapore. We identified 20 independent SNPs associated with T2D at P < 10(-4)
for testing in a replication sample of 13,170 cases and 25,398 controls, also all
of South Asian ancestry. In the combined analysis, we identified common genetic
variants at six loci (GRB14, ST6GAL1, VPS26A, HMG20A, AP3S2 and HNF4A) newly
associated with T2D (P = 4.1 × 10(-8) to P = 1.9 × 10(-11)). SNPs at GRB14 were
also associated with insulin sensitivity (P = 5.0 × 10(-4)), and SNPs at ST6GAL1 
and HNF4A were also associated with pancreatic beta-cell function (P = 0.02 and P
= 0.001, respectively). Our findings provide additional insight into mechanisms
underlying T2D and show the potential for new discovery from genetic association 
studies in South Asians, a population with increased susceptibility to T2D.

PMCID: PMC3773920
PMID: 21874001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Development. 2011 Oct;138(19):4143-53. doi: 10.1242/dev.062547. Epub 2011 Aug 18.

HNF4A is essential for specification of hepatic progenitors from human
pluripotent stem cells.

DeLaForest A(1), Nagaoka M, Si-Tayeb K, Noto FK, Konopka G, Battle MA, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

The availability of pluripotent stem cells offers the possibility of using such
cells to model hepatic disease and development. With this in mind, we previously 
established a protocol that facilitates the differentiation of both human
embryonic stem cells and induced pluripotent stem cells into cells that share
many characteristics with hepatocytes. The use of highly defined culture
conditions and the avoidance of feeder cells or embryoid bodies allowed
synchronous and reproducible differentiation to occur. The differentiation
towards a hepatocyte-like fate appeared to recapitulate many of the developmental
stages normally associated with the formation of hepatocytes in vivo. In the
current study, we addressed the feasibility of using human pluripotent stem cells
to probe the molecular mechanisms underlying human hepatocyte differentiation. We
demonstrate (1) that human embryonic stem cells express a number of mRNAs that
characterize each stage in the differentiation process, (2) that gene expression 
can be efficiently depleted throughout the differentiation time course using
shRNAs expressed from lentiviruses and (3) that the nuclear hormone receptor
HNF4A is essential for specification of human hepatic progenitor cells by
establishing the expression of the network of transcription factors that controls
the onset of hepatocyte cell fate.

PMCID: PMC3171218
PMID: 21852396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Dig Liver Dis. 2011 Nov;43(11):856-61. doi: 10.1016/j.dld.2011.07.006. Epub 2011 
Aug 9.

Association of FCGR2A, JAK2 or HNF4A variants with ulcerative colitis in Koreans.

Yang SK(1), Jung Y, Kim H, Hong M, Ye BD, Song K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Recent genome-wide association studies have identified over 40
candidate genes contributing to ulcerative colitis susceptibility. The goal of
this study was to test the reported ulcerative colitis susceptibility genes
including FCGR2A, SLC26A3, JAK2 and HNF4A in Korean patients with ulcerative
colitis and Crohn's disease.
METHODS: Five single nucleotide polymorphisms from 4 loci including FCGR2A,
SLC26A3, JAK2 and HNF4A were genotyped in 661 patients with ulcerative colitis,
642 patients with Crohn's disease and 601 healthy controls.
RESULTS: Statistically significant associations with ulcerative colitis were
found at FCGR2A (rs1801274, p=2.3×10(-4), OR=0.70 (95% CI=0.57-0.84) under the
allelic model), the JAK2 locus (rs10975003, p=6.7×10(-4), OR=1.43 (95%
CI=1.16-1.77) under the allelic model) and HNF4A (rs6017342, p=0.002, OR=0.66
(95% CI=0.51-0.85) under the allelic model). The association of FCGR2A was much
stronger in female patients with ulcerative colitis (p=5.7×10(-6)) than in males 
(p=0.50). Except rs10975003 from the JAK2 locus, none showed positive association
with Crohn's disease.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest that FCGR2A, JAK2 or HNF4A variants play a role in 
the pathogenesis of ulcerative colitis in Koreans.

Copyright © 2011 Editrice Gastroenterologica Italiana S.r.l. Published by
Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21831733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e21667. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021667. Epub 2011 Jul 28.

A high resolution genome-wide scan of HNF4a recognition sites infers a regulatory
gene network in colon cancer.

Weltmeier F(1), Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, Fraunhofer
Institute of Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Hannover, Germany.

The hepatic nuclear factor HNF4a is a versatile transcription factor and controls
expression of many genes in development, metabolism and disease. To delineate its
regulatory gene network in colon cancer and to define novel gene targets a
comprehensive genome-wide scan was carried out at a resolution of 35 bp with
chromatin IP DNA obtained from the human colon carcinoma cell line Caco-2 that is
a particularly rich source of HNF4a. More than 90% of HNF4a binding sites were
mapped as promoter distal sequences while enhancer elements could be defined to
foster chromatin loops for interaction with other promoter-bound transcription
factors. Sequence motif analysis by various genetic algorithms evidenced a unique
enhanceosome that consisted of the nuclear proteins ERa, AP1, GATA and HNF1a as
cooperating transcription factors. Overall >17,500 DNA binding sites were
identified with a gene/binding site ratio that differed >6-fold between
chromosomes and clustered in distinct chromosomal regions amongst >6600 genes
targeted by HNF4a. Evidence is presented for nuclear receptor cross-talk of HNF4a
and estrogen receptor a that is recapitulated at the sequence level. Remarkably, 
the Y-chromosome is devoid of HNF4a binding sites. The functional importance of
enrichment sites was confirmed in genome-wide gene expression studies at varying 
HNF4a protein levels. Taken collectively, a genome-wide scan of HNF4a binding
sites is reported to better understand basic mechanisms of transcriptional
control of HNF4a targeted genes. Novel promoter distal binding sites are
identified which form an enhanceosome thereby facilitating RNA processing events.

PMCID: PMC3145629
PMID: 21829439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Diabetologia. 2011 Nov;54(11):2801-10. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2261-y. Epub 2011 
Aug 4.

A large multi-centre European study validates high-sensitivity C-reactive protein
(hsCRP) as a clinical biomarker for the diagnosis of diabetes subtypes.

Thanabalasingham G(1), Shah N, Vaxillaire M, Hansen T, Tuomi T, Gaperíková D,
Szopa M, Tjora E, James TJ, Kokko P, Loiseleur F, Andersson E, Gaget S, Isomaa B,
Nowak N, Raeder H, Stanik J, Njolstad PR, Malecki MT, Klimes I, Groop L, Pedersen
O, Froguel P, McCarthy MI, Gloyn AL, Owen KR.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of Oxford,
Churchill Hospital, Headington, Oxford, OX3 7LJ, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: An accurate molecular diagnosis of diabetes subtype confers
clinical benefits; however, many individuals with monogenic diabetes remain
undiagnosed. Biomarkers could help to prioritise patients for genetic
investigation. We recently demonstrated that high-sensitivity C-reactive protein 
(hsCRP) levels are lower in UK patients with hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha
(HNF1A)-MODY than in other diabetes subtypes. In this large multi-centre study we
aimed to assess the clinical validity of hsCRP as a diagnostic biomarker, examine
the genotype-phenotype relationship and compare different hsCRP assays.
METHODS: High-sensitivity CRP levels were analysed in individuals with HNF1A-MODY
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>457), glucokinase (GCK)-MODY (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>404), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha
(HNF4A)-MODY (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>54) and type 2 diabetes (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>582) from seven European centres. 
Three common assays for hsCRP analysis were evaluated. We excluded 121
participants (8.1%) with hsCRP values >10 mg/l. The discriminative power of hsCRP
with respect to diabetes aetiology was assessed by receiver operating
characteristic curve-derived C-statistic.
RESULTS: In all centres and irrespective of the assay method, meta-analysis
confirmed significantly lower hsCRP levels in those with HNF1A-MODY than in those
with other aetiologies (z score -21.8, p<U+2009><<U+2009>5<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-105)). HNF1A-MODY cases with
missense mutations had lower hsCRP levels than those with truncating mutations
(0.03 vs 0.08 mg/l, p<U+2009><<U+2009>5<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-5)). High-sensitivity CRP values between assays
were strongly correlated (r (2)<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.91, p<U+2009>=<U+2009>1<U+2009>×<U+2009>10(-5)). Across the seven
centres, the C-statistic for distinguishing HNF1A-MODY from young adult-onset
type 2 diabetes ranged from 0.79 to 0.97, indicating high discriminative
accuracy.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: In the largest study to date, we have established
that hsCRP is a clinically valid biomarker for HNF1A-MODY in European
populations. Given the modest costs and wide availability, hsCRP could translate 
rapidly into clinical practice, considerably improving diagnosis rates in
monogenic diabetes.

PMID: 21814873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. J Hum Genet. 2011 Oct;56(10):695-700. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2011.83. Epub 2011 Aug 4.

Association of variants in genes involved in pancreatic ß-cell development and
function with type 2 diabetes in North Indians.

Chavali S(1), Mahajan A, Tabassum R, Dwivedi OP, Chauhan G, Ghosh S, Tandon N,
Bharadwaj D.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics and Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Genomics and Integrative
Biology, CSIR, Delhi, India.

Variants in genes involved in pancreatic ß-cell development and function are
known to cause monogenic forms of type 2 diabetes and are also associated with
complex form. In this study, we studied the genetic association of polymorphisms 
in such important genes with type 2 diabetes in the high-risk Indians. We
genotyped 91 polymorphisms in 19 genes (ABCC8, HNF1A, HNF1B, HNF4A, INS, INSM1,
ISL1, KCNJ11, MAFA, MNX1, NEUROD1, NEUROG3, NKX2.2, NKX6.1, PAX4, PAX6, PDX1,
USF1 and WFS1) in 2025 unrelated North Indians of Indo-European ethnicity
comprising of 1019 diabetic and 1006 non-diabetic subjects. HNF4A promoter P2
polymorphisms rs1884613 and rs2144908, which are in high linkage disequilibrium, 
showed significant association with type 2 diabetes (odds ratio (OR)=1.37 (95%
confidence interval (CI) 1.19-1.57), P=9.4 × 10(-6) for rs1884613 and OR=1.37
(95%CI 1.20-1.57), P=6.0 × 10(-6) for rs2144908), as previously shown in other
populations. We observed body mass index-dependent association of these variants 
with type 2 diabetes in normal-weight/lean subjects. Variants in USF1, ABCC8,
ISL1 and KCNJ11 showed nominal association, while haplotypes in these genes were 
significantly associated. rs3812704 upstream of NEUROG3 significantly increased
risk for type 2 diabetes in normal-weight/lean subjects (OR=1.68 (95%CI
1.25-2.24), P=4.9 × 10(-4)). Thus, pancreatic ß-cell development and function
genes contribute to susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in North Indians.

PMID: 21814221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Med Food. 2011 Sep;14(9):930-8. doi: 10.1089/jmf.2010.1396. Epub 2011 Aug 3.

Effects of oolong tea on gene expression of gluconeogenic enzymes in the mouse
liver and in rat hepatoma H4IIE cells.

Yasui K(1), Miyoshi N, Tababe H, Ishigami Y, Fukutomi R, Imai S, Isemura M.

Author information: 
(1)Health Care Research Center, Nisshin Pharma Inc., Fujimino, Saitama, Japan.

Tea has many beneficial effects. We have previously reported that green tea and a
catechin-rich green tea beverage modulated the gene expression of the
gluconeogenic enzymes glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) and phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase (PEPCK) in the normal murine liver. In the present study, we
examined the effects of oral administration of oolong tea on the hepatic
expression of gluconeogenesis-related genes in the mouse. The intake of oolong
tea for 4 weeks reduced the hepatic expression of G6Pase and PEPCK together with 
that of the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4a. When rat
hepatoma H4IIE cells were incubated in the presence of oolong tea, the expression
of these genes was repressed in accordance with the findings in vivo. The reduced
protein expression of PEPCK and HNF4a was also demonstrated. We then fractionated
oolong tea by sequential extraction with three organic solvents to give three
fractions and the residual fraction (Fraction IV). In addition to organic
fractions, Fraction IV, which was devoid of low-molecular-weight catechins such
as (-)-epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG), had effects similar to those of oolong
tea on H4IIE cells. Fraction IV repressed the gene expression of insulin-like
growth factor binding protein 1, as insulin did. This activity was different from
that of EGCG. The present findings suggest that drinking oolong tea may help to
prevent diabetes and that oolong tea contains a component or components with
insulin-like activity distinguishable from EGCG. Identification of such
component(s) may open the way to developing a new drug for diabetes.

PMID: 21812644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. J Clin Invest. 2011 Sep;121(9):3724-34. doi: 10.1172/JCI45277. Epub 2011 Aug 1.

Farnesoid X receptor represses hepatic human APOA gene expression.

Chennamsetty I(1), Claudel T, Kostner KM, Baghdasaryan A, Kratky D, Levak-Frank
S, Frank S, Gonzalez FJ, Trauner M, Kostner GM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biochemistry, Center of Molecular Medicine,
Medical University of Graz, Graz, Austria.

High plasma concentrations of lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a), which is encoded by the APOA
gene] increase an individual's risk of developing diseases, such as coronary
artery diseases, restenosis, and stroke. Unfortunately, increased Lp(a) levels
are minimally influenced by dietary changes or drug treatment. Further, the
development of Lp(a)-specific medications has been hampered by limited knowledge 
of Lp(a) metabolism. In this study, we identified patients suffering from biliary
obstructions with very low plasma Lp(a) concentrations that rise substantially
after surgical intervention. Consistent with this, common bile duct ligation in
mice transgenic for human APOA (tg-APOA mice) lowered plasma concentrations and
hepatic expression of APOA. To test whether farnesoid X receptor (FXR), which is 
activated by bile acids, was responsible for the low plasma Lp(a) levels in
cholestatic patients and mice, we treated tg-APOA and tg-APOA/Fxr-/- mice with
cholic acid. FXR activation markedly reduced plasma concentrations and hepatic
expression of human APOA in tg-APOA mice but not in tg-APOA/Fxr-/- mice.
Incubation of primary hepatocytes from tg-APOA mice with bile acids dose
dependently downregulated APOA expression. Further analysis determined that the
direct repeat 1 element between nucleotides -826 and -814 of the APOA promoter
functioned as a negative FXR response element. This motif is also bound by
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a), which promotes APOA transcription, and FXR 
was shown to compete with HNF4a for binding to this motif. These findings may
have important implications in the development of Lp(a)-lowering medications.

PMCID: PMC3163948
PMID: 21804189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Bioinformatics. 2011 Oct 1;27(19):2625-32. doi: 10.1093/bioinformatics/btr397.
Epub 2011 Jul 19.

coMOTIF: a mixture framework for identifying transcription factor and a
coregulator motif in ChIP-seq data.

Xu M(1), Weinberg CR, Umbach DM, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Biostatistics Branch, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,
NIH, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

MOTIVATION: ChIP-seq data are enriched in binding sites for the protein
immunoprecipitated. Some sequences may also contain binding sites for a
coregulator. Biologists are interested in knowing which coregulatory factor
motifs may be present in the sequences bound by the protein ChIP'ed.
RESULTS: We present a finite mixture framework with an expectation-maximization
algorithm that considers two motifs jointly and simultaneously determines which
sequences contain both motifs, either one or neither of them. Tested on 10
simulated ChIP-seq datasets, our method performed better than repeated
application of MEME in predicting sequences containing both motifs. When applied 
to a mouse liver Foxa2 ChIP-seq dataset involving ~ 12 000 400-bp sequences,
coMOTIF identified co-occurrence of Foxa2 with Hnf4a, Cebpa, E-box, Ap1/Maf or
Sp1 motifs in ~6-33% of these sequences. These motifs are either known as
liver-specific transcription factors or have an important role in liver function.
AVAILABILITY: Freely available at
http://www.niehs.nih.gov/research/resources/software/comotif/.
CONTACT: li3@niehs.nih.gov
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics
online.

PMCID: PMC3179653
PMID: 21775309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Acta Diabetol. 2012 Oct;49(5):349-54. doi: 10.1007/s00592-011-0312-y. Epub 2011
Jul 16.

Characterization of beta cell and incretin function in patients with MODY1 (HNF4A
MODY) and MODY3 (HNF1A MODY) in a Swedish patient collection.

Ekholm E(1), Shaat N, Holst JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences/Diabetes and Endocrinology, Malmö University
Hospital, Lund University, Sweden. ella.ekholm@med.lu.se

The aim of this study was to evaluate the beta cell and incretin function in
patients with HNF4A and HNF1A MODY during a test meal. Clinical characteristics
and biochemical data (glucose, proinsulin, insulin, C-peptide, GLP-1 and GIP)
during a test meal were compared between MODY patients from eight different
families. BMI-matched T2D and healthy subjects were used as two separate control 
groups. The early phase of insulin secretion was attenuated in HNF4A, HNF1A MODY 
and T2D (AUC0-30 controls: 558.2 ± 101.2, HNF4A MODY: 93.8 ± 57.0, HNF1A MODY:
170.2 ± 64.5, T2D: 211.2 ± 65.3, P < 0.01). Markedly reduced levels of proinsulin
were found in HNF4A MODY compared to T2D and that tended to be so also in HNF1A
MODY (HNF4A MODY: 3.7 ± 1.2, HNF1A MODY: 8.3 ± 3.8 vs. T2D: 26.6 ± 14.3).
Patients with HNF4A MODY had similar total GLP-1 and GIP responses as controls
(GLP-1 AUC: (control: 823.9 ± 703.8, T2D: 556.4 ± 698.2, HNF4A MODY: 1,257.0 ±
999.3, HNF1A MODY: 697.1 ± 818.4) but with a different secretion pattern. The AUC
insulin during the test meal was strongly correlated with the GIP secretion
(Correlation coefficient 1.0, P < 0.001). No such correlation was seen for
insulin and GLP-1. Patients with HNF4A and HNF1A MODY showed an attenuated early 
phase of insulin secretion similar to T2Ds. AUC insulin during the test meal was 
strongly correlated with GIP secretion, whereas no such correlation was seen for 
insulin and GLP-1. Thus, GIP may be a more important factor for insulin secretion
than GLP-1 in MODY patients.

PMID: 21761282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Blood Coagul Fibrinolysis. 2011 Oct;22(7):624-7. doi:
10.1097/MBC.0b013e3283497699.

Mutation in the factor VII hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a-binding site contributes 
to factor VII deficiency.

Zheng XW(1), Kudaravalli R, Russell TT, DiMichele DM, Gibb C, Russell JE,
Margaritis P, Pollak ES.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, USA.

Severe coagulant factor VII (FVII) deficiency in postpubertal dizygotic twin
males results from two point mutations in the FVII gene, a promoter region T<U+2192>C
transition at -60 and a His-to-Arg substitution at amino acid 348; both mutations
prevent persistence of plasma functional FVII. This report documents longitudinal
laboratory measurements from infancy to adulthood of FVII coagulant activity
(FVII:C) in the twin FVII-deficient patients; it also details specific
biochemical analyses of the -60 T<U+2192>C mutation. The results revealed FVII:C levels 
of less than 1% in infancy that remain severely decreased through puberty and
into adulthood. In-vitro analyses utilizing hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) 
co-transfection and a chromatin immunoprecipitation assay indicate that the -60
T<U+2192>C mutation severely diminishes functional interaction between the FVII promoter
and transcription factor HNF4a. The importance of interaction between the FVII
gene and HNF4a in normal FVII expression provides an in-vivo illustration of the 
regulated expression of an autosomal gene encoding a coagulation protein. The
constancy of FVII:C and peripubertal patient symptomatology reported here
illustrates androgen-independent expression in contrast to expression with an
analogous mutation in the promoter region of the gene encoding coagulation FIX.

PMID: 21760481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Inflamm Bowel Dis. 2011 Aug;17(8):1714-8. doi: 10.1002/ibd.21541. Epub 2010 Nov
28.

HNF4a and CDH1 are associated with ulcerative colitis in a Dutch cohort.

van Sommeren S(1), Visschedijk MC, Festen EA, de Jong DJ, Ponsioen CY, Wijmenga
C, Weersma RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University Medical Center Groningen, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: Inflammatory bowel diseases (IBDs), consisting of ulcerative colitis 
(UC) and Crohn's disease (CD), are complex disorders with multiple genes
contributing to disease pathogenesis. A recent genome-wide association scan
identified three novel susceptibility loci for UC: HNF4a, CDH1, and LAMB1. We
performed an analysis of these three loci in an independent cohort.
METHODS: In all, 821 UC patients and 1260 healthy controls of central European
Caucasian descent were genotyped for single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs):
rs6017342 (HNF4a), rs1728785 (CDH1), and rs6949033 (LAMB1). Differences in allele
and genotype distribution in cases and controls were tested for significance with
the <U+03C7>² test.
RESULTS: Allelic association analysis showed that SNP rs6017342 in the HNF4a
locus was strongly associated with UC (P = 1,04 × 10(-11) , odds ratio [OR] =
1.56, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.37-1.77) and SNP rs1728785 (CDH1) was
associated with P = 0.01 (OR = 1.23, 95% CI = 1.05-1.44). SNP rs6949033 in LAMB1 
was not associated in our cohort (P = 0.12, OR = 1.11, 95% CI = 0.97-1.26). We
found an association for SNP rs6949033 (LAMB1) for disease limited to the rectum 
(P = 0.02). However, this association was lost after correcting for multiple
testing. No further specific subphenotype associations were identified.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first independent study to replicate the HNF4a and CDH1 
loci as susceptibility loci for UC. The main candidate genes in these risk loci
play important roles in the maintenance of the integrity of the epithelial
barrier, highlighting the importance of the mucosal barrier function for UC
pathogenesis.

Copyright © 2010 Crohn's & Colitis Foundation of America, Inc.

PMID: 21744425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. J Surg Res. 2012 Jun 15;175(2):298-304. doi: 10.1016/j.jss.2011.04.062. Epub 2011
May 24.

Injury-induced changes in liver specific transcription factors HNF-1a and HNF-4a.

Bauzá G(1), Miller G, Kaseje N, Wang Z, Sherburne A, Agarwal S, Burke PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

BACKGROUND: The hepatic acute phase response(APR) is an organ-specific response
to a diverse array of insults and is largely under transcriptional control.
Liver-specific transcription factors, hepatic nuclear factors (HNFs)-1a and 4a
play important roles in maintenance of liver phenotype and function and their
binding activity changes early after injury. However, their roles in modulation
of the liver's response over time are not defined.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: C57/BL6 mice were anesthetized and exposed to 95°C water
for 10 s to create a 15% body surface area full-thickness burn. At specific time 
points, the mice were sacrificed. An ELISA for IL-6 was performed on serum and
hepatic mRNA levels for fibrinogen-<U+03B3> and serum amyloid A(SAA)-3 were obtained
through polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Transcriptional factor binding activity 
was assessed with electrophoretic mobility shift assays.
RESULTS: Serum IL-6 levels peaked at 3 h and fibrinogen-<U+03B3> and SAA mRNA levels
increased more than 6-fold at 12 h before returning to control levels at 48 h.
The binding activity of HNF-4a and HNF-1a rapidly declined after injury (1.5 h)
but recovered to near control level at 24 and 6 h, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Changes in HNF-4a and HNF-1a binding occurred before changes in
acute phase protein mRNA levels and were preceded by the peak in IL-6 levels. The
rapid suppression and reconstitution of liver-specific transcription factor
binding after injury may represent a mechanism that allows the normal liver
phenotype to change and an injury-response phenotype to prevail. This mechanism
in the liver's adaptive response to injury suggests a central role for both
HNF-4a and HNF-1a in transcriptional regulation of the hepatic APR.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3191271
PMID: 21737100  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Hum Pathol. 2011 Nov;42(11):1777-84. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2011.04.002.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A expression discriminates gastric involvement by
metastatic breast carcinomas from primary gastric adenocarcinomas.

Koyama T(1), Sekine S, Taniguchi H, Tsuda H, Ikegami M, Hano H, Kushima R.

Author information: 
(1)Pathology and Clinical Laboratory Division, National Cancer Center Hospital,
104-0045 Tokyo, Japan.

Breast carcinomas sometimes metastasize to the stomach, and the histopathologic
distinction of such metastases from primary gastric adenocarcinomas is often
difficult. We characterized the clinicopathologic features of 21 breast
carcinomas that had metastasized to the stomach and examined the use of a panel
of antibodies, including hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A, for distinguishing the
metastases from primary gastric diffuse-type adenocarcinomas. Histologically, all
the metastatic breast carcinomas showed a poorly differentiated and/or signet
ring cell morphology. Although most metastatic breast and primary gastric
carcinomas contained signet ring cell components, the cases that were
predominantly or exclusively composed of univacuolated-type signet ring cells
were limited to metastatic breast carcinomas. Immunohistochemically, hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4A was expressed in all 33 primary gastric carcinomas that were
examined but was never expressed in metastatic breast carcinomas. Previously
reported markers for breast and gastric carcinomas also showed a high
specificity, but their sensitivities were quite variable. Estrogen receptor a,
progesterone receptor, mammaglobin, and gross cystic disease fluid protein 15
were expressed in 76%, 33%, 52%, and 62%, respectively, of the metastatic breast 
carcinomas, whereas none of the primary gastric carcinomas expressed these
antigens. CDX2, MUC5AC, MUC6, and CK20 were expressed in 36%, 85%, 27%, and 55%, 
respectively, of the primary gastric carcinomas. All the metastatic breast
carcinomas were negative for these antibodies except for 1 case that expressed
MUC5AC. Overall, the use of immunohistochemistry efficiently discriminated
metastatic breast carcinomas from primary gastric carcinomas. In particular, the 
present study identified hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A as an excellent marker for 
differentiating the 2 lesions.

PMID: 21733563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 26;286(34):29635-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.253039. Epub
2011 Jul 3.

Diurnal regulation of the early growth response 1 (Egr-1) protein expression by
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) and small heterodimer partner (SHP) 
cross-talk in liver fibrosis.

Zhang Y(1), Bonzo JA, Gonzalez FJ, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Huntsman Cancer Institute, University of Utah School
of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84132, USA.

Early growth response 1 (Egr-1) protein is a critical regulator of genes
contributing to liver fibrosis; however, little is known about the upstream
transcriptional factors that control its expression. Here we show that Egr-1
expression is tightly regulated by nuclear receptor signaling. Hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4a (HNF4a) activated the Egr-1 promoter through three DR1 response
elements as identified by trans-activation assays. Deletion of these response
elements or knockdown of HNF4a using siRNA largely abrogated Egr-1 promoter
activation. HNF4a activity, as well as its enrichment on the Egr-1 promoter, were
markedly repressed by small heterodimer partner (SHP) co-expression. Egr-1 mRNA
and protein were transiently induced by HNF4a. On the contrary, HNF4a siRNA
reduced Egr-1 expression at both the mRNA and protein levels, and overexpression 
of SHP reversed these effects. Conversely, knockdown of SHP by siRNA elevated
Egr-1 protein. Interestingly, Egr-1 mRNA exhibited diurnal fluctuation, which was
synchronized to the cyclic expression of SHP and HNF4a after cells were released 
from serum shock. Unexpectedly, the levels of Egr-1 mRNA and protein were highly 
up-regulated in Hnf4a(-/-) mice. Both HNF4a and Egr-1 expression were
dramatically increased in SHP(-/-) mice with bile duct ligation and in human
cirrhotic livers, which was inversely correlated with diminished SHP expression. 
In conclusion, our study revealed control network for Egr-1 expression through a 
feedback loop between SHP and HNF4a.

PMCID: PMC3191004
PMID: 21725089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Nature. 2011 Jun 29;475(7356):390-3. doi: 10.1038/nature10263.

Direct conversion of mouse fibroblasts to hepatocyte-like cells by defined
factors.

Sekiya S(1), Suzuki A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Organogenesis and Regeneration, Medical Institute of
Bioregulation, Kyushu University, 3-1-1 Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582,
Japan.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2012 Jan;55(1):316-8.
    Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Aug 5;9(2):89-91.
    Nat Rev Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2011 Sep;8(9):474.

The location and timing of cellular differentiation must be stringently
controlled for proper organ formation. Normally, hepatocytes differentiate from
hepatic progenitor cells to form the liver during development. However, previous 
studies have shown that the hepatic program can also be activated in non-hepatic 
lineage cells after exposure to particular stimuli or fusion with hepatocytes.
These unexpected findings suggest that factors critical to hepatocyte
differentiation exist and become activated to induce hepatocyte-specific
properties in different cell types. Here, by screening the effects of twelve
candidate factors, we identify three specific combinations of two transcription
factors, comprising Hnf4a plus Foxa1, Foxa2 or Foxa3, that can convert mouse
embryonic and adult fibroblasts into cells that closely resemble hepatocytes in
vitro. The induced hepatocyte-like (iHep) cells have multiple hepatocyte-specific
features and reconstitute damaged hepatic tissues after transplantation. The
generation of iHep cells may provide insights into the molecular nature of
hepatocyte differentiation and potential therapies for liver diseases.

PMID: 21716291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jul 15;410(4):749-53. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.06.033. Epub 2011 Jun 17.

Multiple post-translational modifications in hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a.

Yokoyama A(1), Katsura S, Ito R, Hashiba W, Sekine H, Fujiki R, Kato S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cellular Biosciences, University of Tokyo, 1-1-1
Yayoi, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-0032, Japan.

To investigate the role of post-translational modifications (PTMs) in the
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a)-mediated transcription, we took a
comprehensive survey of PTMs in HNF4a protein by mass-spectrometry and identified
totally 8 PTM sites including newly identified ubiquitilation and acetylation
sites. To assess the impact of identified PTMs in HNF4a-function, we introduced
point mutations at the identified PTM sites and, tested transcriptional activity 
of the HNF4a. Among the point-mutations, an acetylation site at lysine 458 was
found significant in the HNF4a-mediated transcriptional control. An acetylation
negative mutant at lysine 458 showed an increased transcriptional activity by
about 2-fold, while an acetylation mimic mutant had a lowered transcriptional
activation. Furthermore, this acetylation appeared to be fluctuated in response
to extracellular nutrient conditions. Thus, by applying an comprehensive analysis
of PTMs, multiple PTMs were newly identified in HNF4a and unexpected role of an
HNF4a acetylation could be uncovered.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21708125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Diabetes Care. 2011 Aug;34(8):1860-2. doi: 10.2337/dc11-0323. Epub 2011 Jun 23.

High-sensitivity CRP discriminates HNF1A-MODY from other subtypes of diabetes.

McDonald TJ(1), Shields BM, Lawry J, Owen KR, Gloyn AL, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula College of Medicine and Dentistry, Peninsula NIHR Clinical
ResearchFacility, Exeter, Devon, UK. tim.mcdonald@rdeft.nhs.uk

Comment in
    Diabetes Care. 2011 Dec;34(12):e186; author reply e187.

OBJECTIVE: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) as a result of mutations
in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-a (HNF1A) is often misdiagnosed as type 1 diabetes
or type 2 diabetes. Recent work has shown that high-sensitivity C-reactive
protein (hs-CRP) levels are lower in HNF1A-MODY than type 1 diabetes, type 2
diabetes, or glucokinase (GCK)-MODY. We aim to replicate these findings in larger
numbers and other MODY subtypes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: hs-CRP levels were assessed in 750 patients (220
HNF1A, 245 GCK, 54 HNF4-a [HNF4A], 21 HNF1-ß (HNF1B), 53 type 1 diabetes, and 157
type 2 diabetes).
RESULTS: hs-CRP was lower in HNF1A-MODY (median [IQR] 0.3 [0.1-0.6] mg/L) than
type 2 diabetes (1.40 [0.60-3.45] mg/L; P < 0.001) and type 1 diabetes (1.10
[0.50-1.85] mg/L; P < 0.001), HNF4A-MODY (1.45 [0.46-2.88] mg/L; P < 0.001),
GCK-MODY (0.60 [0.30-1.80] mg/L; P < 0.001), and HNF1B-MODY (0.60 [0.10-2.8]
mg/L; P = 0.07). hs-CRP discriminated HNF1A-MODY from type 2 diabetes with hs-CRP
<0.75 mg/L showing 79% sensitivity and 70% specificity (receiver operating
characteristic area under the curve = 0.84).
CONCLUSIONS: hs-CRP levels are lower in HNF1A-MODY than other forms of diabetes
and may be used as a biomarker to select patients for diagnostic HNF1A genetic
testing.

PMCID: PMC3142017
PMID: 21700917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Chem Res Toxicol. 2011 Aug 15;24(8):1251-62. doi: 10.1021/tx200148a. Epub 2011
Jul 21.

Predicting drug-induced hepatotoxicity using QSAR and toxicogenomics approaches.

Low Y(1), Uehara T, Minowa Y, Yamada H, Ohno Y, Urushidani T, Sedykh A, Muratov
E, Kuz'min V, Fourches D, Zhu H, Rusyn I, Tropsha A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Molecular Modeling, University of North Carolina , Chapel Hill,
North Carolina 27599, United States.

Quantitative structure-activity relationship (QSAR) modeling and toxicogenomics
are typically used independently as predictive tools in toxicology. In this
study, we evaluated the power of several statistical models for predicting drug
hepatotoxicity in rats using different descriptors of drug molecules, namely,
their chemical descriptors and toxicogenomics profiles. The records were taken
from the Toxicogenomics Project rat liver microarray database containing
information on 127 drugs ( http://toxico.nibio.go.jp/datalist.html ). The model
end point was hepatotoxicity in the rat following 28 days of continuous exposure,
established by liver histopathology and serum chemistry. First, we developed
multiple conventional QSAR classification models using a comprehensive set of
chemical descriptors and several classification methods (k nearest neighbor,
support vector machines, random forests, and distance weighted discrimination).
With chemical descriptors alone, external predictivity (correct classification
rate, CCR) from 5-fold external cross-validation was 61%. Next, the same
classification methods were employed to build models using only toxicogenomics
data (24 h after a single exposure) treated as biological descriptors. The
optimized models used only 85 selected toxicogenomics descriptors and had CCR as 
high as 76%. Finally, hybrid models combining both chemical descriptors and
transcripts were developed; their CCRs were between 68 and 77%. Although the
accuracy of hybrid models did not exceed that of the models based on
toxicogenomics data alone, the use of both chemical and biological descriptors
enriched the interpretation of the models. In addition to finding 85 transcripts 
that were predictive and highly relevant to the mechanisms of drug-induced liver 
injury, chemical structural alerts for hepatotoxicity were identified. These
results suggest that concurrent exploration of the chemical features and acute
treatment-induced changes in transcript levels will both enrich the mechanistic
understanding of subchronic liver injury and afford models capable of accurate
prediction of hepatotoxicity from chemical structure and short-term assay
results.

PMCID: PMC4281093
PMID: 21699217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Diabetes Metab. 2011 Dec;37(6):512-9. doi: 10.1016/j.diabet.2011.04.002. Epub
2011 Jun 16.

Identification of HNF1A-MODY and HNF4A-MODY in Irish families: phenotypic
characteristics and therapeutic implications.

Kyithar MP(1), Bacon S, Pannu KK, Rizvi SR, Colclough K, Ellard S, Byrne MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Mater Misericordiae University Hospital, Dublin, 
Ireland. pyehkyithar@hotmail.com

AIM: The prevalence of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1A and HNF4A mutations,
and the clinical implications following the genetic diagnosis of maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) in the Irish population, remain unknown. The aim of 
this study was to establish the occurrence of HNF1A and HNF4A mutations in
subjects classified clinically as MODY to identify novel mutations, and to
determine the phenotypic features and response to therapy.
METHODS: A total of 36 unrelated index cases with a clinical diagnosis of MODY
were analyzed for HNF1A/HNF4A mutations. OGTT was performed to determine the
degree of glucose tolerance and insulin secretory response. Also, 38 relatives
underwent OGTT and were tested for the relevant known mutations.
HNF1A-/HNF4A-MODY subjects were compared with nine HNF1A mutation-negative
relatives and 20 type 2 diabetic (T2DM) patients.
RESULTS: Seven different HNF1A mutations were identified in 11/36 (30.5%) index
cases, two of which were novel (S352fsdelG and F426X), as well as two novel HNF4A
mutations (M1? and R290C; 6%). Family screening revealed 20 subjects with HNF1A
and seven with HNF4A mutations. Only 51.6% of HNF1A mutation carriers were
diagnosed with diabetes by age 25 years; 11 of the mutation carriers were
overweight and four were obese. Insulin secretory response to glucose was
significantly lower in HNF1A-MODY subjects than in T2DM patients and HNF1A
mutation-negative relatives (P=0.01). Therapeutic changes occurred in 48% of
mutation carriers following genetic diagnosis.
CONCLUSION: There was an HNF1A-MODY pick-up rate of 30.5% and an HNF4A-MODY
pick-up rate of 6% in Irish MODY families. Genetically confirmed MODY has
significant therapeutic implications.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21683639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Sep 1;20(17):3525-34. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr264. Epub 2011 Jun 
15.

A gene-centric association scan for Coagulation Factor VII levels in European and
African Americans: the Candidate Gene Association Resource (CARe) Consortium.

Taylor KC(1), Lange LA, Zabaneh D, Lange E, Keating BJ, Tang W, Smith NL, Delaney
JA, Kumari M, Hingorani A, North KE, Kivimaki M, Tracy RP, O'Donnell CJ, Folsom
AR, Green D, Humphries SE, Reiner AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
Gillings School of Global Public Health, Chapel Hill, NC 27514, USA.
kirat@email.unc.edu

Polymorphisms in several distinct genomic regions, including the F7 gene, were
recently associated with factor VII (FVII) levels in European Americans (EAs).
The genetic determinants of FVII in African Americans (AAs) are unknown. We used 
a 50,000 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) gene-centric array having dense
coverage of over 2,000 candidate genes for cardiovascular disease (CVD) pathways 
in a community-based sample of 16,324 EA and 3898 AA participants from the
Candidate Gene Association Resource (CARe) consortium. Our aim was the discovery 
of new genomic loci and more detailed characterization of existing loci
associated with FVII levels. In EAs, we identified three new loci associated with
FVII, of which APOA5 on chromosome 11q23 and HNF4A on chromosome 20q12-13 were
replicated in a sample of 4289 participants from the Whitehall II study. We
confirmed four previously reported FVII-associated loci (GCKR, MS4A6A, F7 and
PROCR) in CARe EA samples. In AAs, the F7 and PROCR regions were significantly
associated with FVII. Several of the FVII-associated regions are known to be
associated with lipids and other cardiovascular-related traits. At the F7 locus, 
there was evidence of at least five independently associated SNPs in EAs and
three independent signals in AAs. Though the variance in FVII explained by the
existing loci is substantial (20% in EA and 10% in AA), larger sample sizes and
investigation of lower frequency variants may be required to identify additional 
FVII-associated loci in EAs and AAs and further clarify the relationship between 
FVII and other CVD risk factors.

PMCID: PMC3153310
PMID: 21676895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Nat Biotechnol. 2011 Jun 7;29(6):480-3. doi: 10.1038/nbt.1893.

Quantitative analysis demonstrates most transcription factors require only simple
models of specificity.

Zhao Y, Stormo GD.

Comment in
    Nat Biotechnol. 2011 Jun;29(6):483-4.

PMCID: PMC3111930
PMID: 21654662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. J Biol Chem. 2011 Aug 26;286(34):29848-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.217745. Epub
2011 Jun 6.

Cell type-specific target selection by combinatorial binding of Smad2/3 proteins 
and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha in HepG2 cells.

Mizutani A(1), Koinuma D, Tsutsumi S, Kamimura N, Morikawa M, Suzuki HI, Imamura 
T, Miyazono K, Aburatani H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Specific regulation of target genes by transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß) in a 
given cellular context is determined in part by transcription factors and
cofactors that interact with the Smad complex. In this study, we determined Smad2
and Smad3 (Smad2/3) binding regions in the promoters of known genes in HepG2
hepatoblastoma cells, and we compared them with those in HaCaT epidermal
keratinocytes to elucidate the mechanisms of cell type- and context-dependent
regulation of transcription induced by TGF-ß. Our results show that 81% of the
Smad2/3 binding regions in HepG2 cells were not shared with those found in HaCaT 
cells. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) is expressed in HepG2 cells but not
in HaCaT cells, and the HNF4a-binding motif was identified as an enriched motif
in the HepG2-specific Smad2/3 binding regions. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
sequencing analysis of HNF4a binding regions under TGF-ß stimulation revealed
that 32.5% of the Smad2/3 binding regions overlapped HNF4a bindings. MIXL1 was
identified as a new combinatorial target of HNF4a and Smad2/3, and both the HNF4a
protein and its binding motif were required for the induction of MIXL1 by TGF-ß
in HepG2 cells. These findings generalize the importance of binding of HNF4a on
Smad2/3 binding genomic regions for HepG2-specific regulation of transcription by
TGF-ß and suggest that certain transcription factors expressed in a cell
type-specific manner play important roles in the transcription regulated by the
TGF-ß-Smad signaling pathway.

PMCID: PMC3191026
PMID: 21646355  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Genes Dev. 2011 Jun 1;25(11):1185-92. doi: 10.1101/gad.2027811.

Foxl1-Cre-marked adult hepatic progenitors have clonogenic and bilineage
differentiation potential.

Shin S(1), Walton G, Aoki R, Brondell K, Schug J, Fox A, Smirnova O, Dorrell C,
Erker L, Chu AS, Wells RG, Grompe M, Greenbaum LE, Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, USA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2012 Jan;55(1):319-21.

Isolation of hepatic progenitor cells is a promising approach for cell
replacement therapy of chronic liver disease. The winged helix transcription
factor Foxl1 is a marker for progenitor cells and their descendants in the mouse 
liver in vivo. Here, we purify progenitor cells from Foxl1-Cre; RosaYFP mice and 
evaluate their proliferative and differentiation potential in vitro. Treatment of
Foxl1-Cre; RosaYFP mice with a 3,5-diethoxycarbonyl-1,4-dihydrocollidine diet led
to an increase of the percentage of YFP-labeled Foxl1(+) cells. Clonogenic assays
demonstrated that up to 3.6% of Foxl1(+) cells had proliferative potential.
Foxl1(+) cells differentiated into cholangiocytes and hepatocytes in vitro,
depending on the culture condition employed. Microarray analyses indicated that
Foxl1(+) cells express stem cell markers such as Prom1 as well as differentiation
markers such as Ck19 and Hnf4a. Thus, the Foxl1-Cre; RosaYFP model allows for
easy isolation of adult hepatic progenitor cells that can be expanded and
differentiated in culture.

PMCID: PMC3110956
PMID: 21632825  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Aging (Albany NY). 2011 May;3(5):548-54.

Maternal diet, aging and diabetes meet at a chromatin loop.

Ozanne SE(1), Sandovici I, Constância M.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Research Laboratories, Institute of Metabolic Science, University of
Cambridge, United Kingdom. seo10@mole.bio.cam.ac.uk

We have recently demonstrated that exposure to a suboptimal diet during early
development leads to abnormal epigenetic regulation of a promoter-enhancer
interaction at the gene encoding HNF-4a, a key transcription factor required for 
pancreatic ß-cell differentiation and glucose homeostasis. In addition, our
studies revealed that the suboptimal maternal diet amplifies the age-associated
epigenetic silencing of this locus. In this research perspective we discuss these
novel findings in the context of the growing list of epigenetic mechanisms by
which the environment can affect gene activity and emphasize their implications
for the understanding of the mechanistic basis of the development of type 2
diabetes with age.

PMCID: PMC3156605
PMID: 21623004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Dtsch Med Wochenschr. 2011 May;136(21):1111-5. doi: 10.1055/s-0031-1280519. Epub 
2011 May 17.

[Clinical parameters for molecular testing of Maturity Onset Diabetes of the
Young (MODY)].

[Article in German]

Datz N(1), Nestoris C, von Schütz W, Danne T, Driesel AJ, Maringa M, Kordonouri
O.

Author information: 
(1)Diabeteszentrum für Kinder und Jugendliche, Kinderkrankenhaus auf der Bult,
Hannover, Deutschland. datz@hka.de

BACKGROUND: Monogenic forms of diabetes are often diagnosed by chance, due to the
variety of clinical presentation and limited experience of the diabetologists
with this kind of diabetes. Aim of this study was to evaluate clinical parameters
for an efficient screening.
METHODS: Clinical parameters were: negative diabetes-specific antibodies at onset
of diabetes, positive family history of diabetes, and low to moderate insulin
requirements after one year of diabetes treatment. Molecular testing was
performed through sequencing of the programming regions of HNF-4alpha (MODY 1),
glucokinase (MODY 2) and HNF-1alpha/TCF1 (MODY 3) and in one patient the
HNF-1beta/TCF2 region (MODY 5). 39 of 292 patients treated with insulin were
negative for GADA and IA2A, and 8 (20.5%) patients fulfilled both other criteria.
RESULTS: Positive molecular results were found in five (63%) patients (two with
MODY 2, two with MODY 3, one with MODY 5). At diabetes onset, the mean age of the
5 patients with MODY was 10.6 ± 5.3 yrs (range 2.6-15 yrs), HbA(1c) was 8.4 ± 3.1
% (6.5-13.9%), mean diabetes duration until diagnosis of MODY was 3.3 ± 3.6 yrs
(0.8-9.6 yrs) with insulin requirements of 0.44 ± 0.17 U/kg/d (0.2-0.6 U/kg/d).
Patients with MODY 3 were changed from insulin to repaglinide, those with MODY 2 
were recommended discontinuing insulin treatment.
CONCLUSION: In patients with negative diabetes-specific antibodies at onset of
diabetes, with a positive family history, and low to moderate insulin needs a
genetic screening for MODY is indicated. Watchful consideration of these clinical
parameters may lead to an early genetic testing, and to an adequate treatment.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

PMID: 21590629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Biomed Res. 2011 Apr;32(2):119-25.

Effects of a catechin-free fraction derived from green tea on gene expression of 
gluconeogenic enzymes in rat hepatoma H4IIE cells and in the mouse liver.

Yasui K(1), Miyoshi N, Tanabe H, Ishigami Y, Fukutomi R, Imai S, Isemura M.

Author information: 
(1)Health Care Research Center, Nisshin Pharma Inc., Fujimino, Saitama, Japan.

Many biological activities of green tea have been attributed to a major
constituent, (-)-epigallocatechin gallate (EGCG). We previously reported that
EGCG and a catechin-rich green tea beverage modulated the gene expression of
gluconeogenic enzymes, glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) and phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase (PEPCK), in the mouse liver. However, it remains to be examined
whether or not a constituent other than EGCG contributes to the change in gene
expression of these enzymes. In this study, we separated the hot water infusion
of green tea leaves (GT) into an ethanol-soluble fraction (GT-E) and an EGCG-free
water-soluble fraction (GT-W), and examined their effects using rat hepatoma
H4IIE cells. The inclusion of GT, GT-E, and GT-W in the culture medium reduced
the gene expression of G6Pase and PEPCK. GT-W caused a decrease in expression of 
the transcription factor HNF4a. Reduced levels of PEPCK and HNF4a proteins were
demonstrated in the cells treated with GT-W. GT-W showed an activity similar to
insulin, but different from EGCG. Administration of GT-W to mice for 4 weeks
reduced the hepatic expression of G6Pase, PEPCK, and HNF4a. These results suggest
that green tea contains some component(s) with insulin-like activity
distinguishable from EGCG and that drinking green tea may help to prevent
diabetes.

PMID: 21551947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Transplantation. 2011 May 27;91(10):1114-9. doi: 10.1097/TP.0b013e31821620f9.

Genetic and clinical risk factors of new-onset diabetes after transplantation in 
Hispanic kidney transplant recipients.

Yang J(1), Hutchinson II, Shah T, Min DI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy Practice, School of Pharmacy, University of Kansas,
Kansas City, KS, USA. jyang2@kumc.edu

BACKGROUND: New-onset diabetes after transplantation (NODAT) is one of the major 
complications after transplantation and is associated with reduced overall
patient and graft survival. The objective of this study was to determine the
genetic and clinical risk factors for NODAT in Hispanic kidney transplant
recipients.
METHODS: Hispanic kidney allograft recipients without evidence of preexisting
diabetes who developed NODAT (n=133) were studied using Hispanic kidney
transplant recipients with no evidence of diabetes as a control group (n=170).
NODAT was defined as fasting glucose levels =126 mg/dL on two or more occasions
or patients taking any insulin or oral hypoglycemic agents 1 month or later after
kidney transplantation. Fourteen alleles in nine genes were genotyped and other
patients' clinical data with genotype data were analyzed by logistic regression.
RESULTS: Among 14 alleles, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4A) AA
(rs2144908, odds ratio [OR]=1.96, confidence interval [CI]=1.08-3.50, P=0.010),
HNF4A TT (rs1884614, OR=2.44, CI=1.42-4.48, P=0.002), and insulin receptor
substrate 1 AA+AG (rs1801278, OR=2.71, CI=1.16-6.89, P=0.021) remained
significant after logistic regression. Among the clinical factors, average age
(OR=1.01, CI=1.00-1.08, P=0.048), sirolimus (OR=5.36, CI=3.02-10.4, P=0.001),
deceased donor (OR=1.96, CI=1.16-2.94, P=0.015), and acute rejection (OR=2.92,
CI=1.31-5.77, P=0.009) remained significant after logistic regression.
CONCLUSION: This study indicates that polymorphism of two alleles of HNF-4A gene 
(rs2144908 and rs1884614) and insulin receptor substrate 1 (rs1801278) are
significantly associated with NODAT in kidney transplant patients with Hispanic
ethnicity. In the case of clinical factors, older age (>50 year), deceased donor 
type, acute rejection, and sirolimus use are associated with NODAT in Hispanic
kidney transplant recipients.

PMID: 21544032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Endocrinology. 2011 Jul;152(7):2716-21. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1443. Epub 2011 May 
3.

Prenatal glucocorticoid overexposure causes permanent increases in renal
erythropoietin expression and red blood cell mass in the rat offspring.

Tang JI(1), Seckl JR, Nyirenda MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Queen's Medical Research Institute,
University of Edinburgh, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh, EH16 4 TJ,
Scotland, United Kingdom.

Glucocorticoids promote maturation of fetal systems, including erythropoiesis, in
preparation for extrauterine life. However, recent studies have shown that
prenatal glucocorticoid excess can cause long-term deleterious cardiometabolic
and other consequences to the offspring. Here, we examined the effect of prenatal
treatment with the synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone (DEX) during the last
week of gestation on red blood cell (RBC) mass in the rat offspring. DEX-treated 
offspring at 9 months of age had significantly higher RBC count (9.4 ± 0.1 vs.
8.8 ± 0.2 × 10(12) liter; P = 0.02), hematocrit (50.0 ± 0.5 vs. 46.7 ± 0.7%;
P=0.004), hemoglobin (17.3 ± 0.2 vs. 16.2 ± 0.2 g/dl; P = 0.02) and number of
reticulocytes (258.2 ± 8.8 vs. 235.7 ± 5.6 × 10(9) liter; P = 0.04), compared
with offspring of vehicle-treated control pregnancies. White blood cells and
platelets were unaltered. Renal mRNA expression and plasma concentrations of
erythropoietin, the main regulator of erythropoiesis, were increased by nearly
100% in both newborn and adult DEX-treated rats (P < 0.01). This increase was
accompanied by marked elevation in renal expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 
4a mRNA, whereas other erythropoietin-regulating transcription factors, such as
hypoxia-inducible factor 1, hypoxia-inducible factor 2, and GATA2 were unchanged.
These data indicate that RBC mass can be programmed by prenatal glucocorticoid
excess, and if extrapolatable to humans, provide a novel mechanism for fetal
origins of polycythemia and its associated complications.

PMID: 21540288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. J Endocrinol Invest. 2011 Mar;34(3):252-3.

Macrosomia, transient neonatal hypoglycemia, and monogenic diabetes in a family
with heterozygous mutation R154X of HNF4A gene.

Colombo C, Geraci C, Suprani T, Pocecco M, Barbetti F.

PMID: 21537110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2011 Oct;75(4):422-6. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2011.04049.x.

Who should have genetic testing for maturity-onset diabetes of the young?

Naylor R(1), Philipson LH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Kovler Diabetes Center, The University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 606037, USA.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a clinically heterogeneous group
of monogenic disorders characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance of
young-onset, non-insulin-dependent diabetes. The genes involved are important in 
beta cell development, function and regulation and lead to disorders in glucose
sensing and insulin secretion. Heterozygous GCK mutations cause impaired
glucokinase activity resulting in stable, mild hyperglycaemia that rarely
requires treatment. HNF1A mutations cause a progressive insulin secretory defect 
that is sensitive to sulphonylureas, most often resulting in improved glycaemic
control compared with other diabetes treatment. MODY owing to mutations in the
HNF4A gene results in a similar phenotype, including sensitivity to sulphonylurea
treatment. HNF1B mutations most frequently cause developmental renal disease
(particularly renal cysts) but may also cause MODY in isolation or may cause the 
renal cysts and diabetes syndrome (RCAD syndrome). Mutations in NEUROD1, PDX1
(IPF1), CEL and INS are rare causes of MODY. MODY is often misdiagnosed as type 1
or type 2 diabetes. However, a correct genetic diagnosis impacts treatment and
identifies at-risk family members. Thus, it is important to consider a diagnosis 
of MODY in appropriate individuals and to pursue genetic testing to establish a
molecular diagnosis.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21521318  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Pediatr Diabetes. 2011 May;12(3 Pt 1):142-9. doi:
10.1111/j.1399-5448.2010.00681.x. Epub 2010 Sep 6.

Persistently autoantibody negative (PAN) type 1 diabetes mellitus in children.

Hameed S(1), Ellard S, Woodhead HJ, Neville KA, Walker JL, Craig ME, Armstrong T,
Yu L, Eisenbarth GS, Hattersley AT, Verge CF.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology, Sydney Children's Hospital, Randwick, NSW, Australia.
shihab.hameed@sesiahs.health.nsw.gov.au

Comment in
    Pediatr Diabetes. 2011 May;12(3 Pt 1):139-41.

BACKGROUND: Autoantibody-negative children diagnosed with type 1 diabetes might
have unrecognized monogenic or type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: At diagnosis of type 1 diabetes (between ages 0.5
and 16.3 yr, n = 470), autoantibodies [glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD),
insulinoma-associated protein 2 (IA2), insulin autoantibodies (IAA), and/or islet
cell antibody (ICA)] were positive (ab+) in 330 and negative in 37 (unknown in
103). Autoantibody-negative patients were retested at median diabetes duration of
3.2 yr (range 0.9-16.2) for autoantibodies (GAD, IA2, ZnT8), human leukocyte
antigen (HLA) typing, non-fasting C-peptide, and sequencing of HNF4A, HNF1A,
KCNJ11, and INS.
RESULTS: Nineteen (5% of 367) remained persistently autoantibody negative (PAN), 
17 were positive on repeat testing (PORT), and 1 refused retesting. No mutations 
were found in PORT. One PAN was heterozygous for P112L mutation in HNF1A and
transferred from insulin to oral gliclazide. Another PAN transferred to metformin
and the diagnosis was revised to type 2 diabetes. The remaining 17 PAN were
indistinguishable from the ab+ group by clinical characteristics. HLA genotype
was at high risk for type 1 diabetes in 82% of remaining PAN and 100% of PORT.
After excluding patients with diabetes duration <1 yr, C-peptide was detectable
more frequently in the remaining PAN (7/16) and PORT (6/17) than in a random
selection of ab+ (3/28, p = 0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: The diagnosis of type 1 diabetes should be reevaluated in PAN
patients, because a subset has monogenic or type 2 diabetes. The remaining PAN
have relatively preserved C-peptide compared with ab+, suggesting slower ß-cell
destruction, but a very high frequency of diabetogenic HLA, implying that type 1B
(idiopathic) diabetes is rare.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21518407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Ann Surg. 2011 Aug;254(2):302-10. doi: 10.1097/SLA.0b013e31821994a8.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4a expression distinguishes ampullary cancer
subtypes and prognosis after resection.

Ehehalt F(1), Rümmele P, Kersting S, Lang-Schwarz C, Rückert F, Hartmann A,
Dietmaier W, Terracciano L, Aust DE, Jahnke B, Saeger HD, Pilarsky C, Grützmann
R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Thoracic and Vascular Surgery, University Hospital
Dresden, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate biological differences and prognostic indicators of
different ampullary cancer (AC) subtypes.
BACKGROUND: AC is associated with a favorable prognosis compared with other
periampullary carcinomas. Aside from other prognostic factors, the histological
origin of AC may determine survival. Specifically, the pancreatobiliary subtype
of AC displays worse prognosis compared with the intestinal subtype. However,
knowledge of inherent molecular characteristics of different periampullary tumors
and their effects on prognosis has been limited.
METHODS: Gene expression profiling was used to screen for differential gene
expression between 6 PDAC cases and 12 AC cases. Among others, hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4a (HNF4a) mRNA overexpression was observed in AC cases. Nuclear HNF4a
protein expression was assessed using tissue microarrays consisting of 99
individual AC samples. The correlation of HNF4a expression with
clinicopathological data (n = 99) and survival (n = 84) was assessed.
RESULTS: HNF4a mRNA is 7.61-fold up-regulated in AC compared with that in PDAC.
Bioinformatics analyses indicated its key role in dysregulated signaling
pathways. Nuclear HNF4a expression correlates with histological subtype, grading,
CDX2 positivity, MUC1 negativity and presence of adenomatous components in the
carcinoma. The presence of HNF4a is a univariate predictor of survival in AC mean
survival (50 months versus 119 months, P = 0.002). Multivariate analysis revealed
that HNF4a negativity (HR = 17.95, 95% CI: 2.35-136.93, P = 0.005) and lymph node
positivity (HR = 3.33, 95% CI: 1.36-8.18, P = 0.009) are independent negative
predictors of survival.
CONCLUSIONS: Immunohistochemical determination of HNF4a expression is an
effective tool for distinguishing different AC subtypes. Similarly, HNF4a protein
expression is an independent predictor of favorable prognosis in carcinoma of the
papilla of Vater and may serve for risk stratification after curative resection.

PMID: 21494118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Pathol Res Pract. 2011 May 15;207(5):332-6. doi: 10.1016/j.prp.2011.02.010. Epub 
2011 Apr 13.

Primary hepatoid adenocarcinoma of the uterine corpus: A case report with
immunohistochemical study for expression of liver-enriched nuclear factors.

Ishibashi K(1), Kishimoto T, Yonemori Y, Hirashiki K, Hiroshima K, Nakatani Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

We report a case of hepatoid adenocarcinoma of the uterus in an 86-year-old
woman. Serum AFP was elevated (7824ng/ml) on admission. The surgical specimen
obtained by simple hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy showed an
exophytic tumor, 10.5cm×6.0cm×3.7cm in size, in the uterine corpus.
Microscopically, tumor cells proliferated in trabecular or cord-like arrangement,
which was considered as "hepatoid appearance". An adenocarcinomatous component
was intermingled. The expressions of liver-enriched transcription factors,
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1ß, HNF-3, HNF-4a, and CCAAT/enhancer binding
protein (C/EBP)-ß, were investigated in the present case and in 19 cases of
endometrioid adenocarcinoma (11 cases of Grade 2 and 8 cases of Grade 3), because
these nuclear factors are involved in embryonal hepatogenesis. HNF-4a was
diffusely positive in the present case, but negative in all cases of endometrioid
adenocarcinoma. HNF-3 and C/EBP-ß were positive for the present case and control 
adenocarcinoma cases (HNF-3, 36.8% and C/EBP-ß, 84.2%). HNF-1ß was negative for
both the present case and endometrioid adenocarcinomas. This is the first report 
to demonstrate HNF-4a expression in this rare uterine tumor.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21493011  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2011 Mar;4(3):230-40. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Transcriptional factor typing with SOX2, HNF4aP1, and CDX2 closely relates to
tumor invasion and Epstein-Barr virus status in gastric cancer.

Uozaki H(1), Barua RR, Minhua S, Ushiku T, Hino R, Shinozaki A, Sakatani T,
Fukayama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo, Japan. uozaki-tky@umin.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Gastric cancer (GC) is a major cancer, sometimes associated with
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV). Some transcriptional factors (TFs) are specific to the 
digestive tract and related to the character of the tumors.
METHODS: We studied three TFs, SOX2, CDX2, and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4
alpha-promoter 1 (HNF4aP1) in GC. First, 255 tumors including 31 EBV-associated
GC were immunohistochemically examined using tissue arrays and compared TF type
and mucin phenotype. We classified them into 4 TF types: N-TF type as
SOX2-/HNF4aP1- tumor, G: SOX2+/HNF4aP1-, GI: SOX2+/HNF4aP1+, and I:
SOX2-/HNF4aP1+. Next, 915 GCs were intensely investigated and compared with their
clinicopathological factors.
RESULTS: In the first study, 255 GCs were classified into N-TF 44%, G-TF 31%,
GI-TF 3%, and I-TF 2%. The TF type did not strictly accord with the mucin
phenotype, classified by MUC2/5AC/6/CD10 expression. EBV status was the only
factor related to both the TF and mucin phenotype classifications (P<0.0001,
<0.0001). TF classification is related to more factors including tumor stage,
than mucin phenotype classification. The second study using 915 GCs revealed that
N-TF gradually increased and I-TF decreased as GC invaded deeper. TF
classification was not related to nodal involvement in each tumor stage. HNF4aP1 
and CDX2 were independent factors for early stage tumor in logistic regression
analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: EBV-associated GC is a discriminating group in both TF and mucin
phenotype. TF classification, especially the absence of HNF4aP1 and CDX2, is
related to tumor invasion. TF classification is a useful marker to study the
carcinogenesis of GC further.

PMCID: PMC3071656
PMID: 21487519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Radiat Res. 2011 Jun;175(6):677-88. doi: 10.1667/RR2483.1. Epub 2011 Apr 12.

Global gene expression responses to low- or high-dose radiation in a human
three-dimensional tissue model.

Mezentsev A(1), Amundson SA.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Radiological Research, Columbia University Medical Center, New
York, New York 10032, USA.

Accumulating data suggest that the biological responses to high and low doses of 
radiation are qualitatively different, necessitating the direct study of low-dose
responses to better understand potential risks. Most such studies have used
two-dimensional culture systems, which may not fully represent responses in
three-dimensional tissues. To gain insight into low-dose responses in tissue, we 
have profiled global gene expression in EPI-200, a three-dimensional tissue model
that imitates the structure and function of human epidermis, at 4, 16 and 24 h
after exposure to high (2.5 Gy) and low (0.1 Gy) doses of low-LET protons. The
most significant gene ontology groups among genes altered in expression were
consistent with effects observed at the tissue level, where the low dose was
associated with recovery and tissue repair, while the high dose resulted in loss 
of structural integrity and terminal differentiation. Network analysis of the
significantly responding genes suggested that TP53 dominated the response to 2.5 
Gy, while HNF4A, a novel transcription factor not previously associated with
radiation response, was most prominent in the low-dose response. HNF4A protein
levels and phosphorylation were found to increase in tissues and cells after low-
but not high-dose irradiation.

PMCID: PMC3148653
PMID: 21486161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Mol Cell Biochem. 2011 Jul;353(1-2):259-65. doi: 10.1007/s11010-011-0794-5. Epub 
2011 Mar 27.

Association analyses between the genetic polymorphisms of HNF4A and FOXO1 genes
and Chinese Han patients with type 2 diabetes.

Li T(1), Wu X, Zhu X, Li J, Pan L, Li P, Xin Z, Liu Y.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, School of Basic Medicine, Peking
Union Medical College, 5 Dongdan 3 Tiao, Beijing 100005, China.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF4A) and human forkhead box O1 (FOXO1)
genes have been discovered to be associated with type 2 diabetes (T2D) in
different populations. This study aimed to evaluate the association between HNF4A
and FOXO1 genetic polymorphisms and type 2 diabetes in the Chinese Han
population. Five hundred and seventy-seven patients with type 2 diabetes and 462 
normal controls were enrolled in this study. Six single-nucleotide polymorphisms 
(SNPs) in HNF4A and seven in FOXO1 were selected and genotyped with polymerase
chain reaction-restriction fragment length polymorphism (PCR-RFLP) or TaqMan(®)
technology. Single-locus analyses indicated that the C allele of rs11574736 from 
HNF4A had a lower frequency in the case group compared with the control group (P 
= 0.005, OR = 0.74, 95% CI = 0.59-0.92). The genotype distributions of rs11574736
also differed between the two groups (P = 0.02). However, none of the FOXO1 SNPs 
showed any association with type 2 diabetes in the Chinese Han population.
Further analysis suggested the two genes interact with each other
(rs3908773/rs717247/rs6031587/rs11574736: P < 0.0001, testing accuracy = 0.55, CV
consistency = 6/10). In conclusion, this study shows an association between the
HNF4A gene and type 2 diabetes in the Chinese Han population. Moreover, the
authors confirmed the results of previous studies for the interaction between
HNF4A and FOXO1 in the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 21442235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Epigenetics. 2011 May;6(5):593-601. Epub 2011 May 1.

Genome-wide DNA methylation patterns in CD4+ T cells from patients with systemic 
lupus erythematosus.

Jeffries MA(1), Dozmorov M, Tang Y, Merrill JT, Wren JD, Sawalha AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center,
Oklahoma City, OK, USA.

Systemic lupus erythematosus is a chronic-relapsing autoimmune disease of
incompletely understood etiology. Recent evidence strongly supports an epigenetic
contribution to the pathogenesis of lupus. To understand the extent and nature of
dysregulated DNA methylation in lupus T cells, we performed a genome-wide DNA
methylation study in CD4 (+) T cells in lupus patients compared to normal healthy
controls. Cytosine methylation was quantified in 27,578 CG sites located within
the promoter regions of 14,495 genes. We identified 236 hypomethylated and 105
hypermethylated CG sites in lupus CD4 (+) T cells compared to normal controls,
consistent with widespread DNA methylation changes in lupus T cells. Of interest,
hypomethylated genes in lupus T cells include CD9, which is known to provide
potent T-cell co-stimulation signals. Other genes with known involvement in
autoimmunity such as MMP9 and PDGFRA were also hypomethylated. The BST2 gene, an 
interferon-inducible membrane-bound protein that helps restrict the release of
retroviral particles was also hypomethylated in lupus patients. Genes involved in
folate biosynthesis, which plays a role in DNA methylation, were overrepresented 
among hypermethylated genes. In addition, the transcription factor RUNX3 was
hypermethylated in patients, suggesting an impact on T-cell maturation.
Protein-protein interaction maps identified a transcription factor, HNF4a, as a
regulatory hub affecting a number of differentially methylated genes. Apoptosis
was also an overrepresented ontology in these interaction maps. Further, our data
suggest that the methylation status of RAB22A, STX1B2, LGALS3BP, DNASE1L1 and
PREX1 correlates with disease activity in lupus patients.

PMCID: PMC3121972
PMID: 21436623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. J Pharmacol Sci. 2011;115(4):516-24. Epub 2011 Mar 24.

Comparative study of culture conditions for maintaining CYP3A4 and ATP-binding
cassette transporters activity in primary cultured human hepatocytes.

Takeba Y(1), Matsumoto N, Takenoshita-Nakaya S, Harimoto Y, Kumai T, Kinoshita Y,
Nakano H, Ohtsubo T, Kobayashi S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, St. Marianna University School of Medicine,
Kawasaski, Kanagawa 216-8511, Japan. takebay@marianna-u.ac.jp

The aim of this study was to determine suitable culture conditions for
maintaining the activity of cytochrome p450 (CYP) 3A4 and drug transporters in
primary cultured human hepatocytes. Human hepatocytes were isolated using the
two-step collagenase perfusion technique and were cultured with four different
media, serum-free William's E medium (serum-free WEM), WEM containing fetal calf 
serum (FCS-WEM), WEM with human serum (HS-WEM), and Lanford's medium. The albumin
levels were maintained for 7 days in hepatocytes. Although CYP3A4 mRNA levels
gradually decreased from 3 days, CYP3A4 and hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a alpha
protein levels and activities were maintained for 7 days in hepatocytes cultured 
with serum-free WEM and Lanford's but not in those with FCS-WEM and HS-WEM.
Furthermore, CYP3A4 protein levels were significantly increased by the addition
of rifampicin and dexamethasone to the culture media, indicating that the
induction potential was maintained. The protein levels of P-glycoprotein,
multi-drug-resistance-2, and breast cancer-resistance protein were maintained for
7 days in all media. Serum-free WEM and Lanford's also maintained protein levels 
of CYP2C19, CYP2D6, and organic anion transporter polypeptide in the hepatocytes.
Serum-free WEM and Lanford's may be appropriate culture media for maintaining
CYP3A4 and drug transporter protein levels in primary cultured hepatocytes.

PMID: 21436605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Jul;112(7):1898-908. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23110.

Simulated microgravity promoted differentiation of bipotential murine oval liver 
stem cells by modulating BMP4/Notch1 signaling.

Majumder S(1), Siamwala JH, Srinivasan S, Sinha S, Sridhara SR, Soundararajan G, 
Seerapu HR, Chatterjee S.

Author information: 
(1)Vascular Biology Lab, Life Sciences Division, AU-KBC Research Centre, Anna
University, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, India.

Faster growth and differentiation of liver stem cells to hepatocyte is one of the
key factors during liver regeneration. In recent years, simulated microgravity, a
physical force has shown to differentially regulate the differentiation and
proliferation of stem cells. In the present work, we studied the effect of
simulated microgravity on differentiation and proliferation of liver stem cells. 
The cells were subjected to microgravity, which was simulated using indigenously 
fabricated 3D clinostat. Proliferation, apoptosis, immunofluorescence assays and 
Western blot analysis were carried out to study the effects of simulated
microgravity on liver stem cells. Microgravity treatment for 2<U+2009>h enhanced
proliferation of stem cells by twofold without inducing apoptosis and
compromising cell viability. Analysis of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-a (HNF4-a)
expression after 2<U+2009>h of microgravity treatment revealed that microgravity alone
can induce the differentiation of stem cells within 2-3 days. Probing bone
morphogenic protein 4 (BMP4) and Notch1 in microgravity treated stem cells
elaborated downregulation of Notch1 and upregulation of BMP4 after 2 days of
incubation. Further, blocking BMP4 using dorsomorphin and chordin conditioned
media from chordin plasmid transfected cells attenuated microgravity mediated
differentiation of liver stem cells. In conclusion, microgravity interplays with 
BMP4/Notch1 signaling in stem cells thus inducing differentiation of stem cells
to hepatocytes. Present findings can be implicated in clinical studies where
microgravity activated stem cells can regenerate the liver efficiently after
liver injury.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21433062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. BMC Bioinformatics. 2011 Mar 18;12:80. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-12-80.

Network based transcription factor analysis of regenerating axolotl limbs.

Jhamb D(1), Rao N, Milner DJ, Song F, Cameron JA, Stocum DL, Palakal MJ.

Author information: 
(1)School of Informatics, Indiana University-Purdue University Indianapolis, IN
46202, USA.

BACKGROUND: Studies on amphibian limb regeneration began in the early 1700's but 
we still do not completely understand the cellular and molecular events of this
unique process. Understanding a complex biological process such as limb
regeneration is more complicated than the knowledge of the individual genes or
proteins involved. Here we followed a systems biology approach in an effort to
construct the networks and pathways of protein interactions involved in formation
of the accumulation blastema in regenerating axolotl limbs.
RESULTS: We used the human orthologs of proteins previously identified by our
research team as bait to identify the transcription factor (TF) pathways and
networks that regulate blastema formation in amputated axolotl limbs. The five
most connected factors, c-Myc, SP1, HNF4A, ESR1 and p53 regulate ~50% of the
proteins in our data. Among these, c-Myc and SP1 regulate 36.2% of the proteins. 
c-Myc was the most highly connected TF (71 targets). Network analysis showed that
TGF-ß1 and fibronectin (FN) lead to the activation of these TFs. We found that
other TFs known to be involved in epigenetic reprogramming, such as Klf4, Oct4,
and Lin28 are also connected to c-Myc and SP1.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study provides a systems biology approach to how different
molecular entities inter-connect with each other during the formation of an
accumulation blastema in regenerating axolotl limbs. This approach provides an in
silico methodology to identify proteins that are not detected by experimental
methods such as proteomics but are potentially important to blastema formation.
We found that the TFs, c-Myc and SP1 and their target genes could potentially
play a central role in limb regeneration. Systems biology has the potential to
map out numerous other pathways that are crucial to blastema formation in
regeneration-competent limbs, to compare these to the pathways that characterize 
regeneration-deficient limbs and finally, to identify stem cell markers in
regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3240668
PMID: 21418574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Diabet Med. 2011 Sep;28(9):1028-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2011.03287.x.

Islet autoantibodies can discriminate maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY)
from Type 1 diabetes.

McDonald TJ(1), Colclough K, Brown R, Shields B, Shepherd M, Bingley P, Williams 
A, Hattersley AT, Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School,
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

Comment in
    Diabet Med. 2011 Sep;28(9):1009.

AIM: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young is a monogenic form of familial,
young-onset diabetes. It is rare (~1% diabetes) and may be misdiagnosed as Type 1
diabetes and inappropriately treated with insulin. Type 1 diabetes is
characterized by the presence of islet autoantibodies, including glutamate
decarboxylase (GAD) and islet antigen-2 (IA-2) antibodies. The prevalence of
islet autoantibodies is unknown in maturity-onset diabetes of the young and may
have the potential to differentiate this form of diabetes from Type 1 diabetes.
The aim of this study was to determine the prevalence of GAD and IA-2 antibodies 
in patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young and Type 1 diabetes.
METHODS: We measured plasma GAD and IA-2 antibodies in 508 patients with the most
common forms of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (GCK: n = 227; HNF1A: n =
229; HNF4A: n = 52) and 98 patients with newly diagnosed Type 1 diabetes
(diagnosed < 6 months). Autoantibodies were considered positive if = 99th centile
of 500 adult control subjects.
RESULTS: GAD and/or IA-2 antibodies were present in 80/98 (82%) patients with
Type 1 diabetes and 5/508 (< 1%) patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the
young. In the cohort with Type 1 diabetes, both GAD and IA-2 antibodies were
detected in 37.8% of patients, GAD only in 24.5% and IA-2 only in 19.4%. All five
patients with maturity-onset diabetes of the young with detectable antibodies had
GAD antibodies and none had detectable IA-2 antibodies.
CONCLUSION: The prevalence of GAD and IA-2 antibodies in maturity-onset diabetes 
of the young is the same as in control subjects (< 1%). The finding of islet
autoantibodies, especially IA-2 antibodies, makes the diagnosis of maturity-onset
diabetes of the young very unlikely and genetic testing should only be performed 
if other clinical characteristics strongly suggest this form of diabetes rather
than Type 1 diabetes. This supports routine islet autoantibody testing before
proceeding to more expensive molecular genetic testing.

© 2011 The Authors. Diabetic Medicine © 2011 Diabetes UK.

PMID: 21395678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Hum Hered. 2011;71(1):50-8. doi: 10.1159/000323567. Epub 2011 Mar 10.

A principal components-based clustering method to identify variants associated
with complex traits.

Black MH(1), Watanabe RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los
Angeles, CA 90089-9011, USA.

BACKGROUND: Multivariate methods ranging from joint SNP to principal components
analysis (PCA) have been developed for testing multiple markers in a region for
association with disease and disease-related traits. However, these methods
suffer from low power and/or the inability to identify the subset of markers
contributing to evidence for association under various scenarios.
METHODS: We introduce orthoblique principal components-based clustering (OPCC) as
an alternative approach to identify specific subsets of markers showing
association with a quantitative outcome of interest. We demonstrate the utility
of OPCC using simulation studies and an example from the literature on type 2
diabetes.
RESULTS: Compared to traditional methods, OPCC has similar or improved power
under various scenarios of linkage disequilibrium structure and genotype
availability. Most importantly, our simulations show how OPCC accurately parses
large numbers of markers to a subset containing the causal variant or its proxy.
CONCLUSION: OPCC is a powerful and efficient data reduction method for detecting 
associations between gene variants and disease-related traits. Unlike alternative
methodologies, OPCC has the ability to isolate the effect of causal SNP(s) from
among large sets of markers in a candidate region. Therefore, OPCC is an
improvement over PCA for testing multiple SNP associations with phenotypes of
interest.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3089426
PMID: 21389731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. PLoS One. 2011 Feb 28;6(2):e17286. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017286.

Identification of anchor genes during kidney development defines ontological
relationships, molecular subcompartments and regulatory pathways.

Thiagarajan RD(1), Georgas KM, Rumballe BA, Lesieur E, Chiu HS, Taylor D, Tang
DT, Grimmond SM, Little MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, The University of Queensland, St. Lucia,
Australia.

The development of the mammalian kidney is well conserved from mouse to man.
Despite considerable temporal and spatial data on gene expression in mammalian
kidney development, primarily in rodent species, there is a paucity of genes
whose expression is absolutely specific to a given anatomical compartment and/or 
developmental stage, defined here as 'anchor' genes. We previously generated an
atlas of gene expression in the developing mouse kidney using microarray analysis
of anatomical compartments collected via laser capture microdissection. Here,
this data is further analysed to identify anchor genes via stringent
bioinformatic filtering followed by high resolution section in situ hybridisation
performed on 200 transcripts selected as specific to one of 11 anatomical
compartments within the midgestation mouse kidney. A total of 37 anchor genes
were identified across 6 compartments with the early proximal tubule being the
compartment richest in anchor genes. Analysis of minimal and evolutionarily
conserved promoter regions of this set of 25 anchor genes identified enrichment
of transcription factor binding sites for Hnf4a and Hnf1b, RbpJ (Notch
signalling), PPAR<U+03B3>:RxRA and COUP-TF family transcription factors. This was
reinforced by GO analyses which also identified these anchor genes as targets in 
processes including epithelial proliferation and proximal tubular function. As
well as defining anchor genes, this large scale validation of gene expression
identified a further 92 compartment-enriched genes able to subcompartmentalise
key processes during murine renal organogenesis spatially or ontologically. This 
included a cohort of 13 ureteric epithelial genes revealing previously
unappreciated compartmentalisation of the collecting duct system and a series of 
early tubule genes suggesting that segmentation into proximal tubule, loop of
Henle and distal tubule does not occur until the onset of glomerular
vascularisation. Overall, this study serves to illuminate previously ill-defined 
stages of patterning and will enable further refinement of the lineage
relationships within mammalian kidney development.

PMCID: PMC3046260
PMID: 21386911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 29;108(13):5449-54. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1019007108. Epub 2011 Mar 8.

Maternal diet and aging alter the epigenetic control of a promoter-enhancer
interaction at the Hnf4a gene in rat pancreatic islets.

Sandovici I(1), Smith NH, Nitert MD, Ackers-Johnson M, Uribe-Lewis S, Ito Y,
Jones RH, Marquez VE, Cairns W, Tadayyon M, O'Neill LP, Murrell A, Ling C,
Constância M, Ozanne SE.

Author information: 
(1)Metabolic Research Laboratories, Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology,
University of Cambridge, Cambridge CB2 0SW, United Kingdom.

Environmental factors interact with the genome throughout life to determine gene 
expression and, consequently, tissue function and disease risk. One such factor
that is known to play an important role in determining long-term metabolic health
is diet during critical periods of development. Epigenetic regulation of gene
expression has been implicated in mediating these programming effects of early
diet. The precise epigenetic mechanisms that underlie these effects remain
largely unknown. Here, we show that the transcription factor Hnf4a, which has
been implicated in the etiology of type 2 diabetes (T2D), is epigenetically
regulated by maternal diet and aging in rat islets. Transcriptional activity of
Hnf4a in islets is restricted to the distal P2 promoter through its open
chromatin configuration and an islet-specific interaction between the P2 promoter
and a downstream enhancer. Exposure to suboptimal nutrition during early
development leads to epigenetic silencing at the enhancer region, which weakens
the P2 promoter-enhancer interaction and results in a permanent reduction in
Hnf4a expression. Aging leads to progressive epigenetic silencing of the entire
Hnf4a locus in islets, an effect that is more pronounced in rats exposed to a
poor maternal diet. Our findings provide evidence for environmentally induced
epigenetic changes at the Hnf4a enhancer that alter its interaction with the P2
promoter, and consequently determine T2D risk. We therefore propose that
environmentally induced changes in promoter-enhancer interactions represent a
fundamental epigenetic mechanism by which nutrition and aging can influence
long-term health.

PMCID: PMC3069181
PMID: 21385945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Hepatology. 2011 Jun;53(6):2063-74. doi: 10.1002/hep.24280.

The stable repression of mesenchymal program is required for hepatocyte identity:
a novel role for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a.

Santangelo L(1), Marchetti A, Cicchini C, Conigliaro A, Conti B, Mancone C, Bonzo
JA, Gonzalez FJ, Alonzi T, Amicone L, Tripodi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Hematology, Pasteur Institute-Cenci
Bolognetti Foundation, Sapienza University of Rome, Rome, Italy.

The concept that cellular terminal differentiation is stably maintained once
development is complete has been questioned by numerous observations showing that
differentiated epithelium may undergo an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) program. EMT and the reverse process, mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition 
(MET), are typical events of development, tissue repair, and tumor progression.
In this study, we aimed to clarify the molecular mechanisms underlying these
phenotypic conversions in hepatocytes. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) was
overexpressed in different hepatocyte cell lines and the resulting gene
expression profile was determined by real-time quantitative polymerase chain
reaction. HNF4a recruitment on promoters of both mesenchymal and EMT regulator
genes was determined by way of electrophoretic mobility shift assay and chromatin
immunoprecipitation. The effect of HNF4a depletion was assessed in silenced cells
and in the context of the whole liver of HNF4 knockout animals. Our results
identified key EMT regulators and mesenchymal genes as new targets of HNF4a.
HNF4a, in cooperation with its target HNF1a, directly inhibits transcription of
the EMT master regulatory genes Snail, Slug, and HMGA2 and of several mesenchymal
markers. HNF4a-mediated repression of EMT genes induces MET in hepatomas, and its
silencing triggers the mesenchymal program in differentiated hepatocytes both in 
cell culture and in the whole liver.CONCLUSION: The pivotal role of HNF4a in the 
induction and maintenance of hepatocyte differentiation should also be ascribed
to its capacity to continuously repress the mesenchymal program; thus, both HNF4a
activator and repressor functions are necessary for the identity of hepatocytes.

Copyright © 2011 American Association for the Study of Liver Diseases.

PMID: 21384409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Eur J Endocrinol. 2011 May;164(5):733-40. doi: 10.1530/EJE-10-1136. Epub 2011 Mar
4.

The contribution of rapid KATP channel gene mutation analysis to the clinical
management of children with congenital hyperinsulinism.

Banerjee I(1), Skae M, Flanagan SE, Rigby L, Patel L, Didi M, Blair J, Ehtisham
S, Ellard S, Cosgrove KE, Dunne MJ, Clayton PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, 
Manchester M13 9WL, UK. indi.banerjee@cmft.nhs.uk

OBJECTIVE: In children with congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI), K(ATP) channel
genes (ABCC8 and KCNJ11) can be screened rapidly for potential pathogenic
mutations. We aimed to assess the contribution of rapid genetic testing to the
clinical management of CHI.
DESIGN: Follow-up observational study at two CHI referral hospitals.
METHODS: Clinical outcomes such as subtotal pancreatectomy, (18)F-Dopa positron
emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scanning, stability on medical
treatment and remission were assessed in a cohort of 101 children with CHI.
RESULTS: In total, 32 (32%) children had pathogenic mutations in K(ATP) channel
genes (27 in ABCC8 and five in KCNJ11), of which 11 (34%) were novel. In those
negative at initial screening, other mutations (GLUD1, GCK, and HNF4A) were
identified in three children. Those with homozygous/compound heterozygous
ABCC8/KCNJ11 mutations were more likely to require a subtotal pancreatectomy CHI 
(7/10, 70%). Those with paternal heterozygous mutations were investigated with
(18)F-Dopa PET-CT scanning and 7/13 (54%) had a focal lesionectomy, whereas four 
(31%) required subtotal pancreatectomy for diffuse CHI. Those with maternal
heterozygous mutations were most likely to achieve remission (5/5, 100%). In 66
with no identified mutation, 43 (65%) achieved remission, 22 (33%) were stable on
medical treatment and only one child required a subtotal pancreatectomy.
CONCLUSIONS: Rapid genetic analysis is important in the management pathway of
CHI; it provides aetiological confirmation of the diagnosis, indicates the likely
need for a subtotal pancreatectomy and identifies those who require (18)F-Dopa
PET-CT scanning. In the absence of a mutation, reassurance of a favourable
outcome can be given early in the course of CHI.

PMID: 21378087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Aquat Toxicol. 2011 Apr;102(3-4):197-204. doi: 10.1016/j.aquatox.2011.01.017.
Epub 2011 Feb 26.

Natural mixtures of POPs affected body weight gain and induced transcription of
genes involved in weight regulation and insulin signaling.

Lyche JL(1), Nourizadeh-Lillabadi R, Karlsson C, Stavik B, Berg V, Skåre JU,
Alestrøm P, Ropstad E.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. Production Animal Clinical Science, Norwegian School of Veterinary
Science, Oslo, Norway. jan.l.lyche@veths.no

Obesity is reaching epidemic proportions worldwide, and is associated with
chronic illnesses such as diabetes, cardiovascular disease, hypertension and
dyslipidemias (metabolic syndrome). Commonly held causes of obesity are
overeating coupled with a sedentary lifestyle. However, it has also been
postulated that exposure to endocrine disrupting chemicals (EDCs) may be related 
to the significant increase in the prevalence of obesity and associated diseases.
In the present study, developmental and reproductive effects of lifelong exposure
to environmentally relevant concentrations of two natural mixtures of persistent 
organic pollutants (POPs) were investigated using classical and molecular methods
in a controlled zebrafish model. The mixtures used were extracted from burbot
(Lota lota) liver originating from freshwater systems in Norway (Lake Mjøsa and
Lake Losna). The concentration of POPs in the zebrafish ranged from levels
detected in wild fish (Lake Mjøsa and Lake Losna), to concentrations reported in 
human and wildlife populations. Phenotypic effects observed in both exposure
groups included (1) earlier onset of puberty, (2) elevated male/female sex ratio,
and (3) increased body weight at 5 months of age. Interestingly, genome-wide
transcription profiling identified functional networks of genes, in which key
regulators of weight homeostasis (PPARs, glucocoricoids, CEBPs, estradiol),
steroid hormone functions (glucocoricoids, estradiol, NCOA3) and insulin
signaling (HNF4A, CEBPs, PPARG) occupied central positions. The increased weight 
and the regulation of genes associated with weight homeostasis and insulin
signaling observed in the present study suggest that environmental pollution may 
affect the endocrine regulation of the metabolism, possibly leading to increased 
weight gain and obesity.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21356182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. BMC Genomics. 2011 Feb 25;12:128. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-12-128.

Expression profile analysis of the inflammatory response regulated by hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 4a.

Wang Z(1), Bishop EP, Burke PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts 02118, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a), a liver-specific transcription 
factor, plays a significant role in liver-specific functions. However, its
functions are poorly understood in the regulation of the inflammatory response.
In order to obtain a genomic view of HNF4a in this context, microarray analysis
was used to probe the expression profile of an inflammatory response induced by
cytokine stimulation in a model of HNF4a knock-down in HepG2 cells.
RESULTS: The expression of over five thousand genes in HepG2 cells is
significantly changed with the dramatic reduction of HNF4a concentration compared
to the cells with native levels of HNF4a. Over two thirds (71%) of genes that
exhibit differential expression in response to cytokine treatment also reveal
differential expression in response to HNF4a knock-down. In addition, we found
that a number of HNF4a target genes may be indirectly mediated by an ETS-domain
transcription factor ELK1, a nuclear target of mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK).
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that HNF4a has an extensive impact on the
regulation of a large number of the liver-specific genes. HNF4a may play a role
in regulating the cytokine-induced inflammatory response. This study presents a
novel function for HNF4a, acting not only as a global player in many cellular
processes, but also as one of the components of inflammatory response in the
liver.

PMCID: PMC3053261
PMID: 21352552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Biosci Rep. 2011 Oct;31(5):411-9. doi: 10.1042/BSR20110013.

Probing the effect of MODY mutations near the co-activator-binding pocket of
HNF4a.

Rha GB(1), Wu G(1), Chi YI(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, and Center for Structural
Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, U.S.A.

HNF4a (hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a) is a culprit gene product for a monogenic
and dominantly inherited form of diabetes, referred to as MODY (maturity onset
diabetes of the young). As a member of the NR (nuclear receptor) superfamily,
HNF4a recruits transcriptional co-activators such as SRC-1a (steroid receptor
co-activator-1a) and PGC-1a (peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3>
co-activator-1a) through the LXXLL-binding motifs for its transactivation, and
our recent crystal structures of the complex provided the molecular details and
the mechanistic insights into these co-activator recruitments. Several mutations 
have been identified from the MODY patients and, among these, point mutations can
be very instructive site-specific measures of protein function and structure.
Thus, in the present study, we probed the functional effects of the two MODY
point mutations (D206Y and M364R) found directly near the LXXLL motif-binding
site by conducting a series of experiments on their structural integrity and
specific functional roles such as overall transcription, ligand selectivity,
target gene recognition and co-activator recruitment. While the D206Y mutation
has a subtle effect, the M364R mutation significantly impaired the overall
transactivation by HNF4a. These functional disruptions are mainly due to their
reduced ability to recruit co-activators and lowered protein stability (only with
M364R mutation), while their DNA-binding activities and ligand selectivities are 
preserved. These results confirmed our structural predictions and proved that
MODY mutations are loss-of-function mutations leading to impaired ß-cell
function. These findings should help target selective residues for correcting
mutational defects or modulating the overall activity of HNF4a as a means of
therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 21323639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Nov;226(11):2987-96. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22651.

Normal atmospheric oxygen tension and the use of antioxidants improve hepatocyte 
spheroid viability and function.

Lillegard JB(1), Fisher JE, Nedredal G, Luebke-Wheeler J, Bao J, Wang W, Amoit B,
Nyberg SL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Surgery, Department of Surgery, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, Minnesota, USA.

Hepatocyte spheroids have been proposed for drug metabolism studies and in
bioartificial liver devices. However, the optimal conditions required to meet the
aerobic demands of mitochondria-rich hepatocyte spheroids is not well studied. We
hypothesized that an optimal concentration of oxygen could be identified and that
the health of hepatocyte spheroids might be further improved by antioxidant
therapy. Rat hepatocyte spheroids were maintained in suspension culture for 7
days under a mixture of 5% CO(2) plus O(2):N(2) to achieve fractional oxygen
contents of 6%(C1), 21%(C2), 58%(C3), and 95%(C4). Spheroid health was assessed
under each condition by vital staining, TEM, oxygen consumption, and
mitochondrial counts. Hepatocyte differentiation was assessed by expression of 10
liver-related genes (HNF4a, HNF6, Cyp1A1, albumin, Nags, Cps1, Otc, Ass, Asl,
Arg1). Functional markers (albumin and urea) were measured. The influence of
oxygen tension and antioxidant treatment on the production of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) was assessed by confocal microscopy. We observed that the
hepatocyte spheroids were healthiest under normal atmospheric (C2) conditions
with antioxidants ascorbic acid and L-carnitine. Cell death and reduced
functionality of hepatocyte spheroids correlated with the formation of ROS.
Normal atmospheric conditions provided the optimal oxygen tension for suspension 
culture of hepatocyte spheroids. The formation and deleterious effects of ROS
were further reduced by adding antioxidants to the culture medium. These findings
have direct application to development of the spheroid reservoir bioartificial
liver and the use of hepatocyte spheroids in drug metabolism studies.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3107922
PMID: 21302300  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Circulation. 2011 Feb 22;123(7):731-8. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.110.948570.
Epub 2011 Feb 7.

Meta-analysis of genome-wide association studies in >80 000 subjects identifies
multiple loci for C-reactive protein levels.

Dehghan A, Dupuis J, Barbalic M, Bis JC, Eiriksdottir G, Lu C, Pellikka N,
Wallaschofski H, Kettunen J, Henneman P, Baumert J, Strachan DP, Fuchsberger C,
Vitart V, Wilson JF, Paré G, Naitza S, Rudock ME, Surakka I, de Geus EJ, Alizadeh
BZ, Guralnik J, Shuldiner A, Tanaka T, Zee RY, Schnabel RB, Nambi V, Kavousi M,
Ripatti S, Nauck M, Smith NL, Smith AV, Sundvall J, Scheet P, Liu Y, Ruokonen A, 
Rose LM, Larson MG, Hoogeveen RC, Freimer NB, Teumer A, Tracy RP, Launer LJ,
Buring JE, Yamamoto JF, Folsom AR, Sijbrands EJ, Pankow J, Elliott P, Keaney JF, 
Sun W, Sarin AP, Fontes JD, Badola S, Astor BC, Hofman A, Pouta A, Werdan K,
Greiser KH, Kuss O, Meyer zu Schwabedissen HE, Thiery J, Jamshidi Y, Nolte IM,
Soranzo N, Spector TD, Völzke H, Parker AN, Aspelund T, Bates D, Young L, Tsui K,
Siscovick DS, Guo X, Rotter JI, Uda M, Schlessinger D, Rudan I, Hicks AA, Penninx
BW, Thorand B, Gieger C, Coresh J, Willemsen G, Harris TB, Uitterlinden AG,
Järvelin MR, Rice K, Radke D, Salomaa V, Willems van Dijk K, Boerwinkle E, Vasan 
RS, Ferrucci L, Gibson QD, Bandinelli S, Snieder H, Boomsma DI, Xiao X, Campbell 
H, Hayward C, Pramstaller PP, van Duijn CM, Peltonen L, Psaty BM, Gudnason V,
Ridker PM, Homuth G, Koenig W, Ballantyne CM, Witteman JC, Benjamin EJ, Perola M,
Chasman DI.

Comment in
    Biomark Med. 2011 Jun;5(3):373-4.

BACKGROUND: C-reactive protein (CRP) is a heritable marker of chronic
inflammation that is strongly associated with cardiovascular disease. We sought
to identify genetic variants that are associated with CRP levels.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We performed a genome-wide association analysis of CRP in 66
185 participants from 15 population-based studies. We sought replication for the 
genome-wide significant and suggestive loci in a replication panel comprising 16 
540 individuals from 10 independent studies. We found 18 genome-wide significant 
loci, and we provided evidence of replication for 8 of them. Our results confirm 
7 previously known loci and introduce 11 novel loci that are implicated in
pathways related to the metabolic syndrome (APOC1, HNF1A, LEPR, GCKR, HNF4A, and 
PTPN2) or the immune system (CRP, IL6R, NLRP3, IL1F10, and IRF1) or that reside
in regions previously not known to play a role in chronic inflammation (PPP1R3B, 
SALL1, PABPC4, ASCL1, RORA, and BCL7B). We found a significant interaction of
body mass index with LEPR (P<2.9×10(-6)). A weighted genetic risk score that was 
developed to summarize the effect of risk alleles was strongly associated with
CRP levels and explained 5% of the trait variance; however, there was no
evidence for these genetic variants explaining the association of CRP with
coronary heart disease.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified 18 loci that were associated with CRP levels. Our
study highlights immune response and metabolic regulatory pathways involved in
the regulation of chronic inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3147232
PMID: 21300955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Gut. 2011 Dec;60(12):1739-53. doi: 10.1136/gut.2009.199679. Epub 2011 Feb 7.

New IBD genetics: common pathways with other diseases.

Lees CW(1), Barrett JC, Parkes M, Satsangi J.

Author information: 
(1)Gastrointestinal Unit, Molecular Medicine Centre, University of Edinburgh,
Edinburgh, UK. charlie.lees@ed.ac.uk

Complex disease genetics has been revolutionised in recent years by the advent of
genome-wide association (GWA) studies. The chronic inflammatory bowel diseases
(IBDs), Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis have seen notable successes
culminating in the discovery of 99 published susceptibility loci/genes (71
Crohn's disease; 47 ulcerative colitis) to date. Approximately one-third of loci 
described confer susceptibility to both Crohn's disease and ulcerative colitis.
Amongst these are multiple genes involved in IL23/Th17 signalling (IL23R, IL12B, 
JAK2, TYK2 and STAT3), IL10, IL1R2, REL, CARD9, NKX2.3, ICOSLG, PRDM1, SMAD3 and 
ORMDL3. The evolving genetic architecture of IBD has furthered our understanding 
of disease pathogenesis. For Crohn's disease, defective processing of
intracellular bacteria has become a central theme, following gene discoveries in 
autophagy and innate immunity (associations with NOD2, IRGM, ATG16L1 are specific
to Crohn's disease). Genetic evidence has also demonstrated the importance of
barrier function to the development of ulcerative colitis (HNF4A, LAMB1, CDH1 and
GNA12). However, when the data are analysed in more detail, deeper themes emerge 
including the shared susceptibility seen with other diseases. Many
immune-mediated diseases overlap in this respect, paralleling the reported
epidemiological evidence. However, in several cases the reported shared
susceptibility appears at odds with the clinical picture. Examples include both
type 1 and type 2 diabetes mellitus. In this review we will detail the presently 
available data on the genetic overlap between IBD and other diseases. The
discussion will be informed by the epidemiological data in the published
literature and the implications for pathogenesis and therapy will be outlined.
This arena will move forwards very quickly in the next few years. Ultimately, we 
anticipate that these genetic insights will transform the landscape of common
complex diseases such as IBD.

PMID: 21300624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. PLoS One. 2011 Jan 27;6(1):e16319. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0016319.

HNF4alpha dysfunction as a molecular rational for cyclosporine induced
hypertension.

Niehof M(1), Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Center of Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, Fraunhofer Institute
for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Hannover, Germany.

Induction of tolerance against grafted organs is achieved by the
immunosuppressive agent cyclosporine, a prominent member of the calcineurin
inhibitors. Unfortunately, its lifetime use is associated with hypertension and
nephrotoxicity. Several mechanism for cyclosporine induced hypertension have been
proposed, i.e. activation of the sympathetic nervous system, endothelin-mediated 
systemic vasoconstriction, impaired vasodilatation secondary to reduction in
prostaglandin and nitric oxide, altered cytosolic calcium translocation, and
activation of the renin-angiotensin system (RAS). In this regard the molecular
basis for undue RAS activation and an increased signaling of the vasoactive
oligopeptide angiotensin II (AngII) remain elusive. Notably, angiotensinogen
(AGT) is the precursor of AngII and transcriptional regulation of AGT is
controlled by the hepatic nuclear factor HNF4alpha. To better understand the
molecular events associated with cyclosporine induced hypertension, we
investigated the effect of cyclosporine on HNF4alpha expression and activity and 
searched for novel HNF4alpha target genes among members of the RAS cascade. Using
bioinformatic algorithm and EMSA bandshift assays we identified angiotensin II
receptor type 1 (AGTR1), angiotensin I converting enzyme (ACE), and angiotensin I
converting enzyme 2 (ACE2) as genes targeted by HNF4alpha. Notably, cyclosporine 
represses HNF4alpha gene and protein expression and its DNA-binding activity at
consensus sequences to AGT, AGTR1, ACE, and ACE2. Consequently, the gene
expression of AGT, AGTR1, and ACE2 was significantly reduced as evidenced by
quantitative real-time RT-PCR. While RAS is composed of a sophisticated interplay
between multiple factors we propose a decrease of ACE2 to enforce AngII signaling
via AGTR1 to ultimately result in vasoconstriction and hypertension. Taken
collectively we demonstrate cyclosporine to repress HNF4alpha activity through
calcineurin inhibitor mediated inhibition of nuclear factor of activation of
T-cells (NFAT) which in turn represses HNF4alpha that leads to a disturbed
balance of RAS.

PMCID: PMC3029342
PMID: 21298017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Diabetes Care. 2011 Feb;34(2):286-91. doi: 10.2337/dc10-1293.

Urinary C-peptide creatinine ratio is a practical outpatient tool for identifying
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-{alpha}/hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-{alpha}
maturity-onset diabetes of the young from long-duration type 1 diabetes.

Besser RE(1), Shepherd MH, McDonald TJ, Shields BM, Knight BA, Ellard S,
Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula National Institute for Health Research Clinical Research Facility,
Peninsula Medical School, University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-a (HNF1A)/hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-a
(HNF4A) maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is frequently misdiagnosed as
type 1 diabetes, and patients are inappropriately treated with insulin. Blood
C-peptide can aid in the diagnosis of MODY, but practical reasons limit its
widespread use. Urinary C-peptide creatinine ratio (UCPCR), a stable measure of
endogenous insulin secretion, is a noninvasive alternative. We aimed to compare
stimulated UCPCR in adults with HNF1A/4A MODY, type 1 diabetes, and type 2
diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Adults with diabetes for = 5 years, without renal
impairment, were studied (HNF1A MODY [n = 54], HNF4A MODY [n = 23], glucokinase
MODY [n = 20], type 1 diabetes [n = 69], and type 2 diabetes [n = 54]). The UCPCR
was collected in boric acid 120 min after the largest meal of the day and mailed 
for analysis. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves were used to
identify optimal UCPCR cutoffs to differentiate HNF1A/4A MODY from type 1 and
type 2 diabetes.
RESULTS: UCPCR was lower in type 1 diabetes than HNF1A/4A MODY (median
[interquartile range]) (<0.02 nmol/mmol [<0.02 to <0.02] vs. 1.72 nmol/mmol
[0.98-2.90]; P < 0.0001). ROC curves showed excellent discrimination (area under 
curve [AUC] 0.98) and identified a cutoff UCPCR of = 0.2 nmol/mmol for
differentiating HNF1A/4A MODY from type 1 diabetes (97% sensitivity, 96%
specificity). UCPCR was lower in HNF1A/4A MODY than in type 2 diabetes (1.72
nmol/mmol [0.98-2.90] vs. 2.47 nmol/mmol [1.4-4.13]); P = 0.007). ROC curves
showed a weak distinction between HNF1A/4A MODY and type 2 diabetes (AUC 0.64).
CONCLUSIONS: UCPCR is a noninvasive outpatient tool that can be used to
discriminate HNF1A and HNF4A MODY from long-duration type 1 diabetes. To
differentiate MODY from type 1 diabetes of >5 years' duration, UCPCR could be
used to determine whether genetic testing is indicated.

PMCID: PMC3024335
PMID: 21270186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Mar;96(3):E498-502. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-1906. Epub
2011 Jan 20.

Genome-wide homozygosity analysis reveals HADH mutations as a common cause of
diazoxide-responsive hyperinsulinemic-hypoglycemia in consanguineous pedigrees.

Flanagan SE(1), Patch AM, Locke JM, Akcay T, Simsek E, Alaei M, Yekta Z, Desai M,
Kapoor RR, Hussain K, Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School,
Barrack Road, Exeter, EX2 5DW, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Mar;96(3):617-9.

CONTEXT AND OBJECTIVE: Recessive mutations in the hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase
(HADH) gene encoding the enzyme 3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase are a rare cause 
of diazoxide-responsive hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia (HH) with just five
probands reported to date. HADH deficiency in the first three identified patients
was associated with detectable urinary 3-hydroxyglutarate and raised plasma
3-hydroxybutyryl-carnitine levels, but two recent cases did not have abnormal
urine organic acids or acylcarnitines.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We studied 115 patients with diazoxide-responsive HH
in whom the common genetic causes of HH had been excluded. No patients were
reported to have abnormal acylcarnitines or urinary organic acids. Homozygosity
mapping was undertaken in probands from 13 consanguineous pedigrees to search for
regions harboring mutations that are identical by descent.
RESULTS: HADH sequencing was performed after genome-wide single nucleotide
polymorphism analysis revealed a large shared region of homozygosity spanning the
HADH locus in six unrelated probands. Homozygous mutations were identified in
three of these patients and in a further two probands from consanguineous
families. HADH analysis in the remainder of the cohort identified mutations in a 
further six probands for whom consanguinity was not reported, but who originated 
from countries with high rates of consanguinity. Six different HADH mutations
were identified in 11/115 (10%) patients tested.
CONCLUSION: HADH mutations are a relatively common cause of diazoxide-responsive 
HH with a frequency similar to that of GLUD1 and HNF4A mutations. We recommend
that HADH sequence analysis is considered in all patients with
diazoxide-responsive HH when recessive inheritance is suspected.

PMCID: PMC3100671
PMID: 21252247  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. J Hepatol. 2011 Sep;55(3):602-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2010.12.023. Epub 2011 Jan 
15.

Positive regulation of hepatic miR-122 expression by HNF4a.

Li ZY(1), Xi Y, Zhu WN, Zeng C, Zhang ZQ, Guo ZC, Hao DL, Liu G, Feng L, Chen HZ,
Chen F, Lv X, Liu DP, Liang CC.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, 5
Dong Dan San Tiao, Beijing 100005, PR China.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: miR-122 is the most abundant microRNA in the liver and
regulates metabolic pathways including cholesterol biosynthesis, fatty acid
synthesis, and oxidation. However, little is known about mechanisms that regulate
the expression of miR-122 in the liver. The aim of this study was to identify key
transcriptional regulators for miR-122 expression through intensively studying
its primary transcript and promoter region.
METHODS: Bioinformatics analysis, Northern blotting, RT-PCR, and 5'/3' RACE were 
performed to analyze miR-122 primary transcript structure, its promoter region,
and potential transacting factor binding sites. Reporter gene assays integrated
with truncation and site-mutation in miR-122 promoter were performed to determine
the trans-activation effect of HNF4a to miR-122-promoter in vitro. ChIP and EMSA 
assays were performed to determine HNF4a binding to miR-122 promoter. Finally,
forced expression and RNAi were performed to verify the regulatory roles of HNF4 
to miR-122 expression in vitro and in vivo.
RESULTS: Here, we show that miR-122 is processed from a long spliced primary
transcript directed by a distal upstream promoter region conserved across
species. We dissected this promoter region and identified putative binding sites 
for liver-enriched transcriptional factors that contribute to the regulation of
miR-122 expression, including a putative binding site for hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4a (HNF4a). We demonstrate that HNF4a binds to the miR-122 promoter region
through the conserved DR-I element. We observed the DR-1-element-dependent
activation effect of HNF4a on the conserved miR-122 promoter and the activation
could be further enhanced by the addition of PGC1a. Using overexpression and
knockdown strategies, we show that HNF4a positively regulates miR122 expression
in both Huh7 cells and the mouse liver.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that HNF4a is a key regulator of miR-122
expression in the liver.

Copyright © 2011 European Association for the Study of the Liver. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21241755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Vet Med Sci. 2011 May;73(5):601-7. Epub 2010 Dec 21.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha is associated with mesenchymal-epithelial
transition in developing kidneys of C57BL/6 mice.

Kanazawa T(1), Ichii O, Otsuka S, Namiki Y, Hashimoto Y, Kon Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Anatomy, Graduate School of Veterinary Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo 0600818, Japan.

During kidney development, the metanephric mesenchyme (MM) develops into the
nephron through mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET). We have previously
reported that knock-down of the expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha
(Hnf4a) gene induces failure of cellular organization in the condensed mesenchyme
(CM) of cultured embryonic kidneys. To elucidate the details of MET during
nephrogenesis, embryonic mouse kidneys were analyzed by electron microscopy,
immunohistochemistry, and molecular biology. The findings showed that the
intercellular junction, but not the basal lamina, was present in the CM.
Additionally, immediately after Hnf4a gene expression, the expression of
epithelial genes (Krt8, Tjp1, and Cdh1) increased, and those of mesenchymal genes
(Acta1 and Vim) decreased, in the CM compared to the MM. To clarify the
relationship between MET and Hnf4a, the fibroblast cell line with forced
expression of Hnf4a protein were analyzed. In this model, it was noted that Hnf4a
induced increasing epithelial and decreasing mesenchymal gene expression. In
these, up-regulation of Pvrl1, -2, and Mllt4 genes which mediate the formation of
apico-basal polarity, were found. These results, and those of previous findings, 
indicate that Hnf4a protein is associated with the initiation of MET in early
nephrogenesis.

PMID: 21186337  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2011 Feb;20(1):38-44. doi: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2010.10.006.

Rare forms of congenital hyperinsulinism.

Marquard J(1), Palladino AA, Stanley CA, Mayatepek E, Meissner T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Pediatrics, University Children's Hospital Düsseldorf,
Germany. Jan.Marquard@med.uni-duesseldorf.de

Rare forms of congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) are caused by mutations in GLUD1
(encoding glutamate dehydrogenase), GCK (encoding glucokinase), HADH (encoding
for L-3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase), SLC16A1 (encoding the monocarboxylat
transporter 1), HNF4A (encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a) or UCP2 (encoding
mitochondrial uncoupling protein 2). The clinical presentation is very
heterogeneous in regards to age of onset, severity, and manner of symptoms, as
well as the response to medical treatment. Special individual characteristics
have to be accounted in diagnosis and treatment. Diazoxide is the first-line drug
for the rare forms of CHI for long-term treatment but is not entirely effective
in some of these rarer defects (GCK, MCT1). The use of diazoxide is often limited
by side effects and the use of octreotide as second-line drug has to be
considered. A near-total pancreatectomy is only reserved for patients with
diffuse disease and resistance to medical treatment as a last resort. Patients
with CHI should be managed by centers with a highly experienced team in
diagnostic work-up and treatment of this disease.

2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21186003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Semin Pediatr Surg. 2011 Feb;20(1):13-7. doi: 10.1053/j.sempedsurg.2010.10.004.

Genetics of congenital hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia.

Flanagan SE(1), Kapoor RR, Hussain K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School,
University of Exeter, United Kingdom.

A genetic diagnosis is now possible for approximately 45%-55% of patients with
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. Understanding the genetic etiology of the disease 
in these patients is clinically important because a genetic diagnosis will
provide information on prognosis, recurrence risk, and importantly may also guide
clinical management. The aim of this review is to provide an outline of the 7
different molecular mechanisms underlying this heterogeneous disease and to
demonstrate that the clinical phenotype can act as a useful guide when
prioritizing the order of genetic testing.

2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21185998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Mar;31(3):513-9. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.220723. Epub 2010 Dec 23.

Transcriptional activation of apolipoprotein CIII expression by glucose may
contribute to diabetic dyslipidemia.

Caron S(1), Verrijken A, Mertens I, Samanez CH, Mautino G, Haas JT,
Duran-Sandoval D, Prawitt J, Francque S, Vallez E, Muhr-Tailleux A, Berard I,
Kuipers F, Kuivenhoven JA, Biddinger SB, Taskinen MR, Van Gaal L, Staels B.

Author information: 
(1)University Lille Nord de France, Lille, France.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Mar;31(3):471-3.

OBJECTIVE: Hypertriglyceridemia and fatty liver are common in patients with type 
2 diabetes, but the factors connecting alterations in glucose metabolism with
plasma and liver lipid metabolism remain unclear. Apolipoprotein CIII (apoCIII), 
a regulator of hepatic and plasma triglyceride metabolism, is elevated in type 2 
diabetes. In this study, we analyzed whether apoCIII is affected by altered
glucose metabolism.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Liver-specific insulin receptor-deficient mice display lower
hepatic apoCIII mRNA levels than controls, suggesting that factors other than
insulin regulate apoCIII in vivo. Glucose induces apoCIII transcription in
primary rat hepatocytes and immortalized human hepatocytes via a mechanism
involving the transcription factors carbohydrate response element-binding protein
and hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a. ApoCIII induction by glucose is blunted by
treatment with agonists of farnesoid X receptor and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-a but not liver X receptor, ie, nuclear receptors
controlling triglyceride metabolism. Moreover, in obese humans, plasma apoCIII
protein correlates more closely with plasma fasting glucose and glucose excursion
after oral glucose load than with insulin.
CONCLUSIONS: Glucose induces apoCIII transcription, which may represent a
mechanism linking hyperglycemia, hypertriglyceridemia, and cardiovascular disease
in type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 21183731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Jan 11;108(2):492-7. doi: 10.1073/pnas.1016789108.
Epub 2010 Dec 23.

Disease allele-dependent small-molecule sensitivities in blood cells from
monogenic diabetes.

Shaw SY(1), Blodgett DM, Ma MS, Westly EC, Clemons PA, Subramanian A, Schreiber
SL.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Systems Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, 185 Cambridge
Street, Boston, MA 02114, USA. shaw.stanley@mgh.harvard.edu

Even as genetic studies identify alleles that influence human disease
susceptibility, it remains challenging to understand their functional
significance and how they contribute to disease phenotypes. Here, we describe an 
approach to translate discoveries from human genetics into functional and
therapeutic hypotheses by relating human genetic variation to small-molecule
sensitivities. We use small-molecule probes modulating a breadth of targets and
processes to reveal disease allele-dependent sensitivities, using cells from
multiple individuals with an extreme form of diabetes (maturity onset diabetes of
the young type 1, caused by mutation in the orphan nuclear receptor HNF4a). This 
approach enabled the discovery of small molecules that show mechanistically
revealing and therapeutically relevant interactions with HNF4a in both
lymphoblasts and pancreatic ß-cells, including compounds that physically interact
with HNF4a. Compounds including US Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs
were identified that favorably modulate a critical disease phenotype, insulin
secretion from ß-cells. This method may suggest therapeutic hypotheses for other 
nonblood disorders.

PMCID: PMC3021060
PMID: 21183721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Diabet Med. 2010 Dec;27(12):1454-8.

Familial young-onset forms of diabetes related to HNF4A and rare HNF1A molecular 
aetiologies.

Carette C(1), Dubois-Laforgue D, Saint-Martin C, Clauin S, Beaufils S, Larger E, 
Sola A, Mosnier-Pudar H, Timsit J, Bellanné-Chantelot C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetology, Université Paris Descartes, AP-HP Hôpital Cochin,
Paris, France. claire.carette@inserm.fr

OBJECTIVE: We have dissected the rare molecular anomalies that may affect
hepatocyte nuclear factor-1a (HNF1A) and hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a (HNF4A) in 
patients with familial young-onset diabetes for whom HNF1A mutations have been
excluded by sequence analysis.
METHODS: Eighty-four unrelatedHNF1A-negative patients with diabetes diagnosed
before the age of 40 years, a family history of diabetes and the absence of
features suggestive of Type 2 diabetes were included. We analysed by sequencing
the HNF4A promoter and coding regions, the HNF1A promoter region and specific
regions of HNF1A(B) and HNF1A(C) isoforms and searched for large deletions of
HNF1A and HNF4A by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA).
RESULTS: We identified five novel HNF4A mutations (5 / 84, 6%), including four
missense and one in-frame deletion, and one mutation of the HNF1A promoter (1 /
84). Sequence analysis of isoform-specific coding regions of HNF1A did not reveal
any mutation. We next identified two whole gene deletions of HNF1A and HNF4A,
respectively (2 / 84, 2.4%).
CONCLUSIONS: Altogether, the search for rare molecular events in HNF1A and HNF4A 
led us to elucidate 8 / 84 (9.5%) of our HNF1A-negative cases.This study shows
that genetic aetiologies remain to be elucidated in familial young-onset
diabetes. It also highlights the difficulty of the differential diagnosis with
Type 2 diabetes because of the wide clinical expression of monogenic young-onset 
diabetes and the absence of specific biomarkers.

PMID: 21105491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2011 Feb;50(2):122-35. doi: 10.1002/gcc.20838.

Sulfatase 1 and sulfatase 2 in hepatocellular carcinoma: associated signaling
pathways, tumor phenotypes, and survival.

Yang JD(1), Sun Z, Hu C, Lai J, Dove R, Nakamura I, Lee JS, Thorgeirsson SS, Kang
KJ, Chu IS, Roberts LR.

Author information: 
(1)Miles and Shirley Fiterman Center for Digestive Diseases, College of Medicine,
Mayo Clinic and Mayo Clinic Cancer Center, Rochester, MN, USA.

The heparin-degrading endosulfatases sulfatase 1 (SULF1) and sulfatase 2 (SULF2) 
have opposing effects in hepatocarcinogenesis despite structural similarity.
Using mRNA expression arrays, we analyzed the correlations of SULF expression
with signaling networks in human hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) and the
associations of SULF expression with tumor phenotype and patient survival. Data
from two mRNA microarray analyses of 139 and 36 HCCs and adjacent tissues were
used as training and validation sets. Partek and Metacore software were used to
identify SULF correlated genes and their associated signaling pathways.
Associations between SULF expression, the hepatoblast subtype of HCC, and
survival were examined. Both SULF1 and 2 had strong positive correlations with
periostin, IQGAP1, TGFB1, and vimentin and inverse correlations with HNF4A and
IQGAP2. Genes correlated with both SULFs were highly associated with the cell
adhesion, cytoskeletal remodeling, blood coagulation, TGFB, and Wnt/ß-catenin and
epithelial mesenchymal transition signaling pathways. Genes uniquely correlated
with SULF2 were more associated with neoplastic processes than genes uniquely
correlated with SULF1. High SULF expression was associated with the hepatoblast
subtype of HCC. There was a bimodal effect of SULF1 expression on prognosis, with
patients in the lowest or highest tertile having a worse prognosis than those in 
the middle tertile. SULFs have complex effects on HCC signaling and patient
survival. There are functionally similar associations with cell adhesion, ECM
remodeling, TGFB, and WNT pathways, but also unique associations of SULF1 and
SULF2. The roles and targeting of the SULFs in cancer require further
investigation.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3253341
PMID: 21104785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Drug Metab Dispos. 2011 Mar;39(3):490-7. doi: 10.1124/dmd.110.035980. Epub 2010
Nov 18.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a regulates expression of the mouse female-specific
Cyp3a41 gene in the liver.

Bhadhprasit W(1), Sakuma T, Kawasaki Y, Nemoto N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Graduate School of Medicine and Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University of Toyama, Toyama, Japan.

CYP3A41 is a female-specific cytochrome P450 in mouse liver. A putative
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a)-binding site was found at -99/-87 in the
promoter of Cyp3a41 by reporter assays performed in the hepatocytes of female
mice. Cotransfection of an HNF4a expression plasmid significantly increased
transcription of the reporter gene. Although electrophoretic mobility shift
assays with liver nuclear extracts did not show a sex-related difference,
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays showed that larger amounts of HNF4a
bound to Cyp3a41 in female than in male mice. A relation between the amount of
HNF4a on the Cyp3a41 gene and mRNA expression was observed in hepatic tissue
sets, which differ in mRNA expression depending on the sex, age, or endocrine
status of mice. The degree of histone-3-lysine-4 dimethylation and
histone-3-lysine-27 trimethylation around the HNF4a-binding site was higher in
females and males, respectively. Moreover, the ChIP assay indicated greater
acetylation of histone-4-lysine-8 of the Cyp3a41 chromatin in females than in
males. HNF4a plays an important role in the transcriptional activation of the
Cyp3a41 gene, and a sex difference in chromatin structure may contribute to the
female-specific expression of Cyp3a41 in the livers of mice.

PMID: 21088200  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Dev Cell. 2010 Nov 16;19(5):713-26. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.10.006.

Differentiation-specific histone modifications reveal dynamic chromatin
interactions and partners for the intestinal transcription factor CDX2.

Verzi MP(1), Shin H, He HH, Sulahian R, Meyer CA, Montgomery RK, Fleet JC, Brown 
M, Liu XS, Shivdasani RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Erratum in
    Dev Cell. 2014 Dec 22;31(6):801.

Comment in
    Dev Cell. 2010 Nov 16;19(5):647-8.

VIDEO ABSTRACT: Cell differentiation requires remodeling of tissue-specific gene 
loci and activities of key transcriptional regulators, which are recognized for
their dominant control over cellular programs. Using epigenomic methods, we
characterized enhancer elements specifically modified in differentiating
intestinal epithelial cells and found enrichment of transcription factor-binding 
motifs corresponding to CDX2, a critical regulator of the intestine. Directed
investigation revealed surprising lability in CDX2 occupancy of the genome, with 
redistribution from hundreds of sites occupied only in proliferating cells to
thousands of new sites in differentiated cells. Knockout mice confirmed distinct 
Cdx2 requirements in dividing and mature adult intestinal cells, including
responsibility for the active enhancer configuration associated with maturity.
Dynamic CDX2 occupancy corresponds with condition-specific gene expression and,
importantly, to differential co-occupancy with other tissue-restricted
transcription factors, such as GATA6 and HNF4A. These results reveal dynamic,
context-specific functions and mechanisms of a prominent transcriptional
regulator within a cell lineage.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3001591
PMID: 21074721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2011 Feb;31(2):328-36. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.217828. Epub 2010 Nov 11.

Hepatic hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a is essential for maintaining triglyceride
and cholesterol homeostasis.

Yin L(1), Ma H, Ge X, Edwards PA, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Medical Sciences, Northeastern Ohio Universities
College of Medicine, 4209 State Rte. 44, Rootstown, OH 44272, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Loss-of-function mutations in human hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a
(HNF4a) are associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young and lipid
disorders. However, the mechanisms underlying the lipid disorders are poorly
understood. In this study, we determined the effect of acute loss or augmentation
of hepatic HNF4a function on lipid homeostasis.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We generated an adenovirus expressing LacZ (Ad-shLacZ) or
short hairpin RNA of Hnf4a (Ad-shHnf4a). Tail vain injection of C57BL/6J mice
with Ad-shHnf4a reduced hepatic Hnf4a expression and resulted in striking
phenotypes, including the development of fatty liver and a >80% decrease in
plasma levels of triglycerides, total cholesterol, and high-density lipoprotein
cholesterol. These latter changes were associated with reduced hepatic
lipogenesis and impaired very-low-density lipoprotein secretion. Deficiency in
hepatic Hnf4a did not affect intestinal cholesterol absorption despite decreased 
expression of genes involved in bile acid synthesis. Consistent with the
loss-of-function data, overexpression of Hnf4a induced numerous genes involved in
lipid metabolism in isolated primary hepatocytes. Interestingly, many of these
HNF4a-regulated genes were not induced in wild-type mice that overexpressed
hepatic Hnf4a. Because of selective gene regulation, mice overexpressing hepatic 
Hnf4a had unchanged plasma triglyceride levels and decreased plasma cholesterol
levels.
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of hepatic HNF4a results in severe lipid disorder as a result
of dysregulation of multiple genes involved in lipid metabolism. In contrast,
augmentation of hepatic HNF4a activity lowers plasma cholesterol levels but has
no effect on plasma triglyceride levels because of selective gene regulation. Our
data indicate that hepatic HNF4a is essential for controlling the basal
expression of numerous genes involved in lipid metabolism and is indispensable
for maintaining normal lipid homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3079249
PMID: 21071704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 15;70(22):9423-33. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1697. Epub 
2010 Nov 9.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha promotes gut neoplasia in mice and protects
against the production of reactive oxygen species.

Darsigny M(1), Babeu JP, Seidman EG, Gendron FP, Levy E, Carrier J, Perreault N, 
Boudreau F.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Institute of Health Research Team on Digestive Epithelium,
Département d'Anatomie et Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des
Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Québec, Canada.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a (Hnf4a) is a transcription factor that controls
epithelial cell polarity and morphogenesis. Hnf4a conditional deletion during
postnatal development has minor effects on intestinal epithelium integrity but
promotes activation of the Wnt/ß-catenin pathway without causing tumorigenesis.
Here, we show that Hnf4a does not act as a tumor-suppressor gene but is crucial
in promoting gut tumorigenesis in mice. Polyp multiplicity in ApcMin mice lacking
Hnf4a is suppressed compared with littermate ApcMin controls. Analysis of
microarray gene expression profiles from mice lacking Hnf4a in the intestinal
epithelium identifies novel functions of this transcription factor in targeting
oxidoreductase-related genes involved in the regulation of reactive oxygen
species (ROS) levels. This role is supported with the demonstration that HNF4a is
functionally involved in the protection against spontaneous and 5-fluorouracil
chemotherapy-induced production of ROS in colorectal cancer cell lines. Analysis 
of a colorectal cancer patient cohort establishes that HNF4a is significantly
upregulated compared with adjacent normal epithelial resections. Several genes
involved in ROS neutralization are also induced in correlation with HNF4A
expression. Altogether, the findings point to the nuclear receptor HNF4a as a
potential therapeutic target to eradicate aberrant epithelial cell resistance to 
ROS production during intestinal tumorigenesis.

Copyright © 2010 AACR.

PMID: 21062980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Clin Genet. 2011 Dec;80(6):541-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1399-0004.2010.01577.x. Epub
2010 Nov 10.

Association of novel variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A gene with
maturity onset diabetes of the young and early onset type 2 diabetes.

Anuradha S(1), Radha V, Mohan V.

Author information: 
(1)Madras Diabetes Research Foundation, ICMR Advanced Centre for Genomics of Type
2 Diabetes and Dr. Mohan's Diabetes Specialities Centre, WHO Collaborating Centre
for Non Communicable Diseases Prevention & Control, Gopalapuram, Chennai 600086, 
India.

Variants in hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A (HNF4A) cause maturity onset diabetes of
the young (MODY 1). The objective of the study was to screen the coding and the
promoter regions of HNF4A mutations in 87 unrelated South Indian subjects with
clinically diagnosed MODY with severe forms of diabetes referred to a tertiary
diabetes centre. In addition, we looked at the association of common
polymorphisms in HNF4 A gene in subjects with MODY (n = 199), early onset type 2 
diabetes (T2DM) (n = 505), late onset T2DM (n = 287) and normal glucose tolerance
(NGT) (n = 247). We identified three novel mutations in the P2 promoter region of
HNF4A, namely -1009 G/C, -129 T/C and -79 C/T. Co-segregation with diabetes was
noted with the -1009 G/C and -129 T/C in one MODY family. We also studied eight
single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of HNF4A gene. The frequency of the minor 
allele of the rs2144908 was significantly higher in subjects with MODY (p < 0.01)
and that of rs736823 was significantly higher in early onset T2DM (p = 0.001).
Minor allele frequency of rs1884614 and rs2071197 was significantly lower in
early onset T2DM when compared to NGT subjects (p < 0.01). Minor allele frequency
of Val255Met was significantly lower in MODY, early onset T2DM and late onset
T2DM compared to NGT subjects (p < 0.01). This is the first report of MODY 1
mutations from India and shows that 3.4% of clinically diagnosed MODY subjects
have MODY 1. In addition, we report SNPs of HNF4A that are both susceptible to,
and protective against, MODY and early onset T2DM.

© 2010 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 21062274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. J Thromb Haemost. 2010 Dec;8(12):2839-41. doi: 10.1111/j.1538-7836.2010.04080.x.

The role of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a in regulating mouse hepatic
anticoagulation and fibrinolysis gene transcript levels.

Safdar H, Inoue Y, van Puijvelde GH, Reitsma PH, van Vlijmen BJ.

PMID: 21029356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. World J Gastroenterol. 2010 Oct 28;16(40):5092-103.

HNF-4a determines hepatic differentiation of human mesenchymal stem cells from
bone marrow.

Chen ML(1), Lee KD, Huang HC, Tsai YL, Wu YC, Kuo TM, Hu CP, Chang C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular and Genomic Medicine, National Health Research
Institutes, Miaoli 350, Taiwan.

AIM: To investigate the differentiation status and key factors to facilitate
hepatic differentiation of human bone-marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs).
METHODS: Human MSCs derived from bone marrow were induced into hepatocyte-like
cells following a previously published protocol. The differentiation status of
the hepatocyte-like cells was compared with various human hepatoma cell lines.
Overexpression of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4a was mediated by adenovirus
infection of these hepatocyte-like cells. The expression of interesting genes was
then examined by either reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
or real-time RT-PCR methods.
RESULTS: Our results demonstrated that the differentiation status of
hepatocyte-like cells induced from human MSCs was relatively similar to poorly
differentiated human hepatoma cell lines. Interestingly, the HNF-4 isoform in
induced MSCs and poorly differentiated human hepatoma cell lines was identified
as HNF-4<U+03B3> instead of HNF-4a. Overexpression of HNF-4a in induced MSCs
significantly enhanced the expression level of hepatic-specific genes,
liver-enriched transcription factors, and cytochrome P450 (P450) genes.
CONCLUSION: Overexpression of HNF-4a improves the hepatic differentiation of
human MSCs from bone marrow and is a simple way of providing better cell sources 
for clinical applications.

PMCID: PMC2965287
PMID: 20976847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. BMC Med Genet. 2010 Oct 12;11:144. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-11-144.

Suggestive evidence of associations between liver X receptor ß polymorphisms with
type 2 diabetes mellitus and obesity in three cohort studies: HUNT2 (Norway),
MONICA (France) and HELENA (Europe).

Solaas K(1), Legry V, Retterstol K, Berg PR, Holven KB, Ferrières J, Amouyel P,
Lien S, Romeo J, Valtueña J, Widhalm K, Ruiz JR, Dallongeville J, Tonstad S,
Rootwelt H, Halvorsen B, Nenseter MS, Birkeland KI, Thorsby PM, Meirhaeghe A,
Nebb HI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Oslo University Hospital, Aker, Oslo, Norway.

BACKGROUND: The liver X receptors (LXR) a and ß regulate lipid and carbohydrate
homeostasis and inflammation. Lxrß<U+207B>/<U+207B> mice are glucose intolerant and at the same
time lean. We aimed to assess the associations between single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in LXRß and risk of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), obesity
and related traits in 3 separate cohort studies.
METHODS: Twenty LXRß SNPs were identified by sequencing and genotyped in the
HUNT2 adult nested case-control study for T2DM (n = 835 cases/1986 controls).
Five tag-SNPs (rs17373080, rs2695121, rs56151148, rs2303044 and rs3219281),
covering 99.3% of the entire common genetic variability of the LXRß gene were
identified and genotyped in the French MONICA adult study (n = 2318) and the
European adolescent HELENA cross-sectional study (n = 1144). In silico and in
vitro functionality studies were performed.
RESULTS: We identified suggestive or significant associations between rs17373080 
and the risk of (i) T2DM in HUNT2 (OR = 0.82, p = 0.03), (ii) obesity in MONICA
(OR = 1.26, p = 0.05) and (iii) overweight/obesity in HELENA (OR = 1.59, p =
0.002). An intron 4 SNP (rs28514894, a perfect proxy for rs17373080) could
potentially create binding sites for hepatic nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4a) and
nuclear factor 1 (NF1). The C allele of rs28514894 was associated with ~1.25-fold
higher human LXRß basal promoter activity in vitro. However, no differences
between alleles in terms of DNA binding and reporter gene transactivation by
HNF4a or NF1 were observed.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that rs17373080 in LXRß is associated with T2DM 
and obesity, maybe via altered LXRß expression.

PMCID: PMC2958901
PMID: 20939869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Mol Cell Biochem. 2011 Jan;347(1-2):29-39. doi: 10.1007/s11010-010-0609-0. Epub
2010 Oct 12.

Effect of dietary saturated fatty acids on HNF-4a DNA binding activity and
ApoCIII mRNA in sedentary rat liver.

Ceccarelli V(1), Nocentini G, Riccardi C, Ayroldi E, Di Nardo P, Roberti R,
Binaglia L, Vecchini A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine and Biochemical Sciences, University of
Perugia, Via del Giochetto, 3, 06122, Perugia, Italy.

Hind limb-suspended rats represent a sedentary-hyperinsulinemic model with a
liver dyslipidemia mainly related to changes in sterol regulatory element-binding
protein 1 (SREBP-1) and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-a (PPARa)
expression and activity. To assess the effects of dietary fatty acids on hepatic 
lipid homeostasis, the hepatic expression and activity of PPARa, SREBP-1, and
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a (HNF-4a) were investigated in this animal model. In 
control and sedentary rats, diets enriched with saturated, monounsaturated, and
polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) enhanced the expression of the PPARa target
genes carnitine palmitoyltransferase 1 and acyl-CoA oxidase, the highest effect
being exerted by <U+03C9>-3. The same diets reduced SREBP-1 mRNA and target lipogenic
gene expression, as indicated by the reduction in fatty acid synthase and
acetyl-CoA carboxylase mRNA content. Effects were greater in sedentary rat liver 
than in controls on the same diet. Only the <U+03C9>-3 enriched diet decreased liver
triglyceride content as well as plasma cholesterol and triglyceride levels in
sedentary rats. This effect may be mainly related to the enhanced mitochondrial
and peroxisomal ß-oxidation genes expression. On the other hand, saturated fatty 
acid-enriched diet induced an increase in liver triglyceride content and enhanced
plasma cholesterol and triglyceride levels, both in control and immobilized rats.
This detrimental effect may be ascribed to the induced HNF-4a binding activity on
ApoCIII promoter and to the enhanced ApoCIII mRNA levels both in control and in
sedentary rat livers. In conclusion, we can speculate that dietary saturated
fats, acting at apolipoprotein transcriptional level, may impact on the close
relationship existing among high ApoCIII plasma level, dyslipidemia, and
atherosclerosis.

PMID: 20938723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Toxicol Sci. 2010 Dec;118(2):380-90. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfq280. Epub 2010 Oct 8.

Alterations in hepatic mRNA expression of phase II enzymes and xenobiotic
transporters after targeted disruption of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha.

Lu H(1), Gonzalez FJ, Klaassen C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutics, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160, USA. hlu@kumc.edu

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4a) is a liver-enriched master regulator of
liver function. HNF4a is important in regulating hepatic expression of certain
cytochrome P450s. The purpose of this study was to use mice lacking HNF4a
expression in liver (HNF4a-HNull) to elucidate the role of HNF4a in regulating
hepatic expression of phase II enzymes and transporters in mice. Compared with
male wild-type mice, HNF4a-HNull male mouse livers had (1) markedly lower
messenger RNAs (mRNAs) encoding the uptake transporters sodium taurocholate
cotransporting polypeptide, organic anion transporting polypeptide (Oatp) 1a1,
Oatp2b1, organic anion transporter 2, sodium phosphate cotransporter type 1,
sulfate anion transporter 1, sodium-dependent vitamin C transporter 1, the phase 
II enzymes Uridine 5'-diphospho (UDP)-glucuronosyltransferase (Ugt) 2a3, Ugt2b1, 
Ugt3a1, Ugt3a2, sulfotransferase (Sult) 1a1, Sult1b1, Sult5a1, the efflux
transporters multidrug resistance-associated protein (Mrp) 6, and multidrug and
toxin extrusion 1; (2) moderately lower mRNAs encoding Oatp1b2, organic cation
transporter (Oct) 1, Ugt1a5, Ugt1a9, glutathione S-transferase (Gst) m4, Gstm6,
and breast cancer resistance protein; but (3) higher mRNAs encoding Oatp1a4,
Octn2, Ugt1a1, Sult1e1, Sult2a2, Gsta4, Gstm1-m3, multidrug resistance protein
(Mdr) 1a, Mrp3, and Mrp4. Hepatic signaling of nuclear factor E2-related factor 2
and pregnane X receptor appear to be activated in HNF4a-HNull mice. In
conclusion, HNF4a deficiency markedly alters hepatic mRNA expression of a large
number of phase II enzymes and transporters, probably because of the loss of
HNF4a, which is a transactivator and a determinant of gender-specific expression 
and/or adaptive activation of signaling pathways important in hepatic regulation 
of these phase II enzymes and transporters.

PMCID: PMC2984525
PMID: 20935164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Toxicol In Vitro. 2011 Feb;25(1):100-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2010.09.013. Epub 2010
Oct 12.

Preservation of hepatocellular functionality in cultures of primary rat
hepatocytes upon exposure to 4-Me2N-BAVAH, a hydroxamate-based HDAC-inhibitor.

Henkens T(1), Snykers S, Vinken M, Fraczek J, Lukaszuk A, Tourwé D, Verheyen G,
Van Gompel J, Vanparys P, Rogiers V, Vanhaecke T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Vrije Universiteit Brussel, Brussels, Belgium.

Great efforts are being put in the development/optimization of reliable and
highly predictive models for high-throughput screening of efficacy and toxicity
of promising drug candidates. The use of primary hepatocyte cultures, however, is
still limited by the occurrence of phenotypic alterations, including loss of
xenobiotic biotransformation capacity. In the present study, the
differentiation-stabilizing effect of a new histone deacetylase inhibitor
5-(4-dimethylaminobenzoyl)-aminovaleric acid hydroxamide (4-Me(2)N-BAVAH), a
structural Trichostatin A (TSA)-analogue with a more favourable
pharmaco-toxicological profile, was studied at a genome-wide scale by means of
microarray analysis. Several genes coding for xenobiotic biotransformation
enzymes were found to be positively regulated upon exposure to 4-Me(2)N-BAVAH.
For CYP1A1/2B1/3A2, these observations were confirmed by qRT-PCR and immunoblot
analysis. In addition, significantly higher 7-ethoxyresorufin-O-deethylase and
7-pentoxyresorufin-O-dealkylase activity levels were measured. These effects were
accompanied by an increased expression of CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha
and hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)4a, but not of HNF1a. Finally, 4-Me(2)N-BAVAH was
found to induce histone H3 acetylation at the proximal promoter of the albumin,
CYP1A1 and CYP2B1 genes, suggesting that chromatin remodelling is directly
involved in the transcriptional regulation of these genes. In conclusion, histone
deacetylase inhibitors prove to be efficient agents for better maintaining a
differentiated hepatic phenotype in rat hepatocyte cultures.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20932894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. BMC Genomics. 2010 Oct 8;11:548. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-548.

Dynamic transcriptomic profiles of zebrafish gills in response to zinc depletion.

Zheng D(1), Kille P, Feeney GP, Cunningham P, Handy RD, Hogstrand C.

Author information: 
(1)Mineral Metabolism Group, Nutritional Sciences Division, King's College
London, London SE1 9NH, UK.

BACKGROUND: Zinc deficiency is detrimental to organisms, highlighting its role as
an essential micronutrient contributing to numerous biological processes. To
investigate the underlying molecular events invoked by zinc depletion we
performed a temporal analysis of transcriptome changes observed within the
zebrafish gill. This tissue represents a model system for studying ion absorption
across polarised epithelial cells as it provides a major pathway for fish to
acquire zinc directly from water whilst sharing a conserved zinc transporting
system with mammals.
RESULTS: Zebrafish were treated with either zinc-depleted (water = 2.61 µg L-1;
diet = 26 mg kg-1) or zinc-adequate (water = 16.3 µg L-1; diet = 233 mg kg-1)
conditions for two weeks. Gill samples were collected at five time points and
transcriptome changes analysed in quintuplicate using a 16K oligonucleotide
array. Of the genes represented the expression of a total of 333 transcripts
showed differential regulation by zinc depletion (having a fold-change greater
than 1.8 and an adjusted P-value less than 0.1, controlling for a 10% False
Discovery Rate). Down-regulation was dominant at most time points and distinct
sets of genes were regulated at different stages. Annotation enrichment analysis 
revealed that 'Developmental Process' was the most significantly overrepresented 
Biological Process GO term (P = 0.0006), involving 26% of all regulated genes.
There was also significant bias for annotations relating to development, cell
cycle, cell differentiation, gene regulation, butanoate metabolism, lysine
degradation, protein tyrosin phosphatases, nucleobase, nucleoside and nucleotide 
metabolism, and cellular metabolic processes. Within these groupings genes
associated with diabetes, bone/cartilage development, and ionocyte proliferation 
were especially notable. Network analysis of the temporal expression profile
indicated that transcription factors foxl1, wt1, nr5a1, nr6a1, and especially,
hnf4a may be key coordinators of the homeostatic response to zinc depletion.
CONCLUSIONS: The study revealed the complex regulatory pathways that allow the
organism to subtly respond to the low-zinc condition. Many of the processes
affected reflected a fundamental restructuring of the gill epithelium through
reactivation of developmental programs leading to stem cell differentiation. The 
specific regulation of genes known to be involved in development of diabetes
provides new molecular links between zinc deficiency and this disease. The
present study demonstrates the importance of including the time-dimension in
microarray studies.

PMCID: PMC3091697
PMID: 20932299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Rev Endocr Metab Disord. 2010 Sep;11(3):185-91. doi: 10.1007/s11154-010-9148-y.

Congenital hyperinsulinism due to mutations in HNF4A and HADH.

Kapoor RR(1), Heslegrave A, Hussain K.

Author information: 
(1)Clinical and Molecular Genetics Unit, The Developmental Endocrinology Research
Group, Institute of Child Health, University College London, 30 Guilford Street, 
London, WC1N 1EH, UK.

Mutations in the HADH and HNF4A genes are rare causes of diazoxide responsive
congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI). This chapter details the phenotype known to be 
associated with mutations in these genes. Additionally, the authors give a brief 
overview of the role of these genes in glucose physiology and the possible
mechanisms of CHI in patients with mutations in these genes.

PMID: 20931292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Curr Diabetes Rev. 2010 Nov;6(6):393-9.

Genetics in gestational diabetes mellitus: association with incidence, severity, 
pregnancy outcome and response to treatment.

Lambrinoudaki I(1), Vlachou SA, Creatsas G.

Author information: 
(1)2nd Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Aretaieion University Hospital,
Athens University Medical School, GR-11528, Athens, Greece.
ilambrinoudaki@hotmail.com

Constant advances in gene mapping technology have allowed research to focus from 
rare monogenic disorders on common complex diseases involving multiple
susceptibility genes-environment interactions. Gestational diabetes mellitus
(GDM) is a heterogeneous pathogenic condition affecting 2-5% of all pregnant
women during pregnancy. GDM is considered to result when genetic predisposition
is triggered by increased insulin resistance during pregnancy leading to what
seems to be one of the primary characteristics of GDM, the pancreatic b-cell
impairment. Genetic predisposition to GDM has been suggested given the occurrence
of the disease within family members. Furthermore, GDM is reported to be often
present in women with maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) gene mutations.
In addition, candidate susceptibility gene variants have been suggested to
increase the risk of GDM. These genes include glucokinase (GCK), HLA antigens,
insulin receptor (INSR), insulin-like growth factor-2 (IGF2), HNF4A, insulin gene
(INS-VNTR), plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 (PAI-1), potassium inwardly
rectifying channel subfamily J, member 11 (KCNJ11), hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a 
(HNF4A). Identification of the possible underlying genetic factors of GDM would
eventually enrich our knowledge on the pathophysiologic mechanism of the disease 
and contribute to the individualization of both prevention and treatment of
complications for the mother and fetus. However, so far, little is known about
the genetic basis of GDM and its potential clinical significance. This review
focuses on possible gestational diabetes mellitus susceptibility genes and their 
association with the disease incidence and severity as well as the pregnancy
outcome and the response to treatment.

PMID: 20879971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Animal. 2010 Oct;4(10):1619-27. doi: 10.1017/S175173111000087X.

The Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha ( HNF1A) gene is associated with fatness
and loin muscle area in the pig.

Fan B(1), Du ZQ, Rothschild MF.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Animal Science and Center for Integrated Animal Genomics, Iowa 
State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

The significance of hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) in ß-cell development and
function has been generally recognized in humans, as evidenced by their
associations with cases of maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY). Common
Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1A), Hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta
(HNF1B) and Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF4A) mutations could lead to
monogenic forms 3, 5 and 1 of diabetes mellitus, respectively, and were
characterized by MODY in humans. In this study, multiple variants were discovered
in the porcine HNF1A and HNF4A genes, and one single-nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) was detected in the HNF1B gene. Using the Iowa State University Berkshire ×
Yorkshire pig resource population, the HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A genes were mapped
on chromosomes 14, 12 and 17, respectively. The linkage disequilibrium (LD)
analyses indicated that most of the HNF1A variants were not in strong LD with
each other; however, nearly all of them were highly significantly (P < 0.01)
associated with loin muscle area (LMA). The SNPs c.327-19G>T and c.1768+40_23del 
were significantly (P < 0.05) associated with backfat and total lipid percentage,
and the latter was also associated with muscle glycogen metabolism measures. Four
major haplotypes were observed and the association analyses suggested that
haplotype 3 (-CGCGD-, I indicates Insertion and D indicates Deletion) was
favorable for reduced backfat, while haplotype 1 (-CACGI-) was unfavorably
associated with backfat and LMA. There was no significant interaction effect on
backfat among the SNPs c.327-19G>T, c.1768+40_23del of the HNF1A gene and
c.646C>T of the transcription factor-7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene. These findings
suggest that the HNF1A gene has significant effects on both fatness- and meat
production-related traits. No significant associations with production traits
with the SNPs from the HNF1B and HNF4A genes were observed in the study.

PMID: 22445113  [PubMed]


450. Diabetologia. 2011 Jan;54(1):111-9. doi: 10.1007/s00125-010-1916-4. Epub 2010 Sep
29.

A role for coding functional variants in HNF4A in type 2 diabetes susceptibility.

Jafar-Mohammadi B(1), Groves CJ, Gjesing AP, Herrera BM, Winckler W, Stringham
HM, Morris AP, Lauritzen T, Doney AS, Morris AD, Weedon MN, Swift AJ, Kuusisto J,
Laakso M, Altshuler D, Hattersley AT, Collins FS, Boehnke M, Hansen T, Pedersen
O, Palmer CN, Frayling TM; DIAGRAM Consortium, Gloyn AL, McCarthy MI.

Author information: 
(1)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, University of
Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Headington, UK.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Rare mutations in the gene HNF4A, encoding the transcription
factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF-4A), account for ~5% of cases of MODY
and more frequent variants in this gene may be involved in multifactorial forms
of diabetes. Two low-frequency, non-synonymous variants in HNF4A (V255M, minor
allele frequency [MAF] ~0.1%; T130I, MAF ~3.0%)-known to influence downstream
HNF-4A target gene expression-are of interest, but previous type 2 diabetes
association reports were inconclusive. We aimed to evaluate the contribution of
these variants to type 2 diabetes susceptibility through large-scale association 
analysis.
METHODS: We genotyped both variants in at least 5,745 cases and 14,756 population
controls from the UK and Denmark. We also undertook an expanded association
analysis that included previously reported and novel genotype data obtained in
Danish, Finnish, Canadian and Swedish samples. A meta-analysis incorporating all 
published association studies of the T130I variant was subsequently carried out
in a maximum sample size of 14,279 cases and 26,835 controls.
RESULTS: We found no association between V255M and type 2 diabetes in either the 
initial (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.28) or the expanded analysis (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.44). However, T130I
demonstrated a modest association with type 2 diabetes in the UK and Danish
samples (additive per allele OR 1.17 [95% CI 1.08-1.28]; p<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.5<U+2009>×<U+2009>10<U+207B>4), which
was strengthened in the meta-analysis (OR 1.20 [95% CI 1.10-1.30];
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>2.1<U+2009>×<U+2009>10<U+207B>5).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Our data are consistent with T130I as a low-frequency
variant influencing type 2 diabetes risk, but are not conclusive when judged
against stringent standards for genome-wide significance. This study exemplifies 
the difficulties encountered in association testing of low-frequency variants.

PMCID: PMC3119815
PMID: 20878384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Cancer Res. 2010 Oct 1;70(19):7640-51. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0824. Epub
2010 Sep 28.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha suppresses the development of hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Ning BF(1), Ding J, Yin C, Zhong W, Wu K, Zeng X, Yang W, Chen YX, Zhang JP,
Zhang X, Wang HY, Xie WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Changzheng Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) is a transcription factor that plays a key
role in hepatocyte differentiation and the maintenance of hepatic function, but
its role in hepatocarcinogenesis has yet to be examined. Here, we report evidence
of a suppressor role for HNF4a in liver cancer. HNF4a expression was
progressively decreased in the diethylinitrosamine-induced rat model of liver
carcinogenesis. In human liver tissues, HNF4a expression was decreased in
cirrhotic tissue and further decreased in hepatocarcinoma relative to healthy
tissue. Notably, an inverse correlation existed with epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). Enforced expression of HNF4a attenuated hepatocyte EMT during
hepatocarcinogenesis, alleviated hepatic fibrosis, and blocked hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC) occurrence. In parallel, stem cell marker gene expression was
inhibited along with cancer stem/progenitor cell generation. Further, enforced
expression of HNF4a inhibited activation of ß-catenin, which is closely
associated with EMT and hepatocarcinogenesis. Taken together, our results suggest
that the inhibitory effect of HNF4a on HCC development might be attributed to
suppression of hepatocyte EMT and cancer stem cell generation through an
inhibition of ß-catenin signaling pathways. More generally, our findings broaden 
knowledge on the biological significance of HNF4a in HCC development, and they
imply novel strategies for HCC prevention through the manipulation of
differentiation-determining transcription factors in various types of carcinomas.

© 2010 AACR.

PMID: 20876809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2011 Jan;1813(1):102-8. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2010.09.009. 
Epub 2010 Sep 27.

Role of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a in controlling copper-responsive
transcription.

Song MO(1), Freedman JH.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park,
NC, USA.

Previous global transcriptome and interactome analyses of copper-treated HepG2
cells identified hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) as a potential master
regulator of copper-responsive transcription. Copper exposure caused a decrease
in the expression of HNF4a at both mRNA and protein levels, which was accompanied
by a decrease in the level of HNF4a binding to its consensus DNA binding
sequence. qRT-PCR and RNAi studies demonstrated that changes in HNF4a expression 
ultimately affected the expressions of its down-stream target genes. Analysis of 
upstream regulators of HNF4a expression, including p53 and ATF3, showed that
copper caused an increase in the steady-state levels of these proteins. These
results support a model for copper-responsive transcription in which the metal
affects ATF3 expression and stabilizes p53 resulting in the down-regulation of
HNF4a expression. In addition, copper may directly affect p53 protein levels. The
suppression of HNF4a activity may contribute to the molecular mechanisms
underlying the physiological and toxicological consequences of copper toxicity in
hepatic-derived cells.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3014409
PMID: 20875833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. J Biol Chem. 2010 Dec 24;285(52):40448-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.155358. Epub
2010 Sep 24.

Modification in oxidative stress, inflammation, and lipoprotein assembly in
response to hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha knockdown in intestinal epithelial
cells.

Marcil V(1), Seidman E, Sinnett D, Boudreau F, Gendron FP, Beaulieu JF, Ménard D,
Precourt LP, Amre D, Levy E.

Author information: 
(1)Research Institute, McGill University, Campus MGH, C10.148.6, Montreal H3G
1A4, Quebec.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) is a nuclear transcription factor mainly
expressed in the liver, intestine, kidney, and pancreas. Many of its hepatic and 
pancreatic functions have been described, but limited information is available on
its role in the gastrointestinal tract. The objectives of this study were to
evaluate the anti-inflammatory and antioxidant functions of HNF4a as well as its 
implication in intestinal lipid transport and metabolism. To this end, the HNF4A 
gene was knocked down by transfecting Caco-2 cells with a pGFP-V-RS lentiviral
vector containing an shRNA against HNF4a. Inactivation of HNF4a in Caco-2 cells
resulted in the following: (a) an increase in oxidative stress as demonstrated by
the levels of malondialdehyde and conjugated dienes; (b) a reduction in secondary
endogenous antioxidants (catalase, glutathione peroxidase, and heme oxygenase-1);
(c) a lower protein expression of nuclear factor erythroid 2-related factor that 
controls the antioxidant response elements-regulated antioxidant enzymes; (d) an 
accentuation of cellular inflammatory activation as shown by levels of nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B, interleukin-6, interleukin-8, and leukotriene B4; (e) a decrease in
the output of high density lipoproteins and of their anti-inflammatory and
anti-oxidative components apolipoproteins (apo) A-I and A-IV; (f) a diminution in
cellular lipid transport revealed by a lower cellular secretion of chylomicrons
and their apoB-48 moiety; and (g) alterations in the transcription factors sterol
regulatory element-binding protein 2, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor 
a, and liver X receptor a and ß. In conclusion, HNF4a appears to play a key role 
in intestinal lipid metabolism as well as intestinal anti-oxidative and
anti-inflammatory defense mechanisms.

PMCID: PMC3003343
PMID: 20871093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. BMC Endocr Disord. 2010 Sep 23;10:16. doi: 10.1186/1472-6823-10-16.

Disease progression and search for monogenic diabetes among children with new
onset type 1 diabetes negative for ICA, GAD- and IA-2 Antibodies.

Pörksen S(1), Laborie LB, Nielsen L, Louise Max Andersen M, Sandal T, de Wet H,
Schwarcz E, Aman J, Swift P, Kocova M, Schönle EJ, de Beaufort C, Hougaard P,
Ashcroft F, Molven A, Knip M, Mortensen HB, Hansen L, Njølstad PR; Hvidøre Study 
Group on Childhood Diabetes.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Glostrup Hospital & University of Copenhagen,
Copenhagen, Denmark. spoerksen@yahoo.com.

BACKGROUND: To investigate disease progression the first 12 months after
diagnosis in children with type 1 diabetes negative (AAB negative) for pancreatic
autoantibodies [islet cell autoantibodies(ICA), glutamic acid decarboxylase
antibodies (GADA) and insulinoma-associated antigen-2 antibodies (IA-2A)].
Furthermore the study aimed at determining whether mutations in KCNJ11, ABCC8,
HNF1A, HNF4A or INS are common in AAB negative diabetes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In 261 newly diagnosed children with type 1 diabetes, we
measured residual ß-cell function, ICA, GADA, and IA-2A at 1, 6 and 12 months
after diagnosis. The genes KCNJ11, ABCC8, HNF1A, HNF4A and INS were sequenced in 
subjects AAB negative at diagnosis. We expressed recombinant K-ATP channels in
Xenopus oocytes to analyse the functional effects of an ABCC8 mutation.
RESULTS: Twenty-four patients (9.1%) tested AAB negative after one month.
Patients, who were AAB-negative throughout the 12-month period, had higher
residual ß-cell function (P = 0.002), lower blood glucose (P = 0.004), received
less insulin (P = 0.05) and had lower HbA1c (P = 0.02) 12 months after diagnosis.
One patient had a heterozygous mutation leading to the substitution of arginine
at residue 1530 of SUR1 (ABCC8) by cysteine. Functional analyses of recombinant
K-ATP channels showed that R1530C markedly reduced the sensitivity of the K-ATP
channel to inhibition by MgATP. Morover, the channel was highly sensitive to
sulphonylureas. However, there was no effect of sulfonylurea treatment after four
weeks on 1.0-1.2 mg/kg/24 h glibenclamide.
CONCLUSION: GAD, IA-2A, and ICA negative children with new onset type 1 diabetes 
have slower disease progression as assessed by residual beta-cell function and
improved glycemic control 12 months after diagnosis. One out of 24 had a mutation
in ABCC8, suggesting that screening of ABCC8 should be considered in patients
with AAB negative type 1 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2955624
PMID: 20863361  [PubMed]


455. J Biotechnol. 2010 Oct 15;150(2):259-67. doi: 10.1016/j.jbiotec.2010.09.929. Epub
2010 Sep 17.

Boosting native promoter activities with non-adjacent response-element multimers.

Huang J(1), Levitsky LL, Rhoads DB.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrine Unit, MassGeneral Hospital for Children and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114-2696, USA. jmhuang@partners.org

Effective gene therapy requires regulated gene expression and vector safety. We
developed a strategy to exponentially increase native promoter activity while
retaining inherent regulation by inserting multi-copy response elements (REs)
into non-adjacent locations. For the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4a-dependent
Hnf1a (MODY3) gene, HNF4a stimulation increased from 5- to 90-fold by inserting 3
additional HNF4a REs (H4REs). Constructing a promoter with two 4xH4REs 0.25kb
apart by duplicating the 4xH4RE fragment increased stimulation to >1000-fold.
HNF4a-induced protein expression by the duplicate 4xH4RE Hnf1a promoter was
comparable to a viral promoter. Converting the two Apolipoprotein C3 (ApoC3)
H4REs spaced 0.61kb apart to 4xH4REs achieved a similar result. Increasing
spacing to 2.1kb with non-promoter DNA abolished the augmentation. Finally,
converting the HNF1a RE of the HNF4A (MODY1) P2 promoter to 4xH1RE and adding a
second 4xH1RE 0.84kb upstream increased HNF1a stimulation from 26- to >200-fold. 
Deleting intervening DNA to produce 0.23-kb spacing increased stimulation to
>500-fold. Spaced multi-copy RE motifs is a novel strategy for engineering
promoters that boosts activity far beyond other techniques. Augmentation of three
promoters suggests that this approach is potentially applicable to other
promoters for gene therapy and might obviate the need for viral promoters.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20850486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2010 Oct 15;401(2):213-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2010.09.032. Epub 2010 Sep 19.

Development of a bioassay to screen for chemicals mimicking the anti-aging
effects of calorie restriction.

Chiba T(1), Tsuchiya T, Komatsu T, Mori R, Hayashi H, Shimano H, Spindler SR,
Shimokawa I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Investigative Pathology, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences,
Nagasaki University, 1-12-4 Sakamoto, Nagasaki 852-8523, Japan.
takuya@nagasaki-u.ac.jp

Suppression of the growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor-I pathway in Ames
dwarf (DF) mice, and caloric restriction (CR) in normal mice extends lifespan and
delays the onset of age-related disorders. In combination, these interventions
have an additive effect on lifespan in Ames DF mice. Therefore, common signaling 
pathways regulated by DF and CR could have additive effects on longevity. In this
study, we tried to identity the signaling mechanism and develop a system to
assess pro-longevity status in cells and mice. We previously identified genes
up-regulated in the liver of DF and CR mice by DNA microarray analysis. Motif
analysis of the upstream sequences of those genes revealed four major consensus
sequence motifs, which have been named dwarfism and calorie
restriction-responsive elements (DFCR-REs). One of the synthesized sequences
bound to hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a (HNF-4a), an important transcription factor
involved in liver metabolism. Furthermore, using this sequence information, we
developed a highly sensitive bioassay to identify chemicals mimicking the
anti-aging effects of CR. When the reporter construct, containing an element
upstream of a secreted alkaline phosphatase (SEAP) gene, was co-transfected with 
HNF-4a and its regulator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR) <U+03B3>
coactivator-1a (PGC-1a), SEAP activity was increased compared with untransfected 
controls. Moreover, transient transgenic mice established using this construct
showed increased SEAP activity in CR mice compared with ad libitum-fed mice.
These data suggest that because of its rapidity, ease of use, and specificity,
our bioassay will be more useful than the systems currently employed to screen
for CR mimetics, which mimic the beneficial effects of CR. Our system will be
particularly useful for high-throughput screening of natural and synthetic
candidate molecules.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20846506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2010 Dec;10(6):698-705. doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2010.08.010.

HNF4a--role in drug metabolism and potential drug target?

Hwang-Verslues WW(1), Sladek FM.

Author information: 
(1)Genomics Research Center, Academia Sinica, Taipei 115, Taiwan.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a (HNF4a) is a highly conserved member of the nuclear 
receptor superfamily of ligand-dependent transcription factors. It is best known 
as a master regulator of liver-specific gene expression, especially those genes
involved in lipid transport and glucose metabolism. However, there is also a
growing body of work that indicates the importance of HNF4a in the regulation of 
genes involved in xenobiotic and drug metabolism. A recent study identifying the 
essential fatty acid linoleic acid (LA, C18:2) as the endogenous, reversible
ligand for HNF4a suggests that HNF4a may also be a potential drug target and that
its activity may be regulated by diet. This review will discuss the role of HNF4a
in drug metabolism, including the genes it regulates, the factors that regulate
its activity, and its potential as a drug target.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2981672
PMID: 20833107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 18;5(8):e12274. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012274.

Tissue-specific and ubiquitous expression patterns from alternative promoters of 
human genes.

Jacox E(1), Gotea V, Ovcharenko I, Elnitski L.

Author information: 
(1)National Human Genome Research Institute, National Institutes of Health,
Rockville, Maryland, United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Transcriptome diversity provides the key to cellular identity. One
important contribution to expression diversity is the use of alternative
promoters, which creates mRNA isoforms by expanding the choice of transcription
initiation sites of a gene. The proximity of the basal promoter to the
transcription initiation site enables prediction of a promoter's location based
on the gene annotations. We show that annotation of alternative promoters
regulating expression of transcripts with distinct first exons enables a novel
methodology to quantify expression levels and tissue specificity of mRNA
isoforms.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The use of distinct alternative first exons in 3,296 genes
was examined using exon-microarray data from 11 human tissues. Comparing two
transcripts from each gene we found that the activity of alternative promoters
(i.e., P1 and P2) was not correlated through tissue specificity or level of
expression. Furthermore neither P1 nor P2 conferred any bias for tissue-specific 
or ubiquitous expression. Genes associated with specific diseases produced
transcripts whose limited expression patterns were consistent with the tissue
affected in disease. Notably, genes that were historically designated as
tissue-specific or housekeeping had alternative isoforms that showed differential
expression. Furthermore, only a small number of alternative promoters showed
expression exclusive to a single tissue indicating that "tissue preference"
provides a better description of promoter activity than tissue specificity. When 
compared to gene expression data in public databases, as few as 22% of the genes 
had detailed information for more than one isoform, whereas the remainder
collapsed the expression patterns from individual transcripts into one profile.
CONCLUSIONS: We describe a computational pipeline that uses microarray data to
assess the level of expression and breadth of tissue profiles for transcripts
with distinct first exons regulated by alternative promoters. We conclude that
alternative promoters provide individualized regulation that is confirmed through
expression levels, tissue preference and chromatin modifications. Although the
selective use of alternative promoters often goes uncharacterized in gene
expression analyses, transcripts produced in this manner make unique
contributions to the cell that requires further exploration.

PMCID: PMC2923625
PMID: 20806066  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. World J Gastroenterol. 2010 Aug 21;16(31):3919-27.

Mapping of liver-enriched transcription factors in the human intestine.

Lehner F(1), Kulik U, Klempnauer J, Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Research and Medical Biotechnology, Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology
and Experimental Medicine, Nikolai-Fuchs-Strasse, Hannover, Germany.

AIM: To investigate the gene expression pattern of hepatocyte nuclear factor 6
(HNF6) and other liver-enriched transcription factors in various segments of the 
human intestine to better understand the differentiation of the gut epithelium.
METHODS: Samples of healthy duodenum and jejunum were obtained from patients with
pancreatic cancer whereas ileum and colon was obtained from patients undergoing
right or left hemicolectomy or (recto)sigmoid or rectal resection. All surgical
specimens were subjected to histopathology. Excised tissue was shock-frozen and
analyzed for gene expression of liver-enriched transcription factors by
semiquantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain and compared to the human
colon carcinoma cell line Caco-2. Protein expression of major liver-enriched
transcription factors was determined by Western blotting while the DNA binding of
HNF6 was investigated by electromobility shift assays.
RESULTS: The gene expression patterning of liver-enriched transcription factors
differed in the various segments of the human intestine with HNF6 gene expression
being most abundant in the duodenum (P < 0.05) whereas expression of the zinc
finger protein GATA4 and of the HNF6 target gene ALDH3A1 was most abundant in the
jejunum (P < 0.05). Likewise, expression of FOXA2 and the splice variants 2 and 4
of HNF4alpha were most abundantly expressed in the jejunum (P < 0.05).
Essentially, expression of transcription factors declined from the duodenum
towards the colon with the most abundant expression in the jejunum and less in
the ileum. The expression of HNF6 and of genes targeted by this factor, i.e.
neurogenin 3 (NGN3) was most abundant in the jejunum followed by the ileum and
the colon while DNA binding activity of HNF4alpha and of NGN3 was confirmed by
electromobility shift assays to an optimized probe. Furthermore, Western blotting
provided evidence of the expression of several liver-enriched transcription
factors in cultures of colon epithelial cells, albeit at different levels.
CONCLUSION: We describe significant local and segmental differences in the
expression of liver-enriched transcription factors in the human intestine which
impact epithelial cell biology of the gut.

PMCID: PMC2923766
PMID: 20712053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Diabetes Care. 2010 Nov;33(11):2336-8. doi: 10.2337/dc10-0561. Epub 2010 Aug 12.

Double heterozygous mutations involving both HNF1A/MODY3 and HNF4A/MODY1 genes: a
case report.

Forlani G(1), Zucchini S, Di Rocco A, Di Luzio R, Scipione M, Marasco E, Romeo G,
Marchesini G, Mantovani V.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Metabolic Diseases and Clinical Dietetics, Alma Mater Studiorum
University of Bologna, Center for Applied Biomedical Research (CRBA), S.
Orsola-Malpighi Hospital, Bologna, Italy. gabriele.forlani@aosp.bo.it

OBJECTIVE: We describe a maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) case with
mutations involving both HNF4A and HNF1A genes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A male patient was diagnosed with diabetes at age
17; the metabolic control rapidly worsened to insulin requirement. At that time
no relatives were known to be affected by diabetes, which was diagnosed years
later in both the parents (father at age 50 years, mother at age 54 years) and
the sister (at age 32 years, during pregnancy).
RESULTS: The genetic screening showed a double heterozygosity for the mutation
p.E508K in the HNF1A/MODY3 gene and the novel variant p.R80Q in the HNF4A/MODY1
gene. The genetic testing of the family showed that the father carried the MODY3 
mutation while the mother, the sister, and her two children carried the MODY1
mutation.
CONCLUSIONS: MODY1 and MODY3 mutations may interact by chance to give a more
severe form of diabetes (younger age at presentation and early need of insulin
therapy to control hyperglycemia).

PMCID: PMC2963490
PMID: 20705777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. J Physiol. 2010 Aug 1;588(Pt 15):2687-8. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2010.193797.

Exercise: not just a medicine for muscle?

Thyfault JP(1), Rector RS.

Author information: 
(1)Harry S Truman Memorial Veterans Hospital, Columbia, MO 65211, USA.
thyfaultj@missouri.edu

Comment on
    J Physiol. 2010 Jun 15;588(Pt 12):2239-53.

PMCID: PMC2956892
PMID: 20675815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Sep;1803(9):1013-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbamcr.2010.05.008.
Epub 2010 Jun 4.

cAMP-mediated regulation of HNF-4alpha depends on the level of coactivator
PGC-1alpha.

Dankel SN(1), Hoang T, Flågeng MH, Sagen JV, Mellgren G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen and the Hormone Laboratory,
Haukeland University Hospital, N-5021 Bergen, Norway.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF-4alpha) is a member of the nuclear
receptor superfamily with important roles in hepatic metabolism. Fasting induces 
the cAMP/protein kinase A (PKA)-signaling pathway. The mechanisms whereby cAMP
regulates HNF-4alpha transcriptional activity are incompletely understood. We
have therefore investigated the role of cAMP/PKA in regulation of HNF-4alpha in
COS-1 cells and the hepatoma HepG2 cell line. cAMP/PKA inhibited the
transcriptional activity of HNF-4alpha in COS-1 cells, whereas a stimulatory
effect was observed in HepG2 cells. The cAMP-induced inhibition of HNF-4alpha in 
COS-1 cells was counteracted by overexpression of the nuclear receptor
coactivator PGC-1alpha, and cAMP/PKA-dependent induction of the PGC1A gene in
HepG2 cells seems to explain the cell specific differences. This was further
supported by knock-down of PGC-1alpha in HepG2 cells, which abolished the
stimulatory effect of PKA on HNF-4alpha transcriptional activity. Similar to the 
cAMP/PKA-mediated regulation of HNF-4alpha, overexpression of the cAMP-response
element binding protein (CREB) inhibited the transcriptional activity of
HNF-4alpha in COS-1 cells, regardless of cAMP/PKA activation and CREB
phosphorylation. Moreover, activation of CREB by cAMP/PKA further stimulated
HNF-4alpha transactivation in HepG2 cells. cAMP induced the expression of the
HNF-4alpha target genes PCK1 and G6Pase in these cells. In conclusion, our
results suggest that the level of PGC-1alpha determines whether the
cAMP/PKA-pathway overall stimulates or inhibits HNF-4alpha transcriptional
activation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20670916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Gene Expr. 2010;14(6):337-44.

Developmental and tissue-specific regulation of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha
(HNF4-alpha) isoforms in rodents.

Dean S(1), Tang JI, Seckl JR, Nyirenda MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology Unit, Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Queen's Medical
Research Institute, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh, UK.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF4-alpha) regulates expression of a number
of genes in several metabolic organs. The HNF4-alpha gene has two promoters and
encodes at least nine isoforms through differential splicing. In mouse liver,
transcription initiates at promoter 2 (P2) during fetal life, but switches to P1 
at birth. Developmental and tissue-specific expression of HNF4-alpha in other
organs is largely unknown. Here, we examined expression of P1- and P2-derived
transcripts in a number of mouse and rat tissues. Both P1 and P2 were active in
mouse fetal liver, but P2-derived isoforms were detected 50% more abundantly than
P1 transcripts. Conversely, the adult mouse liver expressed significantly higher 
levels of P1- than P2-derived mRNA. In contrast, in the rat, P1 was used more
predominantly in both fetal and adult liver. Exposure of fetal rats to the
synthetic glucocorticoid dexamethasone caused suppression of P2 while enhancing
hepatic expression of transcripts from P1. This was associated with increased
expression of erythropoietin and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, which are key
HNF4-alpha targets in the liver. Unlike liver, the kidney and stomach used
promoters more selectively, so that only P1-derived isoforms were detected in
fetal and adult kidneys in mice or rats, whereas the stomach in both species
expressed P2-derived transcripts exclusively. No significant HNF4-alpha mRNA was 
detected in the spleen. These data reveal striking developmental and
tissue-specific variation in expression of HNF4-alpha, and indicate that this can
be influenced by environmental factors (such as exposure to glucocorticoid
excess), with potential pathophysiological consequences.

PMID: 20635575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. J Biol Chem. 2010 Sep 10;285(37):28457-71. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.118364. Epub
2010 Jul 9.

CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha (C/EBPalpha) and hepatocyte nuclear factor
4alpha (HNF4alpha) synergistically cooperate with constitutive androstane
receptor to transactivate the human cytochrome P450 2B6 (CYP2B6) gene:
application to the development of a metabolically competent human hepatic cell
model.

Benet M(1), Lahoz A, Guzmán C, Castell JV, Jover R.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Hepatología Experimental, Centro de Investigación, Hospital
Universitario La Fe, Valencia 46009, Spain.

The transcription of tissue-specific and inducible genes is usually subject to
the dynamic control of multiple activators. Dedifferentiated hepatic cell lines
lose the expression of tissue-specific activators and many characteristic hepatic
genes, such as drug-metabolizing cytochrome P450. Here we demonstrate that by
combining adenoviral vectors for CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein alpha
(C/EBPalpha), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha), and constitutive
androstane receptor, the CYP2B6 expression and inducibility by CITCO are restored
in human hepatoma HepG2 cells at levels similar to those in cultured human
hepatocytes. Moreover, several other phase I and II genes are simultaneously
activated, which suggests that this is an effective approach to endow
dedifferentiated human hepatoma cells with a particular metabolic competence and 
response to inducers. In order to gain insight into the molecular mechanism, we
examined the cooperation of these three transcription factors on the CYP2B6
5'-flanking region. We show new CYP2B6-responsive sequences for C/EBPalpha and
HNF4alpha and a novel synergistic regulatory mechanism whereby C/EBPalpha,
HNF4alpha, and constitutive androstane receptor bind and cooperate through
proximal and distal response elements to confer a maximal level of expression.
The results obtained from human liver also suggest that important differences in 
the expression and binding of C/EBPalpha and HNF4alpha could account for the
large interindividual variability of the hepatic CYP2B6 enzyme, which metabolizes
commonly used drugs.

PMCID: PMC2937871
PMID: 20622021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2010 Sep;299(3):G769-77. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00237.2010. Epub 2010 Jun 24.

Differential transcriptional characteristics of small and large biliary
epithelial cells derived from small and large bile ducts.

Glaser S(1), Wang M, Ueno Y, Venter J, Wang K, Chen H, Alpini G, Holterman A.

Author information: 
(1)Scott and White Digestive Disease Research Center, Temple, Texas, USA.

Biliary epithelial cells (BEC) are morphologically and functionally
heterogeneous. To investigate the molecular mechanism for their diversities, we
test the hypothesis that large and small BEC have disparity in their target gene 
response to their transcriptional regulator, the biliary cell-enriched hepatocyte
nuclear factor HNF6. The expression of the major HNF (HNF6, OC2, HNF1b, HNF1a,
HNF4a, C/EBPb, and Foxa2) and representative biliary transport target genes that 
are HNF dependent were compared between SV40-transformed BEC derived from large
(SV40LG) and small (SV40SM) ducts, before and after treatment with recombinant
adenoviral vectors expressing HNF6 (AdHNF6) or control LacZ cDNA (AdLacZ). Large 
and small BEC were isolated from mouse liver treated with growth hormone, a known
transcriptional activator of HNF6, and the effects on selected target genes were 
examined. Constitutive Foxa2, HNF1a, and HNF4a gene expression were 2.3-, 12.4-, 
and 2.6-fold, respectively, higher in SV40SM cells. This was associated with 2.7-
and 4-fold higher baseline expression of HNF1a- and HNF4a-regulated ntcp and
oatp1 genes, respectively. Following AdHNF6 infection, HNF6 gene expression was
1.4-fold higher (P = 0.02) in AdHNF6 SV40SM relative to AdHNF6 SV40LG cells, with
a corresponding higher Foxa2 (4-fold), HNF1a (15-fold), and HNF4a (6-fold) gene
expression in AdHNF6-SV40SM over AdHNF6-SV40LG. The net effects were upregulation
of HNF6 target gene glucokinase and of Foxa2, HNF1a, and HNF4a target genes
oatp1, ntcp, and mrp2 over AdLacZ control in both cells, but with higher levels
in AdH6-SV40SM over AdH6-SV40LG of glucokinase, oatp1, ntcp, and mrp2 (by 1.8-,
3.4-, 2.4-, and 2.5-fold, respectively). In vivo, growth hormone-mediated
increase in HNF6 expression was associated with similar higher upregulation of
glucokinase and mrp2 in cholangiocytes from small vs. large BEC. Small and large 
BEC have a distinct profile of hepatocyte transcription factor and cognate target
gene expression, as well as differential strength of response to transcriptional 
regulation, thus providing a potential molecular basis for their divergent
function.

PMCID: PMC2950684
PMID: 20576918  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Exp Biol Med (Maywood). 2010 Jul;235(7):857-61. doi: 10.1258/ebm.2010.010024.

Variants in hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha gene promoter region and type 2
diabetes risk in Chinese.

Chen Z(1), Zhang D, Liu Y, Zhou D, Zhao T, Yang Y, He L, Xu H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Nutritional Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 294 Taiyuan Road, Shanghai, PR China.

As a key regulator of insulin secretion and metabolism of glucose, cholesterol
and fatty acid, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4A) was suggested as a
candidate gene for type 2 diabetes (T2D); however, no association study between
HNF4A and T2D in the Chinese population has been conducted before. To address
this issue, we evaluated the impact of the HNF4A variants (rs1884614 and
rs2425637) on T2D and metabolic traits in 1912 unrelated patients and 2041
control subjects in the Chinese Han population. Our results suggested that no
individual single nucleotide polymorphisms of HNF4A was significantly associated 
with T2D at either allele or genotype level. However, rs2425637 in the promoter
region of HNF4A was found to have an effect on total cholesterol and high-density
lipoprotein before multiple testing correction. To summarize, our investigation
did not confirm the effects of HNF4A variants (rs1884614 and rs2425637) on T2D
risk, but found that the risk HNF4A contributed to T2D might be population
specific.

PMID: 20558840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Genome Res. 2010 Aug;20(8):1037-51. doi: 10.1101/gr.104356.109. Epub 2010 Jun 15.

Locus co-occupancy, nucleosome positioning, and H3K4me1 regulate the
functionality of FOXA2-, HNF4A-, and PDX1-bound loci in islets and liver.

Hoffman BG(1), Robertson G, Zavaglia B, Beach M, Cullum R, Lee S, Soukhatcheva G,
Li L, Wederell ED, Thiessen N, Bilenky M, Cezard T, Tam A, Kamoh B, Birol I, Dai 
D, Zhao Y, Hirst M, Verchere CB, Helgason CD, Marra MA, Jones SJ, Hoodless PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Endocrinology, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver,
British Columbia V5Z 1L3, Canada. brad.hoffman@ubc.ca

The liver and pancreas share a common origin and coexpress several transcription 
factors. To gain insight into the transcriptional networks regulating the
function of these tissues, we globally identify binding sites for FOXA2 in adult 
mouse islets and liver, PDX1 in islets, and HNF4A in liver. Because most
eukaryotic transcription factors bind thousands of loci, many of which are
thought to be inactive, methods that can discriminate functionally active binding
events are essential for the interpretation of genome-wide transcription factor
binding data. To develop such a method, we also generated genome-wide H3K4me1 and
H3K4me3 localization data in these tissues. By analyzing our binding and histone 
methylation data in combination with comprehensive gene expression data, we show 
that H3K4me1 enrichment profiles discriminate transcription factor occupied loci 
into three classes: those that are functionally active, those that are poised for
activation, and those that reflect pioneer-like transcription factor activity.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that the regulated presence of H3K4me1-marked
nucleosomes at transcription factor occupied promoters and enhancers controls
their activity, implicating both tissue-specific transcription factor binding and
nucleosome remodeling complex recruitment in determining tissue-specific gene
expression. Finally, we apply these approaches to generate novel insights into
how FOXA2, PDX1, and HNF4A cooperate to drive islet- and liver-specific gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC2909568
PMID: 20551221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Early Hum Dev. 2010 May;86(5):287-94. doi: 10.1016/j.earlhumdev.2010.05.003. Epub
2010 Jun 13.

Congenital hyperinsulinism.

Arnoux JB(1), de Lonlay P, Ribeiro MJ, Hussain K, Blankenstein O, Mohnike K,
Valayannopoulos V, Robert JJ, Rahier J, Sempoux C, Bellanné C, Verkarre V,
Aigrain Y, Jaubert F, Brunelle F, Nihoul-Fékété C.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI or HI) is a condition leading to recurrent
hypoglycemia due to an inappropriate insulin secretion by the pancreatic islet
beta cells. HI has two main characteristics: a high glucose requirement to
correct hypoglycemia and a responsiveness of hypoglycemia to exogenous glucagon. 
HI is usually isolated but may be rarely part of a genetic syndrome (e.g.
Beckwith-Wiedemann syndrome, Sotos syndrome etc.). The severity of HI is
evaluated by the glucose administration rate required to maintain normal glycemia
and the responsiveness to medical treatment. Neonatal onset HI is usually severe 
while late onset and syndromic HI are generally responsive to a medical
treatment. Glycemia must be maintained within normal ranges to avoid brain
damages, initially with glucose administration and glucagon infusion then, once
the diagnosis is set, with specific HI treatment. Oral diazoxide is a first line 
treatment. In case of unresponsiveness to this treatment, somatostatin analogues 
and calcium antagonists may be added, and further investigations are required for
the putative histological diagnosis: pancreatic (18)F-fluoro-L-DOPA PET-CT and
molecular analysis. Indeed, focal forms consist of a focal adenomatous
hyperplasia of islet cells, and will be cured after a partial pancreatectomy.
Diffuse HI involves all the pancreatic beta cells of the whole pancreas. Diffuse 
HI resistant to medical treatment (octreotide, diazoxide, calcium antagonists and
continuous feeding) may require subtotal pancreatectomy which post-operative
outcome is unpredictable. The genetics of focal islet-cells hyperplasia
associates a paternally inherited mutation of the ABCC8 or the KCNJ11 genes, with
a loss of the maternal allele specifically in the hyperplasic islet cells. The
genetics of diffuse isolated HI is heterogeneous and may be recessively inherited
(ABCC8 and KCNJ11) or dominantly inherited (ABCC8, KCNJ11, GCK, GLUD1, SLC16A1,
HNF4A and HADH). Syndromic HI are always diffuse form and the genetics depend on 
the syndrome. Except for HI due to potassium channel defect (ABCC8 and KCNJ11),
most of these HI are sensitive to diazoxide. The main points sum up the
management of HI: i) prevention of brain damages by normalizing glycemia and ii) 
screening for focal HI as they may be definitively cured after a limited
pancreatectomy.

2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20550977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Diabet Med. 2010 Jun;27(6):631-5. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2010.03003.x.

Novel monogenic diabetes mutations in the P2 promoter of the HNF4A gene are
associated with impaired function in vitro.

Wirsing A(1), Johnstone KA, Harries LW, Ellard S, Ryffel GU, Stanik J,
Gasperikova D, Klimes I, Murphy R.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Universität Duisburg-Essen, Germany.

AIMS: Mutations in HNF4A cause a form of monogenic beta-cell diabetes. We aimed
to identify mutations in the pancreas-specific P2 promoter of HNF4A in families
with suspected HNF4A diabetes and to show that they impaired the function of the 
promoter in vitro.
METHODS: We screened families with a clinical suspicion of HNF4A monogenic
beta-cell diabetes for mutations in the HNF4A P2 promoter. We investigated the
function of the previously reported HNF4A P2 promoter mutation -192C>G linked to 
late-onset diabetes in several families, along with two new segregating
mutations, in vitro using a modified luciferase reporter assay system with
enhanced sensitivity.
RESULTS: We identified two novel HNF4A P2 promoter mutations that co-segregate
with diabetes in two families, -136A>G and -169C>T. Both families displayed
phenotypes typical of HNF4A monogenic beta-cell diabetes, including at least two 
affected generations, good response to sulphonylurea treatment and increased
birthweight and/or neonatal hypoglycaemia. We show that both of these novel
mutations and -192C>G impair the function of the promoter in transient
transfection assays.
CONCLUSIONS: Two novel mutations identified here and the previously identified
late-onset diabetes mutation, -192C>G, impair the function of the HNF4A P2
promoter in vitro.

PMID: 20546279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jun 12;9:146. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-146.

Integrative and comparative genomics analysis of early hepatocellular carcinoma
differentiated from liver regeneration in young and old.

Colak D(1), Chishti MA, Al-Bakheet AB, Al-Qahtani A, Shoukri MM, Goyns MH, Ozand 
PT, Quackenbush J, Park BH, Kaya N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biostatistics, Epidemiology and Scientific Computing, King
Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
dcolakkaya@kfshrc.edu.sa

BACKGROUND: Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the third-leading cause of
cancer-related deaths worldwide. It is often diagnosed at an advanced stage, and 
hence typically has a poor prognosis. To identify distinct molecular mechanisms
for early HCC we developed a rat model of liver regeneration post-hepatectomy, as
well as liver cells undergoing malignant transformation and compared them to
normal liver using a microarray approach. Subsequently, we performed
cross-species comparative analysis coupled with copy number alterations (CNA) of 
independent early human HCC microarray studies to facilitate the identification
of critical regulatory modules conserved across species.
RESULTS: We identified 35 signature genes conserved across species, and shared
among different types of early human HCCs. Over 70% of signature genes were
cancer-related, and more than 50% of the conserved genes were mapped to human
genomic CNA regions. Functional annotation revealed genes already implicated in
HCC, as well as novel genes which were not previously reported in liver tumors. A
subset of differentially expressed genes was validated using quantitative RT-PCR.
Concordance was also confirmed for a significant number of genes and pathways in 
five independent validation microarray datasets. Our results indicated
alterations in a number of cancer related pathways, including p53, p38 MAPK,
ERK/MAPK, PI3K/AKT, and TGF-beta signaling pathways, and potential critical
regulatory role of MYC, ERBB2, HNF4A, and SMAD3 for early HCC transformation.
CONCLUSIONS: The integrative analysis of transcriptional deregulation, genomic
CNA and comparative cross species analysis brings new insights into the molecular
profile of early hepatoma formation. This approach may lead to robust biomarkers 
for the detection of early human HCC.

PMCID: PMC2898705
PMID: 20540791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Tidsskr Nor Laegeforen. 2010 Jun 3;130(11):1145-9. doi: 10.4045/tidsskr.09.1035.

[Progress in diabetes genetics].

[Article in Norwegian]

Njølstad PR(1), Hertel JK, Søvik O, Raeder H, Johansson S, Molven A.

Author information: 
(1)Senter for diabetesgenetikk, Barneklinikken, Haukeland universitetssykehus,
5021 Bergen, Norway. pal.njolstad@uib.no

BACKGROUND: Diabetes is classified as Type 1 diabetes, Type 2 diabetes,
gestational diabetes and other types. Our goal was to provide an overview of new 
genetic knowledge of monogenic and type 2 diabetes.
MATERIAL AND METHOD: The article is based on literature identified through a
non-systematic search in PubMed and own experience concerning research in
diabetes genetics and treatment of patients with monogenic diabetes.
RESULTS: 18 genes have been found for which one single mutation may cause
diabetes. The most common causes for such monogenic diabetes are mutations in the
genes KCNJ11, ABCC8 and INS when the condition is diagnosed at the age 0 - 6
months, and in the genes HNF1A, GCK, HNF4A and HNF1B when the diagnosis is made
later than six months of age. Genetic testing is appropriate in assessment of
monogenic diabetes, because antidiabetic tablets rather that insulin injections
can be used to treat patients with mutations in certain genes; i.e. KCNJ11,
ABCC8, HNF1A and HNF4A. Genome-wide association studies have recently identified 
about 20 genetic variants that increase the risk of Type 2 diabetes, but which
have a low predictive value for development of disease. How these genetic
variants can cause Type 2 diabetes has not been assessed and clinical relevance
remains to be shown.
INTERPRETATION: So far, genetic findings only affect diagnosis and treatment of
monogenic diabetes.

PMID: 20531501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. PLoS Genet. 2010 May 27;6(5):e1000970. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1000970.

Epistasis of transcriptomes reveals synergism between transcriptional activators 
Hnf1alpha and Hnf4alpha.

Boj SF(1), Petrov D, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Programming of Beta-Cells Laboratory, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain.

The transcription of individual genes is determined by combinatorial interactions
between DNA-binding transcription factors. The current challenge is to understand
how such combinatorial interactions regulate broad genetic programs that underlie
cellular functions and disease. The transcription factors Hnf1alpha and Hnf4alpha
control pancreatic islet beta-cell function and growth, and mutations in their
genes cause closely related forms of diabetes. We have now exploited genetic
epistasis to examine how Hnf1alpha and Hnf4alpha functionally interact in
pancreatic islets. Expression profiling in islets from either Hnf1a(+/-) or
pancreas-specific Hnf4a mutant mice showed that the two transcription factors
regulate a strikingly similar set of genes. We integrated expression and genomic 
binding studies and show that the shared transcriptional phenotype of these two
mutant models is linked to common direct targets, rather than to known effects of
Hnf1alpha on Hnf4a gene transcription. Epistasis analysis with transcriptomes of 
single- and double-mutant islets revealed that Hnf1alpha and Hnf4alpha regulate
common targets synergistically. Hnf1alpha binding in Hnf4a-deficient islets was
decreased in selected targets, but remained unaltered in others, thus suggesting 
that the mechanisms for synergistic regulation are gene-specific. These findings 
provide an in vivo strategy to study combinatorial gene regulation and reveal how
Hnf1alpha and Hnf4alpha control a common islet-cell regulatory program that is
defective in human monogenic diabetes.

PMCID: PMC2877749
PMID: 20523905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. Genome Res. 2010 Jul;20(7):890-8. doi: 10.1101/gr.100370.109. Epub 2010 May 25.

Sequence features that drive human promoter function and tissue specificity.

Landolin JM(1), Johnson DS, Trinklein ND, Aldred SF, Medina C, Shulha H, Weng Z, 
Myers RM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Sciences, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley,
California 94720, USA.

Promoters are important regulatory elements that contain the necessary sequence
features for cells to initiate transcription. To functionally characterize a
large set of human promoters, we measured the transcriptional activities of 4575 
putative promoters across eight cell lines using transient transfection reporter 
assays. In parallel, we measured gene expression in the same cell lines and
observed a significant correlation between promoter activity and endogenous gene 
expression (r = 0.43). As transient transfection assays directly measure the
promoting effect of a defined fragment of DNA sequence, decoupled from
epigenetic, chromatin, or long-range regulatory effects, we sought to predict
whether a promoter was active using sequence features alone. CG dinucleotide
content was highly predictive of ubiquitous promoter activity, necessitating the 
separation of promoters into two groups: high CG promoters, mostly ubiquitously
active, and low CG promoters, mostly cell line-specific. Computational models
trained on the binding potential of transcriptional factor (TF) binding motifs
could predict promoter activities in both high and low CG groups: average area
under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUC) of the models was 91% and
exceeded the AUC of CG content by an average of 23%. Known relationships, for
example, between HNF4A and hepatocytes, were recapitulated in the corresponding
cell lines, in this case the liver-derived cell line HepG2. Half of the
associations between tissue-specific TFs and cell line-specific promoters were
new. Our study underscores the importance of collecting functional information
from complementary assays and conditions to understand biology in a systematic
framework.

PMCID: PMC2892090
PMID: 20501695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 Aug;30(8):1583-90. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.110.205757. Epub 2010 May 13.

The mouse atherosclerosis locus at chromosome 10 (Ath11) acts early in lesion
formation with subcongenic strains delineating 2 narrowed regions.

Wolfrum S(1), Rodríguez JM, Tan M, Chen KY, Teupser D, Breslow JL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemical Genetics and Metabolism, Rockefeller University, New
York, NY, USA.

OBJECTIVE: Ath11, an atherosclerosis susceptibility locus on proximal chromosome 
10 (0 to 21 cM) revealed in a cross between apolipoprotein E deficient C57BL/6
(B6) and FVB mice, was recently confirmed in congenic mice. The objectives of
this study were to assess how Ath11 affects lesion development and morphology, to
determine aortic gene expression in congenics, and to narrow the congenic
interval.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Assessing lesion area over time in congenic mice showed that
homozygosity for the FVB allele increased lesion area at 6 weeks persisting
through to 24 weeks of age. Staining of aortic root sections at 16 weeks did not 
reveal obvious differences between congenics. Aortic expression-array analysis at
6 weeks revealed 97 genes that were >2-fold regulated, including 1 gene in the
quantitative trait locus interval, Aldh8a1, and 2 gene clusters regulated by
Hnf4alpha and Esr1. Analysis of lesion area in 11 subcongenic strains revealed 2 
narrowed regions, 10a (21 genes), acting in females, and 10b (7 genes), acting in
both genders.
CONCLUSIONS: Ath11 appears to act early in lesion formation, with significant
effects on aortic gene expression. This quantitative trait locus is genetically
complex, containing a female-specific region 10a from 0 to 7.3 megabases (21
genes) and a gender-independent region 10b from 20.1 to 21.9 megabases (7 genes).

PMCID: PMC2917113
PMID: 20466976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. J Lipid Res. 2010 Jun;51(6):1354-62. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M900274.

HNF1alpha and SREBP2 are important regulators of NPC1L1 in human liver.

Pramfalk C(1), Jiang ZY, Cai Q, Hu H, Zhang SD, Han TQ, Eriksson M, Parini P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Chemistry, Department of Endocrinology, Karolinska
Institutet, Karolinska University Hospital, Huddinge, S-141 86 Stockholm, Sweden.

Niemann-Pick C1-like 1 (NPC1L1), a key regulator of intestinal cholesterol
absorption, is highly expressed in human liver. Here, we aimed to gain more
insight into mechanisms participating in its hepatic regulation in humans.
Correlation analysis in livers from Chinese patients with and without gallstone
disease revealed strong positive correlations between NPC1L1 and sterol
regulatory element binding protein 2 (SREBP2) (r = 0.74, P < 0.05) and between
NPC1L1 and hepatic nuclear factor alpha (HNF4alpha) (r = 0.53, P < 0.05) mRNA
expression. HNF4alpha is an upstream regulator of HNF1alpha; thus, we also tested
whether HNF1alpha participates in the regulation of NPC1L1. We showed a
dose-dependent regulation by SREBP2 on the NPC1L1 promoter activity and mRNA
expression in HuH7 cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assay confirmed the
binding of SREBP2 to the promoter in vivo. Surprisingly, HNF4alpha slightly
decreased the NPC1L1 promoter activity but had no effect on its gene expression. 
By contrast, HNF1alpha increased the promoter activity and the gene expression,
and an important HNF1 binding site was identified within the human NPC1L1
promoter. ChIP assays confirmed that HNF1alpha can bind to the NPC1L1 promoter in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC3035498
PMID: 20460578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. J Physiol. 2010 Jun 15;588(Pt 12):2239-53. doi: 10.1113/jphysiol.2009.183996.
Epub 2010 Apr 26.

Acute exercise reduces hepatic glucose production through inhibition of the
Foxo1/HNF-4alpha pathway in insulin resistant mice.

De Souza CT(1), Frederico MJ, da Luz G, Cintra DE, Ropelle ER, Pauli JR, Velloso 
LA.

Author information: 
(1)Exercise Biochemistry and Physiology Laboratory, Postgraduate Program in
Health Sciences, Health Sciences Unit, University of Southern Santa Catarina -
Criciaúma, SC, Brazil. ctsouza@unesc.net

Comment in
    J Physiol. 2010 Aug 1;588(Pt 15):2687-8.

Protein hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha) is atypically activated in 
the liver of diabetic rodents and contributes to hepatic glucose production.
HNF-4alpha and Foxo1 can physically interact with each other and represent an
important signal transduction pathway that regulates the synthesis of glucose in 
the liver. Foxo1 and HNF-4alpha interact with their own binding sites in the
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase)
promoters, and this binding is required for their effects on those promoters.
However, the effect of physical activity on the HNF-4alpha/Foxo1 pathway is
currently unknown. Here, we investigate the protein levels of HNF-4alpha and the 
HNF-4alpha/Foxo1 pathway in the liver of leptin-deficient (ob/ob) and
diet-induced obese Swiss (DIO) mice after acute exercise. The ob/ob and DIO mice 
swam for four 30 min periods, with 5 min rest intervals for a total swimming time
of 2h. Eight hours after the acute exercise protocol, the mice were submitted to 
an insulin tolerance test (ITT) and determination of biochemical and molecular
parameters. Acute exercise improved insulin signalling, increasing
insulin-stimulated Akt and Foxo1 phosphorylation and decreasing HNF-4alpha
protein levels in the liver of DIO and ob/ob mice under fasting conditions. These
phenomena were accompanied by a reduction in the expression of gluconeogenesis
genes, such as PEPCK and G6Pase. Importantly, the PI3K inhibitor LY292004
reversed the acute effect of exercise on fasting hyperglycaemia, confirming the
involvement of the PI3K pathway. The present study shows that exercise acutely
improves the action of insulin in the liver of animal models of obesity and
diabetes, resulting in increased phosphorylation and nuclear exclusion of Foxo1, 
and a reduction in the Foxo1/HNF-4alpha pathway. Since nuclear localization and
the association of these proteins is involved in the activation of PEPCK and
G6Pase, we believe that the regulation of Foxo1 and HNF-4alpha activities are
important mechanisms involved in exercise-induced improvement of glucose
homeostasis in insulin resistant states.

PMCID: PMC2911223
PMID: 20421289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Mol Endocrinol. 2010 Jun;24(6):1151-64. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0482. Epub 2010 Apr 
6.

A novel bile acid-activated vitamin D receptor signaling in human hepatocytes.

Han S(1), Li T, Ellis E, Strom S, Chiang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Medical Sciences, Northeastern Ohio University's
Colleges of Medicine and Pharmacy, 4209 State Route 44, Rootstown, Ohio 44272,
USA.

Vitamin D receptor (VDR) is activated by natural ligands, 1alpha,
25-dihydroxy-vitamin D(3) [1alpha,25(OH)(2)-D(3)] and lithocholic acid (LCA). Our
previous study shows that VDR is expressed in human hepatocytes, and VDR ligands 
inhibit bile acid synthesis and transcription of the gene encoding cholesterol
7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1). Primary human hepatocytes were used to study LCA and
1alpha,25(OH)(2)-D(3) activation of VDR signaling. Confocal immunofluorescent
microscopy imaging and immunoblot analysis showed that LCA and 1alpha,
25(OH)(2)-D(3) induced intracellular translocation of VDR from the cytosol to the
nucleus and also plasma membrane where VDR colocalized with caveolin-1. VDR
ligands induced tyrosine phosphorylation of c-Src and VDR and their interaction. 
Inhibition of c-Src abrogated VDR ligand-dependent inhibition of CYP7A1 mRNA
expression. Kinase assays showed that VDR ligands specifically activated the
c-Raf/MEK1/2/extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) 1/2 pathway, which
stimulates serine phosphorylation of VDR and hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha,
and their interaction. Mammalian two-hybrid assays showed a VDR ligand-dependent 
interaction of nuclear receptor corepressor-1 and silencing mediator of retinoid 
and thyroid with VDR/retinoid X receptor-alpha (RXRalpha). Chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays revealed that an ERK1/2 inhibitor reversed VDR
ligand-induced recruitment of VDR, RXRalpha, and corepressors to human CYP7A1
promoter. In conclusion, VDR ligands activate membrane VDR signaling to activate 
the MEK1/2/ERK1/2 pathway, which stimulates nuclear VDR/RXRalpha recruitment of
corepressors to inhibit CYP7A1 gene transcription in human hepatocytes. This
membrane VDR-signaling pathway may be activated by bile acids to inhibit bile
acid synthesis as a rapid response to protect hepatocytes from cholestatic liver 
injury.

PMCID: PMC2875805
PMID: 20371703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. PLoS One. 2010 Mar 26;5(3):e9903. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0009903.

Gene-gene interactions lead to higher risk for development of type 2 diabetes in 
an Ashkenazi Jewish population.

Neuman RJ(1), Wasson J, Atzmon G, Wainstein J, Yerushalmi Y, Cohen J, Barzilai N,
Blech I, Glaser B, Permutt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, 
Missouri, United States of America. rneuman@wustl.edu

BACKGROUND: Evidence has accumulated that multiple genetic and environmental
factors play important roles in determining susceptibility to type 2 diabetes
(T2D). Although variants from candidate genes have become prime targets for
genetic analysis, few studies have considered their interplay. Our goal was to
evaluate interactions among SNPs within genes frequently identified as associated
with T2D.
METHODS/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Logistic regression was used to study interactions
among 4 SNPs, one each from HNF4A[rs1884613], TCF7L2[rs12255372],
WFS1[rs10010131], and KCNJ11[rs5219] in a case-control Ashkenazi sample of 974
diabetic subjects and 896 controls. Nonparametric multifactor dimensionality
reduction (MDR) and generalized MDR (GMDR) were used to confirm findings from the
logistic regression analysis. HNF4A and WFS1 SNPs were associated with T2D in
logistic regression analyses [P<0.0001, P<0.0002, respectively]. Interaction
between these SNPs were also strong using parametric or nonparametric methods:
the unadjusted odds of being affected with T2D was 3 times greater in subjects
with the HNF4A and WFS1 risk alleles than those without either (95% CI =
[1.7-5.3]; P<or=0.0001). Although the univariate association between the TCF7L2
SNP and T2D was relatively modest [P = 0.02], when paired with the HNF4A SNP, the
OR for subjects with risk alleles in both SNPs was 2.4 [95% CI = 1.7-3.4;
P<or=0.0001]. The KCNJ11 variant reached significance only when paired with
either the HNF4A or WFSI SNPs: unadjusted ORs were 2.0 [95% CI = 1.4-2.8;
P<or=0.0001] and 2.3 [95% CI = 1.2-4.4; P<or=0.0001], respectively. MDR and GMDR 
results were consistent with the parametric findings.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide evidence of strong independent associations
between T2D and SNPs in HNF4A and WFS1 and their interaction in our Ashkenazi
sample. We also observed an interaction in the nonparametric analysis between the
HNF4A and KCNJ11 SNPs (P<or=0.001), demonstrating that an independently
non-significant variant may interact with another variant resulting in an
increased disease risk.

PMCID: PMC2845632
PMID: 20361036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. J Cell Mol Med. 2011 Apr;15(4):909-27. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2010.01055.x.

Specific regulation of low-abundance transcript variants encoding human Acyl-CoA 
binding protein (ACBP) isoforms.

Nitz I(1), Kruse ML, Klapper M, Döring F.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Nutrition and Food Science, Department of Molecular
Prevention, Christian-Albrechts University, Kiel, Germany.

Despite intensive efforts on annotation of eukaryotic transcriptoms, little is
known about the regulation of low-abundance transcripts. To address this
question, we analysed the regulation of novel low-abundance transcript variants
of human acyl-CoA binding protein (ACBP), an important multifunctional
housekeeping protein, which we have identified by screening of human expressed
sequence tags in combination with ab initio gene prediction. By using RT-,
real-time RT- and rapid amplification of cDNA ends-PCR in five human tissues, we 
find these transcripts, which are generated by a consequent use of alternative
promoters and alternate first or first two exons, to be authentic ones. They show
a tissue-specific distribution and intrinsic responsiveness to glucose and
insulin. Promoter analyses of the corresponding transcripts revealed a
differential regulation mediated by sterol regulatory element-binding protein-2, 
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4a and nuclear factor <U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B), central transcription
factors of fat and glucose metabolism and inflammation. Subcellular localization 
studies of deduced isoforms in liver HepG2 cells showed that they are distributed
in different compartments. By demonstrating that ACBP is a target of NF-<U+03BA>B, our
findings link fatty acid metabolism with inflammation. Furthermore, our findings 
show that low-abundance transcripts are regulated in a similar mode than their
high-abundance counterparts.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3922676
PMID: 20345851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Familial Hyperinsulinism.

Glaser B.
In: Pagon RA, Adam MP, Ardinger HH, Wallace SE, Amemiya A, Bean LJH, Bird TD,
Fong CT, Mefford HC, Smith RJH, Stephens K, editors. GeneReviews(®) [Internet].
Seattle (WA): University of Washington, Seattle; 1993-2016.
2003 Aug 19.

CLINICAL CHARACTERISTICS: Familial hyperinsulinism (referred to as FHI in this
GeneReview) is characterized by hypoglycemia that ranges from severe
neonatal-onset, difficult-to-manage disease to childhood-onset disease with mild 
symptoms and difficult-to-diagnose hypoglycemia. Neonatal-onset disease manifests
within hours to two days after birth. Childhood-onset disease manifests during
the first months or years of life. In the newborn period, presenting symptoms may
be nonspecific, including seizures, hypotonia, poor feeding, and apnea. In severe
cases, serum glucose concentrations are typically extremely low and thus easily
recognized, whereas in milder cases, variable and mild hypoglycemia may make the 
diagnosis more difficult. Even within the same family, disease manifestations can
range from mild to severe. Individuals with autosomal recessive familial
hyperinsulinism, caused by mutations in either ABCC8 or KCNJ11 (FHI-KATP), tend
to be large for gestational age and usually present with severe refractory
hypoglycemia in the first 48 hours of life; affected infants usually respond only
partially to diet or medical management (i.e., diazoxide therapy) and thus may
require pancreatic resection. Individuals with autosomal dominant FHI-KATP tend
to be appropriate for gestational age at birth, to present at approximately age
one year (range: 2 days - 30 years), and to respond to diet and diazoxide
therapy. Exceptions to both of these generalities have been reported. FHI-GCK,
caused by mutations in GCK, may be much milder than FHI-KATP; however, some
persons have severe, diazoxide-unresponsive hypoglycemia. FHI-HADH, caused by
mutations in HADH, tends to be relatively mild, although severe cases have been
reported. Individuals with FHI-HNF4A, caused by mutations in HNF4A, are typically
born large for gestational age and have mild features that respond to diazoxide
treatment. FHI-UCP2, caused by mutations in UCP2, is a rare cause of
diazoxide-responsive FH1. Hyperammonemia/hyperinsulinism (HA/HI) is associated
with mild-to-moderate hyperammonemia and with relatively mild, late-onset
hypoglycemia; most but not all affected individuals have mutations in GLUD1.
DIAGNOSIS/TESTING: Approximately 45% of affected individuals have mutations in
either ABCC8, which encodes the protein SUR1, or KCNJ11, which encodes the
protein Kir6.2. In the Ashkenazi Jewish population, two ABCC8 founder mutations
are responsible for approximately 97% of FHI. Other ABCC8 founder mutations are
present in the Finnish population (p.Val187Asp and p.Asp1506Lys). Mutations in
GLUD1 and HNF4A each account for approximately 5% of individuals with FHI.
Activating mutations in GCK or inactivating mutations in HADH occur in fewer than
1% of individuals with FHI. Mutations in UCP2 have been reported in only two
families to date. Approximately 40% of individuals with FHI do not have an
identifiable mutation in any of the genes known to be associated with FHI.
MANAGEMENT: Treatment of manifestations: At initial diagnosis, hypoglycemia is
corrected with intravenous glucose to normalize plasma glucose concentration and 
prevent brain damage. Long-term medical management includes the use of diazoxide,
somatostatin analogs, nifedipine, glucagon, recombinant IGF-I, glucocorticoids,
human growth hormone, dietary intervention, or combinations of these therapies.
In individuals in whom aggressive medical management fails to maintain plasma
glucose concentration within safe limits, or in whom such therapy cannot be
safely maintained over time, pancreatic resection is considered. Prevention of
secondary complications: Aggressive treatment to prevent hypoglycemia helps avoid
irreversible brain damage. Surveillance: Monitoring of plasma glucose
concentrations, especially during intercurrent illness. Agents/circumstances to
avoid: Prolonged fasting of any sort. Evaluation of relatives at risk: If the
family-specific mutation(s) are known, early identification of at-risk relatives 
by molecular genetic testing ensures initiation of treatment before hypoglycemia 
occurs. Pregnancy management: Affected pregnant women who have diabetes due to
prior pancreatectomy should receive the same treatment as any pregnant woman who 
has pre-existing diabetes from any cause.
GENETIC COUNSELING: FHI-KATP, caused by mutations in either ABCC8 or KCNJ11, is
most commonly inherited in an autosomal recessive manner and less commonly in an 
autosomal dominant manner, although de novo mutations have been reported.
FHI-GCK, caused by mutations in GCK, and HA/HI, caused by mutations in GLUD1, are
inherited in an autosomal dominant manner; de novo mutations are not rare.
FHI-HADH, caused by mutations in HADH, is inherited in an autosomal recessive
manner. The focal form of FHI (pancreatic adenomatous hyperplasia that involves a
limited region of the pancreas), caused by biallelic mutations of ABCC8 or
KCNJ11, is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, but only manifests when the
mutation occurs on the paternally derived allele and a somatic event results in
the loss of the maternal allele in a beta cell precursor. Risk to sibs of a
proband depends on the underlying genetic mechanism. Carrier testing for
relatives at risk for the autosomal recessive forms of FHI and prenatal diagnosis
for pregnancies at increased risk for the diffuse form of FHI (involvement of
beta cells throughout the pancreas) are possible if the family-specific
mutation(s) are known. Prenatal or preimplantation genetic diagnosis for focal
FHI is not possible, as a somatic mutation in the pancreas is required for
clinical disease.

PMID: 20301549  [PubMed]


481. Genetika. 2010 Feb;46(2):282-6.

[Expression of early developmental genes in vole Microtus rossiaemeridionalis].

[Article in Russian]

Sorokin MA, Medvedev SP, Shevchenko AI, Slyn'ko NM, Zakiian SM.

The expression of genes Sox2, Klf4, Myc, Sall4, Gata6, Foxa2, Hnf4a, Cdx2, Esrrb,
Hand1 in cultivated cells, embryos and organs of adult voles Microtus
rossiaemeridionalis was studied. High resemblance of the expression patterns of
these genes in the organs of adult voles, mice and humans was demonstrated. It
was established that genes Gata6, Foxa2 and Hnf4a were specifically expressed in 
vole extraembryonic endoderm cells, while Cdx2 and Handl genes, in trophoblast
stem cells. This shows that these genes can be used markers for corresponding
vole cell lines. Indirect confirmation pointing to the fact that Oct4 gene is a
marker gene for epiblast cells both in the vole and mouse was obtained.

PMID: 20297663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


482. BMC Genomics. 2010 Feb 10;11 Suppl 1:S6. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-S1-S6.

Analysis of deep sequencing microRNA expression profile from human embryonic stem
cells derived mesenchymal stem cells reveals possible role of let-7 microRNA
family in downstream targeting of hepatic nuclear factor 4 alpha.

Koh W(1), Sheng CT, Tan B, Lee QY, Kuznetsov V, Kiang LS, Tanavde V.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Institute (BII), Agency of Science Technology and Research
(A*STAR), Matrix, Singapore. winstonk@bii.a-star.edu.sg

BACKGROUND: Recent literature has revealed that genetic exchange of microRNA
between cells can be essential for cell-cell communication, tissue-specificity
and developmental processes. In stem cells, as in other cells, this can be
accomplished through microvesicles or exosome mediated transfer. However,
molecular profiles and functions of microRNAs within the cells and in their
exosomes are poorly studied. Next generation sequencing technologies could
provide a broad-spectrum of microRNAs and their expression and identify possible 
microRNA targets. In this work, we performed deep sequencing of microRNAs to
understand the profile and expression of the microRNAs in microvesicles and
intracellular environment of human embryonic stem cells derived mesenchymal stem 
cells (hES-MSC). We outline a workflow pertaining to visualizing, statistical
analysis and interpreting deep sequencing data of known intracellular and
extracellular microRNAs from hES-MSC). We utilized these results of which
directed our attention towards establishing hepatic nuclear factor 4 alpha
(HNF4A) as a downstream target of let-7 family of microRNAs.
RESULTS: In our study, significant differences in expression profile of microRNAs
were found in the intracellular and extracellular environment of hES-MSC.
However, a high level of let-7 family of microRNAs is predominant in both intra- 
and extra- cellular samples of hES-MSC. Further results derived from
visualization of our alignment data and network analysis showed that let-7 family
microRNAs could affect the downstream target HNF4A, which is a known endodermal
differentiation marker. The elevated presence of let-7 microRNA in both
intracellular and extra cellular environment further suggests a possible
intercellular signalling mechanism through microvesicles transfer. We suggest
that let-7 family microRNAs might play a signalling role via such a mechanism
amongst populations of stem cells in maintaining self renewal property by
suppressing HNF4A expression. This is in line with recent paradigm where
microRNAs regulate self-renewal and differentiation pathways of embryonic stem
cells by forming an integral biological network with transcription factors.
CONCLUSION: In summary, our study using a combination of alignment, statistical
and network analysis tools to examine deep sequencing data of microRNAs in
hES-MSC has led to a result that (i) identifies intracellular and exosome
microRNA expression profiles of hES-MSC with a possible mechanism of miRNA
mediated intercellular regulation by these cells and (ii) placed HNF4A within the
cross roads of regulation by the let-7 family of microRNAs.

PMCID: PMC2822534
PMID: 20158877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


483. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2010 May;30(5):962-7. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.201426. Epub 2010 Feb 18.

DGAT1 participates in the effect of HNF4A on hepatic secretion of
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins.

Krapivner S(1), Iglesias MJ, Silveira A, Tegnér J, Björkegren J, Hamsten A, van't
Hooft FM.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Genetics Group, Center for Molecular Medicine, Karolinska
University Hospital, Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF4A) is a transcription factor
that influences plasma triglyceride metabolism via an as of yet unknown
mechanism. In this study, we searched for the critical protein that mediates this
effect using different human model systems.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Up- and downregulation of HNF4A in human hepatoma Huh7 and
HepG2 cells was associated with marked changes in the secretion of
triglyceride-rich lipoproteins (TRLs). Short interfering RNA (siRNA) inhibition
of HNF4A influenced the expression of several genes, including
acyl-CoA:diacylglycerol acyltransferase 1 (DGAT1). siRNA knockdown of DGAT1
reduced DGAT1 activity and decreased the secretion of TRLs. No additive effects
of combined siRNA inhibition of HNF4A and DGAT1 were found on the secretion of
TRLs, whereas the increase in TRL secretion induced by HNF4A overexpression was
largely abolished by DGAT1 siRNA inhibition. A putative binding site for HNF4A
was defined by in silico and in vitro methods. HNF4A and DGAT1 expressions were
analyzed in 80 human liver samples, and significant relationships were observed
between HNF4A and DGAT1 mRNA levels (r(2)=0.50, P<0.0001) and between DGAT1 mRNA 
levels and plasma triglyceride concentration (r(2)=0.09, P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: This study identified DGAT1 as an important protein that participates
in the effect of HNF4A on hepatic secretion of TRLs.

PMID: 20167659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


484. Eur J Endocrinol. 2010 May;162(5):987-92. doi: 10.1530/EJE-09-0861. Epub 2010 Feb
17.

Diazoxide-responsive hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia caused by HNF4A gene
mutations.

Flanagan SE(1), Kapoor RR, Mali G, Cody D, Murphy N, Schwahn B, Siahanidou T,
Banerjee I, Akcay T, Rubio-Cabezas O, Shield JP, Hussain K, Ellard S.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science,
University of Exeter, Exeter, UK.

OBJECTIVE: The phenotype associated with heterozygous HNF4A gene mutations has
recently been extended to include diazoxide responsive neonatal hypoglycemia in
addition to maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). To date, mutation
screening has been limited to patients with a family history consistent with
MODY. In this study, we investigated the prevalence of HNF4A mutations in a large
cohort of patients with diazoxide responsive hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia (HH).
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We sequenced the ABCC8, KCNJ11, GCK, GLUD1, and/or HNF4A
genes in 220 patients with HH responsive to diazoxide. The order of genetic
testing was dependent upon the clinical phenotype.
RESULTS: A genetic diagnosis was possible for 59/220 (27%) patients. K(ATP)
channel mutations were most common (15%) followed by GLUD1 mutations causing
hyperinsulinism with hyperammonemia (5.9%), and HNF4A mutations (5%). Seven of
the 11 probands with a heterozygous HNF4A mutation did not have a parent affected
with diabetes, and four de novo mutations were confirmed. These patients were
diagnosed with HI within the first week of life (median age 1 day), and they had 
increased birth weight (median +2.4 SDS). The duration of diazoxide treatment
ranged from 3 months to ongoing at 8 years.
CONCLUSIONS: In this large series, HNF4A mutations are the third most common
cause of diazoxide responsive HH. We recommend that HNF4A sequencing is
considered in all patients with diazoxide responsive HH diagnosed in the first
week of life irrespective of a family history of diabetes, once K(ATP) channel
mutations have been excluded.

PMCID: PMC2857991
PMID: 20164212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


485. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2010 May;88(2):132-8. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2010.01.005. Epub 2010 Feb 4.

Three novel mutations in MODY and its phenotype in three different Czech
families.

Bazalová Z(1), Rypácková B, Broz J, Brunerová L, Polák J, Rusavý Z, Treslová L,
Andel M.

Author information: 
(1)3rd Faculty of Medicine of Charles University, Centre of Research for
Diabetes, Endocrinological Diseases and Clinical Nutrition, Ruská 87, 100 00
Prague 10, Czech Republic. bazalova@modydiabetes.cz

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: MODY (Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young) is an autosomal
dominant inherited type of diabetes with significant genetic heterogeneity. New
mutations causing MODY are still being found. A genetically confirmed diagnosis
of MODY allows application of individualized treatment based on the underlying
concrete genetic dysfunction. Detection of novel MODY mutations helps provide a
more complete picture of the possible MODY genotypes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: We tested 43 adult Czech patients with clinical
characteristics of MODY, using direct sequencing of HNF1A (hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1-alpha), HNF4A (hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha) and GCK (glucokinase) 
genes.
RESULTS: In three Czech families we identified three novel mutations we believe
causing MODY-two missense mutations in HNF1A [F268L (c.802T>C) and P291S
(c.871C>T)] and one frame shift mutation in GCK V244fsdelG (c.729delG). Some of
the novel HNF1A mutation carriers were successfully transferred from insulin to
gliclazide, while some of the novel GCK mutation carriers had a good clinical
response when switched from insulin or oral antidiabetic drugs to diet.
CONCLUSION: We describe three novel MODY mutations in three Czech families. The
identification of MODY mutations had a meaningful impact on therapy on the
mutation carriers.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20132997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


486. PLoS One. 2010 Jan 26;5(1):e8887. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0008887.

Cytosine methylation dysregulation in neonates following intrauterine growth
restriction.

Einstein F(1), Thompson RF, Bhagat TD, Fazzari MJ, Verma A, Barzilai N, Greally
JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Women's Health, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, United States of America.

Comment in
    Epigenomics. 2010 Jun;2(3):359-60.

BACKGROUND: Perturbations of the intrauterine environment can affect fetal
development during critical periods of plasticity, and can increase
susceptibility to a number of age-related diseases (e.g., type 2 diabetes
mellitus; T2DM), manifesting as late as decades later. We hypothesized that this 
biological memory is mediated by permanent alterations of the epigenome in stem
cell populations, and focused our studies specifically on DNA methylation in
CD34+ hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells from cord blood from neonates with 
intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) and control subjects.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Our epigenomic assays utilized a two-stage design involving
genome-wide discovery followed by quantitative, single-locus validation. We found
that changes in cytosine methylation occur in response to IUGR of moderate degree
and involving a restricted number of loci. We also identify specific loci that
are targeted for dysregulation of DNA methylation, in particular the hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4A) gene, a well-known diabetes candidate gene not
previously associated with growth restriction in utero, and other loci encoding
HNF4A-interacting proteins.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results give insights into the potential contribution of
epigenomic dysregulation in mediating the long-term consequences of IUGR, and
demonstrate the value of this approach to studies of the fetal origin of adult
disease.

PMCID: PMC2811176
PMID: 20126273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


487. J Biol Chem. 2010 Apr 16;285(16):12181-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.064238. Epub 2010
Jan 27.

Distinct regulation of hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha by NKX6.1 in pancreatic beta
cells.

Donelan W(1), Koya V, Li SW, Yang LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Immunology, and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Florida College of Medicine, Gainesville, Florida 32610, USA.

Hepatic nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) is a key regulator of development and
function in pancreatic beta cells and is specifically involved in regulation of
glycolysis and glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. Abnormal expression of
HNF1alpha leads to development of MODY3 (maturity-onset diabetes of the young 3).
We report that NK6 homeodomain 1 (NKX6.1) binds to a cis-regulatory element in
the HNF1alpha promoter and is a major regulator of this gene in beta cells. We
identified an NKX6.1 recognition sequence in the distal region of the HNF1alpha
promoter and demonstrated specific binding of NKX6.1 in beta cells by
electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin immunoprecipitation assays.
Site-directed mutagenesis of the NKX6.1 core-binding sequence eliminated
NKX6.1-mediated activation and substantially decreased activity of the HNF1alpha 
promoter in beta cells. Overexpression or small interfering RNA-mediated
knockdown of the Nkx6.1 gene resulted in increased or diminished HNF1alpha gene
expression, respectively, in beta cells. We conclude that NKX6.1 is a novel
regulator of HNF1alpha in pancreatic beta cells. This novel regulatory mechanism 
for HNF1alpha in beta cells may provide new molecular targets for the diagnosis
of MODY3.

PMCID: PMC2852957
PMID: 20106981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


488. Hepatology. 2010 Feb;51(2):376-7. doi: 10.1002/hep.23487.

Making the liver what it is: the many targets of the transcriptional regulator
HNF4alpha.

Kaestner KH.

Comment on
    Hepatology. 2010 Feb;51(2):642-53.

PMID: 20101744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


489. Drug Metab Dispos. 2010 Apr;38(4):591-9. doi: 10.1124/dmd.109.030387. Epub 2010
Jan 19.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4{alpha} regulates rifampicin-mediated induction of
CYP2C genes in primary cultures of human hepatocytes.

Rana R(1), Chen Y, Ferguson SS, Kissling GE, Surapureddi S, Goldstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Human Metabolism Section, Laboratory of Pharmacology, National Institute of
Environmental Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle
Park, NC 27709, USA.

CYP2C enzymes are expressed constitutively and comprise approximately 20% of the 
total cytochrome P450 in human liver. However, the factors influencing the
transcriptional regulation of the CYP2C subfamily have only been addressed
recently. In the present study, we used primary cultures of human hepatocytes to 
investigate the role of HNF4alpha in the pregnane X receptor
(PXR)/rifampicin-mediated up-regulation of CYP2C8, CYP2C9, and CYP2C19 gene
expression. We first identified new proximal cis-acting HNF4alpha sites in the
proximal CYP2C8 promoter [at -181 base pairs (bp) from the translation start
site] and the CYP2C9 promoter (at -211 bp). Both sites bound HNF4alpha in gel
shift assays. Thus, these and recent studies identified a total of three
HNF4alpha sites in the CYP2C9 promoter and two in the CYP2C8 promoter. Mutational
studies showed that the HNF4alpha sites are needed for up-regulation of the
CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 promoters by rifampicin. Furthermore, silencing of HNF4alpha
abolished transactivation of the CYP2C8 and CYP2C9 promoters by rifampicin.
Constitutive promoter activity was also decreased. Quantitative polymerase chain 
reaction analysis demonstrated that silencing HNF4alpha reduced the constitutive 
expression of CYP2C8 (53%), CYP2C9 (55%), and CYP2C19 (43%) mRNAs and
significantly decreased the magnitude of the rifampicin-mediated induction of
CYP2C8 (6.6- versus 2.7-fold), CYP2C9 (3- versus 1.5-fold), and CYP2C19 (1.8-
versus 1.1-fold). These results provide clear evidence that HNF4alpha contributes
to the constitutive expression of the human CYP2C genes and is also important for
up-regulation by the PXR agonist rifampicin.

PMCID: PMC2845933
PMID: 20086032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


490. Chin Med J (Engl). 2009 Oct 20;122(20):2477-82.

Effect of genetic variants in KCNJ11, ABCC8, PPARG and HNF4A loci on the
susceptibility of type 2 diabetes in Chinese Han population.

Wang F(1), Han XY, Ren Q, Zhang XY, Han LC, Luo YY, Zhou XH, Ji LN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Peking University People's
Hospital, Beijing 100044, China.

BACKGROUND: KCNJ11, ABCC8, PPARG, and HNF4A have been found to be associated with
type 2 diabetes in populations with different genetic backgrounds. The aim of
this study was to test, in a Chinese Han population from Beijing, whether the
genetic variants in these four genes were associated with genetic predisposition 
to type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: We studied the association of four representative SNPs in KCNJ11, ABCC8,
PPARG, and HNF4A by genotyping them using ABI SNaPshot Multiplex System in 400
unrelated type 2 diabetic patients and 400 unrelated normoglycaemic subjects.
RESULTS: rs5219 (E23K) in KCNJ11 was associated with genetic susceptibility to
type 2 diabetes (OR = 1.400 with 95% CI 1.117 1.755, P = 0.004 under an additive 
model, OR = 1.652 with 95% CI 1.086 2.513, P = 0.019 under a recessive model, and
OR = 1.521 with 95% CI 1.089 2.123, P = 0.014 under a dominant model) after
adjusting for sex and body mass index (BMI). We did not find evidence of
association for ABCC8 rs1799854, PPARG rs1801282 (Pro12Ala) and HNF4A rs2144908. 
Genotype-phenotype correlation analysis revealed that rs1799854 in ABCC8 was
associated with 2-hour postprandial insulin secretion (P = 0.005) after adjusting
for sex, age and BMI. Although no interactions between the four variants on the
risk of type 2 diabetes were detected, the multiplicative interaction between
PPARG Pro12Ala and HNF4A rs2144908 was found to be associated with 2-hour
postprandial insulin (P = 0.004 under an additive model for rs2144908; and P =
0.001 under a dominant model for rs2144908) after adjusting for age, sex and BMI,
assuming a dominant model for PPARG Pro12Ala.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study replicated the association of rs5219 in KCNJ11 with type 2
diabetes in Chinese Han population in Beijing. And we also observed that ABCC8 as
well as the interaction between PPARG and HNF4A may contribute to post-challenge 
insulin secretion.

PMID: 20079163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


491. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Mar;30(6):1341-56. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01076-09. Epub 2010 Jan
11.

Nuclear receptor SHP, a death receptor that targets mitochondria, induces
apoptosis and inhibits tumor growth.

Zhang Y(1), Soto J, Park K, Viswanath G, Kuwada S, Abel ED, Wang L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Oncological Sciences, Huntsman Cancer Institute,
University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA.

Small heterodimer partner (SHP) is an epigenetically regulated nuclear
transcriptional repressor that suppresses the development of liver cancer by
inhibiting cellular growth. Here we report a novel cytoplasmic function of SHP
through its regulation of mitochondrial activity. SHP is a pivotal cell death
receptor that targets mitochondria, where it binds with Bcl-2, disrupts Bcl-2/Bid
interaction, and induces cytochrome c release. The apoptosis inducer AHPN
{retinoid 6-[3-(1-adamantyl)-4-hydroxyphenyl]-2-naphthalene carboxylic acid} acts
by regulating SHP gene expression and promotes the translocation of SHP from the 
nucleus to the mitochondria. Induction of apoptosis by SHP activation inhibits
peritoneal pancreatic tumor growth. Our findings provide for the first time a
mechanism by which SHP regulates cell survival, namely, by controlling
mitochondrial function via modulating the activity of Bcl-2 through AHPN-mediated
or AHPN-independent action. Thus, SHP regulates a mechanism by which apoptotic
signals can mediate local control of mitochondrial function and apoptosis, which 
in turn may limit tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2832505
PMID: 20065042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


492. Hepatology. 2010 Feb;51(2):642-53. doi: 10.1002/hep.23357.

Integrated approach for the identification of human hepatocyte nuclear factor
4alpha target genes using protein binding microarrays.

Bolotin E(1), Liao H, Ta TC, Yang C, Hwang-Verslues W, Evans JR, Jiang T, Sladek 
FM.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics, Genomics and Bioinformatics Graduate Program, University of
California Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521-0314, USA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2010 Feb;51(2):376-7.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4alpha), a member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily, is essential for liver function and is linked to several diseases
including diabetes, hemophilia, atherosclerosis, and hepatitis. Although many DNA
response elements and target genes have been identified for HNF4alpha, the
complete repertoire of binding sites and target genes in the human genome is
unknown. Here, we adapt protein binding microarrays (PBMs) to examine the
DNA-binding characteristics of two HNF4alpha species (rat and human) and isoforms
(HNF4alpha2 and HNF4alpha8) in a high-throughput fashion. We identified
approximately 1400 new binding sequences and used this dataset to successfully
train a Support Vector Machine (SVM) model that predicts an additional
approximately 10,000 unique HNF4alpha-binding sequences; we also identify new
rules for HNF4alpha DNA binding. We performed expression profiling of an
HNF4alpha RNA interference knockdown in HepG2 cells and compared the results to a
search of the promoters of all human genes with the PBM and SVM models, as well
as published genome-wide location analysis. Using this integrated approach, we
identified approximately 240 new direct HNF4alpha human target genes, including
new functional categories of genes not typically associated with HNF4alpha, such 
as cell cycle, immune function, apoptosis, stress response, and other
cancer-related genes.CONCLUSION: We report the first use of PBMs with a
full-length liver-enriched transcription factor and greatly expand the repertoire
of HNF4alpha-binding sequences and target genes, thereby identifying new
functions for HNF4alpha. We also establish a web-based tool, HNF4 Motif Finder,
that can be used to identify potential HNF4alpha-binding sites in any sequence.

PMCID: PMC3581146
PMID: 20054869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


493. Cells Tissues Organs. 2010;191(6):466-77. doi: 10.1159/000273266. Epub 2009 Dec
30.

A comparative study of proliferation and hepatic differentiation of human
adipose-derived stem cells.

Coradeghini R(1), Guida C, Scanarotti C, Sanguineti R, Bassi AM, Parodi A, Santi 
PL, Raposio E.

Author information: 
(1)Nanobiosciences Unit, JRC - European Commission Institute for Health and
Consumer Protection, Ispra, Italy.

Human adipose-derived stem cells possess a lot of stem cell characteristics, so
they may be considered a source of stem cell population. On the basis of that, we
have investigated the hepatic potential of adipose-derived stem cells, obtained
from liposuction, following two differentiation protocols. In the first
procedure, medium was supplemented with epidermal growth factor (EGF), basic
fibroblast growth factor, hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) and nicotinamide; the
second involved the addition of factors such as dexametasone, EGF,
insulin-transferrin-sodium selenite, HGF, dimethyl sulfoxide and oncostatin. In
parallel, we carried out our study in the Hep G2 cell line, as human hepatic
differentiated in vitro model. Immunocytochemical analysis and RT-PCR were
performed using hepatic markers to evaluate cell differentiation. DNA content,
MTT test and carboxyl fluorescein succinimidyl ester staining were carried out to
evaluate cell proliferation. We reported the evidence of basal hepatic marker in 
undifferentiated adipose-derived stem cells, which confirmed their multipotency. 
A strong expression of albumin and alpha-fetoprotein was observed in
hepatic-induced adipose-derived stem cells following both differentiation
procedures. Morphological aspects of the two types of hepatic adipose-derived
stem cells were alike. Proliferation index suggested that the first
differentiation procedure promoted better growth than the second. These
preliminary findings suggest adipose-derived stem cells may be induced into
hepatic lineage, and the most significant difference between the two standard
differentiation procedures concerns proliferation rate. This aspect is to be
considered when adipose-derived stem cells are employed in research and clinical 
studies.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20051678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


494. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2010 Apr;1801(4):496-502. doi:
10.1016/j.bbalip.2009.12.013. Epub 2010 Jan 4.

Regulatory role for phosphatidylcholine transfer protein/StarD2 in the metabolic 
response to peroxisome proliferator activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha).

Kang HW(1), Kanno K, Scapa EF, Cohen DE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Phosphatidylcholine transfer protein (PC-TP, a.k.a. StarD2) is abundantly
expressed in liver and is regulated by PPARalpha. When fed the synthetic
PPARalpha ligand fenofibrate, Pctp(-/-) mice exhibited altered lipid and glucose 
metabolism. Microarray profiling of livers from fenofibrate fed wild type and
Pctp(-/-) mice revealed differential expression of a broad array of metabolic
genes, as well as their regulatory transcription factors. PC-TP expression in
cell culture controlled the activities of both PPARalpha and HNF4alpha,
suggesting that the mechanism by which it modulates hepatic metabolism is at
least in part via activation of transcription factors that govern nutrient
homeostasis.

2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2826570
PMID: 20045742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


495. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 12;285(7):4415-22. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.085431. Epub 2009 
Dec 15.

MicroRNAs regulate human hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha, modulating the
expression of metabolic enzymes and cell cycle.

Takagi S(1), Nakajima M, Kida K, Yamaura Y, Fukami T, Yokoi T.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Metabolism and Toxicology, Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate 
School of Medical Science, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, 
Japan.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4alpha is a key transcription factor regulating
endo/xenobiotic-metabolizing enzymes and transporters. We investigated whether
microRNAs are involved in the regulation of human HNF4alpha. Potential
recognition elements for miR-24 (MRE24) were identified in the coding region and 
the 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR), and those for miR-34a (MRE34a) were
identified in the 3'-UTR in HNF4alpha mRNA. The HNF4alpha protein level in HepG2 
cells was markedly decreased by the overexpression of miR-24 and miR-34a. The
HNF4alpha mRNA level was significantly decreased by the overexpression of miR-24 
but not by miR-34a. In luciferase analyses in HEK293 cells, the reporter activity
of plasmid containing the 3'-UTR of HNF4alpha was significantly decreased by
miR-34a. The reporter activity of plasmid containing the HNF4alpha coding region 
downstream of the luciferase gene was significantly decreased by miR-24. These
results suggest that the MRE24 in the coding region and MRE34a in the 3'-UTR are 
functional in the negative regulation by mRNA degradation and translational
repression, respectively. The down-regulation of HNF4alpha by these microRNAs
resulted in the decrease of various target genes such as cytochrome P450 7A1 and 
8B1 as well as morphological changes and the decrease of the S phase population
in HepG2 cells. We also clarified that the expressions of miR-24 and miR-34a were
regulated by protein kinase C/mitogen-activated protein kinase and reactive
oxygen species pathways, respectively. In conclusion, we found that human
HNF4alpha was down-regulated by miR-24 and miR-34a, the expression of which are
regulated by cellular stress, affecting the metabolism and cellular biology.

PMCID: PMC2836046
PMID: 20018894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


496. J Biol Chem. 2010 Feb 12;285(7):4725-31. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.058198. Epub 2009 
Dec 16.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha induces transdifferentiation of hematopoietic
cells into hepatocytes.

Khurana S(1), Jaiswal AK, Mukhopadhyay A.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Biology Laboratory, National Institute of Immunology, Aruna Asaf Ali
Marg, New Delhi 110067, India.

Hematopoietic stem cells can directly transdifferentiate into hepatocytes because
of cellular plasticity, but the molecular basis of transdifferentiation is not
known. Here, we show the molecular basis using lineage-depleted oncostatin M
receptor beta-expressing (Lin(-)OSMRbeta(+)) mouse bone marrow cells in a hepatic
differentiation culture system. Differentiation of the cells was marked by the
expression of albumin. Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha was expressed and
translocated into the nuclei of the differentiating cells. Suppression of its
activation in OSM-neutralized culture medium inhibited cellular differentiation. 
Ectopic expression of full-length HNF4alpha in 32D myeloid cells resulted in
decreased myeloid colony-forming potential and increased expression of
hepatocyte-specific genes and proteins. Nevertheless, the neohepatocytes produced
in culture expressed active P450 enzyme. The obligatory role of HNF4alpha in
hepatic differentiation was confirmed by transfecting Lin(-)OSMRbeta(+) cells
with dominant negative HNF4alpha in the differentiation culture because its
expression inhibited the transcription of the albumin and tyrosine
aminotransferase genes. The loss and gain of functional activities strongly
suggested that HNF4alpha plays a central role in the transdifferentiation
process. For the first time, this report demonstrates the mechanism of
transdifferentiation of hematopoietic cells into hepatocytes, in which HNF4alpha 
serves as a molecular switch.

PMCID: PMC2836077
PMID: 20018873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


497. Cardiovasc Diabetol. 2009 Dec 10;8:63. doi: 10.1186/1475-2840-8-63.

Mutations in the coding regions of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha in
Iranian families with maturity onset diabetes of the young.

Taghavi SM(1), Fatemi SS, Rafatpanah H, Ganjali R, Tavakolafshari J, Valizadeh N.

Author information: 
(1)1Internal Medicine Department, Ghaem Hospital & Endocrine Research Center,
Mashhad University of Medical Sciences, Parastar St, Ahmad abad blvd, Mashhad,
Iran. taghavimr@mums.ac.ir

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is a nuclear receptor involved in
glucose homeostasis and is required for normal beta cell function. Mutations in
the HNF4alpha gene are associated with maturity onset diabetes of the young type 
1 (MODY1). The aim of the present study was to determine the prevalence and
nature of mutations in HNF4alpha gene in Iranian patients with a clinical
diagnosis of MODY and their family members. Twelve families including 30 patients
with clinically MODY diagnosis and 21 members of their family were examined using
PCR-RFLP method and in case of mutation confirmed by sequencing techniques. Fifty
age and sex matched subjects with normal fasting blood sugar (FBS) and Glucose
tolerance test (GTT) were constituted the control group and investigated in the
similar pattern. Single mutation of V255M in the HNF4alpha gene was detected.
This known mutation was found in 8 of 30 patients and 3 of 21 individuals in
relatives. Fifty healthy control subjects did not show any mutation. Here, it is 
indicated that the prevalence of HNF4alpha mutation among Iranian patients with
clinical MODY is considerable. This mutation was present in 26.6% of our
patients, but nothing was found in control group. In the family members, 3
subjects with the age of <or=25 years old carried this mutation. Therefore,
holding this mutation in this range of age could be a predisposing factor for
developing diabetes in future.

PMCID: PMC2797770
PMID: 20003313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


498. Mol Cancer Res. 2009 Dec;7(12):1928-36. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-09-0372. Epub 
2009 Dec 8.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4-independent synthesis of coagulation factor VII in
breast cancer cells and its inhibition by targeting selective histone
acetyltransferases.

Koizume S(1), Yokota N, Miyagi E, Hirahara F, Nakamura Y, Sakuma Y, Yoshida A,
Kameda Y, Tsuchiya E, Ruf W, Miyagi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Pathology and Genetics Division, Kanagawa Cancer Center Research
Institute, 1-1-2 Nakao, Asahi-ku, Yokohama 241-0815, Japan.

Tissue factor/coagulation factor VII (fVII) complex formation on the surface of
cancer cells plays important roles in cancer biology, such as cell migration and 
invasion, angiogenesis, and antiapoptotic effects. We recently found that various
cancer cells ectopically synthesize fVII, resulting in activation of cell
motility and invasion. Here, we characterized mechanisms of hepatic and ectopic
fVII (FVII) gene expression to identify molecular targets enabling selective
inhibition of the ectopic expression. Unlike hepatic expression, hepatocyte
nuclear factor-4 binding to the promoter is not required for ectopic FVII
expression, although Sp1 binding is essential. Furthermore, we found novel
nuclear targets of basal hepatocytic and ectopic FVII expression. Notably,
histone acetyltransferases p300 and cyclic AMP-responsive element binding
protein-binding protein (CBP) are exclusively recruited to the promoter region of
the FVII gene specifically in breast cancer cells. We further show that curcumin,
a dietary compound, can selectively inhibit ectopic fVII expression by targeting 
p300/CBP activity. These results suggest a strategy to inhibit ectopic
fVII-induced tumor progression without impairment of the physiologic hemostatic
process.

PMCID: PMC2796277
PMID: 19996301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


499. J Biol Chem. 2010 Jan 29;285(5):3035-43. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.083899. Epub 2009 
Dec 7.

Identification of novel pathways that control farnesoid X receptor-mediated
hypocholesterolemia.

Zhang Y(1), Yin L, Anderson J, Ma H, Gonzalez FJ, Willson TM, Edwards PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Medical Sciences, Northeastern Ohio Universities
College of Medicine, Rootstown, Ohio 44272, USA. yzhang@neoucom.edu

Farnesoid X receptor (FXR) plays important regulatory roles in bile acid,
lipoprotein, and glucose homeostasis. Here, we have utilized Fxr(-/-) mice and
mice deficient in scavenger receptor class B type I (SR-BI), together with an
FXR-specific agonist and adenovirus expressing hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha
or constitutively active FXR, to identify the mechanisms by which activation of
FXR results in hypocholesterolemia. We identify a novel pathway linking FXR to
changes in hepatic p-JNK, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha, and finally SR-BI.
Importantly, we demonstrate that the FXR-dependent increase in SR-BI results in
both hypocholesterolemia and an increase in reverse cholesterol transport, a
process involving the transport of cholesterol from peripheral macrophages to the
liver for excretion into the feces. In addition, we demonstrate that FXR
activation also induces an SR-BI-independent increase in reverse cholesterol
transport and reduces intestinal cholesterol absorption. Together, these data
indicate that FXR is a promising therapeutic target for treatment of
hypercholesterolemia and coronary heart disease.

PMCID: PMC2823426
PMID: 19996107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


500. J Lipid Res. 2010 Apr;51(4):832-42. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M002782. Epub 2009 Oct 28.

Glucose stimulates cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase gene transcription in human
hepatocytes.

Li T(1), Chanda D, Zhang Y, Choi HS, Chiang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Integrative Medical Sciences, Northeastern Ohio Universities
Colleges of Medicine and Pharmacy, Rootstown, OH 44272, USA.

Bile acids play important roles in the regulation of lipid, glucose, and energy
homeostasis. Recent studies suggest that glucose regulates gene transcription in 
the liver. The aim of this study was to investigate the potential role of glucose
in regulation of bile acid synthesis in human hepatocytes. High glucose
stimulated bile acid synthesis and induced mRNA expression of cholesterol
7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1), the key regulatory gene in bile acid synthesis.
Activation of an AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) decreased CYP7A1 mRNA,
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) protein, and binding to CYP7A1
chromatin. Glucose increased ATP levels to inhibit AMPK and induce HNF4alpha to
stimulate CYP7A1 gene transcription. Furthermore, glucose increased histone
acetylation and decreased H3K9 di- and tri-methylation in the CYP7A1 chromatin.
Knockdown of ATP-citrate lyase, which converts citrate to acetyl-CoA, decreased
histone acetylation and attenuated glucose induction of CYP7A1 mRNA expression.
These results suggest that glucose signaling also induces CYP7A1 gene
transcription by epigenetic regulation of the histone acetylation status. This
study uncovers a novel link between hepatic glucose metabolism and bile acid
synthesis. Glucose induction of bile acid synthesis may have an important
implication in metabolic control of glucose, lipid, and energy homeostasis under 
normal and diabetic conditions.

PMCID: PMC2842145
PMID: 19965590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Hepatology. 2010 Jan;51(1):277-85. doi: 10.1002/hep.23289.

Mechanisms for increased expression of cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (Cyp7a1) in
lactating rats.

Wooton-Kee CR(1), Coy DJ, Athippozhy AT, Zhao T, Jones BR, Vore M.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Center for Toxicology, University of Kentucky College of Medicine,
Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

Cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (Cyp7a1) and the bile acid pool size are increased
2 to 3-fold in lactating postpartum rats. We investigated the interaction of
nuclear receptors with the Cyp7a1 proximal promoter and the expression of
regulatory signaling pathways in postpartum rats at day 10 (PPd10) versus female 
controls to identify the mechanisms of increased expression of Cyp7a1, which is
maximal at 16 hours. Liver X receptor (LXRalpha) and RNA polymerase II (RNA Pol
II) recruitment to Cyp7a1 chromatin were increased 1.5- and 2.5-fold,
respectively, at 16 hours on PPd10. Expression of nuclear receptors farnesoid X
receptor (FXR), LXRalpha, liver receptor homolog (LRH-1), hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha), and short heterodimer partner (SHP) messenger RNA
(mRNA) and coactivator peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor gamma
coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha) mRNA was unchanged in PPd10 versus controls at 16
hours, whereas chicken ovalbumin upstream transcription factor II (COUP-TFII) was
decreased 40% at 16 hours. Investigation of a repressive signaling pathway, the
c-Jun-N-terminal kinase (JNK) signaling pathway in PPd10 versus controls, showed 
decreased mRNA expression of hepatocyte growth factor (HGF; decreased 60% at 16
hours) and tyrosine kinase receptor c-Met (decreased 44%-50% at 16 hours), but
these were not accompanied by decreased expression of phosphorylated c-Jun.
Importantly, expression of fibroblast growth factor 15 (FGF15) mRNA in the ileum 
was decreased 70% in PPd10 versus controls, whereas phosphorylated
mitogen-activated protein kinase/extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2
(Erk1/2) protein expression in liver was decreased 88% at 16 hours.CONCLUSION:
The increased recruitment of LXRalpha, a Cyp7a1 stimulatory pathway, and
decreased expression of FGF15 and phosphorylated Erk1/2, a Cyp7a1 repressive
pathway, combined to increase Cyp7a1 expression during lactation.

PMCID: PMC2799537
PMID: 19957370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Hepatology. 2009 Dec;50(6):1773-82. doi: 10.1002/hep.23226.

Not interferon, but interleukin-6 controls early gene expression in hepatitis B
virus infection.

Hösel M(1), Quasdorff M, Wiegmann K, Webb D, Zedler U, Broxtermann M, Tedjokusumo
R, Esser K, Arzberger S, Kirschning CJ, Langenkamp A, Falk C, Büning H, Rose-John
S, Protzer U.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne (ZMMK), University Hospital Cologne,
Köln, Germany.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2009 Dec;50(6):1692-5.

With about 350 million virus carriers, hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection remains 
a major health problem. HBV is a noncytopathic virus causing persistent
infection, but it is still unknown whether host recognition of HBV may activate
an innate immune response. We describe that upon infection of primary human liver
cells, HBV is recognized by nonparenchymal cells of the liver, mainly by liver
macrophages (Kupffer cells), although they are not infected. Within 3 hours, this
recognition leads to the activation of nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) and
subsequently to the release of interleukin-6 (IL-6) and other proinflammatory
cytokines (IL-8, TNF-alpha, IL-1beta), but does not induce an interferon
response. The activation of proinflammatory cytokines, however, is transient, and
even inhibits responsiveness toward a subsequent challenge. IL-6 released by
Kupffer cells after activation of NF-kappaB controls HBV gene expression and
replication in hepatocytes at the level of transcription shortly after infection.
Upon binding to its receptor complex, IL-6 activates the mitogen-activated
protein kinases exogenous signal-regulated kinase 1/2, and c-jun N-terminal
kinase, which inhibit expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1alpha and
HNF 4alpha, two transcription factors essential for HBV gene expression and
replication.CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrate recognition of HBV patterns by
nonparenchymal liver cells, which results in IL-6-mediated control of HBV
infection at the transcriptional level. Thus, IL-6 ensures early control of the
virus, limiting activation of the adaptive immune response and preventing death
of the HBV-infected hepatocyte. This pattern recognition may be essential for a
virus, which infects a new host with only a few virions. Our data also indicate
that therapeutic neutralization of IL-6 for treatment of certain diseases may
represent a risk if the patient is HBV-infected.

PMID: 19937696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Hepatology. 2009 Dec;50(6):2046; author reply 2046-7. doi: 10.1002/hep.23287.

The reprogramming factors of human somatic cells are novel targets for human
hepatocellular carcinoma therapy.

Moriguchi H.

Comment on
    Hepatology. 2008 Nov;48(5):1528-39.

PMID: 19937684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Atherosclerosis. 2010 May;210(1):14-27. doi:
10.1016/j.atherosclerosis.2009.10.035. Epub 2009 Nov 5.

The potential influence of genetic variants in genes along bile acid and bile
metabolic pathway on blood cholesterol levels in the population.

Lu Y(1), Feskens EJ, Boer JM, Müller M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Nutrition, Wageningen University and Research Center, PO Box
8129, 6700 EV Wageningen, The Netherlands. kevin.lu@wur.nl

The liver is currently known to be the major organ to eliminate excess
cholesterol from our body. It accomplishes this function in two ways: conversion 
of cholesterol molecules into bile acids (BAs) and secretion of unesterified
cholesterol molecules into bile. BAs are synthesized in the hepatocytes, secreted
into bile and delivered to the lumen of the small intestine where they act as
detergents to facilitate absorption of fats and fat-soluble vitamins. About 95%
of BAs are recovered in the ileum during each cycle of the enterohepatic
circulation. Five percent are lost and replaced by newly synthesized BAs, which
amounts to approximately 500 mg/day in adult humans. In contrast to the
efficiency of the BAs' enterohepatic circulation, 50% of the 1000 mg of
cholesterol secreted daily into bile is lost in feces. It is known that rare
human mutations in certain genes in bile acid and bile metabolic pathway
influence blood cholesterol levels. With the recent success of genome-wide
association studies, we are convinced that common genetic variants also play a
role in the genetic architecture of plasma lipid traits. In this review, we
summarized the current state of knowledge about genetic variations in bile acid
and bile metabolic pathway, and assessed their impact on blood cholesterol levels
and cholesterol metabolic kinetics in the population.

Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19932478  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Diabet Med. 2009 Nov;26(11):1172-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2009.02855.x.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1A and HNF4A substitution occurring simultaneously
in a family with maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Beijers HJ(1), Losekoot M, Odink RJ, Bravenboer B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Catharina Hospital, Eindhoven, The
Netherlands. hanneke.beijers@cze.nl

INTRODUCTION: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of 
diabetes mellitus characterized by an early age at onset, autosomal dominant
inheritance and a primary defect in the function of the B-cells of the pancreas. 
We report a family with two members carrying a substitution in both the
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1A and HNF4A gene simultaneously.
CASE REPORT: A 39-year-old man was referred because of mild diabetic retinopathy.
Because of a dominant presentation of diabetes in his family, genetic testing was
performed. Sequence analysis of the genes involved in MODY-1-3 revealed the
presence of an amino acid substitution in the HNF1A as well as the HNF4A gene.
Both substitutions were also detected in his mother. The HNF1A substitution has
been described previously as pathogenic, whereas the HNF4A substitution had not
been found previously. The HNF4A substitution was located in a conserved region
of the protein and, additionally, the proband and his mother had high
birthweights and low triglyceride levels, both of which are associated with
pathogenic HNF4A substitutions.
CONCLUSIONS: To our knowledge this is the first reported family carrying both a
substitution of HNF1A and HNF4A gene simultaneously. The exact contribution of
each substitution to the phenotype of our subjects remains to be further
elucidated, however, given the high birthweights and the low triglyceride levels 
in those with both substitutions, it is reasonable that the HNF4A substitution is
pathogenic.

PMID: 19929997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 16;4(11):e7855. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007855.

Species-specific differences in the expression of the HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A
genes.

Harries LW(1), Brown JE, Gloyn AL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Peninsula Medical School,
University of Exeter, Exeter, United Kingdom. L.W.Harries@exeter.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: The HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A genes are part of an autoregulatory
network in mammalian pancreas, liver, kidney and gut. The layout of this network 
appears to be similar in rodents and humans, but inactivation of HNF1A, HNF1B or 
HNF4A genes in animal models cause divergent phenotypes to those seen in man. We 
hypothesised that some differences may arise from variation in the expression
profile of alternatively processed isoforms between species.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We measured the expression of the major isoforms 
of the HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A genes in human and rodent pancreas, islet, liver
and kidney by isoform-specific quantitative real-time PCR and compared their
expression by the comparative Ct (DeltaDeltaCt) method. We found major changes in
the expression profiles of the HNF genes between humans and rodents. The
principal difference lies in the expression of the HNF1A gene, which exists as
three isoforms in man, but as a single isoform only in rodents. More subtle
changes were to the balance of HNF1B and HNF4A isoforms between species; the
repressor isoform HNF1B(C) comprised only 6% in human islets compared with 24-26%
in rodents (p = 0.006) whereas HNF4A9 comprised 22% of HNF4A expression in human 
pancreas but only 11% in rodents (p = 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The differences we note in the isoform-specific
expression of the human and rodent HNF1A, HNF1B and HNF4A genes may impact on the
absolute activity of these genes, and therefore on the activity of the pancreatic
transcription factor network as a whole. We conclude that alterations to
expression of HNF isoforms may underlie some of the phenotypic variation caused
by mutations in these genes.

PMCID: PMC2773013
PMID: 19924231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Nat Genet. 2009 Dec;41(12):1330-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.483. Epub 2009 Nov 15.

Genome-wide association study of ulcerative colitis identifies three new
susceptibility loci, including the HNF4A region.

UK IBD Genetics Consortium, Barrett JC, Lee JC, Lees CW, Prescott NJ, Anderson
CA, Phillips A, Wesley E, Parnell K, Zhang H, Drummond H, Nimmo ER, Massey D,
Blaszczyk K, Elliott T, Cotterill L, Dallal H, Lobo AJ, Mowat C, Sanderson JD,
Jewell DP, Newman WG, Edwards C, Ahmad T, Mansfield JC, Satsangi J, Parkes M,
Mathew CG; Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 2, Donnelly P, Peltonen L,
Blackwell JM, Bramon E, Brown MA, Casas JP, Corvin A, Craddock N, Deloukas P,
Duncanson A, Jankowski J, Markus HS, Mathew CG, McCarthy MI, Palmer CN, Plomin R,
Rautanen A, Sawcer SJ, Samani N, Trembath RC, Viswanathan AC, Wood N, Spencer CC,
Barrett JC, Bellenguez C, Davison D, Freeman C, Strange A, Donnelly P, Langford
C, Hunt SE, Edkins S, Gwilliam R, Blackburn H, Bumpstead SJ, Dronov S, Gillman M,
Gray E, Hammond N, Jayakumar A, McCann OT, Liddle J, Perez ML, Potter SC,
Ravindrarajah R, Ricketts M, Waller M, Weston P, Widaa S, Whittaker P, Deloukas
P, Peltonen L, Mathew CG, Blackwell JM, Brown MA, Corvin A, McCarthy MI, Spencer 
CC, Attwood AP, Stephens J, Sambrook J, Ouwehand WH, McArdle WL, Ring SM,
Strachan DP.

Ulcerative colitis is a common form of inflammatory bowel disease with a complex 
etiology. As part of the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium 2, we performed a
genome-wide association scan for ulcerative colitis in 2,361 cases and 5,417
controls. Loci showing evidence of association at P < 1 x 10(-5) were followed up
by genotyping in an independent set of 2,321 cases and 4,818 controls. We find
genome-wide significant evidence of association at three new loci, each
containing at least one biologically relevant candidate gene, on chromosomes
20q13 (HNF4A; P = 3.2 x 10(-17)), 16q22 (CDH1 and CDH3; P = 2.8 x 10(-8)) and
7q31 (LAMB1; P = 3.0 x 10(-8)). Of note, CDH1 has recently been associated with
susceptibility to colorectal cancer, an established complication of longstanding 
ulcerative colitis. The new associations suggest that changes in the integrity of
the intestinal epithelial barrier may contribute to the pathogenesis of
ulcerative colitis.

PMCID: PMC2812019
PMID: 19915572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Diabet Med. 2009 Oct;26(10):1070-4. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2009.02812.x.

Testing for monogenic diabetes among children and adolescents with
antibody-negative clinically defined Type 1 diabetes.

Rubio-Cabezas O(1), Edghill EL, Argente J, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Infantil Universitario Niño Jesús,
Madrid, Spain. oscar.rubio-cabezas@pms.ac.uk

AIMS: Monogenic diabetes is frequently misdiagnosed as Type 1 diabetes. We aimed 
to screen for undiagnosed monogenic diabetes in a cohort of children who had a
clinical diagnosis of Type 1 diabetes but were pancreatic autoantibody-negative.
METHODS: We studied 252 patients diagnosed clinically with Type 1 diabetes
between 6 months and 17 years of age. Pancreatic autoantibodies [islet cell
autoantibodies (ICA), glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies (GADA) and/or
insulinoma-associated antigen-2 antibodies (IA2A)] were absent in 25 cases
(9.9%). The most frequent genes involved in monogenic diabetes [KCNJ11 and INS
for neonatal diabetes and HNF1A and HNF4A for maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY)] were directly sequenced.
RESULTS: Two of the 25 (8%) antibody-negative patients had de novo heterozygous
mutations in INS; c.94G>A (G32S) and c.265C>T (R89C). The two patients presented 
with non-ketotic hyperglycaemia at 8 and 11 months of age. In contrast, the four 
antibody-positive patients who presented at a similar age (6-12 months) had a
more severe metabolic derangement, manifested as ketosis in all four cases, with 
ketoacidosis in two. At ages 15 and 5 years, both INS mutation patients were
prescribed a replacement dose of insulin with good glycaemic control [glycated
haemoglobin (HbA(1c)) 7.0 and 7.2%]. No mutations were found in KCNJ11, HNF1A or 
HNF4A.
CONCLUSIONS: The identification of patients with monogenic diabetes from children
with clinically defined Type 1 diabetes may be helped by clinical criteria
including the absence of pancreatic autoantibodies.

PMID: 19900242  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 29;4(10):e7609. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007609.

Loss of hepatocyte-nuclear-factor-4alpha affects colonic ion transport and causes
chronic inflammation resembling inflammatory bowel disease in mice.

Darsigny M(1), Babeu JP, Dupuis AA, Furth EE, Seidman EG, Lévy E, Verdu EF,
Gendron FP, Boudreau F.

Author information: 
(1)Canadian Institutes of Health Research Team on Digestive Epithelium,
Département d'Anatomie et Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine et des
Sciences de la Santé, Université de Sherbrooke, Sherbrooke, Quebec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Hnf4alpha, an epithelial specific transcriptional regulator, is
decreased in inflammatory bowel disease and protects against chemically-induced
colitis in mice. However, the precise role of this factor in maintaining normal
inflammatory homeostasis of the intestine remains unclear. The aim of this study 
was to evaluate the sole role of epithelial Hnf4alpha in the maintenance of gut
inflammatory homeostasis in mice.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We show here that specific epithelial deletion of
Hnf4alpha in mice causes spontaneous chronic intestinal inflammation leading to
focal areas of crypt dropout, increased cytokines and chemokines secretion,
immune cell infiltrates and crypt hyperplasia. A gene profiling analysis in
diseased Hnf4alpha null colon confirms profound genetic changes in cell death and
proliferative behaviour related to cancer. Among the genes involved in the immune
protection through epithelial barrier function, we identify the ion transporter
claudin-15 to be down-modulated early in the colon of Hnf4alpha mutants. This
coincides with a significant decrease of mucosal ion transport but not of barrier
permeability in young animals prior to the manifestation of the disease. We
confirm that claudin-15 is a direct Hnf4alpha gene target in the intestinal
epithelial context and is down-modulated in mouse experimental colitis and
inflammatory bowel disease.
CONCLUSION: Our results highlight the critical role of Hnf4alpha to maintain
intestinal inflammatory homeostasis during mouse adult life and uncover a novel
function for Hnf4alpha in the regulation of claudin-15 expression. This
establishes Hnf4alpha as a mediator of ion epithelial transport, an important
process for the maintenance of gut inflammatory homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2764139
PMID: 19898610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Biochemistry. 2009 Dec 22;48(50):11950-60. doi: 10.1021/bi9015742.

Role of the nuclear receptors HNF4 alpha, PPAR alpha, and LXRs in the TNF
alpha-mediated inhibition of human apolipoprotein A-I gene expression in HepG2
cells.

Mogilenko DA(1), Dizhe EB, Shavva VS, Lapikov IA, Orlov SV, Perevozchikov AP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Russian
Academy of Medical Sciences, 197376 St. Petersburg, Russia. denis@iem.sp.ru

The expression of the apolipoprotein A-I gene (apoA-I) in hepatocytes is
repressed by pro-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-1beta and TNFalpha. In this
work, we have demonstrated that treatment of HepG2 human hepatoma cells with
chemical inhibitors for JNK, p38 protein kinases, and NFkappaB transcription
factor abolishes the TNFalpha-mediated inhibition of human apoA-I gene expression
in HepG2 cells. In addition, we have shown that TNFalpha decreases also the rate 
of secretion of apoA-I protein by HepG2 cells, and this effect depends on JNK and
p38, but not on NFkappaB and MEK1/2 signaling pathways. The inhibitory effect of 
TNFalpha has been found to be mediated by the hepatic enhancer of the apoA-I
gene. The decrease in the level of human apoA-I gene expression under the impact 
of TNFalpha appears to be partly mediated by the inhibition of HNF4alpha and
PPARalpha gene expression. Treatment of HepG2 cells with PPARalpha antagonist
(MK886) or LXR agonist (TO901317) abolishes the TNFalpha-mediated decrease in the
level of apoA-I gene expression. PPARalpha agonist (WY-14643) abolishes the
negative effect of TNFalpha on apoA-I gene expression in the case of simultaneous
inhibition of MEK1/2, although neither inhibition of MEK1/2 nor addition of
WY-14643 leads to the blocking of the TNFalpha-mediated decrease in the level of 
apoA-I gene expression individually. The ligand-dependent regulation of apoA-I
gene expression by PPARalpha appears to be affected by the TNFalpha-mediated
activation of MEK1/2 kinases, probably through PPARalpha phosphorylation.
Treatment of HepG2 cells with PPARalpha and LXR synthetic agonists also blocks
the inhibition of apoA-I protein secretion in HepG2 cells under the impact of
TNFalpha. A chromatin immunoprecipitation assay demonstrates that TNFalpha leads 
to a 2-fold decrease in the level of PPARalpha binding with the apoA-I gene
hepatic enhancer. At the same time, the level of LXRbeta binding with the apoA-I 
gene hepatic enhancer is increased 3-fold under the impact of TNFalpha. These
results suggest that nuclear receptors HNF4alpha, PPARalpha, and LXRs are
involved in the TNFalpha-mediated downregulation of human apoA-I gene expression 
and apoA-I protein secretion in HepG2 cells.

PMID: 19883121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Biol Chem. 2009 Dec 11;284(50):35165-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.052506. Epub
2009 Oct 21.

Multiple binding modes between HNF4alpha and the LXXLL motifs of PGC-1alpha lead 
to full activation.

Rha GB(1), Wu G, Shoelson SE, Chi YI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, Center for Structural
Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is a novel nuclear receptor that
participates in a hierarchical network of transcription factors regulating the
development and physiology of such vital organs as the liver, pancreas, and
kidney. Among the various transcriptional coregulators with which HNF4alpha
interacts, peroxisome proliferation-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma)
coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha) represents a novel coactivator whose activation
is unusually robust and whose binding mode appears to be distinct from that of
canonical coactivators such as NCoA/SRC/p160 family members. To elucidate the
potentially unique molecular mechanism of PGC-1alpha recruitment, we have
determined the crystal structure of HNF4alpha in complex with a fragment of
PGC-1alpha containing all three of its LXXLL motifs. Despite the presence of all 
three LXXLL motifs available for interactions, only one is bound at the canonical
binding site, with no additional contacts observed between the two proteins.
However, a close inspection of the electron density map indicates that the bound 
LXXLL motif is not a selected one but an averaged structure of more than one
LXXLL motif. Further biochemical and functional studies show that the individual 
LXXLL motifs can bind but drive only minimal transactivation. Only when more than
one LXXLL motif is involved can significant transcriptional activity be measured,
and full activation requires all three LXXLL motifs. These findings led us to
propose a model wherein each LXXLL motif has an additive effect, and the multiple
binding modes by HNF4alpha toward the LXXLL motifs of PGC-1alpha could account
for the apparent robust activation by providing a flexible mechanism for
combinatorial recruitment of additional coactivators and mediators.

PMCID: PMC2787377
PMID: 19846556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Dec;37(22):7498-508. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp823.

Molecular interactions between HNF4a, FOXA2 and GABP identified at regulatory DNA
elements through ChIP-sequencing.

Wallerman O(1), Motallebipour M, Enroth S, Patra K, Bysani MS, Komorowski J,
Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, SE-751 85 Uppsala,
Sweden.

Gene expression is regulated by combinations of transcription factors, which can 
be mapped to regulatory elements on a genome-wide scale using ChIP experiments.
In a previous ChIP-chip study of USF1 and USF2 we found evidence also of binding 
of GABP, FOXA2 and HNF4a within the enriched regions. Here, we have applied
ChIP-seq for these transcription factors and identified 3064 peaks of enrichment 
for GABP, 7266 for FOXA2 and 18783 for HNF4a. Distal elements with USF2 signal
was frequently bound also by HNF4a and FOXA2. GABP peaks were found at
transcription start sites, whereas 94% of FOXA2 and 90% of HNF4a peaks were
located at other positions. We developed a method to accurately define TFBS
within peaks, and found the predicted sites to have an elevated conservation
level compared to peak centers; however the majority of bindings were not
evolutionary conserved. An interaction between HNF4a and GABP was seen at TSS,
with one-third of the HNF4a positive promoters being bound also by GABP, and this
interaction was verified by co-immunoprecipitations.

PMCID: PMC2794179
PMID: 19822575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Dec;29(23):6294-308. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00939-09. Epub 2009 Oct
5.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha, a key factor for homeostasis, cell
architecture, and barrier function of the adult intestinal epithelium.

Cattin AL(1), Le Beyec J, Barreau F, Saint-Just S, Houllier A, Gonzalez FJ,
Robine S, Pinçon-Raymond M, Cardot P, Lacasa M, Ribeiro A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche des Cordeliers, Université Pierre et Marie Curie-Paris 6, 
UMRS 872, Paris F-75006, France.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha) is a transcription factor which is 
highly expressed in the intestinal epithelium from duodenum to colon and from
crypt to villus. The homeostasis of this constantly renewing epithelium relies on
an integrated control of proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis, as well
as on the functional architecture of the epithelial cells. In order to determine 
the consequences of HNF-4alpha loss in the adult intestinal epithelium, we used a
tamoxifen-inducible Cre-loxP system to inactivate the Hnf-4a gene. In the
intestines of adult mice, loss of HNF-4alpha led to an increased proliferation in
crypts and to an increased expression of several genes controlled by the
Wnt/beta-catenin system. This control of the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway
by HNF-4alpha was confirmed in vitro. Cell lineage was affected, as indicated by 
an increased number of goblet cells and an impairment of enterocyte and
enteroendocrine cell maturation. In the absence of HNF-4alpha, cell-cell
junctions were destabilized and paracellular intestinal permeability increased.
Our results showed that HNF-4alpha modulates Wnt/beta-catenin signaling and
controls intestinal epithelium homeostasis, cell function, and cell architecture.
This study indicates that HNF-4alpha regulates the intestinal balance between
proliferation and differentiation, and we hypothesize that it might act as a
tumor suppressor.

PMCID: PMC2786690
PMID: 19805521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Pharm. 2009 Sep-Oct;6(5):1573-81. doi: 10.1021/mp9001552.

Transcriptional activation of PPARalpha by phenobarbital in the absence of CAR
and PXR.

Tamasi V(1), Juvan P, Beer M, Rozman D, Meyer UA.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Scale Biology, Biozentrum, University of Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
vtamasi@mac.com

The nuclear receptors CAR (constitutive androstane receptor) and PXR (pregnane X 
receptor) mediate the effects of phenobarbital on gene transcription. To
investigate the relative contribution of these nuclear receptors to the
expression of specific genes we studied the effect of phenobarbital in livers of 
wild type, CAR(-/-), PXR(-/-) and CAR/PXR(-/-) knockout mice. Spotted Steroltalk 
v1 cDNA arrays were applied containing probes for genes involved in drug
metabolism, sterol biosynthesis, steroid synthesis/transport and heme synthesis. 
In the absence of CAR and PXR, phenobarbital unexpectedly induced mRNAs of
several nuclear receptors, including PPARalpha and its target genes Cyp4a10 and
Cyp4a14. Interestingly, in primary cultures of hepatocytes isolated from
CAR/PXR(-/-) knockout mice, phenobarbital increased HNF-4alpha levels. In further
experiments in these hepatocyte cultures we provide evidence that phenobarbital
directly induces transcription of the PPARalpha gene via its HNF-4alpha response 
element, and indirectly by lack of inhibitory crosstalk of AMPK, CAR and PXR with
HNF-4alpha. Our results provide further insight into CAR and PXR-independent
effects of phenobarbital and the crosstalk between different nuclear receptor
signaling pathways.

PMID: 19708687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Gut. 2010 Feb;59(2):236-46. doi: 10.1136/gut.2008.174904. Epub 2009 Aug 10.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha attenuates hepatic fibrosis in rats.

Yue HY(1), Yin C, Hou JL, Zeng X, Chen YX, Zhong W, Hu PF, Deng X, Tan YX, Zhang 
JP, Ning BF, Shi J, Zhang X, Wang HY, Lin Y, Xie WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Shanghai Changzheng Hospital, Second Military 
Medical University, Shanghai, China.

Erratum in
    Gut. 2010 Jul;59(7):1007.

BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is a central
transcriptional regulator of hepatocyte differentiation and function. The aim of 
this study was to evaluate the effect of HNF4alpha on attenuation of hepatic
fibrosis.
METHODS: The adenoviruses carrying HNF4alpha gene or containing siRNA targeting
HNF4alpha were injected through tail vein on two distinct hepatic fibrosis models
either induced by dimethylnitrosamine or by bile duct ligation in rats. Moreover,
HNF4alpha, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT)-related and fibrotic markers
in hepatocytes, hepatic stellate cells (HSCs) and liver tissues were detected by 
real time PCR, immunofluorescence or immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: We demonstrated that decreased expression of HNF4alpha and epithelial
markers accompanied by enhanced expression of mesenchymal markers occurred in
fibrotic liver. More importantly, forced expression of HNF4alpha remarkably
alleviated hepatic fibrosis and improved liver function with suppression of EMT
in both fibrosis models. In contrast, downregulation of HNF4alpha by siRNA
aggravated hepatic fibrosis and decreased the expression of E-cadherin in
association with the enhanced expression of vimentin and fibroblast-specific
protein-1. In vitro study revealed that HNF4alpha could suppress the EMT process 
of hepatocytes induced by transforming growth factor-beta1 and increase the
expression of liver-specific genes. A similar phenomenon of the EMT process was
observed during the activation of HSCs, which was abrogated by HNF4alpha.
Additionally, HNF4alpha deactivated the myofibroblasts through inducing the
mesenchymal-to-epithelial transition and inhibited their proliferation.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study suggests that HNF4alpha is critical for hepatic
fibrogenesis and upregulation of HNF4alpha might present as an ideal option for
the treatment of hepatic fibrosis.

PMID: 19671543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Diabet Med. 2009 May;26(5):569-70. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2009.02705.x.

Variants in the isoform-specific coding regions of the HNF1A, HNF4A and HNF1B
genes are not a common cause of familial, young-onset diabetes or renal cysts and
diabetes (RCAD).

Locke JM, Ellard S, Norwood VF, Harries LW.

PMID: 19646202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Diabet Med. 2009 May;26(5):466-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2009.02720.x.

Phenotypical aspects of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY diabetes) in
comparison with Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) in children and adolescents:
experience from a large multicentre database.

Schober E(1), Rami B, Grabert M, Thon A, Kapellen T, Reinehr T, Holl RW; DPV-Wiss
Initiative of the German Working Group for Paediatric Diabetology and.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Department, Medical University of Vienna, Vienna, Austria.
edith.schober@meduniwien.ac.at

AIMS: To analyse and compare clinical characteristics in young patients with
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and Type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM).
METHODS: We conducted an observational investigation using the DPV-Wiss database 
containing clinical data on 40 757 diabetic patients < 20 years of age from
Germany and Austria.
RESULTS: Three hundred and thirty-nine cases were clinically categorized as MODY 
(0.83%); 562 patients were diagnosed as T2DM (1.4%). In 20% of cases, the
diagnosis of MODY was based on clinical findings only. Of the 272 subjects where 
genetic testing was available, 3% did not carry mutations in the three examined
MODY genes. Glucokinase-MODY was commoner than HNF1A-MODY and HNF4A-MODY. Age at 
diagnosis was younger in MODY patients. The body mass index of T2DM was
significantly higher compared with all MODY subgroups. Macrovascular risk factors
such as dyslipidaemia and hypertension were commoner in T2DM, but 23% of MODY
patients had dyslipidaemia and 10% hypertension. Glycaemic control was within the
therapeutic target (HbA(1c) < 7.5%) in 86% of MODY and 70% of T2DM patients.
CONCLUSIONS: The prevalence of MODY in children and adolescents in Germany and
Austria is lower than that of T2DM in this age group. Dyslipidaemia and
hypertension are less frequent in MODY compared with T2DM patients, but do occur.

PMID: 19646184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Hepatology. 2009 Oct;50(4):1241-50. doi: 10.1002/hep.23090.

Zinc supplementation reverses alcohol-induced steatosis in mice through
reactivating hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor-alpha.

Kang X(1), Zhong W, Liu J, Song Z, McClain CJ, Kang YJ, Zhou Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Louisville School of Medicine,
Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

Alcoholic steatosis is a fundamental metabolic disorder in the progression of
alcoholic liver disease. Zinc deficiency is one of the most consistently observed
biochemical/nutritional manifestations of alcoholic liver disease. The purpose of
this study is to determine whether dietary zinc supplementation to mice
previously exposed to alcohol could reverse alcoholic steatosis. Male 129S mice
were pair-fed an alcohol or isocaloric maltose dextrin liquid diet for 16 weeks
with or without dietary zinc supplementation for the last 4 weeks. Zinc
supplementation significantly attenuated alcohol-mediated increases in hepatic
triglyceride, cholesterol, and free fatty acids in association with accelerated
hepatic fatty acid oxidation and very low density lipoproteins (VLDL) secretion. 
Hepatic genes related to fatty acid oxidation and VLDL secretion were
up-regulated by zinc supplementation, which was accompanied by restoring activity
of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) and peroxisome proliferators
activated receptor-alpha (PPAR-alpha). Zinc supplementation enhanced alcohol
metabolism and attenuated oxidative stress and liver injury. Zinc supplementation
also normalized alcohol-mediated increases in plasma triglycerides and partially 
reversed decrease in gonadal adipose depot mass. Studies in HepG2 cells showed
that zinc deprivation significantly suppressed the DNA-binding activities of
HNF-4alpha and PPAR-alpha, and reduced HNF-4alpha and PPAR-alpha target proteins.
Consequently, zinc deprivation caused cellular accumulation of lipid droplets,
triglycerides and free fatty acids in the HepG2 cells.CONCLUSION: Zinc
supplementation reverses alcoholic steatosis, and reactivation of HNF-4alpha and 
PPAR-alpha by increasing zinc availability and inhibiting oxidative stress are
potential mechanisms underlying these beneficial effects of zinc on hepatic lipid
homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC2757527
PMID: 19637192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. BMC Mol Biol. 2009 Jul 3;10:68. doi: 10.1186/1471-2199-10-68.

Expression of HNF4alpha in the human and rat choroid plexus: implications for
drug transport across the blood-cerebrospinal-fluid (CSF) barrier.

Niehof M(1), Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute for Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Center of
Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, Hannover, Germany.
niehof@item.fraunhofer.de

BACKGROUND: The choroid plexus consists of highly differentiated epithelium and
functions as a barrier at the interface of the blood-cerebrospinal-fluid (CSF).
This tissue may therefore determine the bioavailability and transport of drugs to
the brain. Little is known about the expression of drug and xenobiotic
metabolizing enzymes (DME) and of drug transporters in the human choroid plexus. 
Notably, the transcription factor and zinc finger protein HNF4alpha is a master
regulator of DMEs and of drug transporters. As of today its activity in the
blood-CSF barrier is unknown. Here we report our efforts in determining HNF4alpha
activity in the regulation of ABC transporters in the human and rat choroid
plexus.
RESULTS: We report expression of HNF4alpha by qRT-PCR and by immunohistochemistry
and evidence transcript expression of the ATP-binding cassette transporters
ABCB1, ABCB4, ABCC1-6 in choroid plexus. Additionally, HNF4alpha DNA binding
activity at regulatory sequences of ABCB4 and ABCC1 was determined by EMSA
bandshift assays with a specific antibody. We then performed siRNA mediated
functional knock down of HNF4alpha in Caco-2 cells and found ABCC1 gene
expression to be repressed in cell culture experiments.
CONCLUSION: Our study evidences activity of HNF4alpha in human and rat choroid
plexus. This transcription factor targets DMEs and drug transporters and may well
determine availability of drugs at the blood-CSF barrier.

PMCID: PMC2713241
PMID: 19575803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2009;24(3):218-25.

Inter-individual variation in flavin-containing monooxygenase 3 in livers from
Japanese: correlation with hepatic transcription factors.

Nagashima S(1), Shimizu M, Yano H, Murayama N, Kumai T, Kobayashi S, Guengerich
FP, Yamazaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Showa Pharmaceutical
University, Tokyo, Japan.

Human flavin-containing monooxygenase 3 (FMO3)-mediated microsomal oxygenation
activity, levels of FMO3 protein and FMO3 mRNA and modifications were
investigated in Japanese livers genotyped for the FMO3 gene. Significant
correlations were observed for benzydamine N-oxygenation or methyl p-tolyl
sulfide S-oxygenation activity (in the range of approximately 20- to
approximately 40-fold) and FMO3 levels determined immunochemically in liver
microsomes (r(2)=0.73-0.75, p<0.0001, n=16). Preincubation with the reducing
agent ascorbate revealed that FMO3 activity in some liver samples is suppressed. 
Microsomal FMO3 protein content (approximately 40-fold) was correlated with FMO3 
mRNA levels (r(2)=0.55, p=0.0010, n=16), but FMO3 haplotypes did not affect FMO3 
mRNA expression (approximately 100-fold) under the conditions used. FMO3 mRNA
levels were multivariately correlated with trans-acting factors, i.e. hepatic
nuclear factor 4 (HNF-4) mRNA and nuclear factor Y box-binding protein (NF-Y)
mRNA (r(2)=0.31, p=0.0017, n=37). These results suggest that considerable
individual differences in FMO3 levels may exist in Japanese livers. The
liver-enriched transcription factor HNF-4 appears to be a determinant of FMO3
expression in livers, as well as the ubiquitous factor NF-Y.

PMCID: PMC4755719
PMID: 19571433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Aust N Z J Obstet Gynaecol. 2009 Jun;49(3):328-30. doi:
10.1111/j.1479-828X.2009.01009.x.

Neonatal hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia and monogenic diabetes due to a
heterozygous mutation of the HNF4A gene.

Conn JJ, Simm PJ, Oats JJ, Nankervis AJ, Jacobs SE, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Recent research has demonstrated that mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 
4-alpha (HNF4A) gene are associated with neonatal hyperinsulinaemic
hypoglycaemia. Mutations of this gene also cause one of the subtypes of monogenic
diabetes, a form of diabetes formerly known as maturity-onset diabetes of the
young. This article describes a family discovered to have a novel frame-shift
mutation of the HNF4A gene in the setting of early-onset maternal diabetes and
severe neonatal hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia. The implications of a diagnosis 
of HNF4A gene mutation for obstetric and paediatric practice are discussed.

PMID: 19566570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Clin Biochem Rev. 2009 May;30(2):67-74.

Investigating maturity onset diabetes of the young.

Nyunt O(1), Wu JY, McGown IN, Harris M, Huynh T, Leong GM, Cowley DM, Cotterill
AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes Mellitus, Mater Children's
Hospital, South Brisbane, Qld 4101, Australia. ohn.nyunt@mater.org.au

Maturity Onset Diabetes of Young (MODY) is a monogenic and autosomal dominant
form of diabetes mellitus with onset of the disease often before 25 years of age.
It is due to dysfunction of pancreatic beta cells characterised by non-ketotic
diabetes and absence of pancreatic auto-antibodies. It is frequently mistaken for
type 1 or type 2 diabetes mellitus. Diagnosis of MODY is important as the GCK
subtype has better prognosis and may not require any treatment. Subtypes HNF1A
and HNF4A are sensitive to sulfonylureas, however diabetes complications are
common if not treated early. Moreover, there is genetic implication for the
patient and family. Rare MODY subtypes can be associated with pancreatic and
renal anomalies as well as exocrine dysfunction of the pancreas. So far there are
six widely accepted subtypes of MODY described but the list has grown to nine.
Although the majority of diabetes mellitus in youth remains type 1 and the
incidence of type 2 is rising, MODY should be considered in patients with
non-ketotic diabetes at presentation, and in patients with a strong family
history of diabetes mellitus without pancreatic auto-antibodies. Furthermore the 
diagnosis must be confirmed by molecular studies. With advancement in genomic
technology, rapid screening for MODY mutations will become readily available in
the future.

PMCID: PMC2702215
PMID: 19565026  [PubMed]


23. Drug Metab Dispos. 2009 Sep;37(9):1978-86. doi: 10.1124/dmd.109.027409. Epub 2009
Jun 18.

Genetic polymorphisms in the TATA box and upstream phenobarbital-responsive
enhancer module of the UGT1A1 promoter have combined effects on
UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1A1 transcription mediated by constitutive androstane
receptor, pregnane X receptor, or glucocorticoid receptor in human liver.

Li Y(1), Buckley D, Wang S, Klaassen CD, Zhong XB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutics, University of Kansas
Medical Center, 3901 Rainbow Blvd., Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Transcription of UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) 1A1 is regulated by the
transcription factors, constitutive androstane receptor (CAR), pregnane X
receptor (PXR), glucocorticoid receptor (GR), hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1
alpha, and HNF4 alpha. The purpose of this study was to determine whether the
genetic polymorphisms in the RNA polymerase II core promoter and the upstream
phenobarbital-responsive element module (PBREM) of the UGT1A1 promoter have
combined effects on UGT1A1 transcription mediated by the transcription factors. A
polymorphism of A(TA)(5-8)TAA in the UGT1A1 TATA box and a single nucleotide
polymorphism of -3279T>G in PBREM were genotyped in 98 human liver samples.
Relative mRNA levels of CAR, PXR, GR, HNF1 alpha, HNF4 alpha, and UGT1A1 were
quantified by a multiplex branched DNA technique. Correlations of mRNA levels
between UGT1A1 and the transcription factors were established in liver samples
with different combined genetic polymorphisms. Correlation of mRNA levels between
UGT1A1 and CAR, PXR, or GR, but not HNF1 alpha or HNF4 alpha, was abolished in
the samples with the combined genotype of TA7/7 plus -3279G/G, which was also
associated with significantly lower UGT1A1 mRNA levels compared with other
combined genotypes. Correlations of mRNA levels between UGT1A1 and CAR or PXR
were reduced but not abolished in the samples with the combined genotype of TA6/7
plus -3279 G/G, which showed significantly lower UGT1A1 mRNA levels compared with
the combined genotype of TA6/7 plus -3279T/G and other genotypes containing
TA6/6. In conclusion, the combined genotypes containing A(TA)(7)TAA and -3279G
decrease UGT1A transcription mediated by CAR, PXR, or GR but not by HNF1 alpha or
HNF4 alpha.

PMCID: PMC2729330
PMID: 19541828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Biochimie. 2009 Sep;91(9):1095-103. doi: 10.1016/j.biochi.2009.06.009. Epub 2009 
Jun 21.

Characterization of glucocorticoid receptor and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha 
(HNF4alpha) binding to the hnf4alpha gene in the liver.

Bailly A(1), Briançon N, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, URA 2578 du CNRS, Département de
Biologie du Développement, Institut Pasteur, 75724 Paris Cedex 15, France.
alain.bailly@college-de-france.fr

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) plays a crucial role in hepatocyte
differentiation, liver organogenesis and regulation of liver functions. In mouse 
liver, HNF4alpha is expressed from two promoters, P1 and P2, the latter being
very weakly active and only in the embryo. Previously, using transfection assays 
we identified an enhancer upstream of P1 that mediates both HNF4alpha
transactivation and glucocorticoid induction and showed that HNF4alpha1,
originated from P1, represses activity of the P2 promoter, possibly through its
indirect recruitment to the promoter. However, glucocorticoid receptor (GR)
binding to the enhancer was not shown and HNF4alpha binding to P2, first reported
in isolated human hepatocytes, was not confirmed in mouse liver. Here, to analyse
glucocorticoid inducibility and auto-regulation of the hnf4alpha gene in the
liver, we accurately mapped and quantitatively assessed GR and HNF4alpha binding 
to enhancer and HNF4alpha recruitment to the P2 promoter using chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and real-time PCR. We proved that GR binds to enhancer
from embryonic day (E) 17.5 onward and HNF4alpha even earlier. We showed that
HNF4alpha binds to P2 independently of the activation function (AF) 1 domain in
adult liver. We mapped the binding region between -400 and -200 bp upstream of
the transcription start site. Although Sp1 binds within this region in vitro, we 
did not find evidence of a role of this factor in HNF4alpha recruitment. Our
results suggest that, in the liver, HNF4alpha expression may be induced by
glucocorticoids around birth and positive auto-regulation of the gene may take
place early in development. They support a model of P2 repression involving
HNF4alpha recruitment to promoter, possibly through interaction with several
promoter-bound factors.

PMID: 19540905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Genomics. 2009 Oct;94(4):257-62. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2009.05.008. Epub 2009 May 
29.

Differentially expressed genes strongly correlated with femur strength in rats.

Alam I(1), Sun Q, Koller DL, Liu L, Liu Y, Edenberg HJ, Li J, Foroud T, Turner
CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Indiana University Purdue University
Indianapolis (IUPUI), Indianapolis, IN 46202-5251, USA.

The region of chromosome 1q33-q54 harbors quantitative trait loci (QTL) for femur
strength in COPxDA and F344xLEW F2 rats. The purpose of this study is to identify
the genes within this QTL region that contribute to the variation in femur
strength. Microarray analysis was performed using RNA extracted from femurs of
COP, DA, F344 and LEW rats. Genes differentially expressed in the 1q33-q54 region
among these rat strains were then ranked based on the strength of correlation
with femur strength in F2 animals derived from these rats. A total of 214 genes
in this QTL region were differentially expressed among all rat strains, and 81
genes were found to be strongly correlated (r(2)>0.50) with femur strength. Of
these, 12 candidate genes were prioritized for further validation, and 8 of these
genes (Ifit3, Ppp2r5b, Irf7, Mpeg1, Bloc1s2, Pycard, Sec23ip, and Hps6) were
confirmed by quantitative PCR (qPCR). Ingenuity Pathway Analysis suggested that
these genes were involved in interferon alpha, nuclear factor-kappa B (NFkB),
extracellular signal-related kinase (ERK), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha
(HNF4A) and tumor necrosis factor (TNF) pathways.

PMCID: PMC3052638
PMID: 19482074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2009 Aug;29(8):1235-41. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.109.188581. Epub 2009 May 28.

Control of ACAT2 liver expression by HNF4{alpha}: lesson from MODY1 patients.

Pramfalk C(1), Karlsson E, Groop L, Rudel LL, Angelin B, Eriksson M, Parini P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Chemistry, Department of Laboratory Medicine, C1-74,
Karolinska Institutet at Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, S-141 86
Stockholm, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: ACAT2 is thought to be responsible for cholesteryl ester production in
chylomicron and VLDL assembly. Recently, we identified HNF1alpha as an important 
regulator of the human ACAT2 promoter. Thus, we hypothesized that MODY3
(HNF1alpha gene mutations) and possibly MODY1 (HNF4alpha, upstream regulator of
HNF1alpha, gene mutations) subjects may have lower VLDL esterified cholesterol.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Serum analysis and lipoprotein separation using
size-exclusion chromatography were performed in controls and MODY1 and MODY3
subjects. In vitro analyses included mutagenesis and cotransfections in HuH7
cells. Finally, the relevance in vivo of these findings was tested by ChIP assays
in human liver. Whereas patients with MODY3 had normal lipoprotein composition,
those with MODY1 had lower levels of VLDL and LDL esterified cholesterol, as well
as of VLDL triglyceride. Mutagenesis revealed one important HNF4 binding site in 
the human ACAT2 promoter. ChIP assays and protein-to-protein interaction studies 
showed that HNF4alpha, directly or indirectly (via HNF1alpha), can bind to the
ACAT2 promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified HNF4alpha as an important regulator of the
hepatocyte-specific expression of the human ACAT2 promoter. Our results suggest
that the lower levels of esterified cholesterol in VLDL- and LDL-particles in
patients with MODY1 may-at least in part-be attributable to lower ACAT2 activity 
in these patients.

PMID: 19478207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jul 24;284(30):19915-26. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.016295. Epub
2009 May 28.

Identification of DNA-dependent protein kinase as a cofactor for the forkhead
transcription factor FoxA2.

Nock A(1), Ascano JM, Jones T, Barrero MJ, Sugiyama N, Tomita M, Ishihama Y,
Malik S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Rockefeller University, New 
York, New York 10065, USA.

Forkhead factors are important regulators of animal development and homeostasis. 
They are among the earliest to bind quiescent genes, which they activate in
conjunction with other transcription factors. Many liver-specific genes are under
the control of FoxA2, a liver-enriched forkhead protein. Here we confirmed by
chromatin immunoprecipitation that FoxA2 is one of the factors bound to the
promoter-proximal enhancer of the gene encoding apolipoprotein AI (a component of
high density lipoprotein) and that it functions in synergy with the nuclear
receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha. Furthermore, toward identifying
additional cofactors that could potentially regulate FoxA2 activity, we
identified DNA-dependent protein kinase (DNA-PK) as a FoxA2-associated factor
upon affinity purification of epitope-tagged FoxA2. We show that FoxA2, found to 
be a phosphoprotein in vivo, is also an efficient substrate for DNA-PK, which
targets serine 283. This residue is contained within a conserved serine-glutamine
phosphorylation signal for DNA-PK, located within the C-terminal third of the
polypeptide, just distal to its winged-helix DNA binding domain. We establish
that this residue is critical for FoxA2 function because FoxA2 bearing a mutation
at this site is severely compromised in its ability to activate a reporter gene
under the control of its cognate DNA-binding site (apoAI site B). Complementary
experiments rule out that this mutation compromises the ability of FoxA2 to
either translocate to the nucleus or to bind site B. We therefore conclude that
DNA-PK-dependent phosphorylation of FoxA2 plays a critical role in its
transcriptional activation function per se.

PMCID: PMC2740417
PMID: 19478084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. FEBS Lett. 2009 Jun 18;583(12):2126-30. doi: 10.1016/j.febslet.2009.05.031. Epub 
2009 May 23.

Early growth response 1 loops the CYP2B6 promoter for synergistic activation by
the distal and proximal nuclear receptors CAR and HNF4alpha.

Inoue K(1), Negishi M.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacogenetics Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Nuclear xenobiotic receptor CAR activates transcription of the CYP2B6 gene by
directly binding to the distal enhancer PB responsive enhancer module (PBREM).
This CAR-mediated activation is synergized by transcription factors early growth 
response 1 (EGR1) and hepatocyte-enriched nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) that 
bind to the proximal element OA response element KI (OARE(KI)) [Inoue, K., &
Negishi, M. (2008). Nuclear receptor CAR requires early growth response 1 to
activate the human cytochrome P450 2B6 gene. J. Biol. Chem. 283, 10425-10432].
Two additional EGR1 binding sites have now been found just downstream from PBREM.
Internal deletion of EGR1 sites within the context of the -1.8 kb CYP2B6
promoter, which contains both PBREM and OARE(KI), revealed that the distal and
proximal EGR1 sites are essential for EGR1 to synergize CAR-mediated
transcription. Chromatin conformation capture 3C assays demonstrated that ERG1
may loop the distal PBREM towards the proximal OARE(KI) so that together, CAR and
HNF4alpha synergistically activate the CYP2B6 promoter.

PMCID: PMC3178840
PMID: 19467232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Gastroenterology. 2009 Aug;137(2):660-72. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2009.05.038. Epub
2009 May 18.

Convergence of Wnt signaling on the HNF4alpha-driven transcription in controlling
liver zonation.

Colletti M(1), Cicchini C, Conigliaro A, Santangelo L, Alonzi T, Pasquini E,
Tripodi M, Amicone L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Haematology, Istituto
Pasteur-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, University Sapienza of Rome, Italy.

Erratum in
    Gastroenterology. 2010 Feb;138(2):793.

Comment in
    Gastroenterology. 2009 Aug;137(2):425-7.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: In each hepatocyte, the specific repertoire of gene expression
is influenced by its exact location along the portocentrovenular axis of the
hepatic lobule and provides a reason for the liver functions compartmentalization
defined "metabolic zonation." So far, few molecular players controlling genetic
programs of periportal (PP) and perivenular (PV) hepatocytes have been
identified; the elucidation of zonation mechanisms remains a challenge for
experimental hepatology. Recently, a key role in induction and maintenance of the
hepatocyte heterogeneity has been ascribed to Wnt/beta-catenin pathway. We sought
to clarify how this wide-ranging stimulus integrates with hepatocyte specificity.
METHODS: Reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) allowed the
transcriptional profiling of hepatocytes derived from in vitro differentiation of
liver stem cells. The GSK3beta inhibitor 6-bromoindirubin-3'-oxime (BIO) was used
for beta-catenin stabilization. Co-immunoprecipitations were used to study
biochemical protein interactions while ChIP assays allowed the in vivo inspection
of PV and PP genes regulatory regions.
RESULTS: We found that spontaneous differentiation of liver stem cells gives rise
to PP hepatocytes that, after Wnt pathway activation, switch into PV hepatocytes.
Next, we showed that the Wnt downstream player LEF1 interacts with the
liver-enriched transcriptional factor HNF4alpha. Finally, we unveiled that the
BIO induced activation of PV genes correlates with LEF1 binding to both its own
and HNF4alpha consensus, and the repression of PP genes correlates with HNF4alpha
displacement from its own consensus.
CONCLUSION: Our data show a direct and hitherto unknown convergence of the
canonical Wnt signaling on the HNF4alpha-driven transcription providing evidences
of a mechanism controlling liver zonated gene expression.

PMID: 19454287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Pharmazie. 2009 Apr;64(4):252-7.

Expression of CYP3A23/1, CYP3A2, PXR, CAR and HNF4alpha in
large-for-gestational-age neonatal rats.

Ni S(1), Wang X, Wang J, Zeng S, Zhao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Analysis and Drug Metabolism, College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: The available information about hepatic drug-metabolizing enzymes in 
the large-for-gestational-age (LGA) neonate is limited.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether LGA status alters expression of the cytochrome
p450 enzymes, CYP3A23/1 and CYP3A2, and nuclear receptors PXR, CAR and HNF4alpha.
METHODS: Appropriate-for-gestational-age (AGA) and LGA pups from 10 litters of
rats (n=15 pups/group) were used. Hepatic expression levels of CYP3A23/1, CYP3A2,
pregnane X receptor (PXR), constitutive androstane receptor (CAR), and HNF4alpha 
mRNA were detected by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. Protein expression was
determined immunohistochemically and expression levels were evaluated using
staining intensity scores and percentage of positive hepatocytes.
RESULTS: The mean body weights of AGA and LGA rat pups were 6.20 +/- 0.49 and
7.77 +/- 0.70 g (mean +/- SD), respectively (P < 0.001). Liver weight/body weight
ratios trended higher in the LGA group (5.18 +/- 0.50%, mean +/- SD) than in the 
AGA group (4.90 +/- 0.01%, mean +/- SD), but the difference was not significant. 
CYP3A2 mRNA levels were higher in LGA than in AGA pups (P < 0.05), but there were
no group differences in CYP3A23/1 mRNA levels. HNF4alpha levels were also higher 
in the LGA group (P < 0.05), but PXR and CAR mRNA levels did not differ between
the groups. The staining intensity and frequency of CYP3A23/1-positive and
HNF4alpha-positive hepatocytes differed between LGA and AGA pups, whereas no
significant differences in CYP3A2 or CAR protein expression were observed between
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: LGA status affects the hepatic expression of CYP3A23/1, CYP3A2, and 
HNF4alpha, suggesting that further research on this issue is warranted.

PMID: 19435144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Jul;37(12):4100-15. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkp333. Epub 2009
May 8.

Molecular characterization of SMILE as a novel corepressor of nuclear receptors.

Xie YB(1), Nedumaran B, Choi HS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Center, School of Biological Sciences and Technology, Chonnam
National University, Gwangju, 500-757, Republic of Korea.

SMILE (small heterodimer partner interacting leucine zipper protein) has been
identified as a coregulator in ER signaling. In this study, we have examined the 
effects of SMILE on other NRs (nuclear receptors). SMILE inhibits GR, CAR and
HNF4 alpha-mediated transactivation. Knockdown of SMILE gene expression increases
the transactivation of the NRs. SMILE interacts with GR, CAR and HNF4 alpha in
vitro and in vivo. SMILE and these NRs colocalize in the nucleus. SMILE binds to 
the ligand-binding domain or AF2 domain of the NRs. Competitions between SMILE
and the coactivators GRIP1 or PGC-1 alpha have been demonstrated in vitro and in 
vivo. Furthermore, an intrinsic repressive activity of SMILE is observed in
Gal4-fusion system, and the intrinsic repressive domain is mapped to the
C-terminus of SMILE, spanning residues 203-354. Moreover, SMILE interacts with
specific HDACs (histone deacetylases) and SMILE-mediated repression is released
by HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A, in a NR-specific manner. Finally, ChIP
(chromatin immunoprecipitation) assays reveal that SMILE associates with the NRs 
on the target gene promoters. Adenoviral overexpression of SMILE represses GR-,
CAR- and HNF4 alpha-mediated target gene expression. Overall, these results
suggest that SMILE functions as a novel corepressor of NRs via competition with
coactivators and the recruitment of HDACs.

PMCID: PMC2709580
PMID: 19429690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Jul;94(7):2658-64. doi: 10.1210/jc.2008-2189. Epub 
2009 May 5.

Expanded clinical spectrum in hepatocyte nuclear factor 1b-maturity-onset
diabetes of the young.

Raile K(1), Klopocki E, Holder M, Wessel T, Galler A, Deiss D, Müller D, Riebel
T, Horn D, Maringa M, Weber J, Ullmann R, Grüters A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Endocrinology and Diabetes, Charité Campus Virchow,
13353 Berlin, Germany. klemens.raile@charite.de

AIMS: HNF1B-maturity-onset diabetes of the young is caused by abnormalities in
the HNF1B gene encoding the transcription factor HNF-1beta. We aimed to
investigate detailed clinical features and the type of HNF1B gene anomaly in five
pediatric cases with HNF1B-MODY.
METHODS: From a cohort of 995 children and adolescents with diabetes, we analyzed
the most frequent maturity-onset diabetes of the young genes (GCK, HNF1A, HNF4A) 
including HNF1B sequencing and deletion analysis by quantitative Multiplex-PCR of
Short Fluorescent Fragments (QMPSF) if patients were islet autoantibody-negative 
and had one parent with diabetes or associated extrapancreatic features or
detectable C-peptide outside honeymoon phase. Presence and size of
disease-causing chromosomal rearrangements detected by QMPSF were further
analyzed by array comparative genomic hybridization.
RESULTS: Overall, five patients had a heterozygous HNF1B deletion, presenting
renal disease, elevated liver enzymes, and diabetes. Diabetes was characterized
by insulin resistance and adolescent onset of hyperglycemia. Additionally,
clinical features in some patients were pancreas dysplasia and exocrine
insufficiency (two of five patients), genital defects (three of five), mental
retardation (two of five), and eye abnormalities (coloboma, cataract in two of
five). One case also had severe growth deficit combined with congenital
cholestasis, and another case had common variable immune deficiency. All patients
reported here had monoallelic loss of the entire HNF1B gene. Whole genome array
comparative genomic hybridization confirmed a precurrent genomic deletion of
approximately 1.3-1.7 Mb in size.
CONCLUSION: The clinical data of our cases enlarge the wide spectrum of patients 
with HNF1B anomaly. The underlying molecular defect in all cases was a 1.3- to
1.7-Mb deletion, and paired, segmental duplications along with breakpoints were
most likely involved in this recurrent chromosomal microdeletion.

PMID: 19417042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. FASEB J. 2009 Sep;23(9):2855-65. doi: 10.1096/fj.08-126631. Epub 2009 Apr 30.

cAMP opposes the glucose-mediated induction of the L-PK gene by preventing the
recruitment of a complex containing ChREBP, HNF4alpha, and CBP.

Burke SJ(1), Collier JJ, Scott DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15261, USA.

Glucose-mediated activation of the L-type pyruvate kinase (L-PK) gene is
repressed by cAMP, making this an excellent model for studying the mechanism by
which these contrary signals regulate gene expression. Using the 832/13 rat
insulinoma cell line, we demonstrate using RNA interference and chromatin
immunoprecipitation that carbohydrate response element binding protein (ChREBP), 
hepatic nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha), and the coactivator CREB binding
protein (CBP) are required for the glucose response of the L-PK gene and are
recruited to the promoter by glucose. The cAMP agonist forskolin blocked the
glucose-mediated induction of the L-PK gene in a PKA-dependent manner and blocked
the recruitment of ChREBP, HNF4alpha, and CBP to the L-PK promoter, while
simultaneously recruiting CBP to the cAMP-inducible gene, nuclear receptor
subfamily 4, group A, member 2 (NR4A2). Overexpression of CBP, but not ChREBP,
reversed the cAMP repression of the L-PK gene. In addition, CBP augmented the
glucose response of the L-PK promoter. We conclude that cAMP and glucose
signaling converge on a complex containing ChREBP, HNF4alpha, and CBP, and that
cAMP acts by disrupting this transcriptional complex assembled by glucose-derived
signals.

PMID: 19406844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2009 Jun;84(3):211-8. doi:
10.1016/j.diabres.2009.03.012. Epub 2009 Apr 29.

Interaction between HNF4A polymorphisms and physical activity in relation to type
2 diabetes-related traits: results from the Quebec Family Study.

Ruchat SM(1), Weisnagel JS, Rankinen T, Bouchard C, Vohl MC, Pérusse L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Laval University, Quebec, Canada.

Erratum in
    Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2010 Oct;90(1):126. Stephanie-May, Ruchat [corrected to 
Ruchat, Stephanie-May]; John, Weisnagel S [corrected to Weisnagel, John S];
Tuomo, Rankinen [corrected to Rankinen, Tuomo]; Claude, Bouchard [corrected to
Bouchard, Claude]; Marie-Claude, Vohl [corrected to Vohl, Marie-Claude]; Louis,
Pérusse [corrected to Pérusse, Louis].

AIMS: To test for associations between type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)-related
traits and polymorphisms (SNPs) in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha gene
(HNF4A) in the Quebec Family Study cohort, and determine whether these
associations are modulated by physical activity (PA).
METHODS: Two HNF4A SNPs (rs1885088 G>A; rs745975 C>T), previously reported to be 
associated with T2DM, were studied in 528 non-diabetic subjects who underwent a
75g oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT). Glucose, insulin and C-peptide plasma
levels, measured in the fasting state and during the OGTT, were used in the
analysis. The amount (hours per week) of PA was assessed by questionnaire.
RESULTS: The HNF4A rs1885088 SNP was not independently associated with
T2DM-related traits, whereas the rs745975 was associated with fasting insulin,
HOMA-IR and 2-h glucose levels (p<0.05 for all). Genotype by PA interactions were
found for glucose homeostasis (p<0.0001) and insulin secretion (p<or=0.03). When 
subjects were stratified by PA level (according to the median value), we found
that high level of PA (>2h/week) was associated with smaller glucose area under
the curve (AUC) and 2-h glucose levels in rs1885088 A/A homozygotes and with
lower fasting C-peptide and insulin AUC in rs745975 T/T homozygotes.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate that the associations of HNF4A rs1885088 with 
glucose tolerance and rs745975 with insulin secretion are modulated by PA. Our
finding therefore suggests that the effect of HNF4A polymorphisms on the risk of 
T2DM is influenced by PA.

PMID: 19406499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Aug;23(8):1171-82. doi: 10.1210/me.2009-0024. Epub 2009 Apr 
23.

Fasting-induced hepatic production of DHEA is regulated by PGC-1alpha, ERRalpha, 
and HNF4alpha.

Grasfeder LL(1), Gaillard S, Hammes SR, Ilkayeva O, Newgard CB, Hochberg RB,
Dwyer MA, Chang CY, McDonnell DP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

The transcriptional coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma 
coactivator (PGC)-1alpha is involved in the coordinate induction of changes in
gene expression in the liver that enable a homeostatic response to alterations in
metabolic state, environmental cues, and nutrient availability. In exploring the 
specific pathways under PGC-1alpha regulation in the liver, we have made the
surprising observation that this coactivator can induce the expression of CYP11A1
and CYP17A1, key rate-limiting enzymes involved in the initial steps of
steroidogenesis. Both of these enzymes function to produce C(19)-steroids,
converting cholesterol into pregnenolone, and then to dehydroepiandrosterone
(DHEA). Estrogen-related receptor (ERR)-alpha mediates PGC-1alpha's induction of 
CYP11A1 and binds within the first intron of the CYP11A1 gene. Both ERR-alpha and
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha are required for PGC-1alpha-mediated induction
of CYP17A1, and specific binding sites for these receptors have been identified
in the regulatory regions of this gene. The potential physiological significance 
of these observations was highlighted in rats where fasting induced hepatic
expression of PGC-1alpha and CYP17A1 and was associated with an increase in
hepatic levels of DHEA. These data suggest that DHEA could be playing a role as
an intracellular signaling molecule involved in modulating hepatic activity in
response to fasting conditions.

PMCID: PMC2718748
PMID: 19389810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 Jul;297(1):G124-34. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.90690.2008. Epub 2009 Apr 23.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha contributes to an intestinal epithelial
phenotype in vitro and plays a partial role in mouse intestinal epithelium
differentiation.

Babeu JP(1), Darsigny M, Lussier CR, Boudreau F.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Anatomie et de Biologie Cellulaire, Université de
Sherbrooke,Canadian Institutes of Health Research Team on Digestive Epithelium,
Sherbrooke, QC J1H 5N4, Canada.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is a regulator of hepatocyte and
pancreatic transcription. Hnf4alpha deletion in the mouse is embryonically lethal
with severe defects in visceral endoderm formation. It has been concluded in the 
past that the role of Hnf4alpha in the developing colon was much less important
than in the liver. However, the precise role of Hnf4alpha in the homeostasis of
the small intestinal epithelium remains unclear. Our aim was to evaluate the
potential of Hnf4alpha to support an intestinal epithelial phenotype. First,
Hnf4alpha potential to dictate this phenotype was assessed in nonintestinal cell 
lines in vitro. Forced expression of Hnf4alpha in fibroblasts showed an induction
of features normally restricted to epithelial cells. Combinatory expression of
Hnf4alpha with specific transcriptional regulators of the intestine resulted in
the induction of intestinal epithelial genes in this context. Second, the
importance of Hnf4alpha in maintaining the homeostasis of the intestinal
epithelium was investigated in mice. Mice conditionally deficient for intestinal 
Hnf4alpha developed normally throughout adulthood with an epithelium displaying
normal morphological and functional structures with minor alterations. Subtle but
statistical differences were observed at the proliferation and the
cytodifferentiation levels. Hnf4alpha mutant mice displayed an increase in the
number of goblet and enteroendocrine cells compared with controls. Given the
fundamental role of this transcription factor in other tissues, these findings
dispute the crucial role for this regulator in the maintenance of intestinal
epithelial cell function at a period of time that follows cytodifferentiation but
may suggest a functional role in instructing cells to become specific to the
intestinal epithelium.

PMID: 19389805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Exp Cell Res. 2009 Apr 15;315(7):1200-11.

Novel P2 promoter-derived HNF4alpha isoforms with different N-terminus generated 
by alternate exon insertion.

Huang J(1), Levitsky LL, Rhoads DB.

Author information: 
(1)MassGeneral Hospital for Children, Harvard Medical School, Boston,
Massachusetts 02114-2696, USA. jmhuang@partners.org

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is a critical transcription factor
for pancreas and liver development and functions in islet beta cells to maintain 
glucose homeostasis. Mutations in the human HNF4A gene lead to maturity onset
diabetes of the young (MODY1) and polymorphisms are associated with increased
risk for type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM). Expression of six HNF4alpha variants,
three each from two developmentally regulated promoters, has been firmly
established. We have now detected a new set of HNF4alpha variants designated
HNF4alpha10-12 expressed from distal promoter P2. These variants, generated by
inclusion of previously undetected exon 1E (human=222 nt, rodent=136 nt)
following exon 1D have an altered N-terminus but identical remaining reading
frame. HNF4alpha10-alpha12 are expressed in pancreatic islets (and liver) and
exhibit transactivation potentials similar to the corresponding alpha7-alpha9
isoforms. DNA-binding analyses implied much higher protein levels of
HNF4alpha10-alpha12 in liver than expected from the RT-PCR data. Our results
provide evidence for a more complex expression pattern of HNF4alpha than
previously appreciated. We recommend inclusion of exon 1E and nearby DNA
sequences in screening for HNF4alpha mutations and polymorphisms in genetic
analyses of MODY1 and T2DM.

PMID: 19353766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Hum Mol Genet. 2009 Jul 1;18(13):2328-43. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddp165. Epub 2009 Apr 
3.

Systems biology of autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD):
computational identification of gene expression pathways and integrated
regulatory networks.

Song X(1), Di Giovanni V, He N, Wang K, Ingram A, Rosenblum ND, Pei Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology, University Health Network, McMaster University,
Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

To elucidate the molecular pathways that modulate renal cyst growth in ADPKD, we 
performed global gene profiling on cysts of different size (<1 ml, n = 5; 10-20
ml, n = 5; >50 ml, n = 3) and minimally cystic tissue (MCT, n = 5) from five PKD1
human polycystic kidneys using Affymetrix HG-U133 Plus 2.0 arrays. We used gene
set enrichment analysis to identify overrepresented signaling pathways and key
transcription factors (TFs) between cysts and MCT. We found down-regulation of
kidney epithelial restricted genes (e.g. nephron segment-specific markers and
cilia-associated cystic genes such as HNF1B, PKHD1, IFT88 and CYS1) in the renal 
cysts. On the other hand, PKD1 cysts displayed a rich profile of gene sets
associated with renal development, mitogen-mediated proliferation, cell cycle
progression, epithelial-mesenchymal transition, hypoxia, aging and
immune/inflammatory responses. Notably, our data suggest that up-regulation of
Wnt/beta-catenin, pleiotropic growth factor/receptor tyrosine kinase (e.g.
IGF/IGF1R, FGF/FGFR, EGF/EGFR, VEGF/VEGFR), G-protein-coupled receptor (e.g.
PTGER2) signaling was associated with renal cystic growth. By integrating these
pathways with a number of dysregulated networks of TFs (e.g. SRF, MYC, E2F1,
CREB1, LEF1, TCF7, HNF1B/ HNF1A and HNF4A), our data suggest that epithelial
dedifferentiation accompanied by aberrant activation and cross-talk of specific
signaling pathways may be required for PKD1 cyst growth and disease progression. 
Pharmacological modulation of some of these signaling pathways may provide a
potential therapeutic strategy for ADPKD.

PMID: 19346236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. EMBO J. 2009 May 6;28(9):1234-45. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.81. Epub 2009 Mar 26.

Architectural roles of multiple chromatin insulators at the human apolipoprotein 
gene cluster.

Mishiro T(1), Ishihara K, Hino S, Tsutsumi S, Aburatani H, Shirahige K, Kinoshita
Y, Nakao M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Regeneration Medicine, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

Long-range regulatory elements and higher-order chromatin structure coordinate
the expression of multiple genes in cluster, and CTCF/cohesin-mediated chromatin 
insulator may be a key in this regulation. The human apolipoprotein (APO)
A1/C3/A4/A5 gene region, whose alterations increase the risk of dyslipidemia and 
atherosclerosis, is partitioned at least by three CTCF-enriched sites and three
cohesin protein RAD21-enriched sites (two overlap with the CTCF sites), resulting
in the formation of two transcribed chromatin loops by interactions between
insulators. The C3 enhancer and APOC3/A4/A5 promoters reside in the same loop,
where the APOC3/A4 promoters are pointed towards the C3 enhancer, whereas the
APOA1 promoter is present in the different loop. The depletion of either CTCF or 
RAD21 disrupts the chromatin loop structure, together with significant changes in
the APO expression and the localization of transcription factor hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha and transcriptionally active form of RNA polymerase
II at the APO promoters. Thus, CTCF/cohesin-mediated insulators maintain the
chromatin loop formation and the localization of transcriptional apparatus at the
promoters, suggesting an essential role of chromatin insulation in controlling
the expression of clustered genes.

PMCID: PMC2683055
PMID: 19322193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Med Genet. 2009 May;46(5):289-99. doi: 10.1136/jmg.2008.064337. Epub 2009 Mar
1.

The genetic basis of congenital hyperinsulinism.

James C(1), Kapoor RR, Ismail D, Hussain K.

Author information: 
(1)London Centre for Paediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Hospital for
Children NHS Trust, and The nstitute of Child Health,University College London,
London, UK.

Congenital hyperinsulinism (CHI) is biochemically characterised by the
dysregulated secretion of insulin from pancreatic beta-cells. It is a major cause
of persistent hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia (HH) in the newborn and infancy
period. Genetically CHI is a heterogeneous condition with mutations in seven
different genes described. The genetic basis of CHI involves defects in key genes
which regulate insulin secretion from beta-cells. Recessive inactivating
mutations in ABCC8 and KCNJ11 (which encode the two subunits of the adenosine
triphosphate sensitive potassium channels (ATP sensitive K(ATP) channels)) in
beta-cells are the most common cause of CHI. The other recessive form of CHI is
due to mutations in HADH (encoding for-3-hydroxyacyl-coenzyme A dehydrogenase).
Dominant forms of CHI are due to inactivating mutations in ABCC8 and KCNJ11, and 
activating mutations in GLUD1 (encoding glutamate dehydrogenase) and GCK
(encoding glucokinase). Recently dominant mutations in HNF4A (encoding hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4alpha) and SLC16A1 (encoding monocarboxylate transporter 1) have 
been described which lead to HH. Mutations in all these genes account for about
50% of the known causes of CHI. Histologically there are three (possibly others
which have not been characterised yet) major subtypes of CHI: diffuse, focal and 
atypical forms. The diffuse form is inherited in an autosomal recessive (or
dominant manner), the focal form being sporadic in inheritance. The diffuse form 
of the disease may require a near total pancreatectomy whereas the focal form
requires a limited pancreatectomy potentially curing the patient. Understanding
the genetic basis of CHI has not only provided novel insights into beta-cell
physiology but also aided in patient management and genetic counselling.

PMID: 19254908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS One. 2009;4(3):e4662. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0004662. Epub 2009 Mar 2.

HNF4alpha and HNF1alpha dysfunction as a molecular rational for cyclosporine
induced posttransplantation diabetes mellitus.

Borlak J(1), Niehof M.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Medical School
of Hannover, Hannover, Germany. borlak@item.fraunhofer.de

Posttransplantation diabetes mellitus (PTDM) is a frequent complication in
immunosuppressive therapy. To better understand the molecular events associated
with PTDM we investigated the effect of cyclosporine on expression and activity
of hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)1alpha and 4alpha and on genes coding for glucose 
metabolism in cultures of the rat insulinoma cell line INS-1E, the human
epithelial cell line Caco-2 and with Zucker diabetic fatty (ZDF) rats. In the
pancreas of untreated but diabetic animals expression of HNF4alpha, insulin1,
insulin2 and of phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase was significantly repressed.
Furthermore, cyclosporine treatment of the insulinoma-1E cell line resulted in
remarkable reduction in HNF4alpha protein and INS1 as well as INS2 gene
expression, while transcript expression of HNF4alpha, apolipoprotein C2,
glycerolkinase, pyruvatekinase and aldolase B was repressed in treated Caco-2
cells. Furthermore, with nuclear extracts of cyclosporine treated cell lines
protein expression and DNA binding activity of hepatic nuclear factors was
significantly repressed. As cyclosporine inhibits the calcineurin dependent
dephosphorylation of nuclear factor of activated T-cells (NFAT) we also searched 
for binding sites for NFAT in the pancreas specific P2 promoter of HNF4alpha.
Notably, we observed repressed NFAT binding to a novel DNA binding site in the P2
promoter of HNF4alpha. Thus, cyclosporine caused inhibition of DNA binding of two
important regulators for insulin signaling, i.e. NFAT and HNF4alpha. We further
investigated HNF4alpha transcript expression and observed >200-fold differences
in abundance in n = 14 patients. Such variability in expression might help to
identify individuals at risk for developing PTDM. We propose cyclosporine to
repress HNF4alpha gene and protein expression, DNA-binding to targeted promoters 
and subsequent regulation of genes coding for glucose metabolism and of
pancreatic beta-cell function.

PMCID: PMC2646130
PMID: 19252740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Apr 17;381(4):544-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2009.02.078. Epub 2009 Feb 20.

The metabolic activator FOXO1 binds hepatitis B virus DNA and activates its
transcription.

Shlomai A(1), Shaul Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot,
Israel. amirsh@tasmc.health.gov.il

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is a small DNA virus that targets the liver and infects
humans worldwide. Recently we have shown that the metabolic regulator PGC-1alpha 
coactivates HBV transcription thereby rendering the virus susceptible to
fluctuations in the nutritional status of the liver. PGC-1alpha coactivation of
HBV is mediated through the liver-enriched nuclear receptor HNF4alpha and through
another yet unknown transcription factor(s). Here we show that the forkhead
transcription factor FOXO1, a known target for PGC-1alpha coactivation and a
central mediator of glucose metabolism in the liver, binds HBV core promoter and 
activates its transcription. This activation is further enhanced in the presence 
of PGC-1alpha, implying that FOXO1 is a target for PGC-1alpha coactivation of HBV
transcription. Thus, our results identify another key metabolic regulator as an
activator of HBV transcription, thereby supporting the principle that HBV gene
expression is regulated in a similar way to key hepatic metabolic genes.

PMID: 19233123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 Apr;296(4):G936-47. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.90678.2008. Epub 2009 Feb 19.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha and bile acids regulate human concentrative
nucleoside transporter-1 gene expression.

Klein K(1), Kullak-Ublick GA, Wagner M, Trauner M, Eloranta JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology and Toxicology, Department of Internal
Medicine, University Hospital, Rämistrasse 100, CH-8091 Zurich, Switzerland.

The concentrative nucleoside transporter-1 (CNT1) is a member of the solute
carrier 28 (SLC28) gene family and is expressed in the liver, intestine, and
kidneys. CNT1 mediates the uptake of naturally occurring pyrimidine nucleosides, 
but also nucleoside analogs used in anticancer and antiviral therapy. Thus
expression levels of CNT1 may affect the pharmacokinetics of these drugs and the 
outcome of drug therapy. Because little is known about the transcriptional
regulation of human CNT1 gene expression, we have characterized the CNT1 promoter
with respect to DNA response elements and their binding factors. The
transcriptional start site of the CNT1 gene was determined by 5'-RACE. In silico 
analysis revealed the existence of three putative binding sites for the nuclear
receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) within the CNT1 promoter. 
A luciferase reporter gene construct containing the CNT1 promoter region was
transactivated by HNF-4alpha in human cell lines derived from the liver,
intestine, and kidneys. Consistent with this, we showed in electromobility shift 
assays that HNF-4alpha specifically binds to two conserved direct repeat-1 motifs
within the proximal CNT1 promoter. In cotransfection experiments, the
transcriptional coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
coactivator-1alpha further increased, whereas the bile acid-inducible corepressor
small heterodimer partner reduced, HNF-4alpha-dependent CNT1 promoter activity.
Consistent with the latter phenomenon, CNT1 mRNA expression levels were
suppressed in primary human hepatocytes upon bile acid treatment. Supporting the 
physiological relevance and species conservation of this effect, ileal Cnt1 mRNA 
expression was decreased upon bile acid feeding and increased upon bile duct
ligation in mice.

PMID: 19228884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Diabetes Care. 2009 May;32(5):873-7. doi: 10.2337/dc08-1529. Epub 2009 Feb 19.

A-beta-subtype of ketosis-prone diabetes is not predominantly a monogenic
diabetic syndrome.

Haaland WC(1), Scaduto DI, Maldonado MR, Mansouri DL, Nalini R, Iyer D, Patel S, 
Guthikonda A, Hampe CS, Balasubramanyam A, Metzker ML.

Author information: 
(1)Human Genome Sequencing Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas,
USA.

OBJECTIVE: Ketosis-prone diabetes (KPD) is an emerging syndrome that encompasses 
several distinct phenotypic subgroups that share a predisposition to diabetic
ketoacidosis. We investigated whether the A-beta- subgroup of KPD, characterized 
by complete insulin dependence, absent beta-cell functional reserve, lack of
islet cell autoantibodies, and strong family history of type 2 diabetes,
represents a monogenic form of diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Over 8 years, 37 patients with an A-beta- phenotype 
were identified in our longitudinally followed cohort of KPD patients. Seven
genes, including hepatocyte nuclear factor 4A (HNF4A), glucokinase (GCK), HNF1A, 
pancreas duodenal homeobox 1 (PDX1), HNF1B, neurogenic differentiation 1
(NEUROD1), and PAX4, were directly sequenced in all patients. Selected gene
regions were also sequenced in healthy, unrelated ethnically matched control
subjects, consisting of 84 African American, 96 Caucasian, and 95 Hispanic
subjects.
RESULTS: The majority (70%) of the A-beta- KPD patients had no significant causal
polymorphisms in either the proximal promoter or coding regions of the seven
genes. The combination of six potentially significant low-frequency, heterozygous
sequence variants in HNF-1 alpha (A174V or G574S), PDX1 (putative 5'-untranslated
region CCAAT box, P33T, or P239Q), or PAX4 (R133W) were found in 27% (10/37) of
patients, with one additional patient revealing two variants, PDX1 P33T and PAX4 
R133W. The A174V variant has not been previously reported.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite its well-circumscribed, robust, and distinctive phenotype of
severe, nonautoimmune-mediated beta-cell dysfunction, A-beta- KPD is most likely 
not a predominantly monogenic diabetic syndrome. Several A-beta- KPD patients
have low-frequency variants in HNF1A, PDX1, or PAX4 genes, which may be of
functional significance in their pathophysiology.

PMCID: PMC2671096
PMID: 19228875  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Cytogenet. 2009 Feb 13;2:5. doi: 10.1186/1755-8166-2-5.

MODY-like diabetes associated with an apparently balanced translocation: possible
involvement of MPP7 gene and cell polarity in the pathogenesis of diabetes.

Bhoj EJ(1), Romeo S, Baroni MG, Bartov G, Schultz RA, Zinn AR.

Author information: 
(1)McDermott Center for Human Growth and Development, The University of Texas
Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 75390, USA.
andrew.zinn@utsouthwestern.edu.

BACKGROUND: Characterization of disease-associated balanced translocations has
led to the discovery of genes responsible for many disorders, including syndromes
that include various forms of diabetes mellitus. We studied a man with
unexplained maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY)-like diabetes and an
apparently balanced translocation [46,XY,t(7;10)(q22;p12)] and sought to identify
a novel diabetes locus by characterizing the translocation breakpoints.
RESULTS: Mutations in coding exons and splice sites of known MODY genes were
first ruled out by PCR amplification and DNA sequencing. Fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) studies demonstrated that the translocation did not disrupt 
two known diabetes-related genes on 10p12. The translocation breakpoints were
further mapped to high resolution using FISH and somatic cell hybrids and the
junctions PCR-amplified and sequenced. The translocation did not disrupt any
annotated transcription unit. However, the chromosome 10 breakpoint was 220
kilobases 5' to the Membrane Protein, Palmitoylated 7 (MPP7) gene, which encodes 
a protein required for proper cell polarity. This biological function is shared
by HNF4A, a known MODY gene. Databases show MPP7 is highly expressed in mouse
pancreas and is expressed in human islets. The translocation did not appear to
alter lymphoblastoid expression of MPP7 or other genes near the breakpoints.
CONCLUSION: The balanced translocation and MODY-like diabetes in the proband
could be coincidental. Alternatively, the translocation may cause islet cell
dysfunction by altering MPP7 expression in a subtle or tissue-specific fashion.
The potential roles of MPP7 mutations in diabetes and perturbed islet cell
polarity in insulin secretion warrant further study.

PMCID: PMC2646739
PMID: 19216786  [PubMed]


46. Arch Toxicol. 2009 Aug;83(8):747-62. doi: 10.1007/s00204-009-0405-3. Epub 2009
Feb 11.

D-Serine exposure resulted in gene expression changes implicated in
neurodegenerative disorders and neuronal dysfunction in male Fischer 344 rats.

Davidson ME(1), Kerepesi LA, Soto A, Chan VT.

Author information: 
(1)Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education, Columbus, OH 43201, USA.
Molly.Davidson@wpafb.af.mil

D-Serine, an endogenous amino acid, is involved in many physiological processes
through its interaction with the glycine binding site of the N-methyl-D-aspartate
(NMDA) receptor. It has important roles in development, learning, and cell death 
signaling. Recent evidence suggests that decreased function of the NMDA receptor 
is related to the etiology of schizophrenia, and the use of D-serine as add-on
therapy is beneficial in alleviating the symptoms of treatment-refractory
schizophrenia. The NMDA receptor also plays a major role in neuronal cell death
and neurodegeneration mediated by excitatory amino acid toxicity in ischemia,
epilepsy, and trauma. Due to its co-activator function, D-serine can markedly
potentiate NMDA-mediated excitotoxicity. To investigate potential adverse effects
of D-serine treatment, we investigated gene expression changes in the forebrain
of male F-344 rats treated with a single intraperitoneal injection of D-serine
(5, 20, 50, 200, or 500 mg/kg) at 96 h post-treatment. Gene expression profiling 
using Affymetrix Rat Genome 230 2.0 arrays revealed that D-serine treatment
resulted in up- and down-regulation of 134 and 52 genes, respectively, based on
the common genes identified using three statistical methods, i.e. t test (p <
0.01 over two consecutive doses), ANOVA (with adjusted Bonferonni correction for 
multiple testing) and significance analysis of microarray (SAM). Self organized
map (SOM) clustering analysis of the differentially expressed genes showed two
clusters, one with all 134 up-regulated probe sets and the other with all 52
down-regulated probe sets. The dose-response pattern of the down-regulated
cluster showed nearly a perfect mirror image of that of the up-regulated one.
Gene ontology analysis revealed that pathways implicated in neuronal functions
and/or neurodegenerative disorders are over-represented among the differentially 
expressed genes. Specifically, genes involved in vesicle-mediated transport,
endocytosis, ubiquitin conjugation pathway, regulation of actin filament
polymerization/depolymerization, focal adhesion, Wnt signaling, and insulin
signaling were up-regulated, while genes involved in RNA
metabolism/splicing/processing and Notch signaling were down-regulated.
Consistent with this finding, pathway analysis using GenMAPP showed a significant
number of differentially expressed genes in these pathways. In addition, the
GenMAPP result also showed activation of the signaling pathways of several
proinflammatory cytokines (including IL-2, IL-3, IL-5, IL-6 and TNF-alpha), which
might suggest the onset of neuroinflammation. Biological association network
analysis showed that several nuclear factors implicated in transcription
regulation (including Taf1, Max, Myc, and Hnf4a) are highly connected to a large 
number of up-regulated genes. While the transcript levels of these transcription 
factors were not changed, their connections to Ddx3x, a gene involved in mRNA
processing and translation initiation, raise the possibility that they may be
up-regulated at the post-transcriptional level. The observation that Ubqln1 and
Ube2d, two differentially expressed genes involved in ubiquitin-mediated
proteolysis and implicated in neurodegenerative disorders, are highly connected
in this network suggests a role of ubiquitination proteasome pathway in response 
to D-serine exposure. This finding is consistent with the result of gene ontology
analysis and suggests that D-serine treatment might result in damage to cellular 
proteins and subsequent up-regulation of ubiquitination proteasome pathway to
clear these damaged proteins. In summary, D-serine exposure resulted in
perturbation of a number of pathways implicated in neuronal functions and
neurodegenerative disorders. However, activation of cellular response to counter 
the toxic effects of D-serine might be hindered due to the down-regulation of
such important cellular machinery like RNA metabolism, splicing and processing.
Consequently, cell damage might be further exacerbated. Taken together, these
findings highlight the potential impacts of D-serine exposure on neuronal
functions.

PMID: 19212759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Hum Pathol. 2009 Jun;40(6):783-94. doi: 10.1016/j.humpath.2008.07.022. Epub 2009 
Feb 5.

Histologic subtypes of hepatoblastoma are characterized by differential canonical
Wnt and Notch pathway activation in DLK+ precursors.

López-Terrada D(1), Gunaratne PH, Adesina AM, Pulliam J, Hoang DM, Nguyen Y,
Mistretta TA, Margolin J, Finegold MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
doloresl@bcm.edu

Hepatoblastoma is characterized by a diversity of differentiation patterns, some 
resembling stages of liver development, and occasionally associated with clinical
behavior. Our hypothesis is that histologic microheterogeneity in hepatoblastoma 
correlates with molecular heterogeneity and reflects different stages of
developmental arrest. We studied the activation status of the Wnt and Notch
pathways and the differential expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha,
EGFR, and IGF2 genes, relevant to liver development and malignant transformation 
in histologic variants of hepatoblastoma. Eighty-seven percent of 32
hepatoblastoma cases studied carried CTNNB1 mutations within the ubiquitination
domain. Large deletions were seen only in pure fetal cases, also characterized by
CCND1 and GLUL (GS) overexpression. Hepatoblastomas with small-cell type appeared
clearly distinct and were the only ones with negative GLUL expression. HES1
expression and HES1/AXIN2 used to measure Notch versus Wnt activation ratio were 
particularly elevated in pure fetal cases and were lowest in hepatoblastomas with
small-cell component. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha was relatively elevated
only in embryonal hepatoblastomas. DLK1, DKK, AXIN2, IGF2, and EGFR were
increased in all subtypes. Our results support the hypothesis that hepatoblastoma
microheterogeneity correlates with molecular heterogeneity. DLK1, a marker of
bipotential oval cells, is consistently up-regulated in hepatoblastoma.
Therefore, we speculate that hepatoblastomas may arise from a proliferating
bipotential precursor. Wnt activation is prevalent in hepatoblastomas, most
significantly in predominantly embryonal and mixed types, whereas Notch
activation, needed for cholangiocytic differentiation at a more differentiated
state, is highest in pure fetal hepatoblastomas. The relative Wnt versus Notch
activation appears useful in stratifying different subtypes.

PMID: 19200579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Diabetes. 2009 May;58(5):1245-53. doi: 10.2337/db08-0812. Epub 2009 Feb 2.

Functional targets of the monogenic diabetes transcription factors HNF-1alpha and
HNF-4alpha are highly conserved between mice and humans.

Boj SF(1), Servitja JM, Martin D, Rios M, Talianidis I, Guigo R, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Programming of Beta-cells Laboratory, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: The evolutionary conservation of transcriptional mechanisms has been
widely exploited to understand human biology and disease. Recent findings,
however, unexpectedly showed that the transcriptional regulators hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and -4alpha rarely bind to the same genes in mice and
humans, leading to the proposal that tissue-specific transcriptional regulation
has undergone extensive divergence in the two species. Such observations have
major implications for the use of mouse models to understand HNF-1alpha- and
HNF-4alpha-deficient diabetes. However, the significance of studies that assess
binding without considering regulatory function is poorly understood.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We compared previously reported mouse and human
HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha binding studies with independent binding experiments.
We also integrated binding studies with mouse and human loss-of-function gene
expression datasets.
RESULTS: First, we confirmed the existence of species-specific HNF-1alpha and
-4alpha binding, yet observed incomplete detection of binding in the different
datasets, causing an underestimation of binding conservation. Second, only a
minor fraction of HNF-1alpha- and HNF-4alpha-bound genes were downregulated in
the absence of these regulators. This subset of functional targets did not show
evidence for evolutionary divergence of binding or binding sequence motifs.
Finally, we observed differences between conserved and species-specific binding
properties. For example, conserved binding was more frequently located near
transcriptional start sites and was more likely to involve multiple binding
events in the same gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Despite evolutionary changes in binding, essential direct
transcriptional functions of HNF-1alpha and -4alpha are largely conserved between
mice and humans.

PMCID: PMC2671044
PMID: 19188435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2009 Apr;85(4):303-13. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20537.

Regulation of folate receptor 1 gene expression in the visceral endoderm.

Salbaum JM(1), Finnell RH, Kappen C.

Author information: 
(1)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, Louisiana State University, Baton
Rouge, Louisiana, USA. michael.salbaum@pbrc.edu

BACKGROUND: Nutrient supply to the developing mammalian embryo is a fundamental
requirement. Before completion of the chorioallantoic placenta, the visceral
endoderm plays a crucial role in nurturing the embryo. We have found that
visceral endoderm cells express folate receptor 1, a high-affinity receptor for
the essential micronutrient folic acid, suggesting that the visceral endoderm has
an important function for folate transport to the embryo. The mechanisms that
direct expression of FOLR1 in the visceral endoderm are unknown.
METHODS: Sequences were tested for transcriptional activation capabilities in the
visceral endoderm utilizing reporter gene assays in a cell model for
extraembryonic endoderm in vitro, and in transgenic mice in vivo.
RESULTS: With F9 embryo carcinoma cells as a model for extraembryonic endoderm,
we demonstrate that the P4 promoter of the human FOLR1 gene is active during
differentiation of the cells towards visceral endoderm. However, transgenic mouse
experiments show that promoter sequences alone are insufficient to elicit
reporter gene transcription in vivo. Using sequence conservation as guide to
choose genomic sequences from the human FOLR1 gene locus, we demonstrate that the
sequence termed F1CE2 exhibits specific enhancer activity in F9 cells in vitro,
in the visceral endoderm, and later the yolk sac in transgenic mouse embryos in
vivo. We further show that the transcription factor HNF4-alpha can activate this 
enhancer sequence.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a transcriptional enhancer sequence from the
FOLR1 locus with specific activity in vitro and in vivo, and suggest that FOLR1
is a target for regulation by HNF4-alpha.

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2731486
PMID: 19180647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Endocrinol. 2009 Apr;23(4):434-43. doi: 10.1210/me.2007-0531. Epub 2009 Jan
29.

Down-regulation of hepatic HNF4alpha gene expression during hyperinsulinemia via 
SREBPs.

Xie X(1), Liao H, Dang H, Pang W, Guan Y, Wang X, Shyy JY, Zhu Y, Sladek FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, Peking University, Health
Sciences Center, Beijing 100083, China.

Mutations in the coding region of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha),
and its upstream promoter (P2) that drives expression in the pancreas, are known 
to lead to maturity-onset diabetes of the young 1 (MODY1). HNF4alpha also
controls gluconeogenesis and lipid metabolism in the liver, where the proximal
promoter (P1) predominates. However, very little is known about the role of
hepatic HNF4alpha in diabetes. Here, we examine the expression of hepatic
HNF4alpha in two diabetic mouse models, db/db mice (type 2, insulin resistant)
and streptozotocin-treated mice (type 1, insulin deficient). We found that the
level of HNF4alpha protein and mRNA was decreased in the liver of db/db mice but 
increased in streptozotocin-treated mice. Because insulin increases the activity 
of sterol regulatory element-binding proteins (SREBP)-1c and -2, we also examined
the effect of SREBPs on hepatic HNF4alpha gene expression and found that, like
insulin, ectopic expression of SREBPs decreases the level of hepatic HNF4alpha
protein and mRNA both in vitro in primary hepatocytes and in vivo in the liver of
C57BL/6 mice. Finally, we use gel shift, chromatin immunoprecipitation, small
interfering RNA, and reporter gene analysis to show that SREBP2 binds the human
HNF4alpha P1 promoter and negatively regulates its expression. These data
indicate that hyperinsulinemia down-regulates HNF4alpha in the liver through the 
up-regulation of SREBPs, thereby establishing a link between these two critical
transcription factor pathways that regulate lipid and glucose metabolism in the
liver. These findings also provide new insights into diabetes-associated
complications such as fatty liver disease.

PMCID: PMC2667705
PMID: 19179483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Feb;5(2):101-12. doi:
10.1038/ncpendmet1046.

Advances in the diagnosis and management of hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia.

Kapoor RR(1), James C, Hussain K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Child Health, University College London and Great Ormond Street
Hospital for Children National Health Services Trust, London, UK.

Erratum in
    Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab. 2009 Mar;5(3):180.

Hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia (HH) is a consequence of unregulated insulin
secretion by pancreatic beta-cells and is a major cause of hypoglycemic brain
injury and mental retardation. Congenital HH is caused by mutations in genes
involved in regulation of insulin secretion, seven of which have been identified 
(ABCC8, KCNJ11, GLUD1, CGK, HADH, SLC16A1 and HNF4A). Severe forms of congenital 
HH are caused by mutations in ABCC8 and KCNJ11, which encode the two components
of the pancreatic beta-cell ATP-sensitive potassium channel. Mutations in HNF4A, 
GLUD1, CGK, and HADH lead to transient or persistent HH, whereas mutations in
SLC16A1 cause exercise-induced HH. Rapid genetic analysis combined with an
understanding of the histological features (focal or diffuse disease) of
congenital HH and the introduction of (18)F-L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine PET-CT
to guide laparoscopic surgery have totally transformed the clinical approach to
this complex disease. Adult-onset HH is mostly caused by an insulinoma; however, 
it has also been reported to present as postprandial HH in patients with
noninsulinoma pancreatogenous hypoglycemia syndrome, in those who have undergone 
gastric-bypass surgery for morbid obesity, and in those with mutations in the
insulin-receptor gene.

PMID: 19165222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2008 Sep;33(18):2105-9.

[Effects of berberine on expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha and
glucokinase activity in mouse primary hepatocytes].

[Article in Chinese]

Yan ZQ(1), Leng SH, Lu FE, Lu XH, Dong H, Gao ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Integrative Traditional & Western Medicine, Tongji Hospital,
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan
430030, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe the expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha
(HNF4alpha) and the activity of key enzyme glucokinase (GK) in glucose
metabolism, and further to investigate the possible mechanism of berberine in
treating type 2 diabetes.
METHOD: Mouse primary hepatocytes were isolated by an improved single two-step
perfusion method. The murine hepatocytes were cultured and incubated with
berberine (0, 1, 3, 10, 30, 100 micromol x L(-1)) and 1 mmol x L(-1) metformin
for 24 h respectively. The mRNA expression of HNF4alpha were quantified by RT-PCR
and the protein expression of HNF4alpha were quantified by Western-blot. And the 
activity of GK were detected with enzyme kinetics method.
RESULT: As compared with the negative control group, at a certain concentration
range, the expression of HNF4alpha mRNA and protein and the activity of GK were
promoted by berberine. Both of them reached the top at the concentration of 30
micromol x L(-1) (P<0.01). But the metformin made no difference with the negative
control group on the expression of HNF4alpha and the activity of GK.
CONCLUSION: It is suggested that the effects of berberine on improving glucose
metabolism can be mechanically associated with its up-regulating the HNF4a
expression and inducing the activity of hepatic glucokinase.

PMID: 19160796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Pathol Int. 2009 Feb;59(2):61-72. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2008.02330.x.

Protein expression of nuclear receptors in human and murine tissues.

Takegoshi S(1), Jiang S, Ohashi R, Savchenko AS, Iwanari H, Tanaka T, Hasegawa G,
Hamakubo T, Kodama T, Naito M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Function, Division of Cellular and Molecular Pathology,
Niigata University Graduate School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata,
Japan.

Nuclear receptors (NR) are transcriptional regulators expressed in a variety of
tissues and they play important roles in embryonic development, organogenesis and
metabolic homeostasis. In order to investigate the tissue-specific expression
pattern of NR, mouse anti-human monoclonal antibodies newly generated against
various NR. Specificities of the antibodies were confirmed on immunoblotting
using overexpressed proteins. Most of the antibodies recognized intrinsic
protein. Among 60 monoclonal antibodies generated, 32 were applicable for
immunohistochemistry. The expression pattern of NR in human liver and pancreas
was confirmed on immunohistochemical staining using these antibodies. The P2
promoter-driven hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) isoform and
progesterone receptor were expressed in pancreatic alpha-cells, but not
beta-cells in the human pancreas, suggesting an unknown role of these NR in
diabetes mellitus. These antibodies were also useful for immunohistochemistry of 
the murine liver and pancreas. Immunoblotting using these antibodies produced
similar corresponding bands both in human and mouse tissues. These monoclonal
antibodies may serve as powerful tools to detect tissue-specific localization of 
NR and provide a platform for future studies of NR in human and murine tissues.

PMID: 19154258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2009 Mar;296(3):G524-33. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.90469.2008. Epub 2009 Jan 15.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha regulates human cellular retinol-binding protein
type II gene expression in intestinal cells.

Yamaguchi N(1), Miyamoto S, Ogura Y, Goda T, Suruga K.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Human Health Sciences, University of Nagasaki, 1-1-1
Manabino, Nagayo-cho, Nishisonogi-gun, Nagasaki 851-2195, Japan.

Cellular retinol-binding protein type II (CRBPII) is abundantly expressed in the 
small intestinal enterocytes of many vertebrates and plays important
physiological roles in intestinal absorption, transport, and metabolism of
vitamin A. In the present study, we investigated regulation of human CRBPII gene 
expression using human intestinal Caco-2 BBe cells. We found that the human
CRBPII gene contained a direct repeat 1 (DR-1)-like nuclear receptor response
element in the proximal promoter region and that endogenous hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) was a major transcription factor binding to the
DR-1-like element. Cotransfection of HNF-4alpha expression vector transactivated 
the human CRBPII gene promoter activity, whereas mutation of the DR-1-like
element abolished the promoter activity. Stably transfected Caco-2 BBe cells
overexpressing HNF-4alpha significantly increased endogenous CRBPII gene
expression and retinyl ester synthesis. Reduction of HNF-4alpha protein levels by
HNF-4alpha small interference RNA decreased CRBPII gene expression. Caco-2 BBe
cells treated with phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate, a protein kinase C activator,
decreased nuclear HNF-4alpha protein level and binding activity to the human
CRBPII gene DR-1-like element, as well as CRBPII gene expression. Moreover,
nuclear HNF-4alpha protein levels, HNF-4alpha protein binding to human CRBPII
DR-1-like elements, and CRBPII gene expression level were coordinately increased 
during Caco-2 BBe cell differentiation. These results suggest that HNF-4alpha is 
an important transcriptional factor that regulates human CRBPII gene expression
and provide the possibility for a novel function of HNF-4alpha in the regulation 
of human intestinal vitamin A absorption and metabolism.

PMID: 19147806  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Hepatology. 2009 Mar;49(3):969-78. doi: 10.1002/hep.22700.

Tbx3 promotes liver bud expansion during mouse development by suppression of
cholangiocyte differentiation.

Lüdtke TH(1), Christoffels VM, Petry M, Kispert A.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Molekularbiologie, Medizinische Hochschule Hannover, Hannover,
Germany.

Comment in
    J Hepatol. 2010 Mar;52(3):450-1.

After specification of the hepatic endoderm, mammalian liver organogenesis
progresses through a series of morphological stages that culminate in the
migration of hepatocytes into the underlying mesenchyme to populate the hepatic
lobes. Here, we show that in the mouse the transcriptional repressor Tbx3, a
member of the T-box protein family, is required for the transition from a hepatic
diverticulum with a pseudo-stratified epithelium to a cell-emergent liver bud. In
Tbx3-deficient embryos, proliferation in the hepatic epithelium is severely
reduced, hepatoblasts fail to delaminate, and cholangiocyte rather than
hepatocyte differentiation occurs. Molecular analyses suggest that the primary
function of Tbx3 is to maintain expression of hepatocyte transcription factors,
including hepatic nuclear factor 4a (Hnf4a) and CCAAT/enhancer binding protein
(C/EBP), alpha (Cebpa), and to repress expression of cholangiocyte transcription 
factors such as Onecut1 (Hnf6) and Hnf1b.CONCLUSION: Tbx3 controls liver bud
expansion by suppressing cholangiocyte and favoring hepatocyte differentiation in
the liver bud.

PMID: 19140222  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Mar;37(4):1049-60. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn1028. Epub 2009
Jan 7.

Identification of an inter-transcription factor regulatory network in human
hepatoma cells by Matrix RNAi.

Tomaru Y(1), Nakanishi M, Miura H, Kimura Y, Ohkawa H, Ohta Y, Hayashizaki Y,
Suzuki M.

Author information: 
(1)OMICS Sciences Center (OSC), RIKEN Yokohama Institute 1-7-22 Suehiro-Cho,
Japan.

Transcriptional regulation by transcriptional regulatory factors (TRFs) of their 
target TRF genes is central to the control of gene expression. To study a static 
multi-tiered inter-TRF regulatory network in the human hepatoma cells, we have
applied a Matrix RNAi approach in which siRNA knockdown and quantitative RT-PCR
are used in combination on the same set of TRFs to determine their
interdependencies. This approach focusing on several liver-enriched TRF families,
each of which consists of structurally homologous members, revealed many
significant regulatory relationships. These include the cross-talks between
hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs) and the other TRF groups such as
CCAAT/enhancer-binding proteins (CEBPs), retinoic acid receptors (RARs), retinoid
receptors (RXRs) and RAR-related orphan receptors (RORs), which play key
regulatory functions in human hepatocytes and liver. In addition, various
multi-component regulatory motifs, which make up the complex inter-TRF regulatory
network, were identified. A large part of the regulatory edges identified by the 
Matrix RNAi approach could be confirmed by chromatin immunoprecipitation. The
resultant significant edges enabled us to depict the inter-TRF TRN forming an
apparent regulatory hierarchy of (FOXA1, RXRA) --> TCF1 --> (HNF4A, ONECUT1) --> 
(RORC, CEBPA) as the main streamline.

PMCID: PMC2651797
PMID: 19129217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Hepatology. 2009 Mar;49(3):920-9. doi: 10.1002/hep.22705.

Foxl1 is a marker of bipotential hepatic progenitor cells in mice.

Sackett SD(1), Li Z, Hurtt R, Gao Y, Wells RG, Brondell K, Kaestner KH, Greenbaum
LE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

The liver contains a population of small bipotential facultative progenitor cells
that reconstitute liver function when mature hepatocytes or cholangiocytes are
unable to proliferate. Mesenchymal markers, including members of the forkhead
transcription factor gene family, have been detected in hepatic progenitor cells.
The winged helix transcription factor Foxl1 localizes to mesenchymal cells in the
intestine; however, its expression in the liver has not been reported. We found
that Foxl1 is expressed in rare cells in the normal liver but is dramatically
induced in the livers of mice that have undergone bile duct ligation or were fed 
a 3,5-diethoxycarbonyl-1,4-dihydrocollidine (DDC)-containing or
choline-deficient, ethionine-supplemented diet. In addition, we employed genetic 
lineage tracing using a Foxl1-Cre transgenic mouse crossed with the Rosa26R lacZ 
reporter line to demonstrate that Foxl1-Cre-expressing cells are present within
the periportal region shortly after injury. These cells give rise to both
hepatocytes [marked by hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF-4alpha) expression]
and cholangiocytes (marked by CK19 expression), indicating that these cells are
derived from Foxl1-Cre-expressing cells. Foxl1-Cre-expressing cells are distinct 
from hepatic stellate cells, portal fibroblasts, and myofibroblasts, although
they are located in close proximity to portal fibroblasts. These results
demonstrate that the early Foxl1-Cre lineage cell gives rise to both
cholangiocytes and hepatocytes after liver injury and suggest the potential for
progenitor-portal fibroblast cell interactions.CONCLUSION: We propose that Foxl1 
is a bona fide marker of the facultative progenitor cell in the mouse liver.

PMCID: PMC2931830
PMID: 19105206  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2009 Jan;19(1):11-24. doi: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e32831665ea.

Inhibition of CYP3A4 expression by ketoconazole is mediated by the disruption of 
pregnane X receptor, steroid receptor coactivator-1, and hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4alpha interaction.

Lim YP(1), Kuo SC, Lai ML, Huang JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical College, National Cheng Kung University,
Tainan, Taiwan.

BACKGROUND: Earlier studies have shown that ketoconazole inhibits CYP3A4
expression through pregnane X receptor (PXR)-mediated transcription and
coactivator interaction. The involvement of other nuclear receptors remains to be
elucidated. It was recently reported that hepatocyte nuclear receptor 4alpha
(HNF4alpha), a master regulator of several nuclear receptors, associates with PXR
thus regulates the expression of CYP3A4 under rifampin treatment. We therefore
focused on the role of PXR-HNF4alpha interaction in the transcriptional
regulation of CYP3A4 under rifampin-mediated ketoconazole inhibition.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Several approaches were used to characterize this role and
to investigate the relation between the regulatory function of the PXR-HNF4alpha 
complex and CYP3A4 expression, including a mammalian two-hybrid system, DNA
affinity precipitation assay, co-immunoprecipitation, and HNF4alpha silencing by 
RNA interference. Here, we report that HNF4alpha plays a critical role in CYP3A4 
promoter activation, and the interaction between PXR and HNF4alpha, which is
closely related to the expression of CYP3A4, might be involved in
ketoconazole-mediated inhibition of CYP3A4 gene expression. These observations
indicate that the inhibition of the interaction of PXR with HNF4alpha is likely
an important mechanism of drug-drug interaction.

PMID: 19077665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Nucleic Acids Res. 2009 Feb;37(3):778-92. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn978. Epub 2008 Dec 
15.

Identification of DNA regions and a set of transcriptional regulatory factors
involved in transcriptional regulation of several human liver-enriched
transcription factor genes.

Miura H(1), Tomaru Y, Nakanishi M, Kondo S, Hayashizaki Y, Suzuki M.

Author information: 
(1)RIKEN Omics Science Center, RIKEN Yokohama Institute 1-7-22 Suehiro-Cho,
Tsurumi-Ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.

Mammalian tissue- and/or time-specific transcription is primarily regulated in a 
combinatorial fashion through interactions between a specific set of
transcriptional regulatory factors (TRFs) and their cognate cis-regulatory
elements located in the regulatory regions. In exploring the DNA regions and TRFs
involved in combinatorial transcriptional regulation, we noted that individual
knockdown of a set of human liver-enriched TRFs such as HNF1A, HNF3A, HNF3B,
HNF3G and HNF4A resulted in perturbation of the expression of several single TRF 
genes, such as HNF1A, HNF3G and CEBPA genes. We thus searched the potential
binding sites for these five TRFs in the highly conserved genomic regions around 
these three TRF genes and found several putative combinatorial regulatory
regions. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that almost all of the
putative regulatory DNA regions were bound by the TRFs as well as two
coactivators (CBP and p300). The strong transcription-enhancing activity of the
putative combinatorial regulatory region located downstream of the CEBPA gene was
confirmed. EMSA demonstrated specific bindings of these HNFs to the target DNA
region. Finally, co-transfection reporter assays with various combinations of
expression vectors for these HNF genes demonstrated the transcriptional
activation of the CEBPA gene in a combinatorial manner by these TRFs.

PMCID: PMC2647325
PMID: 19074951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Dev Biol. 2009 Feb 15;326(2):431-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2008.11.016. Epub 2008 
Dec 3.

miR-17 family miRNAs are expressed during early mammalian development and
regulate stem cell differentiation.

Foshay KM(1), Gallicano GI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular & Cellular Biology, Georgetown
University Medical Center, Washington, DC 20007, USA.

MicroRNAs are small non-coding RNAs that regulate protein expression by binding
3'UTRs of target mRNAs, thereby inhibiting translation. Similar to siRNAs, miRNAs
are cleaved by Dicer. Mouse and ES cell Dicer mutants demonstrate that microRNAs 
are necessary for embryonic development and cellular differentiation. However,
technical obstacles and the relative infancy of this field have resulted in few
data on the functional significance of individual microRNAs. We present evidence 
that miR-17 family members, miR-17-5p, miR-20a, miR-93, and miR-106a, are
differentially expressed in developing mouse embryos and function to control
differentiation of stem cells. Specifically, miR-93 localizes to differentiating 
primitive endoderm and trophectoderm of the blastocyst. We also observe high
miR-93 and miR-17-5p expression within the mesoderm of gastrulating embryos.
Using an ES cell model system, we demonstrate that modulation of these miRNAs
delays or enhances differentiation into the germ layers. Additionally, we
demonstrate that these miRNAs regulate STAT3 mRNA in vitro. We suggest that
STAT3, a known ES cell regulator, is one target mRNA responsible for the effects 
of these miRNAs on cellular differentiation.

PMID: 19073166  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Nat Genet. 2009 Jan;41(1):56-65. doi: 10.1038/ng.291. Epub 2008 Dec 7.

Common variants at 30 loci contribute to polygenic dyslipidemia.

Kathiresan S(1), Willer CJ, Peloso GM, Demissie S, Musunuru K, Schadt EE, Kaplan 
L, Bennett D, Li Y, Tanaka T, Voight BF, Bonnycastle LL, Jackson AU, Crawford G, 
Surti A, Guiducci C, Burtt NP, Parish S, Clarke R, Zelenika D, Kubalanza KA,
Morken MA, Scott LJ, Stringham HM, Galan P, Swift AJ, Kuusisto J, Bergman RN,
Sundvall J, Laakso M, Ferrucci L, Scheet P, Sanna S, Uda M, Yang Q, Lunetta KL,
Dupuis J, de Bakker PI, O'Donnell CJ, Chambers JC, Kooner JS, Hercberg S, Meneton
P, Lakatta EG, Scuteri A, Schlessinger D, Tuomilehto J, Collins FS, Groop L,
Altshuler D, Collins R, Lathrop GM, Melander O, Salomaa V, Peltonen L,
Orho-Melander M, Ordovas JM, Boehnke M, Abecasis GR, Mohlke KL, Cupples LA.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research Center and Cardiology Division, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02114, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 2009 Jan;41(1):5-6.

Blood low-density lipoprotein (LDL) cholesterol, high-density lipoprotein (HDL)
cholesterol and triglyceride levels are risk factors for cardiovascular disease. 
To dissect the polygenic basis of these traits, we conducted genome-wide
association screens in 19,840 individuals and replication in up to 20,623
individuals. We identified 30 distinct loci associated with lipoprotein
concentrations (each with P < 5 x 10(-8)), including 11 loci that reached
genome-wide significance for the first time. The 11 newly defined loci include
common variants associated with LDL cholesterol near ABCG8, MAFB, HNF1A and
TIMD4; with HDL cholesterol near ANGPTL4, FADS1-FADS2-FADS3, HNF4A, LCAT, PLTP
and TTC39B; and with triglycerides near AMAC1L2, FADS1-FADS2-FADS3 and PLTP. The 
proportion of individuals exceeding clinical cut points for high LDL cholesterol,
low HDL cholesterol and high triglycerides varied according to an allelic dosage 
score (P < 10(-15) for each trend). These results suggest that the cumulative
effect of multiple common variants contributes to polygenic dyslipidemia.

PMCID: PMC2881676
PMID: 19060906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Biopharm Drug Dispos. 2008 Dec;29(9):501-10. doi: 10.1002/bdd.635.

Effects of intrauterine undernutrition on the expression of CYP3A23/3A1, PXR, CAR
and HNF4alpha in neonate rats.

Ni S(1), Wang X, Wang J, Lu S, Zeng S, Zhao Z, Yu L, Chen S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Analysis and Drug Metabolism, College of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, People's Republic of China.
nsqshc@163.com

Cytochrome P-450 3A (CYP3A) together with its nuclear receptors plays a critical 
role in drug metabolism. The present study investigated the effects of
undernutrition in utero on hepatic mRNA and protein expression of the enzyme
CYP3A23/3A1 and nuclear receptors including pregnane X receptor (PXR; NR1I2),
constitutive androstane receptor (CAR; NR1I3) and nuclear factor-4alpha
(HNF4alpha; HNF4A) in neonatal rats. At gestational day 2, pregnant rats were
randomly divided into two groups: nourished (fed ad libitum) and undernourished
(50% of nourished group). The pups delivered by nourished rats were designated as
the normal-birth-weight group (NBW, n=15) and those delivered by undernourished
rats were designated as the low-birth-weight group (LBW, n=15). Hepatic mRNA
expression was detected by quantitative real-time PCR and the corresponding
protein expression was examined by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Compared with NBW 
pups, LBW pups tended to have lower mRNA expression levels of CYP3A23/3A1, PXR
and CAR but higher levels of HNF4alpha. Only the CAR mRNA expression differences 
were significant (p<0.05). mRNA expression of CYP3A23/3A1 correlated with that of
HNF4alpha in both the LBW(r=0.808, p=0.007) and NBW (r=0.452, p=0.012) groups.
CYP3A23/3A1 and CAR protein expression differed between the two groups
(CYP3A23/3A1, chi(2)=7.87, p=0.005; CAR, chi(2)=12.069, p=0.001). In conclusion, 
these findings suggest that undernutrition may influence the mRNA expression of
CAR and protein expression of both CYP3A23/3A1 and CAR in neonatal rats. Since
CYP3A23/3A1 and CAR are critically involved in drug metabolism, these results may
have clinical implications for optimal medication in LBW children.

Copyright (c) 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 19058292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Int J Cancer. 2009 Mar 1;124(5):1081-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24041.

Inhibition of colorectal cancer by targeting hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha.

Schwartz B(1), Algamas-Dimantov A, Hertz R, Nataf J, Kerman A, Peri I, Bar-Tana
J.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Biochemistry, Food Science and Nutrition, Faculty of
Agricultural, Food and Environmental Quality Sciences, The Hebrew University of
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, Israel. bschwart@agri.huji.ac.il

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) serves as target for fatty acid
nutrients and xenobiotic amphipathic carboxylates and may account for the
differential effects of dietary fatty acids on colorectal cancer (CRC). The
putative role played by HNF-4alpha in CRC has been verified here by evaluating
the effect of HNF-4alpha antagonists and HNF-4alpha siRNA on CRC growth and
proliferation in cultured CRC cells and xenotransplanted nude mice in vivo.
HNF-4alpha ligand antagonists of the MEDICA series, namely,
beta,beta'-tetramethylhexadecanedioic acid (M16betabeta) and
gamma,gamma'-tetramethyloctadocanedioic acid (M18gammagamma) as well as
HNF-4alpha siRNA are shown here to inhibit growth and proliferation of HT29 and
Caco2 CRC cells, accompanied by increased subG1 cell population, downregulated
PCNA, activation of caspase-3, upregulation of Bak and cytoplasmic cytochrome-c, 
and downregulation of Bcl-2 resulting in apoptotic death. Inhibition of CRC
growth with concomitant apoptosis was further confirmed in nude mice
xenotransplanted with HT29 CRC cells. CRC suppression by HNF-4alpha ligand
antagonists and by HNF-4alpha siRNA was accounted for by suppression of
HNF-4alpha transcription and protein expression.
alpha,alpha'-tetrachlorotetradecanedioic acid (Cl-DICA), a MEDICA analogue that
fails to suppress HNF-4alpha, was ineffective in suppressing growth of cultured
or xenotransplanted HT29 CRC cells. Hence, increased transcriptional activity of 
HNF-4alpha converging onto genes coding for antiapoptotic oncogenes and cytokines
may promote CRC development. Suppression of HNF-4alpha activity by natural or
xenobiotic HNF-4alpha ligand antagonists or by HNF-4alpha siRNA may offer a
treatment mode for CRC.

PMID: 19048623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Mol Biol (Mosk). 2008 Sep-Oct;42(5):786-97.

[Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4) in epithelial development and
carcinogenesis].

[Article in Russian]

Lazarevich NL, Al'pern DV.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors play the key role in the establishing and maintenance 
of hepatocyte differentiation. They not only control the expression of functional
hepatic genes but are also involved in the regulation of proliferation,
morphogenesis and detoxication in the liver. In this review we consider the main 
biological properties of the central regulator of hepatic differentiation
HNF4alpha, patterns of its expression in embryogenesis and different adult
tissues, mechanisms of regulation of its activity and transcriptional properties,
and the essential target genes. Based on the studies of gene expression on the
experimental models of rodent carcinogenesis and clinical samples of human liver 
tumors, the clear association of HNF4alpha transcriptional repression with
progression and dedifferentiation of this type of tumors was shown. The
possibility of the reversion of dedifferentiated hepatocarcinoma malignant
phenotype by means of HNF4alpha exogenous expression confirms the important role 
of this factor in the coordination of proliferation, differentiation and the
maintenance of epithelial morphology in several types of epithelial cells.

PMID: 18988528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Genome Res. 2008 Dec;18(12):1969-78. doi: 10.1101/gr.074070.107. Epub 2008 Oct
29.

DNA methylation profile of tissue-dependent and differentially methylated regions
(T-DMRs) in mouse promoter regions demonstrating tissue-specific gene expression.

Yagi S(1), Hirabayashi K, Sato S, Li W, Takahashi Y, Hirakawa T, Wu G, Hattori N,
Hattori N, Ohgane J, Tanaka S, Liu XS, Shiota K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cellular Biochemistry, Department of Animal Resource
Sciences/Veterinary Medical Sciences, The University of Tokyo, Japan.

DNA methylation constitutes an important epigenetic regulation mechanism in many 
eukaryotes, although the extent of DNA methylation in the regulation of gene
expression in the mammalian genome is poorly understood. We developed D-REAM, a
genome-wide DNA methylation analysis method for tissue-dependent and
differentially methylated region (T-DMR) profiling with restriction tag-mediated 
amplification in mouse tissues and cells. Using a mouse promoter tiling array
covering a region from -6 to 2.5 kb ( approximately 30,000 transcription start
sites), we found that over 3000 T-DMRs are hypomethylated in liver compared to
cerebrum. The DNA methylation profile of liver was distinct from that of kidney
and spleen. This hypomethylation profile marked genes that are specifically
expressed in liver, including key transcription factors such as Hnf1a and Hnf4a. 
Genes with T-DMRs, especially those lacking CpG islands and those with HNF-1A
binding motifis in their promoters, showed good correlation between their
tissue-specific expression and liver hypomethylation status. T-DMRs located
downstream from their transcription start sites also showed tissue-specific gene 
expression. These data indicate that multilayered regulation of tissue-specific
gene function could be elucidated by DNA methylation tissue profiling.

PMCID: PMC2593572
PMID: 18971312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Dec;36(21):6795-805. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn752. Epub 2008
Oct 25.

Positional distribution of human transcription factor binding sites.

Koudritsky M(1), Domany E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physics of Complex Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science,
Rehovot, Israel.

We developed a method for estimating the positional distribution of transcription
factor (TF) binding sites using ChIP-chip data, and applied it to recently
published experiments on binding sites of nine TFs: OCT4, SOX2, NANOG, HNF1A,
HNF4A, HNF6, FOXA2, USF1 and CREB1. The data were obtained from a genome-wide
coverage of promoter regions from 8-kb upstream of the transcription start site
(TSS) to 2-kb downstream. The number of target genes of each TF ranges from few
hundred to several thousand. We found that for each of the nine TFs the estimated
binding site distribution is closely approximated by a mixture of two components:
a narrow peak, localized within 300-bp upstream of the TSS, and a distribution of
almost uniform density within the tested region. Using Gene Ontology (GO) and
Enrichment analysis, we were able to associate (for each of the TFs studied) the 
target genes of both types of binding with known biological processes. Most GO
terms were enriched either among the proximal targets or among those with a
uniform distribution of binding sites. For example, the three stemness-related
TFs have several hundred target genes that belong to 'development' and
'morphogenesis' whose binding sites belong to the uniform distribution.

PMCID: PMC2588498
PMID: 18953043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. World J Gastroenterol. 2008 Oct 21;14(39):6004-11.

Facilitating effects of berberine on rat pancreatic islets through modulating
hepatic nuclear factor 4 alpha expression and glucokinase activity.

Wang ZQ(1), Lu FE, Leng SH, Fang XS, Chen G, Wang ZS, Dong LP, Yan ZQ.

Author information: 
(1)Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, Hubei Province,
China.

AIM: To observe the effect of berberine on insulin secretion in rat pancreatic
islets and to explore its possible molecular mechanism.
METHODS: Primary rat islets were isolated from male Sprague-Dawley rats by
collagenase digestion and treated with different concentrations (1, 3, 10 and 30 
micromol/L) of berberine or 1 micromol/L Glibenclamide (GB) for 24 h.
Glucose-stimulated insulin secretion (GSIS) assay was conducted and insulin was
determined by radioimmunoassay.
3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay was
performed to evaluate cytotoxicity. The mRNA level of hepatic nuclear factor 4
alpha (HNF4alpha) was determined by reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR). Indirect immunofluorescence staining and Western blot analysis
were employed to detect protein expression of HNF4alpha in the islets.
Glucokinase (GK) activity was measured by spectrophotometric method.
RESULTS: Berberine enhanced GSIS rather than basal insulin secretion
dose-dependently in rat islets and showed no significant cytotoxicity on islet
cells at the concentration of 10 mumol/L. Both mRNA and protein expressions of
HNF4alpha were up-regulated by berberine in a dose-dependent manner, and GK
activity was also increased accordingly. However, GB demonstrated no regulatory
effects on HNF4alpha expression or GK activity.
CONCLUSION: Berberine can enhance GSIS in rat islets, and probably exerts the
insulinotropic effect via a pathway involving HNF4alpha and GK, which is distinct
from sulphonylureas (SUs).

PMCID: PMC2760199
PMID: 18932278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Hepatology. 2008 Nov;48(5):1528-39. doi: 10.1002/hep.22510.

Differentiation therapy of hepatocellular carcinoma in mice with recombinant
adenovirus carrying hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha gene.

Yin C(1), Lin Y, Zhang X, Chen YX, Zeng X, Yue HY, Hou JL, Deng X, Zhang JP, Han 
ZG, Xie WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Changzheng Hospital, Shanghai, China.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2009 Dec;50(6):2046; author reply 2046-7.

Previous studies have shown that hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF4alpha) is 
a central regulator of differentiated hepatocyte phenotype and forced expression 
of HNF4alpha could promote reversion of tumors toward a less invasive phenotype. 
However, the effect of HNF4alpha on cancer stem cells (CSCs) and the treatment of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) with HNF4alpha have not been reported. In this
study, an adenovirus-mediated gene delivery system, which could efficiently
transfer and express HNF4alpha, was generated to determine its effect on hepatoma
cells (Hep3B and HepG2) in vitro and investigate the anti-tumor effect of
HNF4alpha in mice. Our results demonstrated that forced re-expression of
HNF4alpha induced the differentiation of hepatoma cells into hepatocytes,
dramatically decreased "stemness" gene expression and the percentage of CD133(+) 
and CD90(+) cells, which are considered as cancer stem cells in HCC. Meanwhile,
HNF4alpha reduced cell viability through inducing apparent apoptosis in Hep3B,
while it induced cell cycle arrest and cellular senescence in HepG2. Moreover,
infection of hepatoma cells by HNF4alpha abolished their tumorigenesis in mice.
Most interestingly, systemic administration of adenovirus carrying the HNF4alpha 
gene protected mice from liver metastatic tumor formation, and intratumoral
injection of HNF4alpha also displayed significant antitumor effects on
transplanted tumor models.CONCLUSION: The striking suppression effect of
HNF4alpha on tumorigenesis and tumor development is attained by inducing the
differentiation of hepatoma cells--especially CSCs--into mature hepatocytes,
suggesting that differentiation therapy with HNF4alpha may be an effective
treatment for HCC patients. Our study also implies that differentiation therapy
may present as one of the best strategies for cancer treatment through the
induction of cell differentiation by key transcription factors.

PMID: 18925631  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2008 Dec;295(6):G1211-6. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.90360.2008. Epub 2008 Oct 9.

Regulation of basal core promoter activity of human organic cation transporter 1 
(OCT1/SLC22A1).

Kajiwara M(1), Terada T, Asaka J, Aoki M, Katsura T, Ikai I, Inui K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Kyoto University Hospital, Faculty of Medicine,
Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto University, Kyoto, Japan.

Human organic cation transporter 1 (OCT1/SLC22A1) plays important roles in the
hepatic uptake of cationic drugs. The functional characteristics of this
transporter have been well evaluated, but molecular information regarding
transcriptional regulation is limited. In the present study, therefore, we
examined the gene regulation of OCT1 gene focusing on basal core expression. An
approximately 2.5-kb fragment of the OCT1 promoter region was isolated, and
promoter activity was measured by luciferase assay in the human liver cell lines 
Huh7 and HepG2. Deletion analysis suggested that the region spanning -141/-69 was
essential for the basal core transcriptional activity and that this region
contained the sequence of a cognate E-box (CACGTG). The E-box is known to be
bound by the basal transcription factors, upstream stimulating factors (USFs),
and the functional involvements of USF1 and USF2 were confirmed by a
transactivation effect, a mutational analysis of the E-box, and an
electrophoretic mobility shift assay. The transactivation effect of USFs on the
OCT1 promoter was further stimulated by hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha, a
liver-enriched transcription factor. There were no polymorphisms in the proximal 
promoter region (about 400 bp) of OCT1 gene (n = 109). These findings indicated
that both USF1 and USF2 bind to an E-box sequence located in the OCT1 core
promoter region and are required for the basal gene expression of this
transporter.

PMID: 18845576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Pathol Int. 2008 Nov;58(11):681-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2008.02293.x.

Expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha in primary ovarian mucinous
tumors.

Sugai M(1), Umezu H, Yamamoto T, Jiang S, Iwanari H, Tanaka T, Hamakubo T, Kodama
T, Naito M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, Niigata University Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4 alpha) is a member of the nuclear
receptor superfamily and is expressed in several endodermal tissues. The aim of
the present study was to examine the expression of HNF4 alpha on ovarian
epithelial tumors with immunocytochemistry and immunohistochemistry using mAbs
recognizing P1 and P2 promoter-driven HNF4 alpha. Ovarian mucinous adenoma,
mucinous tumors of borderline malignancy, and mucinous adenocarcinoma had
positive nuclear staining for HNF4 alpha (41/45, 91%). One-third (34%) of
mucinous tumors had P1-positive staining and most had P1/P2-positive staining
(93%). MUC2- and MUC5AC-positive staining was observed in 34% and 95% of mucinous
tumors, respectively. The histological subtype of these mucinous tumors was not
correlated with HNF4 alpha expression. On cytology it was found that cancer cells
in the ascites from ovarian mucinous adenocarcinomas were HNF4 alpha positive,
but tumor cells in ascites from other types of ovarian carcinomas were negative
for HNF4 alpha. Thus, HNF4 alpha is demonstrated to be a useful marker for
histological and cytological diagnosis of ovarian mucinous tumors.

PMID: 18844932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 28;283(48):33685-97. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806213200. Epub 2008
Oct 1.

Structural basis of natural promoter recognition by a unique nuclear receptor,
HNF4alpha. Diabetes gene product.

Lu P(1), Rha GB, Melikishvili M, Wu G, Adkins BC, Fried MG, Chi YI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry, University of Kentucky,
Lexington, Kentucky 40536, USA.

HNF4alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha) plays an essential role in the
development and function of vertebrate organs, including hepatocytes and
pancreatic beta-cells by regulating expression of multiple genes involved in
organ development, nutrient transport, and diverse metabolic pathways. As such,
HNF4alpha is a culprit gene product for a monogenic and dominantly inherited form
of diabetes, known as maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY). As a unique
member of the nuclear receptor superfamily, HNF4alpha recognizes target genes
containing two hexanucleotide direct repeat DNA-response elements separated by
one base pair (DR1) by exclusively forming a cooperative homodimer. We describe
here the 2.0 angstroms crystal structure of human HNF4alpha DNA binding domain in
complex with a high affinity promoter element of another MODY gene, HNF1alpha,
which reveals the molecular basis of unique target gene selection/recognition,
DNA binding cooperativity, and dysfunction caused by diabetes-causing mutations. 
The predicted effects of MODY mutations have been tested by a set of biochemical 
and functional studies, which show that, in contrast to other MODY gene products,
the subtle disruption of HNF4alpha molecular function can cause significant
effects in afflicted MODY patients.

PMCID: PMC2586258
PMID: 18829458  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Clin Endocrinol (Oxf). 2009 Jun;70(6):847-53. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2265.2008.03397.x. Epub 2008 Sep 22.

Mutations of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) genes in Thais with
early-onset type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Plengvidhya N(1), Boonyasrisawat W, Chongjaroen N, Jungtrakoon P, Sriussadaporn
S, Vannaseang S, Banchuin N, Yenchitsomanus PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Siriraj
Hospital, Mahidol University, Bangkok 10700, Thailand. sinpv.natpl@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: Six known genes responsible for maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) were analysed to evaluate the prevalence of their mutations in Thai
patients with MODY and early-onset type 2 diabetes.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Fifty-one unrelated probands with early-onset type 2
diabetes, 21 of them fitted into classic MODY criteria, were analysed for
nucleotide variations in promoters, exons, and exon-intron boundaries of six
known MODY genes, including HNF-4alpha, GCK, HNF-1alpha, IPF-1, HNF-1beta, and
NeuroD1/beta2, by the polymerase chain reaction-single strand conformation
polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) method followed by direct DNA sequencing. Missense
mutations or mutations located in regulatory region, which were absent in 130
chromosomes of non-diabetic controls, were classified as potentially pathogenic
mutations.
RESULTS: We found that mutations of the six known MODY genes account for a small 
proportion of classic MODY (19%) and early-onset type 2 diabetes (10%) in Thais. 
Five of these mutations are novel including GCK R327H, HNF-1alpha P475L,
HNF-1alphaG554fsX556, NeuroD1-1972 G > A and NeuroD1 A322N. Mutations of IPF-1
and HNF-1beta were not identified in the studied probands.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations of the six known MODY genes may not be a major cause of
MODY and early-onset type 2 diabetes in Thais. Therefore, unidentified genes
await discovery in a majority of Thai patients with MODY and early-onset type 2
diabetes.

PMID: 18811724  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 21;283(47):32432-41. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M806179200. Epub 2008
Sep 19.

A combination of HNF-4 and Foxo1 is required for reciprocal transcriptional
regulation of glucokinase and glucose-6-phosphatase genes in response to fasting 
and feeding.

Hirota K(1), Sakamaki J, Ishida J, Shimamoto Y, Nishihara S, Kodama N, Ohta K,
Yamamoto M, Tanimoto K, Fukamizu A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Tsukuba Advanced Research Alliance, University of Tsukuba, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 305-8577, Japan.

Glucokinase (GK) and glucose-6-phosphatase (G6Pase) regulate rate-limiting
reactions in the physiologically opposed metabolic cascades, glycolysis and
gluconeogenesis, respectively. Expression of these genes is conversely regulated 
in the liver in response to fasting and feeding. We explored the mechanism of
transcriptional regulation of these genes by nutritional condition and found that
reciprocal function of HNF-4 and Foxo1 plays an important role in this process.
In the GK gene regulation, Foxo1 represses HNF-4-potentiated transcription of the
gene, whereas it synergizes with HNF-4 in activating the G6Pase gene
transcription. These opposite actions of Foxo1 concomitantly take place in the
cells under no insulin stimulus, and such gene-specific action was promoter
context-dependent. Interestingly, HNF-4-binding elements (HBEs) in the GK and
G6Pase promoters were required both for the insulin-stimulated GK gene activation
and insulin-mediated G6Pase gene repression. Indeed, mouse in vivo imaging showed
that mutating the HBEs in the GK and G6Pase promoters significantly impaired
their reactivity to the nutritional states, even in the presence of intact
Foxo1-binding sites (insulin response sequences). Thus, in the physiological
response of the GK and G6Pase genes to fasting/feeding conditions, Foxo1
distinctly decodes the promoter context of these genes and differently modulates 
the function of HBE, which then leads to opposite outcomes of gene transcription.

PMID: 18805788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Biol Chem. 2008 Nov 7;283(45):30970-9. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M803895200. Epub 2008
Sep 2.

Molecular cloning and characterization of the human PED/PEA-15 gene promoter
reveal antagonistic regulation by hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha and chicken
ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor II.

Ungaro P(1), Teperino R, Mirra P, Cassese A, Fiory F, Perruolo G, Miele C, Laakso
M, Formisano P, Beguinot F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia e Patologia Cellulare e Molecolare, Università di
Napoli Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy.

Overexpression of the ped/pea-15 gene in mice impairs glucose tolerance and leads
to diabetes in conjunction with high fat diet treatment. PED/PEA-15 is also
overexpressed in type 2 diabetics as well as in euglycemic offspring from these
subjects. The cause(s) of this abnormality remains unclear. In the present work
we have cloned and localized the promoter region of the human PED/PEA-15 gene
within the first 230 bp of the 5(R)-flanking region. A cis-acting regulatory
element located between -320 and -335 bps upstream the PED/PEA-15 gene
transcriptional start site (+1) is recognized by both the hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha) and the chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter
transcription factor II (COUP-TFII), two members of the steroid/thyroid
superfamily of transcription factors, both of which are involved in the control
of lipid and glucose homeostasis. HNF-4alpha represses PED/PEA-15 expression in
HeLa cells, whereas COUP-TFII activates its expression. In hepatocytes, the
activation of PED/PEA-15 gene transcription is paralleled by the establishment of
a partially dedifferentiated phenotype accompanied by a reduction in mRNA levels 
encoded by genes normally expressed during liver development. Cotransfection of
HeLa cells with a reporter construct containing the PED/PEA-15 response element
and various combinations of HNF-4alpha and COUP-TFII expression vectors indicated
that COUP-TFII antagonizes the repression of the PED/PEA-15 gene by HNF-4alpha.
Thus, at least in part, transcription of the PED/PEA-15 gene in vivo is dependent
upon the intracellular balance of these positive and negative regulatory factors.
Abnormalities in HNF-4alpha and COUP-TFII balance might have important
consequences on glucose tolerance in humans.

PMCID: PMC2662169
PMID: 18765665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Diabetes. 2008 Nov;57(11):3161-5. doi: 10.2337/db08-0719. Epub 2008 Aug 26.

Population-specific risk of type 2 diabetes conferred by HNF4A P2 promoter
variants: a lesson for replication studies.

Barroso I(1), Luan J, Wheeler E, Whittaker P, Wasson J, Zeggini E, Weedon MN,
Hunt S, Venkatesh R, Frayling TM, Delgado M, Neuman RJ, Zhao J, Sherva R, Glaser 
B, Walker M, Hitman G, McCarthy MI, Hattersley AT, Permutt MA, Wareham NJ,
Deloukas P.

Author information: 
(1)Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge, UK. ib1@sanger.ac.uk

OBJECTIVE: Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in the P2 promoter region of
HNF4A were originally shown to be associated with predisposition for type 2
diabetes in Finnish, Ashkenazi, and, more recently, Scandinavian populations, but
they generated conflicting results in additional populations. We aimed to
investigate whether data from a large-scale mapping approach would replicate this
association in novel Ashkenazi samples and in U.K. populations and whether these 
data would allow us to refine the association signal.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Using a dense linkage disequilibrium map of 20q, we 
selected SNPs from a 10-Mb interval centered on HNF4A. In a staged approach, we
first typed 4,608 SNPs in case-control populations from four U.K. populations and
an Ashkenazi population (n = 2,516). In phase 2, a subset of 763 SNPs was
genotyped in 2,513 additional samples from the same populations.
RESULTS: Combined analysis of both phases demonstrated association between HNF4A 
P2 SNPs (rs1884613 and rs2144908) and type 2 diabetes in the Ashkenazim (n = 991;
P < 1.6 x 10(-6)). Importantly, these associations are significant in a subset of
Ashkenazi samples (n = 531) not previously tested for association with P2 SNPs
(odds ratio [OR] approximately 1.7; P < 0.002), thus providing replication within
the Ashkenazim. In the U.K. populations, this association was not significant (n 
= 4,022; P > 0.5), and the estimate for the OR was much smaller (OR 1.04; [95%CI 
0.91-1.19]).
CONCLUSIONS: These data indicate that the risk conferred by HNF4A P2 is
significantly different between U.K. and Ashkenazi populations (P < 0.00007),
suggesting that the underlying causal variant remains unidentified. Interactions 
with other genetic or environmental factors may also contribute to this
difference in risk between populations.

PMCID: PMC2570416
PMID: 18728231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Hepatology. 2008 Oct;48(4):1242-50. doi: 10.1002/hep.22439.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha is implicated in endoplasmic reticulum
stress-induced acute phase response by regulating expression of cyclic adenosine 
monophosphate responsive element binding protein H.

Luebke-Wheeler J(1), Zhang K, Battle M, Si-Tayeb K, Garrison W, Chhinder S, Li J,
Kaufman RJ, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, WI 53226, USA.

Loss of the nuclear hormone receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha)
in hepatocytes results in a complex pleiotropic phenotype that includes a block
in hepatocyte differentiation and a severe disruption to liver function. Recent
analyses have shown that hepatic gene expression is severely affected by the
absence of HNF4alpha, with expression of 567 genes reduced by > or =2.5-fold (P <
or = 0.05) in Hnf4alpha(-/-) fetal livers. Although many of these genes are
direct targets, HNF4alpha has also been shown to regulate expression of other
liver transcription factors, and this raises the possibility that the dependence 
on HNF4alpha for normal expression of some genes may be indirect. We postulated
that the identification of transcription factors whose expression is regulated by
HNF4alpha might reveal roles for HNF4alpha in controlling hepatic functions that 
were not previously appreciated. Here we identify cyclic adenosine monophosphate 
responsive element binding protein H (CrebH) as a transcription factor whose
messenger RNA can be identified in both the embryonic mouse liver and adult mouse
liver and whose expression is dependent on HNF4alpha. Analyses of genomic DNA
revealed an HNF4alpha binding site upstream of the CrebH coding sequence that was
occupied by HNF4alpha in fetal livers and facilitated transcriptional activation 
of a reporter gene in transient transfection analyses. Although CrebH is highly
expressed during hepatogenesis, CrebH(-/-) mice were viable and healthy and
displayed no overt defects in liver formation. However, upon treatment with
tunicamycin, which induces an endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-stress response,
CrebH(-/-) mice displayed reduced expression of acute phase response
proteins.CONCLUSION: These data implicate HNF4alpha in having a role in
controlling the acute phase response of the liver induced by ER stress by
regulating expression of CrebH.

PMCID: PMC2717709
PMID: 18704925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Prim Care Diabetes. 2008 Jun;2(2):87-90. doi: 10.1016/j.pcd.2008.02.002. Epub
2008 Apr 18.

Our evolving understanding of monogenic diabetes: possibilities of improving
glycaemic control following transfer from insulin to sulphonylureas.

Shepherd M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Barrack Road, Exeter EX25DW, UK.
m.h.shepherd@exeter.ac.uk

PMID: 18684428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Hepatology. 2008 Aug;48(2):635-45. doi: 10.1002/hep.22396.

Genetic polymorphism of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha influences human
cytochrome P450 2D6 activity.

Lee SS(1), Cha EY, Jung HJ, Shon JH, Kim EY, Yeo CW, Shin JG.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacogenimics Research Center, Inje University College of Medicine,
Busanjin-gu, Busan, Korea.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF4A) is an essential transcriptional
regulator for many genes that are expressed preferentially in the liver. Among
the important functions of the liver is drug metabolism in response to xenobiotic
exposure. Recent studies have suggested that HNF4A regulates the expression of
cytochrome P450 (CYP), including CYP2D6 and CYP3A4, which show large individual
variations in their activities. To understand the genetic factors that influence 
individual CYP activities, a genetic variant of HNF4A and the effects of genetic 
variants of HNF4A on CYP activity were investigated. Here, we report the
identification of a novel coding variant of HNF4A that influences CYP2D6 activity
in humans. After direct sequencing, a polymorphism search revealed the HNF4A G60D
variant in Koreans. This variant was unable to bind to the recognition site in
the CYP2D6 promoter and therefore lacked the regulatory function for this gene.
Human liver specimens with the heterozygous HNF4A G60D genotype showed a tendency
toward lower levels of CYP2D6 activity than the wild-type genotype in the same
genetic background of CYP2D6. Furthermore, human subjects with the HNF4A G60D
genotype tended to have lower CYP2D6 activity than those with the wild-type
HNF4A. The HNF4A G60D variant was detected at low frequency in Asian populations,
including Koreans, Chinese, and Vietnamese, and was not found in Africans or
Caucasians.CONCLUSION: This is the first report to show that the genetic
polymorphism of liver-enriched nuclear receptor HNF4A influences downstream
CYP2D6 function in human subjects.

PMID: 18666237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. J Lipid Res. 2008 Dec;49(12):2582-9. doi: 10.1194/jlr.M800232-JLR200. Epub 2008
Jul 25.

Multiple genetic variants along candidate pathways influence plasma high-density 
lipoprotein cholesterol concentrations.

Lu Y(1), Dollé ME, Imholz S, van 't Slot R, Verschuren WM, Wijmenga C, Feskens
EJ, Boer JM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Human Nutrition, Wageningen University, Wageningen, The
Netherlands. kevin.lu@wur.nl

The known genetic variants determining plasma HDL cholesterol (HDL-C) levels
explain only part of its variation. Three hundred eighty-four single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) across 251 genes based on pathways potentially relevant to
HDL-C metabolism were selected and genotyped in 3,575 subjects from the
Doetinchem cohort, which was examined thrice over 11 years. Three hundred
fifty-three SNPs in 239 genes passed the quality-control criteria. Seven SNPs
[rs1800777 and rs5882 in cholesteryl ester transfer protein (CETP); rs3208305,
rs328, and rs268 in LPL; rs1800588 in LIPC; rs2229741 in NRIP1] were associated
with plasma HDL-C levels with false discovery rate (FDR) adjusted q values
(FDR_q) < 0.05. Five other SNPs (rs17585739 in SC4MOL, rs11066322 in PTPN11,
rs4961 in ADD1, rs6060717 near SCAND1, and rs3213451 in MBTPS2 in women) were
associated with plasma HDL-C levels with FDR_q between 0.05 and 0.2. Two less
well replicated associations (rs3135506 in APOA5 and rs1800961 in HNF4A) known
from the literature were also observed, but their significance disappeared after 
adjustment for multiple testing (P = 0.008, FDR_q = 0.221 for rs3135506; P =
0.018, FDR_q = 0.338 for rs1800961, respectively). In addition to replication of 
previous results for candidate genes (CETP, LPL, LIPC, HNF4A, and APOA5), we
found interesting new candidate SNPs (rs2229741 in NRIP1, rs3213451 in MBTPS2,
rs17585739 in SC4MOL, rs11066322 in PTPN11, rs4961 in ADD1, and rs6060717 near
SCAND1) for plasma HDL-C levels that should be evaluated further.

PMID: 18660489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Gastroenterology. 2008 Oct;135(4):1238-1247, 1247.e1-3. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2008.06.045. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Multiple regulatory regions control the complex expression pattern of the mouse
Cdx2 homeobox gene.

Benahmed F(1), Gross I, Gaunt SJ, Beck F, Jehan F, Domon-Dell C, Martin E,
Kedinger M, Freund JN, Duluc I.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U682, Strasbourg, France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The Cdx2 homeobox gene exerts multiple functions including
trophectoderm specification, antero-posterior patterning, and determination of
intestinal identity. The aim of this study was to map genomic regions that
regulate the transcription of Cdx2, with a particular interest in the gut.
METHODS: Genomic fragments covering 13 kilobase (kb) of the mouse Cdx2 locus were
analyzed in transgenic mice and in cell assays.
RESULTS: No fragment was active in the trophectoderm. Fragments containing the
first intron and extending up to -5-kb upstream of the transcription start site
became active posteriorly at gastrulation and then inactive at midgestation in
every tissue including the endoderm. Specific persistence of activity in the
intestinal endoderm/epithelium beyond midgestation requires extending the genomic
fragment up to -9 kb. We identified a 250-base pair segment around -8.5-kb
binding and responding to endodermal factors, with a stimulatory effect exerted
synergistically by HNF4alpha, GATA6, Tcf4, and beta-catenin. These factors were
able to activate endogenous expression of Cdx2 in nonintestinal Hela cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Multiple regulatory regions control the complex developmental
pattern of Cdx2, including far upstream sequences required for the persistence of
gene expression specifically in the gut epithelium throughout life. Cooperation
between HNF4alpha, GATA6, beta-catenin, and Tcf4 contributes to the
intestine-specific expression of Cdx2.

PMID: 18655789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Endocr J. 2008 Dec;55(6):999-1004. Epub 2008 Jul 24.

A common P2 promoter polymorphism of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha gene is
associated with insulin secretion in non-obese Japanese with type 2 diabetes.

Tokunaga A(1), Horikawa Y, Fukuda-Akita E, Okita K, Iwahashi H, Shimomura I,
Takeda J, Yamagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka
University, Osaka, Japan.

AIMS: Heterozygous mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha gene
cause a particular form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY1). Recent
genetic studies have shown that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of the
beta-cell type P2 promoter of the HNF-4alpha gene are associated with type 2
diabetes in some populations. In the Japanese population, a haplotype consisting 
of two SNPs (rs1884614 and rs2144908) in the P2 promoter region is reported to
show a significant association with type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: Both rs1884614 and rs2144908 were genotyped in 349 type 2 diabetic
patients and 203 non-diabetic controls. The relation of these SNPs to clinical
characteristics was also examined in the diabetic subjects.
RESULTS: There were no differences in the genotype distribution of the two SNPs
between the control and diabetic subjects, and the haplotype distribution was
also similar in the two groups. However, the rs1884614 T/T genotype was
significantly associated with a smaller area under the plasma insulin curve (AUC)
during the OGTT in non-obese (BMI <25 kg/m(2)) patients (p=0.0272; adjusted for
age and sex).
CONCLUSIONS: SNP rs1884614 in the P2 promoter region of the HNF-4alpha gene may
influence insulin secretion in non-obese Japanese subjects with type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 18654034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Hepatol. 2008 Sep;49(3):384-95. doi: 10.1016/j.jhep.2008.04.024. Epub 2008 Jun 
5.

Morphogenetic competence of HNF4 alpha-deficient mouse hepatic cells.

Hayhurst GP(1), Strick-Marchand H, Mulet C, Richard AF, Morosan S, Kremsdorf D,
Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: To specify roles of HNF 4 alpha in mouse liver development, we
have analyzed the ex vivo morphogenetic potential of HNF4 alpha-null embryonic
hepatic cells.
METHODS: Using mice with floxed or deficiency alleles of HNF4 alpha, hepatic
cells lacking this transcription factor were explanted into primary culture and
derived into cell lines.
RESULTS: Contrary to behavior in vivo where HNF4 alpha-null liver cells fail to
show normal polarity and epithelialization, e18.5 hepatic cells in primary
culture from mutant embryos show restoration of apical expression of tight
junction protein-1 and of transcripts for E-cadherin. Clones of control and HNF4 
alpha-null cell lines were indistinguishable, even when differentiation of bile
canalicular formation was induced. HNF4 alpha-null and control cell lines showed 
similar potential to colonize livers of the murine ALB-uPA/SCID model of liver
regeneration, but null cells formed only bile ducts and not clusters of
hepatocytes. Finally, analysis of mutant embryonic livers revealed a
transcriptional signature consistent with a stress response, which could underlie
the morphogenetic defects observed in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that the lack of epithelialization characteristic of the
HNF4 alpha-null embryonic liver is due, at least in part, to non-cell autonomous 
defects, and that null cells do not suffer intrinsic defects in polarization.

PMCID: PMC2625285
PMID: 18617288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Genomics. 2008 Oct;92(4):226-34. doi: 10.1016/j.ygeno.2008.06.004. Epub 2008 Aug 
9.

Heterogeneity in gene loci associated with type 2 diabetes on human chromosome
20q13.1.

Bento JL(1), Palmer ND, Zhong M, Roh B, Lewis JP, Wing MR, Pandya H, Freedman BI,
Langefeld CD, Rich SS, Bowden DW, Mychaleckyj JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Human chromosome 20q12-q13.1 has been linked to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM)
in multiple studies. We screened a 5.795-Mb region for diabetes-related
susceptibility genes in a Caucasian cohort of 310 controls and 300 cases with
T2DM and end-stage renal disease (ESRD), testing 390 SNPs for association with
T2DM-ESRD. The most significant SNPs were found in the perigenic regions: HNF4A
(hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha), SLC12A5 (potassium-chloride cotransporter
member 5), CDH22 (cadherin-like 22), ELMO2 (engulfment and cell motility 2),
SLC13A3 (sodium-dependent dicarboxylate transporter member 3), and PREX1
(phosphatidylinositol 3,4,5-triphosphate-dependent RAC exchanger 1). Haplotype
analysis found six haplotype blocks globally associated with disease (p<0.05). We
replicated the PREX1 SNP association in an independent case-control T2DM
population and inferred replication of CDH22, ELMO2, SLC13A3, SLC12A5, and PREX1 
using in silico perigenic analysis of two T2DM Genome-Wide Association Study data
sets. We found substantial heterogeneity between study results.

PMCID: PMC2583938
PMID: 18602983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2008 Oct 1;232(1):135-41. doi:
10.1016/j.taap.2008.06.001. Epub 2008 Jun 17.

Coactivator PGC-1alpha regulates the fasting inducible xenobiotic-metabolizing
enzyme CYP2A5 in mouse primary hepatocytes.

Arpiainen S(1), Järvenpää SM, Manninen A, Viitala P, Lang MA, Pelkonen O, Hakkola
J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Oulu, Oulu, Finland.

The nutritional state of organisms and energy balance related diseases such as
diabetes regulate the metabolism of xenobiotics such as drugs, toxins and
carcinogens. However, the mechanisms behind this regulation are mostly unknown.
The xenobiotic-metabolizing cytochrome P450 (CYP) 2A5 enzyme has been shown to be
induced by fasting and by glucagon and cyclic AMP (cAMP), which mediate numerous 
fasting responses. Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator
(PGC)-1alpha triggers many of the important hepatic fasting effects in response
to elevated cAMP levels. In the present study, we were able to show that cAMP
causes a coordinated induction of PGC-1alpha and CYP2A5 mRNAs in murine primary
hepatocytes. Furthermore, the elevation of the PGC-1alpha expression level by
adenovirus mediated gene transfer increased CYP2A5 transcription. Co-transfection
of Cyp2a5 5' promoter constructs with the PGC-1alpha expression vector
demonstrated that PGC-1alpha is able to activate Cyp2a5 transcription through the
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha response element in the proximal promoter 
of the Cyp2a5 gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that PGC-1alpha
binds, together with HNF-4alpha, to the same region at the Cyp2a5 proximal
promoter. In conclusion, PGC-1alpha mediates the expression of Cyp2a5 induced by 
cAMP in mouse hepatocytes through coactivation of transcription factor
HNF-4alpha. This strongly suggests that PGC-1alpha is the major factor mediating 
the fasting response of CYP2A5.

PMID: 18602936  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2008 Oct;24(7):533-43. doi: 10.1002/dmrr.870.

Expression of HNF4alpha variants in pancreatic islets and Ins-1 beta cells.

Huang J(1), Karakucuk V, Levitsky LL, Rhoads DB.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrine Unit, MassGeneral Hospital for Children and Harvard
Medical School, Boston, MA 02114-2696, USA.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF4alpha) is a nuclear receptor essential
for endodermal differentiation and cell functions in the adult pancreas, liver,
and other tissues. Mutations in the HNF4A gene cause MODY1. Up to nine protein
variants arise from two developmentally regulated promoters. Because some
variants lack the N-terminal activation function 1 (AF-1) and/or C-terminal
inhibitory F domain, defining their tissue-specific regulation and function is
important for understanding pancreatic beta cell behaviour.
METHODS: Expression of HNF4alpha variants in islets, rat Ins-1 insulinoma cells, 
and human Hep3B hepatocellular carcinoma cells was assessed using a long-range
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) strategy capable of
recognizing each combination of mRNA termini. Protein expression was verified by 
immuno-blotting with terminus-specific antibodies and DNA-binding assays.
RESULTS: Mouse islets and both cell lines express HNF4alpha9, which lacks both
AF-1 and the F domain. Islets also expressed the HNF4alpha P1 promoter variants
HNF4alpha1/alpha2, and Hep3B cells expressed HNF4alpha3. When ectopically
expressed in COS-7 cells, HNF4alpha1, alpha3, alpha7, and alpha9 each stimulated 
an HNF4alpha-dependent promoter. Variants containing exon 1B (HNF4alpha4 -
alpha6) were not detected. Lack of canonical splicing signals and species
conservation argues against exon 1B usage.
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first report of HNF4alpha9 expression in any tissue. Our
findings extend our understanding of HNF4alpha gene transcription and function.
This knowledge may be useful in efforts to recover or establish regulated insulin
secretion.

Copyright (c) 2008 John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 18561282  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Physiol Genomics. 2008 Aug 15;34(3):277-84. doi:
10.1152/physiolgenomics.90236.2008. Epub 2008 Jun 3.

SOX17 directly activates Zfp202 transcription during in vitro endoderm
differentiation.

Patterson ES(1), Addis RC, Shamblott MJ, Gearhart JD.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cell Engineering, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, USA. espatterson@wustl.edu

SOX17 is a SRY-related high-mobility group (HMG) box transcription factor that is
necessary for endoderm formation in multiple species. Despite its essential
function during endoderm formation and differentiation, few direct targets of
SOX17 are known. To identify targets of SOX17, we isolated SOX17 binding sites
with a chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-cloning screen. SOX17-ChIP identified
zinc finger protein 202 (Zfp202) as a direct target of SOX17 during endoderm
differentiation of F9 embryonal carcinoma cells. A sequence in the first intron
of Zfp202 activated transcription in differentiated F9 cells, and overexpression 
of Sox17 increased the transcriptional activity of this sequence. SOX17 binds to 
a site within this sequence in electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and
mutation of this site decreases the transcriptional activation. Zfp202 is induced
concomitantly with Sox17 during endoderm differentiation of F9 cells. We also
show that ZFP202 represses Hnf4a, which has been reported for the human ortholog 
ZNF202. Identifying targets of SOX17 will help to elucidate the molecular basis
of endoderm differentiation and may provide a better understanding of the role of
endoderm in patterning the other germ layers.

PMID: 18523156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Diabet Med. 2008 Jul;25(7):788-91. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-5491.2008.02467.x.

Can complement factors 5 and 8 and transthyretin be used as biomarkers for MODY 1
(HNF4A-MODY) and MODY 3 (HNF1A-MODY)?

Karlsson E(1), Shaat N, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences/Diabetes and Endocrinology, Malmö University
Hospital, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. ella.karlsson@med.lu.se

AIMS: Genetic testing is needed for the formal diagnosis of maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY), but this is not widely available. If any MODY
biomarkers were known, these could possibly be used as an alternative. Hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and HNF-4alpha regulate transcription of genes
encoding complement 5 (C5), complement 8 (C8) and transthyretin (TTR), suggesting
that these could be potential biomarkers for the disease. We therefore set out to
determine whether serum concentrations of C5, C8 and TTR can be used as
biomarkers for patients with HNF4A-MODY and HNF1A-MODY.
METHODS: The serum concentrations of C5, C8 and TTR were analysed in patients
with mutations in the HNF-1alpha (n=29) and HNF-4alpha (N=13) genes. Type 2
diabetic (n = 14) and healthy subjects (n = 20), matched for body mass index
(BMI), served as diabetic and non-diabetic control groups, respectively.
RESULTS: Type 2 diabetic patients had markedly increased levels of C5 and C8
compared with healthy control subjects. Levels of C5 and C8 correlated with
glycated haemoglobin (C5: r = 0.48, P = 0.019). After adjustment for BMI,
glycated haemoglobin, age and gender, HNF4A-MODY and HNF1A patients had reduced
levels of C5 and C8 compared with Type 2 diabetic patients (C5: P = 0.001; C8: P 
= 0.004). In addition, patients with HNF4A-MODY, but not those with HNF1A-MODY,
had decreased TTR compared with diabetic patients (P = 0.038).
CONCLUSIONS: Serum concentrations of C5 and C8 seem to distinguish HNF4A and
HNF1A-MODY from other forms of diabetes. However, hyperglycaemia per se increases
the serum concentrations, thereby attenuating their potential role as biomarkers 
for MODY.

PMID: 18513302  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Diabetes. 2008 Jun;57(6):1461-2. doi: 10.2337/db08-0454.

HNF4A and diabetes: injury before insult?

Stanger BZ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology, Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute,
University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, 
USA. bstanger@mail.med.upenn.edu

Comment on
    Diabetes. 2008 Jun;57(6):1745-52.

PMID: 18511449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Biochem J. 2008 Oct 15;415(2):289-96. doi: 10.1042/BJ20080355.

Modulation of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha function by the
peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor-gamma co-activator-1alpha in the
acute-phase response.

Wang Z(1), Burke PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Boston University School of Medicine, 850 Harrison
Avenue, Dowling 2 South, Boston, MA 02118, USA.

HNF-4alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha) is a key regulator of
liver-specific gene expression. To understand the mechanisms governing the
regulation of HNF-4alpha function during the APR (acute-phase response), the
effects of transcription co-activators, including p300, PGC-1alpha
(peroxisome-proliferator-activated receptor-gamma co-activator-1alpha) and SRC
(steroid receptor co-activator)-1alpha were investigated in an injury cell model.
We have shown previously that the HNF-4alpha-sensitive APR genes ApoB
(apolipoprotein B), TTR (transthyretin) and alpha1-AT (alpha1-antitrypsin) were
regulated at the DNA binding and transcriptional levels after cytokine
stimulation. We now show that co-activators have a differential impact on the
transactivation of HNF-4alpha-sensitive genes via HNF-4alpha-binding sites in
ApoB, TTR or alpha1-AT promoters. PGC-1alpha strongly enhances the
transactivation of ApoB and alpha1-AT and, to a lesser extent, of TTR, whereas
SRC-1alpha and p300 only have a weak or no effect on these three genes. More
importantly, it was found that PGC-1alpha has a novel role in the modulation of
the binding ability of HNF-4alpha in response to cytokine treatment. Using in
vitro and in vivo approaches, electrophoretic mobility-shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays, we demonstrate that the reduced HNF-4alpha-DNA
binding ability induced by cytokines is eliminated by overexpression of
PGC-1alpha. Cytokine treatment does not significantly alter the protein levels of
HNF-4alpha and PGC-1alpha, but it does reduce the recruitment of PGC-1alpha to
HNF-4alpha-binding sites and thereby decreases transcriptional activity. These
results establish the importance of PGC-1alpha for HNF-4alpha function and
describe a new HNF-4alpha-dependent regulatory mechanism that is involved in the 
response to injury.

PMCID: PMC3552497
PMID: 18510493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. BMC Med Genet. 2008 May 22;9:45. doi: 10.1186/1471-2350-9-45.

The genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes may be modulated by obesity status:
implications for association studies.

Cauchi S(1), Nead KT, Choquet H, Horber F, Potoczna N, Balkau B, Marre M,
Charpentier G, Froguel P, Meyre D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR8090, Institut de Biologie de Lille, Génomique et Physiologie
Moléculaire des Maladies Métaboliques, Lille, France. Stephane.Cauchi@good.ibl.fr

BACKGROUND: Considering that a portion of the heterogeneity amongst previous
replication studies may be due to a variable proportion of obese subjects in
case-control designs, we assessed the association of genetic variants with type 2
diabetes (T2D) in large groups of obese and non-obese subjects.
METHODS: We genotyped RETN, KCNJ11, HNF4A, HNF1A, GCK, SLC30A8, ENPP1, ADIPOQ,
PPARG, and TCF7L2 polymorphisms in 1,283 normoglycemic (NG) and 1,581 T2D obese
individuals as well as in 3,189 NG and 1,244 T2D non-obese subjects of European
descent, allowing us to examine T2D risk over a wide range of BMI.
RESULTS: Amongst non-obese individuals, we observed significant T2D associations 
with HNF1A I27L [odds ratio (OR) = 1.14, P = 0.04], GCK -30G>A (OR = 1.23, P =
0.01), SLC30A8 R325W (OR = 0.87, P = 0.04), and TCF7L2 rs7903146 (OR = 1.89, P = 
4.5 x 10-23), and non-significant associations with PPARG Pro12Ala (OR = 0.85, P 
= 0.14), ADIPOQ -11,377C>G (OR = 1.00, P = 0.97) and ENPP1 K121Q (OR = 0.99, P = 
0.94). In obese subjects, associations with T2D were detected with PPARG Pro12Ala
(OR = 0.73, P = 0.004), ADIPOQ -11,377C>G (OR = 1.26, P = 0.02), ENPP1 K121Q (OR 
= 1.30, P = 0.003) and TCF7L2 rs7903146 (OR = 1.30, P = 1.1 x 10-4), and
non-significant associations with HNF1A I27L (OR = 0.96, P = 0.53), GCK -30G>A
(OR = 1.15, P = 0.12) and SLC30A8 R325W (OR = 0.95, P = 0.44). However, a
genotypic heterogeneity was only found for TCF7L2 rs7903146 (P = 3.2 x 10-5) and 
ENPP1 K121Q (P = 0.02). No association with T2D was found for KCNJ11, RETN, and
HNF4A polymorphisms in non-obese or in obese individuals.
CONCLUSION: Genetic variants modulating insulin action may have an increased
effect on T2D susceptibility in the presence of obesity, whereas genetic variants
acting on insulin secretion may have a greater impact on T2D susceptibility in
non-obese individuals.

PMCID: PMC2412856
PMID: 18498634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jul;28(14):4588-97. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01191-07. Epub 2008 May 
12.

The MODY1 gene for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha and a feedback loop control
COUP-TFII expression in pancreatic beta cells.

Perilhou A(1), Tourrel-Cuzin C, Zhang P, Kharroubi I, Wang H, Fauveau V, Scott
DK, Wollheim CB, Vasseur-Cognet M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Cancer, Institut Cochin,
Université Paris Descartes, CNRS, UMR 8104, Paris, France.

Pancreatic islet beta cell differentiation and function are dependent upon a
group of transcription factors that maintain the expression of key genes and
suppress others. Knockout mice with the heterozygous deletion of the gene for
chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor II (COUP-TFII) or the
complete disruption of the gene for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) 
in pancreatic beta cells have similar insulin secretion defects, leading us to
hypothesize that there is transcriptional cross talk between these two nuclear
receptors. Here, we demonstrate specific HNF4alpha activation of a reporter
plasmid containing the COUP-TFII gene promoter region in transfected pancreatic
beta cells. The stable association of the endogenous HNF4alpha with a region of
the COUP-TFII gene promoter that contains a direct repeat 1 (DR-1) binding site
was revealed by chromatin immunoprecipitation. Mutation experiments showed that
this DR-1 site is essential for HNF4alpha transactivation of COUP-TFII. The
dominant negative suppression of HNF4alpha function decreased endogenous
COUP-TFII expression, and the specific inactivation of COUP-TFII by small
interfering RNA caused HNF4alpha mRNA levels in 832/13 INS-1 cells to decrease.
This positive regulation of HNF4alpha by COUP-TFII was confirmed by the
adenovirus-mediated overexpression of human COUP-TFII (hCOUP-TFII), which
increased HNF4alpha mRNA levels in 832/13 INS-1 cells and in mouse pancreatic
islets. Finally, hCOUP-TFII overexpression showed that there is direct COUP-TFII 
autorepression, as COUP-TFII occupies the proximal DR-1 binding site of its own
gene in vivo. Therefore, COUP-TFII may contribute to the control of insulin
secretion through the complex HNF4alpha/maturity-onset diabetes of the young 1
(MODY1) transcription factor network operating in beta cells.

PMCID: PMC2447131
PMID: 18474611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Chem Biol Interact. 2008 Jun 17;173(3):179-86. doi: 10.1016/j.cbi.2008.03.015.
Epub 2008 Apr 8.

Preservation of hepatic phenotype in lentiviral-transduced primary human
hepatocytes.

Zamule SM(1), Strom SC, Omiecinski CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Toxicology & Carcinogenesis and Department of Veterinary 
& Biomedical Sciences, Pennsylvania State University, 101 Life Sciences Building,
University Park, PA 16802, USA.

Lentiviral vectors effectively transduce both dividing and non-dividing cells and
stably integrate into the genome of the host cell. In this study, we evaluated
the usefulness of a lentiviral system for genetic modulation of primary human
hepatocyte cultures. Infection with GFP-expressing lentivectors shows that Huh7
and HepG2 cell lines, as well as primary cultures of human hepatocytes, are
efficiently transduced by lentiviral vectors. Real-time RT-PCR analyses
demonstrate that infection with lentivectors does not alter hepatic hallmarks
such as the expression of the nuclear receptors CAR, PXR, RXR alpha, or HNF4
alpha, or expression of the secretory protein, albumin. Additionally, infected
hepatocytes retain the capacity for CYP3A4 induction in response to treatment
with phenobarbital, a uniquely sensitive indicator of hepatic differentiation
status. Lentivectors may be used for both over-expression and knockdown analyses 
in primary hepatocytes, as demonstrated in this study by >200-fold CAR
over-expression and knockdown of CAR to less than 40% of endogenous levels, with 
corresponding effects on CYP2B6 expression. In summary, lentiviral vectors
provide a novel methodology by which primary human hepatocytes may be stably
genetically manipulated, with minimal effects on the differentiated hepatic
phenotype. These approaches offer considerable advantage over current
methodologies, providing a valuable alternative for use in pharmacological and
toxicological investigations involving primary human hepatocyte models and
potentially for cell-based therapeutics to treat hepatic dysfunction in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2749468
PMID: 18468591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Gastroenterology. 2008 Apr;134(4):1191-202. doi: 10.1053/j.gastro.2008.01.027.
Epub 2008 Jan 17.

EPS15R, TASP1, and PRPF3 are novel disease candidate genes targeted by HNF4alpha 
splice variants in hepatocellular carcinomas.

Niehof M(1), Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Center of Drug
Research and Medical Biotechnology, Hannover, Germany.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: The orphan nuclear receptor HNF4alpha is a member of the
hepatic transcription factor network. This protein plays a pivotal role in liver 
development and hepatocellular differentiation. Nine splice variants have been
identified, some of which are specifically regulated in disease. The role of
HNF4alpha splice variants in hepatocellular carcinomas (HCC) is unknown. Here, we
report an identification of novel candidate genes targeted by splice variants of 
HNF4alpha.
METHODS: We used chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by cloning and sequencing
of DNA. Expression of HNF4alpha P1 and P2 promoter-driven isoforms and of genes
targeted by HNF4alpha were analyzed by quantitative reverse-transcription
polymerase chain reaction, Western blotting, electrophoretic mobility shift
assay, and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: We observed a remarkable switch in gene and protein expression from P1
to P2 promoter-driven fetal isoforms of HNF4alpha in transgenic livers and HCCs
of epidermal growth factor (EGF) overexpressing mice and in human HCCs. We
further identified EGF-receptor substrate (EPS15R), related EPS15, the
premessenger RNA processing factor 3 (PRPF3), and taspase 1 (TASP1) as novel
HNF4alpha disease regulated genes with induced expression in mouse and in human
HCCs. We suggest EPS15 and EPS15R mediated internalization of activated EGF
receptor to result in receptor recycling as to reinforce the proliferative
response to EGF. Regulation of the type 2 asparaginase TASP1 and of the splicing 
factor PRPF3 further documents a switch to fetal liver programs in HCC.
CONCLUSIONS: We report induction of P2 promoter-driven HNF4alpha splice variants 
and regulation of disease candidate genes in EGF-induced mouse and human HCC.

PMID: 18395097  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Acta Crystallogr Sect F Struct Biol Cryst Commun. 2008 Apr 1;64(Pt 4):313-7. doi:
10.1107/S1744309108007136. Epub 2008 Mar 29.

Crystallization of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4 alpha) in complex with
the HNF1 alpha promoter element.

Lu P(1), Liu J, Melikishvili M, Fried MG, Chi YI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry and Center for Structural
Biology, University of Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is a member of the nuclear receptor 
superfamily that plays a central role in organ development and metabolic
functions. Mutations on HNF4alpha cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY), a dominant monogenic cause of diabetes. In order to understand the
molecular mechanism of promoter recognition and the molecular basis of
disease-causing mutations, the recombinant HNF4alpha DNA-binding domain was
prepared and used in a study of its binding properties and in crystallization
with a 21-mer DNA fragment that contains the promoter element of another MODY
gene, HNF1alpha. The HNF4alpha protein displays a cooperative and specific
DNA-binding activity towards its target gene-recognition elements. Crystals of
the complex diffract to 2.0 A using a synchrotron-radiation source under
cryogenic (100 K) conditions and belong to space group C2, with unit-cell
parameters a = 121.63, b = 35.43, c = 70.99 A, beta = 119.36 degrees . A
molecular-replacement solution has been obtained and structure refinement is in
progress. This structure and the binding studies will provide the groundwork for 
detailed functional and biochemical studies of the MODY mutants.

PMCID: PMC2374247
PMID: 18391435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Ann Biol Clin (Paris). 2008 Mar-Apr;66(2):189-93. doi: 10.1684/abc.2008.0201.

[Diabetic ketoacidosis with a fatal issue: is it a MODY3 (maturity-onset diabetes
of the young type 3)?].

[Article in French]

Dehan C(1), Tran Van D, Delacour H, Deroudilhe G, Fritsch N, Chiappini J, Dardare
E, Gardet V.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de biochimie, Hôpital d'instruction des Armées Robert Picqué,
Bordeaux.

Ketoacidotic coma is one of the possible diabetes mellitus first symptoms. It
results from complete or relative lack of insuline and is often associated with
type 1 diabetes. The authors report a case of a 45-years old woman with inaugural
diabetes of which atypical features have motivated the study of MODY gene
(maturity-onset diabetes of the young). Gly574ser polymorphism in the HNF-1alpha 
gene was found, in homozygous state, and the question of the responsibility of
this polymorphism in this diabete is asked.

PMID: 18390429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Endocrine. 2008 Feb;33(1):1-8. doi: 10.1007/s12020-008-9054-1. Epub 2008 Mar 25.

The multifunctional estrogen receptor-alpha F domain.

Skafar DF(1), Zhao C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, 540 E.
Canfield, Detroit, MI, 48201, USA. dskafar@med.wayne.edu

The members of the nuclear receptor superfamily act as transcriptional regulatory
factors and exhibit a multidomain structure characterized as domains A-E/F. This 
review focuses on a small, relatively understudied region at the extreme
carboxy-terminus of the estrogen receptor (ER) alpha, the F domain. The F domain 
contributes to differences in the activity of ER alpha and beta subtypes; it is
required for tamoxifen's agonist activity on an estrogen response element, and it
modifies the receptor's interactions with coregulators including steroid receptor
coactivator-1. The differences between the F domains of the ER alpha and beta
subtypes and among the other members of the nuclear hormone receptor superfamily 
may offer opportunities for selective control of the activity of these proteins.

PMID: 18363044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Diabetes. 2008 Jun;57(6):1745-52. doi: 10.2337/db07-1742. Epub 2008 Mar 20.

The diabetic phenotype in HNF4A mutation carriers is moderated by the expression 
of HNF4A isoforms from the P1 promoter during fetal development.

Harries LW(1), Locke JM, Shields B, Hanley NA, Hanley KP, Steele A, Njølstad PR, 
Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Sciences, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, UK. l.w.harries@exeter.ac.uk

Comment in
    Diabetes. 2008 Jun;57(6):1461-2.

OBJECTIVE: Mutations in the alternatively spliced HNF4A gene cause maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY). We characterized the spatial and developmental
expression patterns of HNF4A transcripts in human tissues and investigated their 
role as potential moderators of the MODY phenotype.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We measured the expression of HNF4A isoforms in
human adult tissues and gestationally staged fetal pancreas by isoform-specific
real-time PCR. The correlation between mutation position and age of diagnosis or 
age-related penetrance was assessed in a cohort of 190 patients with HNF4A
mutations.
RESULTS: HNF4A was expressed exclusively from the P2 promoter in adult pancreas, 
but from 9 weeks until at least 26 weeks after conception, up to 23% of
expression in fetal pancreas was of P1 origin. HNF4A4-6 transcripts were not
detected in any tissue. In whole pancreas, HNF4A9 expression was greater than in 
islets isolated from the endocrine pancreas (relative level 22 vs. 7%). Patients 
with mutations in exons 9 and 10 (absent from HNF4A3, HNF4A6, and HNF4A9
isoforms) developed diabetes later than those with mutations in exons 2-8, where 
all isoforms were affected (40 vs. 24 years; P = 0.029). Exon 9/10 mutations were
also associated with a reduced age-related penetrance (53 vs. 10% without
diabetes at age 55 years; P < 0.00001).
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that isoforms derived from the HNF4A P1 promoter are
expressed in human fetal, but not adult, pancreas, and that their presence during
pancreatic development may moderate the diabetic phenotype in individuals with
mutations in the HNF4A gene.

PMID: 18356407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Cell Microbiol. 2008 Jul;10(7):1478-90. doi: 10.1111/j.1462-5822.2008.01141.x.
Epub 2008 Mar 11.

A concerted action of HNF4alpha and HNF1alpha links hepatitis B virus replication
to hepatocyte differentiation.

Quasdorff M(1), Hösel M, Odenthal M, Zedler U, Bohne F, Gripon P, Dienes HP,
Drebber U, Stippel D, Goeser T, Protzer U.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Infectiology at the Center for Molecular Medicine Cologne, Institute
for Medical Microbiology, Goldenfelsstr. 19-21, 50935 Cologne, Germany.

Hepatitis B virus (HBV) is an important human pathogen, which targets the liver
extremely efficient, gaining access to hepatocytes by a so far unknown receptor
and replicating in a hepatocyte-specific fashion. Cell differentiation seems to
determine HBV replication. We here show that the level of hepatocyte
differentiation, as indicated by hepatocyte polarization and metabolic activity, 
is closely correlated to the transcription of the HBV RNA pregenome. Pregenome
transcription determined the level of HBV replication in various cell lines of
hepatocellular origin and in primary human hepatocytes. A variety of
hepatocyte-enriched nuclear factors have been described to regulate transcription
of the pregenome, but it remained unknown which factors link HBV replication to
hepatocyte differentiation. We determined that high expression levels of
HNF4alpha but not its potential cofactors or other hepatocyte-enriched
transcription factors were essential for efficient HBV replication, and link it
to hepatocyte differentiation. HNF1alpha contributed to the control of HBV
replication because it regulated the expression of HNF4alpha. Thus, a concerted
action of HNF4alpha and HNF1alpha, which also determines morphological and
functional differentiation of hepatocytes, links HBV replication to hepatocyte
differentiation.

PMID: 18346225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008 Jun;28(6):1193-9. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.107.160150. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

Association of stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 activity with familial combined
hyperlipidemia.

Mar-Heyming R(1), Miyazaki M, Weissglas-Volkov D, Kolaitis NA, Sadaat N, Plaisier
C, Pajukanta P, Cantor RM, de Bruin TW, Ntambi JM, Lusis AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2008 Aug;28(8):e152; author reply e153.

OBJECTIVE: Stearoyl-CoA desaturase 1 (SCD1) is the rate-limiting enzyme involved 
in the synthesis of monounsaturated fatty acids, and in mice SCD1 activity is
associated with plasma triglyceride levels. We used the fatty acid desaturation
index (the plasma ratio of 18:1/18:0) as a marker of SCD1 activity to investigate
the relationship of SCD1 to familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL).
METHODS AND RESULTS: The fatty acid desaturation index was measured in 400
individuals from 18 extended FCHL pedigrees. FCHL-affected individuals exhibited 
increased SCD1 activity when compared to unrelated controls (P < 0.0001). The
fatty acid desaturation index was found to be highly heritable (h(2) = 0.48, P = 
2.2 x 10(-11)) in this study sample. QTL analysis in 346 sibling pairs from 18
FCHL families revealed suggestive linkage of the desaturation index to
chromosomes 3p26.1 to 3p13 (z = 2.7, P = 0.003), containing the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPARgamma) gene, and 20p11.21 to 20q13.32 
(z = 1.7, P = 0.04), containing the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4, alpha
(HNF4alpha) gene. A specific haplotype of HNF4alpha was found to be associated
with the desaturation index in these FCHL families (P = 0.002).
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that the fatty acid desaturation index is a 
highly heritable trait that is associated with the dyslipidemia observed in FCHL.

PMCID: PMC2758768
PMID: 18340007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Diabetes. 2008 Jun;57(6):1738-44. doi: 10.2337/db06-1464. Epub 2008 Mar 10.

Common variants in maturity-onset diabetes of the young genes and future risk of 
type 2 diabetes.

Holmkvist J(1), Almgren P, Lyssenko V, Lindgren CM, Eriksson KF, Isomaa B, Tuomi 
T, Nilsson P, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences-Diabetes and Endocrinology, CRC, Malmö
University Hospital MAS, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden.
johan.holmkvist@med.lu.se

OBJECTIVE: Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, HNF-4alpha,
glucokinase (GCK), and HNF-1beta genes cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY), but it is not known whether common variants in these genes predict future
type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We tested 14 previously associated polymorphisms in 
HNF-1alpha, HNF-4alpha, GCK, and HNF-1beta for association with type 2
diabetes-related traits and future risk of type 2 diabetes in 2,293 individuals
from the Botnia study (Finland) and in 15,538 individuals from the Malmö
Preventive Project (Sweden) with a total follow-up >360,000 years.
RESULTS: The polymorphism rs1169288 in HNF-1alpha strongly predicted future type 
2 diabetes (hazard ratio [HR] 1.2, P = 0.0002). Also, SNPs rs4810424 and
rs3212198 in HNF-4alpha nominally predicted future type 2 diabetes (HR 1.3 [95%
CI 1.0-1.6], P = 0.03; and 1.1 [1.0-1.2], P = 0.04). The rs2144908 polymorphism
in HNF-4alpha was associated with elevated rate of hepatic glucose production
during a hyperinsulinemic-euglycemic clamp (P = 0.03) but not with deterioration 
of insulin secretion over time. The SNP rs1799884 in the GCK promoter was
associated with elevated fasting plasma glucose (fPG) concentrations that
remained unchanged during the follow-up period (P = 0.4; SE 0.004 [-0.003-0.007])
but did not predict future type 2 diabetes (HR 0.9 [0.8-1.0], P = 0.1).
Polymorphisms in HNF-1beta (transcription factor 2 [TCF2]) did not significantly 
influence insulin or glucose values nor did they predict future type 2 diabetes.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion, genetic variation in both HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha
predict future type 2 diabetes, whereas variation in the GCK promoter results in 
a sustained but subtle elevation of fPG that is not sufficient to increase risk
for future type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 18332101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2008;23(1):54-8.

Complex mechanism underlying transcriptional control of the haplotyped
flavin-containing monooxygenase 3 (FMO3) gene in Japanese: different regulation
between mutations in 5'-upstream distal region and common element in proximal
region.

Shimizu M(1), Murayama N, Nagashima S, Fujieda M, Yamazaki H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism and Pharmacokinetics, Showa Pharmaceutical
University, Machida, Tokyo, Japan.

We reported the human flavin-containing monooxygenase 3 (FMO3) haplotypes
(Pharmacogenet. Genomics: 17, 827, 2007). The objective was to gain the insight
into transcriptional regulation in a Japanese population. The wild-type FMO3
reporter plasmids carrying 5'-flanking sequence from the transcriptional
initiation site of the FMO3 haplotype 1 (prepared from three individuals) showed 
higher luciferase activities in HepG2 cells than those from the FMO3 haplotypes 2
and 3, with the wild-type coding region. Several deletion mutants of the FMO3
haplotype 1 (extending from -5,167 to -1,764, numbered relative to the A of the
ATG translational initiation codon) revealed that the region of -2,064 to -1,804 
contained an important cis-acting element(s) for activation of the FMO3 gene
expression. Putative hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 (HNF-4) binding site and CCAAT
box, but not Yin Yang 1 element, could be responsible cis-acting elements of the 
FMO3 gene, by site-directed mutagenesis analysis. The unknown suppressive
cis-element(s) at the 5'-upstream region from -2,064 might show genetic
polymorphism, because the FMO3 haplotypes 2 and 3 had three and ten mutations,
respectively. These results suggest that the putative HNF-4 binding site and
CCAAT box could be responsible cis-acting elements of the FMO3 gene in Japanese.

PMID: 18305374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Biol Chem. 2008 Apr 18;283(16):10425-32. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M800729200. Epub 2008
Feb 25.

Nuclear receptor CAR requires early growth response 1 to activate the human
cytochrome P450 2B6 gene.

Inoue K(1), Negishi M.

Author information: 
(1)Pharmacogenetics Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, NIEHS, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North
Carolina 27709, USA.

The nuclear receptor CAR (constitutive active/androstane receptor) is a
drug-sensing transcription factor, regulating the hepatic genes that encode
various drug-metabolizing enzymes. We have now characterized the novel regulatory
mechanism by which the signal molecule EGR1 (early growth response 1) determines 
CAR-mediated activation of the human CYP2B6 (cytochrome P450 2B6) gene. The
CYP2B6 enzyme metabolizes commonly used therapeutics and also activates
pro-drugs. The CAR directly binds to the distal enhancer element of the CYP2B6
promoter, which is essential in converging to its drug-sensing function onto
promoter activity. However, this binding alone is not sufficient to activate the 
CYP2B6 promoter; the promoter requires EGR1 to enable CAR to activate the CYP2B6 
promoter. Upon stimulation by protein kinase C, EGR1 directly binds to the
proximal promoter and coordinates the nearby HNF4alpha (hepatocyte-enriched
nuclear factor 4alpha) with CAR at the distal enhancer element to activate the
promoter. Thus, synergy of drug activation and the stimulation of cellular signal
are necessary for CAR to activate the CYP2B6 gene.

PMCID: PMC2447624
PMID: 18303024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Nat Clin Pract Endocrinol Metab. 2008 Apr;4(4):200-13. doi:
10.1038/ncpendmet0778. Epub 2008 Feb 26.

Clinical implications of a molecular genetic classification of monogenic
beta-cell diabetes.

Murphy R(1), Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, UK.

Monogenic diabetes resulting from mutations that primarily reduce beta-cell
function accounts for 1-2% of diabetes cases, although it is often misdiagnosed
as either type 1 or type 2 diabetes. Knowledge of the genetic etiology of
diabetes enables more-appropriate treatment, better prediction of disease
progression, screening of family members and genetic counseling. We propose that 
the old clinical classifications of maturity-onset diabetes of the young and
neonatal diabetes are obsolete and that specific genetic etiologies should be
sought in four broad clinical situations because of their specific treatment
implications. Firstly, diabetes diagnosed before 6 months of age frequently
results from mutation of genes that encode Kir6.2 (ATP-sensitive inward rectifier
potassium channel) or sulfonylurea receptor 1 subunits of an ATP-sensitive
potassium channel, and improved glycemic control can be achieved by treatment
with high-dose sulfonylureas rather than insulin. Secondly, patients with stable,
mild fasting hyperglycemia detected particularly when they are young could have a
glucokinase mutation and might not require specific treatment. Thirdly,
individuals with familial, young-onset diabetes that does not fit with either
type 1 or type 2 diabetes might have mutations in the transcription factors
HNF-1alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-alpha) or HNF-4alpha, and can be treated 
with low-dose sulfonylureas. Finally, extrapancreatic features, such as renal
disease (caused by mutations in HNF-1beta) or deafness (caused by a mitochondrial
m.3243A>G mutation), usually require early treatment with insulin.

PMID: 18301398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Diabetologia. 2008 Apr;51(4):546-53. doi: 10.1007/s00125-008-0942-y. Epub 2008
Feb 23.

Best practice guidelines for the molecular genetic diagnosis of maturity-onset
diabetes of the young.

Ellard S(1), Bellanné-Chantelot C, Hattersley AT; European Molecular Genetics
Quality Network (EMQN) MODY group.

Collaborators: Carette C, Castano Gonzalez L, de Nanclares Leal G, Elles R,
Gaspar G, Gasperikova D, Hansen T, Herr M, Kamarainen O, Kannengiesser C, Klimes 
I, Lacape G, Losekoot M, Malecki M, Meyer P, Njolstad P, Predragovic T, Pruhova
S, Wuyts W.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, Peninsula Medical School,
Exeter, UK. Sian.Ellard@rdeft.nhs.uk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mutations in the GCK and HNF1A genes are the most common cause
of the monogenic forms of diabetes known as 'maturity-onset diabetes of the
young'. GCK encodes the glucokinase enzyme, which acts as the pancreatic glucose 
sensor, and mutations result in stable, mild fasting hyperglycaemia. A
progressive insulin secretory defect is seen in patients with mutations in the
HNF1A and HNF4A genes encoding the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 alpha and -4 alpha. A molecular genetic diagnosis often changes
management, since patients with GCK mutations rarely require pharmacological
treatment and HNF1A/4A mutation carriers are sensitive to sulfonylureas. These
monogenic forms of diabetes are often misdiagnosed as type 1 or 2 diabetes. Best 
practice guidelines for genetic testing were developed to guide testing and
reporting of results.
METHODS: A workshop was held to discuss clinical criteria for testing and the
interpretation of molecular genetic test results. The participants included 22
clinicians and scientists from 13 countries. Draft best practice guidelines were 
formulated and edited using an online tool (http://www.coventi.com).
RESULTS: An agreed set of clinical criteria were defined for the testing of
babies, children and adults for GCK, HNF1A and HNF4A mutations. Reporting
scenarios were discussed and consensus statements produced.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Best practice guidelines have been established for
monogenic forms of diabetes caused by mutations in the GCK, HNF1A and HNF4A
genes. The guidelines include both diagnostic and predictive genetic tests and
interpretation of the results.

PMCID: PMC2270360
PMID: 18297260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Glycoconj J. 2008 Apr;25(3):225-35. doi: 10.1007/s10719-008-9114-z. Epub 2008 Feb
15.

Transcriptional regulation of the fucosyltransferase VI gene in hepatocellular
carcinoma cells.

Higai K(1), Miyazaki N, Azuma Y, Matsumoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Toho
University, Miyama 2-2-1, Funabashi, Chiba, 274-8510, Japan.
koji@phar.toho-u.ac.jp

The alpha1,3-fucosyltransferase VI (FUT VI) protein is a key enzyme for synthesis
of sialyl Lewis X and Lewis X in epithelial cells. Despite its importance, how
FUT VI expression is regulated has not previously been elucidated. In this work, 
we examined transcriptional regulation of the FUT VI gene in hepatocellular
carcinoma HepG2 cells. 5'-Rapid amplification of cDNA ends analysis revealed
transcription start sites of FUT VI in HepG2 cells at +65 and +278 nucleotides
(nt) downstream of the position registered in the Data Base of Human
Transcription Start Sites. We determined promoter regions for FUT VI in HepG2
cells using a luciferase reporter gene assay. The promoter activities of
constructs located 5'-upstream of the transcription start site decreased when the
-186 to -156 and -56 to -19 nt regions were deleted. Site-directed mutagenesis of
these regions revealed that two hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF-4 alpha)
and one octamer binding transcription factor-1 (Oct-1) binding sites are
essential for FUT VI transcription. Furthermore, transient over-expression of
HNF-4 alpha but not Oct-1 enhanced both FUT VI promoter activities and FUT VI
mRNA levels in HuH-7 cells. These results suggest that two defined regions in the
5'-flanking region of the FUT VI transcription start site are critical for FUT VI
transcription in HepG2 cells.

PMID: 18274891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Diabetes. 2008 Jun;57(6):1659-63. doi: 10.2337/db07-1657. Epub 2008 Feb 11.

Persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia and maturity-onset diabetes of the young
due to heterozygous HNF4A mutations.

Kapoor RR(1), Locke J, Colclough K, Wales J, Conn JJ, Hattersley AT, Ellard S,
Hussain K.

Author information: 
(1)London Centre for Paediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism, Great Ormond Street
Hospital for Children NHS Trust, and The Institute of Child Health, University
College London, London, UK.

OBJECTIVE: Mutations in the human HNF4A gene encoding the hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-4alpha are known to cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY), which is characterized by autosomal-dominant inheritance and impaired
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion from pancreatic beta-cells. HNF-4alpha has a
key role in regulating the multiple transcriptional factor networks in the islet.
Recently, heterozygous mutations in the HNF4A gene were reported to cause
transient hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia associated with macrosomia.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Three infants presented with macrosomia and severe
hypoglycemia with a positive family history of MODY. The hypoglycemia was
confirmed to be due to hyperinsulinism, and all three patients required diazoxide
therapy to maintain normoglycemia. Two of the three infants are still requiring
diazoxide therapy at 8 and 18 months, whereas one of them had resolution of
hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia at 32 months of age.
RESULTS: Sequencing of the HNF4A gene identified heterozygous mutations in all
three families. In family 1, a frameshift mutation L330fsdel17ins9 (c.987
1003del17ins9; p.Leu330fs) was present in the proband; a mutation affecting the
conserved A nucleotide of the intron 2 branch site (c.264-21A>G) was identified
in the proband of family 2; and finally a nonsense mutation, Y16X (c.48C>G,
p.Tyr16X), was found in the proband of family 3.
CONCLUSIONS: Heterozygous HNF4A mutations can therefore cause both transient and 
persistent hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia associated with macrosomia. We recommend
that macrosomic infants with transient or persistent hyperinsulinemic
hypoglycemia should be screened for HNF4A mutations if there is a family history 
of youth-onset diabetes.

PMID: 18268044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Diabetes. 2008 Apr;57(4):1069-77. doi: 10.2337/db07-1065. Epub 2008 Jan 9.

HNF4 alpha and the Ca-channel TRPC1 are novel disease candidate genes in diabetic
nephropathy.

Niehof M(1), Borlak J.

Author information: 
(1)Fraunhofer Institute of Toxicology and Experimental Medicine, Center of
Molecular Medicine and Medical Biotechnology, Nikolai-Fuchs-Str. 1, 30625
Hannover, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: The nuclear receptor hepatic nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF 4 alpha) is a
master regulatory protein and an essential player in the control of a wide range 
of metabolic processes. Dysfunction of HNF 4 alpha is associated with metabolic
disorders including diabetes. We were particularly interested in investigating
molecular causes associated with diabetic nephropathy.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Novel disease candidate genes were identified by the
chromatin immunoprecipitation-cloning assay and by sequencing of
immunoprecipitated DNA. Expression of candidate genes was analyzed in kidney and 
liver of Zucker diabetic fatty (ZDF) and of streptozotocin (STZ)-administered
rats and after siRNA-mediated silencing of HNF 4 alpha.
RESULTS: We identified the calcium-permeable nonselective transient receptor
potential cation channel, subfamily C, member 1 (TRPC1) as a novel HNF 4 alpha
gene target. Strikingly, TRPC1 is localized on human chromosome 3q22-24, i.e., a 
region considered to be a hotspot for diabetic nephropathy. We observed a
significant reduction of TRPC1 gene expression in kidney and liver of diabetic
ZDF and of STZ-administered rats as a result of HNF 4 alpha dysfunction. We found
HNF 4 alpha and TRPC1 protein expression to be repressed in kidneys of diabetic
patients diagnosed with nodular glomerulosceloris as evidenced by
immunohistochemistry. Finally, siRNA-mediated functional knock down of HNF 4
alpha repressed TRPC1 gene expression in cell culture experiments.
CONCLUSIONS: Taken collectively, results obtained from animal studies could be
translated to human diabetic nephropathy; there is evidence for a common
regulation of HNF 4 alpha and TRPC1 in human and rat kidney pathologies. We
propose dysregulation of HNF 4 alpha and TRPC1 as a possible molecular rationale 
in diabetic nephropathy.

PMID: 18184923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Diabetes. 2008 Apr;57(4):1048-56. Epub 2007 Dec 27.

Evidence of interaction between PPARG2 and HNF4A contributing to variation in
insulin sensitivity in Mexican Americans.

Black MH(1), Fingerlin TE, Allayee H, Zhang W, Xiang AH, Trigo E, Hartiala J,
Lehtinen AB, Haffner SM, Bergman RN, McEachin RC, Kjos SL, Lawrence JM, Buchanan 
TA, Watanabe RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, 1540 Alcazar St., CHP-220, Los Angeles, CA 90089-9011, USA.

OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that interaction between PPARG2 Pro12Ala and variants 
in the promoter region of HNF4A are associated with type 2 diabetes-related
quantitative traits in Mexican-American families of a proband with previous
gestational diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The BetaGene project genotyped PPARG2 Pro12Ala and
nine HNF4A single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 473 individuals in 89
families. Members of the proband generation had fasting glucose <126 mg/dl and
were phenotyped by oral and intravenous glucose tolerance tests.
RESULTS: Neither PPARG2 Pro12Ala nor any of the nine HNF4A SNPs were
independently associated with type 2 diabetes-related quantitative traits.
However, the interaction between PPARG2 Pro12Ala and HNF4A rs2144908 was
significantly associated with both insulin sensitivity (S(I)) (Bonferroni P =
0.0006) and 2-h insulin (Bonferroni P = 0.039). Subjects with at least one PPARG2
Ala allele and homozygous for the HNF4A rs2144908 A allele had 40% higher S(I)
compared with individuals with at least one G allele. S(I) did not vary by
rs2144908 genotype among PPARG2 Pro/Pro. The interaction result for S(I) was
replicated by the Insulin Resistance Atherosclerosis Family Study (P = 0.018) in 
their San Antonio sample (n = 484) where subjects with at least one PPARG2 Ala
allele and homozygous for the HNF4A rs2144908 A allele had a 29% higher S(I)
compared with individuals with at least one G allele. However, the interaction
was not replicated in their San Luis Valley sample (n = 496; P = 0.401).
CONCLUSIONS: Together, these results suggest that variation in PPARG2 and HNF4A
may interact to regulate insulin sensitivity in Mexican Americans at risk for
type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC4447520
PMID: 18162503  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Pharm Res. 2008 May;25(5):1134-41. Epub 2007 Dec 14.

HNF4alpha is a crucial modulator of the cholesterol-dependent regulation of
NPC1L1.

Iwayanagi Y(1), Takada T, Suzuki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacy, The University of Tokyo Hospital, Faculty of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

PURPOSE: Niemann-Pick C1-like 1 (NPC1L1) has been identified as a target of
ezetimibe and found to be responsible for intestinal cholesterol absorption.
Although, it was recently demonstrated that sterol responsive element binding
protein 2 (SREBP2) is responsible for the cholesterol-dependent down-regulation
of NPC1L1, the molecular mechanism of NPC1L1 expression is not fully understood. 
In the present study, we examined the involvement of hepatocyte nuclear factor
4alpha (HNF4alpha), a key modulator of lipid metabolism, in the transcriptional
regulation of human NPC1L1 gene.
METHODS: Reporter gene assays and EMSAs were performed using human NPC1L1
promoter constructs and the effect of siHNF4alpha was examined.
RESULTS: Transfection of SREBP2 induced the transcriptional activities of NPC1L1 
and additional transfection of HNF4alpha results in a marked stimulation of the
activities. Studies with deletion mutants indicated that important elements are
located within 264 nt upstream in the human NPC1L1 promoter. In addition, studies
with mutations in putative binding sites of HNF4alpha indicated the existence of 
binding sites in -209 to -197 and -52 to -40. Moreover, HNF4alpha knockdown
resulted in the reduced expression and regulation by cholesterol.
CONCLUSIONS: It is concluded that HNF4alpha plays a crucial role in the
expression and regulation of human NPC1L1 gene.

PMID: 18080173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Exp Clin Endocrinol Diabetes. 2007 Nov;115(10):654-61.

Sustained expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor-6 leads to loss of pancreatic
beta-cells by apoptosis.

Hara M(1), Shen J, Pugh W, Polonsky KS, Le Beau MM, Bell GI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, United
States. mhara@midway.uchicago.edu

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-6 (HNF-6) is the ONECUT-homeodomain transcription
factor that is enriched in liver and also present in pancreas and central nervous
system. It is expressed in the pancreatic bud at E10.5. In adult pancreas, its
expression is restricted to the exocrine pancreas and duct cells. Since duct
cells are thought to be precursors of endocrine cells and HNF-6 is involved in
the regulation of the expression of HNF-4alpha and -1beta, genes that cause
maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY), we hypothesized that the sustained
expression of HNF-6 would affect beta-cell function. We generated transgenic mice
over-expressing human HNF-6 using the mouse insulin I promoter (MIP). We obtained
one female founder in which the transgene had been incorporated into two sites;
the chromosome (Ch) 14 and the X chromosome. The integration site of the latter
was within centromeric heterochromatin and the transgene was inactivated. Studies
on mice in which the transgene was integrated into Ch14 showed beta-cell specific
defects functionally and pathologically. The insulin secretory response to
glucose and arginine in the in situ-perfused pancreas was also significantly
impaired in these mice. Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the islets
were smaller and had an abnormal architecture with an inverted ratio of alpha-
and beta-cells resulting from beta-cell loss to 30% by 6-wk of age. The decreased
number of beta-cells was quantified first time by fluorescent activated cell
sorting using entire pancreata from the transgenic mice crossed with MIP-green
fluorescent protein (GFP) mice. This severe loss of beta-cells involved
programmed cell death.

PMID: 18058600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Clin Genet. 2008 Feb;73(2):185-7. Epub 2007 Nov 19.

High frequency of T130I mutation of HNF4A gene in Mexican patients with
early-onset type 2 diabetes.

Menjívar M, Granados-Silvestre MA, Montúfar-Robles I, Herrera M, Tusié-Luna MT,
Canizales-Quinteros S, Aguilar-Salinas CA, Ortiz-López MG.

PMID: 18028455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. J Clin Invest. 2007 Dec;117(12):3979-87.

Monosaccharide-induced lipogenesis regulates the human hepatic sex
hormone-binding globulin gene.

Selva DM(1), Hogeveen KN, Innis SM, Hammond GL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of British Columbia, Child
and Family Research Institute, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

The liver produces plasma sex hormone-binding globulin (SHBG), which transports
sex steroids and regulates their access to tissues. In overweight children and
adults, low plasma SHBG levels are a biomarker of the metabolic syndrome and its 
associated pathologies. Here, we showed in transgenic mice and HepG2
hepatoblastoma cells that monosaccharides (glucose and fructose) reduce human
SHBG production by hepatocytes. This occurred via a downregulation of hepatocyte 
nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) and replacement of HNF-4alpha by the chicken
OVA upstream promoter-transcription factor 1 at a cis-element within the human
SHBG promoter, coincident with repression of its transcriptional activity. The
dose-dependent reduction of HNF-4alpha levels in HepG2 cells after treatment with
glucose or fructose occurred in concert with parallel increases in cellular
palmitate levels and could be mimicked by treatment with palmitoyl-CoA. Moreover,
inhibition of lipogenesis prevented monosaccharide-induced downregulation of
HNF-4alpha and reduced SHBG expression in HepG2 cells. Thus,
monosaccharide-induced lipogenesis reduced hepatic HNF-4alpha levels, which in
turn attenuated SHBG expression. This provides a biological explanation for why
SHBG is a sensitive biomarker of the metabolic syndrome and the metabolic
disturbances associated with increased fructose consumption.

PMCID: PMC2066187
PMID: 17992261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Feb;22(2):485-500. Epub 2007 Nov 8.

Expression of the hepatic specific V1 messenger ribonucleic acid of the human
growth hormone receptor gene is regulated by hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha2
and HNF-4alpha8.

Goodyer CG(1), Rhani Z, Zheng H.

Author information: 
(1)McGill University Health Centre-Montreal Children's Hospital Research
Institute, 4060 St Catherine West, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
cindy.goodyer@muhc.mcgill.ca

Human (h) GH plays an essential role in growth and metabolism, and its
effectiveness is modulated by the availability of its specific receptor [hGH
receptor (hGHR)] on target cells. The hGHR gene has a complex 5'-regulatory
region containing multiple first exons. Seven are clustered within two small
regions: V2,V3,V9 (module A) and V1,V4,V7,V8 (module B). Module A-derived mRNAs
are ubiquitously expressed whereas those from module B are only found in
postnatal liver, suggesting developmental- and liver-specific regulation of
module B hGHR gene expression. To characterize the elements regulating module B
activity, we studied a 1.8-kb promoter of the highest expressing exon in liver,
V1. This promoter was repressed in transfection assays; however, either 5'- or
3'-deletions relieved this, suggesting the presence of multiple negative
regulatory elements. Six putative hepatic nuclear factor 4 (HNF-4) response
elements were identified. We determined that HNF-4alpha is developmentally
regulated in the human liver: HNF-4alpha2 and HNF-4alpha8 are expressed in fetal 
hepatocytes but only HNF-4alpha2 is expressed in postnatal liver. Transient
transfection assays demonstrated that HNF-4alpha2 and HNF-4alpha8 have a similar 
dual effect on V1 transcription: activation via site 1 in the proximal promoter
and repression through site 6, approximately 1.7 kb upstream.
EMSA/electrophoretic mobility supershift assays and chromatin immunoprecipitation
analyses confirmed these two sites are bound by HNF-4alpha. Based on these data, 
we speculate there are multiple regions working together to repress the
expression of V1 hGHR transcripts in tissues other than the normal postnatal
liver, and that HNF-4alpha is a good candidate for regulating V1 hGHR expression 
in the human hepatocyte.

PMID: 17991764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2007 Oct;22(5):391-8.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha and 4 alpha are factors involved in
interindividual variability in the expression of UGT1A6 and UGT1A9 but not
UGT1A1, UGT1A3 and UGT1A4 mRNA in human livers.

Aueviriyavit S(1), Furihata T, Morimoto K, Kobayashi K, Chiba K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Chiba University, Chiba, Japan.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) catalyze phase-II biotransformation reaction 
of a variety of substances. Among the UGT1A isoforms, UGT1A1, UGT1A3, UGT1A4,
UGT1A6 and UGT1A9 are predominantly expressed in the liver. Interindividual
variability in expression of these isoforms would cause interindividual
differences in drug response, toxicity and cancer susceptibility. In the present 
study, we investigated the interindividual variability in UGT1A mRNA expression
and whether hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) and HNF4alpha were
factors responsible for their variability in human livers. The amounts of UGT1A1,
UGT1A3, UGT1A4, UGT1A6, UGT1A9, HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha mRNA in 18 human livers
were measured by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction. The largest
and smallest interindividual differences in expression levels were observed in
UGT1A1 (8.6-fold) and UGT1A4 (2.5-fold) mRNA, respectively. The amounts of
HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha mRNA were strongly correlated with the amount of UGT1A9
mRNA and moderately correlated with that of UGT1A6 mRNA, whereas no significant
correlation was found with the amounts of UGT1A1, UGT1A3 and UGT1A4 mRNA. Our
results suggest that HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha are the factors involved in the
interindividual variability of UGT1A6 and UGT1A9 mRNA expression. Further studies
of other transcription factors are needed to clarify the factor(s) determining
the interindividual variations in UGT1A1, UGT1A3 and UGT1A4 mRNA expression.

PMID: 17965524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Thromb Haemost. 2007 Nov;5(11):2250-8.

Regulation of human protein Z gene expression by liver-enriched transcription
factor HNF-4alpha and ubiquitous factor Sp1.

Sugawara H(1), Iwata H, Souri M, Ichinose A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Patho-Biochemistry and Patho-Biology, Yamagata
University School of Medicine, Yamagata, Japan.

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVES: Protein Z (PZ), which regulates blood coagulation, is 
mainly synthesized in the liver. Its plasma level varies widely among
individuals, and is highly sensitive to Warfarin. The mechanism for the basic
transcription of the human PZ gene, however, has not been reported. The aim of
this study was to elucidate the mechanism of gene regulation for PZ by
characterizing its 5'-flanking region.
METHODS AND RESULTS: A reporter gene assay using the human hepatoma cell line,
HepG2, identified a minimal promoter region (site A) and two enhancer regions
(sites B and C) in the PZ gene. DNase I footprinting and electromobility shift
assays revealed binding of the liver-enriched transcriptional factor hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha to site A, the ubiquitous transcriptional factor Sp1 
to sites A and C, and an unidentified factor to site B. The co-transfection of an
HNF-4alpha expression vector with reporter gene constructs to the non-hepatic
cell line HeLa resulted in a significant increase of PZ promoter activity.
CONCLUSIONS: HNF-4alpha plays a crucial role in human PZ gene expression in
hepatocytic cells, and Sp1 is also important. These findings provide the first
step toward understanding the mechanisms of the varying plasma PZ levels in
individuals under physiological and pathological conditions.

PMID: 17958743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Med J Aust. 2007 Oct 15;187(8):478.

Paediatric diabetes--which children can gain insulin independence?

Harris MF, McGown IN, Cowley DM.

Comment on
    Med J Aust. 2007 May 7;186(9):436-7.

PMID: 17937654  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. EMBO J. 2007 Oct 31;26(21):4445-56. Epub 2007 Oct 11.

Cited2, a coactivator of HNF4alpha, is essential for liver development.

Qu X(1), Lam E, Doughman YQ, Chen Y, Chou YT, Lam M, Turakhia M, Dunwoodie SL,
Watanabe M, Xu B, Duncan SA, Yang YC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Center, Case Western Reserve University 
School of Medicine, Cleveland, OH, USA.

The transcriptional modulator Cited2 is induced by various biological stimuli
including hypoxia, cytokines, growth factors, lipopolysaccharide (LPS) and flow
shear. In this study, we report that Cited2 is required for mouse fetal liver
development. Cited2(-/-) fetal liver displays hypoplasia with higher incidence of
cell apoptosis, and exhibits disrupted cell-cell contact, disorganized sinusoidal
architecture, as well as impaired lipid metabolism and hepatic gluconeogenesis.
Furthermore, we demonstrated the physical and functional interaction of Cited2
with liver-enriched transcription factor HNF4alpha. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
(ChIP) assays further confirmed the recruitment of Cited2 onto the
HNF4alpha-responsive promoters and the reduced HNF4alpha binding to its target
gene promoters in the absence of Cited2. Taken together, this study suggests that
fetal liver defects in mice lacking Cited2 result, at least in part, from its
defective coactivation function for HNF4alpha.

PMCID: PMC2063472
PMID: 17932483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Endocr Dev. 2007;12:33-45.

Distinct roles of HNF1beta, HNF1alpha, and HNF4alpha in regulating pancreas
development, beta-cell function and growth.

Maestro MA(1), Cardalda C, Boj SF, Luco RF, Servitja JM, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Genomic Programming of Beta Cells Laboratory, Institut d'Investigacions
Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Endocrinology, Hospital Clínic de Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain.

Mutations in the genes encoding transcriptional regulators HNF1beta (TCF2),
HNF1alpha (TCF1), and HNF4alpha cause autosomal dominant diabetes (also known as 
maturity-onset diabetes of the young). Herein, we review what we have learnt
during recent years concerning the functions of these regulators in the
developing and adult pancreas. Mouse studies have revealed that HNF1beta is a
critical regulator of a transcriptional network that controls the specification, 
growth, and differentiation of the embryonic pancreas. HNF1beta mutations in
humans accordingly often cause pancreas hypoplasia. By contrast, HNF1alpha and
HNF4alpha have been shown to regulate the function of differentiated beta-cells. 
HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha mutations in patients thus cause decreased
glucose-induced insulin secretion that leads to a progressive form of diabetes.
HNF4alpha mutations paradoxically also cause in utero and neonatal
hyperinsulinism, which later evolves to decreased glucose-induced secretion.
Recent studies show that Hnf4alpha deficiency in mice causes not only abnormal
insulin secretion, but also an impairment of the expansion of beta-cell mass that
normally occurs during pregnancy. In line with this finding, we present data that
Hnf1alpha-/- beta-cells expressing SV40 large T antigen show a severe impairment 
of proliferation and failure to form tumours. Collectively, these findings
implicate HNF1beta as a regulator of pancreas organogenesis and differentiation, 
whereas HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha primarily regulate both growth and function of
islet beta-cells.

PMID: 17923767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Diabet Med. 2007 Nov;24(11):1187-91. Epub 2007 Sep 26.

Gene-gene interactions between HNF4A and KCNJ11 in predicting Type 2 diabetes in 
women.

Qi L(1), van Dam RM, Asselbergs FW, Hu FB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition, Harvard Medical School of Public Health, Boston, MA
02115, USA. nhlqi@channing.harvard.edu

AIMS: Recent studies indicate transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4
alpha (HNF-4 alpha, HNF4A) modulates the transcription of the pancreatic B-cell
ATP-sensitive K+ (KATP) channel subunit Kir6.2 gene (KCNJ11). Both HNF4A and
KCNJ11 have previously been associated with diabetes risk but little is known
whether the variations in these genes interact with each other.
METHODS: We conducted a prospective, nested case-control study of 714 incident
cases of Type 2 diabetes and 1120 control subjects from the Nurses' Health Study.
RESULTS: KCNJ11 E23K was significantly associated with an increased diabetes risk
(odds ratio 1.26, 95% CI 1.03-1.53) while HNF4A P2 promoter polymorphisms were
associated with a moderately increased risk at borderline significance. By using 
a logistic regression model, we found significant interactions between HNF4A
rs2144908, rs4810424 and rs1884613 and KCNJ11 E23K (P for interaction = 0.017,
0.012 and 0.004, respectively). Carrying the minor alleles of the three HNF4A
polymorphisms was associated with significantly greater diabetes risk in women
carrying the KCNJ11 allele 23K, but not in those who did not carry this allele.
Analyses using the multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) method confirmed
the gene-gene interaction. We identified that the best interaction model included
HNF4A rs2144908 and KCNJ11 E23K. Such a two-locus model showed the maximum
cross-validation consistency of 10 out of 10 and a significant prediction
accuracy of 54.2% (P = 0.01) on the basis of 1000-fold permutation testing.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data indicate that HNF4A P2 promoter polymorphisms may interact 
with KCNJ11 E23K in predicting Type 2 diabetes in women.

PMID: 17894829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Diabetologia. 2007 Dec;50(12):2600-1. Epub 2007 Sep 22.

Macrosomia and neonatal hypoglycaemia in RW pedigree subjects with a mutation
(Q268X) in the gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4A).

Fajans SS, Bell GI.

Comment on
    PLoS Med. 2007 Apr;4(4):e118.

PMID: 17891372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Mol Endocrinol. 2008 Jan;22(1):78-90. Epub 2007 Sep 20.

Nuclear receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha1 competes with oncoprotein
c-Myc for control of the p21/WAF1 promoter.

Hwang-Verslues WW(1), Sladek FM.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program, University of California,
Riverside, California 92521, USA.

The dichotomy between cellular differentiation and proliferation is a fundamental
aspect of both normal development and tumor progression; however, the molecular
basis of this opposition is not well understood. To address this issue, we
investigated the mechanism by which the nuclear receptor hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4alpha1 (HNF4alpha1) regulates the expression of the human
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor gene p21/WAF1 (CDKN1A). We found that
HNF4alpha1, a transcription factor that plays a central role in differentiation
in the liver, pancreas, and intestine, activates the expression of p21 primarily 
by interacting with promoter-bound Sp1 at both the proximal promoter region and
at newly identified sites in a distal region (-2.4 kb). Although HNF4alpha1 also 
binds two additional regions containing putative HNF4alpha binding sites,
HNF4alpha1 mutants deficient in DNA binding activate the p21 promoter to the same
extent as wild-type HNF4alpha1, indicating that direct DNA binding by HNF4alpha1 
is not necessary for p21 activation. We also observed an in vitro and in vivo
interaction between HNF4alpha1 and c-Myc as well as a competition between these
two transcription factors for interaction with promoter-bound Sp1 and regulation 
of p21. Finally, we show that c-Myc competes with HNF4alpha1 for control of
apolipoprotein C3 (APOC3), a gene associated with the differentiated hepatic
phenotype. These results suggest a general model by which a differentiation
factor (HNF4alpha1) and a proliferation factor (c-Myc) may compete for control of
genes involved in cell proliferation and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2194635
PMID: 17885207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Pharmacogenomics J. 2008 Apr;8(2):139-46. Epub 2007 Sep 18.

PXR, CAR and HNF4alpha genotypes and their association with pharmacokinetics and 
pharmacodynamics of docetaxel and doxorubicin in Asian patients.

Hor SY(1), Lee SC, Wong CI, Lim YW, Lim RC, Wang LZ, Fan L, Guo JY, Lee HS, Goh
BC, Tan T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, National University of Singapore, Singapore.

Previously studied candidate genes have failed to account for inter-individual
variability of docetaxel and doxorubicin disposition and effects. We genotyped
the transcriptional regulators of CYP3A and ABCB1 in 101 breast cancer patients
from 3 Asian ethnic groups, that is, Chinese, Malays and Indians, in correlation 
with the pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics of docetaxel and doxorubicin.
While there was no ethnic difference in docetaxel and doxorubicin
pharmacokinetics, ethnic difference in docetaxel- (ANOVA, P=0.001) and
doxorubicin-induced (ANOVA, P=0.003) leukocyte suppression was observed, with
Chinese and Indians experiencing greater degree of docetaxel-induced
myelosuppression than Malays (Bonferroni, P=0.002, P=0.042), and Chinese
experiencing greater degree of doxorubicin-induced myelosuppression than Malays
and Indians (post hoc Bonferroni, P=0.024 and 0.025). Genotyping revealed both
PXR and CAR to be well conserved; only a PXR 5'-untranslated region polymorphism 
(-24381A>C) and a silent CAR variant (Pro180Pro) were found at allele frequencies
of 26 and 53%, respectively. Two non-synonymous variants were identified in
HNF4alpha (Met49Val and Thr130Ile) at allele frequencies of 55 and 1%,
respectively, with the Met49Val variant associated with slower neutrophil
recovery in docetaxel-treated patients (ANOVA, P=0.046). Interactions were
observed between HNF4alpha Met49Val and CAR Pro180Pro, with patients who were
wild type for both variants experiencing least docetaxel-induced neutropenia
(ANOVA, P=0.030). No other significant genotypic associations with
pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics of either drug were found. The PXR-24381A>C 
variants were significantly more common in Indians compared to Chinese or Malays 
(32/18/21%, P=0.035) Inter-individual and inter-ethnic variations of docetaxel
and doxorubicin pharmacokinetics or pharmacodynamics exist, but genotypic
variability of the transcriptional regulators PAR, CAR and HNF4alpha cannot
account for this variability.

PMID: 17876342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Diabetologia. 2007 Nov;50(11):2313-7. Epub 2007 Sep 8.

Partial and whole gene deletion mutations of the GCK and HNF1A genes in
maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Ellard S(1), Thomas K, Edghill EL, Owens M, Ambye L, Cropper J, Little J,
Strachan M, Stride A, Ersoy B, Eiberg H, Pedersen O, Shepherd MH, Hansen T,
Harries LW, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Science and Clinical Medicine, Peninsula Medical
School, Exeter, UK. Sian.Ellard@rdeft.nhs.uk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Heterozygous mutations of glucokinase (GCK) and hepatocyte
nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1A; also known as hepatic transcription factor 1
[TCF1]) genes are the most common cause of MODY. Genomic deletions of the HNF1B
(also known as TCF2) gene have recently been shown to account for one third of
mutations causing renal cysts and diabetes syndrome. We investigated the
prevalence of partial and whole gene deletions in UK patients meeting clinical
criteria for GCK or HNF-1alpha/-4alpha MODY and in whom no mutation had been
identified by sequence analysis.
METHODS: A multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) assay was
developed using synthetic oligonucleotide probes for 30 exons of the GCK, HNF1A
and HNF4A genes.
RESULTS: Partial or whole gene deletions were identified in 1/29 (3.5%) probands 
using the GCK MLPA assay and 4/60 (6.7%) of probands using the HNF1A/-4A MLPA
assay. Four different deletions were detected: GCK exon 2, HNF1A exon 1, HNF1A
exons 2 to 10 and HNF1A exons 1 to 10. An additional Danish pedigree with
evidence of linkage to HNF1A had a deletion of exons 2 to 10. Testing other
family members confirmed co-segregation of the deletion mutations with diabetes
in the pedigrees.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Large deletions encompassing whole exons can cause
GCK or HNF-1alpha MODY and will not be detected by sequencing. Gene dosage
assays, such as MLPA, are a useful adjunct to sequence analysis when a diagnosis 
of MODY is strongly suspected.

PMID: 17828387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2007 Aug;22(4):287-98.

Role of human hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha in the expression of
drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters in human hepatocytes assessed by use
of small interfering RNA.

Kamiyama Y(1), Matsubara T, Yoshinari K, Nagata K, Kamimura H, Yamazoe Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Drug Metabolism and Molecular Toxicology, Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is an important transcription factor
in hepatic gene expression. Here, we have investigated the role of HNF4alpha in
the expression of drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters in human hepatocytes
using an adenovirus expressing human HNF4alpha-small interfering RNA
(hHNF4alpha-siRNA). The hHNF4alpha-siRNA effectively reduced the mRNA and nuclear
protein levels of hHNF4alpha in a concentration-dependent manner. The
hHNF4alpha-siRNA also decreased the mRNA levels of CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8,
CYP2C9, CYP2C19, CYP2D6, CYP3A4, UGT1A1, UGT1A9, SULT2A1, ABCB1, ABCB11, ABCC2,
OATP1B1 and OCT1, as well as those of PXR and CAR. To discern the role of these
nuclear receptors, we co-infected hepatocytes with hHNF4alpha-siRNA and PXR- or
CAR-expressing adenovirus. The hHNF4alpha-siRNA-induced reductions of the enzyme 
and transporter mRNA levels were not restored except CYP2B6 mRNA levels, which
were returned to the control level by overexpressing CAR. Furthermore, although
hHNF4alpha-siRNA did not significantly affect the fold-induction of CYP2B6,
CYP2C8, CYP2C9, or CYP3A4 mRNA levels following treatment with CYP inducers, the 
levels in hHNF4alpha-suppressed cells fell significantly compared to the control.
These results suggest that HNF4alpha plays a dominant role in the expression of
drug-metabolizing enzymes and transporters in human hepatocytes, and that
HNF4alpha expression levels is a possible determinant for inter-individual
variations in the expression of these enzymes and transporters.

PMID: 17827783  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Diabetes. 2007 Dec;56(12):3112-7. Epub 2007 Sep 7.

Studies in 3,523 Norwegians and meta-analysis in 11,571 subjects indicate that
variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4A) P2 region are
associated with type 2 diabetes in Scandinavians.

Johansson S(1), Raeder H, Eide SA, Midthjell K, Hveem K, Søvik O, Molven A,
Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

OBJECTIVE: Recent publications have found an association between common variants 
near the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4A) P2 promoter and type 2
diabetes in some populations but not in others, and the role for HNF4A in type 2 
diabetes has remained unclear. In an attempt to address these inconsistencies, we
investigated HNF4A single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in a large
population-based sample and included a meta-analysis of published studies.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We genotyped 12 SNPs in the HNF4A region in a
Norwegian population-based sample of 1,644 individuals with type 2 diabetes and
1,879 control subjects (the Nord-Trøndelag Health Study [HUNT] 2). We combined
our data with all previously published case/control studies and performed a
meta-analysis.
RESULTS: Consistent with initial studies, we found a trend toward association for
the SNPs rs1884613 (odds ratio [OR] 1.17 [95% CI 1.03-1.35]) and rs2144908 (1.21 
[1.05-1.38]) in the P2 region and for rs4812831 (1.21 [1.02-1.44]), located 34 kb
downstream of the P2 promoter. Meta-analysis, comprising 12,292 type 2 diabetic
case and 15,519 control subjects, revealed a nonsignificant OR of 1.05 (95% CI
0.98-1.12) but with significant heterogeneity between the populations. We
therefore performed a subanalysis including only the data for subjects from
Scandinavia. Among the 4,000 case and 7,571 control Scandinavian subjects, a
pooled OR of 1.14 (1.06-1.23), P = 0.0004, was found for the SNP rs1884613.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that variation in the HNF4A region is associated
with type 2 diabetes in Scandinavians, highlighting the importance of exploring
small genetic effects in large, homogenous populations.

PMID: 17827402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Acta Diabetol. 2007 Dec;44(4):227-32. Epub 2007 Sep 6.

Association of genetic variations near P2 promoter of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4alpha gene and insulin secretion index in Thais.

Jongjaroenprasert W(1), Chanprasertyothin S, Kongsuksai A, Bunnag P, Puavilai G, 
Ongphiphadhanakul B.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrine and Metabolism Unit, Department of Medicine, Ramathibodi Hospital,
Mahidol University, Rama 6 Road, Rajthevi, Bangkok 10400, Thailand.
rawjj@mahidol.ac.th

This study was aimed to assess the association of the two single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) near P2 promoter (rs1884614 and rs2144908) of hepatocyte
nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF4A) with insulin secretion index and type 2 diabetes in
Thais. Participants were categorized into three groups; unrelated type 2 diabetes
(N = 219), prediabetes subjects (N = 228), and normal glucose tolerant controls
(N = 203). Homeostasis model assessment was calculated for individual insulin
secretion and insulin sensitivity index. Genotyping of both SNPs was done by
allele-specific PCR technique. Difference of SNP allele frequencies between
groups were computed using the chi (2)-statistic. Multivariate regression
analysis was performed to determine the effect of SNPs on insulin secretion
index. The clinical features of all groups were similar. We demonstrated genotype
TT at rs1884614, BMI, and waist circumference were significantly associated with 
insulin secretion index (P = 0.023) but not with diabetes phenotype.

PMID: 17805472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Biochem J. 2008 Jan 1;409(1):243-50.

The far and distal enhancers in the CYP3A4 gene co-ordinate the proximal promoter
in responding similarly to the pregnane X receptor but differentially to
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha.

Liu FJ(1), Song X, Yang D, Deng R, Yan B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Rhode
Island, Kingston, RI 02881, USA.

CYP3A4 (cytochrome P450 3A4) is involved in the metabolism of more than 50% of
drugs and other xenobiotics. The expression of CYP3A4 is induced by many
structurally dissimilar compounds. The PXR (pregnane X receptor) is recognized as
a key regulator for the induction, and the PXR-directed transactivation of the
CYP3A4 gene is achieved through a co-ordinated mechanism of the distal module
with the proximal promoter. Recently, a far module was found to support
constitutive expression of CYP3A4. The far module, like the distal module, is
structurally clustered by a PXR response element (F-ER6) and elements recognized 
by HNF-4alpha (hepatocyte nuclear receptor-4alpha). We hypothesized that the far 
module supports PXR transactivation of the CYP3A4 gene. Consistent with the
hypothesis, fusion of the far module to the proximal promoter of CYP3A4 markedly 
increased rifampicin-induced reporter activity. The increase was synergistically 
enhanced when both the far and distal modules were fused to the proximal
promoter. The increase, however, was significantly reduced when the F-ER6 was
disrupted. Chromatin immunoprecipitation detected the presence of PXR in the far 
module. Interestingly, HNF-4alpha increased the activity of the distal-proximal
fused promoter, but decreased the activity of the far-proximal fused promoter.
Given the fact that induction of CYP3A4 represents an important detoxification
mechanism, the functional redundancy and synergistic interaction in supporting
PXR transactivation suggest that the far and distal modules ensure the induction 
of CYP3A4 during chemical insults. The difference in responding to HNF-4alpha
suggests that the magnitude of the induction is under control through various
transcriptional networks.

PMCID: PMC4114763
PMID: 17764444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2007 Nov;323(2):586-98. Epub 2007 Aug 8.

Positive and negative regulation of human hepatic hydroxysteroid sulfotransferase
(SULT2A1) gene transcription by rifampicin: roles of hepatocyte nuclear factor
4alpha and pregnane X receptor.

Fang HL(1), Strom SC, Ellis E, Duanmu Z, Fu J, Duniec-Dmuchowski Z, Falany CN,
Falany JL, Kocarek TA, Runge-Morris M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Wayne State University, Detroit,
Michigan 48201, USA.

The effects of rifampicin treatment on SULT2A1 mRNA expression were evaluated in 
23 preparations of primary cultured human hepatocytes. In contrast to the
consistently occurring induction of CYP3A4, a prototypical pregnane X receptor
(PXR) target gene, rifampicin treatment increased SULT2A1 mRNA levels in 12 of
the hepatocyte preparations, but it produced little change or even suppression in
the others. Transient transfection of HepG2 cells with a series of reporter
constructs implicated two SULT2A1 5'-flanking regions as containing
rifampicin-responsive information. Each of these regions contained a hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4 (HNF4) binding site (at nucleotide [nt] -6160 and -54), as
demonstrated by in vitro binding and site-directed mutagenesis. HNF4alpha bound
to the HNF4-54 region of the endogenous SULT2A1 gene, as indicated by chromatin
immunoprecipitation. Cotransfection of HepG2 cells with pregnane X receptor (PXR)
dose-dependently suppressed reporter expression from SULT2A1 constructs
containing the HNF4 sites, and rifampicin treatment augmented the suppression.
Rifampicin treatment concentration-dependently suppressed SULT2A1 reporter
expression at the same concentrations that progressively induced expression from 
a PXR-responsive CYP3A4 reporter, whereas higher rifampicin concentrations
reversed the SULT2A1 suppression. The suppressive effect of rifampicin was
diminished, whereas the activating effect was augmented, in HepG2 cells with RNA 
interference-mediated PXR knockdown. These results suggest that HNF4alpha plays a
central role in the control of SULT2A1 transcription and that rifampicin-liganded
PXR suppresses SULT2A1 expression by interfering with HNF4alpha activity. By
contrast, the rifampicin-inducible SULT2A1 expression that occurs in many human
hepatocyte preparations seems to be mediated through a PXR-independent mechanism.

PMID: 17687072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2007 Sep;293(3):G585-90. Epub 2007 Jul
19.

Fasting induces basolateral uptake transporters of the SLC family in the liver
via HNF4alpha and PGC1alpha.

Dietrich CG(1), Martin IV, Porn AC, Voigt S, Gartung C, Trautwein C, Geier A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Division of Gastroenterology and
Hepatology, University Hospital Aachen, Aachen University, Pauwelsstrasse 30,
52074 Aachen, Germany.

Fasting induces numerous adaptive changes in metabolism by several central
signaling pathways, the most important represented by the
HNF4alpha/PGC-1alpha-pathway. Because HNF4alpha has been identified as central
regulator of basolateral bile acid transporters and a previous study reports
increased basolateral bile acid uptake into the liver during fasting, we
hypothesized that HNF4alpha is involved in fasting-induced bile acid uptake via
upregulation of basolateral bile acid transporters. In rats, mRNA of Ntcp, Oatp1,
and Oatp2 were significantly increased after 48 h of fasting. Protein expression 
as determined by Western blot showed significant increases for all three
transporters 72 h after the onset of fasting. Whereas binding activity of
HNF1alpha in electrophoretic mobility shift assays remained unchanged, HNF4alpha 
binding activity to the Ntcp promoter was increased significantly. In line with
this result, we found significantly increased mRNA expression of HNF4alpha and
PGC-1alpha. Functional studies in HepG2 cells revealed an increased endogenous
NTCP mRNA expression upon cotransfection with either HNF4alpha, PGC-1alpha, or a 
combination of both. We conclude that upregulation of the basolateral bile acid
transporters Ntcp, Oatp1, and Oatp2 in fasted rats is mediated via the
HNF4alpha/PGC-1alpha pathway.

PMID: 17640976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Diabetes Care. 2007 Jul;30 Suppl 2:S134-40.

Genetics of gestational diabetes mellitus and type 2 diabetes.

Watanabe RM(1), Black MH, Xiang AH, Allayee H, Lawrence JM, Buchanan TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine of USC, Los
Angeles, CA 90089-9011, USA. rwatanab@usc.edu

Erratum in
    Diabetes Care. 2007 Dec;30(12):3154.

PMCID: PMC2925642
PMID: 17596461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Biol Chem. 2007 Aug 24;282(34):24607-14. Epub 2007 Jun 30.

Activation of bile acid biosynthesis by the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase 
(MAPK): hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha phosphorylation by the p38 MAPK is
required for cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase expression.

Xu Z(1), Tavares-Sanchez OL, Li Q, Fernando J, Rodriguez CM, Studer EJ, Pandak
WM, Hylemon PB, Gil G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Microbiology, Medical
College of Virginia at Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond, Virginia
23298-0614, USA.

Bile acids are required for intestinal absorption and biliary solubilization of
cholesterol and lipids. In addition, bile acids play a crucial role in
cholesterol homeostasis. One of the key enzymes in the bile acid biosynthetic
pathways is cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase/cytochrome P450 7alpha-hydroxylase
(7alpha-hydroxylase), which is the rate-limiting and regulatory step of the
"classic" pathway. Transcription of the 7alpha-hydroxylase gene is highly
regulated. Two nuclear receptors, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha)
and alpha(1)-fetoprotein transcription factor, are required for both
transcription and regulation by different physiological events. It has been shown
that some mitogen-activated protein kinases, such as the c-Jun N-terminal kinase 
and the ERK, play important roles in the regulation of 7alpha-hydroxylase
transcription. In this study, we show evidence that the p38 kinase pathway plays 
an important role in 7alpha-hydroxylase expression and hence in bile acid
synthesis. Inhibition of p38 kinase activity in primary hepatocytes results in
approximately 5-10-fold reduction of 7alpha-hydroxylase mRNA. This suppression is
mediated, at least in part, through HNF-4alpha. Inhibition of p38 kinase activity
diminishes HNF-4alpha nuclear protein levels and its phosphorylation in vivo and 
in vitro, and it renders a less stable protein. Induction of the p38 kinase
pathway by insulin results in an increase in HNF-4alpha protein and a concomitant
induction of 7alpha-hydroxylase expression that is blocked by inhibiting the p38 
pathway. These studies show a functional link between the p38 signaling pathway, 
HNF-4alpha, and bile acid synthesis.

PMCID: PMC3291957
PMID: 17603092  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Diabetes. 2007 Oct;56(10):2638-42. Epub 2007 Jun 29.

Variants of the transcription factor 7-like 2 (TCF7L2) gene are associated with
type 2 diabetes in an African-American population enriched for nephropathy.

Sale MM(1), Smith SG, Mychaleckyj JC, Keene KL, Langefeld CD, Leak TS, Hicks PJ, 
Bowden DW, Rich SS, Freedman BI.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Human Genomics, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina, USA. msale@virginia.edu

OBJECTIVE: Recently, variants in the TCF7L2 gene have been reported to be
associated with type 2 diabetes across multiple Europid populations, but only one
small sample of African-American type 2 diabetic patients has been examined. Our 
objective was to investigate the importance of TCF7L2 in a larger
African-American case-control population.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: We investigated single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in six known type 2 diabetes genes in 577 African-American case subjects
with type 2 diabetes enriched for nephropathy and 596 African-American control
subjects. Additionally, we genotyped 70 ancestry-informative markers (AIMs) to
apply adjustments for differences in ancestral proportions.
RESULTS: The most significant associations were observed with TCF7L2 intron 3
SNPs rs7903146 (additive P = 4.10 x 10(-6), odds ratio [OR] 1.51;
admixture-adjusted P(a) = 3.77 x 10(-6)) and rs7901695 (P = 0.001, OR 1.30; P(a) 
= 0.003). The 2-SNP haplotype containing these SNPs was also associated with type
2 diabetes (P = 3 x 10(-5)). Modest associations were also seen with TCF7L2
intron 4 SNPs rs7895340, rs11196205, and rs12255372 (0.01 < P < 0.05; 0.03 < P(a)
< 0.08), as well as with ATP-sensitive inwardly rectifying potassium channel
subunit Kir6.2 (KCNJ11) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF4A) SNPs (0.01 
< P < 0.05; 0.01 < P(a) < 0.41). No significant associations were detected with
genotyped calpain 10 (CAPN10), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma
(PPARG), and transcription factor 1 (TCF1) SNPs.
CONCLUSIONS: This study indicates that variants in the TCF7L2 gene significantly 
contribute to diabetes susceptibility in African-American populations.

PMID: 17601994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Dev Biol. 2007 Aug 15;308(2):355-67. Epub 2007 May 25.

The homeobox gene Hhex is essential for proper hepatoblast differentiation and
bile duct morphogenesis.

Hunter MP(1), Wilson CM, Jiang X, Cong R, Vasavada H, Kaestner KH, Bogue CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar
Street, New Haven, CT 06510, USA.

Hhex is required for early development of the liver. A null mutation of Hhex
results in a failure to form the liver bud and embryonic lethality. Therefore,
Hhex null mice are not informative as to whether this gene is required during
later stages of hepatobiliary morphogenesis. To address this question, we derived
Hhex conditional null mice using the Cre-loxP system and two different Cre
transgenics (Foxa3-Cre and Alfp-Cre). Deletion of Hhex in the hepatic
diverticulum (Foxa3-Cre;Hhex(d2,3/-)) led to embryonic lethality and resulted in 
a small and cystic liver with loss of Hnf4alpha and Hnf6 expression in early
hepatoblasts. In addition, the gall bladder was absent and the extrahepatic bile 
duct could not be identified. Loss of Hhex in the embryonic liver
(Alfp-Cre;Hhex(d2,3/-)) caused irregular development of intrahepatic bile ducts
and an absence of Hnf1beta in many (cystic) biliary epithelial cells, which
resulted in a slow, progressive form of polycystic liver disease in adult mice.
Thus, we have shown that Hhex is required during multiple stages of hepatobiliary
development. The altered expression of Hnf4alpha, Hnf6 and Hnf1beta in Hhex
conditional null mice suggests that Hhex is an essential component of the genetic
networks regulating hepatoblast differentiation and intrahepatic bile duct
morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2045067
PMID: 17580084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Drug Metab Dispos. 2007 Sep;35(9):1700-10. Epub 2007 Jun 18.

Expression of constitutive androstane receptor, hepatic nuclear factor 4 alpha,
and P450 oxidoreductase genes determines interindividual variability in basal
expression and activity of a broad scope of xenobiotic metabolism genes in the
human liver.

Wortham M(1), Czerwinski M, He L, Parkinson A, Wan YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Therapeutics, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, KS 66160, USA.

Identification of genetic variation predictive of clearance rate of a wide
variety of prescription drugs could lead to cost-effective personalized medicine.
Here we identify regulatory genes whose variable expression level among
individuals may have widespread effects upon clearance rate of a variety of
drugs. Twenty liver samples with variable CYP3A activity were profiled for
expression level and activity of xenobiotic metabolism genes as well as genes
involved in the regulation thereof. Regulatory genes whose expression level
accounted for the highest degree of collinearity among expression levels of
xenobiotic metabolism genes were identified as possible master regulators of drug
clearance rate. Significant linear correlations (p < 0.05) were identified among 
mRNA levels of CYP2A6, CYP2B6, CYP2C8, CYP2C9, CYP2C19, MRP2, OATP2, P450
oxidoreductase (POR), and UDP-glucuronosyltranferase 1A1, suggesting that these
xenobiotic metabolism genes are coregulated at the transcriptional level. Using
partial regression analysis, constitutive androstane receptor (CAR) and hepatic
nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4 alpha) were identified as the nuclear receptors
whose expression levels are most strongly associated with expression of
coregulated xenobiotic metabolism genes. POR expression level, which is also
associated with CAR and HNF4 alpha expression level, was found to be strongly
associated with the activity of many cytochromes P450. Thus, interindividual
variation in the expression level of CAR, HNF4 alpha, and POR probably determines
variation in expression and activity of a broad scope of xenobiotic metabolism
genes and, accordingly, clearance rate of a variety of xenobiotics.
Identification of polymorphisms in these candidate master regulator genes that
account for their variable expression among individuals may yield readily
detectable biomarkers that could serve as predictors of xenobiotic clearance
rate.

PMID: 17576804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cytotherapy. 2007;9(4):362-78.

In vitro differentiation of human cord blood-derived unrestricted somatic stem
cells towards an endodermal pathway.

Sensken S(1), Waclawczyk S, Knaupp AS, Trapp T, Enczmann J, Wernet P, Kogler G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Transplantation Diagnostics and Cell Therapeutics, University of
Duesseldorf Medical School, Duesseldorf, Germany.

BACKGROUND: Pluripotent unrestricted somatic stem cells (USSC) from UC blood can 
differentiate into hepatic cells in the in utero sheep model, resulting in 20%
human albumin-producing parenchymal hepatic cells without cell fusion or
tumor-formation events. Additionally, we have shown in vitro differentiation of
USSC by hepatocyte growth factor and oncostatin M induction, causing changes in
the gene expression towards the endodermal lineage. Positive glycogen synthase
expression and a positive periodic acid-schiff reaction demonstrated a functional
production of polysaccharides in the cells.
METHODS: We describe the in vitro differentiation of USSC towards an endodermal
pathway using different matrices, growth factors and organic substances. Also,
co-cultures of USSC with primary cells of endodermal tissue were prepared to
mimic the biologic niche. We investigated the effect of direct co-culture of USSC
with primary rat hepatocytes or with sheep tissue of endodermal origin. Direct
co-cultures were set up to ensure cell-cell contacts. For co-cultures without
cell-cell contacts, transwell inlays with 1-microm membranes were used to
separate the cells. Furthermore, the effect of endodermally conditioned medium
was investigated. Changes in the gene expression patterns were analyzed by
RT-PCR.
RESULTS: We have shown that USSC can differentiate in vitro into an
endodermal-like cell with a phenotype similar to hepatic cells. Differentiation
of USSC with growth factors, retinoic acid, matrigel matrix and different
co-cultures led to an increased expression of albumin and also to the detection
of GSC, SOX 17, Cyp2B6, Cyp3A4, Gys2, HNF4a, ISL-1 and Nkx6.1. In addition,
functional albumin secretion was observed.
DISCUSSION: Although the differentiation assays demonstrated here produce only an
immature hepatocyte-like cell, endodermaly differentiated USSC might be a useful 
alternative for cell replacement in the future.

PMID: 17573612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Placenta. 2007 Oct;28(10):1004-11. Epub 2007 Jun 18.

Examination of Glucocorticoid receptor alpha-mediated transcriptional regulation 
of P-glycoprotein, CYP3A4, and CYP2C9 genes in placental trophoblast cell lines.

Pavek P(1), Cerveny L, Svecova L, Brysch M, Libra A, Vrzal R, Nachtigal P, Staud 
F, Ulrichova J, Fendrich Z, Dvorak Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Charles
University, Heyrovskoho 1203, Hradec Kralove 500 05, Czech Republic.
petr.pavek@faf.cuni.cz

The placental trophoblast at different stages of pregnancy contains some drug
transporters and xenobiotic-metabolising enzymes, as well as ligand-activated
nuclear receptors, which control their inducible transcriptional regulation.
Glucocorticoid receptor alpha (GRalpha) is expressed in both placental
syncytiotrophoblast and cytotrophoblast. GRalpha was shown to control inducible
expression of several enzymes of the cytochrome P-450 family (CYP) and the drug
transporter P-glycoprotein in the liver. However, GRalpha-mediated
transcriptional regulation of drug transporters and CYPs has not been studied in 
the placental trophoblast. In this study, we examined the expression and activity
of GRalpha in the transcriptional regulation of P-glycoprotein, CYP3A4, and
CYP2C9 in placental trophoblast cell lines. Employing RT-PCR, Western blotting,
and luciferase gene reporter assay, we detected the expression and activity of
GRalpha in JEG3 and BeWo cell lines. However, we observed that only MDR1 mRNA was
up-regulated after treatment of placental cells with dexamethasone. Accordingly, 
only the promoter of the MDR1 gene was activated by dexamethasone in gene
reporter assays in placental cells and the activation was abolished by RU486, an 
antagonist of GRalpha. CYP3A4 and CYP2C9 promoters were activated in placental
cells only after co-transfection with hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha
(HNF4alpha), which indicates the hepatocyte-specific character of
GRalpha-mediated regulation of the genes. On the other hand, coexpression of
HNF4alpha had no effect on the activation of the MDR1 gene promoter, suggesting
HNF4alpha-independent regulation via GRalpha. We conclude that GRalpha may be
involved in the transcriptional regulation of P-glycoprotein in the placental
trophoblast. We also indicate that the CYP3A4 and CYP2C9 genes are not inducible 
through GRalpha in placental cell lines, due to the lack of HNF4alpha expression 
and possibly some additional hepatocyte-specific transcriptional factors.

PMID: 17572486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Curr Opin Clin Nutr Metab Care. 2007 Jul;10(4):397-402.

HNF4A genetic variants: role in diabetes.

Love-Gregory L(1), Permutt MA.

Author information: 
(1)Nutritional Sciences, Endocrinology, Metabolism and Lipid Research, Department
of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110, 
USA.

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4A) gene 
play a role in the development of diabetes mellitus. Although genetic variation
in and around HNF4A regulatory regions has received considerable attention, the
significance of these variants in the common type 2 diabetes varies in the
literature. This review will provide a general overview of recent genetic studies
involving the evaluation of HNF4A as a contributor to the risk and
pathophysiology of diabetes mellitus and related risk factors.
RECENT FINDINGS: These studies report newly identified variants, evaluate
previously reported polymorphisms that were associated with type 2 diabetes in
several distinct populations with maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 2
diabetes, gestational diabetes, and diabetes related risk factors, and propose a 
role for HNF4A in insulin secretion via the potassium ATP channel.
SUMMARY: HNF4A variants identified so far appear to modestly contribute to
predisposition for type 2 diabetes. Continued identification and especially
functional characterization of variants, however, will be critical in future
studies to enhance our understanding of the metabolic impact of this gene.

PMID: 17563455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Nat Genet. 2007 Jun;39(6):730-2. Epub 2007 May 21.

Tissue-specific transcriptional regulation has diverged significantly between
human and mouse.

Odom DT(1), Dowell RD, Jacobsen ES, Gordon W, Danford TW, MacIsaac KD, Rolfe PA, 
Conboy CM, Gifford DK, Fraenkel E.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02142, USA.

We demonstrate that the binding sites for highly conserved transcription factors 
vary extensively between human and mouse. We mapped the binding of four
tissue-specific transcription factors (FOXA2, HNF1A, HNF4A and HNF6) to 4,000
orthologous gene pairs in hepatocytes purified from human and mouse livers.
Despite the conserved function of these factors, from 41% to 89% of their binding
events seem to be species specific. When the same protein binds the promoters of 
orthologous genes, approximately two-thirds of the binding sites do not align.

PMCID: PMC3797512
PMID: 17529977  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Lipid Res. 2007 Aug;48(8):1781-91. Epub 2007 May 7.

The acyl-CoA thioesterase I is regulated by PPARalpha and HNF4alpha via a distal 
response element in the promoter.

Dongol B(1), Shah Y, Kim I, Gonzalez FJ, Hunt MC.

Author information: 
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Department of Laboratory Medicine, Division of Clinical
Chemistry, Karolinska University Hospital at Huddinge, Stockholm, Sweden.

The cytosolic acyl-coenzyme A thioesterase I (Acot1) is an enzyme that hydrolyzes
long-chain acyl-CoAs of C(12)-C(20)-CoA in chain length to the free fatty acid
and CoA. Acot1 was shown previously to be strongly upregulated at the mRNA and
protein level in rodents by fibrates. In this study, we show that Acot1 mRNA
levels were increased by 90-fold in liver by treatment with Wy-14,643 and that
Acot1 mRNA was also increased by 15-fold in the liver of hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) knockout animals. Our study identified a direct repeat 
1 (DR1) located in the Acot1 gene promoter in mouse, which binds the peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha) and HNF4alpha. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay showed that the identified DR1 bound
PPARalpha/retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRalpha) and HNF4alpha, whereas the binding
in ChIP was abrogated in the PPARalpha and HNF4alpha knockout mouse models.
Reporter gene assays showed activation of the Acot1 promoter in cells by the
PPARalpha agonist Wy-14,643 after cotransfection with PPARalpha/RXRalpha.
However, transfection with a plasmid containing HNF4alpha also resulted in an
increase in promoter activity. Together, these data show that Acot1 is under
regulation by an interplay between HNF4alpha and PPARalpha.

PMID: 17485727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Jun 15;357(4):1100-6. Epub 2007 Apr 19.

Search of type 2 diabetes susceptibility gene on chromosome 20q.

Takeuchi F(1), Yanai K, Inomata H, Kuzuya N, Kajio H, Honjo S, Takeda N, Kaburagi
Y, Yasuda K, Shirasawa S, Sasazuki T, Kato N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Ecology and Informatics, Research Institute,
International Medical Center of Japan, Tokyo, Japan.

Significant evidence of linkage to type 2 diabetes (T2D) has been shown in a
relatively broad region on chromosome 20q, where the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4alpha (HNF4A) has been noted as a positional candidate. To systematically
evaluate genetic susceptibility to T2D in the relevant region, we examined the
disease association by using 1145 SNPs in two-step screening in the Japanese
population. The marker screening enabled us to identify significant disease
association in the lipopolysaccharide binding protein (LBP) but not in the HNF4A 
locus. In a 17.7-Mb interval screened, the strongest association was identified
for a SNP, rs2232592, located in the intron of LBP, with an estimated odds ratio 
of 1.73 (95% CI 1.30-2.31) (P=0.0002) in the whole study panel involving 675 case
and 474 control subjects. Our data suggest that the LBP gene may confer genetic
susceptibility to T2D and this warrants further replication study.

PMID: 17466274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Stem Cells. 2007 Jul;25(7):1779-90. Epub 2007 Apr 5.

Isolation, characterization, and differentiation to hepatocyte-like cells of
nonparenchymal epithelial cells from adult human liver.

Duret C(1), Gerbal-Chaloin S, Ramos J, Fabre JM, Jacquet E, Navarro F, Blanc P,
Sa-Cunha A, Maurel P, Daujat-Chavanieu M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Montpellier,
France.

Activation and proliferation of human liver progenitor cells has been observed
during acute and chronic liver diseases. Our goal was to investigate the presence
of these putative progenitors in the liver of patients who underwent lobectomy
for various reasons but did not show any hepatic insufficiency. Hepatic lesions
were evaluated by histological analysis. Nonparenchymal epithelial (NPE) cells
were isolated from samples of human liver resections located at a distance from
the lesion that motivated the operation and were cultured and characterized.
These cells exhibited a marked proliferative potential. They did not express the 
classic set of stem cell/progenitor markers (Oct-4, Rex-1, alpha-fetoprotein,
CD90, c-kit, and CD34) and were faintly positive for albumin. When cultured at
confluence in the presence of hepatocyte growth factor and either epidermal
growth factor or fibroblast growth factor-4, they entered a differentiation
process toward hepatocytes. Their phenotype was quantitatively compared with that
of mature human hepatocytes in primary culture. Differentiated NPE cells
expressed albumin; alpha1-antitrypsin; fibrinogen; hepatobiliary markers such as 
cytokeratins 7, 19, and 8/18; liver-enriched transcription factors; and genes
characterized by either a fetal (cytochrome P4503A7 and glutathione S-transferase
pi) or a mature (tyrosine aminotransferase, tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase,
glutathione S-transferase alpha, and cytochrome P4503A4) expression pattern. NPE 
cells could be isolated from the liver of several patients, irrespective of the
absence or presence of lesions, and differentiated toward hepatocyte-like cells
with an intermediate hepatobiliary and mature/immature phenotype. These cells are
likely to represent a resident progenitor population of the adult human liver,
even in the absence of hepatic failure. Disclosure of potential conflicts of
interest is found at the end of this article.

PMID: 17412893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. PLoS Med. 2007 Apr;4(4):e148.

Type 2 diabetes: hypoinsulinism, hyperinsulinism, or both?

Glaser B(1).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Metabolism Service, Internal Medicine Department,
Hadassah-Hebrew University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. beng@cc.huji.ac.il

Comment on
    PLoS Med. 2007 Apr;4(4):e118.

PMCID: PMC1831715
PMID: 17407388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. PLoS Med. 2007 Apr;4(4):e118.

Macrosomia and hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia in patients with heterozygous
mutations in the HNF4A gene.

Pearson ER(1), Boj SF, Steele AM, Barrett T, Stals K, Shield JP, Ellard S, Ferrer
J, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Peninsula Medical School, Exeter, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    PLoS Med. 2007 Apr;4(4):e148.
    Diabetologia. 2007 Dec;50(12):2600-1.

BACKGROUND: Macrosomia is associated with considerable neonatal and maternal
morbidity. Factors that predict macrosomia are poorly understood. The increased
rate of macrosomia in the offspring of pregnant women with diabetes and in
congenital hyperinsulinaemia is mediated by increased foetal insulin secretion.
We assessed the in utero and neonatal role of two key regulators of pancreatic
insulin secretion by studying birthweight and the incidence of neonatal
hypoglycaemia in patients with heterozygous mutations in the maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) genes HNF4A (encoding HNF-4alpha) and HNF1A/TCF1
(encoding HNF-1alpha), and the effect of pancreatic deletion of Hnf4a on foetal
and neonatal insulin secretion in mice.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: We examined birthweight and hypoglycaemia in 108 patients
from families with diabetes due to HNF4A mutations, and 134 patients from
families with HNF1A mutations. Birthweight was increased by a median of 790 g in 
HNF4A-mutation carriers compared to non-mutation family members (p < 0.001); 56% 
(30/54) of HNF4A-mutation carriers were macrosomic compared with 13% (7/54) of
non-mutation family members (p < 0.001). Transient hypoglycaemia was reported in 
8/54 infants with heterozygous HNF4A mutations, but was reported in none of 54
non-mutation carriers (p = 0.003). There was documented hyperinsulinaemia in
three cases. Birthweight and prevalence of neonatal hypoglycaemia were not
increased in HNF1A-mutation carriers. Mice with pancreatic beta-cell deletion of 
Hnf4a had hyperinsulinaemia in utero and hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia at
birth.
CONCLUSIONS: HNF4A mutations are associated with a considerable increase in
birthweight and macrosomia, and are a novel cause of neonatal hypoglycaemia. This
study establishes a key role for HNF4A in determining foetal birthweight, and
uncovers an unanticipated feature of the natural history of HNF4A-deficient
diabetes, with hyperinsulinaemia at birth evolving to decreased insulin secretion
and diabetes later in life.

PMCID: PMC1845156
PMID: 17407387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Pathology. 2006 Dec;38(6):548-54.

The expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha, a developmental regulator of 
visceral endoderm, correlates with the intestinal phenotype of gastric
adenocarcinomas.

Kojima K(1), Kishimoto T, Nagai Y, Tanizawa T, Nakatani Y, Miyazaki M, Ishikura
H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Chiba University Graduate School of
Medicine, Chiba, Japan.

AIMS: Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha is a developmental regulator of the 
visceral endoderm, which is expressed in the embryonic gut and later in the adult
intestine and colon. However, adult gastric mucosa does not express HNF-4alpha.
We investigated the possible involvement of HNF-4alpha in intestinal metaplasia
and the intestinalisation of gastric adenocarcinomas.
METHODS: Thirty-five cases of adenocarcinomas and 46 cases of adjacent
non-neoplastic mucosa with (22 lesions) or without (24 lesions) intestinal
metaplasia were immunostained for HNF-4alpha. The gastric or the intestinal
phenotype was also examined using immunohistochemistry for MUC5AC, MUC2, CD10,
and gastric-type mucin (GTM). Adenocarcinomas were classified into the gastric
type (G-type, 42.9%), the mixed gastric and intestinal type (GI-type, 31.4%), and
the intestinal type (I-type, 25.7%).
RESULTS: The HNF-4alpha expression was exclusively seen in glandular cells with
intestinal metaplasia, which was correlated with MUC2 expression (p<0.05) and
inversely correlated with MUC5AC expression (p<0.05). All adenocarcinomas more or
less expressed HNF-4alpha, with an intense expression being seen in the I-type
(p<0.01) and in well-differentiated adenocarcinomas (p<0.03).
CONCLUSIONS: HNF-4alpha expression is associated with the intestinal phenotype of
non-neoplastic and neoplastic gastric glandular cells, suggesting a possible
involvement in the establishment and/or maintenance of the intestinal phenotype
of the gastric mucosa and adenocarcinomas.

PMID: 17393984  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Drug Metab Dispos. 2007 Jun;35(6):946-54. Epub 2007 Mar 7.

Molecular mechanism of basal CYP3A4 regulation by hepatocyte nuclear factor
4alpha: evidence for direct regulation in the intestine.

Tegude H(1), Schnabel A, Zanger UM, Klein K, Eichelbaum M, Burk O.

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Margarete Fischer-Bosch-Institute of Clinical Pharmacology,
Auerbachstrasse 112, D-70376 Stuttgart, Germany.

Cytochrome P450 3A4 plays an outstanding role in the metabolism of clinically
used drugs and shows a marked interindividual variability in expression even in
the absence of inducing agents. Thus, regulation of basal expression contributes 
considerably to variability. The nuclear receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor
4alpha (HNF4alpha) was previously shown to be associated with basal hepatic
CYP3A4 expression. As how HNF4alpha regulates basal expression of CYP3A4 still
remains elusive, we systematically screened 12.5 kilobase pairs (kb) of the
CYP3A4 5' upstream region for activation by the receptor in the human intestinal 
cell line LS174T. In this study, we newly identified two widely separated regions
mediating the activation by HNF4alpha: a far distal region at -9.0 kb and the
proximal promoter region at approximately -0.2 kb. By gel shift experiments and
transient transfections, we characterized direct repeat (DR) 1-type motifs in
both regions as functional HNF4alpha response elements. Cooperation of the two
regions was shown to be required for maximal activation by HNF4alpha. The effect 
of HNF4alpha was antagonized by chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription
factor II, which was shown to bind to one of the DR1 motifs. Furthermore,
activation of CYP3A4 via the DR1 element in the proximal promoter depends on an
additional, yet unknown, factor, which is binding at approximately -189 base
pairs. Physiological relevance of this position for activation by HNF4alpha in
vivo is suggested by the presence of a binding activity in small intestine
similar to that in LS174T cells. In summary, we here have elucidated a molecular 
mechanism of direct regulation of CYP3A4 by HNF4alpha, which is probably specific
for the intestine.

PMID: 17344340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2007 Apr 27;356(1):147-52. Epub 2007 Feb 26.

The human intestinal fatty acid binding protein (hFABP2) gene is regulated by
HNF-4alpha.

Klapper M(1), Böhme M, Nitz I, Döring F.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Nutrition, Institute of Human Nutrition and Food Science,
Christian-Albrechts-University of Kiel, Heinrich-Hecht-Platz 10, D-24118 Kiel,
Germany. klapper@molnut.uni-kiel.de

The cytosolic human intestinal fatty acid binding protein (hFABP2) is proposed to
be involved in intestinal absorption of long-chain fatty acids. The aim of this
study was to investigate the regulation of hFABP2 by the endodermal hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha), involved in regulation of genes of fatty acid
metabolism and differentiation. Electromobility shift assays demonstrated that
HNF-4alpha binds at position -324 to -336 within the hFABP2 promoter. Mutation of
this HNF-4 binding site abolished the luciferase reporter activity of hFABP2 in
postconfluent Caco-2 cells. In HeLa cells, this mutation reduced the activation
of the hFABP2 promoter by HNF-4alpha by about 50%. Thus, binding element at
position -336/-324 essentially determines the transcriptional activity of
promoter and may be important in control of hFABP2 expression by dietary lipids
and differentiation. Studying genotype interactions of hFABP2 and HNF-4alpha,
that are both candidate genes for diabetes type 2, may be a powerful approach.

PMID: 17343826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Diabetes. 2007 Mar;56(3):685-93.

Evaluation of common variants in the six known maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY) genes for association with type 2 diabetes.

Winckler W(1), Weedon MN, Graham RR, McCarroll SA, Purcell S, Almgren P, Tuomi T,
Gaudet D, Boström KB, Walker M, Hitman G, Hattersley AT, McCarthy MI, Ardlie KG, 
Hirschhorn JN, Daly MJ, Frayling TM, Groop L, Altshuler D.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Medical and Population Genetics, Broad Institute of Harvard and
MIT, Cambridge, MA 02142, USA.

An important question in human genetics is the extent to which genes causing
monogenic forms of disease harbor common variants that may contribute to the more
typical form of that disease. We aimed to comprehensively evaluate the extent to 
which common variation in the six known maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) genes, which cause a monogenic form of type 2 diabetes, is associated with
type 2 diabetes. Specifically, we determined patterns of common sequence
variation in the genes encoding Gck, Ipf1, Tcf2, and NeuroD1 (MODY2 and
MODY4-MODY6, respectively), selected a comprehensive set of 107 tag single
nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that captured common variation, and genotyped
each in 4,206 patients and control subjects from Sweden, Finland, and Canada
(including family-based studies and unrelated case-control subjects). All SNPs
with a nominal P value <0.1 for association to type 2 diabetes in this initial
screen were then genotyped in an additional 4,470 subjects from North America and
Poland. Of 30 nominally significant SNPs from the initial sample, 8 achieved
consistent results in the replication sample. We found the strongest effect at
rs757210 in intron 2 of TCF2, with corrected P values <0.01 for an odds ratio
(OR) of 1.13. This association was observed again in an independent sample of
5,891 unrelated case and control subjects and 500 families from the U.K., for an 
overall OR of 1.12 and a P value <10(-6) in >15,000 samples. We combined these
results with our previous studies on HNF4alpha and TCF1 and explicitly tested for
gene-gene interactions among these variants and with several known type 2
diabetes susceptibility loci, and we found no genetic interactions between these 
six genes. We conclude that although rare variants in these six genes explain
most cases of MODY, common variants in these same genes contribute very modestly,
if at all, to the common form of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 17327436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. J Biochem. 2007 May;141(5):635-40. Epub 2007 Feb 21.

Characterization of the PC4 binding domain and its interactions with HNF4alpha.

Guo H(1), Gao C, Mi Z, Zhang J, Kuo PC.

Author information: 
(1)Deparment of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA.

In the presence of oxidative stress, the hepatocellular inflammatory-redox (IR)
state upregulates inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) expression as an
anti-oxidant function. In IL-1beta and peroxide treated hepatocytes, we have
identified hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF4) and the transcriptional
co-activator, PC4, to be essential for upregulation of iNOS transcription in this
setting. The co-activator, PC4, facilitates activator-dependent transcription via
interactions with basal transcriptional machinery that are independent of PC4-DNA
binding. The interaction between HNF4 and PC4 has not been previously
characterized. In this study utilizing human HepG2 cells, we demonstrate the
critical role for p38 MAP kinase mediated HNF4 Ser158 phosphorylation
(P-HNF4-S158), binding of PC4 to P-HNF4-S158 and characterize the functional
domain of PC4 required for P-HNF4-S158 binding. Our results indicate that the
presence of the IR state enhances PC4-HNF4 binding to upregulate transcription of
target hepatocyte genes, such as iNOS.

PMID: 17317687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Pathol Int. 2007 Feb;57(2):82-90.

Downregulated P1 promoter-driven hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha expression in
human colorectal carcinoma is a new prognostic factor against liver metastasis.

Oshima T(1), Kawasaki T, Ohashi R, Hasegawa G, Jiang S, Umezu H, Aoyagi Y,
Iwanari H, Tanaka T, Hamakubo T, Kodama T, Naito M.

Author information: 
(1)Divisions of Cellular and Molecular Pathology, Niigata University Graduate
School of Medical and Dental Sciences, Niigata, Japan.

Liver metastases are the most critical prognostic factors for patients with
colorectal carcinomas (CRC). It has been reported that the dysregulation of
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF4alpha) expression is linked to the
development of CRC, gastric cancer and hepatocellular carcinoma. The purpose of
the present paper was to examine the P1 and P2 promoter-driven HNF4alpha (P1 and 
P2) expression in surgically resected CRC. Immunohistochemically, P1, P2, MUC1
and CD10 expression were evaluated in 63 cases of primary CRC. Positive staining 
with P1, P2, MUC1 and CD10 antibodies were observed in 37 (59%), 63 (100%), 42
(67%) and 27 (43%) cases, respectively. Loss or decreased P1 expression was
observed with respect to the depth of the tumor invasion. The frequency of
P1-positive expression in Dukes' C and D tumors was significantly lower than that
in Dukes' A and B tumors. There was a relationship between the loss of P1
expression and metachronous liver metastases, and the survival rate of the
P1-negative patients without liver metastasis at the time of the primary CRC
resection tended to be worse than that of the P1-positive patients. These
findings suggest that downregulation of P1 expression is involved in tumor
metastasis and a worse prognosis.

PMID: 17300672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Diabetes. 2007 Feb;56(2):513-7.

P2 promoter variants of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha gene are associated 
with type 2 diabetes in Mexican Americans.

Lehman DM(1), Richardson DK, Jenkinson CP, Hunt KJ, Dyer TD, Leach RJ, Arya R,
Abboud HE, Blangero J, Duggirala R, Stern MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine/Clinical Epidemiology, University of Texas Health
Science Center at San Antonio, 7703 Floyd Curl Drive, San Antonio, TX 78229, USA.
lehman@uthscsa.edu

Common and rare variants of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4A) gene
have been associated with type 2 diabetes and related traits in several
populations suggesting the involvement of this transcription factor in diabetes
pathogenesis. Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within a large haplotype
block surrounding the alternate P2 promoter, located approximately 45 kb upstream
from the coding region, have been investigated in several populations of varying 
ethnicity with inconsistent results. Additionally, SNPs located within the P1
promoter and coding region have also been inconsistently associated with type 2
diabetes. Characterization of variation across this gene region in
Mexican-American populations has not been reported. We therefore examined
polymorphisms across the HNF4A gene in a cohort of Mexican-American pedigrees and
assessed their association with type 2 diabetes. We observed evidence for
association of SNPs in the P2 promoter region with type 2 diabetes (P = 0.003)
and its age at diagnosis (P = 0.003). The risk allele frequency (53%) was
intermediate to that reported in Caucasian populations (20-27%) and Pima Indians 
(83%). No other SNPs were associated with either trait. These results support the
possibility that a variant in the P2 promoter region of HNF4A, or variants in
linkage disequilibrium within this region, contributes to susceptibility to type 
2 diabetes in many ethnic populations including Mexican Americans.

PMID: 17259399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Hepatology. 2007 Feb;45(2):433-44.

Hepatic HNF4alpha deficiency induces periportal expression of glutamine
synthetase and other pericentral enzymes.

Stanulovic VS(1), Kyrmizi I, Kruithof-de Julio M, Hoogenkamp M, Vermeulen JL,
Ruijter JM, Talianidis I, Hakvoort TB, Lamers WH.

Author information: 
(1)AMC Liver Center, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam,
The Netherlands.

In liver, most genes are expressed with a porto-central gradient. The
transcription factor hepatic nuclear-factor4alpha (HNF4alpha) is associated with 
12% of the genes in adult liver, but its involvement in zonation of gene
expression has not been investigated. A putative HNF4alpha-response element in
the upstream enhancer of glutamine synthetase (GS), an exclusively pericentral
enzyme, was protected against DNase-I and interacted with a protein that is
recognized by HNF4alpha-specific antiserum. Chromatin-immunoprecipitation assays 
of HNF4alpha-deficient (H4LivKO) and control (H4Flox) livers with HNF4alpha
antiserum precipitated the GS upstream enhancer DNA only from H4Flox liver.
Identical results were obtained with a histone-deacetylasel (HDAC1) antibody, but
antibodies against HDAC3, SMRT and SHP did not precipitate the GS upstream
enhancer. In H4Flox liver, GS, ornithine aminotransferase (OAT) and thyroid
hormone-receptor beta1 (TRbeta1) were exclusively expressed in pericentral
hepatocytes. In H4LivKO liver, this pericentral expression remained unaffected,
but the genes were additionally expressed in the periportal hepatocytes, albeit
at a lower level. The expression of the periportal enzyme phosphoenolpyruvate
carboxykinase had declined in HNF4alpha-deficient hepatocytes. GS-negative cells,
which were present as single, large hepatocytes or as groups of small cells near 
portal veins, did express HNF4alpha. Clusters of very small GS- and
HNF4alpha-negative, and PCNA- and OV6-positive cells near portal veins were
contiguous with streaks of brightly HNF4alpha-positive, OV6-, PCNA-, and
PEPCK-dim cells.CONCLUSION: Our findings show that HNF4alpha suppresses the
expression of pericentral proteins in periportal hepatocytes, possibly via a
HDAC1-mediated mechanism. Furthermore, we show that HNF4alpha deficiency induces 
foci of regenerating hepatocytes.

PMID: 17256722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Cell Biol. 2006 Dec 18;175(6):971-80.

The nuclear receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha acts as a morphogen to
induce the formation of microvilli.

Chiba H(1), Sakai N, Murata M, Osanai M, Ninomiya T, Kojima T, Sawada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Sapporo 060-8556, Japan. hidchiba@sapmed.ac.jp

Microvilli are actin-based organelles found on apical plasma membranes that are
involved in nutrient uptake and signal transduction. Numerous components,
including ezrin/radixin/moesin (ERM) proteins, have been identified that link
filamentous actins to transmembrane proteins, but the signals driving microvillus
biogenesis are not known. In this study, we show that the conditional and/or
ectopic expression of a nuclear receptor, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha
(HNF4alpha), triggers microvillus morphogenesis. We also demonstrate that
HNF4alpha expression induces ERM-binding phosphoprotein 50 (EBP50) expression and
that attenuation of EBP50 using RNA interference inhibits microvillus
development. We conclude that HNF4alpha acts as a morphogen to trigger
microvillus formation.

PMCID: PMC2064706
PMID: 17178913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. An R Acad Nac Med (Madr). 2006;123(1):211-7; discussion 218.

[Monogenic forms of diabetes mellitus].

[Article in Spanish]

Fernández EB.

Through the years the evolution of the concepts in the different classifications 
of Diabetes Mellitus keep a close relationship with the advance of the scientific
knowledge of this matter. In this way the last classification adopted in 1995 by 
the American Association of Diabetes and the World Health Organization has an
etiologic basis, but in some aspects is already obsolete. With the new knowledges
this classification should be modified including a group dedicated to monogenic
diabetes. In this group should be considered diabetes MODY 1 to 6, constituted by
the forms expressed by mutations of transcription factors and the glucokinase
enzyme. There are other patients named MODY X, because the responsible genes of
the diseases have not been identified yet. Also in this section might be included
the mutations of the Kir6.2 subunit of the K+ channel recently described in the
beta cell. It is possible that in a near future other forms will be described,
which will contribute to a better understanding of the monogenic diabetes.

PMID: 17172221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Diabetologia. 2006 Nov;49(11):2809-10. Epub 2006 Sep 19.

Comment on: Nyirenda MJ, Dean S, Lyons V, Chapman KE, Seckl JR (2006) Prenatal
programming of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4a in the rat: a key mechanism in the
'foetal origins of hyperglycaemia'? Diabetologia 49: 1412-1420, and on: McCurdy
CE, Friedman JE (2006) Early foetal programming of hepatic gluconeogenesis:
glucocorticoids strike back. Diabetologia 49:1138-1141.

Burns SP, Cohen RD.

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2006 Jun;49(6):1138-41.
    Diabetologia. 2006 Jun;49(6):1412-20.

PMID: 17047920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Biochem J. 2007 Feb 15;402(1):81-91.

Regulation of the human mucin MUC4 by taurodeoxycholic and taurochenodeoxycholic 
bile acids in oesophageal cancer cells is mediated by hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha.

Piessen G(1), Jonckheere N, Vincent A, Hémon B, Ducourouble MP, Copin MC,
Mariette C, Van Seuningen I.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 560, Place de Verdun, 59045 Lille Cedex, France.

MUC4 (mucin 4) is a membrane-bound mucin overexpressed in the early steps of
oesophageal carcinogenesis and implicated in tumour progression. We previously
showed that bile acids, main components of gastro-oesophageal reflux and tumour
promoters, up-regulate MUC4 expression [Mariette, Perrais, Leteurtre, Jonckheere,
Hemon, Pigny, Batra, Aubert, Triboulet and Van Seuningen (2004) Biochem. J. 377, 
701-708]. HNF (hepatocyte nuclear factor) 1alpha and HNF4alpha transcription
factors are known to mediate bile acid effects, and we previously identified
cis-elements for these factors in MUC4 distal promoter. Our aim was to
demonstrate that these two transcription factors were directly involved in MUC4
activation by bile acids. MUC4, HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha expressions were
evaluated by immunohistochemistry in human oesophageal tissues. Our results
indicate that MUC4, HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha were co-expressed in oesophageal
metaplastic and adenocarcinomatous tissues. Studies at the mRNA, promoter and
protein levels indicated that HNF1alpha regulates endogenous MUC4 expression by
binding to two cognate cis-elements respectively located at -3332/-3327 and
-3040/-3028 in the distal promoter. We also showed by siRNA (small interfering
RNA) approach, co-transfection and site-directed mutagenesis that HNF1alpha
mediates taurodeoxycholic and taurochenodeoxycholic bile acid activation of
endogenous MUC4 expression and transcription in a dose-dependent manner. In
conclusion, these results describe a new mechanism of regulation of MUC4
expression by bile acids, in which HNF1alpha is a key mediator. These results
bring new insights into MUC4 up-regulation in oesophageal carcinoma associated
with bile reflux.

PMCID: PMC1783985
PMID: 17037983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Mol Biol. 2006 Dec 8;364(4):567-81. Epub 2006 Sep 12.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha ligand binding and F domains mediate
interaction and transcriptional synergy with the pancreatic islet LIM HD
transcription factor Isl1.

Eeckhoute J(1), Briche I, Kurowska M, Formstecher P, Laine B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 459, Lille, France. jerome_eeckhoute@dfci.harvard.edu

The orphan nuclear receptor HNF4alpha and the LIM homeodomain factor Isl1 are
co-expressed in pancreatic beta-cells and are required for the differentiation
and function of these endocrine cells. HNF4alpha activates numerous genes and
mutations in its gene are associated with maturity onset diabetes of the young.
Cofactors and transcription factors that interact with HNF4alpha are crucial to
modulate its transcriptional activity, since the latter is not regulated by
conventional ligands. These transcriptional partners interact mainly through the 
HNF4alpha AF-1 module and the ligand binding domain, which contains the AF-2
module. Here, we showed that Isl1 could enhance the HNF4alpha-mediated activation
of transcription of the HNF1alpha, PPARalpha and insulin I promoters. Isl1
interacted with the HNF4alpha AF-2 but also required the HNF4alpha
carboxy-terminal F domain for optimal interaction and transcriptional synergy.
More specifically, we found that naturally occurring HNF4alpha isoforms,
differing only in their F domain, exhibited different abilities to interact and
synergize with Isl1, extending the crucial transcriptional modulatory role of the
HNF4alpha F domain. HNF4alpha interacted with both the homeodomain and the first 
LIM domain of Isl1. We found that the transcriptional synergy between HNF4alpha
and Isl1 involved an increase in HNF4alpha loading on promoter. The effect was
more pronounced on the rat insulin I promoter containing binding sites for both
HNF4alpha and Isl1 than on the human HNF1alpha promoter lacking an Isl1 binding
site. Moreover, Isl1 could mediate the recruitment of the cofactor CLIM2
resulting in a further transcriptional enhancement of the HNF1alpha promoter
activity.

PMID: 17022998  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Sep 28;Suppl 3:54-8.

[MODY].

[Article in Japanese]

Sasaki A(1), Horikawa Y, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Endocrinology, Division of Molecule and Structure
Research Field of Medical Sciences, Graduate School of Medicine, Gifu University.

PMID: 17022499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2006 Aug-Sep;1759(8-9):426-36. Epub 2006 Aug 11.

HNF4alpha and NF-E2 are key transcriptional regulators of the murine Abcc6 gene
expression.

Douet V(1), VanWart CM, Heller MB, Reinhard S, Le Saux O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, John A. Burns School of Medicine,
University of Hawaii, 651 Ilalo Street, BSB 222, Honolulu, HI 96813, USA.

Mutations in an ABC transporter gene called ABCC6 are responsible for
pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE), a rare heritable disease characterized by elastic
fiber calcification in skin, ocular and vascular tissues. The presumed function
of this ABC transporter is to export metabolites from polarized cells. However,
the endogenous substrate(s) are unknown and the exact relationship with elastic
fibers is unclear. As ABCC6 is only expressed at high level in liver and kidneys,
tissues seemingly unrelated to the PXE phenotype, we explored the transcriptional
regulation of the murine Abcc6 gene to define the transcriptional signal
conferring tissue specificity and to gather clues on its possible biological
function. We cloned 2.9 kb of the mAbcc6 5'-flanking region and several deletion 
constructs linked to a luciferase reporter gene. We delineated a proximal
promoter and a liver-specific enhancer region. We also demonstrated that the
proximal region is a TATA-less promoter requiring an intact CCAAT-box and Sp1
binding for its basal activity. By using reporter assays and chromatin
immunoprecipitations, we showed that HNF4alpha and surprisingly, NF-E2, enhanced 
the mAbcc6 promoter activity. The involvement of both HNF4alpha and NF-E2 in the 
mAbcc6 gene regulation suggests that Abcc6 might be involved in a detoxification 
processes related to hemoglobin or heme.

PMCID: PMC1876778
PMID: 16997394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2006 Sep;26(9):1301-3.

[Molecular scanning of MODY1 gene mutations in pedigrees of early onset type 2
diabetes in Beijing].

[Article in Chinese]

Jia HT(1), Zhang SH, Ji LN, Han XY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, First Affiliated Hospital, Zhengzhou University, 
Zhengzhou 450052, China. Jiahetang001@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore MDOY1 gene mutations in pedigrees of early-onset familial
type 2 diabetes.
METHODS: We collected 100 early-onset type 2 diabetes pedigrees in Beijing, in
which the probands were diagnosed with type 2 diabetes before the age of 40 years
with at least one first-degree relative having such a diagnosis before the age of
45 years. PCR was employed to amplify all the exons and exon/intron splice sites 
of MDOY1 gene and the PCR products were sequenced to identify the DNA variants.
RESULTS: Two DNA variants in the noncoding region including IVS1C +44A>T and IVS2
-5C>T were identified, and 3 mutations in the coding region we identified M49V,
T130I, and S462S were found in these pedigrees.
CONCLUSION: Currently no sufficient evidence has been obtained to identify the
variation in or near MDOY1 genes as the major cause of early-onset type 2
diabetic in Chinese population.

PMID: 16982440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 Oct;26(19):7017-29.

Mitogen-activated protein kinase-mediated disruption of enhancer-promoter
communication inhibits hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha expression.

Hatzis P(1), Kyrmizi I, Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology Hellas, Herakleion, Crete, Greece.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF-4) is a key member of the transcription factor
network regulating hepatocyte differentiation and function. Activation of the
HNF-4 gene involves physical interaction between a distant enhancer and the
proximal promoter region, bound by distinct sets of transcription factors. Here
we report that, upon mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activation, HNF-4
expression is downregulated in human hepatoma cells. This effect is mediated by
the loss of CEBPalpha expression. During MAP kinase signaling, the recruitment of
HNF-3beta and HNF-1alpha to the HNF-4 enhancer and RNA polymerase II to the
proximal HNF-4 promoter was compromised. CBP, Brg1, and TFIIB were also
dissociated from the HNF-4 regulatory regions, and the enhancer-promoter complex 
was disrupted. Interestingly, the extent of nucleosome acetylation did not
decrease at either regulatory region, and HNF-6 and HNF-1alpha, as well as
components of the TFIID, remained associated with the proximal promoter during
the repressed state. The results point to an absolute requirement of
enhancer-promoter communication for maintaining the active state of the HNF-4
gene and provide evidence for a molecular bookmarking mechanism, which may
contribute to the prevention of permanent silencing of the locus during the
repressed state.

PMCID: PMC1592892
PMID: 16980607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Hum Genet. 2006 Nov;120(4):527-42. Epub 2006 Sep 6.

Association study on chromosome 20q11.21-13.13 locus and its contribution to type
2 diabetes susceptibility in Japanese.

Tanahashi T(1), Osabe D, Nomura K, Shinohara S, Kato H, Ichiishi E, Nakamura N,
Yoshikawa T, Takata Y, Miyamoto T, Shiota H, Keshavarz P, Yamaguchi Y, Kunika K, 
Moritani M, Inoue H, Itakura M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Genetic Information, Institute for Genome Research, The University
of Tokushima, 3-18-15, Tokushima, Japan.

Several linkage studies have predicted that human chromosome 20q is closely
related to type 2 diabetes, but there is no clear evidence that certain
variant(s) or gene(s) have strong effects on the disease within this region. To
examine disease susceptibility variant in Japanese, verified SNPs from the
databases, with a minor allele frequency larger than 0.15, were selected at 10-kb
intervals across a 19.31-Mb region (20q11.21-13.13), which contained 291 genes,
including hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha). As a result, a total of
1,147 SNPs were genotyped with TaqMan assay using 1,818 Japanese samples. By
searching for HNF4alpha as a representative disease-susceptible gene, no variants
of HNF4alpha were strongly associated with disease. To identify other genetic
variant related with disease, we designed an extensive two-stage association
study (725 first and 1,093 second test samples). Although SNP1146 (rs220076) was 
selected as a landmark within the 19.31 Mb region, the magnitude of the nominal P
value (P = 0.0023) was rather weak. Subsequently, a haplotype-based association
study showed that two common haplotypes were weakly associated with disease. All 
of these tests resulted in non-significance after adjusting for Bonferroni's
correction and the false discovery rate to control for the impact of multiple
testing. Contrary to the initial expectations, we could not conclude that certain
SNPs had a major effect on this promising locus within the framework presented
here. As a way to extend our observations, we emphasize the importance of a
subsequent association study including replication and/or meta-analysis in
multiple populations.

PMID: 16955255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Drug Metab Pharmacokinet. 2006 Aug;21(4):337-46.

Novel genetic variations and haplotypes of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha
(HNF4A) found in Japanese type II diabetic patients.

Fukushima-Uesaka H(1), Saito Y, Maekawa K, Saeki M, Kamatani N, Kajio H, Kuzuya
N, Yasuda K, Sawada J.

Author information: 
(1)Project Team for Pharmacogenetics, National Institute of Health Sciences,
Tokyo, Japan.

Thirty-nine single nucleotide variations, including 16 novel ones, were found in 
the 5' promoter region, all of the exons and their surrounding introns of HNF4A
in 74 Japanese type II diabetic patients. The following novel variations were
identified (based on the amino acid numbering of splicing variant 2): -208G>C in 
the 5' promoter region; 1154C>T (A385V) and 1193T>C (M398T) in the coding exons; 
1580G>A, 1852G>T, 2180C>T, 2190G>A, and 2362_2380delAAGAATGGTGTGGGAGAGG in the
3'-untranslated region, and IVS1+231G>A, IVS2-83C>T, IVS3+50C>T, IVS3-54delC,
IVS5+173_176delTTAG, IVS5-181_-180delAT, IVS8-106A>G, and IVS9-151A>C in the
introns. The allele frequencies were 0.311 for 2362_2380delAAGAATGGTGTGGGAGAGG,
0.054 for 1580G>A, 0.047 for 1852G>T, 0.020 for IVS1+231G>A, 0.014 for
IVS9-151A>C, and 0.007 for the other 11 variations. In addition, one known
nonsynonymous single nucleotide polymorphism, 416C>T (T139I), was detected at a
0.007 frequency. Based on the linkage disequilibrium profiles, the region
analyzed was divided into three blocks. Haplotype analysis determined/inferred
10, 16, and 12 haplotypes for block 1, 2, and 3, respectively. Our results on
HNF4A variations and haplotypes would be useful for pharmacogenetic studies in
Japanese.

PMID: 16946562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Ann Med. 2006;38(5):337-51.

Unraveling the complex genetics of familial combined hyperlipidemia.

Suviolahti E(1), Lilja HE, Pajukanta P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA,
University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095-7088, USA.

Familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL) constitutes a substantial risk factor for
atherosclerosis since it is observed in about 20% of coronary heart disease (CHD)
patients under 60 years. FCHL, characterized by elevated levels of total
cholesterol (TC) and triglycerides (TGs), or both, is also one of the most common
familial hyperlipidemias with a prevalence of 1%-6% in Western populations.
Numerous studies have been performed to identify genes contributing to FCHL. The 
recent linkage and association studies and their replications are beginning to
elucidate the genetic variations underlying the susceptibility to FCHL. Three
chromosomal regions on 1q21-23, 11p and 16q22-24.1 have been replicated in
different study samples, offering targets for gene hunting. In addition, several 
candidate gene studies have replicated the influence of the lipoprotein lipase
(LPL) gene and apolipoprotein A1/C3/A4/A5 (APOA1/C3/A4/A5) gene cluster in FCHL. 
Recently, the linked region on chromosome 1q21 was successfully fine-mapped and
the upstream transcription factor 1 (USF1) gene identified as the underlying gene
for FCHL. This finding has now been replicated in independent FCHL samples.
However, the total number of variants, the risk related to each variant and their
relative contributions to the disease susceptibility are not known yet.

PMID: 16938803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Diabetes. 2006 Sep;55(9):2534-40.

Common variants in maturity-onset diabetes of the young genes contribute to risk 
of type 2 diabetes in Finns.

Bonnycastle LL(1), Willer CJ, Conneely KN, Jackson AU, Burrill CP, Watanabe RM,
Chines PS, Narisu N, Scott LJ, Enloe ST, Swift AJ, Duren WL, Stringham HM, Erdos 
MR, Riebow NL, Buchanan TA, Valle TT, Tuomilehto J, Bergman RN, Mohlke KL,
Boehnke M, Collins FS.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892-2152, USA.

Prior reports have suggested that variants in the genes for maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) may confer susceptibility to type 2 diabetes, but
results have been conflicting and coverage of the MODY genes has been incomplete.
To complement our previous studies of HNF4A, we examined the other five known
MODY genes for association with type 2 diabetes in Finnish individuals. For each 
of the five genes, we selected 1) nonredundant single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) (r(2)< 0.8 with other SNPs) from the HapMap database or another linkage
disequilibrium map, 2) SNPs with previously reported type 2 diabetes association,
and 3) nonsynonymous coding SNPs. We tested 128 SNPs for association with type 2 
diabetes in 786 index cases from type 2 diabetic families and 619 normal
glucose-tolerant control subjects. We followed up 35 of the most significant SNPs
by genotyping them on another 384 case subjects and 366 control subjects from
Finland. We also supplemented our previous HNF4A results by genotyping 12 SNPs on
additional Finnish samples. After correcting for testing multiple correlated SNPs
within a gene, we find evidence of type 2 diabetes association with SNPs in five 
of the six known MODY genes: GCK, HNF1A, HNF1B, NEUROD1, and HNF4A. Our data
suggest that common variants in several MODY genes play a modest role in type 2
diabetes susceptibility.

PMID: 16936201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Am J Cardiol. 2006 Aug 21;98(4A):27i-33i. Epub 2006 May 26.

Mechanisms for the hypotriglyceridemic effect of marine omega-3 fatty acids.

Davidson MH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Radiant Research and Rush University Medical Center, Chicago, Illinois, USA.
michaeldavidson@radiantresearch.com

Comment in
    Am J Cardiol. 2007 Jan 1;99(1):146.

A mechanism to explain the hypotriglyceridemic effects of marine omega-3 fatty
acids in humans has not been clarified. A working model can be developed at the
gene transcriptional level, which involves >or=4 metabolic nuclear receptors.
These include liver X receptor, hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha),
farnesol X receptor, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARs).
Each of these receptors is regulated by sterol receptor element binding
protein-1c (SREBP-1c), the main genetic switch controlling lipogenesis. Omega-3
fatty acids elicit hypotriglyceridemic effects by coordinately suppressing
hepatic lipogenesis through reducing levels of SREBP-1c, upregulating fatty
oxidation in the liver and skeletal muscle through PPAR activation, and enhancing
flux of glucose to glycogen through downregulation of HNF-4alpha. The net result 
is the repartitioning of metabolic fuel from triglyceride storage toward
oxidation, thereby reducing the substrate available for very-low-density
lipoprotein (VLDL) synthesis. By simultaneously downregulating genes encoding
proteins that stimulate lipid synthesis and upregulating genes encoding proteins 
that stimulate fatty acid oxidation, omega-3 fatty acids are more potent
hypotriglyceridemic agents than are omega-6 fatty acids, on a carbon-for-carbon
basis. Additionally, peroxidation of omega-3 fatty acids may reduce VLDL
secretion through stimulating apolipoprotein B degradation. Omega-3 fatty acids
may act by enhancing postprandial chylomicron clearance through reduced VLDL
secretion and by directly stimulating lipoprotein lipase activity. These combined
effects support the use of omega-3 fatty acids as a valuable clinical tool for
the treatment of hypertriglyceridemia.

PMID: 16919514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Hum Mutat. 2006 Sep;27(9):854-69.

Mutations in the genes encoding the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 alpha (HNF1A) and 4 alpha (HNF4A) in maturity-onset diabetes of the
young.

Ellard S(1), Colclough K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics, Royal Devon & Exeter NHS Foundation Trust,
Exeter, United Kingdom. S.Ellard@exeter.ac.uk

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of diabetes
mellitus characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, early age of onset
(often <25 years of age), and pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction. MODY is both
clinically and genetically heterogeneous, with six different genes identified to 
date; glucokinase (GCK), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF1A, or TCF1),
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF4A), insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF1 or
PDX1), hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 beta (HNF1B or TCF2), and neurogenic
differentiation 1 (NEUROD1). Mutations in the HNF1A gene are a common cause of
MODY in the majority of populations studied. A total of 193 different mutations
have been described in 373 families. The most common mutation is Pro291fs
(P291fsinsC) in the polycytosine (poly C) tract of exon 4, which has been
reported in 65 families. HNF4A mutations are rarer; 31 mutations reported in 40
families. Sensitivity to treatment with sulfonylurea tablets is a feature of both
HNF1A and HNF4A mutations. The identification of an HNF1A or 4A gene mutation
confirms a diagnosis of MODY and has important implications for clinical
management.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16917892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Genes Dev. 2006 Aug 15;20(16):2293-305.

Plasticity and expanding complexity of the hepatic transcription factor network
during liver development.

Kyrmizi I(1), Hatzis P, Katrakili N, Tronche F, Gonzalez FJ, Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology, Hellas, 711 10 Herakleion, Crete, Greece.

Cross-regulatory cascades between hepatic transcription factors have been
implicated in the determination of the hepatic phenotype. Analysis of
recruitments to regulatory regions and the temporal and spatial expression
pattern of the main hepatic regulators during liver development revealed a
gradual increase in complexity of autoregulatory and cross-regulatory circuits.
Within these circuits we identified a core group of six transcription factors,
which regulate the expression of each other and the expression of other
downstream hepatic regulators. Changes in the promoter occupancy patterns during 
development included new recruitments, release, and exchange of specific factors.
We also identified promoter and developmental stage-specific dual regulatory
functions of certain factors as an important feature of the network. Inactivation
of HNF-4alpha in embryonic, but not in adult, liver resulted in the diminished
expression of most hepatic factors, demonstrating that the stability of the
network correlates with its complexity. The results illustrate the remarkable
flexibility of a self-sustaining transcription factor network, built up by
complex dominant and redundant regulatory motifs in developing hepatocytes.

PMCID: PMC1553211
PMID: 16912278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Biochem J. 2006 Dec 1;400(2):303-13.

Tumour suppressor p53 down-regulates the expression of the human hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) gene.

Maeda Y(1), Hwang-Verslues WW, Wei G, Fukazawa T, Durbin ML, Owen LB, Liu X,
Sladek FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, University of California,
Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

The liver is exposed to a wide variety of toxic agents, many of which damage DNA 
and result in increased levels of the tumour suppressor protein p53. We have
previously shown that p53 inhibits the transactivation function of HNF
(hepatocyte nuclear factor) 4alpha1, a nuclear receptor known to be critical for 
early development and liver differentiation. In the present study we demonstrate 
that p53 also down-regulates expression of the human HNF4alpha gene via the
proximal P1 promoter. Overexpression of wild-type p53 down-regulated endogenous
levels of both HNF4alpha protein and mRNA in Hep3B cells. This decrease was also 
observed when HepG2 cells were exposed to UV irradiation or doxorubicin, both of 
which increased endogenous p53 protein levels. Ectopically expressed p53, but not
a mutant p53 defective in DNA binding (R249S), down-regulated HNF4alpha P1
promoter activity. Chromatin immunoprecipitation also showed that endogenous p53 
bound the HNF4alpha P1 promoter in vivo after doxorubicin treatment. The
mechanism by which p53 down-regulates the P1 promoter appears to be multifaceted.
The down-regulation was partially recovered by inhibition of HDAC activity and
appears to involve the positive regulator HNF6alpha. p53 bound HNF6alpha in vivo 
and in vitro and prevented HNF6alpha from binding DNA in vitro. p53 also
repressed stimulation of the P1 promoter by HNF6alpha in vivo. However, since the
R249S p53 mutant also bound HNF6alpha, binding HNF6alpha is apparently not
sufficient for the repression. Implications of the p53-mediated repression of
HNF4alpha expression in response to cellular stress are discussed.

PMCID: PMC1652821
PMID: 16895524  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Biol Chem. 2006 Oct 20;281(42):31268-78. Epub 2006 Aug 7.

Transcriptional regulation of the glucose-6-phosphatase gene by cAMP/vasoactive
intestinal peptide in the intestine. Role of HNF4alpha, CREM, HNF1alpha, and
C/EBPalpha.

Gautier-Stein A(1), Zitoun C, Lalli E, Mithieux G, Rajas F.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM, U.449, F-69372 Lyon, France. Amandine.Gautier@univ-lyon1.fr

Gluconeogenesis is induced in both the liver and intestine by increased cAMP
levels. However, hepatic and intestinal glucose production can have opposite
effects on glucose homeostasis. Glucose release into the portal vein by the
intestine increases glucose uptake and reduces food intake. In contrast, glucose 
production by the liver contributes to hyperglycemia in type II diabetes.
Glucose-6-phosphatase (Glc6Pase) is the key enzyme of gluconeogenesis in both the
liver and intestine. Here we specify the cAMP/protein kinase A regulation of the 
Glc6Pase gene in the intestine compared with the liver. Similarly to the liver,
the molecular mechanism of cAMP/protein kinase A regulation involves
cAMP-response element-binding protein, HNF4alpha, CAAT/enhancer-binding protein, 
and HNF1. In contrast to the situation in the liver, we find that different
isoforms of CAAT/enhancer-binding protein and HNF1 contribute to the specific
regulation of the Glc6Pase gene in the intestine. Moreover, we show that
cAMP-response element binding modulator specifically contributes to the
regulation of the Glc6Pase gene in the intestine but not in the liver. These
results allow us to identify intestine-specific regulators of the Glc6Pase gene
and to improve the understanding of the differences in the regulation of
gluconeogenesis in the intestine compared with the liver.

PMID: 16893891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Exp Gerontol. 2006 Sep;41(9):846-54. Epub 2006 Aug 7.

Decreased CYP3A2 expression and activity in senescent male Wistar rats: is there 
a role for HNF4alpha?

Wauthier V(1), Verbeeck RK, Calderon PB.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Pharmacocinétique, Métabolisme, Nutrition et Toxicologie (PMNT),
Département des sciences pharmaceutiques, Université Catholique de Louvain,
Avenue E. Mounier 73, 1200, Brussels, Belgium.

The effect of ageing on CYP3A2, a male specific isoform, was examined in adult (9
months) and senescent (24 months) male rats. A significant decrease (65%) of
CYP3A2-related activity (midazolam oxidation) was observed in all senescent rats.
Half of these rats still express CYP3A2 suggesting that decreased activities in
these rats are due to post-translational modifications. The other senescent male 
rats did not express CYP3A2 anymore, indicating an impairment of transcription.
These transcriptional modifications are due to the previously shown continuous
secretion of GH in senescent male rats. GH also regulates HNF4alpha, a hepatocyte
nuclear factor, essential for the basal transcriptional activation of the CYP3A2 
gene. In senescent rats, a drastic reduction (76%) of HNF4alpha protein content
and a decrease in DNA binding activity were observed. When these parameters were 
assessed in male and female rats of the same age (3 months), a higher HNF4alpha
DNA binding activity and a higher HNF4alpha protein content (38%) were observed
in female rats. Our results show that in male senescent rats (1) the decrease of 
HNF4alpha is not consistent with the continuous secretion of GH, and (2) the
suppression of CYP3A2 expression is not dependent to the HNF4alpha binding
activity.

PMID: 16891075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Zhonghua Yi Xue Yi Chuan Xue Za Zhi. 2006 Aug;23(4):406-9.

[Scanning the HNF4A gene mutation from Chinese pedigrees with early- and/or
multiple-onset diabetes].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang R(1), Hu C, Wang CR, Fang QC, Ma XJ, Jia WP, Xiang KS.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Diabetes Institute, Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism,
Shanghai Jiaotong University Affiliated No. 6 People's Hospital, Shanghai
Diabetes Clinical Center, Shanghai 200233, P. R. China.

OBJECTIVE: To screen the mutation of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha gene
(HNF4A) in Chinese pedigrees with early and/or multiplex-onset diabetes in
Shanghai and nearby area.
METHODS: By PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism (PCR-SSCP) and direct
sequencing, the mutation screen of HNF4A gene was performed in 93 normal controls
and 154 unrelated probands from early- and/or multiplex-onset diabetes. The
PCR-RFLP was used to analyze the frequencies of the discovered mutations and
variants.
RESULTS: Two synonymous mutations (N153N, A158A) were found in two families, of
which the N153N was co-segregated with early-onset diabetes. These two synonymous
mutations were not detected in the 93 normal controls. Three variants, IVS1+308(A
to G)(rs2071197), IVS1+357(A to T)(rs2071198), IVS1-5(C to T)(rs745975), were
also identified in this study. The genotype and allele frequencies of the three
variants had no difference between the probands and normal controls.
CONCLUSION: HNF4A gene mutation is rare in Chinese pedigrees with early and/or
multiplex-onset diabetes.

PMID: 16883527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Diabetes. 2006 Aug;55(8):2379-86.

Association studies of variants in the genes involved in pancreatic beta-cell
function in type 2 diabetes in Japanese subjects.

Yokoi N(1), Kanamori M, Horikawa Y, Takeda J, Sanke T, Furuta H, Nanjo K, Mori H,
Kasuga M, Hara K, Kadowaki T, Tanizawa Y, Oka Y, Iwami Y, Ohgawara H, Yamada Y,
Seino Y, Yano H, Cox NJ, Seino S.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Kobe University Graduate School
of Medicine, Kobe 650-0017, Japan.

Because impaired insulin secretion is characteristic of type 2 diabetes in
Asians, including Japanese, the genes involved in pancreatic beta-cell function
are candidate susceptibility genes for type 2 diabetes. We examined the
association of variants in genes encoding several transcription factors (TCF1,
TCF2, HNF4A, ISL1, IPF1, NEUROG3, PAX6, NKX2-2, NKX6-1, and NEUROD1) and genes
encoding the ATP-sensitive K(+) channel subunits Kir6.2 (KCNJ11) and SUR1 (ABCC8)
with type 2 diabetes in a Japanese cohort of 2,834 subjects. The exon 16 -3c/t
variant rs1799854 in ABCC8 showed a significant association (P = 0.0073), and
variants in several genes showed nominally significant associations (P < 0.05)
with type 2 diabetes. Although the E23K variant rs5219 in KCNJ11 showed no
association with diabetes in Japanese (for the K allele, odds ratio [OR] 1.08
[95% CI 0.97-1.21], P = 0.15), 95% CI around the OR overlaps in meta-analysis of 
European populations, suggesting that our results are not inconsistent with the
previous studies. This is the largest association study so far conducted on these
genes in Japanese and provides valuable information for comparison with other
ethnic groups.

PMID: 16873704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Physiol Genomics. 2006 Oct 11;27(2):141-55. Epub 2006 Jul 25.

Metabolome, transcriptome, and bioinformatic cis-element analyses point to HNF-4 
as a central regulator of gene expression during enterocyte differentiation.

Stegmann A(1), Hansen M, Wang Y, Larsen JB, Lund LR, Ritié L, Nicholson JK,
Quistorff B, Simon-Assmann P, Troelsen JT, Olsen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, The Panum Institute,
University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark.

DNA-binding transcription factors bind to promoters that carry their binding
sites. Transcription factors therefore function as nodes in gene regulatory
networks. In the present work we used a bioinformatic approach to search for
transcription factors that might function as nodes in gene regulatory networks
during the differentiation of the small intestinal epithelial cell. In addition
we have searched for connections between transcription factors and the villus
metabolome. Transcriptome data were generated from mouse small intestinal villus,
crypt, and fetal intestinal epithelial cells. Metabolome data were generated from
crypt and villus cells. Our results show that genes that are upregulated during
fetal to adult and crypt to villus differentiation have an overrepresentation of 
potential hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4 binding sites in their promoters.
Moreover, metabolome analyses by magic angle spinning (1)H nuclear magnetic
resonance spectroscopy showed that the villus epithelial cells contain higher
concentrations of lipid carbon chains than the crypt cells. These findings
suggest a model where the HNF-4 transcription factor influences the villus
metabolome by regulating genes that are involved in lipid metabolism. Our
approach also identifies transcription factors of importance for crypt functions 
such as DNA replication (E2F) and stem cell maintenance (c-Myc).

PMID: 16868071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2006 Nov;319(2):693-702. Epub 2006 Jul 20.

Induction of human CYP2A6 is mediated by the pregnane X receptor with peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1alpha.

Itoh M(1), Nakajima M, Higashi E, Yoshida R, Nagata K, Yamazoe Y, Yokoi T.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Metabolism and Toxicology, Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Graduate 
School of Medical Science, Kanazawa University, Kakuma-machi, Kanazawa 920-1192, 
Japan.

CYP2A6 plays important roles in the metabolism of nicotine and some clinically
used drugs. Interindividual variability in the CYP2A6 expression level in human
liver might be caused by an inducible property, but the molecular mechanism of
induction is unclear. Rifampicin, phenobarbital, and
6-(4-chlorophenyl)imidazo[2,1-b][1,3]thiazole-5-carbaldehyde
O-(3,4-dichlorobenzyl)oxime, which are activators of pregnane X receptor (PXR)
and constitutive androstane receptor (CAR), induced CYP2A6 mRNA in human
hepatocytes. We identified three direct repeat separated by four nucleotides
(DR4)-like elements at -6698, -5476, and -4618 in the CYP2A6 gene, to which PXR
and CAR could bind after dimerization with retinoid X receptor (RXR)-alpha. In
luciferase assays, overexpression of PXR or CAR could not activate the
transcriptional activity of CYP2A6 promoter constructs (-6754 to -1) in HepG2
cells. Cotransfection of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha did not affect the
transcriptional activities in the absence or presence of PXR or CAR.
Interestingly, cotransfection of peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma
coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha) as well as PXR significantly enhanced the
transcriptional activity (3.9-fold of control). By the deletion of a possible
suppresser region (-4533 to -185), the effects of PXR/PGC-1alpha on the
transcriptional activity were increased (6.9-fold of control). Deletion or
mutation analyses revealed that two DR4-like elements at -5476 and -4618 are
essential for transactivation by PXR/PGC-1alpha. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assay revealed that PXR and PGC-1alpha bind to CYP2A6 chromatin. In conclusion,
we found that CYP2A6 is induced via PXR and PGC-1alpha through the DR4-like
element at the distal response region. This is the first study to report the
molecular mechanism of the induction of CYP2A6.

PMID: 16857725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Thyroid. 2006 Jun;16(6):537-44.

Expression of endoderm stem cell markers: evidence for the presence of adult stem
cells in human thyroid glands.

Thomas T(1), Nowka K, Lan L, Derwahl M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Department of Medicine, St. Hedwig Hospital and
Humboldt University Berlin, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Adult stem cells have been detected in several human tissues. The
object of this study was to investigate whether they also occur in the human
thyroid gland.
DESIGN: The expression of the stem cell marker Oct- 4 and the early endodermal
markers GATA-4 and HNF4alpha was analyzed in histologic slides and cultured cells
derived from goiters, in the FRTL5 cell line, and the HTh74, HTC, C643, and
XTC133 thyroid carcinoma cell lines.
MAIN OUTCOME: Stem cell markers were detectable in all primary cultures whereas
in the differentiated FRTL5 cell line no expression was observed. Expression of
stem cell marker mRNA was not affected by thyrotropin (TSH) stimulation and did
not decrease when cells underwent several passages. Immunostaining of cultured
cells and of histologic slides of goitrous tissues showed only single cells that 
were immunoreactive for Oct-4, GATA-4, and HNF4a. Expression of Oct-4 but not of 
endodermal marker GATA-4 was also detectable in some thyroid carcinoma cell
lines. Fluorescence-activated cell sorter (FACS) analysis demonstrated cell
populations that were positive for either Oct-4, GATA-4, or HNF4alpha but
negative for thyroglobulin. When these putative, FACS-sorted stem cell
populations were further analyzed by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), expression of all stem cell markers and of Pax8 but not of
thyroglobulin mRNA was detectable.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide evidence for the presence of adult stem and
precursor cells of endodermal origin in the human thyroid gland.

PMID: 16839255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. J Mol Med (Berl). 2006 Aug;84(8):701-8. Epub 2006 Jul 13.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms of the HNF4alpha gene are associated with the
conversion to type 2 diabetes mellitus: the STOP-NIDDM trial.

Andrulionyte L(1), Laukkanen O, Chiasson JL, Laakso M; STOP-NIDDM Study Group.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Kuopio, 70210 Kuopio, Finland.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is a transcription factor, which is 
necessary for normal function of human liver and pancreatic islets. We
investigated whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) of HNF4A, encoding
HNF4alpha, influenced the conversion from impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) to
type 2 diabetes mellitus in subjects of the STOP-NIDDM trial. This trial aimed at
evaluating the effect of acarbose compared to placebo in the prevention of type 2
diabetes mellitus. Eight SNPs covering the intragenic and alternate P2 promoter
regions of HNF4A were genotyped in study samples using the TaqMan Allelic
Discrimination Assays. Three SNPs in the P2 promoter region (rs4810424,
rs1884614, and rs2144908) were in almost complete association (D'>0.97, r
(2)>0.95) and, therefore, only rs4810424 was included in further analyses. Female
carriers of the less frequent C allele of rs4810424 had a 1.7-fold elevated risk 
[95% confidence interval (CI) 1.09-2.66; P=0.020] for the conversion to diabetes 
compared to women with the common genotype after the adjustment for age,
treatment group (placebo or acarbose), smoking, weight at baseline, and weight
change. No association was found in men. Haplotype analysis based on three SNPs
(rs4810424, rs2071197, and rs3818247) representing the linkage disequilibrium
blocks in our study population indicated that the conversion to type 2 diabetes
mellitus was dependent on the number of risk alleles in different haplotypes in
women. Our results suggest that SNPs of HNF4A and their haplotypes predispose to 
type 2 diabetes mellitus in female subjects of the STOP-NIDDM study population.

PMID: 16838170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Biol Chem. 2006 Sep 8;281(36):26540-51. Epub 2006 Jul 5.

Regulation of constitutive androstane receptor and its target genes by fasting,
cAMP, hepatocyte nuclear factor alpha, and the coactivator peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha.

Ding X(1), Lichti K, Kim I, Gonzalez FJ, Staudinger JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Kansas, Lawrence,
Kansas 66045, USA.

Animal studies reveal that fasting and caloric restriction produce increased
activity of specific metabolic pathways involved in resistance to weight loss in 
liver. Evidence suggests that this phenomenon may in part occur through the
action of the constitutive androstane receptor (CAR, NR1I3). Currently, the
precise molecular mechanisms that activate CAR during fasting are unknown. We
show that fasting coordinately induces expression of genes encoding peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha), CAR,
cytochrome P-450 2b10 (Cyp2b10), UDP-glucuronosyltransferase 1a1 (Ugt1a1),
sulfotransferase 2a1 (Sult2a1), and organic anion-transporting polypeptide 2
(Oatp2) in liver in mice. Treatments that elevate intracellular cAMP levels also 
produce increased expression of these genes in cultured hepatocytes. Our data
show that PGC-1alpha interaction with hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha
(HNF4alpha, NR2A1) directly regulates CAR gene expression through a novel and
evolutionarily conserved HNF4-response element (HNF4-RE) located in its proximal 
promoter. Expression of PGC-1alpha in cells increases CAR expression and
ligand-independent CAR activity. Genetic studies reveal that hepatic expression
of HNF4alpha is required to produce fasting-inducible CAR expression and
activity. Taken together, our data show that fasting produces increased
expression of genes encoding key metabolic enzymes and an uptake transporter
protein through a network of interactions involving cAMP, PGC-1alpha, HNF4alpha, 
CAR, and CAR target genes in liver. Given the recent finding that mice lacking
CAR exhibit a profound decrease in resistance to weight loss during extended
periods of caloric restriction, our findings have important implications in the
development of drugs for the treatment of obesity and related diseases.

PMCID: PMC2991045
PMID: 16825189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Diabetes. 2006 Jul;55(7):1970-7.

Common hepatic nuclear factor-4alpha variants are associated with high serum
lipid levels and the metabolic syndrome.

Weissglas-Volkov D(1), Huertas-Vazquez A, Suviolahti E, Lee J, Plaisier C,
Canizales-Quinteros S, Tusie-Luna T, Aguilar-Salinas C, Taskinen MR, Pajukanta P.

Author information: 
(1)UCLA, Department of Human Genetics, Gonda Neuroscience and Genetics Research
Center, 695 Charles E. Young Dr. South, Los Angeles, CA 90095-7088, USA.

Hepatic nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha), a transcription factor involved in
the regulation of serum lipid and glucose levels, has recently been associated
with type 2 diabetes. The HNF-4alpha gene (HNF4A) resides on chromosome
20q12-q13.1, which, in addition to type 2 diabetes, has also previously been
linked to high triglycerides in Finnish familial combined hyperlipidemia (FCHL)
families. FCHL, characterized by elevated levels of serum total cholesterol,
triglycerides, or both, is a common dyslipidemia observed in up to 20% of
patients with premature coronary heart disease. Considering the clear phenotypic 
overlap between type 2 diabetes and FCHL, both predisposing to high serum
triglycerides and glucose intolerance, we tested this gene for association in
dyslipidemic families originating from two distinct populations, Finnish and
Mexican, and comprising 1,447 subjects. Our data show that common HNF4A variants 
and haplotypes are associated with elevated serum lipid levels and the metabolic 
syndrome (P = 0.008-0.04), as well as with elevated glucose parameters (P =
0.008-0.03), using family-based association analysis. Importantly, both Finnish
and Mexican families shared two common lipid-associated HNF4A haplotypes (P =
0.005 for total cholesterol and 0.006 for triglycerides). In conclusion, we show 
for the first time that common HNF4A variants are associated with high serum
lipid levels and the metabolic syndrome.

PMID: 16804065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Biochem J. 2006 Oct 15;399(2):285-95.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha contributes to carbohydrate-induced
transcriptional activation of hepatic fatty acid synthase.

Adamson AW(1), Suchankova G, Rufo C, Nakamura MT, Teran-Garcia M, Clarke SD,
Gettys TW.

Author information: 
(1)Pennington Biomedical Research Center, 6400 Perkins Road, Baton Rouge, LA
70808, USA.

Refeeding a carbohydrate-rich meal after a fast produces a co-ordinated induction
of key glycolytic and lipogenic genes in the liver. The transcriptional response 
is mediated by insulin and increased glucose oxidation, and both signals are
necessary for optimal induction of FAS (fatty acid synthase). The
glucose-regulated component of FAS promoter activation is mediated in part by
ChREBP [ChoRE (carbohydrate response element)-binding protein], which binds to a 
ChoRE between -7300 and -7000 base-pairs in a carbohydrate-dependent manner.
Using in vivo footprinting with nuclei from fasted and refed rats, we identify an
imperfect DR-1 (direct repeat-1) element between -7110 and -7090 bp that is
protected upon carbohydrate refeeding. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays
establish that this DR-1 element binds HNF-4alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor
4alpha), and chromatin immunoprecipitation establishes that HNF-4alpha binding to
this site is increased approx. 3-fold by glucose refeeding. HNF-4alpha
transactivates reporter constructs containing the distal FAS promoter in a
DR-1-dependent manner, and this DR-1 is required for full glucose induction of
the FAS promoter in primary hepatocytes. In addition, a 3-fold knockdown of
hepatocyte HNF-4alpha by small interfering RNA produces a corresponding decrease 
in FAS gene induction by glucose. Co-immunoprecipitation experiments demonstrate 
a physical interaction between HNF-4alpha and ChREBP in primary hepatocytes,
further supporting an important complementary role for HNF-4alpha in
glucose-induced activation of FAS transcription. Taken together, these
observations establish for the first time that HNF-4alpha functions in vivo
through a DR-1 element in the distal FAS promoter to enhance gene transcription
following refeeding of glucose to fasted rats. The findings support the broader
view that HNF-4alpha is an integral component of the hepatic nutrient sensing
system that co-ordinates transcriptional responses to transitions between
nutritional states.

PMCID: PMC1609920
PMID: 16800817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Hepatology. 2006 Jul;44(1):186-94.

Phenobarbital regulates nuclear expression of HNF-4alpha in mouse and rat
hepatocytes independent of CAR and PXR.

Bell AW(1), Michalopoulos GK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, PA, USA.

Phenobarbital is a lipophilic molecule used as a sedative and antiepileptic drug 
that elicits a multitude of effects in the liver, including gross liver
enlargement, hepatocyte hypertrophy, and induced expression of drug-metabolizing 
enzymes and other liver-specific genes. The constitutive androstane receptor
(CAR; NR1I3) and to a lesser extent the pregnane X receptor (PXR; NR1I2) are
responsible for mediating induction of many phenobarbital-responsive genes.
However, CAR-mediated transcriptional control of some genes is critically
dependent on hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF-4alpha; NR2A1), which itself 
regulates multiple liver-specific genes involved in hepatic growth, metabolism,
and differentiation. We studied the effects of phenobarbital on HNF-4alpha
expression in hepatocytes and provide evidence that HNF-4alpha nuclear expression
is regulated in response to phenobarbital. Real-time polymerase chain reaction
analyses revealed that HNF-4alpha mRNA is modestly up-regulated by phenobarbital.
In addition, nuclear expression of HNF-4alpha protein is significantly elevated 3
hours after the administration of phenobarbital in wild-type, CAR-/-, and
CAR-/-/PXR-/- mice. In vitro analysis revealed that phenobarbital-induced
HNF-4alpha expression is both time- and dose dependent. In addition, the
phosphatase inhibitor okadaic acid and the Ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein
kinase II inhibitor KN62 block nuclear induction of HNF-4alpha by phenobarbital. 
Furthermore, HNF-4alpha nuclear expression is enhanced by inhibition of cyclic
AMP-dependent protein kinase A. In conclusion, induced nuclear expression of
HNF-4alpha and CAR is an integral part of the phenobarbital response, aimed at
coordinated regulation of genes involved in drug metabolism and detoxification as
well as maintenance of liver function.

PMCID: PMC1769339
PMID: 16799975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Diabetologia. 2006 Jul;49(7):1545-51. Epub 2006 Apr 26.

Common variants in MODY genes increase the risk of gestational diabetes mellitus.

Shaat N(1), Karlsson E, Lernmark A, Ivarsson S, Lynch K, Parikh H, Almgren P,
Berntorp K, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences/Diabetes and Endocrinology, Malmö University
Hospital, Lund University, Malmö, Sweden. nael.shaat@med.lu.se

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2006 Sep;49(9):2226-7.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Impaired beta cell function is the hallmark of gestational
diabetes mellitus (GDM) and MODY. In addition, women with MODY gene mutations
often present with GDM, but it is not known whether common variants in MODY genes
contribute to GDM.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We genotyped five common variants in the glucokinase (GCK, 
commonly known as MODY2), hepatocyte nuclear factor 1-alpha (HNF1A, commonly
known as MODY3) and 4-alpha (HNF4A commonly known as MODY1) genes in 1,880
Scandinavian women (648 women with GDM and 1,232 pregnant non-diabetic control
women).
RESULTS: The A allele of the GCK -30G-->A polymorphism was more common in GDM
women than in control subjects (odds ratio [OR] 1.28 [95% CI 1.06-1.53], p=0.008,
corrected p value, p=0.035). Under a recessive model [AA vs GA+GG], the OR
increased further to 2.12 (95% CI 1.21-3.72, p=0.009). The frequency of the L
allele of the HNF1A I27L polymorphism was slightly higher in GDM than in controls
(1.16 [95% CI 1.001-1.34], p=0.048, corrected p value, p=0.17). However, the OR
increased under a dominant model (LL+IL vs II; 1.31 [95% CI 1.08-1.60], p=0.007).
The rs2144908, rs2425637 and rs1885088 variants, which are located downstream of 
the primary beta cell promoter (P2) of HNF4A, were not associated with GDM.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: The -30G-->A polymorphism of the beta-cell-specific
promoter of GCK and the I27L polymorphism of HNF1A seem to increase the risk of
GDM in Scandinavian women.

PMID: 16752173  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Diabetes. 2006 Jun;55(6):1899-903.

A hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha gene (HNF4A) P2 promoter haplotype linked
with late-onset diabetes: studies of HNF4A variants in the Norwegian MODY
registry.

Raeder H(1), Bjørkhaug L, Johansson S, Mangseth K, Sagen JV, Hunting A, Følling
I, Johansen O, Bjørgaas M, Paus PN, Søvik O, Molven A, Njølstad PR.

Author information: 
(1)Section for Pediatrics, Department of Clinical Medicine, University of Bergen,
N-5020 Bergen, Norway.

Variants in hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha cause maturity-onset diabetes 
of the young, type 1 (MODY1) and may also be risk factors for type 2 diabetes. We
sequenced the HNF4A gene of 95 MODY3-negative probands from the Norwegian MODY
Registry. We found three novel coding variants in exon 8 of HNF4A: G326R, T339I, 
and W340X. In intron 7, we noted a single nucleotide polymorphism in the binding 
site of a previously published primer pair, which in some cases caused allelic
drop out when amplifying exon 8. We also detected two novel sequence variants of 
the P2 promoter region, of which P2 -192C>G showed linkage with diabetes in two
families (maximal logarithm of odds score of 3.1 and 0.8, respectively). This
variant and a surrounding haplotype restricted by 3.7 Mb was also found in two
Danish MODY pedigrees. The age of onset was higher in the P2 -192C>G carriers
(median 45 years) compared with that reported for other MODY1 individuals. We
could not support a biological role of the P2 promoter variant by in vitro
transfection assays. In conclusion, we have identified three novel HNF4A
mutations and a 3.7-Mb haplotype, including the HNF4A P2 promoter, which was
linked with diabetes.

PMID: 16731861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Diabetes. 2006 Jun;55(6):1869-73.

A novel -192c/g mutation in the proximal P2 promoter of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4 alpha gene (HNF4A) associates with late-onset diabetes.

Ek J(1), Hansen SP, Lajer M, Nicot C, Boesgaard TW, Pruhova S, Johansen A,
Albrechtsen A, Yderstraede K, Lauenborg J, Parrizas M, Boj SF, Jørgensen T,
Borch-Johnsen K, Damm P, Ferrer J, Lebl J, Pedersen O, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark.

Recently, it has been shown that mutations in the P2 promoter of the hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-4 alpha gene (HNF4A) cause maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY), while single nucleotide polymorphisms in this locus are associated 
with type 2 diabetes. In this study, we examined 1,189 bp of the P2 promoter and 
the associated exon 1D of HNF4A for variations associated with diabetes in 114
patients with type 2 diabetes, 72 MODYX probands, and 85 women with previous
gestational diabetes mellitus. A -192c/g mutation was found in five patients. We 
screened 1,587 diabetic subjects and 4,812 glucose-tolerant subjects for the
-192c/g mutation and identified 5 diabetic and 1 glucose-tolerant mutation
carriers (P=0.004). Examination of the families showed that carriers of the
-192c/g mutation had a significantly impaired glucose-stimulated insulin release 
and lower levels of serum total cholesterol compared with matched control
subjects. Furthermore, the mutation disrupted the binding of an unidentified
sequence-specific DNA binding complex present in human islet extracts. Also, two 
novel linked polymorphisms in the P2 promoter at positions -1107g/t and -858c/t
were identified. These variants were not significantly associated with type 2
diabetes or any pre-diabetic traits. In conclusion, a rare, novel mutation that
disrupts a protein binding site in the pancreatic HNF4A promoter associates with 
late-onset diabetes.

PMID: 16731855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Diabetologia. 2006 Jun;49(6):1138-41.

Early foetal programming of hepatic gluconeogenesis: Glucocorticoids strike back.

McCurdy CE(1), Friedman JE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine, Mail Stop
8106, Aurora, CO, 80045, USA. carrie.mccurdy@uchsc.edu

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2006 Nov;49(11):2809-10.

Comment on
    Diabetologia. 2006 Jun;49(6):1412-20.

PMID: 16680490  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Mol Pharmacol. 2006 Aug;70(2):627-36. Epub 2006 May 2.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1 and HNF4 mediate hepatic multidrug resistance
protein 2 up-regulation during hepatitis C virus gene expression.

Qadri I(1), Iwahashi M, Kullak-Ublick GA, Simon FR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, Mail 
Stop 8106, 12801 East 17th Ave., L-18-7403, RC-1 South, P.O. Box 6511, Aurora, CO
80045, USA. ishtiaq.qadri@uchsc.edu

Hepatitis C virus (HCV) is known to induce hepatic oxidative stress that is
implicated in the up-regulation of multidrug resistance proteins (MRPs). The
relationship between increased prooxidant production, MRPs, and HCV has not been 
investigated. Here, we report that a homeodomain-containing transcription factor,
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 1, plays a central role in liver gene regulation 
during HCV gene expression and/or subgenome replication. MRP2 protein and mRNA
expression were increased and MRP2 promoter activity was increased 7-fold.
Mutations within the putative HNF1 binding site of the human MRP2 promoter
abrogated HCV-induced activation, implicating HNF1 in the induction of MRP2 by
HCV. The mechanism by which HNF1-mediated activation occurs seems to be
transcriptional, because the regulated expression of HNF4, which is known to
control HNF1 expression, was also increased. Consistent with this finding, HNF1
mRNA was increased 10-fold. A promoter-luciferase construct of the human HNF1
gene was activated in an HNF4-dependent manner, and a mutant construct lacking
the HNF4 binding site was not activated in HCV-positive cells. Consistent with
this hypothesis, HNF4 protein and mRNA levels as well as HNF4 promoter activity
and DNA binding activity were increased. The expression of HNF1 seems to play a
critical role in the induction of hepatic MRP2 secondary to HCV subgenomic
replication. The ability of HCV to induce HNF1 and HNF4 is attributed to 1)
increased oxidative stress and 2) direct protein-protein interactions between HCV
nonstructural component (NS) 5A and HNF1, leading to enhanced HNF1 DNA binding.
In conclusion, we describe a novel mechanism by which HCV gene expression may
induce adaptive responses involving MRP2 via HNF1 activation. This may
constitute, in part, the cellular detoxification task force during HCV infection.

PMID: 16670373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Biol Chem. 2006 Jul 7;281(27):18351-62. Epub 2006 Apr 27.

Regulation of rat hepatic L-pyruvate kinase promoter composition and activity by 
glucose, n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-alpha agonist.

Xu J(1), Christian B, Jump DB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan
48824, USA.

Carbohydrate regulatory element-binding protein (ChREBP), MAX-like factor X
(MLX), and hepatic nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) are key transcription
factors involved in the glucose-mediated induction of hepatic L-type pyruvate
kinase (L-PK) gene transcription. n-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) and
WY14643 (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha) agonist)
interfere with glucose-stimulated L-PK gene transcription in vivo and in rat
primary hepatocytes. Feeding rats a diet containing n-3 PUFA or WY14643
suppressed hepatic mRNA(L-PK) but did not suppress hepatic ChREBP or HNF-4alpha
nuclear abundance. Hepatic MLX nuclear abundance, however, was suppressed by n-3 
PUFA but not WY14643. In rat primary hepatocytes, glucose-stimulated accumulation
of mRNA(LPK) and L-PK promoter activity correlated with increased ChREBP nuclear 
abundance. This treatment also increased L-PK promoter occupancy by RNA
polymerase II (RNA pol II), acetylated histone H3 (Ac-H3), and acetylated histone
H4 (Ac-H4) but did not significantly impact L-PK promoter occupancy by ChREBP or 
HNF-4alpha. Inhibition of L-PK promoter activity by n-3 PUFA correlated with
suppressed RNA pol II, Ac-H3, and Ac-H4 occupancy on the L-PK promoter. Although 
n-3 PUFA transiently suppressed ChREBP and MLX nuclear abundance, this treatment 
did not impact ChREBP-LPK promoter interaction. HNF4alpha-LPK promoter
interaction was transiently suppressed by n-3 PUFA. Inhibition of L-PK promoter
activity by WY14643 correlated with a transient decline in ChREBP nuclear
abundance and decreased Ac-H4 interaction with the L-PK promoter. WY14643,
however, had no impact on MLX nuclear abundance or HNF4alpha-LPK promoter
interaction. Although overexpressed ChREBP or HNF-4alpha did not relieve n-3 PUFA
suppression of L-PK gene expression, overexpressed MLX fully abrogated n-3 PUFA
suppression of L-PK promoter activity and mRNA(L-PK) abundance. Overexpressed
ChREBP, but not MLX, relieved the WY14643 inhibition of L-PK. In conclusion, n-3 
PUFA and WY14643/PPARalpha target different transcription factors to control L-PK
gene transcription. MLX, the heterodimer partner for ChREBP, has emerged as a
novel target for n-3 PUFA regulation.

PMCID: PMC2766394
PMID: 16644726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Diabetes. 2006 May;55(5):1260-4.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha P2 promoter haplotypes are associated with type 
2 diabetes in the Japanese population.

Hara K(1), Horikoshi M, Kitazato H, Ito C, Noda M, Ohashi J, Froguel P, Tokunaga 
K, Tobe K, Nagai R, Kadowaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, The University 
of Tokyo, 7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha is a transcription factor known as a key
molecule in the development and functions of the beta-cells. In a previously
performed genome-wide scan of Japanese type 2 diabetic sibpairs, we observed
linkage of type 2 diabetes to chromosome 20q12-q13, a region in which the HNF4A
gene is located. Recent studies have reported associations between type 2
diabetes and polymorphisms in the P2 promoter region specific to beta-cells. In
this study, we attempted to assess whether the HNF4A gene plays a role in the
genetic susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population by analyzing
polymorphisms and haplotypes of the HNF4A gene. Linkage disequilibrium across the
P2 promoter region was preserved in the Japanese population, consistent with
previous reports. Although none of the individual polymorphisms examined showed
any significant association with type 2 diabetes, we found very strong evidence
of the association between type 2 diabetes and the haplotype consisting of two
polymorphisms in the P2 promoter region of the HNF4A gene (P = 3.82 x 10(-4)). In
contrast, there was no association between type 2 diabetes and haplotypes
consisting of polymorphisms not located in the P2 promoter region, suggesting
that the type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci are localized in the P2 promoter
region of the HNF4A gene. The association was replicated using two additional
cohorts (P = 1.51 x 10(-4) and 0.019, respectively). The results of the present
analysis revealed that the HNF4A gene might be a type 2 diabetes susceptibility
gene common to different ethnic groups. The study also suggested the possible
existence of an as-yet-unidentified but functional polymorphism in the P2
promoter region of the HNF4A gene that directly influences susceptibility to type
2 diabetes.

PMID: 16644680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. J Cell Biochem. 2006 Oct 1;99(2):558-64.

Differential expression of HNF4alpha isoforms in liver stem cells and
hepatocytes.

Li K(1), Zhang H, Wang Y, Wang Y, Feng M.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF4alpha) has been implicated in liver
development and hepatocellular differentiation. The HNF4alpha expression in liver
stem cells has not yet been fully investigated. Here, we describe the expression 
characterization of HNF4alpha in liver stem cells isolated from
2-acetylaminofluorene/partial hepatectomy (AAF/PH) rat model by a combination of 
density-gradient centrifugation and selective enzymatic digestion. The obtained
cells were identified by flow cytometry (FCM) immediately and then by
immunocytochemisty and reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
after 5 d culture. The cultured stem cells were subjected to analysis of the
expression of various HNF4alpha isoforms using RT-PCR, Western blotting, and
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA). Results showed that HNF4alpha
isoforms, alpha1, alpha2, alpha7, and alpha8 were present in liver stem cells,
which contrasted with only alpha1 and alpha2 expression in hepatocytes. The
distinct expression patterns of HNF4alpha isoforms in liver stem cells may
contribute to maintain the "stemness" of these cells.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16639723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Diabetes Res Clin Pract. 2006 Oct;74(1):75-81. Epub 2006 May 2.

Genetic and clinical characteristics of Korean maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY) patients.

Hwang JS(1), Shin CH, Yang SW, Jung SY, Huh N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Ajou University School of Medicine, Suwon, South
Korea.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is mostly caused by mutations of the 
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha (MODY3) and glucokinase (MODY2) genes in
Caucasians. But most Japanese and Chinese MODY patients are not linked to known
MODY genes. In this study, we examined the genetic and clinical characteristics
of Korean subjects with MODY and early onset type 2 diabetes who had been
diagnosed before 15 years of age. The study included 23 unrelated subjects
fulfilling the criteria for MODY (three consecutive generations of type 2
diabetes with at least one member diagnosed under the age of 25 year) and 17
unrelated subjects diagnosed with early onset type 2 DM under the age of 15
years. The HNF-4alpha (MODY1), glucokinase (MODY2) and HNF-1alpha (MODY3) genes
were analysed by direct sequencing. Mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene were found
in two patients (5%). One of these, P393fsdelC, was novel, and was found in a
patient classified in the MODY group. The GCK gene mutation, R191W, was
identified in one patient classified as early-onset type 2 DM (2.5%). No
mutations were found in the HNF-4alpha gene, except the T130I variant, which is a
known rare polymorphism. In conclusion, the mutations in the HNF-1alpha gene and 
GCK account for a small proportion, about 5% and 2.5%, respectively, in Korean
MODY and early onset type 2 patients. The majority of MODY cases in the Korean
population are due to defects in unknown genes.

PMID: 16632067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Gastroenterology. 2006 Apr;130(4):1207-20.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha is essential for embryonic development of the
mouse colon.

Garrison WD(1), Battle MA, Yang C, Kaestner KH, Sladek FM, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53326, USA.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4alpha) is a
transcription factor that has been shown to be required for hepatocyte
differentiation and development of the liver. It has also been implicated in
regulating expression of genes that act in the epithelium of the lower
gastrointestinal tract. This implied that HNF4alpha might be required for
development of the gut.
METHODS: Mouse embryos were generated in which Hnf4a was ablated in the
epithelial cells of the fetal colon by using Cre-loxP technology. Embryos were
examined by using a combination of histology, immunohistochemistry, DNA
microarray, reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction, electrophoretic
mobility shift assays, and chromatin immunoprecipitation analyses to define the
consequences of loss of HNF4alpha on colon development.
RESULTS: Embryos were recovered at E18.5 that lacked HNF4alpha in their colons.
Although early stages of colonic development occurred, HNF4alpha-null colons
failed to form normal crypts. In addition, goblet-cell maturation was perturbed
and expression of an array of genes that encode proteins with diverse roles in
colon function was disrupted. Several genes whose expression in the colon was
dependent on HNF4alpha contained HNF4alpha-binding sites within putative
transcriptional regulatory regions and a subset of these sites were occupied by
HNF4alpha in vivo.
CONCLUSIONS: HNF4alpha is a transcription factor that is essential for
development of the mammalian colon, regulates goblet-cell maturation, and is
required for expression of genes that control normal colon function and
epithelial cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3581272
PMID: 16618389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Lipid Res. 2006 Jul;47(7):1463-77. Epub 2006 Apr 7.

Transcriptional regulation of the human hepatic lipase (LIPC) gene promoter.

Rufibach LE(1), Duncan SA, Battle M, Deeb SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Washington, Seattle, USA.
lewarner@u.washington.edu

Hepatic lipase (HL) plays a key role in the metabolism of plasma lipoproteins,
and its level of activity requires tight regulation, given the association of
both low and high levels with atherosclerosis and coronary artery disease.
However, little is known about the factors responsible for HL expression. Here,
we report that the human hepatic lipase gene (LIPC) promoter is regulated by
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha), peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha), apolipoprotein A-I regulatory
protein-1 (ARP-1), and hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha). Reporter
analysis showed that HNF4alpha directly regulates the LIPC promoter via two newly
identified direct repeat elements, DR1 and DR4. PGC-1alpha is capable of
stimulating the HNF4alpha-dependent transactivation of the LIPC promoter. ARP-1
displaces HNF4alpha from the DR1 site and blocks its ability to activate the LIPC
promoter. Induction by HNF1alpha requires the HNF1 binding site and upon
cotransfection with HNF4alpha leads to an additive effect. In addition, the in
vivo relevance of HNF4alpha in LIPC expression is shown by the ability of the
HNF4alpha antagonist Medica 16 to repress endogenous LIPC mRNA expression.
Furthermore, disruption of Hnf4alpha in mice prevents the expression of HL mRNA
in liver. The overall effect these transcription factors have on HL expression
will ultimately depend on the interplay between these various factors and their
relative intracellular concentrations.

PMID: 16603721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Eur J Pediatr. 2006 Jul;165(7):446-52. Epub 2006 Apr 7.

Aetiological heterogeneity of asymptomatic hyperglycaemia in children and
adolescents.

Feigerlová E(1), Pruhová S, Dittertová L, Lebl J, Pinterová D, Kolostová K, Cerná
M, Pedersen O, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University,
Vinohradska 159, 100 81, Prague 10, Czech Republic.

INTRODUCTION: Randomly estimated fasting hyperglycaemia in an asymptomatic
individual may represent the first sign of pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction.
OBJECTIVE: We aimed at specifying the genetic aetiology of asymptomatic
hyperglycaemia in a cohort of children and adolescents.
SUBJECTS AND METHODS: We analysed the aetiological diagnosis in 82 non-obese
paediatric subjects (38 males) aged 0.2-18.5 years (median: 13.1) who were
referred for elucidation of a randomly found blood glucose level above 5.5
mmol/l. In addition to fasting glycaemia and circulating levels of insulin and
C-peptide, the subjects were tested by an oral glucose tolerance test and an
intravenous glucose tolerance test and screened for mutations in the genes
encoding glucokinase (GCK), HNF-1alpha (TCF1), Kir6.2 (KCNJ11) (if aged <2 years)
and HNF-4alpha (HNF4A) (those with a positive family history of diabetes).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: We identified 35 carriers of GCK mutations causing MODY2,
two carriers of TCF1 mutations causing MODY3, one carrier of a HNF4A mutation
causing MODY1 and one carrier of a KCNJ11 mutation causing permanent neonatal
diabetes mellitus. Of the remaining patients, 11 progressed to type 1 diabetes
mellitus (T1DM) and 9 had impaired glucose tolerance or diabetes mellitus of
unknown origin. In 23 subjects, an impairment of blood glucose levels was not
confirmed. We conclude that 39 of 82 paediatric patients (48%) with randomly
found fasting hyperglycaemia suffered from single gene defect conditions, MODY2
being the most prevalent. An additional 11 patients (13%) progressed to overt
T1DM. The aetiological diagnosis in asymptomatic hyperglycaemic children and
adolescents is a clue to introducing an early and effective therapy or, in MODY2,
to preventing any future extensive re-investigations.

PMID: 16602010  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Biol Chem. 2006 May 26;281(21):14683-90. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Partnership of PGC-1alpha and HNF4alpha in the regulation of lipoprotein
metabolism.

Rhee J(1), Ge H, Yang W, Fan M, Handschin C, Cooper M, Lin J, Li C, Spiegelman
BM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical
School, One Jimmy Fund Way, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha) 
is a transcriptional coactivator involved in several aspects of energy
metabolism. It is induced or activated under different stimuli in a highly
tissue-specific manner and subsequently partners with certain transcription
factors in those tissues to execute various biological programs. In the fasted
liver, PGC-1alpha is induced and interacts with hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha 
(HNF4alpha) and other transcription factors to activate gluconeogenesis and
increase hepatic glucose output. Given the broad spectrum of liver genes
responsive to HNF4alpha, we sought to determine those that were specifically
targeted by the combination of PGC-1alpha and HNF4alpha. Coexpression of these
two molecules in murine stem cells reveals a high induction of mRNA for
apolipoproteins A-IV and C-II. Forced expression of PGC-1alpha in mouse and human
hepatoma cells increases the mRNA of a subset of apolipoproteins implicated in
very low density lipoprotein and triglyceride metabolism, including
apolipoproteins A-IV, C-II, and C-III. Coactivation of the apoC-III/A-IV promoter
region by PGC-1alpha occurs through a highly conserved HNF4alpha response
element, the loss of which completely abolishes activation by PGC-1alpha and
HNF4alpha. Adenoviral infusion of PGC-1alpha into live mice increases hepatic
expression of apolipoproteins A-IV, C-II, and C-III and increases serum and very 
low density lipoprotein triglyceride levels. Conversely, knock down of PGC-1alpha
in vivo causes a decrease in both apolipoprotein expression and serum
triglyceride levels. These data point to a crucial role for the
PGC-1alpha/HNF4alpha partnership in hepatic lipoprotein metabolism.

PMID: 16574644  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Diabetologia. 2006 Jun;49(6):1412-20. Epub 2006 Mar 29.

Prenatal programming of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha in the rat: A key
mechanism in the 'foetal origins of hyperglycaemia'?

Nyirenda MJ(1), Dean S, Lyons V, Chapman KE, Seckl JR.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cardiovascular Science, Queen's Medical Research Institute,
University of Edinburgh, 47 Little France Crescent, Edinburgh EH16 4TJ, UK.
m.nyirenda@ed.ac.uk

Comment in
    Diabetologia. 2006 Nov;49(11):2809-10.
    Diabetologia. 2006 Jun;49(6):1138-41.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Prenatal glucocorticoid exposure causes lifelong hyperglycaemia 
in rat offspring, associated with permanently increased hepatic
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase 2 (PCK2), the rate-controlling enzyme of
gluconeogenesis. To elucidate the mechanisms underlying the 'programming' of
PCK2, this study examined the effect of prenatal dexamethasone treatment on
expression of transcription factors that regulate Pck2.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Real-time RT-PCR and in situ hybridisation were used to
measure and localise hepatic mRNA transcribed from the genes for PCK2, hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4, alpha (HNF4A), transcription factor 1 (TCF1), CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein, alpha (CEBPA), CEBPB, the glucocorticoid receptor (NR3C1) and
peroxisome proliferative activated receptor, gamma, coactivator 1 alpha
(PPARGC1A) in foetal and adult offspring of dams treated with dexamethasone or
vehicle during the last week of gestation.
RESULTS: Prenatal dexamethasone exposure significantly elevated Hnf4a mRNA
expression in foetal and adult liver. This resulted from increased expression of 
isoforms derived from the 'adult' (P1) Hnf4a promoter. In contrast, isoforms from
the 'foetal' (P2) promoter were markedly suppressed by dexamethasone. Like Pck2, 
the increase in hepatic Hnf4a mRNA occurred exclusively in the periportal zone.
Foetal Tcf1 expression was also increased by dexamethasone treatment, but this
did not persist into adulthood. Prenatal dexamethasone did not affect the amounts
of foetal and/or adult Cebpa, Cebpb, Nr3c1 or Ppargc1a mRNA.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Prenatal dexamethasone exposure caused a permanent
increase in hepatic Hnf4a mRNA. This increase, which was associated with a
premature switch from foetal to adult promoter predominance, was congruent with
changes in Pck2 expression. These data suggest that HNF4A might mediate Pck2
overexpression and subsequent hyperglycaemia.

PMID: 16570165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Feb;19(2):143-8.

Molecular genetic analysis of MODY candidate genes in Japanese patients with
non-obese juvenile onset diabetes mellitus.

Kagami-Takasugi M(1), Katsumata N, Tanaka T, Tajima T, Fujieda K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology and Metabolism, National Research Institute for
Child Health and Development, Tokyo, Japan.

We analyzed 84 Japanese patients with juvenile-onset (before 18 years of age)
non-obese diabetes mellitus (DM) for mutations in the genes for HNF-1alpha,
HNF-4alpha and HNF-1beta. In HNF-1alpha, previously reported mutations (R271W and
R272C) and one novel sequence variant (at nucleotide -129/-130 insTTGGGG of the
promoter region) were identified in three different patients. In vitro functional
study of the new promoter variant demonstrated that the transcriptional activity 
was 1.6-2.0 times higher than that of the wild-type. This may lead to
overexpression of HNF-1alpha and subsequent negative regulation of the target
genes of HNF-1alpha. No mutation was identified in the HNF-4alpha and HNF-1beta
genes. In this study on a small series of non-obese Japanese patients with
juvenile-onset DM, the prevalence of MODY3 was 3.5%. The significance of the new 
promoter variant in the development of DM is unclear; however, a promoter
mutation in the HNF-1alpha gene could be diabetogenic.

PMID: 16562587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Drug Metab Dispos. 2006 Jun;34(6):1012-8. Epub 2006 Mar 15.

Involvement of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha in the different expression level
between CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 in the human liver.

Kawashima S(1), Kobayashi K, Takama K, Higuchi T, Furihata T, Hosokawa M, Chiba
K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical
Sciences, Chiba University, Inohana 1-8-1, Chiba 260-8675, Japan.

CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 are clinically important drug-metabolizing enzymes. The
expression level of CYP2C9 is much higher than that of CYP2C19, although the
factor(s) responsible for the difference between the expression levels of these
genes is still unclear. It has been reported that hepatocyte nuclear factor
4alpha (HNF4alpha) plays an important role in regulation of the expression of
liver-enriched genes, including P450 genes. Thus, we hypothesized that HNF4alpha 
contributes to the difference between the expression levels of these genes. Two
direct repeat 1 (DR1) elements were located in both the CYP2C9 and CYP2C19
promoters. The upstream and downstream elements in these promoters had the same
sequences, and HNF4alpha could bind to both elements in vitro. The
transactivation levels of constructs containing two DR1 elements of the CYP2C9
promoter were increased by HNF4alpha, whereas those of the CYP2C19 promoter were 
not increased. The introduction of mutations into either the upstream or
downstream element in the CYP2C9 gene abolished the responsiveness to HNF4alpha. 
We also examined whether HNF4alpha could bind to the promoter regions of the
CYP2C9 and the CYP2C19 genes in vivo. The results of chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays showed that HNF4alpha could bind to the promoter
region of the CYP2C9 gene but not to that of the CYP2C19 promoter in the human
liver. Taken together, our results suggest that HNF4alpha is a factor responsible
for the difference between the expression levels of CYP2C9 and CYP2C19 in the
human liver.

PMID: 16540586  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Diabetes Metab. 2006 Feb;32(1):86-8.

Polymorphisms in the gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha and
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes in a Polish population.

Wanic K(1), Malecki MT, Wolkow PP, Klupa T, Skupien J, Bobrek J, Kozek E,
Krolewski AS, Sieradzki J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Medical College, Jagiellonian University,
Krakow, Poland.

Recently, several association studies of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM) and the 
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha gene were reported with conflicting
results. Our aim was to search for association between two polymorphisms of
HNF-4alpha and T2DM in Polish Caucasians. The study groups comprised of 461 T2DM 
cases and 366 controls. Genotype-quantitative trait analyses were based on the
oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT), glucose and insulin results, and comprised
310 glucose-tolerant subjects. All individuals were genotyped for two HNF-4alpha 
polymorphisms. The frequencies of the minor alleles were as follows: 19.2% in
T2DM vs. 17.6% in controls for rs2144908; and 20.6% vs. 20.1% for rs4810424,
respectively. The distributions of alleles, genotypes, and haplotypes of the
HNF-4alpha polymorphisms did not differ between the study groups (lowest P =
0.41). None of the examined SNPs showed an association in control subjects with
quantitative traits of fasting plasma glucose, fasting insulin, as well as plasma
glucose and insulin 2 hours after glucose load in OGTT. We conclude that both
examined polymorphisms in HNF-4alpha are not associated with T2DM and prediabetic
phenotypes in Polish Caucasian study groups of this size.

PMID: 16523192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Eur J Clin Invest. 2006 Mar;36(3):170-5.

Decreased hepatic expression of PPAR-gamma coactivator-1 in cholesterol
cholelithiasis.

Bertolotti M(1), Gabbi C, Anzivino C, Mitro N, Godio C, De Fabiani E, Crestani M,
Del Puppo M, Ricchi M, Carulli L, Rossi A, Loria P, Carulli N.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Medicine e Specialità Mediche, Divisione di Medicina 3,
University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, 41100 Modena, Italy.
bertolotti.marco@unimore.it

BACKGROUND: Cholesterol cholelithiasis (gallstone disease) is a common disease in
the Western world. The aim of the present study was to analyze the hepatic
expression of a number of nuclear receptors involved in bile acid metabolism in
human cholesterol gallstone disease.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Surgical liver biopsies were obtained from 11 patients
with untreated cholesterol cholelithiasis and nine gallstone-free subjects; mRNA 
levels of cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) and related nuclear receptors
and coactivators were assayed by quantitative real-time RT-PCR.
RESULTS: No differences between the two groups were detected in mRNA levels of
CYP7A1 and related nuclear receptors, with the exception of peroxysome
proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1 (PGC-1), which was
significantly (P < 0.01) less expressed in gallstone subjects. Expression of
PGC-1 was linearly correlated with farnesoid X receptor (FXR) in gallstone
patients (r = 0.87 on a log scale, P < 0.01), but not in control subjects; in
gallstone patients PGC-1 expression was also correlated with hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4 (HNF-4) (r = 0.78, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: These findings suggest that PGC-1 can play a role in the prevention
of cholesterol gallstone disease in humans; this might take place via interaction
with the bile acid receptor FXR, whose protective role in cholelithiasis has been
suggested by recent evidence in animal models and other coactivators. The present
data might help to understand the pathophysiology and possibly focus on new
therapeutical targets in cholesterol gallstone disease.

PMID: 16506961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Diabetologia. 2006 May;49(5):1106-8. Epub 2006 Feb 25.

Phenotypic heterogeneity between different mutations of MODY subtypes and within 
MODY pedigrees.

Fajans SS, Bell GI.

PMID: 16502298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. EMBO J. 2006 Mar 22;25(6):1253-62. Epub 2006 Feb 23.

In vivo role of the HNF4alpha AF-1 activation domain revealed by exon swapping.

Briançon N(1), Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)URA 2578 du CNRS, Département de Biologie du Développement, Institut Pasteur, 
Paris, France.

The gene encoding the nuclear receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha
(HNF4alpha) generates isoforms HNF4alpha1 and HNF4alpha7 from usage of
alternative promoters. In particular, HNF4alpha7 is expressed in the pancreas
whereas HNF4alpha1 is found in liver, and mutations affecting HNF4alpha function 
cause impaired insulin secretion and/or hepatic defects in humans and in
tissue-specific 'knockout' mice. HNF4alpha1 and alpha7 isoforms differ
exclusively by amino acids encoded by the first exon which, in HNF4alpha1 but not
in HNF4alpha7, includes the activating function (AF)-1 transactivation domain. To
investigate the roles of HNF4alpha1 and HNF4alpha7 in vivo, we generated mice
expressing only one isoform under control of both promoters, via reciprocal
swapping of the isoform-specific first exons. Unlike Hnf4alpha gene disruption
which causes embryonic lethality, these 'alpha7-only' and 'alpha1-only' mice are 
viable, indicating functional redundancy of the isoforms. However, the former
show dyslipidemia and preliminary results indicate impaired glucose tolerance for
the latter, revealing functional specificities of the isoforms. These 'knock-in' 
mice provide the first test in vivo of the HNF4alpha AF-1 function and have
permitted identification of AF-1-dependent target genes.

PMCID: PMC1422155
PMID: 16498401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. J Biol Chem. 2006 Apr 14;281(15):10081-8. Epub 2006 Feb 17.

A Prospero-related homeodomain protein is a novel co-regulator of hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4alpha that regulates the cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase gene.

Song KH(1), Li T, Chiang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology, Immunology and Biochemistry, Northeastern Ohio
University College of Medicine, 4209 State Route 44, Rootstown, OH 44272, USA.

Prox1, an early specific marker for developing liver and pancreas in foregut
endoderm has recently been shown to interact with alpha-fetoprotein transcription
factor and repress cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) gene transcription.
Using a yeast two-hybrid assay, we found that Prox1 strongly and specifically
interacted with hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)4alpha, an important
transactivator of the human CYP7A1 gene in bile acid synthesis and
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) gene in gluconeogenesis. A real time
PCR assay detected Prox1 mRNA expression in human primary hepatocytes and HepG2
cells. Reporter assay, GST pull-down, co-immunoprecipitation, and yeast
two-hybrid assays identified a specific interaction between the N-terminal LXXLL 
motif of Prox1 and the activation function 2 domain of HNF4alpha. Prox1 strongly 
inhibited HNF4alpha and peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor gamma
coactivator-1alpha co-activation of the CYP7A1 and PEPCK genes. Knock down of the
endogenous Prox1 by small interfering RNA resulted in significant increase of
CYP7A1 and PEPCK mRNA expression and the rate of bile acid synthesis in HepG2
cells. These results suggest that Prox1 is a novel co-regulator of HNF4alpha that
may play a key role in the regulation of bile acid synthesis and gluconeogenesis 
in the liver.

PMCID: PMC1785292
PMID: 16488887  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Biochem J. 2006 Mar 1;394(Pt 2):e3-5.

Role of HNF4alpha in the superinduction of the IL-1beta-activated iNOS gene by
oxidative stress.

Gonzalez FJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, Building 37, Room 3106,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. fjgonz@helix.nih.gov

Comment on
    Biochem J. 2006 Mar 1;394(Pt 2):379-87.

IL-1beta (interleukin-1beta) treatment of hepatocytes results in an NF-kappaB
(nuclear factor-kappaB)-mediated activation of the iNOS (induced nitric oxide
synthase) gene, and this increase in gene expression is further augmented by
oxidative stress. Oxidative stress alone has no influence on the iNOS promoter,
therefore indicating that the promoter needs to be primed by NF-kappaB. In this
issue of the Biochemical Journal, Guo et al. extend their earlier work, showing
that HNF4alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha) mediates the superinduction of 
iNOS observed by co-treating cells with IL-1b plus H2O2. A specific
phosphorylation by p38 kinase at Ser-158 of HNF4alpha results in increased
binding of HNF4alpha to the iNOS promoter, leading to enhanced transcription. The
study by Guo et al. is the first to show definitively that HNF4alpha can be
modulated to differentially activate specific genes. However, issues remain to
determine the functional significance in vivo of the elevated iNOS activity, and 
the mechanism that governs the specificity of HNF4alpha towards the iNOS promoter
element as compared with many other HNF4alpha target genes in the hepatocyte.

PMCID: PMC1408685
PMID: 16479620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Diabetes Metab Res Rev. 2006 Sep-Oct;22(5):348-55.

Glucokinase mutations in young children with hyperglycemia.

Codner E(1), Deng L, Pérez-Bravo F, Román R, Lanzano P, Cassorla F, Chung WK.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Maternal and Child Research (I.D.I.M.I.), School of Medicine,
University of Chile, Santiago, Chile. ecodner@med.uchile.cl

BACKGROUND: The etiology of mild hyperglycemia without ketoacidosis in young
children is often unknown. Maturity onset diabetes of youth (MODY) is a form of
diabetes mellitus (DM) characterized by fasting hyperglycemia without evidence
for autoimmune destruction of beta-cells.
METHODS: We genetically analyzed four families of young children with fasting
hyperglycemia with family histories of diabetes for mutations in the genes for
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF4alpha), glucokinase (GCK), and hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1alpha), the genes responsible for MODY1, MODY2, and
MODY3, respectively.
RESULTS: We identified mutations in GCK (Gly258Asp, Arg303Trp, and Arg191Gln) in 
three of the four families. Molecular genetic characterization in these children 
clarified the etiology and prognosis of the hyperglycemia and allowed
discontinuation of insulin therapy in one family.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that molecular evaluation for MODY in children with mild
fasting hyperglycemia without ketosis with family histories of diabetes can
provide important prognostic information to guide therapy and exclude preclinical
type 1 diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 16444761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2006 May;317(2):778-85. Epub 2006 Jan 25.

The human organic cation transporter-1 gene is transactivated by hepatocyte
nuclear factor-4alpha.

Saborowski M(1), Kullak-Ublick GA, Eloranta JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Zurich,
Rämistrasse 100, CH-8091 Zurich, Switzerland. jyrki.eloranta@usz.ch.

The organic cation transporter-1 (OCT1) mediates the hepatocellular uptake of
cationic drugs and endobiotics from sinusoidal blood. The uptake rates of these
compounds may depend on OCT1 expression level. Because little is known about the 
regulation of the human OCT1 (hOCT1) gene, we characterized the hOCT1 promoter
with respect to DNA-response elements and their binding factors. By computer
analysis, we identified two adjacent putative DNA-response elements for the
liver-enriched homodimeric nuclear receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha
(HNF-4alpha) in the hOCT1 promoter. Each element is of the direct repeat (DR)-2
format, containing directly repeated hexamers separated by two bases. In
electrophoretic mobility shift assays, both elements directly interacted with
HNF-4alpha. A luciferase reporter construct containing the hOCT1 promoter was
strongly activated by HNF-4alpha in transiently transfected Huh7 cells.
Site-directed mutagenesis of either DR-2 element alone or in combination severely
decreased the HNF-4alpha-mediated activation of the hOCT1 promoter, indicating
that both elements are functionally important. Because HNF-4alpha is a known
target for bile acid-mediated suppression of transcription, we studied whether
chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA) suppresses hOCT1 gene expression by inhibiting
HNF-4alpha-mediated transactivation. Treatment of cells with CDCA could indeed
suppress the activation of the endogenous hOCT1 gene by HNF-4alpha. In addition, 
bile acid-inducible transcriptional repressor, small heterodimer partner (SHP),
inhibited activation of the reporter-linked hOCT1 promoter and of the endogenous 
hOCT1 gene by HNF-4alpha. In conclusion, the hOCT1 gene, encoding an important
drug transporter in the human liver, is activated by HNF-4alpha and suppressed by
bile acids via SHP.

PMID: 16436500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Jun;290(6):E1313-20. Epub 2006 Jan 24.

Decreased nuclear hormone receptor expression in the livers of mice in late
pregnancy.

Sweeney TR(1), Moser AH, Shigenaga JK, Grunfeld C, Feingold KR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94121,
USA.

During the third trimester of pregnancy, there is an increase in serum
triglyceride and cholesterol levels. The mechanisms accounting for these changes 
in lipid metabolism during pregnancy are unknown. We hypothesized that, during
pregnancy, the expression of nuclear hormone receptors involved in regulating
lipid metabolism would decrease. In 19-day pregnant mice, serum triglyceride and 
non-HDL cholesterol levels were significantly increased, whereas total
cholesterol was slightly decreased, because of a decrease in the HDL fraction.
Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR)alpha, PPARbeta/delta, and
PPARgamma, liver X receptor (LXR)alpha and LXRbeta, farnesoid X receptor (FXR),
and retinoid X receptor (RXR)alpha, RXRbeta, and RXRgamma mRNA levels were
significantly decreased in the livers of 19-day pregnant mice. Additionally, the 
expressions of thyroid receptor (TR)alpha, pregnane X receptor, sterol regulatory
element-binding proteins (SREBP)-1a, SREBP-1c, SREBP-2, and liver receptor
homolog 1 were also decreased, whereas the expression of TRbeta, constitutive
androstane receptor, and hepatic nuclear factor 4 showed no significant change.
mRNA levels of the PPAR target genes carnitine-palmitoyl transferase 1alpha and
acyl-CoA oxidase, the LXR target genes SREBP1c, ATP-binding cassettes G5 and G8, 
the FXR target gene SHP, and the TR target genes malic enzyme and Spot14 were all
significantly decreased. Finally, the expressions of PPARgamma coactivator
(PGC)-1alpha and PGC-1beta, known activators of a number of nuclear hormone
receptors, were also significantly decreased. The decreases in expression of
RXRs, PPARs, LXRs, FXR, TRs, SREBPs, and PGC-1s could contribute to the
alterations in lipid metabolism during late pregnancy.

PMID: 16434558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 2005 Dec;50(16 Suppl):2084-9.

[Search for type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes].

[Article in Japanese]

Hirota Y(1), Kasuga M.

Author information: 
(1)hirota@med.kobe-u.ac.jp

PMID: 16411434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Pharmacol Rep. 2005 Nov-Dec;57(6):818-23.

Microarray analysis of altered gene expression in diallyl trisulfide-treated
HepG2 cells.

Zhou Z(1), Tan HL, Xu BX, Ma ZC, Gao Y, Wang SQ.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing Institute of Radiation Medicine, 27# Taiping road, Haidian district,
Beijing 100850, PR China.

Diallyl trisulfide (DT) is a natural compound derived from garlic. Despite its
reported lipid-lowering effects, the mechanisms of its actions are not clear yet.
To further understand the molecular mechanisms of actions of this compound,
microarray technology was used in the present study to investigate the
lipid-lowering effects of DT on HepG2 cells. To optimize the concentration of DT 
treatment on HepG2 cells, a series of concentration of DT were incubated with
HepG2 cells for 24 h. The data indicted that the concentrations of DT in the
range from 20 to 50 microM were effective in lowering cellular total triglyceride
and cholesterol, with no significant cytotoxicity. Using oligonucleotide
microarrays and RT-PCR technology, the genes that were differentially regulated
by DT were identified. The results showed that peroxisome proliferator activated 
receptor alpha (PPAR-alpha) and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha)
mRNA were up-regulated, and CYP7A1 mRNA was down-regulated following DT
treatment, suggesting that the lipid-lowering effects of DT may be at least in
part mediated through the regulation of PPAR-alpha dependent pathways.

PMID: 16382202  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Biochem J. 2006 Mar 1;394(Pt 2):379-87.

Phosphorylation of Ser158 regulates inflammatory redox-dependent hepatocyte
nuclear factor-4alpha transcriptional activity.

Guo H(1), Gao C, Mi Z, Wai PY, Kuo PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC 27514, USA.

Retraction in
    Guo H, Gao C, Mi Z, Wai PY, Kuo PC. Biochem J. 2014 Jul 15;461(2):347.

Comment in
    Biochem J. 2006 Mar 1;394(Pt 2):e3-5.

In IL-1beta (interleukin 1beta)-stimulated rat hepatocytes exposed to superoxide,
we have previously identified an IRX (inflammatory redox)-sensitive DR1 [direct
repeat of RG(G/T)TCA with one base spacing] cis-acting activator element (nt
-1327 to -1315) in the iNOS (inducible nitric oxide synthase) promoter:
AGGTCAGGGGACA. The corresponding transcription factor was identified to be
HNF4alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha). HNF4alpha DNA binding activity and 
transactivation potential are tightly regulated by its state of phosphorylation. 
However, the functional consequences of IRX-mediated post-translational
phosphorylation of HNF4alpha have not been well characterized. In the setting of 
IL-1beta+H2O2, HNF4alpha functional activity is associated with a unique
serine/threonine phosphorylation pattern. This indicates that an IRX-sensitive
serine/threonine kinase pathway targets HNF4alpha to augment hepatocyte iNOS
transcription. In the present study, following identification of phosphorylated
residues in HNF4alpha, serial mutations were performed to render the target
residues phosphorylation-resistant. Electrophoretic mobility-shift assays and
transient transfection studies utilizing the iNOS promoter showed that the S158A 
mutation ablates IRX-mediated HNF4alpha DNA binding and transactivation.
Gain-of-function mutation with the S158D phosphomimetic HNF4alpha vector supports
a critical role for Ser158 phosphorylation. In vitro phosphorylation and kinase
inhibitor studies implicate p38 kinase activity. Our results indicate that p38
kinase-mediated Ser158 phosphorylation is essential for augmentation of the DNA
binding and transactivation potential of HNF4alpha in the presence of
IL-1beta+H2O2. This pathway results in enhanced iNOS expression in hepatocytes
exposed to pro-inflammatory cytokines and oxidative stress.

PMCID: PMC1482807
PMID: 16351573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. J Biol Chem. 2006 Feb 10;281(6):3560-8. Epub 2005 Dec 7.

E-cadherin-dependent transcriptional control of apolipoprotein A-IV gene
expression in intestinal epithelial cells: a role for the hepatic nuclear factor 
4.

Peignon G(1), Thenet S, Schreider C, Fouquet S, Ribeiro A, Dussaulx E, Chambaz J,
Cardot P, Pinçon-Raymond M, Le Beyec J.

Author information: 
(1)Université Pierre et Marie Curie UMRS 505, Paris, F-75006 France, INSERM, UMRS
505, F-75006 Paris, France.

Cell-matrix and cell-cell adhesion play a central role in the control of cell
proliferation, differentiation, and gene expression. Integrins and E-cadherin are
the key components involved in these processes in epithelial cells. We recently
showed that integrin-dependent adhesion to the extracellular matrix reinforces
the formation of E-cadherin-actin complexes inducing the polarization of Caco-2
enterocytes and increases the expression of a marker of enterocyte
differentiation, the apolipoprotein A-IV (apoA-IV) gene. By impairing or
enhancing E-cadherin-dependent cell adhesion, we demonstrate in the present study
its involvement in the transcriptional activation of the apoA-IV gene in Caco-2
cells. This control requires the regulatory sequence that we have previously
identified as necessary and sufficient to drive and restrict apoA-IV gene
expression in enterocytes in vivo. Furthermore, using chimeric E-cadherin-Fc
homophilic ligand-coated surfaces, we show that a direct activation of E-cadherin
triggers the transcriptional activation of the apoA-IV promoter. Finally,
E-cadherin-dependent cell-cell adhesion controls the nuclear abundance of the
transcription factor hepatic nuclear factor 4alpha, which is involved in the
enterocyte-specific expression of apoA-IV gene. Altogether, our results suggest
that E-cadherin controls enterocyte-specific expression of genes, such as the
apoA-IV gene, through the control of hepatic nuclear factor 4alpha nuclear
abundance.

PMID: 16338932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Hepatology. 2006 Jan;43(1):117-25.

Glucagon and cAMP inhibit cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) gene expression
in human hepatocytes: discordant regulation of bile acid synthesis and
gluconeogenesis.

Song KH(1), Chiang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pathology, Northeastern Ohio
Universities College of Medicine, Rootstown, OH 44272, USA.

The gene encoding cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) is tightly regulated to
control bile acid synthesis and maintain lipid homeostasis. Recent studies in
mice suggest that bile acid synthesis is regulated by the fasted-to-fed cycle,
and fasting induces CYP7A1 gene expression in parallel to the induction of
peroxisome proliferators-activated receptor gamma co-activator 1alpha
(PGC-1alpha) and phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK). How glucagon
regulates CYP7A1 gene expression in the human liver is not clear. Here we show
that glucagon and cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP) strongly repressed CYP7A1
mRNA expression in human primary hepatocytes. Reporter assays confirmed that cAMP
and protein kinase A (PKA) inhibited human CYP7A1 gene transcription, in contrast
to their stimulation of the PEPCK gene. Mutagenesis analysis identified a
PKA-responsive region located within the previously identified HNF4alpha binding 
site in the human CYP7A1 promoter. Glucagon and cAMP increased HNF4alpha
phosphorylation and reduced the amount of HNF4alpha present in CYP7A1 chromatin. 
Our findings suggest that glucagon inhibited CYP7A1 gene expression via PKA
phosphorylation of HNF4alpha, which lost its ability to bind the CYP7A1 gene and 
resulted in inhibition of human CYP7A1 gene transcription. In conclusion, this
study unveils a species difference in nutrient regulation of the human and mouse 
CYP7A1 gene and suggests a discordant regulation of bile acid synthesis and
gluconeogenesis by glucagon in human livers during fasting.

PMID: 16323215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Lipid Res. 2006 Jan;47(1):215-27. Epub 2005 Nov 1.

Regulation of bile acid biosynthesis by hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha.

Inoue Y(1), Yu AM, Yim SH, Ma X, Krausz KW, Inoue J, Xiang CC, Brownstein MJ,
Eggertsen G, Björkhem I, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) regulates many genes that are
preferentially expressed in liver. Mice lacking hepatic expression of HNF4alpha
(HNF4alphaDeltaL) exhibited markedly increased levels of serum bile acids (BAs)
compared with HNF4alpha-floxed (HNF4alphaF/F) mice. The expression of genes
involved in the hydroxylation and side chain beta-oxidation of cholesterol,
including oxysterol 7alpha-hydroxylase, sterol 12alpha-hydroxylase (CYP8B1), and 
sterol carrier protein x, was markedly decreased in HNF4alphaDeltaL mice.
Cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase mRNA and protein were diminished only during the
dark cycle in HNF4alphaDeltaL mice, whereas expression in the light cycle was not
different between HNF4alphaDeltaL and HNF4alphaF/F mice. Because CYP8B1
expression was reduced in HNF4alphaDeltaL mice, it was studied in more detail. In
agreement with the mRNA levels, CYP8B1 enzyme activity was absent in
HNF4alphaDeltaL mice. An HNF4alpha binding site was found in the mouse Cyp8b1
promoter that was able to direct HNF4alpha-dependent transcription. Surprisingly,
cholic acid-derived BAs, produced as a result of CYP8B1 activity, were still
observed in the serum and gallbladder of these mice. These studies reveal that
HNF4alpha plays a central role in BA homeostasis by regulation of genes involved 
in BA biosynthesis, including hydroxylation and side chain beta-oxidation of
cholesterol in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1413576
PMID: 16264197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Nutr. 2005 Nov;135(11):2503-6.

Fatty acid regulation of hepatic gene transcription.

Jump DB(1), Botolin D, Wang Y, Xu J, Christian B, Demeure O.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Physiology, Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Michigan State 
University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA. Jump@msu.edu

Dietary fat regulates gene expression by controlling the activity or abundance of
key transcription factors. In vitro binding and cell culture studies have
identified many transcription factors as prospective targets for fatty acid
regulation, including peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors (PPARalpha,
beta, gamma1, and gamma2), sterol regulatory element binding protein-1c
(SREBP-1c), hepatic nuclear factors (HNF-4alpha and gamma), retinoid X receptor
(RXRalpha), liver X receptor (LXRalpha), and others. In vivo studies established 
that PPARalpha- and SREBP-1c-regulated genes are key targets for PUFA control of 
hepatic gene expression. PUFA activate PPARalpha by direct binding, leading to
the induction of hepatic fatty acid oxidation. PUFA inhibit hepatic fatty acid
synthesis by suppressing SREBP-1c nuclear abundance through several mechanisms,
including suppression of SREBP-1c gene transcription and enhancement of
proteasomal degradation and mRNA(SREBP1c) decay. Changes in intracellular
nonesterified fatty acids (NEFA) correlate well with changes in PPARalpha
activity and mRNA(SREBP-1c) abundance. Several mechanisms regulate intracellular 
NEFA composition, including fatty acid transport, acyl CoA synthetases and
thioesterases, fatty acid elongases and desaturases, neutral and polar lipid
lipases, and fatty acid oxidation. Many of these mechanisms are regulated by
PPARalpha or SREBP-1c. Together, these mechanisms control hepatic lipid
composition and affect whole-body lipid composition.

PMID: 16251601  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2005 Nov;20(11):1753-61.

Hepatocyte growth factor accelerates the proliferation of hepatic oval cells and 
possibly promotes the differentiation in a 2-acetylaminofluorene/partial
hepatectomy model in rats.

Hasuike S(1), Ido A, Uto H, Moriuchi A, Tahara Y, Numata M, Nagata K, Hori T,
Hayashi K, Tsubouchi H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Faculty of Medicine, University of
Miyazaki, Kihara, Kiyotake, Miyazaki, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) is the primary agent promoting the
proliferation of mature hepatocytes. The purpose of the present paper was to
clarify the effects of HGF on the proliferation and differentiation of hepatic
oval cells using a 2-acetylaminofluorene/partial hepatectomy (2-AAF/PH) model in 
rats.
METHODS: Recombinant human HGF (0.2 mg/day) was administered to 2-AAF/PH rats for
7 days using osmotic pumps intraperitoneally implanted in conjunction with
hepatectomy (day zero).
RESULTS: Periportal basophilic areas consisting of oval cells were significantly 
enlarged by treatment with HGF on day 8. In control animals, expression of
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP) in the liver was gradually upregulated, leading a marked 
increase on day 12. In HGF-treated rats, AFP expression was stimulated at an
earlier date and decreased to an undetectable level on day 12. Conversely,
expression of albumin transcripts, which was stimulated by HGF-treatment at a
later date, continued to increase even after HGF administration ceased, leading
to an extremely high level on day 12. Moreover, treatment with HGF also
stimulated the expression of hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha and -4alpha at an
early date.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that, besides the proliferation of hepatic
oval cells, HGF possibly promotes the differentiation to hepatocytes in vivo,
suggesting that recombinant human HGF accelerates the regeneration of severely
damaged livers, a situation in which the proliferation of mature hepatocytes is
impaired.

(c) 2005 Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 16246197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Drug Metab Dispos. 2006 Jan;34(1):131-7. Epub 2005 Oct 21.

Nuclear receptor expression in fetal and pediatric liver: correlation with CYP3A 
expression.

Vyhlidal CA(1), Gaedigk R, Leeder JS.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Developmental Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics,
Children's Mercy Hospital and Clinics, 2401 Gillham Road, Kansas City, MO 64108, 
USA.

The mechanisms underlying interindividual variation and developmental changes in 
cytochrome P450 3A (CYP3A) expression and activity are not fully understood.
Quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) methods
were used to detect, during human fetal and pediatric development, mRNA
expression of nuclear receptors involved in the regulation of CYP3A genes.
Quantitative RT-PCR was conducted on RNA extracted from prenatal (n = 60, 76 days
to 32 weeks estimated gestational age) and pediatric (n = 20, 4 days to 18 years 
of age) liver tissue with primers for nuclear receptors implicated in regulating 
CYP3A gene expression. Pregnane X receptor (PXR) and constitutive androstane
receptor (CAR) were expressed at low (and highly variable) levels in pre- and
neonatal liver relative to liver tissue derived from older children. CAR was
expressed at higher levels relative to PXR in prenatal liver (757 +/- 480
molecules CAR/ng of RNA versus 271 +/- 190 molecules PXR/ng of RNA after
correction for 18S rRNA). In contrast, mRNA expression of the heterodimer partner
RXRalpha was less variable (33-fold) and did not differ appreciably between pre- 
and postnatal liver samples (219 +/- 101 molecules/ng of RNA prenatal versus 253 
+/- 232 molecules/ng of RNA postnatal). Expression of HNF4alpha1 mRNA was similar
to that of RXRalpha. Log CYP3A7 mRNA expression was significantly correlated with
PXR (r2 = 0.372) and CAR (r2 = 0.380) mRNA in fetal liver, but associations were 
weaker than those observed with CYP3A4 mRNA in postnatal liver (r2 = 0.610 and
0.723 for PXR and CAR, respectively). In conclusion, nuclear receptor mRNA
expression demonstrates considerable interindividual variability in human fetal
and pediatric liver and is significantly correlated with CYP3A expression.

PMID: 16243958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Mol Endocrinol. 2006 Mar;20(3):647-60. Epub 2005 Oct 20.

Codependence of growth hormone-responsive, sexually dimorphic hepatic gene
expression on signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b and hepatic
nuclear factor 4alpha.

Holloway MG(1), Laz EV, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, 5 Cummington Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Targeted disruption of the signal transducer and activator of transcription 5b
gene (STAT5b) leads to decreased expression in male mouse liver of a
male-predominant cytochrome (Cyp) 2d protein, whereas female-predominant Cyp2b
proteins are increased. Presently, we characterize the effects of STAT5b
deficiency on 15 specific, individual Cyp RNAs and other sexually dimorphic liver
gene products. All seven male-specific RNAs investigated were decreased to normal
female levels in STAT5b-deficient male liver, whereas five of eight
female-specific RNAs, designated class I female genes, were increased in
expression up to 200-fold or more. STAT5b deficiency had a much more modest
effect on the expression of these genes in females. Hypophysectomy and GH
replacement studies demonstrated positive GH pulse regulation of all seven male
RNAs and negative GH pulse regulation of class I, but not class II, female RNAs
in wild-type, but not in STAT5b-deficient, male mice. A majority of the
sex-specific genes responded in parallel to the loss of STAT5b and the loss of
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha, indicating that both transcription factors are 
essential and suggesting they may coregulate sexually dimorphic liver gene
expression. Continuous GH treatment of intact male mice, which overrides the
endogenous male, pulsatile plasma GH pattern, down-regulated all seven male RNAs 
and induced expression of the five class I female RNAs within 4-7 d; however,
induction of class II female RNAs was delayed until d 7-14. Given the slow
responses of all 15 genes to changes in plasma GH status, GH regulation of
sex-specific Cyp expression is proposed to be indirect and mediated by STAT5b-
and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha-dependent factors that may include
repressors of female-specific Cyps and other targets of GH action.

PMID: 16239260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Biochem Pharmacol. 2005 Nov 25;70(11):1548-59. Epub 2005 Oct 13.

Transcriptional suppression of human microsomal triglyceride transfer protein by 
hypolipidemic insulin sensitizers.

Sheena V(1), Hertz R, Berman I, Nousbeck J, Bar-Tana J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutrition and Metabolism, Hebrew University Medical
School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) catalyzes the assembly and
secretion of liver triglyceride-rich lipoproteins. The human MTP (hMTP) promoter 
activity is reported here to be suppressed by HNF-4alpha ligand antagonists
(e.g., Medica analogs) or by PPARgamma ligand agonists (e.g.,
thiazolidinediones), thus accounting for their hypolipidemic activity in humans. 
Suppression of liver hMTP by Medica analogs or by thiazolidinediones was mediated
by the TAAA sequence that serves as non-canonical TATA box of the hMTP core
promoter. MTP suppression was evident in the specific context of the wild type
hMTP core promoter, but not in the context of the mutated rodent-conforming hMTP 
core promoter governed by a canonical TATA box conjoined with its proximal
(-50/-38)DR-1 element. hMTP suppression by Medica analogs or thiazolidinediones
mediated by hMTP TAAA was independent of HNF-4alpha or PPARgamma. hMTP
suppression by Medica analogs, but not by thiazolidinediones, was further
complemented by inhibition of HNF-4alpha transcriptional activity transduced by
the distal (-83/-70)DR-1 element of hMTP promoter. hMTP promoter activity was
unaffected by PPARalpha activation. Furthermore, in contrast to hMTP, the
promoter activity of the rodent-conforming hMTP was robustly activated by
Wy-14,643-activated PPARalpha or by thiazolidinedione-activated PPARgamma.
Transcriptional activation by PPARalpha or PPARgamma of the rodent-conforming,
but not the wild type hMTP gene promoter, resulted from the species-specific
context of the respective proximal DR-1 elements. Hence, suppression of hMTP
transcription by hypolipidemic insulin sensitizers requires the specific context 
of hMTP core promoter. In light of the species-specific context of MTP core
promoters, the rodent MTP promoter may not substitute for the human promoter when
searching for hypolipidemic MTP suppressors.

PMID: 16226723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2006 Mar;290(3):G466-75. Epub 2005 Oct
13.

Mechanisms of mutual functional interactions between HNF-4alpha and HNF-1alpha
revealed by mutations that cause maturity onset diabetes of the young.

Rowley CW(1), Staloch LJ, Divine JK, McCaul SP, Simon TC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Washington University School of Medicine, Campus Box
8208, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.

Hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha and HNF-1alpha are key endodermal
transcriptional regulators that physically and functionally interact. HNF-4alpha 
and HNF-1alpha cooperatively activate genes with binding sites for both factors, 
whereas suppressive interactions occur at regulatory sequences with a binding
site for only one factor. The liver fatty acid binding protein gene (Fabp1) has
binding sites for both factors, and chromatin precipitation assays were utilized 
to demonstrate that HNF-4alpha increased HNF-1alpha Fabp1 promoter occupancy
during cooperative transcriptional activation. The HNF4 P2 promoter contains a
HNF-1 but not HNF-4 binding site, and HNF-4alpha suppressed HNF-1alpha HNF4 P2
activation and decreased promoter HNF-1alpha occupancy. The apolipoprotein C III 
(APOC3) promoter contains a HNF-4 but not HNF-1 binding site, and HNF-1alpha
suppressed HNF-4alpha APOC3 activation and decreased HNF-4alpha promoter
occupancy. Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) as well as defects in
hepatic lipid metabolism result from mutations in either HNF-4alpha or
HNF-1alpha. We found that MODY missense mutant R127W HNF-4alpha retained
wild-type individual Fabp1 activation and bound to HNF-1alpha better than
wild-type HNF-4alpha, yet did not cooperate with HNF-1alpha or increase
HNF-1alpha Fabp1 promoter occupancy. The R127W mutant was also defective in both 
suppressing HNF-1alpha activation of HNF4 P2 and decreasing HNF-1alpha promoter
occupancy. The HNF-1alpha R131Q MODY mutant also retained wild-type Fabp1
activation and bound to HNF-4alpha as well as the wild type but was defective in 
both suppressing HNF-4alpha APOC3 activation and decreasing HNF-4alpha promoter
occupancy. These results suggest HNF-1alpha-HNF-4alpha functional interactions
are accomplished by regulating factor promoter occupancy and that defective
factor-factor interactions may contribute to the MODY phenotype.

PMID: 16223942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Hum Mol Genet. 2005 Nov 15;14(22):3435-47. Epub 2005 Oct 12.

Binding sites for metabolic disease related transcription factors inferred at
base pair resolution by chromatin immunoprecipitation and genomic microarrays.

Rada-Iglesias A(1), Wallerman O, Koch C, Ameur A, Enroth S, Clelland G, Wester K,
Wilcox S, Dovey OM, Ellis PD, Wraight VL, James K, Andrews R, Langford C, Dhami
P, Carter N, Vetrie D, Pontén F, Komorowski J, Dunham I, Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
Sweden.

We present a detailed in vivo characterization of hepatocyte transcriptional
regulation in HepG2 cells, using chromatin immunoprecipitation and detection on
PCR fragment-based genomic tiling path arrays covering the encyclopedia of DNA
element (ENCODE) regions. Our data suggest that HNF-4alpha and HNF-3beta, which
were commonly bound to distal regulatory elements, may cooperate in the
regulation of a large fraction of the liver transcriptome and that both
HNF-4alpha and USF1 may promote H3 acetylation to many of their targets.
Importantly, bioinformatic analysis of the sequences bound by each transcription 
factor (TF) shows an over-representation of motifs highly similar to the in vitro
established consensus sequences. On the basis of these data, we have inferred
tentative binding sites at base pair resolution. Some of these sites have been
previously found by in vitro analysis and some were verified in vitro in this
study. Our data suggests that a similar approach could be used for the in vivo
characterization of all predicted/uncharacterized TF and that the analysis could 
be scaled to the whole genome.

PMID: 16221759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Diabetes. 2005 Oct;54(10):3035-9.

Variants in hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha are modestly associated with type 2 
diabetes in Pima Indians.

Muller YL(1), Infante AM, Hanson RL, Love-Gregory L, Knowler W, Bogardus C, Baier
LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Phoenix Epidemiology and Clinical Research Branch, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Disease, National Institutes of Health,
Phoenix, AZ 85016, USA.

Single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) within the hepatocyte nuclear factor
4alpha (HNF4alpha) gene are associated with type 2 diabetes in Finns and
Ashkenazi Jews. Previous studies in both populations have reported linkage to
type 2 diabetes near the HNF4alpha locus on chromosome 20q12-13. To investigate
whether HNF4alpha is a diabetes susceptibility gene in Pima Indians, a population
with the highest reported prevalence of type 2 diabetes but with no evidence for 
linkage of the disease on chromosome 20q, 19 SNPs across the promoter and coding 
region of HNF4alpha were genotyped for association analysis. In a group of 1,037 
Pima Indians (573 diabetic and 464 nondiabetic subjects), three SNPs in HNF4alpha
(rs3212183 and rs2071197 located in introns 3 and 1, respectively, and rs6031558,
an extremely rare SNP located in the P2 promoter region) were modestly associated
with type 2 diabetes (rs3212183 odds ratio [OR] 1.34 [95% CI 1.07-1.67], P =
0.009; rs2071197 1.34 [1.07-1.66], P = 0.008; and rs6031558 3.18 [1.03-9.84], P =
0.04, adjusted for age, sex, birth year, heritage, and family membership). We
conclude that variants in HNF4alpha do not appear to be major determinants for
type 2 diabetes in Pima Indians; however, HNF4alpha may have a minor role in type
2 diabetes susceptibility within this Native American population.

PMCID: PMC1351112
PMID: 16186411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Physiol Genomics. 2005 Oct 17;23(2):217-26. Epub 2005 Aug 9.

Temporal gene expression profiling of liver from periparturient dairy cows
reveals complex adaptive mechanisms in hepatic function.

Loor JJ(1), Dann HM, Everts RE, Oliveira R, Green CA, Guretzky NA, Rodriguez-Zas 
SL, Lewin HA, Drackley JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, University of Illinois, Urbana, Illinois 61801,
USA. jloor@uiuc.edu

Long-term molecular adaptations in liver from high-producing dairy cows are
virtually unknown. Liver from five Holstein cows was biopsied at -65, -30, -14,
+1, +14, +28, and +49 days relative to parturition for transcript profiling using
a microarray consisting of 7,872 annotated cattle cDNA inserts. More than 5,000
cDNA elements represented on the microarray were expressed in liver. From this
set we identified 62 differentially expressed genes related to physiological
state, with a false discovery rate threshold of P = 0.20. The dominant expression
pattern consisted of upregulation from day -30 through day +1, followed by
downregulation through day +28. There was a threefold decrease from day -65
through day +14 in expression of IGFBP3, GSTM5, and PDPK1. These genes mediate
IGF-I transport, oxidative stress, and glucose homeostasis, respectively. IGFBP3,
EIF4B, and GSTM5 mRNA levels were positively correlated with blood serum total
protein. Correlation analysis showed positive associations between serum
nonesterified fatty acids and mRNA expression for SAA1, CPT1A, ACADVL, and
TFAP2A. Transcript levels of ACSL1, PPARA, and TFAP2A were positively correlated 
with serum beta-hydroxybutyrate. Expression patterns for certain genes (e.g.,
IGFBP3, HNF4A, GPAM) revealed adaptations commencing well ahead of parturition,
suggesting they are regulated by factors other than periparturient hormonal
environment. Results provide evidence that hepatic inflammatory responses
occurring near parturition initiate or augment adipose catabolism. In this
context, cytokines, acute-phase proteins, and serum nonesterified fatty acids are
key players in periparturient cow metabolism. We propose a model for integrating 
gene expression, metabolite, and liver composition data to explain physiological 
events in placenta, adipose, and liver during the periparturient period.

PMID: 16091418  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Sichuan Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2005 Jul;36(4):493-6.

[Expression of HNF4alpha and HNF6 mRNA during the process of mouse liver
development].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang JY(1), Li AD, Yang SX, Hong HR, Song HR, Mei Y, Zhou HY, Yang HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, West China School of Preclinical and Forensic Medicine,
Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the function of HNF4a and HNF6 during liver
development.
METHODS: The expression levels of HNF4alpha and HNF6 at E8, 9, 13, 15, 17, P1 and
in adult mouse liver were detected by RT-PCR and in situ hybridization.
RESULTS: RT-PCR results showed that HNF4alpha first expressed at E9, the time of 
liver bud formation, and lasted through all gestation and existed in adult liver.
In situ hybridization showed that the expression of HNF4alpha was detected at the
cells of liver cords during various stages of mouse liver development, and there 
were still a few HNF4alpha positive hepatocytes in adult liver. The cells of bile
duct plate and biliary epithelial cells, endothelial cells, hematopoietic cells
of liver were negative for HNF4alpha. The expression of HNF6 mRNA was detected in
the liver at E9, the time of liver formation onset. Then, HNF6 mRNA disappeared
transiently at E13, but it appeared again at E15. Its expression lasted until
adult. In situ hybridization studies showed that most liver cord cells were
positive for HNF6 at E9 and E15. At E17 and P1, the expression levels of liver
cord cells declined, and HNF6 strongly expressed in the cells of bile duct plate 
and biliary epithelial cells.
CONCLUSION: HNF4alpha could modulate the formation of liver bud, trigger the
differentiation of hepatic stem cell towards hepatocytes, and keep the shape of
hepatocytes. HNF6 might play a role at the onset of liver development, in the
differentiation of hepatic stem cell towards biliary epithelial cells, and in
maintaining the morphological characteristic of biliary epithelial cells.

PMID: 16078569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Biomed Mater Res A. 2005 Nov 1;75(2):268-74.

Improved performance of primary rat hepatocytes on blended natural polymers.

Li K(1), Qu X, Wang Y, Tang Y, Qin D, Wang Y, Feng M.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Biomembrane and Membrane Biotechnology, Institute of
Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100080, China.

Alginate (Alg), chitosan (Chi), collagen (Col), gelatin (Gel), and the mixtures
of every two of them were screened to determine their suitability for hepatocyte 
culture. The test materials were fabricated as films and then evaluated on the
basis of their abilities to promote the attachment and functions of rat
hepatocytes cultured on them. Cellular attachment on Col and Gel was favorable.
However, cellular viability, cytoskeleton organization and function, as evaluated
by albumin production, ureagenesis, and enzyme activity of cytochrome P450 as
well as expression levels of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha deteriorated.
Reverse cellular behavior was observed on Alg and Chi. Two blends, composed of
Chi and Col or Gel, were found to be superior to other materials and sustained
viability and differentiated functions of hepatocyte.

PMID: 16044406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Annu Rev Nutr. 2005;25:317-40.

Polyunsaturated fatty acid regulation of genes of lipid metabolism.

Sampath H(1), Ntambi JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, 
Wisconsin 53706, USA Sampath@nutrisci.wisc.edu

Apart from being an important macronutrient, dietary fat has recently gained much
prominence for its role in regulating gene expression. Polyunsaturated fatty
acids (PUFAs) affect gene expression through various mechanisms including, but
not limited to, changes in membrane composition, intracellular calcium levels,
and eicosanoid production. Furthermore, PUFAs and their various metabolites can
act at the level of the nucleus, in conjunction with nuclear receptors and
transcription factors, to affect the transcription of a variety of genes. Several
of these transcription mediators have been identified and include the nuclear
receptors peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR), hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-4alpha, and liver X receptor (LXR) and the transcription factors
sterol-regulatory element binding protein (SREBP) and nuclear factor-kappaB
(NFkappaB). Their interaction with PUFAs has been shown to be critical to the
regulation of several key genes of lipid metabolism. Working out the mechanisms
by which these interactions and consequent effects occur is proving to be
complicated but is invaluable to our understanding of the role that dietary fat
can play in disease management and prevention.

PMID: 16011470  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Oncogene. 2005 Sep 22;24(42):6418-31.

HNF4alpha reduces proliferation of kidney cells and affects genes deregulated in 
renal cell carcinoma.

Lucas B(1), Grigo K, Erdmann S, Lausen J, Klein-Hitpass L, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
D-45122 Essen, Germany.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is a tissue-specific transcription
factor known to regulate a large number of genes in hepatocytes and pancreatic
beta cells. Although HNF4alpha is highly expressed in some sections of the
kidney, little is known about its role in this organ and about
HNF4alpha-regulated genes in the kidney cells. The abundance and activity of
HNF4alpha are frequently reduced in renal cell carcinoma (RCC) indicating some
tumor suppressing function of HNF4alpha in renal cells. To determine the
potential role of HNF4alpha in RCC, we used Flp recombinase-mediated gene
integration to generate human embryonic kidney cells (HEK293) that conditionally 
express wild-type or mutated HNF4alpha. Expression of wild-type HNF4alpha but not
of the mutants led to reduction of proliferation and alterations of cell
morphology. These effects were reversible and induced at physiological
concentrations of HNF4alpha. Using gene expression profiling by microarrays, we
determined genes regulated by HNF4alpha. Interestingly, many of the genes
regulated by HNF4alpha have been shown to be deregulated in RCC microarray
studies. These genes (ACY1, WT1, SELENBP1, COBL, EFHD1, AGXT2L1, ALDH5A1, THEM2, 
ABCB1, FLJ14146, CSPG2, TRIM9 and HEY1) are good candidates for genes whose
activity is changed upon the decrease of HNF4alpha in RCC.

PMID: 16007190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Diabetes. 2005 Jul;54(7):2256-60.

Polymorphisms in the SLC2A2 (GLUT2) gene are associated with the conversion from 
impaired glucose tolerance to type 2 diabetes: the Finnish Diabetes Prevention
Study.

Laukkanen O(1), Lindström J, Eriksson J, Valle TT, Hämäläinen H, Ilanne-Parikka
P, Keinänen-Kiukaanniemi S, Tuomilehto J, Uusitupa M, Laakso M; Finnish Diabetes 
Prevention Study.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Kuopio, 70210 Kuopio, Finland.

Impaired insulin secretion is a fundamental defect in type 2 diabetes. The aim of
this study was to investigate whether single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in
the genes regulating insulin secretion (SLC2A2 [encoding GLUT2], GCK, TCF1
[encoding HNF-1alpha], HNF4A, GIP, and GLP1R) are associated with the conversion 
from impaired glucose tolerance (IGT) to type 2 diabetes in participants of the
Finnish Diabetes Prevention Study. With the exception of SLC2A2, other genes were
not associated with the risk of type 2 diabetes. All four SNPs of SLC2A2
predicted the conversion to diabetes, and rs5393 (AA genotype) increased the risk
of type 2 diabetes in the entire study population by threefold (odds ratio 3.04, 
95% CI 1.34-6.88, P = 0.008). The risk for type 2 diabetes in the AA genotype
carriers was increased in the control group (5.56 [1.78-17.39], P = 0.003) but
not in the intervention group. We conclude that the SNPs of SLC2A2 predict the
conversion to diabetes in obese subjects with IGT.

PMID: 15983230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Sep;68(3):747-57. Epub 2005 Jun 2.

Human CYP2C8 is transcriptionally regulated by the nuclear receptors constitutive
androstane receptor, pregnane X receptor, glucocorticoid receptor, and hepatic
nuclear factor 4alpha.

Ferguson SS(1), Chen Y, LeCluyse EL, Negishi M, Goldstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmacology & Chemistry, National Institute of Environmental
Health Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,
USA.

Cytochrome P450 (P450) enzymes play important roles in the metabolism of
endogenous and xenobiotic substrates in humans. CYP2C8 is an important member of 
the CYP2C subfamily, which metabolizes both endogenous compounds (i.e.,
arachidonic acids and retinoic acid) and xenobiotics (e.g., paclitaxel).
Induction of P450 enzymes by drugs can result in tolerance as well as drug-drug
interactions. CYP2C8 is the most strongly inducible member of the CYP2C subfamily
in human hepatocytes, but the mechanism of induction by xenobiotics has not been 
delineated. To determine the mechanisms controlling the regulation of this
important P450, we cloned the 5'-flanking region of CYP2C8 and investigated its
transcriptional regulation by nuclear factors such as the pregnane X receptor
(PXR), constitutive androstane receptor (CAR), glucocorticoid receptor (GR), and 
hepatic nuclear factor 4 (HNF4alpha) that are known to be involved in the
induction of other P450 enzymes using both cell lines and primary hepatocyte
models. We initially identified a distal PXR/CAR-binding site in the CYP2C8
promoter that confers inducibility of CYP2C8 via the PXR agonist/ligand
rifampicin and the CAR agonist/ligand CITCO
[6-(4-chlorophenyl)imidazo[2,1-b][1,3]thiazole-5-carbaldehyde
O-(3,4-dichlorobenzyl)oxime]. A glucocorticoid-responsive element was identified 
that mediates dexamethasone induction via the GR. We finally identified an
HNF4alpha-binding site within the CYP2C8 basal promoter region that is
cis-activated by cotransfected HNF4alpha. In summary, the present studies show
that CAR, PXR, GR, and HNF4alpha can regulate CYP2C8 expression and identify
specific cis-elements within the promoter that control these regulatory pathways.

PMID: 15933212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Aug;90(8):4607-14. Epub 2005 May 31.

Half of clinically defined maturity-onset diabetes of the young patients in
Denmark do not have mutations in HNF4A, GCK, and TCF1.

Johansen A(1), Ek J, Mortensen HB, Pedersen O, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Niels Steensens Vej 2, 
DK-2820 Gentofte, Denmark. adjo@steno.dk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically
heterogeneous monogenic form of diabetes characterized by an autosomal dominant
inheritance, an early clinical onset, and a primary defect in beta-cell function.
The aims of the present study were to examine the prevalence and nature of
mutations in the three common MODY genes, HNF4A, GCK, and TCF1, in Danish
patients with a clinical diagnosis of MODY and to describe metabolic differences 
in probands with and without mutations in HNF4A, GCK, and TCF1.
METHODS: Seventy-eight unrelated subjects of Danish Caucasian origin (29 men, 49 
women) and their 351 family members were examined. The promotor and coding
regions including intron-exon boundaries of HNF4A, GCK, and TCF1 were examined by
denaturing HPLC and/or direct sequencing.
RESULTS: We identified 29 different mutations in 38 MODY families. Fifteen of the
mutations were novel. The variants segregated with diabetes within the families, 
and none of the variants were found in 100 normal Danish chromosomes. Our
findings suggest a relative prevalence of 3% of MODY1 (two different mutations in
two families), 10% of MODY2 (seven in eight), and 36% of MODY3 (21 in 28) among
Danish kindred clinically diagnosed as MODY. No significant differences in
biochemical and anthropometric measurements were observed at baseline
examinations.
CONCLUSIONS: Forty-nine percent of the families carried mutations in the three
examined MODY genes. Our findings highlight that unidentified MODY genes may play
a central role for diabetes characterized by autosomal dominant transmission.
Furthermore, baseline measurements of various anthropometric and biochemical
variables are not appropriate markers of MODYX.

PMID: 15928245  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2005 Sep;314(3):1125-33. Epub 2005 May 26.

The nuclear receptors constitutive androstane receptor and pregnane X receptor
cross-talk with hepatic nuclear factor 4alpha to synergistically activate the
human CYP2C9 promoter.

Chen Y(1), Kissling G, Negishi M, Goldstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Human Metabolism Section, Laboratory of Pharmacology and Chemistry, National
Institutes of Environmental Health Sciences, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709,
USA.

CYP2C9 is an important human drug-metabolizing enzyme that is expressed primarily
in liver. Recent studies in our laboratory have shown that the nuclear receptor
pregnane X receptor (PXR) is important in the transcriptional activation of the
CYP2C9 promoter by drugs such as rifampicin and that the essential element is a
constitutive androstane receptor (CAR)/PXR site -1839 bp upstream of the
translation start site. Both CAR and PXR transcriptionally up-regulate the CYP2C9
promoter via these elements. In the present study, we ask whether additional
sites in the proximal promoter also play a role in this induction. We identify
two proximal hepatic nuclear factor (HNF) 4alpha binding sites at -152 and -185
bp of the CYP2C9 promoter, both of which bind HNF4alpha in gel shift assays and
transcriptionally up-regulate this promoter in response to HNF4alpha in HepG2
cells. HNF4alpha synergizes with CAR and with PXR in HepG2 cells treated with
rifampicin. The synergy only occurs when the CAR/PXR binding site at -1839 bp is 
present. Mutation of the two HNF4alpha binding sites differentially prevented
up-regulation of CYP2C9 promoter by both CAR as well as HNF4alpha, synergy
between the two receptors, and essentially abolished induction by rifampicin in
HepG2 cells transfected with PXR. These studies strongly support the hypothesis
that there is cross talk between distal CAR/PXR sites and HNF4alpha binding sites
in the CYP2C9 promoter and that the HNF4alpha sites are required for maximal
induction of the CYP2C9 promoter.

PMID: 15919766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Transplantation. 2005 May 27;79(10):1378-85.

Transplantation of human hepatocytes cultured with deleted variant of hepatocyte 
growth factor prolongs the survival of mice with acute liver failure.

Chen Y(1), Kobayashi N, Suzuki S, Soto-Gutierrez A, Rivas-Carrillo JD, Tanaka K, 
Navarro-Alvarez N, Fukazawa T, Narushima M, Miki A, Okitsu T, Amemiya H, Tanaka
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Okayama University Graduate School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Okayama, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Considering the scarcity of donor livers, it is extremely important
to establish a functional culture method for isolated hepatocytes. As a tool for 
maintaining hepatocyte functions in vitro, dHGF, a variant of HGF (hepatocyte
growth factor) with a deletion of five amino acids, attracted our attention
because it is less cytotoxic compared with HGF.
METHODS: We evaluated growth, albumin production, metabolizing abilities of
ammonia, lidocaine, and diazepam of human hepatocytes in the presence of dHGF
(10-1000 ng/ml). The gene expression of liver markers was comparatively analyzed.
The effect of intrasplenic transplantation of dHGF-treated human hepatocytes into
severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice was evaluated in an acute liver
failure (ALF) model induced by D-galactosamine (D-gal).
RESULTS: When 100 ng/ml of dHGF was utilized, metabolism rates of ammonia,
lidocaine, and diazepam and albumin production per unit cell significantly
increased. The gene expression analysis demonstrated the enhanced expression of
albumin, HNF-4alpha, and C/EBPalpha in the hepatocytes treated with 100 ng/ml of 
dHGF. Transplantation of such hepatocytes prolonged the survival of the SCID mice
with ALF induced by D-gal.
CONCLUSIONS: The present work clearly demonstrates the usefulness of dHGF (100
ng/ml) for maintaining the differentiated functions of human hepatocytes in
tissue culture.

PMID: 15912107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. JOP. 2005 May 10;6(3):238-45.

Mutations in MODY genes are not common cause of early-onset type 2 diabetes in
Mexican families.

Domínguez-López A(1), Miliar-García A, Segura-Kato YX, Riba L, Esparza-López R,
Ramírez-Jiménez S, Rodríguez-Torres M, Canizales-Quinteros S, Cabrera-Vásquez S, 
Fragoso-Ontiveros V, Aguilar-Salinas CA, Altamirano-Bustamante N, Calzada-León R,
Robles-Valdés C, Bravo-Ríos LE, Tusié-Luna MT.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Medical Sciences and Nutrition Salvador Zubirán,
Biomedical Research Institute, National Autonomous University of Mexico, Mexico
City, Mexico.

CONTEXT: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic form of
diabetes mellitus characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, early age of
onset and a primary insulin secretion defect. Certain MODY gene sequence variants
may be involved in polygenic forms of type 2 diabetes.
OBJECTIVE: We assessed the contribution of MODY genes to the etiology of type 2
early-onset diabetes in 23 Mexican families, including five with apparently
autosomal dominant inheritance.
PATIENTS: Twenty-three unrelated Mexican families with early-onset type 2
diabetes previously screened for the presence of glucokinase mutations, were
studied.
DESIGN: We screened MODY genes for sequence variants by PCR-SSCP analysis and
automated sequencing. We performed a functional analysis of the HNF-1alpha P379H 
recombinant protein in vitro in both HeLa and RINm5f beta-cell lines.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: MODY gene mutation screening and P379H mutant protein
transactivation assay.
RESULTS: No mutations were detected in the HNF-4alpha, IPF-1, NEUROD1 or
HNF-1beta genes in any of the families studied. A new mutation (P379H) of the
HNF-1alpha gene was identified in one MODY family. RINm5f and HeLa cell
transfection assays revealed decreased transactivation activity of the mutant
protein on the human insulin promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: All known MODY genes were screened for abnormalities in this cohort 
of early-onset diabetes families which included 5 MODY pedigrees. We identified a
new HNF-1alpha MODY mutation (P379H) and demonstrated that it reduces the
transactivation potential of the mutant protein on the human insulin promoter. No
other mutation was identified in this cohort indicating that abnormalities in
MODY genes are generally not a common cause of early-onset diabetes and this
includes MODY families in Mexico.

PMID: 15883474  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. J Pharm Sci. 2005 Jun;94(6):1169-86.

Nuclear receptors and drug disposition gene regulation.

Tirona RG(1), Kim RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Pharmacology, Division of Clinical Pharmacology,
Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, Nashville, TN, USA.

In this minireview, the role of various nuclear receptors and transcription
factors in the expression of drug disposition genes is summarized. Specifically, 
the molecular aspects and functional impact of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor
(AhR), nuclear factor-E2 p45-related factor 2 (N(r)f2), hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha (HNF1alpha), constitutive androstane receptor (LAR), pregnane X receptor
(PXR), farnesoid X receptor (FXR), peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor
alpha (PPAR(alpha)), hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha), vitamin D
receptor (VDR), liver receptor homolog 1 (LRH1), liver X receptor (LXR(alpha)),
small heterodimer partner-1 (SHP-1), and glucocorticoid receptor (GR) on gene
expression are detailed. Finally, we discuss some current topics and themes in
nuclear receptor-mediated regulation of drug metabolizing enzymes and drug
transporters.

(c) 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15858847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Aug;289(2):G220-6. Epub 2005 Apr
14.

Differentiation-dependent activation of the human intestinal alkaline phosphatase
promoter by HNF-4 in intestinal cells.

Olsen L(1), Bressendorff S, Troelsen JT, Olsen J.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Medical Biochemistry and Genetics, University of Copenhagen, The
Panum Institute Bldg. 6.4. Blegdamsvej 3, DK-2200 Copenhagen N, Denmark.

The intestinal alkaline phosphatase gene (ALPI) encodes a digestive brush-border 
enzyme, which is highly upregulated during small intestinal epithelial cell
differentiation. To identify new putative promoter motifs responsible for the
regulation of ALPI expression during differentiation of the enterocytes, we have 
conducted a computer-assisted cis-element search of the proximal human ALPI
promoter sequence. A putative recognition site for the transcription factor
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4 was predicted at the positions from -94 to -82 
in relation to the translational start site. The ability of HNF-4alpha to
stimulate the expression from the ALPI promoter was investigated in the
nonintestinal Hela cell line. Cotransfection with an HNF-4alpha expression vector
demonstrated a direct activation of the ALPI promoter through this -94 to -82
element. EMSA showed that HNF-4alpha from nuclear extracts of differentiated
intestinal epithelial cells (Caco-2) bound with high affinity to the predicted
HNF-4 binding site. A 521 bp promoter fragment containing the HNF-4 binding site 
demonstrated a differentiation-dependent increase in promoter activity in Caco-2 
cells. The presence of the HNF-4 binding site was necessary for this increase to 
occur.

PMID: 15831710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Diabetologia. 2005 May;48(5):878-85. Epub 2005 Apr 14.

Molecular genetics and phenotypic characteristics of MODY caused by hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4alpha mutations in a large European collection.

Pearson ER(1), Pruhova S, Tack CJ, Johansen A, Castleden HA, Lumb PJ, Wierzbicki 
AS, Clark PM, Lebl J, Pedersen O, Ellard S, Hansen T, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, Institute of Biomedical and Clinical Science, 
Peninsula Medical School, Barrack Road, Exeter EX2 5AX, UK.
a.t.hattersley@exeter.ac.uk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Heterozygous mutations in the gene of the transcription factor
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha) are considered a rare cause of MODY
with only 14 mutations reported to date. The description of the phenotype is
limited to single families. We investigated the genetics and phenotype of
HNF-4alpha mutations in a large European Caucasian collection.
METHODS: HNF-4alpha was sequenced in 48 MODY probands, selected for a phenotype
of HNF-1alpha MODY but negative for HNF-1alpha mutations. Clinical
characteristics and biochemistry were compared between 54 HNF-4alpha mutation
carriers and 32 familial controls from ten newly detected or previously described
families.
RESULTS: Mutations in HNF-4alpha were found in 14/48 (29%) probands negative for 
HNF-1alpha mutations. The mutations found included seven novel mutations: S34X,
D206Y, E276D, L332P, I314F, L332insCTG and IVS5nt+1G>A. I314F is the first
reported de novo HNF-4alpha mutation. The average age of diagnosis was 22.9 years
with frequent clinical evidence of sensitivity to sulphonylureas. Beta cell
function, but not insulin sensitivity, was reduced in diabetic mutation carriers 
compared to control subjects (homeostasis model assessment of beta cell function 
29% p<0.001 vs controls). HNF-4alpha mutations were associated with lower
apolipoprotein A2 (p=0.001), A1 (p=0.04) and total HDL-cholesterol (p=0.02) than 
in control subjects. However, in contrast to some previous reports, levels of
triglycerides and apolipoprotein C3 were normal.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: HNF-4alpha mutations are common when no HNF-1alpha
mutation is found in strictly defined MODY families. The HNF-4alpha clinical
phenotype and beta cell dysfunction are similar to HNF-1alpha MODY and are
associated with reduced apolipoprotein A2 levels. We suggest that sequencing of
HNF-4alpha should be performed in patients with clinical characteristics of
HNF-1alpha MODY in whom mutations in HNF-1alpha are not found.

PMID: 15830177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jun 10;280(23):21810-9. Epub 2005 Apr 12.

Distinct amino acid residues may be involved in coactivator and ligand
interactions in hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha.

Iordanidou P(1), Aggelidou E, Demetriades C, Hadzopoulou-Cladaras M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Development and Molecular Biology, Laboratory of
Developmental Biology, Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Thessaloniki, Greece
54124.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 (HNF-4) is a transcription factor of the nuclear
hormone receptor superfamily that is constitutively active without the addition
of exogenous ligand. Crystallographic analysis of the HNF-4alpha and HNF-4gamma
ligand binding domains (LBDs) demonstrated the presence of endogenous ligands
that may act as structural cofactors for HNF-4. It was also proposed by
crystallographic studies that a combination of ligand and coactivator might be
required to lock the receptor in its active state. We previously showed that
mutations in amino acid residues Ser-181 and Met-182 in H3, Leu-219 and Leu-220
and Arg-226 in H5, Ileu-338 in H10, and Ileu-346 in H11, which line the LBD
pocket in HNF-4alpha and come in contact with the ligand, impair its
transactivation potential. In the present study, physical and functional
interaction assays were utilized with two different coactivators, PGC-1 and
SRC-3, to address the role of coactivators in HNF-4 function. We show that the
integrity of the hinge (D) domain of HNF-4alpha and the activation function
(AF)-2 activation domain region are critical for coactivation. Surprisingly, a
different mode of coactivation is observed among the LBD point mutants that lack 
transcriptional activity. In particular, coactivation is maintained in mutants
Ser-181, Arg-226, and Ile-346 but is abolished in mutants Met-182, Leu-219, and
Ile-338. Physical interactions confirm this pattern of activation, implying that 
distinct amino acid residues may be involved in coactivator and ligand
interactions, although some residues may be critical for both functions. Our
results provide evidence and expand predictions based on the crystallographic
data as to the role of coactivators in HNF-4alpha constitutive transcriptional
activity.

PMID: 15826954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 May 6;330(2):395-9.

Feedback regulation of bile acid synthesis in human liver: importance of
HNF-4alpha for regulation of CYP7A1.

Abrahamsson A(1), Gustafsson U, Ellis E, Nilsson LM, Sahlin S, Björkhem I,
Einarsson C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology,
Karolinska Institute K63, Karolinska University Hospital Huddinge, S-14186
Stockholm, Sweden. anna.abrahamsson@karolinska.se

A great number of nuclear factors are involved in the negative feedback mechanism
regulating bile acid synthesis. There are two major ways for the negative
feedback to effect the synthesis; the SHP-dependent, involving FXR, and the
SHP-independent way, affecting HNF-4alpha. We studied 23 patients with gallstone 
disease. Eight patients were treated with chenodeoxycholic acid, 7 with
cholestyramine prior to operation, and 8 served as controls. Liver biopsies were 
analyzed with Real-time-PCR. In the cholestyramine-treated group mRNA levels of
CYP7A1 were increased about 10-fold. Treatment with CDCA decreased the mRNA
levels of CYP7A1 by about 70%. The mRNA levels of CYP8B1, CYP27A1, and CYP7B1
were not significantly altered in the treated groups. The analysis of mRNA levels
for HNF-4alpha showed 64% higher levels in the cholestyramine-treated group
compared to the controls. These levels showed positive and highly significant
correlation to the levels of mRNA of CYP7A1 when studied in all three groups
together. FXR, SHP, and LRH-1/FTF were not significantly affected by the
different treatments. Our results indicate that when bile acid synthesis is
upregulated by cholestyramine treatment the SHP-independent pathway for
controlling CYP7A1 transcription dominates over the SHP-dependent pathway.

PMID: 15796896  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Curr Diab Rep. 2005 Apr;5(2):149-56.

The role of HNF4A variants in the risk of type 2 diabetes.

Mohlke KL(1), Boehnke M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC
27599-7264, USA. mohlke@med.unc.edu

Genes influence susceptibility to type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), and both
positional cloning and candidate gene approaches have been used to identify these
genes. Linkage analysis has generated evidence for T2DM-predisposing variants on 
chromosome 20q in studies of Caucasians, Asians, and Africans, and fine-mapping
recently identified a likely susceptibility gene, hepatocyte nuclear factor
4-alpha (HNF4A). Rare loss-of-function mutations in HNF4A cause maturity-onset
diabetes of the young and now common noncoding variants have been found to be
associated with T2DM.

PMID: 15794920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Diabetes. 2005 Apr;54(4):1185-90.

Genetic analysis of HNF4A polymorphisms in Caucasian-American type 2 diabetes.

Bagwell AM(1), Bento JL, Mychaleckyj JC, Freedman BI, Langefeld CD, Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Genetics Program, Wake Forest University School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, North Carolina 27157, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4A), the gene for the maturity-onset
diabetes of the young type 1 monogenic form of type 2 diabetes, is within the
type 2 diabetes-linked region on chromosome 20q12-q13.1 and, consequently, is a
positional candidate gene for type 2 diabetes in the general population. Previous
studies have identified only a few rare coding mutations. However, recent studies
suggest that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) located near the P2
(beta-cell) promoter of HNF4A are associated with diabetes susceptibility. In
this study, we evaluated 23 SNPs spanning 111 kb including the HNF4A gene for
association with type 2 diabetes in a collection of Caucasian type 2 diabetic
patients with end-stage renal disease (n = 300) and control subjects (n = 310).
None of the individual SNPs were associated with type 2 diabetes in this
collection of case subjects (P values ranging from 0.06 to 0.99). However,
haplotype analysis identifies significant differences between haplotype
frequencies in type 2 diabetic case and control subjects (P = 0.013 to P <
0.001), with two uncommon "risk" haplotypes (2.4 and 2.2% of chromosomes) and two
uncommon "protective" haplotypes (7.1 and 5.0% of chromosomes) accounting for the
evidence of association. Our results suggest that type 2 diabetes linked to
20q12-13 is a heterogeneous disease in which different populations may have
different type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci.

PMID: 15793260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Int J Mol Med. 2005 Apr;15(4):743-7.

Comparative genomics on Wnt3-Wnt9b gene cluster.

Katoh M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Cell Biology Section, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 
Tokyo 104-0045, Japan. mkatoh@ncc.go.jp

WNT signals, transduced through Frizzled (FZD) receptors with extracellular
WNT-binding domain and cytoplasmic Dishevelled-binding domain, are implicated in 
carcinogenesis and embryogenesis. WNT3-WNT9B (WNT14B) locus (17q21.31) and
WNT3A-WNT9A (WNT14) locus (1q42.13) are paralogous regions within the human
genome. Here, the rat Wnt3 and Wnt9b genes were identified and characterized by
using bioinformatics. Wnt3 and Wnt9b genes at rat chromosome 10q32.1 were
clustered in head-to-head manner with an interval of about 24 kb within
AC105632.3 genome sequence. The rat Wnt3 gene, consisting of five exons, encoded 
a 355-aa protein with N-terminal signal peptide, 24 conserved Cys residues and
two Asn-linked glycosylation sites. The rat Wnt9b gene, consisting of four exons,
encoded a 359-aa protein with N-terminal signal peptide, 24 conserved Cys
residues and one Asn-linked glycosylation site. The rat Wnt3 core promoter showed
80.5% nucleotide identity with human WNT3 core promoter, while rat Wnt9b core
promoter showed 45.6% nucleotide identity with human WNT9B core promoter. MYB
(c-Myb), ELK1, POU2F1 (OCT1), HNF4A (HNF-4), COMP1, NFYA (NF-Y) and NKX2-5
binding sites were conserved between rat Wnt3 and human WNT3 core promoters. The 
Wnt3-Wnt9b intergenic conserved region (IGCR), corresponding to nucleotide
position 124747-125252 of AC105632.3 genome sequence, showed 85.6% nucleotide
identity with human WNT3-WNT9B IGCR. GC content of rat Wnt3-Wnt9b IGCR was 59.5%.
Wnt3-Wnt9b IGCR was predicted as regulatory element rather than gene because cDNA
or EST derived from Wnt3-Wnt9b IGCR was not identified. This is the first report 
on the rat Wnt3 and Wnt9b genes as well as on comparative genomics on the
Wnt3-Wnt9b gene cluster.

PMID: 15754041  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Apr 15;329(3):984-90.

Functional characterization of the HNF4alpha isoform (HNF4alpha8) expressed in
pancreatic beta-cells.

Ihara A(1), Yamagata K, Nammo T, Miura A, Yuan M, Tanaka T, Sladek FM, Matsuzawa 
Y, Miyagawa J, Shimomura I.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4alpha gene cause a form of
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY1), which is a monogenic form of type 2
diabetes characterized by impaired insulin secretion by pancreatic beta-cells.
HNF4alpha is a transcription factor expressed in the liver, kidney, intestine,
and pancreatic islet. Multiple splice variants of the HNF4alpha gene have been
identified and an isoform of HNF4alpha8, an N-terminal splice variant, is
expressed in pancreatic beta-cells. However, expression levels of HNF4alpha
protein in pancreatic beta-cells and the transcriptional activity of HNF4alpha8
are not yet understood. In the present study, we investigated the expression of
HNF4alpha in beta-cells and examined its functional properties. Western blotting 
and immunohistochemical analysis revealed that the expression of HNF4alpha
protein in pancreatic islets and INS-1 cells was much lower than in the liver. A 
reporter gene assay showed that the transactivation potential of HNF4alpha8 was
significantly weaker than that of HNF4alpha2, which is a major isoform in the
liver, suggesting that the total level of HNF4alpha activity is very weak in
pancreatic beta-cells. We also showed that the N-terminal A/B region of
HNF4alpha8 possessed no activation function and C-terminal F region negatively
regulated the transcriptional activity of HNF4alpha8. The information presented
here would be helpful for the better understanding of MODY1/HNF4alpha diabetes.

PMID: 15752752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Diabetologia. 2005 Mar;48(3):440-4. Epub 2005 Feb 25.

Effect of common polymorphisms in the HNF4alpha promoter on susceptibility to
type 2 diabetes in the French Caucasian population.

Vaxillaire M(1), Dina C, Lobbens S, Dechaume A, Vasseur-Delannoy V, Helbecque N, 
Charpentier G, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS 8090-Institut de Biologie, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 rue du Professeur
Calmette, BP 245, 59019, Lille, France. martine.vaxillaire@pasteur-lille.fr

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The gene encoding HNF-4alpha, an orphan nuclear receptor playing
critical roles in embryogenesis and metabolism by regulating gene expression in
pancreatic beta cells, liver, and other tissues, is localised to chromosome
20q13, where linkage to type 2 diabetes has been shown in multiple studies. As
two reports have independently demonstrated a convincing association with
variants adjacent to the HNF-4alpha P2 promoter in Finnish and Ashkenazi Jewish
populations, we evaluated their contribution to diabetes risk in the French
Caucasian population.
METHODS: Genotypes for four haplotype tag SNPs were analysed for association with
diabetes in a case-control study of 744 unrelated type 2 diabetic patients and
686 normoglycaemic subjects, and for linkage in 148 diabetic families in whom
significant linkage to the HNF4alpha region had been shown.
RESULTS: The association seen in the Finnish and Ashkenazi studies for SNPs
rs2144908 and rs1884614 located within a haplotype block encompassing the beta
cell promoter P2 of HNF-4alpha was not replicated in our study; in French
Caucasians the minor allele prevalence was increased in control subjects [odds
ratio (OR) 0.80, uncorrected p=0.022 for rs2144908; OR 0.82 uncorrected p=0.058
for rs1884614]. Furthermore, none of the SNPs tested in the French familial
sample was associated with diabetes, nor do they appear to contribute to the
linkage.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: None of the previously associated SNPs confer an
increased risk for diabetes in French Caucasians. A large meta-analysis of
association studies will determine whether there is a consistent association
between particular SNPs upstream of HNF-4alpha and type 2 diabetes in several
ethnic groups.

PMID: 15735892  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Diabetologia. 2005 Mar;48(3):452-8. Epub 2005 Feb 25.

Variation near the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha gene associates with
type 2 diabetes in the Danish population.

Hansen SK(1), Rose CS, Glümer C, Drivsholm T, Borch-Johnsen K, Jørgensen T,
Pedersen O, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Niels Steensens Vej 2, 
Gentofte, 2820, Copenhagen, Denmark. toha@steno.dk

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha is an orphan nuclear 
receptor, which plays crucial roles in regulating hepatic gluconeogenesis and
insulin secretion. The gene encoding HNF-4alpha (HNF4A) is located on chromosome 
20q12-q13 in a region that in several studies has shown linkage with type 2
diabetes. Recently, two independent studies identified single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs) in a 90-kb region spanning HNF4A, which showed strong
association with type 2 diabetes in the Finnish and Ashkenazi Jewish populations.
In an attempt to replicate and extend these findings, we selected four SNPs in
the same HNF4A region, which in the Finnish and Ashkenazi Jewish populations were
associated with type 2 diabetes, and examined their relationships with type 2
diabetes and prediabetic phenotypes in the Danish Caucasian population.
METHODS: The rs1884614, rs2425637, rs1885088 and rs3818247 were analysed in
case-control studies of 1387, 1429, 1417 and 1371 type 2 diabetic patients and
4766, 4727, 4665 and 4748 glucose-tolerant subjects respectively.
Genotype-quantitative trait analyses comprised 4430, 4394, 4336 and 4413
middle-aged glucose-tolerant subjects from the population-based Inter99 cohort
for the rs1884614, rs2425637, rs1885088 and rs3818247 respectively.
RESULTS: The risk allele of the rs1884614, which is located 4 kb upstream of the 
HNF4A P2 promoter, was associated with type 2 diabetes (odds ratio [OR]=1.14,
p=0.02) and with a subtle increase in post-OGTT plasma glucose levels in
glucose-tolerant subjects (additive model, p=0.05).
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: Consistent with results from studies of Finnish and
Ashkenazi Jewish subjects, variation near the P2 region of HNF4A is associated
with type 2 diabetes in the Danish population.

PMID: 15735891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Diabetes. 2005 Mar;54(3):886-92.

Association testing of variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha gene with
risk of type 2 diabetes in 7,883 people.

Winckler W(1), Graham RR, de Bakker PI, Sun M, Almgren P, Tuomi T, Gaudet D,
Hudson TJ, Ardlie KG, Daly MJ, Hirschhorn JN, Groop L, Altshuler D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA
02114, USA.

Two recent publications reported association of common polymorphisms in the P2
promoter of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) (the MODY1 gene) with
risk for type 2 diabetes. We attempted to reproduce this putative association by 
genotyping 11 single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) spanning the HNF4alpha coding
region and the P2 promoter in >3,400 patients and control subjects from Sweden,
Finland, and Canada. One SNP that was consistently associated in the two previous
reports (rs1884613, in the P2 promoter region) also trended in the same direction
in our sample, albeit with a lower estimated odds ratio (OR) of 1.11 (P = 0.05,
one-tailed). We genotyped this SNP (rs1884613) in an additional 4,400 subjects
from North America and Poland. In this sample, the association was not confirmed 
and trended in the opposite direction (OR 0.88). Meta-analysis of our combined
sample of 7,883 people (three times larger than the two initial reports combined)
yielded an OR of 0.97 (P = 0.27). Finally, we provide an updated analysis of
haplotype structure in the region to guide any further investigation of common
variation in HNF4alpha. Although our combined results fail to replicate the
previously reported association of common variants in HNF4alpha with risk for
type 2 diabetes, we cannot exclude an effect smaller than that originally
proposed, heterogeneity among samples, variation in as-yet-unmeasured genotypic
or environmental modifiers, or true association secondary to linkage
disequilibrium (LD) with as-yet-undiscovered variant(s) in the region.

PMID: 15734869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 May;90(5):3054-9. Epub 2005 Feb 22.

The functional Thr130Ile and Val255Met polymorphisms of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4alpha (HNF4A): gene associations with type 2 diabetes or altered
beta-cell function among Danes.

Ek J(1), Rose CS, Jensen DP, Glümer C, Borch-Johnsen K, Jørgensen T, Pedersen O, 
Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Niels Steensens Vej 6, 
NSK1.14, DK-2820 Gentofte, Denmark. jaek@steno.dk

HNF4A encodes an orphan nuclear receptor that plays crucial roles in regulating
hepatic gluconeogenesis and insulin secretion. The aim of the present study was
to examine two rare missense polymorphisms of HNF4A, Thr130Ile and Val255Met, for
altered function and for association with type 2 diabetes (T2D). We have examined
these polymorphisms 1) by in vitro transactivation studies and 2) by genotyping
the variants in 1409 T2D patients and in 4726 glucose-tolerant Danish white
subjects. When tested in COS7 cells, both the Thr130Ile and the Val255Met
variants showed a significant decrease in transactivation activity compared with 
wild-type (73% of wild-type, P = 0.02, and 76%, P = 0.04, respectively). The
Thr130Ile variant had a significantly increased carrier frequency among T2D
patients compared with glucose-tolerant subjects [odds ratio, 1.26 (1.01-1.57); P
= 0.04]. The rare Val255Met polymorphism had a similar frequency among T2D
patients and glucose-tolerant subjects. Heterozygous glucose-tolerant carriers of
the variant showed, however, decreased levels of fasting serum C-peptide (76%; P 
= 0.03) and decreased fasting serum triglyceride (58%; P = 0.02). In conclusion, 
The Thr130Ile and the Val255Met polymorphisms decrease the transcriptional
activity of HNF4A, and the Thr130Ile polymorphism associates with T2D, whereas
the Val255Met variant associates with a decrease in fasting serum C-peptide.

PMID: 15728204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Ned Tijdschr Geneeskd. 2005 Jan 15;149(3):139-43.

[Molecular diagnosis on indication of maturity onset diabetes of the young;
results from 184 patients].

[Article in Dutch]

Losekoot M(1), Broekman AJ, Breuning MH, de Koning EJ, Romijn JA, Maassen JA.

Author information: 
(1)Leids Universitair Medisch Centrum, afd. Klinische Genetica, Centrum voor
Humane en Klinische Genetica, Wassenaarseweg 72, 2333 AL Leiden.
m.losekoot@lumc.nl

OBJECTIVE: To describe the results of mutation analysis of the genes involved in 
maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) types 1-3.
DESIGN: Descriptive.
METHOD: In the period July 2000-October 2003 the DNA from 184 possible MODY
patients was analysed for the presence of mutations of the genes involved in MODY
types 1, 2 and 3. The patients fulfilled at least one of the following criteria: 
diabetes mellitus had been diagnosed before the age of 25, or at least before the
age of 40, there was a family history of diabetes mellitus at an early age, there
were no characteristics to indicate diabetes mellitus type 1 or 2.
RESULTS: In the blood of 65 patients (35%) a pathogenic gene mutation was found. 
A total of 45 patients had a mutation in the HNF-1alpha-gene (which is linked to 
MODY3), 11 in the glucokinase gene (MODY2) and 9 in the HNF-4alpha-gene (MODY1). 
Of all the HNF-1alpha-gene mutations, the insertion of a C in codon 291 was the
most frequently seen (in 11 families). A mutation in exon 9 of the
HNF-1alpha-gene was also shown in 9 apparently non-related families, which
probably was a founder mutation.
CONCLUSION: The MODY subtype was found in one third of the selected patients.
This diagnosis may have implications in the clinical management of the patient.

PMID: 15693590  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2005 May;313(2):814-22. Epub 2005 Jan 25.

Transcriptional regulation of the human CYP2A6 gene.

Pitarque M(1), Rodríguez-Antona C, Oscarson M, Ingelman-Sundberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Environmental Medicine, Division of Molecular Toxicology,
Karolinska Institutet, Stockholm, Sweden.

Nicotine C-oxidation is primarily catalyzed by CYP2A6 in humans. This enzymatic
activity exhibits a large interindividual variability, which to a great extent is
caused by genetic polymorphisms in the CYP2A6 gene. There are large
interindividual differences in CYP2A6 mRNA and protein levels, but little is
known about the transcriptional regulation of CYP2A6, which can, e.g., explain
such differences. Using transient transfections of 5'-deleted CYP2A6 promoter
constructs in human hepatoma B16A2 cells, we show that maximal promoter activity 
was harbored in the sequence spanning from -112 to -61. Putative response
elements for the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 (HNF-4)alpha, 
CCAAT-box/enhancer binding protein (C/EBP)alpha, C/EBPbeta, and octamer
transcription factor-1 (Oct-1) were identified in this region, and
electrophoretic mobility shift assays showed that these transcription factors
bind to the predicted elements. To determine the relevance of these sites,
expression vectors for these transcription factors were cotransfected with CYP2A6
promoter constructs in HepG2 cells. HNF-4alpha, C/EBPalpha, and Oct-1 exerted an 
activating effect, whereas overexpression of C/EBPbeta reduced CYP2A6 promoter
activity. To confirm the importance of these sites in vivo, mutated CYP2A6
reporter constructs were injected into mouse liver. Mutation of either HNF-4 or
C/EBP-Oct-1 motifs significantly decreased promoter activity, 52 and 26% of
wildtype, respectively, whereas when both motifs were mutated the activity in
mice decreased to 14% of wild type. In conclusion, the data indicate that the
constitutive hepatic expression of CYP2A6 is governed by an interplay between the
transcription factors HNF-4alpha, C/EBPalpha, C/EBPbeta, and Oct-1. These results
will be important for the identification of new polymorphisms affecting CYP2A6
gene expression.

PMID: 15671201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Diabet Med. 2005 Feb;22(2):137-43.

Clinical characteristics, beta-cell function, HLA class II and mutations in MODY 
genes in non-paediatric subjects with Type 1 diabetes without pancreatic
autoantibodies.

Aguilera E(1), Casamitjana R, Ercilla G, Oriola J, Nicoletti F, Gomis R, Conget
I.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Diabetes Unit, IDIBAPS, Hospital Clínic i Universitari,
Barcelona, Spain.

OBJECTIVE: To study clinical characteristics, beta-cell function, HLA typing and 
mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and HNF-4alpha genes in
Type 1 diabetes mellitus (T1D) patients without pancreatic autoantibodies.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Twenty patients without pancreatic autoantibodies (Ab neg)
and 20 with autoantibodies (Ab pos), age/gender matched, were included (age 17-34
years). Islet cell, glutamic acid decarboxylase, tyrosine phosphatase and insulin
autoantibodies, basal and stimulated C-peptide were measured. HLA-DRB1-DQA1-DQB1 
typing and screening for mutations in the HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha genes were
performed.
RESULTS: No differences were found in clinical presentation, metabolic control
and beta-cell function in the two groups (onset or after 12 months).
DRB1*0301-DQA1*0501-DQB1*0201 was the most frequent haplotype in both groups but 
we found a higher proportion of protective T1D haplotypes and Asp(beta57) in the 
Ab neg group, but in all the cases in combination with susceptible T1D
haplotypes. We found two previously reported polymorphisms (HNF-1alpha, Ala98Val;
HNF-4alpha, Thr130Ile) in Ab neg and a new variant (Ser165Gly) in the HNF-4alpha 
gene in an Ab pos subject. Conclusions In a non-paediatric population with newly 
diagnosed T1D, the absence of islet antibodies does not imply clinical or
metabolic differences when compared with those cases with islet antibodies.
Despite a similar HLA-DR/DQ typing, the presence of protective alleles and
molecular properties in a higher proportion in the Ab neg group suggests that
these factors could modulate the presence or absence of islet antibodies.
Variants in HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha are unlikely to be major contributors to
the pathogenesis of diabetes in antibody-negative T1D.

PMID: 15660729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Eur J Hum Genet. 2005 Apr;13(4):422-7.

Genetic and clinical characteristics of maturity-onset diabetes of the young in
Chinese patients.

Xu JY(1), Dan QH, Chan V, Wat NM, Tam S, Tiu SC, Lee KF, Siu SC, Tsang MW, Fung
LM, Chan KW, Lam KS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Hong Kong, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong
Kong, China.

In Caucasians, maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is mostly caused by
mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha (MODY3) and glucokinase
(MODY2) genes. Most Japanese MODY patients, however, are not linked to known MODY
genes. In this study, we examined the genetic and clinical characteristics of
Chinese subjects with MODY. The study included 146 unrelated families fulfilling 
the minimum criteria for MODY: two consecutive generations of type II diabetes
with at least one member diagnosed under the age of 25. We screened for mutations
in the HNF-4alpha (MODY1), MODY2 and MODY3 genes by direct sequencing. Antibody
to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD-Ab) was measured in subjects with MODY of
unknown cause (MODYX). Insulin resistance index and other clinical data were
compared in sex-, age- and duration-matched MODY3 and MODYX patients. In all, 13 
families had MODY3 mutations and two had MODY2 mutations. No MODY1 mutation was
found. Four of the 12 different MODY3 mutations were newly identified novel
mutations (Q243E, A311D, P379R and P488fsdelC). In subjects with MODYX, 3% were
GAD-Ab positive and 60% were overweight. Compared to MODY3 patients, MODYX
patients had higher body mass index (P<0.02), higher insulin resistance index
(P=0.001) and triglyceride level (P<0.02), lower HDL level (P=0.001) and more
hypertension (P<0.05), but no significant difference in the prevalence of
diabetic complications. In conclusion, MODY3 and MODY2 account for only 9 and 1%,
respectively, of Chinese MODY. A majority of Chinese MODY patients are due to
defects in unknown genes and appear to be characterized by insulin resistance.

PMID: 15657605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Biochem J. 2005 May 15;388(Pt 1):325-32.

Negative autoregulation of HNF-4alpha gene expression by HNF-4alpha1.

Magenheim J(1), Hertz R, Berman I, Nousbeck J, Bar-Tana J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutrition and Metabolism, Hebrew University Medical
School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

HNF-4alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha) is required for tissue-specific
expression of many of the hepatic, pancreatic, enteric and renal traits.
Heterozygous HNF-4alpha mutants are inflicted by MODY-1 (maturity onset diabetes 
of the young type-1). HNF-4alpha expression is reported here to be negatively
autoregulated by HNF-4alpha1 and to be activated by dominant-negative
HNF-4alpha1. Deletion and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis indicated that
negative autoregulation by HNF-4alpha1 was mediated by its association with the
TATA-less HNF-4alpha core promoter enriched in Sp1, but lacking DR-1 response
elements. Also, negative autoregulation by HNF-4alpha1 was independent of its
transactivation function, being similarly exerted by transcriptional-defective
MODY-1 missense mutants of HNF-4alpha1, or under conditions of suppressing or
enhancing HNF-4alpha activity by small heterodimer partner or by inhibiting
histone deacetylase respectively. Negative autoregulation by HNF-4alpha1 was
abrogated by overexpressed Sp1. Transcriptional suppression by HNF-4alpha1
independently of its transactivation function may extend the scope of its
transcriptional activity to interference with docking of the pre-transcriptional 
initiation complex to TATA-less promoters.

PMCID: PMC1186722
PMID: 15651981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2005 Feb 1;434(1):75-85.

Species-specific mechanisms for cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1)
regulation by drugs and bile acids.

Handschin C(1), Gnerre C, Fraser DJ, Martinez-Jimenez C, Jover R, Meyer UA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pharmacology/Neurobiology, Biozentrum of the University of Basel, 
Klingelbergstrasse 50-70, CH-4056 Basel, Switzerland.

The gene encoding cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) is tightly regulated in
order to control intrahepatic cholesterol and bile acid levels. Ligands of the
xenobiotic-sensing pregnane X receptor inhibit CYP7A1 expression. To retrace the 
evolution of the molecular mechanisms underlying CYP7A1 inhibition, we used a
chicken hepatoma cell system that retains the ability to be induced by
phenobarbital and other drugs. Whereas bile acids regulate CYP7A1 via small
heterodimer partner and liver receptor homolog-1, mRNA expression of these
nuclear receptors is unchanged by xenobiotics. Instead, drugs repress chicken
hepatic nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) transcript levels concomitant with a
reduction in CYP7A1 expression. Importantly, no reduction of HNF4alpha levels is 
found in mouse liver in vivo and in human primary hepatocyte cultures,
respectively. Thus, besides the importance of HNF4alpha in CYP7A1 regulation in
all species, birds and mammals use different signaling pathways to adjust CYP7A1 
levels after exposure to xenobiotics.

PMID: 15629111  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Dec;33(3):783-95.

Transcriptional regulation of glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit promoter by
insulin and glucose in the carnivorous fish, Sparus aurata.

Salgado MC(1), Metón I, Egea M, Baanante IV.

Author information: 
(1)Departament de Bioquímica i Biologia Molecular, Facultat de Farmácia,
Universitat de Barcelona, Diagonal 643, 08028 Barcelona, Spain.

Increase in glucose-6-phosphatase catalytic subunit (G6Pase, G6pc) transcription 
enhances hepatic glucose production in non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
(NIDDM). The fact that carnivorous fish is an alternative model to study NIDDM
led us to clone and characterise the first G6pc promoter region reported for fish
and non-mammalian animals. The 5'-flanking region of G6pc from gilthead sea bream
(Sparus aurata) was isolated by chromosome walking. With SMART RACE-PCR, the
transcription start site was located 106 base pairs (bp) upstream of the
translational start. Transfection analysis in HepG2 cells located a functional
promoter in the 850 bp 5'-flanking isolated fragment (positions -770 to +80
relative to the transcription start). Sequential 5'-deletion analysis of the
promoter fragment revealed that a core functional promoter for basal
transcription is comprised within the 190 bp upstream of the transcription start 
site. In vivo, glucose and insulin reduced G6Pase mRNA levels in the fish liver. 
Transfection experiments in HepG2 cells showed that insulin repressed S. aurata
G6pc under high-glucose conditions. Synergistic activation of piscine G6pc
promoter was induced by cotransfection with expression plasmids for hepatocyte
nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) and peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor-gamma coactivator-1 (PGC-1alpha). No direct relationship was found
between PGC-1alpha coactivation of HNF-4alpha transactivation and the repressive 
effect of insulin. Interestingly, insulin hardly affected G6pc promoter activity 
in the absence of glucose, suggesting that a reduced capacity of
insulin-dependent repression of piscine G6pc may lead to insulin resistance in
carnivorous fish.

PMID: 15591035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. FEBS Lett. 2004 Dec 3;578(1-2):63-8.

Hepatocyte nuclear factors 1alpha and 4alpha control expression of proline
oxidase in adult liver.

Kamiya A(1), Inoue Y, Kodama T, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bldg 37, Rm 3106B1, 9000 Rockville Pike, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Adult liver functions are regulated by several hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNFs).
HNF4alpha and HNF1alpha are involved in metabolic functions in the liver. The
expression of proline oxidase (PO) and proline dehydrogenase was downregulated in
the HNF4alpha liver-specific null mice. In addition, the expression of PO was
also diminished in the liver derived from HNF1alpha-null mice. The -160 bp
proximal promoter region of the PO gene has two HNF4alpha- and HNF1alpha-binding 
consensus sites. Transactivation, electrophoretic mobility shift and chromatin
immunoprecipitation studies revealed that these regions are important for PO
promoter activity. These results suggested that HNF4alpha and HNF1alpha regulate 
proline metabolism in adult liver.

PMID: 15581617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Arch Biochem Biophys. 2005 Jan 15;433(2):397-412.

Coordinate transcriptional regulation of bile acid homeostasis and drug
metabolism.

Eloranta JJ(1), Kullak-Ublick GA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Gastroenterology and Hepatology, Department of
Internal Medicine, University Hospital, CH-8091 Zurich, Switzerland.

Drugs and bile acids are taken up into hepatocytes by specialized transport
proteins localized at the basolateral membrane, e.g., organic anion transporting 
polypeptides . Following intracellular metabolism by cytochrome P450 (CYP)
enzymes, drug metabolites are excreted into bile or urine via ATP-dependent
multidrug resistance proteins (MDR1 and MRPs). Bile acids are excreted mainly via
the bile salt export pump (BSEP, ABCB11). The genes coding for drug and bile acid
transporters and CYP enzymes are regulated by a complex network of
transcriptional cascades, notably by the ligand-activated nuclear receptors FXR, 
PXR, and CAR and by the ligand-independent nuclear receptor HNF-4alpha. The bile 
acid synthesizing enzymes CYP7A1, CYP8B1, and CYP27A1 are subject to negative
feedback regulation by bile acids, which is partly mediated through the
transcriptional repressor SHP. The role of transcriptional cofactors, such as
SRC-1 and PGC-1, in mediating the gene-specific effects of individual nuclear
receptors is becoming increasingly evident.

PMID: 15581596  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Lipid Res. 2005 Feb;46(2):287-96. Epub 2004 Dec 1.

Disrupted coordinate regulation of farnesoid X receptor target genes in a patient
with cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis.

Honda A(1), Salen G, Matsuzaki Y, Batta AK, Xu G, Hirayama T, Tint GS, Doy M,
Shefer S.

Author information: 
(1)Ibaraki Prefectural Institute of Public Health, Mito, Ibaraki 310-0852, Japan.
akihonda-gi@umin.ac.jp

Cerebrotendinous xanthomatosis (CTX), sterol 27-hydroxylase (CYP27A1) deficiency,
is associated with markedly reduced chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA), the most
powerful activating ligand for farnesoid X receptor (FXR). We investigated the
effects of reduced CDCA on FXR target genes in humans. Liver specimens from an
untreated CTX patient and 10 control subjects were studied. In the patient,
hepatic CDCA concentration was markedly reduced but the bile alcohol level
exceeded CDCA levels in control subjects (73.5 vs. 37.8 +/- 6.2 nmol/g liver).
Cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1) and Na+/taurocholate-cotransporting
polypeptide (NTCP) were upregulated 84- and 8-fold, respectively. However, small 
heterodimer partner (SHP) and bile salt export pump were normally expressed.
Marked CYP7A1 induction with normal SHP expression was not explained by the
regulation of liver X receptor alpha (LXRalpha) or pregnane X receptor. However, 
another nuclear receptor, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha), was
induced 2.9-fold in CTX, which was associated with enhanced mRNA levels of
HNF4alpha target genes, CYP7A1, 7alpha-hydroxy-4-cholesten-3-one
12alpha-hydroxylase, CYP27A1, and NTCP. In conclusion, the coordinate regulation 
of FXR target genes was lost in CTX. The mechanism of the disruption may be
explained by a normally stimulated FXR pathway attributable to markedly increased
bile alcohols with activation of HNF4alpha caused by reduced bile acids in CTX
liver.

PMID: 15576845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Diabetes. 2004 Dec;53(12):3337-41.

Polymorphisms in both promoters of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha are
associated with type 2 diabetes in the Amish.

Damcott CM(1), Hoppman N, Ott SH, Reinhart LJ, Wang J, Pollin TI, O'Connell JR,
Mitchell BD, Shuldiner AR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes and Nutrition, University of Maryland
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4-alpha (HNF4A) is a transcription factor located on
chromosome 20q13 that regulates expression of genes involved in glucose
metabolism and homeostasis. Recently, two groups independently identified single 
nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) in an alternate upstream promoter (P2) of HNF4A
that were associated with type 2 diabetes in Ashkenazi Jews and Finns. We
genotyped haplotype-tagging SNPs (htSNPs) across the two promoter regions and the
coding region of HNF4A in individuals with type 2 diabetes (n = 137), impaired
glucose tolerance (IGT) (n = 139), and normal glucose tolerance (n = 342) from
the Amish Family Diabetes Study (AFDS) to test for association with type 2
diabetes. In the P1 promoter region, we observed a significant association
between the A allele of rs2425640 and type 2 diabetes (odds ratio [OR] 1.60, P = 
0.03). Furthermore, the mean age of type 2 diabetes onset was, on average, 5.1
years earlier in those with the AA or GA genotype at SNP rs2425640 than in those 
with the GG genotype (57.8 vs. 62.9 years, P = 0.011). In the P2 promoter, the
htSNP rs1884614 showed borderline association with both type 2 diabetes (OR 1.40,
P = 0.09) and the combined type 2 diabetes/IGT trait (1.35, P = 0.07). In an
expanded set of 698 nondiabetic AFDS subjects, we found association between
rs1884614 and glucose area under the curve during an oral glucose tolerance test 
(additive model, P = 0.022; dominant model, P = 0.010). The results of this study
provide evidence that variants in both the P1 and P2 promoters of HNF4A increase 
risk for typical type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 15561969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2005 Apr;288(4):G685-95. Epub 2004 Nov
18.

Cytokine regulation of human sterol 12alpha-hydroxylase (CYP8B1) gene.

Jahan A(1), Chiang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Biochemistry and Molecular Pathology, Northeastern Ohio Universities 
College of Medicine, 4209 State Route 44, P. O Box 95, Rootstown, OH 44272, USA.

Sterol 12alpha-hydroxylase (CYP8B1) catalyzes cholic acid synthesis in the liver 
and is feedback inhibited by bile acids. In addition to activating farnesoid X
receptor (nuclear receptor subfamily 1H4), bile acids also induce inflammatory
cytokines in hepatocytes. The objective of this study was to investigate the
mechanism by which inflammatory cytokines inhibit human CYP8B1 gene
transcription. Real-time PCR assays revealed that both chenodeoxycholic acid
(CDCA) and interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta) markedly reduced CYP8B1, cholesterol
7alpha-hydroxylase CYP7A1 and hepatic nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) mRNA
expression levels in human primary hepatocytes. However, CDCA induced, but
IL-1beta reduced, small heterodimer partner (SHP) mRNA expression. IL-1beta
inhibited human CYP8B1 reporter activity only in liver cells, and a c-Jun
NH(2)-terminal kinase (JNK)-specific inhibitor-blocked IL-1beta inhibition.
Activated JNK1 or c-Jun inhibited, whereas their dominant negative forms blocked,
IL-1beta inhibition of CYP8B1 transcription. Mutagenesis analyses mapped an
IL-1beta response element to a previously identified bile acid response element, 
which contains an HNF4alpha binding site. A dominant negative HNF4alpha inhibited
CYP8B1 gene transcription and ectopically expressed HNF4alpha blocked IL-1beta
inhibition. Furthermore, IL-1beta inhibited HNF4alpha gene transcription, protein
expression, and binding to the CYP8B1 gene. JNK1 phosphorylated HNF4alpha and a
JNK-specific inhibitor blocked the IL-1beta inhibition of HNF4alpha expression.
These results suggest that IL-1beta inhibits CYP8B1 gene transcription via a
mitogen-activated protein kinase/JNK pathway that inhibits HNF4alpha gene
expression and its DNA-binding ability. This mechanism may play an important role
in the adaptive response to inflammatory cytokines and in the protection of the
liver during cholestasis.

PMID: 15550563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. J Lipid Res. 2005 Feb;46(2):328-41. Epub 2004 Nov 16.

Transcriptional regulation of human microsomal triglyceride transfer protein by
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha.

Sheena V(1), Hertz R, Nousbeck J, Berman I, Magenheim J, Bar-Tana J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutrition and Metabolism, Hebrew University Medical
School, Jerusalem, Israel 91120.

Microsomal triglyceride transfer protein (MTP) catalyzes the assembly of
triglyceride (TG)-rich apolipoprotein B-containing liver (e.g., VLDL) and
intestinal (e.g., chylomicron) lipoproteins. The human MTP gene promoter is
reported here to associate in vivo with endogenous hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) and to be transactivated or transsuppressed by
overexpressed or by dominant negative HNF-4alpha, respectively. Human MTP (hMTP) 
transactivation by HNF-4alpha is accounted for by the concerted activity of
distal (-83/-70) and proximal (-50/-38) direct repeat 1 elements of the hMTP
promoter that bind HNF-4alpha. Transactivation by HNF-4alpha is specifically
antagonized by chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter. Transcriptional activation of
hMTP by HNF-4alpha is mediated by HNF-4alpha domains engaged in ligand binding
and ligand-driven transactivation and is further complemented by
HNF-4alpha/HNF-1alpha synergism that involves the HNF-4alpha activation function 
1 (AF-1) domain. hMTP transactivation by HNF-4alpha is specifically inhibited by 
beta,beta-tetramethyl-hexadecanedioic acid acting as an HNF-4alpha antagonist
ligand. hMTP transactivation by HNF-4alpha may account for the activation or
inhibition of MTP expression and the production of TG-rich lipoproteins by
agonist (e.g., saturated fatty acids) or antagonist [e.g., (n-3) PUFA,
hypolipidemic fibrates, or Methyl-substituted dicarboxylic acid (Medica)
compounds] HNF-4alpha ligands.

PMID: 15547294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. J Biol Chem. 2005 Feb 4;280(5):3259-68. Epub 2004 Nov 10.

Role of hepatocyte nuclear factors in transcriptional regulation of male-specific
CYP2A2.

Wiwi CA(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology Boston
University, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Cytochrome P450 2A2 (CYP2A2) is an adult male-specific rat liver steroid
hydroxylase whose sex-dependent expression is regulated at the transcriptional
level by sexually dimorphic pituitary growth hormone (GH) secretory patterns. In 
contrast to CYP2C11 and other male-specific, plasma GH pulse-inducible liver
genes, CYP2A2 is highly expressed in hypophysectomized rat liver, despite the
absence of GH stimulation. CYP2A2 promoter fragments 0.9-6.2 kb long exhibited
unusually high basal promoter activity when transfected into the liver cell line 
HepG2. A further approximately 2.5-fold increase in activity was obtained by
cotransfection of hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 3gamma or HNF4alpha. CYP2A2
promoter activity was inhibited approximately 85% by transfection of HNF3beta or 
HNF6, both of which are more highly expressed in female than male liver and can
strongly trans-activate the female-specific CYP2C12 promoter. The male GH
pulse-activated transcription factor STAT5b had no effect on CYP2A2 promoter
activity, either alone or in combination with HNF3gamma and HNF4alpha, consistent
with the GH pulse-independence of CYP2A2 expression. By contrast, STAT5b
synergistically enhanced the transcriptional activity of HNF4alpha toward two
other male-specific liver target genes, Cyp2d9 and CYP8B1. Furthermore, STAT5b in
combination with the HNF4alpha coactivator peroxisome proliferator-activated
receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha strongly enhanced the transcriptional activity 
of HNF4alpha toward CYP8B1 but not toward CYP2A2. These findings support the
hypothesis that sex-dependent HNFs contribute to the sexually dimorphic
expression of CYP2A2 and other liver CYPs and highlight the ability of STAT5b to 
act in concert with HNF4alpha to regulate select male-specific liver CYP genes.

PMID: 15539409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 Nov 1;32(19):e150.

Pattern of genes influenced by conditional expression of the transcription
factors HNF6, HNF4alpha and HNF1beta in a pancreatic beta-cell line.

Thomas H(1), Senkel S, Erdmann S, Arndt T, Turan G, Klein-Hitpass L, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
D-45122 Essen, Germany.

Using the rat insulinoma cell line INS-1 we generated beta-cell clones that are
most efficient for gene transfer, as they contain an FRT site for Flp
recombinase-mediated, site-directed integration of a single copy transgene.
Therefore, the gene-of-interest can be introduced by DNA transfection without the
need to select individual cell clones. Additionally, the clones contain the
tetracycline repressor allowing tetracycline induction of the transgene. By
oligonucleotide microarray we define the beta-cell specific phenotype of the
Flp-In T-REx cell clones. Using a clone expressing the HNF6, HNF4alpha and
HNF1beta transcription factors at a limited level, we introduced the expression
vectors encoding these factors. We show efficient tetracycline induction of these
transcription factors by western blots and immunocytochemistry. Microarrays
reveal that these three factors affect a similar number of genes with only few
genes regulated in common. Statistical analysis reveals that the three
transcription factors affect genes categorized to different biological processes.
Furthermore, we document the usefulness of these Flp-In T-REx cells for the
functional analysis of mutated HNF1beta transcription factors found in human
MODY5 patients. We show that the expression of the mutant P328L329del and
A263insGG affects only very few transcripts and these are predominantly distinct 
from those induced by wild-type HNF1beta.

PMCID: PMC528820
PMID: 15520459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Trends Mol Med. 2004 Nov;10(11):521-4.

HNF-4alpha: from MODY to late-onset type 2 diabetes.

Gupta RK(1), Kaestner KH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine, 415
Curie Blvd, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a rare subtype of type 2 diabetes 
that is characterized by autosomal-dominant inheritance and can be caused by
mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha). Odom and colleagues
have combined chromatin immunoprecipitation with promoter microarrays to identify
numerous promoters occupied by HNF-4alpha in the human liver and islet,
suggesting a very broad role for HNF-4alpha in glucose homeostasis. This notion
is supported by recent genetic studies linking HNF-4alpha to the much more common
late-onset type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 15519277  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Diabetes. 2004 Nov;53(11):3002-6.

Common variants of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha P2 promoter are
associated with type 2 diabetes in the U.K. population.

Weedon MN(1), Owen KR, Shields B, Hitman G, Walker M, McCarthy MI, Love-Gregory
LD, Permutt MA, Hattersley AT, Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes Research & Vascular Medicine, Peninsula Medical School,
Barrack Road, Exeter, UK.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha is part of a transcription factor network 
that is key for the development and function of the beta-cell. Rare mutations in 
the HNF4alpha gene cause maturity-onset diabetes of the young. A number of type 2
diabetes linkage studies have found evidence of linkage to 20q12-13.1 where the
HNF4alpha gene is located. Two recent studies have found an association between
four common variants of the alternative P2 promoter region and type 2 diabetes.
These variants are in strong linkage disequilibrium, and the minor alleles define
one common risk haplotype. In both studies, the risk haplotype explained a large 
proportion of the evidence of linkage to 20q12-13.1. We aimed to assess this
haplotype in a U.K. Caucasian study of 5,256 subjects. We typed two single
nucleotide polymorphisms tagging the risk haplotype (rs4810424 and rs2144908) and
found evidence of association in both case-control and family-based studies;
rs4810424 marginally demonstrated the stronger association with an overall
estimated odds ratio of 1.15 (95% CI 1.02-1.33) (P = 0.02). The effect of the P2 
haplotype on type 2 diabetes risk is less than in the initial studies, probably
reflecting that these studies used 20q12-13.1-linked cases. In conclusion, we
have replicated the association of the HNF4alpha P2 promoter haplotype with type 
2 diabetes in a U.K. Caucasian population where there is no evidence of linkage
to 20q.

PMID: 15504983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Curr Opin Investig Drugs. 2004 Sep;5(9):941-6.

Hypolipidemia induced by PPARalpha agonists: HNF-4alpha as an alternative to
PPARalpha.

Bar-Tana J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutrition and Metabolism, Hebrew University-Hadassah
Medical School, PO Box 12272, Ein Kerem, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.
bartanaj@cc.huji.ac.il

This critical review examines the putative role played by peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARalpha) in the hypolipidemic activity
induced by peroxisome proliferators/PPARalpha agonists. The hypolipidemic effect 
of peroxisome proliferators mediated in rodents by hepatic PPARalpha activation
is independent of PPARalpha in humans, and is transduced by direct suppression of
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha by the CoA-thioesters of hypolipidemic
peroxisome proliferators. A novel target for hypolipidemic drugs in humans and an
updated risk assessment for human hypolipidemic drugs are implied.

PMID: 15503648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Nutr Rev. 2004 Sep;62(9):333-9.

Polyunsaturated fatty acid regulation of gene expression.

Sampath H(1), Ntambi JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI
53706, USA.

Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs), specifically the n-3 series, have been
implicated in the prevention of various human diseases, including obesity,
diabetes, coronary heart disease and stroke, and inflammatory and neurologic
diseases. PUFAs function mainly by altering membrane lipid composition, cellular 
metabolism, signal transduction, and regulation of gene expression. PUFAs
regulate the expression of genes in various tissues, including the liver, heart, 
adipose tissue, and brain. The role of transcription factors such as SREBP1c and 
nuclear receptors such as PPAR-alpha, HNF-4alpha, and LXRalpha in mediating the
nuclear effects of PUFAs are addressed.

PMID: 15497766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Mol Pharmacol. 2005 Jan;67(1):241-9. Epub 2004 Oct 6.

Hepatic expression of the UGT1A9 gene is governed by hepatocyte nuclear factor
4alpha.

Barbier O(1), Girard H, Inoue Y, Duez H, Villeneuve L, Kamiya A, Fruchart JC,
Guillemette C, Gonzalez FJ, Staels B.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM 545, Institut Pasteur de Lille, 1 rue du Pr Calmette, BP 245,
59019 Lille, France.

UDP-glucuronosyltransferase (UGT) enzymes catalyze the glucuronidation reaction, 
which is a major pathway in the catabolism and elimination of numerous endo- and 
xenobiotics. Among the UGT enzyme family members, the UGT1A7, UGT1A8, UGT1A9, and
UGT1A10 isoforms are issued from a single gene through differential splicing.
However, these enzymes display distinct tissue-specific expression patterns.
Indeed, UGT1A7, UGT1A8, and UGT1A10 are exclusively expressed in extrahepatic
tissues, whereas UGT1A9 transcripts are found at high concentrations in liver. In
the present study, we report that the liver-enriched hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 
(HNF4)-alpha controls the hepatic expression of the UGT1A9 enzyme. Liver-specific
disruption of the HNF4alpha gene in mice drastically decreases liver UGT1A9 mRNA 
levels. Furthermore, an HNF4alpha response element (HNF4alpha RE) was identified 
in the promoter of human UGT1A9 at position -372 to -360 base pairs by transient 
transfection, electrophoretic mobility shift assays, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments. It is interesting that this response element is 
absent in the proximal UGT1A7, UGT1A8, and UGT1A10 gene promoters. In conclusion,
the present study identifies HNF4alpha as a major factor for the control of
UGT1A9 hepatic expression and suggests that the absence of UGT1A7, UGT1A8, and
UGT1A10 expression in the liver is caused by, at least in part, a few base pair
changes in their promoter sequences in the region corresponding to the HNF4alpha 
RE of the UGT1A9 gene.

PMID: 15470081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Jan;19(1):163-74. Epub 2004 Sep 23.

A distal region involving hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha and CAAT/enhancer
binding protein markedly potentiates the protein kinase A stimulation of the
glucose-6-phosphatase promoter.

Gautier-Stein A(1), Mithieux G, Rajas F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 449/Institut 
National de la Recherche Agronomique 1235/Université Claude Bernard Lyon 1,
Insitut Fédératif de Recherche Laennec, 69372 Lyon cedex 08, France.
Amandine.Gautier@univ-lyon1.fr

Glucose-6-phosphatase (Glc6Pase) is the last enzyme of gluconeogenesis and is
only expressed in the liver, kidney, and small intestine. In these tissues, the
mRNA and its activity are increased when cAMP levels increased (e.g. in fasting
or diabetes). We first report that a proximal region (within -200 bp relative to 
the transcription start site) and a distal region (-694/-500 bp) are both
required for a potent cAMP and a protein kinase A (PKA) responsiveness of the
Glc6Pase promoter. Using different molecular approaches, we demonstrate that
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF4alpha), CAAT/enhancer-binding protein-alpha
(C/EBPalpha), C/EBPbeta, and cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) are
involved in the potentiated PKA responsiveness: in the distal region, via one
HNF4alpha- and one C/EBP-binding sites, and in the proximal region, via two
HNF4alpha and two CREB-binding sites. We also show that HNF4alpha, C/EBPalpha,
and C/EBPbeta are constitutively bound to the endogenous Glc6Pase gene, whereas
CREB and CREB-binding protein (CBP) will be bound to the gene upon stimulation by
cAMP. These data strongly suggest that the cAMP responsiveness of the Glc6Pase
promoter requires a tight cooperation between a proximal and a distal region,
which depends on the presence of several HNF4alpha-, C/EBP-, and CREB-binding
sites, therefore involving an intricate association of hepatic and ubiquitous
transcription factors.

PMID: 15388792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Aug 27;321(3):688-94.

Nitric oxide and TGF-beta1 inhibit HNF-4alpha function in HEPG2 cells.

de Lucas S(1), López-Alcorocho JM, Bartolomé J, Carreño V.

Author information: 
(1)Fundación para el Estudio de las Hepatitis Virales, Madrid, Spain.

This study analyzes if the profibrogenic factors nitric oxide and transforming
growth factor-beta1 (TGF-beta1) affect hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha
(HNF-4alpha) function. For this purpose, HepG2 cells were treated with TGF-beta1 
or with a nitric oxide donor to determine mRNA levels of coagulation factor VII
and HNF-4alpha. Treatment effect on factor VII gene promoter was assessed by
chloramphenicol acetyl-transferase assays in cells transfected with the pFVII-CAT
plasmid. HNF-4alpha binding and protein levels were determined by gel shift
assays and Western blot. TGF-beta1 and nitric oxide downregulated factor VII mRNA
levels by inhibiting its gene promoter activity. This inhibition is caused by a
decrease in the DNA binding of HNF-4alpha. TGF-beta1 induces degradation of
HNF-4alpha in the proteasome while nitric oxide provokes nitrosylation of
cysteine residues in this factor. TGF-beta1 and nitric oxide inhibit HNF-4alpha
activity. These findings may explain the loss of liver functions that occurs
during fibrosis progression.

PMID: 15358161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. J Nutr. 2004 Sep;134(9):2444S-2449S.

Control of gene expression by fatty acids.

Pégorier JP(1), Le May C, Girard J.

Author information: 
(1)Département d'Endocrinologie, Institut Cochin, INSERM U567, CNRS UMR8104, IFR 
Alfred JOST, Faculté de Médecine Cochin-Port-Royal, 24 rue du Faubourg Saint
Jacques, 75014 Paris, France. pegorier@cochin.inserm.fr

The last decade provided evidence that major (glucose, fatty acids, amino acids) 
or minor (iron, vitamin, etc.) dietary constituents regulated gene expression in 
an hormonal-independent manner. This review focuses on molecular mechanisms by
which fatty acids control the expression genes encoding regulatory protein
involved in their own metabolism. Nonesterified fatty acids or their CoA
derivatives seem to be the main signals involved in the transcriptional effect of
long-chain fatty acids. The effects of fatty acids are mediated either directly
owing to their specific binding to various nuclear receptors (PPAR, LXR,
HNF-4alpha) leading to changes in the trans-activating activity of these
transcription factors, or indirectly as the result of changes in the abundance of
regulatory transcription factors (SREBP-1c, ChREBP, etc.). The relative
contribution of each transcription factor in fatty acid-induced positive or
negative gene expression is discussed.

PMID: 15333740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Genesis. 2004 Jul;39(3):206-11.

Targeted insertion of an IRES Cre into the Hnf4alpha locus: Cre-mediated
recombination in the liver, kidney, and gut epithelium.

Vincent SD(1), Robertson EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge,
Massachusetts, USA. Stephane.Vincent@ens-lyon.fr

The Hnf4alpha gene belongs to a family of trancriptional regulators required for 
liver development and function. Hnf4alpha is also expressed in other tissues,
including the newly formed visceral endoderm of the early postimplantation
embryo, and later in embryogenesis in the gut epithelium and the kidney. The
regulatory sequences involved in controlling expression of Hnf4alpha at these
diverse sites are not clearly understood. Here we used homologous recombination
to introduce Cre recombinase coding sequences into the endogenous Hnf4alpha
locus. Crossing Hnf4alpha(Creex2/+) mice with R26R partners allowed us to follow 
the pattern of Cre-mediated recombination. Our results show that recombination of
the reporter allele closely follows endogenous Hnf4alpha expression, but with a
slight temporal delay. Thus, the Hnf4alpha(Creex2) strain should prove useful for
conditionally deleting gene activity in the liver, gut epithelium, or kidney.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15282747  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Metabolism. 2004 Aug;53(8):959-63.

Triple genetic variation in the HNF-4alpha gene is associated with early-onset
type 2 diabetes mellitus in a philippino family.

Gragnoli C(1), Menzinger Von Preussenthal G, Habener JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Endocrinology, Massachusetts General Hospital, Harvard
Medical School, Boston 02114, USA.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young-type 1 (MODY1) is a form of monogenic type 2
diabetes mellitus (T2DM) with long-term complications due to mutations in the
HNF-4alpha gene. The HNF-4alpha gene is involved in hepatic differentiation and
expression of genes regulating glucose transport, glycolysis, and lipid
metabolism. The abnormal glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in MODY1 subjects
may be due to reduced glucose transport and glycolysis. To date, 14 mutations in 
the HNF-4alpha gene have been identified as a cause of either MODY1 or late-onset
type 2 diabetes. So far, no screening has been performed in subjects from the
Philippines. We recruited a Philippino family with autosomal dominant early-onset
type 2 diabetes and screened the proband for mutations in the genes for
HNF-1alpha, GCK, HNF-4alpha, IPF-1, HNF-6, and NGN3. We identified a new missense
mutation in exon 5 (V199I) of the HNF-4alpha gene and 2 new single-nucleotide
substitutions in intron 4, IVS4-nt4 (G --> A) and IVS4-nt20 (C --> T), all
cosegregating with diabetes in the 3 affected available siblings. These
variations were not present in 100 normal healthy subjects. Bioinformatic
analysis suggests that these variations in the whole, and overall the IVS4-nt4
variation located at splicing site, may affect the splicing potential of intron
4. We have biochemically and clinically characterized the Philippine-1 family. We
suggest that the V199I missense mutation located in the ligand
binding/dimerization domain of HNF-4alpha contributes to type 2 diabetes in the
Philippine-1 family. The intron variations may contribute susceptibility to
diabetes.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 15281001  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Growth Factors. 2004 Jun;22(2):79-88.

Role of hepatocyte nuclear factors in growth hormone-regulated, sexually
dimorphic expression of liver cytochromes P450.

Wiwi CA(1), Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cell and Molecular Biology, Department of Biology, Boston
University, 5 Cummington Street, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

The liver is a sexually dimorphic organ in many species, including humans. In
rodent models, dramatic sex differences characterize the expression of numerous
plasma proteins, receptors and other signaling molecules, and enzymes of steroid 
and foreign compound metabolism, including members of the cytochrome P450 (CYP)
superfamily. The sexual dimorphism of liver gene expression is dictated by the
temporal pattern of plasma growth hormone (GH) stimulation, which is intermittent
and highly pulsatile in males and more frequent in females. Many liver-specific
genes, including CYP genes, are regulated by the coordinated action of multiple
hepatic nuclear factors (HNFs) through a complex transcriptional hierarchy. These
HNFs are proposed to collaborate with the GH pulse-activated latent cytoplasmic
transcription factor STAT5b to regulate the sex-dependent expression of liver
CYPs. This hypothesis is supported by the finding that certain HNFs are regulated
by GH and exhibit a differential responsiveness to the sex-specific pattern of GH
secretion. In particular, recent studies of an HNF4alpha-deficient mouse model
demonstrate an essential role for this nuclear receptor in regulating several
liver-enriched transcription factors and sexually dimorphic CYPs in liver in
vivo. Further studies on the mechanisms by which HNF4alpha and other liver
factors respond to GH may expand our understanding of the mechanisms by which GH,
via the coordinated action of HNFs and STAT5b, regulate sexually dimorphic liver 
gene expression.

PMID: 15253383  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Biochem J. 2004 Nov 1;383(Pt. 3):573-80.

The G115S mutation associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young impairs
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha activities and introduces a PKA phosphorylation 
site in its DNA-binding domain.

Oxombre B(1), Kouach M, Moerman E, Formstecher P, Laine B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U459, Faculté de Médecine Henri Warembourg, 1 Place de Verdun, 59045
Lille Cedex, France.

HNF4alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha) belongs to a complex transcription
factor network that is crucial for the function of hepatocytes and pancreatic
beta-cells. In these cells, it activates the expression of a very large number of
genes, including genes involved in the transport and metabolism of glucose and
lipids. Mutations in the HNF4alpha gene correlate with MODY1 (maturity-onset
diabetes of the young 1), a form of type II diabetes characterized by an impaired
glucose-induced insulin secretion. The MODY1 G115S (Gly115-->Ser) HNF4alpha
mutation is located in the DNA-binding domain of this nuclear receptor. We show
here that the G115S mutation failed to affect HNF4alpha-mediated transcription on
apolipoprotein promoters in HepG2 cells. Conversely, in pancreatic beta-cell
lines, this mutation resulted in strong impairments of HNF4alpha transcriptional 
activity on the promoters of LPK (liver pyruvate kinase) and HNF1alpha, with this
transcription factor playing a key role in endocrine pancreas. We show as well
that the G115S mutation creates a PKA (protein kinase A) phosphorylation site,
and that PKA-mediated phosphorylation results in a decreased transcriptional
activity of the mutant. Moreover, the G115E (Gly115-->Glu) mutation mimicking
phosphorylation reduced HNF4alpha DNA-binding and transcriptional activities. Our
results may account for the 100% penetrance of diabetes in human carriers of this
mutation. In addition, they suggest that introduction of a phosphorylation site
in the DNA-binding domain may represent a new mechanism by which a MODY1 mutation
leads to loss of HNF4alpha function.

PMCID: PMC1133751
PMID: 15233628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Aug;18(8):1975-87. Epub 2004 May 20.

Sexually dimorphic P450 gene expression in liver-specific hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4alpha-deficient mice.

Wiwi CA(1), Gupte M, Waxman DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Boston University, 5 Cummington Street, Boston,
Massachusetts 02215, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4alpha is a liver-enriched nuclear receptor that 
plays a critical role in regulating the expression of numerous hepatic genes,
including members of the cytochrome P450 (CYP) superfamily, several of which are 
expressed in a sex-dependent manner. Presently, we use a liver-specific
Hnf4alpha-deficient mouse model to investigate the role of HNF4alpha in
regulating liver-enriched transcription factors and sexually dimorphic Cyps in
liver in vivo. Real-time PCR analysis of RNA isolated from livers of wild-type
and Hnf4alpha-deficient mice revealed the following: 1) HNF4alpha exerts both
positive regulation (Hnfalpha, C/ebpalpha, and C/ebpbeta) and negative regulation
(Hnf3alpha and the HNF4alpha coactivator Pgc-1alpha) on liver transcription
factor expression; 2) a strong dependence on HNF4alpha characterizes several
male-predominant Cyps (2d9 and 8b1), female-predominant Cyps (2b10, 2b13, 3a41,
and 3a44) and Cyps, whose expression is sex independent (3a11, 3a25); 3)
HNF4alpha confers a unique, positive regulation of two male-expressed genes
(Cyp4a12 and GSTpi) and a negative regulation of several female-predominant genes
(Cyp2a4, Cyp2b9, Hnf3beta, and Hnf6), both of which are manifest in male but not 
female mouse liver. These trends were confirmed at the protein level by Western
blot analysis using antibodies raised to Cyp2a, Cyp2b, and Cyp3a family members. 
Thus, HNF4alpha is an essential player in the complex regulatory network of
liver-enriched transcription factors and the sexually dimorphic mouse Cyp genes
that they regulate. HNF4alpha is proposed to contribute to the sex specificity of
liver gene expression by positively regulating a subset of male-specific Cyp
genes while concomitantly inhibiting the expression of certain female-specific
Cyps and liver transcription factors, by mechanisms that are operative in male,
but not female, mouse liver.

PMID: 15155787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Nucleic Acids Res. 2004 May 11;32(8):2586-93. Print 2004.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha enhances the hepatocyte nuclear factor
1alpha-mediated activation of transcription.

Eeckhoute J(1), Formstecher P, Laine B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 459, Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine H.
Warembourg, 1 Place de Verdun, F 59045 Lille, France.

Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) and Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4alpha
(HNF4alpha) are two liver-enriched transcription factors coexpressed in specific 
tissues where they play a crucial role through their involvement in a complex
cross-regulatory network. HNF1alpha down regulates HNF4alpha-mediated activation 
of transcription via a direct protein-protein interaction. Here we show that
HNF4alpha enhances the transcriptional activity of HNF1alpha in a DNA binding
independent manner, thus indicating that it behaves as a HNF1alpha coactivator.
Using mutations in the ligand binding domain (LBD) of HNF4alpha, we confirmed the
involvement of the Activation Function 2 module and demonstrated the requirement 
of the integrity of the LBD for the interaction with HNF1alpha. Moreover, we show
that HNF4alpha cooperates with p300 to achieve the highest HNF1alpha-mediated
transcription rates. Our findings highlight a new way by which HNF4alpha can
regulate gene expression and extend our knowledge of the complexity of the
transcriptional network involving HNF4alpha and HNF1alpha.

PMCID: PMC419469
PMID: 15141028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 16;279(29):30680-8. Epub 2004 Apr 30.

Critical role of residues defining the ligand binding pocket in hepatocyte
nuclear factor-4alpha.

Aggelidou E(1), Iordanidou P, Tsantili P, Papadopoulos G, Hadzopoulou-Cladaras M.

Author information: 
(1)Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Faculty of Sciences, School of Biology, 
Department of Genetics, Development and Molecular Biology, GR-54124,
Thessaloniki, Greece.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha), a member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily, is a crucial regulator of a large number of genes involved in
glucose, cholesterol, and fatty acid metabolism. Unlike other members of the
superfamily, HNF-4alpha activates transcription in the absence of exogenously
added ligand. Recently published crystallographic data show that fatty acids are 
endogenous ligands for HNF-4. Transcriptional analysis of point mutations of the 
residues that are located in helices H3, H5, H10, and H11, which have been shown 
to come in contact with the ligand, resulted in a dramatic decrease in activity, 
without affecting DNA binding and dimerization. Our results show the importance
of residues Ser-181, Met-182 in H3, Leu-219, Leu-220 and Arg-226 in H5, Ile-338
in H10, and Ile-346 in H11 that line the ligand-binding domain pocket in
HNF-4alpha and impair its transactivation potential. Structural modeling reveals 
that the mutations do not cause any large scale structural alterations, and the
observed loss in transactivation can be attributed to local changes,
demonstrating that these residues play a significant role in maintaining the
structural integrity of the HNF-4alpha ligand binding pocket.

PMID: 15123688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Biochem J. 2004 Aug 1;381(Pt 3):887-94.

Regulation of Cyp2a5 transcription in mouse primary hepatocytes: roles of
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 and nuclear factor I.

Ulvila J(1), Arpiainen S, Pelkonen O, Aida K, Sueyoshi T, Negishi M, Hakkola J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Oulu, P.O. Box 5000, 
90014 Oulu, Finland.

The cytochrome P4502a5 (Cyp2a5) gene is expressed principally in liver and
olfactory mucosa. In the present study, the transcriptional mechanisms of
hepatocyte-specific expression of Cyp2a5 were studied in mouse primary
hepatocytes. The Cyp2a5 5'-flanking region -3033 to +10 was cloned in front of a 
luciferase reporter gene and transfected into hepatocytes. Deletion analysis
revealed two major activating promoter regions localized at proximal 271 bp and
at a more distal area from -3033 to -2014 bp. The proximal activation region was 
characterized further by DNase I footprinting, and a single clear footprint was
detected in the studied area centred over a sequence similar to the NF-I (nuclear
factor I)-binding site. The binding of NF-I was confirmed using an EMSA
(electrophoretic mobility-shift assay). A putative HNF-4 (hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4)-binding site was localized at the proximal promoter by computer
analysis of the sequence, and HNF-4alpha was shown to interact with the site
using an EMSA. The functional significance of HNF-4 and NF-I binding to the
Cyp2a5 promoter was evaluated by site-directed mutagenesis of the binding motifs 
in reporter constructs. Both mutations strongly decreased transcriptional
activation by the Cyp2a5 promoter in primary hepatocytes, and double mutation
almost completely abolished transcriptional activity. Also, the functionality of 
the distal activation region was found to be dependent on the intact HNF-4 and
NF-I sites at the proximal promoter. In conclusion, these results indicate that
HNF-4 and NF-I play major roles in the constitutive regulation of hepatic
expression of Cyp2a5.

PMCID: PMC1133900
PMID: 15115437  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Diabetes. 2004 Apr;53(4):1141-9.

Genetic variation near the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha gene predicts
susceptibility to type 2 diabetes.

Silander K(1), Mohlke KL, Scott LJ, Peck EC, Hollstein P, Skol AD, Jackson AU,
Deloukas P, Hunt S, Stavrides G, Chines PS, Erdos MR, Narisu N, Conneely KN, Li
C, Fingerlin TE, Dhanjal SK, Valle TT, Bergman RN, Tuomilehto J, Watanabe RM,
Boehnke M, Collins FS.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, Bethesda, 
Maryland, USA.

The Finland-United States Investigation Of NIDDM Genetics (FUSION) study aims to 
identify genetic variants that predispose to type 2 diabetes by studying affected
sibling pair families from Finland. Chromosome 20 showed our strongest initial
evidence for linkage. It currently has a maximum logarithm of odds (LOD) score of
2.48 at 70 cM in a set of 495 families. In this study, we searched for diabetes
susceptibility variant(s) at 20q13 by genotyping single nucleotide polymorphism
(SNP) markers in case and control DNA pools. Of 291 SNPs successfully typed in a 
7.5-Mb interval, the strongest association confirmed by individual genotyping was
with SNP rs2144908, located 1.3 kb downstream of the primary beta-cell promoter
P2 of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF4A). This SNP showed association with
diabetes disease status (odds ratio [OR] 1.33, 95% CI 1.06-1.65, P = 0.011) and
with several diabetes-related traits. Most of the evidence for linkage at 20q13
could be attributed to the families carrying the risk allele. We subsequently
found nine additional associated SNPs spanning a 64-kb region, including the P2
and P1 promoters and exons 1-3. Our results and the independent observation of
association of SNPs near the P2 promoter with diabetes in a separate study
population of Ashkenazi Jewish origin suggests that variant(s) located near or
within HNF4A increases susceptibility to type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 15047633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Science. 2004 Feb 27;303(5662):1378-81.

Control of pancreas and liver gene expression by HNF transcription factors.

Odom DT(1), Zizlsperger N, Gordon DB, Bell GW, Rinaldi NJ, Murray HL, Volkert TL,
Schreiber J, Rolfe PA, Gifford DK, Fraenkel E, Bell GI, Young RA.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Cambridge, MA
02142, USA.

Comment in
    Science. 2004 Feb 27;303(5662):1311-2.

The transcriptional regulatory networks that specify and maintain human tissue
diversity are largely uncharted. To gain insight into this circuitry, we used
chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with promoter microarrays to identify
systematically the genes occupied by the transcriptional regulators HNF1alpha,
HNF4alpha, and HNF6, together with RNA polymerase II, in human liver and
pancreatic islets. We identified tissue-specific regulatory circuits formed by
HNF1alpha, HNF4alpha, and HNF6 with other transcription factors, revealing how
these factors function as master regulators of hepatocyte and islet
transcription. Our results suggest how misregulation of HNF4alpha can contribute 
to type 2 diabetes.

PMCID: PMC3012624
PMID: 14988562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. J Biol Chem. 2004 May 28;279(22):23311-6. Epub 2004 Feb 24.

Structural basis for HNF-4alpha activation by ligand and coactivator binding.

Duda K(1), Chi YI, Shoelson SE.

Author information: 
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center & Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachussets 02215, USA.

In addition to suggesting that fatty acids are endogenous ligands, our recent
crystal structure of HNF-4alpha showed an unusual degree of structural
flexibility in the AF-2 domain (helix alpha12). Although every molecule contained
a fatty acid within its ligand binding domain, one molecule in each homodimer was
in an open inactive conformation with alpha12 fully extended and colinear with
alpha10. By contrast, the second molecule in each homodimer was in a closed
conformation with alpha12 folded against the body of the domain in what is widely
considered to be the active state. This indicates that although ligand binding is
necessary, it is not sufficient to induce an activating structural transition in 
HNF-4alpha as is commonly suggested to occur for nuclear receptors. To further
assess potential mechanisms of activation, we have solved a structure of human
HNF-4alpha bound to both fatty acid ligand and a coactivator sequence derived
from SRC-1. The mode of coactivator binding is similar to that observed for other
nuclear receptors, and in this case, all of the molecules adopt the closed active
conformation. We conclude that for HNF-4alpha, coactivator rather than ligand
binding locks the active conformation.

PMID: 14982928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Biochem Soc Trans. 2004 Feb;32(Pt 1):92-6.

LXR (liver X receptor) and HNF-4 (hepatocyte nuclear factor-4): key regulators in
reverse cholesterol transport.

Crestani M(1), De Fabiani E, Caruso D, Mitro N, Gilardi F, Vigil Chacon AB,
Patelli R, Godio C, Galli G.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Farmacologiche, Facoltà di Farmacia, Università degli 
Studi di Milano, via Balzaretti, 9, 20133 Milano, Italia.
Maurizio.Crestani@unimi.it

Cholesterol homoeostasis is the result of the fine tuning between intake and
disposal of this molecule. High levels of cholesterol in the blood are
detrimental as they may lead to excessive accumulation in vessel walls, a
condition predisposing to the development of atherosclerotic lesions. Cholesterol
is removed from the vessel wall and transported to the liver through a process
called reverse cholesterol transport. Nuclear receptors are among the most
important transcription factors regulating genes involved in different steps of
reverse cholesterol transport. Here, we discuss the role of the nuclear receptors
LXR (liver X receptor) and HNF-4alpha (hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha) in
different steps of reverse cholesterol transport. LXR controls the transcription 
of crucial genes in cholesterol efflux from macrophages and its transport to the 
liver, such as ABCA1 (ATP binding cassette A1), CYP27A1 (sterol 27-hydroxylase), 
CLA-1 (scavenger receptor type B1) and apolipoprotein E. Some oxysterols present 
in oxidized low-density lipoproteins and proinflammatory cytokines modulate the
activity of LXR by antagonizing the effect of activators of this receptor, thus
contributing to cholesterol accumulation in macrophages. Bile acid synthesis,
which represents the final step of reverse cholesterol transport, is
transcriptionally regulated by several nuclear receptors at the level of the
liver-specific cytochrome P450 cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1), the
rate-limiting enzyme of this metabolic pathway. Bile acids returning to the liver
through the enterohepatic circulation down-regulate CYP7A1 transcription via the 
bile acid sensors farnesoid X receptor and HNF-4alpha. Based on this evidence,
these nuclear receptors are candidate targets of new drugs for the treatment and 
prevention of atherosclerotic disease.

PMID: 14748721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Mol Genet Metab. 2004 Feb;81(2):112-21.

Comparative genomic analysis of the HNF-4alpha transcription factor gene.

Bagwell AM(1), Bailly A, Mychaleckyj JC, Freedman BI, Bowden DW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Wake Forest University, School of Medicine,
Winston-Salem, NC 27157, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha), the gene for the maturity-onset
diabetes of the young type 1 (MODY1) form of type 2 diabetes mellitus (T2DM), is 
within the T2DM-linked region on chromosome 20q12-q13.1 and consequently, is a
positional candidate gene for T2DM. Mutations in the coding region of HNF-4alpha 
are rare in diabetes affected subjects. Altered regulation of HNF-4alpha gene
expression, controlled by distant enhancer sequences, may contribute to the
development of type 2 diabetes. Comparative sequence analysis was performed
between 13 kb of genomic DNA 5' to the P1 promoter sequences of the human, mouse,
and rat HNF-4alpha coding sequences. Three regions, located at -10.5 kb (295 bp
in length), -6.25 kb (421 bp in length), and -5.36 kb (263 bp in length), have
significant sequence identity between the species. These three regions were
functionally characterized using the chloramphenicol acetyltransferase (CAT)
reporter assay, in which the conserved 5' regions of mouse HNF-4alpha were cloned
in front of the herpes simplex virus thymidine kinase promoter driving
transcription of the CAT gene. A fragment containing the 421 bp conserved region 
significantly increased CAT activity in differentiated rat hepatoma cells
(13.7-+/-1.9-fold control), while only a modest increase in CAT activity was
observed in pancreatic cells (2.5-+/-0.9-fold control; 1.6-+/-0.1-fold control)
and dedifferentiated hepatoma cells (1.7-+/-0.4-fold control). The remaining two 
conserved regions increased CAT activity minimally in pancreatic (1.1-+/-0.1-fold
control to 1.9-+/-0.1-fold control) and hepatic (1.6-+/-0.5-fold control to
2.3-+/-0.4-fold control) cell lines. Denaturing high-performance liquid
chromatography (DHPLC) was used to search for sequence variants in DNA from 259
T2DM individuals. Two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were identified,
both of which increased CAT activity in the insulinoma cell lines in the CAT
reporter assay (1.4-fold increase over wild-type; 1.7-fold increase over
wild-type). These results suggest that comparative sequence analysis can
efficiently identify regulatory elements and that sequence variants in regulatory
elements of HNF-4alpha can contribute to altered HNF-4alpha gene expression.

PMID: 14741192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Genes Dev. 2004 Jan 15;18(2):157-69. Epub 2004 Jan 16.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha) 
regulates triglyceride metabolism by activation of the nuclear receptor FXR.

Zhang Y(1), Castellani LW, Sinal CJ, Gonzalez FJ, Edwards PA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California at Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor-gamma coactivator 1alpha (PGC-1alpha) 
has been shown to regulate adaptive thermogenesis and glucose metabolism. Here we
show that PGC-1alpha regulates triglyceride metabolism through both farnesoid X
receptor (FXR)-dependent and -independent pathways. PGC-1alpha increases FXR
activity through two pathways: (1) it increases FXR mRNA levels by coactivation
of PPARgamma and HNF4alpha to enhance FXR gene transcription; and (2) it
interacts with the DNA-binding domain of FXR to enhance the transcription of FXR 
target genes. Ectopic expression of PGC-1alpha in murine primary hepatocytes
reduces triglyceride secretion by a process that is dependent on the presence of 
FXR. Consistent with these in vitro studies, we demonstrate that fasting induces 
hepatic expression of PGC-1alpha and FXR and results in decreased plasma
triglyceride levels in wild-type but not in FXR-null mice. Our data suggest that 
PGC-1alpha plays an important physiological role in maintaining energy
homeostasis during fasting by decreasing triglyceride production/secretion while 
it increases fatty acid beta-oxidation to meet energy needs.

PMCID: PMC324422
PMID: 14729567  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Biol Chem. 2004 Mar 26;279(13):12027-35. Epub 2004 Jan 13.

SREBP-1 interacts with hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha and interferes with
PGC-1 recruitment to suppress hepatic gluconeogenic genes.

Yamamoto T(1), Shimano H, Nakagawa Y, Ide T, Yahagi N, Matsuzaka T, Nakakuki M,
Takahashi A, Suzuki H, Sone H, Toyoshima H, Sato R, Yamada N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Institute of Clinical Medicine, University of
Tsukuba, 1-1-1 Tennodai, Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8575, Japan.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha)/PGC-1 pathway plays a crucial
role in the transcriptional regulation of hepatic gluconeogenic enzymes such as
phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase (PEPCK) and Glc-6-Pase, genes that are
activated at fasting and suppressed in a fed state. SREBP-1c dominates the
nutritional regulation of lipogenic genes inverse to gluconeogenesis. Here we
show the mechanism by which SREBP-1 suppresses expression of gluconeogenic genes.
A series of luciferase reporter assays demonstrated that SREBP-1a and -1c
effectively inhibited the PEPCK promoter activity that was induced by HNF-4alpha.
The HNF-4alpha-binding site in the glucocorticoid-response unit was responsible
for the SREBP-1 inhibition, although SREBP-1 did not bind to the PEPCK promoter
as demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility shift assays. The inhibitory effect
was more potent in the isoform of SREBP-1a than SREBP-1c and was eliminated by
deletion of the amino-terminal transactivation domain of SREBP-1.
Coimmunoprecipitation experiments demonstrated that these two transcription
factors directly interact through the transactivation domain of SREBP-1 and the
ligand binding/AF2 domains of HNF-4alpha. Estimation of coactivator recruitment
using HNF-4alpha-Gal4DBD fusion assay showed that SREBP-1 competitively inhibited
PGC-1 recruitment, a requirement for HNF-4alpha activation. Consistent with these
results, hepatic PEPCK and Glc-6-Pase mRNA levels are suppressed by
overexpression of SREBP-1a and -1c in the transgenic mice. Our data indicate that
SREBP-1 has a novel role as negative regulator of gluconeogenic genes through a
cross-talk with HNF-4alpha interference with PGC-1 recruitment.

PMID: 14722127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Mol Genet Metab. 2003 Dec;80(4):412-8.

Characterization of the human glycerol kinase promoter: identification of a
functional HNF-4alpha binding site and evidence for transcriptional activation.

Stepanian SV(1), Huyn ST, McCabe ER, Dipple KM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA and Mattel
Children's Hospital at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA, USA.

Glycerol kinase (GK) is an enzyme at the interface of carbohydrate and fat
metabolism. Mutations in the GK gene result in a rare inborn error of metabolism,
GK deficiency (GKD), and at least one of these mutations (N288D) is associated
with insulin resistance and diabetes mellitus. In an attempt to identify
potential modifiers of the GKD phenotype, and to elucidate better the
relationship between GKD and diabetes mellitus, we investigated the GK promoter. 
We examined the GK promoter using in silico methods, transient transfections of
GK promoter-luciferase constructs in HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cells, and
gel shift assays using liver nuclear extracts. We determined that the first 100
bp of the GK 5(') upstream region was sufficient for basal levels of
transcription and that there was a functional HNF-4alpha binding site in the
first 500 bp of the 5(') upstream region that was important for increased levels 
of GK expression in vitro. The involvement of both GK and HNF-4alpha in the
etiology of diabetes mellitus is intriguing, and we speculate that HNF-4alpha
represents a potential modifier of the GKD phenotype.

PMID: 14654354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Nucleic Acids Res. 2003 Nov 15;31(22):6640-50.

Critical role of charged residues in helix 7 of the ligand binding domain in
Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4alpha dimerisation and transcriptional activity.

Eeckhoute J(1), Oxombre B, Formstecher P, Lefebvre P, Laine B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U459, Faculté de Médecine Henri Warembourg, 1 Place de Verdun, F-59045 
Lille Cedex, France.

Hepatocyte Nuclear Factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha, NR2A1) is central to hepatocyte and 
pancreatic beta-cell functions. Along with retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRalpha), 
HNF4alpha belongs to the nuclear receptor subfamily 2 (NR2), characterised by a
conserved arginyl residue and a glutamate residue insert in helix 7 (H7) of the
ligand binding domain (LBD). Crystallographic studies indicate that R348 and E352
residues in RXRalpha H7 are involved in charge-driven interactions that improve
dimerisation. Consistent with these findings, we showed that removing the charge 
of the corresponding residues in HNF4alpha H7, R258 and E262, impaired
dimerisation in solution. Moreover, our results provide a new concept according
to which helices of the HNF4alpha LBD dimerisation interface contribute
differently to dimerisation required for DNA binding; unlike H9 and H10, H7 is
not involved in DNA binding. Substitutions of E262 decreased the repression of
HNF4alpha transcriptional activity by a dominant-negative HNF4alpha mutant,
highlighting the importance of this residue for dimerisation in the cell context.
The E262 insert is crucial for HNF4alpha function since its deletion abolished
HNF4alpha transcriptional activity and coactivator recruitment. The glutamate
residue insert and the conserved arginyl residue in H7 most probably represent a 
signature of the NR2 subfamily of nuclear receptors.

PMCID: PMC275546
PMID: 14602925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 23;279(4):2480-9. Epub 2003 Oct 28.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha is a central regulator of bile acid conjugation.

Inoue Y(1), Yu AM, Inoue J, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Center for Cancer Research, NCI, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) has an important role in regulating 
the expression of liver-specific genes. Because bile acids are produced from
cholesterol in liver and many enzymes involved in their biosynthesis are
preferentially expressed in liver, the role of HNF4alpha in the regulation of
bile acid production was examined. In mice, unconjugated bile acids are
conjugated with taurine by the liver-specific enzymes, bile acid-CoA ligase and
bile acid-CoA:amino acid N-acyltransferase (BAT). Mice lacking hepatic HNF4alpha 
expression exhibited markedly decreased expression of the very long chain
acyl-CoA synthase-related gene (VLACSR), a mouse candidate for bile acid-CoA
ligase, and BAT. This was associated with markedly elevated levels of
unconjugated and glycine-conjugated bile acids in gallbladder. HNF4alpha was
found to bind directly to the mouse VLACSR and BAT gene promoters, and the
promoter activities were dependent on HNF4alpha-binding sites and HNF4alpha
expression. In conclusion, HNF4alpha plays a central role in bile acid
conjugation by direct regulation of VLACSR and BAT in vivo.

PMID: 14583614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Lab Invest. 2003 Oct;83(10):1395-402.

A crucial role of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 expression in the differentiation
of human ductular hepatocytes.

Hakoda T(1), Yamamoto K, Terada R, Okano N, Shimada N, Suzuki T, Mizuno M,
Shiratori Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Medical Science, Okayama University Graduate School
of Medicine and Dentistry, Okayama, Japan.

Ductular structures are suggested to be bipotential progenitor cells that may
differentiate into hepatocytes or biliary epithelial cells (BEC). To better
understand the differentiation process, we studied the expression of hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF) in ductular structures. Matured hepatocytes in normal liver 
expressed HNF-1, HNF-4alpha, HNF-3beta, and C/EBPalpha in the nucleus. Normal BEC
expressed HNF-1 but did not express HNF-4alpha, suggesting an important role of
HNF-4alpha in maintaining the phenotype of matured hepatocytes. Ductular
structures were classified into ductular cells and ductular hepatocytes. Ductular
cells showed glandular or bile duct-like appearance and strongly expressed
cytokeratin-7. Ductular hepatocytes showed features between BEC and hepatocytes
and heterogeneously expressed cytokeratin-7. Both ductular cells and ductular
hepatocytes expressed HNF-4alpha, but the nuclear localization of HNF-4alpha was 
more prominent in ductular hepatocytes. The expression of HNF-4alpha mRNA in
ductular hepatocytes was demonstrated at the single cell level by laser capture
microdissection. Regenerative hepatocytes strongly expressed all HNFs in the
nucleus, whereas residual hepatocytes in massive necrosis showed low or
cytoplasmic expression. These results suggest that HNF-4alpha plays an important 
role in the differentiation and maintenance of the matured hepatocyte phenotype
and that nuclear localization of HNFs is implicated in the accomplishment of
their function.

PMID: 14563941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2003 Dec;307(3):1205-12. Epub 2003 Oct 13.

Rapid transcriptional suppression of rat cytochrome P450 genes by endotoxin
treatment and its inhibition by curcumin.

Cheng PY(1), Wang M, Morgan ET.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Emory University, Atlanta, GA 30322, USA.

Down-regulation of constitutive hepatic cytochrome P450 (P450) mRNAs by bacterial
endotoxin (lipopolysaccharide, LPS) or other inflammatory stimuli has been
documented extensively, but the contribution of transcriptional suppression to
this effect is poorly understood. Here, we demonstrate that the rates of
transcription of the CYP2C11, CYP3A2, and CYP2E1 genes are reduced to 20, 30, and
10% of control levels, respectively, in rat liver within 1 to 2 h of injection of
LPS (1 mg/kg). The magnitude and rapidity of these effects indicate that
transcriptional suppression is a primary reason for the decline in P450 mRNAs.
Injection of curcumin significantly inhibited the rapid transcriptional
suppression of CYP2E1, and blocked that of CYP3A2. These effects seemed to be
independent of inhibition of nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation by
curcumin, because induction of known NF-kappaB-regulated genes was not
attenuated. One hour after LPS injection, the DNA-binding activities of
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1alpha, HNF3beta, and HNF4alpha were reduced to
73, 72, and 53%, respectively, of control values. The nuclear abundances of Sp1, 
liver-enriched transcriptional inhibitory protein (LIP), HNF1alpha, and HNF3beta 
were unchanged, whereas the abundance of HNF4alpha was reduced to 87% of control 
levels. We conclude that changes in Sp1 or LIP do not contribute significantly to
the early suppression of P450 transcription in the acute phase rat liver.
Although changes in DNA-binding activities of HNF1alpha, HNF3beta, and HNF4alpha 
are too small individually to explain the observed changes in P450 transcription,
the role of each factor in concert with other factors remains to be determined.

PMID: 14557382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. PLoS Biol. 2003 Oct;1(1):E20. Epub 2003 Oct 13.

Candidate gene association study in type 2 diabetes indicates a role for genes
involved in beta-cell function as well as insulin action.

Barroso I(1), Luan J, Middelberg RP, Harding AH, Franks PW, Jakes RW, Clayton D, 
Schafer AJ, O'Rahilly S, Wareham NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Incyte, Palo Alto, California, USA. ib1@sanger.ac.uk

Erratum in
    PLoS Biol. 2003 Dec;1(3):445.

Type 2 diabetes is an increasingly common, serious metabolic disorder with a
substantial inherited component. It is characterised by defects in both insulin
secretion and action. Progress in identification of specific genetic variants
predisposing to the disease has been limited. To complement ongoing positional
cloning efforts, we have undertaken a large-scale candidate gene association
study. We examined 152 SNPs in 71 candidate genes for association with diabetes
status and related phenotypes in 2,134 Caucasians in a case-control study and an 
independent quantitative trait (QT) cohort in the United Kingdom. Polymorphisms
in five of 15 genes (33%) encoding molecules known to primarily influence
pancreatic beta-cell function-ABCC8 (sulphonylurea receptor), KCNJ11 (KIR6.2),
SLC2A2 (GLUT2), HNF4A (HNF4alpha), and INS (insulin)-significantly altered
disease risk, and in three genes, the risk allele, haplotype, or both had a
biologically consistent effect on a relevant physiological trait in the QT study.
We examined 35 genes predicted to have their major influence on insulin action,
and three (9%)-INSR, PIK3R1, and SOS1-showed significant associations with
diabetes. These results confirm the genetic complexity of Type 2 diabetes and
provide evidence that common variants in genes influencing pancreatic beta-cell
function may make a significant contribution to the inherited component of this
disease. This study additionally demonstrates that the systematic examination of 
panels of biological candidate genes in large, well-characterised populations can
be an effective complement to positional cloning approaches. The absence of large
single-gene effects and the detection of multiple small effects accentuate the
need for the study of larger populations in order to reliably identify the size
of effect we now expect for complex diseases.

PMCID: PMC212698
PMID: 14551916  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Gene. 2003 Aug 14;313:71-82.

Regulation of human sterol 27-hydroxylase gene (CYP27A1) by bile acids and
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha).

Chen W(1), Chiang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pathology, Northeastern Ohio
Universities College of Medicine, Rootstown, OH 44272, USA.

Mitochondrial sterol 27-hydroxylase (CYP27A1) catalyses sterol side-chain
oxidation of bile acid synthesis from cholesterol, and the first reaction of the 
acidic bile acid biosynthetic pathway. Hydrophobic bile acids suppress human
CYP27A1 gene reporter activity when assayed in human hepatocellular blastoma
HepG2 cells. Bile acids also inhibit CYP27A1 reporter activity in human embryonic
kidney 293 cells. A putative bile acid response element (BARE) was mapped to a
region downstream of nt -147 of the human CYP27A1 gene, within which a binding
site for a liver-specific nuclear receptor, HNF4alpha, is identified. HNF4alpha
strongly stimulates CYP27A1 gene transcription and mutation of its binding site
markedly reduced promoter activity. Results suggest that human CYP27A1 gene
transcription is suppressed by bile acids and HNF4alpha plays a pivotal role in
transcriptional regulation of this gene.

PMID: 12957378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Gastroenterology. 2003 Aug;125(2):544-55.

Farnesoid X receptor agonists suppress hepatic apolipoprotein CIII expression.

Claudel T(1), Inoue Y, Barbier O, Duran-Sandoval D, Kosykh V, Fruchart J,
Fruchart JC, Gonzalez FJ, Staels B.

Author information: 
(1)UR545 INSERM, Département d'Athérosclérose, Institut Pasteur de Lille, Lille, 
France.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Increased serum triglyceride levels constitute a risk factor
for coronary heart disease. Apolipoprotein CIII (Apo CIII) is a determinant of
serum triglyceride metabolism. In this study, we investigated whether activators 
of the nuclear farnesoid X receptor (FXR) modulate Apo CIII gene expression.
METHODS: The influence of bile acids and synthetic FXR activators on Apo CIII and
triglyceride metabolism was studied in vivo by using FXR wild-type and
FXR-deficient mice and in vitro by using human primary hepatocytes and HepG2
cells.
RESULTS: In mice, treatment with the FXR agonist taurocholic acid strongly
decreased serum triglyceride levels, an effect associated with reduced Apo CIII
serum and liver messenger RNA levels. By contrast, no change was observed in
FXR-deficient mice. Incubation of human primary hepatocytes and HepG2 cells with 
bile acids or the nonsteroidal synthetic FXR agonist GW4064 resulted in a
dose-dependent down-regulation of Apo CIII gene expression. Promoter transfection
experiments and mutation analysis showed that bile acid-activated FXR decrease
human Apo CIII promoter activity via a negative FXR response element located in
the I(4) footprint between nucleotides -739 and -704. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments showed that bile acid treatment led to binding of
FXR/retinoid X receptor heterodimers to and displacement of HNF4alpha from this
site. Bile acid treatment still repressed liver Apo CIII gene expression in
hepatic HNF4alpha-deficient mice, suggesting an active rather than a competitive 
mechanism of Apo CIII repression by the FXR.
CONCLUSIONS: We identified bile acid and synthetic activators of the nuclear FXR 
as negative regulators of Apo CIII expression, an effect that may contribute to
the triglyceride-decreasing action of FXR agonists.

PMID: 12891557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Nat Genet. 2003 Jul;34(3):292-6.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha controls the development of a hepatic epithelium
and liver morphogenesis.

Parviz F(1), Matullo C, Garrison WD, Savatski L, Adamson JW, Ning G, Kaestner KH,
Rossi JM, Zaret KS, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA.

Although advances have been made in understanding cell differentiation, only
rudimentary knowledge exists concerning how differentiated cells form tissues and
organs. We studied liver organogenesis because the cell and tissue architecture
of this organ is well defined. Approximately 60% of the adult liver consists of
hepatocytes that are arranged as single-cell anastomosing plates extending from
the portal region of the liver lobule toward the central vein. The basal surface 
of the hepatocytes is separated from adjacent sinusoidal endothelial cells by the
space of Disse, where the exchange of substances between serum and hepatocytes
takes place. The hepatocyte's apical surface forms bile canaliculi that transport
bile to the hepatic ducts. Proper liver architecture is crucial for hepatic
function and is commonly disrupted in disease states, including cirrhosis and
hepatitis. Here we report that hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (Hnf4alpha) is
essential for morphological and functional differentiation of hepatocytes,
accumulation of hepatic glycogen stores and generation of a hepatic epithelium.
We show that Hnf4alpha is a dominant regulator of the epithelial phenotype
because its ectopic expression in fibroblasts induces a mesenchymal-to-epithelial
transition. Most importantly, the morphogenetic parameters controlled by
Hnf4alpha in hepatocytes are essential for normal liver architecture, including
the organization of the sinusoidal endothelium.

PMID: 12808453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Hepatology. 2003 Jun;37(6):1375-84.

Role of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha in control of the pregnane X
receptor during fetal liver development.

Kamiya A(1), Inoue Y, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Hepatology. 2003 Jun;37(6):1249-53.

The fetal liver, the major site of hematopoiesis during embryonic development,
acquires additional functions near birth. Among the important liver functions is 
the response to xenobiotic exposure due to expression of several cytochromes P450
(CYP) and drug efflux transporters. Expression of these genes is regulated by
nuclear receptors such as the pregnane X receptor (PXR). In this study,
regulation of xenobiotic responses during fetal liver development was analyzed
using a fetal hepatocyte primary culture system derived from embryonic day 15
(E15) livers. Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4alpha regulates the expression of 
many genes preferentially in the liver. Expression of several xenobiotic response
genes as well as HNF4alpha was increased in fetal hepatocytes stimulated by the
hepatic maturation factors oncostatin M (OSM) and Matrigel. To determine the
contribution of HNF4alpha to xenobiotic responses in the fetal liver, fetal
hepatocytes containing floxed HNF4alpha alleles were cultured and the HNF4alpha
gene was inactivated by infection with an adenovirus containing the Cre gene.
Expression of CYP3A11 and PXR was suppressed by inactivation of HNF4alpha. An
HNF4alpha binding site was characterized in the PXR promoter and found to be
required for activation of the PXR promoter in fetal hepatocytes. In conclusion, 
HNF4alpha is the key transcription factor regulating responses to xenobiotics
through activation of the PXR gene during fetal liver development.

PMID: 12774017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Jun 6;305(3):557-65.

Hepatic scavenger receptor class B, type I is stimulated by peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha.

Malerød L(1), Sporstøl M, Juvet LK, Mousavi A, Gjøen T, Berg T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Cell Biology, Institute of Biology, University of Oslo, 
P.O. Box 1050, Blindern, Oslo 0316, Norway.

Excessive cellular cholesterol is transported to the liver by a pathway called
'reverse cholesterol transport.' Scavenger receptor class B, type I (SR-BI)
mediates cholesterol uptake in the liver. Polyunsaturated fatty acids, known to
activate peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor (PPAR), have been reported to
increase hepatic cholesterol uptake. We found in the present study that PPARgamma
induces expression of SR-BI in rat hepatocytes, liver endothelial cells, and
Kupffer cells. In contrast, PPARalpha increased SR-BI levels only in hepatocytes 
and liver endothelial cells. PPARgamma/RXR binds to a response element between
-459 and -472 bp in the human SR-BI promoter. Furthermore, hepatocyte nuclear
factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) was found to enhance PPARgamma-mediated SR-BI
transcription. Thiazolidinedione (TZD)-activated PPARgamma/RXR increased hepatic 
SR-BI levels, which may lead to increased hepatic cholesterol uptake and less
accumulation of lipids in peripheral tissues. The present results are in
agreement with previous reports, indicating that specific PPARgamma-agonists
(such as TZDs) protect against atherosclerosis.

PMID: 12763030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Diabetes. 2003 May;52(5):1276-9.

Genetic variation in the small heterodimer partner gene and young-onset type 2
diabetes, obesity, and birth weight in U.K. subjects.

Mitchell SM(1), Weedon MN, Owen KR, Shields B, Wilkins-Wall B, Walker M, McCarthy
MI, Frayling TM, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Genetics, Peninsula Medical School, Barrack Road, Exeter 
EX2 5AX, U.K.

The orphan receptor small heterodimer partner (SHP, NR0B2) modulates the
transcription activity of the MODY1 gene HNF4a. Mutations in SHP were found in 7%
of Japanese obese young-onset type 2 diabetic patients and were associated with
moderate obesity and increased birth weight. We investigated SHP in 1927 U.K.
subjects, examining relationships with type 2 diabetes, obesity, and birth
weight. Sequencing of the coding region of SHP in 122 obese, young-onset type 2
diabetic patients detected the polymorphism G171A. The polymorphism was not
associated with diabetes in case control or familial association studies. The A
allele (frequency 0.07) was not associated with obesity in type 2 diabetic
subjects (n = 348), their parents (n = 272), or young nondiabetic adults (n =
925). However, the rare (<1%) AA homozygotes had a raised BMI in each cohort;
this was significant when all cohorts were combined (Z score = 0.67 AA vs. -0.05 
G/x, P = 0.02). There was no association with corrected birth weight in 382
normal babies, but the only AA baby was 4,069 g. Our study suggests that genetic 
variation in SHP is unlikely to be common in the predisposition to diabetes,
obesity, or increased birth weight in U.K. Caucasians.

PMID: 12716764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Pathology. 2003 Feb;35(1):75-8.

Further evidence of hepatic transdifferentiation in hepatoid adenocarcinomas of
the stomach: quantitative analysis of mRNA for albumin and hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4alpha.

Yano T(1), Kishimoto T, Tomaru U, Kawarada Y, Kato H, Yoshiki T, Ishikura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.

AIMS: To assess the production of a liver-specific protein, albumin, and of a
master transcriptional factor, hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha, in
hepatoid adenocarcinoma tissue.
METHODS: Standard and quantitative RT-PCR, using five cases of hepatoid and three
cases of non-hepatoid gastric adenocarcinoma.
RESULTS: Hepatoid adenocarcinomas expressed similarly large amounts of albumin
mRNA as those expressed in hepatocellular carcinoma and normal liver tissues. The
observed amounts were several hundred times more than those in non-hepatoid
adenocarcinoma and normal stomach tissues. HNF-4alpha mRNA was expressed in all
stomach samples examined, and the levels of expression did not quantitatively
differ between hepatoid and non-hepatoid adenocarcinomas of the stomach.
CONCLUSIONS: These results provide further support of a relationship between
hepatic transdifferentiation in hepatoid adenocarcinomas and albumin mRNA
expression. Furthermore, transdifferentiation to the hepatocytic phenotype in
hepatoid adenocarcinoma tissue was not directly associated with HNF-4alpha
expression, thus suggesting that transdifferentiation proceeds by a complicated
mechanism.

PMID: 12701690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. J Biol Chem. 2003 Jun 20;278(25):22578-85. Epub 2003 Apr 15.

Rescue of MODY-1 by agonist ligands of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha.

Hertz R(1), Ben-Haim N, Petrescu AD, Kalderon B, Berman I, Eldad N, Schroeder F, 
Bar-Tana J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutrition and Metabolism, Hebrew University Medical
School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Missense mutations of the ligand binding domain of hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-4alpha result in maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY)-1. We show
here that MODY-1 as well as Gln-185 missense mutants of the ligand binding domain
of HNF-4alpha fail to transactivate transcription of HNF-4alpha-responsive genes.
Defective transactivation by these mutants is accounted for by their reduced
binding affinities for fatty acyl agonist ligands of HNF-4alpha. These mutants
may be rescued by exogenous fatty acid agonist ligands of HNF-4alpha, yielding
transcriptional activities in the wild type range. The effect of added ligands is
synergistic with that of transcriptional coactivators of HNF-4alpha. These
findings may indicate the means for treating selected MODY-1 subjects with
HNF-4alpha agonist nutrients and drugs.

PMID: 12697772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Endocrinology. 2003 May;144(5):1686-94.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha isoforms originated from the P1 promoter are
expressed in human pancreatic beta-cells and exhibit stronger transcriptional
potentials than P2 promoter-driven isoforms.

Eeckhoute J(1), Moerman E, Bouckenooghe T, Lukoviak B, Pattou F, Formstecher P,
Kerr-Conte J, Vandewalle B, Laine B.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale Unit 459, Faculté H.
Warembourg, Lille, France.

The nuclear receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4 alpha is involved in a
transcriptional network and plays an important role in pancreatic beta-cells.
Mutations in the HNF4 alpha gene are correlated with maturity-onset diabetes of
the young 1. HNF4 alpha isoforms result from both alternative splicing and
alternate usage of promoters P1 and P2. It has recently been reported that HNF4
alpha transcription is driven almost exclusively by the P2 promoter in pancreatic
islets. We observed that transcripts from both P1 and P2 promoters were expressed
in human pancreatic beta-cells and in the pancreatic beta-cell lines RIN m5F and 
HIT-T15. Expression of HNF4 alpha proteins originating from the P1 promoter was
confirmed by immunodetection. Due to the presence of the activation function
module AF-1, HNF4 alpha isoforms originating from the P1 promoter exhibit
stronger transcriptional activities and recruit coactivators more efficiently
than isoforms driven by the P2 promoter. Conversely, activities of isoforms
produced by both promoters were similarly repressed by the corepressor small
heterodimer partner. These behaviors were observed on the promoter of HNF1 alpha 
that is required for beta-cell function. Our results highlight that expression of
P1 promoter-driven isoforms is important in the control of pancreatic beta-cell
function.

PMID: 12697672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Diabetologia. 2003 Apr;46(4):567-73. Epub 2003 Mar 25.

T130I mutation in HNF-4alpha gene is a loss-of-function mutation in hepatocytes
and is associated with late-onset Type 2 diabetes mellitus in Japanese subjects.

Zhu Q(1), Yamagata K, Miura A, Shihara N, Horikawa Y, Takeda J, Miyagawa J,
Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, B5, Osaka University, 2-2 Yamada-oka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha gene cause a
form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY1). The T130I mutation is a
rare missense mutation, which affects a conserved amino acid in a DNA binding
domain. This mutation can be found in the general population, so this variant
alone does not cause MODY. However, its significance in the development of
late-onset Type 2 diabetes is not known.
METHODS: We screened 423 unrelated Japanese patients with late-onset Type 2
diabetes and 354 unrelated non-diabetic control subjects for the T130I mutation
in the HNF-4alpha gene. The transactivation ability of T130I-HNF-4alpha was
assessed using reporter gene assay.
RESULTS: The frequency of the T130I mutation was higher in Type 2 diabetic
patients ( p=0.015, odds ratio 4.3, 95%CI 1.24-14.98) than control subjects. The 
serum HDL-cholesterol concentration was lower in Type 2 diabetic patients with
the T130I mutation compared with those without this mutation ( p=0.006). Reporter
gene analysis showed that T130I-HNF-4alpha transcriptional activity was not
impaired compared with wild-type HNF-4alpha in Hela and MIN6 cells, but it was
reduced in HepG2 and primary cultured mouse hepatocytes (27-78% of wild type,
p<0.05).
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Our findings suggest that T130I-HNF-4alpha is a
loss-of-function mutation in hepatocytes and that this mutation is associated
with late-onset Type 2 diabetes in Japanese subjects. The T130I mutation in the
HNF-4alpha gene might be involved in the development of Type 2 diabetes in the
Japanese population.

PMID: 12669197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2003 Apr 1;100(7):4012-7. Epub 2003 Mar 21.

Regulation of hepatic fasting response by PPARgamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1):
requirement for hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha in gluconeogenesis.

Rhee J(1), Inoue Y, Yoon JC, Puigserver P, Fan M, Gonzalez FJ, Spiegelman BM.

Author information: 
(1)Dana Farber Cancer Institute and Department of Cell Biology, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The liver plays several critical roles in the metabolic adaptation to fasting. We
have shown previously that the transcriptional coactivator peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma coactivator-1alpha (PGC-1alpha) is induced 
in fasted or diabetic liver and activates the entire program of gluconeogenesis. 
PGC-1alpha interacts with several nuclear receptors known to bind gluconeogenic
promoters including the glucocorticoid receptor, hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha
(HNF4alpha), and the peroxisome proliferator-activated receptors. However, the
genetic requirement for any of these interactions has not been determined. Using 
hepatocytes from mice lacking HNF4alpha in the liver, we show here that
PGC-1alpha completely loses its ability to activate key genes of gluconeogenesis 
such as phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and glucose-6-phosphatase when
HNF4alpha is absent. It is also shown that PGC-1alpha can induce genes of
beta-oxidation and ketogenesis in hepatocytes, but these effects do not require
HNF4alpha. Analysis of the glucose-6-phosphatase promoter indicates a key role
for HNF4alpha-binding sites that function robustly only when HNF4alpha is
coactivated by PGC-1alpha. These data illustrate the involvement of PGC-1alpha in
several aspects of the hepatic fasting response and show that HNF4alpha is a
critical component of PGC-1alpha-mediated gluconeogenesis.

PMCID: PMC153039
PMID: 12651943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. FEBS Lett. 2003 Mar 27;539(1-3):19-23.

Effects of interactions of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha isoforms with
coactivators and corepressors are promoter-specific.

Torres-Padilla ME(1), Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, FR3 2364 du CNRS, Département de
Biologie du Développement, Institut Pasteur, 25 Rue du Dr. Roux, 75724 Paris
Cedex 15, France.

The gene encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) possesses two
alternative promoters responsible for developmental and tissue-specific
expression of HNF4alpha1 and HNF4alpha7. The two isoforms possess different
N-termini and exhibit distinct transactivation properties. We show here for the
first time that the effects mediated by HNF4alpha isoforms in concert with three 
different coregulators result in promoter-specific responses. Transcript levels
of silencing mediator for retinoid and thyroid receptors and glucocorticoid
receptor interacting protein-1 in the liver are reduced at birth, a time point
when many genes are strongly activated, suggesting that the effects of
coregulators on HNF4alpha activity in vivo could be determined by the levels of
their expression as well as by the target promoter.

PMID: 12650919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Diabetologia. 2003 Feb;46(2):291-5. Epub 2003 Jan 8.

Genetic epidemiology of MODY in the Czech republic: new mutations in the MODY
genes HNF-4alpha, GCK and HNF-1alpha.

Pruhova S(1), Ek J, Lebl J, Sumnik Z, Saudek F, Andel M, Pedersen O, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, 3rd Faculty of Medicine, Charles University,
Vinohradska 159, 100-81 Prague 10, Czech Republic.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: The aim of this study was to examine the prevalence and nature
of mutations in HNF4alpha/MODY1, GCK/MODY2 and HNF-1alpha/MODY3 genes in Czech
subjects with clinical diagnosis of MODY.
METHODS: We studied 61 unrelated index probands of Czech origin (28 males, 33
females) with a clinical diagnosis of MODY and 202 family members. The mean age
of probands was 22.7+/-12.0 years (range, 6-62) and the mean age at the first
recognition of hyperglycaemia was 14.7+/-6.0 years (range, 1-25). The promotor
and coding regions inclusive intron exon boundaries of the HNF-4alpha, GCK and
HNF-1alpha genes were examined by PCR-dHPLC (HNF-1alpha and GCK) and direct
sequencing.
RESULTS: We identified 20 different mutations in the HNF-4alpha, GCK and
HNF-1alpha in 29 families (48% of all families studied), giving a relative
prevalence of 5% of MODY1, 31% of MODY2 and 11.5% of MODY3 among the Czech
kindred with MODY. Three of 3, 10 of 11 and 1 of 6 of the mutations identified in
HNF-4alpha, GCK and HNF-1alpha respectively, were new.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Of the families 48% carried mutations in the MODY1-3
genes and of the identified mutations 70% were new. In 52% of Czech families with
clinical characteristics of MODY, no mutations were found in the analysed genes. 
This finding shows that the majority of MODY mutations in a central European
population are local and that other MODY genes could be responsible for autosomal
dominant transmission of diabetes mellitus.

PMID: 12627330  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Biol Chem. 2003 May 2;278(18):15541-9. Epub 2003 Feb 19.

Induction of prothrombinase fgl2 by the nucleocapsid protein of virulent mouse
hepatitis virus is dependent on host hepatic nuclear factor-4 alpha.

Ning Q(1), Lakatoo S, Liu M, Yang W, Wang Z, Phillips MJ, Levy GA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infectious Disease, Institute of Immunology, Tongji Hospital,
Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan
430030, China. qning@tjh.tjmu.edu.cn

Fibrinogen-like protein 2/fibroleukin (Fgl2) plays a pivotal role in the
pathogenesis of both experimental and human fulminant hepatic failure. We have
reported recently that the nucleocapsid (N) protein from strains of murine
hepatitis virus (MHV-3, MHV-A59), which cause massive hepatocellular necrosis but
not from strains (MHV-JHM, MHV-2) which do not produce serious liver disease,
induces transcription of fgl2. The purpose of the present study was to
characterize both viral and host factor(s) necessary for viral induced
transcription of fgl2. Mutation of residues Gly-12, Pro-38, Asn-40, Gln-41, and
Asn-42 within domain 1 of the N protein of MHV-A59 to their corresponding
residues found in MHV-2 abrogated fgl2 transcription, whereas mutation of other N
protein domains, including a protein expressed from an internal reading frame (I 
protein), did not affect fgl2 gene transcription. We then examined the -372 to
-306 sequence within the 1.3-kb fgl2 promoter region upstream from the
transcription start site that was previously identified as necessary for N
protein-induced gene transcription. We demonstrated that the -331/-325 HNF4
cis-element and its cognate transcription factor, HNF4alpha, are necessary for
virus-induced fgl2 gene transcription. In uninfected macrophages and macrophages 
infected with MHV-2, an unidentified protein occupies the HNF4 cis-element.
Following stimulation with MHV-A59, it was shown by electrophoretic mobility
shift assay that HNF4alpha binds the HNF4 cis-element in the fgl2 promoter. We
further report the unprecedented presence of HNF4alpha in peritoneal macrophages.
Collectively, the results of this study define both viral and host factors
necessary for induction of fgl2 prothrombinase gene transcription in MHV
infection and may provide an explanation for the hepatotrophic nature of
MHV-induced fulminant hepatic failure.

PMID: 12594208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. J Virol. 2003 Feb;77(4):2489-99.

Distinct modes of regulation of transcription of hepatitis B virus by the nuclear
receptors HNF4alpha and COUP-TF1.

Yu X(1), Mertz JE.

Author information: 
(1)McArdle Laboratory for Cancer Research, University of Wisconsin Medical
School, Madison, WI 53706-1599, USA.

To study the effects of the nuclear receptors (NRs) HNF4alpha and COUP-TF1 on the
life cycle of hepatitis B virus (HBV), the human hepatoma cell line Huh7 was
transiently cotransfected with plasmids containing the HBV genome and encoding
these two NRs. Overexpression of HNF4alpha and COUP-TF1 led to a 9-fold increase 
and a 7- to 10-fold decrease, respectively, in viral DNA synthesis. These two NRs
also exhibited distinct modes of regulation of viral transcription.
Overexpression of HNF4alpha led to a more-than-10-fold increase in synthesis of
the pregenomic RNA but to only a 2- to 3-fold increase in synthesis of the pre-C 
and S RNAs. Moreover, the NR response element within the pre-C promoter,
NRRE(preC,) played the major role in activation of pregenomic RNA synthesis by
HNF4alpha. On the other hand, overexpression of COUP-TF1 led to an over-10-fold
repression of synthesis of both pre-C and pregenomic RNAs mediated through either
NRRE(preC) or NRRE(enhI). HNF4alpha and COUP-TF1 antagonized each other's effects
on synthesis of pregenomic RNA and viral DNA when they were co-overexpressed. A
naturally occurring HBV variant which allows for binding by HNF4alpha but not
COUP-TF1 in its NRRE(preC) exhibited significantly higher levels of synthesis of 
pregenomic RNA and viral DNA than wild-type HBV in coexpression experiments.
Last, deletion analysis revealed that non-NRRE sequences located within both the 
C and pre-S1 regions are also essential for maximum activation of the pregenomic 
promoter by HNF4alpha but not for repression by COUP-TF1. Thus, HNF4alpha and
COUP-TF1 function through different mechanisms to regulate expression of the HBV 
genes.

PMCID: PMC141100
PMID: 12551987  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Nat Med. 2003 Feb;9(2):220-4. Epub 2003 Jan 6.

The orphan nuclear receptor HNF4alpha determines PXR- and CAR-mediated xenobiotic
induction of CYP3A4.

Tirona RG(1), Lee W, Leake BF, Lan LB, Cline CB, Lamba V, Parviz F, Duncan SA,
Inoue Y, Gonzalez FJ, Schuetz EG, Kim RB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Pharmacology, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine,
Nashville, Tennessee, USA.

The drug metabolizing enzyme cytochrome P450 3A4 (CYP3A4) is thought to be
involved in the metabolism of nearly 50% of all the drugs currently prescribed.
Alteration in the activity or expression of this enzyme seems to be a key
predictor of drug responsiveness and toxicity. Currently available studies
indicate that the ligand-activated nuclear receptors pregnane X receptor (PXR;
NR1I2) and constitutive androstane receptor (CAR; NR1I3) regulate CYP3A4
expression. However, in cell-based reporter assays, CYP3A4 promoter activity was 
most pronounced in liver-derived cells and minimal or modest in non-hepatic
cells, indicating that a liver-specific factor is required for physiological
transcriptional response. Here we show that the orphan nuclear receptor
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF4alpha; HNF4A) is critically involved in the
PXR- and CAR-mediated transcriptional activation of CYP3A4. We identified a
specific cis-acting element in the CYP3A4 gene enhancer that confers HNF4alpha
binding and thereby permits PXR- and CAR-mediated gene activation. Fetal mice
with conditional deletion of Hnf4alpha had reduced or absent expression of CYP3A.
Furthermore, adult mice with conditional hepatic deletion of Hnf4alpha had
reduced basal and inducible expression of CYP3A. These data identify HNF4alpha as
an important regulator of coordinate nuclear-receptor-mediated response to
xenobiotics.

PMID: 12514743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Mol Cell. 2002 Dec;10(6):1467-77.

Dynamics of enhancer-promoter communication during differentiation-induced gene
activation.

Hatzis P(1), Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology Hellas, 1527 Vassilika Vouton, 711 10 Herakleion, Crete, Greece.

We analyzed the order of recruitment of factors to the HNF-4alpha regulatory
regions upon the initial activation of the gene during enterocyte
differentiation. An initially independent assembly of regulatory complexes at the
proximal promoter and the upstream enhancer regions was followed by the tracking 
of the entire DNA-protein complex formed on the enhancer along the intervening
DNA until it encountered the proximal promoter. This movement correlated with a
unidirectional spreading of histone hyperacetylation. Transcription initiation
coincided with the formation of a stable enhancer-promoter complex and remodeling
of the nucleosome situated at the transcription start site. The results provide
experimental evidence for the involvement of a dynamic process culminating in
enhancer-promoter communication during long-distance gene activation.

PMID: 12504020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Diabetes. 2002 Dec;51 Suppl 3:S308-15.

Searching for type 2 diabetes genes on chromosome 20.

Permutt MA(1), Wasson J, Love-Gregory L, Ma J, Skolnick G, Suarez B, Lin J,
Glaser B.

Author information: 
(1)Washington University School of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes 
and Metabolism, St. Louis, Missouri, USA. apermutt@im.wustl.edu

Genome scans in families with type 2 diabetes identified a putative locus on
chromosome 20q. For this study, linkage disequilibrium mapping was used in an
effort to narrow a 7.3-Mb region in an Ashkenazi type 2 diabetic population. The 
region encompassed a 1-logarithm of odds (LOD) interval around the microsatellite
marker D20S107, which gave a LOD score of >3 in linkage analysis of a combined
Caucasian population. This 7.3-Mb region contained 25 known and 99 predicted
genes. Predicted single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) were chosen from public
databases and validated. Two SNPs were unique to the Ashkenazi. Here, 91 SNPs
with a minor allele frequency of >or=10% were genotyped in pooled DNA from 150
case subjects and 150 control subjects of Ashkenazi Jewish descent. The SNP
association study showed that SNP rs2664537 in the TIX1 gene had a significant P 
value of 0.035, but the finding did not replicate in an additional case pool. In 
addition, HNF4a and Mybl2 were screened for mutations and new polymorphisms. No
mutations were identified, and a new nonsynonymous SNP (R687C in exon 14 of
Mybl2) was found. The limits to this type of association study are discussed.

PMID: 12475768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. Intern Med. 2002 Oct;41(10):848-52.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young resulting from a novel mutation in the
HNF-4alpha gene.

Hara K(1), Noda M, Waki H, Tobe K, Yamauchi T, Kadowaki H, Satou H, Tsukamoto K, 
Nagamatsu S, Yamagata K, Matsuzawa Y, Akanuma Y, Kimura S, Kadowaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo.

A 52-year-old woman with early-onset diabetes mellitus, severe diabetic
retinopathy, and a family history of a dominant inheritance pattern was referred 
to our hospital. Direct sequencing revealed a novel mutation in the HNF-4alpha
gene (R244Q). The position of the mutation in the amino-acid sequence of the gene
is well conserved among species and transcriptional activity of the mutant gene
was significantly reduced. Therefore, a diagnosis of maturity-onset diabetes of
the young (MODY)-1 was made. Genetic testing enabled early diagnosis of diabetes 
in the patient's 20-year-old daughter, which we consider to be important for the 
prevention of diabetic complications.

PMID: 12413008  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Bioinformatics. 2002;18 Suppl 2:S100-9.

Identifying transcription factor binding sites through Markov chain optimization.

Ellrott K(1), Yang C, Sladek FM, Jiang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Computer Science, University of California, Riverside, 92521,
USA.

Even though every cell in an organism contains the same genetic material, each
cell does not express the same cohort of genes. Therefore, one of the major
problems facing genomic research today is to determine not only which genes are
differentially expressed and under what conditions, but also how the expression
of those genes is regulated. The first step in determining differential gene
expression is the binding of sequence-specific DNA binding proteins (i.e.
transcription factors) to regulatory regions of the genes (i.e. promoters and
enhancers). An important aspect to understanding how a given transcription factor
functions is to know the entire gamut of binding sites and subsequently potential
target genes that the factor may bind/regulate. In this study, we have developed 
a computer algorithm to scan genomic databases for transcription factor binding
sites, based on a novel Markov chain optimization method, and used it to scan the
human genome for sites that bind to hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha
(HNF4alpha). A list of 71 known HNF4alpha binding sites from the literature were 
used to train our Markov chain model. By looking at the window of 600 nucleotides
around the transcription start site of each confirmed gene on the human genome,
we identified 849 sites with varying binding potential and experimentally tested 
109 of those sites for binding to HNF4alpha. Our results show that the program
was very successful in identifying 77 new HNF4alpha binding sites with varying
binding affinities (i.e. a 71% success rate). Therefore, this computational
method for searching genomic databases for potential transcription factor binding
sites is a powerful tool for investigating mechanisms of differential gene
regulation.

PMID: 12385991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Mol Genet Metab. 2002 Sep-Oct;77(1-2):35-43.

The role of transcription factors in maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Mitchell SM(1), Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, University of Exeter, Barrack
Road, EX2 5AX, Exeter, UK. s.m.s.mitchell@exeter.ac.uk

The study of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), an autosomal dominant
form of early-onset diabetes mellitus characterised by defective insulin
secretion has been extremely successful in two ways. Firstly it has enabled
definitive diagnosis for patients. This allows more accurate prediction of
disease and treatment requirements. Secondly it has facilitated an increased
understanding of the genes and pathways that are crucial for normal beta-cell
function. Five of the six MODY genes, TCF1 (encoding HNF-1alpha), TCF2 (encoding 
HNF-1beta) HNF4A, insulin promoter factor (IPF)1, and NEUROD1, are transcription 
factors that operate in a complex network of gene regulation. Several genes have 
been shown to be regulated by the MODY transcription factors in a beta-cell
specific manner. This includes the co-regulation of HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha by 
each other. The exact mechanism of how mutations in these transcription factors
result in diabetes in humans remains unknown. However, current opinion favours
pleiotropic adverse effects on many genes; extensive in vitro and in vivo studies
of these genes has highlighted their importance in both glucose sensing-insulin
secretion coupling and maintaining the fully differentiated beta-cell phenotype.

PMID: 12359128  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Hepatology. 2002 Oct;36(4 Pt 1):794-804.

Inducible differentiation and morphogenesis of bipotential liver cell lines from 
wild-type mouse embryos.

Strick-Marchand H(1), Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, FRE 2364 du CNRS, Institut Pasteur, 
Paris, France.

This work shows that hepatic cell lines reproducibly can be derived from E14
embryos of many mouse inbred strains. These bipotential mouse embryonic liver
(BMEL) cell lines present a mixed morphology, containing both epithelial and
palmate-like cells, and an uncoupled phenotype, expressing hepatocyte
transcription factors (HNF1alpha, HNF4alpha, GATA4) but not functions
(apolipoproteins, albumin). BMEL cells are bipotential: under inducing conditions
they express hepatocyte and bile duct functions. In addition, they can undergo
morphogenesis in Matrigel culture to form bile duct units. When returned to basal
culture conditions, the differentiated cells revert, within a few days, to an
undifferentiated state. The ensemble of markers expressed by BMEL cells implies
that they originate from hepatoblasts, the endodermal precursors of the liver. In
conclusion, the establishment of a simple and reproducible method to isolate from
any mouse embryo bipotential hepatic cell lines that exhibit the properties of
transit stem cells provides a novel paradigm for investigation of hepatic cell
lineage relationships.

PMID: 12297826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. J Clin Invest. 2002 Sep;110(6):827-33.

Genetic evidence that HNF-1alpha-dependent transcriptional control of HNF-4alpha 
is essential for human pancreatic beta cell function.

Hansen SK(1), Párrizas M, Jensen ML, Pruhova S, Ek J, Boj SF, Johansen A, Maestro
MA, Rivera F, Eiberg H, Andel M, Lebl J, Pedersen O, Ferrer J, Hansen T.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark.
toha@dadlnet.dk

Mutations in the genes encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha) and
HNF-1alpha impair insulin secretion and cause maturity onset diabetes of the
young (MODY). HNF-4alpha is known to be an essential positive regulator of
HNF-1alpha. More recent data demonstrates that HNF-4alpha expression is dependent
on HNF-1alpha in mouse pancreatic islets and exocrine cells. This effect is
mediated by binding of HNF-1alpha to a tissue-specific promoter (P2) located 45.6
kb upstream from the previously characterized Hnf4alpha promoter (P1). Here we
report that the expression of HNF-4alpha in human islets and exocrine cells is
primarily mediated by the P2 promoter. Furthermore, we describe a G --> A
mutation in a conserved nucleotide position of the HNF-1alpha binding site of the
P2 promoter, which cosegregates with MODY. The mutation results in decreased
affinity for HNF-1alpha, and consequently in reduced HNF-1alpha-dependent
activation. These findings provide genetic evidence that HNF-1alpha serves as an 
upstream regulator of HNF-4alpha and interacts directly with the P2 promoter in
human pancreatic cells. Furthermore, they indicate that this regulation is
essential to maintain normal pancreatic function.

PMCID: PMC151122
PMID: 12235114  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. Structure. 2002 Sep;10(9):1225-34.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 is a transcription factor that constitutively binds
fatty acids.

Wisely GB(1), Miller AB, Davis RG, Thornquest AD Jr, Johnson R, Spitzer T, Sefler
A, Shearer B, Moore JT, Miller AB, Willson TM, Williams SP.

Author information: 
(1)GlaxoSmithKline Inc., 5 Moore Drive, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709, USA.

The 2.7 A X-ray crystal structure of the HNF4gamma ligand binding domain (LBD)
revealed the presence of a fatty acid within the pocket, with the AF2 helix in a 
conformation characteristic of a transcriptionally active nuclear receptor. GC/MS
and NMR analysis of chloroform/methanol extracts from purified HNF4alpha and
HNF4gamma LBDs identified mixtures of saturated and cis-monounsaturated C14-18
fatty acids. The purified HNF4 LBDs interacted with nuclear receptor
coactivators, and both HNF4 subtypes show high constitutive activity in transient
transfection assays, which was reduced by mutations designed to interfere with
fatty acid binding. The endogenous fatty acids did not readily exchange with
radiolabeled palmitic acid, and all attempts to displace them without denaturing 
the protein failed. Our results suggest that the HNF4s may be transcription
factors that are constitutively bound to fatty acids.

PMID: 12220494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. J Cell Biochem. 2002;87(1):16-28.

Morphological changes induced by extracellular matrix are correlated with
maturation of rat small hepatocytes.

Sugimoto S(1), Mitaka T, Ikeda S, Harada K, Ikai I, Yamaoka Y, Mochizuki Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Research Institute, Sapporo Medical University
School of Medicine, Chuo-Ku, S-1, W-17, Sapporo 060-8556, Japan.

Small hepatocytes (SHs), which are known to be hepatic progenitor cells, were
isolated from an adult rat liver. SHs in a colony sometimes change their shape
from small to large and from flat to rising/piled-up. The aim of the present
study is to clarify whether the alteration of cell shape is correlated with the
maturation of SHs and whether extracellular matrix (ECM) can induce the
morphological changes of SHs. We used liver-enriched transcription factors
(LETFs) such as hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF) 4 alpha, HNF6, CCAAT/enhancer
binding proteins (C/EBP) alpha, and C/EBP beta, tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TO), 
and serine dehydratase (SDH) as markers of hepatic maturation. To enrich the
number of SH colonies, the colonies were isolated from dishes and replated.
Replated colonies proliferated and the average number of cells per colony was
about five times larger at day 9 than at day 1. When the cells were treated with 
laminin, type IV collagen, a mixture of laminin and type IV collagen, Matrigel or
collagen gel (CG), only the cells treated with Matrigel dramatically changed
their shape within several days and had reduced growth activity, whereas the
cells treated with other ECM did not. HNF4 alpha, HNF6, C/EBP alpha, C/EBP beta, 
and TO were well expressed in the cells treated with Matrigel. Furthermore,
addition of both glucagon and dexamethasone dramatically induced the expression
of SDH mRNA and protein in the cells treated with Matrigel. In conclusion,
morphological changes of SHs may be correlated with hepatic maturation and
basement membrane (BM)-like structure may induce the morphological changes of
SHs.

PMID: 12210718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Hum Mutat. 2002 Sep;20(3):230-1.

Large Family With Maturity-Onset Diabetes of the Young and a Novel V121I Mutation
in HNF4A.

Monney CT(1), Kaltenrieder V, Cousin P, Bonny C, Schorderet DF.

Author information: 
(1)Division Autonome de Génétique Médicale, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire
Vaudois (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a subtype of early-onset diabetes 
mellitus which is characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance. Several genes 
are known to induce MODY : HNF4A/MODY1, GCK/MODY2, TCF1/MODY3, IPF1/MODY4,
TCF2/MODY5 and NEUROD1/MODY6. We studied a Swiss family with 13 diabetic patients
over 3 generations. The average age at diagnosis was 35 +/- 15 years (7 subjects 
before 30). In addition, 2 individuals had an abnormal oral glucose tolerance.
The mutation present in this family was located in the DNA binding domain of
HNF4A, a strongly conserved region across almost all species, and segregated in
all the MODY patients. Identification of this missense mutation allowed for
presymptomatic diagnosis in the younger generations and will improve medical
follow-up of the predisposed individuals.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12203996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 11;277(41):37973-6. Epub 2002 Aug 21.

Crystal structure of the HNF4 alpha ligand binding domain in complex with
endogenous fatty acid ligand.

Dhe-Paganon S(1), Duda K, Iwamoto M, Chi YI, Shoelson SE.

Author information: 
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center & Department of Medicine, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.

HNF4 alpha is an orphan member of the nuclear receptor family with prominent
functions in liver, gut, kidney and pancreatic beta cells. We have solved the
x-ray crystal structure of the HNF4 alpha ligand binding domain, which adopts a
canonical fold. Two conformational states are present within each homodimer: an
open form with alpha helix 12 (alpha 12) extended and collinear with alpha 10 and
a closed form with alpha 12 folded against the body of the domain. Although the
protein was crystallized without added ligands, the ligand binding pockets of
both closed and open forms contain fatty acids. The carboxylic acid headgroup of 
the fatty acid ion pairs with the guanidinium group of Arg(226) at one end of the
ligand binding pocket, while the aliphatic chain fills a long, narrow channel
that is lined with hydrophobic residues. These findings suggest that fatty acids 
are endogenous ligands for HNF4 alpha and establish a framework for understanding
how HNF4 alpha activity is enhanced by ligand binding and diminished by MODY1
mutations.

PMID: 12193589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Ann Med. 2002;34(3):207-16.

Different genes, different diabetes: lessons from maturity-onset diabetes of the 
young.

Stride A(1), Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes, University of Exeter, Devon, UK.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetic subgroup of diabetes
characterised by an autosomal dominant inheritance and early onset, non-insulin
dependent diabetes. This results from a monogenic defect causing beta-cell
dysfunction. The defining of five genes in which mutations cause MODY has allowed
us to understand the clinical heterogeneity seen in this condition and can guide 
clinical management. Mutations in the glucokinase gene lead to stable
hyperglycaemia, complications are unusual and treatment is rarely needed.
Glucokinase patients are often detected during screening in pregnancy. While
maternal mutations increase birth weight by increasing maternal glycaemia, fetal 
mutations reduce birth weight by reducing fetal insulin secretion. Patients with 
mutation in genes encoding the transcription factors, hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)- 1alpha, HNF-4alpha, HNF-1beta and insulin promoter factor 1 (IPF-1) have a
common progressive beta-cell failure resulting in increasing hyperglycaemia and
treatment requirements. These patients are at risk of developing microvascular
complications. They show a pharmacogenetic effect with a specific sensitivity to 
sulphonylureas. Patients with transcription factor mutations have a range of
discrete extra-pancreatic phenotypes including a low renal threshold for glucose 
with HNF-1alpha mutations, altered lipids and lipoproteins with HNF-4alpha
mutations and a variety of cystic renal diseases and uterine and genital
developmental disorders with HNF-1beta mutations. Molecular genetic testing is
now available in routine clinical practice. This allows confirmation of a
diagnosis of MODYand defines the subgroup. Differences in prognosis and treatment
strongly support the increased use of molecular genetic testing in diabetes.

PMID: 12173691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Diabetes. 2002 Aug;51(8):2355-62.

A genetic switch in pancreatic beta-cells: implications for differentiation and
haploinsufficiency.

Ferrer J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Hospital Clínic i Universitari, Institut
d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Barcelona, Spain.
jferrer@medicina.ub.es

Heterozygous mutations in the genes encoding transcriptional regulators
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha and HNF-4alpha cause a form of diabetes
known as maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY). Haploinsufficiency of
HNF-1alpha or HNF-4alpha results in MODY because of defective function of
pancreatic islet cells. In contrast, homozygous null mutations in mouse models
lead to widespread and profound gene expression defects in multiple cell types.
Thus, it is not surprising that HNF-1alpha function is now known to have distinct
properties in pancreatic beta-cells. It controls a complex tissue-selective
genetic network that is activated when pancreatic cells differentiate, and allows
these cells to maintain critical specialized functions. The network contains an
indispensable core component formed by a positive cross-regulatory feedback
circuit between HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha. This type of circuit configuration can
exhibit a switch-like behavior with two stable states. In the default active
state, it can serve to perpetuate network activity in differentiated beta-cells. 
However, the loss of one HNF-1alpha or HNF-4alpha allele can increase the
probability that the feedback circuit is permanently switched off, resulting in
decreased expression of all four alleles selectively in beta-cells. Such a model 
can serve to rationalize key aspects of the pathogenic mechanism in MODY.

PMID: 12145145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. J Mol Med (Berl). 2002 Jul;80(7):423-30. Epub 2002 May 8.

Mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) gene associated with
diabetes result in greater loss of HNF4alpha function in pancreatic beta-cells
than in nonpancreatic beta-cells and in reduced activation of the apolipoprotein 
CIII promoter in hepatic cells.

Oxombre B(1), Moerman E, Eeckhoute J, Formstecher P, Laine B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unit 459, Laboratory of Cell Biology, University of Medicine H.
Warembourg, 1 place de Verdun, 59045 Lille, France.

Mutations in the HNF4alpha gene have been correlated with maturity-onset diabetes
of the young, which is characterized mainly by pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction
and is also associated with mild liver abnormalities. HNF4alpha D126Y and D126H
mutations were found in a patient with early-onset type 2 diabetes, and the R324H
mutation was found in a common type 2 diabetic nephropathic patient. We
investigated whether these mutations, which have not yet been functionally
characterized, impair HNF4alpha function in three cell models: HEK 293 embryonal 
kidney cells, HepG2 hepatoma cells, and betaTC3 pancreatic beta-cells. The R324H 
mutation had no effect on HNF4alpha function with either the HNF1alpha and L-type
pyruvate kinase (LPK) promoters, but the D126Y and D126H mutations impaired
HNF4alpha transcriptional activities in all tested cell lines. These impairments 
by D126Y and D126H mutations, which are located in the T box, are not due to a
loss of dimerization but to a loss of DNA binding. Interestingly, the strongest
functional consequences of these mutations were observed on the HNF1alpha
promoter in betaTC3 cells. Given the key role of the transcription factor
HNF1alpha in pancreatic beta-cell function, it can be inferred that impairment of
HNF4alpha function by these mutations affects metabolic pathways in pancreatic
beta-cells and contributes to development of diabetes. Moreover, the
HNF4alpha-mediated activation of the apolipoprotein CIII promoter in HepG2 cells 
was significantly impaired by D126Y and D126H mutations. These results support
clinical findings that liver function can also be impaired in diabetic patients
having HNF4alpha mutations.

PMID: 12110948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Biol Chem. 2002 Oct 11;277(41):37991-8000. Epub 2002 Jul 9.

The coactivator PGC-1 is involved in the regulation of the liver carnitine
palmitoyltransferase I gene expression by cAMP in combination with HNF4 alpha and
cAMP-response element-binding protein (CREB).

Louet JF(1), Hayhurst G, Gonzalez FJ, Girard J, Decaux JF.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Cochin, Département d'Endocrinologie, 24 rue du Faubourg Saint
Jacques, 75014 Paris, France.

Liver carnitine palmitoyltransferase I catalyzes the transfer of long-chain fatty
acids into mitochondria. L-CPT I is considered the rate-controlling enzyme in
fatty acid oxidation. Expression of the L-CPT I gene is induced by starvation in 
response to glucagon secretion from the pancreas, an effect mediated by cAMP.
Here, the molecular mechanisms underlying the induction of L-CPT I gene
expression by cAMP were characterized. We demonstrate that the cAMP response unit
of the L-CPT I gene is composed of a cAMP-response element motif and a DR1
sequence located 3 kb upstream of the transcription start site. Our data strongly
suggest that the coactivator PGC-1 is involved in the regulation of this gene
expression by cAMP in combination with HNF4 alpha and cAMP-response
element-binding protein (CREB). Indeed, (i) cotransfection of CREB or HNF4 alpha 
dominant negative mutants completely abolishes the effect of cAMP on the L-CPT I 
promoter, and (ii) the cAMP-responsive unit binds HNF4 alpha and CREB through the
DR1 and the cAMP-response element sequences, respectively. Moreover,
cotransfection of PGC-1 strongly activates the L-CPT I promoter through HNF4
alpha bound at the DR1 element. Finally, we show that the transcriptional
induction of the PGC-1 gene by glucagon through cAMP in hepatocytes precedes that
of L-CPT-1. In addition to the key role that PGC-1 plays in glucose homeostasis, 
it may also be critical for lipid homeostasis. Taken together these observations 
suggest that PGC-1 acts to coordinate the process of metabolic adaptation in the 
liver.

PMID: 12107181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Am J Physiol Cell Physiol. 2002 Aug;283(2):C623-30.

Zinc depletion reduced Egr-1 and HNF-3beta expression and apolipoprotein A-I
promoter activity in Hep G2 cells.

Cui L(1), Schoene NW, Zhu L, Fanzo JC, Alshatwi A, Lei KY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Science, University of Maryland, College Park
20742, USA.

We examined the influence of zinc status on expression of certain transcription
factors involved in regulation of apolipoprotein A-I (apoAI) expression in human 
hepatoblastoma Hep G2 cells. A low zinc basal medium (zinc deficient, ZD)
consisting of DMEM and 10% Chelex100-treated fetal bovine serum was used to
deplete cellular zinc over one passage. Cells were also cultured for one passage 
in medium supplemented with 0.4 (ZD0.4), 4.0 (zinc normal, ZN), 16.0 (zinc
adequate, ZA), or 32.0 microM zinc (zinc supplemented, ZS). Compared with ZN
cells, cellular zinc levels were 43 and 31% lower in ZD and ZD0.4 cells but 70
and 146% higher in ZA and ZS cells, respectively. Supplementation of 0.4 microM
zinc significantly increased DNA contents per plate, from 65% in ZD cells to 83% 
in ZD0.4 cells compared with ZN cells. Addition of >4 microM zinc in medium did
not further increase DNA contents. The proportion of cells in G(1)/S and S phase 
was about fourfold higher and threefold lower, respectively, in ZD cells compared
with ZN and other groups. Nuclear Egr-1 protein was markedly decreased in ZD and 
ZD0.4 cells. Moreover, hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-3beta was severely
degraded in ZD and ZD0.4 cells. In contrast, HNF-4alpha remained stable in all
groups and was not significantly lower in ZD and ZD0.4 cells. Furthermore,
downregulation of trans-acting factor Egr-1 and cleavage of HNF-3beta were
associated with reduction of apoAI promoter activity in zinc-deficient Hep G2
cells. Thus zinc is critical in transcriptional regulation of apoAI gene
expression in hepatocytes.

PMID: 12107072  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Jul;16(7):1502-10.

Polyamines modulate the interaction between nuclear receptors and vitamin D
receptor-interacting protein 205.

Maeda Y(1), Rachez C, Hawel L 3rd, Byus CV, Freedman LP, Sladek FM.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program, University of California,
Riverside, California 92521, USA.

Nuclear receptors (NR) activate transcription by interacting with several
different coactivator complexes, primarily via LXXLL motifs (NR boxes) of the
coactivator that bind a common region in the ligand binding domain of nuclear
receptors (activation function-2, AF-2) in a ligand-dependent fashion. However,
how nuclear receptors distinguish between different sets of coactivators remains 
a mystery, as does the mechanism by which orphan receptors such as hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) activate transcription. In this study, we show 
that HNF4alpha interacts with a complex containing vitamin D receptor
(VDR)-interacting proteins (DRIPs) in the absence of exogenously added ligand.
However, whereas a full-length DRIP205 construct enhanced the activation by
HNF4alpha in vivo, it did not interact well with the HNF4alpha ligand binding
domain in vitro. In investigating this discrepancy, we found that the polyamine
spermine significantly enhanced the interaction between HNF4alpha and full-length
DRIP205 in an AF-2, NR-box-dependent manner. Spermine also enhanced the
interaction of DRIP205 with the VDR even in the presence of its ligand, but
decreased the interaction of both HNF4alpha and VDR with the p160 coactivator
glucocorticoid receptor interacting protein 1 (GR1P1). We also found that GR1P1
and DRIP205 synergistically activated HNF4alpha-mediated transcription and that a
specific inhibitor of polyamine biosynthesis, alpha-difluoromethylornithine
(DFMO), decreased the ability of HNF4alpha to activate transcription in vivo.
These results lead us to propose a model in which polyamines may facilitate the
switch between different coactivator complexes binding to NRs.

PMID: 12089346  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Diabetes. 2002 Jul;51(7):2329-33.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young caused by a balanced translocation where the
20q12 break point results in disruption upstream of the coding region of
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF4A) gene.

Gloyn AL(1), Ellard S, Shepherd M, Howell RT, Parry EM, Jefferson A, Levy ER,
Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medical
and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, Barrack Road, Exeter EX2 5AX, U.K.

Monogenic human disorders have been used as paradigms for complex genetic disease
and as tools for establishing important insights into mechanisms of gene
regulation and transcriptional control. Maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY) is a monogenic dominantly inherited form of diabetes that is characterized
by defective insulin secretion from the pancreatic beta-cells. A wide variety of 
mutation types in five different genes have been identified that result in this
condition. There have been no reports of a chromosome deletion or translocation
resulting in MODY. We report a pedigree where MODY cosegregates with a balanced
translocation [karyotype 46, XX t(3;20) (p21.2;q12)]. The chromosome 20 break
point, 20q12, is within the region of one of the known MODY genes, hepatocyte
nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF4A). Fluorescence in situ hybridization analysis
demonstrated that the break point does not disrupt the coding region of this
gene, but it lies at least 6 kb upstream of the conventional promoter (P1). We
propose that this mutation disrupts the spatial relationship between the recently
described alternate distal pancreatic promoter (P2) and HNF4A. This is the first 
case of MODY due to a balanced translocation, and it provides evidence to confirm
the crucial role of an upstream regulator of HNF4A gene expression in the
beta-cell.

PMID: 12086970  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Mol Genet Metab. 2002 Jun;76(2):148-51.

The role of the HNF4alpha enhancer in type 2 diabetes.

Mitchell SM(1), Gloyn AL, Owen KR, Hattersley AT, Frayling TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, University of Exeter, Barrack
Road, EX2 5DW, UK.

The genetic causes of type 2 diabetes are not well understood. The disease has
been linked to chromosome 20q12-q13.1 a region which harbors the transcription
factor HNF4alpha. Mutations in the coding region of HNF4alpha cause maturity
onset diabetes of the young, an autosomal dominant form of diabetes, but do not
account for the linkage to this region. An enhancer element has recently been
characterized 6 kb 5' of the HNF4alpha P1 promoter containing binding sites for
the transcription factors HNF1, HNF4, HNF3, and C/EBP, which are overlapped by
glucocorticoid consensus sites. We hypothesized that variation in the enhancer
element disrupts HNF4alpha expression in the liver and increases susceptibility
to type 2 diabetes. We screened for variants of the enhancer element in 39 white 
UK young onset diabetic subjects, giving >95% power to identify variants with
minor allele frequencies of >5%. No variants of the enhancer element were found
in this population. We conclude that variation in the HNF4alpha enhancer element 
is not a common cause of susceptibility to type 2 diabetes.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12083813  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2002 Jun 13;1583(1):63-73.

On the mechanism of bile acid inhibition of rat sterol 12alpha-hydroxylase gene
(CYP8B1) transcription: roles of alpha-fetoprotein transcription factor and
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha.

Yang Y(1), Zhang M, Eggertsen G, Chiang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pathology, Northeastern Ohio
Universities College of Medicine, Rootstown 44272, USA.

The sterol 12alpha-hydroxylase (CYP8B1) is a key enzyme of the bile acid
biosynthetic pathway. It regulates the composition of bile acids in bile, i.e.
ratio between cholic acid (CA) and chenodeoxycholic acid (CDCA). In similarity
with cholesterol 7alpha-hydroxylase (CYP7A1), this enzyme is subjected to a
negative feedback regulation by bile acids. It has been recently reported that
bile acid-activated farnesoid X receptor (FXR) induces the small heterodimer
partner (SHP) that interacts with alpha-fetoprotein transcription factor (FTF)
and down-regulates CYP7A1 transcription. We studied whether the same mechanism
also regulated rat CYP8B1 gene transcription. Feeding rats with CDCA caused a
40-50% decrease of CYP8B1 and hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) mRNA
expression levels. This was associated with an increase in FTF mRNA expression,
but SHP mRNA expression was not altered. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
(EMSA) and transient transfection assay of promoter/reporter genes coupled to
mutagenesis analysis identified a putative bile acid response element (BARE) that
has an HNF4alpha binding site embedded in two overlapping FTF binding sites.
Mutation of the HNF4alpha binding site markedly reduced basal promoter activity
and its repression by bile acids. Cotransfection with FTF strongly repressed
CYP8B1 transcription. Interestingly, HNF4alpha could overcome the inhibitory
effects of FTF and bile acids. We conclude that FTF and HNF4alpha not only play
critical roles on CYP8B1 gene transcription, but also mediate bile acid feedback 
inhibition. This study reveals a novel mechanism by which bile acids inhibit rat 
CYP8B1 gene transcription by inducing FTF and inhibiting HNF4alpha expression.

PMID: 12069850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jun;87(6):2532-9.

Nine novel mutations in maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) candidate
genes in 22 Spanish families.

Barrio R(1), Bellanné-Chantelot C, Moreno JC, Morel V, Calle H, Alonso M,
Mustieles C.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Diabetes Unit, Ramón y Cajal Hospital, University of Alcalá,
Carretera Comenar Viejo Km. 9.4, 28034 Madrid, Spain. rbarrio@hrc.insalud.es

The aims of this study were to estimate the prevalence of major maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) subtypes in Spanish MODY families and to analyze
genotype-phenotype correlations. Twenty-two unrelated pediatric MODY patients and
97 relatives were screened for mutations in the coding region of the glucokinase 
(GCK), hepatic nuclear factor- HNF-1alpha and HNF4alpha genes using PCR-single
strand conformation polymorphism and/or direct sequencing. In families carrying
GCK mutations, the influence of genetic defects on fetal growth was investigated 
by comparing the birth weights of 32 offspring discordant for the mutations.
Mutations in MODY genes were identified in 64% of the families. GCK/MODY2
mutations were the most frequently found, in 41%: seven novel (R369P, S411F,
M298K, C252Y, Y108C, A188E, and S383L) and 2 already described mutations. Four
pedigrees (18%) harbored mutations in the HNF-1alpha/MODY3 gene, including a
previously unreported change (R271G). One family (4%) carried a novel mutation in
the HNF-4alpha gene (IVS5-2delA), representing the first report of a MODY1
pedigree in the Spanish population. The age at diagnosis was prepubertal in MODY2
index patients and pubertal in MODY3 patients. Overt diabetes was rare in MODY2
and was invariably present in MODY3 index patients. Chronic complications of
diabetes were absent in the MODY2 population and were present in more than 40% of
all relatives of MODY3. Birth weight was lower in the presence of a GCK fetal
mutation when the mutation was of paternal origin. The MODY1 patient was
diagnosed at 15 yr of age. She developed intermittent microalbuminuria despite
good metabolic control, and severe late-onset complications were common within
her family. Mutations in the GCK/MODY2 gene are the most common cause of MODY in 
our population as recruited from pediatric and adolescent index patients. The
inheritance of GCK defects by the fetus results in a reduction of birth weight.
Clinical expression of MODY3 and MODY1 mutations, the second and third groups of 
defects found, was more severe, including the frequent development of chronic
complications.

PMID: 12050210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Jpn J Cancer Res. 2002 May;93(5):532-41.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha induces expression of endothelial Fas
ligand (FasL) to prevent cancer cell transmigration: a novel defense mechanism of
endothelium against cancer metastasis.

Osanai M(1), Chiba H, Kojima T, Fujibe M, Kuwahara K, Kimura H, Satoh M, Sawada
N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Sapporo Medical University School of Medicine,
Chuo-ku, Sapporo 060-8556. osanaim@post.queensu.ca

Endothelial Fas ligand (FasL) contributes to the "immune privilege" of tissues
such as testis and eye, in which apoptosis is induced in infiltrating
Fas-positive activated T cells and results in the inhibition of leukocyte
extravasation. In this study, we examined the role of endothelial FasL in
controlling cancer cell transmigration using rat lung endothelial (RLE) cell line
bearing a doxycycline-inducible hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha expression
system. We showed that a detectable level of FasL was expressed in RLE cells and 
that this expression was markedly up-regulated and well correlated to the degree 
of HNF-4alpha expression in a time-dependent manner. When various cancer cells
were overlaid on an RLE monolayer sheet, we examined the ability of endothelial
FasL to induce massive apoptosis in Fas-expressing cancer cells and found a
causal link to inhibition of the transmigration. Finally, we showed that FasL was
expressed in capillaries of the rat brain by immunohistochemical staining,
suggesting that FasL serves its functions not only in vitro, but also in vivo.
These results raise the possibility that HNF-4alpha is involved in regulating
cancer cell transmigration by modulating the Fas-FasL system.

PMID: 12036449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 12;277(28):25257-65. Epub 2002 May 6.

Defective ureagenesis in mice carrying a liver-specific disruption of hepatocyte 
nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha ). HNF4alpha regulates ornithine
transcarbamylase in vivo.

Inoue Y(1), Hayhurst GP, Inoue J, Mori M, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Division of Basic Sciences, NCI, National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) regulates the expression of many
genes preferentially expressed in liver. HNF4alpha-null mice die during
embryogenesis precluding the analysis of its function in the adult. To circumvent
this problem, liver-specific HNF4alpha-null mice were produced. Mice lacking
hepatic HNF4alpha expression exhibited increased serum ammonia and reduced serum 
urea. This disruption in ureagenesis may be explained by a marked decrease in
expression and activity of hepatic ornithine transcarbamylase (OTC). To determine
the molecular mechanisms involved in transcriptional regulation of the mouse OTC 
gene, the OTC promoter region was analyzed. Sequence analysis revealed the
presence of two putative HNF4alpha-binding sites in the mouse OTC promoter
region. By using transient transfection analysis, it was established that high
levels of promoter activity were dependent on both HNF4alpha-binding sites and
the expression of HNF4alpha. Furthermore, the proximal HNF4alpha-binding site was
found to be more important than the distal one for transactivating OTC promoter. 
These data demonstrate that HNF4alpha is critical for urea homeostasis by direct 
regulation of the OTC gene in vivo.

PMID: 11994307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. J Biol Chem. 2002 Jul 19;277(29):25914-9. Epub 2002 May 6.

Activation of the insulin gene promoter through a direct effect of hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4 alpha.

Bartoov-Shifman R(1), Hertz R, Wang H, Wollheim CB, Bar-Tana J, Walker MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young, subtype 1 (MODY1), is associated with
defective glucose-dependent insulin secretion from pancreatic beta cells. MODY1
is caused by mutation in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4
alpha (HNF4 alpha). To understand better the MODY1 phenotype, we tested whether
HNF4 alpha was able to modulate directly the insulin gene promoter. Transfection 
of cultured 293T cells with an HNF4 alpha expression vector led to 10-fold
activation of a cotransfected reporter plasmid containing the rat insulin I gene 
promoter. Computer analysis revealed a potential HNF4 alpha-binding site between 
nucleotides -57 and -69 of the promoter; mutation of this sequence led to reduced
ability of HNF4 alpha to activate the promoter. The ability of HNF4 alpha to bind
this sequence was confirmed using gel shift analysis. In transfected INS-1 beta
cells, mutation of either the HNF1 alpha site or the HNF4 alpha site in the
insulin gene promoter led to 50-75% reduction in reporter gene activity;
expression of dominant negative HNF4 alpha led to significant reduction in the
activity of wild type and both mutated promoters. Thus, in addition to the
previously described indirect action of HNF4 alpha on insulin gene expression
mediated through elevated HNF1 alpha levels, HNF4 alpha also activates the
insulin gene directly, through a previously unrecognized cis element.

PMID: 11994285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Diabetes. 2002 Apr;51(4):1247-55.

Genome-wide search for type 2 diabetes in Japanese affected sib-pairs confirms
susceptibility genes on 3q, 15q, and 20q and identifies two new candidate Loci on
7p and 11p.

Mori Y(1), Otabe S, Dina C, Yasuda K, Populaire C, Lecoeur C, Vatin V, Durand E, 
Hara K, Okada T, Tobe K, Boutin P, Kadowaki T, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Metabolic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine, University of
Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

The genetic background that predisposes the Japanese population to type 2
diabetes is largely unknown. Therefore, we conducted a 10-cM genome-wide scan for
type 2 diabetes traits in the 359 affected individuals from 159 families,
yielding 224 affected sib-pairs of Japanese origin. Nonparametric multipoint
linkage analyses performed in the whole population showed one suggestive linked
region on 11p13-p12 (maximum logarithm of odds score [MLS] 3.08, near Pax6) and
seven potentially linked regions (MLS >1.17) at 1p36-p32, 2q34, 3q26-q28, 6p23,
7p22-p21, 15q13-q21, and 20q12-q13 (near the gene for hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4alpha [HNF-4alpha]). Subset analyses according to maximal BMI and early
age at diagnosis added suggestive evidence of linkage with type 2 diabetes at
7p22-p21 (MLS 3.51), 15q13-q21 (MLS 3.91), and 20q12-q13 (MLS 2.32). These
results support previous indication for linkage found on chromosome 3q, 15q, and 
20q in other populations and identifies two new potential loci on 7p and 11p that
may confer genetic risk for type 2 diabetes in the Japanese population.

PMID: 11916952  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Diabetes. 2002 Apr;51(4):910-4.

Thyroid hormone receptor interacting protein 3 (trip3) is a novel coactivator of 
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha.

Iwahashi H(1), Yamagata K, Yoshiuchi I, Terasaki J, Yang Q, Fukui K, Ihara A, Zhu
Q, Asakura T, Cao Y, Imagawa A, Namba M, Hanafusa T, Miyagawa J, Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.

Mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) gene are
associated with a subtype of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY1) that is
characterized by impaired insulin secretion in response to a glucose load.
HNF-4alpha, which is a transcription factor expressed in pancreatic beta-cells,
plays an important role in regulating the expression of genes involved in glucose
metabolism. Thus, cofactors that interact with HNF-4alpha and modify its
transcriptional activity might also play an important role in regulating the
metabolic pathways in pancreatic beta-cells, and the genes of such cofactors are 
plausible candidate genes for MODY. In the present study, we showed, using a
yeast two-hybrid screening assay, that thyroid hormone receptor interacting
protein 3 (Trip3) interacted with HNF-4alpha, and their interaction was confirmed
by the glutathione S-transferase pull-down assay. Human Trip3 cDNA contained an
open reading frame for a protein of 155 amino acids, and the gene was expressed
in both pancreatic islets and MIN6 cells. Cotransfection experiments indicated
that Trip3 could enhance (two- to threefold) the transcription activity of
HNF-4alpha in COS-7 cells and MIN6 cells. These results suggest that Trip3 is a
coactivator of HNF-4alpha. Mutation screening revealed that variation of the
Trip3 gene is not a common cause of MODY/early-onset type 2 diabetes in Japanese 
individuals. Trip3 may play an important role in glucose metabolism by regulating
the transcription activity of HNF-4alpha.

PMID: 11916906  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 24;277(21):18510-6. Epub 2002 Mar 12.

Cloning and characterization of the human factor XI gene promoter: transcription 
factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha ) is required for
hepatocyte-specific expression of factor XI.

Tarumi T(1), Kravtsov DV, Zhao M, Williams SM, Gailani D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, Tennessee
37232-6307, USA.

Factor XI is the zymogen of a plasma protease produced primarily in liver that is
required for normal blood coagulation. We cloned approximately 2600 base pairs of
the human factor XI gene upstream of exon one, identified transcription start
sites, and conducted a functional analysis. Luciferase reporter assays
demonstrate that the 381 base pairs upstream of exon one are sufficient for
maximum promoter activity in HepG2 hepatocellular carcinoma cells. The removal of
19 base pairs between -381 and -363 results in a nearly complete loss of promoter
activity. This region contains the sequence ACTTTG, a motif required for binding 
of the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha) to the 
promoters of several genes. Gel mobility shift assays using HepG2 or rat
hepatocyte nuclear extract confirm HNF-4alpha binds between bp -375 and -360.
Scrambling the ACTTTG motif completely abolishes promoter activity in luciferase 
assays. The factor XI promoter functions poorly when transfected into HeLa
carcinoma cells, and gel mobility shift experiments with HeLa nuclear extracts
demonstrate no HNF-4alpha binding to the ACTTTG sequence. When a rat HNF-4alpha
expression construct is co-transfected into HeLa cells, factor XI promoter
activity is enhanced approximately 10-fold. We conclude that HNF-4alpha is
required for hepatocyte-specific expression of factor XI.

PMID: 11891231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 17;277(20):17564-70. Epub 2002 Mar 1.

Foxa2 (HNF3beta ) controls multiple genes implicated in metabolism-secretion
coupling of glucose-induced insulin release.

Wang H(1), Gauthier BR, Hagenfeldt-Johansson KA, Iezzi M, Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Clinical Biochemistry, Department of Internal Medicine, University
Medical Center, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland. Haiyan.Wang@medicine.unige.ch

The transcription factor Foxa2 is implicated in blood glucose homeostasis.
Conditional expression of Foxa2 or its dominant-negative mutant DN-Foxa2 in INS-1
cells reveals that Foxa2 regulates the expression of genes important for glucose 
sensing in pancreatic beta-cells. Overexpression of Foxa2 results in blunted
glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, whereas induction of DN-Foxa2 causes a left
shift of glucose-induced insulin release. The mRNA levels of GLUT2 and
glucokinase are drastically decreased after induction of Foxa2. In contrast, loss
of Foxa2 function leads to up-regulation of hexokinase (HK) I and II and
glucokinase (HK-IV) mRNA expression. The glucokinase and the low K(m) hexokinase 
activities as well as glycolysis are increased proportionally. In addition,
induction of DN-Foxa2 also reduces the expression of beta-cell K(ATP) channel
subunits Sur1 and Kir6.2 by 70%. Furthermore, in contrast to previous reports,
induction of Foxa2 causes pronounced decreases in the HNF4alpha and HNF1alpha
mRNA levels. Foxa2 fails to regulate the expression of Pdx1 transcripts. The
expression of insulin and islet amyloid polypeptide is markedly suppressed after 
induction of Foxa2, while the glucagon mRNA levels are significantly increased.
Conversely, Foxa2 is required for glucagon expression in these INS-1-derived
cells. These results suggest that Foxa2 is a vital transcription factor evolved
to control the expression of genes essential for maintaining beta-cell glucose
sensing and glucose homeostasis.

PMID: 11875061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Mol Cell Biol. 2002 Mar;22(6):1626-38.

Competitive cofactor recruitment by orphan receptor hepatocyte nuclear factor
4alpha1: modulation by the F domain.

Ruse MD Jr(1), Privalsky ML, Sladek FM.

Author information: 
(1)Biochemistry and Molecular Biology Graduate Program, University of
California-Riverside, Riverside, CA 92521, USA.

For most ligand-dependent nuclear receptors, the status of endogenous ligand
modulates the relative affinities for corepressor and coactivator complexes. It
is less clear what parameters modulate the switch between corepressor and
coactivator for the orphan receptors. Our previous work demonstrated that
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha1 (HNF4alpha1, NR2A1) interacts with the p160
coactivator GRIP1 and the cointegrators CBP and p300 in the absence of
exogenously added ligand and that removal of the F domain enhances these
interactions. Here, we utilized transient-transfection analysis to demonstrate
repression of HNF4alpha1 activity by the corepressor silencing mediator of
retinoid and thyroid receptors (SMRT) in several cell lines and on several
HNF4alpha-responsive promoter elements. Glutathione S-transferase pulldown assays
confirmed a direct interaction between HNF4alpha1 and receptor interaction domain
2 of SMRT. Loss of the F domain resulted in marked reduction of the ability of
SMRT to interact with HNF4alpha1 in vitro and repress HNF4alpha1 activity in
vivo, although the isolated F domain itself failed to interact with SMRT.
Surprisingly, loss of both the A/B and F domains restored full repression by
SMRT, suggesting involvement of both domains in the SMRT interaction. Finally, we
show that when coexpressed along with HNF4alpha1 and GRIP1, CBP, or p300, SMRT
can titer out HNF4alpha1-mediated transactivation in a dose-dependent manner and 
that this competition derives from mutually exclusive binding. Collectively,
these results suggest that HNF4alpha can functionally interact with both a
coactivator and a corepressor without altering the status of any putative ligand 
and that the presence of the F domain may play a role in discriminating between
the different coregulators.

PMCID: PMC135595
PMID: 11865043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. J Biol Chem. 2002 May 3;277(18):15736-44. Epub 2002 Feb 25.

Polyunsaturated fatty acyl coenzyme A suppress the glucose-6-phosphatase promoter
activity by modulating the DNA binding of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha.

Rajas F(1), Gautier A, Bady I, Montano S, Mithieux G.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U. 449, Faculté de Médecine Laennec, Rue Guillaume Paradin, 69372 Lyon 
cedex 08, France. rajas@laennec.univ-lyon1.fr

Erratum in
    J Biol Chem. 2002 Feb 14;278(7):5488..

Glucose-6-phosphatase confers on gluconeogenic tissues the capacity to release
endogenous glucose in blood. The expression of its gene is modulated by
nutritional mechanisms dependent on dietary fatty acids, with specific inhibitory
effects of polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA). The presence of consensus binding 
sites of hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4) in the -1640/+60 bp region of the rat
glucose-6-phosphatase gene has led us to consider the hypothesis that HNF4 alpha 
could be involved in the regulation of glucose-6-phosphatase gene transcription
by long chain fatty acid (LCFA). Our results have shown that the
glucose-6-phosphatase promoter activity is specifically inhibited in the presence
of PUFA in HepG2 hepatoma cells, whereas saturated LCFA have no effect. In HeLa
cells, the glucose-6-phosphatase promoter activity is induced by the
co-expression of HNF4 alpha or HNF1 alpha. PUFA repress the promoter activity
only in HNF4 alpha-cotransfected HeLa cells, whereas they have no effects on the 
promoter activity in HNF1 alpha-cotransfected HeLa cells. From gel shift mobility
assays, deletion, and mutagenesis experiments, two specific binding sequences
have been identified that appear able to account for both transactivation by HNF4
alpha and regulation by LCFA in cells. The binding of HNF4 alpha to its cognate
sites is specifically inhibited by polyunsaturated fatty acyl coenzyme A in
vitro. These data strongly suggest that the mechanism by which PUFA suppress the 
glucose-6-phosphatase gene transcription involves an inhibition of the binding of
HNF4 alpha to its cognate sites in the presence of polyunsaturated fatty acyl-CoA
thioesters.

PMID: 11864989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Genesis. 2002 Feb;32(2):130-3.

Generation of a conditionally null allele of hnf4alpha.

Parviz F(1), Li J, Kaestner KH, Duncan SA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology and Anatomy, Medical College of
Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin 53226, USA.

PMID: 11857799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Biol Chem. 2002 Apr 19;277(16):14011-9. Epub 2002 Feb 7.

Analysis of gene expression profile induced by hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha
in hepatoma cells using an oligonucleotide microarray.

Naiki T(1), Nagaki M, Shidoji Y, Kojima H, Imose M, Kato T, Ohishi N, Yagi K,
Moriwaki H.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine and the Department of Neurology and
Psychiatry, Gifu University School of Medicine, Gifu, Japan.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha), a liver-specific transcription
factor, plays a significant role in many liver-specific functions, including
lipid, glucose, drug, and ammonia metabolism, and also in embryonal liver
development. However, its functions and regulation are not yet clearly
understood. In this study, we constructed an adenovirus vector carrying rat
HNF-4alpha cDNA and transfected the adenovirus to human hepatoma cells, HuH-7, to
enforce expression of the exogenous HNF-4alpha gene. We analyzed
HNF-4alpha-induced genes using cDNA microarray technology, which included over
9000 genes. As a result, 62 genes showed a greater than 2.0-fold change in
expression level after the viral transfection. Fifty-six genes were consistently 
induced by HNF-4alpha overexpression, and six genes were repressed. To assess
HNF-4alpha function, we attempted to classify the genes, which had been
classified by their encoding protein functions in a previous report. We could
classify 45 genes. The rest of the HNF-4alpha-sensitive genes were unclassified
(4 genes) or not identified (13 genes). Among the classified genes, almost half
of the induced genes (26 of 40) were related to metabolism genes and particularly
to lipid metabolism-related genes. This cDNA microarray analysis showed that
HNF-4alpha is one of the central liver metabolism regulators.

PMID: 11834723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Mech Dev. 2001 Dec;109(2):183-93.

Expression of HNF4alpha isoforms in mouse liver development is regulated by
sequential promoter usage and constitutive 3' end splicing.

Torres-Padilla ME(1), Fougère-Deschatrette C, Weiss MC.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique de la Différenciation, FRE 2364 du CNRS, Département de
Biologie Moléculaire, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is essential for the establishment
and maintenance of liver-specific gene expression. The HNF4alpha gene codes for
several isoforms whose developmental and physiological relevance has not yet been
explored. HNF4alpha1 and HNF4alpha7 originate from different promoters, while
alternative splicing in 3' leads to HNF4alpha2 and HNF4alpha8, respectively.
HNF4alpha7/alpha8 were abundantly expressed in embryonic liver and fetal-like
hepatoma cells. HNF4alpha1/alpha2 transcripts were up-regulated at birth and
represented the only isoforms in adult-like hepatoma cells. In line with its
expression profile, HNF4alpha7 activated more avidly than HNF4alpha1 reporter
plasmids for genes that are expressed early. The expression patterns of both
isoforms together with the differences observed in their transcriptional
activities provide elements accounting for fine-tuning of the activity of
HNF4alpha. The sequential expression of HNF4alpha7/alpha8 and HNF4alpha1/alpha2
during mouse liver development is the only modification in liver-enriched
transcription factors thus far recorded, which parallels the transition from the 
fetal to the adult hepatic phenotype.

PMID: 11731232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Mol Pharmacol. 2001 Dec;60(6):1260-7.

The CYP2D6 humanized mouse: effect of the human CYP2D6 transgene and HNF4alpha on
the disposition of debrisoquine in the mouse.

Corchero J(1), Granvil CP, Akiyama TE, Hayhurst GP, Pimprale S, Feigenbaum L,
Idle JR, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Erratum in
    Mol Pharmacol 2002 Jan;61(1):248.

CYP2D6 is a highly polymorphic human gene responsible for a large variability in 
the disposition of more than 100 drugs to which humans may be exposed. Animal
models are inadequate for preclinical pharmacological evaluation of CYP2D6
substrates because of marked species differences in CYP2D isoforms. To overcome
this issue, a transgenic mouse line expressing the human CYP2D6 gene was
generated. The complete wild-type CYP2D6 gene, including its regulatory sequence,
was microinjected into a fertilized FVB/N mouse egg, and the resultant offspring 
were genotyped by both polymerase chain reaction and Southern blotting.
CYP2D6-specific protein expression was detected in the liver, intestine, and
kidney from only the CYP2D6 humanized mice. Pharmacokinetic analysis revealed
that debrisoquine (DEB) clearance was markedly higher (94.1 +/- 22.3 l/h/kg), and
its half-life significantly reduced (6.9 +/- 1.6 h), in CYP2D6 humanized mice
compared with wild-type animals (15.2 +/- 0.9 l/h/kg and 16.5 +/- 4.5 h,
respectively). Mutations in hepatic nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha), a hepatic 
transcription factor known to regulate in vitro expression of the CYP2D6 gene,
could affect the disposition of CYP2D6 drug substrates. To determine whether the 
HNF4alpha gene modulates in vivo pharmacokinetics of CYP2D6 substrates, a mouse
line carrying both the CYP2D6 gene and the HNF4alpha conditional mutation was
generated and phenotyped using DEB. After deletion of HNF4alpha, DEB
4-hydroxylase activity in CYP2D6 humanized mice decreased more than 50%. The data
presented in this study show that only CYP2D6 humanized mice but not wild-type
mice display significant DEB 4-hydroxylase activity and that HNF4alpha regulates 
CYP2D6 activity in vivo. The CYP2D6 humanized mice represent an attractive model 
for future preclinical studies on the pharmacology, toxicology, and physiology of
CYP2D6-mediated metabolism.

PMID: 11723233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 4;98(25):14481-6. Epub 2001 Nov 20.

A transcription factor regulatory circuit in differentiated pancreatic cells.

Boj SF(1), Parrizas M, Maestro MA, Ferrer J.

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinology and Hormonal Biochemistry Units, Hospital Clinic Universitari,
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, Villarroel 170, 08036
Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 4;98(25):14189-91.

Mutations in the human genes encoding hepatocyte nuclear factors (HNF) 1alpha,
1beta, 4alpha, and IPF1(PDX1/IDX1/STF1) result in pancreatic beta cell
dysfunction and diabetes mellitus. In hepatocytes, hnf4alpha controls the
transcription of hnf1alpha, suggesting that this same interaction may operate in 
beta cells and thus account for the common diabetic phenotype. We show that, in
pancreatic islet and exocrine cells, hnf4alpha expression unexpectedly depends on
hnf1alpha. This effect is tissue-specific and mediated through direct occupation 
by hnf1alpha of an alternate promoter located 45.6 kb from the previously
characterized hnf4alpha promoter. Hnf1alpha also exerts direct control of
pancreatic-specific expression of hnf4gamma and hnf3gamma. Hnf1alpha dependence
of hnf4alpha, hnf4gamma, hnf3gamma, and two previously characterized distal
targets (glut2 and pklr) is established only after differentiated cells arise
during pancreatic embryonic development. These studies define an unexpected
hierarchical regulatory relationship between two genes involved in human
monogenic diabetes in the cells, which are relevant to its pathophysiology.
Furthermore, they indicate that hnf1alpha is an essential component of a
transcription factor circuit whose role may be to maintain differentiated
functions of pancreatic cells.

PMCID: PMC64707
PMID: 11717395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Hum Mol Genet. 2001 Sep 15;10(19):2089-97.

A distant upstream promoter of the HNF-4alpha gene connects the transcription
factors involved in maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Thomas H(1), Jaschkowitz K, Bulman M, Frayling TM, Mitchell SM, Roosen S,
Lingott-Frieg A, Tack CJ, Ellard S, Ryffel GU, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung), Universitätsklinikum Essen,
Hufelandstrasse 55, D-45122 Essen, Germany.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic, autosomal dominant
subtype of early-onset diabetes mellitus due to defective insulin secretion by
the pancreatic beta-cell in humans. Five different genes have been identified
including those encoding the tissue-specific transcription factors expressed in
pancreatic beta-cells, i.e. HNF-4alpha (MODY1), HNF-1alpha (MODY3), IPF-1 (also
known as PDX-1, MODY4) and HNF-1beta (MODY5). Analyzing the transcription of the 
HNF-4alpha gene, we now identify an alternative promoter, P2, which is 46 kb 5'
to the previously identified P1 promoter of the human gene. Based on RT-PCR this 
distant upstream P2 promoter represents the major transcription site in
pancreatic beta-cells, but is also used in hepatic cells. Transfection assays
with various deletions and mutants of the P2 promoter reveal functional binding
sites for HNF-1alpha, HNF-1beta and IPF-1, the other transcription factors known 
to encode MODY genes. We demonstrate the significance of this alternative
promoter in a large MODY family where a mutated IPF-1 binding site in the P2
promoter of the HNF-4alpha gene co-segregates with diabetes (LOD score 3.25).
These data suggest a regulatory network of the four MODY transcription factors
interconnected at the distant upstream P2 promoter of the HNF-4alpha gene.

PMID: 11590126  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Nov;21(21):7320-30.

Regulatory mechanisms controlling human hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha gene
expression.

Hatzis P(1), Talianidis I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Biotechnology, Foundation for Research and 
Technology Hellas, 711 10 Herakleion, Crete, Greece.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha) (nuclear receptor 2A1) is an
essential regulator of hepatocyte differentiation and function. Genetic and
molecular evidence suggests that the tissue-restricted expression of HNF-4alpha
is regulated mainly at the transcriptional level. As a step toward understanding 
the molecular mechanism involved in the transcriptional regulation of the human
HNF-4alpha gene, we cloned and analyzed a 12.1-kb fragment of its upstream
region. Major DNase I-hypersensitive sites were found at the proximal promoter,
the first intron, and the more-upstream region comprising kb -6.5, -8.0, and
-8.8. By the use of reporter constructs, we found that the proximal-promoter
region was sufficient to drive high levels of hepatocyte-specific transcription
in transient-transfection assays. DNase I footprint analysis and electrophoretic 
mobility shift experiments revealed binding sites for HNF-1alpha and -beta, Sp-1,
GATA-6, and HNF-6. High levels of HNF-4alpha promoter activity were dependent on 
the synergism between either HNF-1alpha and HNF-6 or HNF-1beta and GATA-6, which 
implies that at least two alternative mechanisms may activate HNF-4alpha gene
transcription. Chromatin immunoprecipitation experiments with human hepatoma
cells showed stable association of HNF-1alpha, HNF-6, Sp-1, and COUP-TFII with
the promoter. The last factor acts as a repressor via binding to a newly
identified direct repeat 1 (DR-1) sequence of the human promoter, which is absent
in the mouse homologue. We present evidence that this sequence is a bona fide
retinoic acid response element and that HNF-4alpha expression is upregulated in
vivo upon retinoic acid signaling.

PMCID: PMC99906
PMID: 11585914  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. J Biol Chem. 2001 Nov 9;276(45):41690-9. Epub 2001 Sep 4.

Transcriptional regulation of the human sterol 12alpha-hydroxylase gene (CYP8B1):
roles of heaptocyte nuclear factor 4alpha in mediating bile acid repression.

Zhang M(1), Chiang JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pathology, Northeastern Ohio
Universities College of Medicine, Rootstown, Ohio 44272, USA.

Sterol 12alpha-hydroxylase catalyzes the synthesis of cholic acid and controls
the ratio of cholic acid over chenodeoxycholic acid in the bile. Transcription of
CYP8B1 is inhibited by bile acids, cholesterol, and insulin. To study the
mechanism of CYP8B1 transcription by bile acids, we have cloned and determined
3389 base pairs of the 5'-upstream nucleotide sequences of the human CYP8B1.
Deletion analysis of CYP8B1/luciferase reporter activity in HepG2 cells revealed 
that the sequences from -57 to +300 were important for basal and liver-specific
promoter activities. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) strongly
activated human CYP8B1 promoter activities, whereas cholesterol
7alpha-hydroxylase promoter factor (CPF), an NR5A2 family of nuclear receptors,
had much less effect. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay identified an
overlapping HNF4alpha- and CPF-binding site in the +198/+227 region. The human
CYP8B1 promoter activities were strongly repressed by bile acids, and the bile
acid response element was localized between +137 and +220. Site-directed
mutagenesis of the HNF4alpha-binding site markedly reduced promoter activity and 
its response to bile acid repression. On the other hand, mutation of the
CPF-binding site had little effect on promoter activity and bile acid inhibition.
A negative nuclear receptor, small heterodimer partner markedly inhibited
transactivation of CYP8B1 by HNF4alpha. Mammalian two-hybrid assay confirmed that
HNF4alpha interacted with small heterodimer partner. Furthermore, bile acids and 
farnesoid X receptor reduced the expression of nuclear HNF4alpha in HepG2 cells
and rat livers and its binding to DNA. Bile acids and farnesoid X receptor also
inhibited mouse HNF4alpha gene transcription. In summary, our data revealed the
critical roles HNF4alpha play on CYP8B1 transcription and its repression by bile 
acids. Bile acids repress human CYP8B1 transcription by reducing the
transactivation activity of HNF4alpha through interaction of HNF4alpha with SHP
and reduction of HNF4alpha expression in the liver.

PMID: 11535594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Aug 31;286(4):673-7.

Sphingosine kinase regulates hepatoma cell differentiation: roles of hepatocyte
nuclear factor and retinoid receptor.

Osawa Y(1), Nagaki M, Banno Y, Nozawa Y, Moriwaki H, Nakashima S.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Gifu University School of Medicine,
Tsukasamachi-40, Gifu 500-8705, Japan.

In hepatoma Huh-7 cells, inhibition of sphingosine kinase (SphK) activity by
N,N-dimethylsphingosine (DMS) resulted in up-regulated production of
liver-specific serum proteins including albumin and alpha-fetoprotein (AFP). The 
changes in these protein levels coincided well with those of two liver-enriched
transcription factors, hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1 and -4, which regulate a
number of liver-specific genes at the transcriptional level. Moreover, DMS
induced the expression of retinoic acid receptor-alpha and retinoid X
receptor-alpha. In DMS-treated cells, 9-cis retinoic acid (RA) further enhanced
HNF-4alpha and albumin expression but it inhibited AFP accumulation. These
results suggest that activation of SphK disengages cells from their
liver-specific phenotype, and that 9-cis RA further induces differentiation of
hepatoma cells when SphK activity is inhibited.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11520048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. J Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Aug;27(1):11-29.

Mutations in the human genes encoding the transcription factors of the hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)1 and HNF4 families: functional and pathological
consequences.

Ryffel GU(1).

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Essen, Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung),
Hufelandstrasse 55, D-45122 Essen, Germany. gerhart.ryffel@uni-essen.de

Mutations in the human genes encoding the tissue-specific transcription factors
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)1alpha, HNF1beta and HNF4alpha are responsible for
maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY), a monogenic dominant inherited form 
of diabetes mellitus characterized by defective insulin secretion of the
pancreatic beta-cells. In addition, the mutated HNF1beta gene causes defective
development of the kidney and genital malformation. This review summarizes the
main features of these transcription factors and discusses potential events
leading to the specific disease phenotypes.

PMID: 11463573  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Mol Endocrinol. 2001 Jul;15(7):1200-10.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young Type 1 (MODY1)-associated mutations R154X
and E276Q in hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) gene impair recruitment
of p300, a key transcriptional co-activator.

Eeckhoute J(1), Formstecher P, Laine B.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 459 INSERM Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire Université H. Warembourg
Lille, France F 59045.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is a nuclear receptor involved in
glucose homeostasis and is required for normal beta-cell function. Mutations in
the HNF4alpha gene are associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young type 
1. E276Q and R154X mutations were previously shown to impair intrinsic
transcriptional activity (without exogenously supplied co-activators) of
HNF4alpha. Given that transcriptional partners of HNF4alpha modulate its
intrinsic transcriptional activity and play crucial roles in HNF4alpha function, 
we investigated the effects of these mutations on potentiation of HNF4alpha
activity by p300, a key co-activator for HNF4alpha. We show here that loss of
HNF4alpha function by both mutations is increased through impaired physical
interaction and functional cooperation between HNF4alpha and p300. Impairment of 
p300-mediated potentiation of HNF4alpha transcriptional activity is of particular
importance for the E276Q mutant since its intrinsic transcriptional activity is
moderately affected. Together with previous results obtained with chicken
ovalbumin upstream promoter-transcription factor II, our results highlight that
impairment of recruitment of transcriptional partners represents an important
mechanism leading to abnormal HNF4alpha function resulting from the MODY1 E276Q
mutation. The impaired potentiations of HNF4alpha activity were observed on the
promoter of HNF1alpha, a transcription factor involved in a transcriptional
network and required for beta-cell function. Given its involvement in a
regulatory signaling cascade, loss of HNF4alpha function may cause reduced
beta-cell function secondary to defective HNF1alpha expression. Our results also 
shed light on a better structure-function relationship of HNF4alpha and on p300
sequences involved in the interaction with HNF4alpha.

PMID: 11435618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Diabetes. 2001 Jul;50(7):1515-21.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha involved in type 1 maturity-onset diabetes of
the young is a novel target of AMP-activated protein kinase.

Leclerc I(1), Lenzner C, Gourdon L, Vaulont S, Kahn A, Viollet B.

Author information: 
(1)Cochin Institute of Molecular Genetics, Department of Genetics, Development,
and Molecular Pathology, Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche
Médicale (INSERM) Unit 129, 24 Rue de Faubourg Saint-Jacques, 75014 Paris,
France.

Mutations in the HNF4alpha gene are responsible for type 1 maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY1), which is characterized by a defect in insulin
secretion. Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha is a transcription factor that 
plays a critical role in the transcriptional regulation of genes involved in
glucose metabolism in both hepatocytes and pancreatic beta-cells. Recent evidence
has implicated AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) in the modulation of both
insulin secretion by pancreatic beta-cells and the control of glucose-dependent
gene expression in both hepatocytes and beta-cells. Therefore, the question could
be raised as to whether AMPK plays a role in these processes by modulating
HNF-4alpha function. In this study, we show that activation of AMPK by
5-amino-4-imidazolecarboxamide riboside (AICAR) in hepatocytes greatly diminished
HNF-4alpha protein levels and consequently downregulates the expression of
HNF-4alpha target genes. Quantitative evaluation of HNF-4alpha target gene
expression revealed diminished mRNA levels for HNF-1alpha, GLUT2, L-type pyruvate
kinase, aldolase B, apolipoprotein (apo)-B, and apoCIII. Our data clearly
demonstrate that the MODY1/HNF-4alpha transcription factor is a novel target of
AMPK in hepatocytes. Accordingly, it can be suggested that in pancreatic
beta-cells, AMPK also acts by decreasing HNF-4alpha protein level, and therefore 
insulin secretion. Hence, the possible role of AMPK in the physiopathology of
type 2 diabetes should be considered.

PMID: 11423471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Diabetes Care. 2001 Apr;24(4):663-71.

Familial early-onset type 2 diabetes in Chinese patients: obesity and genetics
have more significant roles than autoimmunity.

Ng MC(1), Lee SC, Ko GT, Li JK, So WY, Hashim Y, Barnett AH, Mackay IR, Critchley
JA, Cockram CS, Chan JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong,
Prince of Wales Hospital, Shatin, SAR. maggieng@cuhk.edu.hk

OBJECTIVE: We examined the prevalence of different forms of diabetes in Hong Kong
Chinese patients with familial early-onset type 2 diabetes and compared their
clinical features with patients with familial late-onset type 2 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: A total of 145 young patients with early-onset
diabetes (age and age at diagnosis < or = 40 years) and a family history of
diabetes were studied. They were screened for mutations in the genes encoding
glucokinase, hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha, and HNF-1alpha. The
mitochondrial DNA A-->G at nucleotide 3243 (mt3243) and amyLin S20G mutations
were studied, and antibodies to GAD (anti-GADs) were also examined.
RESULTS: The prevalence of putative diabetogenic gene mutations and autoimmune
markers were 4% for glucokinase, 0% for HNF-4alpha, 5% for HNF-1alpha, 3% for
mt3243, 2% for amylin 520G, and 4% for anti-GAD. Compared with late-onset
patients, the patients with early-onset diabetes had a higher prevalence of a
parental history of diabetes and were generally more obese. When classified by
obesity indexes (BMI and waist circumference), the obese patients, especially
those with early-onset diabetes, had a clustering of cardiovascular risk factors 
and increased rates of retinopathy and albuminuria. CONCLUSIONS; Genetic factors 
(up to 14%) and obesity (55%) play more significant roles than autoimmunity (4%) 
in familial type 2 diabetes in young Chinese patients. The significance of
obesity-related genes and other gene-gene and gene-environment interactions in
these young patients remains to be determined.

PMID: 11315828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Cancer Res. 2001 Apr 1;61(7):3176-81.

Expression profiling suggested a regulatory role of liver-enriched transcription 
factors in human hepatocellular carcinoma.

Xu L(1), Hui L, Wang S, Gong J, Jin Y, Wang Y, Ji Y, Wu X, Han Z, Hu G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences,
Shanghai.

By using a cDNA array representing 14,000 cDNA clusters, we studied the
expression profiles in paired clinical hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) samples and
the distal nontumorous liver tissues from the same patients. Despite the
significant heterogeneity among the clinical samples, 72 genes (including 30
novel genes) were down-regulated and 84 genes (including 48 novel genes) were
up-regulated in >50% of the cancer samples that were identified. The alterations 
in gene expression levels were confirmed by Northern blot and
reverse-transcription PCR in all of 4 randomly selected genes. It was conspicuous
that 21 of 38 hepatocarcinoma (HCC) down-regulated genes studied previously were 
reportedly regulated by a group of liver-enriched transcription factors (LETFs), 
and 12 of 36 HCC up-regulated genes studied previously were involved in protein
translation. Reexamination of the cDNA array data further revealed that most of
the genes known to be regulated by LETFs were down-regulated in at least a
portion of the HCC samples. Among the LETFs, the expression level of
CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBP) alpha was down-regulated in cancer,
whereas hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 (HNF-1), HNF-3beta, HNF-4alpha, and
HNF-4gamma were up-regulated. The expression profiling thus suggested multiple
regulatory pathways involved in HCC, especially that related to LETFs.

PMID: 11306505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Biochem Pharmacol. 2001 May 1;61(9):1057-62.

Suppression of hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha by acyl-CoA thioesters of
hypolipidemic peroxisome proliferators.

Hertz R(1), Sheena V, Kalderon B, Berman I, Bar-Tana J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutrition and Metabolism, Hebrew University Medical
School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) modulates the expression of
liver-specific genes that control the production (e.g. apolipoprotein [apo] A-I
and apo B) and clearance (e.g. apo C-III) of plasma lipoproteins. We reported
that the CoA thioesters of amphipathic carboxylic hypolipidemic drugs (e.g.
clofibric acid analogues currently used for treating hyperlipidemia in humans and
substituted long-chain dicarboxylic acids) were formed in vivo, bound to
HNF-4alpha, inhibited its transcriptional activity, and suppressed the expression
of HNF-4alpha-responsive genes. Hypolipidemic PPARalpha (peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor alpha) activators that were not endogenously
thioesterified into their respective acyl-CoAs were shown to be effective in rats
but not in humans, implying that the hypolipidemic activity transduced by
PPARalpha in rats was PPARalpha-independent in humans. The suppressed acyl-CoA
synthase of PPARalpha knockout mice left unresolved the contribution made by the 
acyl-CoA/HNF-4alpha pathway to the hypolipidemic effect of PPARalpha agonists in 
rodents. Hence, suppression of HNF-4alpha activity by the CoA thioesters of
hypolipidemic "peroxisome proliferators" may account for their hypolipidemic
activity independently of PPARalpha activation by their respective free
carboxylates. The hypolipidemic activity of peroxisome proliferators is mediated 
in rats and humans by the PPARalpha and HNF-4alpha pathways, respectively.

PMID: 11301038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Biochem J. 2001 Apr 15;355(Pt 2):537-44.

Co-operative regulation of the transcription of human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase
(DD)4/aldo-keto reductase (AKR)1C4 gene by hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-4alpha/gamma and HNF-1alpha.

Ozeki T(1), Takahashi Y, Kume T, Nakayama K, Yokoi T, Nunoya K, Hara A, Kamataki 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Drug Metabolism, Hokkaido University Graduate School of
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sapporo, Hokkaido 060-0812, Japan.

Human dihydrodiol dehydrogenase (DD) 4/aldo-keto reductase (AKR) 1C4 is a major
isoform of hepatic DD that oxidizes trans-dihydrodiols of polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons to reactive and redox-active o-quinones and that reduces several
ketone-containing drugs. To investigate the mechanism of transcriptional
regulation of the human DD4 gene, the 5'-flanking region of the gene was fused to
the luciferase gene. The results of luciferase assays using HepG2 cells and of
1,10-phenanthroline-copper footprinting indicated that two positive regulatory
regions were located in regions from -701 to -684 and from -682 to -666. The
former region contained a putative hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4 binding
motif, and the latter region contained an HNF-1 consensus binding sequence. DNA
fragments of the HNF-4 or HNF-1 motif gave a shifted band in a gel-shift assay
with nuclear extracts from HepG2 cells. The formation of the DNA-protein complex 
was inhibited by the HNF-4 or HNF-1 motif of the alpha(1)-antitrypsin gene. A
supershift assay using antibodies to human HNF-4alpha, HNF-4gamma and HNF-1alpha 
showed that HNF-4alpha and HNF-4gamma bound to the HNF-4 motif, and that
HNF-1alpha interacted with the HNF-1 motif. Introduction of mutations into the
HNF-4 or HNF-1 motif lowered the luciferase activity to 10 or 8% respectively of 
that seen with the intact human DD4 gene. These results indicate that HNF-4alpha,
HNF-4gamma and HNF-1alpha regulate co-operatively the transcription of the human 
DD4 gene in HepG2 cells.

PMCID: PMC1221767
PMID: 11284743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Diabetes. 2001 Feb;50 Suppl 1:S94-100.

beta-cell genes and diabetes: molecular and clinical characterization of
mutations in transcription factors.

Frayling TM(1), Evans JC, Bulman MP, Pearson E, Allen L, Owen K, Bingham C,
Hannemann M, Shepherd M, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Molecular Genetics, School of Postgraduate Medicine and Health
Sciences, University of Exeter, Devon, UK. t.m.frayling@exeter.ac.uk

beta-Cell transcription factor genes are important in the pathophysiology of the 
beta-cell, with mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, HNF-4alpha, 
insulin promoter factor (IPF)-1, HNF-1beta, and NeuroD1/BETA2, all resulting in
early-onset type 2 diabetes. We assessed the relative contribution of these genes
to early-onset type 2 diabetes using linkage and sequencing analysis in a cohort 
of 101 families (95% U.K. Caucasian). The relative distribution of the 90
families fitting maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) criteria was 63%
HNF-1alpha, 2% HNF-4alpha, 0% IPF-1, 1% HNF-1beta, 0% NeuroD1/ BETA2, and 20%
glucokinase. We report the molecular genetic and clinical characteristics of
these patients including 29 new families and 8 novel HNF-1alpha gene mutations.
Mutations in the transactivation domain are more likely to be protein truncating 
rather than result in amino acid substitutions, suggesting that a relatively
severe disruption of this domain is necessary to result in diabetes. Mutations in
the different transcription factors result in clinical heterogeneity. IPF-1
mutations are associated with a higher age at diagnosis (42.7 years) than
HNF-1alpha (20.4 years), HNF-1beta (24.2 years), or HNF-4alpha (26.3 years) gene 
mutations. Subjects with HNF-1beta mutations, in contrast to the other
transcription factors, frequently present with renal disease. A comparison of age
at diagnosis between subjects with different types and locations of HNF-1alpha
mutations did not reveal genotype-phenotype correlations. In conclusion,
mutations in transcription factors expressed in the beta-cell are the major cause
of MODY, and the phenotype clearly varies with the gene that is mutated. There is
little evidence to indicate that different mutations within the same gene have
different phenotypes.

PMID: 11272211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Jan;86(1):220-6.

Early-onset type 2 diabetes: metabolic and genetic characterization in the
mexican population.

Aguilar-Salinas CA(1), Reyes-Rodríguez E, Ordóñez-Sánchez ML, Torres MA,
Ramírez-Jiménez S, Domínguez-López A, Martínez-Francois JR, Velasco-Pérez ML,
Alpizar M, García-García E, Gómez-Pérez F, Rull J, Tusié-Luna MT.

Author information: 
(1)Departmento de Medicina y Unidad de Genética de la Nutrición del Instituto de 
Investigaciones Biomédicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de México, Mexico.
caas@aztlan.innsz.mx

The objective of this study was to investigate possible defects in the insulin
sensitivity and/or the acute insulin response in a group of Mexican patients
displaying early-onset type 2 diabetes and to evaluate the contribution of
mutations in three of the genes linked to maturity-onset diabetes of the young.
We studied 40 Mexican patients with an age of diagnosis between 20 and 40 yr in
which the insulin sensitivity as well as the insulin secretory response were
measured using the minimal model approach. A partial screening for possible
mutations in 3 of the 5 genes linked to maturity-onset diabetes of the young was 
carried out by PCR-single strand conformation polymorphism analysis. A low
insulin secretory capacity (AIRg = 68.5 +/- 5 muU/mL.min) and a near-normal
insulin sensitivity (3.43 +/- 0.2 min/muU.mL x 10(4)) were found in these
patients. Among this group we found two individuals carrying missense mutations
in exon 4 of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-4alpha) gene
(Asp(126)-->His/Tyr and Arg(154)-->Gln, respectively) and one carrying a nonsense
mutation in exon 7 of the HNF-1alpha gene (Gln(486)-->stop codon); 7.5% had
positive titers for glutamic acid decarboxylase antibodies. Thirty-five percent
of cases had insulin resistance; these subjects had the lipid abnormalities seen 
in the metabolic syndrome. A defect in insulin secretion is the hallmark in
Mexican diabetic patients diagnosed between 20 and 40 yr of age. Mutations in
either the HNF-1alpha or the HNF-4alpha genes are present among the individuals
who develop early-onset diabetes in our population. These particular sequence
changes have not been previously reported and therefore represent putative new
mutations. Even in the absence of endogenous hyperinsulinemia, insulin resistance
is associated with an adverse lipid profile.

PMID: 11232004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Feb;21(4):1393-403.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (nuclear receptor 2A1) is essential for
maintenance of hepatic gene expression and lipid homeostasis.

Hayhurst GP(1), Lee YH, Lambert G, Ward JM, Gonzalez FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolism, Division of Basic Sciences, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

The numerous functions of the liver are controlled primarily at the
transcriptional level by the concerted actions of a limited number of
hepatocyte-enriched transcription factors (hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha
[HNF1alpha], -1beta, -3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4alpha, and -6 and members of the
c/ebp family). Of these, only HNF4alpha (nuclear receptor 2A1) and HNF1alpha
appear to be correlated with the differentiated phenotype of cultured hepatoma
cells. HNF1alpha-null mice are viable, indicating that this factor is not an
absolute requirement for the formation of an active hepatic parenchyma. In
contrast, HNF4alpha-null mice die during embryogenesis. Moreover, recent in vitro
experiments using tetraploid aggregation suggest that HNF4alpha is indispensable 
for hepatocyte differentiation. However, the function of HNF4alpha in the
maintenance of hepatocyte differentiation and function is less well understood.
To address the function of HNF4alpha in the mature hepatocyte, a conditional gene
knockout was produced using the Cre-loxP system. Mice lacking hepatic HNF4alpha
expression accumulated lipid in the liver and exhibited greatly reduced serum
cholesterol and triglyceride levels and increased serum bile acid concentrations.
The observed phenotypes may be explained by (i) a selective disruption of
very-low-density lipoprotein secretion due to decreased expression of genes
encoding apolipoprotein B and microsomal triglyceride transfer protein, (ii) an
increase in hepatic cholesterol uptake due to increased expression of the major
high-density lipoprotein receptor, scavenger receptor BI, and (iii) a decrease in
bile acid uptake to the liver due to down-regulation of the major basolateral
bile acid transporters sodium taurocholate cotransporter protein and organic
anion transporter protein 1. These data indicate that HNF4alpha is central to the
maintenance of hepatocyte differentiation and is a major in vivo regulator of
genes involved in the control of lipid homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC99591
PMID: 11158324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 20;276(16):13136-44. Epub 2001 Jan 5.

The mouse fetoprotein transcription factor (FTF) gene promoter is regulated by
three GATA elements with tandem E box and Nkx motifs, and FTF in turn activates
the Hnf3beta, Hnf4alpha, and Hnf1alpha gene promoters.

Pare JF(1), Roy S, Galarneau L, Belanger L.

Author information: 
(1)Le Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, L'Hôtel-Dieu de 
Québec, Département de Biologie Médicale, Faculté de Médecine, Québec G1R 2J6,
Canada.

Fetoprotein transcription factor (FTF) is an orphan nuclear receptor that
activates the alpha(1)-fetoprotein gene during early liver developmental growth. 
Here we sought to define better the position of FTF in transcriptional cascades
leading to hepatic differentiation. The mouse FTF gene was isolated and assigned 
to chromosome 1 band E4 (one mFTF pseudogene was also found). Exon/intron mapping
shows an mFTF gene structure similar to that of its close homologue SF1, with two
more N-terminal exons in the mFTF gene; exon mapping also delimits several FTF
mRNA 5'- and 3'-splice variants. The mFTF transcription initiation site was
located in adult liver at 238 nucleotides from the first translation initiator
codon, with six canonical GATA, E box, and Nkx motifs clustered between -50/-140 
base pairs (bp) from the cap site; DNA/protein binding assays also pinpointed an 
HNF4-binding element at +36 bp and an FTF-binding element at -257 bp.
Transfection assays and point mutations showed that the mFTF promoter is
activated by GATA, HNF4alpha, FTF, Nkx, and basic helix-loop-helix factors, with 
marked cooperativity between GATA and HNF4alpha. A tandem GATA/E box activatory
motif in the proximal mFTF promoter is strikingly similar to a composite motif
coactivated by differentiation inducers in the hematopoietic lineage; a tandem
GATA-Nkx motif in the distal mFTF promoter is also similar to a composite motif
transducing differentiation signals from transforming growth factor-beta-like
receptors in the cardiogenic lineage. Three genes encoding transcription factors 
critical to early hepatic differentiation, Hnf3beta, Hnf4alpha, and Hnf1alpha,
each contain dual FTF-binding elements in their proximal promoters, and all three
promoters are activated by FTF in transfection assays. Direct DNA binding action 
and cooperativity was demonstrated between FTF and HNF3beta on the Hnf3beta
promoter and between FTF and HNF4alpha on the Hnf1alpha promoter. These combined 
results suggest that FTF is an early intermediary between endodermal
specification signals and downstream genes that establish and amplify the hepatic
phenotype.

PMID: 11145965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Diabetologia. 2000 Dec;43(12):1476-83.

Insulin secretion and insulin sensitivity in diabetic subgroups: studies in the
prediabetic and diabetic state.

Tripathy D(1), Carlsson AL, Lehto M, Isomaa B, Tuomi T, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Wallenberg Laboratory, Department of Endocrinology, Lund University, Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: To evaluate insulin sensitivity and insulin secretion in
prediabetic and diabetic subjects with mutations in MODY1 (HNF-4 alpha) and MODY3
(HNF-1 alpha) genes, in subjects with GAD antibodies, latent autoimmune diabetes 
in adults and in subjects with the common form of Type II (non-insulin-dependent)
diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: Insulin secretion was measured as the incremental 30-min insulin (I30)
and insulin glucose ratio (I:G30) during OGTT whereas insulin sensitivity was
measured as the insulin sensitivity index during OGTT in 131 carriers of MODY
mutations [NGT = 38, IFG/IGT = 21, diabetes mellitus (DM) = 72], in 293 subjects 
with GADA (NGT = 47, IFG/IGT = 29, DM = 217) and in 2961 subjects with a family
history of the common form of Type II diabetes but without MODY mutations or GADA
(NGT = 1360, IFG/IGT = 857, DM = 744). A subgroup of the subjects underwent a
euglycaemic clamp (n = 210) and intravenous glucose tolerance test (n = 337) for 
the estimation of insulin sensitivity and first-phase insulin secretion.
RESULTS: Non-diabetic subjects with MODY mutations had pronounced impaired
insulin secretion (I30, I:G30) compared with the two other groups (p = 0.005).
Normal or non-diabetic glucose tolerance was maintained by enhanced insulin
sensitivity compared with the other two groups (p < 0.05 and p < 0.005). In
contrast to patients with Type II diabetes and with adult latent autoimmune
diabetes, MODY patients showed only a modest deterioration in insulin sensitivity
at onset of diabetes. The 2-h glucose values inversely correlated with insulin
sensitivity in subjects with GADA (r = -0.447, p < 0.001) and subjects from Type 
II diabetic families (r = -0.426, p < 0.001), whereas no such relation was
observed in subjects with MODY mutations (r = 0.151, p = NS). There were no
statistically significant differences in insulin secretion or insulin sensitivity
between subjects with GADA or subjects with a family history of Type II diabetes,
either at the NGT or the IFG/IGT stage.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Glucose-tolerant carriers of MODY mutations are
characterised by a severe impairment in insulin secretion. Enhanced insulin
sensitivity is the most likely explanation for the normal glucose tolerance.
Whereas subjects with positive GADA or Type II diabetes have impaired insulin
sensitivity with increasing glucose concentrations, MODY mutation carriers seem
to be protected from the effect of glucose toxicity.

PMID: 11151756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Jan 16;98(2):575-80. Epub 2001 Jan 2.

Mutations in the small heterodimer partner gene are associated with mild obesity 
in Japanese subjects.

Nishigori H(1), Tomura H, Tonooka N, Kanamori M, Yamada S, Sho K, Inoue I,
Kikuchi N, Onigata K, Kojima I, Kohama T, Yamagata K, Yang Q, Matsuzawa Y, Miki
T, Seino S, Kim MY, Choi HS, Lee YK, Moore DD, Takeda J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratories of Molecular Genetics and Cell Physiology, Department of Cell
Biology, Institute for Molecular and Cellular Regulation, Gunma University,
Maebashi, Gunma 371-8512, Japan.

Mutations in several genes encoding transcription factors of the hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF) cascade are associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the
young (MODY), a monogenic form of early-onset diabetes mellitus. The ability of
the orphan nuclear receptor small heterodimer partner (SHP, NR0B2) to modulate
the transcriptional activity of MODY1 protein, the nuclear receptor HNF-4alpha,
suggested SHP as a candidate MODY gene. We screened 173 unrelated Japanese
subjects with early-onset diabetes for mutations in this gene and found five
different mutations (H53fsdel10, L98fsdel9insAC, R34X, A195S, and R213C) in 6
subjects as well as one apparent polymorphism (R216H), all present in the
heterozygous state. Interestingly, all of the subjects with the mutations were
mildly or moderately obese at onset of diabetes, and analysis of the lineages of 
these individuals indicated that the SHP mutations were associated with obesity
rather than with diabetes. Therefore, an additional group of 101 unrelated
nondiabetic subjects with early-onset obesity was screened for mutations in the
SHP gene. Two of the previously observed mutations (R34X and A195S) and two
additional mutations (R57W and G189E) were identified in 6 subjects, whereas no
mutations were identified in 116 young nondiabetic lean controls (P = 0.0094).
Functional studies of the mutant proteins show that the mutations result in the
loss of SHP activity. These results suggest that genetic variation in the SHP
gene contributes to increased body weight and reveal a pathway leading to this
common metabolic disorder in Japanese.

PMCID: PMC14629
PMID: 11136233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Diabetologia. 2000 Sep;43(9):1203.

R127W in HNF4alpha is a loss-of-function mutation causing maturity-onset diabetes
of the young (MODY) in a UK Caucasian family.

Bulman MP, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

PMID: 11043869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2000 Oct 5;276(3):837-42.

Identification of retinoic acid-responsive elements on the HNF1alpha and
HNF4alpha genes.

Qian A(1), Cai Y, Magee TR, Wan YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Harbor-UCLA Medical Center, Torrance, California,
90509, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1alpha (HNF1alpha) and HNF4alpha are liver-selective
transcription factors and are essential for hepatocyte differentiation. This
study demonstrates that HNF1alpha as well as HNF4alpha genes contain a direct
repeat with a space of one nucleotide (DR1)-retinoic acid (RA) response element
that can be bound and regulated by RA and retinoid x receptor alpha (RXRalpha)
complex. Transient transfection experiments showed that RA increased the promoter
activity of the HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha genes in Hep3B cells. Overexpression of
RXRalpha further enhanced the activities of both genes. Two putative RXRalpha
binding sites on the HNF1alpha (-295 to -276) and HNF4alpha (-418 to -399) genes 
have been characterized. By transient transfection, both sites positively
responded to RA, and overexpression of RXRalpha in Hep3B cells increased the
regulatory effect. Gel mobility shift assay demonstrated that these two DR-1
sites could be bound by RXRalpha specifically. These data suggest that the
differentiation effect of RA on hepatocyte may be due to direct interaction of
RXRalpha with the RA-responsive elements on the HNF1alpha and HNF4alpha genes.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11027556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Diabetes Care. 2000 Oct;23(10):1533-8.

Variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha and -4alpha genes in Finnish and
Chinese subjects with late-onset type 2 diabetes.

Rissanen J(1), Wang H, Miettinen R, Kärkkäinen P, Kekäläinen P, Mykkänen L,
Kuusisto J, Karhapää P, Niskanen L, Uusitupa M, Laakso M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Kuopio, Finland.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the role of the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha
and HNF-4alpha genes in the etiology of late-onset type 2 diabetes in Finnish and
Chinese subjects.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The whole coding regions of the genes encoding for
HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha, including approximately 800 bp of the HNF-1alpha
promoter, were investigated in 40 Finnish subjects (fasting C-peptide 50-570
pmol/l) and 47 Chinese subjects with type 2 diabetes by single-strand
conformation polymorphism (SSCP) analysis. Frequencies of the variants of these
genes were analyzed by restriction fragment-length polymorphism analysis in
additional samples of 100 Finnish diabetic patients and 82 Finnish control
subjects and in 58 Chinese diabetic patients and 51 Chinese control subjects.
RESULTS: No previously reported gene defects were detected, but one novel
functionally silent GCC-->GCG variant (nucleotide 73, exon 10) was observed in
the HNF-4alpha gene in a Chinese diabetic patient. Interestingly, the Ala98Val
substitution of the HNF-1alpha gene occurred at a significantly higher frequency 
in 140 Finnish diabetic patients compared with 82 control subjects (P = 0.014).
The Ala98Val variant was not, however, associated with abnormalities in insulin
secretion evaluated by oral and intravenous glucose tolerance tests in subjects
with normal (n = 295) or impaired (n = 38) glucose tolerance.
CONCLUSIONS: Variants in the HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha genes are unlikely to play
a major role in the pathogenesis of late-onset type 2 diabetes in Finnish and
Chinese subjects. However, the association of the Ala98Val variant of the
HNF-1alpha gene with type 2 diabetes in Finnish subjects may indicate a
diabetogenic locus close to the HNF-1alpha gene.

PMID: 11023148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Mol Biol. 2000 Sep 29;302(4):831-51.

Analysis of protein dimerization and ligand binding of orphan receptor HNF4alpha.

Bogan AA(1), Dallas-Yang Q, Ruse MD Jr, Maeda Y, Jiang G, Nepomuceno L, Scanlan
TS, Cohen FE, Sladek FM.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Toxicology, University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143,
USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) (NR2A1), an orphan member of the
nuclear receptor superfamily, binds DNA exclusively as a homodimer even though it
is very similar in amino acid sequence to retinoid X receptor alpha (RXRalpha),
which heterodimerizes readily with other receptors. Here, experimental analysis
of residues involved in protein dimerization and studies on a reported ligand for
HNF4alpha are combined with a structural model of the HNF4alpha ligand-binding
domain (LBD) (residues 137 to 384). When K300 (in helix 9) and E327 (in helix 10)
of HNF4alpha1 were converted to the analogous residues in RXRalpha (E390 and
K417, respectively) the resulting construct did not heterodimerize with the
wild-type HNF4alpha, although it was still able to form homodimers and bind DNA. 
Furthermore, the double mutant did not heterodimerize with RXR or RAR but was
still able to dimerize in solution with an HNF4alpha construct truncated at amino
acid residue 268. This suggests that the charge compatibility between helices 9
and 10 is necessary, but not sufficient, to determine dimerization partners, and 
that additional residues in the HNF4alpha LBD are also important in dimerization.
The structural model of the HNF4alpha LBD and an amino acid sequence alignment of
helices 9 and 10 in various HNF4 and other receptor genes indicates that a
K(X)(26)E motif can be used to identify HNF4 genes from other organisms and that 
a (E/D(X)(26-29)K/R) motif can be used to predict heterodimerization of many, but
not all, receptors with RXR. In vitro analysis of another HNF4alpha mutant
construct indicates that helix 10 also plays a structural role in the
conformational integrity of HNF4alpha. The structural model and experimental
analysis indicate that fatty acyl CoA thioesters, the proposed HNF4alpha ligands,
are not good candidates for a traditional ligand for HNF4alpha. Finally, these
results provide insight into the mechanism of action of naturally occurring
mutations in the human HNF4alpha gene found in patients with maturity onset
diabetes of the young 1 (MODY1).

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10993727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Diabetologia. 2000 Aug;43(8):1064-9.

No diabetes-associated mutations in the coding region of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4gamma gene (HNF4G) in Japanese patients with MODY.

Hara M(1), Wang X, Paz VP, Cox NJ, Iwasaki N, Ogata M, Iwamoto Y, Bell GI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The University of Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 
(HNF)-4alpha are the cause of one form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young,
MODY1. The HNF-4gamma is structurally related to HNF-4alpha and is expressed
together with HNF-4alpha in pancreatic islets. We therefore tested the hypothesis
that genetic variation in the HNF-4gamma gene (HNF4G) is associated with MODY in 
Japanese subjects.
METHODS: We screened the protein coding region of HNF4G (exons 3-11) for
mutations in 57 unrelated Japanese subjects with MODY by amplifying each exon and
adjacent intron region using the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and specific
primers and then directly sequencing the PCR products. The frequency of each
variant was compared between patients with MODY and a group of non-diabetic
subjects.
RESULTS: We found ten sequence variants, two of these were located in exons: exon
6, a silent substitution in codon 144, c.432A/G and exon 7, a G-to-A substitution
in codon 190 (c.570G/A) resulting in a conservative Met-to-Ile substitution
(M/I190) in the putative ligand-binding region of HNF-4gamma protein. The
remaining eight variants were located in introns. There was no significant
difference in the frequency of these polymorphisms between subjects with MODY and
non-diabetic control subjects.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Genetic variation in the coding region of HNF4G is
unlikely to be a major cause of MODY in Japanese people.

PMID: 10990086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Horm Metab Res. 2000 Aug;32(8):316-20.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha gene in Japanese with
non-insulin-dependent diabetes: a nucleotide substitution in the polypyrimidine
tract of intron 1b.

Sakurai K(1), Seki N, Fujii R, Yagui K, Tokuyama Y, Shimada F, Makino H, Suzuki
Y, Hashimoto N, Saito Y, Egashira T, Matsui K, Kanatsuka A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine II, Chiba University School of Medicine,
Japan.

Mutations of the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF-4alpha) gene have been
demonstrated in maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) 1 families. To
investigate the possibility that the HNF-4alpha gene contributes to the onset of 
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) in Japanese patients, we screened
all exons and flanking introns of this gene for mutations in 100 patients with
NIDDM diagnosed after 25 years of age. We identified two missense mutations: M49V
in exon 1c and T1301 in exon 4; and two nucleotide substitutions in introns:
cytosine to thymidine at -5 nt in intron 1b and adenine to thymidine at -21 nt in
intron 5. We screened an additional 220 diabetic subjects for the polymorphism in
intron 1b. The c/t substitution in intron 1b was associated with NIDDM. This
substitution in the polypyrimidine tract, an important cis-acting element
directing intron removal, is likely to influence pre-mRNA splicing of this gene. 
T1301 in exon 4 was observed in only two diabetic subjects. This mutation could
influence the conformation of this peptide, resulting in changes in ligand
binding domain function. M49V in exon 1c was found in both diabetic and
non-diabetic subjects; isoforms HNF-4alpha 4, 5, and 6 with this mutation may
impair glucose metabolism in tissue. In contrast to the primary cause of nonsense
and missense mutations of the HNF-4alpha gene in MODY1, the nucleotide
substitution in intron 1b may partially contribute to development of NIDDM in
combination with other genetic and environmental factors.

PMID: 10983627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 17;275(46):35953-9.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha regulates the expression of pancreatic beta
-cell genes implicated in glucose metabolism and nutrient-induced insulin
secretion.

Wang H(1), Maechler P, Antinozzi PA, Hagenfeldt KA, Wollheim CB.

Author information: 
(1)Division de Biochimie Clinique, Départment de Médecine Interne, Centre Médical
Universitaire, CH-1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Mutations in the HNF4alpha gene are associated with the subtype 1 of
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY1), which is characterized by impaired 
insulin secretory response to glucose in pancreatic beta-cells. Hepatocyte
nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is a transcription factor critical for liver
development and hepatocyte-specific gene expression. However, the role of
HNF4alpha in the regulation of pancreatic beta-cell gene expression and its
correlation with metabolism secretion coupling have not been previously
investigated. The tetracycline-inducible system was employed to achieve tightly
controlled expression of both wild type (WT) and dominant-negative mutant (DN) of
HNF4alpha in INS-1 cells. The induction of WT-HNF4alpha resulted in a left shift 
in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion, whereas DN-HNF4alpha selectively
impaired nutrient-stimulated insulin release. Induction of DN-HNF4alpha also
caused defective mitochondrial function substantiated by reduced [(14)C]pyruvate 
oxidation, attenuated substrate-evoked mitochondrial membrane hyperpolarization, 
and blunted nutrient-generated cellular ATP production. Quantitative evaluation
of HNF4alpha-regulated pancreatic beta-cell gene expression revealed altered mRNA
levels of insulin, glucose transporter-2, L-pyruvate kinase, aldolase B,
2-oxoglutarate dehydrogenase E1 subunit, and mitochondrial uncoupling protein-2. 
The patterns of HNF4alpha-regulated gene expression are strikingly similar to
that of its downstream transcription factor HNF1alpha. Indeed, HNF4alpha changed 
the HNF1alpha mRNA levels and HNF1alpha promoter luciferase activity through
altered HNF4alpha binding. These results demonstrate the importance of HNF4alpha 
in beta-cell metabolism-secretion coupling.

PMID: 10967120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Biol Chem. 2000 Nov 24;275(47):36910-9.

Autoregulation and maturity onset diabetes of the young transcription factors
control the human PAX4 promoter.

Smith SB(1), Watada H, Scheel DW, Mrejen C, German MS.

Author information: 
(1)Hormone Research Institute and Department of Medicine University of
California, San Francisco, California 941423-0534, USA.

During pancreatic development, the paired homeodomain transcription factor PAX4
is required for the differentiation of the insulin-producing beta cells and
somatostatin-producing delta cells. To establish the position of PAX4 in the
hierarchy of factors controlling islet cell development, we examined the control 
of the human PAX4 gene promoter. In both cell lines and transgenic animals, a
4.9-kilobase pair region directly upstream of the human PAX4 gene transcriptional
start site acts as a potent pancreas-specific promoter. Deletion mapping
experiments demonstrate that a 118-base pair region lying approximately 1.9
kilobase pairs upstream of the transcription start site is both necessary and
sufficient to direct pancreas-specific expression. Serial deletions through this 
region reveal the presence of positive elements that bind several pancreatic
transcription factors as follows: the POU homeodomain factor HNF1alpha, the
orphan nuclear receptor HNF4alpha, the homeodomain factor PDX1, and a heterodimer
composed of two basic helix-loop-helix factors. Interestingly, mutations in the
genes encoding four of these factors cause a dominantly inherited form of human
diabetes called Maturity Onset Diabetes of the Young. In addition, PAX4 itself
has at least two high affinity binding sites within the promoter through which it
exerts a strong negative autoregulatory effect. Together, these results suggest a
model in which PAX4 expression is activated during pancreatic development by a
combination of pancreas-specific factors but is then switched off once PAX4
protein reaches sufficient levels.

PMID: 10967107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Aug;85(8):2951-3.

Variability of the insulin receptor substrate-1, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha
(HNF-1alpha), HNF-4alpha, and HNF-6 genes and size at birth in a population-based
sample of young Danish subjects.

Rasmussen SK(1), Urhammer SA, Hansen T, Almind K, Møller AM, Borch-Johnsen K,
Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark.

Reduced size at birth has been proposed to be a risk factor for insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes. It is, however, not known whether this
association is explained by unfavorable intrauterine environment or by specific
susceptibility genotypes predisposing for both reduced fetal growth and insulin
resistance and type 2 diabetes. The present study was performed to evaluate
whether previously identified amino acid polymorphisms of genes that from animal 
models have been suggested to play important roles during fetal development are
associated with alterations in size at birth. The study population comprised 380 
subjects randomly recruited from a population of young Danish Caucasian
individuals, aged 18-32 yr. The original data of birth length and weight for 331 
of 380 subjects were obtained from the midwife records. The Gly/Arg972 of insulin
receptor substrate-1 (IRS-1), the Thr/Ile130 of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha), the Pro/Ala75 of HNF-6, and the Ile/Leu27, Ala/Val93,
and Ser/Asn4s7 polymorphisms of the HNF-lalpha gene were examined for association
with birth weight and length and the ponderal index. Using a generalized linear
model, including gender and the genotype as fixed variables, and applying
Bonferroni correction for multiple testing, we could not demonstrate any
significant differences in these estimates among wild-type, heterozygous, and
homozygous carriers with respect to any of the gene variants. In conclusion,
common variability in the genes encoding the IRS-1, HNF-lalpha, HNF-4alpha, and
HNF-6 proteins can be excluded as major factors influencing size at birth among
Danish Caucasian subjects.

PMID: 10946909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. FEBS Lett. 2000 Aug 11;479(1-2):41-5.

Functional properties of the R154X HNF-4alpha protein generated by a mutation
associated with maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 1.

Laine B(1), Eeckhoute J, Suaud L, Briche I, Furuta H, Bell GI, Formstecher P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 459 INSERM, Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire, Université H.
Warembourg, Lille, France. blaine@lille.inserm.fr

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF-4alpha) gene are
associated with one form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY1). The
R154X mutation generates a protein lacking the E-domain which is required for
normal HNF-4alpha functions. Since pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction is a feature 
of MODY1 patients, we compared the functional properties of the R154X mutant in
insulin-secreting pancreatic beta-cells and non-beta-cells. The R154X mutation
did not affect nuclear localisation in beta-cells and non-beta-cells. However, it
did lead to a greater impairment of HNF-4a function in beta-cells compared to
non-beta-cells, including a complete loss of transactivation activity and a
dominant-negative behaviour. .

PMID: 10940385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Diabetes. 2000 May;49(5):832-7.

Genotype/phenotype relationships in HNF-4alpha/MODY1: haploinsufficiency is
associated with reduced apolipoprotein (AII), apolipoprotein (CIII),
lipoprotein(a), and triglyceride levels.

Shih DQ(1), Dansky HM, Fleisher M, Assmann G, Fajans SS, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, Rockefeller University, New York, New York
10021, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha is a transcription factor that plays an
important role in regulation of gene expression in pancreatic beta-cells and in
the liver. Heterozygous mutations in the HNF-4alpha gene are responsible for
maturity-onset diabetes of the young 1 (MODY1), which is characterized by
pancreatic beta-cell-deficient insulin secretion. HNF-4alpha is a major
transcriptional regulator of many genes expressed in the liver. However, no liver
defect has been identified in individuals with HNF-4alpha mutations. In this
study, we have identified HNF-4alpha target genes that are mainly expressed in
the liver, including alpha1-antitrypsin, alpha1-antichymotrypsin, alpha-fetal
protein, ceruloplasmin, IGF binding protein 1, transferrin, apolipoprotein(AI)
[apo(AI)], apo(AII), apo(B), and apo(CIII). Serum levels of these proteins and
Lp(a) and triglycerides were measured in 24 members of the HNF-4alpha/MODY1 RW
pedigree (Q268X mutation), including 12 diabetic patients with HNF-4alpha
mutations (D-HNF4+/-), 6 nondiabetic subjects with HNF-4alpha mutations
(N-HNF4+/-), 6 normal relatives (N-HNF4+/+), 6 unrelated normal matched control
subjects (N-HNF4+/+), and 12 matched diabetic (non-MODY1-5) patients (D-HNF4+/+).
Serum levels of apo(AII), apo(CIII), lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)], and triglyceride
were significantly reduced in HNF4+/- subjects (26.9, 19.8, 12.1, and 72.1 mg/dl,
respectively) compared with HNF4+/+ subjects (37.4, 26.5, 45.2, and 124.2 mg/dl, 
respectively) (P = 0.00001, P = 0.01, P = 0.00006, and P = 0.000003,
respectively). This reduction was not found when apo(AII), apo(CIII), Lp(a), and 
triglyceride levels were compared in D-HNF4+/- versus N-HNF4+/- or in D-HNF4+/+
versus N-HNF4+/+ subjects, which indicates that HNF-4alpha haploinsufficiency
rather than hyperglycemia is the primary cause of decreased serum protein and
triglyceride concentrations. Furthermore, we determined that genetic or
environmental modifiers other than HNF-4alpha do not appear to contribute to the 
observed decrease of HNF-4alpha-regulated serum proteins. This study demonstrates
that a heterozygous HNF-4alpha mutation leads to an HNF-4alpha-dependent
hepatocyte secretory defect of liver-specific proteins.

PMID: 10905494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Diabetes Care. 2000 Mar;23(3):302-4.

Mutations in the genes for hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, -4alpha,
-1beta, and -3beta; the dimerization cofactor of HNF-1; and insulin promoter
factor 1 are not common causes of early-onset type 2 diabetes in Pima Indians.

Baier LJ(1), Permana PA, Traurig M, Dobberfuhl A, Wiedrich C, Sutherland J,
Thuillez P, Luczy-Bachman G, Hara M, Horikawa Y, Hinokio Y, Hanson RL, Bogardus
C.

Author information: 
(1)Phoenix Epidemiology and Clinical Research Branch, National Institute of
Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of Health,
Arizona 85016, USA. lbaier@phx.niddk.nih.gov

OBJECTIVE: Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically
heterogeneous subtype of type 2 diabetes characterized by an early age at onset
and autosomal dominant inheritance. MODY can result from heterozygous mutations
in at least five genes. The purpose of this study was to determine whether
alterations in known MODY genes and two MODY candidate genes contribute to the
development of early-onset type 2 diabetes in Pima Indians.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: The coding regions of the known MODY genes
hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-1alpha, HNF-4alpha, HNF-1beta, and insulin
promoter factor 1 and the coding regions of two MODY candidate genes, HNF-3beta
and the dimerization cofactor of HNF-1, were sequenced in genomic DNA from Pima
Indians. The primary "affected" study population consisted of 46 Pima Indians
whose age at onset of type 2 diabetes was < or =20 years. DNA sequence variants
identified in the affected group were then analyzed in a group of 80 "unaffected"
Pima Indians who were at least 40 years old and had normal glucose tolerance.
RESULTS: A total of 11 polymorphisms were detected in these genes. However, none 
of the polymorphisms differed in frequency among Pima Indians with an early age
at onset of diabetes compared with older Pima Indians with normal glucose
tolerance.
CONCLUSIONS: Mutations in these known MODY or MODY candidate genes are not a
common cause of early-onset diabetes in Pima Indians.

PMID: 10868855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Diabetes. 2000 Jun;49(6):961-8.

Reduced pancreatic polypeptide response to hypoglycemia and amylin response to
arginine in subjects with a mutation in the HNF-4alpha/MODY1 gene.

Ilag LL(1), Tabaei BP, Herman WH, Zawacki CM, D'Souza E, Bell GI, Fajans SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Health System, Ann
Arbor, USA.

Subjects with the Q268X mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha
gene (RW pedigree/maturity-onset diabetes of the young [MODY]-1) have diminished 
insulin and glucagon secretory responses to arginine. To determine if pancreatic 
polypeptide (PP) secretion is likewise involved, we studied PP responses to
insulin-induced hypoglycemia in 17 RW pedigree members: 6 nondiabetic
mutation-negative [ND(-)], 4 nondiabetic mutation-positive [ND(+)], and 7
diabetic mutation-positive [D(+)]. Subjects received 0.08 U/kg body wt human
regular insulin as an intravenous bolus to produce moderate self-limited
hypoglycemia. PP areas under the curve (PP-AUCs) were compared among groups. With
hypoglycemia, the PP-AUC was lower in the D(+) group (14,907 +/- 6,444 pg/ml, P =
0.03) and the ND(+) group (14,622 +/- 6,015 pg/ml, P = 0.04) compared with the
ND(-) group (21,120 +/- 4,158 pg/ml). In addition, to determine if the beta-cell 
secretory defect in response to arginine involves amylin in addition to insulin
secretion, we analyzed samples from 17 previously studied RW pedigree subjects.
We compared the AUCs during arginine infusions for the 3 groups both at
euglycemia and hyperglycemia as well as their C-peptide-to-amylin ratios. The
D(+) and ND(+) groups had decreased amylin AUCs during both arginine infusions
compared with the ND(-) group, but had similar C-peptide-to-amylin ratios. These 
results suggest that the HNF-4alpha mutation in the RW/MODY1 pedigree confers a
generalized defect in islet cell function involving PP cells in addition to beta-
and alpha-cells, and beta-cell impairment involving proportional deficits in
insulin and amylin secretion.

PMID: 10866048  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Diabetologia. 2000 Apr;43(4):520-4.

R127W-HNF-4alpha is a loss of function mutation but not a rare polymorphism and
causes Type II diabetes in a Japanese family with MODY1.

Yang Q(1), Yamagata K, Yamamoto K, Cao Y, Miyagawa J, Fukamizu A, Hanafusa T,
Matsuzawa Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Department of Internal Medicine and Molecular Science, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Osaka University, Japan.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha gene
cause the type 1 form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY1). The R127W 
mutation is a missense mutation located in the T-box region of HNF-4alpha that
was first identified in a Japanese family with MODY. We have examined the
functional properties of this mutation in order to clarify the molecular basis of
MODY1.
METHODS: The intracellular localisation, DNA binding ability, transactivation
activity and functional synergism with the coactivator CREB-binding protein (CBP)
of R127W-HNF-4alpha were investigated.
RESULTS: The nuclear import and functional synergy with CBP of R127W-HNF-4alpha
were normal. The DNA binding ability of the mutant was decreased as was its
transcriptional activation of the HNF-1alpha and L-type pyruvate kinase (PKL)
genes.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: The R127W mutation seems to be a loss-of-function
mutation.

PMID: 10819248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2000 Jan 31;1490(1-2):21-32.

Primary structure, chromosomal mapping, expression and transcriptional activity
of murine hepatocyte nuclear factor 4gamma.

Taraviras S(1), Mantamadiotis T, Dong-Si T, Mincheva A, Lichter P, Drewes T,
Ryffel GU, Monaghan AP, Schütz G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology of the Cell 1, German Cancer Research Center,
Heidelberg.

We demonstrate the presence of a new member of the orphan nuclear receptor
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4) subfamily in mouse which is genetically
distinct from the previously characterized mouse HNF4alpha gene. The new member
of the HNF4 subfamily shows highest amino acid identity, similar tissue
distribution and syntenous chromosomal localization to the recently described
human HNF4gamma (NR2A2), we therefore classify it as mouse HNF4gamma
(mHNF4gamma). A combination of RT-PCR and immunohistochemical analysis showed
expression of mHNF4gamma mRNA and protein in the endocrine pancreas, testes,
kidney and gut. By co-transfection experiments, we show that mHNF4gamma is able
to activate transcription, acting through binding sites that have been previously
characterized as HNF4alpha binding sites. The presence of HNFgamma in human and
mouse implies that a complex transcriptional network exists in higher vertebrates
involving a number of HNF4 members with overlapping yet distinct function and
tissue distribution.

PMID: 10786614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2000 Feb;85(2):853-7.

No evidence for linkage at candidate type 2 diabetes susceptibility loci on
chromosomes 12 and 20 in United Kingdom Caucasians.

Frayling TM(1), McCarthy MI, Walker M, Levy JC, O'Rahilly S, Hitman GA, Rao PV,
Bennett AJ, Jones EC, Menzel S, Ellard S, Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Diabetes and Vascular Medicine, School of Postgraduate Medicine 
and Health Sciences, University of Exeter, United Kingdom.
t.m.frayling@exeter.ac.uk

Several studies have identified evidence for linkage between type 2 diabetes and 
the regions on chromosomes 12 and 20 containing the maturity-onset diabetes of
the young (MODY) genes, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha) and
HNF-4alpha. Two studies examining the HNF-1alpha region have demonstrated
evidence for linkage at genome-wide levels of significance, whereas four studies 
examining the HNF-4alpha locus have resulted in evidence for linkage at more
suggestive levels of significance. The demonstration of linkage to these regions 
in additional patient series will strengthen the evidence that susceptibility
alleles exist at these loci. We therefore assessed the evidence for linkage to
these regions using a large cohort of United Kingdom Caucasian type 2
diabetes-affected sibling pairs. A maximum total of 315 affected full sibling
pairs were typed for microsatellite markers across the MODY regions and, in a
subset of families, for markers spanning the whole of chromosome 20. Evidence for
linkage was assessed using a multipoint, mode of inheritance-free method. Linkage
analysis did not reveal any significant evidence for excess allele sharing at any
of the regions studied. Loci contributing sibling recurrence risks, relative to
the general population risk, of 1.75 and 1.25 could be excluded for the
HNF-1alpha and HNF-4alpha regions, respectively. We have not confirmed in United 
Kingdom Caucasians the evidence for linkage previously reported on 12q and 20q.
Our results highlight further the problems of replicating previous positive
linkage results across different ethnic groups.

PMID: 10690901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Nucleic Acids Res. 2000 Jan 15;28(2):430-7.

Naturally occurring mutations in the human HNF4alpha gene impair the function of 
the transcription factor to a varying degree.

Lausen J(1), Thomas H, Lemm I, Bulman M, Borgschulze M, Lingott A, Hattersley AT,
Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zellbiologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Hufelandstrasse 55,
D-45122 Essen, Germany.

The hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)4alpha, a member of the nuclear receptor
superfamily, regulates genes that play a critical role in embryogenesis and
metabolism. Recent studies have shown that mutations in the human HNF4alpha gene 
cause a rare form of type 2 diabetes, maturity onset diabetes of the young
(MODY1). To investigate the properties of these naturally occurring HNF4alpha
mutations we analysed five MODY1 mutations (R154X, R127W, V255M, Q268X and E276Q)
and one other mutation (D69A), which we found in HepG2 hepatoma cells. Activation
of reporter genes in transfection assays and DNA binding studies showed that the 
MODY1-associated mutations result in a variable reduction in function, whereas
the D69A mutation showed an increased activity on some promoters. None of the
MODY mutants acted in a dominant negative manner, thus excluding inactivation of 
the wild-type factor as a critical event in MODY development. A MODY3-associated 
mutation in the HNF1alpha gene, a well-known target gene of HNF4alpha, results in
a dramatic loss of the HNF4 binding site in the promoter, indicating that
mutations in the HNF4alpha gene might cause MODY through impaired HNF1alpha gene 
function. Based on these data we propose a two-hit model for MODY development.

PMCID: PMC102517
PMID: 10606640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Diabetologia. 1999 Sep;42(9):1131-7.

High frequency of mutations in MODY and mitochondrial genes in Scandinavian
patients with familial early-onset diabetes.

Lehto M(1), Wipemo C, Ivarsson SA, Lindgren C, Lipsanen-Nyman M, Weng J, Wibell
L, Widén E, Tuomi T, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, University Hospital MAS, University of Lund,
Malmö, Sweden.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: To investigate the contribution of mutations in maturity-onset
diabetes of the young (MODY) and mitochondrial genes to early-onset diabetes with
a strong family history of diabetes in a cohort with a high prevalence of Type I 
(insulin-dependent) diabetes mellitus.
METHODS: Screening for sequence variants in the hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-4alpha (MODY1), glucokinase (MODY2), HNF-1alpha (MODY3) genes and
mitochondrial DNA was carried out in 115 Finnish and Swedish patients with
early-onset ( </= 40 years) diabetes using the single strand conformation
polymorphism (SSCP) technique and direct sequencing. Allele frequencies were
compared with 118 patients with onset of diabetes Type II (non-insulin-dependent)
diabetes mellitus after the age of 40 and 92 non-diabetic control subjects
without a family history of diabetes.
RESULTS: In total 52 sequence variants were found in the HNF-1alpha, HNF-4alpha
and glucokinase genes, 12 of which were considered as MODY mutations. Three
families had the A3243G mutation in the mitochondrial tRNA(Leu) gene, which
resulted in an overall prevalence of these mutations of 13 %.
CONCLUSION/INTERPRETATION: Among 115 Scandinavian families, mutations in the
HNF-1alpha gene represented the most common cause of familial early-onset ( </=
40 years) diabetes: MODY3 (5.2 %) more than MODY2 (3.5 %) more than MIDD (2.6 %) 
more than MODY1 (1.7 %).

PMID: 10447526  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Jul-Aug;12(4):487-97.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY): a new challenge for pediatric
diabetologists.

Guazzarotti L(1), Bartolotta E, Chiarelli F.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatrics, S. Lucia Hospital, Recanati, MC, Italy.

The differential diagnosis of hyperglycemia in childhood and adolescence has to
take into consideration early-onset non-insulin-dependent diabetes, defined as
maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY). To date, mutations in genes of five 
proteins have been shown to cause MODY: glucokinase (MODY2), hepatic nuclear
factor-1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) (MODY3), hepatic nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF-4
alpha) (MODY1), insulin promoter factor 1 (IPF-1) (MODY4) and hepatic nuclear
factor-1 beta (HNF-1 beta) (MODY5), but other MODY genes still await elucidation.
Clinical and metabolic heterogeneity of these subtypes of type 2 diabetes need to
be defined, as deficiency of each factor has its own phenotype. Pediatric
diabetologists should be aware of the increasing importance of MODY as a possible
cause of hyperglycemia in children and adolescents. This will allow for the early
diagnosis of these metabolic conditions and for the appropriate follow-up and
treatment.

PMID: 10417964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Diabetes. 1999 Feb;48(2):423-5.

Mutation in the HNF-4alpha gene affects insulin secretion and triglyceride
metabolism.

Lehto M(1), Bitzén PO, Isomaa B, Wipemo C, Wessman Y, Forsblom C, Tuomi T,
Taskinen MR, Groop L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Dalby Primary Health Center, University of Lund, 
Sweden. markku.lehto@endo.mas.lu.se

PMID: 10334325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Diabetes. 1999 May;48(5):1162-7.

Functional study of the E276Q mutant hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha found in
type 1 maturity-onset diabetes of the young: impaired synergy with chicken
ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor II on the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 promoter.

Suaud L(1), Hemimou Y, Formstecher P, Laine B.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 459 INSERM, Laboratory of Cell Biology, University of Medicine H.
Warembourg, Lille, France.

Seven mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha gene have been
shown to correlate with type 1 maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY 1), a
monogenic form of type 2 diabetes. Up to now, only the functional properties of
two MODY 1 HNF-4alpha mutants, Q268X and V393I, have been investigated to address
how the mutations in the HNF-4alpha gene, found by genetic studies, can give rise
to impaired activities of mutated HNF-4alpha proteins and can cause this disease.
The E276Q mutation results in a nonconservative substitution occurring in the
HNF-4alpha E domain, which is involved in dimerization and transactivation
activities as well as in protein-protein interactions with other transcription
factors or coactivators. Using the mutated human HNF-4alpha2, we have found that,
in the absence of chicken ovalbumin upstream promoter transcription factor II
(COUP TFII), the E276Q substitution does not significantly affect the
dimerization and transactivating activities of HNF-4alpha, at least on the
promoters studied herein. On the other hand, in the presence of COUP TFII, the
substitution impairs the enhancement of HNF-4-mediated activation of HNF-1
promoter. The impaired synergy between COUP TFII and HNF-4 on the HNF-1 promoter 
results from an alteration of their interaction. HNF-1 expression plays a crucial
role in transactivation of insulin promoter and of numerous genes coding for
enzymes involved in glucose homeostasis. Therefore, its downregulation resulting 
from the E276Q mutation in HNF-4alpha gene most probably impairs the function of 
pancreatic beta-cells.

PMID: 10331424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Biochem J. 1999 May 15;340 ( Pt 1):161-9.

The activity of the activation function 2 of the human hepatocyte nuclear factor 
4 (HNF-4alpha) is differently modulated by F domains from various origins.

Suaud L(1), Formstecher P, Laine B.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 459 INSERM, Laboratoire de Biologie Cellulaire, Faculté de Médecine H.
Warembourg, 1 Place de Verdun, F 59045 Lille, France.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF-4) is a member of the nuclear hormone-receptor
superfamily, which plays an important role in the regulation of several genes
involved in numerous metabolic pathways. HNF-4 contains a DNA-binding domain
located in domain C and two activation-function domains, designated AF-1 and
AF-2, located in domains A/B and E, respectively. The seven isoforms of human
HNF-4, termed alpha1-alpha6 and gamma, differ mainly by their A/B and F domains. 
The high sequence variability of the F domain led us to investigate whether this 
domain modulates the transcriptional activity of HNF-4. Using constructs having
the same core receptor and different F domains, we observed that the F domains of
HNF-4 modulate the transactivating activity of the full-length HNF-4. A more
precise analysis using HNF-4alpha AF-2 fused to GAL4 protein and various F
domains demonstrated that F domains of isoforms alpha3 and gamma exhibited
inhibitory effects on the activation function AF-2 but that their inhibition
behaviours were weaker than that of HNF-4alpha2 F domain, which has been reported
previously. The presence of domain F results in a decreased interaction with the 
co-activator glucocorticoid receptor-interacting protein 1. For a given F domain,
the modulating effects on the full-length HNF-4 as well as on the AF-2 depended
on the target promoters. Our results suggest that the presence of domain F
results in conformation changes in HNF-4 AF-2 or in its spatial environment,
which probably modify the interaction of the AF-2 activation domain with
co-factors and transcription factors bound to cis-elements of the target
promoters.

PMCID: PMC1220234
PMID: 10229671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Diabet Med. 1999 Mar;16(3):193-200.

Identification of new mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha gene
among families with early onset Type 2 diabetes mellitus.

Malecki MT(1), Yang Y, Antonellis A, Curtis S, Warram JH, Krolewski AS.

Author information: 
(1)Research Division, Joslin Diabetes Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02215-5397,
USA.

AIMS: Mutations in hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha gene located on
chromosome 20q have been found to be responsible for the development of early
onset Type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM). Through a national campaign, 53 families
with autosomal dominant, early onset Type 2 DM (n=654) were assembled to
determine the frequency of mutations in the HNF-4alpha gene and their
contribution to the development of diabetes.
METHODS: Twelve exons and the promoter region of the HNF-4alpha gene were
screened in probands of the families by a double gradient, denaturing gradient
gel electrophoresis (DG-DGGE) protocol combined with automated bi-directional
sequencing of the PCR products of all heterozygous individuals.
RESULTS: We detected two new mutations in the HNF-4alpha gene that changed the
amino-acid sequence. The first mutation was a Gly-->Ser substitution in codon 115
within a highly conserved DNA binding domain, and all six carriers of this
mutation had diabetes and low insulin secretion. The second mutation was an
Ile-->Val substitution in codon 454 within the transactivation domain. It was
carried by four family members, two of whom also carried a mutation in the
HNF-1alpha gene. Of those having only the mutation in HNF-4alpha one had diabetes
and the other had normal glucose tolerance and both were obese and
hyperinsulinaemic. Thus, it is uncertain that this mutation is responsible for
any of the diabetes in this family.
CONCLUSION: We have found that mutations in the HNF-4alpha gene account for a
small proportion, about 2-4%, of families with early onset, autosomal dominant,
Type 2 DM in US Caucasians.

PMID: 10227563  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Mar 2;96(5):2198-203.

Type 2 diabetes: evidence for linkage on chromosome 20 in 716 Finnish affected
sib pairs.

Ghosh S(1), Watanabe RM, Hauser ER, Valle T, Magnuson VL, Erdos MR, Langefeld CD,
Balow J Jr, Ally DS, Kohtamaki K, Chines P, Birznieks G, Kaleta HS, Musick A, Te 
C, Tannenbaum J, Eldridge W, Shapiro S, Martin C, Witt A, So A, Chang J,
Shurtleff B, Porter R, Kudelko K, Unni A, Segal L, Sharaf R, Blaschak-Harvan J,
Eriksson J, Tenkula T, Vidgren G, Ehnholm C, Tuomilehto-Wolf E, Hagopian W,
Buchanan TA, Tuomilehto J, Bergman RN, Collins FS, Boehnke M.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
sghosh@alw.nih.gov

We are conducting a genome scan at an average resolution of 10 centimorgans (cM) 
for type 2 diabetes susceptibility genes in 716 affected sib pairs from 477
Finnish families. To date, our best evidence for linkage is on chromosome 20 with
potentially separable peaks located on both the long and short arms. The
unweighted multipoint maximum logarithm of odds score (MLS) was 3.08 on 20p
(location, chi = 19.5 cM) under an additive model, whereas the weighted MLS was
2.06 on 20q (chi = 57 cM, recurrence risk,lambda(s) = 1. 25, P = 0.009). Weighted
logarithm of odds scores of 2.00 (chi = 69.5 cM, P = 0.010) and 1.92 (chi = 18.5 
cM, P = 0.013) were also observed. Ordered subset analyses based on sibships with
extreme mean values of diabetes-related quantitative traits yielded sets of
families who contributed disproportionately to the peaks. Two-hour glucose levels
in offspring of diabetic individuals gave a MLS of 2. 12 (P = 0.0018) at 9.5 cM. 
Evidence from this and other studies suggests at least two
diabetes-susceptibility genes on chromosome 20. We have also screened the gene
for maturity-onset diabetes of the young 1, hepatic nuclear factor 4-a
(HNF-4alpha) in 64 affected sibships with evidence for high chromosomal sharing
at its location on chromosome 20q. We found no evidence that sequence changes in 
this gene accounted for the linkage results we observed.

PMCID: PMC26760
PMID: 10051618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Jan;84(1):367-9.

A novel Phe75fsdelT mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha gene in a
Danish pedigree with maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Møller AM(1), Dalgaard LT, Ambye L, Hansen L, Schmitz O, Hansen T, Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Mutations in 5 different genes [the hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha),
glucokinase, HNF-1alpha, insulin promoter factor-1, and HNF-1beta genes] have
been shown to cause maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY). About 50% of all
known MODY in Danish Caucasian MODY probands can be explained by mutations in the
HNF-1alpha gene (MODY3). To estimate the prevalence of MODY caused by mutations
in the HNF-4alpha gene (MODY1), we screened 10 non-MODY3 probands for mutations
in the minimal promoter and the 12 exons of the HNF-4alpha gene. One of the
probands had a novel frameshift mutation (Phe75fsdelT) in exon 2 of the
HNF-4alpha gene, resulting in a premature termination of translation after 117
amino acids of the messenger RNA encoded by that allele. The mutation
cosegregated with diabetes in the pedigree and was not detected in 84 unrelated
Danish Caucasian healthy glucose-tolerant control subjects or in 84 type 2
diabetic patients. At the time of examination, 4 of 6 mutation carriers were
treated with insulin and 2 with oral hypoglycemic medication. Two mutation
carriers had late-diabetic complications. Even though the HNF-4alpha protein is
known to be important in the regulation of genes involved in lipid metabolism,
carriers of the mutation did not differ from age and sex-matched control
subjects, in regard to levels of fasting serum total cholesterol, serum
high-density lipoprotein-cholesterol, and serum triglyceride. In conclusion, by
screening 10 non-MODY3 probands for mutations in the HNF-4alpha gene, we
identified 1 diabetes-associated frameshift mutation (Phe75fsdelT), suggesting
that defects in HNF-4alpha are a rare cause of MODY in Denmark.

PMID: 9920109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Diabetes Care. 1998 Dec;21(12):2144-8.

Liver and kidney function in Japanese patients with maturity-onset diabetes of
the young.

Iwasaki N(1), Ogata M, Tomonaga O, Kuroki H, Kasahara T, Yano N, Iwamoto Y.

Author information: 
(1)Diabetes Center, Tokyo Women's Medical University, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: Heterozygous mutations in the transcription factors hepatocyte nuclear
factor (HNF)-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta, and HNF-4 alpha are associated with
maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) and are believed to cause this form
of diabetes by impairing pancreatic beta-cell function. The HNFs also play a
central role in the tissue-specific regulation of gene expression in liver and
kidney, suggesting that patients with MODY due to a mutation in HNF-1 alpha,
HNF-1 beta, or HNF-4 alpha may exhibit abnormal liver or kidney function. Here,
we have examined liver and kidney function in a series of Japanese patients with 
HNF-4 alpha/MODY1, HNF-1 alpha/MODY3, and HNF-1 beta/MODY5 diabetes.
RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS: Clinical and biochemical data were obtained from
Japanese subjects with HNF-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta, and HNF-4 alpha diabetes. The
clinical data included information on BMI, age at diagnosis, current treatment,
and the presence and nature of any complications. The biochemical studies
examined liver and kidney function and included measures of alanine and aspartate
aminotransferase, gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine,
uric acid, total and HDL cholesterol, triglycerides, and 17 serum proteins.
RESULTS: The present age and duration of diabetes were similar in patients with
HNF-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta, or HNF-4 alpha diabetes, as was the age at diagnosis of 
diabetes in the youngest generation. All subjects were lean. Of the subjects with
HNF-1 alpha and HNF-4 alpha diabetes, 50% were treated with insulin, as were all 
three subjects with HNF-1 beta diabetes. Retinopathy was present in patients with
each form of diabetes. None of the subjects with HNF-4 alpha diabetes had
evidence of nephropathy, whereas 36% of the patients with HNF-1 alpha diabetes
and 100% of those with HNF-1 beta diabetes showed diminished kidney function. The
three subjects with HNF-1 beta diabetes also had abnormally high serum
creatinine, uric acid, and blood urea nitrogen levels, which are consistent with 
impaired kidney function, and one of seven subjects with HNF-1 alpha diabetes had
a mild elevation in creatinine and blood urea nitrogen levels. These values were 
within the normal range in the three patients with HNF-4 alpha diabetes. Although
the HNFs play a role in regulating the expression of the genes for most, if not
all, serum proteins, there was no decrease in the levels of any of the 17 serum
proteins examined, and most were within or slightly above the normal range.
Lipoprotein(a) [Lp(a)] levels were elevated in the three patients with HNF-4
alpha diabetes and in one patient with HNF-1 beta diabetes, and in a second
patient with HNF-1 beta diabetes, Lp(a) was at the upper limit of normal.
CONCLUSIONS: The results indicate that as in white patients, MODY resulting from 
mutations in the HNF-1 alpha, HNF-1 beta, and HNF-4 alpha genes in Japanese
patients may be a severe disease similar to classic type 2 diabetes. In addition,
they suggest that patients with HNF-1 beta diabetes may be characterized by
diminished kidney function and perhaps abnormal liver function. Further studies
are needed to determine whether tests of liver and kidney function will be useful
in the diagnosis and subclassification of MODY.

PMID: 9839108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Diabetologia. 1998 Sep;41(9):1017-23.

Mutation screening in 18 Caucasian families suggest the existence of other MODY
genes.

Chèvre JC(1), Hani EH, Boutin P, Vaxillaire M, Blanché H, Vionnet N, Pardini VC, 
Timsit J, Larger E, Charpentier G, Beckers D, Maes M, Bellanné-Chantelot C, Velho
G, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Biologie de Lille, CNRS EP-10, France.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a heterogeneous subtype of
non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus characterised by early onset, autosomal
dominant inheritance and a primary defect in insulin secretion. To date five MODY
genes have been identified: hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha
(HNF-4alpha/MODY1/TCF14) on chromosome 20q, glucokinase (GCK/MODY2) on chromosome
7p, hepatocyte nuclear factor-1 alpha (HNF-1alpha/MODY3/TCF1) on chromosome 12q, 
insulin promoter factor-1 (IPF1/MODY4) on chromosome 13q and hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1 beta (HNF-1beta/MODY5/TCF2) on chromosome 17cen-q. We have screened the 
HNF-4alpha, HNF-1alpha and HNF-1beta genes in members of 18 MODY kindreds who
tested negative for glucokinase mutations. Five missense (G31D, R159W, A161T,
R200W, R271W), one substitution at the splice donor site of intron 5 (IVS5nt +
2T-->A) and one deletion mutation (P379fsdelT) were found in the HNF-1alpha gene,
but no MODY-associated mutations were found in the HNF-4alpha and HNF-1beta
genes. Of 67 French MODY families that we have now studied, 42 (63%) have
mutations in the glucokinase gene, 14 (21%) have mutations in the HNF-1alpha
gene, and 11 (16%) have no mutations in the HNF-4alpha, IPF1 and HNF-1beta genes.
Eleven families do not have mutations in the five known MODY genes suggesting
that there is at least one additional locus that can cause MODY.

PMID: 9754819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Diabetes. 1998 Jun;47(6):985-90.

MODY1 mutation Q268X in hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha allows for dimerization 
in solution but causes abnormal subcellular localization.

Sladek FM(1), Dallas-Yang Q, Nepomuceno L.

Author information: 
(1)Environmental Toxicology Graduate Program, University of California, Riverside
92521, USA. frances.sladek@ucr.edu

Recent studies have shown that mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-4alpha gene give rise to maturity-onset diabetes of the young, type 1
(MODY1). HNF-4, an orphan member of the nuclear receptor superfamily, contains a 
DNA-binding domain (DBD) and a putative ligand-binding domain (LBD) that can act 
independently of each other. The first MODY1 mutation identified creates a stop
codon at amino acid 268 in the LBD of HNF-4 (Q268X) that leaves the DBD intact,
suggesting that the mutant protein may retain some of the properties of the
wild-type protein. To determine the functional properties of this mutant, we
constructed HNF4.Q268X and tested it in vitro and in vivo for DNA binding,
protein dimerization, and transactivation activity. Results of an electrophoretic
mobility shift assay showed that HNF4.Q268X neither binds DNA alone nor binds it 
as a dimer with wild-type HNF-4 (HNF4.wt). In contrast, a co-immunoprecipitation 
assay showed that HNF4.Q268X is capable of dimerizing in solution with HNF4.wt.
Transient transfection assays, however, indicated that HNF4.Q268X does not affect
transactivation by HNF4.wt in vivo, supporting the argument against a dominant
negative effect. Additional results suggest that the lack of a dominant negative 
effect could be due to a striking differential subcellular localization of the
HNF4.Q268X protein: HNF4.Q268X could be extracted from transfected cells only
when treated with SDS. Taken together, our results suggest that the MODY1
phenotype is due to a loss of functional HNF-4 protein that is aggravated in
tissues that express relatively low amounts of HNF-4, such as pancreas.

PMID: 9604881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Nature. 1998 Apr 2;392(6675):512-6.

Fatty acyl-CoA thioesters are ligands of hepatic nuclear factor-4alpha.

Hertz R(1), Magenheim J, Berman I, Bar-Tana J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Nutrition and Metabolism, Faculty of Medicine, Hebrew
University, Jerusalem.

Dietary fatty acids specifically modulate the onset and progression of various
diseases, including cancer, atherogenesis, hyperlipidaemia, insulin resistances
and hypertension, as well as blood coagulability and fibrinolytic defects; their 
effects depend on their chain length and degree of saturation. Hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) is an orphan transcription factor of the superfamily
of nuclear receptors and controls the expression of genes that govern the
pathogenesis and course of some of these diseases. Here we show that long-chain
fatty acids directly modulate the transcriptional activity of HNF-4alpha by
binding as their acyl-CoA thioesters to the ligand-binding domain of HNF-4alpha. 
This binding may shift the oligomeric-dimeric equilibrium of HNF-4alpha or may
modulate the affinity of HNF-4alpha for its cognate promoter element, resulting
in either activation or inhibition of HNF-4alpha transcriptional activity as a
function of chain length and the degree of saturation of the fatty acyl-CoA
ligands. In addition to their roles as substrates to yield energy, as an energy
store, or as constituents of membrane phospholipids, dietary fatty acids may
affect the course of a disease by modulating the expression of
HNF-4alpha-controlled genes.

PMID: 9548258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Eur J Endocrinol. 1998 Mar;138(3):233-9.

Genetic, metabolic and clinical characteristics of maturity onset diabetes of the
young.

Velho G(1), Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-342, Hôpital Saint Vincent de Paul, Paris, France.

Maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically and clinically
heterogeneous subtype of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM)
characterised by early onset, autosomal dominant inheritance and a primary defect
in insulin secretion. To date, three MODY genes have been identified on
chromosomes 20q (MODY1/hepatic nuclear factor (HNF)-4alpha), 7p
(MODY2/glucokinase) and 12q (MODY3/HNF-1alpha). Mutations in MODY2/glucokinase
result in mild chronic hyperglycaemia as a result of reduced pancreatic beta-cell
responsiveness to glucose, and decreased net accumulation of hepatic glycogen and
increased hepatic gluconeogenesis after meals. In contrast, MODY1 and MODY3 are
characterised by severe insulin secretory defects, and by major hyperglycaemia
associated with microvascular complications. The role of the three known MODY
genes in susceptibility to the more common late-onset NIDDM remain uncertain.
Genetic studies seem to exclude a role as major susceptibility genes, but leave
unresolved whether they may have a minor role in a polygenic context or an
important role in particular populations.

PMID: 9539292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. J Clin Invest. 1998 Feb 1;101(3):521-6.

A missense mutation in hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha, resulting in a reduced 
transactivation activity, in human late-onset non-insulin-dependent diabetes
mellitus.

Hani EH(1), Suaud L, Boutin P, Chèvre JC, Durand E, Philippi A, Demenais F,
Vionnet N, Furuta H, Velho G, Bell GI, Laine B, Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS) EP10-Institute of Biology,
Pasteur Institute of Lille & CHRU-Lille, 59019 Lille, France.

Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) is a heterogeneous disorder
characterized by hyperglycemia resulting from defects in insulin secretion and
action. Recent studies have found mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4
alpha gene (HNF-4alpha) in families with maturity-onset diabetes of the young
(MODY), an autosomal dominant form of diabetes characterized by early age at
onset and a defect in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion. During the course of 
our search for susceptibility genes contributing to the more common late-onset
NIDDM forms, we observed nominal evidence for linkage between NIDDM and markers
in the region of the HNF-4alpha/MODY1 locus in a subset of French families with
NIDDM diagnosed before 45 yr of age. Thus, we screened these families for
mutations in the HNF-4alpha gene. We found a missense mutation, resulting in a
valine-to-isoleucine substitution at codon 393 in a single family. This mutation 
cosegregated with diabetes and impaired insulin secretion, and was not present in
119 control subjects. Expression studies showed that this conservative
substitution is associated with a marked reduction of transactivation activity, a
result consistent with this mutation contributing to the insulin secretory defect
observed in this family.

PMCID: PMC508593
PMID: 9449683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Nucleic Acids Res. 1998 Jan 15;26(2):497-504.

An alternative splice variant of the tissue specific transcription factor
HNF4alpha predominates in undifferentiated murine cell types.

Nakhei H(1), Lingott A, Lemm I, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Universitätsklinikum Essen, Institut für Zellbiologie (Tumorforschung),
Hufelandstrasse 55, D-45122 Essen, Germany.

The transcription factor hepatocyte nuclear factor 4alpha (HNF4alpha) is a tissue
specific transcription factor mainly expressed in the liver, kidney, intestine
and the endocrine pancreas, but is also an essential regulator for early
embryonic events. Based on its protein structure HNF4alpha is classified as an
orphan member of the nuclear receptor superfamily. Comparing HNF4alpha
transcription factors in the differentiated and dedifferentiated murine
hepatocyte cell line MHSV-12 we identified in dedifferentiated cells the novel
splice variant HNF4alpha7. This variant is characterized by an alternative first 
exon and has a lower transactivation potential in transient transfection assays
using HNF4 dependent reporter genes. HNF4alpha7 mRNA and the corresponding
protein are expressed in the undifferentiated pluripotent embryonal carcinoma
cell line F9, whereas HNF4alpha1 only appears after differentiation of F9 cells
to visceral endoderm. HNF4alpha7 mRNA is also found in totipotent embryonic stem 
cells. However, the function of HNF4alpha7 seems not to be restricted to
embryonic cells as the HNF4alpha7 mRNA is also present in adult tissues, most
notably the stomach. All these features suggest that the presence of distinct
splice variants of HNF4alpha modulates the activity of HNF4alphain a cell type
specific way.

PMCID: PMC147295
PMID: 9421506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Diabet Med. 1998 Jan;15(1):15-24.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young: clinical heterogeneity explained by genetic
heterogeneity.

Hattersley AT(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Vascular Medicine (Diabetes Research), Postgraduate Medical
School, Exeter, UK.

Erratum in
    Diabet Med 1998 May;15(5):437.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) can be defined by the clinical
characteristics of early-onset Type 2 (non-insulin-dependent) diabetes and
autosomal dominant inheritance. Mutations in four genes have been shown to cause 
MODY: glucokinase, hepatic nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF1alpha), hepatic nuclear
factor 4 alpha (HNF4alpha) and insulin promoter [corrected] factor 1 (IPF1). In
white Caucasians it is now possible to define the gene in most patients with a
clinical diagnosis of MODY. Each gene involved in MODY has its own specific
clinical and physiological characteristics. Patients with mutations of the
glucokinase gene have mild fasting hyperglycaemia throughout life, and rarely
require medication or develop microvascular complications. The principle
pathophysiology is stable beta-cell dysfunction characterized by reduced sensing 
of glucose by the pancreas. Patients with mutations in HNF1alpha have normal
glucose tolerance in early childhood and usually present with symptomatic
diabetes in their late teens or early adulthood. They show increasing
hyperglycaemia and treatment requirements with frequent microvascular
complications. The underlying defect is progressive beta-cell failure, with the
early lesion characterized by failure to increase insulin secretion with
increasing glucose levels. Patients with HNF4alpha and IPF1 mutations show a
similar clinical picture to HNF1alpha although diabetes may be diagnosed later.
There are other patients with MODY in whom the genetic defect is still unknown.
Molecular genetic testing in patients with diabetes offers the possibility of
making a firm diagnosis of MODY and allows prediction of the future clinical
course. The role of predictive testing in non-diabetic subjects within families
is uncertain at present. Preliminary evidence suggests that maintaining insulin
sensitivity by avoiding obesity and regular physical exercise may help delay the 
onset of diabetes.

PMID: 9472859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Diabetes. 1997 Nov;46(11):1749-54.

Diminished insulin and glucagon secretory responses to arginine in nondiabetic
subjects with a mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha/MODY1 gene.

Herman WH(1), Fajans SS, Smith MJ, Polonsky KS, Bell GI, Halter JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann
Arbor 48109-0354, USA. wherman@umich.edu

Nondiabetic subjects with the Q268X mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor
(HNF)-4alpha/MODY1 gene have impaired glucose-induced insulin secretion. To
ascertain the effects of the nonglucose secretagogue arginine on insulin and
glucagon secretion in these subjects, we studied 18 members of the RW pedigree: 7
nondiabetic mutation negative (ND[-]), 7 nondiabetic mutation positive (ND[+]),
and 4 diabetic mutation positive (D[+]). We gave arginine as a 5-g bolus,
followed by a 25-min infusion at basal glucose concentrations, and after glucose 
infusion to clamp plasma glucose at approximately 200 mg/dl. The acute insulin
response (AIR), the 10-60 min insulin area under the curve (AUC), and the insulin
secretion rate (ISR) were compared, as were the acute glucagon response (AGR) and
glucagon AUC. The ND[+] and D[+] groups had decreased insulin AUC and ISR and
decreased glucose potentiation of AIR, insulin AUC, and ISR to arginine
administration when compared with the ND[-] group. At basal glucose
concentrations, glucagon AUC was greatest for the ND[-] group, intermediate for
the ND[+] group, and lowest for the D[+] group. During the hyperglycemic clamp,
there was decreased suppression of glucagon AUC for both ND[+] and D[+] groups
compared with the ND[-] group. The decreased ISR to arginine in the ND[+] group
compared with the ND[-] group, magnified by glucose potentiation, indicated that 
HNF-4alpha affects the signaling pathway for arginine-induced insulin secretion. 
The decrease in glucagon AUC and decreased suppression of glucagon AUC with
hyperglycemia suggest that mutations in HNF-4alpha may lead to alpha-cell as well
as beta-cell secretory defects or a reduction in pancreatic islet mass.

PMID: 9356021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Diabetes. 1997 Oct;46(10):1652-7.

Organization and partial sequence of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha/MODY1 
gene and identification of a missense mutation, R127W, in a Japanese family with 
MODY.

Furuta H(1), Iwasaki N, Oda N, Hinokio Y, Horikawa Y, Yamagata K, Yano N,
Sugahiro J, Ogata M, Ohgawara H, Omori Y, Iwamoto Y, Bell GI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Chicago, IL
60637, USA.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor-4 alpha (HNF-4 alpha) is a member of the nuclear
receptor superfamily, a class of ligand-activated transcription factors. A
nonsense mutation in the gene encoding this transcription factor was recently
found in a white family with one form of maturity-onset diabetes of the young,
MODY1. Here, we report the exon-intron organization and partial sequence of the
human HNF-4 alpha gene. In addition, we have screened the 12 exons, flanking
introns and minimal promoter region for mutations in a group of 57 unrelated
Japanese subjects with early-onset NIDDM/MODY of unknown cause. Eight nucleotide 
substitutions were noted, of which one resulted in the mutation of a conserved
arginine residue, Arg127 (CGG)-->Trp (TGG) (designated R127W), located in the
T-box, a region of the protein that may play a role in HNF-4 alpha dimerization
and DNA binding. This mutation was not found in 214 unrelated nondiabetic
subjects (53 Japanese, 53 Chinese, 51 white, and 57 African-American). The R127W 
mutation was only present in three of five diabetic members in this family,
indicating that it is not the only cause of diabetes in this family. The
remaining seven nucleotide substitutions were located in the proximal promoter
region and introns. They are not predicted to affect the transcription of the
gene or mRNA processing and represent polymorphisms and rare variants. The
results suggest that mutations in the HNF-4 alpha gene may cause early-onset
NIDDM/MODY in Japanese but they are less common than mutations in the HNF-1
alpha/MODY3 gene. The information on the sequence of the HNF-4 alpha gene and its
promoter region will facilitate the search for mutations in other populations and
studies of the role of this gene in determining normal pancreatic beta-cell
function.

PMID: 9313765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Diabetes. 1997 Oct;46(10):1648-51.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young due to a mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear 
factor-4 alpha binding site in the promoter of the hepatocyte nuclear factor-1
alpha gene.

Gragnoli C(1), Lindner T, Cockburn BN, Kaisaki PJ, Gragnoli F, Marozzi G, Bell
GI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Recent studies have shown that mutations in the transcription factor hepatocyte
nuclear factor (HNF)-1 alpha are the cause of one form of maturity-onset diabetes
of the young (MODY3). These studies have identified mutations in the mRNA and
protein coding regions of this gene that result in the synthesis of an abnormal
mRNA or protein. Here, we report an Italian family in which an A-->C substitution
at nucleotide-58 of the promoter region of the HNF-1 alpha gene cosegregates with
MODY. This mutation is located in a highly conserved region of the promoter and
disrupts the binding site for the transcription factor HNF-4 alpha, mutations in 
the gene encoding HNF-4 alpha being another cause of MODY (MODY1). This result
demonstrates that decreased levels of HNF-1 alpha per se can cause MODY.
Moreover, it indicates that both the promoter and coding regions of the HNF-1
alpha gene should be screened for mutations in subjects thought to have MODY
because of mutations in this gene.

PMID: 9313764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. J Clin Invest. 1997 Sep 15;100(6):1400-5.

Hepatic function in a family with a nonsense mutation (R154X) in the hepatocyte
nuclear factor-4alpha/MODY1 gene.

Lindner T(1), Gragnoli C, Furuta H, Cockburn BN, Petzold C, Rietzsch H, Weiss U, 
Schulze J, Bell GI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically heterogeneous
monogenic disorder characterized by autosomal dominant inheritance, onset usually
before 25 yr of age, and abnormal pancreatic beta-cell function. Mutations in the
hepatocyte nuclear factor(HNF)-4alpha/MODY1, glucokinase/MODY2, and
HNF-1alpha/MODY3 genes can cause this form of diabetes. In contrast to the
glucokinase and HNF-1alpha genes, mutations in the HNF-4alpha gene are a
relatively uncommon cause of MODY, and our understanding of the MODY1 form of
diabetes is based on studies of only a single family, the R-W pedigree. Here we
report the identification of a second family with MODY1 and the first in which
there has been a detailed characterization of hepatic function. The affected
members of this family, Dresden-11, have inherited a nonsense mutation, R154X, in
the HNF-4alpha gene, and are predicted to have reduced levels of this
transcription factor in the tissues in which it is expressed, including
pancreatic islets, liver, kidney, and intestine. Subjects with the R154X mutation
exhibited a diminished insulin secretory response to oral glucose. HNF-4alpha
plays a central role in tissue-specific regulation of gene expression in the
liver, including the control of synthesis of proteins involved in cholesterol and
lipoprotein metabolism and the coagulation cascade. Subjects with the R154X
mutation, however, showed no abnormalities in lipid metabolism or coagulation
except for a paradoxical 3.3-fold increase in serum lipoprotein(a) levels, nor
was there any evidence of renal dysfunction in these subjects. The results
suggest that MODY1 is primarily a disorder of beta-cell function.

PMCID: PMC508318
PMID: 9294105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Diabetologia. 1997 Aug;40(8):980-3.

Studies of the genetic variability of the coding region of the hepatocyte nuclear
factor-4alpha in Caucasians with maturity onset NIDDM.

Møller AM(1), Urhammer SA, Dalgaard LT, Reneland R, Berglund L, Hansen T, Clausen
JO, Lithell H, Pedersen O.

Author information: 
(1)Steno Diabetes Center and Hagedorn Research Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha (HNF-4alpha) gene cause the
type 1 form of maturity onset diabetes of the young (MODY1). To address the
question of whether genetic variability of HNF-4alpha is associated with late
onset non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) we have sequenced the
coding region and intron/exon boundaries of the gene in 36 randomly recruited
Danish NIDDM patients. Two nucleotide substitutions that changed the sequence of 
HNF-4alpha were identified: Thr/Ile130, which has been reported previously and a 
novel Val/Met255. The Val/Met 255 mutation was found in 4 of 477 Danish NIDDM
patients and in none of 217 glucose tolerant control subjects; thus it cannot be 
excluded that this mutation may have an impact on NIDDM susceptibility. Among 509
NIDDM patients the allelic frequency of the Thr/Ile130 variant was 4.7% (95%
confidence interval: 3.4-6.0%) compared to 1.9% (0.7-3.1%) among 239 control
subjects (p = 0.008). However, in a population sample of 942 Swedish men with an 
average age of 70 years the allelic frequency of the variant was similar in 246
men with either impaired glucose tolerance (5.6% [2.6-8.6%]) or NIDDM (5.4%
[2.7-8.1%]) as compared to 666 glucose tolerant men (5.1% [3.9-6.3%]). Also in a 
population sample of 369 young healthy Danes the prevalence of the codon 130
variant (4.7% [3.2-6.2%]) was similar to what was found in Swedish Caucasians.
Thus, the allelic frequency of the Thr/Ile130 variant among the control subjects 
in the Danish case-control study deviates from the prevalence in the two other
studies which is why we consider the significant association between the codon
130 variant and NIDDM an incidental finding. In glucose tolerant subjects the
codon 130 variant in its heterozygous form had no major effect on glucose-induced
insulin and C-peptide release although a tendency to a lower insulin secretion
during an oral glucose tolerance test was seen in middle-aged subjects. In
conclusion, variability in the coding region of the HNF-4alpha gene is not a
common cause of NIDDM among whites of Danish ancestry. However, a Val/Met255
mutation was found exclusively in NIDDM patients (0.8% of cases) and functional
as well as family segregation studies are needed to determine whether this
HNF-4alpha variant is a NIDDM causing mutation.

PMID: 9267996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Diabetes. 1997 Aug;46(8):1364-7.

Pancreatic islet expression studies and polymorphic DNA markers in the genes
encoding hepatocyte nuclear factor-3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4gamma, and -6.

Vaisse C(1), Kim J, Espinosa R 3rd, Le Beau MM, Stoffel M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Diseases, Rockefeller University, New York, New York
10021, USA.

The genes encoding the functionally related hepatocyte nuclear factors HNF-1alpha
and HNF-4alpha play a critical role in normal pancreatic beta-cell function.
Mutations in these liver-enriched transcription factors result in two forms of
early-onset type 2 diabetes (maturity-onset diabetes of the young [MODY]), MODY3 
and MODY1, which are characterized by impaired glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion, early disease onset, and autosomal dominant inheritance. The
transcriptional hierarchy of HNFs suggests that other proteins of the regulatory 
cascade might be responsible for other forms of MODY and/or late-onset type 2
diabetes. In this study, we show that HNF-3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4gamma, and
-6 are expressed in pancreatic beta-cells. We report the identification and
characterization of simple tandem repeat DNA polymorphisms in the genes encoding 
HNF-3alpha, -3beta, -3gamma, -4gamma, and -6 and the mapping of HNF-6 to
chromosome bands 15q21.1-21.2 by fluorescence in situ hybridization. These
markers will be useful to study the role of genetic variation in these genes in
the pathogenesis of type 2 diabetes.

PMID: 9231664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Diabetologia. 1997 Jul;40(7):859-62.

A missense mutation in the hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha gene in a UK
pedigree with maturity-onset diabetes of the young.

Bulman MP(1), Dronsfield MJ, Frayling T, Appleton M, Bain SC, Ellard S,
Hattersley AT.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Genetics, University of Exeter, UK.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a monogenic subgroup of
non-insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) characterised bylan early age of 
onset (< 25 years) and an autosomal dominant mode of inheritance. MODY is
genetically heterogeneous with three different genes identified to date;
hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 alpha (HNF-4 alpha) [MODY1], glucokinase [MODY2] and 
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 alpha (HNF-1 alpha) [MODY3]. A nonsense mutation in
the HNF-4 alpha gene has recently been shown to cause MODY in a single large
North American pedigree (RW). We screened a large UK Caucasian MODY family which 
showed weak evidence of linkage to the MODY1 locus on chromosome 20q (lod score
for ADA 0.68 at theta = 0) for mutations in the coding region of the HNF-4 alpha 
gene by direct sequencing. A missense mutation resulting in the substitution of
glutamine for glutamic acid was identified in exon 7 (E276Q). The mutation was
present in all of the diabetic members of the pedigree plus two unaffected
subjects and was not detected in 75 normal control subjects or 95 UK Caucasian
subjects with late-onset NIDDM. This is the first missense mutation to be
described in the HNF-4 alpha gene.

PMID: 9243109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Diabetes Metab. 1997 Mar;23 Suppl 2:34-7.

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY), MODY genes and non-insulin-dependent
diabetes mellitus.

Velho G(1), Froguel P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-358, Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France. gvelho@infobiogen.fr

Maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically and clinically
heterogeneous subtype of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM)
characterised by early onset, autosomal dominant inheritance and a primary defect
in insulin secretion. To date, three MODY genes have been identified on
chromosomes 20q [hepatocyte nuclear factor (HNF-4 alpha)/MODY1], 7p
(glucokinase/MODY2) and 12q (HNF-1 alpha/MODY3). Mutations in glucokinase/MODY2
result in mild chronic hyperglycaemia due to reduced pancreatic beta-cell
responsiveness to glucose as well as decreased net accumulation of hepatic
glycogen and increased hepatic gluconeogenesis following meals. In contrast,
MODY1 and MODY3 are characterised by severe insulin secretory defects and major
hyperglycaemia associated with microvascular complications. The role of the three
known MODY genes in susceptibility to the more common late-onset from of NIDDM
remains uncertain. Genetic studies seem to exclude any function as major
susceptibility genes, although they may play a minor role in a polygenic context 
or a major role in particular populations.

PMID: 9162575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):458-60.

Mutations in the hepatocyte nuclear factor-4alpha gene in maturity-onset diabetes
of the young (MODY1)

Yamagata K(1), Furuta H, Oda N, Kaisaki PJ, Menzel S, Cox NJ, Fajans SS,
Signorini S, Stoffel M, Bell GI.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, The University of Chicago, Illinois 60637,
USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 1996 Dec 5;384(6608):407-8.

The disease maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) is a genetically
heterogeneous monogenic form of non-insulin-dependent (type 2) diabetes mellitus 
(NIDDM), characterized by early onset, usually before 25 years of age and often
in adolescence or childhood, and by autosomal dominant inheritance. It has been
estimated that 2-5% of patients with NIDDM may have this form of diabetes
mellitus. Clinical studies have shown that prediabetic MODY subjects have normal 
insulin sensitivity but suffer from a defect in glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion, suggesting that pancreatic beta-cell dysfunction rather than insulin
resistance is the primary defect in this disorder. Linkage studies have localized
the genes that are mutated in MODY on human chromosomes 20 (MODY1), 7 (MODY2) and
12 (MODY3), with MODY2 and MODY3 being allelic with the genes encoding
glucokinase, a key regulator of insulin secretion, and hepatocyte nuclear
factor-1alpha (HNF-1alpha), a transcription factor involved in tissue-specific
regulation of liver genes but also expressed in pancreatic islets, insulinoma
cells and other tissues. Here we show that MODY1 is the gene encoding HNF-4alpha 
(gene symbol, TCF14), a member of the steroid/thyroid hormone receptor
superfamily and an upstream regulator of HNF-1alpha expression.

PMID: 8945471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Mar;16(3):925-31.

Human hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 isoforms are encoded by distinct and
differentially expressed genes.

Drewes T(1), Senkel S, Holewa B, Ryffel GU.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Zelbiologie, Universitätsklinikum Essen, Germany.

Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4) was first identified as a DNA binding activity
in rat liver nuclear extracts. Protein purification had then led to the cDNA
cloning of rat HNF4, which was found to be an orphan member of the nuclear
receptor superfamily. Binding sites for this factor were identified in many
tissue-specifically expressed genes, and the protein was found to be essential
for early embryonic development in the mouse. We have now isolated cDNAs encoding
the human homolog of the rat and mouse HNF4 splice variant HNF4 alpha 2, as well 
as a previously unknown splice variant of this protein, which we called HNF alpha
4. More importantly, we also cloned a novel HNF4 subtype (HNF4 gamma) derived
from a different gene and showed that the genes encoding HNF 4 alpha and HNF4
gamma are located on human chromosomes 20 and 8, respectively. Northern (RNA)
blot analysis revealed that HNF4 GAMMA is expressed in the kidney, pancreas,
small intestine, testis, and colon but not in the liver, while HNF4 alpha RNA was
found in all of these tissues. By cotransfection experiments in C2 and HeLa
cells, we showed that HNF4 gamma is significantly less active than HNF4 alpha 2
and that the novel HNF4 alpha splice variant HNF4 alpha 4 has no detectable
transactivation potential. Therefore, the differential expression of distinct
HNF4 proteins may play a key role in the differential transcriptional regulation 
of HNF4-dependent genes.

PMCID: PMC231074
PMID: 8622695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


