
1. J Invest Dermatol. 2016 Mar 23. pii: S0022-202X(16)00481-4. doi:
10.1016/j.jid.2016.01.032. [Epub ahead of print]

HOPX: The Unusual Homeodomain-Containing Protein.

Mariotto A(1), Pavlova O(1), Park HS(1), Huber M(1), Hohl D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Cutaneous Biology, Service of Dermatology and Venereology,
University Hospital of Lausanne (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland. (2)Laboratory of
Cutaneous Biology, Service of Dermatology and Venereology, University Hospital of
Lausanne (CHUV), Lausanne, Switzerland. Electronic address: daniel.hohl@chuv.ch.

The homeodomain-only protein homeobox (HOPX) is the smallest known member of the 
homeodomain-containing protein family, atypically unable to bind DNA. HOPX is
widely expressed in diverse tissues, where it is critically involved in the
regulation of proliferation and differentiation. In human skin, HOPX controls
epidermal formation through the regulation of late differentiation markers, and
HOPX expression correlates with the level of differentiation in cutaneous
pathologies. In mouse skin, Hopx was additionally identified as a lineage tracing
marker of quiescent hair follicle stem cells. This review discusses current
knowledge of HOPX structure and function in normal and pathological conditions.

Copyright © 2016 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27017330  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Gastroenterology. 2016 Mar 18. pii: S0016-5085(16)00353-X. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2016.03.007. [Epub ahead of print]

Polyclonal Crypt Genesis and Development of Familial Small Intestinal
Neuroendocrine Tumors.

Sei Y(1), Feng J(1), Zhao X(1), Forbes J(1), Tang D(1), Nagashima K(2), Hanson
J(3), Quezado MM(3), Hughes MS(4), Wank SA(5).

Author information: 
(1)Digestive Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney, Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1804.
(2)Electron Microscopy Laboratory, Frederick National Laboratory for Cancer
Research, Frederick, Maryland 21701. (3)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer 
Institute, National Institutes of Health. (4)Surgery Branch, National Cancer
Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1804.
(5)Digestive Diseases Branch, National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and
Kidney, Diseases, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1804.
Electronic address: stevew@mail.nih.gov.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Small intestinal neuroendocrine tumors (SI-NET) are
serotonin-secreting well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors believed to
originate from enterochromaffin (EC) cells. Intestinal stem cell (ISC) are
believed to contribute to formation of SI-NET, although little is known about
tumor formation or development. We investigated the relationship between EC
cells, ISCs, and SI-NETs.
METHODS: We analyzed jejuno-ileal tissue specimens from 14 patients with familial
SI-NETs enrolled in the Natural History of Familial Carcinoid Tumor study at the 
National institutes of Health from January 2009 to December 2014. Frozen and
paraffin-embedded tumor tissues of different stages and isolated crypts were
analyzed by in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry. Tumor clonality was
assessed by analyses of mitochondrial DNA.
RESULTS: We identified multifocal aberrant crypt-containing endocrine cell
clusters (ACEC) that contain crypt EC cell micro-tumors in patients with familial
SI-NET. RNA in situ hybridization revealed expression of the EC cell and reserve 
stem cell genes TPH1, BMI1, HOPX, and LGR5(low), in the ACECs and more advanced
extra-epithelial tumor nests. This expression pattern resembled that of reserve
EC cells that express ISC genes; most reside at the +4 position in normal crypts.
The presence of multifocal ACECs from separate tumors and in the macroscopic
tumor-free mucosa indicated widespread, independent, multifocal tumorigenesis.
Analyses of mitochondrial DNA confirmed the independent origin of the ACECs.
CONCLUSION: Familial SI-NETs originate from a subset of EC cells (reserve EC
cells that express ISC genes) via multifocal and polyclonal processes. Increasing
our understanding of the role of these reserve EC cells in the genesis of
multifocal SI-NETs could improve diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for this
otherwise intractable disease.

Copyright © 2016 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27003604  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Cell Host Microbe. 2016 Jan 13;19(1):32-43. doi: 10.1016/j.chom.2015.12.005.

The Host Shapes the Gut Microbiota via Fecal MicroRNA.

Liu S(1), da Cunha AP(1), Rezende RM(1), Cialic R(1), Wei Z(1), Bry L(2),
Comstock LE(3), Gandhi R(1), Weiner HL(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA 02115, USA. (3)Division of Infectious Diseases, Department of
Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA. (4)Department of Neurology, Ann Romney Center for Neurologic Diseases,
Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.
Electronic address: hweiner@rics.bwh.harvard.edu.

The host gut microbiota varies across species and individuals but is relatively
stable over time within an individual. How the host selectively shapes the
microbiota is largely unclear. Here, we show that fecal microRNA (miRNA)-mediated
inter-species gene regulation facilitates host control of the gut microbiota.
miRNAs are abundant in mouse and human fecal samples and present within
extracellular vesicles. Cell-specific loss of the miRNA-processing enzyme, Dicer,
identified intestinal epithelial cells (IEC) and Hopx-positive cells as
predominant fecal miRNA sources. These miRNAs can enter bacteria, such as
F. nucleatum and E. coli, specifically regulate bacterial gene transcripts, and
affect bacterial growth. IEC-miRNA-deficient (Dicer1(<U+0394>IEC)) mice exhibit
uncontrolled gut microbiota and exacerbated colitis, and WT fecal miRNA
transplantation restores fecal microbes and ameliorates colitis. These findings
identify both a physiologic role by which fecal miRNA shapes the gut microbiota
and a potential strategy for manipulating the microbiome.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26764595  [PubMed - in process]


4. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2015 Dec 22;112(51):E7148-54. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1509249112. Epub 2015 Dec 7.

Fasting protects mice from lethal DNA damage by promoting small intestinal
epithelial stem cell survival.

Tinkum KL(1), Stemler KM(2), White LS(1), Loza AJ(3), Jeter-Jones S(2), Michalski
BM(4), Kuzmicki C(4), Pless R(5), Stappenbeck TS(6), Piwnica-Worms D(7),
Piwnica-Worms H(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110; Mallinckrodt Institute of Radiology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110; (2)Department of Cancer
Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030;
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO 63110; (4)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110; (5)Department of Computer
Science and Engineering, Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130;
(6)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110; (7)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110; Mallinckrodt
Institute of Radiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO
63110; Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030; Department of Cancer Systems Imaging, The University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030
dpiwnica-worms@mdanderson.org hpiwnica-worms@mdanderson.org. (8)Department of
Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110; Department of Cancer Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030; Department of Internal Medicine, Washington
University School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63110; dpiwnica-worms@mdanderson.org
hpiwnica-worms@mdanderson.org.

Short-term fasting protects mice from lethal doses of chemotherapy through
undetermined mechanisms. Herein, we demonstrate that fasting preserves small
intestinal (SI) architecture by maintaining SI stem cell viability and SI barrier
function following exposure to high-dose etoposide. Nearly all SI stem cells were
lost in fed mice, whereas fasting promoted sufficient SI stem cell survival to
preserve SI integrity after etoposide treatment. Lineage tracing demonstrated
that multiple SI stem cell populations, marked by Lgr5, Bmi1, or HopX expression,
contributed to fasting-induced survival. DNA repair and DNA damage response genes
were elevated in SI stem/progenitor cells of fasted etoposide-treated mice, which
importantly correlated with faster resolution of DNA double-strand breaks and
less apoptosis. Thus, fasting preserved SI stem cell viability as well as SI
architecture and barrier function suggesting that fasting may reduce host
toxicity in patients undergoing dose intensive chemotherapy.

PMCID: PMC4697381 [Available on 2016-06-22]
PMID: 26644583  [PubMed - in process]


5. Cell Tissue Res. 2015 Nov 27. [Epub ahead of print]

Mensenchymal stem cells can delay radiation-induced crypt death: impact on
intestinal CD44(+) fragments.

Chang PY(1,)(2), Jin X(3), Jiang YY(4), Wang LX(5), Liu YJ(6), Wang J(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, The First Bethune Hospital of Jilin
University, Changchun, 130021, People's Republic of China. (2)Changchun Institute
of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, 130000, People's
Republic of China. (3)Ever Union Biotechology, Tianjin, 300162, People's Republic
of China. (4)Department of Cardiac Surgery, TEDA International Cardiovascular
Hospital, Tianjin, 300000, People's Republic of China. (5)Tianjin Institute of
Industrial Biotechnology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Tianjin, 300300, People's 
Republic of China. (6)Alliancells Bioscience, Tianjin, 300300, People's Republic 
of China. andyliuliu2001@yahoo.com.cn. (7)Changchun Institute of Applied
Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, 130000, People's Republic of
China. jin.d.wang@gmail.com.

Intestinal stem cells are primitive cells found within the intestinal epithelium 
that play a central role in maintaining epithelial homeostasis through
self-renewal and commitment into functional epithelial cells. Several markers are
available to identify intestinal stem cells, such as Lgr5, CD24 and EphB2, which 
can be used to sort intestinal stem cells from mammalian gut. Here, we identify
and isolate intestinal stem cells from C57BL/6 mice by using a cell surface
antigen, CD44. In vitro, some CD44(+) crypt cells are capable of forming
"villus-crypt"-like structures (organoids). A subset strongly positive for CD44
expresses high levels of intestinal stem-cell-related genes, including Lgr5,
Bmi1, Hopx, Lrig1, Ascl2, Smoc2 and Rnf43. Cells from this subset are more
capable of developing into organoids in vitro, compared with the subset weakly
positive for CD44. However, the organoids are sensitive to ionizing irradiation. 
We investigate the specific roles of mesenchymal stem cells in protecting
organoids against radiation-induced crypt death. When co-cultured with
mesenchymal stem cells, the crypt domains of irradiated organoids possess more
proliferative cells and fewer apoptotic cells than those not co-cultured with
mesenchymal stem cells. Cd44v6 continues to be expressed in the crypt domains of 
irradiated organoids co-cultured with mesenchymal stem cells. Our results
indicate specific roles of mesenchymal stem cells in delaying radiation-induced
crypt death in vitro.

PMID: 26613604  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2016 Jan 15;310(2):L114-20. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00337.2015. Epub 2015 Nov 6.

Combinations of differentiation markers distinguish subpopulations of alveolar
epithelial cells in adult lung.

Liebler JM(1), Marconett CN(2), Juul N(3), Wang H(1), Liu Y(1), Flodby P(1),
Laird-Offringa IA(2), Minoo P(4), Zhou B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Critical Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Will Rogers Institute Pulmonary Research Center, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California;
(2)Department of Surgery, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California; Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California;
Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California; and. (3)Department of
Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, California; (4)Division of Newborn Medicine, Department of Pediatrics,
and Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California. (5)Division of Pulmonary, Critical 
Care and Sleep Medicine, Department of Medicine, Will Rogers Institute Pulmonary 
Research Center, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los 
Angeles, California; Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of Medicine,
University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California; bzhou@usc.edu.

Distal lung epithelium is maintained by proliferation of alveolar type II (AT2)
cells and, for some daughter AT2 cells, transdifferentiation into alveolar type I
(AT1) cells. We investigated if subpopulations of alveolar epithelial cells (AEC)
exist that represent various stages in transdifferentiation from AT2 to AT1 cell 
phenotypes in normal adult lung and if they can be identified using combinations 
of cell-specific markers. Immunofluorescence microscopy showed that, in distal
rat and mouse lungs, ~20-30% of NKX2.1(+) (or thyroid transcription factor 1(+)) 
cells did not colocalize with pro-surfactant protein C (pro-SP-C), a highly
specific AT2 cell marker. In distal rat lung, NKX2.1(+) cells coexpressed either 
pro-SP-C or the AT1 cell marker homeodomain only protein x (HOPX). Not all
HOPX(+) cells colocalize with the AT1 cell marker aquaporin 5 (AQP5), and some
AQP5(+) cells were NKX2.1(+). HOPX was expressed earlier than AQP5 during
transdifferentiation in rat AEC primary culture, with robust expression of both
by day 7. We speculate that NKX2.1 and pro-SP-C colocalize in AT2 cells, NKX2.1
and HOPX or AQP5 colocalize in intermediate or transitional cells, and HOPX and
AQP5 are expressed without NKX2.1 in AT1 cells. These findings suggest marked
heterogeneity among cells previously identified as exclusively AT1 or AT2 cells, 
implying the presence of subpopulations of intermediate or transitional AEC in
normal adult lung.

Copyright © 2016 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4719049 [Available on 2017-01-15]
PMID: 26545903  [PubMed - in process]


7. Nat Methods. 2016 Jan;13(1):87-93. doi: 10.1038/nmeth.3629. Epub 2015 Nov 16.

Fixed single-cell transcriptomic characterization of human radial glial
diversity.

Thomsen ER(1), Mich JK(1), Yao Z(1), Hodge RD(1), Doyle AM(2), Jang S(2), Shehata
SI(1), Nelson AM(1), Shapovalova NV(1), Levi BP(1), Ramanathan S(1,)(2,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Allen Institute for Brain Science, Seattle, Washington, USA. (2)Molecular and 
Cellular Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA. (3)School of
Engineering and Applied Science, Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
USA.

The diverse progenitors that give rise to the human neocortex have been difficult
to characterize because progenitors, particularly radial glia (RG), are rare and 
are defined by a combination of intracellular markers, position and morphology.
To circumvent these problems, we developed Fixed and Recovered Intact Single-cell
RNA (FRISCR), a method for profiling the transcriptomes of individual fixed,
stained and sorted cells. Using FRISCR, we profiled primary human RG that
constitute only 1% of the midgestation cortex and classified them as ventricular 
zone-enriched RG (vRG) that express ANXA1 and CRYAB, and outer subventricular
zone-localized RG (oRG) that express HOPX. Our study identified vRG and oRG
markers and molecular profiles, an essential step for understanding human
neocortical progenitor development. FRISCR allows targeted single-cell profiling 
of any tissues that lack live-cell markers.

PMID: 26524239  [PubMed - in process]


8. Stem Cell Res. 2015 Nov;15(3):522-9. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2015.09.015. Epub 2015
Oct 8.

Hopx distinguishes hippocampal from lateral ventricle neural stem cells.

Li D(1), Takeda N(1), Jain R(1), Manderfield LJ(1), Liu F(1), Li L(1), Anderson
SA(2), Epstein JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Cardiovascular Institute,
Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (2)Department of
Psychiatry, Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Perelman School of Medicine at
the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address: 
sande@mail.med.upenn.edu. (3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
Cardiovascular Institute, Institute for Regenerative Medicine, Perelman School of
Medicine at the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
Electronic address: epsteinj@upenn.edu.

In the adult dentate gyrus (DG) and in the proliferative zone lining the lateral 
ventricle (LV-PZ), radial glia-like (RGL) cells are neural stem cells (NSCs) that
generate granule neurons. A number of molecular markers including glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), Sox2 and nestin, can identify quiescent NSCs in
these two niches. However, to date, there is no marker that distinguishes NSC
origin of DG versus LV-PZ. Hopx, an atypical homeodomain only protein, is
expressed by adult stem cell populations including those in the intestine and
hair follicle. Here, we show that Hopx is specifically expressed in RGL cells in 
the adult DG, and these cells give rise to granule neurons. Assessed by
non-stereological quantitation, Hopx-null NSCs exhibit enhanced neurogenesis
evident by an increased number of BrdU-positive cells and doublecortin
(DCX)-positive neuroblasts. In contrast, Sox2-positive, quiescent NSCs are
reduced in the DG of Hopx-null animals and Notch signaling is reduced, as
evidenced by reduced expression of Notch targets Hes1 and Hey2, and a reduction
of the number of cells expressing the cleaved, activated form of the Notch1
receptor, the Notch intracellular domain (NICD) in Hopx-null DG. Surprisingly,
Hopx is not expressed in RGL cells of the adult LV-PZ, and Hopx-expressing cells 
do not give rise to interneurons of the olfactory bulb (OB). These findings
establish that Hopx expression distinguishes NSCs of the DG from those of the
LV-PZ, and suggest that Hopx potentially regulates hippocampal neurogenesis by
modulating Notch signaling.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4704104 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26451648  [PubMed - in process]


9. Cell. 2015 Sep 24;163(1):55-67. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2015.09.004.

Molecular identity of human outer radial glia during cortical development.

Pollen AA(1), Nowakowski TJ(2), Chen J(2), Retallack H(2), Sandoval-Espinosa
C(2), Nicholas CR(3), Shuga J(4), Liu SJ(2), Oldham MC(3), Diaz A(5), Lim DA(5), 
Leyrat AA(4), West JA(4), Kriegstein AR(6).

Author information: 
(1)Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research,
University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Department
of Neurology, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158,
USA. Electronic address: alex.pollen@gmail.com. (2)Eli and Edythe Broad Center of
Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Department of Neurology, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. (3)Eli and Edythe Broad 
Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (4)Fluidigm Corporation, South San
Francisco, CA 94080, USA. (5)Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine
and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA 94143, USA; Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California, San 
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA. (6)Eli and Edythe Broad Center of
Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, University of California, San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA; Department of Neurology, University of
California, San Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA. Electronic address:
kriegsteina@stemcell.ucsf.edu.

Radial glia, the neural stem cells of the neocortex, are located in two niches:
the ventricular zone and outer subventricular zone. Although outer subventricular
zone radial glia may generate the majority of human cortical neurons, their
molecular features remain elusive. By analyzing gene expression across single
cells, we find that outer radial glia preferentially express genes related to
extracellular matrix formation, migration, and stemness, including TNC, PTPRZ1,
FAM107A, HOPX, and LIFR. Using dynamic imaging, immunostaining, and clonal
analysis, we relate these molecular features to distinctive behaviors of outer
radial glia, demonstrate the necessity of STAT3 signaling for their cell cycle
progression, and establish their extensive proliferative potential. These results
suggest that outer radial glia directly support the subventricular niche through 
local production of growth factors, potentiation of growth factor signals by
extracellular matrix proteins, and activation of self-renewal pathways, thereby
enabling the developmental and evolutionary expansion of the human neocortex.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4583716 [Available on 2016-09-24]
PMID: 26406371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Ther. 2015 Sep;23(9):1420-2. doi: 10.1038/mt.2015.140.

Hopx and the Cardiomyocyte Parentage.

Schneider MD(1), Baker AH(2), Riley P(3).

Author information: 
(1)British Heart Foundation Centre of Regenerative Medicine, National Heart and
Lung Institute, Imperial College London, London, UK. (2)British Heart Foundation 
Centre of Regenerative Medicine, Institute of Cardiovascular and Medical
Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK. (3)Oxbridge BHF Centre of
Regenerative Medicine, Department of Physiology, Anatomy and Genetics, University
of Oxford, Oxford, UK.

Comment on
    Science. 2015 Jun 26;348(6242):aaa6071.

PMID: 26321185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. J Immunol. 2015 Aug 15;195(4):1489-97. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1500174. Epub 2015
Jul 13.

Peripherally Induced Tolerance Depends on Peripheral Regulatory T Cells That
Require Hopx To Inhibit Intrinsic IL-2 Expression.

Jones A(1), Opejin A(1), Henderson JG(1), Gross C(1), Jain R(2), Epstein JA(2),
Flavell RA(3), Hawiger D(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Microbiology and Immunology, Saint Louis University
School of Medicine, St. Louis, MO 63104; (2)Department of Cell and Developmental 
Biology and Institute for Regenerative Medicine and Cardiovascular Institute,
Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104; 
and. (3)Department of Immunobiology and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06519. (4)Department of Molecular
Microbiology and Immunology, Saint Louis University School of Medicine, St.
Louis, MO 63104; dhawiger@slu.edu.

Dendritic cells (DCs) can induce peripheral immune tolerance that prevents
autoimmune responses. Ag presentation by peripheral DCs under steady-state
conditions leads to a conversion of some peripheral CD4(+) T cells into
regulatory T cells (Tregs) that require homeodomain-only protein (Hopx) to
mediate T cell unresponsiveness. However, the roles of these peripheral Tregs
(pTregs) in averting autoimmune responses, as well as immunological mechanisms of
Hopx, remain unknown. We report that Hopx(+) pTregs converted by DCs from Hopx(-)
T cells are indispensible to sustain tolerance that prevents autoimmune responses
directed at self-Ags during experimental acute encephalomyelitis. Our studies
further reveal that Hopx inhibits intrinsic IL-2 expression in pTregs after
antigenic rechallenge. In the absence of Hopx, increased levels of IL-2 lead to
death and decreased numbers of pTregs. Therefore, formation of Hopx(+) pTregs
represents a crucial pathway of sustained tolerance induced by peripheral DCs,
and the maintenance of such pTregs and tolerance requires functions of Hopx to
block intrinsic IL-2 production in pTregs.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4530038 [Available on 2016-08-15]
PMID: 26170384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Gastroenterology. 2015 Nov;149(6):1553-1563.e10. doi:
10.1053/j.gastro.2015.07.004. Epub 2015 Jul 11.

SOX9 maintains reserve stem cells and preserves radioresistance in mouse small
intestine.

Roche KC(1), Gracz AD(2), Liu XF(1), Newton V(3), Akiyama H(4), Magness ST(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (2)Department of Medicine, University
of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (3)Department of
Cell Biology and Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel 
Hill, North Carolina; Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina. (4)Department of Orthopedics, Gifu
University, Gifu, Gifu Prefecture, Japan. (5)Department of Cell Biology and
Physiology, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North
Carolina; Department of Medicine, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill,
Chapel Hill, North Carolina. Electronic address: magness@med.unc.edu.

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Reserve intestinal stem cells (rISCs) are quiescent/slowly
cycling under homeostatic conditions, allowing for their identification with
label-retention assays. rISCs mediate epithelial regeneration after tissue damage
by converting to actively proliferating stem cells (aISCs) that self renew and
demonstrate multipotency, which are defining properties of stem cells. Little is 
known about the genetic mechanisms that regulate the production and maintenance
of rISCs. High expression levels of the transcription factor Sox9 (Sox9(high))
are associated with rISCs. This study investigates the role of SOX9 in regulating
the rISC state.
METHODS: We used fluorescence-activated cell sorting to isolate cells defined
as aISCs (Lgr5(high)) and rISCs (Sox9(high)) from Lgr5(EGFP) and Sox9(EGFP)
reporter mice. Expression of additional markers associated with active and
reserve ISCs were assessed in Lgr5(high) and Sox9(high) populations by
single-cell gene expression analyses. We used label-retention assays to identify 
whether Sox9(high) cells were label-retatining cells (LRCs). Lineage-tracing
experiments were performed in Sox9-CreERT2 mice to measure the stem cell
capacities and radioresistance of Sox9-expressing cells. Conditional SOX9
knockout mice and inducible-conditional SOX9 knockout mice were used to determine
whether SOX9 was required to maintain LRCs and rISC function.
RESULTS: Lgr5(high) and a subset of crypt-based Sox9(high) cells co-express
markers of aISC and rISC (Lgr5, Bmi1, Lrig1, and Hopx). LRCs express high levels 
of Sox9 and are lost in SOX9-knockout mice. SOX9 is required for epithelial
regeneration after high-dose irradiation. Crypts from SOX9-knockout mice have
increased sensitivity to radiation, compared with control mice, which could not
be attributed to impaired cell-cycle arrest or DNA repair.
CONCLUSIONS: SOX9 limits proliferation in LRCs and imparts radiation resistance
to rISCs in mice.

Copyright © 2015 AGA Institute. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4709179 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26170137  [PubMed - in process]


13. Science. 2015 Jun 26;348(6242):aaa6071. doi: 10.1126/science.aaa6071.

HEART DEVELOPMENT. Integration of Bmp and Wnt signaling by Hopx specifies
commitment of cardiomyoblasts.

Jain R(1), Li D(1), Gupta M(1), Manderfield LJ(1), Ifkovits JL(1), Wang Q(1), Liu
F(1), Liu Y(1), Poleshko A(1), Padmanabhan A(1), Raum JC(2), Li L(1), Morrisey
EE(1), Lu MM(1), Won KJ(2), Epstein JA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Penn Cardiovascular Institute,
Institute of Regenerative Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (2)Department of Genetics,
Institute for Diabetes, Obesity, and Metabolism, Perelman School of Medicine at
the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (3)Department of
Cell and Developmental Biology, Penn Cardiovascular Institute, Institute of
Regenerative Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. epsteinj@upenn.edu.

Comment in
    Mol Ther. 2015 Sep;23(9):1420-2.

Cardiac progenitor cells are multipotent and give rise to cardiac endothelium,
smooth muscle, and cardiomyocytes. Here, we define and characterize the
cardiomyoblast intermediate that is committed to the cardiomyocyte fate, and we
characterize the niche signals that regulate commitment. Cardiomyoblasts express 
Hopx, which functions to coordinate local Bmp signals to inhibit the Wnt pathway,
thus promoting cardiomyogenesis. Hopx integrates Bmp and Wnt signaling by
physically interacting with activated Smads and repressing Wnt genes. The
identification of the committed cardiomyoblast that retains proliferative
potential will inform cardiac regenerative therapeutics. In addition, Bmp signals
characterize adult stem cell niches in other tissues where Hopx-mediated
inhibition of Wnt is likely to contribute to stem cell quiescence and to explain 
the role of Hopx as a tumor suppressor.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMCID: PMC4806339
PMID: 26113728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Stem Cell Transl Investig. 2015;2(2). pii: e839.

Role of Krüppel-like factor 5 in the maintenance of the stem cell niche in the
intestinal crypt.

Kuruvilla JG(1), Ghaleb AM(1), Bialkowska AB(1), Nandan MO(1), Yang VW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Stony Brook University School of Medicine, HSC-T16
Room 020, Stony Brook, NY 11794, United States. (2)Department of Medicine, Stony 
Brook University School of Medicine, HSC-T16 Room 020, Stony Brook, NY 11794,
United States ; Department of Physiology and Biophysics, Stony Brook University
School of Medicine, HSC-T16 Room 020, Stony Brook, NY 11794, United States.

The intestinal epithelium is a tissue that undergoes continuous self-renewal
initiated at the bottom of the crypts, which harbor the intestinal stem cell
(ISC) pool. The ISC pool is sub-divided into crypt base columnar (CBC) cells at
the crypt bottom and label retention cells (LRC) at position +4 from the crypt
bottom. CBC cells are marked by Leucine-rich repeat-containing G-protein coupled 
receptor (Lgr5) while LRC cells are identified by several markers including Bmi1,
mTert, Hopx, Lrig1, and Sox9. Krüppel-like factors (KLFs) belong to a family of
transcription factors that exert important physiological function in various
tissues. In the intestine, KLF4 is predominantly expressed in the terminally
differentiated, non-proliferating cells lining the villus. Its deletion in the
adult mouse intestine results in perturbed homeostasis. In contrast, KLF5 is
expressed in actively proliferating cells of the intestinal crypt, including CBC 
cells and transit amplifying (TA) cells. We recently investigated the effect of
Klf5 deletion specifically from the Lgr5-expressing CBC cells in adult mouse
intestine using an inducible Cre recombinase system. Shortly (3-5 days) after Cre
induction, proliferation of both CBC and TA cells ceased, which was accompanied
by an increase in apoptosis in the crypt. Beginning at two weeks following Cre
induction, both Klf5 expression and proliferation re-appeared but without the
re-emergence of Lgr5-positive CBC cells, which were eventually depleted by four
months following induction. These findings indicate that KLF5 plays an important 
role in regulating proliferation and survival of CBC stem cells in the intestine.

PMCID: PMC4474380
PMID: 26097895  [PubMed]


15. Stem Cell Reports. 2015 Jul 14;5(1):125-38. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.05.008.
Epub 2015 Jun 4.

The Genetic Landscape of Hematopoietic Stem Cell Frequency in Mice.

Zhou X(1), Crow AL(2), Hartiala J(2), Spindler TJ(1), Ghazalpour A(3), Barsky
LW(1), Bennett BJ(4), Parks BW(3), Eskin E(5), Jain R(6), Epstein JA(6), Lusis
AJ(3), Adams GB(7), Allayee H(8).

Author information: 
(1)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem Cell Research
at USC, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, 
CA 90033, USA. (2)Department of Preventive Medicine and Institute for Genetic
Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los
Angeles, CA 90033, USA. (3)Departments of Human Genetics, Medicine, and
Microbiology, Immunology, and Molecular Genetics, David Geffen School of Medicine
at UCLA, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA. (4)Department of Genetics and Nutrition
Research Institute, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, Kannapolis, NC
28081, USA. (5)Department of Computer Science and Inter-Departmental Program in
Bioinformatics, University of California, Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095,
USA. (6)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Penn Cardiovascular
Institute, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA. (7)Eli and Edythe Broad Center for Regenerative Medicine and Stem 
Cell Research at USC, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA 90033, USA. Electronic address: gregorad@med.usc.edu.
(8)Department of Preventive Medicine and Institute for Genetic Medicine, Keck
School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, CA 90033,
USA. Electronic address: hallayee@usc.edu.

Prior efforts to identify regulators of hematopoietic stem cell physiology have
relied mainly on candidate gene approaches with genetically modified mice. Here
we used a genome-wide association study (GWAS) strategy with the hybrid mouse
diversity panel to identify the genetic determinants of hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cell (HSPC) frequency. Among 108 strains, we observed ~120- to
300-fold variation in three HSPC populations. A GWAS analysis identified several 
loci that were significantly associated with HSPC frequency, including a locus on
chromosome 5 harboring the homeodomain-only protein gene (Hopx). Hopx previously 
had been implicated in cardiac development but was not known to influence HSPC
biology. Analysis of the HSPC pool in Hopx-/- mice demonstrated significantly
reduced cell frequencies and impaired engraftment in competitive repopulation
assays, thus providing functional validation of this positional candidate gene.
These results demonstrate the power of GWAS in mice to identify genetic
determinants of the hematopoietic system.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4618249
PMID: 26050929  [PubMed - in process]


16. Development. 2015 Jun 15;142(12):2147-62. doi: 10.1242/dev.121046. Epub 2015 May 
26.

Rab8a vesicles regulate Wnt ligand delivery and Paneth cell maturation at the
intestinal stem cell niche.

Das S(1), Yu S(1), Sakamori R(1), Vedula P(1), Feng Q(1), Flores J(1), Hoffman
A(2), Fu J(3), Stypulkowski E(1), Rodriguez A(1), Dobrowolski R(1), Harada A(4), 
Hsu W(3), Bonder EM(1), Verzi MP(5), Gao N(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Rutgers University, Newark, NJ 07102, USA. 
(2)Department of Genetics, Human Genetics Institute of New Jersey, Rutgers
University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA. (3)Department of Biomedical Genetics,
Center for Oral Biology, James P. Wilmot Cancer Center, Stem Cell and
Regenerative Medicine Institute, University of Rochester Medical Center,
Rochester, NY 14642, USA. (4)Department of Cell Biology, Graduate School of
Medicine, Osaka University 2-2, Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.
(5)Department of Genetics, Human Genetics Institute of New Jersey, Rutgers
University, Piscataway, NJ 08854, USA Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA. (6)Department of Biological Sciences, Rutgers
University, Newark, NJ 07102, USA Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New
Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA ngao@andromeda.rutgers.edu.

Communication between stem and niche supporting cells maintains the homeostasis
of adult tissues. Wnt signaling is a crucial regulator of the stem cell niche,
but the mechanism that governs Wnt ligand delivery in this compartment has not
been fully investigated. We identified that Wnt secretion is partly dependent on 
Rab8a-mediated anterograde transport of Gpr177 (wntless), a Wnt-specific
transmembrane transporter. Gpr177 binds to Rab8a, depletion of which compromises 
Gpr177 traffic, thereby weakening the secretion of multiple Wnts. Analyses of
generic Wnt/ß-catenin targets in Rab8a knockout mouse intestinal crypts indicate 
reduced signaling activities; maturation of Paneth cells - a Wnt-dependent cell
type - is severely affected. Rab8a knockout crypts show an expansion of Lgr5(+)
and Hopx(+) cells in vivo. However, in vitro, the knockout enteroids exhibit
significantly weakened growth that can be partly restored by exogenous Wnts or
Gsk3ß inhibitors. Immunogold labeling and surface protein isolation identified
decreased plasma membrane localization of Gpr177 in Rab8a knockout Paneth cells
and fibroblasts. Upon stimulation by exogenous Wnts, Rab8a-deficient cells show
ligand-induced Lrp6 phosphorylation and transcriptional reporter activation.
Rab8a thus controls Wnt delivery in producing cells and is crucial for Paneth
cell maturation. Our data highlight the profound tissue plasticity that occurs in
response to stress induced by depletion of a stem cell niche signal.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4483769
PMID: 26015543  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Nat Commun. 2015 Apr 13;6:6727. doi: 10.1038/ncomms7727.

Plasticity of Hopx(+) type I alveolar cells to regenerate type II cells in the
lung.

Jain R(1), Barkauskas CE(2), Takeda N(1), Bowie EJ(3), Aghajanian H(1), Wang
Q(1), Padmanabhan A(1), Manderfield LJ(1), Gupta M(1), Li D(1), Li L(2), Trivedi 
CM(1), Hogan BL(3), Epstein JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Penn Cardiovascular Institute,
Institute of Regenerative Medicine, Perelman School of Medicine at the University
of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA. (2)Division of Pulmonary,
Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, Duke Medicine,
Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA. (3)Department of Cell Biology, Duke Medicine, 
Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

The plasticity of differentiated cells in adult tissues undergoing repair is an
area of intense research. Pulmonary alveolar type II cells produce surfactant and
function as progenitors in the adult, demonstrating both self-renewal and
differentiation into gas exchanging type I cells. In vivo, type I cells are
thought to be terminally differentiated and their ability to give rise to
alternate lineages has not been reported. Here we show that Hopx becomes
restricted to type I cells during development. However, unexpectedly,
lineage-labelled Hopx(+) cells both proliferate and generate type II cells during
adult alveolar regrowth following partial pneumonectomy. In clonal 3D culture,
single Hopx(+) type I cells generate organoids composed of type I and type II
cells, a process modulated by TGFß signalling. These findings demonstrate
unanticipated plasticity of type I cells and a bidirectional lineage relationship
between distinct differentiated alveolar epithelial cell types in vivo and in
single-cell culture.

PMCID: PMC4396689
PMID: 25865356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2015 Apr 15;308(8):G678-90. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00158.2014. Epub 2015 Feb 26.

Fibroblast growth factor 10 alters the balance between goblet and Paneth cells in
the adult mouse small intestine.

Al Alam D(1), Danopoulos S(2), Schall K(2), Sala FG(2), Almohazey D(2), Fernandez
GE(3), Georgia S(4), Frey MR(2), Ford HR(2), Grikscheit T(2), Bellusci S(5).

Author information: 
(1)Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles,
California; Developmental Biology and Regenerative Medicine Program, Saban
Research Institute of Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California;
dalalam@chla.usc.edu. (2)Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California; Developmental Biology and Regenerative
Medicine Program, Saban Research Institute of Children's Hospital Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California; (3)Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California; (4)Developmental Biology and Regenerative
Medicine Program, Saban Research Institute of Children's Hospital Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California; (5)Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, California; Developmental Biology and Regenerative
Medicine Program, Saban Research Institute of Children's Hospital Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, California; Department of Internal Medicine II, University of
Giessen Lung Center and Member of the German Lung Center, Giessen, Germany; and
Institute of Fundamental Medicine and Biology, Kazan Federal University, Kazan,
Russia.

Intestinal epithelial cell renewal relies on the right balance of epithelial cell
migration, proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis. Intestinal epithelial
cells consist of absorptive and secretory lineage. The latter is comprised of
goblet, Paneth, and enteroendocrine cells. Fibroblast growth factor 10 (FGF10)
plays a central role in epithelial cell proliferation, survival, and
differentiation in several organs. The expression pattern of FGF10 and its
receptors in both human and mouse intestine and their role in small intestine
have yet to be investigated. First, we analyzed the expression of FGF10, FGFR1,
and FGFR2, in the human ileum and throughout the adult mouse small intestine. We 
found that FGF10, FGFR1b, and FGFR2b are expressed in the human ileum as well as 
in the mouse small intestine. We then used transgenic mouse models to overexpress
Fgf10 and a soluble form of Fgfr2b, to study the impact of gain or loss of Fgf
signaling in the adult small intestine. We demonstrated that overexpression of
Fgf10 in vivo and in vitro induces goblet cell differentiation while decreasing
Paneth cells. Moreover, FGF10 decreases stem cell markers such as Lgr5, Lrig1,
Hopx, Ascl2, and Sox9. FGF10 inhibited Hes1 expression in vitro, suggesting that 
FGF10 induces goblet cell differentiation likely through the inhibition of Notch 
signaling. Interestingly, Fgf10 overexpression for 3 days in vivo and in vitro
increased the number of Mmp7/Muc2 double-positive cells, suggesting that goblet
cells replace Paneth cells. Further studies are needed to determine the mechanism
by which Fgf10 alters cell differentiation in the small intestine.

Copyright © 2015 the American Physiological Society.

PMCID: PMC4398841 [Available on 2016-04-15]
PMID: 25721301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Stem Cell Reports. 2014 Nov 11;3(5):876-91. doi: 10.1016/j.stemcr.2014.09.011.
Epub 2014 Oct 23.

Single-cell analysis of proxy reporter allele-marked epithelial cells establishes
intestinal stem cell hierarchy.

Li N(1), Yousefi M(2), Nakauka-Ddamba A(1), Jain R(3), Tobias J(4), Epstein
JA(5), Jensen ST(6), Lengner CJ(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Biology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (2)Department of Animal Biology,
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA; Program in Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (3)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
(4)PENN Molecular Profiling Facility, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
PA 19104, USA. (5)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, School of
Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Institute for 
Regenerative Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA;
Program in Cell and Molecular Biology, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, 
PA 19104, USA. (6)Department of Statistics, The Wharton School, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. (7)Department of Animal Biology,
School of Veterinary Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA
19104, USA; Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, School of Medicine,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Institute for
Regenerative Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA;
Center for Molecular Studies in Digestive and Liver Diseases, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA; Program in Cell and Molecular Biology,
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA. Electronic address:
lengner@vet.upenn.edu.

The recent development of targeted murine reporter alleles as proxies for
intestinal stem cell activity has led to significant advances in our
understanding of somatic stem cell hierarchies and dynamics. Analysis of these
reporters has led to a model in which an indispensable reserve stem cell at the
top of the hierarchy (marked by Bmi1 and Hopx reporters) gives rise to active
intestinal stem cells (marked by an Lgr5 reporter). Despite these advances,
controversy exists regarding the specificity and fidelity with which these
alleles distinguish intestinal stem cell populations. Here, we undertake a
comprehensive comparison of widely used proxy reporters including both CreERT2
and EGFP cassettes targeted to the Lgr5, Bmi1, and Hopx loci. Single-cell
transcriptional profiling of these populations and their progeny reveals that
reserve and active intestinal stem cells are molecularly and functionally
distinct, supporting a two-stem-cell model for intestinal self-renewal.

PMCID: PMC4235148
PMID: 25418730  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Pathol. 2015 Feb;235(3):397-407. doi: 10.1002/path.4469. Epub 2014 Dec 18.

HOPX is methylated and exerts tumour-suppressive function through Ras-induced
senescence in human lung cancer.

Chen Y(1), Yang L, Cui T, Pacyna-Gengelbach M, Petersen I.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, University Hospital Jena,
Friedrich-Schiller-University Jena, Ziegelmühlenweg 1, 07743, Jena, Germany.

HOPX acts as a tumour suppressor in various cancers. However, the regulation of
HOPX in human lung cancer as well as the mechanism underlying its
tumour-suppressive function has not yet been well elucidated. Here we
investigated the epigenetic regulation and molecular mechanism by which HOPX
exerts growth inhibitory effects. We found that HOPX was down-regulated in 12 out
of 13 lung cancer cell lines and in 69 out of 120 primary lung tumours at mRNA
and protein levels. Patients with lung adenocarcinoma (ADC) exhibited
significantly more positive staining of HOPX protein compared with lung squamous 
cell carcinoma (SCC) (p =0.036). Again in ADC, patients with higher HOPX
expression had a significantly longer disease-free survival (p =0.001).
Methylation analysis showed that down-regulation of HOPX was associated with DNA 
methylation (p =0.011). To analyse the function of HOPX in lung cancer cells,
stable transfection with an expression vector of HOPX was performed. It turned
out that HOPX inhibited tumour cell proliferation rate, migration, and invasion, 
and, more interestingly, forced expression of HOPX enhanced cellular senescence
via activation of oncogenic Ras and the downstream MAPK pathway, which in turn
led to decreased MDM2 and increased p21. On the contrary, knockdown of HOPX by
siRNA resulted in reduced Ras activity, inactivation of the MAPK pathway, and
decreased p21 levels, accompanied by reduced cellular senescence. Additionally,
the HOPX-induced senescence pathway was also active in human bronchial epithelial
cells. Taken together, our data suggest that down-regulation of HOPX was related 
to DNA methylation and that HOPX exerts tumour-suppressive activity by oncogenic 
Ras-induced cellular senescence in lung cancer cells.

Copyright © 2014 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by 
John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

PMID: 25345926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Anadolu Kardiyol Derg. 2014 Nov;14(7):617-24. doi: 10.5152/akd.2014.4972. Epub
2014 Feb 10.

Association between non-coding polymorphisms of HOPX gene and syncope in
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy.

Güleç Ç(1), Abaci N, Bayrak F, Kömürcü Bayrak E, Kahveci G, Güven C, Erginel
Ünaltuna N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics Institute for Experimental Medicine (DETAE), Istanbul
University; Istanbul-Turkey. nihanerginel@yahoo.com.

OBJECTIVE: Homeodomain Only Protein X (HOPX) is an unusual homeodomain protein
which regulates Serum Response Factor (SRF) dependent gene expression. Due to the
regulatory role of HOPX on SRF activity and the regulatory role of SRF on cardiac
hypertrophy, we aimed to investigate the relationship between HOPX gene
variations and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM).
METHODS: In this study, designed as a case-control study, we analyzed coding and 
flanking non-coding regions of the HOPX gene through 67 patients with HCM and 31 
healty subjects. Certain regions of the gene were investigated by Single Stranded
Conformation Polymorphism (SSCP) and Restriction Fragment Length Polymorphism
(RFLP). Statistical analyses of genotypes and their relationship with clinical
parameters were performed by chi-square, Kruskal-Wallis and the Fisher's exact
test.
RESULTS: In 5' Untranslated Region (UTR) and intronic region of the HOPX gene, we
found a C>T substitution and an 8-bp insertion/deletion (In/Del) polymorphism,
respectively. These two polymorphisms seemed to constitute an haplotype. While
the frequency of homozygous genotypes of In/Del and C/T polymorphisms were found 
significantly lower in the patients with syncope (p=0.014 and p=0.017,
respectively), frequency of their heterozygous genotypes were found significantly
higher in the patients with syncope (p=0.048 and p=0.030, respectively).
CONCLUSION: Though there was not found any mutation in coding sequence of HOPX
gene, two non-coding polymorphisms were found related to syncope in HCM patients.
While homozygous status of these polymorphisms was found to be protective against
the syncope, their heterozygous status seemed to be a risk factor for syncope in 
HCM patients. Our results suggest that HOPX may contribute to pathogenesis or
manifestation of HCM as a modifier gene.

PMID: 25036325  [PubMed - in process]


22. J Exp Med. 2014 May 5;211(5):987-1000. doi: 10.1084/jem.20132203. Epub 2014 Apr
14.

Identification of a human splenic marginal zone B cell precursor with
NOTCH2-dependent differentiation properties.

Descatoire M(1), Weller S, Irtan S, Sarnacki S, Feuillard J, Storck S,
Guiochon-Mantel A, Bouligand J, Morali A, Cohen J, Jacquemin E, Iascone M,
Bole-Feysot C, Cagnard N, Weill JC, Reynaud CA.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Necker-Enfants Malades, INSERM U1151-CNRS UMR 8253, Sorbonne Paris
Cité, Université Paris Descartes, Faculté de Médecine-Site Broussais, 75014
Paris, France.

Erratum in
    J Exp Med. 2014 May 5;21(5):1005. Sarnacki, Sabine [added].

Mouse splenic marginal zone precursors (MZPs) differentiate into marginal zone B 
(MZB) cells under a signaling pathway involving Notch2 and its ligand, delta-like
1 ligand (Dll1). We report the identification of an MZP subset in the spleen of
young children. These MZPs differentiate into MZ-like B cells in vitro in the
presence of OP9 cells expressing human DLL1, as demonstrated by the up-regulation
of classical MZB cell markers. A set of diagnostic genes discriminating
IgM(+)IgD(+)CD27(+) blood and splenic MZB cells from switched B cells was
identified (up-regulation of SOX7, down-regulation of TOX, COCH, and HOPX), and
their expression during the induction assay mirrored the one of MZB cells.
Moreover, Alagille patients with a NOTCH2 haploinsufficiency display a marked
reduction of IgM(+)IgD(+)CD27(+) B cells in blood, whereas their switched memory 
B cells are not affected. Altogether, these results argue in favor of the
existence of a rodent-like MZB cell lineage in humans.

PMCID: PMC4010902
PMID: 24733829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Int J Mol Sci. 2013 Nov 25;14(12):23231-43. doi: 10.3390/ijms141223231.

The homeobox only protein homeobox (HOPX) and colorectal cancer.

Yamashita K(1), Katoh H, Watanabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Asamizodai
2-1-1, Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa 252-0374, Japan.
keishi23@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp.

The HOP (homeobox only protein) homeobox (HOPX) is most closely related to the
homeobox protein that contains a homeobox-like domain but lacks certain conserved
residues required for DNA binding. Here, we review the current understanding of
HOPX in the progression of colorectal cancer (CRC). HOPX was initially reported
as a differentiation marker and is expressed in various normal tissues. In the
colon, HOPX is expressed uniquely in the quiescent stem cell, +4, and in
differentiated mucosal cells of the colon. HOPX expression is markedly suppressed
in a subset of cancers, mainly in an epigenetic manner. CRC may include separate 
entities which are differentially characterized by HOPX expression from a
prognostic point of view. HOPX itself can regulate epigenetics, and defective
expression of HOPX can result in loss of tumor suppressive function and
differentiation phenotype. These findings indicate that HOPX may be both a
central regulator of epigenetic dynamics and a critical determinant for
differentiation in human cells. HOPX downstream targets were identified in CRC
cell lines and hold promise as candidates for therapeutic targets of CRC, such as
EphA2 or AP-1. Further analysis will elucidate and confirm the precise role of
such proteins in CRC progression.

PMCID: PMC3876040
PMID: 24287901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Oct;11(10):1235-47. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-12-0687. Epub
2013 Aug 12.

Downregulation of HOPX controls metastatic behavior in sarcoma cells and
identifies genes associated with metastasis.

Kovárová D(1), Plachy J, Kosla J, Trejbalová K, Cermák V, Hejnar J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Genetics, Videnska 1083, CZ-14220 Prague 4, Czech
Republic. hejnar@img.cas.cz.

Comparing the gene expression profiles of metastatic and nonmetastatic cells has 
the power to reveal candidate metastasis-associated genes, whose involvement in
metastasis can be experimentally tested. In this study, differentially expressed 
genes were explored in the v-src-transformed metastatic cell line PR9692 and its 
nonmetastatic subclone PR9692-E9. First, the contribution of homeodomain only
protein X (HOPX) in metastasis formation and development was assessed.
HOPX-specific knockdown decreased HOPX expression in the nonmetastatic subclone
and displayed reduced cell motility in vitro. Critically, HOPX knockdown
decreased the in vivo metastatic capacity in a syngeneic animal model system.
Genomic analyses identified a cadre of genes affected by HOPX knockdown that
intersected significantly with genes previously found to be differentially
expressed in metastatic versus nonmetastatic cells. Furthermore, 232 genes were
found in both screens with at least a two-fold change in gene expression, and a
number of high-confidence targets were validated for differential expression.
Importantly, significant changes were demonstrated in the protein expression
level of three metastatic-associated genes (NCAM, FOXG1, and ITGA4), and
knockdown of one of the identified HOPX-regulated metastatic genes, ITGA4, showed
marked inhibition of cell motility and metastasis formation. These data
demonstrate that HOPX is a metastasis-associated gene and that its knockdown
decreases the metastatic activity of v-src-transformed cells through altered gene
expression patterns.IMPLICATIONS: This study provides new mechanistic insight
into a HOPX-regulated metastatic dissemination signature.

PMID: 23938949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Clin Invest. 2013 Jul;123(7):3025-36. doi: 10.1172/JCI68782. Epub 2013 Jun 10.

Type 2 alveolar cells are stem cells in adult lung.

Barkauskas CE(1), Cronce MJ, Rackley CR, Bowie EJ, Keene DR, Stripp BR, Randell
SH, Noble PW, Hogan BL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary, Allergy, and Critical Care Medicine, Department of
Medicine, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

Gas exchange in the lung occurs within alveoli, air-filled sacs composed of type 
2 and type 1 epithelial cells (AEC2s and AEC1s), capillaries, and various
resident mesenchymal cells. Here, we use a combination of in vivo clonal lineage 
analysis, different injury/repair systems, and in vitro culture of purified cell 
populations to obtain new information about the contribution of AEC2s to alveolar
maintenance and repair. Genetic lineage-tracing experiments showed that
surfactant protein C-positive (SFTPC-positive) AEC2s self renew and differentiate
over about a year, consistent with the population containing long-term alveolar
stem cells. Moreover, if many AEC2s were specifically ablated, high-resolution
imaging of intact lungs showed that individual survivors undergo rapid clonal
expansion and daughter cell dispersal. Individual lineage-labeled AEC2s placed
into 3D culture gave rise to self-renewing "alveolospheres," which contained both
AEC2s and cells expressing multiple AEC1 markers, including HOPX, a new marker
for AEC1s. Growth and differentiation of the alveolospheres occurred most readily
when cocultured with primary PDGFRa<U+207A> lung stromal cells. This population included
lipofibroblasts that normally reside close to AEC2s and may therefore contribute 
to a stem cell niche in the murine lung. Results suggest that a similar dynamic
exists between AEC2s and mesenchymal cells in the human lung.

PMCID: PMC3696553
PMID: 23921127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 28;8(6):e66465. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066465. Print 2013.

Cell lineage identification and stem cell culture in a porcine model for the
study of intestinal epithelial regeneration.

Gonzalez LM(1), Williamson I, Piedrahita JA, Blikslager AT, Magness ST.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Comparative Medicine and Translational Research, North Carolina
State University, Raleigh, North Carolina, United States of America.

Significant advances in intestinal stem cell biology have been made in murine
models; however, anatomical and physiological differences between mice and humans
limit mice as a translational model for stem cell based research. The pig has
been an effective translational model, and represents a candidate species to
study intestinal epithelial stem cell (IESC) driven regeneration. The lack of
validated reagents and epithelial culture methods is an obstacle to investigating
IESC driven regeneration in a pig model. In this study, antibodies against
Epithelial Adhesion Molecule 1 (EpCAM) and Villin marked cells of epithelial
origin. Antibodies against Proliferative Cell Nuclear Antigen (PCNA),
Minichromosome Maintenance Complex 2 (MCM2), Bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) and
phosphorylated Histone H3 (pH3) distinguished proliferating cells at various
stages of the cell cycle. SOX9, localized to the stem/progenitor cells zone,
while HOPX was restricted to the +4/'reserve' stem cell zone. Immunostaining also
identified major differentiated lineages. Goblet cells were identified by Mucin 2
(MUC2); enteroendocrine cells by Chromogranin A (CGA), Gastrin and Somatostatin; 
and absorptive enterocytes by carbonic anhydrase II (CAII) and sucrase isomaltase
(SIM). Transmission electron microscopy demonstrated morphologic and sub-cellular
characteristics of stem cell and differentiated intestinal epithelial cell types.
Quantitative PCR gene expression analysis enabled identification of
stem/progenitor cells, post mitotic cell lineages, and important growth and
differentiation pathways. Additionally, a method for long-term culture of porcine
crypts was developed. Biomarker characterization and development of IESC culture 
in the porcine model represents a foundation for translational studies of
IESC-driven regeneration of the intestinal epithelium in physiology and disease.

PMCID: PMC3696067
PMID: 23840480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. BMC Bioinformatics. 2013 Jun 21;14:203. doi: 10.1186/1471-2105-14-203.

Prediction of gene-phenotype associations in humans, mice, and plants using
phenologs.

Woods JO(1), Singh-Blom UM, Laurent JM, McGary KL, Marcotte EM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Systems & Synthetic Biology, Institute for Cellular & Molecular
Biology, The University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA.

BACKGROUND: Phenotypes and diseases may be related to seemingly dissimilar
phenotypes in other species by means of the orthology of underlying genes. Such
"orthologous phenotypes," or "phenologs," are examples of deep homology, and may 
be used to predict additional candidate disease genes.
RESULTS: In this work, we develop an unsupervised algorithm for ranking
phenolog-based candidate disease genes through the integration of predictions
from the k nearest neighbor phenologs, comparing classifiers and weighting
functions by cross-validation. We also improve upon the original method by
extending the theory to paralogous phenotypes. Our algorithm makes use of
additional phenotype data--from chicken, zebrafish, and E. coli, as well as new
datasets for C. elegans--establishing that several types of annotations may be
treated as phenotypes. We demonstrate the use of our algorithm to predict novel
candidate genes for human atrial fibrillation (such as HRH2, ATP4A, ATP4B, and
HOPX) and epilepsy (e.g., PAX6 and NKX2-1). We suggest gene candidates for
pharmacologically-induced seizures in mouse, solely based on orthologous
phenotypes from E. coli. We also explore the prediction of plant gene-phenotype
associations, as for the Arabidopsis response to vernalization phenotype.
CONCLUSIONS: We are able to rank gene predictions for a significant portion of
the diseases in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man database. Additionally,
our method suggests candidate genes for mammalian seizures based only on
bacterial phenotypes and gene orthology. We demonstrate that phenotype
information may come from diverse sources, including drug sensitivities, gene
ontology biological processes, and in situ hybridization annotations. Finally, we
offer testable candidates for a variety of human diseases, plant traits, and
other classes of phenotypes across a wide array of species.

PMCID: PMC3704650
PMID: 23800157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):707-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.05.013.

Hopping between differentiation states in lung adenocarcinoma.

Watanabe H(1), Meyerson M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 450 Brookline
Avenue, Boston, MA 02215, USA. hideo_watanabe@dfci.harvard.edu

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):725-38.

The work by Cheung and colleagues, in this issue of Cancer Cell, demonstrates
another example of how lineage-specific transcriptional regulators of
differentiation, GATA6 and HOPX, can control the fate of lung adenocarcinoma
progression.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3748274
PMID: 23763994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):725-38. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2013.04.009. Epub 2013 
May 23.

Control of alveolar differentiation by the lineage transcription factors GATA6
and HOPX inhibits lung adenocarcinoma metastasis.

Cheung WK(1), Zhao M, Liu Z, Stevens LE, Cao PD, Fang JE, Westbrook TF, Nguyen
DX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT
06510, USA.

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2013 Jun 10;23(6):707-9.

Molecular programs that mediate normal cell differentiation are required for
oncogenesis and tumor cell survival in certain cancers. How
cell-lineage-restricted genes specifically influence metastasis is poorly
defined. In lung cancers, we uncovered a transcriptional program that is
preferentially associated with distal airway epithelial differentiation and lung 
adenocarcinoma (ADC) progression. This program is regulated in part by the
lineage transcription factors GATA6 and HOPX. These factors can cooperatively
limit the metastatic competence of ADC cells, by modulating overlapping alveolar 
differentiation and invasogenic target genes. Thus, GATA6 and HOPX are critical
nodes in a lineage-selective pathway that directly links effectors of airway
epithelial specification to the inhibition of metastasis in the lung ADC subtype.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3697763
PMID: 23707782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. J Vet Med Sci. 2013;75(9):1173-80. Epub 2013 Apr 30.

Characterization of anoikis-resistant cells in mouse colonic epithelium.

Kawasaki H(1), Yoshida T, Horiguchi K, Ohama T, Sato K.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pharmacology, Joint Faculty of Veterinary Medicine,
Yamaguchi University, 1677-1 Yoshida, Yamaguchi 753-8515, Japan.

Anoikis is a form of apoptosis triggered by inadequate or inappropriate cell
matrix contacts. Anoikis resistance has been utilized to isolate adult stem or
progenitor cell populations from various tissues. The aim of this study was to
characterize the stem or progenitor cell markers expressed in anoikis-resistant
cells isolated from mouse colonic epithelium. Mouse colonic epithelial cells were
isolated by Ca(2+)-depletion, and anoikis-resistant cells were obtained by
culturing the cells in ultra-low attachment dishes. Flow cytometry analysis
showed that anoikis-resistant cells are positive for the epithelial cell marker
CD326, but negative for the hematopoietic cell marker CD45, eliminating the
possibility of hematopoietic cell contamination. The majority of
anoikis-resistant cells were also positive for the stem or progenitor cell
markers CD133 and DCLK1 by immunofluorescent analysis. Reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction analysis revealed that anoikis-resistant 
cells express +4 position cell marker Hopx, but did not express the other
reported stem or progenitor cell markers, Lgr5, Musashi1, Bmi1, mTert and Olfm4. 
CD133 and DCLK1 double positive cells were observed both apical and basal crypts 
in mouse proximal colonic tissues. Together, anoikis-resistant cells in mouse
colon epithelium were shown to be positive for CD133, DCLK1, Hopx and CD326, but 
negative for CD45, Lgr5, Musashi1, Bmi1, mTert and Olfm4. This study has shown a 
possible approach to isolating stem cells from the intestinal epithelium.

PMID: 23629020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Stem Cells. 2013 Sep;31(9):2024-30. doi: 10.1002/stem.1391.

Brief report: CD24 and CD44 mark human intestinal epithelial cell populations
with characteristics of active and facultative stem cells.

Gracz AD(1), Fuller MK, Wang F, Li L, Stelzner M, Dunn JC, Martin MG, Magness ST.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine Division of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, The
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA;
Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, The University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina, USA.

Recent seminal studies have rapidly advanced the understanding of intestinal
epithelial stem cell (IESC) biology in murine models. However, the lack of
techniques suitable for isolation and subsequent downstream analysis of IESCs
from human tissue has hindered the application of these findings toward the
development of novel diagnostics and therapies with direct clinical relevance.
This study demonstrates that the cluster of differentiation genes CD24 and CD44
are differentially expressed across LGR5 positive "active" stem cells as well as 
HOPX positive "facultative" stem cells. Fluorescence-activated cell sorting
enables differential enrichment of LGR5 (CD24-/CD44+) and HOPX (CD24+/CD44+)
cells for gene expression analysis and culture. These findings provide the
fundamental methodology and basic cell surface signature necessary for isolating 
and studying intestinal stem cell populations in human physiology and disease.

© AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3783577
PMID: 23553902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Development. 2013 Apr;140(8):1655-64. doi: 10.1242/dev.093005. Epub 2013 Mar 13.

Hopx expression defines a subset of multipotent hair follicle stem cells and a
progenitor population primed to give rise to K6+ niche cells.

Takeda N(1), Jain R, Leboeuf MR, Padmanabhan A, Wang Q, Li L, Lu MM, Millar SE,
Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

The mammalian hair follicle relies on adult resident stem cells and their progeny
to fuel and maintain hair growth throughout the life of an organism. The cyclical
and initially synchronous nature of hair growth makes the hair follicle an ideal 
system with which to define homeostatic mechanisms of an adult stem cell
population. Recently, we demonstrated that Hopx is a specific marker of
intestinal stem cells. Here, we show that Hopx specifically labels long-lived
hair follicle stem cells residing in the telogen basal bulge. Hopx(+) cells
contribute to all lineages of the mature hair follicle and to the interfollicular
epidermis upon epidermal wounding. Unexpectedly, our analysis identifies a
previously unappreciated progenitor population that resides in the lower hair
bulb of anagen-phase follicles and expresses Hopx. These cells co-express Lgr5,
do not express Shh and escape catagen-induced apoptosis. They ultimately
differentiate into the cytokeratin 6-positive (K6) inner bulge cells in telogen, 
which regulate the quiescence of adjacent hair follicle stem cells. Although
previous studies have suggested that K6(+) cells arise from Lgr5-expressing lower
outer root sheath cells in anagen, our studies indicate an alternative origin,
and a novel role for Hopx-expressing lower hair bulb progenitor cells in
contributing to stem cell homeostasis.

PMCID: PMC3621484
PMID: 23487314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. BMC Cancer. 2012 Sep 7;12:397. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-397.

Cancer specific promoter CpG Islands hypermethylation of HOP homeobox (HOPX) gene
and its potential tumor suppressive role in pancreatic carcinogenesis.

Waraya M(1), Yamashita K, Katoh H, Ooki A, Kawamata H, Nishimiya H, Nakamura K,
Ema A, Watanabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kitasato University Hospital, 1-15-1 Kitasato,
Minami-ku, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, 252-0375, Japan. komulu@hotmail.co.jp

BACKGROUND: We have recently identified HOP hoemobox (HOPX) as a tumor suppressor
gene candidate, characterized by tumor-specific promoter DNA hypermethylation in 
human cancers, and it can remarkably inhibit tumors' aggressive phenotypes. In
this current study, we for the first time examined methylation level of HOPX and 
tested the functional relevance in pancreatic cancer (PC).
METHODS: Clinical features of HOPX promoter hypermethylation was investigated in 
89 PC tissues, and immunohistochemistry was added. We also examined its
functional relevance in phenotype assays such as soft agar, proliferation,
invasion, and cell cycle analysis.
RESULTS: PC tissues had HOPX gene hypermethylation as compared to the
corresponding normal pancreas tissues, and its uniqueness was robust to
discriminate tumor from normal tissues (AUC<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.85, P<U+2009><<U+2009>0.0001). Unexpectedly,
HOPX was increased in expression in tumor tissues, and immunohistochemistry
revealed its predominant expression in the Langerhans islet cells, where HOPX was
reduced in expression for PC cells with promoter hypermethylation. HOPX
transfectants exhibited G1 arrest with subG1 accumulation, and inhibited tumor
forming and invasive ability.
CONCLUSION: Defective expression of HOPX which is consistent with promoter DNA
hypermethylation may explain aggressive phenotype of pancreatic cancer, and
intense expression of HOPX in the Langerhans cells may in turn uniquely
contribute to pancreatic carcinogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3488580
PMID: 22958219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Am J Hum Genet. 2012 Sep 7;91(3):435-43. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2012.07.007. Epub
2012 Aug 23.

Genomic profiling of a human organotypic model of AEC syndrome reveals ZNF750 as 
an essential downstream target of mutant TP63.

Zarnegar BJ(1), Webster DE, Lopez-Pajares V, Vander Stoep Hunt B, Qu K, Yan KJ,
Berk DR, Sen GL, Khavari PA.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Epithelial Biology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

The basis for impaired differentiation in TP63 mutant ankyloblepharon-ectodermal 
dysplasia-clefting (AEC) syndrome is unknown. Human epidermis harboring AEC TP63 
mutants recapitulated this impairment, along with downregulation of
differentiation activators, including HOPX, GRHL3, KLF4, PRDM1, and ZNF750.
Gene-set enrichment analysis indicated that disrupted expression of epidermal
differentiation programs under the control of ZNF750 and KLF4 accounted for the
majority of disrupted epidermal differentiation resulting from AEC mutant TP63.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analysis and ChIP-sequencing of TP63 binding
in differentiated keratinocytes revealed ZNF750 as a direct target of wild-type
and AEC mutant TP63. Restoring ZNF750 to AEC model tissue rescued activator
expression and differentiation, indicating that AEC TP63-mediated ZNF750
inhibition contributes to differentiation defects in AEC. Incorporating
disease-causing mutants into regenerated human tissue can thus dissect
pathomechanisms and identify targets that reverse disease features.

Copyright © 2012 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3511987
PMID: 22922031  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Neoplasia. 2012 Jul;14(7):559-71.

Epigenetic silencing of HOPX promotes cancer progression in colorectal cancer.

Katoh H(1), Yamashita K, Waraya M, Margalit O, Ooki A, Tamaki H, Sakagami H,
Kokubo K, Sidransky D, Watanabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Japan.

Homeodomain-only protein X (HOPX)-ß promoter methylation was recently shown to be
frequent in human cancers and was suggested as tumor suppressor gene in
esophageal and gastric cancer. The aim of this study was to investigate the
mechanistic roles of HOPX-ß promoter methylation and its clinical relevance in
colorectal cancer (CRC). HOPX-ß promoter methylation was assessed in human CRC
cell lines and 294 CRC tissues. HOPX mRNA and protein levels were measured in
relation to HOPX-ß promoter methylation. The effects of forced HOPX expression on
tumorigenesis were studied using in vitro and in vivo assays. The association
between HOPX-ß promoter methylation and clinical relevance of CRC patients was
determined. HOPX-ß promoter methylation is cancer-specific and frequently found
in CRC cell lines and tissues, resulting in the down-regulation of HOPX mRNA and 
protein levels. In CRC cell lines, forced expression of HOPX suppressed
proliferation, invasion, and anchorage-independent growth. DNA microarray
analyses suggested critical downstream genes that are associated with cancer cell
proliferation, invasion or angiogenesis. In a mouse xenograft model, HOPX
inhibited tumorigenesis and angiogenesis. Finally, HOPX-ß promoter methylation
was associated with worse prognosis of stage III CRC patients (hazard ratio=
1.40, P = .035) and also with poor differentiation (P = .014). In conclusion,
HOPX-ß promoter methylation is a frequent and cancer-specific event in CRC
progression. This epigenetic alteration may have clinical ramifications in the
diagnosis and treatment of CRC patients.

PMCID: PMC3421953
PMID: 22904674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2012 Oct;1822(10):1600-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbadis.2012.06.011. Epub 2012 Jun 30.

Alteration of colonic stem cell gene signatures during the regenerative response 
to injury.

Davidson LA(1), Goldsby JS, Callaway ES, Shah MS, Barker N, Chapkin RS.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Environmental & Rural Health, Texas A&M University, College
Station, TX, USA.

Since aberrant wound healing and chronic inflammation can promote malignant
transformation, we determined whether dietary bioactive fish oil (FO)-derived n-3
polyunsaturated fatty acids (n-3 PUFA) modulate stem cell kinetics in a
colitis-wounding model. Lgr5-LacZ and Lgr5-EGFP-IRES-creER(T2) mice were fed
diets enriched with n-3 PUFA vs n-6 PUFA (control) and exposed to dextran sodium 
sulfate (DSS) for 5days in order to induce crypt damage and colitis throughout
the colon. Stem cell number, cell proliferation, apoptosis, expression of stem
cell (Lgr5, Sox9, Bmi1, Hopx, mTert, Ascl2, and DCAMKL-1) and inflammation
(STAT3) markers were quantified. DSS treatment resulted in the ablation of
Lgr5(+) stem cells in the distal colon, concurrent with the loss of distal crypt 
structure and proliferating cells. Lgr5, Ascl2 and Hopx mRNA expression levels
were decreased in damaged colonic mucosa. Lgr5(+) stem cells reappeared at day 5 
of DSS recovery, with normal levels attained by day 6 of recovery. There was no
effect of diet on the recovery of stem cells. FO fed animals exhibited higher
levels of phospho-STAT3 at all time points, consistent with a higher wounding by 
DSS in FO feeding. n-3 PUFA-fed mice exhibited a reduction in stem cell
associated factors, Ascl2, Axin2 and EphB3. These results indicate that rapidly
cycling Lgr5(+) stem cells residing at position 1 in the colon epithelium are
highly susceptible to DSS-induced damage and that dietary cues can impact stem
cell regulatory networks.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3418394
PMID: 22750333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2012;7(6):e38965. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0038965. Epub 2012 Jun 20.

Paneth cells in intestinal homeostasis and tissue injury.

Roth S(1), Franken P, Sacchetti A, Kremer A, Anderson K, Sansom O, Fodde R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Josephine Nefkens Institute, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.

Adult stem cell niches are often co-inhabited by cycling and quiescent stem
cells. In the intestine, lineage tracing has identified Lgr5(+) cells as
frequently cycling stem cells, whereas Bmi1(+), mTert(+), Hopx(+) and Lrig1(+)
cells appear to be more quiescent. Here, we have applied a non-mutagenic and cell
cycle independent approach to isolate and characterize small intestinal
label-retaining cells (LRCs) persisting in the lower third of the crypt of
Lieberkühn for up to 100 days. LRCs do not express markers of proliferation and
of enterocyte, goblet or enteroendocrine differentiation, but are positive for
Paneth cell markers. While during homeostasis, LR/Paneth cells appear to play a
supportive role for Lgr5(+) stem cells as previously shown, upon tissue injury
they switch to a proliferating state and in the process activate Bmi1 expression 
while silencing Paneth-specific genes. Hence, they are likely to contribute to
the regenerative process following tissue insults such as chronic inflammation.

PMCID: PMC3380033
PMID: 22745693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. EMBO J. 2012 Jun 12;31(14):3079-91. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2012.166.

The Lgr5 intestinal stem cell signature: robust expression of proposed quiescent 
'+4' cell markers.

Muñoz J(1), Stange DE, Schepers AG, van de Wetering M, Koo BK, Itzkovitz S,
Volckmann R, Kung KS, Koster J, Radulescu S, Myant K, Versteeg R, Sansom OJ, van 
Es JH, Barker N, van Oudenaarden A, Mohammed S, Heck AJ, Clevers H.

Author information: 
(1)Bijvoet Center for Biomolecular Research, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical
Sciences, University, The Netherlands.

Two types of stem cells are currently defined in small intestinal crypts: cycling
crypt base columnar (CBC) cells and quiescent '+4' cells. Here, we combine
transcriptomics with proteomics to define a definitive molecular signature for
Lgr5(+) CBC cells. Transcriptional profiling of FACS-sorted Lgr5(+) stem cells
and their daughters using two microarray platforms revealed an mRNA stem cell
signature of 384 unique genes. Quantitative mass spectrometry on the same cell
populations identified 278 proteins enriched in intestinal stem cells. The mRNA
and protein data sets showed a high level of correlation and a combined signature
of 510 stem cell-enriched genes was defined. Spatial expression patterns were
further characterized by mRNA in-situ hybridization, revealing that approximately
half of the genes were expressed in a gradient with highest levels at the crypt
bottom, while the other half was expressed uniquely in Lgr5(+)stem cells. Lineage
tracing using a newly established knock-in mouse for one of the signature genes, 
Smoc2, confirmed its stem cell specificity. Using this resource, we find-and
confirm by independent approaches-that the proposed quiescent/'+4' stem cell
markers Bmi1, Tert, Hopx and Lrig1 are robustly expressed in CBC cells.

PMCID: PMC3400017
PMID: 22692129  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Haematologica. 2012 Dec;97(12):1909-15. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.064667. Epub
2012 Jun 11.

RUNX1 mutations in cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia are associated
with a poor prognosis and up-regulation of lymphoid genes.

Greif PA(1), Konstandin NP, Metzeler KH, Herold T, Pasalic Z, Ksienzyk B, Dufour 
A, Schneider F, Schneider S, Kakadia PM, Braess J, Sauerland MC, Berdel WE,
Büchner T, Woermann BJ, Hiddemann W, Spiekermann K, Bohlander SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine 3, Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität (LMU)
Munich, Munich, Germany.

BACKGROUND: The RUNX1 (AML1) gene is a frequent mutational target in
myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myeloid leukemia. Previous studies suggested 
that RUNX1 mutations may have pathological and prognostic implications.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We screened 93 patients with cytogenetically normal acute
myeloid leukemia for RUNX1 mutations by capillary sequencing of genomic DNA.
Mutation status was then correlated with clinical data and gene expression
profiles.
RESULTS: We found that 15 out of 93 (16.1%) patients with cytogenetically normal 
acute myeloid leukemia had RUNX1 mutations. Seventy-three patients were enrolled 
in the AMLCG-99 trial and carried ten RUNX1 mutations (13.7%). Among these 73
patients RUNX1 mutations were significantly associated with older age, male sex, 
absence of NPM1 mutations and presence of MLL-partial tandem duplications.
Moreover, RUNX1-mutated patients had a lower complete remission rate (30% versus 
73% P=0.01), lower relapse-free survival rate (3-year relapse-free survival 0%
versus 30.4%; P=0.002) and lower overall survival rate (3-year overall survival
0% versus 34.4%; P<0.001) than patients with wild-type RUNX1. RUNX1 mutations
remained associated with shorter overall survival in a multivariate model
including age and the European Leukemia Net acute myeloid leukemia genetic
classification as covariates. Patients with RUNX1 mutations showed a unique gene 
expression pattern with differential expression of 85 genes. The most prominently
up-regulated genes in patients with RUNX1-mutated cytogenetically normal acute
myeloid leukemia include lymphoid regulators such as HOP homeobox (HOPX),
deoxynucleotidyltransferase (DNTT, terminal) and B-cell linker (BLNK), indicating
lineage infidelity.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings firmly establish that RUNX1 mutations are a marker of
poor prognosis and provide insights into the pathogenesis of RUNX1
mutation-positive acute myeloid leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3590097
PMID: 22689681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Am J Physiol Gastrointest Liver Physiol. 2012 May 15;302(10):G1111-32. doi:
10.1152/ajpgi.00519.2011. Epub 2012 Feb 23.

Activation of two distinct Sox9-EGFP-expressing intestinal stem cell populations 
during crypt regeneration after irradiation.

Van Landeghem L(1), Santoro MA, Krebs AE, Mah AT, Dehmer JJ, Gracz AD, Scull BP, 
McNaughton K, Magness ST, Lund PK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Physiology, University of North Carolina,
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7545, USA.

Recent identification of intestinal epithelial stem cell (ISC) markers and
development of ISC reporter mice permit visualization and isolation of
regenerating ISCs after radiation to define their functional and molecular
phenotypes. Previous studies in uninjured intestine of Sox9-EGFP reporter mice
demonstrate that ISCs express low levels of Sox9-EGFP (Sox9-EGFP Low), whereas
enteroendocrine cells (EEC) express high levels of Sox9-EGFP (Sox9-EGFP High). We
hypothesized that Sox9-EGFP Low ISCs would expand after radiation, exhibit
enhanced proliferative capacities, and adopt a distinct gene expression profile
associated with rapid proliferation. Sox9-EGFP mice were given 14 Gy abdominal
radiation and studied between days 3 and 9 postradiation. Radiation-induced
changes in number, growth, and transcriptome of the different Sox9-EGFP cell
populations were determined by histology, flow cytometry, in vitro culture
assays, and microarray. Microarray confirmed that nonirradiated Sox9-EGFP Low
cells are enriched for Lgr5 mRNA and mRNAs enriched in Lgr5-ISCs and identified
additional putative ISC markers. Sox9-EGFP High cells were enriched for EEC
markers, as well as Bmi1 and Hopx, which are putative markers of quiescent ISCs. 
Irradiation caused complete crypt loss, followed by expansion and
hyperproliferation of Sox9-EGFP Low cells. From nonirradiated intestine, only
Sox9-EGFP Low cells exhibited ISC characteristics of forming organoids in
culture, whereas during regeneration both Sox9-EGFP Low and High cells formed
organoids. Microarray demonstrated that regenerating Sox9-EGFP High cells
exhibited transcriptomic changes linked to p53-signaling and ISC-like functions
including DNA repair and reduced oxidative metabolism. These findings support a
model in which Sox9-EGFP Low cells represent active ISCs, Sox9-EGFP High cells
contain radiation-activatable cells with ISC characteristics, and both
participate in crypt regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3362093
PMID: 22361729  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Science. 2011 Dec 9;334(6061):1420-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1213214. Epub 2011 Nov
10.

Interconversion between intestinal stem cell populations in distinct niches.

Takeda N(1), Jain R, LeBoeuf MR, Wang Q, Lu MM, Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Perelman School of Medicine at
the University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Jan 6;10(1):2-4.

Intestinal epithelial stem cell identity and location have been the subject of
substantial research. Cells in the +4 niche are slow-cycling and label-retaining,
whereas a different stem cell niche located at the crypt base is occupied by
crypt base columnar (CBC) cells. CBCs are distinct from +4 cells, and the
relationship between them is unknown, though both give rise to all intestinal
epithelial lineages. We demonstrate that Hopx, an atypical homeobox protein, is a
specific marker of +4 cells. Hopx-expressing cells give rise to CBCs and all
mature intestinal epithelial lineages. Conversely, CBCs can give rise to +4
Hopx-positive cells. These findings demonstrate a bidirectional lineage
relationship between active and quiescent stem cells in their niches.

PMCID: PMC3705713
PMID: 22075725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Diabetologia. 2011 Nov;54(11):2832-44. doi: 10.1007/s00125-011-2283-5. Epub 2011 
Sep 1.

Transcriptomes of the major human pancreatic cell types.

Dorrell C(1), Schug J, Lin CF, Canaday PS, Fox AJ, Smirnova O, Bonnah R, Streeter
PR, Stoeckert CJ Jr, Kaestner KH, Grompe M.

Author information: 
(1)Papé Family Pediatric Research Institute, Oregon Health and Science
University, 3181 SW Sam Jackson Park Rd, L321, Portland, OR 97239, USA.

Erratum in
    Diabetologia. 2013 May;56(5):1192.

AIMS/HYPOTHESIS: We sought to determine the mRNA transcriptome of all major human
pancreatic endocrine and exocrine cell subtypes, including human alpha, beta,
duct and acinar cells. In addition, we identified the cell type-specific
distribution of transcription factors, signalling ligands and their receptors.
METHODS: Islet samples from healthy human donors were enzymatically dispersed to 
single cells and labelled with cell type-specific surface-reactive antibodies.
Live endocrine and exocrine cell subpopulations were isolated by FACS and gene
expression analyses were performed using microarray analysis and quantitative
RT-PCR. Computational tools were used to evaluate receptor-ligand representation 
in these populations.
RESULTS: Analysis of the transcriptomes of alpha, beta, large duct, small duct
and acinar cells revealed previously unrecognised gene expression patterns in
these cell types, including transcriptional regulators HOPX and HDAC9 in the
human beta cell population. The abundance of some regulatory proteins was
different from that reported in mouse tissue. For example, v-maf
musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homologue B (avian) (MAFB) was detected 
at equal levels in adult human alpha and beta cells, but is absent from adult
mouse beta cells. Analysis of ligand-receptor interactions suggested that EPH
receptor-ephrin communication between exocrine and endocrine cells contributes to
pancreatic function.
CONCLUSIONS/INTERPRETATION: This is the first comprehensive analysis of the
transcriptomes of human exocrine and endocrine pancreatic cell types-including
beta cells-and provides a useful resource for diabetes research. In addition,
paracrine signalling pathways within the pancreas are shown. These results will
help guide efforts to specify human beta cell fate by embryonic stem cell or
induced pluripotent stem cell differentiation or genetic reprogramming.

PMCID: PMC3880150
PMID: 21882062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Anticancer Res. 2011 Sep;31(9):2889-92.

Methylation of the homeobox gene, HOPX, is frequently detected in poorly
differentiated colorectal cancer.

Harada Y(1), Kijima K, Shinmura K, Sakata M, Sakuraba K, Yokomizo K, Kitamura Y, 
Shirahata A, Goto T, Mizukami H, Saito M, Kigawa G, Nemoto H, Hibi K.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterological Surgery, Showa University Fujigaoka Hospital, 1-30
Fujigaoka, Aoba-ku, Yokohama 227-8501, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Homeodomein only protein x (HOPX) gene methylation has frequently
been detected in cancer tissues. The methylation status of the HOPX gene in
colorectal cancer was examined and compared to the clinocopathological findings.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Eighty-nine tumor samples and corresponding normal tissues
were obtained from colorectal cancer patients who underwent surgery at our
hospital. The methylation status of the HOPX gene in these samples was examined
by quantitative methylation-specific PCR (qMSP). Subsequently, the
clinicopathological findings were correlated with the methylation status of the
HOPX gene.
RESULTS: HOPX gene methylation was found in 46 (52%) out of the 89 colorectal
carcinomas, suggesting that it was frequently observed in colorectal cancer. A
significant increase of methylation was observed in the poorly differentiated
carcinomas (p=0.0049).
CONCLUSION: HOPX gene methylation could play an important role for the
development of colorectal cancer and is closely related to the histological type.

PMID: 21868534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2011 Jun;50(6):1056-8. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2011.02.015. Epub
2011 Mar 5.

Homeodomain only protein x is down-regulated in human heart failure.

Trivedi CM(1), Cappola TP, Margulies KB, Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Homeodomain only protein x (Hopx) is an unusual homeodomain protein that has
diverse effects on cardiac growth. Manipulation of Hopx function in murine models
is associated with cardiac hypertrophy, dilation and fibrosis. In the present
study, we examined the expression profile of Hopx in various models of pathologic
cardiac hypertrophy and failure. Hopx expression is significantly reduced in
neonatal rat cardiac myocytes after a/ß adrenergic receptor agonist treatment.
Cardiac hypertrophy and failure induced by transaortic constriction in mice
causes marked down-regulation of Hopx expression. Interestingly, HOPX expression 
was significantly reduced in hearts of humans with end-stage heart failure when
compared to non-failing control hearts, and HOPX levels remain low after LVAD
support. Our findings suggest that HOPX/Hopx expression is reduced in multiple
examples of human and murine cardiac hypertrophy and failure.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3114304
PMID: 21382376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Eur J Immunol. 2010 Nov;40(11):2993-3006. doi: 10.1002/eji.201040936. Epub 2010
Oct 27.

Persistence of effector memory Th1 cells is regulated by Hopx.

Albrecht I(1), Niesner U, Janke M, Menning A, Loddenkemper C, Kühl AA, Lepenies
I, Lexberg MH, Westendorf K, Hradilkova K, Grün J, Hamann A, Epstein JA, Chang
HD, Tokoyoda K, Radbruch A.

Author information: 
(1)German Rheumatism Research Center Berlin, Berlin, Germany.

Th1 cells are prominent in inflamed tissue, survive conventional
immunosuppression, and are believed to play a pivotal role in driving chronic
inflammation. Here, we identify homeobox only protein (Hopx) as a critical and
selective regulator of the survival of Th1 effector/memory cells, both in vitro
and in vivo. Expression of Hopx is induced by T-bet and increases upon repeated
antigenic restimulation of Th1 cells. Accordingly, the expression of Hopx is low 
in peripheral, naïve Th cells, but highly up-regulated in terminally
differentiated effector/memory Th1 cells of healthy human donors. In murine Th1
cells, Hopx regulates the expression of genes involved in regulation of apoptosis
and survival and makes them refractory to Fas-induced apoptosis. In vivo,
adoptively transferred Hopx-deficient murine Th1 cells do not persist.
Consequently, they cannot induce chronic inflammation in murine models of
transfer-induced colitis and arthritis, demonstrating a key role of Hopx for
Th1-mediated immunopathology.

Copyright © 2010 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 21061432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Dev Cell. 2010 Sep 14;19(3):450-9. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.08.012.

Hopx and Hdac2 interact to modulate Gata4 acetylation and embryonic cardiac
myocyte proliferation.

Trivedi CM(1), Zhu W, Wang Q, Jia C, Kee HJ, Li L, Hannenhalli S, Epstein JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

Regulation of chromatin structure via histone modification has recently received 
intense attention. Here, we demonstrate that the chromatin-modifying enzyme
histone deacetylase 2 (Hdac2) functions with a small homeodomain factor, Hopx, to
mediate deacetylation of Gata4, which is expressed by cardiac progenitor cells
and plays critical roles in the regulation of cardiogenesis. In the absence of
Hopx and Hdac2 in mouse embryos, Gata4 hyperacetylation is associated with a
marked increase in cardiac myocyte proliferation, upregulation of Gata4 target
genes, and perinatal lethality. Hdac2 physically interacts with Gata4, and this
interaction is stabilized by Hopx. The ability of Gata4 to transactivate cell
cycle genes is impaired by Hopx/Hdac2-mediated deacetylation, and this effect is 
abrogated by loss of Hdac2-Gata4 interaction. These results suggest that Gata4 is
a nonhistone target of Hdac2-mediated deacetylation and that Hdac2, Hopx, and
Gata4 coordinately regulate cardiac myocyte proliferation during embryonic
development.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2947937
PMID: 20833366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Nat Immunol. 2010 Oct;11(10):962-8. doi: 10.1038/ni.1929. Epub 2010 Aug 29.

The transcription cofactor Hopx is required for regulatory T cell function in
dendritic cell-mediated peripheral T cell unresponsiveness.

Hawiger D(1), Wan YY, Eynon EE, Flavell RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunobiology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven,
Connecticut, USA.

Induced regulatory T cells (iT(reg) cells) can be generated by peripheral
dendritic cells (DCs) that mediate T cell unresponsiveness to rechallenge with
antigen. The molecular factors required for the function of such iT(reg) cells
remain unknown. We report a critical role for the transcription cofactor
homeodomain-only protein (Hop; also known as Hopx) in iT(reg) cells to mediate T 
cell unresponsiveness in vivo. Hopx-sufficient iT(reg) cells downregulated
expression of the transcription factor AP-1 complex and suppressed other T cells.
In the absence of Hopx, iT(reg) cells had high expression of the AP-1 complex,
proliferated and failed to mediate T cell unresponsiveness to rechallenge with
antigen. Thus, Hopx is required for the function of T(reg) cells induced by DCs
and the promotion of DC-mediated T cell unresponsiveness in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2943559
PMID: 20802482  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Am Soc Echocardiogr. 2010 Aug;23(8):887-97. doi: 10.1016/j.echo.2010.05.017.
Epub 2010 Jun 29.

An evaluation of transmitral and pulmonary venous Doppler indices for assessing
murine left ventricular diastolic function.

Yuan L(1), Wang T, Liu F, Cohen ED, Patel VV.

Author information: 
(1)Penn Cardiovascular Institute and Division of Cardiovascular Diseases,
University of Pennsylvania, PA 19104, USA.

With the continued development of genetically engineered mouse models of cardiac 
disease, further advancement of noninvasive techniques for evaluating cardiac
diastolic dysfunction in these models would be valuable. Therefore, we performed 
comprehensive transmitral and pulmonary venous Doppler echocardiographic studies 
to devise novel indices of diastolic function in a mouse model with cardiac
hypertrophy, which were validated against invasively measured hemodynamic
parameters. We examined 10 HopX(Tg) transgenic mice with diastolic dysfunction
and 10 age-matched controls sedated with 1% to 2% isoflurane (male, age 14-18
weeks). These studies revealed that the acceleration time of the transmitral
Doppler E-wave was the best Doppler parameter for unmasking LV diastolic
dysfunction in HopX(Tg) mice. This is the first study to assess the utility of
the acceleration time of the E-wave and pulmonary venous Doppler echocardiography
as a primary diagnostic modality for assessing murine diastolic function.

Copyright 2010 American Society of Echocardiography. Published by Mosby, Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2910830
PMID: 20591622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. PLoS Comput Biol. 2010 Apr 8;6(4):e1000737. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000737.

New insights into the genetic control of gene expression using a Bayesian
multi-tissue approach.

Petretto E(1), Bottolo L, Langley SR, Heinig M, McDermott-Roe C, Sarwar R,
Pravenec M, Hübner N, Aitman TJ, Cook SA, Richardson S.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Clinical Sciences Centre, Faculty of Medicine,
Imperial College London, London, United Kingdom.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Genet. 2010 Jun;11(6):388.

The majority of expression quantitative trait locus (eQTL) studies have been
carried out in single tissues or cell types, using methods that ignore
information shared across tissues. Although global analysis of RNA expression in 
multiple tissues is now feasible, few integrated statistical frameworks for joint
analysis of gene expression across tissues combined with simultaneous analysis of
multiple genetic variants have been developed to date. Here, we propose Sparse
Bayesian Regression models for mapping eQTLs within individual tissues and
simultaneously across tissues. Testing these on a set of 2,000 genes in four
tissues, we demonstrate that our methods are more powerful than traditional
approaches in revealing the true complexity of the eQTL landscape at the
systems-level. Highlighting the power of our method, we identified a two-eQTL
model (cis/trans) for the Hopx gene that was experimentally validated and was not
detected by conventional approaches. We showed common genetic regulation of gene 
expression across four tissues for approximately 27% of transcripts, providing >5
fold increase in eQTLs detection when compared with single tissue analyses at 5% 
FDR level. These findings provide a new opportunity to uncover complex genetic
regulatory mechanisms controlling global gene expression while the generality of 
our modelling approach makes it adaptable to other model systems and humans, with
broad application to analysis of multiple intermediate and whole-body phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC2851562
PMID: 20386736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Oncogene. 2010 Jun 3;29(22):3263-75. doi: 10.1038/onc.2010.76. Epub 2010 Mar 15.

Potential utility of HOP homeobox gene promoter methylation as a marker of tumor 
aggressiveness in gastric cancer.

Ooki A(1), Yamashita K, Kikuchi S, Sakuramoto S, Katada N, Kokubo K, Kobayashi H,
Kim MS, Sidransky D, Watanabe M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Kitasato University Hospital, Sagamihara, Kanagawa,
Japan. sp9y9tq9@piano.ocn.ne.jp

HOP homeobox (HOPX) is an unusual homeobox gene encoding three spliced transcript
variants, among which the only HOPX-beta promoter harbors CpG islands. The
characteristics of its promoter methylation was analyzed using bisulfite
sequencing and quantitative-methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction
(Q-MSP), and the effects of HOPX expression were also examined. HOPX-beta
expression was silenced in all gastric cancer cell lines tested; its expression
could be restored by treatment with demethylating agent. On Q-MSP, HOPX-beta
hypermethylation (cut-off value of 3.55) was found in 84% (67 out of 80) of
primary tumor tissues and 10% (8 out of 80) of the corresponding normal tissues
and could discriminate normal from tumor tissues (P<0.0001). The prognosis of the
advanced cases with HOPX-beta hypermethylation was as poor as those with stage IV
disease when cut-off value was set at 11.28. This finding was validated in an
independent cohort of 90 advanced gastric cancers. The HOPX-beta hypermethylation
was also an independent prognostic factor (P=0.029) on multivariate analysis.
Exogenous HOPX expression significantly inhibited cell proliferation, colony
formation and invasion as well as enhanced apoptosis. Taken together, HOPX-beta
promoter methylation is a frequent and cancer-specific event in gastric cancer.
Quantitative assessment of HOPX-beta methylation has great clinical potential as 
a marker of tumor aggressiveness.

PMID: 20228841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Eur J Cell Biol. 2010 Jul;89(7):537-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2010.01.005. Epub
2010 Mar 11.

Expression of the homeobox gene, HOPX, is modulated by cell differentiation in
human keratinocytes and is involved in the expression of differentiation markers.

Yang JM(1), Sim SM, Kim HY, Park GT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University
School of Medicine, 50 Irwon-dong, Gangnam-gu, Seoul, South Korea.

Homeodomain only protein X (HOPX), an unusual homeodomain protein, was originally
identified as a key regulator of cardiac development. We first demonstrated that 
the expression of HOPX was dependent on the differentiation of human
keratinocytes and has an effect on the expression of differentiation markers.
HOPX was suppressed in proliferating human keratinocytes and was gradually
induced by calcium-triggered differentiation of human keratinocytes. In the
epidermis, HOPX is highly expressed in the terminally differentiated suprabasal
layers. Among the transcript variants of HOPX, the variant 3 driven by promoter A
was the main transcript and it was regulated by cell differentiation in human
keratinocytes. The expression of HOPX was induced through the
phorbol-12-myristate-13-acetate (PMA)-dependent protein kinase C (PKC) signaling 
pathway, and not by the demethylating agent, 5-aza-dC (5-aza-2'-deoxycitidine)
suggesting the suppression of HOPX is not associated with DNA methylation in
human keratinocytes. The RNA interference (RNAi) silencing experiment showed that
the knockdown of HOPX expression resulted in the increase of such differentiation
markers as involucrin and loricrin. Exogenous expression of HOPX down-regulated
the expression of differentiation marker genes in immortalized human
keratinocytes (HaCaT). Collectively, HOPX is modulated by cell differentiation in
human keratinocytes and this might contribute to homeostasis of keratinocytes by 
controlling differentiation-dependent genes.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20226564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Int J Cancer. 2009 Jun 1;124(11):2577-88. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24217.

Homeobox gene HOPX is epigenetically silenced in human uterine endometrial cancer
and suppresses estrogen-stimulated proliferation of cancer cells by inhibiting
serum response factor.

Yamaguchi S(1), Asanoma K, Takao T, Kato K, Wake N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Kyushu
University, Fukuoka, Japan.

HOPX (homeodomain only protein X) is a newly identified homeobox gene whose loss 
of expression has been reported for several types of neoplasm. Although we found 
most human uterine endometrial cancers (HEC) defective in HOPX expression,
genetic mutations in the HOPX gene were undetectable. As is the case with several
tumor suppressor genes, the promoter region of HOPX is densely methylated in HEC 
tissue samples obtained by laser capture microdissection. HOPX mRNA and protein
levels were reduced in the majority of samples, and this correlated with
hypermethylation of the HOPX promoter. Forced expression of HOPX resulted in a
partial block in cell proliferation, in vivo tumorigenicity and c-fos gene
expression in HEC and MCF7 cells in response to 17beta-estradiol (E(2))
stimulation. Analysis of the serum response element (SRE) of c-fos gene promoter 
showed that the effect of HOPX expression is associated with inhibition of
E(2)-induced c-fos activation through the serum response factor (SRF) motif.
Knockdown of HOPX in immortalized human endometrial cells resulted in accelerated
proliferation. Our study indicates that transcriptional silencing of HOPX results
from hypermethylation of the HOPpromoter, which leads to HEC development.

PMID: 19173292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2008 Dec;45(6):715-23. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2008.08.015. Epub
2008 Sep 16.

Histone-deacetylase inhibition reverses atrial arrhythmia inducibility and
fibrosis in cardiac hypertrophy independent of angiotensin.

Liu F(1), Levin MD, Petrenko NB, Lu MM, Wang T, Yuan LJ, Stout AL, Epstein JA,
Patel VV.

Author information: 
(1)Penn Cardiovascular Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA,
USA.

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2008 Dec;45(6):707-8.

Atrial fibrosis influences the development of atrial fibrillation (AF),
particularly in the setting of structural heart disease where
angiotensin-inhibition is partially effective for reducing atrial fibrosis and
AF. Histone-deacetylase inhibition reduces cardiac hypertrophy and fibrosis, so
we sought to determine if the HDAC inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA) could reduce
atrial fibrosis and arrhythmias. Mice over-expressing homeodomain-only protein
(HopX(Tg)), which recruits HDAC activity to induce cardiac hypertrophy were
investigated in 4 groups (aged 14-18 weeks): wild-type (WT), HopX(Tg), HopX(Tg)
mice treated with TSA for 2 weeks (TSA-HopX) and wild-type mice treated with TSA 
for 2 weeks (TSA-WT). These groups were characterized using invasive
electrophysiology, atrial fibrosis measurements, atrial connexin
immunocytochemistry and myocardial angiotensin II measurements. Invasive
electrophysiologic stimulation, using the same attempts in each group, induced
more atrial arrhythmias in HopX(Tg) mice (48 episodes in 13 of 15 HopX(Tg) mice
versus 5 episodes in 2 of 15 TSA-HopX mice, P<0.001; versus 9 episodes in 2 of 15
WT mice, P<0.001; versus no episodes in any TSA-WT mice, P<0.001). TSA reduced
atrial arrhythmia duration in HopX(Tg) mice (1307+/-289 ms versus 148+/-110 ms,
P<0.01) and atrial fibrosis (8.1+/-1.5% versus 3.9+/-0.4%, P<0.001). Atrial
connexin40 was lower in HopX(Tg) compared to WT mice, and TSA normalized the
expression and size distribution of connexin40 gap junctions. Myocardial
angiotensin II levels were similar between WT and HopX(Tg) mice (76.3+/-26.0
versus 69.7+/-16.6 pg/mg protein, P=NS). Therefore, it appears HDAC-inhibition
reverses atrial fibrosis, connexin40 remodeling and atrial arrhythmia
vulnerability independent of angiotensin II in cardiac hypertrophy.

PMCID: PMC2630487
PMID: 18926829  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 2007 Oct;20(10):1250-61.

New type III effectors from Xanthomonas campestris pv. vesicatoria trigger plant 
reactions dependent on a conserved N-myristoylation motif.

Thieme F(1), Szczesny R, Urban A, Kirchner O, Hause G, Bonas U.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Biologie, Bereich Genetik, Martin-Luther-Universität
Halle-Wittenberg, D-06099 Halle/Saale, Germany.

Pathogenicity of the gram-negative plant pathogen Xanthomonas campestris pv.
vesicatoria depends on a type III secretion system, which translocates bacterial 
effector proteins into the plant cell. In this study, we identified two novel
type III effectors, XopE1 and XopE2 (Xanthomonas outer proteins), using the
AvrBs3 effector domain as reporter. XopE1 and XopE2 belong to the HopX family and
possess a conserved putative N-myristoylation motif that is also present in the
effector XopJ from X. campestris pv. vesicatoria 85-10. XopJ is a member of the
YopJ/AvrRxv family of acetyltransferases. Confocal laser scanning microscopy and 
immunocytochemistry revealed that green fluorescent protein fusions of XopE1,
XopE2, and XopJ localized to the plant cell plasma membrane. Targeting to the
membrane is probably due to N-myristoylation, because a point mutation in the
putative myristoylated glycine residue G2 in XopE1, XopE2, and XopJ resulted in
cytoplasmic localization of the mutant proteins. Results of hydroxylamine
treatments of XopE2 protein extracts suggest that the proteins are additionally
anchored in the host cell plasma membrane by palmitoylation. The membrane
localization of the effectors strongly influences the phenotypes they trigger in 
the plant. Agrobacterium-mediated expression of xopE1 and xopJ in Nicotiana
benthamiana led to cell-death reactions that, for xopJ, were dependent on the
N-myristoylation motif. In the case of xopE1(G2A), cell death was more pronounced
with the mutant than with the wild-type protein. In addition, XopE2 has an
avirulence activity in Solanum pseudocapsicum.

PMID: 17918627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Plant Microbe Interact. 2007 Apr;20(4):346-57.

The HopX (AvrPphE) family of Pseudomonas syringae type III effectors require a
catalytic triad and a novel N-terminal domain for function.

Nimchuk ZL(1), Fisher EJ, Desveaux D, Chang JH, Dangl JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC 27599,
USA.

Many gram-negative plant pathogenic bacteria employ type III secretion systems to
deliver effector proteins directly into the host cell during infection. On
susceptible hosts, type III effectors aid pathogen growth by manipulating host
defense pathways. On resistant hosts, some effectors can activate specific host
disease resistance (R) genes, leading to generation of rapid and effective immune
responses. The biochemical basis of these processes is poorly understood. The
HopX (AvrPphE) family is a widespread type III effector among phytopathogenic
bacteria. We determined that HopX family members are modular proteins composed of
a conserved putative cysteine-based catalytic triad and a conserved potential
target/cofactor interaction domain. HopX is soluble in host cells. Putative
catalytic triad residues are required for avirulence activity on resistant bean
hosts and for the generation of a cell-death response in specific Arabidopsis
genotypes. The putative target/cofactor interaction domain is also required for
these activities. Our data suggest that specific interaction with and
modification of a cytosolic host target drives HopX recognition in resistant
hosts and may contribute to virulence in susceptible hosts. Surprisingly, the
Legionella pneumophila genome was found to contain a protein with similarity to
HopX in sequence and domain arrangement, suggesting that these proteins might
also contribute to animal pathogenesis and could be delivered to plant and animal
hosts by diverse secretion systems.

PMID: 17427805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Microbes Infect. 2001 Mar;3(3):171-9.

Characterization of four members of a multigene family encoding outer membrane
proteins of Helicobacter pylori and their potential for vaccination.

Peck B(1), Ortkamp M, Nau U, Niederweis M, Hundt E, Knapp B.

Author information: 
(1)Chiron Behring GmbH & Co, Preclinical Research, D-35006 Marburg, Germany.

In search of protective antigens which can be used in a vaccine to prevent
Helicobacter pylori infection, we report on the identification of four genes,
hopV, hopW, hopX and hopY, and the characterization of the corresponding proteins
which belong to the H. pylori outer membrane protein (Hop) family containing 32
homologous members, some of which were shown to function as porins. Sequence
analysis of 16 different H. pylori strains revealed that the proteins HopV, HopW,
HopX and HopY are highly conserved. Localization of HopV, HopW, HopX and HopY at 
the surface of the bacteria was investigated by immunofluorescence. Using a
planar lipid bilayer system the proteins HopV and HopX were shown to form pores
with single-channel conductances of 1.4 and 3.0 nS, respectively.

PMID: 11358711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


