
1. Int J Dev Biol. 2015;59(10-12):497-503. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.150124sf.

External ear microRNA expression profiles during mouse development.

Torres L(1), Juárez U, García L, Miranda-Ríos J, Frias S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Citogenética, Depto. de Investigación en Genética Humana,
Instituto Nacional de Pediatría, México DF, México.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) comprise a class of approximately 22 nucleotide regulatory
non-coding RNAs that play several roles in diverse biological processes. Recent
reports suggest that embryonic development in mammals is accompanied by dynamic
changes in miRNA expression; however, there is no information regarding the role 
of miRNAs in the development of the external ear. The aim of this study was to
determine the stage-specific expression of miRNAs during mouse external ear
development in order to identify potentially implicated miRNAs along with their
possible targets. miRNA expression profiles from fetal mice pinnae and back skin 
tissues at 13.5 dpc and 14.5 dpc were obtained using an Affymetrix GeneChip miRNA
3.0 array. Biological triplicates for both tissues, each collected from a litter 
averaging 16 fetuses, were analyzed. The results were analyzed with Affymetrix's 
Transcriptome Analysis Console software to identify differentially expressed
miRNAs. We observed differential expression of 40 miRNAs including some predicted
to target genes implicated in external ear development, such as mmu-miR-10a, an
miRNA known to modulate Hoxa1 mRNA levels, and mmu-miR-200c and mmu-miR-205. To
our knowledge, this is the first miRNA expression profiling study of external ear
development in mammals. These data could set the basis to understand the
implications of miRNAs in normal external ear development.

PMID: 26864490  [PubMed - in process]


2. Gene Expr Patterns. 2016 Jan 26. pii: S1567-133X(16)30002-3. doi:
10.1016/j.gep.2016.01.002. [Epub ahead of print]

Fat accumulation in differentiated brown adipocytes is linked with expression of 
Hox genes.

Singh S(1), Rajput YS(2), Barui AK(3), Sharma R(3), Datta TK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biochemistry Division, National Dairy Researikch Institute, Karnal,
Haryana, 132001, India. (2)Animal Biochemistry Division, National Dairy
Researikch Institute, Karnal, Haryana, 132001, India. Electronic address:
ys_rajput@rediffmail.com. (3)Dairy Chemistry Division, National Dairy Research
Institute, Karnal, Haryana, 132001, India. (4)Animal Biotechnology Centre,
National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana, 132001, India.

Homeobox (Hox) genes are involved in body plan of embryo along the
anterior-posterior axis. Presence of several Hox genes in white adipose tissue
(WAT) and brown adipose tissue (BAT) is indicative of involvement of Hox genes in
adipogenesis. We propose that differentiation inducing agents viz.
isobutyl-methyl-xanthine (IBMX), indomethacin, dexamethasone (DEX),
triiodothyronine (T3) and insulin may regulate differentiation in brown adipose
tissue through Hox genes. In vitro culture of brown fat stromalvascular fraction 
(SVF) in presence or absence of differentiation inducing agents was used for
establishing relationship between fat accumulation in differentiated adipocytes
and expression of Hox genes. Relative expression of Pref1, UCP1 and Hox genes was
determined in different stages of adipogenesis. Presence or absence of IBMX,
indomethacin and DEX during differentiation of proliferated pre-adipocytes
resulted in marked differences in expression of Hox genes and lipid accumulation.
In presence of these inducing agents, lipid accumulation as well as expression of
HoxA1, HoxA5, HoxC4 &HoxC8 markedly enhanced. Irrespective of presence or absence
of T3, insulin down regulates HoxA10. T3 results in over expression of HoxA5,
HoxC4 and HoxC8 genes, whereas insulin up regulates expression of only HoxC8.
Findings suggest that accumulation of fat in differentiated adipocytes is linked 
with expression of Hox genes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26820751  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Toxicol In Vitro. 2016 Apr;32:287-96. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2016.01.011. Epub 2016
Jan 25.

Identification of compounds that modulate retinol signaling using a cell-based
qHTS assay.

Chen Y(1), Sakamuru S(2), Huang R(2), Reese DH(3), Xia M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Office of Applied Research and Safety
Assessment, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, Laurel, MD 20708, United States. Electronic address:
yanling.chen@fda.hhs.gov. (2)National Center for Advancing Translational
Sciences, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, United States.
(3)Division of Molecular Biology, Office of Applied Research and Safety
Assessment, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, U.S. Food and Drug
Administration, Laurel, MD 20708, United States.

In vertebrates, the retinol (vitamin A) signaling pathway (RSP) controls the
biosynthesis and catabolism of all-trans retinoic acid (atRA), which regulates
transcription of genes essential for embryonic development. Chemicals that
interfere with the RSP to cause abnormal intracellular levels of atRA are
potential developmental toxicants. To assess chemicals for the ability to
interfere with retinol signaling, we have developed a cell-based RARE (Retinoic
Acid Response Element) reporter gene assay to identify RSP disruptors. To
validate this assay in a quantitative high-throughput screening (qHTS) platform, 
we screened the Library of Pharmacologically Active Compounds (LOPAC) in both
agonist and antagonist modes. The screens detected known RSP agonists,
demonstrating assay reliability, and also identified novel RSP agonists including
kenpaullone, niclosamide, PD98059 and SU4312, and RSP antagonists including Bay
11-7085, LY294002, 3,4-Methylenedioxy-ß-nitrostyrene, and topoisomerase
inhibitors (camptothecin, topotecan, amsacrine hydrochloride, and idarubicin).
When evaluated in the P19 pluripotent cell, these compounds were found to affect 
the expression of the Hoxa1 gene that is essential for embryo body patterning.
These results show that the RARE assay is an effective qHTS approach for
screening large compound libraries to identify chemicals that have the potential 
to adversely affect embryonic development through interference with retinol
signaling.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4779714 [Available on 2017-04-01]
PMID: 26820057  [PubMed - in process]


4. J Exp Clin Cancer Res. 2016 Jan 21;35(1):15. doi: 10.1186/s13046-016-0294-2.

Elevated HOXA1 expression correlates with accelerated tumor cell proliferation
and poor prognosis in gastric cancer partly via cyclin D1.

Yuan C(1), Zhu X(2), Han Y(3), Song C(4), Liu C(5), Lu S(6), Zhang M(7), Yu F(8),
Peng Z(9), Zhou C(10,)(11).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200080, P. R. China.
chenwei_yuan@126.com. (2)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai General
Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200080, P.
R. China. zhuxingwu2015@126.com. (3)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai
General Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
200080, P. R. China. hyhanyang85@126.com. (4)Department of General Surgery,
Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, 200080, P. R. China. songchenlong1992@sina.com. (5)Department of
General Surgery, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai, 200080, P. R. China. lccliu_chenchen@sina.com.
(6)Department of Pathology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200080, P. R. China. lu_su1987@sina.com.
(7)Department of Pathology, Shanghai General Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200080, P. R. China.
meng_zhang1988@sina.com. (8)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai General
Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200080, P.
R. China. fudong_yu@sina.com. (9)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai General 
Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200080, P.
R. China. peng_zhihai@tom.com. (10)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai
General Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong University School of Medicine, Shanghai,
200080, P. R. China. chongzhi_zhou@163.com. (11)Department of General Surgery,
Kashgar Prefecture Second People's Hospital, Kashgar, Xinjiang Uyghur Autonomous 
Region, 844000, P. R. China. chongzhi_zhou@163.com.

BACKGROUND: HOXA1 is a member of the Homeobox gene family, which encodes a group 
of highly conserved transcription factors that are important in embryonic
development. However, it has been reported that HOXA1 exhibits oncogenic
properties in many malignancies. This study focused on the expression and
clinical significance of HOXA1 in gastric cancer (GC).
METHODS: To assess the mRNA and protein expression of HOXA1 and cyclin D1 in GC
tissues, we utilized qRT-PCR and western blotting, respectively. The effects of
HOXA1 on GC cell proliferation, migration, and invasion, as well as xenograft
tumor formation and the cell cycle were investigated in our established stable
HOXA1 knockdown GC cell lines. The protein expression of HOXA1 and cyclin D1 was 
examined by immunohistochemistry using GC tissue microarrays (TMA) to analyze
their relationship on a histological level. The Kaplan-Meier method and cox
proportional hazards model were used to analyze the relationship of HOXA1 and
cyclin D1 expression with GC clinical outcomes.
RESULTS: HOXA1 mRNA and protein expression were upregulated in GC tissues.
Knockdown of HOXA1 in GC cells not only inhibited cell proliferation, migration, 
and invasion in vitro but also suppressed xenograft tumor formation in vivo.
Moreover, HOXA1 knockdown induced changes in the cell cycle, and HOXA1 knockdown 
cells were arrested at the G1 phase, the number of cells in S phase was reduced, 
and the expression of cyclin D1 was decreased. In GC tissues, high cyclin D1 mRNA
and protein expression were detected, and a significant correlation was found
between the expression of HOXA1 and cyclin D1. Survival analysis indicated that
HOXA1 and cyclin D1 expression were significantly associated with disease-free
survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS). Interestingly, patients with tumors
that were positive for HOXA1 and cyclin D1 expression showed worse prognosis.
Multivariate analysis confirmed that the combination of HOXA1 and cyclin D1 was
an independent prognostic indicator for OS and DFS.
CONCLUSION: Our data show that HOXA1 plays a crucial role in GC development and
clinical prognosis. HOXA1, alone or combination with cyclin D1, may serve as a
novel prognostic biomarker for GC.

PMCID: PMC4721151
PMID: 26791264  [PubMed - in process]


5. Lab Invest. 2016 Jan;96(1):60-8. doi: 10.1038/labinvest.2015.123. Epub 2015 Nov
2.

Long noncoding RNA-HOTAIR affects chemoresistance by regulating HOXA1 methylation
in small cell lung cancer cells.

Fang S(1), Gao H(1,)(2), Tong Y(1), Yang J(1), Tang R(1), Niu Y(1), Li M(1), Guo 
L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of Pathology, Guangdong Provincial Maternity and 
Child Care Center, Guangzhou, China.

Homeobox (HOX) transcript antisense RNA (HOTAIR), a long intergenic noncoding RNA
(lincRNA), has been reported to play an oncogenic role in various cancers
including small cell lung cancer (SCLC). However, it is not known whether HOTAIR 
can modulate chemoresistance in SCLC. The aim of this study is to investigate the
roles of HOTAIR in chemoresistance of SCLC and its possible molecular mechanism. 
Knockdown of HOTAIR was carried out in SCLC multidrug-resistant cell lines (H69AR
and H446AR) and the parental cell lines (H69 and H446) to assess its influence on
chemoresistance. The results showed that downregulation of HOTAIR increased cell 
sensitivity to anticancer drugs through increasing cell apoptosis and cell cycle 
arrest, and suppressed tumor growth in vivo. Moreover, HOXA1 methylation
increased in the resistant cells using bisulfite sequencing PCR. Depletion of
HOTAIR reduced HOXA1 methylation by decreasing DNMT1 and DNMT3b expression. The
interaction between HOTAIR and HOXA1 was validated by RNA immunoprecipitation.
Taken together, our study suggested that HOTAIR mediates chemoresistance of SCLC 
by regulating HOXA1 methylation and could be utilized as a potential target for
new adjuvant therapies against chemoresistance.

PMID: 26707824  [PubMed - in process]


6. Genom Data. 2015 Jun 4;5:228-30. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2015.05.038. eCollection
2015.

Transcriptomic profiling comparison of YAP over-expression and conditional
knockout mouse tooth germs.

Liu M(1), Wang XP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

To identify the downstream target genes of YAP, we used RNA-Seq technology to
compare the transcriptomic profilings of Yap conditional knockout (Yap CKO) and
YAP over-expression mouse tooth germs. Our results showed that some Hox, Wnt and 
Laminin family genes had concurrent changes with YAP transcripts, indicating that
the expression of these genes may be regulated by YAP. Here, we provide the
detailed experimental procedure for the transcriptomic profiling results (NCBI
GEO accession number GSE65524). The associated study on the regulation of Hoxa1
and Hoxc13 genes by YAP was published in Molecular Cellular Biology in 2015 [Liu 
et al., 2015].

PMCID: PMC4583647
PMID: 26484260  [PubMed]


7. Rev Med Inst Mex Seguro Soc. 2015;53 Suppl 2:S188-93.

[The role of developmental HOX genes in cervical cancer].

[Article in Spanish; Abstract available in Spanish from the publisher]

López-Romero R(1), Marrero-Rodríguez D, Romero-Morelos P, Villegas V, Valdivia A,
Arreola H, Huerta-Padilla V, Salcedo M.

Author information: 
(1)Unidad de Investigación Médica en Enfermedades Oncológicas, Hospital de
Oncología, Centro Médico Nacional Siglo XXI, Instituto Mexicano del Seguro
Social, Distrito Federal, México. rlopez_99@yahoo.com.

Cervical cancer (CC) is a multifactorial disease associated to genetic,
environmental and epigenetic factors, being the infection by human papillomavirus
the main etiologic agent. Additionally, the alteration in the expression of
transcription factors has been considered of importance for the development of
this tumor. HOX genes encode a group of transcription factors involved in
cellular proliferation and differentiation processes during the development of
embryonic structures in vertebrates; their aberrant expression is associated with
tumorigenesis and metastasis. A range of evidence suggests a role for HOX genes
in the development of cervical neoplastic cell. Studies in CC cell lines, primary
tumors and premalignant lesions have suggested the involvement of HOXA1, HOXC5,
C6, C8 and C10, HOXD9 and HOXD13 in the process of cervical carcinogenesis. Also,
the de novo expression of genes HOXB2, B4, B13 and HOXC11-C13 appears to be
involved in the process of malignant transformation of cervical epithelial cell. 
These data would allow to open a field in search of new molecular markers in
cervical cancer and the development of new therapeutic strategies for this
malignancy.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMID: 26462515  [PubMed - in process]


8. Genetics. 2015 Oct;201(2):727-36. doi: 10.1534/genetics.115.178079.

Fitness Assays Reveal Incomplete Functional Redundancy of the HoxA1 and HoxB1
Paralogs of Mice.

Ruff JS(1), Saffarini RB(1), Ramoz LL(1), Morrison LC(1), Baker S(1), Laverty
SM(2), Tvrdik P(3), Potts WK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112.
(2)Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Central Oklahoma,
Edmond, Oklahoma 73034. (3)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112. (4)Department of Biology, University of Utah, Salt Lake
City, Utah 84112 Potts@biology.utah.edu.

Gene targeting techniques have led to the phenotypic characterization of numerous
genes; however, many genes show minimal to no phenotypic consequences when
disrupted, despite many having highly conserved sequences. The standard
explanation for these findings is functional redundancy. A competing hypothesis
is that these genes have important ecological functions in natural environments
that are not needed under laboratory settings. Here we discriminate between these
hypotheses by competing mice (Mus musculus) whose Hoxb1 gene has been replaced by
Hoxa1, its highly conserved paralog, against matched wild-type controls in
seminatural enclosures. This Hoxb1(A1) swap was reported as a genetic
manipulation resulting in no discernible embryonic or physiological phenotype
under standard laboratory tests. We observed a transient decline in first litter 
size for Hoxb1(A1) homozygous mice in breeding cages, but their fitness was
consistently and more dramatically reduced when competing against controls within
seminatural populations. Specifically, males homozygous for the Hoxb1(A1) swap
acquired 10.6% fewer territories and the frequency of the Hoxb1(A1) allele
decreased from 0.500 in population founders to 0.419 in their offspring. The
decrease in Hoxb1(A1) frequency corresponded with a deficiency of both Hoxb1(A1) 
homozygous and heterozygous offspring. These data suggest that Hoxb1 and Hoxa1
are more phenotypically divergent than previously reported and support that sub- 
and/or neofunctionalization has occurred in these paralogous genes leading to a
divergence of gene function and incomplete redundancy. Furthermore, this study
highlights the importance of obtaining fitness measures of mutants in
ecologically relevant conditions to better understand gene function and
evolution.

Copyright © 2015 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4596679 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 26447130  [PubMed - in process]


9. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 20;6(32):32737-47. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5355.

MicroRNA-99a inhibits tumor aggressive phenotypes through regulating HOXA1 in
breast cancer cells.

Wang X(1), Li Y(2), Qi W(2), Zhang N(1), Sun M(1), Huo Q(1), Cai C(1), Lv S(2),
Yang Q(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Breast Surgery, Qilu Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan,
Shandong, 250012, P.R. China. (2)School of Medicine, Shandong University, Jinan, 
Shandong, 250012, P.R. China. (3)Department of Pathology Tissue Bank, Qilu
Hospital, Shandong University, Jinan, Shandong, 250012, P.R. China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are key regulators of tumor progression. Based on microarray
data, we identified miR-99a as a potential tumor suppressor in breast cancer.
Expression of miR-99a is frequently down-regulated in breast cancer tissues
relative to normal breast tissues. Reduced miR-99a expression was highly
associated with lymph node metastasis and shorter overall survival of patients
with breast cancer. Gain- and loss-of-function studies revealed that, miR-99a
significantly inhibits breast cancer cell proliferation, migration, and invasion.
An integrated bioinformatics analysis identified HOXA1 mRNA as the direct
functional target of miR-99a, and this regulation was confirmed by luciferase
reporter assay. Furthermore, we showed for the first time that HOXA1 expression
is elevated in breast cancer tissues. Knockdown of HOXA1 significantly inhibited 
breast cancer cell proliferation, migration and invasion, and restoration of
HOXA1 partially rescued the inhibitory effect of miR-99a in breast cancer cells. 
Collectively, our data indicate that miR-99a plays a tumor-suppressor role in the
development of breast cancer, and could serve as a potential therapeutic target
for breast cancer treatment.

PMCID: PMC4741726
PMID: 26417931  [PubMed - in process]


10. Dev Biol. 2015 Oct 15;406(2):247-58. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2015.08.015. Epub 2015 
Aug 15.

Hoxb1 regulates proliferation and differentiation of second heart field
progenitors in pharyngeal mesoderm and genetically interacts with Hoxa1 during
cardiac outflow tract development.

Roux M(1), Laforest B(1), Capecchi M(2), Bertrand N(1), Zaffran S(3).

Author information: 
(1)Aix Marseille Université, GMGF, 13385 Marseille, France; Inserm, UMR_S910,
13385 Marseille, France. (2)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Utah, 
Salt Lake City, UT, USA. (3)Aix Marseille Université, GMGF, 13385 Marseille,
France; Inserm, UMR_S910, 13385 Marseille, France. Electronic address:
stephane.zaffran@univ-amu.fr.

Outflow tract (OFT) anomalies are among the most common congenital heart defects 
found at birth. The embryonic OFT grows by the progressive addition of cardiac
progenitors, termed the second heart field (SHF), which originate from splanchnic
pharyngeal mesoderm. Development of the SHF is controlled by multiple
intercellular signals and transcription factors; however the relationship between
different SHF regulators remains unclear. We have recently shown that Hoxa1 and
Hoxb1 are expressed in a sub-population of the SHF contributing to the OFT. Here,
we report that Hoxb1 deficiency results in a shorter OFT and ventricular septal
defects (VSD). Mechanistically, we show that both FGF/ERK and BMP/SMAD signaling,
which regulate proliferation and differentiation of cardiac progenitor cells and 
OFT morphogenesis, are enhanced in the pharyngeal region in Hoxb1 mutants.
Absence of Hoxb1 also perturbed SHF development through premature myocardial
differentiation. Hence, the positioning and remodeling of the mutant OFT is
disrupted. Hoxa1(-/-) embryos, in contrast, have low percentage of VSD and normal
SHF development. However, compound Hoxa1(-/-); Hoxb1(+/-) embryos display OFT
defects associated with premature SHF differentiation, demonstrating redundant
roles of these factors during OFT development. Our findings provide new insights 
into the gene regulatory network controlling SHF and OFT formation.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26284287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Oncol Rep. 2015 Sep;34(3):1203-10. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4085. Epub 2015 Jun 26.

HOXA1 enhances the cell proliferation, invasion and metastasis of prostate cancer
cells.

Wang H(1), Liu G(2), Shen D(3), Ye H(3), Huang J(4), Jiao L(3), Sun Y(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of E.N.T., Second Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin
130041, P.R. China. (2)Department of Radiology Imaging, Changhai Hospital, Second
Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, P.R. China. (3)Department of
Urology, Changhai Hospital, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai 200433, 
P.R. China. (4)Department of Urologic Surgery, The 85th Hospital of PLA, Shanghai
200052, P.R. China.

HOXA1, a member of the HOX gene family, has been implicated in tumor progression.
However, the role of HOXA1 in prostate cancer is not well-established. In the
present study, we found that HOXA1 was highly expressed in prostate cancer cells.
We then repressed the expression of HOXA1 by short hairpin RNA (shRNA) to
investigate the function of HOXA1 in prostate cancer cells. Our in vitro data
showed that knockdown of HOXA1 attenuated the growth, invasion and migration of
prostate cancer DU-145 and PC-3 cells. Furthermore, knockdown of HOXA1 resulted
in an increased E-cadherin level and decreased Snail and MMP-3 levels in the
DU-145 cells. In addition, knockdown of HOXA1 inhibited activation of ERK1/2 and 
AKT in the DU-145 cells. Our in vivo data revealed that knockdown of HOXA1
suppressed the growth and metastasis of prostate cancer cells. Collectively, our 
findings suggest that HOXA1 is involved in the regulation of prostate cancer
progression, including cell growth, migration, invasion and metastasis. Thus,
downregulation of HOXA1 may be a novel approach for the treatment of prostate
cancer.

PMID: 26135141  [PubMed - in process]


12. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Sep;12(3):4284-90. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3933. Epub 2015 Jun
15.

Microarray and ChIP-seq data analysis revealed changes in p53-mediated
transcriptional regulation in Nutlin-3-treated U2OS cells.

Zhao S(1), Niu F(1), Xu CY(2), Ye L(1), Bi GB(1), Chen L(1), Gong P(1), Tian
G(1), Nie TH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Spinal Surgery, The First Hospital of Jilin University,
Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China. (2)Department of Medical Records, The First 
Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, Jilin 130021, P.R. China.

Integrative analysis of chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing (ChIP-seq) data 
and microarray data was performed to illustrate the effect of Nutlin-3 on
promoter selectivity and transcriptional regulation by the tumor suppressor p53
in U2OS human osteosarcoma cells. Raw data (accession number, GSE46642) were
downloaded from Gene Expression Omnibus. Differential analyses were performed
using package limma of R software. Gene ontology enrichment and Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes pathway enrichment analyses were performed for 
the differentially expressed genes (DEGs) using the Database for Annotation,
Visualization and Integration Discovery. Integrative analysis of ChIP-seq data
and microarray data were confirmed with ChIP-Array. A total of 565 DEGs were
identified, including 373 upregulated genes and 192 downregulated genes. Genes
involved in the p53 signaling pathway, cell cycle, DNA replication,
cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction and melanoma were markedly
over-represented in the DEGs. A total of 39 DEGs were directly regulated by p53
and two were the transcription factors (TFs), E2F2 and HOXA1. E2F2 regulated 25
DEGs, while HOXA1 regulated one DEG. The cell cycle, p53 signaling pathway,
melanoma and pathways involved in cancer were enriched in the direct and indirect
target genes. Changes in the p53-binding pattern induced by Nutlin-3 were
described in the present study, which may advance the understanding of the
regulatory network of p53 in osteosarcoma and aid in the development of novel
therapies.

PMCID: PMC4526040
PMID: 26080812  [PubMed - in process]


13. Dis Model Mech. 2015 Jun;8(6):611-22. doi: 10.1242/dmm.018291. Epub 2015 Apr 2.

Understanding the molecular mechanisms of human microtia via a pig model of HOXA1
syndrome.

Qiao R(1), He Y(2), Pan B(3), Xiao S(2), Zhang X(2), Li J(2), Zhang Z(2), Hong
Y(2), Xing Y(2), Ren J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory for Animal Biotechnology of Jiangxi Province and the Ministry
of Agriculture of China, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang 330045,
People's Republic of China College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine,
Henan Agricultural University, Zhengzhou 450002, People's Republic of China.
(2)Key Laboratory for Animal Biotechnology of Jiangxi Province and the Ministry
of Agriculture of China, Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang 330045,
People's Republic of China. (3)Plastic Surgery Hospital, Peking Union Medical
College, Beijing 100144, People's Republic of China. (4)Key Laboratory for Animal
Biotechnology of Jiangxi Province and the Ministry of Agriculture of China,
Jiangxi Agricultural University, Nanchang 330045, People's Republic of China
renjunjxau@hotmail.com.

Microtia is a congenital malformation of the outer ears. Although both genetic
and environmental components have been implicated in microtia, the genetic causes
of this innate disorder are poorly understood. Pigs have naturally occurring
diseases comparable to those in humans, providing exceptional opportunity to
dissect the molecular mechanism of human inherited diseases. Here we first
demonstrated that a truncating mutation in HOXA1 causes a monogenic disorder of
microtia in pigs. We further performed RNA sequencing (RNA-Seq) analysis on
affected and healthy pig embryos (day 14.25). We identified a list of 337
differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between the normal and mutant samples,
shedding light on the transcriptional network involving HOXA1. The DEGs are
enriched in biological processes related to cardiovascular system and embryonic
development, and neurological, renal and urological diseases. Aberrant
expressions of many DEGs have been implicated in human innate deformities
corresponding to microtia-associated syndromes. After applying three prioritizing
algorithms, we highlighted appealing candidate genes for human microtia from the 
337 DEGs. We searched for coding variants of functional significance within six
candidate genes in 147 microtia-affected individuals. Of note, we identified one 
EVC2 non-synonymous mutation (p.Asp1174Asn) as a potential disease-implicating
variant for a human microtia-associated syndrome. The findings advance our
understanding of the molecular mechanisms underlying human microtia, and provide 
an interesting example of the characterization of human disease-predisposing
variants using pig models.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4457031
PMID: 26035869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cytopathology. 2016 Apr;27(2):122-30. doi: 10.1111/cyt.12248. Epub 2015 May 18.

DNA methylation analysis for the diagnosis of thyroid nodules - a pilot study
with reference to BRAF(V) (600E) mutation and cytopathology results.

Chang H(1), Shin BK(1), Kim A(1), Kim HK(1), Kim BH(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Korea University Guro Hospital, Korea University
College of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.

OBJECTIVE: Promoter hypermethylation and the BRAF(V) (600E) mutation are both
involved in thyroid tumorigenesis. We conducted a pilot study on the diagnosis of
thyroid nodules by analysis of promoter hypermethylation status with reference to
BRAF(V) (600E) mutation and cytopathology results using formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded (FFPE) tissues and liquid-based preparation (LBP) thyroid fine 
needle aspiration (FNA) samples to predict more reliably the possibility of
papillary carcinoma.
METHODS: We initially performed MethyLight analysis for 30 genes that are known
to be hypermethylated in malignancies using 164 papillary carcinomas and 77
benign tissue samples. Five genes selected from the tissue analysis were
subsequently analysed in 75 surgically proven benign and 66 surgically proven
papillary carcinoma LBP FNA samples. Samples that showed two or more positive
results among the five genes were classified as methylation positive. We also
analysed the BRAF(V) (600E) mutation status of the FNA samples.
RESULTS: We identified five genes that were significantly hypermethylated in
malignant tissues: PTGS2, HOXA1, TMEFF2, p16 and PTEN. With respect to diagnostic
potential, results obtained using the BRAF(V) (600E) mutation test combined with 
cytological examination were not significantly different from those obtained with
cytological examination only. Combining methylation analyses with cytological
examination or performing all three tests for diagnoses did not improve
significantly the negative predictive values and sensitivity, but a significant
decrease in positive predictive value and specificity was observed.
CONCLUSION: Further studies are needed on larger samples to assess the potential 
value of methylation analysis of thyroid FNA.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 25988212  [PubMed - in process]


15. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):10840-52.

The long non-coding RNA HOTTIP enhances pancreatic cancer cell proliferation,
survival and migration.

Cheng Y(1), Jutooru I(1,)(2), Chadalapaka G(1), Corton JC(3), Safe S(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843, USA. (2)Covance, Inc., Madison, WI 53704, USA.
(3)Integrated Systems Toxicology Division, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, USA.
(4)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

HOTTIP is a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) transcribed from the 5' tip of the HOXA 
locus and is associated with the polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2) and WD
repeat containing protein 5 (WDR5)/mixed lineage leukemia 1 (MLL1) chromatin
modifying complexes. HOTTIP is expressed in pancreatic cancer cell lines and
knockdown of HOTTIP by RNA interference (siHOTTIP) in Panc1 pancreatic cancer
cells decreased proliferation, induced apoptosis and decreased migration. In
Panc1 cells transfected with siHOTTIP, there was a decrease in expression of 757 
genes and increased expression of 514 genes, and a limited gene analysis
indicated that HOTTIP regulation of genes is complex. For example, Aurora kinase 
A, an important regulator of cell growth, is coregulated by MLL and not WDR5 and,
in contrast to previous studies in liver cancer cells, HOTTIP does not regulate
HOXA13 but plays a role in regulation of several other HOX genes including
HOXA10, HOXB2, HOXA11, HOXA9 and HOXA1. Although HOTTIP and the HOX-associated
lncRNA HOTAIR have similar pro-oncogenic functions, they regulate strikingly
different sets of genes in Panc1 cells and in pancreatic tumors.

PMCID: PMC4484423
PMID: 25912306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Mol Genet Genomics. 2015 Oct;290(5):1659-71. doi: 10.1007/s00438-015-1026-6. Epub
2015 Mar 16.

Transcriptome analysis reveals the potential contribution of long noncoding RNAs 
to brown adipocyte differentiation.

You LH(1), Zhu LJ(1), Yang L(1), Shi CM(1), Pang LX(1), Zhang J(1), Cui XW(2), Ji
CB(3), Guo XR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Institute, Nanjing Maternity and Child
Health Care Hospital Affiliated with Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210029,
China. (2)Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Institute, Nanjing Maternity
and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated with Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, 210029, China. cuixianwei198615@126.com. (3)Nanjing Maternity and Child 
Health Care Institute, Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital
Affiliated with Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210029, China.
chenboji@njmu.edu.cn. (4)Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Institute,
Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Hospital Affiliated with Nanjing Medical 
University, Nanjing, 210029, China. xrguo@njmu.edu.cn.

Brown adipose tissue (BAT) functions to dissipate energy in response to cold
exposure or overfeeding. Counteracting obesity has been extensively considered as
a promising target. Long noncoding RNAs (lncRNAs) are an important class of
pervasive genes involved in a variety of biological functions. However, the
potential biological functions of lncRNAs during mouse brown fat cell
differentiation have not been fully understood. Here, we performed lncRNA and
mRNA expression profile analysis using microarray technology and identified 1064 
lncRNAs with differential expression (fold change| =4, p = 0.01) on day 0 and day
8 during differentiation. Furthermore, candidate lncRNAs were characterized by
comprehensive examination of their genomic context, gene ontology (GO) enrichment
of their associated protein-coding genes and pathway analysis. We identified
three lncRNAs (Gm15051, Tmem189 and Cebpd) associated with their flanking coding 
genes (Hoxa1, C/EBPß and C/EBPd), which participated in adipose commitment.
Collectively, our findings indicated lncRNAs are involved in mouse BAT
development and provide potential targets for obesity therapy.

PMID: 25773316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Mol Cell Biol. 2015 Apr;35(8):1449-61. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00765-14. Epub 2015 Feb
17.

YAP regulates the expression of Hoxa1 and Hoxc13 in mouse and human oral and skin
epithelial tissues.

Liu M(1), Zhao S(2), Lin Q(3), Wang XP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA. (2)Department of Developmental Biology, Harvard
School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA Department of Pediatric
Dentistry, School of Stomatology, Peking University, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Developmental Biology, Harvard School of Dental Medicine,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA Department of Implantation, School of Stomatology,
Shandong University, Jinan, China. (4)Department of Developmental Biology,
Harvard School of Dental Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts, USA
xwang2527@gmail.com.

Yes-associated protein (YAP) is a Hippo signaling transcriptional coactivator
that plays pivotal roles in stem cell proliferation, organ size control, and
tumor development. The downstream targets of YAP have been shown to be highly
context dependent. In this study, we used the embryonic mouse tooth germ as a
tool to search for the downstream targets of YAP in ectoderm-derived tissues. Yap
deficiency in the dental epithelium resulted in a small tooth germ with reduced
epithelial cell proliferation. We compared the gene expression profiles of
embryonic day 14.5 (E14.5) Yap conditional knockout and YAP transgenic mouse
tooth germs using transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) and further confirmed the
differentially expressed genes using real-time PCR and in situ hybridization. We 
found that YAP regulates the expression of Hoxa1 and Hoxc13 in oral and dental
epithelial tissues as well as in the epidermis of skin during embryonic and adult
stages. Sphere formation assay suggested that Hoxa1 and Hoxc13 are functionally
involved in YAP-regulated epithelial progenitor cell proliferation, and chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay implies that YAP may regulate Hoxa1 and Hoxc13
expression through TEAD transcription factors. These results provide mechanistic 
insights into abnormal YAP activities in mice and humans.

Copyright © 2015, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4372702
PMID: 25691658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Oncogene. 2015 Aug 6;34(32):4162-7. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.350. Epub 2014 Oct 27.

ACK1/TNK2 tyrosine kinase: molecular signaling and evolving role in cancers.

Mahajan K(1), Mahajan NP(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Moffitt Cancer Center, Drug Discovery Department, Tampa, FL, USA [2]
Department of Oncologic Sciences, University of South Florida, Tampa, FL, USA.

Deregulated tyrosine kinase signaling alters cellular homeostasis to drive cancer
progression. The emergence of a non-receptor tyrosine kinase (non-RTK), ACK1
(also known as activated Cdc42-associated kinase 1 or TNK2) as an oncogenic
kinase, has uncovered novel mechanisms by which tyrosine kinase signaling
promotes cancer progression. Although early studies focused on ACK1 as a
cytosolic effector of activated transmembrane RTKs, wherein it shuttles between
the cytosol and the nucleus to rapidly transduce extracellular signals from the
RTKs to the intracellular effectors, recent data unfold a new aspect of its
functionality as an epigenetic regulator. ACK1 interacts with the estrogen
receptor (ER)/histone demethylase KDM3A (JHDM2a) complex, which modifies KDM3A by
tyrosine phosphorylation to regulate the transcriptional outcome at HOXA1 locus
to promote the growth of tamoxifen-resistant breast cancer. It is also well
established that ACK1 regulates the activity of androgen receptor (AR) by
tyrosine phosphorylation to fuel the growth of hormone-refractory prostate
cancers. Further, recent explosion in genomic sequencing has revealed recurrent
ACK1 gene amplification and somatic mutations in a variety of human malignancies,
providing a molecular basis for its role in neoplastic transformation. In this
review, we will discuss the various facets of ACK1 signaling, including its newly
uncovered epigenetic regulator function, which enables cells to bypass the
blockade to major survival pathways to promote resistance to standard cancer
treatments. Not surprisingly, cancer cells appear to acquire an 'addiction' to
ACK1-mediated survival, particularly under stress conditions, such as growth
factor deprivation or genotoxic insults or hormone deprivation. With the
accelerated development of potent and selective ACK1 inhibitors, targeted
treatment for cancers harboring aberrant ACK1 activity may soon become a clinical
reality.

PMCID: PMC4411206
PMID: 25347744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Aug 15;7(9):5968-77. eCollection 2014.

Clinicopathological and immunohistochemical evaluation of oral and oropharyngeal 
squamous cell carcinoma in Chilean population.

Rivera C(1), González-Arriagada WA(2), Loyola-Brambilla M(3), de Almeida OP(4),
Coletta RD(4), Venegas B(5).

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Histology and Embryology, Department of Basic Biomedical Sciences,
University of Talca (UTALCA) Talca, Maule Region, Chile ; Department of Oral
Diagnosis, School of Dentistry, State University of Campinas (UNICAMP)
Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil ; Mass Spectrometry Laboratory, Brazilian
Biosciences National Laboratory - CNPEM Campinas, São Paulo, Brazil. (2)Oral
Pathology and Diagnosis, Faculty of Dentistry, Universidad de Valparaíso
Valparaíso, Valparaíso Region, Chile. (3)Morpho-physiopathology and Cytodiagnosis
Laboratory, San Sebastián University (USS) Concepción, Bío-Bío Region, Chile.
(4)Department of Oral Diagnosis, School of Dentistry, State University of
Campinas (UNICAMP) Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil. (5)Unit of Oral Pathology,
Department of Stomatology, University of Talca Talca, Maule Region, Chile ;
Carlos Van Buren Hospital Valparaíso, Valparaíso Region, Chile.

In oral and oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinoma (OCSCC and OPSCC) exist an
association between clinical and histopathological parameters with cell
proliferation, basal lamina, connective tissue degradation and surrounding stroma
markers. We evaluated these associations in Chilean patients. A convenience
sample of 37 cases of OCSCC (n=16) and OPSCC (n=21) was analyzed clinically (TNM,
clinical stage) and histologically (WHO grade of differentiation, pattern of
tumor invasion). We assessed the expression of p53, Ki67, HOXA1, HOXB7, type IV
collagen (ColIV) and carcinoma-associated fibroblast (a-SMA-positive cells).
Additionally we conducted a univariate/bivariate analysis to assess the
relationship of these variables with survival rates. Males were mostly affected
(56.2% OCSCC, 76.2% OPSCC). Patients were mainly diagnosed at III/IV clinical
stages (68.8% OCSCC, 90.5% OPSCC) with a predominantly infiltrative pattern
invasion (62.9% OCSCC, 57.1% OPSCC). Significant association between regional
lymph nodes (N) and clinical stage with OCSCC-HOXB7 expression (Chi-Square test P
< 0.05) was observed. In OPSCC a statistically significant association exists
between p53, Ki67 with gender (Chi-Square test P < 0.05). In OCSCC and OPSCC was 
statistically significant association between ki67 with HOXA1, HOXB7, and between
these last two antigens (Pearson's Correlation test P < 0.05). Furthermore
OPSCC-p53 showed significant correlation when it was compared with a-SMA
(Kendall's Tau-c test P < 0.05). Only OCSCC-pattern invasion and OPSCC-primary
tumor (T) pattern resulted associated with survival at the end of the follow up
period (Chi-Square Likelihood Ratio, P < 0.05). Clinical, histological and
immunohistochemical features are similar to seen in other countries. Cancer
proliferation markers were associated strongly from each other. Our sample
highlights prognostic value of T and pattern of invasion, but the conclusions may
be limited and should be considered with caution (small sample). Many cases were 
diagnosed in the advanced stages of the disease, which suggests that the
diagnosis of OCSCC and OPSCC is made late.

PMCID: PMC4203212
PMID: 25337241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Stem Cells. 2015 Jan;33(1):289-300. doi: 10.1002/stem.1853.

Sall4 is essential for mouse primordial germ cell specification by suppressing
somatic cell program genes.

Yamaguchi YL(1), Tanaka SS, Kumagai M, Fujimoto Y, Terabayashi T, Matsui Y,
Nishinakamura R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Kidney Development, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University, Kumamoto, Japan.

The Spalt-like 4 (Sall4) zinc finger protein is a critical transcription factor
for pluripotency in embryonic stem cells (ESCs). It is also involved in the
formation of a variety of organs, in mice, and humans. We report the essential
roles of Sall4 in mouse primordial germ cell (PGC) specification. PGC
specification is accompanied by the activation of the stem cell program and
repression of the somatic cell program in progenitor cells. Conditional
inactivation of Sall4 during PGC specification led to a reduction in the number
of PGCs in embryonic gonads. Sall4(del/del) PGCs failed to translocate from the
mesoderm to the endoderm and underwent apoptosis. In Sall4(del/del) PGC
progenitors, somatic cell program genes (Hoxa1 and Hoxb1) were derepressed, while
activation of the stem cell program was not impaired. We demonstrated that in
differentiated ESCs, Sall4 bound to these somatic cell program gene loci, which
are reportedly occupied by Prdm1 in embryonic carcinoma cells. Given that Sall4
and Prdm1 are known to associate with the histone deacetylase repressor complex, 
our findings suggest that Sall4 suppresses the somatic cell program possibly by
recruiting the repressor complex in conjunction with Prdm1; therefore, it is
essential for PGC specification.

© 2014 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 25263278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Leukemia. 2015 Apr;29(4):901-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.287. Epub 2014 Sep 25.

Insulin-like growth factor 1 is a direct HOXA9 target important for hematopoietic
transformation.

Steger J(1), Füller E(1), Garcia-Cuellar MP(1), Hetzner K(1), Slany RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

HOX homeobox proteins are key oncogenic drivers in hematopoietic malignancies.
Here we demonstrate that HOXA1, HOXA6 and predominantly HOXA9 are able to induce 
the production of insulin-like growth factor 1 (Igf1). In chromatin
immunoprecipitations, HOXA9 bound directly to the putative promoter and a
DNase-hypersensitive region in the first intron of the Igf1 gene. Transcription
rates of the Igf1 gene paralleled HOXA9 activity. Primary cells transformed by
HOXA9 expressed functional Igf1 receptors and activated the protein kinase Akt in
response to Igf1 stimulation, suggesting the existence of an autocrine signaling 
loop. Genomic deletion of the Igf1 gene by Cre-mediated recombination increased
sensitivity toward apoptosis after serum starvation. In addition, the
leukemogenic potential of Igf1-negative, HOXA9-transformed cells was impaired,
leading to a significant delay in disease development on transplantation into
recipient animals.

PMID: 25252870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J AAPOS. 2014 Aug;18(4):362-7. doi: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2014.03.005.

The ECEL1-related strabismus phenotype is consistent with congenital cranial
dysinnervation disorder.

Khan AO(1), Shaheen R(2), Alkuraya FS(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital &
Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. Electronic address: arif.khan@mssm.edu.
(2)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital & Research Center,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. (3)Department of Genetics, King Faisal Specialist Hospital 
& Research Center, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, 
College of Medicine, Alfaisal University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.

Erratum in
    J AAPOS. 2014 Oct;18(5):517.

BACKGROUND: Congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders (CCDDs) are phenotypes of
congenital incomitant strabismus and/or ptosis related to orbital dysinnervation.
CCDDs have been associated with dominant or recessive monogenic mutations in at
least 7 different genes (CHN1, SALL4, HOXA1, KIF21A, PHOX2A, TUBB3, ROBO3) that
cause phenotypes such as Duane retraction syndrome, congenital fibrosis of the
extraocular muscles, and horizontal gaze palsy with progressive scoliosis.
Recently, arthrogryposis with or without strabismus has been shown to be caused
by recessive mutations in ECEL1, a gene likely involved in neuromuscular junction
formation. The strabismus phenotype in ECEL1-related cases has not always been
detailed but may be a form of CCDD. To better define the ECEL1-related ophthalmic
phenotype, we detail ophthalmic findings in 4 affected siblings from a
consanguineous family and review documented ophthalmic findings for other
reported mutation-positive cases.
METHODS: Affected family members were prospectively examined and the relevant
literature was reviewed.
RESULTS: Ophthalmic findings were present in 3 of the 4 siblings with
ECEL1-related distal arthrogryposis: bilateral ptosis with bilateral congenital
fibrosis of the extraocular muscles, right ptosis with ipsilateral Y exotropia
(exotropia increasing in upgaze), and right ptosis with ipsilateral Duane
retraction syndrome. The fourth affected sibling, who had the mildest
arthrogryposis, had no ophthalmic abnormalities. Of 26 other reported recessive
ECEL1 mutation cases (14 families), all had arthrogryposis, 19 had documented
ptosis, and 4 had documented complex strabismus. One of these cases had both
documented ptosis and complex strabismus.
CONCLUSIONS: Our clinical findings are consistent with recessive ECEL1 mutations 
causing variably penetrant orbital dysinnervation phenotypes (ptosis and/or
complex strabismus with abnormal synkinesis) in the context of arthrogryposisis, 
that is, with the ECEL1-related ophthalmic phenotype being a form of CCDD.

Copyright © 2014 American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and Strabismus.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25173900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Med Sci Monit. 2014 Aug 28;20:1531-8. doi: 10.12659/MSM.890916.

The OSR1 rs12329305 polymorphism contributes to the development of congenital
malformations in cases of stillborn/neonatal death.

Lozic B(1), Krelj V(1), Kuzmic-Prusac I(2), Kuzmanic-amija R(1), Capkun V(3),
Lasan R(4), Zemunik T(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Centre Split, Split, Croatia.
(2)Department of Pathology, University Hospital Centre Split, Split, Croatia.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital Centre Split, Split,
Croatia. (4)Department of Pediatrics, University Hospital Centre Zagreb, Zagreb, 
Croatia. (5)Department of Medical Biology, School of Medicine Split, University
of Split, Split, Croatia.

BACKGROUND: Involvement of development-related gene polymorphisms in
multifactorial/polygenic etiology of stillborn/neonatal deaths due to
malformations has been insufficiently tested. Since these genes showed
evolutional stability and their mutations are very rare, we can assume that their
polymorphic variants may be a risk factor associated with the occurrence of
developmental disorders of unknown etiology or can enhance the phenotypic
variability of known genetic disorders.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: To determine the association of 3 polymorphisms involved in
the regulation of the early embryonic development of different organs, we
conducted an association study of their relation to the particular malformation. 
We selected 140 samples of archived paraffin tissue samples from deceased
patients in which fetal/neonatal autopsy examination had shown congenital
abnormalities as the most likely cause of death. The polymorphisms of OSR1
rs12329305, rs9936833 near FOXF1, and HOXA1 rs10951154 were genotyped using the
TaqMan allelic discrimination assay.
RESULTS: After Bonferroni correction for multiple testing, significant allelic
association with stillborn/neonatal deaths was observed for rs12329305
(p=7×10-4). In addition, association analysis for the same polymorphism was shown
in the subgroup with isolated anomalies (1.25×10^-5), particularly in the
subgroup of cases with kidney and heart anomalies (p=4.18×10^-5, p=5.12×10^-8,
respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: The findings of the present study showed, for the first time, the
role of the OSR1 rs12329305 polymorphism in the development of congenital
malformations in cases of stillborn/neonatal death, particularly in those with
congenital kidney and heart developmental defects.

PMCID: PMC4156340
PMID: 25164089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Methods Mol Biol. 2014;1196:37-48. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-1242-1_3.

Genetic lineage tracing analysis of anterior Hox expressing cells.

Laforest B(1), Bertrand N, Zaffran S.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm, GMGF UMR_S910, Aix-Marseille Université, 13385, Marseille, France.

Cell lineage studies have been widely used in developmental biology to establish 
which cells, and how many cells, in the early embryo will give rise to a specific
structure and its derivatives. Several methods have been developed to label
progenitor cells in the early embryo. Here, we describe the genetic tracing
approach that relies on the use of the recombinase to genetically and permanently
label progenitor cells as well as their progeny through specific activation of a 
conditional reporter gene, the ROSA26 reporter mouse. Labeling of progenitor
cells is spatially controlled by the use of a tissue-specific promoter driving
Cre, the Hoxb1 (IRES-Cre/+) <U+2009>and the Hoxa1-enhIII-cre. ROSA26R mice and Hoxb1
(IRES-Cre/+)<U+2009>or Hoxa1-enhIII-cremice are crossed together to generate embryos at 
different stages of development. Embryos are collected and dissected at a
specific stage of development and fixed in paraformaldehyde. To follow Hoxb1 (+) 
and Hoxa1 (+) progeny, X-gal staining is performed to detect ß-galactosidase
activity in embryos or developing organ such as the heart. Finally,
X-gal-positive cells are observed on whole-mount embryos or dissected organ to
determine the lineage contribution of Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 during development.

PMID: 25151156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. J Biol Chem. 2014 Oct 10;289(41):28179-91. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.584425. Epub
2014 Aug 22.

ACK1 tyrosine kinase interacts with histone demethylase KDM3A to regulate the
mammary tumor oncogene HOXA1.

Mahajan K(1), Lawrence HR(2), Lawrence NJ(2), Mahajan NP(3).

Author information: 
(1)From the Drug Discovery Department, Moffitt Cancer Center, and the Department 
of Oncologic Sciences, College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa,
Florida 33612 kiran.mahajan@moffitt.org. (2)From the Drug Discovery Department,
Moffitt Cancer Center, and the Department of Oncologic Sciences, College of
Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612. (3)From the Drug
Discovery Department, Moffitt Cancer Center, and the Department of Oncologic
Sciences, College of Medicine, University of South Florida, Tampa, Florida 33612 
nupam.mahajan@moffitt.org.

Hormone therapy with the selective estrogen-receptor modulator tamoxifen provides
a temporary relief for patients with estrogen receptor a (ER)-positive breast
cancers. However, a subset of patients exhibiting overexpression of the HER2
receptor tyrosine kinase displays intrinsic resistance to tamoxifen therapy.
Therefore, elucidating the mechanisms promoting the estrogen (E2)-independent
ER-regulated gene transcription in tamoxifen-resistant breast tumors is essential
to identify new therapeutic avenues to overcome drug resistance and ameliorate
poor prognosis. The non-receptor tyrosine kinase, ACK1 (also known as TNK2), has 
emerged as a major integrator of signaling from various receptor tyrosine kinases
including HER2. We have uncovered that heregulin-mediated ACK1 activation
promoted ER activity in the presence of tamoxifen, which was significantly
down-regulated upon ACK1 knockdown or inhibition of ACK1 by small molecule
inhibitors, AIM-100 or Dasatinib. We report that ACK1 phosphorylates the ER
co-activator, KDM3A, a H3K9 demethylase, at an evolutionary conserved tyrosine
1114 site in a heregulin-dependent manner, even in the presence of tamoxifen.
Consistent with this finding, ACK1 activation resulted in a significant decrease 
in the deposition of dimethyl H3K9 epigenetic marks. Conversely, inhibition of
ACK1 by AIM-100 or Dasatinib restored dimethyl H3K9 methylation marks and caused 
transcriptional suppression of the ER-regulated gene HOXA1. Thus, by its ability 
to regulate the epigenetic activity of an ER co-activator KDM3A, ACK1 modulates
HOXA1 expression in the absence of E2, conferring tamoxifen resistance. These
data reveal a novel therapeutic option, suppression of ACK1 signaling by AIM-100 
or Dasatinib, to mitigate HOXA1 up-regulation in breast cancer patients
displaying tamoxifen resistance.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4192474
PMID: 25148682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Mol Oncol. 2015 Jan;9(1):17-31. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2014.07.010. Epub 2014 Jul 
24.

Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1A3 influences breast cancer progression via differential 
retinoic acid signaling.

Marcato P(1), Dean CA(2), Liu RZ(3), Coyle KM(4), Bydoun M(4), Wallace M(4),
Clements D(4), Turner C(5), Mathenge EG(5), Gujar SA(6), Giacomantonio CA(5),
Mackey JR(3), Godbout R(3), Lee PW(7).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada; Department
of Microbiology & Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada.
Electronic address: paola.marcato@dal.ca. (2)Department of Microbiology &
Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada. (3)Department of Oncology,
University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB, Canada. (4)Department of Pathology,
Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada. (5)Department of Surgery, Dalhousie
University, Halifax, NS, Canada. (6)Department of Microbiology & Immunology,
Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada; Strategy and Organizational
Performance, IWK Health Centre, Halifax, NS, Canada. (7)Department of Pathology, 
Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada; Department of Microbiology &
Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, NS, Canada. Electronic address:
patrick.lee@dal.ca.

Aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) 1A enzymes produce retinoic acid (RA), a
transcription induction molecule. To investigate if ALDH1A1 or ALDH1A3-mediated
RA signaling has an active role in breast cancer tumorigenesis, we performed gene
expression and tumor xenograft studies. Analysis of breast patient tumors
revealed that high levels of ALDH1A3 correlated with expression of RA-inducible
genes with retinoic acid response elements (RAREs), poorer patient survival and
triple-negative breast cancers. This suggests a potential link between ALDH1A3
expression and RA signaling especially in aggressive and/or triple-negative
breast cancers. In MDA-MB-231, MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB-435 cells, ALDH1A3 and RA
increased expression of RA-inducible genes. Interestingly, ALDH1A3 had opposing
effects in tumor xenografts, increasing tumor growth and metastasis of MDA-MB-231
and MDA-MB-435 cells, but decreasing tumor growth of MDA-MB-468 cells. Exogenous 
RA replaced ALDH1A3 in inducing the same opposing tumor growth and metastasis
effects, suggesting that ALDH1A3 mediates these effects by promoting RA
signaling. Genome expression analysis revealed that ALDH1A3 induced largely
divergent gene expression in MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells which likely
resulted in the opposing tumor growth effects. Treatment with DNA methylation
inhibitor 5-aza-2'deoxycytidine restored uniform RA-inducibility of
RARE-containing HOXA1 and MUC4 in MDA-MB-231 and MDA-MB-468 cells, suggesting
that differences in epigenetic modifications contribute to differential
ALDH1A3/RA-induced gene expression in breast cancer. In summary, ALDH1A3 induces 
differential RA signaling in breast cancer cells which affects the rate of breast
cancer progression.

Copyright © 2014 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25106087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Microrna. 2014;3(1):37-44.

Identification of critical microRNA gene targets in cervical cancer using network
properties.

Sharma G, Agarwal SM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics Division, Institute of Cytology and Preventive Oncology (ICMR),
I-7, Sector-39, Noida-201301, India.

miRNAs are short non-coding RNAs which function as oncogenes or tumour suppressor
gene and regulate gene expression by controlling targets that play role in cancer
development and progression. Numerous recent studies have established an
association of abnormal expression of miRNA with cervical cancer progression.
Although the number of reported deregulated miRNA in cervical cancer is
increasing, only a few associations between miRNA and their targets have been
studied in cervical cancer. Therefore, we performed a systematic analysis of
known dysregulated miRNAs involved in cervical cancer so as to identify critical 
miRNA targets that could pave way for therapeutic solutions. In this study,
miRNAs reported to be dysregulated in cervical cancer were collected and their
targets predicted using TargetScan, PicTar and miRanda. These targets were
subsequently compared with previously curated gene dataset involved in cervical
cancer to derive the putative target dataset. We then compared network properties
(composed of degree, betweenness centrality, closeness centrality and clustering 
coefficient) of the putative, validated and human protein-protein interaction
network. Based on the topological properties genes were ranked and observed that 
the gene targets BIRC5 (survivin), HOXA1 and RARB presenting with high Novoseek
score of Genecards were enriched in cervical cancer. BIRC5 is an anti- apoptotic 
protein while HOXA1 and RARB are transcription factors which play critical role
in altering the level of cell cycle and apoptosis associated proteins. Also,
miRNA-mRNA network was constructed and it was found that miR-203 and miR-30b
could target these genes. The analysis indicates that the genes BIRC5, HOXA1 and 
RARB are critical targets that play an important regulatory role in cervical
cancer pathogenesis.

PMID: 25069511  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. BMC Dev Biol. 2014 Jun 5;14:25. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-14-25.

Targeted germ line disruptions reveal general and species-specific roles for
paralog group 1 hox genes in zebrafish.

Weicksel SE, Gupta A, Zannino DA, Wolfe SA, Sagerström CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, University of
Massachusetts Medical School, 364 Plantation St,/LRB815, Worcester, MA
01605-2324, USA. charles.sagerstrom@umassmed.edu.

BACKGROUND: The developing vertebrate hindbrain is transiently segmented into
rhombomeres by a process requiring Hox activity. Hox genes control specification 
of rhombomere fates, as well as the stereotypic differentiation of
rhombomere-specific neuronal populations. Accordingly, germ line disruption of
the paralog group 1 (PG1) Hox genes Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 causes defects in hindbrain
segmentation and neuron formation in mice. However, antisense-mediated
interference with zebrafish hoxb1a and hoxb1b (analogous to murine Hoxb1 and
Hoxa1, respectively) produces phenotypes that are qualitatively and
quantitatively distinct from those observed in the mouse. This suggests that PG1 
Hox genes may have species-specific functions, or that anti-sense mediated
interference may not completely inactivate Hox function in zebrafish.
RESULTS: Using zinc finger and TALEN technologies, we disrupted hoxb1a and hoxb1b
in the zebrafish germ line to establish mutant lines for each gene. We find that 
zebrafish hoxb1a germ line mutants have a more severe phenotype than reported for
Hoxb1a antisense treatment. This phenotype is similar to that observed in Hoxb1
knock out mice, suggesting that Hoxb1/hoxb1a have the same function in both
species. Zebrafish hoxb1b germ line mutants also have a more severe phenotype
than reported for hoxb1b antisense treatment (e.g. in the effect on Mauthner
neuron differentiation), but this phenotype differs from that observed in Hoxa1
knock out mice (e.g. in the specification of rhombomere 5 (r5) and r6),
suggesting that Hoxa1/hoxb1b have species-specific activities. We also
demonstrate that Hoxb1b regulates nucleosome organization at the hoxb1a promoter 
and that retinoic acid acts independently of hoxb1b to activate hoxb1a
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: We generated several novel germ line mutants for zebrafish hoxb1a
and hoxb1b. Our analyses indicate that Hoxb1 and hoxb1a have comparable functions
in zebrafish and mouse, suggesting a conserved function for these genes. In
contrast, while Hoxa1 and hoxb1b share functions in the formation of r3 and r4,
they differ with regards to r5 and r6, where Hoxa1 appears to control formation
of r5, but not r6, in the mouse, whereas hoxb1b regulates formation of r6, but
not r5, in zebrafish. Lastly, our data reveal independent regulation of hoxb1a
expression by retinoic acid and Hoxb1b in zebrafish.

PMCID: PMC4061917
PMID: 24902847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Can J Neurol Sci. 2014 Jul;41(4):448-51.

HOXA1 Mutations are Not Commonly Associated with Non-Syndromic Deafness.

Abu-Amero KK, Hagr Aa, Almomani MO, Azad TA, Alorainy IA, Oystreck DT, Bosley TM.

OBJECTIVE: Homozygous homeobox A1 (HOXA1) mutations cause a spectrum of
abnormalities in humans including bilateral profound deafness. This study
evaluates the possible role of HOXA1 mutations in familial, non-syndromic
sensorineural deafness.
METHODS: Forty-eight unrelated Middle Eastern families with either consanguinity 
or familial deafness were identified in a large deafness clinic, and the proband 
from each family was evaluated by chart review, audiogram, neuroimaging, and
HOXA1 sequencing.
RESULTS: All 48 probands had normal neuro-ophthalmologic and general medical
examinations except for refractive errors. All had congenital non-syndromic
sensorineural hearing loss that was symmetric bilaterally and profound (>90 dBHL)
in 33 individuals and varied from 40 to 90 dBHL in the remainder. Thirty-nine of 
these individuals had neuroimaging studies, all documenting normal internal
carotid arteries and normal 6th, 7th, and 8th cranial nerves bilaterally. Of
these, 27 had normal internal ear structures with the remaining 12 having mild to
modest developmental abnormalities of the cochlea, semicircular canals, and/or
vestibular aqueduct. No patient had homozygous HOXA1 mutations.
CONCLUSIONS: None of these patients with non-syndromic deafness had HOXA1
mutations. None had major inner ear anomalies, obvious cerebrovascular defects,
or recognized congenital heart disease. HOXA1 is likely not a common cause of
non-syndromic deafness in this Middle Eastern population.

PMID: 24878468  [PubMed - in process]


30. Ophthalmic Genet. 2014 Sep;35(3):162-9. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2014.921317. Epub
2014 May 27.

Microdeletions involving chromosomes 12 and 22 associated with syndromic Duane
retraction syndrome.

Abu-Amero KK(1), Kondkar AA, Oystreck DT, Khan AO, Bosley TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, King Saud University ,
Riyadh , Saudi Arabia .

BACKGROUND: Duane retraction syndrome (DRS) is the most common of the congenital 
cranial dysinnervation disorders (CCDDs). CCDDs can be monogenic or chromosomal
in origin. Identification of the genetic cause(s) in patients and families with
DRS facilitates definitive diagnosis and provides insights into these
developmental errors.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This study described a young girl with DRS on the left and
several additional developmental abnormalities. Clinical examination including
neuroimaging, sequencing of candidate genes associated with DRS, and array
comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) were performed.
RESULTS: The proband had unilateral DRS type 3 on the left with somewhat low-set 
ears, mild motor delay with normal intelligence, and an asymmetric neck without a
palpable right sternocleidomastoid muscle. Spine X-rays revealed a Klippel-Feil
syndrome (KFS) and an MRI showed a webbed neck. She also had spina bifida at
C8-T1 and a submucosal cleft palate. The parents of the proband were related with
no other family member affected similarly. Sequencing of SALL4, CHN1, HOXA1, and 
TUBB3 did not show any mutation. Array CGH revealed de novo deletions of 21 Kb on
chromosome 12q24.31 and 11<U+2009>Kb on chromosome 22q13.31, each encompassing only one 
gene, ring finger protein 34, E3 ubiquitin protein ligase (RNF34) and peroxisome 
proliferator-activated receptor alpha (PPARA) respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: This patient presents an unusual phenotype associated with a unique 
combination of two chromosomal microdeletions.

PMID: 24865192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Biol Chem. 2014 Jul 11;289(28):19519-30. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M114.556555. Epub
2014 May 12.

Retinoic acid and histone deacetylases regulate epigenetic changes in embryonic
stem cells.

Urvalek AM(1), Gudas LJ(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Department of Pharmacology and the Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell
Medical College of Cornell University, New York, New York 10065. (2)From the
Department of Pharmacology and the Meyer Cancer Center, Weill Cornell Medical
College of Cornell University, New York, New York 10065 ljgudas@med.cornell.edu.

All-trans-retinoic acid (RA) is a vitamin A metabolite that plays major roles in 
regulating stem cell differentiation and development. RA is the ligand of the
retinoic acid receptor (RAR) family of transcription factors, which interact with
retinoic acid response elements (RAREs) within target gene proximal promoters and
enhancers. Although RA-mediated gene activation is well understood, less is known
about the mechanisms for repression at RA-regulated genes. Using chromatin
immunoprecipitation experiments, we show that in embryonic stem cells in the
absence of RA, histone deacetylases (HDACs) differentially bind to various RAREs 
in proximal promoters or enhancer regions of RA-regulated genes; HDAC1, HDAC2,
and HDAC3 bind at RAREs in the Hoxa1 and Cyp26a1 gene regulatory regions, whereas
only HDAC1 binds at the RARß2 RARE. shRNA knockdown of HDAC1, HDAC2, or HDAC3
differentially increases the deposition of the histone 3 lysine 27 acetylation
(H3K27ac) epigenetic mark associated with increases in these three transcripts.
Importantly, RA treatment differentially mediates the removal of HDACs from the
Hoxa1, Cyp26a1, and RARß2 genes and promotes the deposition of the H3K27ac mark
at these genes. Overall, we show that HDACs differentially bind to RA-regulated
genes to control key epigenetic marks involved in stem cell differentiation.

© 2014 by The American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4094062
PMID: 24821725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. J Virol. 2014 Jul;88(14):7929-40. doi: 10.1128/JVI.00787-14. Epub 2014 Apr 30.

Transcriptional suppression of miR-181c by hepatitis C virus enhances homeobox A1
expression.

Mukherjee A(1), Shrivastava S(1), Bhanja Chowdhury J(1), Ray R(2), Ray RB(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA.
(2)Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri, 
USA. (3)Department of Pathology, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA
Department of Internal Medicine, Saint Louis University, St. Louis, Missouri, USA
rayrb@slu.edu.

Hepatitis C virus (HCV)-induced chronic liver disease is one of the leading
causes of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). The molecular events leading to HCC
following chronic HCV infection remain poorly defined. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have
been implicated in the control of many biological processes, and their
deregulation is associated with different viral infections. In this study, we
observed that HCV infection of hepatocytes transcriptionally downregulates
miR-181c expression by modulating CCAAT/enhancer binding protein ß (C/EBP-ß).
Reduced expression of the pri-miR-181c transcript was noted following HCV
infection. In silico prediction suggests that homeobox A1 (HOXA1) is a direct
target of miR-181c. HOXA1 is a member of the homeodomain-containing transcription
factor family and possesses pivotal roles in normal growth, development, and
differentiation of mammalian tissues. Our results demonstrated that HOXA1
expression is enhanced in HCV-infected hepatocytes. Exogenous expression of the
miR-181c mimic inhibits HOXA1 and its downstream molecules STAT3 and STAT5, which
are involved in cell growth regulation. Interestingly, overexpression of miR-181c
inhibited HCV replication by direct binding with E1 and NS5A sequences.
Furthermore, accumulation of HCV genotype 2a RNA with miR-181c was observed in an
RNA-induced silencing complex in Huh7.5 cells. Our results provide new
mechanistic insights into the role of miR-181c in HCV-hepatocyte interactions,
and miR-181c may act as a target for therapeutic intervention. Importance:
Chronic HCV infection is one of the major causes of end-stage liver disease,
including hepatocellular carcinoma. An understanding of the molecular mechanisms 
of HCV-mediated hepatocyte growth promotion is necessary for therapeutic
intervention against HCC. In this study, we have provided evidence of
HCV-mediated transcriptional downregulation of miR-181c. HCV-infected liver
biopsy specimens also displayed lower expression levels of miR-181c. We have
further demonstrated that inhibition of miR-181c upregulates homeobox A1 (HOXA1),
which is important for hepatocyte growth promotion. Exogenous expression of
miR-181c inhibited HCV replication by directly binding with HCV E1 and NS5A
sequences. Taken together, our results provided new mechanistic insights for an
understanding of the role of miR-181c in HCV-hepatocyte interactions and revealed
miR-181c as a potential target for therapeutic intervention.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4097774
PMID: 24789793  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Ophthalmology. 2014 Jul;121(7):1461-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ophtha.2014.01.006. Epub
2014 Mar 6.

Diagnostic distinctions and genetic analysis of patients diagnosed with moebius
syndrome.

MacKinnon S(1), Oystreck DT(2), Andrews C(3), Chan WM(3), Hunter DG(4), Engle
EC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston,
Massachusetts. (2)Department of Ophthalmology, Boston Children's Hospital,
Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, King
Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; Division of Ophthalmology, Faculty of
Health Sciences, University of Stellenbosch, Tygerberg, South Africa.
(3)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts;
Department of Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Howard
Hughes Medical Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland. (4)Department of Ophthalmology, 
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Ophthalmology,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts. Electronic address:
david.hunter@childrens.harvard.edu. (5)Department of Ophthalmology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of Neurology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; F. B. Kirby Neurobiology Center,
Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Manton Center for Orphan
Disease Research, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts; Department
of Ophthalmology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Department of
Neurology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts; Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, Chevy Chase, Maryland. Electronic address:
elizabeth.engle@childrens.harvard.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To improve diagnostic assessment in Moebius syndrome by (1) creating
more selective diagnostic subgroups and (2) conducting genetic evaluation in a
large patient cohort.
DESIGN: Prospective, observational study.
PARTICIPANTS: Attendees of 3 consecutive Moebius syndrome conferences held in the
United States, with a prior diagnosis of Moebius syndrome, were invited to
participate.
METHODS: Participants underwent standardized ophthalmologic examination for
Moebius syndrome minimum diagnostic criteria (MDC) (congenital, nonprogressive
facial palsy, and abduction deficit) and genetic testing for HOXA1, HOXB1, and
TUBB3 mutations.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: The number of patients meeting MDC and the number of
patients with confirmed genetic mutation.
RESULTS: A total of 112 participants from 107 families enrolled. Nineteen percent
of participants (21/112) did not meet accepted MDC for Moebius syndrome because
they had abduction deficits without facial palsy or facial palsy with full ocular
motility. All 5 families with 2 affected individuals had at least 1 family member
in this category, including 2 siblings with comitant strabismus who harbored a
HOXB1 mutation. Four unrelated participants, also not meeting MDC, had
large-angle exotropia, vertical gaze deficiency, and ptosis consistent with
congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles type 3 (CFEOM3); 1 patient
harbored a novel TUBB3 mutation, and 3 patients harbored previously reported de
novo TUBB3 mutations. Three percent of participants (3/112) met MDC but also had 
restricted vertical gaze. The remaining 88 participants (79%) met MDC and had
full vertical gaze. This group had relatively homogeneous findings, and none had 
a family history of Moebius syndrome. Two previously undescribed phenomena were
observed in this category: (1) volitional Bell's phenomenon and (2) intorsion
with fixation.
CONCLUSIONS: Although the genetic contributors to classic Moebius syndrome remain
elusive, accuracy in clinical evaluation will properly subdivide patients to
facilitate genetic testing as new candidate genes are identified. Failure to test
ocular motility may lead to misdiagnosis of Moebius syndrome, especially in
patients who have facial palsy with full ductions. Patients with exotropia,
vertical gaze limitation, and ptosis do not have classic Moebius syndrome and may
have TUBB3 mutations associated with CFEOM3. To optimize genetic analysis, we
propose adding "full vertical motility" to the MDC for Moebius syndrome.

Copyright © 2014 American Academy of Ophthalmology. Published by Elsevier Inc.
All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4082742
PMID: 24612975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. PLoS Genet. 2014 Feb 27;10(2):e1004177. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1004177.
eCollection 2014.

miR-100 induces epithelial-mesenchymal transition but suppresses tumorigenesis,
migration and invasion.

Chen D(1), Sun Y(2), Yuan Y(3), Han Z(2), Zhang P(1), Zhang J(1), You MJ(4),
Teruya-Feldstein J(5), Wang M(1), Gupta S(6), Hung MC(7), Liang H(8), Ma L(9).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (2)Department
of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (3)Department of Bioinformatics
and Computational Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Graduate Program in Structural and
Computational Biology and Molecular Biophysics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, United States of America. (4)Department of Hematopathology, The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of
America ; Cancer Biology Program, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, The
University of Texas Health, Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, United
States of America. (5)Department of Pathology, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, New York, United States of America. (6)Whitehead Institute for 
Biomedical Research, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States of America.
(7)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Cancer Biology
Program, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas Health, 
Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(8)Department of Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, The University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America.
(9)Department of Experimental Radiation Oncology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas, United States of America ; Cancer Biology
Program, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, The University of Texas Health, 
Science Center at Houston, Houston, Texas, United States of America.

Whether epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) is always linked to increased
tumorigenicity is controversial. Through microRNA (miRNA) expression profiling of
mammary epithelial cells overexpressing Twist, Snail or ZEB1, we identified
miR-100 as a novel EMT inducer. Surprisingly, miR-100 inhibits the
tumorigenicity, motility and invasiveness of mammary tumor cells, and is commonly
downregulated in human breast cancer due to hypermethylation of its host gene
MIR100HG. The EMT-inducing and tumor-suppressing effects of miR-100 are mediated 
by distinct targets. While miR-100 downregulates E-cadherin by targeting SMARCA5,
a regulator of CDH1 promoter methylation, this miRNA suppresses tumorigenesis,
cell movement and invasion in vitro and in vivo through direct targeting of
HOXA1, a gene that is both oncogenic and pro-invasive, leading to repression of
multiple HOXA1 downstream targets involved in oncogenesis and invasiveness. These
findings provide a proof-of-principle that EMT and tumorigenicity are not always 
associated and that certain EMT inducers can inhibit tumorigenesis, migration and
invasion.

PMCID: PMC3937226
PMID: 24586203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Eur J Cancer. 2014 May;50(8):1541-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ejca.2014.01.024. Epub 2014 
Feb 19.

Downregulation of HOXA1 gene affects small cell lung cancer cell survival and
chemoresistance under the regulation of miR-100.

Xiao F(1), Bai Y(1), Chen Z(1), Li Y(1), Luo L(1), Huang J(1), Yang J(1), Liao
H(2), Guo L(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, China. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern
Medical University, Guangzhou, China. (3)Department of Pathology, Zhujiang
Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China. Electronic address:
linlangg@yahoo.com.

Chemoresistance is often developed in small cell lung cancer (SCLC) patients and 
leads to poor prognosis. Hox genes, a highly conserved family, play a crucial
role in apoptosis, receptor signalling and differentiation. MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
have also been shown to play a crucial role in these biological processes by
regulating the target genes. Several studies reported that both Hox genes and
miRNAs are involved in chemoresistance. The aim of our study is to characterise
the clinical significance and functional roles of HOXA1 in SCLC. Expression of
HOXA1 was examined in 63 cases of SCLC tissues and 29 cases of blood by
immunohistochemistry and quantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (qRT-PCR) methods. Multivariate analysis confirmed the prognostic
significance of HOXA1 in SCLC patients. Restoration of HOXA1 expression was
carried out in SCLC multidrug resistant cell line H69AR and its parental cell
line H69 to assess its influence on chemoresistance. Luciferase reporter assay
was used to assess HOXA1 as a target of miR-100. The results showed that HOXA1
was expressed in 46% (29/63) of SCLC. Low HOXA1 expression was associated with
the poor prognosis of SCLC (P<0.05 by the Fisher's Exact Test) and the shorter
survival rate (P<0.001 by the Kaplan-Meier method). HOXA1 expression on both mRNA
and protein levels significantly correlated with chemotherapy response. Enforced 
expression of HOXA1 in resistant H69AR cells led to increased chemosensitivity
through increasing cell apoptosis and cell-cycle arrest. Inhibition of HOXA1
expression using HOXA1 siRNA in H69 cells resulted in cell resistance to
therapeutic drugs through reducing drug-induced cell apoptosis accompanied with
cell cycle arrest. Expression of endogenous miR-100 was significantly elevated in
resistant H69AR cells and negatively related with HOXA1 expression. The
expression of HOXA1 in SCLC tissues correlated inversely with the expression
levels of miR-100. Reporter assays confirmed that miR-100 targeted predicted
sites in 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) of HOXA1 gene. Our data suggested that
HOXA1-mediated SCLC chemoresistance is under the regulation of miR-100. HOXA1 may
be a prognostic predictor and potential therapeutic target in human SCLC.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24559685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. PLoS One. 2014 Jan 31;9(1):e88057. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0088057. eCollection
2014.

MicroRNA-10a is down-regulated by DNA methylation and functions as a tumor
suppressor in gastric cancer cells.

Jia H(1), Zhang Z(2), Zou D(3), Wang B(4), Yan Y(2), Luo M(2), Dong L(2), Yin
H(4), Gong B(2), Li Z(2), Wang F(2), Song W(2), Liu C(2), Ma Y(2), Zhang J(2),
Zhao H(5), Li J(6), Yu J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, The First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University,
Taiyuan, PR China. (2)Department of Biochemistry, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) & Peking Union Medical
College (PUMC), Beijing, PR China. (3)Department of Gynecologic Oncology,
Chongqing Cancer Institute, Chongqing, PR China. (4)Department of Biochemistry,
Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences (CAMS) &
Peking Union Medical College (PUMC), Beijing, PR China ; Department of Surgery,
The First Hospital of Shanxi Medical University, Taiyuan, PR China. (5)Department
of Surgery,The Shanxi Academy of Medical Sciences & Shanxi Dayi Hospital,
Taiyuan, PR China. (6)Cancer center, The General Hospital of the People's
Liberation Army, Beijing, PR China.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs act as posttranscriptional regulators of gene expression in
many biological processes. Their deregulations occur commonly in gastric cancer
(GC). Although DNA methylation constitutes an important mechanism for microRNA
deregulation in cancer, this field largely remains unexplored.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Total RNA was extracted from the tissues of 100
patients with GC and four gastric cancer cell lines. The expression levels of
miR-10a were determined by real-time PCR with specific TaqMan probes. Moreover, a
functional analysis of miR-10a in regulating cell proliferation, migration and
invasion was performed. Subsequently, quantitative methylation-specific PCR
(qMSP) was used to detect the DNA methylation status in the CpG islands upstream 
of miR-10a. In this study, we found that the expression of miR-10a in GC cells
was lower than that in normal cells, which was due to the hypermethylation of the
CpG islands upstream of miR-10a. We also validated the slightly lower expression 
of miR-10a in GC tissues than their adjacent non-neoplastic tissues in 100 GC
patients and confirmed the hypermethylation of CpG islands upstream of miR-10a in
some patients. Furthermore, re-introduction of miR-10a into GC cells was able to 
inhibit cell proliferation, migration and invasion. Bioinformatic and immunoblot 
analysis indicated that the tumor suppressor roles of miR-10a in GC cells were
possibly through targeting HOXA1.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data indicate that miR-10a acts as a tumor
suppressor in GC cells and is partially silenced by DNA hypermethylation in GC,
suggesting that miR-10a may serve as a potential diagnostic or therapeutic target
of GC.

PMCID: PMC3909310
PMID: 24498243  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Semin Ophthalmol. 2015 Dec;30(5-6):435-42. doi: 10.3109/08820538.2013.874474.
Epub 2014 Jan 29.

CCDD Phenotype Associated with a Small Chromosome 2 Deletion.

Abu-Amero KK(1,)(2), Bosley TM(1), Kondkar AA(1), Oystreck DT(1,)(3), Khan AO(4).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Ophthalmology , College of Medicine, King Saud University ,
Riyadh , Saudi Arabia . (2)b Department of Ophthalmology , College of Medicine,
University of Florida , Jacksonville , Florida , USA . (3)c Division of
Ophthalmology, Faculty of Health Sciences , University of Stellenbosch ,
Tygerberg , South Africa , and. (4)d Division of Pediatric Ophthalmology , King
Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital , Riyadh , Saudi Arabia.

PURPOSE: Some individuals are born with congenital limitation of ocular motility,
often associated with ptosis and retraction of the globe. Many of these disorders
are now known as the congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders (CCDDs). While
several genes have been associated with CCDD phenotypes, there are still patients
for whom the genetic basis has not been identified.
METHODS: Clinical evaluation and neuroimaging, sequencing of candidate genes, and
array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH).
RESULTS: The patient was a four-year-old girl with mild dysmorphism; bilateral
mild ptosis; substantial limitation of abduction OS with milder limitations of
abduction OD, adduction OS, and vertical gaze OS; and retraction OS<U+2009>><U+2009>OD on
attempted adduction. No mutations were detected in the HOXA1, KIF21A, SALL4,
TUBB3, and CHN1 genes. Array CGH revealed a 8 Kb de novo deletion on chromosome 2
(2q24.3) that encompassed a portion of only one gene, the Xin Actin-binding
Repeat containing 2 (Gene Symbol XIRP2; NM_001079810). This gene encodes a
protein that is involved in muscle development and protecting actin filaments
from depolymerization. It interacts functionally with 10 other proteins playing a
similar role in muscle development.
CONCLUSIONS: This patient's chromosomal abnormality affected only one gene that
currently seems involved only in muscle development. All other genes currently
associated with the CCDDs affect neurologic development. Genetic information from
this patient implies that genes involved in development and maintenance of
extraocular muscles can cause congenital ocular motility disorders as well.

PMID: 24475916  [PubMed - in process]


38. Development. 2014 Feb;141(3):639-49. doi: 10.1242/dev.098731.

Hoxb1b controls oriented cell division, cell shape and microtubule dynamics in
neural tube morphogenesis.

Zigman M(1), Laumann-Lipp N, Titus T, Postlethwait J, Moens CB.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Organismal Studies (COS), University of Heidelberg, Im Neuenheimer 
Feld 329, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany.

Hox genes are classically ascribed to function in patterning the
anterior-posterior axis of bilaterian animals; however, their role in directing
molecular mechanisms underlying morphogenesis at the cellular level remains
largely unstudied. We unveil a non-classical role for the zebrafish hoxb1b gene, 
which shares ancestral functions with mammalian Hoxa1, in controlling progenitor 
cell shape and oriented cell division during zebrafish anterior hindbrain neural 
tube morphogenesis. This is likely distinct from its role in cell fate
acquisition and segment boundary formation. We show that, without affecting major
components of apico-basal or planar cell polarity, Hoxb1b regulates mitotic
spindle rotation during the oriented neural keel symmetric mitoses that are
required for normal neural tube lumen formation in the zebrafish. This function
correlates with a non-cell-autonomous requirement for Hoxb1b in regulating
microtubule plus-end dynamics in progenitor cells in interphase. We propose that 
Hox genes can influence global tissue morphogenesis by control of microtubule
dynamics in individual cells in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3899817
PMID: 24449840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Sci Transl Med. 2014 Jan 1;6(217):217ra2. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3007048.

Silencing HoxA1 by intraductal injection of siRNA lipidoid nanoparticles prevents
mammary tumor progression in mice.

Brock A(1), Krause S, Li H, Kowalski M, Goldberg MS, Collins JJ, Ingber DE.

Author information: 
(1)Wyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University,
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Comment in
    Breast Cancer Res. 2014;16(2):306.

With advances in screening, the incidence of detection of premalignant breast
lesions has increased in recent decades; however, treatment options remain
limited to surveillance or surgical removal by lumpectomy or mastectomy. We
hypothesized that disease progression could be blocked by RNA interference (RNAi)
therapy and set out to develop a targeted therapeutic delivery strategy. Using
computational gene network modeling, we identified HoxA1 as a putative driver of 
early mammary cancer progression in transgenic C3(1)-SV40TAg mice. Silencing this
gene in cultured mouse or human mammary tumor spheroids resulted in increased
acinar lumen formation, reduced tumor cell proliferation, and restoration of
normal epithelial polarization. When the HoxA1 gene was silenced in vivo via
intraductal delivery of nanoparticle-formulated small interfering RNA (siRNA)
through the nipple of transgenic mice with early-stage disease, mammary
epithelial cell proliferation rates were suppressed, loss of estrogen and
progesterone receptor expression was prevented, and tumor incidence was reduced
by 75%. This approach that leverages new advances in systems biology and
nanotechnology offers a novel noninvasive strategy to block breast cancer
progression through targeted silencing of critical genes directly within the
mammary epithelium.

PMID: 24382894  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 May 17;16(2):306. doi: 10.1186/bcr3656.

Combining the strength of genomics, nanoparticle technology, and direct
intraductal delivery for breast cancer treatment.

Teo WW(1), Sukumar S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Program, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, 1650, Orleans Street, CRB1/143, Baltimore,
MD, 21231, USA. wteo2@jhmi.edu. (2)Breast Cancer Program, Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 1650,
Orleans Street, CRB1/143, Baltimore, MD, 21231, USA. saras@jhmi.edu.

Comment on
    Sci Transl Med. 2014 Jan 1;6(217):217ra2.

A large number of genes are altered in cancer cells. Often, reversal or
inhibition of just one of these alterations leads to death of the cancer cells.
Technological advances in multiple areas are necessary to potentiate clinical
translation of these findings. In a recent article, Brock and colleagues reported
that overexpressed HOXA1 is a critical event in tumor progression in a mouse
mammary tumor model. They developed HOXA1-small interfering RNA nanoparticles and
achieved effective therapeutic doses by delivering them intraductally through the
nipple to the site of the tumor and at the same time circumvented the systemic
immune response. This study strengthens the concept of targeting overexpressed
genes by using small interfering RNA and bypassing systemic immunity through
local intraductal delivery.

PMCID: PMC4053158
PMID: 25927933  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 3;8(12):e80625. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0080625. eCollection
2013.

MicroRNA-99 family members suppress Homeobox A1 expression in epithelial cells.

Chen D(1), Chen Z, Jin Y, Dragas D, Zhang L, Adjei BS, Wang A, Dai Y, Zhou X.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Biology of Oral Diseases, College of Dentistry,
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, United States of America ; 
Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, the First Affiliated Hospital, Sun 
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, China.

The miR-99 family is one of the evolutionarily most ancient microRNA families,
and it plays a critical role in developmental timing and the maintenance of
tissue identity. Recent studies, including reports from our group, suggested that
the miR-99 family regulates various physiological processes in adult tissues,
such as dermal wound healing, and a number of disease processes, including
cancer. By combining 5 independent genome-wide expression profiling experiments, 
we identified a panel of 266 unique transcripts that were down-regulated in
epithelial cells transfected with miR-99 family members. A comprehensive
bioinformatics analysis using 12 different sequence-based microRNA target
prediction algorithms revealed that 81 out of these 266 down-regulated
transcripts are potential direct targets for the miR-99 family. Confirmation
experiments and functional analyses were performed to further assess 6 selected
miR-99 target genes, including mammalian Target of rapamycin (mTOR), Homeobox A1 
(HOXA1), CTD small phosphatase-like (CTDSPL), N-myristoyltransferase 1 (NMT1),
Transmembrane protein 30A (TMEM30A), and SWI/SNF-related matrix-associated
actin-dependent regulator of chromatin subfamily A member 5 (SMARCA5). HOXA1 is a
known proto-oncogene, and it also plays an important role in embryonic
development. The direct targeting of the miR-99 family to two candidate binding
sequences located in the HOXA1 mRNA was confirmed using a luciferase reporter
gene assay and a ribonucleoprotein-immunoprecipitation (RIP-IP) assay. Ectopic
transfection of miR-99 family reduced the expression of HOXA1, which, in
consequence, down-regulated the expression of its downstream gene (i.e., Bcl-2)
and led to reduced proliferation and cell migration, as well as enhanced
apoptosis. In summary, we identified a number of high-confidence miR-99 family
target genes, including proto-oncogene HOXA1, which may play an important role in
regulating epithelial cell proliferation and migration during physiological
disease processes, such as dermal wound healing and tumorigenesis.

PMCID: PMC3849180
PMID: 24312487  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Semin Ophthalmol. 2013 Sep-Nov;28(5-6):427-37. doi: 10.3109/08820538.2013.825288.

The genetic basis of incomitant strabismus: consolidation of the current
knowledge of the genetic foundations of disease.

Graeber CP(1), Hunter DG, Engle EC.

Author information: 
(1)Boston Children's Hospital, Boston , Massachusetts , USA and.

In recent years, our understanding of the genetic foundations of incomitant
strabismus has grown significantly. Much new understanding has been gleaned since
the concept of congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders (CCDDs) was introduced
in 2002, and the genetic basis of CCDDs continues to be elucidated. In this
review, we aim to provide an update of the genetic and clinical presentation of
these disorders. Disorders reviewed include Duane syndrome (DS), HOXA1 and HOXB1 
syndromes, Moebius syndrome, congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles
(CFEOM), and horizontal gaze palsy with progressive scoliosis (HGPPS).

PMCID: PMC4098966
PMID: 24138051  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Oct;29(10):1015-9.

[MicroRNA-10a accelerates endodermal lineage differentiation of mesenchymal stem 
cells from human placenta].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen D(1), Ma H, Liu S, Wang L, Li Y, Wei J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Stem Cell, General Hospital, Key Laboratory of Fertility
Preservation and Maintenance, Ministry of Education, Ningxia Medical University, 
Yinchuan 750004, China.

OBJECTIVE: To improve the potential of endodermal differentiation of human
placenta-derived mesenchymal stem cells (PMSCs) by microRNA-10a
(miR-10a)-mediated post-transcriptional regulation of its mRNA targets.
METHODS: Lentiviral vectors were used to stably and specifically over-express
miR-10a and inhibited the miR-10a function by its antagomir. In addition, the
relationship between miR-10a and Hoxa1 expression was analyzed. Real-time
quantitative PCR (qRT-PCR) and immunofluorescent cytochemical staining were
utilized to test the mRNA and protein expression variation and assess the ability
of PMSCs to differentiate into endodermal cells. Results Over-expression of
miR-10a led to the suppression of endogenous Hoxa1 expression, and inhibition of 
miR-10a relieved the repression of Hoxa1. Over-expression of miR-10a in PMSCs
resulted in the up-regulation of endoderm-specific genes (FoxA2, Sox-17, Pdx-1
and Cdx2) and the increased proportions of FOXA2, SOX-17 and PDX-1 positive
events as compared with the control treated cells.
CONCLUSION: miR-10a was up-regulated during endodermal differentiation of PMSCs
and involved in its differentiation partially via the suppression of the Hoxa1
gene. Furthermore, the miR-10a accelerates endodermal differentiation, likely
mediated by the up-reguation of endoderm-specific down-stream genes.

PMID: 24103260  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 27;8(9):e73685. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073685. eCollection
2013.

Transcription profiles of endothelial cells in the rat ductus arteriosus during a
perinatal period.

Liu NM(1), Yokota T, Maekawa S, Lü P, Zheng YW, Taniguchi H, Yokoyama U, Kato T, 
Minamisawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Science and Medical Bioscience, Waseda University, Tokyo,
Japan.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2014;9(1). doi:10.1371/annotation/ebd2da91-3f5a-4b50-8f16-9d7150795c69.
Tei, Inbun [corrected to Zheng, Yun-Wen].

Endothelial cells (ECs) lining the blood vessels serve a variety of functions and
play a central role in the homeostasis of the circulatory system. Since the
ductus arteriosus (DA) has different arterial characteristics from its connecting
vessels, we hypothesized that ECs of the DA exhibited a unique gene profile
involved in the regulation of DA-specific morphology and function. Using a
fluorescence-activated cell sorter, we isolated ECs from pooled tissues from the 
DA or the descending aorta of Wistar rat fetuses at full-term of gestation (F
group) or neonates 30 minutes after birth (N group). Using anti-CD31 and
anti-CD45 antibodies as cell surface markers for ECs and hematopoietic derived
cells, respectively, cDNAs from the CD31-positive and CD45-negative cells were
hybridized to the Affymetrix GeneChip® Rat Gene 1.0 ST Array. Among 26,469
gene-level probe sets, 82 genes in the F group and 81 genes in the N group were
expressed at higher levels in DA ECs than in aortic ECs (p<0.05, fold
change>2.0). In addition to well-known endothelium-enriched genes such as Tgfb2
and Vegfa, novel DA endothelium-dominant genes including Slc38a1, Capn6, and Lrat
were discovered. Enrichment analysis using GeneGo MetaCore software showed that
DA endothelium-related biological processes were involved in morphogenesis and
development. We identified many overlapping genes in each process including
neural crest-related genes (Hoxa1, Hoxa4, and Hand2, etc) and the second heart
field-related genes (Tbx1, Isl1, and Fgf10, etc). Moreover, we found that
regulation of epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition, cell adhesion, and retinol
metabolism are the active pathways involved in the network via potential
interactions with many of the identified genes to form DA-specific endothelia. In
conclusion, the present study uncovered several significant differences of the
transcriptional profile between the DA and aortic ECs. Newly identified DA
endothelium-dominant genes may play an important role in DA-specific functional
and morphologic characteristics.

PMCID: PMC3785468
PMID: 24086288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 9;8(9):e74556. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0074556. eCollection 
2013.

Chromatin changes in dicer-deficient mouse embryonic stem cells in response to
retinoic acid induced differentiation.

Tennakoon JB(1), Wang H, Coarfa C, Cooney AJ, Gunaratne PH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology and Biochemistry, University of Houston, Houston, Texas,
United States of America.

Loss of Dicer, an enzyme critical for microRNA biogenesis, results in lethality
due to a block in mouse embryonic stem cell (mES) differentiation. Using ChIP-Seq
we found increased H3K9me2 at over 900 CpG islands in the Dicer(-/-)ES epigenome.
Gene ontology analysis revealed that promoters of chromatin regulators to be
among the most impacted by increased CpG island H3K9me2 in ES (Dicer(-/-)). We
therefore, extended the study to include H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 marks for selected 
genes. We found that the ES (Dicer(-/-)) mutant epigenome was characterized by a 
shift in the overall balance between transcriptionally favorable (H3K4me3) and
unfavorable (H3K27me3) marks at key genes regulating ES cell differentiation.
Pluripotency genes Oct4, Sox2 and Nanog were not impacted in relation to patterns
of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 and showed no changes in the rates of transcript
down-regulation in response to RA. The most striking changes were observed in
regards to genes regulating differentiation and the transition from self-renewal 
to differentiation. An increase in H3K4me3 at the promoter of Lin28b was
associated with the down-regulation of this gene at a lower rate in Dicer(-/-)ES 
as compared to wild type ES. An increase in H3K27me3 in the promoters of
differentiation genes Hoxa1 and Cdx2 in Dicer(-/-)ES cells was coincident with an
inability to up-regulate these genes at the same rate as ES upon retinoic acid
(RA)-induced differentiation. We found that siRNAs Ezh2 and post-transcriptional 
silencing of Ezh2 by let-7 g rescued this effect suggesting that Ezh2
up-regulation is in part responsible for increased H3K27me3 and decreased rates
of up-regulation of differentiation genes in Dicer(-/-)ES.

PMCID: PMC3767645
PMID: 24040281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Vet Comp Oncol. 2015 Sep;13(3):322-36. doi: 10.1111/vco.12062. Epub 2013 Sep 6.

Characterization of HOX gene expression in canine mammary tumour cell lines from 
spontaneous tumours.

DeInnocentes P(1,)(2), Perry AL(1), Graff EC(1,)(3), Lutful Kabir FM(1,)(2),
Curtis Bird R(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA.
(2)AURIC-Auburn University Research Initiative in Cancer, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA. (3)Department of Anatomy,
Physiology and Pharmacology, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA.

Spatial/temporal controls of development are regulated by the homeotic (HOX) gene
complex and require integration with oncogenes and tumour suppressors regulating 
cell cycle exit. Spontaneously derived neoplastic canine mammary carcinoma cell
models were investigated to determine if HOX expression profiles were associated 
with neoplasia as HOX genes promote neoplastic potential in human cancers.
Comparative assessment of human and canine breast cancer expression profiles
revealed remarkable similarity for all four paralogous HOX gene clusters and
several unlinked HOX genes. Five canine HOX genes were overexpressed with
expression profiles consistent with oncogene-like character (HOXA1, HOXA13,
HOXD4, HOXD9 and SIX1) and three HOX genes with underexpressed profiles (HOXA11, 
HOXC8 and HOXC9) were also identified as was an apparent nonsense mutation in
HOXC6. This data, as well as a comparative analysis of similar data from human
breast cancers suggested expression of selected HOX genes in canine mammary
carcinoma could be contributing to the neoplastic phenotype.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 24034269  [PubMed - in process]


47. Am J Hum Biol. 2013 Nov-Dec;25(6):743-50. doi: 10.1002/ajhb.22441. Epub 2013 Sep 
10.

Nonsyndromic brachydactyly type D and type E mapped to 7p15 in healthy children
and adults from the Jirel ethnic group in eastern Nepal.

Williams KD(1), Blangero J, Subedi J, Jha B, Dyer T, Vandeberg JL, Towne B,
Williams-Blangero S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, Temple University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania;
Department of Pediatrics, Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania.

OBJECTIVES: There is phenotypic overlap between Brachydactyly Type D (BDD) and
Brachydactyly Type E (BDE) that suggests a possible common underlying etiology.
We seek to understand the genetic underpinnings of, and relationship between,
these skeletal anomalies.
METHODS: The Jirel ethnic group of eastern Nepal participates in various genetic 
epidemiologic studies, including those in which hand-wrist radiographs have been 
taken to examine skeletal development. Nearly 2,130 individuals (969 males; 1,161
females) were phenotyped for BDD/BDE. Of these, 1,722 individuals (773 males; 949
females) were genotyped for 371 STR markers spanning the autosomal genome.
Variance components-based linkage analysis was used to conduct a genome-wide
linkage scan for QTL influencing the BDD/BDE phenotype.
RESULTS: BDD was present in 3.55%, and BDE was present in 0.39%, of the study
sample. Because of the phenotypic overlap between two traits, affecteds of either
type were considered as affected by a single combined phenotype (BDD/BDE) having 
a prevalence of 3.94%. The additive genetic heritability of BDD/BDE was highly
significant (h(2) ± SE = 0.89 ± 0.13; P = 1.7 × 10(-11) ). Significant linkage of
BDD/BDE was found to markers on chromosome 7p21-7p14 (peak LOD score = 3.74 at
7p15 between markers D7S493 and D7S516).
CONCLUSIONS: Possible positional candidate genes in the one-lod support interval 
of this QTL include TWIST and the HOXA1-A13 cluster. This is the first study to
report significant linkage results for BDD/BDE using a large extended pedigree,
and the first to suggest that mutations in TWIST and/or the HOXA1-A13 cluster may
contribute to these specific skeletal anomalies.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3968259
PMID: 24022874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Ophthalmic Genet. 2015 Jun;36(2):99-104. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2013.835431. Epub 
2013 Sep 3.

Nicotinic Receptor Mutation in a Mildly Dysmorphic Girl with Duane Retraction
Syndrome.

Abu-Amero KK(1), Kondkar A, Hellani AM, Oystreck DT, Khan AO, Bosley TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, King Saud University ,
Riyadh , Saudi Arabia .

BACKGROUND: To evaluate possible monogenic and chromosomal anomalies in a patient
with unilateral Duane retraction syndrome and modest dysmorphism.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Clinical evaluation, sequencing of candidate genes, and
array comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH).
RESULTS: The proband had unilateral Duane retraction syndrome (DRS) with low-set 
ears bilaterally, a high arched palate, and clinodactyly. Motor development and
cognitive function were normal. Parents were first cousins, but no other family
member was similarly affected. No mutations were detected in the HOXA1. KIF21A.
SALL4, TUBB3, and CHN1 genes. Array CGH revealed a 16<U+2009>Kb de novo deletion at
chromosome 8p11.2 that encompassed a portion of only one gene, the Cholinergic
Receptor, Nicotinic, Beta-3 (CHRNB3, Neuronal). This gene encodes a protein that 
is involved in the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor on neurons. It interacts
functionally with other genes that code components of the acetylcholine receptor.
CONCLUSIONS: This patient's chromosomal abnormality affected only one gene that
is highly expressed in the brainstem and brain, involved in neurotransmission,
and could be related to her Duane retraction syndrome.

PMID: 24001015  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Ophthalmic Genet. 2015 Mar;36(1):14-20. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2013.827218. Epub
2013 Aug 19.

Partial duplication of chromosome 19 associated with syndromic duane retraction
syndrome.

Abu-Amero KK(1), Kondkar AA, Al Otaibi A, Alorainy IA, Khan AO, Hellani AM,
Oystreck DT, Bosley TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, King Saud University ,
Riyadh , Saudi Arabia .

BACKGROUND: To evaluate possible monogenic and chromosomal anomalies in a patient
with unilateral Duane retraction syndrome, modest dysmorphism, cerebral white
matter abnormalities, and normal cognitive function.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Performing high-resolution array comparative genomic
hybridization (array CGH) and sequencing of HOXA1, KIF21A, SALL4, and CHN1 genes.
RESULTS: The proband had unilateral Duane retraction syndrome (DRS) type III on
the right with low-set ears, prominent forehead, clinodactyly, and a history of
frequent infections during early childhood. Motor development and cognitive
function were normal. Parents were not related, and no other family member was
similarly affected. MRI revealed multiple small areas of high signal on T2
weighted images in cerebral white matter oriented along white matter tracts.
Sequencing of HOXA1, KIF21A, SALL4, and CHN1 did not reveal any mutation(s).
Array CGH showed a 95<U+2009>Kb de novo duplication on chromosome 19q13.4 encompassing
four killer cell immunoglobulin-like receptor (KIR) genes. Conclusions. KIR genes
have not previously been linked to a developmental syndrome, although they are
known to be expressed in the human brain and brainstem and to be associated with 
certain infections and autoimmune diseases, including some affecting the nervous 
system. DRS and brain neuroimaging abnormalities may imply a central and
peripheral oligodendrocyte abnormality related in some fashion to an
immunomodulatory disturbance.

PMID: 23952617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. J Proteome Res. 2013 Sep 6;12(9):3969-79. doi: 10.1021/pr400255h. Epub 2013 Aug
21.

IMAC fractionation in combination with LC-MS reveals H2B and NIF-1 peptides as
potential bladder cancer biomarkers.

Frantzi M(1), Zoidakis J, Papadopoulos T, Zürbig P, Katafigiotis I, Stravodimos
K, Lazaris A, Giannopoulou I, Ploumidis A, Mischak H, Mullen W, Vlahou A.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Research Foundation Academy of Athens, Athens, Greece.

Improvement in bladder cancer (BC) management requires more effective diagnosis
and prognosis of disease recurrence and progression. Urinary biomarkers attract
special interest because of the noninvasive means of urine collection. Proteomic 
analysis of urine entails the adoption of a fractionation methodology to reduce
sample complexity. In this study, we applied immobilized metal affinity
chromatography in combination with high-resolution LC-MS/MS for the discovery of 
native urinary peptides potentially associated with BC aggressiveness. This
approach was employed toward urine samples from patients with invasive BC,
noninvasive BC, and benign urogenital diseases. A total of 1845 peptides were
identified, corresponding to a total of 638 precursor proteins. Specific
enrichment for proteins involved in nucleosome assembly and for zinc-finger
transcription factors was observed. The differential expression of two candidate 
biomarkers, histone H2B and NIF-1 (zinc finger 335) in BC, was verified in
independent sets of urine samples by ELISA and by immunohistochemical analysis of
BC tissue. The results collectively support changes in the expression of both of 
these proteins with tumor progression, suggesting their potential role as markers
for discriminating BC stages. In addition, the data indicate a possible
involvement of NIF-1 in BC progression, likely as a suppressor and through
interactions with Sox9 and HoxA1.

PMID: 23924207  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Genes Dev. 2013 Jun 1;27(11):1260-71. doi: 10.1101/gad.217018.113. Epub 2013 May 
30.

linc-HOXA1 is a noncoding RNA that represses Hoxa1 transcription in cis.

Maamar H(1), Cabili MN, Rinn J, Raj A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Recently, researchers have uncovered the presence of many long noncoding RNAs
(lncRNAs) in embryonic stem cells and believe they are important regulators of
the differentiation process. However, there are only a few examples explicitly
linking lncRNA activity to transcriptional regulation. Here, we used transcript
counting and spatial localization to characterize a lncRNA (dubbed linc-HOXA1)
located ~50 kb from the Hoxa gene cluster in mouse embryonic stem cells.
Single-cell transcript counting revealed that linc-HOXA1 and Hoxa1 RNA are highly
variable at the single-cell level and that whenever linc-HOXA1 RNA abundance was 
high, Hoxa1 mRNA abundance was low and vice versa. Knockdown analysis revealed
that depletion of linc-HOXA1 RNA at its site of transcription increased
transcription of the Hoxa1 gene cis to the chromosome and that exposure of cells 
to retinoic acid can disrupt this interaction. We further showed that linc-HOXA1 
RNA represses Hoxa1 by recruiting the protein PURB as a transcriptional cofactor.
Our results highlight the power of transcript visualization to characterize
lncRNA function and also suggest that PURB can facilitate lncRNA-mediated
transcriptional regulation.

PMCID: PMC3690399
PMID: 23723417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Birth Defects Res B Dev Reprod Toxicol. 2013 Jun;98(3):276-82. doi:
10.1002/bdrb.21062. Epub 2013 May 21.

A screen for disruptors of the retinol (vitamin A) signaling pathway.

Chen Y(1), Reese DH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, Office of Applied Research and Safety
Assessment, Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition, U.S. FDA, Laurel,
Maryland 20878, USA.

The pathway through which retinol (vitamin A) is converted to its active
metabolite, all-trans-retinoic acid (atRA), and subsequent receptor-mediated
regulation of gene transcription by atRA is essential for all mammal life stages.
This pathway is required for normal embryonic development and maintenance of
cellular phenotype in adult organisms; chemicals that cause even minor
interference with its normal function are potential developmental and adult
toxicants. A short-term (24 h) in vitro mode-of-action screen for detecting
chemicals that disrupt this essential pathway is described. It uses the mouse
pluripotent P19 stem cell in a 96-well format, RT-qPCR gene-expression assay that
does not require RNA purification to detect chemicals that interfere with
retinol-induced Hoxa1 gene expression, a target of retinol signaling in mammals. 
A total of 21 chemicals were screened at a single 45 µM concentration. Four
chemicals known to disrupt the pathway in the rodent embryo (citral, disulfiram, 
and two rodent teratogens, nitrofen and bisdiamine) all significantly inhibited
Hoxa1 upregulation by retinol. An additional four of seven chemicals with varying
degrees of structural similarity to known disruptors or to the retinoid side
chain, but not previously known to disrupt the pathway, were positive in the
screen. The xenoestrogens, diethylstilbestrol, bisphenol A, 4-n-nonylphenol, and 
genistein and the phthalate esters, dibutyl phthalate and dipentyl phthalate, but
not diethylhexyl phthalate, also significantly disrupted the pathway. Of the 21
chemicals tested, diethylstilbestrol was the only chemical that showed evidence
in the MTT assay that cytotoxicity may have contributed to disruption of the
pathway.

© 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23696197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Clin Chim Acta. 2013 Sep 23;424:53-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2013.05.002. Epub 2013 
May 10.

Gene methylation in gastric cancer.

Qu Y(1), Dang S, Hou P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Xi'an 710061, People's Republic of China.

Gastric cancer is one of the most common malignancies and remains the second
leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Over 70% of new cases and deaths
occur in developing countries. In the early years of the molecular biology
revolution, cancer research mainly focuses on genetic alterations, including
gastric cancer. Epigenetic mechanisms are essential for normal development and
maintenance of tissue-specific gene expression patterns in mammals. Disruption of
epigenetic processes can lead to altered gene function and malignant cellular
transformation. Recent advancements in the rapidly evolving field of cancer
epigenetics have shown extensive reprogramming of every component of the
epigenetic machinery in cancer, including DNA methylation, histone modifications,
nucleosome positioning, noncoding RNAs, and microRNAs. Aberrant DNA methylation
in the promoter regions of gene, which leads to inactivation of tumor suppressor 
and other cancer-related genes in cancer cells, is the most well-defined
epigenetic hallmark in gastric cancer. The advantages of gene methylation as a
target for detection and diagnosis of cancer in biopsy specimens and non-invasive
body fluids such as serum and gastric washes have led to many studies of
application in gastric cancer. This review focuses on the most common and
important phenomenon of epigenetics, DNA methylation, in gastric cancer and
illustrates the impact epigenetics has had on this field.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23669186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jul;41(13):6430-43. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt367. Epub 2013
May 10.

Polycomb recruitment attenuates retinoic acid-induced transcription of the
bivalent NR2F1 gene.

Laursen KB(1), Mongan NP, Zhuang Y, Ng MM, Benoit YD, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Polycomb proteins play key roles in mediating epigenetic modifications that occur
during cell differentiation. The Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) mediates
the tri-methylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3). In this study, we
identify a distinguishing feature of two classes of PRC2 target genes,
represented by the Nr2F1 (Coup-TF1) and the Hoxa5 gene, respectively. Both genes 
are transcriptionally activated by all-trans retinoic acid (RA) and display
increased levels of the permissive H3K9/K14ac and tri-methylated histone H3
lysine 4 epigenetic marks in response to RA. However, while in response to RA the
PRC2 and H3K27me3 marks are greatly decreased at the Hoxa5 promoter, these marks 
are initially increased at the Nr2F1 promoter. Functional depletion of the
essential PRC2 protein Suz12 by short hairpin RNA (shRNA) technology enhanced the
RA-associated transcription of Nr2F1, Nr2F2, Meis1, Sox9 and BMP2, but had no
effect on the Hoxa5, Hoxa1, Cyp26a1, Cyp26b1 and RARß2 transcript levels in
wild-type embryonic stem cells. We propose that PRC2 recruitment attenuates the
RA-associated transcriptional activation of a subset of genes. Such a mechanism
would permit the fine-tuning of transcriptional networks during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3905905
PMID: 23666625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 24;8(4):e62274. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0062274. Print 2013.

Transcriptomic analysis of murine embryos lacking endogenous retinoic acid
signaling.

Paschaki M(1), Schneider C, Rhinn M, Thibault-Carpentier C, Dembélé D,
Niederreither K, Dollé P.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology and Stem Cells Department, Institut de Génétique et de
Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC), Centre National de la Recherche
Scientifique (Unité Mixte de Recherche 7104), Institut National de la Santé et de
la Recherche Médicale (Unité 964), Université de Strasbourg, Illkirch-Strasbourg,
France.

Retinoic acid (RA), an active derivative of the liposoluble vitamin A (retinol), 
acts as an important signaling molecule during embryonic development, regulating 
phenomenons as diverse as anterior-posterior axial patterning, forebrain and
optic vesicle development, specification of hindbrain rhombomeres, pharyngeal
arches and second heart field, somitogenesis, and differentiation of spinal cord 
neurons. This small molecule directly triggers gene activation by binding to
nuclear receptors (RARs), switching them from potential repressors to
transcriptional activators. The repertoire of RA-regulated genes in embryonic
tissues is poorly characterized. We performed a comparative analysis of the
transcriptomes of murine wild-type and Retinaldehyde Dehydrogenase 2 null-mutant 
(Raldh2 (-/-)) embryos - unable to synthesize RA from maternally-derived retinol 
- using Affymetrix DNA microarrays. Transcriptomic changes were analyzed in two
embryonic regions: anterior tissues including forebrain and optic vesicle, and
posterior (trunk) tissues, at early stages preceding the appearance of overt
phenotypic abnormalities. Several genes expected to be downregulated under RA
deficiency appeared in the transcriptome data (e.g. Emx2, Foxg1 anteriorly, Cdx1,
Hoxa1, Rarb posteriorly), whereas reverse-transcriptase-PCR and in situ
hybridization performed for additional selected genes validated the changes
identified through microarray analysis. Altogether, the affected genes belonged
to numerous molecular pathways and cellular/organismal functions, demonstrating
the pleiotropic nature of RA-dependent events. In both tissue samples, genes
upregulated were more numerous than those downregulated, probably due to feedback
regulatory loops. Bioinformatic analyses highlighted groups (clusters) of genes
displaying similar behaviors in mutant tissues, and biological functions most
significantly affected (e.g. mTOR, VEGF, ILK signaling in forebrain tissues;
pyrimidine and purine metabolism, calcium signaling, one carbon metabolism in
posterior tissues). Overall, these data give an overview of the gene expression
changes resulting from embryonic RA deficiency, and provide new candidate genes
and pathways that may help understanding retinoid-dependent molecular events.

PMCID: PMC3634737
PMID: 23638021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2013;14(1):387-92.

Let-7c inhibits NSCLC cell proliferation by targeting HOXA1.

Zhan M(1), Qu Q, Wang G, Liu YZ, Tan SL, Lou XY, Yu J, Zhou HH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacology, Hunan Key Laboratory of Pharmacogenetics, 
Central South University, Changsha, China.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of the present study was to explore mechanisms by which let-7c
suppresses NSCLC cell proliferation.
METHODS: The expression level of let-7c was quantified by qRT-PCR. A549 and H1299
cells were transfected with let-7c mimics to restore the expression of let-7c.
The effects of let-7c were then assessed by cell proliferation, colony formation 
and cell cycle assay. Mouse experiments were used to confirm the effect of let-7c
on tumorigenicity in vivo. Luciferase reporter assays and Western blotting were
performed to identify target genes for let-7c.
RESULTS: HOXA1 was identified as a novel target of let-7c. MTS, colony formation 
and flow cytometry assays demonstrated that forced expression of let-7c inhibited
NSCLC cell proliferation by inducing G1 arrest in vitro, consistent with
inhibitory effects induced by knockdown of HOXA1. Mouse experiments demonstrated 
that let-7c expression suppressed tumorigenesis. Furthermore, we found that
let-7c could regulate the expression of HOXA1 downstream effectors CCND1, CDC25A 
and CDK2.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these results demonstrate let-7c inhibits NSCLC cell
proliferation and tumorigenesis by partial direct targeting of the HOXA1 pathway,
which suggests that restoration of let-7c expression may thus offer a potential
therapeutic intervention strategy for NSCLC.

PMID: 23534758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Oncogene. 2014 Feb 20;33(8):1017-26. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.30. Epub 2013 Feb 25.

HOXA1 drives melanoma tumor growth and metastasis and elicits an invasion gene
expression signature that prognosticates clinical outcome.

Wardwell-Ozgo J(1), Dogruluk T(1), Gifford A(1), Zhang Y(2), Heffernan TP(3), van
Doorn R(4), Creighton CJ(2), Chin L(5), Scott KL(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. (2)Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, TX, USA. (3)Institute for Applied Cancer Science, University of Texas
M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA. (4)Department of Dermatology;
Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The Netherlands. (5)1] Institute for
Applied Cancer Science, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center, Houston,
TX, USA [2] Department of Genomic Medicine, Houston, TX, USA. (6)1] Department of
Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA [2]
Dan L. Duncan Cancer Center, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX, USA.

Melanoma is a highly lethal malignancy notorious for its aggressive clinical
course and eventual resistance to existing therapies. Currently, we possess a
limited understanding of the genetic events driving melanoma progression, and
much effort is focused on identifying pro-metastatic aberrations or perturbed
signaling networks that constitute new therapeutic targets. In this study, we
validate and assess the mechanism by which homeobox transcription factor A1
(HOXA1), a pro-invasion oncogene previously identified in a metastasis screen by 
our group, contributes to melanoma progression. Transcriptome and pathway
profiling analyses of cells expressing HOXA1 reveals upregulation of factors
involved in diverse cytokine pathways that include the transforming growth factor
beta (TGFß) signaling axis, which we further demonstrate to be required for
HOXA1-mediated cell invasion in melanoma cells. Transcriptome profiling also
shows HOXA1's ability to potently downregulate expression of
microphthalmia-associated transcription factor (MITF) and other genes required
for melanocyte differentiation, suggesting a mechanism by which HOXA1 expression 
de-differentiates cells into a pro-invasive cell state concomitant with TGFß
activation. Our analysis of publicly available data sets indicate that the
HOXA1-induced gene signature successfully categorizes melanoma specimens based on
their metastatic potential and, importantly, is capable of stratifying melanoma
patient risk for metastasis based on expression in primary tumors. Together,
these validation data and mechanistic insights suggest that patients whose
primary tumors express HOXA1 are among a high-risk metastasis subgroup that
should be considered for anti-TGFß therapy in adjuvant settings. Moreover,
further analysis of HOXA1 target genes in melanoma may reveal new pathways or
targets amenable to therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC3982326
PMID: 23435427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Ophthalmic Genet. 2014 Mar;35(1):18-24. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2013.766218. Epub
2013 Feb 1.

Xq26.3 microdeletion in a male with Wildervanck Syndrome.

Abu-Amero KK(1), Kondkar AA, Alorainy IA, Khan AO, Al-Enazy LA, Oystreck DT,
Bosley TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, King Saud University ,
Riyadh , Saudi Arabia .

BACKGROUND: Wildervanck Syndrome (WS; cervico-oculo-acoustic syndrome) consists
of Duane retraction syndrome (DRS), the Klippel-Feil anomaly, and congenital
deafness. It is much more common in females than males and could be due to an
X-linked mutation that is lethal to hemizygous males. We present the genetic
evaluation of a male with WS and his family.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Clinical evaluation and neuroimaging, sequencing of
candidate genes, and array comparative genomic hybridization.
RESULTS: The patient had bilateral type 1 DRS, fusion of almost the entire
cervical spine, and bilateral severe sensorineural hearing loss due to bilateral 
cochlear dysplasia; he also had congenital heart disease requiring surgery. His
parents were unrelated, and he had eight unaffected siblings. The patient had no 
mutation found by Sanger sequencing of HOXA1, KIF21A, SALL4, and CHN1. He had a
3kB deletion in the X-chromosome at Xq26.3 that was not found in his mother, one 
unaffected sibling, or 56 healthy controls of matching ethnicity. This deletion
encompassed only one gene, Fibroblast Growth Factor Homologous Factor 13 (FGF13),
which encodes a 216-amino acid protein that acts intracellularly in neurons
throughout brain development.
CONCLUSIONS: Analysis of this patient's phenotype and genotype open the
possibility that X-chromosome deletions may be a cause of WS with larger
deletions being lethal to males and that FGF13 mutations may be a cause of WS.

PMID: 23373430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Hematology. 2013 Mar;18(2):93-100. doi: 10.1179/1607845412Y.0000000047. Epub 2012
Nov 19.

Megakaryocytic differentiation of CD133+ hematopoietic stem cells by
down-regulation of microRNA-10a.

Zarif MN(1), Soleimani M, Abolghasemi H, Amirizade N, Arefian E, Rahimian A.

Author information: 
(1)Blood Transfusion Research Center, High Institute for Research and Education
in Transfusion Medicine, Tehran, Iran.

MicroRNAs (miRNA), as a class of non-coding RNAs, play a crucial role in normal
hematopoiesis. Recent studies on miRNA profiling during hematopoiesis showed
miR-10a down-regulation in megakaryocytic differentiation. Here we investigated
whether decrease in miR-10a can differentiate umbilical cord blood CD133+ cells
to megakaryocytic series. We ectopically induced miR-10a down-regulation by
locked nucleic acid anti-miR-10a transfection of CD133+ cells. The megakaryocytic
differentiation was evaluated by CD42/CD61 and CD41 surface expression and
colonogenic capacity in Megacult media. In addition, real-time polymerase chain
reaction was done for detection of miR-10a and its target HoxA1 mRNA. HOXA1
protein expression was detected by flow cytometry as mean fluorescent intensity
that shows the antibody reaction proteins. Our findings showed megakaryocytic
differentiation of about 28% of umbilical cord blood CD133+ stem cells with
bright expression of CD42/CD61 and CD41 in parallel with increase in HoxA1 mRNA
and protein level. Colony forming of CD61+ cells in Megacult demonstrated the
colonogenic capacity of differentiated progenitor cells. In conclusion, MiR-10a
has a role in megakaryocyte differentiation of stem cells via HOXA1 transcription
factor targeting.

PMID: 23321646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Nat Biotechnol. 2013 Jan;31(1):46-53. doi: 10.1038/nbt.2450. Epub 2012 Dec 9.

Differential analysis of gene regulation at transcript resolution with RNA-seq.

Trapnell C(1), Hendrickson DG, Sauvageau M, Goff L, Rinn JL, Pachter L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.

Differential analysis of gene and transcript expression using high-throughput RNA
sequencing (RNA-seq) is complicated by several sources of measurement variability
and poses numerous statistical challenges. We present Cuffdiff 2, an algorithm
that estimates expression at transcript-level resolution and controls for
variability evident across replicate libraries. Cuffdiff 2 robustly identifies
differentially expressed transcripts and genes and reveals differential splicing 
and promoter-preference changes. We demonstrate the accuracy of our approach
through differential analysis of lung fibroblasts in response to loss of the
developmental transcription factor HOXA1, which we show is required for lung
fibroblast and HeLa cell cycle progression. Loss of HOXA1 results in significant 
expression level changes in thousands of individual transcripts, along with
isoform switching events in key regulators of the cell cycle. Cuffdiff 2 performs
robust differential analysis in RNA-seq experiments at transcript resolution,
revealing a layer of regulation not readily observable with other high-throughput
technologies.

PMCID: PMC3869392
PMID: 23222703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. BMC Dev Biol. 2012 Oct 22;12:29. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-12-29.

Protein interactions of the transcription factor Hoxa1.

Lambert B(1), Vandeputte J, Remacle S, Bergiers I, Simonis N, Twizere JC, Vidal
M, Rezsohazy R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Animal Embryology group, Life Sciences Institute (ISV),
Université Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, 1348, Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Hox proteins are transcription factors involved in crucial processes 
during animal development. Their mode of action remains scantily documented.
While other families of transcription factors, like Smad or Stat, are known cell 
signaling transducers, such a function has never been squarely addressed for Hox 
proteins.
RESULTS: To investigate the mode of action of mammalian Hoxa1, we characterized
its interactome by a systematic yeast two-hybrid screening against ~12,200
ORF-derived polypeptides. Fifty nine interactors were identified of which 45
could be confirmed by affinity co-purification in animal cell lines. Many Hoxa1
interactors are proteins involved in cell-signaling transduction, cell adhesion
and vesicular trafficking. Forty-one interactions were detectable in live cells
by Bimolecular Fluorescence Complementation which revealed distinctive
intracellular patterns for these interactions consistent with the selective
recruitment of Hoxa1 by subgroups of partner proteins at vesicular, cytoplasmic
or nuclear compartments.
CONCLUSIONS: The characterization of the Hoxa1 interactome presented here
suggests unexplored roles for Hox proteins in cell-to-cell communication and cell
physiology.

PMCID: PMC3514159
PMID: 23088713  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Int J Oncol. 2012 Dec;41(6):2285-95. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2012.1660. Epub 2012 Oct
15.

The prolactin receptor mediates HOXA1-stimulated oncogenicity in mammary
carcinoma cells.

Hou L(1), Xu B, Mohankumar KM, Goffin V, Perry JK, Lobie PE, Liu DX.

Author information: 
(1)Liggins Institute, University of Auckland, Auckland 1023, New Zealand.

The HOX genes are a highly conserved subgroup of homeodomain-containing
transcription factors that are crucial to normal development. Forced expression
of HOXA1 results in oncogenic transformation of immortalized human mammary cells 
with aggressive tumour formation in vivo. Microarray analysis identified that the
prolactin receptor (PRLR) was significantly upregulated by forced expression of
HOXA1 in mammary carcinoma cells. To determine prolactin (PRL) involvement in
HOXA1-induced oncogenicity in mammary carcinoma cells (MCF-7), we examined the
effect of human prolactin (hPRL)-initiated PRLR signal transduction on changes in
cellular behaviour mediated by HOXA1. Forced expression of HOXA1 in MCF-7 cells
increased PRLR mRNA and protein expression. Forced expression of HOXA1 also
enhanced hPRL-stimulated phosphorylation of both STAT5A/B and p44/42 MAPK, and
increased subsequent transcriptional activity of STAT5A and STAT5B, and Elk-1 and
Sap1a, respectively. Moreover, forced expression of HOXA1 in MCF-7 cells enhanced
the hPRL-stimulated increase in total cell number as a consequence of enhanced
cell proliferation and cell survival, and also enhanced hPRL-stimulated
anchorage-independent growth in soft agar. Increased anchorage-independent growth
was attenuated by the PRLR antagonist <U+2206>1-9-G129R-hPRL. In conclusion, we have
demonstrated that HOXA1 increases expression of the cell surface receptor PRLR
and enhances PRLR-mediated signal transduction. Thus, the PRLR is one mediator of
HOXA1-stimulated oncogenicity in mammary carcinoma cells.

PMID: 23064471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Hum Genet. 2013 Jan;58(1):51-3. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.118. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

HOX gene methylation status analysis in patients with hereditary breast cancer.

Pilato B(1), Pinto R, De Summa S, Lambo R, Paradiso A, Tommasi S.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Research Centre, Istituto Tumori Giovanni Paolo II, Bari,
Italy.

Cancer development is related not only to genetic alterations but also to
aberrant epigenetic changes that could lead to heritable gene patterns critical
for neoplastic initiation and progression. Knowledge of epigenetic regulation in 
cancer cells is useful for both the understanding of carcinogenesis and for the
possibility of using epigenetic drugs. HOX genes deregulation have a crucial role
in oncogenesis process and tumor suppression. In this report, the methylation of 
HOXA1, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXB13, HNF1B, OTX1, TLX1 genes have been analyzed in
patients with hereditary breast cancer. This is the first study analyzing BRCA
mutational status of patients with respect to methylation of HOX genes. HOXA10
has been found to be methylated in all patients analyzed but never in healthy
subjects. With respect to clinical pathological information, hypermethylation of 
all studied genes, with the exception of OTX1, was significantly associated with 
absence of HER2 neu expression (P<0.05). Moreover, hypermethylation of HOXB13,
HOXA10 and HOXA1 was associated with a high proliferation index (Mib1=10%,
P<0.05) and hypermethylation of HOXB13 and HOXA10 also with high expression of
estrogen and progesterone receptors. These preliminary data suggest a possible
involvement of HOX genes in familial breast cancer as marker helpful to identify 
high-risk patients.

PMID: 23051705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e46036. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046036. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

Implication of DNA demethylation and bivalent histone modification for selective 
gene regulation in mouse primordial germ cells.

Mochizuki K(1), Tachibana M, Saitou M, Tokitake Y, Matsui Y.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Resource Center for Biomedical Research, Institute of Development, Aging 
and Cancer, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan.

Primordial germ cells (PGCs) sequentially induce specific genes required for
their development. We focused on epigenetic changes that regulate PGC-specific
gene expression. mil-1, Blimp1, and Stella are preferentially expressed in PGCs, 
and their expression is upregulated during PGC differentiation. Here, we first
determined DNA methylation status of mil-1, Blimp1, and Stella regulatory regions
in epiblast and in PGCs, and found that they were hypomethylated in
differentiating PGCs after E9.0, in which those genes were highly expressed. We
used siRNA to inhibit a maintenance DNA methyltransferase, Dnmt1, in embryonic
stem (ES) cells and found that the flanking regions of all three genes became
hypomethylated and that expression of each gene increased 1.5- to 3-fold. In
addition, we also found 1.5- to 5-fold increase of the PGC genes in the PGCLCs
(PGC-like cells) induced form ES cells by knockdown of Dnmt1. We also obtained
evidence showing that methylation of the regulatory region of mil-1 resulted in
2.5-fold decrease in expression in a reporter assay. Together, these results
suggested that DNA demethylation does not play a major role on initial activation
of the PGC genes in the nascent PGCs but contributed to enhancement of their
expression in PGCs after E9.0. However, we also found that repression of
representative somatic genes, Hoxa1 and Hoxb1, and a tissue-specific gene, Gfap, 
in PGCs was not dependent on DNA methylation; their flanking regions were
hypomethylated, but their expression was not observed in PGCs at E13.5. Their
promoter regions showed the bivalent histone modification in PGCs, that may be
involved in repression of their expression. Our results indicated that epigenetic
status of PGC genes and of somatic genes in PGCs were distinct, and suggested
contribution of epigenetic mechanisms in regulation of the expression of a
specific gene set in PGCs.

PMCID: PMC3461056
PMID: 23029374  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. J Cell Physiol. 2013 Apr;228(4):791-800. doi: 10.1002/jcp.24228.

Role of COUP-TFI during retinoic acid-induced differentiation of P19 cells to
endodermal cells.

Pickens BS(1), Teets BW, Soprano KJ, Soprano DR.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Biochemistry, Temple University School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19140, USA.

Retinoic acid (RA) is a positive regulator of P19 cell differentiation. Silencing
of pre-B cell leukemia transcription factors (PBXs) expression in P19 cells (AS
cells) results in a failure of these cells to differentiate to endodermal cells
upon RA treatment. Chicken Ovalbumin Upstream Promoter Transcription Factor I
(COUP-TFI) is an orphan member of the steroid-thyroid hormone superfamily. RA
treatment of wild type P19 cells results in a dramatic increase in the expression
of COUP-TFI; however, COUP-TFI mRNA levels fail to be elevated upon RA treatment 
of AS cells indicating that PBX expression is required for elevation in COUP-TFI 
expression. To study the role of COUP-TFI during RA-dependent differentiation of 
P19 cells, AS cells that inducibly express various levels of COUP-TFI were
prepared. Exogenous expression of COUP-TFI in AS cells, in a dose-dependent
fashion, leads to growth inhibition, modest cell cycle disruption, and early
apoptosis. Furthermore, AS cells can overcome the blockage in RA-dependent
differentiation to endodermal cells when either pharmacological levels of
COUP-TFI are expressed or a combination of both the expression of physiological
levels of COUP-TFI and RA treatment. Additionally, the mRNA level of several
pluripotency associated genes including OCT-4, DAX-1, and SF-1 in the COUP-TFI
expressing AS cells are reduced. Moreover, analysis of the expression of primary 
RA response genes indicates that COUP-TFI is involved in the regulatory
modulation of the expression of at least two genes, CYP26A1 and HoxA1. These
studies demonstrate that COUP-TFI functions as a physiologically relevant
regulator during RA-mediated endodermal differentiation of P19 cells.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3657553
PMID: 23018522  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Blood. 2012 Nov 8;120(19):4018-27. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-384685. Epub 2012
Sep 18.

The homeodomain region controls the phenotype of HOX-induced murine leukemia.

Breitinger C(1), Maethner E, Garcia-Cuellar MP, Slany RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

HOX proteins are widely involved in hematopoietic development. These
transcription factors combine a conserved DNA-binding homeobox with a divergent
N-terminus that mediates interaction with variable cofactors. The resulting
combinatorial diversity is thought to be responsible for mammalian HOX
specificity. Contrasting this proposed mechanism for normal HOX function, here we
demonstrate that, in the context of hematopoietic immortalization and
leukemogenesis, individual HOX properties are governed almost exclusively by the 
homeodomain. Swap experiments between HOXA1 and HOXA9, 2 members of nonrelated
paralog groups, revealed that gene expression patterns of HOX transformed cells
in vitro are determined by the nature of the homeodomain. Similar results were
seen in vivo during HOX-mediated leukemogenesis. An exchange of the homeodomains 
was sufficient to convert the slow, low-penetrance phenotype of HOXA1-induced
leukemia to the aggressive fast-acting disease elicited by HOXA9 and vice versa. 
Mutation and deletion studies identified several subregions within the DNA
binding domain responsible for paralog specificity. Previously defined binding
sites for PBX cofactors within the exchangeable, nonhomeobox segment were
dispensable for in vitro oncogenic HOX activity but affected in vivo disease
development. The transcriptional activator domain shared by HOXA1 and HOXA9 at
the very N-terminus proved essential for all transformation.

PMID: 22990017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Cancer Res. 2012 Sep 15;72(18):4629-41. Epub 2012 Sep 7.

Hypoxia-inducible miR-210 regulates the susceptibility of tumor cells to lysis by
cytotoxic T cells.

Noman MZ(1), Buart S, Romero P, Ketari S, Janji B, Mari B, Mami-Chouaib F,
Chouaib S.

Author information: 
(1)Unité INSERM U753, Institut de Cancérologie Gustave Roussy, 114 rue Edouard
Vaillant, 94805 Villejuif, France.

Hypoxia in the tumor microenvironment plays a central role in the evolution of
immune escape mechanisms by tumor cells. In this study, we report the definition 
of miR-210 as a miRNA regulated by hypoxia in lung cancer and melanoma,
documenting its involvement in blunting the susceptibility of tumor cells to
lysis by antigen-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL). miR-210 was induced in
hypoxic zones of human tumor tissues. Its attenuation in hypoxic cells
significantly restored susceptibility to autologous CTL-mediated lysis,
independent of tumor cell recognition and CTL reactivity. A comprehensive
approach using transcriptome analysis, argonaute protein immunoprecipitation, and
luciferase reporter assay revealed that the genes PTPN1, HOXA1, and TP53I11 were 
miR-210 target genes regulated in hypoxic cells. In support of their primary
importance in mediating the immunosuppressive effects of miR-210, coordinate
silencing of PTPN1, HOXA1, and TP53I11 dramatically decreased tumor cell
susceptibility to CTL-mediated lysis. Our findings show how miR-210 induction
links hypoxia to immune escape from CTL-mediated lysis, by providing a
mechanistic understanding of how this miRNA mediates immunosuppression in
oxygen-deprived regions of tumors where cancer stem-like cells and metastatic
cellular behaviors are known to evolve.

PMID: 22962263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Ophthalmic Genet. 2013 Mar-Jun;34(1-2):90-6. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2012.718850.
Epub 2012 Sep 6.

Partial chromosome 7 duplication with a phenotype mimicking the HOXA1 spectrum
disorder.

Abu-Amero KK(1), Kondkar AA, Salih MA, Alorainy IA, Khan AO, Oystreck DT, Bosley 
TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, King Saud University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. abuamero@gmail.com

PURPOSE: To evaluate possible monogenic and chromosomal anomalies in a patient
with bilateral Duane retraction syndrome and hearing impairment resulting in a
phenotype resembling the HOXA1 spectrum disorder.
METHODS: Sequencing HOXA1 and performing high resolution array comparative
genomic hybridization (arrayCGH).
RESULTS: The proband had bilateral Duane retraction syndrome (DRS) with severe
hearing loss bilaterally and an absent right vertebral artery, mimicking the
major features of the Bosley-Salih-Alorainy variant of the HOXA1 spectrum.
However, he also had developmental delay, mild mental retardation, and seizures. 
His parents were not related, but his father had milder sensorineural hearing
loss bilaterally, and two paternal uncles and a paternal cousin had seizures.
Neuroimaging revealed moderate maldevelopment of inner ear bony anatomy
bilaterally. HOXA1 sequencing was normal, but arrayCGH revealed a small partial
duplication of chromosome 7 encompassing only the PTPRN2 gene (protein tyrosine
phosphatase, receptor type, N polypeptide 2) that was not present in his parents,
an unaffected brother, or 53 normal ethnically-matched individuals.
CONCLUSIONS: PTPRN2 is not yet linked to a genetic syndrome, although its
expression has been identified in the adult human brain, in certain tumors, and
in association with type 1 diabetes mellitus. The phenotype of this patient is
strikingly similar to, but not identical to, that of the HOXA1 spectrum disorder.
The findings in this patient raise the possibility that PTPRN2 may be active
during early development of the human brainstem and that its overexpression may
cause bilateral DRS with hearing loss as occurs in patients with homozygous HOXA1
mutations.

PMID: 22950449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Tumour Biol. 2012 Dec;33(6):2125-34. doi: 10.1007/s13277-012-0472-6. Epub 2012
Aug 4.

Overexpression of HOXA1 correlates with poor prognosis in patients with
hepatocellular carcinoma.

Zha TZ(1), Hu BS, Yu HF, Tan YF, Zhang Y, Zhang K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Yixing People's Hospital, No 75, Tongzhen Guan 
Rd, Yixing 214200, China.

HOXA1 overexpression is sufficient for malignant transformation of nontumorigenic
epithelial cells. It is known that HOXA1, which was upregulated in squamous cell 
carcinomas, affects both cell growth and death. The forced expression of HOXA1 in
human breast cancer cells results in increased cell growth activity. However, it 
has not been reported in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). In this study, we used
immunohistochemistry to compare HOXA1 protein expression in HCC and normal liver 
tissues and further analyzed HOXA1 protein expression in 156
clinicopathologically characterized HCC cases. We stably knocked down the
endogenous expression level of HOXA1 in HepG2 cells with specific
shRNA-expressing lentiviral vector. Following the successful establishment of
stable cells, we examined in vitro cell growth by the MTT assay,
anchorage-independent growth through a soft agar colony formation assay and cell 
migration/invasion by transwell and Boyden chamber assay. In addition, we also
investigated in vivo tumor growth by xenograft transplantation of HepG2 cells
into nude mice. Our results showed that the protein expression level of HOXA1 was
markedly higher in HCC tissues than that in normal liver tissue (P = 0.019). In
addition, a high expression level of HOXA1 protein was positively correlated with
the T classification (P < 0.001), the N classification (P < 0.001), distant
metastasis (P = 0.004), and the clinical stage (P < 0.001) of HCC patients.
Patients with higher HOXA1 expression showed a significantly shorter overall
survival time compared with patients with low HOXA1 expression. Multivariate
analysis suggested that HOXA1 expression might be an independent prognostic
indicator (P < 0.001) for the survival of patients with HCC. HOXA1-specific shRNA
(shHOXA1) successfully knocked down HOXA1 endogenous expression in HepG2 cells.
Compared to the parental and control shRNA-transfected (shCtrl) HepG2 cells, the 
shHOXA1 cells exhibited significantly reduced in vitro cell growth,
anchorage-independent growth, and cell migration and invasion (P < 0.05). In
vivo, the xenograft transplants from shHOXA1 cells gave rise to much smaller
tumors compared with those from shCtrl cells. Collectively, high HOXA1 expression
is associated with poor overall survival in patients with HCC. The downregulation
of HOXA1 inhibits growth, anchorage-independent growth, and migration and
invasion of HepG2 cells.

PMID: 22864671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Pediatr Cardiol. 2013 Feb;34(2):226-30. doi: 10.1007/s00246-012-0418-1. Epub 2012
Jul 10.

HOXA1 gene is not potentially related to ventricular septal defect in Chinese
children.

Liu J(1), Wang B, Chen X, Li H, Wang J, Cheng L, Ma X, Gao B.

Author information: 
(1)The Second Clinical Medical College, Lanzhou University, Lanzhou 730030,
China.

The HOXA1 gene plays a fundamental role in embryonic morphogenesis. Recent
studies in humans and mice have indicated that HOXA1 plays a previously
unrecognized role in cardiovascular system development. Congenital heart disease 
(CHD), particularly ventricular septal defect (VSD), might be a clinically
isolated manifestation of HOXA1 mutations. The purpose of the present study was
to identify potential pathological mutations in the HOXA1 gene in Chinese
children with VSD and to gain insight into the etiology of CHD. A total of 340
nonsyndromic VSD patients and 200 normal subjects were sampled. Two exons and the
nearby introns of the human HOXA1 gene were amplified using polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). The PCR products were purified and directly sequenced. However,
no nonsynonymous mutations in the coding regions of the HOXA1 gene were observed:
Only two novel synonymous mutations (c.C210T p.His70His, and c.T861A p.Arg287Arg)
were found in two patients. Two previously reported single and multiple
histidine-deletion variants were identified in both normal and VSD patients. To
our knowledge, this is the first study to investigate the role of the HOXA1 gene 
in CHD. Although our results did not show any pathogenic HOXA1 mutation, our
results suggest that VSD might not be a clinically isolated manifestation of
HOXA1 mutations.

PMID: 22777240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. PLoS One. 2012;7(5):e31984. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031984. Epub 2012 May 31.

Dynamic network of transcription and pathway crosstalk to reveal molecular
mechanism of MGd-treated human lung cancer cells.

Shao L(1), Wang L, Wei Z, Xiong Y, Wang Y, Tang K, Li Y, Feng G, Xing Q, He L.

Author information: 
(1)Bio-X Institutes, Key Laboratory for the Genetics of Developmental and
Neuropsychiatric Disorders (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai, China.

Recent research has revealed various molecular markers in lung cancer. However,
the organizational principles underlying their genetic regulatory networks still 
await investigation. Here we performed Network Component Analysis (NCA) and
Pathway Crosstalk Analysis (PCA) to construct a regulatory network in human lung 
cancer (A549) cells which were treated with 50 uM motexafin gadolinium (MGd), a
metal cation-containing chemotherapeutic drug for 4, 12, and 24 hours. We
identified a set of key TFs, known target genes for these TFs, and signaling
pathways involved in regulatory networks. Our work showed that putative
interactions between these TFs (such as ESR1/Sp1, E2F1/Sp1, c-MYC-ESR,
Smad3/c-Myc, and NFKB1/RELA), between TFs and their target genes (such as
BMP41/Est1, TSC2/Myc, APE1/Sp1/p53, RARA/HOXA1, and SP1/USF2), and between
signaling pathways (such as PPAR signaling pathway and Adipocytokines signaling
pathway). These results will provide insights into the regulatory mechanism of
MGd-treated human lung cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC3365074
PMID: 22693540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Biol Cell. 2012 Sep;104(9):516-32. doi: 10.1111/boc.201200005. Epub 2012 Jun 21.

Retinoic acid-dependent control of MAP kinase phosphatase-3 is necessary for
early kidney development in Xenopus.

Le Bouffant R(1), Wang JH, Futel M, Buisson I, Umbhauer M, Riou JF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Biologie du Développement, UMR, Université Pierre et Marie
Curie, Equipe 'Signalisation et Morphogenèse', Paris, France.

BACKGROUND INFORMATION: In Xenopus, the functional kidney of the tadpole, the
pronephros, forms from the kidney field, which is specified at completion of
gastrulation. Specification of the kidney field requires retinoic acid (RA)
signalling during gastrulation, while fibroblast growth factor (FGF) signals
inhibit should be inhibit this process.
RESULTS: We have analysed the functional interactions taking place during
gastrulation between RA and FGF signals in the lateral marginal zone (LMZ), that 
is in the environment of unspecified pronephric mesoderm precursors. Inhibition
of FGF receptor (FGFR) signalling with SU5402 does not significantly affect
expression of genes encoding RA metabolism enzymes and RA receptor-a in LMZ
explants. Furthermore, SU5402 has no effect on the expression of hoxa1, a major
RA target in the LMZ, showing that FGF is not antagonising RA in the LMZ.
Disruption of RA signalling affects FGF ligand production to some extent,
especially FGF8b, but the strongest effect is the down-regulation of the
mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase-3 (MKP3)-encoding gene, mkp3. A
strong up-regulation of mkp3 occurs in response to exogenous RA. This effect is
reduced in a context of FGFR inhibition, suggesting that RA and FGF signals are
co-operating upstream of mkp3. Mkp3 knockdown results in an inhibition of the
kidney field markers pax8 and lhx1 and in a defective development of the
pronephros.
CONCLUSIONS: FGF is not negatively influencing pronephric specification by
antagonising RA signalling. Functional interactions between RA and FGF rather
take place at the level of the transcriptional regulation of mkp3, indicating
that RA may antagonise FGF signalling at the level of the extracellular
signal-regulated kinase (Erk) pathway. A fine tuning of Erk signalling by MKP3 is
important for the proper establishment of the kidney field.

Copyright © 2012 Soçiété Francaise des Microscopies and Société de Biologie
Cellulaire de France.

PMID: 22548301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. BMC Cancer. 2012 Apr 12;12:146. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-146.

HOXA1 is overexpressed in oral squamous cell carcinomas and its expression is
correlated with poor prognosis.

Bitu CC(1), Destro MF, Carrera M, da Silva SD, Graner E, Kowalski LP, Soares FA, 
Coletta RD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Diagnosis, School of Dentistry, State University of
Campinas, CP 52, CEP 13414-018 Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil.
coletta@fop.unicamp.br

BACKGROUND: HOX genes encode homeodomain-containing transcription factors
involved in the regulation of cellular proliferation and differentiation during
embryogenesis. However, members of this family demonstrated oncogenic properties 
in some malignancies. The present study investigated whether genes of the HOXA
cluster play a role in oral cancer.
METHODS: In order to identify differentially expressed HOXA genes, duplex RT-PCR 
in oral samples from healthy mucosa and squamous cell carcinoma was used. The
effects of HOXA1 on proliferation, apoptosis, adhesion, invasion,
epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and anchorage-independent growth were
assessed in cells with up- and down-regulation of HOXA1. Immunohistochemical
analysis using a tissue microarray (TMA) containing 127 oral squamous cell
carcinomas (OSCC) was performed to determine the prognostic role of HOXA1
expression.
RESULTS: We showed that transcripts of HOXA genes are more abundant in OSCC than 
in healthy oral mucosa. In particular, HOXA1, which has been described as one of 
the HOX members that plays an important role in tumorigenesis, was significantly 
more expressed in OSCCs compared to healthy oral mucosas. Further analysis
demonstrated that overexpression of HOXA1 in HaCAT human epithelial cells
promotes proliferation, whereas downregulation of HOXA1 in human OSCC cells (SCC9
cells) decreases it. Enforced HOXA1 expression in HaCAT cells was not capable of 
modulating other events related to tumorigenesis, including apoptosis, adhesion, 
invasion, EMT and anchorage-independent growth. A high number of HOXA1-positive
cells was significantly associated with T stage, N stage, tumor differentiation
and proliferative potential of the tumors, and was predictive of poor survival.
In multivariate analysis, HOXA1 was an independent prognostic factor for OSCC
patients (HR: 2.68; 95% CI: 1.59-2.97; p = 0.026).
CONCLUSION: Our findings indicate that HOXA1 may contribute to oral
carcinogenesis by increasing tumor cell proliferation, and suggest that HOXA1
expression might be helpful as a prognostic marker for patients with OSCC.

PMCID: PMC3351375
PMID: 22498108  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Gene. 2012 May 25;500(1):107-14. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.03.028. Epub 2012 Mar
16.

Characterization of miR-10a mediated gene regulation in avian splenocytes.

Trakooljul N(1), Hicks JA, Liu HC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC
27695, USA.

Erratum in
    Gene. 2012 Aug 10;504(2):315-6.

It is well established that microRNAs (miRNAs) are an important class of
post-transcriptional regulators of gene expression. Although numerous miRNA
expression profiles have been generated for many eukaryotic organisms, little is 
known about the specific functions of individual miRNAs in regulating gene
expression. We previously reported that the miRNA, miR-10a, is highly expressed
during spleen development in embryonic chicks. In this current study we have
identified genes and potential pathways that are both directly and indirectly
influenced by miR-10a expression. To achieve this goal, miRNA Real-Time (RT) PCR 
analysis was first utilized to examine miR-10a expression across tissues during
both embryonic and post-hatch chick development. Next, microarray analysis was
employed to determine alterations in global gene expression associated with
miR-10a in embryonic chick splenocytes subjected to an in vitro miR-10a inhibitor
treatment. Finally the miRNA target prediction algorithm miRanda was used to
predict potential chicken genes directly targeted by miR-10a. A select group of
potential miR-10a target genes was validated using an RCAS-miRNA expression based
luciferase assay. Our results indicate that miR-10a is highly expressed in the
avian spleen, lung, kidneys, and fat tissues. Functional analysis suggests that
miR-10a is involved in regulating gene expression in pathways associated with Ras
signaling, intracellular trafficking, and development of immune functions.
Additionally, we confirmed that chicken HOXA1 is a miR-10a target gene,
suggesting a conserved role for miR-10a in the regulation of hematopoiesis across
vertebrates.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22446044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Ann Surg Oncol. 2012 Jul;19(7):2394-402. doi: 10.1245/s10434-012-2252-3. Epub
2012 Mar 10.

MicroRNA-10a is overexpressed in human pancreatic cancer and involved in its
invasiveness partially via suppression of the HOXA1 gene.

Ohuchida K(1), Mizumoto K, Lin C, Yamaguchi H, Ohtsuka T, Sato N, Toma H,
Nakamura M, Nagai E, Hashizume M, Tanaka M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Oncology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan. kenoki@med.kyushu-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: There is increasing evidence that microRNAs are differentially
expressed in many types of cancers. Despite progress in analyses of microRNAs in 
several types of cancers, the functional contributions of microRNAs to pancreatic
cancer remain unclear.
METHODS: In the present study, the expression levels of specific microRNAs
identified by microarray analyses were examined in a panel of 15 pancreatic
cancer cell lines. We then investigated the functional roles of these microRNAs
in the proliferation and invasion of pancreatic cancer cells.
RESULTS: Based on the microarray data, we found frequent and marked
overexpression of miR-10a, miR-92, and miR-17-5p in pancreatic cancer cell lines.
Microdissection analyses revealed that miR-10a was overexpressed in pancreatic
cancer cells isolated from a subset of primary tumors (12 of 20, 60%) compared
with precursor lesions and normal ducts (P<.01). In vitro experiments revealed
that miR-10a inhibitors decreased the invasiveness of pancreatic cancer cells
(P<.01), but had no effect on their proliferation. Inhibition of HOXA1, a target 
of miR-10a, promoted the invasiveness of pancreatic cancer cells (P<.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The present data suggest that miR-10a is overexpressed in a subset
of pancreatic cancers and is involved in the invasive potential of pancreatic
cancer cells partially via suppression of HOXA1.

PMID: 22407312  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Autism Res. 2012 Apr;5(2):93-100. doi: 10.1002/aur.238. Epub 2012 Feb 22.

Allelic variation within the putative autism spectrum disorder risk gene homeobox
A1 and cerebellar maturation in typically developing children and adolescents.

Raznahan A(1), Lee Y, Vaituzis C, Tran L, Mackie S, Tiemeier H, Clasen L, Lalonde
F, Greenstein D, Pierson R, Giedd JN.

Author information: 
(1)Child Psychiatry Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA. raznahana@mail.nih.gov

Homeobox A1 (HOXA1) has been proposed as a candidate gene for autism spectrum
disorder (ASD) as it regulates embryological patterning of hind-brain structures 
implicated in autism neurobiology. In line with this notion, a nonsynonymous
single nucleotide polymorphism within a highly conserved domain of HOXA1--A218G
(rs10951154)--has been linked to both ASD risk, and cross-sectional differences
in superior posterior lobar cerebellar anatomy in late adulthood. Despite
evidence for early onset and developmentally dynamic cerebellar involvement in
ASD, little is known of the relationship between A218G genotype and maturation of
the cerebellum over early development. We addressed this issue using 296
longitudinally acquired structural magnetic resonance imaging brain scans from
116 healthy individuals between 5 and 23 years of age. Mixed models were used to 
compare the relationship between age and semi-automated measures of cerebellar
volume in A-homozygotes (AA) and carriers of the G allele (Gcar). Total
cerebellar volume increased between ages of 5 and 23 years in both groups.
However, this was accelerated in the Gcar relative to the AA group
(Genotype-by-age interaction term, P = 0.03), and driven by genotype-dependent
differences in the rate of bilateral superior posterior lobar volume change with 
age (P = 0.002). Resultantly, although superior posterior lobar volume did not
differ significantly between genotype groups at age 5 (P = 0.9), by age 23 it was
12% greater in Gcar than AA (P = 0.002). Our results suggest that common genetic 
variation within this putative ASD risk gene has the capacity to modify the
development of cerebellar systems implicated in ASD neurobiology.

© 2012 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3329569
PMID: 22359339  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Mod Pathol. 2012 Feb;25(2):185-96. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.160. Epub 2011 Oct
28.

Distinct patterns of promoter CpG island methylation of breast cancer subtypes
are associated with stem cell phenotypes.

Park SY(1), Kwon HJ, Choi Y, Lee HE, Kim SW, Kim JH, Kim IA, Jung N, Cho NY, Kang
GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Although DNA methylation profiles in breast cancer have been connected to breast 
cancer molecular subtype, there have been no studies of the association of DNA
methylation with stem cell phenotype. This study was designed to evaluate the
promoter CpG island methylation of 15 genes in relation to breast cancer subtype,
and to investigate whether the patterns of CpG island methylation in each subtype
are associated with their cancer stem cell phenotype represented by CD44+/CD24-
and ALDH1 expression. We performed MethyLight analysis of the methylation status 
of 15 promoter CpG island loci involved in breast cancer progression (APC, DLEC1,
GRIN2B, GSTP1, HOXA1, HOXA10, IGF2, MT1G, RARB, RASSF1A, RUNX3, SCGB3A1, SFRP1,
SFRP4, and TMEFF2) and determined cancer stem cell phenotype by CD44/CD24 and
ALDH1 immunohistochemistry in 36 luminal A, 33 luminal B, 30 luminal-HER2, 40
HER2 enriched, and 40 basal-like subtypes of breast cancer. The number of CpG
island loci methylated differed significantly between subtypes, and was highest
in the luminal-HER2 subtype and lowest in the basal-like subtype. Methylation
frequencies and levels in 12 of the 15 genes differed significantly between
subtypes, and the basal-like subtype had significantly lower methylation
frequencies and levels in nine of the genes than the other subtypes. CD44+/CD24- 
and ALDH1+ putative stem cell populations were most enriched in the basal-like
subtype. Methylation of promoter CpG islands was significantly lower in
CD44+/CD24-cell (+) tumors than in CD44+/CD24-cell (-) tumors, even within the
basal-like subtype. ALDH1 (+) tumors were also less methylated than ALDH1 (-)
tumors. Our findings showed that promoter CpG island methylation was different in
relation to breast cancer subtype and stem cell phenotype of tumor, suggesting
that breast cancers have distinct patterns of CpG island methylation according to
molecular subtypes and these are associated with different stem cell phenotypes
of the tumor.

PMID: 22037257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Int J Cancer. 2012 Aug 1;131(3):E179-89. doi: 10.1002/ijc.26501. Epub 2011 Dec
21.

The JmjC domain-containing histone demethylase KDM3A is a positive regulator of
the G1/S transition in cancer cells via transcriptional regulation of the HOXA1
gene.

Cho HS(1), Toyokawa G, Daigo Y, Hayami S, Masuda K, Ikawa N, Yamane Y, Maejima K,
Tsunoda T, Field HI, Kelly JD, Neal DE, Ponder BA, Maehara Y, Nakamura Y,
Hamamoto R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Human Genome Center, Institute of Medical
Science, The University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

A number of histone demethylases have been identified and biochemically
characterized, yet their biological functions largely remain uncharacterized,
particularly in the context of human diseases such as cancer. In this study, we
describe important roles for the histone demethylase KDM3A, also known as JMJD1A,
in human carcinogenesis. Expression levels of KDM3A were significantly elevated
in human bladder carcinomas compared with nonneoplastic bladder tissues (p <
0.0001), when assessed by real-time PCR. We confirmed that some other cancers
including lung cancer also overexpressed KDM3A, using cDNA microarray analysis.
Treatment of cancer cell lines with small interfering RNA targeting KDM3A
significantly knocked down its expression and resulted in the suppression of
proliferation. Importantly, we found that KDM3A activates transcription of the
HOXA1 gene through demethylating histone H3 at lysine 9 di-methylation by binding
to its promoter region. Indeed, expression levels of KDM3A and HOXA1 in several
types of cancer cell lines and bladder cancer samples were statistically
correlated. We observed the down-regulation of HOXA1 as well as CCND1 after
treatment with KDM3A siRNA, indicating G(1) arrest of cancer cells. Together, our
results suggest that elevated expression of KDM3A plays a critical role in the
growth of cancer cells, and further studies may reveal a cancer therapeutic
potential in KDM3A inhibition.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 22020899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25603. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025603. Epub 2011 Sep 29.

An integrated meta-analysis of two variants in HOXA1/HOXB1 and their effect on
the risk of autism spectrum disorders.

Song RR(1), Zou L, Zhong R, Zheng XW, Zhu BB, Chen W, Liu L, Miao XP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Maternal and Child Health, School of Public Health, Tongji
Medical College, Huangzhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, China.

BACKGROUND: HOXA1 and HOXB1 have been strongly posed as candidate genes for
autism spectrum disorders (ASD) given their important role in the development of 
hindbrain. The A218G (rs10951154) in HOXA1 and the insertion variant in HOXB1
(nINS/INS, rs72338773) were of special interest for ASD but with inconclusive
results. Thus, we conducted a meta-analysis integrating case-control and
transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT) studies to clearly discern the effect of
these two variants in ASD.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Multiple electronic databases were searched to identify
studies assessing the A218G and/or nINS/INS variant in ASD. Data from
case-control and TDT studies were analyzed in an allelic model using the Catmap
software. A total of 10 and 7 reports were found to be eligible for meta-analyses
of A218G and nINS/INS variant, respectively. In overall meta-analysis, the pooled
OR for the 218G allele and the INS allele was 0.97 (95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.76-1.25,
P(heterogeneity)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.029) and 1.14 (95% CI<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.97-1.33,
P(heterogeneity)<U+200A>=<U+200A>0.269), respectively. No significant association was also
identified between these two variants and ASD risk in stratified analysis.
Further, cumulative meta-analysis in chronologic order showed the inclination
toward null-significant association for both variants with continual adding
studies. Additionally, although the between-study heterogeneity regarding the
A218G is not explained by study design, ethnicity, and sample size, the sensitive
analysis indicated the stability of the result.
CONCLUSIONS: This meta-analysis suggests the HOXA1 A218G and HOXB1 nINS/INS
variants may not contribute significantly to ASD risk.

PMCID: PMC3183057
PMID: 21980499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. PLoS One. 2011;6(9):e25247. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0025247. Epub 2011 Sep 21.

The Pbx interaction motif of Hoxa1 is essential for its oncogenic activity.

Delval S(1), Taminiau A, Lamy J, Lallemand C, Gilles C, Noël A, Rezsohazy R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Animal Embryology Group, Life Sciences Institute (ISV),
Université Catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

Hoxa1 belongs to the Hox family of homeodomain transcription factors involved in 
patterning embryonic territories and governing organogenetic processes. In
addition to its developmental functions, Hoxa1 has been shown to be an oncogene
and to be overexpressed in the mammary gland in response to a deregulation of the
autocrine growth hormone. It has therefore been suggested that Hoxa1 plays a
pivotal role in the process linking autocrine growth hormone misregulation and
mammary carcinogenesis. Like most Hox proteins, Hoxa1 can interact with Pbx
proteins. This interaction relies on a Hox hexapeptidic sequence centred on
conserved Tryptophan and Methionine residues. To address the importance of the
Hox-Pbx interaction for the oncogenic activity of Hoxa1, we characterized here
the properties of a Hoxa1 variant with substituted residues in the hexapeptide
and demonstrate that the Hoxa1 mutant lost its ability to stimulate cell
proliferation, anchorage-independent cell growth, and loss of contact inhibition.
Therefore, the hexapeptide motif of Hoxa1 is required to confer its oncogenic
activity, supporting the view that this activity relies on the ability of Hoxa1
to interact with Pbx.

PMCID: PMC3177904
PMID: 21957483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Hum Mol Genet. 2012 Jan 1;21(1):26-31. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr434. Epub 2011 Sep 22.

Cardiovascular defects in a mouse model of HOXA1 syndrome.

Makki N(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Human Genetics, University
of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112-5331, USA.

Congenital heart disease is one of the most common human birth defects, yet many 
genes and pathways regulating heart development remain unknown. A recent study in
humans revealed that mutations in a single Hox gene, HOXA1 (Athabascan Brainstem 
Dysgenesis Syndrome, Bosley-Salih-Alorainy Syndrome), can cause severe
cardiovascular malformations, some of which are lethal without surgical
intervention. Since the discovery of the human syndromes, there have been no
reports of any Hox mouse mutants with cardiac defects, hampering studies to
explore the developmental causes of the human disease. In this study, we identify
severe cardiovascular malformations in a Hox mouse model, which mimic the
congenital heart defects in HOXA1 syndrome patients. Hoxa1 null mice show defects
such as interrupted aortic arch, aberrant subclavian artery and Tetralogy of
Fallot, demonstrating that Hoxa1 is required for patterning of the great arteries
and outflow tract of the heart. We show that during early embryogenesis, Hoxa1 is
expressed in precursors of cardiac neural crest cells (NCCs), which populate the 
heart. We further demonstrate that Hoxa1 acts upstream of several genes,
important for neural crest specification. Thus, our data allow us to suggest a
model in which Hoxa1 regulates heart development through its influence on cardiac
NCCs, providing insight into the mechanisms underlying the human disease.

PMCID: PMC3235008
PMID: 21940751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Dec;124(2):370-7. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr245. Epub 2011 Sep 20.

Development of a neural teratogenicity test based on human embryonic stem cells: 
response to retinoic acid exposure.

Colleoni S(1), Galli C, Gaspar JA, Meganathan K, Jagtap S, Hescheler J,
Sachinidis A, Lazzari G.

Author information: 
(1)Avantea, Laboratory of Reproductive Technologies, 26100 Cremona, Italy.
silviacolleoni@avantea.it

The aim of this study was the development of an alternative testing method based 
on human embryonic stem cells for prenatal developmental toxicity with particular
emphasis on early neural development. To this purpose, we designed an in vitro
protocol based on the generation of neural rosettes, representing the in vitro
counterpart of the developing neural plate and neural tube, and we challenged
this complex cell model with retinoic acid (RA), a well-known teratogenic agent. 
The cells were exposed to different concentrations of RA during the process of
rosettes formation. Morphological and molecular parameters were evaluated in
treated as compared with untreated cells to detect both cytotoxicity and specific
neural toxicity. Transcriptomic analysis was performed with microarray Affymetrix
platform and validated by quantitative real-time PCR for genes relevant to early 
neural development such as HoxA1, HoxA3, HoxB1, HoxB4, FoxA2, FoxC1, Otx2, and
Pax7. The results obtained demonstrated that neural rosette forming cells respond
to RA with clear concentration-dependent morphological, and gene expression
changes remarkably similar to those induced in vivo, in the developing neural
tube, by RA exposure. This strict correspondence indicates that the neural
rosette protocol described is capable of detecting specific teratogenic
mechanisms causing perturbations of early neural development and therefore
represents a promising alternative test for human prenatal developmental
toxicity.

PMID: 21934132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Dev Biol. 2011 Sep 15;357(2):295-304. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.06.042. Epub 2011
Jul 18.

Identification of novel Hoxa1 downstream targets regulating hindbrain, neural
crest and inner ear development.

Makki N(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Department of Human Genetics, UT, USA.

Hox genes play a crucial role during embryonic patterning and organogenesis. Of
the 39 Hox genes, Hoxa1 is the first to be expressed during embryogenesis and the
only anterior Hox gene linked to a human syndrome. Hoxa1 is necessary for the
proper development of the brainstem, inner ear and heart in humans and mice;
however, almost nothing is known about the molecular downstream targets through
which it exerts its function. To gain insight into the transcriptional network
regulated by this protein, we performed microarray analysis on tissue
microdissected from the prospective rhombomere 3-5 region of Hoxa1 null and wild 
type embryos. Due to the very early and transient expression of this gene,
dissections were performed on early somite stage embryos during an eight-hour
time window of development. Our array yielded a list of around 300 genes
differentially expressed between the two samples. Many of the identified genes
play a role in a specific developmental or cellular process. Some of the
validated targets regulate early neural crest induction and specification.
Interestingly, three of these genes, Zic1, Hnf1b and Foxd3, were down-regulated
in the posterior hindbrain, where cardiac neural crest cells arise, which pattern
the outflow tract of the heart. Other targets are necessary for early inner ear
development, e.g. Pax8 and Fgfr3 or are expressed in specific hindbrain neurons
regulating respiration, e.g. Lhx5. These findings allow us to propose a model
where Hoxa1 acts in a genetic cascade upstream of genes controlling specific
aspects of embryonic development, thereby providing insight into possible
mechanisms underlying the human HoxA1-syndrome.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3176680
PMID: 21784065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21443. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021443. Epub 2011 Jun 23.

DNA methylation changes in atypical adenomatous hyperplasia, adenocarcinoma in
situ, and lung adenocarcinoma.

Selamat SA(1), Galler JS, Joshi AD, Fyfe MN, Campan M, Siegmund KD, Kerr KM,
Laird-Offringa IA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Keck School of
Medicine, University of Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United
States of America.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation is common in lung adenocarcinoma, but its
timing in the phases of tumor development is largely unknown. Delineating when
abnormal DNA methylation arises may provide insight into the natural history of
lung adenocarcinoma and the role that DNA methylation alterations play in tumor
formation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We used MethyLight, a sensitive real-time
PCR-based quantitative method, to analyze DNA methylation levels at 15 CpG
islands that are frequently methylated in lung adenocarcinoma and that we had
flagged as potential markers for non-invasive detection. We also used two repeat 
probes as indicators of global DNA hypomethylation. We examined DNA methylation
in 249 tissue samples from 93 subjects, spanning the putative spectrum of
peripheral lung adenocarcinoma development: histologically normal adjacent
non-tumor lung, atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH), adenocarcinoma in situ
(AIS, formerly known as bronchioloalveolar carcinoma), and invasive lung
adenocarcinoma. Comparison of DNA methylation levels between the lesion types
suggests that DNA hypermethylation of distinct loci occurs at different time
points during the development of lung adenocarcinoma. DNA methylation at CDKN2A
ex2 and PTPRN2 is already significantly elevated in AAH, while CpG islands at
2C35, EYA4, HOXA1, HOXA11, NEUROD1, NEUROD2 and TMEFF2 are significantly
hypermethylated in AIS. In contrast, hypermethylation at CDH13, CDX2, OPCML,
RASSF1, SFRP1 and TWIST1 and global DNA hypomethylation appear to be present
predominantly in invasive cancer.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The gradual increase in DNA methylation seen for
numerous loci in progressively more transformed lesions supports the model in
which AAH and AIS are sequential stages in the development of lung
adenocarcinoma. The demarcation of DNA methylation changes characteristic for
AAH, AIS and adenocarcinoma begins to lay out a possible roadmap for aberrant DNA
methylation events in tumor development. In addition, it identifies which DNA
methylation changes might be used as molecular markers for the detection of
preinvasive lesions.

PMCID: PMC3121768
PMID: 21731750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Dev Dyn. 2011 Aug;240(8):1880-8. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22679. Epub 2011 Jun 14.

Plasticity of neural crest-placode interaction in the developing visceral nervous
system.

Chen Y(1), Takano-Maruyama M, Gaufo GO.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Texas at San Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 
78249, USA.

The reciprocal relationship between rhombomere (r)-derived cranial neural crest
(NC) and epibranchial placodal cells derived from the adjacent branchial arch is 
critical for visceral motor and sensory gangliogenesis, respectively. However, it
is unknown whether the positional match between these neurogenic precursors is
hard-wired along the anterior-posterior (A/P) axis. Here, we use the interaction 
between r4-derived NC and epibranchial placode-derived geniculate ganglion as a
model to address this issue. In Hoxa1(-/-) b1(-/-) embryos, r2 NC compensates for
the loss of r4 NC. Specifically, a population of r2 NC cells is redirected toward
the geniculate ganglion, where they differentiate into postganglionic (motor)
neurons. Reciprocally, the inward migration of the geniculate ganglion is
associated with r2 NC. The ability of NC and placodal cells to, respectively,
differentiate and migrate despite a positional mismatch along the A/P axis
reflects the plasticity in the relationship between the two neurogenic precursors
of the vertebrate head.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3285277
PMID: 21674689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Hum Mol Genet. 2011 Sep 1;20(17):3366-75. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddr243. Epub 2011 May 
30.

Oligogenic heterozygosity in individuals with high-functioning autism spectrum
disorders.

Schaaf CP(1), Sabo A, Sakai Y, Crosby J, Muzny D, Hawes A, Lewis L, Akbar H,
Varghese R, Boerwinkle E, Gibbs RA, Zoghbi HY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Program in Developmental Biology, 
Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Autism spectrum disorders (ASDs) are a heterogeneous group of neuro-developmental
disorders. While significant progress has been made in the identification of
genes and copy number variants associated with syndromic autism, little is known 
to date about the etiology of idiopathic non-syndromic autism. Sanger sequencing 
of 21 known autism susceptibility genes in 339 individuals with high-functioning,
idiopathic ASD revealed de novo mutations in at least one of these genes in 6 of 
339 probands (1.8%). Additionally, multiple events of oligogenic heterozygosity
were seen, affecting 23 of 339 probands (6.8%). Screening of a control population
for novel coding variants in CACNA1C, CDKL5, HOXA1, SHANK3, TSC1, TSC2 and UBE3A 
by the same sequencing technology revealed that controls were carriers of
oligogenic heterozygous events at significantly (P < 0.01) lower rate, suggesting
oligogenic heterozygosity as a new potential mechanism in the pathogenesis of
ASDs.

PMCID: PMC3153303
PMID: 21624971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. J Cell Biochem. 2011 Oct;112(10):2865-72. doi: 10.1002/jcb.23200.

The retinol signaling pathway in mouse pluripotent P19 cells.

Chen Y(1), Reese DH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Biology, U.S. FDA, Laurel, Maryland 20708, USA.

atRA (all-trans-retinoic acid), the active metabolite of retinol (vitamin A), is 
essential for embryogenesis and maintenance of cellular phenotype in adults.
Chemicals that interfere with the metabolism of retinol to atRA, therefore, are a
human health concern. During development of a screen for disruptors of this
signaling pathway, we investigated whether the mouse pluripotent P19 cell
metabolizes retinol to atRA and thus can be used in a cell-based screen for
disruptors of the pathway. We found that retinol induced the identical pattern of
homeobox gene expression as atRA and its precursor, retinal. Retinol was 160-fold
less potent than atRA as an inducer, however. In spite of its lower potency,
increased Hoxa1 gene expression was detected 30 min after retinol exposure and
increased 40-fold by 2 h. Rdh10 and Aldh1a2/Raldh2, which together convert
retinol to atRA in the embryo, were the predominant alcohol and aldehyde
dehydrogenases expressed in P19 cells. The cell expressed high mRNA levels of
retinol binding proteins, Rbp1 and Rbp4, and the 13,14-dihydroretinol saturase,
Retsat. It also expressed all Rar and Rxr isotypes, Crabp1&2, the three Cyp26
genes, and both ß-carotene-cleaving genes, Bcmo1 and Bco2. The basal expression
levels and retinol responsiveness of 25 pathway-related genes were quantitated by
RT-qPCR. A test of the Aldh1a2 inhibitor, citral, showed that the disruption of
the pathway was easily detected and quantitated showing that the P19 cell
provides an in vitro model system for identifying and exploring the mechanism of 
action of chemicals that interfere with this critical cellular pathway.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21618588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2011 Aug 31;178(1):146-55. doi:
10.1016/j.resp.2011.04.013. Epub 2011 Apr 16.

Prenatal development of central rhythm generation.

Champagnat J(1), Morin-Surun MP, Bouvier J, Thoby-Brisson M, Fortin G.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiologie et Développement (UPR 3294, CNRS), Neuro-Sud Paris (IFR 144),
Centre de Recherche de Gif-sur Yvette (CNRS, FRC 3115), Gif-sur-Yvette, France.
jean.champagnat@iaf.cnrs-gif.fr

Foetal breathing in mice results from prenatal activity of the two coupled
hindbrain oscillators considered to be responsible for respiratory rhythm
generation after birth: the pre-Bötzinger complex (preBötC) is active shortly
before the onset of foetal breathing; the parafacial respiratory group (e-pF in
embryo) starts activity one day earlier. Transcription factors have been
identified that are essential to specify neural progenitors and lineages forming 
each of these oscillators during early development of the neural tube: Hoxa1,
Egr2 (Krox20), Phox2b, Lbx1 and Atoh1 for the e-pF; Dbx1 and Evx1 for the preBötC
which eventually grow contralateral axons requiring expression of Robo3.
Inactivation of the genes encoding these factors leads to mis-specification of
these neurons and distinct breathing abnormalities: apneic patterns and loss of
central chemosensitivity for the e-pF (central congenital hypoventilation
syndrome, CCHS, in humans), complete loss of breathing for the preBötC,
right-left desynchronized breathing in Robo3 mutants. Mutations affecting
development in more rostral (pontine) respiratory territories change the shape of
the inspiratory drive without affecting the rhythm. Other (primordial) embryonic 
oscillators start in the mouse three days before the e-pF, to generate low
frequency (LF) rhythms that are probably required for activity-dependent
development of neurones at embryonic stages; in the foetus, however, they are
actively silenced to avoid detrimental interaction with the on-going respiratory 
rhythm. Altogether, these observations provide a strong support to the previously
proposed hypothesis that the functional organization of the respiratory generator
is specified at early stages of development and is dual in nature, comprising two
serially non-homologous oscillators.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21527363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Ophthalmic Genet. 2011 Nov;32(4):212-6. doi: 10.3109/13816810.2011.574186. Epub
2011 Apr 21.

Horizontal gaze palsy and progressive scoliosis without ROBO3 mutations.

Abu-Amero KK(1), Faletra F, Gasparini P, Parentin F, Pensiero S, Alorainy IA,
Hellani AM, Catalano D, Bosley TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ophthalmology, College of Medicine, King Saud University,
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia. abuamero@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: To describe clinical and genetic observations in a patient with
horizontal gaze palsy and progressive scoliosis (HGPPS) without identified
mutations in the ROBO3 gene.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Neurologic and orthopedic evaluation of the proband;
sequencing all exons, exon-intron boundaries, and promoter region of ROBO3 in the
proband and his mother. Array CGH was also carried out in the proband and his
mother to evaluate possible chromosomal deletion(s) and/or duplication(s).
RESULTS: The proband had complete horizontal gaze restriction with full vertical 
gaze and small amplitude horizontal pendular nystagmus. He also had severe
scoliosis and brainstem hypoplasia pathognomonic of HGPPS. However, complete
sequencing of ROBO3 twice in both forward and reverse directions did not reveal
any mutations. Array CGH investigation revealed no chromosomal abnormalities.
CONCLUSIONS: This patient had clinical and neuroimaging characteristics
considered pathognomonic of HGPPS and yet did not have ROBO3 mutations. A
clinical misdiagnosis is unlikely in the absence of facial weakness (typical of
Moebius syndrome), deafness (typical of the HOXA1 spectrum), or mental
retardation (typical of other central decussation abnormalities). It is perhaps
more likely that a phenotype identical to HGPPS can be caused by abnormalities in
ROBO3 splice variant expression, by mutations of a gene other than ROBO3, or by
some environmental or epigenetic factor(s) inhibiting the action of ROBO3 or its 
protein product in the developing brainstem.

PMID: 21510772  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Dev Cell. 2011 Apr 19;20(4):469-82. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2011.03.011.

Hox and Pbx factors control retinoic acid synthesis during hindbrain
segmentation.

Vitobello A(1), Ferretti E, Lampe X, Vilain N, Ducret S, Ori M, Spetz JF, Selleri
L, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical Research, Basel, Switzerland.

In vertebrate embryos, retinoic acid (RA) synthesized in the mesoderm by Raldh2
emanates to the hindbrain neuroepithelium, where it induces anteroposterior
(AP)-restricted Hox expression patterns and rhombomere segmentation. However, how
appropriate spatiotemporal RA activity is generated in the hindbrain is poorly
understood. By analyzing Pbx1/Pbx2 and Hoxa1/Pbx1 null mice, we found that Raldh2
is itself under the transcriptional control of these factors and that the
resulting RA-deficient phenotypes can be partially rescued by exogenous RA.
Hoxa1-Pbx1/2-Meis2 directly binds a specific regulatory element that is required 
to maintain normal Raldh2 expression levels in vivo. Mesoderm-specific Xhoxa1 and
Xpbx1b knockdowns in Xenopus embryos also result in Xraldh2 downregulation and
hindbrain defects similar to mouse mutants, demonstrating conservation of this
Hox-Pbx-dependent regulatory pathway. These findings reveal a feed-forward
mechanism linking Hox-Pbx-dependent RA synthesis during early axial patterning
with the establishment of spatially restricted Hox-Pbx activity in the developing
hindbrain.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3677862
PMID: 21497760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Virchows Arch. 2011 Aug;459(2):201-11. doi: 10.1007/s00428-011-1079-9. Epub 2011 
Apr 15.

DNA methylation profile during multistage progression of pulmonary
adenocarcinomas.

Chung JH(1), Lee HJ, Kim BH, Cho NY, Kang GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam,
Gyeonggi-do, South Korea.

Multiple genetic and epigenetic alterations are known to be involved in the
carcinogenesis of peripheral pulmonary adenocarcinoma (ADC). However, epigenetic 
abnormalities have not been extensively investigated in the following multistage 
progression sequence: atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH) to adenocarcinoma in
situ (AIS), to invasive ADC. To determine the potential role of promoter
methylation during ADC development of the lung, we examined methylation status in
20 normal, 20 AAH, 30 AIS, and 60 ADC lung tissues and compared methylation
status among the lesions. The MethyLight assay was used to determine the
methylation status of 18 CpG island loci, which were hypermethylated in ADC
compared to noncancerous lung tissues. The mean number of methylated CpG island
loci was significantly higher in ADC than in AAH and AIS, (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.003 between ADC 
and AAH, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.005 between ADC and AIS). Aberrant methylation of HOXA1, TMEFF2,
and RARB was frequently observed in preinvasive lesions, including AAH and AIS.
Furthermore, methylation of PENK, BCL2, RUNX3, DLEC1, MT1G, GRIN2B, CDH13, CCND2,
and HOXA10 was significantly more frequent in invasive ADC than AAH or AIS. Our
results indicate that epigenetic alterations are involved in the multistep
progression of pulmonary ADC development, and aberrant CpG island methylation
accumulates during multistep carcinogenesis. In addition, aberrant methylation of
HOXA1, TMEFF2, and RARB occurred in preinvasive lesions, which indicates that
epigenetic alterations of these genes are involved in the early stages of
pulmonary ADC development. In contrast, hypermethylation of PENK, BCL2, RUNX3,
DLEC1, MT1G, GRIN2B, CDH13, CCND2, and HOXA10 was more frequent in invasive ADC
than in preinvasive lesions, which indicates that methylation of these genes
occurs later during tumor invasion in the AAH-AIS-ADC sequence.

PMID: 21494759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Stem Cells. 2011 May;29(5):858-70. doi: 10.1002/stem.630.

Anterior Hox genes interact with components of the neural crest specification
network to induce neural crest fates.

Gouti M(1), Briscoe J, Gavalas A.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Laboratory, Biomedical Research Foundation of the
Academy of Athens (BRFAA), Athens, Greece.

Hox genes play a central role in neural crest (NC) patterning particularly in the
cranial region of the body. Despite evidence that simultaneous loss of Hoxa1 and 
Hoxb1 function resulted in NC specification defects, the role of Hox genes in NC 
specification has remained unclear due to extended genetic redundancy among Hox
genes. To circumvent this problem, we expressed anterior Hox genes in the trunk
neural tube of the developing chick embryo. This demonstrated that anterior Hox
genes play a central role in NC cell specification by rapidly inducing the key
transcription factors Snail2 and Msx1/2 and a neural progenitor to NC cell fate
switch characterized by cell adhesion changes and an epithelial-to-mesenchymal
transition (EMT). Cells delaminated from dorsal and medial neural tube levels and
generated ectopic neurons, glia progenitors, and melanocytes. The mobilization of
the NC genetic cascade was dependent upon bone morphogenetic protein signaling
and optimal levels of Notch signaling. Therefore, anterior Hox patterning genes
participate in NC specification and EMT by interacting with NC-inducing signaling
pathways and regulating the expression of key genes involved in these processes.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMCID: PMC3184476
PMID: 21433221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Dev Biol. 2011 May 15;353(2):266-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.02.029. Epub 2011 
Mar 6.

Hox genes define distinct progenitor sub-domains within the second heart field.

Bertrand N(1), Roux M, Ryckebüsch L, Niederreither K, Dollé P, Moon A, Capecchi
M, Zaffran S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale et Génomique Fonctionnelle, Inserm UMR_S910,
Université d'Aix-Marseille, 27 Bd Jean Moulin, 13005 Marseille, France.
nicolas.bertrand@univmed.fr

Much of the heart, including the atria, right ventricle and outflow tract (OFT)
is derived from a progenitor cell population termed the second heart field (SHF) 
that contributes progressively to the embryonic heart during cardiac looping.
Several studies have revealed anterior-posterior patterning of the SHF, since the
anterior region (anterior heart field) contributes to right ventricular and OFT
myocardium whereas the posterior region gives rise to the atria. We have
previously shown that Retinoic Acid (RA) signal participates to this patterning. 
We now show that Hoxb1, Hoxa1, and Hoxa3, as downstream RA targets, are expressed
in distinct sub-domains within the SHF. Our genetic lineage tracing analysis
revealed that Hoxb1, Hoxa1 and Hoxa3-expressing cardiac progenitor cells
contribute to both atria and the inferior wall of the OFT, which subsequently
gives rise to myocardium at the base of pulmonary trunk. By contrast to
Hoxb1(Cre), the contribution of Hoxa1-enhIII-Cre and Hoxa3(Cre)-labeled cells is 
restricted to the distal regions of the OFT suggesting that proximo-distal
patterning of the OFT is related to SHF sub-domains characterized by
combinatorial Hox genes expression. Manipulation of RA signaling pathways showed 
that RA is required for the correct deployment of Hox-expressing SHF cells. This 
report provides new insights into the regulatory gene network in SHF cells
contributing to the atria and sub-pulmonary myocardium.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3115524
PMID: 21385575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Virchows Arch. 2011 Jan;458(1):73-84. doi: 10.1007/s00428-010-1013-6. Epub 2010
Dec 1.

Promoter CpG island hypermethylation during breast cancer progression.

Park SY(1), Kwon HJ, Lee HE, Ryu HS, Kim SW, Kim JH, Kim IA, Jung N, Cho NY, Kang
GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 28
Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu, Seoul, 110-744, South Korea.

This study was designed to evaluate the changes in promoter CpG islands
hypermethylation during breast cancer progression from pre-invasive lesions [flat
epithelial atypia (FEA), atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH), and ductal carcinoma 
in situ (DCIS)] to invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC). We performed MethyLight
analysis for the methylation status of 57 promoter CpG island loci in 20 IDCs and
their paired normal breast tissues. After selecting 15 CpG island loci showing
breast cancer-specific DNA methylation, another set of normal breast tissue
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10), ADH/FEA (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>30), DCIS (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>35), and IDC (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>30) of the breast were
analyzed for these loci. We found six new methylation markers of breast cancer,
namely DLEC1, GRIN2B, HOXA1, MT1G, SFRP4, and TMEFF2, in addition to APC, GSTP1, 
HOXA10, IGF2, RARB, RASSF1A, RUNX3, SCGB3A1 (HIN-1), and SFRP1. The number of
methylated genes increased stepwise from normal breast to ADH/FEA and DCIS, while
IDC did not differ from DCIS. Methylation levels and frequencies of APC, DLEC1,
HOXA1, and RASSF1A promoter CpG islands were significantly higher in ADH/FEA than
in normal breast tissue. GRIN2B, GSTP1, HOXA1, RARB, RUNX3, SFRP1, and TMEFF2
showed higher methylation levels and frequencies in DCIS than in ADH/FEA. DICS
and IDC did not differ in the methylation levels or frequencies for most CpG
island loci except SFRP1 and HOXA10. Our findings showed that promoter CpG island
methylation changed significantly in pre-invasive lesions, and was similar in IDC
and DCIS, suggesting that CpG island methylation of tumor-related genes is an
early event in breast cancer progression.

PMID: 21120523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 4;286(5):3250-60. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.157545. Epub 2010
Nov 18.

Epigenomic reorganization of the clustered Hox genes in embryonic stem cells
induced by retinoic acid.

Kashyap V(1), Gudas LJ, Brenet F, Funk P, Viale A, Scandura JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 
10065, USA.

Retinoic acid (RA) regulates clustered Hox gene expression during embryogenesis
and is required to establish the anterior-posterior body plan. Using mutant
embryonic stem cell lines deficient in the RA receptor <U+03B3> (RAR<U+03B3>) or Hoxa1
3'-RA-responsive element, we studied the kinetics of transcriptional and
epigenomic patterning responses to RA. RAR<U+03B3> is essential for RA-induced Hox
transcriptional activation, and deletion of its binding site in the Hoxa1
enhancer attenuates transcriptional and epigenomic activation of both Hoxa and
Hoxb gene clusters. The kinetics of epigenomic reorganization demonstrate that
complete erasure of the polycomb repressive mark H3K27me3 is not necessary to
initiate Hox transcription. RAR<U+03B3> is not required to establish the bivalent
character of Hox clusters, but RA/RAR<U+03B3> signaling is necessary to erase H3K27me3
from activated Hox genes during embryonic stem cell differentiation. Highly
coordinated, long range epigenetic Hox cluster reorganization is closely linked
to transcriptional activation and is triggered by RAR<U+03B3> located at the Hoxa1
3'-RA-responsive element.

PMCID: PMC3030330
PMID: 21087926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. BMC Genomics. 2010 Nov 6;11:619. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-619.

Digital gene expression tag profiling of bat digits provides robust candidates
contributing to wing formation.

Wang Z(1), Dong D, Ru B, Young RL, Han N, Guo T, Zhang S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Ecology and Evolution, iAIR, East China Normal
University, Shanghai 200062, PR China.

BACKGROUND: As the only truly flying mammals, bats use their unique wing -
consisting of four elongated digits (digits II-V) connected by membranes - to
power their flight. In addition to the elongated digits II-V, the forelimb
contains one shorter digit (digit I) that is morphologically similar to the
hindlimb digits. Here, we capitalized on the morphological variation among the
bat forelimb digits to investigate the molecular mechanisms underlying digit
elongation and wing formation. Using next generation sequencing technology, we
performed digital gene expression tag profiling (DGE-tag profiling) of developing
digits in a pooled sample of two Myotis ricketti and validated our sequencing
results using real-time quantitative PCR (RT-qPCR) of gene expression in the
developing digits of two Hipposideros armiger.
RESULTS: Among hundreds of genes exhibiting significant differences in expression
between the short and long digits, we highlight 14 genes most related to digit
elongation. These genes include two Tbx genes (Tbx3 and Tbx15), five BMP pathway 
genes (Bmp3, RGMB, Smad1, Smad4 and Nog), four Homeobox genes (Hoxd8, Hoxd9,
Hoxa1 and Satb1), and three other genes (Twist1, Tmeff2 and Enpp2) related to
digit malformations or cell proliferation. In addition, our results suggest that 
Tbx4 and Pitx2 contribute to the morphological similarity and five genes (Acta1, 
Tnnc2, Atp2a1, Hrc and Myoz1) contribute to the functional similarity between the
thumb and hindlimb digits.
CONCLUSIONS: Results of this study not only implicate many developmental genes as
robust candidates underlying digit elongation and wing formation in bats, but
also provide a better understanding of the genes involved in autopodial
development in general.

PMCID: PMC3017863
PMID: 21054883  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Dev Biol. 2011 Feb 1;350(1):154-68. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.10.011. Epub 2010
Oct 20.

Retinoic acid-dependent establishment of positional information in the hindbrain 
was conserved during vertebrate evolution.

Ishioka A(1), Jindo T, Kawanabe T, Hatta K, Parvin MS, Nikaido M, Kuroyanagi Y,
Takeda H, Yamasu K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Life Science, Graduate School of Science and Engineering, Saitama 
University, Shimo-Okubo, Sakura-ku, Saitama City, Saitama 338-8570, Japan.

Zebrafish hoxb1b is expressed during epiboly in the posterior neural plate, with 
its anterior boundary at the prospective r4 region providing a positional cue for
hindbrain formation. A similar function and expression is known for Hoxa1 in
mice, suggesting a shared regulatory mechanism for hindbrain patterning in
vertebrate embryos. To understand the evolution of the regulatory mechanisms of
key genes in patterning of the central nervous system, we examined how hoxb1b
transcription is regulated in zebrafish embryos and compared the regulatory
mechanisms between mammals and teleosts that have undergone an additional genome 
duplication. By promoter analysis, we found that the expression of the reporter
gene recapitulated hoxb1b expression when driven in transgenic embryos by a
combination of the upstream 8.0-kb DNA and downstream 4.6-kb DNA. Furthermore,
reporter expression expanded anteriorly when transgenic embryos were exposed to
retinoic acid (RA) or LiCl, or injected with fgf3/8 mRNA, implicating the
flanking DNA examined here in the responsiveness of hoxb1b to posteriorizing
signals. We further identified at least two functional RA responsive elements in 
the downstream DNA that were shown to be major regulators of early hoxb1b
expression during gastrulation, while the upstream DNA, which harbors repetitive 
sequences with apparent similarity to the autoregulatory sequence of mouse Hoxb1,
contributed only to later hoxb1b expression, during somitogenesis. Possible
implications in vertebrate evolution are discussed based on these findings.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20969843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. J Cell Physiol. 2011 Feb;226(2):322-30. doi: 10.1002/jcp.22417.

Retinoids regulate stem cell differentiation.

Gudas LJ(1), Wagner JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York 10065, USA. ljgudas@med.cornell.edu

Retinoids are ubiquitous signaling molecules that influence nearly every cell
type, exert profound effects on development, and complement cancer
chemotherapeutic regimens. All-trans retinoic acid (RA) and other active
retinoids are generated from vitamin A (retinol), but key aspects of the
signaling pathways required to produce active retinoids remain unclear. Retinoids
generated by one cell type can affect nearby cells, so retinoids also function in
intercellular communication. RA induces differentiation primarily by binding to
RARs, transcription factors that associate with RXRs and bind RAREs in the
nucleus. Binding of RA: (1) initiates changes in interactions of RAR/RXRs with
co-repressor and co-activator proteins, activating transcription of primary
target genes; (2) alters interactions with proteins that induce epigenetic
changes; (3) induces transcription of genes encoding transcription factors and
signaling proteins that further modify gene expression (e.g., FOX03A, Hoxa1,
Sox9, TRAIL, UBE2D3); and (4) results in alterations in estrogen receptor a
signaling. Proteins that bind at or near RAREs include Sin3a, N-CoR1, PRAME,
Trim24, NRIP1, Ajuba, Zfp423, and MN1/TEL. Interactions among retinoids,
RARs/RXRs, and these proteins explain in part the powerful effects of retinoids
on stem cell differentiation. Studies of this retinol signaling cascade enhance
our ability to understand and regulate stem cell differentiation for therapeutic 
and scientific purposes. In cancer chemotherapeutic regimens retinoids can
promote tumor cell differentiation and/or induce proteins that sensitize tumors
to drug combinations. Mechanistic studies of retinoid signaling continue to
suggest novel drug targets and will improve therapeutic strategies for cancer and
other diseases, such as immune-mediated inflammatory diseases.

© 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3315372
PMID: 20836077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Mol Autism. 2010 May 25;1(1):9. doi: 10.1186/2040-2392-1-9.

Candidate gene study of HOXB1 in autism spectrum disorder.

Muscarella LA(1), Guarnieri V, Sacco R, Curatolo P, Manzi B, Alessandrelli R,
Giana G, Militerni R, Bravaccio C, Lenti C, Saccani M, Schneider C, Melmed R,
D'Agruma L, Persico AM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Service, IRCCS 'Casa Sollievo dalla Sofferenza', San Giovanni
Rotondo, FG, Italy. l.dagruma@operapadrepio.it.

BACKGROUND: HOXB1 plays a major role in brainstem morphogenesis and could partly 
determine the cranial circumference in conjunction with HOXA1. In our sample,
HOXA1 alleles significantly influence head growth rates both in autistic patients
and in population controls. An initial report, suggesting that HOXB1 could confer
autism vulnerability in interaction with HOXA1, was not confirmed by five small
association studies.
METHODS: Our sample includes 269 autistic individuals, belonging to 219 simplex
and 28 multiplex families. A mutational analysis of the two exons and flanking
intronic sequences of the HOXB1 gene was carried out in 84 autistic patients by
denaturing high performance liquid chromatography, followed by DNA sequencing.
Identified rare variants were then searched by a restriction analysis in 236
autistic patients and 325-345 controls. Case-control and family-based association
studies were performed on two common variants in 169 Italian patients versus 184 
Italian controls and in 247 trios.
RESULTS: We identified three common polymorphisms, rs72338773 [c.82insACAGCGCCC
(INS/nINS)], rs12939811 [c.309A>T (Q103H)], and rs7207109 [c.450G>A (A150A)] and 
three rare variants, namely IVS1+63G>A, rs35115415 [c.702G>A (V234V)] and
c.872_873delinsAA (S291N). SNPs rs72338773 and rs12939811 were not associated
with autism, using either a case-control (alleles, exact P = 0.13) or a
family-based design [transmission/disequilibrium test (TDT)chi2 = 1.774, P =
0.183]. The rare variants, all inherited from one of the parents, were present in
two Italian and in two Caucasian-American families. Autistic probands in two
families surprisingly inherited a distinct rare variant from each parent. The
IVS1+63A allele was present in 3/690 control chromosomes, whereas rare alleles at
rs35115415 and c.872_873delinsAA (S291N) were not found in 662 and 650 control
chromosomes, respectively. The INS-T309 allele influenced head size, but its
effect appears more modest and shows no interaction with HOXA1 alleles. The
INS-T309 allele is also associated with more severe stereotypic behaviours,
according to ADI-R scores (N = 60 patients, P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: HOXB1 mutations do not represent a common cause of autism, nor do
HOXB1 common variants play important roles in autism vulnerability. HOXB1
provides minor, albeit detectable contributions to head circumference in autistic
patients, with HOXA1 displaying more prominent effects. HOXB1 variants may
modulate the clinical phenotype, especially in the area of stereotypic
behaviours.

PMCID: PMC2913946
PMID: 20678259  [PubMed]


100. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jul 27;107(30):13450-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1002120107. Epub 2010 Jul 12.

MicroRNA-10a regulation of proinflammatory phenotype in athero-susceptible
endothelium in vivo and in vitro.

Fang Y(1), Shi C, Manduchi E, Civelek M, Davies PF.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Medicine and Engineering, Center for Bioinformatics, and
Department of Genetics, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

A chronic proinflammatory state precedes pathological change in arterial
endothelial cells located within regions of susceptibility to atherosclerosis.
The potential contributions of regulatory microRNAs to this disequilibrium were
investigated by artery site-specific profiling in normal adult swine. Expression 
of endothelial microRNA10a (miR-10a) was lower in the athero-susceptible regions 
of the inner aortic arch and aorto-renal branches than elsewhere. Expression of
Homeobox A1 (HOXA1), a known miR-10a target, was up-regulated in the same
locations. Endothelial transcriptome microarray analysis of miR-10a knockdown in 
cultured human aortic endothelial cells (HAEC) identified
IkappaB/NF-kappaB-mediated inflammation as the top category of up-regulated
biological processes. Phosphorylation of IkappaBalpha, a prerequisite for
IkappaBalpha proteolysis and NF-kappaB activation, was significantly up-regulated
in miR-10a knockdown HAEC and was accompanied by increased nuclear expression of 
NF-kappaB p65. The inflammatory biomarkers monocyte chemotactic protein 1
(MCP-1), IL-6, IL-8, vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1), and E-selectin
were elevated following miR-10a knockdown. Conversely, knockin of miR-10a (a
conservative 25-fold increase) inhibited the basal expression of VCAM-1 and
E-selectin in HAEC. Two key regulators of IkappaBalpha
degradation--mitogen-activated kinase kinase kinase 7 (MAP3K7; TAK1) and
beta-transducin repeat-containing gene (betaTRC)--contain a highly conserved
miR-10a binding site in the 3' UTR. Both molecules were up-regulated by miR-10a
knockdown and suppressed by miR-10a knockin, and evidence of direct miR-10a
binding to the 3' UTR was demonstrated by luciferase assay. Comparative
expression studies of endothelium located in athero-susceptible aortic arch and
athero-protected descending thoracic aorta identified significantly up-regulated 
MAP3K7, betaTRC, phopho-IkappaBalpha, and nuclear p65 expression suggesting that 
the differential expression of miR-10a contributes to the regulation of
proinflammatory endothelial phenotypes in athero-susceptible regions in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2922125
PMID: 20624982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Pancreatology. 2010;10(1):74-84. doi: 10.1159/000276895. Epub 2010 Mar 26.

Conservation of the TGFbeta/Labial homeobox signaling loop in endoderm-derived
cells between Drosophila and mammals.

Lomberk GA(1), Imoto I, Gebelein B, Urrutia R, Cook TA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minn., USA.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Midgut formation in Drosophila melanogaster is dependent upon
the integrity of a signaling loop in the endoderm which requires the
TGFbeta-related peptide, Decapentaplegic, and the Hox transcription factor,
Labial. Interestingly, although Labial-like homeobox genes are present in
mammals, their participation in endoderm morphogenesis is not clearly understood.
METHODS: We report the cloning, expression, localization, TGFbeta inducibility,
and biochemical properties of the mammalian Labial-like homeobox, HoxA1, in
exocrine pancreatic cells that are embryologically derived from the gut endoderm.
RESULTS: HoxA1 is expressed in pancreatic cell populations as two alternatively
spliced messages, encoding proteins that share their N-terminal domain, but
either lack or include the homeobox at the C-terminus. Transcriptional regulatory
assays demonstrate that the shared N-terminal domain behaves as a strong
transcriptional activator in exocrine pancreatic cells. HoxA1 is an early
response gene for TGFbeta(1) in pancreatic epithelial cell populations and HoxA1 
protein co-localizes with TGFbeta(1) receptors in the embryonic pancreatic
epithelium at a time when exocrine pancreatic morphogenesis occurs (days E16 and 
E17).
CONCLUSIONS: These results report a role for HoxA1 in linking TGFbeta-mediated
signaling to gene expression in pancreatic epithelial cell populations, thus
suggesting a high degree of conservation for a TGFbeta/labial signaling loop in
endoderm-derived cells between Drosophila and mammals. and IAP.

PMCID: PMC2865486
PMID: 20339309  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. J Cell Biochem. 2010 May 15;110(2):484-96. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22563.

Pentapeptide insertion mutagenesis of the Hoxa1 protein: mapping of transcription
activation and DNA-binding regulatory domains.

Lambert B(1), Vandeputte J, Desmet PM, Hallet B, Remacle S, Rezsohazy R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Veterinary Sciences, Life Sciences Institute (ISV), Université
Catholique de Louvain, 1348 Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

The mode of action of Hoxa1, like that of most Hox proteins, remains poorly
characterized. In an effort to identify functional determinants contributing to
the activity of Hoxa1 as a transcription factor, we generated 18 pentapeptide
insertion mutants of the Hoxa1 protein and we assayed them in transfected cells
for their activity on target enhancers from the EphA2 and Hoxb1 genes known to
respond to Hoxa1 in the developing hindbrain. Only four mutants displayed a
complete loss-of-function. Three of them contained an insertion in the
homeodomain of Hoxa1, whereas the fourth loss-of-function mutant harbored an
insertion in the very N-terminal end of the protein. Transcription activation
assays in yeast further revealed that the integrity of both the N-terminal end
and homeodomain is required for Hoxa1-mediated transcriptional activation.
Furthermore, an insertion in the serine-threonine-proline rich C-terminal
extremity of Hoxa1 induced an increase in activity in mammalian cells as well as 
in the yeast assay. The C-terminal extremity thus modulates the transcriptional
activation capacity of the protein. Finally, electrophoretic mobility shift
assays revealed that the N-terminal extremity of the protein also exerts a
modulatory influence on DNA binding by Hoxa1-Pbx1a heterodimers.

(c) 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20336696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 7;285(19):14534-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.115345. Epub 2010
Mar 15.

Epigenetic regulatory mechanisms distinguish retinoic acid-mediated
transcriptional responses in stem cells and fibroblasts.

Kashyap V(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, New York, New York 10065, USA.

Retinoic acid (RA), a vitamin A metabolite, regulates transcription by binding to
RA receptor (RAR) and retinoid X receptor (RXR) heterodimers. This
transcriptional response is determined by receptor interactions with
transcriptional regulators and chromatin modifying proteins. We compared
transcriptional responses of three RA target genes (Hoxa1, Cyp26a1, RARbeta(2))
in primary embryo fibroblasts (mouse embryonic fibroblasts), immortalized
fibroblasts (Balb/c3T3), and F9 teratocarcinoma stem cells. Hoxa1 and Cyp26a1
transcripts are not expressed, but RARbeta(2) transcripts are induced by RA in
mouse embryonic fibroblasts and Balb/c3T3 cells. Retinoid receptors (RARgamma,
RXRalpha), coactivators (pCIP (NCOA3, SRC3)), and p300 and RNA polymerase II are 
recruited only to the RARbeta(2) RA response element (RARE) in Balb/c3T3, whereas
these proteins are recruited to RAREs of all three genes by RA in F9 cells. In
F9, RA reduces polycomb (PcG) protein Suz12 and the associated H3K27me3
repressive epigenetic modification at the RAREs of all three genes. In contrast, 
in Balb/c3T3 cells cultured in the +/-RA, Suz12 is not associated with the Hoxa1,
RARbeta(2), and Cyp26a1 RAREs, whereas slow levels of the H3K27me3 mark are seen 
at these RAREs. Thus, Suz12 is not required for gene repression in the absence of
RA. Even though the Hoxa1 RARE and proximal promoter show high levels of H3K9,K14
acetylation in Balb/c3T3, the Hoxa1 gene is not transcriptionally activated by
RA. In Balb/c3T3, CpG islands are methylated in the Cyp26a1 promoter region but
not in the Hoxa1 promoter or in these promoters in F9 cells. We have delineated
the complex mechanisms that control RA-mediated transcription in fibroblasts
versus stem cells.

PMCID: PMC2863236
PMID: 20231276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. J AAPOS. 2010 Feb;14(1):78-80. doi: 10.1016/j.jaapos.2009.11.007.

HOXA1 mutations are not a common cause of Möbius syndrome.

Rankin JK(1), Andrews C, Chan WM, Engle EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital Boston, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

The HOXA1-related syndromes result from autosomal-recessive truncating mutations 
in the homeobox transcription factor, HOXA1. Limited horizontal gaze and
sensorineural deafness are the most common features; affected individuals can
also have facial weakness, mental retardation, autism, motor disabilities,
central hypoventilation, carotid artery, and/or conotruncal heart defects. Möbius
syndrome is also phenotypically heterogeneous, with minimal diagnostic criteria
of nonprogressive facial weakness and impaired ocular abduction; mental
retardation, autism, motor disabilities, additional eye movements restrictions,
hearing loss, hypoventilation, and craniofacial, lingual, and limb abnormalities 
also occur. We asked, given the phenotypic overlap between these syndromes and
the variable expressivity of both disorders, whether individuals with Möbius
syndrome might harbor mutations in HOXA1. Our results suggest that HOXA1
mutations are not a common cause of sporadic Möbius syndrome in the general
population.

Copyright (c) 2010 American Association for Pediatric Ophthalmology and
Strabismus. Published by Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2862693
PMID: 20227628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Dev Biol. 2010 May 15;341(2):499-509. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.02.014. Epub 2010
Feb 18.

Hoxa1 lineage tracing indicates a direct role for Hoxa1 in the development of the
inner ear, the heart, and the third rhombomere.

Makki N(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT, USA.

Loss of Hoxa1 function results in severe defects of the brainstem, inner ear, and
cranial ganglia in humans and mice as well as cardiovascular abnormalities in
humans. Because Hoxa1 is expressed very transiently during an early embryonic
stage, it has been difficult to determine whether Hoxa1 plays a direct role in
the precursors of the affected organs or if all defects result from indirect
effects due to mispatterning of the hindbrain. In this study we use a
Hoxa1-IRES-Cre mouse to genetically label the early Hoxa1-expressing cells and
determine their contribution to each of the affected organs, allowing us to
conclude in which precursor tissue Hoxa1 is expressed. We found Hoxa1
lineage-labeled cells in all tissues expected to be derived from the Hoxa1
domain, such as the facial and abducens nuclei and nerves as well as r4 neural
crest cells. In addition, we detected the lineage in derivatives that were not
thought to have expressed Hoxa1 during development. In the brainstem, the
anterior border of the lineage was found to be in r3, which is more anterior than
previously reported. We also observed an interesting pattern of the lineage in
the inner ear, namely a strong contribution to the otic epithelium with the
exception of sensory patches. Moreover, lineage-labeled cells were detected in
the atria and outflow tract of the developing heart. In conclusion, Hoxa1 lineage
tracing uncovered new domains of Hoxa1 expression in rhombomere 3, the otic
epithelium, and cardiac precursors, suggesting a more direct role for Hoxa1 in
development of these tissues than previously believed.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2862106
PMID: 20171203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Funct Integr Genomics. 2010 Mar;10(1):11-9. doi: 10.1007/s10142-010-0159-2. Epub 
2010 Feb 4.

Integrated gene networks in breast cancer development.

Ratkaj I(1), Stajduhar E, Vucinic S, Spaventi S, Bosnjak H, Pavelic K, Kraljevic 
Pavelic S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology, University of Rijeka, Croatia. iratkaj@irb.hr

Erratum in
    Funct Integr Genomics. 2011 Jun;11(2):381.

Breast cancer is a complex and heterogenous disease. Classical molecular medical 
approaches cannot fully understand and comprehend its pathogenesis. In this
review, the development of new biological markers for the early detection and
creation of guided and specific therapy of breast cancer are discussed in light
of the rapid advances in the "omics". Results of cancer research in combination
with large-scale methods that examine the expression status of genes and proteins
have identified a large number of new biomarkers as well as confirmed the human
growth hormone as an important player in the pathogenesis of this disease through
its autocrine regulation where it influences the activation of Pax5 and HOXA1
gene networks.

PMID: 20130947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Blood. 2010 Apr 8;115(14):2910-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-04-216606. Epub 2010
Feb 3.

Leukemogenic transformation by HOXA cluster genes.

Bach C(1), Buhl S, Mueller D, García-Cuéllar MP, Maethner E, Slany RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

HOX homeobox genes are important regulators of normal and malignant
hematopoiesis. Abdominal-type HOXA genes like HOXA9 are highly leukemogenic.
However, little is known about transformation by anterior HOXA genes. Here we
performed a comprehensive assessment of the oncogenic potential of every HOXA
gene in primary hematopoietic cells. With exception of HOXA2 and HOXA5, all HOXA 
genes caused a block or delay of hematopoietic differentiation and cooperated
with Meis1. No evidence for the alleged tumor-suppressor function of HOXA5 could 
be found. Whereas all active HOXA genes immortalized mixed granulocytic/monocytic
populations, HOXA13 preferentially specified monocytoid development. The anterior
HOXA genes HOXA1, HOXA4, and HOXA6 transformed cells, generating permanent cell
lines, although they did so less potently than HOXA9. Upon transplantation these 
lines induced myeloproliferation and acute myeloid leukemia in recipient animals.
Kinetic studies with inducible HOX derivatives demonstrated that anterior HOXA
genes autonomously contributed to cellular transformation. This function was not 
mediated by endogenous Hoxa9, which was persistently expressed in cells
transformed by anterior HOX genes. In summary our results demonstrate a hitherto 
unexpected role of anterior HOXA genes in hematopoietic malignancy.

PMID: 20130239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. AJNR Am J Neuroradiol. 2011 Feb;32(2):E23-5. doi: 10.3174/ajnr.A1969. Epub 2010
Jan 14.

Bilateral complete labyrinthine aplasia with bilateral internal carotid artery
aplasia, developmental delay, and gaze abnormalities: a presumptive case of a
rare HOXA1 mutation syndrome.

Higley MJ(1), Walkiewicz TW, Miller JH, Curran JG, Towbin RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Phoenix Children's Hospital, Arizona 85016, USA.

The human HOXA1 mutation syndromes commonly present with abnormalities of the
inner ear and ICAs. Previous cases describe varying degrees of hypoplasia or
aplasia of the affected structures, often with asymmetric involvement. We present
imaging findings documenting complete absence of the ICAs bilaterally with
bilateral CLA, which, to our knowledge, has not been previously reported.

PMID: 20075099  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Biol Reprod. 2010 Jan;82(1):214-23. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.109.078717. Epub 2009
Sep 23.

Critical function of AP-2 gamma/TCFAP2C in mouse embryonic germ cell maintenance.

Weber S(1), Eckert D, Nettersheim D, Gillis AJ, Schäfer S, Kuckenberg P,
Ehlermann J, Werling U, Biermann K, Looijenga LH, Schorle H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Department of Developmental Pathology, University of
Bonn, Bonn, Germany.

Formation of the germ cell lineage involves multiple processes, including
repression of somatic differentiation and reacquisition of pluripotency as well
as a unique epigenetic constitution. The transcriptional regulator Prdm1 has been
identified as a main coordinator of this process, controlling epigenetic
modification and gene expression. Here we report on the expression pattern of the
transcription factor Tcfap2c, a putative downstream target of Prdm1, during
normal mouse embryogenesis and the consequences of its specific loss in
primordial germ cells (PGCs) and their derivatives. Tcfap2c is expressed in PGCs 
from Embryonic Day 7.25 (E 7.25) up to E 12.5, and targeted disruption resulted
in sterile animals, both male and female. In the mutant animals, PGCs were
specified but were lost around E 8.0. PGCs generated in vitro from embryonic stem
cells lacking TCFAP2C displayed induction of Prdm1 and Dppa3. Upregulation of
Hoxa1, Hoxb1, and T together with lack of expression of germ cell markers such
Nanos3, Dazl, and Mutyh suggested that the somatic gene program is induced in
TCFAP2C-deficient PGCs. Repression of TCFAP2C in TCam-2, a human PGC-resembling
seminoma cell line, resulted in specific upregulation of HOXA1, HOXB1, MYOD1, and
HAND1, indicative of mesodermal differentiation. Expression of genes indicative
of ectodermal, endodermal, or extraembryonic differentiation, as well as the
finding of no change to epigenetic modifications, suggested control by other
factors. Our results implicate Tcfap2c as an important effector of Prdm1 activity
that is required for PGC maintenance, most likely mediating Prdm1-induced
suppression of mesodermal differentiation.

PMID: 19776388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Virchows Arch. 2009 Oct;455(4):343-51. doi: 10.1007/s00428-009-0829-4. Epub 2009 
Sep 10.

CpG island hypermethylation and repetitive DNA hypomethylation in premalignant
lesion of extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma.

Kim BH(1), Cho NY, Shin SH, Kwon HJ, Jang JJ, Kang GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Korea University Medical School, Seoul, South Korea.

Biliary intraepithelial neoplasia (BilIN) is the premalignant lesion of
extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (EHC), and there are no published data regarding 
epigenetic changes throughout disease progression from normal biliary epithelia
to BilIN to EHC. The objective of this study was to identify the occurrence of
CpG island hypermethylation and repetitive DNA hypomethylation in BilIN. A total 
of 50 EHCs, 31 BilINs, and 31 normal cystic duct samples were analyzed for their 
methylation status in seven genes and two repetitive DNA elements. The number of 
methylated genes increased with disease progression (normal bile duct, 0.6;
BilIN, 2.0; EHC, 3.6; P < 0.001). The methylation level of examined genes was
significantly higher in BilIN than in normal samples (TMEFF2, HOXA1, NEUROG1, and
RUNX3, P < 0.05) and in EHC than in BilIN samples (TMEFF2, HOXA1, NEUROG1, RUNX3,
RASSF1A, and APC, P < 0.05). Long interspersed nucleotide element-1 (LINE-1) and 
juxtacentromeric satellite 2 (SAT2) methylation levels were markedly lower in EHC
than in normal duct and BilIN samples, and BilIN samples showed a decrease of
SAT2 methylation levels but no decrease of LINE-1 methylation levels compared to 
normal samples. These findings suggest that most of cancer-specific CpG island
hypermethylation occur in the stage of BilIN and that CpG island hypermethylation
seems to occur earlier than repetitive DNA element hypomethylation.

PMID: 19763613  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Autism Res. 2009 Jun;2(3):157-77. doi: 10.1002/aur.80.

Genes related to sex steroids, neural growth, and social-emotional behavior are
associated with autistic traits, empathy, and Asperger syndrome.

Chakrabarti B(1), Dudbridge F, Kent L, Wheelwright S, Hill-Cawthorne G, Allison
C, Banerjee-Basu S, Baron-Cohen S.

Author information: 
(1)Autism Research Centre, Department of Psychiatry, Cambridge University, UK.
bhisma@cantab.net

Genetic studies of autism spectrum conditions (ASC) have mostly focused on the
"low functioning" severe clinical subgroup, treating it as a rare disorder.
However, ASC is now thought to be relatively common ( approximately 1%), and
representing one end of a quasi-normal distribution of autistic traits in the
general population. Here we report a study of common genetic variation in
candidate genes associated with autistic traits and Asperger syndrome (AS). We
tested single nucleotide polymorphisms in 68 candidate genes in three functional 
groups (sex steroid synthesis/transport, neural connectivity, and
social-emotional responsivity) in two experiments. These were (a) an association 
study of relevant behavioral traits (the Empathy Quotient (EQ), the Autism
Spectrum Quotient (AQ)) in a population sample (n=349); and (b) a case-control
association study on a sample of people with AS, a "high-functioning" subgroup of
ASC (n=174). 27 genes showed a nominally significant association with autistic
traits and/or ASC diagnosis. Of these, 19 genes showed nominally significant
association with AQ/EQ. In the sex steroid group, this included ESR2 and CYP11B1.
In the neural connectivity group, this included HOXA1, NTRK1, and NLGN4X. In the 
socio-responsivity behavior group, this included MAOB, AVPR1B, and WFS1. Fourteen
genes showed nominally significant association with AS. In the sex steroid group,
this included CYP17A1 and CYP19A1. In the socio-emotional behavior group, this
included OXT. Six genes were nominally associated in both experiments, providing 
a partial replication. Eleven genes survived family wise error rate (FWER)
correction using permutations across both experiments, which is greater than
would be expected by chance. CYP11B1 and NTRK1 emerged as significantly
associated genes in both experiments, after FWER correction (P<0.05). This is the
first candidate-gene association study of AS and of autistic traits. The most
promising candidate genes require independent replication and fine mapping.

PMID: 19598235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2009 Nov;50(11):5213-6. doi: 10.1167/iovs.08-2928.
Epub 2009 Jul 2.

Synergistic divergence: a distinct ocular motility dysinnervation pattern.

Oystreck DT(1), Khan AO, Vila-Coro AA, Oworu O, Al-Tassan N, Chan WM, Engle EC,
Bosley TM.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Ophthalmology Division, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.

PURPOSE: To summarize the clinical, neuroradiologic, and genetic observations in 
a group of patients with unilateral synergistic divergence (SD).
METHODS: Five unrelated patients with unilateral SD underwent ophthalmic and
orthoptic examinations; three of them also had magnetic resonance imaging of the 
brain and orbits. Three patients underwent genetic evaluation of genes known to
affect ocular motility: KIF21A, PHOX2A, HOXA1, and ROBO3.
RESULTS: The patients did not meet the clinical criteria for CFEOM types 1, 2, or
3. Each patient had severe adduction weakness on the affected side and
large-angle exotropia in primary gaze that increased on attempted contralateral
gaze because of anomalous abduction. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a much
smaller medial rectus muscle in the involved SD orbit. Oculomotor cranial nerves 
were present in the one patient imaged appropriately. Genetic sequencing in three
patients revealed no mutations in KIF21A, PHOX2A, HOXA1, or ROBO3.
CONCLUSIONS: SD should be classified as a distinct congenital ocular motility
pattern within congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders. It may be caused by
denervation of the medial rectus with dysinnervation of the ipsilateral lateral
rectus by the oculomotor nerve precipitated by genetic abnormalities (some
currently identified) or by local environmental, teratogenic, or epigenetic
disturbances.

PMCID: PMC2787189
PMID: 19578026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Biomed Environ Sci. 2009 Feb;22(1):14-21. doi: 10.1016/S0895-3988(09)60016-7.

MicroRNA expression profiles and miR-10a target in anti-benzo[a] pyrene-7,
8-diol-9, 10-epoxide-transformed human 16HBE cells.

Shen YL(1), Jiang YG, Greenlee AR, Zhou LL, Liu LH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemical Carcinogenesis, Guangzhou Medical College, Guangzhou
510182, Guangdong, China.

OBJECTIVE: To screen miRNA profiles of malignantly transformed human bronchial
epithelial cells, 16HBE-T, induced by
anti-benzo[a]pyrene-trans-7,8-diol-9,10-epoxide (anti-BPDE), and to analyze
putative miR-10a targets in 16HBE-T.
METHODS: A novel microarray platform was employed to screen miRNA profiles of
16HBE-T cells transformed by anti-BPDE. Microarray data for miR-10a and miR-320
were validated using quantitative real time polymerase chain reaction (QRT-PCR). 
The expression of a putative target for miR-10a, HOXA1, was analyzed by reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and QRT-PCR.
RESULTS: In comparison with the vehicle-treated cells (16HBE-N), 16HBE-T
exhibited differential expression of 54 miRNAs, in which, 45 were over-expressed 
and 9 were down-regulated. The five most highly expressed miRNAs were miR-494,
miR-320, miR-498, miR-129, and miR-106a. The lowest expressed miRNAs were
miR-10a, miR-493-5p, and miR-363*. Three members of miR-17-92 cluster, miR-17-5p,
miR-20a, and miR-92, showed significantly higher abundance in 16BHE-T as miR-21, 
miR-141, miR-27a, miR-27b, miR-16 and miRNAs of the let-7 family. The putative
target for miR-10a, HOXA1 mRNA was up-regulated 3-9-fold in 16HBE-T, as compared 
with 16HBE-N.
CONCLUSION: The findings of the study provide information on differentially
expressed miRNA in malignant 16HBE-T, and also suggest a potential role of these 
miRNAs in cell transformation induced by anti-BPDE. HOXA1 is similarly
up-regulated, suggesting that miR-10a is associated with the process of HOXA
1-mediated transformation.

PMID: 19462682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Mol Hum Reprod. 2009 Jul;15(7):451-7. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gap030. Epub 2009 Apr
22.

Thrombin and interleukin-1beta decrease HOX gene expression in human first
trimester decidual cells: implications for pregnancy loss.

Sarno J(1), Schatz F, Huang SJ, Lockwood C, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Bleeding or inflammation in early pregnancy may result in pregnancy loss or
defective implantation. Their effect on HOX gene expression in first trimester
decidua is unknown. Bleeding results in thrombin generation, although infection
or inflammation results in production of cytokines typified by Interleukin-1beta 
(IL-1beta). First trimester decidual cells were pretreated with 17beta estradiol 
(E(2)), medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) or both and subsequently treated with
thrombin or IL-1beta. Affymetrix microarray analysis was used to assess the
expression of all HOX genes and confirmed using real-time RT-PCR. E(2) or MPA
treatment resulted in significant increases in HOXA10 and HOXA11. Subsequent
treatment with thrombin resulted in diminished expression of HOXA10 and HOXA9.
Treatment with IL-1beta resulted in decreased expression of HOXA1, 3, 9, 10 and
11. HOXA10 expression was reduced by 70% after thrombin treatment (P = 0.018) and
by 90% after IL-1beta treatment (P = 0.004). HOXA11 mRNA expression was decreased
by 88% after IL-1beta treatment (P < 0.001), but not by thrombin treatment.
Decidua was collected at the time of elective termination of pregnancy (n = 10)
or surgical treatment of spontaneous pregnancy loss (n = 10). Real-time PCR and
western analysis demonstrated decreased HOXA10 and HOXA11 RNA and protein
expression in the decidua of spontaneous pregnancy loss compared with that of
viable pregnancies. In conclusion, multiple HOX genes are expressed in decidual
cells and inhibited by thrombin and IL-1beta. Since HOXA10 and HOXA11 are known
to be necessary for successful pregnancy, these findings suggest a molecular
mechanism by which bleeding or inflammation may affect pregnancy outcome.

PMCID: PMC2722817
PMID: 19389728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Blood. 2009 Mar 12;113(11):2526-34. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-162164. Epub 2009 
Jan 14.

A myelopoiesis-associated regulatory intergenic noncoding RNA transcript within
the human HOXA cluster.

Zhang X(1), Lian Z, Padden C, Gerstein MB, Rozowsky J, Snyder M, Gingeras TR,
Kapranov P, Weissman SM, Newburger PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

We have identified an intergenic transcriptional activity that is located between
the human HOXA1 and HOXA2 genes, shows myeloid-specific expression, and is
up-regulated during granulocytic differentiation. The novel gene, termed HOTAIRM1
(HOX antisense intergenic RNA myeloid 1), is transcribed antisense to the HOXA
genes and originates from the same CpG island that embeds the start site of
HOXA1. The transcript appears to be a noncoding RNA containing no long
open-reading frame; sucrose gradient analysis shows no association with
polyribosomal fractions. HOTAIRM1 is the most prominent intergenic transcript
expressed and up-regulated during induced granulocytic differentiation of NB4
promyelocytic leukemia and normal human hematopoietic cells; its expression is
specific to the myeloid lineage. Its induction during retinoic acid (RA)-driven
granulocytic differentiation is through RA receptor and may depend on the
expression of myeloid cell development factors targeted by RA signaling.
Knockdown of HOTAIRM1 quantitatively blunted RA-induced expression of HOXA1 and
HOXA4 during the myeloid differentiation of NB4 cells, and selectively attenuated
induction of transcripts for the myeloid differentiation genes CD11b and CD18,
but did not noticeably impact the more distal HOXA genes. These findings suggest 
that HOTAIRM1 plays a role in the myelopoiesis through modulation of gene
expression in the HOXA cluster.

PMCID: PMC2656274
PMID: 19144990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Biol Chem. 2009 Mar 20;284(12):7542-52. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M805872200. Epub 2009 
Jan 8.

Identification and characterization of a novel nuclear protein complex involved
in nuclear hormone receptor-mediated gene regulation.

Garapaty S(1), Xu CF, Trojer P, Mahajan MA, Neubert TA, Samuels HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, New York University School of Medicine, New York, 
New York 10016, USA.

NRC/NCoA6 plays an important role in mediating the effects of ligand-bound
nuclear hormone receptors as well as other transcription factors. NRC interacting
factor 1 (NIF-1) was cloned as a novel factor that interacts in vivo with NRC.
Although NIF-1 does not directly interact with nuclear hormone receptors, it
enhances activation by nuclear hormone receptors presumably through its
interaction with NRC. To further understand the cellular and biological function 
of NIF-1, we identified NIF-1-associated proteins by in-solution proteolysis
followed by mass spectrometry. The identified components revealed factors
involved in histone methylation and cell cycle control and include Ash2L, RbBP5, 
WDR5, HCF-1, DBC-1, and EMSY. Although the NIF-1 complex contains Ash2L, RbBP5,
and WDR5, suggesting that the complex might methylate histone H3-Lys-4, we found 
that the complex contains a H3 methyltransferase activity that modifies a residue
other than H3-Lys-4. The identified components form at least two distinctly sized
NIF-1 complexes. DBC-1 and EMSY were identified as integral components of an
NIF-1 complex of approximately 1.5 MDa and were found to play an important role
in the regulation of nuclear receptor-mediated transcription. Stimulation of the 
Sox9 and HoxA1 genes by retinoic acid receptor-alpha was found to require both
DBC-1 and EMSY in addition to NIF-1 for maximal transcriptional activation.
Interestingly, NRC was not identified as a component of the NIF-1 complex,
suggesting that NIF-1 and NRC do not exist as stable in vitro purified complexes,
although the separate NIF-1 and NRC complexes appear to functionally interact in 
the cell.

PMCID: PMC2658049
PMID: 19131338  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Feb 15;106(3):427-43. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22023.

The truncated Hoxa1 protein interacts with Hoxa1 and Pbx1 in stem cells.

Fernandez CC(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, 1300 York Avenue,
New York, New York 10065, USA.

Hox genes contain a homeobox encoding a 60-amino acid DNA binding sequence. The
Hoxa1 gene (Hox1.6, ERA1) encodes two alternatively spliced mRNAs that encode
distinct proteins, one with the homeodomain (Hoxa1-993), and another protein
lacking this domain (Hoxa1-399). The functions of Hoxa1-399 are unknown. We
detected Hoxa1-993 and Hoxa1-399 by immunoprecipitation using Hoxa1 antibodies.
To assess whether Hoxa1-399 functions in cellular differentiation, we analyzed
Hoxb1, a Hoxa1 target gene. Hoxa1-993 and its cofactor, Pbx1, bind to the Hoxb1
SOct-R3 promoter to transcriptionally activate a luciferase reporter. Results
from F9 stem cells that stably express ectopic Hoxa1-399 (the F9-399 line) show
that Hoxa1-399 reduces this transcriptional activation. Gel shift assays
demonstrate that Hoxa1-399 reduces Hoxa1-993/Pbx1 binding to the Hoxb1 SOct-R3
region. GST pull-down experiments suggest that Hoxa1-399, Hoxa1-993, and Pbx1
form a trimer. However, the F9-399 line exhibits no differences in RA-induced
proliferation arrest or endogenous Hoxb1, Pbx1, Hoxa5, Cyp26a1, GATA4, or Meis
mRNA levels when compared to F9 wild-type.

PMCID: PMC3923656
PMID: 19115252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Hum Reprod. 2009 Mar;24(3):562-79. doi: 10.1093/humrep/den439. Epub 2008 Dec 17.

Ethanol exposure induces differential microRNA and target gene expression and
teratogenic effects which can be suppressed by folic acid supplementation.

Wang LL(1), Zhang Z, Li Q, Yang R, Pei X, Xu Y, Wang J, Zhou SF, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Peking
University, Beijing 100191, PR China.

BACKGROUND: microRNAs (miRNAs) play an important role in development and are
associated with birth defects. Data are scant on the role of miRNAs in birth
defects arising from exposure to environmental factors such as alcohol.
METHODS: In this study, we determined the expression levels of 509 mature miRNAs 
in fetal mouse brains with or without prenatal ethanol exposure using a miRNA
microarray technique, verified by northern blot and PCR. Mouse embryos in culture
were used to examine the effect of ethanol treatment on expression of the
putative target genes of miR-10a (Hoxa1 and other Hox members) at mRNA and
protein level. Open field and Morris water maze tests were also performed at
post-natal day 35.
RESULTS: Ethanol treatment induced major fetal teratogenesis in mice and caused
mental retardation in their offspring, namely lower locomotor activity (P < 0.01)
and impaired task acquisition. Of the screened miRNAs, miR-10a, miR-10b, miR-9,
miR-145, miR-30a-3p and miR-152 were up-regulated (fold change >1.5) in fetal
brains with prenatal ethanol exposure, whereas miR-200a, miR-496, miR-296,
miR-30e-5p, miR-362, miR-339, miR-29c and miR-154 were down-regulated (fold
change <0.67). Both miR-10a and miR-10b were significantly up-regulated (P <
0.01) in brain after prenatal ethanol exposure. Ethanol treatment also caused
major obstruction in the development of cultured embryos, with down-regulated
Hoxa1. Co-incubation with folic acid blocked ethanol-induced teratogenesis, with 
up-regulated Hoxa1 and down-regulated miR-10a (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: The study provided new insights into the role of miRNAs and their
target genes in the pathogenesis of fetal alcohol syndrome.

PMID: 19091803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. J Neuroimaging. 2009 Oct;19(4):353-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1552-6569.2008.00326.x.

HOXA1 A218G polymorphism is associated with smaller cerebellar volume in healthy 
humans.

Canu E(1), Boccardi M, Ghidoni R, Benussi L, Duchesne S, Testa C, Binetti G,
Frisoni GB.

Author information: 
(1)LENITEM Laboratory of Epidemiology, Neuroimaging, and Telemedicin-IRCCS Centro
S Giovanni di Dio-FBF, Brescia, Italy.

BACKGROUND AND PURPOSE: The Homeobox A1 (HOXA1) gene plays a critical role during
development of the hindbrain in mice. Little is currently known about the
relation between this gene and human brain development. The HOXA1 A218G
polymorphism has been found to be associated with autism and larger head
circumference in autistic patients. Similar effects were revealed also in healthy
children but not in adult controls. The aim of this study was to investigate the 
role of the A218G polymorphism on the hindbrain structure of healthy adults.
METHODS: Healthy persons from two independent groups underwent 3-dimensional high
resolution magnetic resonance (MR) exam. Group A was made of 80 persons (27 G
allele carriers and 53 non-carriers) and Group B of 72 (26 carriers and 46
non-carriers). Statistical parametric mapping 2 (SPM2) were used to perform
voxel-based analysis of the gray matter (GM) of the hindbrain in carriers and
non. Significance threshold was set at .05 with small volume correction using a
cerebellar mask.
RESULTS: In Group A, G carriers exhibited decreased GM volume in the superior
posterior and anterior lobe of the cerebellum bilaterally. In Group B, decreased 
GM volume were found across the entire left cerebellar cortex.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that the HOXA1 A218G polymorphism may affect
cerebellar development in humans.

PMID: 19018953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Psychiatr Genet. 2008 Dec;18(6):295-301. doi: 10.1097/YPG.0b013e3283060fa5.

Polymorphisms of coding trinucleotide repeats of homeogenes in neurodevelopmental
psychiatric disorders.

Laroche F(1), Ramoz N, Leroy S, Fortin C, Rousselot-Paillet B, Philippe A,
Colleaux L, Bresson JL, Mogenet A, Golse B, Mouren-Simeoni MC, Gorwood P, Galli
T, Simonneau M, Krebs MO, Robel L.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM AVENIR, Institut Jacques Monod UMR7592, Paris, France.

OBJECTIVES: Autism (MIM#209850) and schizophrenia (MIM#181500) are both
neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders characterized by a highly genetic
component. Homeogenes and forkhead genes encode transcription factors, which have
been involved in brain development and cell differentiation. Thus, they are
relevant candidate genes for psychiatric disorders. Genetic studies have reported
an association between autism and DLX2, HOXA1, EN2, ARX, and FOXP2 genes whereas 
only three studies of EN2, OTX2, and FOXP2 were performed on schizophrenia.
Interestingly, most of these candidate genes contain trinucleotide repeats coding
for polyamino acid stretch in which instability can be the cause of
neurodevelopmental disorders. Our goal was to identify variations of coding
trinucleotide repeats in schizophrenia, autism, and idiopathic mental
retardation.
METHODS: We screened the coding trinucleotide repeats of OTX1, EN1, DLX2, HOXA1, 
and FOXP2 genes in populations suffering from schizophrenia (247 patients),
autism (98 patients), and idiopathic mental retardation (56 patients), and
compared them with control populations (112 super controls and 202 healthy
controls).
RESULTS: Novel deletions and insertions of coding trinucleotide repeats were
found in the DLX2, HOXA1, and FOXP2 genes. Most of these variations were detected
in controls and no difference in their distribution was observed between patient 
and control groups. Two different polymorphisms in FOXP2 were, however, found
only in autistic patients and the functional consequences of these variations of 
repeats have to be characterized and correlated to particular clinical features.
CONCLUSION: This study did not identify specific disease risk variants of
trinucleotide repeats in OTX1, EN1, DLX2, HOXA1, and FOXP2 candidate genes in
neurodevelopmental psychiatric disorders.

PMID: 19018235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Ann Hematol. 2009 Apr;88(4):325-32. doi: 10.1007/s00277-008-0602-9. Epub 2008 Sep
5.

Megakaryocytic expression of miRNA 10a, 17-5p, 20a and 126 in Philadelphia
chromosome-negative myeloproliferative neoplasm.

Hussein K(1), Dralle W, Theophile K, Kreipe H, Bock O.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Pathology, Hannover Medical School, Carl-Neuberg-Strasse 1, 30615
Hanover, Germany. Hussein.Kais@MH-Hannover.de

Micro RNA (miRNA) are small non-coding RNA molecules which have a
post-transcriptional inhibitory regulation function, e.g. in megakaryopoiesis. A 
characteristic of Philadelphia chromosome-negative myeloproliferative neoplasm
(Ph(-) MPN) is the abundance of morphologically aberrant megakaryocytes. Based on
previously published in vitro megakaryocytic differentiation assay data, we
selected miRNA 10a, 17-5p, 20a and 126 and potential target proteins (HOXA1,
RUNX1) for analysis of laser-microdissected bone marrow megakaryocytes from Ph(-)
MPN and controls (n=66). Furthermore, we tested a potential influence of
cytoreductive treatment on miRNA expression in bone marrow cells during the
course of Ph(-) MPN (n=18). In summary, miRNA 17-5p, 20a and 126 are
constitutively expressed in Ph(-) MPN megakaryopoiesis while low or absent miRNA 
10a appeared to correlate with strong megakaryocytic HOXA1 protein expression. No
association to thrombocytosis, JAK2(V617F) mutations or cytoreductive treatment
(bone marrow cells) were observed.

PMID: 18773208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Neurosci Res. 2008 Oct;86(13):2809-19. doi: 10.1002/jnr.21729.

Hoxa1 is required for the retinoic acid-induced differentiation of embryonic stem
cells into neurons.

Martinez-Ceballos E(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, New York, New York 
10065, USA.

The ability of embryonic stem (ES) cells to differentiate into different cell
fates has been extensively evaluated, and several protocols exist for the
generation of various types of cells from mouse and human ES cells. We used a
differentiation protocol that involves embryoid body formation and
all-trans-retinoic acid (RA, 5 microM) treatment (EB/5 microM RA) to test the
ability of Hoxa1 null ES cells to adopt a neuronal fate. Hoxa1(-/-) ES cells,
when treated in this EB/5 microM RA protocol, failed to differentiate along a
neural lineage; Hoxa1(-/-) ES cells express severalfold lower levels of many
neuronal differentiation markers, including nestin, beta-tubulin III, and MAP2,
and conversely, higher levels of endodermal differentiation markers (i.e., Sox17,
Col4a1) than wild type (Wt) cells. Reintroduction of exogenous Hoxa1, under the
control of the metallothionein I promoter, into Hoxa1(-/-) ES cells restored
their capacity to generate neurons. Moreover, overexpression of Sox17, a gene
that regulates endodermal differentiation, in Wt ES cells resulted in endodermal 
differentiation and in a complete abolition of beta-tubulin III expression. Thus,
Hoxa1 activity is essential for the neuronal differentiation of ES cells in the
presence of all-trans-RA, and Hoxa1 may promote neural differentiation by
inhibiting Sox17 expression. Pharmacological manipulation of Hoxa1 levels may
provide a method for promoting neuronal differentiation for therapeutic uses.
Furthermore, because mutations in the Hoxa1 gene can cause autism spectrum
disorder in humans, these data also provide important mechanistic insights into
the early developmental processes that may result in this disorder.

(c) 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 18512762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Neuropathol Appl Neurobiol. 2009 Feb;35(1):16-35. doi:
10.1111/j.1365-2990.2008.00947.x. Epub 2008 May 8.

Protein microarray analysis identifies human cellular prion protein interactors.

Satoh J(1), Obayashi S, Misawa T, Sumiyoshi K, Oosumi K, Tabunoki H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics and Molecular Neuropathology, Meiji
Pharmaceutical University, Tokyo, Japan. satoj@my-pharm.ac.jp

AIMS: To obtain an insight into the function of cellular prion protein (PrPC), we
studied PrPC-interacting proteins (PrPIPs) by analysing a protein microarray.
METHODS: We identified 47 novel PrPIPs by probing an array of 5000 human proteins
with recombinant human PrPC spanning amino acid residues 23-231 named PR209.
RESULTS: The great majority of 47 PrPIPs were annotated as proteins involved in
the recognition of nucleic acids. Coimmunoprecipitation and cell imaging in a
transient expression system validated the interaction of PR209 with neuronal
PrPIPs, such as FAM64A, HOXA1, PLK3 and MPG. However, the interaction did not
generate proteinase K-resistant proteins. KeyMolnet, a bioinformatics tool for
analysing molecular interaction on the curated knowledge database, revealed that 
the complex molecular network of PrPC and PrPIPs has a significant relationship
with AKT, JNK and MAPK signalling pathways.
CONCLUSIONS: Protein microarray is a useful tool for systematic screening and
comprehensive profiling of the human PrPC interactome. Because the network of
PrPC and interactors involves signalling pathways essential for regulation of
cell survival, differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis, these observations
suggest a logical hypothesis that dysregulation of the PrPC interactome might
induce extensive neurodegeneration in prion diseases.

PMID: 18482256  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Am J Med Genet A. 2008 May 15;146A(10):1235-40. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.32262.

The clinical spectrum of homozygous HOXA1 mutations.

Bosley TM(1), Alorainy IA, Salih MA, Aldhalaan HM, Abu-Amero KK, Oystreck DT,
Tischfield MA, Engle EC, Erickson RP.

Author information: 
(1)The Neuro-ophthalmology Division, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia. bosley-thomas@cooperhealth.edu

We describe nine previously unreported individuals from six families who have
homozygous mutations of HOXA1 and either the Bosley-Salih-Alorainy syndrome
(BSAS) or the Athabascan brainstem dysgenesis syndrome (ABDS). Congenital heart
disease was present in four BSAS patients, two of whom had neither deafness nor
horizontal gaze restriction, thus raising the possibility that cardiovascular
malformations might be a clinically isolated, or relatively isolated,
manifestation of homozygous HOXA1 mutations. Two ABDS probands had relatively
mild mental retardation. These individuals blur the clinical distinctions between
the BSAS and ABDS HOXA1 variants and broaden the phenotype and genotype of the
homozygous HOXA1 mutation clinical spectrum.

2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3517166
PMID: 18412118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Apr;82(4):982-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.02.015.

A mutation in HOXA2 is responsible for autosomal-recessive microtia in an Iranian
family.

Alasti F(1), Sadeghi A, Sanati MH, Farhadi M, Stollar E, Somers T, Van Camp G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Sep;83(3):424.

Microtia, a congenital deformity manifesting as an abnormally shaped or absent
external ear, occurs in one out of 8,000-10,000 births. We ascertained a
consanguineous Iranian family segregating with autosomal-recessive bilateral
microtia, mixed symmetrical severe to profound hearing impairment, and partial
cleft palate. Genome-wide linkage analysis localized the responsible gene to
chromosome 7p14.3-p15.3 with a maximum multi-point LOD score of 4.17. In this
region, homeobox genes from the HOXA cluster were the most interesting
candidates. Subsequent DNA sequence analysis of the HOXA1 and HOXA2 homeobox
genes from the candidate region identified an interesting HOXA2 homeodomain
variant: a change in a highly conserved amino acid (p.Q186K). The variant was not
found in 231 Iranian and 109 Belgian control samples. The critical contribution
of HoxA2 for auditory-system development has already been shown in mouse models. 
We built a homology model to predict the effect of this mutation on the structure
and DNA-binding activity of the homeodomain by using the program Modeler 8v2. In 
the model of the mutant homeodomain, the position of the mutant lysine side chain
is consistently farther away from a nearby phosphate group; this altered position
results in the loss of a hydrogen bond and affects the DNA-binding activity.

PMCID: PMC2427268
PMID: 18394579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Endocrinology. 2008 May;149(5):2219-29. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-1320. Epub 2008 Feb 
14.

Transcriptional activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription
(STAT) 3 and STAT5B partially mediate homeobox A1-stimulated oncogenic
transformation of the immortalized human mammary epithelial cell.

Mohankumar KM(1), Perry JK, Kannan N, Kohno K, Gluckman PD, Emerald BS, Lobie PE.

Author information: 
(1)The Liggins Institute and National Research Centre for Growth and Development,
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

We have previously demonstrated that the p44/42 MAPK pathway is one pathway
involved in homeobox (HOX) A1-stimulated oncogenesis. However, inhibition of MAPK
kinase 1 does not completely prevent HOXA1-stimulated oncogenic transformation,
suggesting the involvement of additional signal transduction pathways. Here, we
report that forced expression of HOXA1 in immortalized human mammary epithelial
cells significantly increased levels of signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT) 3, 5A, and 5B mRNA by transcriptional up-regulation. The
protein levels of STAT3 and 5B, but not STAT5A, and protein phosphorylation
levels of STAT3 and 5B were significantly increased by forced expression of
HOXA1. Forced expression of STAT3 or STAT5B was sufficient to transform
oncogenically an immortalized human mammary epithelial cell line. Accordingly,
inhibition of STAT3 or STAT5B activity with dominant negative STAT3 or STAT5B
abrogated the ability of HOXA1 to stimulate cell proliferation, survival,
oncogenic transformation, and generation of large disorganized multiacinar
structures in three-dimensional culture. These results suggest that HOXA1
partially mediates oncogenic transformation of the immortalized human mammary
epithelial cell through modulation of the STAT3 and STAT5B pathways.

PMID: 18276758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Dev Biol. 2008 Mar 15;315(2):331-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.12.021. Epub 2007 
Dec 27.

CYP26A1 knockout embryonic stem cells exhibit reduced differentiation and growth 
arrest in response to retinoic acid.

Langton S(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, 1300 York Avenue,
Rm. E-409, New York, NY 10021, USA.

CYP26A1, a cytochrome P450 enzyme, metabolizes all-trans-retinoic acid (RA) into 
polar metabolites, e.g. 4-oxo-RA and 4-OH-RA. To determine if altering RA
metabolism affects embryonic stem (ES) cell differentiation, we disrupted both
alleles of Cyp26a1 by homologous recombination. CYP26a1(-/-) ES cells had a
11.0+/-3.2-fold higher intracellular RA concentration than Wt ES cells after RA
treatment for 48 h. RA-treated CYP26A1(-/-) ES cells exhibited 2-3 fold higher
mRNA levels of Hoxa1, a primary RA target gene, than Wt ES cells. Despite
increased intracellular RA levels, CYP26a1(-/-) ES cells were more resistant than
Wt ES cells to RA-induced proliferation arrest. Transcripts for parietal
endodermal differentiation markers, including laminin, J6(Hsp 47), and J31(SPARC,
osteonectin) were expressed at lower levels in RA-treated CYP26a1(-/-) ES cells, 
indicating that the lack of CYP26A1 activity inhibits RA-associated
differentiation. Microarray analyses revealed that RA-treated CYP26A1(-/-) ES
cells exhibited lower mRNA levels than Wt ES cells for genes involved in
differentiation, particularly in neural (Epha4, Pmp22, Nrp1, Gap43, Ndn) and
smooth muscle differentiation (Madh3, Nrp1, Tagln Calponin, Caldesmon1). In
contrast, genes involved in the stress response (e.g. Tlr2, Stk2, Fcgr2b, Bnip3, 
Pdk1) were expressed at higher levels in CYP26A1(-/-) than in Wt ES cells without
RA. Collectively, our results show that CYP26A1 activity regulates intracellular 
RA levels, cell proliferation, transcriptional regulation of primary RA target
genes, and ES cell differentiation to parietal endoderm.

PMID: 18241852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Biol Chem. 2008 Mar 14;283(11):6806-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M706986200. Epub 2008 
Jan 7.

Components of the CCR4-NOT complex function as nuclear hormone receptor
coactivators via association with the NRC-interacting Factor NIF-1.

Garapaty S(1), Mahajan MA, Samuels HH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Medicine, New York University School of
Medicine, New York, New York 10016, USA.

CCR4-NOT is an evolutionarily conserved, multicomponent complex known to be
involved in transcription as well as mRNA degradation. Various subunits (e.g.
CNOT1 and CNOT7/CAF1) have been reported to be involved in influencing nuclear
hormone receptor activities. Here, we show that CCR4/CNOT6 and RCD1/CNOT9,
members of the CCR4-NOT complex, potentiate nuclear receptor activity. RCD1
interacts in vivo and in vitro with NIF-1 (NRC-interacting factor), a previously 
characterized nuclear receptor cotransducer that activates nuclear receptors via 
its interaction with NRC. As with NIF-1, RCD1 and CCR4 do not directly associate 
with nuclear receptors; however, they enhance ligand-dependent transcriptional
activation by nuclear hormone receptors. CCR4 mediates its effect through the
ligand binding domain of nuclear receptors and small interference RNA-mediated
silencing of endogenous CCR4 results in a marked decrease in nuclear receptor
activation. Furthermore, knockdown of CCR4 results in an attenuated stimulation
of RARalpha target genes (e.g. Sox9 and HoxA1) as shown by quantitative PCR
assays. The silencing of endogenous NIF-1 also resulted in a comparable decrease 
in the RAR-mediated induction of both Sox9 and HoxA1. Furthermore, CCR4
associates in vivo with NIF-1. In addition, the CCR4-enhanced transcriptional
activation by nuclear receptors is dependent on NIF-1. The small interference
RNA-mediated knockdown of NIF-1 blocks the ligand-dependent potentiating effect
of CCR4. Our results suggest that CCR4 plays a role in the regulation of certain 
endogenous RARalpha target genes and that RCD1 and CCR4 might mediate their
function through their interaction with NIF-1.

PMID: 18180299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Lab Invest. 2008 Feb;88(2):161-70. Epub 2007 Dec 24.

DNA methylation profiles of gastric carcinoma characterized by quantitative DNA
methylation analysis.

Kang GH(1), Lee S, Cho NY, Gandamihardja T, Long TI, Weisenberger DJ, Campan M,
Laird PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. ghkang@snu.ac.kr

Transcriptional silencing by CpG island hypermethylation is a potential mechanism
for the inactivation of tumor-related genes. Virtually, all types of human
cancers show CpG island hypermethylation, and gastric carcinoma (GC) is one of
the tumors with a high frequency of aberrant CpG island hypermethylation. In this
study, we prescreened DNA methylation of 170 CpG island loci in a training set of
8 paired GC and GC-associated non-neoplastic mucosae (GCN) using MethyLight
technology and selected 27 DNA methylation markers showing higher methylation
frequency or level in GC than in GCN. These markers were then analyzed in a
tester set of 25 paired GC and GCN and 27 chronic gastritis (CG) from non-cancer 
patients to generate their DNA methylation profiles. We identified 17 novel
methylation markers in GC, including SFRP4, SEZ6L, TWIST1, BCL2, KL, TERT,
SCGB3A1, IGF2, GRIN2B, SFRP5, DLEC1, HOXA1, CYP1B1, SMAD9, MT1G, NR3C1, and
HOXA10. Of the 27 selected CpG island loci, 23 were methylated in GC, GCN, and CG
and the remainder four loci (DLEC1, CHFR, CYP1B1, and NR3C1) were only methylated
in GC. We found that the number of methylated loci was significantly higher in GC
than in GCN or CG and that Helicobacter pylori infection was strongly associated 
with aberrant CpG island hypermethylation in CG. Hypermethylation was more
prevalent in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive GC than in EBV-negative GC and in 
diffuse-type GC than in intestinal-type GC. Through our large-scale screening of 
170 CpG island loci, we found 17 new DNA methylation markers of GC, which may
serve as useful markers that may identify a distinct subset of GC.

PMID: 18158559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Mol Cancer. 2007 Oct 29;6:70.

Identification of a panel of sensitive and specific DNA methylation markers for
lung adenocarcinoma.

Tsou JA(1), Galler JS, Siegmund KD, Laird PW, Turla S, Cozen W, Hagen JA, Koss
MN, Laird-Offringa IA.

Author information: 
(1)Norris Cancer Center and Department of Surgery and of Biochemistry and
Molecular Biology, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern California,
Los Angeles, CA 90089-9176, USA. tsouwhat@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer is the number one cancer killer of both men and women in 
the United States. Three quarters of lung cancer patients are diagnosed with
regionally or distantly disseminated disease; their 5-year survival is only 15%. 
DNA hypermethylation at promoter CpG islands shows great promise as a
cancer-specific marker that would complement visual lung cancer screening tools
such as spiral CT, improving early detection. In lung cancer patients, such
hypermethylation is detectable in a variety of samples ranging from tumor
material to blood and sputum. To date the penetrance of DNA methylation at any
single locus has been too low to provide great clinical sensitivity. We used the 
real-time PCR-based method MethyLight to examine DNA methylation quantitatively
at twenty-eight loci in 51 primary human lung adenocarcinomas, 38 adjacent
non-tumor lung samples, and 11 lung samples from non-lung cancer patients.
RESULTS: We identified thirteen loci showing significant differential DNA
methylation levels between tumor and non-tumor lung; eight of these show highly
significant hypermethylation in adenocarcinoma: CDH13, CDKN2A EX2, CDX2, HOXA1,
OPCML, RASSF1, SFPR1, and TWIST1 (p-value << 0.0001). Using the current tissue
collection and 5-fold cross validation, the four most significant loci (CDKN2A
EX2, CDX2, HOXA1 and OPCML) individually distinguish lung adenocarcinoma from
non-cancer lung with a sensitivity of 67-86% and specificity of 74-82%. DNA
methylation of these loci did not differ significantly based on gender, race, age
or tumor stage, indicating their wide applicability as potential lung
adenocarcinoma markers. We applied random forests to determine a good classifier 
based on a subset of our loci and determined that combined use of the same four
top markers allows identification of lung cancer tissue from non-lung cancer
tissue with 94% sensitivity and 90% specificity.
CONCLUSION: The identification of eight CpG island loci showing highly
significant hypermethylation in lung adenocarcinoma provides strong candidates
for evaluation in patient remote media such as plasma and sputum. The four most
highly ranked loci, CDKN2A EX2, CDX2, HOXA1 and OPCML, which show significant DNA
methylation even in stage IA tumor samples, merit further investigation as some
of the most promising lung adenocarcinoma markers identified to date.

PMCID: PMC2206053
PMID: 17967182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. PLoS One. 2007 Sep 19;2(9):e895.

DNA methylation in the human cerebral cortex is dynamically regulated throughout 
the life span and involves differentiated neurons.

Siegmund KD(1), Connor CM, Campan M, Long TI, Weisenberger DJ, Biniszkiewicz D,
Jaenisch R, Laird PW, Akbarian S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles, California, United States of America.

The role of DNA cytosine methylation, an epigenetic regulator of chromatin
structure and function, during normal and pathological brain development and
aging remains unclear. Here, we examined by MethyLight PCR the DNA methylation
status at 50 loci, encompassing primarily 5' CpG islands of genes related to CNS 
growth and development, in temporal neocortex of 125 subjects ranging in age from
17 weeks of gestation to 104 years old. Two psychiatric disease cohorts--defined 
by chronic neurodegeneration (Alzheimer's) or lack thereof (schizophrenia)--were 
included. A robust and progressive rise in DNA methylation levels across the
lifespan was observed for 8/50 loci (GABRA2, GAD1, HOXA1, NEUROD1, NEUROD2, PGR, 
STK11, SYK) typically in conjunction with declining levels of the corresponding
mRNAs. Another 16 loci were defined by a sharp rise in DNA methylation levels
within the first few months or years after birth. Disease-associated changes were
limited to 2/50 loci in the Alzheimer's cohort, which appeared to reflect an
acceleration of the age-related change in normal brain. Additionally, methylation
studies on sorted nuclei provided evidence for bidirectional methylation events
in cortical neurons during the transition from childhood to advanced age, as
reflected by significant increases at 3, and a decrease at 1 of 10 loci.
Furthermore, the DNMT3a de novo DNA methyl-transferase was expressed across all
ages, including a subset of neurons residing in layers III and V of the mature
cortex. Therefore, DNA methylation is dynamically regulated in the human cerebral
cortex throughout the lifespan, involves differentiated neurons, and affects a
substantial portion of genes predominantly by an age-related increase.

PMCID: PMC1964879
PMID: 17878930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Neurology. 2007 Sep 18;69(12):1245-53.

Clinical characterization of the HOXA1 syndrome BSAS variant.

Bosley TM(1), Salih MA, Alorainy IA, Oystreck DT, Nester M, Abu-Amero KK,
Tischfield MA, Engle EC.

Author information: 
(1)Neuro-ophthalmology Division, King Khaled Eye Specialist Hospital, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia. Bosley-Thomas@cooperhealth.edu

BACKGROUND: The Bosley-Salih-Alorainy syndrome (BSAS) variant of the congenital
human HOXA1 syndrome results from autosomal recessive truncating HOXA1 mutations.
We describe the currently recognized spectrum of ocular motility, inner ear
malformations, cerebrovascular anomalies, and cognitive function.
METHODS: We examined nine affected individuals from five consanguineous Saudi
Arabian families, all of whom harbored the same I75-I76insG homozygous mutation
in the HOXA1 gene. Patients underwent complete neurologic, neuro-ophthalmologic, 
orthoptic, and neuropsychological examinations. Six individuals had CT, and six
had MRI of the head.
RESULTS: All nine individuals had bilateral Duane retraction syndrome (DRS) type 
3, but extent of abduction and adduction varied between eyes and individuals.
Eight patients were deaf with the common cavity deformity of the inner ear, while
one patient had normal hearing and skull base development. Six had delayed motor 
milestones, and two had cognitive and behavioral abnormalities meeting Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-IV criteria for autism spectrum
disorder. MRI of the orbits, extraocular muscles, brainstem, and supratentorial
brain appeared normal. All six appropriately studied patients had cerebrovascular
malformations ranging from unilateral internal carotid artery hypoplasia to
bilateral agenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: This report extends the Bosley-Salih-Alorainy syndrome phenotype and
documents the clinical variability resulting from identical HOXA1 mutations
within an isolated ethnic population. Similarities between this syndrome and
thalidomide embryopathy suggest that the teratogenic effects of early thalidomide
exposure in humans may be due to interaction with the HOX cascade.

PMCID: PMC2826214
PMID: 17875913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. J Biol Chem. 2007 Nov 16;282(46):33421-34. Epub 2007 Sep 17.

Retinoic acid receptor isotype specificity in F9 teratocarcinoma stem cells
results from the differential recruitment of coregulators to retinoic response
elements.

Gillespie RF(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Weill Graduate School of Medical Sciences, Cornell 
University, New York, New York 10021, USA.

The retinoic acid receptor (RAR) alpha, beta(2), and gamma isotypes each regulate
specific subsets of target genes in F9 teratocarcinoma stem cells. We used
chromatin immunoprecipitation assays to monitor the association of RARgamma,
retinoic X receptor (RXR) alpha, and coregulators with the RARbeta(2), Hoxa1, and
Cyp26A1 retinoic acid response elements (RAREs) in F9 wild type and RARalpha,
-beta(2), and -gamma null cells. Additionally we quantitatively monitored
expression of the corresponding mRNAs. We demonstrated that the association of
RARgamma and/or RXRalpha with a RARE was not sufficient for retinoic acid
(RA)-mediated transcription of the corresponding target gene. However, the
ability of RARgamma and/or RXRalpha to recruit pCIP
(AIB1/ACTR/RAC-3/TRAM-1/SRC-3) and p300 to a RARE did correlate with
RA-associated transcription of target mRNAs. Therefore, the specific functions of
the RAR isotypes do not manifest at the level of their DNA binding but rather
from a differential ability to recruit specific components of the transcriptional
machinery. We also demonstrated that RA-mediated displacement of the polycomb
group protein SUZ12 from a RARE was inhibited in the absence of RARgamma. Thus,
transcriptional components of the RAR signaling pathway are specifically required
for displacement of SUZ12 from RAREs during RA-mediated differentiation of F9
cells.

PMID: 17875646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Development. 2007 Oct;134(20):3615-25. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

Fgf3 is required for dorsal patterning and morphogenesis of the inner ear
epithelium.

Hatch EP(1), Noyes CA, Wang X, Wright TJ, Mansour SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Utah, Salt Lake City, UT
84112-5330, USA.

The inner ear, which contains sensory organs specialized for hearing and balance,
develops from an ectodermal placode that invaginates lateral to hindbrain
rhombomeres (r) 5-6 to form the otic vesicle. Under the influence of signals from
intra- and extraotic sources, the vesicle is molecularly patterned and undergoes 
morphogenesis and cell-type differentiation to acquire its distinct functional
compartments. We show in mouse that Fgf3, which is expressed in the hindbrain
from otic induction through endolymphatic duct outgrowth, and in the prospective 
neurosensory domain of the otic epithelium as morphogenesis initiates, is
required for both auditory and vestibular function. We provide new morphologic
data on otic dysmorphogenesis in Fgf3 mutants, which show a range of
malformations similar to those of Mafb (Kreisler), Hoxa1 and Gbx2 mutants, the
most common phenotype being failure of endolymphatic duct and common crus
formation, accompanied by epithelial dilatation and reduced cochlear coiling. The
malformations have close parallels with those seen in hearing-impaired patients. 
The morphologic data, together with an analysis of changes in the molecular
patterning of Fgf3 mutant otic vesicles, and comparisons with other mutations
affecting otic morphogenesis, allow placement of Fgf3 between hindbrain-expressed
Hoxa1 and Mafb, and otic vesicle-expressed Gbx2, in the genetic cascade initiated
by WNT signaling that leads to dorsal otic patterning and endolymphatic duct
formation. Finally, we show that Fgf3 prevents ventral expansion of r5-6
neurectodermal Wnt3a, serving to focus inductive WNT signals on the dorsal otic
vesicle and highlighting a new example of cross-talk between the two signaling
systems.

PMCID: PMC2366212
PMID: 17855431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. J Mol Biol. 2007 Sep 14;372(2):298-316. Epub 2007 Jul 3.

Retinoid regulated association of transcriptional co-regulators and the polycomb 
group protein SUZ12 with the retinoic acid response elements of Hoxa1,
RARbeta(2), and Cyp26A1 in F9 embryonal carcinoma cells.

Gillespie RF(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program of Weill Graduate School of Medical Sciences,
Cornell University, New York, NY 10021, USA.

Hox gene expression is activated by all-trans retinoic acid (RA), through binding
to retinoic acid receptor-retinoid X receptor (RAR-RXR) heterodimers bound at RA 
response elements (RAREs) of target genes. The RARs and RXRs each have three
isotypes (alpha, beta, and gamma), which are encoded by distinct genes. Hox genes
are also repressed by polycomb group proteins (PcG), though how these proteins
are targeted is unclear. We used chromatin immunoprecipitation assays to
investigate the association of RXRalpha, RARgamma, cofactors, and the PcG protein
SUZ12 with the Hoxa1, RARbeta2, and Cyp26A1 RAREs in F9 embryonal carcinoma cells
(teratocarcinoma stem cells) during RA treatment. We demonstrate that RARgamma
and RXRalpha are associated with RAREs prior to and during RA treatment. pCIP,
p300, and RNA polymerase II levels increased at target RAREs upon exposure to RA.
Conversely, SUZ12 was found associated with all RAREs studied and these
associations were attenuated by treatment with RA. Upon RA removal, SUZ12
re-associated with RAREs. H3ac, H3K4me2, and H3K27me3 marks were simultaneously
detected at target loci, indicative of a bivalent domain chromatin structure.
During RA mediated differentiation, H3K27me3 levels decreased at target RAREs
whereas H3ac and H3K4me2 levels remained constant. These studies provide insight 
into the dynamics of association of co-regulators with RAREs and demonstrate a
novel link between RA signaling and PcG repression.

PMCID: PMC2972191
PMID: 17663992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Arch Pathol Lab Med. 2007 Jun;131(6):923-30.

Methylation profiles of multiple CpG island loci in extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma versus those of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas.

Kim BH(1), Cho NY, Choi M, Lee S, Jang JJ, Kang GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 28
Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu, Seoul 110-744 South Korea.

CONTEXT: CpG island hypermethylation is attracting attention because of its
importance as a tumor marker and its potential mechanism for the development of
human cancers. Extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma has been poorly investigated with 
respect to CpG island hypermethylation, and the number of genes known to be
methylated in extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas is fewer than 20.
OBJECTIVE: To generate methylation profiles of 24 CpG island loci in extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinomas, to correlate methylation findings with clinicopathologic
findings, and to compare these findings with those of intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinomas.
DESIGN: Sixty-three extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas and 48 intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinomas were investigated for hypermethylation in 24 CpG island loci 
by using methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: A total of 61 (96.8%) of 63 extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas showed
hypermethylation in at least one of the examined loci, and a high methylation
frequency was seen in HOXA1 (95.2%), HPP1 (69.8%), and NEUROG1 (61.9%). The
number of methylated CpG island loci was greater in extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinomas with nodal metastasis than in those without nodal metastasis 
(P = .047), and hypermethylation of TIG1 was closely associated with nodal
metastasis of extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas (P = .007). CDH1 and NEUROG1 were 
more frequently methylated in extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma than in
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, whereas CHFR, GSTP1, IGF2, MGMT, MINT31, p14,
and RBP1 were more frequently methylated in intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma: the 
differences was statistically significant (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: A close relationship exists between CpG island hypermethylation and 
nodal metastasis of extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas. Methylation profiles of
extrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas are somewhat similar to but distinct from those 
of intrahepatic cholangiocarcinomas.

PMID: 17550320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Stem Cells. 2007 Sep;25(9):2191-9. Epub 2007 May 24.

High histone acetylation and decreased polycomb repressive complex 2 member
levels regulate gene specific transcriptional changes during early embryonic stem
cell differentiation induced by retinoic acid.

Lee ER(1), Murdoch FE, Fritsch MK.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Biology Program, University of Wisconsin-Madison, Madison, Wisconsin
53706, USA.

Histone modifications play a crucial role during embryonic stem (ES) cell
differentiation. During differentiation, binding of polycomb repressive complex 2
(PRC2), which mediates trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (K27me3), is
lost on developmental genes that are transcriptionally induced. We observed a
global decrease in K27me3 in as little as 3 days after differentiation of mouse
ES cells induced by retinoic acid (RA) treatment. The global levels of the
histone K27 methyltransferase EZH2 also decreased with RA treatment. A loss of
EZH2 binding and K27me3 was observed locally on PRC2 target genes induced after 3
days of RA, including Nestin. In contrast, direct RA-responsive genes that are
rapidly induced, such as Hoxa1, showed a loss of EZH2 binding and K27me3 after
only a few hours of RA treatment. Following differentiation induced by leukemia
inhibitor factor (LIF) withdrawal without RA, Hoxa1 was not transcriptionally
activated. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of EZH2 resulted in loss of
K27me3 during LIF withdrawal, but the Hoxa1 gene remained transcriptionally
silent after loss of this repressive mark. Induction of histone hyperacetylation 
overrode the repressive K27me3 modification and resulted in Hoxa1 gene
expression. Together, these data show that there are multiple temporal phases of 
derepression of PRC2 target genes during ES cell differentiation and that other
epigenetic marks (specifically, increased acetylation of histones H3 and H4), in 
addition to derepression, are important for gene-specific transcriptional
activation. This report demonstrates the temporal interplay of various epigenetic
changes in regulating gene expression during early ES cell differentiation.

PMID: 17525233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Arch Neurol. 2007 May;64(5):633-7.

Oculomotility disorders arising from disruptions in brainstem motor neuron
development.

Engle EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genomics, Department of Neurology, Children's Hospital Boston,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.
elizabeth.engle@childrens.harvard.edu

The identification and analysis of pedigrees with rare congenital oculomotility
syndromes has led to the definition of the congenital cranial dysinnervation
disorders. These disorders appear to result from mutations in genes that are
essential to the normal development and/or connectivity of cranial motoneurons.
This review highlights the clinical features and genetic etiology of 3 congenital
cranial dysinnervation disorders: the human homeobox A1 (HOXA1) syndromes, in
which early motoneuron development is disrupted; horizontal gaze palsy with
progressive scoliosis, in which there is aberrant axonal targeting onto abducens 
motoneurons; and congenital fibrosis of the extraocular muscles type 1, in which 
there is aberrant axonal targeting onto the extraocular muscles.

PMID: 17502461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Oncol Res. 2006;16(5):217-24.

Aberrant expression of HOX genes in oral dysplasia and squamous cell carcinoma
tissues.

Hassan NM(1), Hamada J, Murai T, Seino A, Takahashi Y, Tada M, Zhang X,
Kashiwazaki H, Yamazaki Y, Inoue N, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Human HOX genes consist of 39 genes and encode transcription factors that
function as master developmental regulators. We hypothesized that the
misexpression of HOX genes was associated with carcinogenesis and malignant
progression. The expression levels of 39 HOX genes in 31 human oral squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC), 11 dysplasia, and 10 normal mucosa tissues were quantified by
the real-time RT-PCR method. The expression levels of 18 HOX genes in the SCC
tissues were significantly higher than those in the normal mucosa tissues. The
dysplasia tissues showed higher expression of HOXA2, A3, B3, and D10 than normal 
mucosa tissues whereas they showed lower expression of HOXA1, B7, B9, and C8 than
SCC. The SCC with lymph node metastasis showed high expression of HOXC6 compared 
to the SCC without it. These results suggest that misexpressions of particular
HOX genes are implicated in the development of oral dysplasia and SCC.

PMID: 17294802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Oncogene. 2007 Jun 7;26(27):3998-4008. Epub 2007 Jan 8.

HOXA1-stimulated oncogenicity is mediated by selective upregulation of components
of the p44/42 MAP kinase pathway in human mammary carcinoma cells.

Mohankumar KM(1), Xu XQ, Zhu T, Kannan N, Miller LD, Liu ET, Gluckman PD, Sukumar
S, Emerald BS, Lobie PE.

Author information: 
(1)The Liggins Institute and National Research Centre for Growth and Development,
University of Auckland, Auckland, New Zealand.

Expression of homeobox A1 (HOXA1) results in oncogenic transformation of
immortalized human mammary epithelial cells with aggressive tumor formation in
vivo. However, the mechanisms by which HOXA1 mediates oncogenic transformation is
not well defined. To identify molecules that could potentially be involved in
HOXA1-mediated oncogenic transformation, microarray analysis was utilized to
characterize and compare the gene expression pattern in response to forced
expression or depletion of HOXA1 in human mammary carcinoma cells. Gene
expression profiling identified that genes involved in the p44/42
mitogen-activated protein (MAP) kinase activation pathway (GRB2, MAP kinase
kinase (MEK1) and SDFR1) or p44/42 MAP kinase-regulated genes (IER3, EPAS1, PCNA 
and catalase) are downstream expression targets of HOXA1. Forced expression of
HOXA1 increased GRB2 and MEK1 mRNA and protein expression and increased p44/42
MAP kinase phosphorylation, activity and Elk-1-mediated transcription. Use of a
MEK1 inhibitor demonstrated that increased p44/42 MAP kinase activity is required
for the HOXA1-mediated increase in cell proliferation, survival, oncogenicity and
oncogenic transformation. Thus, modulation of the p44/42 MAP kinase pathway is
one mechanism by which HOXA1 mediates oncogenic transformation of the human
mammary epithelial cell.

PMID: 17213808  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 2007 Jan;48(1):189-93.

Two pedigrees segregating Duane's retraction syndrome as a dominant trait map to 
the DURS2 genetic locus.

Engle EC(1), Andrews C, Law K, Demer JL.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genomics, Children's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.
elizabeth.engle@childrens.harvard.edu

PURPOSE: The genetic bases of Duane's retraction syndrome (DRS) were investigated
to determine its molecular etiologies. In prior studies, the transcription
factors SALL4 and HOXA1 were identified as the genes mutated in DRS with radial
anomalies, and in DRS with deafness, vascular anomalies, and cognitive deficits, 
respectively. Less is known, however, about the genetic etiology of DRS when it
occurs in isolation, and only one genetic locus for isolated DRS, the DURS2 locus
on chromosome 2, has been mapped to date. Toward the goal of identifying the
DURS2 gene, two pedigrees have been ascertained that segregate DRS as a dominant 
trait.
METHODS: Members of two large dominant DRS pedigrees were enrolled in an ongoing 
study of the genetic basis of the congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders,
and linkage analysis was conducted to determine whether their DRS phenotype maps 
to the DURS2 locus.
RESULTS: By haplotype analysis, the DRS phenotype in each family cosegregates
with markers spanning the DURS2 region. Linkage analysis reveals maximum lod
scores >2, establishing that the DRS phenotype in these two pedigrees maps to the
DURS2 locus.
CONCLUSIONS: These two pedigrees double the published pedigrees known to map to
the DURS2 locus and can thus contribute toward the search for the DURS2 gene. The
affected members represent a genetically defined population of DURS2-linked DRS
individuals, and hence studies of their clinical and structural features can
enhance understanding of the DURS2 phenotype, as described in the companion
paper.

PMCID: PMC2829295
PMID: 17197532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2007 Apr 5;144B(3):388-90.

HOXA1 gene variants influence head growth rates in humans.

Muscarella LA(1), Guarnieri V, Sacco R, Militerni R, Bravaccio C, Trillo S,
Schneider C, Melmed R, Elia M, Mascia ML, Rucci E, Piemontese MR, D'Agruma L,
Persico AM.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetics Service, I.R.C.C.S. Casa Sollievo dalla Sofferenza, S.
Giovanni Rotondo, Foggia, Italy.

We previously described a significant association between the HOXA1 G218 allele
and increased head circumference in autism [Conciatori et al. (2004); Biol
Psychiatry 55:413-419]. The present study reveals identical effects also in
normal children. HOXA1 A218G alleles and sex explain as much as 10.9 and 6.8% of 
the variance in head circumference in 142 pediatric controls and in 191 autistic 
children, aged 3-16 years (F = 6.777, 3 and 141 df, P < 0.001 and F = 5.588, 3
and 190 df, P < 0.01, respectively). Instead, no association is found in 183
adult controls and in 35 pediatric fragile-X patients. Therefore HOXA1 A218G
alleles significantly influence head growth rates, but not final head size, in
normal human development. This influence does not differ between normal and
autistic children, whereas the lack of FMRP seemingly overwhelms HOXA1 effects in
fragile-X patients.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17171652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Psychiatr Genet. 2007 Feb;17(1):1.

Lack of association of HOXA1 and HOXB1 variants with autism in the Indian
population.

Sen B, Sinha S, Ahmed S, Ghosh S, Gangopadhyay PK, Usha R.

PMID: 17167333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. J Neurosci Res. 2007 Feb 15;85(3):479-87.

Enhanced autophagic cell death in expanded polyhistidine variants of HOXA1
reduces PBX1-coupled transcriptional activity and inhibits neuronal
differentiation.

Paraguison RC(1), Higaki K, Yamamoto K, Matsumoto H, Sasaki T, Kato N, Nanba E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Functional Genomics, Research Center for Bioscience and
Technology, Tottori University, Yonago, Japan.

HOXA1 is a member of the homeobox gene family and is involved in early brain
development. In our previous study, we identified novel variants of polyhistidine
repeat tract in HOXA1 gene and showed that ectopic expression of expanded
variants led to enhanced intranuclear aggregation and accelerated cell death in a
time-dependent manner. Here, we further investigate the implications of
polyhistidine variants on HOXA1 function. Aside from intranuclear aggregation, we
observed cytosolic aggregates during the early stages of expression. Rapamycin,
an autophagy inducer, resulted in decreased protein aggregation and cell death.
Here, we also show an interaction between variants of HOXA1 and one of the HOX
protein known cofactors, PBX1. Expanded HOXA1 variants exhibited reduced
PBX1-coupled transcriptional activity through a regulatory enhancer of HOXB1.
Moreover, we demonstrate that both deleted and expanded variants inhibited
neurite outgrowth in retinoic acid-induced neuronal differentiation in
neuroblastoma cells. These results provide further evidence that expanded
polyhistidine repeats in HOXA1 enhance aggregation and cell death, resulting in
impaired neuronal differentiation and cooperative binding with PBX1.

PMID: 17131398  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Dev Biol. 2007 Feb 15;302(2):646-60. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

Expression of Hoxa2 in rhombomere 4 is regulated by a conserved cross-regulatory 
mechanism dependent upon Hoxb1.

Tümpel S(1), Cambronero F, Ferretti E, Blasi F, Wiedemann LM, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 E. 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

The Hoxa2 gene is an important component of regulatory events during hindbrain
segmentation and head development in vertebrates. In this study we have used
sequenced comparisons of the Hoxa2 locus from 12 vertebrate species in
combination with detailed regulatory analyses in mouse and chicken embryos to
characterize the mechanistic basis for the regulation of Hoxa2 in rhombomere (r) 
4. A highly conserved region in the Hoxa2 intron functions as an r4 enhancer. In 
vitro binding studies demonstrate that within the conserved region three
bipartite Hox/Pbx binding sites (PH1-PH3) in combination with a single binding
site for Pbx-Prep/Meis (PM) heterodimers co-operate to regulate enhancer activity
in r4. Mutational analysis reveals that these sites are required for activity of 
the enhancer, suggesting that the r4 enhancer from Hoxa2 functions in vivo as a
Hox-response module in combination with the Hox cofactors, Pbx and Prep/Meis.
Furthermore, this r4 enhancer is capable of mediating a response to ectopic HOXB1
expression in the hindbrain. These findings reveal that Hoxa2 is a target gene of
Hoxb1 and permit us to develop a gene regulatory network for r4, whereby Hoxa2,
along with Hoxb1, Hoxb2 and Hoxa1, is integrated into a series of auto- and
cross-regulatory loops between Hox genes. These data highlight the important role
played by direct cross-talk between Hox genes in regulating hindbrain patterning.

PMID: 17113575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2006 Sep-Oct;28(5):617-24. Epub 2006 Aug 16.

Induction of the homeotic gene Hoxa1 through valproic acid's teratogenic
mechanism of action.

Stodgell CJ(1), Ingram JL, O'Bara M, Tisdale BK, Nau H, Rodier PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Rochester, Rochester,
NY, United States. Chris_Stodgell@urmc.rochester.edu
<Chris_Stodgell@urmc.rochester.edu>

BACKGROUND: Valproic acid (VPA) exposure in utero has been associated with an
increased risk of both neural tube defects and autism spectrum disorders (ASDs). 
The terata induced by VPA suggest interference with pattern formation. Retinoic
acid produces similar terata and is known to act in part by increasing the
expression of Hoxa1. We tested the hypotheses that exposure to VPA would alter
the expression of Hoxa1 in rat embryos during times of normal Hoxa1 expression
(d10.5-13.5) and that exposure at earlier and later stages would induce
inappropriate expression.
METHOD: Hoxa1 expression levels were determined by real-time PCR in individual
embryos 1 h after exposure on gestational d10, 12, 13, 14, or 15. Additionally,
teratogenic (4-yn-VPA) and nonteratogenic analogs of VPA (IE-VPA), retinoic acid 
(RA), and saline were compared for effects on Hoxa1 expression on d12. Embryos
were allowed to develop for 1, 2, 4, 6, or 24 h, to follow the time course of
effects.
RESULTS: In utero exposure to VPA on gestational d10 and on d12-14 significantly 
increased the level of Hoxa1 expression compared to saline-exposed embryos at
developmental ages prior to, during and after the normal expression period for
this gene. On gestational d12, exposures to VPA and 4-yn-VPA significantly
increased Hoxa1 expression at all sacrifice times, compared to saline-exposed
embryos. RA significantly elevated Hoxa1 expression at all time points except
24-h post-treatment. The nonteratogenic VPA analog, IE-VPA, did not affect Hoxa1 
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: VPA and 4-yn-VPA exposures elevated Hoxa1 mRNA during its normal
expression period and induced expression outside of the normal period. This may
explain, in part, how VPA disrupts development.

PMID: 16989981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Dev Cell. 2006 Aug;11(2):239-50.

Reversal of Hox1 gene subfunctionalization in the mouse.

Tvrdik P(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Utah, 15 North 2030 East, Salt 
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

In vertebrates, paralogous Hox genes play diverse biological roles. We examined
the interchangeability of Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 in mouse development by swapping their 
protein-coding regions. Remarkably, the mice expressing the Hox-B1 protein from
the Hoxa1 locus, and vice versa, are essentially normal. We noted, nonetheless, a
specific facial nerve hypomorphism in hemizygous Hoxb1(A1/-) mice and decreased
viability in homozygous Hoxa1(B1/B1) embryos. Further, we established a mouse
line in which we have inserted the 107 bp Hoxb1 autoregulatory enhancer into the 
Hoxa1 promoter. Strikingly, the newly generated autoregulatory Hoxa1 gene can
deliver the functionality of both paralogs in these mice, providing normal
viability as well as proper facial nerve formation even in the Hoxb1 mutant
background. This study affirms that subfunctionalization of the transcriptional
regulatory elements has a principal role in the diversification of paralogous Hox
genes. Moreover, we show that the ancestral vertebrate Hox1 gene can still be
experimentally reconstructed.

PMID: 16890163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 May;12(5):283-9. Epub 2006 Apr 5.

cDNA cloning and expression of the human NOBOX gene in oocytes and ovarian
follicles.

Huntriss J(1), Hinkins M, Picton HM.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction and Early Development Research Group, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. j.huntriss@leeds.ac.uk

Nobox is a homeobox gene that is preferentially expressed in the oocytes and is
essential for folliculogenesis and the regulation of oocyte-specific gene
expression in the mouse. The likely human homologue has been identified in silico
but has not as yet been confirmed experimentally. Here, we present the first cDNA
cloning and transcript expression analysis of the human NOBOX gene. Using RT-PCR,
we reveal that expression within adult human tissues is limited to the ovary,
testis and pancreas. Expression within the ovary is oocyte specific, with
expression observed from the primordial stage ovarian follicle through to the
metaphase II (MII) oocyte. In complementary studies, we reveal dynamic expression
profiles of 14 additional homeobox genes throughout human oogenesis and early
development. The expression of HOXA10 is restricted to primordial and early
primary follicles. HOXB7 is expressed from primordial and early primary stage
follicles through to germinal vesicle (GV) oocytes. Gastrulation brain homeobox 1
(GBX1) and HOXA7 genes are homeobox markers preferentially expressed by GV
oocytes. HOXA1 and HEX are homeobox markers preferentially expressed by MII
oocytes. In summary, the homeobox gene transcripts that are detected in ovarian
follicles and oocytes are distinct from those expressed in human blastocysts
(HOXB4, CDX2 and HOXC9) and granulosa cells (HOXC9, HOXC8, HOXC6, HOXA7, HOXA5
and HOXA4).

PMID: 16597639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Mar 28;103(13):5078-83. Epub 2006 Mar 20.

MicroRNA fingerprints during human megakaryocytopoiesis.

Garzon R(1), Pichiorri F, Palumbo T, Iuliano R, Cimmino A, Aqeilan R, Volinia S, 
Bhatt D, Alder H, Marcucci G, Calin GA, Liu CG, Bloomfield CD, Andreeff M, Croce 
CM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Virology, Comprehensive Cancer Center, Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH 43210, USA.

microRNAs are a highly conserved class of noncoding RNAs with important
regulatory functions in proliferation, apoptosis, development, and
differentiation. To discover novel regulatory pathways during megakaryocytic
differentiation, we performed microRNA expression profiling of in
vitro-differentiated megakaryocytes derived from CD34(+) hematopoietic
progenitors. The main finding was down-regulation of miR-10a, miR-126, miR-106,
miR-10b, miR-17 and miR-20. Hypothetically, the down-regulation of microRNAs
unblocks target genes involved in differentiation. We confirmed in vitro and in
vivo that miR-130a targets the transcription factor MAFB, which is involved in
the activation of the GPIIB promoter, a key protein for platelet physiology. In
addition, we found that miR-10a expression in differentiated megakaryocytes is
inverse to that of HOXA1, and we showed that HOXA1 is a direct target of miR-10a.
Finally, we compared the microRNA expression of megakaryoblastic leukemic cell
lines with that of in vitro differentiated megakaryocytes and CD34(+)
progenitors. This analysis revealed up-regulation of miR-101, miR-126, miR-99a,
miR-135, and miR-20. Our data delineate the expression of microRNAs during
megakaryocytopoiesis and suggest a regulatory role of microRNAs in this process
by targeting megakaryocytic transcription factors.

PMCID: PMC1458797
PMID: 16549775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2006 Nov;154(1-2):37-46. Epub 2006 Mar 14.

Ontogeny of central rhythm generation in chicks and rodents.

Chatonnet F(1), Borday C, Wrobel L, Thoby-Brisson M, Fortin G, McLean H,
Champagnat J.

Author information: 
(1)UPR 2216, Neurobiologie Génétique et Integrative, Institut fédératif de
Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard, C.N.R.S. 1, Avenue de la terrasse, Gif sur Yvette, 
91198 Cedex, France.

Recent studies help in understanding how the basic organization of brainstem
neuronal circuits along the anterior-posterior (AP) axis is set by the
Hox-dependent segmentation of the neural tube in vertebrate embryos. Neonatal
respiratory abnormalities in Krox20(-/-), Hoxa1(-/-) and kreisler mutant mice
indicate the vital role of a para-facial (Krox20-dependent, rhombomere 4-derived)
respiratory group, that is distinct from the more caudal rhythm generator called 
Pre-Bötzinger complex. Embryological studies in the chick suggest homology and
conservation of this Krox20-dependent induction of parafacial rhythms in birds
and mammals. Calcium imaging in embryo indicate that rhythm generators may derive
from different cell lineages within rhombomeres. In mice, the Pre-Bötzinger
complex is found to be distinct from oscillators producing the earliest neuronal 
activity, a primordial low-frequency rhythm. In contrast, in chicks, maturation
of the parafacial generator is tightly linked to the evolution of this primordial
rhythm. It seems therefore that ontogeny of brainstem rhythm generation involves 
conserved processes specifying distinct AP domains in the neural tube, followed
by diverse, lineage-specific regulations allowing the emergence of organized
rhythm generators at a given AP level.

PMID: 16533622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Am J Med Genet A. 2006 Apr 15;140(8):900-2.

HOXA1 mutations are not a common cause of Duane anomaly.

Tischfield MA, Chan WM, Grunert JF, Andrews C, Engle EC.

PMCID: PMC2553396
PMID: 16528738  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Oncol Rep. 2006 Apr;15(4):797-802.

Disordered expression of HOX genes in human non-small cell lung cancer.

Abe M(1), Hamada J, Takahashi O, Takahashi Y, Tada M, Miyamoto M, Morikawa T,
Kondo S, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

We hypothesized that the disordered tissue architecture in cancer results from
the cells executing the program designed during ontogeny in a spatio-temporally
inappropriate manner. HOX genes are known as master regulators of embryonic
morphogenesis, and encode transcription factors which regulate the transcription 
of the downstream genes to realize the program of body plan. In this study, we
quantified the expression levels of 39 HOX genes in 41 human non-small cell lung 
cancer (non-SCLC) and non-cancerous lung tissues by a comprehensive analysis
system based on the real-time RT-PCR method. We found that the expression levels 
of HOXA1, A5, A10 and C6 in squamous cell carcinoma tissues (and HOXA5 and A10 in
adenocarcinoma tissues) were significantly higher than those in the non-cancerous
tissues. Comparison of HOX gene expressions between adenocarcinoma and squamous
cell carcinoma tissues showed higher expressions of HOXA1, D9, D10 and D11 in
squamous cell carcinoma tissues than in adenocarcinoma tissues.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that HOXA5 and A10 proteins were localized 
in the cytoplasm of tumor cells in both adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma tissues. These results suggest that the disordered patterns of HOX gene
expressions were involved not only in the development of non-SCLC but also in the
histologically aberrant diversity such as adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma.

PMID: 16525661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Pediatr Res. 2006 Mar;59(3):343-8.

The genetic basis of complex strabismus.

Engle EC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Genomics, Children's Hospital Boston, MA 02115, USA.
elizabeth.engle@childrens.harvard.edu

Members of my research laboratory combine clinical, genetic, and molecular
biologic approaches to the study of congenital strabismus. Strabismus, which is
misalignment of the eyes, affects 2-4% of the population and causes loss of
binocular vision and amblyopia (vision loss in a structurally normal eye). The
cause of strabismus when it occurs in the absence of structural brain
abnormalities is generally unknown. In the last decade, we have focused our
research studies on understanding the genetic etiology of a series of complex
strabismus syndromes in which eye movement in at least one direction is limited
or paralyzed. We are discovering that these disorders result from mutations in
genes necessary for the normal development and connectivity of brainstem ocular
motoneurons, including PHOX2A, SALL4, KIF21A, ROBO3, and HOXA1, and we now refer 
to these syndromes as the "congenital cranial dysinnervation disorders," or CCDD.

PMID: 16492969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Biol Chem. 2006 Mar 10;281(10):6471-81. Epub 2005 Dec 22.

HOXA1 is required for E-cadherin-dependent anchorage-independent survival of
human mammary carcinoma cells.

Zhang X(1), Emerald BS, Mukhina S, Mohankumar KM, Kraemer A, Yap AS, Gluckman PD,
Lee KO, Lobie PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology, National
University of Singapore, 30 Medical Dr., Singapore 117609, Republic of Singapore.

Forced expression of HOXA1 is sufficient to stimulate oncogenic transformation of
immortalized human mammary epithelial cells and subsequent tumor formation. We
report here that the expression and transcriptional activity of HOXA1 are
increased in mammary carcinoma cells at full confluence. This
confluence-dependent expression of HOXA1 was abrogated by incubation of cells
with EGTA to produce loss of intercellular contact and rescued by extracellular
addition of Ca2+. Increased HOXA1 expression at full confluence was prevented by 
an E-cadherin function-blocking antibody and attachment of non-confluent cells to
a substrate by homophilic ligation of E-cadherin increased HOXA1 expression.
E-cadherin-directed signaling increased HOXA1 expression through Rac1. Increased 
HOXA1 expression consequent to E-cadherin-activated signaling decreased apoptotic
cell death and was required for E-cadherin-dependent anchorage-independent
proliferation of human mammary carcinoma cells. HOXA1 is therefore a downstream
effector of E-cadherin-directed signaling required for anchorage-independent
proliferation of mammary carcinoma cells.

PMID: 16373333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Nov 4;336(4):1033-9.

Polyhistidine tract expansions in HOXA1 result in intranuclear aggregation and
increased cell death.

Paraguison RC(1), Higaki K, Sakamoto Y, Hashimoto O, Miyake N, Matsumoto H,
Yamamoto K, Sasaki T, Kato N, Nanba E.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Functional Genomics, Research Center for Bioscience and
Technology, Tottori University, Yonago, Japan.

HOXA1 gene is part of a cluster of homeotic selector genes that regulates the
anteroposterior patterning of mammals during embryonic development. HOXA1 encodes
two alternatively spliced mRNAs with two isoforms, A and B, the former contains
the homeodomain and expressed in early embryonic development. HOXA1 contains a
string of 10 histidine repeats. However, individuals heterozygous for 7, 9, 11,
and 12 histidine repeat variants were present among the Japanese population,
notably in some autism cases. To determine the biological implications of the
different polyhistidine repeat lengths, we expressed these variants in COS-7 and 
a human neuroblastoma cell line (SK-N-SH). Expression of expanded variants of
HOXA1 isoform A, containing 11 and 12 polyhistidine, resulted in early and great 
degree of protein aggregation in the nucleus. This aggregation resulted in
accelerated cell death in cells expressing 11 and 12 expanded variants compared
to those transfected with 7 and 10 polyhistidine variants. Furthermore, we showed
that these aggregates were ubiquitinated and were inhibited by a
histidine-modifying compound, DEPC. These data suggest that HOXA1 protein with
polyhistidine tract expansions misfold, aggregate, and have a toxic effect on
cell.

PMID: 16168961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Nat Genet. 2005 Oct;37(10):1035-7. Epub 2005 Sep 11.

Homozygous HOXA1 mutations disrupt human brainstem, inner ear, cardiovascular and
cognitive development.

Tischfield MA(1), Bosley TM, Salih MA, Alorainy IA, Sener EC, Nester MJ, Oystreck
DT, Chan WM, Andrews C, Erickson RP, Engle EC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Program in Genomics, Children's Hospital Boston,
Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

We identified homozygous truncating mutations in HOXA1 in three genetically
isolated human populations. The resulting phenotype includes horizontal gaze
abnormalities, deafness, facial weakness, hypoventilation, vascular malformations
of the internal carotid arteries and cardiac outflow tract, mental retardation
and autism spectrum disorder. This is the first report to our knowledge of viable
homozygous truncating mutations in any human HOX gene and of a mendelian disorder
resulting from mutations in a human HOX gene critical for development of the
central nervous system.

PMID: 16155570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Development. 2005 Jun;132(12):2861-71.

Knockdown of the complete Hox paralogous group 1 leads to dramatic hindbrain and 
neural crest defects.

McNulty CL(1), Peres JN, Bardine N, van den Akker WM, Durston AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratory, Netherlands Institute for Developmental Biology,
Uppsalalaan 8, 3584 CT Utrecht, The Netherlands.

The Hox paralogous group 1 (PG1) genes are the first and initially most anterior 
Hox genes expressed in the embryo. In Xenopus, the three PG1 genes, Hoxa1, Hoxb1 
and Hoxd1, are expressed in a widely overlapping domain, which includes the
region of the future hindbrain and its associated neural crest. We used
morpholinos to achieve a complete knockdown of PG1 function. When Hoxa1, Hoxb1
and Hoxd1 are knocked down in combination, the hindbrain patterning phenotype is 
more severe than in the single or double knockdowns, indicating a degree of
redundancy for these genes. In the triple PG1 knockdown embryos the hindbrain is 
reduced and lacks segmentation. The patterning of rhombomeres 2 to 7 is lost,
with a concurrent posterior expansion of the rhombomere 1 marker, Gbx2. This
effect could be via the downregulation of other Hox genes, as we show that PG1
function is necessary for the hindbrain expression of Hox genes from paralogous
groups 2 to 4. Furthermore, in the absence of PG1 function, the cranial neural
crest is correctly specified but does not migrate into the pharyngeal arches.
Embryos with no active PG1 genes have defects in derivatives of the pharyngeal
arches and, most strikingly, the gill cartilages are completely missing. These
results show that the complete abrogation of PG1 function in Xenopus has a much
wider scope of effect than would be predicted from the single and double PG1
knockouts in other organisms.

PMID: 15930115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Oncol Rep. 2005 Apr;13(4):673-9.

Aberrant expression of HOX genes in human invasive breast carcinoma.

Makiyama K(1), Hamada J, Takada M, Murakawa K, Takahashi Y, Tada M, Tamoto E,
Shindo G, Matsunaga A, Teramoto K, Komuro K, Kondo S, Katoh H, Koike T, Moriuchi 
T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Kita-15, Nishi-7, Kita-ku, Sapporo 060-0815, Japan.

HOX genes are known not only as master genes that control the morphogenesis, but 
also as regulator genes that maintain tissue or organ specificity in the adult
body. We hypothesized that dysregulated expression of HOX genes was associated
with tumor development and malignant progression such as invasion and metastasis.
In this study, we analyzed the expression patterns of 39 HOX genes in human
invasive ductal breast cancer tissues and normal tissues by the real-time RT-PCR 
method. We found 11 HOX genes (HOXA1, A2, A3, A5, A9, C11, D3, D4, D8, D9 and
D10) expression levels of which were significantly different between cancerous
and normal tissues. All 10 genes except HOXC11 were expressed at lower levels in 
cancerous tissues than normal tissues. Comparing expression levels of each HOX
gene among the different types of cancer tissues, the expression level of HOXB7
was lower in lymph node metastasis-positive cancer tissues than negative cancer
tissues; those of HOXD12 and D13 were higher in progesterone receptor-positive
cancer tissues than negative cancer tissues; and the expression level of HOXC5
was lower in cancerous tissues with mutated-type p53 than in normal and cancerous
tissues with wild-type p53. These results suggest that the aberrant expression of
HOX genes is related to the development of breast cancer and malignant behavior
of cancer cells.

PMID: 15756441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 22;280(16):16484-98. Epub 2005 Feb 18.

Differences in gene expression between wild type and Hoxa1 knockout embryonic
stem cells after retinoic acid treatment or leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF)
removal.

Martinez-Ceballos E(1), Chambon P, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

Homeobox (Hox) genes encode a family of transcription factors that regulate
embryonic patterning and organogenesis. In embryos, alterations of the normal
pattern of Hox gene expression result in homeotic transformations and
malformations. Disruption of the Hoxa1 gene, the most 3' member of the Hoxa
cluster and a retinoic acid (RA) direct target gene, results in abnormal
ossification of the skull, hindbrain, and inner ear deficiencies, and neonatal
death. We have generated Hoxa1(-/-) embryonic stem (ES) cells (named Hoxa1-15)
from Hoxa1(-/-) mutant blastocysts to study the Hoxa1 signaling pathway. We have 
characterized in detail these Hoxa1(-/-) ES cells by performing microarray
analyses, and by this technique we have identified a number of putative Hoxa-1
target genes, including genes involved in bone development (e.g. Col1a1,
Postn/Osf2, and the bone sialoprotein gene or BSP), genes that are expressed in
the developing brain (e.g. Nnat, Wnt3a, BDNF, RhoB, and Gbx2), and genes involved
in various cellular processes (e.g. M-RAS, Sox17, Cdkn2b, LamA1, Col4a1, Foxa2,
Foxq1, Klf5, and Igf2). Cell proliferation assays and Northern blot analyses of a
number of ES cell markers (e.g. Rex1, Oct3/4, Fgf4, and Bmp4) suggest that the
Hoxa1 protein plays a role in the inhibition of cell proliferation by RA in ES
cells. Additionally, Hoxa1(-/-) ES cells express high levels of various
endodermal markers, including Gata4 and Dab2, and express much less Fgf5 after
leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) withdrawal. Finally, we propose a model in which
the Hoxa1 protein mediates repression of endodermal differentiation while
promoting expression of ectodermal and mesodermal characteristics.

PMID: 15722554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. J Biol Chem. 2005 Mar 18;280(11):10119-27. Epub 2005 Jan 15.

MEIS C termini harbor transcriptional activation domains that respond to cell
signaling.

Huang H(1), Rastegar M, Bodner C, Goh SL, Rambaldi I, Featherstone M.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, 3655 Promenade Sir William Osler,
Montréal, Québec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

MEIS proteins form heteromeric DNA-binding complexes with PBX monomers and
PBX.HOX heterodimers. We have shown previously that transcriptional activation by
PBX.HOX is augmented by either protein kinase A (PKA) or the histone deacetylase 
inhibitor trichostatin A (TSA). To examine the contribution of MEIS proteins to
this response, we used the chromatin immunoprecipitation assay to show that MEIS1
in addition to PBX1, HOXA1, and HOXB1 was recruited to a known PBX.HOX target,
the Hoxb1 autoregulatory element following Hoxb1 transcriptional activation in
P19 cells. Subsequent to TSA treatment, MEIS1 recruitment lagged behind that of
HOX and PBX partners. MEIS1A also enhanced the transcriptional activation of a
reporter construct bearing the Hoxb1 autoregulatory element after treatment with 
TSA. The MEIS1 homeodomain and protein-protein interaction with PBX contributed
to this activity. We further mapped TSA-responsive and CREB-binding
protein-dependent PKA-responsive transactivation domains to the MEIS1A and MEIS1B
C termini. Fine mutation of the 56-residue MEIS1A C terminus revealed four
discrete regions required for transcriptional activation function. All of the
mutations impairing the response to TSA likewise reduced activation by PKA,
implying a common mechanistic basis. C-terminal deletion of MEIS1 impaired
transactivation without disrupting DNA binding or complex formation with HOX and 
PBX. Despite sequence similarity to MEIS and a shared ability to form heteromeric
complexes with PBX and HOX partners, the PREP1 C terminus does not respond to TSA
or PKA. Thus, MEIS C termini possess transcriptional regulatory domains that
respond to cell signaling and confer functional differences between MEIS and PREP
proteins.

PMID: 15654074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2005 Jan;38(1):103-17. Epub 2004 Dec 8.

Molecular dynamics of the compensatory response to myocardial infarct.

LaFramboise WA(1), Bombach KL, Dhir RJ, Muha N, Cullen RF, Pogozelski AR, Turk D,
George JD, Guthrie RD, Magovern JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Allegheny General Hospital, Drexel
University School of Medicine, 320 East North Avenue, Pittsburgh, PA 15212, USA. 
laframboisewa@upmc.edu

Comment in
    J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2005 Apr;38(4):547-50.

Myocardial infarct via occlusion of the left anterior descending coronary in rats
caused overriding depression in transcription, signal transduction, inflammation 
and extracellular matrix pathways in the infarct zone within 24 h. In contrast,
remote zone gene expression was reciprocally activated during the immediate
post-infarct period. Infarct zone signal transduction occurred primarily through 
TGFbeta1 induction while the remote zone exhibited elevated WNT, NOTCH, GPCR and 
transmembrane signaling. A minimal day 1 acute phase, inflammatory response was
detected in the infarct zone while interleukins (IL1alpha, IL1beta, IL6,
IL12alpha, IL18) and the TNFalpha superfamily were activated in the remote zone. 
Different cytochrome subsets were activated in each left ventricular region on
day 1 while anti-oxidant genes were elevated only in the remote zone. The infarct
zone exhibited mixed early transcription factor activation across all binding
domains with a balance favoring constitutive gene activation and differentiation 
pathways as opposed to cell proliferation. In contrast, the remote zone exhibited
activation of extensive developmental transcription factors involved in
specification of cell phenotype, tissue-specific interactions and
position-specific cell proliferation on day 1. The day 28 infarct zone response
mirrored the day 1 remote zone response including activation of genes associated 
with matrix remodeling (metallothionein and metalloproteinase 9, 12, 23), as well
as genes associated with cell proliferation and phenotype specification (MYC,
EGR2, ATF3, HOXA1) recapitulating developmental histogenesis programs.

PMID: 15623427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Dev Biol. 2004 Dec 15;276(2):301-12.

Abnormalities of caudal pharyngeal pouch development in Pbx1 knockout mice mimic 
loss of Hox3 paralogs.

Manley NR(1), Selleri L, Brendolan A, Gordon J, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Life Sciences, B 420A, Athens, 
GA 30602, USA. nmanley@uga.edu

Pbx1 is a TALE-class homeodomain protein that functions in part as a cofactor for
Hox class homeodomain proteins. Previous analysis of the in vivo functions of
Pbx1 by targeted mutagenesis in mice has revealed roles for this gene in skeletal
patterning and development and in the organogenesis of multiple systems. Both RNA
expression and protein localization studies have suggested a possible role for
Pbx1 in pharyngeal region development. As several Hox mutants have distinct
phenotypes in this region, we investigated the potential requirement for Pbx1 in 
the development of the pharyngeal arches and pouches and their organ derivatives.
Pbx1 homozygous mutants exhibited delayed or absent formation of the caudal
pharyngeal pouches, and disorganized patterning of the third pharyngeal pouch.
Formation of the third pouch-derived thymus/parathyroid primordia was also
affected, with absent or hypoplastic primordia, delayed expression of
organ-specific differentiation markers, and reduced proliferation of thymic
epithelium. The fourth pouch and the fourth pouch-derived ultimobranchial bodies 
were usually absent. These phenotypes are similar to those previously reported in
Hoxa3(-/-) single mutants and Hoxa1(-/-);Hoxb1(-/-) or
Hoxa3(+/-);Hoxb3(-/-);Hoxd3(-/-) compound mutants, suggesting that Pbx1 acts
together with multiple Hox proteins in the development of the caudal pharyngeal
region. However, some aspects of the Pbx1 mutant phenotype included specific
defects that were less severe than those found in known Hox mutant mice,
suggesting that some functions of Hox proteins in this region are
Pbx1-independent.

PMID: 15581866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Int J Cancer. 2005 Apr 10;114(3):436-41.

Altered expressions of HOX genes in human cutaneous malignant melanoma.

Maeda K(1), Hamada J, Takahashi Y, Tada M, Yamamoto Y, Sugihara T, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

HOX genes act as master genes to control morphogenesis. In human, HOX genes form 
4 clusters composing 9 to 11 HOX genes (39 genes in total) on different
chromosomes. We hypothesized that aberrant expression of HOX genes was associated
with development and subsequent progression of melanoma and that the 39 HOX gene 
expression pattern determined the sites where melanoma grew. The expression
levels of 39 HOX genes in 15 human cutaneous melanoma specimens and 7 nevus
pigmentosus specimens were quantified by a comprehensive analysis system based on
the real-time RT-PCR method. We found that the expression levels of HOXA11, A13, 
B9, D12 and D13 in melanoma were higher than those in nevus pigmentosus and that 
the expression levels of HOXA11, B2 and C13 were significantly different between 
pT4 melanoma and pT1 to pT3 melanoma. It was most notable that the expression
levels of HOXA1, A2, C4 and B13 in melanoma with distant metastasis were higher
than those in melanoma without it. On the other hand, we found no relationship
between HOX genes expression patterns and the growing sites of melanoma. These
results indicated that the misexpressions of some specific HOX genes were
implicated in melanoma genesis and metastasis but had no linkage with melanoma
sites.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15551325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. J Neurosci. 2004 Oct 20;24(42):9383-90.

Induction of a parafacial rhythm generator by rhombomere 3 in the chick embryo.

Coutinho AP(1), Borday C, Gilthorpe J, Jungbluth S, Champagnat J, Lumsden A,
Fortin G.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Research Council Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College
London, Guy's Campus, London SE1 1UL, United Kingdom.

Observations of knock-out mice suggest that breathing at birth requires correct
development of a specific hindbrain territory corresponding to rhombomeres (r) 3 
and 4. Focusing on this territory, we examined the development of a neuronal
rhythm generator in the chick embryo. We show that rhythmic activity in r4 is
inducible after developmental stage 10 through interaction with r3. Although the 
nature of this interaction remains obscure, we find that the expression of
Krox20, a segmentation gene responsible for specifying r3 and r5, is sufficient
to endow other rhombomeres with the capacity to induce rhythmic activity in r4.
Induction is robust, because it can be reproduced with r2 and r6 instead of r4
and with any hindbrain territory that normally expresses Krox20 (r3, r5) or can
be forced to do so (r1, r4). Interestingly, the interaction between r4 and r3/r5 
that results in rhythm production can only take place through the anterior border
of r4, revealing a heretofore unsuspected polarity in individual rhombomeres. The
r4 rhythm generator appears to be homologous to a murine respiratory parafacial
neuronal system developing in r4 under the control of Krox20 and Hoxa1. These
results identify a late role for Krox20 at the onset of neurogenesis.

PMID: 15496674  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Gene Expr Patterns. 2004 Oct;4(6):671-85.

Hox/Pbx and Brn binding sites mediate Pax3 expression in vitro and in vivo.

Pruitt SC(1), Bussman A, Maslov AY, Natoli TA, Heinaman R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute,
Elm and Carlton Streets, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA. steven.pruitt@roswellpark.org

Pax3 is a paired-homeodomain class transcription factor that serves a role in
dorsal-ventral and medial-lateral patterning during vertebrate embryogenesis. Its
expression is localized to dorsal domains within the developing neural tube and
lateral domains within the developing somite. Additionally, modulation of its
expression occurs along the rostral-caudal axis. Previous studies [Development
124 (1997) 617] have localized sequence elements required for expression of Pax3 
in the neural tube and neural crest to a 1.6 kbp promoter fragment. In the
present study, four discrete DNA elements within the 1.6 kbp promoter fragment
are shown by electrophoretic mobility shift assays (EMSA) to exhibit sequence
specific interactions with proteins present in nuclear extracts from P19 EC cells
induced to express Pax3 by treatment with retinoic acid (RA). Proteins
interacting at each of these elements are identified based on biochemical
purification using DNA affinity chromatography or a candidate approach. These
identifications were confirmed by the ability of specific antibodies to
super-shift DNA-protein complexes in EMSA. Two of the four DNA sequence elements 
are shown to interact with the neural specific Pou-domain class III transcription
factors Brn1 and Brn2. The remaining sites contain either consensus binding
elements for heterodimers of Pbx and an anterior set of Hox family members, from 
paralogous groups 1-5, or monomeric Meis and are shown to interact with members
of the Pbx and Meis families. Ectopic expression of Brn2 plus HoxA1 but not
either factor alone, is sufficient to induce efficient expression from the
endogenous Pax3 promoter in P19 EC stem cells under conditions where they would
not otherwise express Pax3. Finally, in transgenic mice, mutation of either of
the Pou-domain protein binding sites results in reduced expression throughout the
neural tube while mutation of the Pbx/Hox binding site results in loss of
expression in the anterior domain in which Hox family members from paralogous
groups 1-5 are expressed. These observations demonstrate that binding elements
for both neural and anterior-posterior position specific transcription factors
mediate domains of Pax3 expression.

PMID: 15465489  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Oct;24(19):8567-75.

Loss of function but no gain of function caused by amino acid substitutions in
the hexapeptide of Hoxa1 in vivo.

Remacle S(1), Abbas L, De Backer O, Pacico N, Gavalas A, Gofflot F, Picard JJ,
Rezsöhazy R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Developmental Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium.

Homeodomain containing transcription factors of the Hox family play critical
roles in patterning the anteroposterior embryonic body axis, as well as in
controlling several steps of organogenesis. Several Hox proteins have been shown 
to cooperate with members of the Pbx family for the recognition and activation of
identified target enhancers. Hox proteins contact Pbx via a conserved hexapeptide
motif. Previous biochemical studies provided evidence that critical amino acid
substitutions in the hexapeptide sequence of Hoxa1 abolish its interaction with
Pbx. As a result, these substitutions also abolish Hoxa1 activity on known target
enhancers in cellular models, suggesting that Hoxa1 activity relies on its
capacity to interact with Pbx. Here, we show that mice with mutations in the
Hoxa1 hexapeptide display hindbrain, cranial nerve, and skeletal defects highly
reminiscent of those reported for the Hoxa1 loss of function. Since similar
hexapeptide mutations in the mouse Hoxb8 and the Drosophila AbdA proteins result 
in activity modulation and gain of function, our data demonstrate that the
functional importance of the hexapeptide in vivo differs according to the Hox
proteins.

PMCID: PMC516739
PMID: 15367676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2004 Dec;311(3):968-81. Epub 2004 Aug 9.

Epigenomic changes during leukemia cell differentiation: analysis of histone
acetylation and cytosine methylation using CpG island microarrays.

Nouzova M(1), Holtan N, Oshiro MM, Isett RB, Munoz-Rodriguez JL, List AF, Narro
ML, Miller SJ, Merchant NC, Futscher BW.

Author information: 
(1)Arizona Cancer Center, 1515 N. Campbell Ave., Tucson AZ 85724-5024, USA.

Dysregulation of epigenetic control is an important participant in
carcinogenesis. The PML/RAR alpha translocation in acute promyelocytic leukemia
(APL) is an example where the resultant fusion protein recruits histone
deacetylase complexes to target genes resulting in their inappropriate
transcriptional repression. All-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA) acts as a ligand that 
relieves this repression and produces an epigenetic transcriptional reprogramming
of the cancer cell. CpG island microarrays were used to analyze the DNA
methylation and histone acetylation state of the human APL cell line NB4 before
and after differentiation with ATRA as well as normal peripheral blood
mononuclear cells (PBMC). Over 70 CpG islands within 1 kb of transcription start 
of a known gene are aberrantly methylated in NB4 cells compared with PBMC;
however, no changes in cytosine methylation were detected following ATRA-induced 
differentiation. With respect to histone H4 acetylation, over 100 single-copy CpG
islands within 1 kb of transcription start of a known human gene became
hyperacetylated following ATRA-induced differentiation. One CpG island was
aberrantly methylated in NB4 cells, but became hyperacetylated and was induced
following ATRA treatment and was associated with the HoxA1 gene, suggesting it
may be a target gene of ATRA in APL. In addition to single-copy sequences, a
selective increase in acetylation was detected in satellite DNA when compared
with other high-copy sequences, such as Alu or rDNA. In summary, ATRA stimulates 
complex epigenomic changes during leukemic cell differentiation, and monitoring
these changes may help to identify new targets of epigenetic dysfunction.

PMID: 15302897  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. J Mol Evol. 2003;57 Suppl 1:S60-75.

The molecular basis for the evolution of the metazoan bodyplan: extracellular
matrix-mediated morphogenesis in marine demosponges.

Wiens M(1), Mangoni A, D'Esposito M, Fattorusso E, Korchagina N, Schröder HC,
Grebenjuk VA, Krasko A, Batel R, Müller IM, Müller WE.

Author information: 
(1)Institut für Physiologische Chemie, Abteilung Angewandte Molekularbiologie,
Universität, Duesbergweg 6, D-55099 Mainz, Germany.

Molecular data on development/differentiation and on comparative genomics allow
insights into the genetic basis of the evolution of a bodyplan. Sponges (phylum
Porifera) are animals that are the (still extant) stem group with the
hypothetical Urmetazoa as the earliest common ancestor of all metazoans; they
possess the basic features of the characteristic metazoan bodyplan also valid for
the animals of the crown taxa. Here we describe three homeobox genes from the
demosponge Suberites domuncula whose deduced proteins (HOXa1_SUBDO, HOXb1_SUBDO, 
HOXc1_SUBDO) are to be grouped with the Antennapedia class of homeoproteins
(subclasses TIx-Hox11 and NK-2). In addition, a cDNA encoding a LIM/homeobox
protein has been isolated which comprises high sequence similarity to the related
LIM homeodomain (HD) proteins in its LIM as well as in its HD domains. To
elucidate the potential function of these proteins in the sponge a new in vitro
system was developed. Primmorphs which are formed from dissociated cells were
grown on a homologous galectin matrix. This galectin cDNA was cloned and the
recombinant protein was used for the preparation of the matrix. The
galectin/polylysine matrix induced in primmorphs the formation of channels, one
major morphogenetic process in sponges. Under such conditions the expression of
the gene encoding the LIM/homeobox protein is strongly upregulated, while the
expression of the other homeobox genes remains unchanged or is even
downregulated. Competition experiments with galactosylceramides isolated from S. 
domuncula were performed. They revealed that a beta-galactosylceramide, named
Sdgal-1, prevented the expression of the LIM gene on the galectin matrix, while
Sdgal-2, a diglycosylceramide having a terminal alpha-glycosidically linked
galactose, caused no effect on the formation of channels in primmorphs or on LIM 
expression. This study demonstrates for the first time that an extracellular
matrix molecule, galectin, induces a morphogenetic process in sponges which is
very likely caused by a LIM/homeobox protein. Furthermore, a new model is
introduced (galectin-caused channel formation in sponge primmorphs) to
investigate basic pathways, thus allowing new insights into the functional
molecular evolution of Metazoa.

PMID: 15008404  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Biol Psychiatry. 2004 Feb 15;55(4):413-9.

Association between the HOXA1 A218G polymorphism and increased head circumference
in patients with autism.

Conciatori M(1), Stodgell CJ, Hyman SL, O'Bara M, Militerni R, Bravaccio C,
Trillo S, Montecchi F, Schneider C, Melmed R, Elia M, Crawford L, Spence SJ,
Muscarella L, Guarnieri V, D'Agruma L, Quattrone A, Zelante L, Rabinowitz D,
Pascucci T, Puglisi-Allegra S, Reichelt KL, Rodier PM, Persico AM.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Psychiatry and Neurogenetics, University Campus
Bio-Medico, Via Longoni 83, I-00155 Rome, Italy.

BACKGROUND: The HOXA1 gene plays a major role in brainstem and cranial
morphogenesis. The G allele of the HOXA1 A218G polymorphism has been previously
found associated with autism.
METHODS: We performed case-control and family-based association analyses,
contrasting 127 autistic patients with 174 ethnically matched controls, and
assessing for allelic transmission disequilibrium in 189 complete trios.
RESULTS: A, and not G, alleles were associated with autism using both
case-control (chi(2) = 8.96 and 5.71, 1 df, p <.005 and <.025 for genotypes and
alleles, respectively), and family-based (transmission/disequilibrium test chi(2)
= 8.80, 1 df, p <.005) association analyses. The head circumference of 31
patients carrying one or two copies of the G allele displayed significantly
larger median values (95.0th vs. 82.5th percentile, p <.05) and dramatically
reduced interindividual variability (p <.0001), compared with 166 patients
carrying the A/A genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: The HOXA1 A218G polymorphism explains approximately 5% of the
variance in the head circumference of autistic patients and represents to our
knowledge the first known gene variant providing sizable contributions to cranial
morphology. The disease specificity of this finding is currently being
investigated. Nonreplications in genetic linkage/association studies could partly
stem from the dyshomogeneous distribution of an endophenotype morphologically
defined by cranial circumference.

PMID: 14960295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Am J Med Genet B Neuropsychiatr Genet. 2004 Jan 1;124B(1):64-7.

No association between allelic variants of HOXA1/HOXB1 and autism.

Gallagher L(1), Hawi Z, Kearney G, Fitzgerald M, Gill M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Smurfit Institute for Genetics, Trinity College,
Dublin 2, Ireland. lgallagh@tcd.ie

Two recent studies have reported conflicting findings of association of a variant
in the HOXA1 gene and autism. To try to resolve the conflict in findings, we
conducted an association study in 78 Irish families of the reported DNA variants.
We did not find statistically significant association between the variants and
autism. Similarly there was no evidence of preferential transmission of variants 
from parent of either sex to affected offspring. We also report negative findings
for HOXB1 variants. We conclude that the HOXA1/B1 are unlikely to be the
susceptibility genes for autism in our sample.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14681917  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Development. 2003 Dec;130(23):5663-79. Epub 2003 Oct 1.

Neuronal defects in the hindbrain of Hoxa1, Hoxb1 and Hoxb2 mutants reflect
regulatory interactions among these Hox genes.

Gavalas A(1), Ruhrberg C, Livet J, Henderson CE, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Hox genes are instrumental in assigning segmental identity in the developing
hindbrain. Auto-, cross- and para-regulatory interactions help establish and
maintain their expression. To understand to what extent such regulatory
interactions shape neuronal patterning in the hindbrain, we analysed
neurogenesis, neuronal differentiation and motoneuron migration in Hoxa1, Hoxb1
and Hoxb2 mutant mice. This comparison revealed that neurogenesis and
differentiation of specific neuronal subpopulations in r4 was impaired in a
similar fashion in all three mutants, but with different degrees of severity. In 
the Hoxb1 mutants, neurons derived from the presumptive r4 territory were
re-specified towards an r2-like identity. Motoneurons derived from that territory
resembled trigeminal motoneurons in both their migration patterns and the
expression of molecular markers. Both migrating motoneurons and the resident
territory underwent changes consistent with a switch from an r4 to r2 identity.
Abnormally migrating motoneurons initially formed ectopic nuclei that were
subsequently cleared. Their survival could be prolonged through the introduction 
of a block in the apoptotic pathway. The Hoxa1 mutant phenotype is consistent
with a partial misspecification of the presumptive r4 territory that results from
partial Hoxb1 activation. The Hoxb2 mutant phenotype is a hypomorph of the Hoxb1 
mutant phenotype, consistent with the overlapping roles of these genes in facial 
motoneuron specification. Therefore, we have delineated the functional
requirements in hindbrain neuronal patterning that follow the establishment of
the genetic regulatory hierarchy between Hoxa1, Hoxb1 and Hoxb2.

PMID: 14522873  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. J Autism Dev Disord. 2003 Jun;33(3):343-8.

The HOXA1 A218G polymorphism and autism: lack of association in white and black
patients from the South Carolina Autism Project.

Collins JS(1), Schroer RJ, Bird J, Michaelis RC.

Author information: 
(1)J. C. Self Research Institute, Greenwood Genetic Center, Greenwood, South
Carolina 29646, USA.

A recent study has suggested that the A218G polymorphism in the homeobox A1
(HOXA1) gene may influence susceptibility to autism. We have determined the
frequencies of the A and G alleles of the HOXA1 A218G polymorphism in both white 
and black patients from the South Carolina Autism Project (SCAP) and controls.
Marked differences were found in allele frequencies between the races, but no
deviations from Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium were seen in either white or black
SCAP family members. More direct tests, comparing genotype frequencies between
probands and controls and tracking transmission of the A versus G alleles to
affected offspring, did not support the contention that allele status for the
HOXA1 A218G polymorphism influences one's susceptibility to autism.

PMID: 12908836  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Blood. 2003 Nov 15;102(10):3727-36. Epub 2003 Jul 31.

Comparative analysis of genes regulated by PML/RAR alpha and PLZF/RAR alpha in
response to retinoic acid using oligonucleotide arrays.

Park DJ(1), Vuong PT, de Vos S, Douer D, Koeffler HP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, University of
California, Los Angeles School of Medicine, 8700 Beverly Blvd, Rm 5433, Los
Angeles, CA 90048, USA. parkd@cshs.org

Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is associated with chromosomal translocations 
involving retinoic acid receptor alpha (RAR alpha) and its fusion partners
including promyelocytic leukemia (PML) and promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger
(PLZF). Using oligonucleotide arrays, we examined changes in global gene
expression mediated by the ectopic expression of either PML/RAR alpha
(retinoid-sensitive) or PLZF/RAR alpha (retinoid-resistant) in U937 cells. Of
more than 5000 genes analyzed, 16 genes were commonly up-regulated, and 57 genes 
were down-regulated by both fusion proteins suggesting their role in the APL
phenotype. In our APL model, for example, TNFAIP2, TNFR2, ELF4, RAR gamma, and
HoxA1 were down-regulated by both fusion proteins in the absence of retinoic acid
(RA). RA strongly up-regulated these genes in PML/RAR alpha, but not in PLZF/RAR 
alpha expressing U937 cells. Expression studies in NB4, retinoid-resistant
NB4-R2, normal human CD34+ cells, and APL patient samples strongly suggest their 
role in the regulation of granulocytic differentiation. Furthermore, combined
treatment with tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF alpha) and RA synergistically
enhanced granulocytic differentiation in NB4 cells but not in NB4-R2 cells. Our
data indicate that APL pathogenesis and retinoid-induced granulocytic
differentiation of APL cells involve genes in the cell death pathway, and that
cooperation between the RA and TNFalpha signaling pathways exists. Targeting both
the retinoid-dependent differentiation and the cell death pathways may improve
leukemic therapy, especially in retinoid-resistant acute myeloid leukemia.

PMID: 12893766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Mol Psychiatry. 2003 Aug;8(8):716-7.

Lack of association of HOXA1 and HOXB1 mutations and autism in Sicilian (Italian)
patients.

Romano V, Calì F, Mirisola M, Gambino G, D' Anna R, Di Rosa P, Seidita G,
Chiavetta V, Aiello F, Canziani F, De Leo G, Ayala GF, Elia M.

PMID: 12888798  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Cancer Sci. 2003 May;94(5):437-41.

Homeobox gene expression and mutation in cervical carcinoma cells.

Hung YC(1), Ueda M, Terai Y, Kumagai K, Ueki K, Kanda K, Yamaguchi H, Akise D,
Ueki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, China Medical College, Taiwan.
gyn017@poh.osaka-med.ac.jp

An association between deregulation of homeobox (HOX) gene expression and
oncogenic transformation has been recently reported in human tumors. In this
study, we investigated HOX gene expression and mutation in cervical carcinoma
cells. Using reverse transcription-PCR, 11 human cervical carcinoma cell lines
and 14 normal cervical tissue samples were examined for mRNA expression of the 39
class I HOX genes. DNA samples from 11 cell lines were tested for mutations in
exons 1 and 2 of the HOXA10 and A13 genes using overlapping primer pairs which
also cover intron 1 of these genes. HOXA1, B2, B4, C5, C10 and D13 genes were
expressed in 8, 7, 9, 9, 9 and 11 of 11 cervical carcinoma cell lines,
respectively, but not in any of the normal cervical tissues. HOXA9, A11, A13, B5,
C4, D3 and D9 genes were expressed in all cell lines and normal tissues. In
contrast, 13 of 39 HOX genes were silent in all materials examined. Single-strand
conformational polymorphism and sequence analysis revealed a C insertion after
base 1042 and/or a G to C substitution at base 1113 in intron 1 of the HOXA13
gene in 4 of 11 cell lines, however, neither deletions nor mutations were
detected in exons 1 and 2 of the HOX A10 and A13 genes. Our data suggest that the
expression of HOXA1, B2, B4, C5, C10 and D13 genes might be involved in the
process leading to the transformation of normal cervical cells.

PMID: 12824890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Dev Genes Evol. 2003 Aug;213(8):399-406. Epub 2003 May 14.

Conserved expression of Hoxa1 in neurons at the ventral forebrain/midbrain
boundary of vertebrates.

McClintock JM(1), Jozefowicz C, Assimacopoulos S, Grove EA, Louvi A, Prince VE.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Developmental Biology, Department of Organismal Biology and
Anatomy, University of Chicago, 1027 E 57th St, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The previously described expression patterns of zebrafish and mouse Hoxa1 genes
are seemingly very disparate, with mouse Hoxa1 expressed in the gastrula stage
hindbrain and the orthologous zebrafish hoxa1a gene expressed in cell clusters
within the ventral forebrain and midbrain. To investigate the evolution of Hox
gene deployment within the vertebrate CNS, we have performed a comparative
expression analysis of Hoxa1 orthologs in a range of vertebrate species,
comprising representatives from the two major lineages of vertebrates
(actinopterygians and sarcopterygians). We find that fore/midbrain expression of 
hoxa1a is conserved within the teleosts, as it is shared by the ostariophysan
teleost zebrafish (Danio rerio) and the distantly related acanthopterygian
teleost medaka (Oryzias latipes). Furthermore, we find that in addition to the
described gastrula stage hindbrain expression of mouse Hoxa1, there is a
previously unreported neurula stage expression domain, again located more
anteriorly at the ventral fore/midbrain boundary. A two-phase expression profile 
in early hindbrain and later fore/midbrain is shared by the other tetrapod model 
organisms chick and Xenopus. We show that the anterior Hoxa1 expression domain is
localized to the anterior terminus of the medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF) in
mouse, chick, and zebrafish. These findings suggest that anterior expression of
Hoxa1 is a primitive characteristic that is shared by the two major vertebrate
lineages. We conclude that Hox gene expression within the vertebrate CNS is not
confined exclusively to the segmented hindbrain and spinal cord, but rather that 
a presumptive fore/midbrain expression domain arose early in vertebrate origins
and has been conserved for at least 400 million years.

PMID: 12748854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Development. 2003 Jun;130(11):2525-34.

The regional pattern of retinoic acid synthesis by RALDH2 is essential for the
development of posterior pharyngeal arches and the enteric nervous system.

Niederreither K(1), Vermot J, Le Roux I, Schuhbaur B, Chambon P, Dollé P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, BP 10142, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, CU de
Strasbourg, France.

Targeted inactivation of the mouse retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2
(RALDH2/ALDH1a2), the enzyme responsible for early embryonic retinoic acid
synthesis, is embryonic lethal because of defects in early heart morphogenesis.
Transient maternal RA supplementation from E7.5 to (at least) E8.5 rescues most
of these defects, but the supplemented Raldh2(-/-) mutants die prenatally, from a
lack of septation of the heart outflow tract (Niederreither, K., Vermot, J.,
Messaddeq, N., Schuhbaur, B., Chambon, P. and Dollé, P. (2001). Development 128, 
1019-1031). We have investigated the developmental basis for this defect, and
found that the RA-supplemented Raldh2(-/-) embryos exhibit impaired development
of their posterior (3rd-6th) branchial arch region. While the development of the 
first and second arches and their derivatives, as well as the formation of the
first branchial pouch, appear to proceed normally, more posterior pharyngeal
pouches fail to form and the pharyngeal endoderm develops a rudimentary,
pouch-like structure. All derivatives of the posterior branchial arches are
affected. These include the aortic arches, pouch-derived organs (thymus,
parathyroid gland) and post-otic neural crest cells, which fail to establish
segmental migratory pathways and are misrouted caudally. Patterning and axonal
outgrowth of the posterior (9th-12th) cranial nerves is also altered. Vagal crest
deficiency in Raldh2(-/-) mutants leads to agenesis of the enteric ganglia, a
condition reminiscent of human Hirschprung's disease. In addition, we provide
evidence that: (i) wildtype Raldh2 expression is restricted to the posteriormost 
pharyngeal mesoderm; (ii) endogenous RA response occurs in both the pharyngeal
endoderm and mesoderm, and extends more rostrally than Raldh2 expression up to
the 2nd arch; (iii) RA target genes (Hoxa1, Hoxb1) are downregulated in both the 
pharyngeal endoderm and mesoderm of mutant embryos. Thus, RALDH2 plays a crucial 
role in producing RA required for pharyngeal development, and RA is one of the
diffusible mesodermal signals that pattern the pharyngeal endoderm.

PMID: 12702665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Am J Med Genet A. 2003 Feb 15;117A(1):47-56.

Facial dysgenesis: a novel facial syndrome with chromosome 7 deletion p15.1-21.1.

Hoover-Fong JE(1), Cai J, Cargile CB, Thomas GH, Patel A, Griffin CA, Jabs EW,
Hamosh A.

Author information: 
(1)McKusick-Nathans Institute of Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University,
Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA. doctorhoover@yahoo.com

We describe a female neonate with a unique constellation of features including
anophthalmia and cryptophthalmos, temporal remnant "eye tags," bilateral cleft
lip, unilateral cleft palate, a proboscis with absent nasal septum, choanal
atresia, micrognathia, square stoma, and bilateral external auditory canal
atresia. Gross brain structure, pituitary function, limbs, trunk, and genitalia
were normal. Skeletal survey, echocardiogram and abdominal viscera were
unremarkable except for a split central sinus of the right kidney. BAER exam
indicated she could hear and temporal CT confirmed the presence of cochlea and
possible ossicles. Cytogenetic evaluation revealed an interstitial deletion at
chromosome 7p15.1-21.1. TWIST, a gene encoding a transcription factor involved in
craniofacial development, is deleted by FISH analysis. The absence of a mutation 
on the non-deleted allele of TWIST as determined by sequencing virtually
eliminates complete loss of the TWIST gene as the cause of this patient's severe 
phenotype. The HOXA gene cluster also encodes transcription factors that are
crucial for directing cephalad to caudad somatic fetal development. HOXA1, the
most telomeric of the 13 members of the HOXA gene cluster, is located at the
centromeric boundary of the patient's chromosome 7 deletion. By FISH analysis,
neither allele of HOXA1 is deleted and sequencing reveals no mutations.
Haploinsufficiency or complete loss of the HOXA1 gene also does not appear to
cause this patient's severe phenotype. Previous reports of chromosome 7p15-21
deletions do not have phenotypes similar to this patient.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12548740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. J Biol Chem. 2003 Feb 28;278(9):7580-90. Epub 2002 Dec 13.

Human growth hormone-regulated HOXA1 is a human mammary epithelial oncogene.

Zhang X(1), Zhu T, Chen Y, Mertani HC, Lee KO, Lobie PE.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular and Cell Biology and Department of Medicine, National
University of Singapore, 30 Medical Dr., Singapore 117609, Republic of Singapore.

Increased mammary epithelial expression of the human growth hormone (hGH) gene is
associated with the acquisition of pathological proliferation. We report here
that autocrine hGH production by human mammary carcinoma cells increased the
expression and transcriptional activity of the homeobox domain containing protein
HOXA1. Forced expression of HOXA1 in human mammary carcinoma cells resulted in
increased total cell number primarily by the promotion of cell survival mediated 
by the transcriptional up-regulation of Bcl-2. HOXA1 also abrogated the apoptotic
response of mammary carcinoma cells to doxorubicin. Forced expression of HOXA1 in
mammary carcinoma cells, in a Bcl-2-dependent manner, resulted in dramatic
enhancement of anchorage-independent proliferation and colony formation in soft
agar. Finally, forced expression of HOXA1 was sufficient to result in the
oncogenic transformation of immortalized human mammary epithelial cells with
aggressive in vivo tumor formation. Herein, we have therefore provided a
molecular mechanism by which autocrine hGH stimulation of human mammary
epithelial cells may result in oncogenic transformation.

PMID: 12482855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. J Med Genet. 2002 Nov;39(11):e70.

No association between HOXA1 and HOXB1 genes and autism spectrum disorders (ASD).

Talebizadeh Z, Bittel DC, Miles JH, Takahashi N, Wang CH, Kibiryeva N, Butler MG.

PMCID: PMC1735009
PMID: 12414832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Dev Dyn. 2002 Nov;225(3):305-15.

Targeted insertion results in a rhombomere 2-specific Hoxa2 knockdown and ectopic
activation of Hoxa1 expression.

Ren SY(1), Angrand PO, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Illkirch Cedex, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Recent studies indicated that retention of selectable marker cassettes in
targeted Hox loci may cause unexpected phenotypes in mutant mice, due to
neighborhood effects. However, the molecular mechanisms have been poorly
investigated. Here, we analysed the effects of the targeted insertion of a
PGK-neo cassette in the 3' untranslated region of Hoxa2. Even at this 3'
position, the insertion resulted in homozygous mutants that unexpectedly did not 
survive beyond 3 weeks of age. Molecular analysis of the targeted allele revealed
a selective "knockdown" of Hoxa2 expression in rhombomere 2 and associated
patterning abnormalities. Moreover, Hoxa1 was ectopically expressed in the
hindbrain and branchial arches of mutant embryos. Of interest, we demonstrated
that the ectopic expression was due to the generation of neo-Hoxa1 fusion
transcripts, resulting from aberrant alternative splicing. These defects could be
rescued after removal of the PGK-neo cassette by Flp-mediated recombination.
These results underscore the complexity of transcriptional regulation at Hox loci
and provide insights into the in vivo regulation of Hoxa2 segmental expression.
They also provide a molecular basis for the interpretation of unexpected Hox
knockout phenotypes in which the targeted selectable marker is retained in the
locus.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12412013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Cas Lek Cesk. 2002 Jun 21;141(12):381-7.

[Genetic study of 20 patients with autism disorders].

[Article in Czech]

Havlovicová M(1), Propper L, Novotná D, Musová Z, Hrdlicka M, Sedlácek Z.

Author information: 
(1)Ustav biologie a lékarské genetiky, LF UK a FNM, Praha.
marketa.havlovicova@lfmotol.cuni.cz

BACKGROUND: Many observations indicate that genetic factors play an important
role in the aetiology of autism. Up to now, however, no genetic markers have been
convincingly identified which influence the predisposition to this disorder.
Complex genetic analysis of autistic patients and their families may therefore
lead to the identification of features which could help to direct further search 
for the predisposing genes.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We have analysed a sample of 20 patients with autism
spectrum disorders. The patients have been subjected to clinical genetic
examination, cytogenetic analysis and DNA analysis of the FMR1 gene. In the
sample studied we have observed more boys (15/20), various degree of mental
retardation (18/20), high frequency of complications during pregnancy (10/20) and
delivery (10/20), increased incidence of psychiatric disorders, behavioural
abnormalities and suicides among the relatives, and increased head circumference 
and unusually formed ears in the probands. Three patients had different
chromosomal aberrations or variants (t(21;22), inv(9) and inv(10)). One patient
harboured expansion of the trinucleotide repeat sequence in the FMR1 gene on the 
full mutation level which is characteristic for the fragile X syndrome, and one
patient is suspected to suffer from the Rett syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: Our observations confirm and extend the results reported in the
literature. Most interesting are mainly the macrocephaly which may be associated 
with the recently described increased neonatal levels of neural growth factors in
autistic individuals, ear malformations which may indicate aberrations in the
HOXA1 gene pathway, the occurrence of chromosomal inversions recurrent in autism,
and peculiarities in the pedigrees of the patients.

PMID: 12238024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Aug 8;114(6):667-72.

No evidence for linkage of liability to autism to HOXA1 in a sample from the CPEA
network.

Devlin B(1), Bennett P, Cook EH Jr, Dawson G, Gonen D, Grigorenko EL, McMahon W, 
Pauls D, Smith M, Spence MA, Schellenberg GD; Collaborative Programs of
Excellence in Autism (CPEA) Genetics Network.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pittsburgh, School of Medicine,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, USA.

A recent study by Ingram et al. [2000b: Teratology 62:393-405] suggests a
(His)73(Arg) polymorphism (A:G) in HOXA1 contributes substantially to a liability
for autism. Using 68 individuals diagnosed with Autism Spectrum Disorders, they
found a significant dearth of G homozygotes and biased transmission of G alleles 
from parents to affected offspring, especially from mothers. Because the
connection between HOXA1 and liability to autism is compelling, we attempted to
replicate their finding using a larger, independent sample from the Collaborative
Programs of Excellence in Autism (CPEA) network. In our data, genotype
frequencies conform to Hardy-Weinberg equilibrium; allele transmissions meet
Mendelian expectations; and there is no obvious sex-biased allele transmission.
Based on our sample size, calculations suggest that we would have at least 95%
power to detect linkage and association even if the A:G polymorphism were to
account for only 1% of the heritability of autism. Therefore, although we cannot 
exclude the possibility that the samples in the two studies are intrinsically
different, our data from our sample argue against a major role for HOXA1
(His)73(Arg) in liability to autism.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12210285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2002 Jul;131(1-2):5-13.

Early development of respiratory rhythm generation in mouse and chick.

Chatonnet F(1), Thoby-Brisson M, Abadie V, Domínguez del Toro E, Champagnat J,
Fortin G.

Author information: 
(1)U.P.R. 2216, Neurobiologie Génétique et Intégrative, IFR 2118 Institut de
Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard, C.N.R.S., 1, av. de la Terrasse, 91198
Gif-sur-Yvette, France. fabrice.chatonnet@iaf.cnrs-gif.fr

We are investigating neuronal circuits resulting from conservative developmental 
mechanisms orchestrating the segmentation of the vertebrates hindbrain into
compartments called rhombomeres (r). Segmentation transcription factors Hoxa1,
Krox20 and kreisler are expressed in the future rhombomeres r4-r5, r3 and r5,
r5-r6, respectively. In mice, the in vivo and in vitro analysis of neuronal
groups after inactivation of these three genes revealed distinct postnatal
respiratory phenotypes associated with defects of central respiratory controls
resulting from deletion, neoformation or reconfiguration of modular circuits. In 
chick and mice, we have found neuronal rhythm generators that conform to the
rhombomeric anatomical pattern as early as at the end of the segmentation. By
isolating chick hindbrain segments in vitro, we have also identified rhombomeric 
motifs allowing the formation or deletion of a specific (GABAergic)
rhythm-promoting module. Therefore, primordial rhombomeric organization of the
hindbrain seems to determine a modular organization of the rhythmogenic network, 
thereby influencing later function of brainstem respiratory control networks.

PMID: 12106991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. Nucleic Acids Res. 2002 Jun 15;30(12):2663-8.

Changing homeodomain residues 2 and 3 of Hoxa1 alters its activity in a cell-type
and enhancer dependent manner.

Remacle S(1), Shaw-Jackson C, Matis C, Lampe X, Picard J, Rezsöhazy R.

Author information: 
(1)Unité de Génétique du Développement, UCL 7382, Université Catholique de
Louvain, B-1200 Bruxelles, Belgium.

The second and third amino acid residues of the N-terminal arm of most Hox
protein homeodomains are basic (lysine or arginine), whereas they are asparagine 
and alanine, respectively, in the Hoxa1 homeodomain. Previous reports pinpointed 
these residues as specificity determinants in the function of Hoxa1 when it is
acting as a monomer. However, in vitro data supported that these residues do not 
influence the target specificity of Hoxa1 in Pbx1a-Hoxa1 heterodimers. Here, we
have analysed the transcriptional activity of a Hoxa1(NA-KR) mutant for which the
asparagine and alanine residues of the homeodomain have been replaced by lysine
and arginine, respectively. Comparison between the wild-type and mutant Hoxa1
reveals that they show distinct activity on the TSEII enhancer of the
somatostatin gene, but that they are equally active in the presence of Pbx and
Prep cofactors. This therefore corroborates the biochemical evidence having shown
that the second and third residues of the homeodomain do not contribute to the
DNA binding of Hoxa1-Pbx dimers. However, on the hoxb1 autoregulatory enhancer,
Hoxa1 and Hoxa1(NA-KR) may display distinct activity despite the presence of Pbx,
in a cell-type dependent manner. Therefore, our data suggest that, depending on
the enhancer, these residues may contribute to the functional specificity of
Hoxa1 and that this contribution may not be abrogated by the interaction with
Pbx.

PMCID: PMC117285
PMID: 12060683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Med Hypotheses. 2002 Apr;58(4):337-9.

Minor form of trigonocephaly is an autistic skull shape? A suggestion based on
homeobox gene variants and MECP2 mutations.

Ijichi S(1), Ijichi N.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for EGT, Satsuma-gun, Kagoshima, Japan. jyajya@po.synapse.ne.jp

A possible role for Hoxa1 genotype in susceptibility to autism spectrum disorders
was recently proposed. Furthermore, it has been demonstrated that Rett syndrome, 
which is categorized into pervasive developmental disorders the same as the
autism spectrum disorders are, is associated with mutations in MECP2 gene. These 
findings suggest that the genetic backgrounds of these behavioral conditions may 
involve genes which also have an important role in the development of skull,
because Hoxa1 is a key gene for skull development as well as for brain
development and one of the clinical characteristics of Rett syndrome is
deceleration in head growth. Together with this evolving knowledge, a series of
ethical arguments concerning the indication of surgical treatment in patients
with minor forms of trigonocephaly with autistic behaviors and/or hyperactivity
leads us to hypothesize the presence of an autism subtype which may frequently be
accompanied by specific morphological skull characteristics (autistic skull
shape).

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 12027529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Development. 2002 May;129(10):2339-54.

Knockdown of duplicated zebrafish hoxb1 genes reveals distinct roles in hindbrain
patterning and a novel mechanism of duplicate gene retention.

McClintock JM(1), Kheirbek MA, Prince VE.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Developmental Biology, The University of Chicago, 1027 E 57th
Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

We have used a morpholino-based knockdown approach to investigate the functions
of a pair of zebrafish Hox gene duplicates, hoxb1a and hoxb1b, which are
expressed during development of the hindbrain. We find that the zebrafish hoxb1
duplicates have equivalent functions to mouse Hoxb1 and its paralogue Hoxa1.
Thus, we have revealed a 'function shuffling' among genes of paralogue group 1
during the evolution of vertebrates. Like mouse Hoxb1, zebrafish hoxb1a is
required for migration of the VIIth cranial nerve branchiomotor neurons from
their point of origin in hindbrain rhombomere 4 towards the posterior. By
contrast, zebrafish hoxb1b, like mouse Hoxa1, is required for proper segmental
organization of rhombomere 4 and the posterior hindbrain. Double knockdown
experiments demonstrate that the zebrafish hoxb1 duplicates have partially
redundant functions. However, using an RNA rescue approach, we reveal that these 
duplicated genes do not have interchangeable biochemical functions: only hoxb1a
can properly pattern the VIIth cranial nerve. Despite this difference in protein 
function, we provide evidence that the hoxb1 duplicate genes were initially
maintained in the genome because of complementary degenerative mutations in
defined cis-regulatory elements.

PMID: 11973267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Int J Oncol. 2002 Apr;20(4):735-8.

Alternately spliced luteinizing hormone/human chorionic gonadotropin receptor
mRNA in human breast epithelial cells.

Jiang X(1), Russo IH, Russo J.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Resarch Laboratory, Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, PA
19111, USA.

Luteinizing hormone (LH)/human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) bind to a common
transmembrane glycoprotein receptor, which is a member of the G protein-coupled
receptor family. In human, the LH/hCG receptor gene is composed of 11 exons and
10 introns and its coding region is over 60 kb long. Human chorionic gonadotropin
is a glycoprotein hormone containing a cystine-knot folding motif that is found
in peptide growth factors known to activate the expression of homeogenes. In the 
present work we present evidence that hCG down-regulates all the three
transcripts of HOXA1 at early stages of hCG treatment in the immortalized human
breast epithelial cells (MCF-10F), whereas HOXA1-S1, the largest transcript, as
well as HOXA1-S3, the smallest transcript, were up-regulated in the cancer cell
lines MDA-MB-231 and MCF-7, respectively. This divergent reaction of hCG was
associated with the pattern of LH/hCG receptors and splicing forms expression in 
human breast epithelial cells. MCF-10F cells expressed the full-length (1191 bp) 
compared with the cancer-derived cells MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 that was weakly or
not expressed. Isoform 1 (1117 bp) was silent in MCF-10F and expressed weakly in 
the cancer cells. The isoforms 2 (1006 bp) and 3 (932 bp) of LH/hCG gene receptor
were silent in all the cell lines, whereas isoforms 4 (892 bp), 6 (626 bp) and 7 
(441 bp) were silent in MCF-10F cells and expressed in the cancer cell lines.
Instead isoform 5 (707 bp) showed in the three cell lines the strongest
expression in MCF-10F cells. This difference in the expression of alternate
splicing of LH/hCG receptor mRNA among the MCF-10F, MCF-7 and MDA-MB-231 cells,
may explain the divergent response of these cells to HOXA1 activation by hCG.

PMID: 11894118  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Am J Med Genet. 2002 Jan 8;114(1):24-30.

Lack of association between HoxA1 and HoxB1 gene variants and autism in 110
multiplex families.

Li J(1), Tabor HK, Nguyen L, Gleason C, Lotspeich LJ, Spiker D, Risch N, Myers
RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305, USA.

A recent report suggested that the HoxA1 and/or HoxB1 genes play a role in
susceptibility to autism. To determine whether these findings could be confirmed,
we screened these genes for DNA polymorphisms by sequencing all exons in 24
individuals with autism. We identified the same sequence variants in the genes
that appeared in this report, which include one single-base substitution variant 
in HoxA1 and a common haplotype in HoxB1. We performed an association study by
applying the transmission disequilibrium test to detect possible association of
these variants to autism in 110 multiplex families. Our results demonstrated no
deviation from the null hypothesis of no association. We have also separately
examined transmissions within individual mating types, for paternal versus
maternal alleles, to affected versus unaffected children, and for transmission to
affected boys versus girls. None of these subsets revealed significant deviation 
from the null expectation. Our interpretation of these findings is that it is
unlikely that HoxA1 and HoxB1 play a significant role in the genetic
predisposition to autism.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11840501  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Mol Reprod Dev. 2001 Nov;60(3):297-301.

Expression of homeobox-containing genes in cDNA libraries derived from cattle
oocytes and preimplantation stage embryo.

Ponsuksili S(1), Wimmers K, Adjaye J, Schellander K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding Science, University of Bonn, Endenicher Allee,
53115 Bonn, Germany. spon@itz.uni-bonn.de

The homeobox-containing gene family plays a pivotal role in regulating,
patterning, and axial morphogenesis in the developing embryo. But there is still 
very little known about the expression and function of these genes in mammalian
oocytes and preimplantation stage embryos. In this study we have used degenerate 
primers corresponding to the highly conserved regions of Antennapedia class
homeodomains as a rapid and an efficient method to survey bovine cDNA libraries
derived from unfertilised oocytes, single 2-cell, 4-cell, 8-cell, morula, and
blastocyst stage embryos for the presence of homeobox sequences. Our results
provide, for the first time, evidence for the transcription of Hoxa3 and Hoxd1 in
oocytes; Cdx1 and Cdx2 in the 2-cell; Cdx1, Hoxa1, Hoxd1, and Hoxd4 in the
4-cell; Cdx1, Hoxa1, and Hoxc9 in the 8-cell; Cdx2, Hoxb9, and Hoxc9 in the
morula; Cdx2, Hoxb7, Hoxb9, and Hoxc9 in blastocyst stage cattle embryos. These
are candidate genes for the developmental capacity of in vivo and in vitro
produced bovine embryos.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11599040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Development. 2001 Aug;128(15):3017-27.

Synergy between Hoxa1 and Hoxb1: the relationship between arch patterning and the
generation of cranial neural crest.

Gavalas A(1), Trainor P, Ariza-McNaughton L, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 have overlapping synergistic roles in patterning the hindbrain
and cranial neural crest cells. The combination of an ectoderm-specific
regulatory mutation in the Hoxb1 locus and the Hoxa1 mutant genetic background
results in an ectoderm-specific double mutation, leaving the other germ layers
impaired only in Hoxa1 function. This has allowed us to examine neural crest and 
arch patterning defects that originate exclusively from the neuroepithelium as a 
result of the simultaneous loss of Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 in this tissue. Using
molecular and lineage analysis in this double mutant background we demonstrate
that presumptive rhombomere 4, the major site of origin of the second pharyngeal 
arch neural crest, is reduced in size and has lost the ability to generate neural
crest cells. Grafting experiments using wild-type cells in cultured normal or
double mutant mouse embryos demonstrate that this is a cell-autonomous defect,
suggesting that the formation or generation of cranial neural crest has been
uncoupled from segmental identity in these mutants. Furthermore, we show that
loss of the second arch neural crest population does not have any adverse
consequences on early patterning of the second arch. Signalling molecules are
expressed correctly and pharyngeal pouch and epibranchial placode formation are
unaffected. There are no signs of excessive cell death or loss of proliferation
in the epithelium of the second arch, suggesting that the neural crest cells are 
not the source of any indispensable mitogenic or survival signals. These results 
illustrate that Hox genes are not only necessary for proper axial specification
of the neural crest but that they also play a vital role in the generation of
this population itself. Furthermore, they demonstrate that early patterning of
the separate components of the pharyngeal arches can proceed independently of
neural crest cell migration.

PMID: 11532923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Nat Genet. 2001 Sep;29(1):34-9.

Retinoic acid rescues inner ear defects in Hoxa1 deficient mice.

Pasqualetti M(1), Neun R, Davenne M, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, BP 163-67404 Illkirch Cedex, C.U. de
Strasbourg, France.

Little is known about the genetic pathways involved in the early steps of inner
ear morphogenesis. Hoxa1 is transiently expressed in the developing hindbrain;
its targeted inactivation in mice results in severe abnormalities of the otic
capsule and membranous labyrinth. Here we show that a single maternal
administration of a low dose of the vitamin A metabolite retinoic acid is
sufficient to compensate the requirement for Hoxa1 function. It rescues cochlear 
and vestibular defects in mutant fetuses without affecting the development of the
wildtype fetuses. These results identify a temporal window of susceptibility to
retinoids that is critical for mammalian inner ear specification, and provide the
first evidence that a subteratogenic dose of vitamin A derivative can be
effective in rescuing a congenital defect in the mammalian embryo.

PMID: 11528388  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Development. 2001 Jul;128(13):2471-84.

Consequences of Hox gene duplication in the vertebrates: an investigation of the 
zebrafish Hox paralogue group 1 genes.

McClintock JM(1), Carlson R, Mann DM, Prince VE.

Author information: 
(1)Committee on Developmental Biology, The University of Chicago, 1027 E 57th
Street, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

As a result of a whole genome duplication event in the lineage leading to
teleosts, the zebrafish has seven clusters of Hox patterning genes, rather than
four, as described for tetrapod vertebrates. To investigate the consequences of
this genome duplication, we have carried out a detailed comparison of genes from 
a single Hox paralogue group, paralogue group (PG) 1. We have analyzed the
sequences, expression patterns and potential functions of all four of the
zebrafish PG1 Hox genes, and compared our data with that available for the three 
mouse genes. As the basic functions of Hox genes appear to be tightly
constrained, comparison with mouse data has allowed us to identify specific
changes in the developmental roles of Hox genes that have occurred during
vertebrate evolution. We have found variation in expression patterns, amino acid 
sequences within functional domains, and potential gene functions both within the
PG1 genes of zebrafish, and in comparison to mouse PG1 genes. We observed novel
expression patterns in the midbrain, such that zebrafish hoxa1a and hoxc1a are
expressed anterior to the domain traditionally thought to be under Hox patterning
control. The hoxc1a gene shows significant coding sequence changes in known
functional domains, which correlate with a reduced capacity to cause
posteriorizing transformations. Moreover, the hoxb1 duplicate genes have
differing functional capacities, suggesting divergence after duplication. We also
find that an intriguing function 'shuffling' between paralogues has occurred,
such that one of the zebrafish hoxb1 duplicates, hoxb1b, performs the role in
hindbrain patterning played in mouse by the non-orthologous Hoxa1 gene.

PMID: 11493564  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. J Neurosci. 2001 Aug 1;21(15):5637-42.

Generation of a novel functional neuronal circuit in Hoxa1 mutant mice.

del Toro ED(1), Borday V, Davenne M, Neun R, Rijli FM, Champagnat J.

Author information: 
(1)Neurobiologie Génétique et Intégrative, Unité Propre de Recherche 2216, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique (CNRS), 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

Early organization of the vertebrate brainstem is characterized by cellular
segmentation into compartments, the rhombomeres, which follow a metameric pattern
of neuronal development. Expression of the homeobox genes of the Hox family
precedes rhombomere formation, and analysis of mouse Hox mutations revealed that 
they play an important role in the establishment of rhombomere-specific neuronal 
patterns. However, segmentation is a transient feature, and a dramatic
reconfiguration of neurons and synapses takes place during fetal and postnatal
stages. Thus, it is not clear whether the early rhombomeric pattern of Hox
expression has any influence on the establishment of the neuronal circuitry of
the mature brainstem. The Hoxa1 gene is the earliest Hox gene expressed in the
developing hindbrain. Moreover, it is rapidly downregulated. Previous analysis of
mouse Hoxa1(-/-) mutants has focused on early alterations of hindbrain
segmentation and patterning. Here, we show that ectopic neuronal groups in the
hindbrain of Hoxa1(-/-) mice establish a supernumerary neuronal circuit that
escapes apoptosis and becomes functional postnatally. This system develops from
mutant rhombomere 3 (r3)-r4 levels, includes an ectopic group of progenitors with
r2 identity, and integrates the rhythm-generating network controlling respiration
at birth. This is the first demonstration that changes in Hox expression patterns
allow the selection of novel neuronal circuits regulating vital adaptive
behaviors. The implications for the evolution of brainstem neural networks are
discussed.

PMID: 11466434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jun 8;276(23):20506-15. Epub 2001 Mar 1.

The recruitment of SOX/OCT complexes and the differential activity of HOXA1 and
HOXB1 modulate the Hoxb1 auto-regulatory enhancer function.

Di Rocco G(1), Gavalas A, Popperl H, Krumlauf R, Mavilio F, Zappavigna V.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT-Istituto Scientifico H. San Raffaele, Via Olgettina 58, 20132 Milano,
Italy.

Regionally restricted expression patterns of Hox genes in developing embryos rely
on auto-, cross-, and para-regulatory transcriptional elements. One example is
the Hoxb1 auto-regulatory element (b1-ARE), which drives expression of Hoxb1 in
the fourth rhombomere of the hindbrain. We previously showed that HOXB1 and PBX1 
activate transcription from the b1-ARE by binding to sequences required for the
expression of a reporter gene in rhombomere 4 in vivo. We now report that in
embryonal carcinoma cells, which retain characteristics of primitive
neuroectodermal cells, the b1-ARE displays higher basal and HOX/PBX-induced
activities than in other cell backgrounds. We have identified a bipartite-binding
site for SOX/OCT heterodimers within the b1-ARE that accounts for its cell
context-specific activity and is required for maximal transcriptional activity of
HOX/PBX complexes in embryonal carcinoma cells. Furthermore, we found that in an 
embryonal carcinoma cell background, HOXB1 has a significantly higher
transcriptional activity than its paralog HOXA1. We map the determinants for this
differential activity within the HOXB1 N-terminal transcriptional activation
domain. By using analysis in transgenic and HOXA1 mutant mice, we extended these 
findings on the differential activities of HOXA1 and HOXB1 in vivo, and we
demonstrated that they are important for regulating aspects of HOXB1 expression
in the hindbrain. We found that mutation of the SOX/OCT site and targeted
inactivation of Hoxa1 both impair the response of the b1-ARE to retinoic acid in 
transgenic mice. Our results show that Hoxa1 is the primary mediator of the
response of b1-ARE to retinoic acid in vivo and that this function is dependent
on the binding of SOX/OCT heterodimers to the b1-ARE. These results uncover novel
functional differences between Hox paralogs and their modulators.

PMID: 11278854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Dev Biol. 2001 Mar 15;231(2):410-9.

Formation of the middle ear: recent progress on the developmental and molecular
mechanisms.

Mallo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stübeweg 51, Freiburg, D-79108, Germany. mallo@immunobio.mpg.de

The middle ear allows animals to hear while moving in an aerial medium. It is
composed of a cavity harbouring a chain of three ossicles that transmit
vibrations produced by airborne sound in the tympanic membrane into the inner
ear, where they are converted into neural impulses. The middle ear develops in
the branchial arches, and this requires sequential interactions between the
epithelia and the underlying mesenchyme. Gene-inactivation experiments have
identified genes required for the formation of different middle ear components.
Some encode for signalling molecules, including Endothelin1 and Fgf8, probable
mediators of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. Other genes, including Eya1,
Prx1, Hoxa1, Hoxa2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, and Gsc, are most likely involved in
patterning and morphogenetic processes in the neural crest-derived mesenchyme.
Mechanisms controlling formation of a functional tympanic membrane are also
discussed. Basically, the tympanic ring, which serves as support for the tympanic
membrane, directs invagination of the first pharyngeal cleft ectoderm to form the
external acoustic meatus (EAM), which provides the outer layer of the membrane.
Gsc and Prx1 are essential for tympanic ring development. While invaginating, the
EAM controls skeletogenesis in the underlying mesenchyme to form the manubrium of
the malleus, the link between the membrane and the middle ear ossicles.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11237469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Teratology. 2000 Dec;62(6):393-405.

Discovery of allelic variants of HOXA1 and HOXB1: genetic susceptibility to
autism spectrum disorders.

Ingram JL(1), Stodgell CJ, Hyman SL, Figlewicz DA, Weitkamp LR, Rodier PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Rochester School of
Medicine and Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA.

BACKGROUND: Family studies have demonstrated that the autism spectrum disorders
(ASDs) have a major genetic etiologic component, but expression and penetrance of
the phenotype are variable. Mice with null mutations of Hoxa1 or Hoxb1, two genes
critical to hindbrain development, have phenotypic features frequently observed
in autism, but no naturally occurring variants of either gene have been
identified in mammals.
METHODS: By sequencing regions of genomic DNA of patients with autism spectrum
disorders, we detected a substitution variant at HOXA1 and an insertion variant
at HOXB1, both in coding regions of the genes. Fifty-seven individuals
ascertained for a diagnosis of an ASD, along with 166 of their relatives, were
typed for these variants. Two non-ASD populations were typed, and the frequency
of the newly identified alleles was determined in all groups. The genotypes of
the ASD families were tested for conformation to Hardy-Weinberg proportions and
Mendelian expectations for gene transmission.
RESULTS: The frequency of the variants was 10-25% in persons of European or
African origin. In the ASD families, there was a significant deviation from the
HOXA1 genotype ratios expected from Hardy-Weinberg proportions (P = 0.005). Among
affected offspring, a significant deviation from Mendelian expectation in gene
transmission (P = 0.011) was observed. No statistically significant effects were 
detected when the same analyses were applied to the HOXB1 locus, but there was
evidence of an interaction between HOXA1, HOXB1, and gender in susceptibility to 
ASDs.
CONCLUSIONS: The results support a role for HOXA1 in susceptibility to autism,
and add to the existing body of evidence implicating early brain stem injury in
the etiology of ASDs.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11091361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Nov 7;97(23):12776-81.

Altered HOX and WNT7A expression in human lung cancer.

Calvo R(1), West J, Franklin W, Erickson P, Bemis L, Li E, Helfrich B, Bunn P,
Roche J, Brambilla E, Rosell R, Gemmill RM, Drabkin HA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, and Department of Pathology, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, 4200 East 9th Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

HOX genes encode transcription factors that control patterning and cell fates.
Alterations in HOX expression have been clearly implicated in leukemia, but their
role in most other malignant diseases remains unknown. By using degenerate
reverse transcription-PCR and subsequent real-time quantitative assays, we
examined HOX expression in lung cancer cell lines, direct tumor-control pairs,
and bronchial epithelial cultures. As in leukemia, genes of the HOX9 paralogous
group and HOXA10 were frequently overexpressed. For HOXB9, we confirmed that
elevated RNA was associated with protein overexpression. In some cases, marked
HOX overexpression was associated with elevated FGF10 and FGF17. During
development, the WNT pathway affects cell fate, polarity, and proliferation, and 
WNT7a has been implicated in the maintenance of HOX expression. In contrast to
normal lung and mortal short-term bronchial epithelial cultures, WNT7a was
frequently reduced or absent in lung cancers. In immortalized bronchial
epithelial cells, WNT7a was lost concomitantly with HOXA1, and a statistically
significant correlation between the expression of both genes was observed in lung
cancer cell lines. Furthermore, we identified a homozygous deletion of
beta-catenin in the mesothelioma, NCI-H28, associated with reduced WNT7a and the 
lowest overall cell line expression of HOXA1, HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA10, whereas
HOXB9 levels were unaffected. Of note, both WNT7a and beta-catenin are encoded on
chromosome 3p, which undergoes frequent loss of heterozygosity in these tumors.
Our results suggest that alterations in regulatory circuits involving HOX, WNT,
and possibly fibroblast growth factor pathways occur frequently in lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC18840
PMID: 11070089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Exp Cell Res. 2000 Aug 25;259(1):274-83.

Molecular cloning and analysis of a group of genes differentially expressed in
cells which overexpress the Hoxa-1 homeobox gene.

Shen J(1), Wu H, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Medical College of Cornell University, 1300 
York Avenue, New York, New York, 10021, USA.

The homeobox gene Hoxa-1 is transcriptionally regulated by retinoic acid (RA) and
encodes a transcription factor which has been shown to play important roles in
cell differentiation and embryogenesis. In order to clone and characterize target
genes of Hoxa-1, we utilized differential hybridization screening and cDNA
subtractive hybridization methods to identify genes which are differentially
expressed in F9-10, a murine F9 teratocarcinoma stem cell line which expresses
high levels of exogenous Hoxa-1, compared to F9 wild-type stem cells, which do
not express endogenous Hoxa-1 mRNA in the absence of RA. Twenty-eight candidate
genes were identified; these genes encode very diverse proteins, including
signaling molecules such as BMP-4, the enzyme superoxide dismutase, the cell
adhesion molecule cadherin-6, proteins involved in gene transcription such as
HMG-1 and SAP18, homeodomain-containing proteins Gbx-2 and Evx-2, and cell cycle 
regulatory proteins such as the retinoblastoma binding protein-2. Clone 104
encodes a novel protein; the expression of the clone 104 mRNA is also regulated
in a fashion very similar to that of the exogenous Hoxa-1 gene in another F9 cell
line, called F9-tet-Hoxa1-8, in which the exogenous Hoxa-1 mRNA expression is
tightly regulated by a Tet-off gene expression system. These data strongly
suggest that clone 104 is a direct downstream target of the transcription factor 
Hoxa-1. The cDNA sequence of clone 104 is related to that of human ubiquitin
carboxyl-terminal hydrolase T. Further characterization of these putative Hoxa-1 
target genes will aid in delineating the functions of the Hoxa-1 protein in the
differentiation processes which occur during embryogenesis.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 10942599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Development. 2000 Apr;127(8):1553-62.

Retinoid signaling is essential for patterning the endoderm of the third and
fourth pharyngeal arches.

Wendling O(1), Dennefeld C, Chambon P, Mark M.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IGBMC),
CNRS/INSERM/ULP/Collège de France, BP 163, CU de Strasbourg, France.

The requirement of retinoic acid (RA) in the initial formation of the pharyngeal 
arches was investigated by treating headfold-stage mouse embryos with a pan-RAR
antagonist in vitro and in vivo. This results in a complete absence of
mesenchyme, arteries, nerves and epibranchial placodes of the 3rd and 4th
pharyngeal arches, complete agenesis of the 3rd and 4th pouches and consistent
lack of the 6th arch artery. Mesodermally derived endothelial cells are absent
from the 3rd and 4th pharyngeal arch region and the distribution domain of EphA2 
transcripts in mesodermal cells is shifted caudally. In situ hybridization with
CRABPI, kreisler and EphA4 probes and the pattern of expression of a Wnt1-lacZ
transgene show that neural crest cells (NCC) normally destined to the 3rd and 4th
arches migrate ectopically. Most interestingly, the appearance of the 3rd and 4th
arches is prevented by the antagonist only during a very narrow window of time,
which does not correspond to the period of post-otic NCC migration. Both the
timing of appearance and the nature of the defects in RAR antagonist-treated
embryos indicate that migrating NCC and mesodermal cells destined to the caudal
pharyngeal arches do not represent primary targets of RA action. Alterations in
the endodermal expression pattern of Hoxa1, Hoxb1, Pax1, Pax9, Fgf3 and Fgf8 in
response to the antagonist-induced block in RA signal transduction demonstrate
for the first time that RA signaling is indispensable for the specification of
the pharyngeal endoderm and suggest that this signaling is necessary to provide a
permissive environment locally for the migration of NCC and mesodermal cells. Our
study also indicates that the formation of the 2nd pharyngeal arch and that of
the 3rd and 4th pharyngeal arches probably involve distinct RA-dependent
developmental processes.

PMID: 10725232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Cell Growth Differ. 2000 Jan;11(1):11-7.

Molecular cloning of a novel retinoic acid-responsive gene, HA1R-62, which is
also up-regulated in Hoxa-1-overexpressing cells.

Shen J(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New 
York 10021, USA.

Using a PCR-based cDNA subtractive hybridization method (L. Diatchenko et al.,
Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 93: 6025-6030, 1996), we cloned a cDNA fragment of a 
novel gene that is highly expressed in F9-10; F9-10 is an F9 teratocarcinoma stem
cell line that expresses high levels of exogenous Hoxa-1 mRNA and protein in
comparison to F9 wild-type stem cells, which do not express endogenous Hoxa-1
mRNA in the absence of retinoic acid (RA). Rapid amplification of cDNA ends was
used to clone the full-length cDNA of this gene, designated HA1R-62 (Hoxa1
regulated-62). We have shown that HA1R-62 is also a RA-responsive gene and that
it is expressed (mRNA size, approximately 4.3 kb) in adult mouse thymus, lung,
kidney, and ovary as well as in 12.5-day mouse embryos. DNA sequence analysis and
in vitro translation experiments have shown that HA1R-62 encodes a protein with a
molecular mass of approximately 26 kDa. Elucidation of the function of the
HA1R-62 gene product will provide new insights into the functions of RA and
homeobox genes.

PMID: 10672899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Development. 2000 Mar;127(5):933-44.

Roles of Hoxa1 and Hoxa2 in patterning the early hindbrain of the mouse.

Barrow JR(1), Stadler HS, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Early in its development, the vertebrate hindbrain is transiently subdivided into
a series of compartments called rhombomeres. Genes have been identified whose
expression patterns distinguish these cellular compartments. Two of these genes, 
Hoxa1 and Hoxa2, have been shown to be required for proper patterning of the
early mouse hindbrain and the associated neural crest. To determine the extent to
which these two genes function together to pattern the hindbrain, we generated
mice simultaneously mutant at both loci. The hindbrain patterning defects were
analyzed in embryos individually mutant for Hoxa1 and Hoxa2 in greater detail and
extended to embryos mutant for both genes. From these data a model is proposed to
describe how Hoxa1, Hoxa2, Hoxb1, Krox20 (Egr2) and kreisler function together to
pattern the early mouse hindbrain. Critical to the model is the demonstration
that Hoxa1 activity is required to set the anterior limit of Hoxb1 expression at 
the presumptive r3/4 rhombomere boundary. Failure to express Hoxb1 to this
boundary in Hoxa1 mutant embryos initiates a cascade of gene misexpressions that 
result in misspecification of the hindbrain compartments from r2 through r5.
Subsequent to misspecification of the hindbrain compartments, ectopic induction
of apoptosis appears to be used to regulate the aberrant size of the misspecified
rhombomeres.

PMID: 10662633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Development. 1999 Nov;126(22):5027-40.

Mice mutant for both Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 show extensive remodeling of the hindbrain
and defects in craniofacial development.

Rossel M(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

The analysis of mice mutant for both Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 suggests that these two
genes function together to pattern the hindbrain. Separately, mutations in Hoxa1 
and Hoxb1 have profoundly different effects on hindbrain development. Hoxa1
mutations disrupt the rhombomeric organization of the hindbrain, whereas Hoxb1
mutations do not alter the rhombomeric pattern, but instead influence the fate of
cells originating in rhombomere 4. We suggest that these differences are not the 
consequences of different functional roles for these gene products, but rather
reflect differences in the kinetics of Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 gene expression. In strong
support of the idea that Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 have overlapping functions, Hoxa1/Hoxb1 
double mutant homozygotes exhibit a plethora of defects either not seen, or seen 
only in a very mild form, in mice mutant for only Hoxa1 or Hoxb1. Examples
include: the loss of both rhombomeres 4 and 5, the selective loss of the 2(nd)
branchial arch, and the loss of most, but not all, 2(nd) branchial arch-derived
tissues. We suggest that the early role for both of these genes in hindbrain
development is specification of rhombomere identities and that the aberrant
development of the hindbrain in Hoxa1/Hoxb1 double mutants proceeds through two
phases, the misspecification of rhombomeres within the hindbrain, followed
subsequently by size regulation of the misspecified hindbrain through induction
of apoptosis.

PMID: 10529420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Development. 1999 Nov;126(22):5011-26.

Compensatory defects associated with mutations in Hoxa1 restore normal
palatogenesis to Hoxa2 mutants.

Barrow JR(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

The rhombencephalic neural crest play several roles in craniofacial development. 
They give rise to the cranial sensory ganglia and much of the craniofacial
skeleton, and are vital for patterning of the craniofacial muscles. The loss of
Hoxa1 or Hoxa2 function affects the development of multiple neural crest-derived 
structures. To understand how these two genes function together in craniofacial
development, an allele was generated that disrupts both of these linked genes.
Some of the craniofacial defects observed in the double mutants were additive
combinations of those that exist in each of the single mutants, indicating that
each gene functions independently in the formation of these structures. Other
defects were found only in the double mutants demonstrating overlapping or
synergistic functions. We also uncovered multiple defects in the attachments and 
trajectories of the extrinsic tongue and hyoid muscles in Hoxa2 mutants.
Interestingly, the abnormal trajectory of two of these muscles, the styloglossus 
and the stylohyoideus, blocked the attachment of the hyoglossus to the greater
horn of the hyoid, which in turn correlated exactly with the presence of cleft
palate in Hoxa2 mutants. We suggest that the hyoglossus, whose function is to
depress the lateral edges of the tongue, when unable to make its proper
attachment to the greater horn of the hyoid, forces the tongue to adopt an
abnormal posture which blocks closure of the palatal shelves. Unexpectedly, in
Hoxa1/Hoxa2 double mutants, the penetrance of cleft palate is dramatically
reduced. We show that two compensatory defects, associated with the loss of Hoxa1
function, restore normal attachment of the hyoglossus to the greater horn thereby
allowing the palatal shelves to lift and fuse above the flattened tongue.

PMID: 10529419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Differentiation. 1999 Jul;65(1):1-11.

Overexpression of thyroid hormone receptor alpha 1 during zebrafish embryogenesis
disrupts hindbrain patterning and implicates retinoic acid receptors in the
control of hox gene expression.

Essner JJ(1), Johnson RG, Hackett PB Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Cell Biology, University of Minnesota, St. Paul
55108-1095, USA. jeffrey.essner@hci.utah.edu

Nuclear receptors play key roles in anterior/posterior (A/P) axis formation
during vertebrate embryogenesis. Within this gene family, retinoic acid receptors
and retinoic acid itself have profound influences on the establishment of the A/P
axis. Thyroid hormone receptors are expressed during early periods of
development, long before the establishment of the thyroid gland, and are able to 
interact with retinoic acid receptors. Here we examined the ability of the
thyroid hormone receptor alpha 1 to affect early embryonic development by mRNA
injection of either repressor or activator forms of the thyroid hormone receptor.
Overexpression of either the thyroid hormone receptor alpha 1 or a constitutive
repressor form, v-erbA, caused a swelling in the rostral hindbrain. These defects
were associated with disorganization and loss of rhombomere borders as well as an
increase in the number of acetylcholine esterase positive cells. This phenotype
correlated with a reduction in hoxa1 expression during gastrulation. Furthermore,
injection of either thyroid hormone receptor alpha 1 or v-erbA mRNA repressed a
reporter gene that contained a retinoic acid response element, demonstrating the 
ability of the thyroid hormone receptor alpha 1 to repress retinoic acid
signaling during gastrulation. In contrast, embryos treated with retinoic acid
alone or embryos injected with thyroid hormone receptor alpha 1 and treated with 
the thyroid hormone analog TRIAC displayed a similar set of defects, including
loss of the midbrain-hindbrain border and severe disruption of the rostral
hindbrain. These studies support the involvement of retinoic acid and its
receptors in the direct control of Hox gene expression and the early patterning
of the zebrafish central nervous system.

PMID: 10448709  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Somat Cell Mol Genet. 1998 Jul;24(4):245-8.

PAC and cosmid contig spanning the HOXA cluster on human chromosome 7p15.

Kim MH(1), Park JH, Park HW, Chung IH, Park KA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Anatomy, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
mhkim1@yumc.yonsei.ac.kr

To construct the PAC and cosmid contig map spanning the HOXA cluster on human
chromosome 7, we used 9 DNA markers (D7S2243, D7S3010, HOXA1, EVX1, 750, pBH8,
p60, p8.0, and HOXA11), among which the final 4 were generated in this study by
shotgun cloning strategy. From the libraries, 5 PAC and 35 cosmid clones were
screened and as a result, an overlapping continuous array of cosmid and PAC
clones covering the genomic region (about 200 kb) spanning the entire cluster
were constructed. The isolated cosmids contained several consecutive HOX genes of
regional group, probably sharing the regulatory processes such as alternative
splicing or polyadenylation, and thus could be used as useful materials for
elucidating the molecular mechanism of HOX gene expression in the future.

PMID: 10410678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Bioessays. 1998 Oct;20(10):794-7.

1 + 1 = r4 and much much more.

Morrison AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Vertebrate Development Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London.
a.morrison@icrf.icnet.uk

Expression and mutational analysis has shown that the vertebrate Hox genes are
instrumental in patterning of the developing embryo. However, the combined
effects of functional redundancy, compensation, and synergy often obscure the
precise roles of these genes. By combining gene targeting strategies with the
analysis of regulatory sequences from the Hoxa1 and Hoff1 genes, it has been
possible to bypass some of these complications and demonstrate their genetic and 
functional interactions during the development of the hindbrain and branchial
arches.

PMID: 10200119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Cell Growth Differ. 1998 Dec;9(12):969-81.

The murine Hoxb1 3' RAIDR5 enhancer contains multiple regulatory elements.

Thompson JR(1), Huang DY, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New 
York 10021, USA.

Homeobox genes play key roles in specifying body part identity during vertebrate 
embryonic development. Retinoids are signaling molecules involved in the
regulation of expression of homeobox genes. We have previously identified an
retinoic acid (RA)-inducible enhancer (RAIDR5) located approximately 6.5 kb 3' of
the coding region of the murine Hoxb1 gene. This 3' enhancer contains three
sequences that are highly conserved in similar RA-inducible enhancers identified 
in the murine and human Hoxa1 genes and in the chicken Hoxb1 gene. One element, a
DR5 RA response element, contributes to the RA inducibility of a Hoxb1 reporter
gene construct in F9 cells. In this report, further analysis of the other two
elements of the Hoxb1 3' enhancer is reported. The two other sequences, conserved
element (CE) 1 and CE2, act as negative elements in cultured F9 cells; when
either is mutated, an increase in the beta-galactosidase activity of a Hoxb1
reporter gene construct results. A single Hoxb1 CE2 DNA element:protein binding
complex was detected in F9 stem cells, and experiments suggest that this is the
same binding protein that recognizes the CE2 element of Hoxa1. In a variant F9
cell line in which both allelic copies of the RA receptor gamma (RARgamma) gene
are disrupted, the CE2 binding complex is absent, and this absence correlates
with the inability of the CE2 element to function as a repressor of Hoxb1
reporter gene expression in these cells. A single Hoxb1 CE1 binding complex is
also detected by gel shift assays in nuclear extracts prepared from both stem and
RA-treated F9 cells. This complex contains an Mr approximately 200,000 protein as
shown by UV cross-linking. Although the sequences of the CE1 elements of Hoxb1
and Hoxa1 are highly conserved, they differ by two nucleotides. Gel shift
analysis shows that either of these nucleotide changes prevents binding of F9
cell protein extracts. When gel shift assays were performed using nuclear
extracts prepared from mouse embryos at a time when Hoxb1 mRNA is expressed,
i.e., day 9.0, CE1 and CE2 binding complexes identical in mobility to those
detected in F9 cells were observed. This suggests roles for both the CE1 and CE2 
elements in regulating Hoxb1 gene expression during development.

PMID: 9869297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Development. 1998 Dec;125(23):4739-48.

Hoxa1 and Krox-20 synergize to control the development of rhombomere 3.

Helmbacher F(1), Pujades C, Desmarquet C, Frain M, Rijli FM, Chambon P, Charnay
P.

Author information: 
(1)Unité 368 de l'Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, 75230 Paris Cedex 05, France.

The transcription factor genes Hoxa1 and Krox-20 have been shown to play
important roles in vertebrate hindbrain segmentation. In this report, we present 
evidence for novel functions of these genes which co-operate in specifying
cellular identity in rhombomere (r) 3. Although Hoxa1 has not been observed to be
expressed rostrally to the prospective r3/r4 boundary, its inactivation results
in (i) the appearance of patches of cells presenting an r2-like molecular
identity within r3, (ii) early neuronal differentiation in r3, normally
characteristic of even-numbered rhombomeres, and (iii) abnormal navigation of r3 
motor axons, similar to that observed in even-numbered rhombomeres. These
phenotypic manifestations become more severe in the context of the additional
inactivation of one allele of the Krox-20 gene, demonstrating that Hoxa1 and
Krox-20 synergize in a dosage-dependent manner to specify r3 identity and odd-
versus even-numbered rhombomere characters. In addition, these data suggest that 
the control of the development of r3 may not be autonomous but dependent on
interactions with Hoxa1-expressing cells.

PMID: 9806922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Oct 27;95(22):13042-7.

Detection of targeted GFP-Hox gene fusions during mouse embryogenesis.

Godwin AR(1), Stadler HS, Nakamura K, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

The ability to use a vital cell marker to study mouse embryogenesis will open new
avenues of experimental research. Recently, the use of transgenic mice,
containing multiple copies of the jellyfish gene encoding the green fluorescent
protein (GFP), has begun to realize this potential. Here, we show that the
fluorescent signals produced by single-copy, targeted GFP in-frame fusions with
two different murine Hox genes, Hoxa1 and Hoxc13, are readily detectable by using
confocal microscopy. Since Hoxa1 is expressed early and Hoxc13 is expressed late 
in mouse embryogenesis, this study shows that single-copy GFP gene fusions can be
used through most of mouse embryogenesis. Previously, targeted lacZ gene fusions 
have been very useful for analyzing mouse mutants. Use of GFP gene fusions
extends the benefits of targeted lacZ gene fusions by providing the additional
utility of a vital marker. Our analysis of the Hoxc13(GFPneo) embryos reveals GFP
expression in each of the sites expected from analysis of Hoxc13(lacZneo)
embryos. Similarly, Hoxa1(GFPneo) expression was detected in all of the sites
predicted from RNA in situ analysis. GFP expression in the foregut pocket of
Hoxa1(GFPneo) embryos suggests a role for Hoxa1 in foregut-mediated
differentiation of the cardiogenic mesoderm.

PMCID: PMC23702
PMID: 9789037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. J Biol Chem. 1998 Sep 18;273(38):24670-5.

An enhancer element in the EphA2 (Eck) gene sufficient for rhombomere-specific
expression is activated by HOXA1 and HOXB1 homeobox proteins.

Chen J(1), Ruley HE.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine (Rheumatology) and Cell Biology, Vanderbilt
University, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA. Jin.Chen@mcmail.vanderbilt.edu

In the hindbrain of the mouse embryo, there is often coincident
rhombomere-restricted expression of Eph receptor tyrosine kinases and Hox
homeobox genes, raising the possibility of regulatory interactions. In this
paper, we have identified cis-acting regulatory sequences of the EphA2 (Eck)
gene, which direct node and hindbrain-specific expression in transgenic embryos. 
An 8-kilobase region of mouse genomic DNA element was sufficient to drive
rhombomere 4 (r4)-specific expression while conferring patchy expression in the
node. Further analysis localized the rhombomere-specific enhancer to a
0.9-kilobase sequence. This element contains multiple Hox-Pbx consensus binding
sites that bind to both HOXA1/Pbx1 and HOXB1/Pbx1 proteins in vitro.
Co-expression of either HOXA1 or HOXB1 with Pbx1 transactivated EphA2
enhancer-dependent reporter gene expression. These results, together with
observations of reduced EphA2 expression in hoxa1 and hoxb1 double mutant mice,
suggest that expression of EphA2 gene in rhombomere 4 is directly regulated by
Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 homeobox transcription factors.

PMID: 9733765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Cancer Res. 1998 Sep 1;58(17):3777-81.

The coding region of the Bloom syndrome BLM gene and of the CBL proto-oncogene is
mutated in genetically unstable sporadic gastrointestinal tumors.

Calin G(1), Herlea V, Barbanti-Brodano G, Negrini M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental and Diagnostic Medicine, University of Ferrara,
Italy.

Microsatellite instability (MSI) characterizes the hereditary nonpolyposis
colorectal cancer syndrome but is also found in sporadic tumors. Frameshifts in
microsatellites found in the coding regions (CDRs) of the TGFbeta1-RII, IGFIIR,
hMSH3, hMSH6, and BAX genes indicate that MSI is involved in tumorigenesis by
targeting genes that are directly implicated in the tumorigenic process. To
identify additional genes targeted for MSI, we performed an analysis of the
GenBank database that revealed 21 microsatellite repeats located in the CDR of 18
genes (12% of the analyzed sequences) whose function could be potentially
associated with the tumorigenic process. Mutational studies of 57 sporadic
gastrointestinal tumor DNAs revealed the presence of length variations in three
of them: (a) BLM; (b) CBL; and (c) HOXA1. In the BLM gene, we found a frameshift 
mutation in a polyadenine repeat, whereas in the CBL proto-oncogene, an expansion
of a trinucleotide repeat was detected with no translation shift. These
alterations were present in 18 and 9%, respectively, of the genetically unstable 
sporadic gastrointestinal tumors analyzed, but in none of the cancers without the
mutator phenotype. These changes were present in the DNA from the tumor but not
in that from normal cells of the same patient. The HOXA1 retraction of a
trinucleotide repeat was as frequent in both types of cancers and was also found 
in some normal paired tissues, therefore behaving as a neutral polymorphism. Our 
data extend the spectrum of unstable microsatellites located in gene CDRs and
suggest that BLM and possibly CBL are involved in gastrointestinal tumorigenesis.
Based on its proposed function, the BLM gene could represent a link between MSI
and chromosomal instability pathways, because MSI targeting of the BLM gene could
generate hypermutability and/or chromosomal instability.

PMID: 9731483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Mech Dev. 1998 Feb;71(1-2):5-21.

The development of the vertebrate inner ear.

Torres M(1), Giráldez F.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Inmunologiá y Oncologiá, Centro Nacional de Biotecnología
CSIC, Cantoblanco, E-28049, Madrid, Spain.

The inner ear is a complex sensory organ responsible for balance and sound
detection in vertebrates. It originates from a transient embryonic structure, the
otic vesicle, that contains all of the information to develop autonomously into
the mature inner ear. We review here the development of the otic vesicle,
bringing together classical embryological experiments and recent genetic and
molecular data. The specification of the prospective ectoderm and its commitment 
to the otic fate are very early events and can be related to the expression of
genes with restricted expression domains. A combinatorial gene expression model
for placode specification and diversification, based on classical embryological
evidence and gene expression patterns, is discussed. The formation of the otic
vesicle is dependent on inducing signals from endoderm, mesoderm and
neuroectoderm. Ear induction consists of a sequence of discrete instructions from
those tissues that confer its final identity on the otic field, rather than a
single all-or-none process. The important role of the neural tube in otic
development is highlighted by the abnormalities observed in mouse mutants for the
Hoxa1, kreisler and fgf3 genes and those reported in retinoic acid-deficient
quails. Still, the nature of the relation between the neural tube and otic
development remains unclear. Gene targeting experiments in the mouse have
provided evidence for genes potentially involved in regional and cell-fate
specification in the inner ear. The disruption of the mouse Brn3.1 gene
identifies the first mutation affecting sensory hair-cell specification, and
mutants for Pax2 and Nkx5.1 genes show their requirement for the development of
specific regions of the otic vesicle. Several growth-factors contribute to the
patterned cell proliferation of the otic vesicle. Among these, IGF-I and FGF-2
are expressed in the otic vesicle and may act in an autocrine manner. Finally,
little is known about early mechanisms involved in guiding ear innervation.
However, targeted disruption of genes coding for neurotrophins and Trk receptors 
have shown that once synaptic contacts are established, they depend on specific
trophic interactions that involve these two gene families. The accessibility of
new cellular and molecular approaches are opening new perspectives in vertebrate 
development and are also starting to be applied to ear development. This will
allow this classical and attractive model system to see a rapid progress in the
near future.

PMID: 9507049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. J Biol Chem. 1998 May 22;273(21):13273-9.

A conserved C-terminal domain in PBX increases DNA binding by the PBX homeodomain
and is not a primary site of contact for the YPWM motif of HOXA1.

Green NC(1), Rambaldi I, Teakles J, Featherstone MS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montréal, Québec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

HOX proteins are dependent upon cofactors of the PBX family for specificity of
DNA binding. Two regions that have been implicated in HOX/PBX cooperative
interactions are the YPWM motif, found N-terminal to the HOX homeodomain, and the
GKFQ domain (also known as the Hox cooperativity motif) immediately C-terminal to
the PBX homeodomain. Using derivatives of the E2A-PBX oncoprotein, we find that
the GKFQ domain is not essential for cooperative interaction with HOXA1 but
contributes to the stability of the complex. By contrast, the YPWM motif is
strictly required for cooperative interactions in vitro and in vivo, even with
mutants of E2A-PBX lacking the GKFQ domain. Using truncated PBX proteins, we show
that the YPWM motif contacts the PBX homeodomain. The presence of the GKFQ domain
increases monomer binding by the PBX homeodomain 5-fold, and the stability of the
HOXA1.E2A-PBX complex 2-fold. These data suggest that the GKFQ domain acts mainly
to increase DNA binding by PBX, rather than providing a primary contact site for 
the YPWM motif of HOXA1. We have identified 2 residues, Glu-301 and Tyr-305,
required for GKFQ function and suggest that this is dependent on alpha-helical
character.

PMID: 9582372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Development. 1998 Mar;125(6):1123-36.

Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 synergize in patterning the hindbrain, cranial nerves and second 
pharyngeal arch.

Gavalas A(1), Studer M, Lumsden A, Rijli FM, Krumlauf R, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire and Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collége de France, BP 163 - 67404 Illkirch Cedex, CU de
Strasbourg, France.

The analysis of Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 null mutants suggested that these genes are
involved in distinct aspects of hindbrain segmentation and specification. Here we
investigate the possible functional synergy of the two genes. The generation of
Hoxa1(3'RARE)/Hoxb1(3'RARE) compound mutants resulted in mild facial motor nerve 
defects reminiscent of those present in the Hoxb1 null mutants. Strong genetic
interactions between Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 were uncovered by introducing the
Hoxb1(3'RARE) and Hoxb1 null mutations into the Hoxa1 null genetic background.
Hoxa1(null)/Hoxb1(3'RARE) and Hoxa1(null)/Hoxb1(null )double homozygous embryos
showed additional patterning defects in the r4-r6 region but maintained a
molecularly distinct r4-like territory. Neurofilament staining and retrograde
labelling of motor neurons indicated that Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 synergise in patterning
the VIIth through XIth cranial nerves. The second arch expression of neural crest
cell markers was abolished or dramatically reduced, suggesting a defect in this
cell population. Strikingly, the second arch of the double mutant embryos
involuted by 10.5 dpc and this resulted in loss of all second arch-derived
elements and complete disruption of external and middle ear development.
Additional defects, most notably the lack of tympanic ring, were found in first
arch-derived elements, suggesting that interactions between first and second arch
take place during development. Taken together, our results unveil an extensive
functional synergy between Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 that was not anticipated from the
phenotypes of the simple null mutants.

PMID: 9463359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Development. 1998 Mar;125(6):1025-36.

Genetic interactions between Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 reveal new roles in regulation of
early hindbrain patterning.

Studer M(1), Gavalas A, Marshall H, Ariza-McNaughton L, Rijli FM, Chambon P,
Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

In the developing vertebrate hindbrain Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 play important roles in
patterning segmental units (rhombomeres). In this study, genetic analysis of
double mutants demonstrates that both Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 participate in the
establishment and maintenance of Hoxb1 expression in rhombomere 4 through auto-
and para-regulatory interactions. The generation of a targeted mutation in a
Hoxb1 3' retinoic acid response element (RARE) shows that it is required for
establishing early high levels of Hoxb1 expression in neural ectoderm. Double
mutant analysis with this Hoxb1(3'RARE) allele and other targeted
loss-of-function alleles from both Hoxa1 and Hoxb1 reveals synergy between these 
genes. In the absence of both genes, a territory appears in the region of r4, but
the earliest r4 marker, the Eph tyrosine kinase receptor EphA2, fails to be
activated. This suggests a failure to initiate rather than maintain the
specification of r4 identity and defines new roles for both Hoxb1 and Hoxa1 in
early patterning events in r4. Our genetic analysis shows that individual members
of the vertebrate labial-related genes have multiple roles in different steps
governing segmental processes in the developing hindbrain.

PMID: 9463349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Eur J Hum Genet. 1997 Nov-Dec;5(6):397-405.

Refined mapping of a gene for autosomal dominant progressive sensorineural
hearing loss (DFNA5) to a 2-cM region, and exclusion of a candidate gene that is 
expressed in the cochlea.

Van Laer L(1), Van Camp G, van Zuijlen D, Green ED, Verstreken M, Schatteman I,
Van de Heyning P, Balemans W, Coucke P, Greinwald JH, Smith RJ, Huizing E,
Willems P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Belgium.

A gene for an autosomal dominant form of progressive sensorineural hearing loss
(DFNA5) was previously assigned by us to a 15-cM region on chromosome 7p15. In
this study, the DFNA5 candidate region was refined to less than 2 cM, and
completely cloned in a YAC contig. The HOXA1 gene located in 7p15 was considered 
to be a good candidate gene for DFNA5 as it harbours mutations leading to
developmental defects of the inner ear in mice. However, the refinement of the
candidate region of DFNA5 excludes the HOXA1 gene as a candidate for DFNA5. We
cloned a novel candidate gene (CG1, candidate gene 1), which is expressed in
human fetal cochlea, from the DFNA5 candidate region. The complete cDNA sequence 
of CG1, encoding a 423 amino acid protein of unknown function, was determined.
Mutation analysis of the CG1 gene in DFNA5 patients, however, could not reveal a 
disease-causing mutation.

PMID: 9450185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Dev Dyn. 1998 Jan;211(1):97-108.

An evolutionary conserved element is essential for somite and adjacent
mesenchymal expression of the Hoxa1 gene.

Thompson JR(1), Chen SW, Ho L, Langston AW, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cornell University Medical College, New York, New 
York 10021, USA.

The murine Hoxa1 gene is a member of the vertebrate Hox complex and plays a role 
in defining the body plan during development. At day 8.0-9.0 post coitus, Hoxa1
transcripts are detected extensively throughout the embryo in the neural tube,
adjacent mesenchyme, paraxial mesoderm, somites and gut epithelium; expression
extends from the most caudal region of the embryo to the rhombomere 3/4 border.
This spatiotemporal expression of Hoxa1 mRNA is critical for normal embryonic
development. We have previously identified a 10 bp element, called CE2, which is 
located approximately 3 kilobases 3' of the Hoxa1 coding region in the RAIDR5
enhancer, and which binds to an approximately 170 kd protein in retinoic acid
treated P19 embryonal carcinoma cells. CE2 elements were also identified 3' of
the murine Hoxb1 gene, the chicken Hoxb1 gene and the human Hoxa1 gene. To
examine the role of this CE2 element in regulating Hoxa1 expression in vivo,
transgenic mice were generated which express a Hoxa1 beta-galactosidase reporter 
gene that contains a mutation in the CE2 element. Relative to transgenic mice
bearing a wild type CE2 element, the mutant CE2 construct recapitulated
rhombomeric, neural, and gut epithelium expression but failed to show
beta-galactosidase expression in somites and adjacent mesenchymal tissue. Gel
shift analysis showed that binding activity similar to that detected in extracts 
prepared from retinoic acid treated P19 cells was present in nuclear extracts
prepared from day 9.0 embryos. However, an additional binding complex not
detected in P19 cells was also observed. These results indicate that in
transgenic animals, the evolutionary conserved CE2 element is a somite and
adjacent mesenchymal enhancer of Hoxa1 expression.

PMID: 9438427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Genes Dev. 1997 Jul 15;11(14):1885-95.

Cross-regulation in the mouse HoxB complex: the expression of Hoxb2 in rhombomere
4 is regulated by Hoxb1.

Maconochie MK(1), Nonchev S, Studer M, Chan SK, Pöpperl H, Sham MH, Mann RS,
Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Medical Research Council (MRC),
National Institute for Medical Research (NIMR), London, UK.

Correct regulation of the segment-restricted patterns of Hox gene expression is
essential for proper patterning of the vertebrate hindbrain. We have examined the
molecular basis of restricted expression of Hoxb2 in rhombomere 4 (r4), by using 
deletion analysis in transgenic mice to identify an r4 enhancer from the mouse
gene. A bipartite Hox/Pbx binding motif is located within this enhancer, and in
vitro DNA binding experiments showed that the vertebrate labial-related protein
Hoxb1 will cooperatively bind to this site in a Pbx/Exd-dependent manner. The
Hoxb2 r4 enhancer can be transactivated in vivo by the ectopic expression of
Hoxb1, Hoxa1, and Drosophila labial in transgenic mice. In contrast, ectopic
Hoxb2 and Hoxb4 are unable to induce expression, indicating that in vivo this
enhancer preferentially responds to labial family members. Mutational analysis
demonstrated that the bipartite Hox/Pbx motif is required for r4 enhancer
activity and the responses to retinoids and ectopic Hox expression. Furthermore, 
three copies of the Hoxb2 motif are sufficient to mediate r4 expression in
transgenic mouse embryos and a labial pattern in Drosophila embryos. This
reporter expression in Drosophila embryos is dependent upon endogenous labial and
exd, suggesting that the ability of this Hox/Pbx site to interact with
labial-related proteins has been evolutionarily conserved. The endogenous Hoxb2
gene is no longer upregulated in r4 in Hoxb1 homozygous mutant embryos. On the
basis of these experiments we conclude that the r4-restricted domain of Hoxb2 in 
the hindbrain is the result of a direct cross-regulatory interaction by Hoxb1
involving vertebrate Pbx proteins as cofactors. This suggests that part of the
functional role of Hoxb1 in maintaining r4 identity may be mediated by the Hoxb2 
gene.

PMID: 9242495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. EMBO J. 1997 Jun 16;16(12):3644-54.

Functional dissection of a transcriptionally active, target-specific Hox-Pbx
complex.

Di Rocco G(1), Mavilio F, Zappavigna V.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT-Istituto Scientifico H.S. Raffaele, Milano, Italy.

Hox genes control cell fates and specify regional identities in vertebrate
development. Hox proteins show a relaxed DNA-binding selectivity in vitro,
suggesting that functional specificity is achieved in vivo through the action of 
transcriptional co-factors. Pbx proteins are good candidates for such a role, on 
the basis of both genetic and biochemical evidence. We report that the human Pbx1
and HOXB1 proteins can cooperatively activate transcription through a genetically
characterized Hox target, i.e. an autoregulatory element directing spatially
restricted expression of the murine Hoxb-1 gene (b1-ARE) in the developing
hindbrain. On the b1-ARE, only a restricted subset of HOX proteins (HOXA1, HOXB1,
HOXA2) are able to bind cooperatively with Pbx1 and activate transcription.
Selective recognition of the b1-ARE is mediated by the N-terminal region of the
HOX homeodomain. The DNA-binding and protein-protein interaction functions of
HOXB1 and Pbx1 are all necessary for the assembly of a transcriptionally active
complex on the b1-ARE. Functional dissection of the complex allowed the
localization of the main activation domain in the HOXB1 N-terminal region, and of
an additional one in the C-terminal region of Pbx1 contained in the Pbx1a but not
in the alternatively spliced Pbx1b isoform. Our results indicate that Pbx1 acts
as a transcriptional co-factor of Hox proteins, allowing selective recognition
and cooperative activation of regulatory target sequences.

PMCID: PMC1169988
PMID: 9218805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Hum Genet. 1997 Jun;99(6):831-3.

Physical mapping of the HOXA1 gene and the hnRPA2B1 gene in a YAC contig from
human chromosome 7p14-p15.

Van Laer L(1), Van Camp G, Green ED, Huizing EH, Willems PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, Belgium.

A cluster of homeobox-containing genes (HOXA) and a heterogeneous nuclear
ribonucleoprotein (hnRPA2B1) have both previously been assigned to chromosome
7p15 by in situ hybridization. In this report, we constructed a YAC contig from
chromosome 7p14-p15, between markers D7S2496 and D7S1838, and determined the
position of the HOXA1 gene and the hnRPA2B1 gene in this YAC contig.

PMID: 9187682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8635-43.

Distinct HOX N-terminal arm residues are responsible for specificity of DNA
recognition by HOX monomers and HOX.PBX heterodimers.

Phelan ML(1), Featherstone MS.

Author information: 
(1)McGill Cancer Centre, McGill University, Montréal, Québec H3G 1Y6, Canada.

Dimerization with extradenticle or PBX homeoproteins dramatically improves DNA
binding by HOX transcription factors, indicating that recognition by such
complexes is important for HOX specificity. For HOX monomeric binding, a major
determinant of specificity is the flexible N-terminal arm. It makes base-specific
contacts via the minor groove, including one to the 1st position of a 5'-TNAT-3' 
core by a conserved arginine (Arg-5). Here we show that Arg-5 also contributes to
the stability of HOX.PBX complexes, apparently by forming the same DNA contact.
We further show that heterodimers of PBX with HOXA1 or HOXD4 proteins have
different specificities at another position recognized by the N-terminal arm (the
2nd position in the TNAT core). Importantly, N-terminal arm residues 2 and 3,
which distinguish the binding of HOXA1 and HOXD4 monomers, play no role in the
specificity of their complexes with PBX. In addition, HOXD9 and HOXD10, which are
capable of binding both TTAT and TAAT sites as monomers, can cooperate with PBX1A
only on a TTAT site. These data suggest that some DNA contacts made by the
N-terminal arm are altered by interaction with PBX.

PMID: 9079695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1996 May 15;222(2):292-7.

Detection of HOXA1 expression in human breast cancer.

Chariot A(1), Castronovo V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry and Clinical Oncology, University of Liege,
Belgium.

Homeodomain-containing proteins are transcription factors that regulate the
coordinated expression of multiple genes involved in development, differentiation
and malignant transformation. To better understand the role played by these
proteins in breast cancer cells, we demonstrate, using semi-quantitative RT-PCR
experiments, that progestin induces HOXA1 mRNAs in MCF7 cells. This is the first 
evidence of regulation of a HOX gene by steroids. Moreover, we detected HOXA1
expression in a variety of human breast cancer lesions, suggesting that HOXA1 may
be required for the establishment of breast cancer cells phenotype. We propose
that HOXA1 gene could be one of the orchestrators that regulate breast epithelial
cell differentiation and that alteration of HOXA1 expression could play a role in
breast cancer progression.

PMID: 8670198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Mar 5;93(5):1803-7.

Retinoid X receptor-selective ligands produce malformations in Xenopus embryos.

Minucci S(1), Saint-Jeannet JP, Toyama R, Scita G, DeLuca LM, Tiara M, Levin AA, 
Ozato K, Dawid IB.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child Health 
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Retinoids exert pleiotropic effects on the development of vertebrates through the
action of retinoic acid receptors (RAR) and retinoid X receptors (RXR). We have
investigated the effect of synthetic retinoids selective for RXR and RAR on the
development of Xenopus and zebrafish embryos. In Xenopus, both ligands selective 
for RAR and RXR caused striking malformations along the anterior-posterior axis, 
whereas in zebrafish only ligands specific for RAR caused embryonic
malformations. In Xenopus, RAR- and RXR-selective ligands regulated the
expression of the Xlim-1, gsc, and HoxA1 genes similarly as all-trans-retinoic
acid. Nevertheless, RXR-selective ligands activated only an RXR responsive
reporter but not an RAR responsive reporter introduced by microinjection into the
Xenopus embryo, consistent with our failure to detect conversion of an
RXR-selective ligand to different derivatives in the embryo. These results
suggest that Xenopus embryos possess a unique response pathway in which liganded 
RXR can control gene expression. Our observations further illustrate the
divergence in retinoid responsiveness between different vertebrate species.

PMCID: PMC39862
PMID: 8700839  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Oct 13;215(2):713-20.

Retinoic acid induces three newly cloned HOXA1 transcripts in MCF7 breast cancer 
cells.

Chariot A(1), Moreau L, Senterre G, Sobel ME, Castronovo V.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Research Laboratory, University of Liege, Belgium.

Coordinated expression of genes involved in development, differentiation and
malignant transformation is regulated by transcription factors including
homeodomain-containing proteins. However, most of their cDNA sequences are still 
unknown. We report here the molecular characterization of three newly cloned
HOXA1 transcripts from human breast cancer cells. In addition, we provide
evidence that these alternatively spliced transcripts encode one
homeodomain-containing protein and two products lacking the conserved DNA-binding
domain. Moreover, we demonstrate that all three HOXA1 transcripts are induced by 
retinoic acid in MCF7 cells. Taken together, our results suggest that HOXA1 gene 
may be a key element in the establishment of the breast cancer cell phenotype.

PMID: 7488013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Dev Biol. 1995 Jan;167(1):34-49.

Regulation of the Xenopus labial homeodomain genes, HoxA1 and HoxD1: activation
by retinoids and peptide growth factors.

Kolm PJ(1), Sive HL.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, 9 Cambridge Center, Massachusetts
02142.

Vertebrate homologues of Drosophila labial are likely to play key roles in
anteroposterior axis formation. However, little is known about the regulation of 
these genes during vertebrate development. Here we examine the expression and
regulation of the Xenopus labial homeodomain genes, HoxA1 and HoxD1. HoxA1 was
expressed around the dorsoventral circumference of the trunk in neurula embryos, 
with later expression in spinal cord, midbrain, hindbrain, and endolymphatic
duct. By mid gastrula, HoxD1 was predominantly expressed in dorsolateral and
ventral ectoderm, with a gap in expression at the dorsal midline. By neurula,
ventral expression had declined with most expression restricted to dorsolateral
mesoderm and ectoderm. Retinoic acid strongly induced HoxA1 and HoxD1 throughout 
the ectoderm and mesendoderm of gastrula stages, while in older embryos retinoids
induced ectopic expression of these genes in more limited regions. Induction by
retinoids was independent of protein synthesis. Surprisingly, HoxA1 was expressed
at high levels in isolated animal caps in the absence of retinoic acid. The
peptide growth factors bFGF and activin A strongly induced expression of HoxD1,
but not HoxA1, in animal caps; however, RNA accumulated only many hours after the
application of these factors. Overexpression of thyroid hormone receptor (c-erbA)
prevented induction of HoxD1 by retinoic acid in animal caps. c-erbA also ablated
expression of HoxD1 in whole embryos, suggesting a role for endogenous retinoids 
in the regulation of HoxD1 expression. Dominant interfering activin and FGF
receptors prevented expression of HoxD1 in vivo, implicating these factors in the
normal induction of HoxD1. Our data indicate that induction of labial-like
homeodomain genes is complex and may require many factors.

PMID: 7851655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Lab Invest. 1994 Aug;71(2):243-51.

Inhibition of proliferation and induction of differentiation of pluripotent human
embryonal carcinoma cells by osteogenic protein-1 (or bone morphogenetic
protein-7).

Andrews PW(1), Damjanov I, Berends J, Kumpf S, Zappavigna V, Mavilio F, Sampath
K.

Author information: 
(1)Wistar Institute of Anatomy and Biology, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania.

BACKGROUND: Osteogenic protein-1 (OP-1) is a member of the transforming growth
factor-beta super family closely related to the bone morphogenetic proteins and
also known as bone morphogenetic protein-7. Other members of this family of
growth factors influence cell differentiation as well as cell growth in a number 
of systems. The Drosophila homolog encoded by the decapentaplegic locus is
involved in dorsal-ventral pattern formation during embryogenesis, whereas the
expression of several bone morphogenetic proteins including OP-1 is
developmentally regulated in mammalian embryos.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: The effect of recombinant human OP-1 on the proliferation
and differentiation of an established pluripotent human embryonal carcinoma (EC) 
cell line, NTERA2, and three nullipotent human EC cell lines, 2102Ep, 833KE and
TERA-1, was investigated. These cells were grown under reduced serum conditions, 
and differentiation was monitored by morphology and expression of marker
antigens.
RESULTS: OP-1 inhibited proliferation of NTERA2 and induced their
differentiation, marked by changes in cellular morphology, the loss of EC cell
antigens (SSEA3, SSEA4, the liver isozyme of alkaline phosphatase), and the
appearance of new antigens, notably SSEA1 and class 1 major histocompatibility
complex antigens. These changes were irreversible and did not involve significant
cell degeneration or cell death. The OP-1-induced differentiation of NTERA2
appeared distinct from that induced by either retinoic acid or hexamethylene
bisacetamide. Nevertheless, OP-1 did induce the homeobox gene, HOXA1. By
contrast, OP-1 elicited only a limited and partial response from the nullipotent 
EC cell lines.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results suggest that pluripotent human EC cells differentiate in
response to OP-1 and that this factor can modulate the differentiation induced by
retinoic acid. Like other members of the transforming growth factor-beta super
family, OP-1 might play an inductive role in the early embryo. The results also
suggest a possible therapeutic value for OP-1 in the treatment of some germ cell 
tumors.

PMID: 7521445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Biochem Pharmacol. 1994 Jan 13;47(1):137-43.

Homeobox genes: potential candidates for the transcriptional control of the
transformed and invasive phenotype.

Castronovo V(1), Kusaka M, Chariot A, Gielen J, Sobel M.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Research Laboratory, University of Liège, Belgium.

The transformation of a cell and the acquisition of the invasive and metastatic
phenotype result from the activation of a group of complex cellular processes
rather than from the effect of a single gene product. It is likely that the
coordination of the multiple genes involved in malignancy is under the control of
a few genes that act as master genes or orchestrator genes. The latter probably
code for transcription factors that control the genetic program for tumor
invasion and metastasis. Homeobox genes are a family of transcription factors
that contain a 183 bp highly conserved nucleotide sequence coding for a 61 amino 
acid domain that binds specifically to DNA. First discovered in Drosophila as
genes controlling segmentation and segment identity, homeobox genes have since
been identified in many other species including nematodes, frog, mouse and human.
There is strong support for the suggestion that homeobox genes play a key role in
development and differentiation. In humans, there are 38 homeobox genes organized
in four clusters that are localized on chromosomes 2, 7, 12 and 17. The specific 
functions of each of these genes are generally unknown. Alterations in expression
of several homeobox genes have been reported in a variety of malignant lesions,
suggesting that they could play a role in the development of cancer. Using
reverse transcriptase reaction coupled with polymerase chain reaction and
degenerate oligonucleotides corresponding to the 5' and 3' ends of the highly
conserved homeodomain, we amplified 130 bp cDNA fragments from the human breast
cancer cell line MCF7 that were subsequently cloned into pBluescript vector.
Sequencing of the clones, resulted in the identification of the homeodomains of
four different human homeobox genes: HOXB6, HOXA1, HOXA10 and HOXC6. Further
studies should determine the specific role of these four homeobox genes in the
development and progression of human breast cancer and potentially determine if
they might be good targets for gene therapy.

PMID: 7906121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


