
1. Cancer Lett. 2016 Apr 10;373(2):251-9. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2016.01.039. Epub
2016 Jan 29.

A novel cell cycle-associated lncRNA, HOXA11-AS, is transcribed from the 5-prime 
end of the HOXA transcript and is a biomarker of progression in glioma.

Wang Q(1), Zhang J(2), Liu Y(3), Zhang W(3), Zhou J(1), Duan R(3), Pu P(1), Kang 
C(1), Han L(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Tianjin Medical University General Hospital,
Tianjin 300052, China; Laboratory of Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological
Institute, Tianjin 300052, China; Key Laboratory of Post-trauma Neuro-Repair and 
Regeneration in Central Nervous System, Ministry of Education, Tianjin 300052,
China; Tianjin Key Laboratory of Injuries, Variations and Regeneration of Nervous
System, Tianjin 300052, China; Chinese Glioma Cooperative Group (CGCG), 6
Tiantanxi Li, Beijing 100050, China. (2)Chinese Glioma Cooperative Group (CGCG), 
6 Tiantanxi Li, Beijing 100050, China; Department of Neurosurgery, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.
(3)Chinese Glioma Cooperative Group (CGCG), 6 Tiantanxi Li, Beijing 100050,
China; Glioma Center, Department of Neurosurgery, Beijing Tiantan Hospital,
Capital Medical University, Beijing 100050, China. (4)Department of Neurosurgery,
Tianjin Medical University General Hospital, Tianjin 300052, China; Laboratory of
Neuro-Oncology, Tianjin Neurological Institute, Tianjin 300052, China; Key
Laboratory of Post-trauma Neuro-Repair and Regeneration in Central Nervous
System, Ministry of Education, Tianjin 300052, China; Tianjin Key Laboratory of
Injuries, Variations and Regeneration of Nervous System, Tianjin 300052, China;
Chinese Glioma Cooperative Group (CGCG), 6 Tiantanxi Li, Beijing 100050, China.
Electronic address: superhanlei@hotmail.com.

The comprehensive lncRNA expression signature in glioma has not yet been fully
elucidated. We performed a high-throughput microarray to detect the ncRNA
expression profiles of 220 human glioma tissues. Here, we found that a novel
lncRNA, HOXA11-AS, was the antisense transcript of the HOX11 gene. It was shown
that HOXA11-AS was closely associated with glioma grade and poor prognosis.
Multivariate Cox regression analysis revealed that HOXA11-AS was an independent
prognostic factor in glioblastoma multiforme patients, and its expression was
correlated with the glioma molecular subtypes of the Cancer Genome Atlas. Gene
set enrichment analysis indicated that the gene sets most correlated with
HOXA11-AS expression were involved in cell cycle progression. Over-expression of 
the HOXA11-AS transcript promoted cell proliferation in vitro, while knockdown of
HOXA11-AS expression repressed cell proliferation via regulation of cell cycle
progression. The growth-promoting and growth-inhibiting effects of HOXA11-AS were
also demonstrated in a xenograft mouse model. Our data confirms, for the first
time, that HOXA11-AS is an important long non-coding RNA that primarily serves as
a prognostic factor for glioma patient survival. HOXA11-AS could serve as a
biomarker for identifying glioma molecular subtypes and as therapeutic target for
glioma patients.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26828136  [PubMed - in process]


2. Reprod Biomed Online. 2016 Jan;32(1):85-95. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2015.09.011. Epub
2015 Oct 9.

Regulation of inflammatory and angiogenesis mediators in a functional model of
decidualized endometrial stromal cells.

Bourdiec A(1), Ahmad SF(2), Lachhab A(2), Akoum A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinologie de la reproduction, Centre de recherche-Hôpital Saint-François 
d'Assise, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, Faculté de médecine,
Université Laval, Québec, Canada. Electronic address:
amelie.bourdiec.1@ulaval.ca. (2)Endocrinologie de la reproduction, Centre de
recherche-Hôpital Saint-François d'Assise, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Québec, Faculté de médecine, Université Laval, Québec, Canada.

The mechanisms involving the expression of interleukin (IL) 1 family members in
the process of preparing the endometrium to receive an embryo remain unclear. In 
this study, decidualization differentially skewed the balance of IL1 family
receptor expression in a pattern that increases endometrial stromal cell
receptivity to IL1, IL18 and IL33. Additionally, endometrial cells showed
increased expression of homeobox HOXA10 and HOXA11 and LIFR, which are known to
be involved in endometrial embryo receptivity. Further analyses of decidual
endometrial cells revealed a significant increase in the release of potent
proinflammatory, remodelling and angiogenic factors implicated in the embryo
invasion process, such as VEGF (P = 0.0305), MMP9 (P = 0.0003), TIMP3 (P =
0.0001), RANTES (P = 0.0020), MCP1 (P = 0.0001) and MIF (P = 0.0068). No
significant changes in endogenous IL1B secretion were observed. Decreased
secretion of IL18 and decidualization increased secretion of IL33. These findings
reveal a significant modulation of endometrial cell receptivity to IL1 family
members during endometrial stromal cell decidualization, and suggest that the
involvement of IL1 family members is important in physiological processes of
endometrial receptivity, including adaptive immunology. This may be relevant to
establishing a favourable uterine microenvironment for embryo implantation.

Copyright © 2015 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 26602943  [PubMed - in process]


3. Am J Hum Genet. 2015 Dec 3;97(6):848-54. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2015.10.010. Epub
2015 Nov 12.

Mutations in MECOM, Encoding Oncoprotein EVI1, Cause Radioulnar Synostosis with
Amegakaryocytic Thrombocytopenia.

Niihori T(1), Ouchi-Uchiyama M(2), Sasahara Y(3), Kaneko T(4), Hashii Y(5), Irie 
M(2), Sato A(6), Saito-Nanjo Y(2), Funayama R(7), Nagashima T(7), Inoue S(8),
Nakayama K(7), Ozono K(5), Kure S(3), Matsubara Y(9), Imaizumi M(6), Aoki Y(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai
980-8574, Japan. Electronic address: tniihori@med.tohoku.ac.jp. (2)Department of 
Pediatrics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8574, Japan;
Department of Hematology and Oncology, Miyagi Children's Hospital, Sendai
989-3126, Japan. (3)Department of Pediatrics, Tohoku University School of
Medicine, Sendai 980-8574, Japan. (4)Department of Hematology-Oncology, Tokyo
Metropolitan Children's Medical Center, Fuchu 183-8561, Japan. (5)Department of
Pediatrics, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, Suita 565-0871, Japan. 
(6)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Miyagi Children's Hospital, Sendai
989-3126, Japan. (7)Division of Cell Proliferation, United Centers for Advanced
Research and Translational Medicine, Tohoku University Graduate School of
Medicine, Sendai 980-8575, Japan. (8)Department of Medical Genetics, Tohoku
University School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8574, Japan. (9)Department of Medical
Genetics, Tohoku University School of Medicine, Sendai 980-8574, Japan; National 
Research Institute for Child Health and Development, Tokyo 157-8535, Japan.

Radioulnar synostosis with amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia (RUSAT) is an
inherited bone marrow failure syndrome, characterized by thrombocytopenia and
congenital fusion of the radius and ulna. A heterozygous HOXA11 mutation has been
identified in two unrelated families as a cause of RUSAT. However, HOXA11
mutations are absent in a number of individuals with RUSAT, which suggests that
other genetic loci contribute to RUSAT. In the current study, we performed whole 
exome sequencing in an individual with RUSAT and her healthy parents and
identified a de novo missense mutation in MECOM, encoding EVI1, in the individual
with RUSAT. Subsequent analysis of MECOM in two other individuals with RUSAT
revealed two additional missense mutations. These three mutations were clustered 
within the 8(th) zinc finger motif of the C-terminal zinc finger domain of EVI1. 
Chromatin immunoprecipitation and qPCR assays of the regions harboring the
ETS-like motif that is known as an EVI1 binding site showed a reduction in
immunoprecipitated DNA for two EVI1 mutants compared with wild-type EVI1.
Furthermore, reporter assays showed that MECOM mutations led to alterations in
both AP-1- and TGF-ß-mediated transcriptional responses. These functional assays 
suggest that transcriptional dysregulation by mutant EVI1 could be associated
with the development of RUSAT. We report missense mutations in MECOM resulting in
a Mendelian disorder that provide compelling evidence for the critical role of
EVI1 in normal hematopoiesis and in the development of forelimbs and fingers in
humans.

Copyright © 2015 The American Society of Human Genetics. Published by Elsevier
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4678429 [Available on 2016-06-03]
PMID: 26581901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2015 Nov 9;6(1). pii: a023002. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a023002.

The Role of Hox Genes in Female Reproductive Tract Development, Adult Function,
and Fertility.

Du H(1), Taylor HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520.

HOX genes convey positional identity that leads to the proper partitioning and
adult identity of the female reproductive track. Abnormalities in reproductive
tract development can be caused by HOX gene mutations or altered HOX gene
expression. Diethylstilbestrol (DES) and other endocrine disruptors cause
Müllerian defects by changing HOX gene expression. HOX genes are also essential
regulators of adult endometrial development. Regulated HOXA10 and HOXA11
expression is necessary for endometrial receptivity; decreased HOXA10 or HOXA11
expression leads to decreased implantation rates. Alternation of HOXA10 and
HOXA11 expression has been identified as a mechanism of the decreased
implantation associated with endometriosis, polycystic ovarian syndrome,
leiomyoma, polyps, adenomyosis, and hydrosalpinx. Alteration of HOX gene
expression causes both uterine developmental abnormalities and impaired adult
endometrial development that prevent implantation and lead to female infertility.

Copyright © 2016 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

PMID: 26552702  [PubMed - in process]


5. Reprod Sci. 2016 Feb;23(2):186-91. doi: 10.1177/1933719115613449. Epub 2015 Oct
28.

Endometriosis Located Proximal to or Remote From the Uterus Differentially
Affects Uterine Gene Expression.

Naqvi H(1), Mamillapalli R(2), Krikun G(1), Taylor HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. (2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
ramana.mamillapalli@yale.edu.

The mechanisms that lead to the altered uterine gene expression in women with
endometriosis are poorly understood. Are these changes in gene expression
mediated by proximity to endometriotic lesions or is endometriosis a systemic
disease where the effect is independent of proximity to the uterus? To answer
this question, we created endometriosis in a murine model either in the
peritoneal cavity (proximal) or at a subcutaneous remote site (distal). The
expression of several genes that are involved in endometrial receptivity
(homeobox A10 [Hoxa10], homeobox A11 [Hoxa11], insulin-like growth factor binding
protein 1 [Igfbp1], Kruppel-like factor 9 [Klf9], and progesterone receptor
[Pgr]) was measured in the eutopic endometrium of mice transplanted with either
proximal or distal endometriosis lesions. Decreased expression of Hoxa10, Igfbp1,
Klf9, and total Pgr genes was observed in the eutopic endometrium of mice with
peritoneal endometriosis. In the mice with distal lesions, overall expression of 
these genes was not as severely affected, however, Igfbp1 expression was
similarly decreased and the effect on Pgr was more pronounced. Endometriosis does
have a systemic effect that varies with distance to the end organ. However, even 
remote disease selectively and profoundly alters the expression of genes such as 
Pgr. This is the first controlled experiment demonstrating that endometriosis is 
not simply a local peritoneal disease. Selective alteration of genes critical for
endometrial receptivity and endometriosis propagation may be systemic. Similarly,
systemic effects of endometriosis on other organs may also be responsible for the
widespread manifestations of the disease.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26516123  [PubMed - in process]


6. Fertil Steril. 2016 Feb;105(2):501-510.e1. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.10.011.
Epub 2015 Oct 26.

Cryopreservation and recovery of human endometrial epithelial cells with high
viability, purity, and functional fidelity.

Chen JC(1), Hoffman JR(1), Arora R(1), Perrone LA(1), Gonzalez-Gomez CJ(1), Vo
KC(1), Laird DJ(1), Irwin JC(1), Giudice LC(2).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Sciences, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductive Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, California.
(2)Center for Reproductive Sciences, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductive Sciences, University of California, San Francisco, California.
Electronic address: Linda.Giudice@ucsf.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To develop a protocol for cryopreservation and recovery of human
endometrial epithelial cells (eECs) retaining molecular and functional
characteristics of endometrial epithelium in vivo.
DESIGN: In vitro study using human endometrial cells.
SETTING: University research laboratory.
PATIENT(S): Endometrial biopsies were obtained from premenopausal women
undergoing benign gynecologic procedures.
INTERVENTION(S): Primary eECs were cryopreserved in 1% fetal bovine serum/10%
dimethylsulfoxide in Defined Keratinocyte Serum-Free Medium (KSFM). Recovered
cells were observed for endometrial stromal fibroblast (eSF) contamination and
subsequently evaluated for morphology, gene expression, and functional
characteristics of freshly cultured eECs and in vivo endometrial epithelium.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Analysis of eEC morphology and the absence of eSF
contamination; evaluation of epithelial-specific gene and protein expression;
assessment of epithelial polarity.
RESULT(S): Endometrial epithelial cells recovered after cryopreservation (n = 5) 
displayed epithelial morphology and expressed E-cadherin (CDH1), occludin (OCLN),
claudin1 (CLDN1), and keratin18 (KRT18). Compared with eSF, recovered eECs
displayed increased (P<.05) expression of epithelial-specific genes AREG, CDH1,
DEFB4A, MMP7, and WNT7A, while exhibiting low-to-undetectable (P<.05)
stromal-specific genes COL6A3, HOXA11, MMP2, PDGFRB, and WNT5A. Recovered eECs
secreted levels of cytokines and growth factors similarly to freshly cultured
eECs. Recovered eECs could form a polarized monolayer with high transepithelial
electrical resistance (TER) and impermeability to small molecules, and expressed 
apical/basolateral localization of CDH1 and apical localization of OCLN.
CONCLUSION(S): We have developed a protocol for cryopreservation of eECs in which
recovered cells after thawing demonstrate morphologic, transcriptomic, and
functional characteristics of human endometrial epithelium in vivo.

Copyright © 2016 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4744114 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26515378  [PubMed - in process]


7. Biol Open. 2015 Oct 23;4(11):1538-48. doi: 10.1242/bio.012500.

Hox11 genes regulate postnatal longitudinal bone growth and growth plate
proliferation.

Pineault KM(1), Swinehart IT(2), Garthus KN(2), Ho E(2), Yao Q(3), Schipani E(3),
Kozloff KM(3), Wellik DM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cell and Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 
MI 48109-2200, USA. (2)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular
Medicine and Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.
(3)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109, USA. (4)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine
and Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA
dwellik@umich.edu.

Hox genes are critical regulators of skeletal development and Hox9-13 paralogs,
specifically, are necessary for appendicular development along the proximal to
distal axis. Loss of function of both Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 results in severe
malformation of the forelimb zeugopod. In the radius and ulna of these mutants,
chondrocyte development is perturbed, growth plates are not established, and
skeletal growth and maturation fails. In compound mutants in which one of the
four Hox11 alleles remains wild-type, establishment of a growth plate is
preserved and embryos develop normally through newborn stages, however, skeletal 
phenotypes become evident postnatally. During postnatal development, the radial
and ulnar growth rate slows compared to wild-type controls and terminal bone
length is reduced. Growth plate height is decreased in mutants and premature
growth plate senescence occurs along with abnormally high levels of chondrocyte
proliferation in the reserve and proliferative zones. Compound mutants
additionally develop an abnormal curvature of the radius, which causes
significant distortion of the carpal elements. The progressive bowing of the
radius appears to result from physical constraint caused by the
disproportionately slower growth of the ulna than the radius. Collectively, these
data are consistent with premature depletion of forelimb zeugopod progenitor
cells in the growth plate of Hox11 compound mutants, and demonstrate a continued 
function for Hox genes in postnatal bone growth and patterning.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4728342
PMID: 26500224  [PubMed]


8. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 27;6(33):34745-57. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5784.

A functional variant in HOXA11-AS, a novel long non-coding RNA, inhibits the
oncogenic phenotype of epithelial ovarian cancer.

Richards EJ(1), Permuth-Wey J(2), Li Y(1), Chen YA(3), Coppola D(4), Reid BM(2), 
Lin HY(3), Teer JK(3), Berchuck A(5), Birrer MJ(6), Lawrenson K(7), Monteiro
AN(2), Schildkraut JM(8), Goode EL(9), Gayther SA(7), Sellers TA(2), Cheng JQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, 
FL, USA. (4)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL,
USA. (5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, NC, USA. (6)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)School of Medicine, Public Health Sciences, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA, USA. (9)Department of Health Science Research, Division of
Epidemiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

The homeobox A (HOXA) region of protein-coding genes impacts female reproductive 
system embryogenesis and ovarian carcinogenesis. The 5-prime end of HOXA includes
three long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) (HOXA10-AS, HOXA11-AS, and HOTTIP) that are 
underexplored in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). We evaluated whether common
genetic variants in these lncRNAs are associated with EOC risk and/or have
functional roles in EOC development. Using genome-wide association study data
from 1,201 serous EOC cases and 2,009 controls, an exonic variant within
HOXA11-AS, rs17427875 (A>T), was marginally associated with reduced serous EOC
risk (OR = 0.88 (95% CI: 0.78-1.01, p = 0.06). Functional studies of ectopic
expression of HOXA11-AS minor allele T in EOC cells showed decreased survival,
proliferation, migration, and invasion compared to common allele A expression.
Additionally, stable expression of HOXA11-AS minor allele T reduced primary tumor
growth in mouse xenograft models to a greater extent than common allele A.
Furthermore, HOXA11-AS expression levels were significantly lower in human EOC
tumors than normal ovarian tissues (p < 0.05), suggesting that HOXA11-AS has a
tumor suppressor function in EOC which may be enhanced by the T allele. These
findings demonstrate for the first time a role for HOXA11-AS in EOC with effects 
that could be modified by germline variants.

PMCID: PMC4741487
PMID: 26430965  [PubMed - in process]


9. Syst Biol. 2016 Mar;65(2):194-211. doi: 10.1093/sysbio/syv067. Epub 2015 Sep 16.

Geometric Morphometrics on Gene Expression Patterns Within Phenotypes: A Case
Example on Limb Development.

Martínez-Abadías N(1), Mateu R(1), Niksic M(1), Russo L(1), Sharpe J(2).

Author information: 
(1)EMBL-CRG Systems Biology Program, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The
Barcelona Institute of Science and Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, 
Spain; Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain; (2)EMBL-CRG Systems
Biology Program, Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG), The Barcelona Institute of 
Science and Technology, Dr. Aiguader 88, 08003 Barcelona, Spain; Universitat
Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona, Spain; Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis
Avançats (ICREA), Pg. Lluís Companys 23, 08010 Barcelona, Spain
james.sharpe@crg.eu.

How the genotype translates into the phenotype through development is critical to
fully understand the evolution of phenotypes. We propose a novel approach to
directly assess how changes in gene expression patterns are associated with
changes in morphology using the limb as a case example. Our method combines
molecular biology techniques, such as whole-mount in situ hybridization, with
image and shape analysis, extending the use of Geometric Morphometrics to the
analysis of nonanatomical shapes, such as gene expression domains. Elliptical
Fourier and Procrustes-based semilandmark analyses were used to analyze the
variation and covariation patterns of the limb bud shape with the expression
patterns of two relevant genes for limb morphogenesis, Hoxa11 and Hoxa13. We
devised a multiple thresholding method to semiautomatically segment gene domains 
at several expression levels in large samples of limb buds from C57Bl6 mouse
embryos between 10 and 12 postfertilization days. Besides providing an accurate
phenotyping tool to quantify the spatiotemporal dynamics of gene expression
patterns within developing structures, our morphometric analyses revealed high,
non-random, and gene-specific variation undergoing canalization during limb
development. Our results demonstrate that Hoxa11 and Hoxa13, despite being
paralogs with analogous functions in limb patterning, show clearly distinct
dynamic patterns, both in shape and size, and are associated differently with the
limb bud shape. The correspondence between our results and already
well-established molecular processes underlying limb development confirms that
this morphometric approach is a powerful tool to extract features of development 
regulating morphogenesis. Such multilevel analyses are promising in systems where
not so much molecular information is available and will advance our understanding
of the genotype-phenotype map. In systematics, this knowledge will increase our
ability to infer how evolution modified a common developmental pattern to
generate a wide diversity of morphologies, as in the vertebrate limb.

© The Author(s) 2015. Published by Oxford University Press, on behalf of the
Society of Systematic Biologists.

PMCID: PMC4748747
PMID: 26377442  [PubMed - in process]


10. Biol Reprod. 2015 Nov;93(5):121. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.131516. Epub 2015
Sep 2.

The Histone Methyltransferase Gene Absent, Small, or Homeotic Discs-1 Like Is
Required for Normal Hox Gene Expression and Fertility in Mice.

Brinkmeier ML(1), Geister KA(2), Jones M(2), Waqas M(1), Maillard I(3), Camper
SA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(2)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan. (4)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan scamper@umich.edu.

Chromatin remodeling influences gene expression in developing and adult
organisms. Active and repressive marks of histone methylation dictate the
embryonic expression boundaries of developmentally regulated genes, including the
Hox gene cluster. Drosophila ash1 (absent, small or homeotic discs 1) gene
encodes a histone methyltransferase essential for regulation of Hox gene
expression that interacts genetically with other members of the trithorax group
(TrxG). While mammalian members of the mixed lineage leukemia (Mll) family of
TrxG genes have roles in regulation of Hox gene expression, little is known about
the expression and function of the mammalian ortholog of the Drosophila ash1
gene, Ash1-like (Ash1l). Here we report the expression of mouse Ash1l gene in
specific structures within various organs and provide evidence that reduced Ash1l
expression has tissue-specific effects on mammalian development and adult
homeostasis. Mutants exhibit partially penetrant postnatal lethality and failure 
to thrive. Surviving mutants have growth insufficiency, skeletal transformations,
and infertility associated with developmental defects in both male and female
reproductive organs. Specifically, expression of Hoxa11 and Hoxd10 are altered in
the epididymis of Ash1l mutant males and Hoxa10 is reduced in the uterus of Ash1l
mutant females. In summary, we show that the histone methyltransferase Ash1l is
important for the development and function of several tissues and for proper
expression of homeotic genes in mammals.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4712006 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26333994  [PubMed - in process]


11. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Jul 19;15:28. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0078-5.

Key pathways regulated by HoxA9,10,11/HoxD9,10,11 during limb development.

Raines AM(1), Magella B(2), Adam M(3), Potter SS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, 3333 
Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. annaraines516@gmail.com. (2)Division of 
Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave.,
Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. bliss.magella@cchmc.org. (3)Division of Developmental
Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH, 
45229, USA. mike.adam@cchmc.org. (4)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati
Children's Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA.
steve.potter@cchmc.org.

BACKGROUND: The 39 mammalian Hox genes show problematic patterns of functional
overlap. In order to more fully define the developmental roles of Hox genes it is
necessary to remove multiple combinations of paralogous and flanking genes. In
addition, the downstream molecular pathways regulated by Hox genes during limb
development remain incompletely delineated.
RESULTS: In this report we examine limb development in mice with frameshift
mutations in six Hox genes, Hoxa9,10,11 and Hoxd9,10,11. The mice were made with 
a novel recombineering method that allows the simultaneous targeting of
frameshift mutations into multiple flanking genes. The Hoxa9,10,11 (-/-)
/Hoxd9,10,11 (-/-) mutant mice show a reduced ulna and radius that is more severe
than seen in Hoxa11 (-/-)/Hoxd11 (-/-) mice, indicating a minor role for the
flanking Hox9,10 genes in zeugopod development, as well as their primary function
in stylopod development. The mutant mice also show severe reduction of Shh
expression in the zone of polarizing activity, and decreased Fgf8 expression in
the apical ectodermal ridge, thereby better defining the roles of these specific 
Hox genes in the regulation of critical signaling centers during limb
development. Importantly, we also used laser capture microdissection coupled with
RNA-Seq to characterize the gene expression programs in wild type and mutant
limbs. Resting, proliferative and hypertrophic compartments of E15.5 forelimb
zeugopods were examined. The results provide an RNA-Seq characterization of the
progression of gene expression patterns during normal endochondral bone
formation. In addition of the Hox mutants showed strongly altered expression of
Pknox2, Zfp467, Gdf5, Bmpr1b, Dkk3, Igf1, Hand2, Shox2, Runx3, Bmp7 and Lef1, all
of which have been previously shown to play important roles in bone formation.
CONCLUSIONS: The recombineering based frameshift mutation of the six flanking and
paralogous Hoxa9,10,11 and Hoxd9,10,11 genes provides a resource for the analysis
of their overlapping functions. Analysis of the Hoxa9,10,11 (-/-) /Hoxd9,10,11
(-/-) mutant limbs confirms and extends the results of previous studies using
mice with Hox mutations in single paralogous groups or with entire Hox cluster
deletions. The RNA-Seq analysis of specific compartments of the normal and mutant
limbs defines the multiple key perturbed pathways downstream of these Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC4506574
PMID: 26186931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Syst Biol. 2015 Jul 14;11(7):815. doi: 10.15252/msb.20145882.

Data-driven modelling of a gene regulatory network for cell fate decisions in the
growing limb bud.

Uzkudun M(1), Marcon L(1), Sharpe J(2).

Author information: 
(1)EMBL-CRG Systems Biology Program Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG)
Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF), Barcelona Spain. (2)EMBL-CRG Systems Biology
Program Centre for Genomic Regulation (CRG) Universitat Pompeu Fabra (UPF),
Barcelona Spain Institucio Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avancats (ICREA),
Barcelona, Spain james.sharpe@crg.eu.

Parameter optimization coupled with model selection is a convenient approach to
infer gene regulatory networks from experimental gene expression data, but so far
it has been limited to single cells or static tissues where growth is not
significant. Here, we present a computational study in which we determine an
optimal gene regulatory network from the spatiotemporal dynamics of gene
expression patterns in a complex 2D growing tissue (non-isotropic and
heterogeneous growth rates). We use this method to predict the regulatory
mechanisms that underlie proximodistal (PD) patterning of the developing limb
bud. First, we map the expression patterns of the PD markers Meis1, Hoxa11 and
Hoxa13 into a dynamic description of the tissue movements that drive limb
morphogenesis. Secondly, we use reverse-engineering to test how different gene
regulatory networks can interpret the opposing gradients of fibroblast growth
factors (FGF) and retinoic acid (RA) to pattern the PD markers. Finally, we
validate and extend the best model against various previously published
manipulative experiments, including exogenous application of RA, surgical removal
of the FGF source and genetic ectopic expression of Meis1. Our approach
identifies the most parsimonious gene regulatory network that can correctly
pattern the PD markers downstream of FGF and RA. This network reveals a new model
of PD regulation which we call the "crossover model", because the proximal
morphogen (RA) controls the distal boundary of Hoxa11, while conversely the
distal morphogens (FGFs) control the proximal boundary.

© 2015 The Authors. Published under the terms of the CC BY 4.0 license.

PMCID: PMC4547844
PMID: 26174932  [PubMed - in process]


13. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Oct;12(4):5049-57. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4010. Epub 2015 Jul 1.

Substrate-specific gene expression profiles in different kidney cell types are
associated with Fabry disease.

Shin YJ(1), Jeon YJ(1), Jung N(1), Park JW(1), Park HY(1), Jung SC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Ewha Womans University, Seoul 
158-710, Republic of Korea.

Fabry disease is an X-linked lysosomal storage disorder caused by mutations in
the gene encoding the a-galactosidase A (a-Gal A) lysosomal enzyme, which results
in globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) storage in vascular endothelial cells and
different cell types throughout the body. Involvement of the kidney and heart is 
life threatening, and fibrosis of these organs is considered to be involved in
the pathogenesis of Fabry disease. An increased concentration of deacylated Gb3
(lyso-Gb3) in the plasma of symptomatic patients has also been suggested as a
causative molecular event. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms involved in
renal fibrosis in Fabry disease, the present analyzed the changes in global gene 
expression prior to and following Gb3 or lyso-Gb3 treatment in two types of
kidney cell lines, human proximal renal tubular epithelial (HK-2) and mouse renal
glomerular mesangial (SV40 MES 13) cells. Gb3 and lyso-Gb3 treatment regulated
the expression of 199 and 328 genes in each cell type, demonstrating a >2.0-fold 
change. The majority of the biological functions of the regulated genes were
associated with fibrogenesis or epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT). The gene
expression patterns of sphingolipid-treated HK-2 cells were distinguishable from 
the patterns in the SV40 MES 13 cells. Several genes associated with the EMT were
selected and evaluated further in kidney cells and in Fabry mouse kidney tissues.
In the SV40 MES 13 cells, the DLL1, F8, and HOXA11 genes were downregulated, and 
FOXP2 was upregulated by treatment with Gb3 or lyso-Gb3. In the HK-2 cells, the
ADAMTS6, BEST1, IL4, and MYH11 genes were upregulated. Upregulation of the FOXP2,
COL15A1, IL4, and MYH11 genes was also observed in the Fabry mouse kidney
tissues. The gene expression profiles in kidney cells following the addition of
Gb3 or lyso-Gb3 revealed substrate-specific and cell-specific patterns. These
findings suggested that Gb3 and lyso-Gb3 lead to renal fibrosis in Fabry disease 
through different biochemical modulations.

PMCID: PMC4581816
PMID: 26135632  [PubMed - in process]


14. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 15;10(6):e0130202. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130202.
eCollection 2015.

Associations of Polymorphisms in WNT9B and PBX1 with
Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser Syndrome in Chinese Han.

Ma W(1), Li Y(1), Wang M(1), Li H(1), Su T(2), Li Y(1), Wang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome is a rare syndrome
that is characterized by congenital aplasia of the uterus and the upper portion
(2/3) of the vagina. Previous attempts to identify causal mutations of MRKH
syndrome have primarily resulted in negative outcomes. We investigated whether
these reported variants are associated with MRKH syndrome (types I and II) in a
relatively large sample size of Chinese Han patients, and whether any gene-gene
epistatic interactions exist among these variants.
METHODS: This study included 182 unrelated Chinese women with MRKH syndrome (155 
with type I and 27 with type II) and 228 randomized female controls. Seventeen
candidate loci in the AMH, PBX1, WNT4, WNT7A, WNT9B, HOXA10, HOXA11, LHXA1 and
GALT genes were genotyped using the Sequenom MassARRAY iPLEX platform.
Single-marker association, additive effects and multifactor interactions were
investigated.
RESULTS: The gene frequency distributions of MRKH type 1 and type 2 were similar.
Rs34072914 in WNT9B was found to be associated with MRKH syndrome (P = 0.024, OR 
= 2.65, 95%CI = 1.14-6.17). The dominant models of rs34072914 and rs2275558 in
WNT9B and PBX1, respectively, were significantly associated with MRKH syndrome
risk in the Chinese Han patients. Additive gene-gene interaction analyses
indicated a significant synergetic interaction between WNT9B and PBX1 (RERI =
1.397, AP = 0.493, SI = 4.204). Multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR)
analysis revealed novel dimensional epistatic four-gene effects (AMH, PBX1, WNT7A
and WNT9B) in MRKH syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: This association study successfully identified two susceptibility
SNPs (WNT9B and PBX1) associated with MRKH syndrome risk, both separately and
interactively. The discovery of a four-gene epistatic effect (AMH, PBX1, WNT7A
and WNT9B) in MRKH syndrome provides novel information for the elucidation of the
genetic mechanism underlying the etiology of MRKH syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4468103
PMID: 26075712  [PubMed - in process]


15. Fertil Steril. 2015 Aug;104(2):356-65. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.04.041.
Epub 2015 Jun 13.

Laparoscopic endometrioma resection increases peri-implantation endometrial
HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 mRNA expression.

Celik O(1), Unlu C(2), Otlu B(3), Celik N(4), Caliskan E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Private Clinic, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Usak, Turkey. Electronic address:
celiksudenaz@gmail.com. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of
Medicine, Acibadem University, Istanbul, Turkey. (3)Department of Medical
Microbiology, Inonu University, School of Medicine, Malatya, Turkey.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Behçet Uz Children's Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical Park Hospital, Kocaeli,
Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether laparoscopic endometrioma resection alters
peri-implantation endometrial HOXA-10, HOXA-11, LIF, ITGB3 and ITGAV mRNA
expression.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Medical school.
PATIENT(S): Twenty infertile patients with uni- or bilateral endometrioma, five
infertile patients having nonendometriotic benign ovarian cyst, and five fertile 
control subjects.
INTERVENTION(S): Mid-luteal-phase endometrial sampling was performed at the time 
of surgery. Second endometrial biopsies were obtained 3 months after laparoscopic
endometrioma resection during the mid-luteal phase of the cycle.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Endometrial HOXA-10, HOXA-11, LIF, ITGAV, and ITGB3 mRNA
expressions were evaluated with the use of reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULT(S): Significantly decreased endometrial ITGAV mRNA expression was noted in
biopsies obtained from endometrioma and nonendometriotic cyst groups before
surgery. Trends toward decreased endometrial HOXA-10, HOXA-11, LIF, and ITGB3
mRNA expressions were noted in the endometrioma and nonendometriotic cyst groups 
before surgery compared with the fertile subjects. However, the differences
failed to show statistical significance. Compared with preoperative values,
significantly increased HOXA-10 (12.1-fold change) and HOXA-11 (17.2-fold change)
mRNA expressions were noted in endometrial biopsies obtained from subjects who
were undergoing endometrioma surgery. Fold change in endometrial ITGAV mRNA after
endometrioma surgery was found to be 30.1 and indicated a positive regulation.
However, this fold increase was statistically insignificant. Expressions of these
endometrial receptivity markers did not change significantly after surgical
removal of nonendometriotic benign ovarian cysts.
CONCLUSION(S): Laparoscopic endometrioma resection increases peri-implantation
endometrial HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 mRNA expression, suggesting an improvement in
endometrial receptivity.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26056923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2015 Jul;324(5):410-23. doi: 10.1002/jez.b.22627. Epub
2015 Jun 7.

Developmental stages for the divergence of relative limb length between a twig
and a trunk-ground Anolis lizard species.

Wakasa H(1), Cádiz A(1,)(2), Echenique-Díaz LM(3), Iwasaki WM(1), Kamiyama N(1), 
Nishimura Y(1), Yokoyama H(1), Tamura K(1), Kawata M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Graduate School of Life
Sciences, Tohoku University, Sendai, Japan. (2)Faculty of Biology, Havana
University, Havana, Cuba. (3)Miyagi University of Education, Aramaki-aza-Aoba,
Aobaku, Sendai, Japan.

The divergent evolution of niche-related traits can facilitate adaptive
radiation, yet identification of the genetic or molecular mechanisms underlying
such trait changes remains a major challenge in evolutionary biology. Conducting 
a detailed morphological comparison along growth trajectories is a powerful
method for observing the formation of differences in niche-related traits. Here, 
we focused on hindlimb length of Anolis lizards, differences in which are related
to adaptation for use of different microhabitats. We measured the length of
hindlimb skeletons in different ecomorphs of anole lizards (A. sagrei, a
trunk-ground ecomorph with long hindlimbs, and A. angusticeps, a twig ecomorph
with short hindlimbs) from early embryonic stages to adulthood, to determine
which hindlimb elements mainly differentiate the species and the timing of the
formation of these differences. With respect to the digit, differences between
the species mainly occurred during the embryonic stages of interdigit reduction, 
when the cartilage of the distal phalanges was simultaneously forming. In
addition, we compared the relative length of developing autopods in early
embryonic stages using whole-mount in situ hybridization before the formation of 
the cartilaginous bones, and the results showed that the relative growth rate of 
the Hoxa11-negative distal region in A. sagrei was greater than that in A.
angusticeps. Our results show that there are several important developmental
stages for hindlimb length differentiation between A. angusticeps and A. sagrei, 
depending on which hindlimb element is considered. In particular, the species
differences were largely due to variations in digit length, which arose at early 
embryonic stages.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26055630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Biomed Pharmacother. 2015 May;72:83-90. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2015.04.010. Epub
2015 Apr 17.

Systematic gene microarray analysis of the lncRNA expression profiles in human
uterine cervix carcinoma.

Chen J(1), Fu Z(2), Ji C(2), Gu P(3), Xu P(2), Yu N(1), Kan Y(1), Wu X(4), Shen
R(1), Shen Y(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cervical Branch, Affiliated Nanjing Maternal and Child Health Hospital,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210004, China. (2)Nanjing Maternal and Child 
Health Medical Institute, Affiliated Nanjing Maternal and Child Health Hospital, 
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210004, China. (3)Department of Clinical
laboratory, Affiliated Nanjing Maternal and Child Health Hospital, Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210004, China. (4)Department of Pharmacology, School 
of Basic Medical Sciences, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, China.
(5)Cervical Branch, Affiliated Nanjing Maternal and Child Health Hospital,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210004, China. Electronic address:
yanshennjmu@163.com.

The human uterine cervix carcinoma is one of the most well-known malignancy
reproductive system cancers, which threatens women health globally. However, the 
mechanisms of the oncogenesis and development process of cervix carcinoma are not
yet fully understood. Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been proved to play key
roles in various biological processes, especially development of cancer. The
function and mechanism of lncRNAs on cervix carcinoma is still rarely reported.
We selected 3 cervix cancer and normal cervix tissues separately, then performed 
lncRNA microarray to detect the differentially expressed lncRNAs. Subsequently,
we explored the potential function of these dysregulated lncRNAs through online
bioinformatics databases. Finally, quantity real-time PCR was carried out to
confirm the expression levels of these dysregulated lncRNAs in cervix cancer and 
normal tissues. We uncovered the profiles of differentially expressed lncRNAs
between normal and cervix carcinoma tissues by using the microarray techniques,
and found 1622 upregulated and 3026 downregulated lncRNAs (fold-change>2.0) in
cervix carcinoma compared to the normal cervical tissue. Furthermore, we found
HOXA11-AS might participate in cervix carcinogenesis by regulating HOXA11, which 
is involved in regulating biological processes of cervix cancer. This study
afforded expression profiles of lncRNAs between cervix carcinoma tissue and
normal cervical tissue, which could provide database for further research about
the function and mechanism of key-lncRNAs in cervix carcinoma, and might be
helpful to explore potential diagnosis factors and therapeutic targets for cervix
carcinoma.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26054679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):10840-52.

The long non-coding RNA HOTTIP enhances pancreatic cancer cell proliferation,
survival and migration.

Cheng Y(1), Jutooru I(1,)(2), Chadalapaka G(1), Corton JC(3), Safe S(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843, USA. (2)Covance, Inc., Madison, WI 53704, USA.
(3)Integrated Systems Toxicology Division, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, USA.
(4)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

HOTTIP is a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) transcribed from the 5' tip of the HOXA 
locus and is associated with the polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2) and WD
repeat containing protein 5 (WDR5)/mixed lineage leukemia 1 (MLL1) chromatin
modifying complexes. HOTTIP is expressed in pancreatic cancer cell lines and
knockdown of HOTTIP by RNA interference (siHOTTIP) in Panc1 pancreatic cancer
cells decreased proliferation, induced apoptosis and decreased migration. In
Panc1 cells transfected with siHOTTIP, there was a decrease in expression of 757 
genes and increased expression of 514 genes, and a limited gene analysis
indicated that HOTTIP regulation of genes is complex. For example, Aurora kinase 
A, an important regulator of cell growth, is coregulated by MLL and not WDR5 and,
in contrast to previous studies in liver cancer cells, HOTTIP does not regulate
HOXA13 but plays a role in regulation of several other HOX genes including
HOXA10, HOXB2, HOXA11, HOXA9 and HOXA1. Although HOTTIP and the HOX-associated
lncRNA HOTAIR have similar pro-oncogenic functions, they regulate strikingly
different sets of genes in Panc1 cells and in pancreatic tumors.

PMCID: PMC4484423
PMID: 25912306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Cell Mol Med. 2015 Feb;19(2):501-9. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12448.

MicroRNA-30d and microRNA-181a regulate HOXA11 expression in the uterosacral
ligaments and are overexpressed in pelvic organ prolapse.

Jeon MJ(1), Kim EJ, Lee M, Kim H, Choi JR, Chae HD, Moon YJ, Kim SK, Bai SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Seoul National University College of 
Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

The balanced turnover of collagen is necessary to maintain the mechanical
strength of pelvic supportive connective tissues. Homeobox (HOX) A11 is a key
transcriptional factor that controls collagen metabolism and homoeostasis in the 
uterosacral ligaments (USLs), and the deficient HOXA11 signalling may contribute 
to alterations in the biochemical strength of the USLs, leading to pelvic organ
prolapse (POP). However, it is unknown how HOXA11 transcripts are regulated in
the USLs. In this study, we found that microRNA (miRNA)-30d and 181a were
overexpressed in women with POP, and their expression was inversely correlated
with HOXA11 mRNA levels. The overexpression of miR-30d or 181a suppressed HOXA11 
mRNA and protein levels in 293T cells, whereas the knockdown of these miRNAs
enhanced HOXA11 levels and collagen production. Cotransfection of a luciferase
reporter plasmid containing the 3'-untranslated region of HOXA11 with miR-30d or 
181a mimic resulted in decreased relative luciferase activity. Conversely,
cotransfection with anti-miR-30d or 181a increased luciferase activity. Taken
together, these results indicate that both miR-30d and 181a are important
posttranscriptional regulators of HOXA11 in the USLs and could be a potential
therapeutic target for POP.

© 2015 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMCID: PMC4407598
PMID: 25630974  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Epigenomics. 2015;7(2):201-13. doi: 10.2217/epi.14.92. Epub 2015 Jan 15.

Epigenetic changes and functional study of HOXA11 in human gastric cancer.

Cui Y(1), Gao D, Linghu E, Zhan Q, Chen R, Brock MV, Herman JG, Guo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology & Hepatology, Chinese PLA General Hospital,
Beijing, China.

AIM: To examine epigenetic changes and the function of HOXA11 in human gastric
cancer (GC).
MATERIALS & METHODS: Seven GC cell lines, five cases of normal gastric mucosa and
112 cases primary GC samples were used in this study.
RESULTS: Expression of HOXA11 and lack of promoter region methylation were found 
in NCI-N87, MKN45, BGC823 and HGC27 cells. Loss of expression and complete
methylation were found in AGS gastric cancer cells. Reduced expression and
partial methylation were found in MGC803 and SGC7901 cells. Restoration of HOXA11
expression was induced by 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. HOXA11 was methylated in 81.25%
(91/112) of primary GCs. The presence of methylation was associated with male
gender, tumor size, tumor differentiation and lymph node metastasis (all p <
0.05). Restoration of HOXA11 expression reduced cell proliferation, invasion,
migration and induced apoptosis and G2/M phase arrest. HOXA11 was found to
inhibit Wnt signaling by upregulating NKD1 expression.
CONCLUSION: Epigenetic silencing of HOXA11 promotes GC proliferation, migration
and invasion through activation of Wnt signaling.

PMID: 25590359  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 15;20(24):6504-16. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1553. 
Epub 2014 Oct 14.

The novel, small-molecule DNA methylation inhibitor SGI-110 as an ovarian cancer 
chemosensitizer.

Fang F(1), Munck J(2), Tang J(1), Taverna P(2), Wang Y(1), Miller DF(1), Pilrose 
J(1), Choy G(2), Azab M(2), Pawelczak KS(3), VanderVere-Carozza P(4), Wagner
M(5), Lyons J(2), Matei D(6), Turchi JJ(7), Nephew KP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, Bloomington, Indiana.
(2)Astex Pharmaceuticals Inc., Dublin, California. (3)Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana. (4)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. (5)Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. Indiana University Melvin and Bren
Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis, Indiana. VA Roudebush Hospital, Indianapolis, 
Indiana. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. Department of Medicine, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. knephew@indiana.edu jturchi@iupui.edu 
dmatei@iupui.edu. (7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. Department of Medicine,
Division of Hematology/Oncology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana. knephew@indiana.edu jturchi@iupui.edu dmatei@iupui.edu.
(8)Medical Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, Bloomington, Indiana.
Indiana University Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis, Indiana.
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana. Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. knephew@indiana.edu
jturchi@iupui.edu dmatei@iupui.edu.

PURPOSE: To investigate SGI-110 as a "chemosensitizer" in ovarian cancer and to
assess its effects on tumor suppressor genes (TSG) and
chemoresponsiveness-associated genes silenced by DNA methylation in ovarian
cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Several ovarian cancer cell lines were used for in vitro and
in vivo platinum resensitization studies. Changes in DNA methylation and
expression levels of TSG and other cancer-related genes in response to SGI-110
were measured by pyrosequencing and RT-PCR.
RESULTS: We demonstrate in vitro that SGI-110 resensitized a range of
platinum-resistant ovarian cancer cells to cisplatin (CDDP) and induced
significant demethylation and reexpression of TSG, differentiation-associated
genes, and putative drivers of ovarian cancer cisplatin resistance. In vivo,
SGI-110 alone or in combination with CDDP was well tolerated and induced
antitumor effects in ovarian cancer xenografts. Pyrosequencing analyses confirmed
that SGI-110 caused both global (LINE1) and gene-specific hypomethylation in
vivo, including TSGs (RASSF1A), proposed drivers of ovarian cancer cisplatin
resistance (MLH1 and ZIC1), differentiation-associated genes (HOXA10 and HOXA11),
and transcription factors (STAT5B). Furthermore, DNA damage induced by CDDP in
ovarian cancer cells was increased by SGI-110, as measured by inductively coupled
plasma-mass spectrometry analysis of DNA adduct formation and repair of
cisplatin-induced DNA damage.
CONCLUSIONS: These results strongly support further investigation of
hypomethylating strategies in platinum-resistant ovarian cancer. Specifically,
SGI-110 in combination with conventional and/or targeted therapeutics warrants
further development in this setting.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4268357
PMID: 25316809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2014 Dec;31(12):1713-8. doi: 10.1007/s10815-014-0354-5.
Epub 2014 Oct 8.

Reduced uterine receptivity for mouse embryos developed from in-vitro matured
oocytes.

Lin YH(1), Tsai CY, Huang LW, Seow KM, Hwang JL, Tzeng CR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Shin Kong Wu Ho-Su Memorial Hospital,
No. 95, Wen Chang Road, Shih Lin District, Taipei, Taiwan.

PURPOSE: The outcomes of in-vitro maturation (IVM) are inferior compared to those
of IVF. The purpose of the study was to compare the implantation rates of IVM-
and in-vivo maturation (IVO)- derived embryos, and to evaluate their effects on
uterine receptivity.
METHODS: The IVM- and IVO- oocytes were obtained from female mice, fertilized and
transferred to separate oviducts of the same pseudo-pregnant mice. After 5 days, 
the implanted blastocysts were dissected out of the uterine horns, and the
uterine horns were analyzed for the expression of mRNAs encoding leukemia
inhibitory factor, heparin-binding epidermal growth factor, insulin-like growth
factor binding protein-4, progesterone receptor, and Hoxa-10.
RESULTS: The maturation rate of the IVM- oocytes was 81.2%. The fertilization
rate of the IVM oocytes was lower than that of the IVO oocytes (50.5% vs. 78.0%, 
p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.038), as was their implantation rate (14.5% vs. 74.7%, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.001). All 5
mRNAs examined were expressed at significantly lower levels in the uterine horns 
that received the IVM-derived embryos than in those that received the IVO-derived
embryos.
CONCLUSIONS: The IVM-derived embryos are less competent in inducing expression of
implantation-related mRNAs in the uterine horn.

PMCID: PMC4250451
PMID: 25292155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Oct 7;16(5):450. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0450-6.

DNA methylation profiling in the Carolina Breast Cancer Study defines cancer
subclasses differing in clinicopathologic characteristics and survival.

Conway K, Edmiston SN, May R, Kuan PF, Chu H, Bryant C, Tse CK, Swift-Scanlan T, 
Geradts J, Troester MA, Millikan RC.

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, with several intrinsic
subtypes differing by hormone receptor (HR) status, molecular profiles, and
prognosis. However, the role of DNA methylation in breast cancer development and 
progression and its relationship with the intrinsic tumor subtypes are not fully 
understood.
METHODS: A microarray targeting promoters of cancer-related genes was used to
evaluate DNA methylation at 935 CpG sites in 517 breast tumors from the Carolina 
Breast Cancer Study, a population-based study of invasive breast cancer.
RESULTS: Consensus clustering using methylation (ß) values for the 167 most
variant CpG loci defined four clusters differing most distinctly in HR status,
intrinsic subtype (luminal versus basal-like), and p53 mutation status.
Supervised analyses for HR status, subtype, and p53 status identified 266
differentially methylated CpG loci with considerable overlap. Genes relatively
hypermethylated in HR+, luminal A, or p53 wild-type breast cancers included
FABP3, FGF2, FZD9, GAS7, HDAC9, HOXA11, MME, PAX6, POMC, PTGS2, RASSF1, RBP1, and
SCGB3A1, whereas those more highly methylated in HR-, basal-like, or p53 mutant
tumors included BCR, C4B, DAB2IP, MEST, RARA, SEPT5, TFF1, THY1, and SERPINA5.
Clustering also defined a hypermethylated luminal-enriched tumor cluster 3 that
gene ontology analysis revealed to be enriched for homeobox and other
developmental genes (ASCL2, DLK1, EYA4, GAS7, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB13, IHH, IPF1,
ISL1, PAX6, TBX1, SOX1, and SOX17). Although basal-enriched cluster 2 showed
worse short-term survival, the luminal-enriched cluster 3 showed worse long-term 
survival but was not independently prognostic in multivariate Cox proportional
hazard analysis, likely due to the mostly early stage cases in this dataset.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that epigenetic patterns are strongly
associated with HR status, subtype, and p53 mutation status and may show
heterogeneity within tumor subclass. Among HR+ breast tumors, a subset exhibiting
a gene signature characterized by hypermethylation of developmental genes and
poorer clinicopathologic features may have prognostic value and requires further 
study. Genes differentially methylated between clinically important tumor subsets
have roles in differentiation, development, and tumor growth and may be critical 
to establishing and maintaining tumor phenotypes and clinical outcomes.

PMCID: PMC4303129
PMID: 25287138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Anat. 2014 Nov;225(5):527-38. doi: 10.1111/joa.12235. Epub 2014 Oct 3.

The pisiform growth plate is lost in humans and supports a role for Hox in growth
plate formation.

Kjosness KM(1), Hines JE, Lovejoy CO, Reno PL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anthropology, The Pennsylvania State University, University
Park, PA, USA.

The human pisiform is a small, nodular, although functionally significant, bone
of the wrist. In most other mammals, including apes and Australopithecus
afarensis, pisiforms are elongate. An underappreciated fact is that the typical
mammalian pisiform forms from two ossification centers. We hypothesize that: (i) 
the presence of a secondary ossification center in mammalian pisiforms indicates 
the existence of a growth plate; and (ii) human pisiform reduction results from
growth plate loss. To address these hypotheses, we surveyed African ape pisiform 
ossification and confirmed the presence of a late-forming secondary ossification 
center in chimpanzees and gorillas. Identification of the initial ossification
center occurs substantially earlier in apes relative to humans, raising questions
concerning the homology of the human pisiform and the two mammalian ossification 
centers. Second, we conducted histological and immunohistochemical analyses of
pisiform ossification in mice. We confirm the presence of two ossification
centers separated by organized columnar and hypertrophic chondrocyte zones.
Flattened chondrocytes were highly mitotic, indicating the presence of a growth
plate. Hox genes have been proposed to play a fundamental role in growth plate
patterning. The existence of a pisiform growth plate presents an interesting test
case for the association between Hox expression and growth plate formation, and
could explain the severe effects on the pisiform observed in Hoxa11 and Hoxd11
knockout mice. Consistent with this hypothesis, we show that Hoxd11 is expressed 
adjacent to the pisiform in late-stage embryonic mouse limbs supporting a role
for Hox genes in growth plate specification. This raises questions concerning the
mechanisms regulating Hox expression in the developing carpus.

© 2014 Anatomical Society.

PMID: 25279687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Genetics. 2014 Nov;198(3):1117-26. doi: 10.1534/genetics.114.167460. Epub 2014
Sep 11.

Genetic interactions between Shox2 and Hox genes during the regional growth and
development of the mouse limb.

Neufeld SJ(1), Wang F(2), Cobb J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N
1N4, Canada. (2)Department of Neurobiology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710. (3)Department of Biological Sciences, University of
Calgary, Calgary, Alberta T2N 1N4, Canada jacobb@ucalgary.ca.

The growth and development of the vertebrate limb relies on homeobox genes of the
Hox and Shox families, with their independent mutation often giving
dose-dependent effects. Here we investigate whether Shox2 and Hox genes function 
together during mouse limb development by modulating their relative dosage and
examining the limb for nonadditive effects on growth. Using double mRNA
fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) in single embryos, we first show that
Shox2 and Hox genes have associated spatial expression dynamics, with Shox2
expression restricted to the proximal limb along with Hoxd9 and Hoxa11
expression, juxtaposing the distal expression of Hoxa13 and Hoxd13. By generating
mice with all possible dosage combinations of mutant Shox2 alleles and HoxA/D
cluster deletions, we then show that their coordinated proximal limb expression
is critical to generate normally proportioned limb segments. These epistatic
interactions tune limb length, where Shox2 underexpression enhances, and Shox2
overexpression suppresses, Hox-mutant phenotypes. Disruption of either Shox2 or
Hox genes leads to a similar reduction in Runx2 expression in the developing
humerus, suggesting their concerted action drives cartilage maturation during
normal development. While we furthermore provide evidence that Hox gene function 
influences Shox2 expression, this regulation is limited in extent and is unlikely
on its own to be a major explanation for their genetic interaction. Given the
similar effect of human SHOX mutations on regional limb growth, Shox and Hox
genes may generally function as genetic interaction partners during the growth
and development of the proximal vertebrate limb.

Copyright © 2014 by the Genetics Society of America.

PMCID: PMC4224156
PMID: 25217052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Oncol Lett. 2014 Oct;8(4):1613-1617. Epub 2014 Jul 7.

Microarray-based DNA methylation study of Ewing's sarcoma of the bone.

Park HR(1), Jung WW(2), Kim HS(3), Park YK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Hallym University, Anyang,
Gyeonggi 431-070, Republic of Korea. (2)Department of Biomedical Laboratory
Science, College of Health Science, Cheongju University, Cheongju, Chungbuk
360-764, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science,
College of Health Science, Korea University, Seoul 136-703, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Pathology, College of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul
130-702, Republic of Korea.

Alterations in DNA methylation patterns are a hallmark of malignancy. However,
the majority of epigenetic studies of Ewing's sarcoma have focused on the
analysis of only a few candidate genes. Comprehensive studies are thus lacking
and are required. The aim of the present study was to identify novel methylation 
markers in Ewing's sarcoma using microarray analysis. The current study reports
the microarray-based DNA methylation study of 1,505 CpG sites of 807
cancer-related genes from 69 Ewing's sarcoma samples. The Illumina GoldenGate
Methylation Cancer Panel I microarray was used, and with the appropriate controls
(n=14), a total of 92 hypermethylated genes were identified in the Ewing's
sarcoma samples. The majority of the hypermethylated genes were associated with
cell adhesion, cell regulation, development and signal transduction. The overall 
methylation mean values were compared between patients who survived and those
that did not. The overall methylation mean was significantly higher in the
patients who did not survive (0.25±0.03) than in those who did (0.22±0.05)
(P=0.0322). However, the overall methylation mean was not found to significantly 
correlate with age, gender or tumor location. GDF10, OSM, APC and HOXA11 were the
most significant differentially-methylated genes, however, their methylation
levels were not found to significantly correlate with the survival rate. The DNA 
methylation profile of Ewing's sarcoma was characterized and 92 genes that were
significantly hypermethylated were detected. A trend towards a more aggressive
behavior was identified in the methylated group. The results of this study
indicated that methylation may be significant in the development of Ewing's
sarcoma.

PMCID: PMC4156184
PMID: 25202378  [PubMed]


27. Tissue Eng Part A. 2015 Jan;21(1-2):353-61. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2014.0052. Epub 
2014 Sep 19.

Regeneration of uterine horns in rats using collagen scaffolds loaded with human 
embryonic stem cell-derived endometrium-like cells.

Song T(1), Zhao X, Sun H, Li X, Lin N, Ding L, Dai J, Hu Y.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital,
Nanjing University Medical School , Nanjing, China .

A variety of diseases may lead to hysterectomies or uterine injuries, which may
form a scar and lead to infertility. Due to the limitation of native materials,
there are a few effective methods to treat such damages. Tissue engineering
combines cell and molecular biology with materials and mechanical engineering to 
replace or repair damaged organs and tissues. The use of human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) as a donor cell source for the replacement therapy will require the
development of simple and reliable cell differentiation protocols. This study
aimed at efficiently generating endometrium-like cells from the hESCs and at
using these cells with collagen scaffold to repair uterine damage. The hESCs were
induced by co-culturing with endometrial stromal cells, and simultaneously added 
cytokines: epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived growth factor-b
(PDGF-b), and E2. Expression of cell specific markers was analyzed by
immunofluorescence and reverse trascription-polymerase chain reaction to monitor 
the progression toward an endometrium-like cell fate. After differentiation, the 
majority of cells (>80%) were positive for cytokeratin-7, and the expression of
key transcription factors related to endometrial development, such as Wnt4,
Wnt7a, Wnt5a, Hoxa11, and factors associated with endometrial epithelial cell
function: Hoxa10, Intergrinß3, LIF, ER, and PR were also detected. Then, we
established the uterine full-thickness-injury rat models to test cell function in
vivo. hESC-derived cells were dropped onto collagen scaffolds and transplanted
into the animal model. Twelve weeks after transplantation, we discovered that the
hESC-derived cells could survive and recover the structure and function of
uterine horns in a rat model of severe uterine damage. The experimental system
presented here provides a reliable protocol to produce endometrium-like cells
from hESCs. Our results encourage the use of hESCs in cell-replacement therapy
for severe uterine damage in future.

PMCID: PMC4292859
PMID: 25097004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Int J Dev Biol. 2014;58(2-4):117-26. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.130335gw.

Evolution of mammalian pregnancy and the origin of the decidual stromal cell.

Wagner GP(1), Kin K, Muglia L, Pavlicev M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology and Systems Biology Institute, 
Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. gunter.wagner@yale.edu.

Reproduction in eutherian mammals is characterized by extended intrauterine
retention of the fetus after implantation. We summarize evolutionary innovations 
that enable this form of vivipary, including early maternal recognition of
pregnancy, invasive placentation, and emergence of the decidual cell type. We
first review the structure of the marsupial endometrium and its relationship to
that of eutherian mammals. While the tissue components of endometrium are the
same in marsupials and eutherians, an important difference is the amount of
stromal cells, which are much more abundant in eutherians. Moreover, the nature
of the invasive placentation differs in marsupials and eutherians. In the
opossum, it consists of cytoplasmatic extensions of trophoblast cells that
penetrate between the luminal epithelial cells to contact maternal capillaries.
In bandicoots, the trophoblast and luminal epithelial cells fuse, and the
maternal epithelium is replaced by a layer of multinucleated cells. In no case
has there been evidence of a direct interaction between trophoblast and stromal
cells. The direct interface between the trophoblast and maternal stroma is a
derived feature of eutherian mammals, coincidental with the origin of decidual
cells. Gene expression studies are suggestive of "categorical reprograming" of
endometrial fibroblasts during decidualization. This reprogramming suggests that 
the decidual cell is a distinct cell type rather than a modulation of endometrial
fibroblasts. Further support for this hypothesis is the origin of derived
transcription factor interactions that are necessary for the regulation of
decidual gene expression, in particular the interactions between HOXA11 and CEBPB
with FOXO1A.

PMID: 25023677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Int J Clin Exp Med. 2014 May 15;7(5):1244-54. eCollection 2014.

Gene microarray analysis of the lncRNA expression profile in human urothelial
carcinoma of the bladder.

Luo H(1), Zhao X(1), Wan X(1), Huang S(1), Wu D(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Tongji Hospital of Tongji University Shanghai 200065,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the expression profile variation of lncRNAs in normal
urinary bladder tissue and urothelial carcinoma of the urinary bladder through
microarray technology. The differentially expressed lncRNAs were identified and
classified, and their biological information was analyzed. The data obtained in
the study will prove helpful for the diagnosis, treatment, and prevention of
urothelial carcinoma of the bladder.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Three specimens of urothelial carcinoma of the bladder and
three specimens of normal bladder tissue were identified by histology. The total 
RNA was isolated from the bladder urothelial carcinomas and normal tissue and
purified. The targets were mixed and hybridized with the genes on the microarray,
which contained thirty thousand lncRNAs. The bladder urothelial carcinomas were
then compared with the normal bladder tissue. The lncRNAs that were
differentially expressed between the two groups were identified based on the
signal-to-noise ratios using the Agilent Feature Extraction software and were
analyzed with the Agilent Genespring GX software (Agilent). The outcome was
obtained, and the biological information of these genes was deposited in GenBank.
RESULTS: The expression profile of lncRNAs was significantly different between
normal bladder tissue and urothelial carcinoma of the bladder. Compared with
normal bladder tissue, 1,122 lncRNAs exhibited at least a twofold, significant
difference (P < 0.05) and are thus regarded as differentially expressed lncRNAs. 
Of these, 734 and 388 lncRNAs were upregulated and down regulated. The
differentially expressed lncRNAs in the urothelial carcinoma of the bladder are
distributed on every chromosome, and most of these lncRNAs are distributed on
chromosomes 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, and X.
CONCLUSIONS: Urothelial carcinoma of the bladder is a complicated disease that
involves the regulation of multiple genes and the participation of multiple
chromosomes. Some of the differentially expressed lncRNAs that were upregulated, 
such as AK124776, lincRNA-RAB12-1, KRT8P25, RP11-474J18.4, AC000110.1, KRT8P13,
KRT8P10, BC072678, and downregulated, such as nc-HOXB9-206, RP11-160A10.2,
nc-HOXA11-86, nc-HOXD10-7, nc-HOXB9-205, CES4, nc-HOXD12-3, systematic research
on these lncRNAs will help clarify the mechanisms of urothelial carcinoma of the 
bladder and guide the early diagnosis and treatment of this cancer in the future.

PMCID: PMC4073740
PMID: 24995079  [PubMed]


30. J Turk Ger Gynecol Assoc. 2014 Jun 1;15(2):104-8. doi: 10.5152/jtgga.2014.0088.
eCollection 2014.

HOXA11 and MMP2 gene expression in uterosacral ligaments of women with pelvic
organ prolapse.

Yilmaz N(1), Ozaksit G(1), Terzi YK(2), Yilmaz S(1), Budak B(1), Aksakal O(1),
Sahin FI(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dr. Zekai Tahir Burak Women's Health Education and Research Hospital, Ankara, 
Turkey. (2)Department of Clinical Genetics, Baskent University Faculty of
Medicine, Ankara, Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: Pelvic organ prolapse (POP) is a common disorder that negatively
impacts the quality of life in many women. Uterosacral ligaments (USLs) are
supportive structures of the pelvic organs that are often attenuated in women
with POP. The HOXA genes regulate the development of the uterosacral ligaments.
We compared expression of HOXA11 and MMP2 in USLs of women with and without POP.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: A prospective sequential cross sectional study was
conducted in ZTB Women's Health Research and Education Hospital. We compared
expression of HOXA11 and MMP2 in USLs of women with (n:18) and without (n: 15)
POP. Total RNA was isolated from patient (n:18) and control (n:15) uterosacral
ligament tissues with TriPure isolation reagent according to the manufacturer's
instructions. Expression levels of HOXA11 and MMP2 were determined using
semiquantitative RT-PCR in a Light Cycler 480 system. Real-time ready catalog
assays, which are short FAM-labeled hydrolysis probes containing locked nucleic
acid, were used for RT-PCR reactions.
RESULTS: There was no difference in patients' mean age, parity, body mass
indexes, and menopausal status between two groups. Means of RNA expression of
MMP2 were 1.27±0.6 and 0.75±0.4 in the POP group vs control group, respectively
(p:0.007). Means of RNA expression of HOXA 11 were 2.57±2.4 and 1.94±1.4 in the
POP group vs control group, respectively (p:0.376). The POP group was divided as 
mild and severe POP; there was no difference in HOXA11 and MMP2 RNA expression
between groups (p>0.05).
CONCLUSION: Although there was no difference HOXA11 RNA expression in USLs with
the POP group vs control, there was a significant difference MMP2 RNA expression 
in USLs with the POP group vs control. There are limited studies on this subject,
and study results are contradictory. Further investigations with larger numbers
of cases are needed to clarify this subject.

PMCID: PMC4072547
PMID: 24976777  [PubMed]


31. BMC Cancer. 2014 May 21;14:353. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-353.

Investigation of HOXA9 promoter methylation as a biomarker to distinguish oral
cancer patients at low risk of neck metastasis.

Uchida K, Veeramachaneni R, Huey B, Bhattacharya A, Schmidt BL, Albertson DG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San 
Francisco, 1450 Third Street, San Francisco CA 94158-9001, USA. da66@nyu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Metastasis to the cervical (neck) lymph nodes is one of the most
significant clinical factors responsible for death from oral squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC). Therefore, the lymph nodes are frequently removed when the tumor
is excised (neck dissection), even though the majority of patients will not
benefit from the extra surgery. Two subtypes of oral SCC distinguished by the
presence of tumor genomic aberrations +3q, -8p, +8q and/or +20 differ in risk for
metastasis - high for the 3q8pq20 subtype, harboring one or more of the
aberrations and low for the non-3q8pq20 subtype, lacking these alterations. A
prior analysis of the literature suggested genes differentially methylated in the
two subtypes. Therefore, the goal of this study was to further investigate the
methylation status of candidate biomarkers of the non-3q8pq20 subtype, and
evaluate their utility for identifying patients at low risk for metastasis.
METHODS: Methylation status of genes in a cohort of 52 oral SCC patients with at 
least five year follow up was determined by pyrosequencing. Gene expression
levels were determined by quantitative RT-PCR. Growth following re-expression of 
HOXA9 in cultured oral SCC cells was assessed by proliferation and colony
formation assays.
RESULTS: A pilot study evaluating methylation levels of HOXA9, MT1A and HOXA11
promoters in DNA from 12 tumors (six each of the 3q8pq20 and non-3q8pq20
subtypes) revealed that only HOXA9 was differentially methylated. Significant
differences in methylation levels of HOXA9 were observed amongst the 52 oral SCCs
with respect to genomic subtype and nodal status (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014, and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.024,
respectively, Wilcoxon rank sum test). High levels of HOXA9 methylation and low
levels of expression in oral SCC cell lines were observed compared to HaCaT, a
non-tumorigenic keratinocyte cell line. Re-expression of HOXA9 in the SCC4 oral
cancer cell line resulted in diminished proliferation and colony formation.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXA9 methylation is frequent in oral cancers and levels are higher 
in tumors with greater risk of metastasis. Expression of HOXA9 is low in cells
with high levels of methylation and reduced expression appears to confer a growth
advantage.

PMCID: PMC4045880
PMID: 24886209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Arch Oral Biol. 2014 Aug;59(8):783-9. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2014.05.001.
Epub 2014 May 10.

Epigenetic repression of HOXB cluster in oral cancer cell lines.

Xavier FC(1), Destro MF(2), Duarte CM(2), Nunes FD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Propaedeutics and Integrated Clinic, School of Dentistry,
Federal University of Bahia, Av. Araujo Pinho, 62, Canela, Salvador 40110-150
Bahia, Brazil. (2)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of
São Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil.
(3)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Av.
Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil. Electronic
address: fadnunes@usp.br.

OBJECTIVE: Aberrant DNA methylation is a fundamental transcriptional control
mechanism in carcinogenesis. The expression of homeobox genes is usually
controlled by an epigenetic mechanism, such as the methylation of CpG islands in 
the promoter region. The aim of this study was to describe the differential
methylation pattern of HOX genes in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell
lines and transcript status in a group of hypermethylated and hypomethylated
genes.
DESIGN: Quantitative analysis of DNA methylation was performed on two OSCC cell
lines (SCC4 and SCC9) using a method denominated Human Homeobox Genes EpiTect
Methyl qPCR Arrays, which allowed fast, precise methylation detection of 24 HOX
specific genes without bisulfite conversion.
RESULTS: Methylation greater than 50% was detected in HOXA11, HOXA6, HOXA7,
HOXA9, HOXB1, HOXB2, HOXB3, HOXB4, HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXC8 and HOXD10. Both cell
lines demonstrated similar hypermethylation status for eight HOX genes. A similar
pattern of promoter hypermethylation and hypomethylation was demonstrated for the
HOXB cluster and HOXA cluster, respectively. Moreover, the hypermethylation
profile of the HOXB cluster, especially HOXB4, was correlated with decreased
transcript expression, which was restored following treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
CONCLUSIONS: The homeobox methylation profile in OSCC cell lines is consistent
with an epigenetic biomarker.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24859765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Reprod Biomed Online. 2014 Jun;28(6):739-42. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2014.01.018.
Epub 2014 Feb 25.

Mutations in HOXA11 are not responsible for Müllerian duct anomalies in Chinese
patients.

Chen X(1), Li G(2), Qin Y(2), Cui Y(2), You L(2), Chen ZJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, China; National Research Center for
Assisted Reproductive Technology and Reproductive Genetics, 324 Jingwu Road,
Jinan 250021, China; The Key Laboratory for Reproductive Endocrinology of
Ministry of Education, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, China; Shandong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, China;
School of Nursing, Shandong University, 44 Wenhua Road, Jinan 250012, China.
(2)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, China; National Research Center for
Assisted Reproductive Technology and Reproductive Genetics, 324 Jingwu Road,
Jinan 250021, China; The Key Laboratory for Reproductive Endocrinology of
Ministry of Education, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, China; Shandong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, China.
(3)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, China; National Research Center for
Assisted Reproductive Technology and Reproductive Genetics, 324 Jingwu Road,
Jinan 250021, China; The Key Laboratory for Reproductive Endocrinology of
Ministry of Education, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, China; Shandong Provincial 
Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, China;
Center for Reproductive Medicine, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Shanghai Key Laboratory for Assisted Reproduction and
Reproductive Genetics, Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
chenzijiang@hotmail.com.

As a member of the homeobox (HOX) gene family, HOXA11 is expressed in the
primordia of lower uterus and cervix during fetal life and is essential for
endometrial development and embryo implantation in the adults. The aim of the
present study was to investigate whether mutations in HOXA11 contribute to
Müllerian duct anomalies (MDA) in Chinese. A cohort of 192 patients with MDA and 
192 healthy controls was enrolled. Genomic DNA was extracted. All exons and
exon-intron boundaries were amplified and sequenced. One novel synonymous variant
(c.774G>A) and one known single-nucleotide polymorphism were identified, both of 
which were not found in the matched controls. The results suggest that mutations 
in the coding region of HOXA11 are not common in Chinese women with MDA. As a
member of the homeobox gene family, HOXA11 is expressed in the primordia of lower
uterus and cervix during fetal life and is essential for endometrial development 
and embryo implantation in the adults. The aim of the present study was to
investigate whether mutations in HOXA11 contribute to Müllerian duct anomalies
(MDA) in Chinese. A cohort of 192 patients with MDA and 192 healthy controls was 
enrolled. Genomic DNA was extracted. All exons and exon-intron boundaries were
amplified and sequenced. One novel synonymous variant (c.774G>A) and one known
single-nucleotide polymorphism were identified, both of which were not found in
the matched controls. The results suggest that mutations in the coding region of 
HOXA11 are not common in Chinese women with MDA.

Copyright © 2014 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 24745830  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Biol Reprod. 2014 May;90(5):111. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.113.115139. Epub 2014
Apr 16.

Immunohistological study of the endometrial stromal fibroblasts in the opossum,
Monodelphis domestica: evidence for homology with eutherian stromal fibroblasts.

Kin K(1), Maziarz J(1), Wagner GP(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale Systems Biology
Institute, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut. (2)Department of Ecology and 
Evolutionary Biology, Yale Systems Biology Institute, Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut gunter.wagner@yale.edu.

Molecular phylogenetic studies suggest that the hemochorial placentation and
decidualization are ancestral traits of eutherian mammals. While the origin of
the placental tissue is well understood, the origin of the decidual cells is
unclear. Here we address the origin of decidual cells by examining the expression
patterns of six transcription factors (TFs) as well as four structural proteins
in the endometrium of a marsupial, Monodelphis domestica, and compared them with 
the patterns known from eutherian species. We found a mesenchymal cell population
in the subepithelial compartment of the opossum endometrium. These cells express 
a set of TFs, such as homeobox A11 (HOXA11), CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein beta 
(CEBPB), and progesterone receptor (PGR), that are important for eutherian
endometrial stromal cells. On the other hand, we did not find the expression of a
decidual cell marker desmin (DES) or of TFs that are important for decidual cell 
differentiation, such as forkhead box O1 (FOXO1), in those cells. Based on these 
results, we propose that opossum has cells homologous to eutherian endometrial
fibroblasts but no decidual cells. In addition, we describe cellular changes
associated with the progression of pregnancy: nuclear localization of CEBPB in
luminal epithelial cells as early as 8 days postcoitum, expansion of endometrial 
glands, nuclear localization of FOXO1 in glandular epithelial cells, and
expression of smooth muscle actin in luminal epithelial cells. These data show
that the luminal and glandular epithelium react to the presence of the
preplacentation conceptus and suggest a limited form of pregnancy recognition.

© 2014 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMID: 24740599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Iran J Reprod Med. 2013 Dec;11(12):983-8.

Effect of intramural myomectomy on endometrial HOXA10 and HOXA11 mRNA expression 
at the time of implantation window.

Alizadeh Z(1), Faramarzi S(2), Saidijam M(3), Alizamir T(4), Esna-Ashari F(5),
Shabab N(3), Farimani Sanoee M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Endometrium and Endometriosis Research Center, Hamadan University of Medical
Sciences, Hamadan, Iran. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hamadan
University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran. (3)Research Center for Molecular
Medicine, Hamadan University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran. (4)Department of
Anatomy, School of Medicine, Hamadan University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan,
Iran. (5)Department of Epidemiology, Hamadan University of Medical Sciences,
Hamadan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: HOXA11 and HOXA10 are expressed in endometrium throughout the
menstrual cycle and show a dramatic increase during the mid-luteal phase at the
time of implantation. The expression of these genes is decreased in women with
myomas.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether myomectomy would reverse HOXA11 and HOXA10
expression, we evaluated the transcript levels of these genes in the endometria
of patients before and after myomectomy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of HOXA11 and HOXA10 were examined
prospectively during the midluteal phase in endometrium obtained from infertile
women (n=12) with myoma before and three months after myomectomy. Endometrial
HOXA11 and HOXA10 expression were evaluated using quantitative real-time reverse 
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Endometrial HOXA11 and HOXA10 mRNAs expression levels (normalized to
18SrRNA) were increased insignificantly in endometrium of patients after
myomectomy (p=0.7 and p=0.15 respectively).
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that the alteration in expression pattern of
these genes could not account for some aspects of fertility after myomectomy.
This article extracted from M.Sc. thesis. (Shamila Faramarzi).

PMCID: PMC3941402
PMID: 24639724  [PubMed]


36. Hum Reprod. 2014 Apr;29(4):781-90. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deu004. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Regulation of endometrial receptivity by the highly expressed HOXA9, HOXA11 and
HOXD10 HOX-class homeobox genes.

Xu B(1), Geerts D, Bu Z, Ai J, Jin L, Li Y, Zhang H, Zhu G.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medicine College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 JieFang Avenue, Wuhan 430030,
People's Republic of China.

STUDY QUESTION: Are other HOX genes, in addition to HOXA10, involved in
endometrial receptivity?
SUMMARY ANSWER: The highly expressed HOXA9, HOXA11 and HOXD10 genes also appear
to be involved in endometrial receptivity.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Within the HOX family of homeobox transcription factor
genes are the leading candidates for the regulation of embryonic implantation. A 
crucial role of HOXA10 in endometrial receptivity has been well established.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: To identify HOX candidate genes, we performed data 
mining on all 39 human HOX genes in the 'Human body index' gene expression
database of normal human tissue. The temporal and spatial expression pattern of
four highly expressed HOX genes in the human endometrium was determined. To
further investigate the function of these Hox genes, we used a robust in vivo
mouse model in which we blocked maternal Hox gene expression.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING AND METHODS: Analysis of a gene expression
profile set in the public domain consisting of 504 samples representing 95
different normal human tissues, showed that in addition to HOXA10, also HOXA9,
HOXA11, HOXB6 and HOXD10 mRNA showed increased expression in the human
endometrium (16 samples). The temporal and spatial expression pattern of these
four HOX genes throughout the menstrual cycle was determined in the endometrium
from 27 female patients eligible for IVF-embryo transfer with a normal cycle by
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), western blot and immunohistochemistry. The 
role of maternal Hoxa9, Hoxa11 and Hoxd10 was assessed in a mouse implantation
model by expression knockdown using RNA interference. Forty mice were transfected
with Hoxa9-, Hoxa11- or Hoxd10-specific small hairpin RNA (shRNA) constructs or a
vector control by injection into the uterine horn at Day 2 after vaginal plug
detection (Day 1) (160 mice in total). The effects were examined by qRT-PCR and
western blot at Day 4 and litter sizes counted at Day 9 of pregnancy.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: HOXA10, HOXA9, HOXA11 and HOXD10 all showed 
increased expression during the mid-secretory phase of the menstrual cycle (P <
0.01). Knockdown of Hoxa9, Hoxa11 and Hoxd10 in the murine uterus resulted in
significantly reduced average implantation rates (P < 0.01) and, with regard to
four Hox target genes, also correlated with a significantly increased empty
spiracles homolog 2 (Emx2) and insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1
(Igfbp1), and decreased integrin ß3 (Itgb3) and leukemia inhibitory factor (Lif),
expression (P < 0.01).
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Menstrual cycle stage was not confirmed by
serum hormone analysis. We verified the absence of significant differences in
stage-specific expression of the reference genes used in our study (ACTB/Actb and
GAPDH/Gapdh) and therefore possible limitations of this approach were minimized. 
In addition, the translatability of our data from a mouse model to patients needs
to be investigated further.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: We provide evidence that three other HOX
genes in addition to HOXA10 are involved in endometrial receptivity, and that
part of their function is asserted through several known HOX target genes,
suggesting the presence of a central HOX signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 24549215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Dev Biol. 2014 Apr 1;388(1):57-67. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2014.01.018. Epub 2014
Feb 1.

Yap1, transcription regulator in the Hippo signaling pathway, is required for
Xenopus limb bud regeneration.

Hayashi S(1), Tamura K(1), Yokoyama H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology and Neurosciences, Graduate School of Life
Sciences, Tohoku University, Aramaki-Aza-Aoba 6-3, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578,
Japan. (2)Department of Developmental Biology and Neurosciences, Graduate School 
of Life Sciences, Tohoku University, Aramaki-Aza-Aoba 6-3, Aoba-ku, Sendai
980-8578, Japan. Electronic address: yokoyoko@m.tohoku.ac.jp.

The Hippo signaling pathway is conserved from insects to mammals and is important
for multiple processes, including cell proliferation, apoptosis and tissue
homeostasis. Hippo signaling is also crucial for regeneration, including
intercalary regeneration, of the whole body in the flatworm and of the leg in the
cricket. However, its role in vertebrate epimorphic regeneration is unknown.
Therefore, to identify principles of regeneration that are conserved among
bilaterians, we investigated the role of Hippo signaling in the limb bud
regeneration of an anuran amphibian, Xenopus laevis. We found that a
transcription factor, Yap1, an important downstream effector of Hippo signaling, 
is upregulated in the regenerating limb bud. To evaluate Yap1<U+05F3>s function in limb 
bud regeneration, we made transgenic animals that expressed a dominant-negative
form of Yap under a heat-shock promoter. Overexpression of a dominant-negative
form of Yap in tadpoles reduced cell proliferation, induced ectopic apoptosis,
perturbed the expression domains of limb-patterning genes including hoxa13,
hoxa11, and shh in the regenerating limb bud. Transient expression of a
dominant-negative Yap in transgenic tadpoles also caused limb bud regeneration
defects, and reduced intercalary regeneration. These results indicate that Yap1
has a crucial role in controlling the limb regenerative capacity in Xenopus, and 
suggest that the involvement of Hippo signaling in regeneration is conserved
between vertebrates and invertebrates. This finding provides molecular evidence
that common principles underlie regeneration across phyla, and may contribute to 
the development of new therapies in regenerative medicine.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24491818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Cancer Cell Int. 2014 Aug 19;14:79. doi: 10.1186/s12935-014-0079-7. eCollection
2014.

HOXA11 gene is hypermethylation and aberrant expression in gastric cancer.

Bai Y(1), Fang N(2), Gu T(2), Kang Y(3), Wu J(4), Yang D(3), Zhang H(3), Suo
Z(3), Ji S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Huaihe Hospital of Henan University, Kaifeng
475000, Henan Province, China ; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
Medical School of Henan University, Kaifeng 475004, Henan Province, China.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Medical School of Henan
University, Kaifeng 475004, Henan Province, China. (3)Department of
Gastroenterology, Huaihe Hospital of Henan University, Kaifeng 475000, Henan
Province, China. (4)Department of pathology, Huaihe Hospital of Henan University,
Kaifeng 475000, Henan Province, China.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation is an acquired epigenetic alteration that
serves as an alternative to genetic defects in the inactivation of tumor
suppressor genes and other genes in diverse human cancers. Gastric carcinoma is
one of the tumors with a high frequency of aberrant methylation in promoter
region. Hence we investigated the promoter methylation status and expression
level of HOXA11 gene which may involve in GC development.
METHODS: Thirty-two surgical excised gastric cancer specimens, twelve paired
adjacent non-cancerous specimens and seven normal gastric mucosas were examined. 
The methylation status and expression level of HOXA11 gene were determined by
bisulfite sequencing polymerase chain reaction (BSP), real-time polymerase chain 
reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry (IHC) respectively. HOXA11 expression 
was knocked-down with siRNA to mimic HOXA11 gene hypermethylation and ability of 
cell proliferation and migration was determinate. In addition, we analyzed and
correlated the findings with clinicopathological features.
RESULTS: The methylation level of HOXA11 gene in gastric cancer tissues and
adjacent non-cancerous tissues were higher than those in normal gastric mucosa (P
< 0.05). The methylation level was higher in TNM III and IV patients of GC than
those in TNM I and II patients (P < 0.05). The expression of HOXA11 mRNA and
protein decreased in normal gastric mucosa, peri-cancer tissue and GC (P < 0.05).
HOXA11 expression was inversely correlated with DNA methylation (P < 0.05).
Knocked-down of HOXA11 expression with siRNA in BGC-823 cells enhanced cell
proliferation compared with control, but no significant different was observed in
migration ability.
CONCLUSION: Hypermethylation and decreased expression of HOXA11 gene may be
involved in the carcinogenesis and development of GC and may provide useful
information for the prediction of the malignant behaviors of GC. And the
expression of HOXA11 is impaired by DNA methylation. However, repression of
HOXA11 expression promoted BGC-823 cell proliferation.

PMCID: PMC4364045
PMID: 25788862  [PubMed]


39. Congenit Anom (Kyoto). 2014 Feb;54(1):54-62. doi: 10.1111/cga.12046.

Effects of thalidomide on Fgf8, Bmp4 and Hoxa11 expression in the limb bud in
Kbl:JW rabbit embryos.

Kawamura Y(1), Yamashita T, Yamauchi T, Matsumoto K, Sato K.

Author information: 
(1)Drug Safety Research Laboratories, Pharmaceutical Research Division, Takeda
Pharmaceutical Company Limited, Fujisawa, Kanagawa, Japan.

Thalidomide (TM) induces limb defects in humans and some animal species including
rabbits. Although the mechanism of TM-induced limb defects has been investigated 
for a long period, the limb development-related genes expressions have not been
vigorously characterized in rabbits. In this study, we investigated the Fgf8,
Bmp4 and Hoxa11 expressions in TM-treated JW rabbit embryos on gestation days
(GDs) 10, 11 and 12 by whole mount in situ hybridization. On GDs 10 and 11,
growth retardation of the embryo was induced by TM treatment. The Fgf8 expression
lengths on GDs 10 and 11 in the forelimb bud were significantly or tended to be
decreased in the TM-treated embryos, which was correlated to the growth
retardation and was not considered to be directly relevant to the teratogenic
effect of TM in the forelimb. The TM-induced characteristic changes in the
expression pattern of Hoxa11 and Bmp4 on GDs 10 and/or 11 were not noted. On GD
12, TM-induced growth retardation was not noted and the Fgf8 and Bmp4 expressions
were not changed. On the contrary, Hoxa11 expression was narrowed at the anterior
region, which was located on the radial side, and was not changed at the middle
and posterior regions in the forelimb bud and in all regions in the hindlimb bud.
Because the radius malformations were induced by TM treatment, we concluded the
decrease in the Hoxa11 expression was related to the TM-induced limb defects and 
can be a good marker for early prediction of the teratogenic effect of TM.

© 2013 Japanese Teratology Society.

PMID: 24344727  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Pediatr Surg. 2013 Dec;48(12):2431-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2013.08.019.

Hoxa-11 maintains cell proliferation in the mouse gubernaculum to facilitate
testicular descent.

Harisis GN(1), Lewis AG, Southwell BR, Hutson JM.

Author information: 
(1)Douglas Stephens Surgical Research Laboratory, Murdoch Children's Research
Institute, Melbourne, Australia; Department of Paediatrics, University of
Melbourne, Australia.

INTRODUCTION: The gubernaculum is a structure vital for guiding testicular
descent. The Homeobox gene, Hoxa-11, is involved in patterning embryonic
structures and is necessary for gubernacular development, as Hoxa-11 knock-out
mice exhibit abnormal gubernacula and undescended testes. We aimed to elucidate
how testicular descent fails by examining cell proliferation and androgen
receptor (AR) expression in Hoxa-11 KO mice gubernacula.
METHODS: Postnatal day 2 wild type (n=6) and Hoxa-11 KO mice (n=6), were prepared
for immunohistochemistry and confocal microscopy using antibodies against
androgen receptor, slow skeletal myosin (My32), and Ki67, a marker of cell
proliferation.
RESULTS: The gubernacula of Hoxa-11 KO mice were hypocellular compared with WT.
AR was present in the gubernaculum and abutting inguinal fat pad in both WT and
Hoxa-11 KO with no difference in expression. Slow skeletal myosin was present in 
a clear 'swirl' in the growth centre of WT animals which was absent in the
Hoxa-11 KO mice. Ki67, expressed in the growth centre and cremaster muscle in WT,
was greatly decreased in Hoxa-11 KO.
CONCLUSION: Hoxa-11 may regulate fibroblast proliferation in the gubernaculum, as
it does in human uterosacral ligaments, allowing formation of the 'growth centre'
within the bulb and facilitating myogenesis and elongation to the scrotum.
Polymorphisms in Hoxa-11 may contribute to the aetiology of human cryptorchidism.

© 2013.

PMID: 24314182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014 Nov;21(12):3891-9. doi: 10.1245/s10434-013-3401-z. Epub 2013
Dec 4.

DNA methylation profiling identifies EYA4 gene as a prognostic molecular marker
in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Hou X(1), Peng JX, Hao XY, Cai JP, Liang LJ, Zhai JM, Zhang KS, Lai JM, Yin XY.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Hepatobiliary Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital, Sun
Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, Guangdong, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: DNA hypermethylation plays important roles in carcinogenesis by
silencing key genes. This study aims to identify pivotal genes in hepatocellular 
carcinoma (HCC) by DNA methylation microarray and to assess their prognostic
values.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: DNA methylation microarray was performed in 45 pairs of
HCC and adjacent nontumorous tissues and six normal liver tissues to identify
hypermethylated genes in HCC. Potential prognosis-related genes were selected
among hypermethylated genes by analyzing influences of methylation levels on
disease-free survival (DFS) and overall survival (OS) in 45 patients. Their
prognostic values were validated in 154 patients with HCC (including the initial 
45 patients) to determine the independent prognostic gene.
RESULTS: Altogether, 54 CpG islands in 44 genes were hypermethylated in HCC
compared with liver tissues. Among them, methylation levels of ERG and HOXA11
were inversely associated with DFS (both P < 0.050), and methylation levels of
EYA4 were inversely related to DFS and OS (both P < 0.050). EYA4 expression was
inversely related to tumor size (P < 0.050). Lower EYA4 expression and larger
tumor size were independent predictors of both shorter DFS and OS, and higher
Barcelona Clinic Liver Cancer (BCLC) staging was an independent predictor of
shorter OS (all P < 0.050).
CONCLUSIONS: EYA4 functions as a prognostic molecular marker in HCC. Its aberrant
hypermethylation and subsequent down-regulation may promote tumor progression.

PMID: 24306662  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Oncotarget. 2013 Dec;4(12):2317-25.

HOXA11 hypermethylation is associated with progression of non-small cell lung
cancer.

Hwang JA(1), Lee BB, Kim Y, Park SE, Heo K, Hong SH, Kim YH, Han J, Shim YM, Lee 
YS, Kim DH.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genomics Branch, Research Institute, National Cancer Center, Goyang-si,
Korea.

This study was aimed at understanding the functional significance of HOXA11
hypermethylation in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). HOXA11 hypermethylation
was characterized in six lung cancer cell lines, and its clinical significance
was analyzed using formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues from 317 NSCLC
patients, and Ki-67 expression was analyzed using immunohistochemistry. The
promoter region of HOXA11 was highly methylated in six lung cancer cell lines,
but not in normal bronchial epithelial cells. The loss of expression was restored
by treatment of the cells with a demethylating agent, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
(5-Aza-dC). Transient transfection of HOXA11 into H23 lung cancer cells resulted 
in the inhibition of cell migration and proliferation. HOXA11 hypermethylation
was found in 218 (69%) of 317 primary NSCLCs. HOXA11 hypermethylation was found
at a higher prevalence in squamous cell carcinoma than in adenocarcinoma (74% vs.
63%, respectively). HOXA11 hypermethylation was associated with Ki-67
proliferation index (P = 0.03) and pT stage (P = 0.002), but not with patient
survival. Patients with pT2 and pT3 stages were 1.85 times (95% confidence
interval [CI] = 1.04-3.29; P = 0.04) and 5.47 times (95% CI = 1.18-25.50; P =
0.01), respectively, more likely to show HOXA11 hypermethylation than those with 
pT1 stage, after adjusting for age, sex, and histology. In conclusion, the
present study suggests that HOXA11 hypermethylation may contribute to the
progression of NSCLC by promoting cell proliferation or migration.

PMCID: PMC3926829
PMID: 24259349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Nov;8(5):1373-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1686. Epub 2013 Sep 17.

Characterization of amplification patterns and target genes on the short arm of
chromosome 7 in early-stage lung adenocarcinoma.

Kang JU(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, Korea Nazarene University,
Cheonan-si, Chungcheongnam-do 330-718, Republic of Korea.

Chromosomal alterations are a predominant genomic force contributing to the
development of lung adenocarcinoma (ADC). High density genomic arrays were
conducted to identify critical genetic landmarks that may be important mediators 
in the formation or progression of early-stage ADC. In this study, the most
noteworthy and consistent observation was a copy number gain on the short arm of 
chromosome 7, which was detected in 85.7% (12/14) of cases. Notably, three
distinct regions of amplification were identified between the 7p22.3 and q11.2
regions in 28.6% (4/14) of cases; at a size of 4.1 Mbp (7p22.3-p21.1), 2.6 Mbp
(7p15.2-p14.1) and 1.5 Mbp (7p12.3-p11.2). Variations of the 7p11.2 locus that
encodes EGFR are known to be oncogenic. Furthermore, potential target genes were 
identified that were previously not assumed to be involved in the pathogenesis of
ADC, including CALM1P2 (7p11.2), HOXA4, HOXA5, HOXA6, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10,
HOXA11 and HOXA13 (7p15.2) and LOC442586, LOC442589, LOC442282, FAM20C and
LOC442651 (7p22.3). The present study determined critical regions on the 7p arm
of chromosome 7, which were implicated in ADC. The pattern of rearrangements on
the 7p arm may be a consequence of the high density of potential targets and the 
identified genes at the 7p regions may aid in the development of therapeutic
targets for ADC.

PMID: 24045431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Vet Comp Oncol. 2015 Sep;13(3):322-36. doi: 10.1111/vco.12062. Epub 2013 Sep 6.

Characterization of HOX gene expression in canine mammary tumour cell lines from 
spontaneous tumours.

DeInnocentes P(1,)(2), Perry AL(1), Graff EC(1,)(3), Lutful Kabir FM(1,)(2),
Curtis Bird R(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathobiology, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA.
(2)AURIC-Auburn University Research Initiative in Cancer, College of Veterinary
Medicine, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA. (3)Department of Anatomy,
Physiology and Pharmacology, Auburn University, Auburn, AL, 36849, USA.

Spatial/temporal controls of development are regulated by the homeotic (HOX) gene
complex and require integration with oncogenes and tumour suppressors regulating 
cell cycle exit. Spontaneously derived neoplastic canine mammary carcinoma cell
models were investigated to determine if HOX expression profiles were associated 
with neoplasia as HOX genes promote neoplastic potential in human cancers.
Comparative assessment of human and canine breast cancer expression profiles
revealed remarkable similarity for all four paralogous HOX gene clusters and
several unlinked HOX genes. Five canine HOX genes were overexpressed with
expression profiles consistent with oncogene-like character (HOXA1, HOXA13,
HOXD4, HOXD9 and SIX1) and three HOX genes with underexpressed profiles (HOXA11, 
HOXC8 and HOXC9) were also identified as was an apparent nonsense mutation in
HOXC6. This data, as well as a comparative analysis of similar data from human
breast cancers suggested expression of selected HOX genes in canine mammary
carcinoma could be contributing to the neoplastic phenotype.

© 2013 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 24034269  [PubMed - in process]


45. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2013 Nov;30(11):1505-12. doi: 10.1007/s10815-013-0088-9.
Epub 2013 Aug 25.

HOXA-11 mediated dysregulation of matrix remodeling during implantation window in
women with endometriosis.

Jana SK(1), Banerjee P, Mukherjee R, Chakravarty B, Chaudhury K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Science and Technology, Indian Institute of Technology,
Kharagpur, Pin- 721 302, West Bengal, India.

PURPOSE: To investigate the Homeobox genes HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 mediated
endometrial molecular defects during implantation window in
endometriosis-associated infertility cases.
METHODS: Endometrial biopsies were obtained during implantation window from 31
infertile women with endometriosis (age<U+2009><<U+2009>35 years) and 26 age and BMI-matched
infertile women without endometriosis were included in the study for comparison
purposes. Endometrial expression of HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 genes, MMP-2, -9,
a(v)ß(3) integrin, leukemia inhibitory factor and surface characteristics
including average roughness and topology were assessed.
RESULTS: A significantly lower expression of HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 were observed in
endometriotic women compared to non-endometriotic controls. Further, a
significantly higher endometrial expression of MMP-2 and -9 were observed in
women with endometriosis when compared with controls. Interestingly, endometrial 
surface were observed to be grossly affected in terms of average roughness and
topology in women with endometriosis compared to controls.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that aberrant expression of HOXA-10 and -11
genes adversely affects endometrial remodelling and expression of receptivity
markers.

PMCID: PMC3879944
PMID: 23979130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Blood. 2013 Oct 10;122(15):2704-13. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-02-485524. Epub 2013 
Aug 23.

Pediatric acute myeloid leukemia with t(8;16)(p11;p13), a distinct clinical and
biological entity: a collaborative study by the
International-Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster AML-study group.

Coenen EA(1), Zwaan CM, Reinhardt D, Harrison CJ, Haas OA, de Haas V, Mihál V, De
Moerloose B, Jeison M, Rubnitz JE, Tomizawa D, Johnston D, Alonzo TA, Hasle H,
Auvrignon A, Dworzak M, Pession A, van der Velden VH, Swansbury J, Wong KF, Terui
K, Savasan S, Winstanley M, Vaitkeviciene G, Zimmermann M, Pieters R, van den
Heuvel-Eibrink MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands;

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Oct 10;122(15):2532-4.

In pediatric acute myeloid leukemia (AML), cytogenetic abnormalities are strong
indicators of prognosis. Some recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities, such as
t(8;16)(p11;p13), are so rare that collaborative studies are required to define
their prognostic impact. We collected the clinical characteristics, morphology,
and immunophenotypes of 62 pediatric AML patients with t(8;16)(p11;p13) from 18
countries participating in the International Berlin-Frankfurt-Münster (I-BFM) AML
study group. We used the AML-BFM cohort diagnosed from 1995-2005 (n = 543) as a
reference cohort. Median age of the pediatric t(8;16)(p11;p13) AML patients was
significantly lower (1.2 years). The majority (97%) had M4-M5
French-American-British type, significantly different from the reference cohort. 
Erythrophagocytosis (70%), leukemia cutis (58%), and disseminated intravascular
coagulation (39%) occurred frequently. Strikingly, spontaneous remissions
occurred in 7 neonates with t(8;16)(p11;p13), of whom 3 remain in continuous
remission. The 5-year overall survival of patients diagnosed after 1993 was 59%, 
similar to the reference cohort (P = .14). Gene expression profiles of
t(8;16)(p11;p13) pediatric AML cases clustered close to, but distinct from,
MLL-rearranged AML. Highly expressed genes included HOXA11, HOXA10, RET, PERP,
and GGA2. In conclusion, pediatric t(8;16)(p11;p13) AML is a rare entity defined 
by a unique gene expression signature and distinct clinical features in whom
spontaneous remissions occur in a subset of neonatal cases.

PMCID: PMC4314534
PMID: 23974201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. J Am Soc Nephrol. 2013 Sep;24(9):1424-34. doi: 10.1681/ASN.2012121143. Epub 2013 
Jun 13.

Direct transcriptional reprogramming of adult cells to embryonic nephron
progenitors.

Hendry CE(1), Vanslambrouck JM, Ineson J, Suhaimi N, Takasato M, Rae F, Little
MH.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Molecular Bioscience, University of Queensland, St. Lucia,
Australia.

Direct reprogramming involves the enforced re-expression of key transcription
factors to redefine a cellular state. The nephron progenitor population of the
embryonic kidney gives rise to all cells within the nephron other than the
collecting duct through a mesenchyme-to-epithelial transition, but this
population is exhausted around the time of birth. Here, we sought to identify the
conditions under which adult proximal tubule cells could be directly
transcriptionally reprogrammed to nephron progenitors. Using a combinatorial
screen for lineage-instructive transcription factors, we identified a pool of six
genes (SIX1, SIX2, OSR1, EYA1, HOXA11, and SNAI2) that activated a network of
genes consistent with a cap mesenchyme/nephron progenitor phenotype in the adult 
proximal tubule (HK2) cell line. Consistent with these reprogrammed cells being
nephron progenitors, we observed differential contribution of the reprogrammed
population into the Six2(+) nephron progenitor fields of an embryonic kidney
explant. Dereplication of the pool suggested that SNAI2 can suppress E-CADHERIN, 
presumably assisting in the epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT) required
to form nephron progenitors. However, neither TGFß-induced EMT nor SNAI2
overexpression alone was sufficient to create this phenotype, suggesting that
additional factors are required. In conclusion, these results suggest that
reinitiation of kidney development from a population of adult cells by generating
embryonic progenitors may be feasible, opening the way for additional cellular
and bioengineering approaches to renal repair and regeneration.

PMCID: PMC3752949
PMID: 23766537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Development. 2013 Jul;140(14):2942-52. doi: 10.1242/dev.092569. Epub 2013 Jun 12.

Recombineering-based dissection of flanking and paralogous Hox gene functions in 
mouse reproductive tracts.

Raines AM(1), Adam M, Magella B, Meyer SE, Grimes HL, Dey SK, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Hox genes are key regulators of development. In mammals, the study of these genes
is greatly confounded by their large number, overlapping functions and
interspersed shared enhancers. Here, we describe the use of a novel
recombineering strategy to introduce simultaneous frameshift mutations into the
flanking Hoxa9, Hoxa10 and Hoxa11 genes, as well as their paralogs on the HoxD
cluster. The resulting Hoxa9,10,11 mutant mice displayed dramatic synergistic
homeotic transformations of the reproductive tracts, with the uterus anteriorized
towards oviduct and the vas deferens anteriorized towards epididymis. The
Hoxa9,10,11 mutant mice also provided a genetic setting that allowed the
discovery of Hoxd9,10,11 redundant reproductive tract patterning function. Both
shared and distinct Hox functions were defined. Hoxd9,10,11 play a crucial role
in the regulation of uterine immune function. Non-coding non-polyadenylated RNAs 
were among the key Hox targets, with dramatic downregulation in mutants. We
observed Hox cross-regulation of transcription and splicing. In addition, we
observed a surprising anti-dogmatic apparent posteriorization of the uterine
epithelium. In caudal regions of the uterus, the normal simple columnar
epithelium flanking the lumen was replaced by a pseudostratified transitional
epithelium, normally found near the more posterior cervix. These results identify
novel molecular functions of Hox genes in the development of the male and female 
reproductive tracts.

PMCID: PMC3699281
PMID: 23760953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. J Neurooncol. 2013 Jul;113(3):441-9. doi: 10.1007/s11060-013-1133-3. Epub 2013
Apr 28.

Promoter methylation of AREG, HOXA11, hMLH1, NDRG2, NPTX2 and Tes genes in
glioblastoma.

Skiriute D(1), Vaitkiene P, Amoniene V, Steponaitis G, Deltuva VP, Tamaauskas
A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neurooncology and Genetics, Neuroscience Institute, Lithuanian
University of Health Sciences, Eiveniu str 4, 50161 Kaunas, Lithuania.
dainski@gmail.com

Epigenetic alterations alone or in combination with genetic mechanisms play a key
role in brain tumorigenesis. Glioblastoma is one of the most common, lethal and
poor clinical outcome primary brain tumors with extraordinarily miscellaneous
epigenetic alterations profile. The aim of this study was to investigate new
potential prognostic epigenetic markers such as AREG, HOXA11, hMLH1, NDRG2, NTPX2
and Tes genes promoter methylation, frequency and value for patients outcome. We 
examined the promoter methylation status using methylation-specific polymerase
chain reaction in 100 glioblastoma tissue samples. The value for clinical outcome
was calculated using Kaplan-Meier estimation with log-rank test. DNA promoter
methylation was frequent event appearing more than 45 % for gene. AREG and HOXA11
methylation status was significantly associated with patient age. HOXA11 showed
the tendency to be associated with patient outcome in glioblastomas. AREG gene
promoter methylation showed significant correlation with poor patient outcome.
AREG methylation remained significantly associated with patient survival in a Cox
multivariate model including MGMT promoter methylation status. This study of new 
epigenetic targets has shown considerably high level of analyzed genes promoter
methylation variability in glioblastoma tissue. AREG gene might be valuable
marker for glioblastoma patient survival prognosis, however further analysis is
needed to clarify the independence and appropriateness of the marker.

PMID: 23624749  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Blood. 2013 Feb 21;121(8):1422-31. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-07-442004. Epub 2012
Dec 20.

PBX3 is an important cofactor of HOXA9 in leukemogenesis.

Li Z(1), Zhang Z, Li Y, Arnovitz S, Chen P, Huang H, Jiang X, Hong GM, Kunjamma
RB, Ren H, He C, Wang CZ, Elkahloun AG, Valk PJ, Döhner K, Neilly MB, Bullinger
L, Delwel R, Löwenberg B, Liu PP, Morgan R, Rowley JD, Yuan CS, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. zjli@uchicago.edu

Although PBX proteins are known to increase DNA-binding/transcriptional activity 
of HOX proteins through their direct binding, the functional importance of their 
interaction in leukemogenesis is unclear.We recently reported that overexpression
of a 4-homeobox-gene signature (ie, PBX3/HOXA7/HOXA9/HOXA11) is an independent
predictor of poor survival in patients with cytogenetically abnormal acute
myeloid leukemia (CA-AML). Here we show that it is PBX3, but not PBX1 or PBX2,
that is consistently coexpressed with HOXA9 in various subtypes of CA-AML,
particularly MLL-rearranged AML, and thus appears as a potential pathologic
cofactor of HOXA9 in CA-AML. We then show that depletion of endogenous Pbx3
expression by shRNA significantly inhibits MLL-fusion-mediated cell
transformation, and coexpressed PBX3 exhibits a significantly synergistic effect 
with HOXA9 in promoting cell transformation in vitro and leukemogenesis in vivo. 
Furthermore, as a proof of concept, we show that a small peptide, namely HXR9,
which was developed to specifically disrupt the interactions between HOX and PBX 
proteins, can selectively kill leukemic cells with overexpression of HOXA/PBX3
genes. Collectively, our data suggest that PBX3 is a critical cofactor of HOXA9
in leukemogenesis, and targeting their interaction is a feasible strategy to
treat presently therapy resistant CA-AML (eg, MLL-rearranged leukemia) in which
HOXA/PBX3 genes are overexpressed.

PMCID: PMC3578957
PMID: 23264595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Dev Dyn. 2013 Jan;242(1):53-66. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23893. Epub 2012 Nov 19.

Spatio-temporal expression of HOX genes in human hindgut development.

Illig R(1), Fritsch H, Schwarzer C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Division of Clinical and
Functional Anatomy, Innsbruck Medical University, Innsbruck, Austria.

BACKGROUND: Hox genes belong to a highly conserved subgroup of the homeobox gene 
superfamily. Studies of animal models have emphasized their role in defining the 
body plan by their coordinated expression along the body axis during ontogeny.
Although an important role of HOX genes in human development is assumed, little
is known about their expression during human ontogenesis. Therefore, we
investigated the expression of the nine most posterior members of the HOXA, HOXB,
HOXC, and HOXD clusters in embryonic hindgut between weeks 6 to 12 and in adult
rectal tissue.
RESULTS: Applying in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, we observed
expression of HOXA11, HOXA13, HOXD12, and HOXD13 in developmental week 6.
However, expression of HOXD12 faded during weeks 7 and 8, and then became
increasingly re-expressed during week 9 in humans. With the exception of HOXD13, 
all expressed HOX genes dropped below detection limits in week 11. Adult rectal
tissue displayed distinct HOXA11, HOXA13, HOXD12, and HOXD13 expression patterns 
within the rectal layers.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data suggest a strict spatio-temporal regulation of HOX gene
expression during human development, supporting the idea of their role as key
regulators. Nonetheless, the expression pattern of distinct HOX genes differs
markedly from animal models.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23073994  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Reprod Biomed Online. 2012 Nov;25(5):481-91. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2012.07.019.
Epub 2012 Aug 8.

Endometrial expression of selected genes in patients achieving pregnancy
spontaneously or after ICSI and patients failing at least two ICSI cycles.

Allegra A(1), Marino A, Peregrin PC, Lama A, García-Segovia A, Forte GI,
Núñez-Calonge R, Agueli C, Mazzola S, Volpes A.

Author information: 
(1)Andros Day Surgery, Reproductive Medicine Unit, 90144 Palermo, Italy.
allegra@centroandros.it

The objective of this study was to identify the endometrial gene expression
profile in receptive phase, which could represent a useful prognostic tool for
selecting IVF patients. Endometrial expression of 47 selected genes biopsied
during the window of implantation in natural cycles was compared between patients
who achieved a successful pregnancy spontaneously or after subsequent
intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) cycles and patients who did not achieve a
pregnancy after at least two failed ICSI cycles. The comparative analysis showed 
significantly different levels of expression in 19 genes, five implicated in
apoptosis (CASP8, FADD, CASP10, APAF1, ANXA4), three in immunity (LIF, SPP1,
C4BPA), five in transcriptional activity (MSX1, HOXA10, MSX2, HOXA11, GATA2), two
in lipid metabolism (LEPR, APOD) and four in oxidative metabolism (AOX1, ALDH1A3,
GPX3, NNMT). The evidence for these genes being differently expressed could
represent the starting point of identifying the ideal receptive endometrial gene 
expression profile, which could be used in the future as a prognostic tool for
IVF patients. Gene expression analysis technology has opened new important
perspectives on the study of the physiological processes of different tissues and
organs. Specifically for the endometrium, it would be really interesting to find 
out an endometrial gene expression profile of receptive phase, which could be
used in future as a useful prognostic tool for selecting IVF patients. To achieve
this aim, the objective of the present paper was the comparison of endometrial
expression in natural cycles of 47 selected genes between the biopsies of
patients who achieved a successful pregnancy, either spontaneously or after
subsequent ICSI cycles, and those of patients who did not achieve a pregnancy
after at least two failed ICSI cycles. The comparative analysis showed a
significant different expression in 19 genes: five implicated in programmed cell 
death, known as apoptosis (CASP8, FADD, CASP10, APAF1, ANXA4), three in immunity 
(LIF, SPP1, C4BPA), five in transcriptional activity (MSX1, HOXA10, MSX2, HOXA11,
GATA2), two in lipid metabolism (LEPR, APOD) and four in oxidative metabolism
(AOX1, ALDH1A3, GPX3, NNMT). The evidence of these genes being differently
expressed could represent the starting point of identifying the ideal receptive
endometrial gene expression profile which could be used in the future as a
prognostic tool for IVF patients.

Copyright © 2012 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 22999554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. PLoS One. 2012;7(8):e43553. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0043553. Epub 2012 Aug 20.

Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 regulate chondrocyte differentiation upstream of Runx2 and
Shox2 in mice.

Gross S(1), Krause Y, Wuelling M, Vortkamp A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Center for Medical Biotechnology,
University of Duisburg-Essen, Essen, Germany.

During limb development, posterior Hox genes of the Hoxa- and Hoxd cluster
provide positional information along the limb axis. Here we report a new function
for Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 in regulating the early steps of chondrocyte
differentiation. We analyzed forelimbs of Hoxa11(-/-);d11(-/-) and Ulnaless mice,
which are characterized by specifically shortened zeugopods. By detailed
morphological and molecular analyses, we show that loss of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 in
the ulna of both mutants leads to an arrest of chondrocyte differentiation at a
step before the separation into round and columnar cells takes place.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 act upstream of Runx2 and
Shox2, two key regulators of chondrocyte differentiation. We hypothesize that
Runx2 activates Shox2 in early chondrocytes, which at later stages induces Runx2 
expression to regulate hypertrophic differentiation. These results give insight
into mechanisms by which positional information might be translated into a
specific bone pattern.

PMCID: PMC3423364
PMID: 22916278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Mol Syndromol. 2011 Dec;2(1):45-49. Epub 2011 Nov 12.

Severe Developmental Delay in a Patient with 7p21.1-p14.3 Microdeletion Spanning 
the TWIST Gene and the HOXA Gene Cluster.

Fryssira H(1), Makrythanasis P, Kattamis A, Stokidis K, Menten B, Kosaki K,
Willems P, Kanavakis E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Athens Medical School, Choremio 
Research Laboratory, 'Aghia Sophia' Children's Hospital, Athens, Greece.

We describe a patient with a rare interstitial deletion of chromosome
7p21.1-p14.3 detected by array-CGH. The deletion encompassed 74 genes and caused 
haploinsufficiency (or loss of allele) of 6 genes known to be implicated in
different autosomal dominant genetic disorders: TWIST, DFNA5, CYCS, HOXA11,
HOXA13, and GARS. The patient had several morphological abnormalities similar to 
Saethre-Chotzen syndrome (caused by TWIST mutations) including craniosynostosis
of the coronal suture and anomalies similar to those seen in hand-foot-uterus
syndrome (caused by HOXA13 mutations) including hypospadias. The combined
phenotype of Saethre-Chotzen syndrome and hand-foot-uterus syndrome of our
patient closely resembles a previously reported case with a cytogenetically
visible small deletion spanning 7p21-p14.3. We therefore conclude that
microdeletions of 7p spanning the TWIST gene and HOXA gene cluster lead to a
clinically recognizable 'haploinsufficiency syndrome'.

PMCID: PMC3343762
PMID: 22570644  [PubMed]


55. Cancer Res. 2012 May 1;72(9):2197-205. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3909.

Epigenetic resensitization to platinum in ovarian cancer.

Matei D(1), Fang F, Shen C, Schilder J, Arnold A, Zeng Y, Berry WA, Huang T,
Nephew KP.

Author information: 
(1)Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 
46202, USA. dmatei@iupui.edu

Preclinical studies have shown that hypomethylating agents reverse platinum
resistance in ovarian cancer. In this phase II clinical trial, based upon the
results of our phase I dose defining study, we tested the clinical and biologic
activity of low-dose decitabine administered before carboplatin in
platinum-resistant ovarian cancer patients. Among 17 patients with heavily
pretreated and platinum-resistant ovarian cancer, the regimen induced a 35%
objective response rate (RR) and progression-free survival (PFS) of 10.2 months, 
with nine patients (53%) free of progression at 6 months. Global and
gene-specific DNA demethylation was achieved in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells and tumors. The number of demethylated genes was greater (P < 0.05) in
tumor biopsies from patients with PFS more than 6 versus less than 6 months (311 
vs. 244 genes). Pathways enriched at baseline in tumors from patients with PFS
more than 6 months included cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions, drug
transporters, and mitogen-activated protein kinase, toll-like receptor and
Jak-STAT signaling pathways, whereas those enriched in demethylated genes after
decitabine treatment included pathways involved in cancer, Wnt signaling, and
apoptosis (P < 0.01). Demethylation of MLH1, RASSF1A, HOXA10, and HOXA11 in
tumors positively correlated with PFS (P < 0.05). Together, the results of this
study suggest that low-dose decitabine altered DNA methylation of genes and
cancer pathways, restoring sensitivity to carboplatin in patients with heavily
pretreated ovarian cancer and resulting in a high RR and prolonged PFS.

©2012 AACR

PMCID: PMC3700422
PMID: 22549947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Biol Reprod. 2012 Apr 5;86(4):98. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.112.099283. Print 2012 
Apr.

Tissue remodeling in the female reproductive tract--a complex process becomes
more complex: the role of Hox genes.

Leppert PC(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Duke University School of Medicine,
Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA. phyllis.leppert@duke.edu

Comment on
    Biol Reprod. 2012 Apr;86(4):100.

PMID: 22302691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Blood. 2012 Mar 8;119(10):2314-24. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-386235. Epub 2012
Jan 17.

Up-regulation of a HOXA-PBX3 homeobox-gene signature following down-regulation of
miR-181 is associated with adverse prognosis in patients with cytogenetically
abnormal AML.

Li Z(1), Huang H, Li Y, Jiang X, Chen P, Arnovitz S, Radmacher MD, Maharry K,
Elkahloun A, Yang X, He C, He M, Zhang Z, Dohner K, Neilly MB, Price C, Lussier
YA, Zhang Y, Larson RA, Le Beau MM, Caligiuri MA, Bullinger L, Valk PJ, Delwel R,
Lowenberg B, Liu PP, Marcucci G, Bloomfield CD, Rowley JD, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
IL 60637, USA.

Increased expression levels of miR-181 family members have been shown to be
associated with favorable outcome in patients with cytogenetically normal acute
myeloid leukemia. Here we show that increased expression of miR-181a and miR-181b
is also significantly (P < .05; Cox regression) associated with favorable overall
survival in cytogenetically abnormal AML (CA-AML) patients. We further show that 
up-regulation of a gene signature composed of 4 potential miR-181 targets
(including HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA11, and PBX3), associated with down-regulation of
miR-181 family members, is an independent predictor of adverse overall survival
on multivariable testing in analysis of 183 CA-AML patients. The independent
prognostic impact of this 4-homeobox-gene signature was confirmed in a validation
set of 271 CA-AML patients. Furthermore, our in vitro and in vivo studies
indicated that ectopic expression of miR-181b significantly promoted apoptosis
and inhibited viability/proliferation of leukemic cells and delayed
leukemogenesis; such effects could be reversed by forced expression of PBX3.
Thus, the up-regulation of the 4 homeobox genes resulting from the
down-regulation of miR-181 family members probably contribute to the poor
prognosis of patients with nonfavorable CA-AML. Restoring expression of miR-181b 
and/or targeting the HOXA/PBX3 pathways may provide new strategies to improve
survival substantially.

PMCID: PMC3311258
PMID: 22251480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2012 Jan 10;10:1. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-10-1.

Expression of HOXA11 in the mid-luteal endometrium from women with
endometriosis-associated infertility.

Szczepanska M(1), Wirstlein P, Skrzypczak J, Jagodzinski PP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Gynecological Oncology, Division of
Reproduction, Poznan Medical University of Sciences Poland.

BACKGROUND: A decrease in HOXA11 expression in eutopic mid-secretory endometrium 
has been found in women with endometriosis-associated infertility.
METHODS: Using Real-time quantitative PCR (RQ-PCR) and western blotting analysis 
we studied the HOXA11 transcript and protein levels in mid-luteal eutopic
endometrium from eighteen infertile women with minimal endometriosis, sixteen
healthy fertile women and sixteen infertile women with fallopian tubal occlusion 
from the Polish population. We also evaluated transcript levels of DNA
methyltransferases DNMT1, DNMT3A and DNMT3B in these groups of women.
RESULTS: There were significantly lower levels of HOXA11 transcripts (p = 0.003, 
p = 0.041) and protein (p = 0.004, p = 0.001) in women with endometriosis as
compared to fertile women and infertile women with tubal occlusion. Moreover, we 
found significantly higher methylation levels of the CpG region in the first exon
of HOXA11 in infertile women with endometriosis compared with fertile women (p < 
0.001) and infertile women with tubal occlusion (p < 0.001). We also observed
significantly increased levels of DNMT3A transcript in women with endometriosis
than fertile women (p = 0.044) and infertile women with tubal occlusion (p =
0.047). However, we did not observe significant differences in DNMT1 and DNMT3B
transcript levels between these investigated groups of women.
CONCLUSIONS: We confirmed that reduced HOXA11 expression may contribute to
endometriosis-associated infertility. Moreover, we found that DNA
hypermethylation can be one of the possible molecular mechanisms causing a
decrease in HOXA11 expression in the eutopic mid-secretory endometrium in
infertile women with endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC3275521
PMID: 22233680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Development. 2012 Feb;139(4):731-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.075408. Epub 2012 Jan 4.

Recruitment of 5' Hoxa genes in the allantois is essential for proper
extra-embryonic function in placental mammals.

Scotti M(1), Kmita M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Development, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, Université de Montréal, 110 avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, Québec,
Canada.

The Hox gene family is well known for its functions in establishing morphological
diversity along the anterior-posterior axis of developing embryos. In mammals,
one of these genes, Hoxa13, is crucial for embryonic survival, as its function is
required for the proper expansion of the fetal vasculature in the placenta. Thus,
it appears that the developmental strategy specific to placental mammals is
linked, at least in part, to the recruitment of Hoxa13 function in developing
extra-embryonic tissues. Yet, the mechanism underlying this extra-embryonic
recruitment is unknown. Here, we provide evidence that this functional novelty is
not exclusive to Hoxa13 but is shared with its neighboring Hoxa11 and Hoxa10
genes. We show that the extra-embryonic function of these three Hoxa genes stems 
from their specific expression in the allantois, an extra-embryonic hallmark of
amniote vertebrates. Interestingly, Hoxa10-13 expression in the allantois is
conserved in chick embryos, which are non-placental amniotes, suggesting that the
extra-embryonic recruitment of Hoxa10, Hoxa11 and Hoxa13 most likely arose in
amniotes, i.e. prior to the emergence of placental mammals. Finally, using a
series of targeted recombination and transgenic assays, we provide evidence that 
the regulatory mechanism underlying Hoxa expression in the allantois is extremely
complex and relies on several cis-regulatory sequences.

PMCID: PMC4508127
PMID: 22219351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Biol Reprod. 2012 Apr 5;86(4):100. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.093245. Print 2012
Apr.

Knockdown of Hoxa11 in vivo in the uterosacral ligament and uterus of mice
results in altered collagen and matrix metalloproteinase activity.

Ma Y(1), Guess M, Datar A, Hennessey A, Cardenas I, Johnson J, Connell KA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Urogynecology, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive
Sciences, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Comment in
    Biol Reprod. 2012 Apr;86(4):98.

Homeobox (HOX) genes are evolutionarily conserved genes encoding transcription
factors that regulate mammalian embryonic growth and development of the
urogenital tract. In both humans and mice, HOXA11 persists in the adult
reproductive tract and is thought to play an important role in maintaining tissue
developmental plasticity by regulating the expression of genes involved in
extracellular matrix metabolism in the reproductive organs. Previously, we have
shown that HOXA11 is necessary for development of the uterosacral ligaments in
mice and is deficient in women with pelvic organ prolapse. Therefore, we
hypothesized that Hoxa11 regulates the synthesis and/or metabolism of collagens
in the uterosacral ligaments and uterus, and tested this by establishing an in
utero and peritoneal Hoxa11 gene knockdown system in C57/BL6 mice using vectors
bearing Hoxa11 short hairpin RNA. Specific knockdown of Hoxa11 transcripts and
protein levels were confirmed versus control vectors. Protein and mRNA expression
of collagen types I and III exhibited significant decreases following Hoxa11
knockdown according to Western blot analysis and real-time PCR. Tissue inhibitor 
of matrix metalloproteinase 1 (MMP1) expression also exhibited a significant
decrease. Gelatinase zymography confirmed increases in pro-MMP2 and MMP9, as well
as activated MMP2, following Hoxa11 knockdown. These results reveal that Hoxa11
knockdown in the uterosacral ligaments and uterus increases extracellular matrix 
degradation. More importantly, it suggests a mechanism in the weakening of the
pelvic floor support in women, because decreased HOXA11 gene expression has been 
reported to be associated with decreased collagen and increased MMP2 expression
in the uterosacral ligaments of women with pelvic organ prolapse.

PMID: 22190701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Hum Reprod. 2006 Apr;21(4):936-42. Epub 2005 Dec 16.

Cryptorchidism in LhrKO animals and the effect of testosterone-replacement
therapy.

Yuan FP(1), Lin DX, Rao CV, Lei ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Women's Health,
University of Louisville, Health Sciences Center, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

BACKGROUND: The objective of the current study was to characterize the
morphological and genetic basis of cryptorchidism.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We investigated cryptorchidism in LH receptor (Lhr) knockout
(LhrKO) mice and how testosterone-replacement therapy (TRT) worked to correct the
phenotype. The results revealed that while gubernacular development was
indistinguishable between Lhr-null and wild-type animals until 7 days of age, it 
was subsequently severely impaired in null animals. This was due to a reduction
in mesenchymal cell division, differentiation into cremaster muscle cells and
their delayed maturation. While transcript levels of Hoxa10, Hoxa11, Desrt and
Dll1 were indistinguishable, the levels of Notch1, Numb and Lgr8 in the
gubernaculum and Insl3 in the testes were lower in Lhr-null than in wild-type
siblings. The TRT, which completed testicular descent into the scrotum, corrected
the morphological changes and the expression of Lgr8, Numb and Notch, but not
Insl3, to wild-type levels. Transection of the genitofemoral nerve did not
prevent the TRT effect.
CONCLUSION: In summary, cryptorchidism in Lhr-null animals was caused by defects 
in the gubernacular development due to testosterone deficiency. TRT reversed all 
the morphological and gene expression changes except Insl3, suggesting that
testosterone, not INSL3, secreted by Leydig cells, facilitates the completion of 
testicular descent.

PMID: 16361283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Dev Biol. 2006 Feb 1;290(1):105-17. Epub 2005 Dec 7.

Hoxa-10 deficiency alters region-specific gene expression and perturbs
differentiation of natural killer cells during decidualization.

Rahman MA(1), Li M, Li P, Wang H, Dey SK, Das SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, TN 
37232, USA.

Uterine decidualization, a key event for successful implantation, is critically
controlled by stromal cell proliferation and differentiation. One hallmark event 
of decidualization is the acquisition of stromal cell polyploidy through terminal
differentiation at the anti-mesometrial pole of the implantation site. Hoxa-10, a
developmentally regulated homeobox transcription factor, is highly expressed in
decidualizing stromal cells, and targeted deletion of Hoxa-10 in mice shows
severe decidualization defects, primarily due to reduced stromal cell
responsiveness to progesterone. However, the underlying molecular mechanism by
which Hoxa-10 regulates this process remains largely unknown. Here, we show that 
Hoxa-10 deficiency confers diminished core cell cycle activity during stromal
cell proliferation without disturbing polyploidy, suggesting that these events
depend on local regulators that impact cell cycle machinery. To further address
this question, we compared global gene expression profiles in uteri of wild-type 
and Hoxa-10(-/-) mice after inducing decidualization. Our studies show two major 
aspects of decidualization downstream of Hoxa-10. First, Hoxa-10 deficiency
results in the aberrant region-specific expression of cyclin-dependent kinase-4
(cdk4) and -6 (cdk6), growth differentiation factor 10 (Gdf10), hepatocyte growth
factor (Hgf) and Snail2. Second, Hoxa-10 deficiency compromises natural killer
(NK) cell differentiation without altering trafficking of NK precursor cells
during decidualization. Collectively, the results provide evidence that Hoxa-10
influences a host of genes and cell functions necessary for propagating normal
decidual development during the post-implantation period.

PMCID: PMC4265803
PMID: 16337623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Cancer Res. 2005 Oct 15;65(20):9245-52.

Continuous MLL-ENL expression is necessary to establish a "Hox Code" and maintain
immortalization of hematopoietic progenitor cells.

Horton SJ(1), Grier DG, McGonigle GJ, Thompson A, Morrow M, De Silva I, Moulding 
DA, Kioussis D, Lappin TR, Brady HJ, Williams O.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Haematology and Cancer Biology Unit, Institute of Child Health,
University College London.

The t[(11;19)(p22;q23)] translocation, which gives rise to the MLL-ENL fusion
protein, is commonly found in infant acute leukemias of both the myeloid and
lymphoid lineage. To investigate the molecular mechanism of immortalization by
MLL-ENL we established a Tet-regulatable system of MLL-ENL expression in primary 
hematopoietic progenitor cells. Immortalized myeloid cell lines were generated,
which are dependent on continued MLL-ENL expression for their survival and
proliferation. These cells either terminally differentiate or die when MLL-ENL
expression is turned off with doxycycline. The expression profile of all 39
murine Hox genes was analyzed in these cells by real-time quantitative PCR. This 
analysis showed that loss of MLL-ENL was accompanied by a reduction in the
expression of multiple Hoxa genes. By comparing these changes with Hox gene
expression in cells induced to differentiate with granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor, we show for the first time that reduced Hox gene expression is specific
to loss of MLL-ENL and is not a consequence of differentiation. Our data also
suggest that the Hox cofactor Meis-2 can substitute for Meis-1 function. Thus,
MLL-ENL is required to initiate and maintain immortalization of myeloid
progenitors and may contribute to leukemogenesis by aberrantly sustaining the
expression of a "Hox code" consisting of Hoxa4 to Hoxa11.

PMID: 16230385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Genes Dev. 2005 Sep 15;19(18):2116-21.

Hox genes specify vertebral types in the presomitic mesoderm.

Carapuço M(1), Nóvoa A, Bobola N, Mallo M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciencia, 2780-156 Oeiras, Portugal.

We show here that expression of Hoxa10 in the presomitic mesoderm is sufficient
to confer a Hox group 10 patterning program to the somite, producing vertebrae
without ribs, an effect not achieved when Hoxa10 is expressed in the somites. In 
addition, Hox group 11-dependent vertebral sacralization requires Hoxa11
expression in the presomitic mesoderm, while their caudal differentiation
requires that Hoxa11 is expressed in the somites. Therefore, Hox gene patterning 
activity is different in the somites and presomitic mesoderm, the latter being
very prominent for Hox gene-mediated patterning of the axial skeleton. This is
further supported by our finding that inactivation of Gbx2, a homeobox-containing
gene expressed in the presomitic mesoderm but not in the somites, produced
Hox-like phenotypes in the axial skeleton without affecting Hox gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1221883
PMID: 16166377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Mol Biol Evol. 2006 Jan;23(1):121-36. Epub 2005 Sep 14.

The "fish-specific" Hox cluster duplication is coincident with the origin of
teleosts.

Crow KD(1), Stadler PF, Lynch VJ, Amemiya C, Wagner GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, USA.
karen.crow@yale.edu

The Hox gene complement of zebrafish, medaka, and fugu differs from that of other
gnathostome vertebrates. These fishes have seven to eight Hox clusters compared
to the four Hox clusters described in sarcopterygians and shark. The clusters in 
different teleost lineages are orthologous, implying that a "fish-specific" Hox
cluster duplication has occurred in the stem lineage leading to the most recent
common ancestor of zebrafish and fugu. The timing of this event, however, is
unknown. To address this question, we sequenced four Hox genes from taxa
representing basal actinopterygian and teleost lineages and compared them to
known sequences from shark, coelacanth, zebrafish, and other teleosts. The
resulting gene genealogies suggest that the fish-specific Hox cluster duplication
occurred coincident with the origin of crown group teleosts. In addition, we
obtained evidence for an independent Hox cluster duplication in the sturgeon
lineage (Acipenseriformes). Finally, results from HoxA11 suggest that duplicated 
Hox genes have experienced diversifying selection immediately after the
duplication event. Taken together, these results support the notion that the
duplicated Hox genes of teleosts were causally relevant to adaptive evolution
during the initial teleost radiation.

PMID: 16162861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Aug 8;33(14):4475-84. Print 2005.

Group 13 HOX proteins interact with the MH2 domain of R-Smads and modulate Smad
transcriptional activation functions independent of HOX DNA-binding capability.

Williams TM(1), Williams ME, Heaton JH, Gelehrter TD, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Interactions with co-factors provide a means by which HOX proteins exert
specificity. To identify candidate protein interactors of HOXA13, we created and 
screened an E11.5-E12.5, distal limb bud yeast two-hybrid prey library. Among the
interactors, we isolated the BMP-signaling effector Smad5, which interacted with 
the paralogous HOXD13 but not with HOXA11 or HOXA9, revealing unique interaction 
capabilities of the AbdB-like HOX proteins. Using deletion mutants, we determined
that the MH2 domain of Smad5 is necessary for HOXA13 interaction. This is the
first report demonstrating an interaction between HOX proteins and the MH2 domain
of Smad proteins. HOXA13 and HOXD13 also bind to other BMP and
TGF-beta/Activin-regulated Smad proteins including Smad1 and Smad2, but not
Smad4. Furthermore, HOXD13 could be co-immunoprecipitated with Smad1 from cells. 
Expression of HOXA13, HOXD13 or a HOXD13 homeodomain mutant (HOXD13(IQN>AAA))
antagonized TGF-beta-stimulated transcriptional activation of the
pAdtrack-3TP-Lux reporter vector in Mv1Lu cells as well as the
Smad3/Smad4-activated pTRS6-E1b promoter in Hep3B cells. Finally, using mammalian
one-hybrid assay, we show that transcriptional activation by a
GAL4/Smad3-C-terminus fusion protein is specifically inhibited by HOXA13. Our
results identify a new co-factor for HOX group 13 proteins and suggest that HOX
proteins may modulate Smad-mediated transcriptional activity through
protein-protein interactions without the requirement for HOX monomeric
DNA-binding capability.

PMCID: PMC1183491
PMID: 16087734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2005 Sep 15;304(5):468-75.

Repressor domain and nuclear localization signal of the murine Hoxa-11 protein
are located in the homeodomain: no evidence for role of poly alanine stretches in
transcriptional repression.

Roth JJ(1), Breitenbach M, Wagner GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, 165 Prospect 
Street, New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA.

Hoxa-11 is a member of the homeodomain class of transcription factors, which play
important roles in metazoan development. Hoxa-11 is particularly interesting
because it is involved in a major mammalian innovation, uterus development and
gestation. We are interested in the molecular changes underlying this
evolutionary innovation. Although phenotypes resulting from loss of functions are
well investigated (e.g., female sterility), little is known about the domains
contributing to Hoxa-11 protein function. We therefore mapped the domains
mediating two essential transcription factor functions, nuclear localization and 
transcriptional activity in the mouse Hoxa-11 protein. Our results show that the 
mammal-specific alanine repeat does not contribute to repressor activity, as has 
been hypothesized based on amino acid composition and analogy with other
repressor domains. Interestingly, both the repressor domain as well as the
nuclear localization signal (NLS) are located within the homeodomain, adding to
the growing evidence that the homeodomain is a multifunctional domain which
fulfills essential transcription factor functions beyond DNA binding. It is
proposed that the high degree of conservation of the homeodomain is due to the
multiple functional constraints that result from the various conserved functions 
accommodated in the homeodomain.

PMID: 16032701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Development. 2005 Jul;132(13):3055-67.

Comparative analysis of genes downstream of the Hoxd cluster in developing digits
and external genitalia.

Cobb J(1), Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center (NCCR Zoology and Animal Biology, University of
Geneva, Sciences III, Quai Ernest Ansermet 30, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Mammalian Hox genes encode transcription factors that are crucial for proper
morphogenesis along the various body axes. Despite their extensive structural and
functional characterization, the nature of their target genes remains elusive. We
have addressed this question by using DNA microarrays to screen for genes whose
expression in developing distal forelimbs and genital eminences was significantly
modified in the absence of the full Hoxd gene complement. This comparative
approach not only identified specific candidate genes, but also allowed the
examination of whether a similar Hox expression pattern in distinct tissues leads
to the modulation of the same or different downstream genes. We report here a set
of potential target genes, most of which were not previously known to play a role
in the early stages of either limb or genital bud development. Interestingly, we 
find that the majority of these candidate genes are differentially expressed in
both structures, although often at different times. This supports the idea that
both appendices involve similar genetic controls, both upstream and downstream of
the Hox gene family. These results highlight the surprising mechanistic
relationship between these rather different body parts and suggest a common
developmental strategy to build up the most distal appendicular structures of the
body, i.e. the digits and the penis/clitoris.

PMID: 15944189  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nat Med. 2005 May;11(5):531-7. Epub 2005 Apr 10.

Lineage infidelity of epithelial ovarian cancers is controlled by HOX genes that 
specify regional identity in the reproductive tract.

Cheng W(1), Liu J, Yoshida H, Rosen D, Naora H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Box 184, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Although epithelial ovarian cancers (EOCs) have been thought to arise from the
simple epithelium lining the ovarian surface or inclusion cysts, the major
subtypes of EOCs show morphologic features that resemble those of the müllerian
duct-derived epithelia of the reproductive tract. We found that HOX genes, which 
normally regulate mullerian duct differentiation, are not expressed in normal
ovarian surface epithelium (OSE), but are expressed in different EOC subtypes
according to the pattern of mullerian-like differentiation of these cancers.
Ectopic expression of Hoxa9 in tumorigenic mouse OSE cells gave rise to papillary
tumors resembling serous EOCs. In contrast, Hoxa10 and Hoxa11 induced
morphogenesis of endometrioid-like and mucinous-like EOCs, respectively. Hoxa7
showed no lineage specificity, but promoted the abilities of Hoxa9, Hoxa10 and
Hoxa11 to induce differentiation along their respective pathways. Therefore,
inappropriate activation of a molecular program that controls patterning of the
reproductive tract could explain the morphologic heterogeneity of EOCs and their 
assumption of müllerian-like features.

PMID: 15821746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Dec;1034:1-18.

The role of HOX genes in human implantation.

Eun Kwon H(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Reproductive
Endocrinology, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, P.O. Box
2008063, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The endometrium undergoes an ordered process of differentiation leading to
receptivity to embryonic implantation. HOX genes direct this development in a
fashion similar to that in which they direct embryonic development, including
development of the reproductive tract. HOXA10 and HOXA11 expression increases
during the menstrual cycle, increasing drastically in the midluteal phase, at the
time of implantation. This expression is regulated by sex steroid hormones. This 
expression is necessary for implantation of the blastocyst as demonstrated by the
decreased implantation rates in women with altered HOX expression. HOX genes are 
markers of endometrial receptivity. The possibility of augmenting HOX gene
expression with gene therapy to improve implantation has promise for the future.

PMID: 15731295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Leukemia. 2005 Mar;19(3):358-66.

A new recurrent inversion, inv(7)(p15q34), leads to transcriptional activation of
HOXA10 and HOXA11 in a subset of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias.

Speleman F(1), Cauwelier B, Dastugue N, Cools J, Verhasselt B, Poppe B, Van Roy
N, Vandesompele J, Graux C, Uyttebroeck A, Boogaerts M, De Moerloose B, Benoit Y,
Selleslag D, Billiet J, Robert A, Huguet F, Vandenberghe P, De Paepe A, Marynen
P, Hagemeijer A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
franki.speleman@ugent.be

Chromosomal translocations with breakpoints in T-cell receptor (TCR) genes are
recurrent in T-cell malignancies. These translocations involve the TCRalphadelta 
gene (14q11), the TCRbeta gene (7q34) and to a lesser extent the TCRgamma gene at
chromosomal band 7p14 and juxtapose T-cell oncogenes next to TCR regulatory
sequences leading to deregulated expression of those oncogenes. Here, we describe
a new recurrent chromosomal inversion of chromosome 7, inv(7)(p15q34), in a
subset of patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia characterized by CD2 
negative and CD4 positive, CD8 negative blasts. This rearrangement juxtaposes the
distal part of the HOXA gene cluster on 7p15 to the TCRbeta locus on 7q34. Real
time quantitative PCR analysis for all HOXA genes revealed high levels of HOXA10 
and HOXA11 expression in all inv(7) positive cases. This is the first report of a
recurrent chromosome rearrangement targeting the HOXA gene cluster in T-cell
malignancies resulting in deregulated HOXA gene expression (particularly HOXA10
and HOXA11) and is in keeping with a previous report suggesting HOXA deregulation
in MLL-rearranged T- and B cell lymphoblastic leukemia as the key factor in
leukaemic transformation. Finally, our observation also supports the previous
suggested role of HOXA10 and HOXA11 in normal thymocyte development.

PMID: 15674412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Int J Cancer. 2005 Apr 10;114(3):436-41.

Altered expressions of HOX genes in human cutaneous malignant melanoma.

Maeda K(1), Hamada J, Takahashi Y, Tada M, Yamamoto Y, Sugihara T, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

HOX genes act as master genes to control morphogenesis. In human, HOX genes form 
4 clusters composing 9 to 11 HOX genes (39 genes in total) on different
chromosomes. We hypothesized that aberrant expression of HOX genes was associated
with development and subsequent progression of melanoma and that the 39 HOX gene 
expression pattern determined the sites where melanoma grew. The expression
levels of 39 HOX genes in 15 human cutaneous melanoma specimens and 7 nevus
pigmentosus specimens were quantified by a comprehensive analysis system based on
the real-time RT-PCR method. We found that the expression levels of HOXA11, A13, 
B9, D12 and D13 in melanoma were higher than those in nevus pigmentosus and that 
the expression levels of HOXA11, B2 and C13 were significantly different between 
pT4 melanoma and pT1 to pT3 melanoma. It was most notable that the expression
levels of HOXA1, A2, C4 and B13 in melanoma with distant metastasis were higher
than those in melanoma without it. On the other hand, we found no relationship
between HOX genes expression patterns and the growing sites of melanoma. These
results indicated that the misexpressions of some specific HOX genes were
implicated in melanoma genesis and metastasis but had no linkage with melanoma
sites.

(c) 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15551325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Proc Biol Sci. 2004 Nov 7;271(1554):2201-7.

Adaptive evolution of HoxA-11 and HoxA-13 at the origin of the uterus in mammals.

Lynch VJ(1), Roth JJ, Takahashi K, Dunn CW, Nonaka DF, Stopper GF, Wagner GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, 165 Prospect 
Street, New Haven, CT 06551, USA. vincent.j.lynch@yale.edu

The evolution of morphological characters is mediated by the evolution of
developmental genes. Evolutionary changes can either affect cis-regulatory
elements, leading to differences in their temporal and spatial regulation, or
affect the coding region. Although there is ample evidence for the importance of 
cis-regulatory evolution, it has only recently been shown that transcription
factors do not remain functionally equivalent during evolution. These results
suggest that the evolution of transcription factors may play an active role in
the evolution of development. To test this idea we investigated the molecular
evolution of two genes essential for the development and function of the
mammalian female reproductive organs, HoxA-11 and HoxA-13. We predicted that if
coding-region evolution plays an active role in developmental evolution, then
these genes should have experienced adaptive evolution at the origin of the
mammalian female reproductive system. We report the sequences of HoxA-11 from
basal mammalian and amniote taxa and analyse HoxA-11 and HoxA-13 for signatures
of adaptive molecular evolution. The data demonstrate that these genes were under
strong positive (directional) selection in the stem lineage of therian and
eutherian mammals, coincident with the evolution of the uterus and vagina. These 
results support the idea that adaptive evolution of transcription factors can be 
an integral part in the evolution of novel structures.

PMCID: PMC1691855
PMID: 15539344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2004 Sep;191(3):767-72.

Expression of HOXA11 gene in human endometrium.

Wang LF(1), Luo HZ, Zhu ZM, Wang JD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, the Second Affiliated Hospital of Dalian Medical
University, Dalian, China. lifen_w@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: This study was conducted to examine HOXA11 gene expression in the
human endometrium during normal menstrual cycle.
STUDY DESIGN: Expression of HOXA11 was examined in the endometrium by in situ
hybridization and semiquantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: In the proliferative and early secretory endometrium, both glandular and
stromal cells expressed HOXA11 after hybridization. It is interesting to note
that the expression in glandular epithelium was dramatically decreased or
disappeared in the midsecretory phase at the time of implantation. This
expression patterning was kept in the late secretory endometrium and decidua of
early pregnancy, whereas in stromal cells, a high-level expression was found and 
no variations were detected during the menstrual cycle. Semiquantitative RT-PCR
analysis demonstrated that total HOXA11 messenger RNA levels were markedly
increased in the midsecreatory endometrium.
CONCLUSION: This study reveals a novel expression pattern for HOXA11 gene in
human endometrium and the downregulation of HOXA11 in glandular epithelium may be
necessary for the differentiation and receptivity of endometrium.

PMID: 15467538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Toxicology. 2004 Dec 1;205(1-2):55-63.

Estrogen receptor-alpha mediates the detrimental effects of neonatal
diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure in the murine reproductive tract.

Couse JF(1), Korach KS.

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Biology Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, PO Box 12233, MD B3-02, NC 27709,
USA.

It is generally believed that estrogen receptor-dependent and -independent
pathways are involved in mediating the developmental effects of the synthetic
estrogen, diethylstilbestrol (DES). However, the precise role and extent to which
each pathway contributes to the resulting pathologies remains unknown. We have
employed the estrogen receptor knockout (ERKO) mice, which lack either estrogen
receptor-alpha (alphaERKO or estrogen receptor-beta (betaERKO), to gain insight
into the contribution of each ER-dependent pathway in mediating the effects of
neonatal DES exposure in the female and male reproductive tract tissues of the
mouse. Estrogen receptor-alpha female mice exhibited complete resistance to the
chronic effects of neonatal DES exposure that were obvious in exposed wild-type
animals, including atrophy and epithelial squamous metaplasia in the uterus;
proliferative lesions of the oviduct; and persistent cornification of the vaginal
epithelium. DES-mediated reduction in uterine Hoxa10, Hoxa11 and Wnt7a expression
that occurs wild-type females during the time of exposure was also absent in
alphaERKO females. In the male, alphaERKO mice exhibited complete resistance to
the chronic effects of neonatal DES exposure on the prostate, including decreased
androgen receptor levels, epithelial hyperplasia, and increased basal cell
proliferation. Although ERbeta is highly expressed in the prostate epithelium,
DES-exposed betaERKO males exhibited all of the effects of neonatal DES exposure 
that were observed in similarly exposed wild-type males. Therefore, the lack of
DES-effects on gene expression and tissue differentiation in the alphaERKO uterus
and prostate provides unequivocal evidence of an obligatory role for ERalpha in
mediating the detrimental actions of neonatal DES exposure in the murine
reproductive tract.

PMID: 15458790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Cell. 2004 Jul 23;15(2):245-58.

A dimerized coiled-coil domain and an adjoining part of geminin interact with two
sites on Cdt1 for replication inhibition.

Saxena S(1), Yuan P, Dhar SK, Senga T, Takeda D, Robinson H, Kornbluth S,
Swaminathan K, Dutta A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Genetics, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville 22908, USA.

Geminin is a cellular protein that associates with Cdt1 and inhibits Mcm2-7
loading during S phase. It prevents multiple cycles of replication per cell cycle
and prevents episome replication. It also directly inhibits the HoxA11
transcription factor. Here we report that geminin forms a parallel coiled-coil
homodimer with atypical residues in the dimer interface. Point mutations that
disrupt the dimerization abolish interaction with Cdt1 and inhibition of
replication. An array of glutamic acid residues on the coiled-coil domain surface
interacts with positive charges in the middle of Cdt1. An adjoining region
interacts independently with the N-terminal 100 residues of Cdt1. Both
interactions are essential for replication inhibition. The negative residues on
the coiled-coil domain and a different part of geminin are also required for
interaction with HoxA11. Therefore a rigid cylinder with negative surface charges
is a critical component of a bipartite interaction interface between geminin and 
its cellular targets.

PMID: 15260975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Development. 2004 May;131(9):2061-72. Epub 2004 Apr 8.

Wnt5a is required for proper epithelial-mesenchymal interactions in the uterus.

Mericskay M(1), Kitajewski J, Sassoon D.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Department Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, Mount Sinai
Medical School, 1 G Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions play a crucial role in the correct patterning
of the mammalian female reproductive tract (FRT). Three members of the Wnt family
of growth factors are expressed at high levels in the developing FRT in the mouse
embryo. The expression of Wnt genes is maintained in the adult FRT, although
levels fluctuate during estrous. Wnt4 is required for Müllerian duct initiation, 
whereas Wnt7a is required for subsequent differentiation. In this study, we show 
that Wnt5a is required for posterior growth of the FRT. We further demonstrate
that the mutant FRT has the potential to form the posterior compartments of the
FRT using grafting techniques. Postnatally, Wnt5a plays a crucial role in the
generation of uterine glands and is required for cellular and molecular responses
to exogenous estrogens. Finally, we show that Wnt5a participates in a regulatory 
loop with other FRT patterning genes including Wnt7a, Hoxa10 and Hoxa11. Data
presented provide a mechanistic basis for how uterine stroma mediates both
developmental and estrogen-mediated changes in the epithelium and demonstrates
that Wnt5a is a key component in this process. The similarities of the Wnt5a and 
Wnt7a mutant FRT phenotypes to those described for the Hoxa11 and Hoxa13 mutant
FRT phenotypes reveal a mechanism whereby Wnt and Hox genes cooperate to pattern 
the FRT along the anteroposterior axis.

PMID: 15073149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Dev Dyn. 2004 Apr;229(4):771-9.

Atlas of Hox gene expression in the developing kidney.

Patterson LT(1), Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, The Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA. larry.patterson@cchmc.org

Hox genes often play important roles in segment identity determination and
organogenesis. To better understand the roles of Hox genes during kidney
development, we performed an extensive analysis of their expression patterns.
Section in situ hybridizations were used to define the expression of 37 Hox genes
at embryonic day (E) 12.5, E13.5, E15.5, and E17.5 of kidney development. Several
interesting principles emerged. First, the concept of colinearity was preserved. 
Hox genes from the more 3' positions in clusters were more often expressed in the
ureteric bud, which is derived from the anterior of the intermediate mesoderm.
Second, Hox genes were expressed throughout the ureteric bud without any segment 
specificity. Third, in the different segments of the forming nephron we did
observe overlapping domains of Hox gene expression, which initiated distally at
the junction between the nephron and ureteric bud, and extended proximally
variable distances. Finally, we observed that paralogous Hox genes often showed
surprisingly diverse expression patterns. Indeed, contiguous genes on a single
cluster more often showed similar expression patterns than paralogs. In summary, 
the resulting atlas of Hox gene expression provides a foundation for further
study of the overlapping functions Hox genes in the developing kidney.

PMID: 15042701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Biol Reprod. 2004 Jun;70(6):1870-6. Epub 2004 Feb 25.

Gene expression profiling of neonatal mouse uterine development.

Hu J(1), Gray CA, Spencer TE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics and Department of Animal Science,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843-2471, USA.

Postnatal uterine development involves differentiation and development of the
endometrial glandular epithelium from the luminal epithelium as well as
development of the mesenchyme into the endometrial stroma and myometrium. This
period of development is critical because exposure of neonates to endocrine
disruptors compromises reproductive cycles and pregnancy in the adult. However,
the hormonal, cellular, and molecular mechanisms regulating postnatal uterine
development remain largely unknown. In order to identify candidate genes and gene
networks that regulate postnatal uterine development, uteri were collected from
CD-1 outbred mice on postnatal days (PND) 3, 6, 9, 12, and 15, and gene
expression profiling was conducted using Affymetrix mouse genome U74Av2 GeneChips
in study 1. Of the approximately 12,000 genes analyzed, 9002 genes were expressed
in the uterus and expression of 3012 genes increased or decreased 2-fold during
uterine development. In study 2, the uterine epithelium was enzymatically
separated from the stroma/myometrium on PNDs 3, 6, and 9, and gene expression
profiling was conducted using CodeLink UniSet Mouse I Expression Bioarrays.
Results from these two studies support the hypothesis that postnatal uterine
development is a complex process involving overlapping positive and negative
changes in uterine epithelial and stromal/myometrial gene expression. Candidate
genes regulating uterine development encode secreted factors (Wnt5a, Wnt7a),
transcription factors (Hoxa10, Hoxa11, Hoxd10, MSX-1), enzymes (matrix
metalloproteinases, cathepsin, carbonic anhydrase), growth factors (IGF-II, IGF
binding proteins), and components of the extracellular matrix (osteopontin) to
name a few. The candidate genes and gene networks identified by transcriptional
profiling provide an important foundation to discern and understand mechanisms
regulating postnatal uterine morphogenesis.

PMID: 14985250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2004 Feb;16(1):15-22.

Inherited thrombocytopenias: toward a molecular understanding of disorders of
platelet production.

Geddis AE(1), Kaushansky K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, USA.
Ageddis@ucsd.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To review the defined syndromes of inherited thrombocytopenia 
and discuss new genetic data for several disorders that shed light on the process
of megakaryopoiesis.
RECENT FINDINGS: The genes responsible for several inherited thrombocytopenias
have been recently discovered, including congenital amegakaryocytic leukemia,
amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia with radio-ulnar synostosis, familial platelet
syndrome with predisposition to acute myelogenous leukemia, Paris-Trousseau,
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, and the May-Hegglin, Sebastian, Epstein, and Fechner
syndromes. These clinical syndromes, combined with studies in mouse and in vitro 
models, reveal the importance of these genes for normal hematopoiesis.
SUMMARY: Although inherited syndromes of thrombocytopenia are rare,
characterization of mutations in these disorders has contributed greatly to our
understanding of megakaryocyte and platelet development. A systematic registry of
congenitally thrombocytopenic individuals would almost certainly lead to new
genetic discoveries.

PMID: 14758109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Dev Growth Differ. 2003 Oct-Dec;45(5-6):485-98.

Hoxa-11 and Hoxa-13 are involved in repression of MyoD during limb muscle
development.

Yamamoto M(1), Kuroiwa A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, Nagoya 464-8602 Japan. masakazu.yamamoto@uconn.edu

Under the influence of the limb mesenchyme, Hoxa-11 is expressed in migrating and
proliferating premyoblasts in the limb field and Hoxa-13 is induced in subdomains
of congregated limb muscle masses. To evaluate the roles of Hoxa-11 and Hoxa-13
in myogenesis of the limb, we performed electroporation in ovo to force
expression of these Hox genes in limb muscle precursors. In the presence of
ectopic Hoxa-11, expression of MyoD was blocked transiently. In C2C12 myoblasts, 
transfection of Hoxa-11 also repressed the expression of endogenous MyoD. Forced 
expression of Hoxa-13 resulted in more pronounced repression of MyoD in both limb
and C2C12 myoblasts. In contrast, targeted disruption of Hoxa-13 gave rise to
enhanced expression of MyoD in the flexor carpi radialis muscle, a forearm muscle
that normally expressed Hoxa-13. These results suggest that Hoxa-11 and Hoxa-13
are involved in the negative regulation of MyoD expression in limb muscle
precursors.

PMID: 14706073  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Development. 2004 Jan;131(2):299-309. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Multiple roles of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 in the formation of the mammalian forelimb
zeugopod.

Boulet AM(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Mutations in the 5' or posterior murine Hox genes (paralogous groups 9-13)
markedly affect the formation of the stylopod, zeugopod and autopod of both
forelimbs and hindlimbs. Targeted disruption of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 or Hoxa10,
Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 result in gross mispatterning of the radius and ulna or the
femur, respectively. Similarly, in mice with disruptions of both Hoxa13 and
Hoxd13, development of the forelimb and hindlimb autopod is severely curtailed.
Although these examples clearly illustrate the major roles played by the
posterior Hox genes, little is known regarding the stage or stages at which Hox
transcription factors intersect with the limb development program to ensure
proper patterning of the principle elements of the limb. Moreover, the cellular
and/or molecular bases for the developmental defects observed in these mutant
mice have not been described. In this study, we show that malformation of the
forelimb zeugopod in Hoxa11/Hoxd11 double mutants is a consequence of
interruption at multiple steps during the formation of the radius and ulna. In
particular, reductions in the levels of Fgf8 and Fgf10 expression may be related 
to the observed delay in forelimb bud outgrowth that, in turn, leads to the
formation of smaller mesenchymal condensations. However, the most significant
defect appears to be the failure to form normal growth plates at the proximal and
distal ends of the zeugopod bones. As a consequence, growth and maturation of
these bones is highly disorganized, resulting in the creation of amorphous bony
elements, rather than a normal radius and ulna.

PMID: 14668414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 Jan;18(1):184-93. Epub 2003 Oct 9.

Hoxa11 regulates stromal cell death and proliferation during neonatal uterine
development.

Wong KH(1), Wintch HD, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University
of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112-5331, USA.

Increasing evidence indicates that the Hoxa11 gene plays a critical role in the
proper development of the uterus. In this report, we describe potential altered
cellular processes in the developing uterus of Hoxa11 mutants. Histologic
analysis demonstrates normal uterine morphology in Hoxa11 mutants as compared
with controls at the newborn stage and d 7 after birth. Stromal tissue was
moderately reduced in the Hoxa11 mutant uterus by d 14 after birth and was absent
by d 21 after birth. There is decreased cellular proliferation in the Hoxa11
mutant uterus both at 7 and 14 d after birth. Terminal deoxyribonucleotide
transferase-mediated deoxyuridine triphosphate nick-end labeling analysis
demonstrates that apoptosis was markedly increased in the Hoxa11 mutant uterus at
d 14 after birth. p27 is decreased in the Hoxa11 mutant as evidenced by real-time
PCR. Epidermal growth factor receptor expression is dramatically decreased as
evidenced by both real-time PCR and immunohistochemistry results. These findings 
suggest that Hoxa11 is required for proper cellular proliferation and apoptotic
responses in the developing neonatal uterus and that the regulation of epidermal 
growth factor receptor is critical to these processes.

PMID: 14551265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Gynecol Oncol. 2003 Sep;90(3):512-8.

Expression of HOX gene products in normal and abnormal trophoblastic tissue.

Amesse LS(1), Moulton R, Zhang YM, Pfaff-Amesse T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Wright State University School of
Medicine, Dayton, OH 45409, USA. lsamesse@mvh.org

OBJECTIVE: The expression pattern of three homeobox genes products, HOX A11, HOX 
B6, and HOX C6, was examined in normal human placental tissue and abnormal
trophoblastic tissue derived from complete hydatidiform moles and choriocarcinoma
tumors. We sought to determine whether expression of these gene products during
different states of trophoblastic differentiation and proliferation is constant
or demonstrates variation. Variation in expression of these respective homeobox
genes may provide insight into predicting which molar tissues are likely to
develop into choriocarcinoma tumors.
METHODS: Tissue sections from a total of 12 samples were studied. Among these,
six full-term human placentas, three complete hydatidiform moles, and three
choriocarcinoma tumors were examined for expression of the homeobox HOX A11, HOX 
B6, and HOX C6 gene products, using immunohistochemistry staining methods.
RESULTS: Expression of HOX homeobox gene products, HOX A11, HOX B6, and HOX C6,
was detected in full-term human placenta and tissue from complete hydatiform
moles. Abnormal trophoblasts from complete moles demonstrated an immunoreactivity
expression pattern comparable to that of normal trophoblasts from term
pregnancies. However, definitive expression of these respective homeobox genes
was not identified in tissue obtained from choriocarcinoma tumors.
CONCLUSION: Variation in expression of HOX homeobox gene products, HOX A11, HOX
B6, and HOX C6, was established in trophoblast tissue obtained from full-term
human placentas, complete hydatiform moles, and choriocarcinoma tumors. This
finding indicates that normal full-term trophoblasts and abnormal molar
trophoblasts may share similar fundamental regulatory control mechanisms. The
absence of definitive expression of these HOX gene products in trophoblastic
cells derived from choriocarcinoma tumors indicates that while HOX A11, HOX B6,
and HOX C6 genes may be involved in maintenance of some trophoblastic cell
states, they may be either downregulated or have alterations in their expression 
in trophoblasts from choriocarcinoma tumors.

PMID: 13678718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Biol Reprod. 2004 Jan;70(1):39-45. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

HOXC and HOXD gene expression in human endometrium: lack of redundancy with HOXA 
paralogs.

Akbas GE(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

HOXA genes, essential regulators of differentiation in the embryo, are also
essential for adult cyclic endometrial development and for endometrial
receptivity. Mice deficient in Hoxa10 or Hoxa11 exhibit reduced fertility because
of defects in implantation. We hypothesized that HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and
HOXD11, paralogs of HOXA10 and HOXA11, might also be involved in endometrial
development. Here, we showed that the expression of HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and
HOXD11 was evident throughout the menstrual cycle in the endometrium by
semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. In the
secretory phase, expression of HOXC10, HOXC11, and HOXD11 decreased to 4% and
HOXD10 decreased to 25% of the proliferative phase expression (P < 0.001, P <
0.001, P < 0.02, P < 0.01, respectively). In situ hybridization demonstrated
expression of each of these HOX genes primarily in the stroma and confirmed the
decreased expression in the secretory phase. HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and HOXD11
expression was not regulated by sex steroids in primary endometrial stromal cells
or Ishikawa cells. The expression and regulation of HOXC and HOXD genes varies
from that of HOXA10 and HOXA11. Whereas HOXA10 and HOXA11 are regulators of
endometrial differentiation, HOXC and HOXD genes likely regulate endometrial
proliferation. Paralogous HOX genes typically have a redundant function in
development; a novel evolutionary divergence of paralogous Hox genes has resulted
in HOXC and HOXD genes having distinct expression patterns, regulation, and
likely also distinct functions from HOXA genes. A network of HOX genes may be
involved in regulating multiple aspects of endometrial development, including
both proliferation and differentiation.

PMID: 12954737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Urol. 2003 Jul;170(1):302-5.

Early orchiopexy restores fertility in the Hoxa 11 gene knockout mouse.

Lewis AG(1), Pecha BR, Smith EP, Gardner BJ, Hsieh-Li HM, Potter SS, Sheldon CA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Urology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 
3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229-3039, USA.

PURPOSE: We investigated whether infertility could be reversed in cryptorchid
mice (with disrupted expression of the homeobox gene Hoxa 11) by orchiopexy and
mating such animals with females of proven fertility.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Hoxa 11 mutant and WT male mice were genotyped by
polymerase chain reaction. Surgery (orchiopexy or sham operation) was performed
at age 18 days and fertility was assessed at ages 6 to 8 weeks. Animals were
sacrificed at ages 6 to 9 months and computer assisted semen analysis was
performed on fluid obtained by epididymal puncture.
RESULTS: Five of 28 mutant mice proved fertile following orchiopexy versus 0 of
22 after sham operation (p <0.05). Values in WT mice were 18 of 35 and 25 of 33, 
respectively (p <0.01). Mean spermatozoa counts +/- SEM were 21.7 +/- 5.9 x
106/ml in 8 mutant mice with orchiopexy, 2.78 +/- 1.59 x 106/ml in 8 sham
operated mutant mice (p <0.002), 15.6 +/- 4.9 x 106/ml in 7 WT mice with
orchiopexy and 36.3 +/- 10.5 x 106/ml in 9 sham operated WT mice (p <0.02).
CONCLUSIONS: Testicular position following orchiopexy is important to achieve
fertility but the surgical procedure was associated with a degree of damage.
Since mutant animals did not attain the fertility rates observed in WT animals
following orchiopexy, other factors (possibly vaso-epididymal) may be necessary
for normal spermatogenesis. Further studies of this model may allow the
identification of such factors.

PMID: 12796710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Clin Cancer Res. 2003 Jun;9(6):2277-87.

Frequent HOXA11 and THBS2 promoter methylation, and a methylator phenotype in
endometrial adenocarcinoma.

Whitcomb BP(1), Mutch DG, Herzog TJ, Rader JS, Gibb RK, Goodfellow PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

PURPOSE: This study was designed to determine whether there is a methylator
phenotype in stage I and II endometrioid endometrial adenocarcinoma, and if so,
whether methylation correlates with recurrence.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Bisulfite-converted DNAs from 24 stage I and II primary
cancers (12 recurrent and 12 nonrecurrent), and 5 endometrial cancer cell lines
were analyzed for methylation in the promoter regions of seven genes. A
methylation index (MeI) was calculated for each tumor. Frequent HOXA11 and THBS2 
methylation prompted analysis of case-matched bloods and 25 additional
nonrecurrent primary cancers. Statistical analysis included Fisher's exact and
Student t tests.
RESULTS: Rates of methylation in the initial tumor series were as follows:
HOXA11, 70.8%; THBS2, 62.5%; MLH1, 33.3%; CTNNB1, 16.7%; VDR, 4.2%; CDKN2A, 4.2%;
and THBS1, 0%. There was no difference in the MeI of recurrent and nonrecurrent
cases. However, cell lines had higher mean MeI. High rates of HOXA11 and THBS2
methylation were confirmed in the additional nonrecurrent tumors. None of the 24 
case-matched bloods had HOXA11 methylation, whereas three blood DNAs showed THBS2
methylation. There was a statistically significant difference in the rate of
HOXA11 methylation in recurrent and nonrecurrent tumors (P = 0.0167).
CONCLUSIONS: Endometrial adenocarcinomas have a methylator phenotype. No
correlation between MeI and clinicopathologic variables in early stage tumors was
observed. High rates of methylation were found in the HOXA11 and THBS2 promoter
regions. HOXA11 promoter methylation was significantly more frequent in recurrent
than nonrecurrent cases. HOXA11 methylation in early stage endometrial cancer is 
associated with poor outcome.

PMID: 12796396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Apr;17(4):610-27. Epub 2003 Jan 9.

Gene expression profiling reveals progesterone-mediated cell cycle and
immunoregulatory roles of Hoxa-10 in the preimplantation uterus.

Yao MW(1), Lim H, Schust DJ, Choe SE, Farago A, Ding Y, Michaud S, Church GM,
Maas RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham & Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Thorn Building, Room 1019, 20 Shattuck Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Human infertility and recurrent pregnancy loss caused by implantation defects are
poorly understood. Hoxa-10-deficient female mice have severe infertility and
recurrent pregnancy loss due to defective uterine implantation. Gene expression
profiling experiments reveal that Hoxa-10 is an important regulator of two
critical events in implantation: stromal cell proliferation and local
immunosuppression. At the time of implantation, Hoxa-10 mediates the
progesterone-stimulated proliferation of uterine stromal cells. Hoxa-10 mutants
express a stromal cell proliferation defect that is accompanied by quantitative
or spatial alterations in the expression of two cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
genes, p57 and p15. Hoxa-10 deficiency also leads to a severe local immunological
disturbance, characterized by a polyclonal proliferation of T cells, that occurs 
in place of the normal progesterone-mediated immunosuppression in the
periimplantation uterus.

PMID: 12554760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Biol Reprod. 2003 Feb;68(2):644-50.

5' hox genes and meis 1, a hox-DNA binding cofactor, are expressed in the adult
mouse epididymis.

Bomgardner D(1), Hinton BT, Turner TT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology Cell Biology, University of Virginia Health Science
System, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA. db8j@virginia.edu

Hox genes determine the formation of segmented structures during development. The
epididymis shows a segmented organization in its structure and function beyond
embryogenesis. This study examined the adult mouse epididymis and vas deferens
for expression of 5' hox genes and a hox-DNA binding cofactor. Reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) showed the expression of hoxa-9,
hoxa-10, hoxa-11, hoxd-9, and hoxd-10 in all regions including the vas deferens. 
Semiquantitative RT-PCR revealed highest mRNA levels for hoxa-11 in the distal
part of the epididymis and vas deferens, and this was confirmed by Northern blot 
analysis. To determine protein presence an antibody raised against a peptide
N-terminal to the homeodomain of hoxa-11 was produced in rabbits. The antibody
recognized a band of approximately 37-39 kDa in Western blot analysis.
Immunohistochemistry indicated the presence of hoxa-11 in the nuclei of the
epithelial cells with some staining in the cytoplasm. Staining was also detected 
in nuclei of interstitial cells throughout the entire organ and the vas deferens.
A DNA binding cofactor for hoxa-11, Meis 1, was investigated for its presence in 
the epididymis. Semiquantitative RT-PCR identified both transcripts for Meis 1
(Meis 1a and Meis 1b) in all regions. Protein presence was confirmed by Western
blot analysis, and this detected one band of approximately 53-55 kDa.
Immunohistochemistry localized Meis 1 in the nuclei of interstitial cells
throughout the entire organ and the vas deferens. Our study provides preliminary 
data from which we suggest the involvement of homeodomain transcription factors
in the maintenance of segmental function of the adult epididymis and vas
deferens.

PMID: 12533430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. DNA Cell Biol. 2002 Nov;21(11):819-25.

Hox proteins activate the IGFBP-1 promoter and suppress the function of hPR in
human endometrial cells.

Gao J(1), Mazella J, Tseng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, State University 
of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, New York 11794-8091, USA.

Previous studies have shown that progestin activates the transcription of IGFBP-1
(insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1). Four regions in the IGFBP-1
promotor have been identified to enhance the transcription. Two of the regions,
located at -73 to -65 bp and -319 to -311 bp formed identical DNA-protein
complexes with the nuclear extracts of endometrial stromal/decidual cells. To
identify the binding protein(s) in endometrial cells that interact with these two
regions, we have used the TGTCAATTA repeats (-319 to -11 bp of the IGFBP-1
promoter) to screen the human decidual cDNA library by yeast one-hybrid system.
We found that Hox A10, HoxA11, HoxB2, HoxB4, and HoxD11 interacted with the
TGTCAATTA repeats in yeast cells. Among these hox genes, the full-length coding
region of HoxA10, HoxA11, and HoxB4 were used for functional analysis in three
types of endometrial cells, undifferentiated endometrial stromal cells, decidual 
cells (differentiated stromal cells) and endometrial adenocarcinoma cell line
(HEC1-B). All these endometrial cells produce IGFBP-1. Transient transfection
assay showed that HoxA10 expression vector increased the promoter activity (the
IGFBP-1 proximal promoter containing TGC/TCAATTA and two functional PRE sites) in
endometrial stromal cells and in HEC-1B cells, but not in decidual cells. HoxB4
enhanced the promoter activity only in decidual cells, while HoxA11 had no
apparent effect in all three types of cells. To evaluate whether Hox proteins
would interact with progesterone receptor (hPR), cells were transfected with the 
promoter construct, Hox and hPR expression vectors. hPR alone activated the
IGFBP-1 promoter activity, but expression of Hox gene suppressed the activation. 
Hox proteins also suppressed the hPR enhanced promoter activities of MMTV
(containing consensus-PRE sites) and glycodelin (GdA, containing Sp1 site which
mediates the hPR function). These data showed that Hox genes selectively activate
the transcription of the IGFBP-1 and GdA genes in different types of endometrial 
cells. Hox genes, however, suppress the hPR enhanced activities. In addition, we 
found that HoxB4 expression was induced by estrogen and progestin. Other
investigators have shown that HoxA10 and 11 were stimulated by progestin. These
findings show that Hox proteins are molecular mediators of the steroid hormones
during endometrial cell development.

PMID: 12489992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2003 Jan;36(1):107-12.

Fusion of the NUP98 gene and the homeobox gene HOXC13 in acute myeloid leukemia
with t(11;12)(p15;q13).

Panagopoulos I(1), Isaksson M, Billström R, Strömbeck B, Mitelman F, Johansson B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Sweden.
ioannis.panagopoulos@klingen.lu.se

The NUP98 gene at 11p15 is known to be fused to DDX10, HOXA9, HOXA11, HOXA13,
HOXD11, HOXD13, LEDGF, NSD1, NSD3, PMX1, RAP1GDS1, and TOP1 in various
hematologic malignancies. The common theme in all NUP98 chimeras is a transcript 
consisting of the 5' part of NUP98 and the 3' portion of the partner gene;
however, apart from the frequent fusion to different homeobox genes, there is no 
apparent similarity among the other partners. We here report a de novo acute
myeloid leukemia with a t(11;12)(p15;q13), resulting in a novel NUP98/HOXC13
fusion. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analyses, by the use of probes
covering NUP98 and the HOXC gene cluster at 12q13, revealed a fusion signal at
the der(11)t(11;12), indicating a NUP98/HOXC chimera, whereas no fusion was found
on the der(12)t(11;12), suggesting that the translocation was accompanied by a
deletion of the reciprocal fusion gene. Reverse transcription-PCR and sequence
analyses showed that exon 16 (nucleotide 2290) of NUP98 was fused in-frame with
exon 2 (nucleotide 852) of HOXC13. Neither the HOXC13/NUP98 transcript nor the
normal HOXC13 was expressed. The present results, together with previous studies 
of NUP98/homeobox gene fusions, strongly indicate that NUP98/HOXC13 is of
pathogenetic importance in t(11;12)-positive acute myeloid leukemia.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12461755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. Dev Biol. 2002 Sep 1;249(1):96-107.

Duplication of the Hoxd11 gene causes alterations in the axial and appendicular
skeleton of the mouse.

Boulet AM(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, Utah 84112-5331, USA.

The Hox genes encode a group of transcription factors essential for proper
development of the mouse. Targeted mutation of the Hoxd11 gene causes reduced
male fertility, vertebral transformation, carpal bone fusions, and reductions in 
digit length. A duplication of the Hoxd11 gene was created with the expectation
that the consequences of restricted overexpression in the appropriate cells would
provide further insight into the function of the Hoxd11 gene product. Genetic
assays demonstrated that two tandem copies of Hoxd11 were functionally
indistinguishable from the normal two copies of the gene on separate chromosomes 
with respect to formation of the axial and appendicular skeleton. Extra copies of
Hoxd11 caused an increase in the lengths of some bones of the forelimb autopod
and a decrease in the number of lumbar vertebrae. Further, analysis of the Hoxd11
duplication demonstrated that the Hoxd11 protein can perform some functions
supplied by its paralogue Hoxa11. For example, the defects in forelimb bones are 
corrected when extra copies of Hoxd11 are present in the Hoxa11 homozygous mutant
background. Thus, it appears that Hoxd11 can quantitatively compensate for the
absence of Hoxa11 protein, and therefore Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 are functionally
equivalent in the zeugopod. However, extra copies of Hoxd11 did not improve male 
or female fertility in Hoxa11 mutants. Interestingly, the insertion of an
additional Hoxd11 locus into the HoxD complex does not appear to affect the
expression patterns of the neighboring Hoxd10, -d12, or -d13 genes.

PMID: 12217321  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2002 Jul;187(1):24-32.

Expression of homeobox gene transcripts in trophoblastic cells.

Zhang YM(1), Xu B, Rote N, Peterson L, Amesse LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology, Wright State University School of
Medicine and College of Science and Mathematics, Dayton, Ohio 45409-2793, USA.

OBJECTIVE: This study was conducted to examine the dynamics of homeobox gene
expression in the differentiation of trophoblasts as a key to the understanding
of the regulatory mechanisms that are involved in placental development.
STUDY DESIGN: Expression of homeobox genes was examined in primary trophoblastic 
cells and in the BeWo choriocarcinoma model cell lines by molecular and
immunocytochemistry techniques.
RESULTS: We demonstrated the expression of 3 homeobox genes (HOX B6, HOX C6, and 
HOX A11) in primary trophoblastic cells. BeWo cells showed an expression pattern 
similar to that of the primary cell lines. In both primary trophoblasts and BeWo 
cells, the HOX A11 gene, but not the HOX B6 or HOX C6 genes, were found to
down-regulate with differentiation from single- to multinucleate giant cells.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates a novel expression pattern for HOX A11 gene
in trophoblastic differentiation and suggests that the down-regulation of HOX A11
may be necessary for the differentiation of cytotrophoblasts into
syncytiotrophoblasts.

PMID: 12114884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Int J Hematol. 2002 Jun;75(5):473-83.

Molecular control of megakaryopoiesis and thrombopoiesis.

Matsumura I(1), Kanakura Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Osaka University Graduate School of
Medicine, Suita, Japan.

Megakaryopoiesis and subsequent thrombopoiesis occur through complex biologic
steps: megakaryocyte precursors that developed from hematopoietic stem cells
initially proliferate, then differentiate into mature polyploid megakaryocytes,
and finally release platelets. Although a number of growth factors can augment
megakaryopoiesis in vitro, thrombopoietin is a physiologic and the most potent
regulator of megakaryopoiesis in vitro and in vivo. Thrombopoietin induces the
growth of megakaryocyte precursors through activation of multiple signaling
cascades, including Ras/mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), signal
transducers and activators of transcription 5 (STAT5), phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase (PI3-K)/Akt, and protein kinase C, whereas it induces megakaryocytic
maturation primarily through the Ras/MAPK pathway. During the maturation step,
megakaryocytes undergo polyploidization characterized by repeated rounds of DNA
replication without concomitant cell division. During these rounds of
replication, cytokinesis is neglected because of the down-regulated expression of
AIM-1, and DNA replication occurs through the increased expression of D-type
cyclins. As for transcriptional regulation during megakaryopoiesis, GATA-1 plays 
a central role in the lineage commitment of hematopoietic stem cells toward
erythroid/megakaryocytic lineage and subsequent maturation. p45 NF-E2 is
essential for platelet release from terminally differentiated megakaryocytes. At 
present, mutations of GATA-1, AML1, and HOXA11 genes have been found in
hereditary diseases accompanying thrombocytopenia among humans.

PMID: 12095146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Am J Pathol. 2002 Jun;160(6):2181-90.

Gene expression in Wilms' tumor mimics the earliest committed stage in the
metanephric mesenchymal-epithelial transition.

Li CM(1), Guo M, Borczuk A, Powell CA, Wei M, Thaker HM, Friedman R, Klein U,
Tycko B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Cancer Genetics, Columbia University, New York, New York, USA.

Wilms' tumor (WT) has been considered a prototype for arrested cellular
differentiation in cancer, but previous studies have relied on selected markers. 
We have now performed an unbiased survey of gene expression in WTs using
oligonucleotide microarrays. Statistical criteria identified 357 genes as
differentially expressed between WTs and fetal kidneys. This set contained 124
matches to genes on a microarray used by Stuart and colleagues (Stuart RO, Bush
KT, Nigam SK: Changes in global gene expression patterns during development and
maturation of the rat kidney. Proc Natl Acad Sci USA 2001, 98:5649-5654) to
establish genes with stage-specific expression in the developing rat kidney.
Mapping between the two data sets showed that WTs systematically overexpressed
genes corresponding to the earliest stage of metanephric development, and
underexpressed genes corresponding to later stages. Automated clustering
identified a smaller group of 27 genes that were highly expressed in WTs compared
to fetal kidney and heterologous tumor and normal tissues. This signature set was
enriched in genes encoding transcription factors. Four of these, PAX2, EYA1,
HBF2, and HOXA11, are essential for cell survival and proliferation in early
metanephric development, whereas others, including SIX1, MOX1, and SALL2, are
predicted to act at this stage. SIX1 and SALL2 proteins were expressed in the
condensing mesenchyme in normal human fetal kidneys, but were absent (SIX1) or
reduced (SALL2) in cells at other developmental stages. These data imply that the
blastema in WTs has progressed to the committed stage in the
mesenchymal-epithelial transition, where it is partially arrested in
differentiation. The WT-signature set also contained the Wnt receptor FZD7, the
tumor antigen PRAME, the imprinted gene NNAT and the metastasis-associated
transcription factor E1AF.

PMCID: PMC1850829
PMID: 12057921  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jun;87(6):2674-80.

HOXA11 silencing and endogenous HOXA11 antisense ribonucleic acid in the uterine 
endometrium.

Chau YM(1), Pando S, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520,
USA.

Hoxa11 is an essential regulator of embryonic uterine development and the cyclic 
development of the adult uterine endometrium. Hoxa11 is required for female
fertility, as evidenced by targeted mutation. Here we demonstrate a naturally
occurring Hoxa11 (mouse)/HOXA11 (human) antisense transcript present in the adult
mouse and human endometrium. HOXA11 antisense transcript levels varied during the
menstrual cycle, with peak antisense RNA levels occurring in the midproliferative
phase, varying inversely with mRNA expression levels. HOXA11 protein levels
correlated temporally with peak mRNA levels. In primary stromal cell culture,
progesterone down-regulated HOXA11 antisense transcription, and this was followed
by up-regulation of HOXA11 mRNA, suggesting a possible role for the antisense
transcript in regulating mRNA expression. Attempts to block Hoxa11 function by
transfection of the murine uterus with Hoxa11 antisense oligonucleotides failed
to interrupt normal uterine function, suggesting that Hoxa11 antisense does not
regulate Hoxa11 mRNA by formulation of sense/antisense duplexes. We propose that 
HOXA11 antisense functions by transcriptional interference, repressing HOXA11
expression by competing for transcription of the common gene, rather than by
sense/antisense interaction.

PMID: 12050232  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Genes Dev. 2002 Jun 1;16(11):1423-32.

Hox11 paralogous genes are essential for metanephric kidney induction.

Wellik DM(1), Hawkes PJ, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics and Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University
of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112-5331, USA.

The mammalian Hox complex is divided into four linkage groups containing 13 sets 
of paralogous genes. These paralogous genes have retained functional redundancy
during evolution. For this reason, loss of only one or two Hox genes within a
paralogous group often results in incompletely penetrant phenotypes which are
difficult to interpret by molecular analysis. For example, mice individually
mutant for Hoxa11 or Hoxd11 show no discernible kidney abnormalities.
Hoxa11/Hoxd11 double mutants, however, demonstrate hypoplasia of the kidneys. As 
described in this study, removal of the last Hox11 paralogous member, Hoxc11,
results in the complete loss of metanephric kidney induction. In these triple
mutants, the metanephric blastema condenses, and expression of early patterning
genes, Pax2 and Wt1, is unperturbed. Eya1 expression is also intact. Six2
expression, however, is absent, as is expression of the inducing growth factor,
Gdnf. In the absence of Gdnf, ureteric bud formation is not initiated. Molecular 
analysis of this phenotype demonstrates that Hox11 control of early metanephric
induction is accomplished by the interaction of Hox11 genes with the pax-eya-six 
regulatory cascade, a pathway that may be used by Hox genes more generally for
the induction of multiple structures along the anteroposterior axis.

PMCID: PMC186320
PMID: 12050119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 Apr 16;99(8):5492-7. Epub 2002 Apr 9.

Molecular evolution of the HoxA cluster in the three major gnathostome lineages.

Chiu CH(1), Amemiya C, Dewar K, Kim CB, Ruddle FH, Wagner GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven, CT
06520, USA. chiu@biology.rutgers.edu

The duplication of Hox clusters and their maintenance in a lineage has a
prominent but little understood role in chordate evolution. Here we examined how 
Hox cluster duplication may influence changes in cluster architecture and
patterns of noncoding sequence evolution. We sequenced the entire duplicated
HoxAa and HoxAb clusters of zebrafish (Danio rerio) and extended the 5'
(posterior) part of the HoxM (HoxA-like) cluster of horn shark (Heterodontus
francisci) containing the hoxa11 and hoxa13 orthologs as well as intergenic and
flanking noncoding sequences. The duplicated HoxA clusters in zebrafish each
house considerably fewer genes and are dramatically shorter than the single HoxA 
clusters of human and horn shark. We compared the intergenic sequences of the
HoxA clusters of human, horn shark, zebrafish (Aa, Ab), and striped bass and
found extensive conservation of noncoding sequence motifs, i.e., phylogenetic
footprints, between the human and horn shark, representing two of the three
gnathostome lineages. These are putative cis-regulatory elements that may play a 
role in the regulation of the ancestral HoxA cluster. In contrast, homologous
regions of the duplicated HoxAa and HoxAb clusters of zebrafish and the HoxA
cluster of striped bass revealed a striking loss of conservation of these
putative cis-regulatory sequences in the 3' (anterior) segment of the cluster,
where zebrafish only retains single representatives of group 1, 3, 4, and 5
(HoxAa) and group 2 (HoxAb) genes and in the 5' part of the clusters, where
zebrafish retains two copies of the group 13, 11, and 9 genes, i.e., AbdB-like
genes. In analyzing patterns of cis-sequence evolution in the 5' part of the
clusters, we explicitly looked for evidence of complementary loss of conserved
noncoding sequences, as predicted by the duplication-degeneration-complementation
model in which genetic redundancy after gene duplication is resolved because of
the fixation of complementary degenerative mutations. Our data did not yield
evidence supporting this prediction. We conclude that changes in the pattern of
cis-sequence conservation after Hox cluster duplication are more consistent with 
being the outcome of adaptive modification rather than passive mechanisms that
erode redundancy created by the duplication event. These results support the view
that genome duplications may provide a mechanism whereby master control genes
undergo radical modifications conducive to major alterations in body plan. Such
genomic revolutions may contribute significantly to the evolutionary process.

PMCID: PMC122797
PMID: 11943847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Exp Nephrol. 2002;10(2):102-13.

Genes and proteins in renal development.

Davies JA(1), Fisher CE.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Developmental Biology, Edinburgh University Medical School, Teviot 
Place, Edinburgh EH8 9AG, UK. Jamie.Davies@ed.ac.uk

Metanephric kidney development begins with the formation of the metanephrogenic
mesenchyme; this event depends on the prior action in the intermediate mesoderm
of transcription factors such as Lim-1, Pax-2, Eya-1, and Foxc-1. Once it has
formed, the mesenchyme secretes GDNF; this induces the nearby wolffian duct to
produce a ureteric bud which invades the metanephrogenic mesenchyme and begins to
arborize. Ureteric bud development and branching depends on the transcription
factor Emx-2, the GDNF-cRet and probably the HGF/cMet, signalling systems, and
the intracellular regulatory molecules formin IV and timeless. Proteins of the
BMP family modulate ureteric bud branching and keep bud development in step with 
that of other tissue types. Proteins and glycosaminoglycans of the matrix, and
their receptors, and also required. The metanephrogenic mesenchyme has a default 
fate of apoptosis and is dissuaded from suicide by factors secreted from the bud 
such as TGF-alpha, TIMP-2, EGF, and FGF-2. Other factors such as LIF and TGFbeta2
cooperate with these to induce clumps of mesenchyme cells to differentiate into
nephrons, while BMP-7 appears to lead them instead to form stroma. As nephrons
form, they express critical transcription factors such as WT-1, Pax-2, and Hoxa11
and d11, condense, and secrete Wnt-4. Wnt-4 acts in an autocrine loop to
stimulate its own synthesis and is required for cells to differentiate into
epithelia; its action is antagonized by sFRP-1, secreted by stroma, but this
antagonism is itself inhibited by sFRP-2 made by the developing nephron. This
system probably acts both to limit the spread of Wnt-4's influence and also to
commit responding cells to their epithelial fate. As nephrons mature, regions of 
them differentiate to perform specific physiological functions, a process that
requires the proteins WT-1, Lmx-1b, Notch-2, Jagged-1, and Hnf-1.

Copyright 2002 S. Karger AG, Basel

PMID: 11937757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Dev Biol. 2002 Apr 1;244(1):21-36.

Functional comparison of the Hoxa 4, Hoxa 10, and Hoxa 11 homeoboxes.

Zhao Y(1), Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45224, USA.

A number of models attempt to explain the functional relationships of Hox genes. 
The functional equivalence model states that mammalian Hox-encoded proteins are
largely functionally equivalent, and that Hox quantity is more important than Hox
quality. In this report, we describe the results of two homeobox swaps. In one
case, the homeobox of Hoxa 11 was replaced with that of the very closely related 
Hoxa 10. Developmental function was assayed by analyzing the phenotypes of all
possible allele combinations, including the swapped allele, and null alleles for 
Hoxa 11 and Hoxd 11. This chimeric gene provided wild-type function in the
development of the axial skeleton and male reproductive tract, but served as a
hypomorph allele in the development of the appendicular skeleton, kidneys, and
female reproductive tract. In the other case, the Hoxa 11 homeobox was replaced
with that of the divergent Hoxa 4 gene. This chimeric gene provided near
recessive null function in all tissues except the axial skeleton, which developed
normally. These results demonstrate that even the most conserved regions of Hox
genes, the homeoboxes, are not functionally interchangeable in the development of
most tissues. In some cases, developmental function tracked with the homeobox, as
previously seen in simpler organisms. Homeoboxes with more 5' cluster positions
were generally dominant over more 3' homeoboxes, consistent with phenotypic
suppression seen in Drosophila. Surprisingly, however, all Hox homeoboxes tested 
did appear functionally equivalent in the formation of the axial skeleton. The
determination of segment identity is one of the most evolutionarily ancient
functions of Hox genes. It is interesting that Hox homeoboxes are interchangeable
in this process, but are functionally distinct in other aspects of development.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11900456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Teratology. 2002 Feb;65(2):50-62.

Complete mutation analysis panel of the 39 human HOX genes.

Kosaki K(1), Kosaki R, Suzuki T, Yoshihashi H, Takahashi T, Sasaki K, Tomita M,
McGinnis W, Matsuo N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Keio University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
kkosaki@sc.itc.keio.ac.jp

Comment in
    Teratology. 2002 Feb;65(2):47-9.

BACKGROUND: The HOX gene family consists of highly conserved transcription
factors that specify the identity of the body segments along the anteroposterior 
axis of the embryo. Because the phenotypes of mice with targeted disruptions of
Hox genes resemble some patterns of human malformations, mutations in HOX genes
have been expected to be associated with a significant number of human
malformations. Thus far, however, mutations have been documented in only three of
the 39 human HOX genes (HOXD13, HOXA13, and HOXA11) partly because current
knowledge on the complete coding sequence and genome structure is limited to only
20 of the 39 human HOX genes.
METHODS: Taking advantage of the human and mouse draft genome sequences, we
attempted to characterize the remaining 19 human HOX genes by bioinformatic
analysis including phylogenetic footprinting, the probabilistic prediction
method, and comparison of genomic sequences with the complete set of the human
anonymous cDNA sequences.
RESULTS: We were able to determine the full coding sequences of 19 HOX genes and 
their genome structure and successfully designed a complete set of PCR primers to
amplify the entire coding region of each of the 39 HOX genes from genomic DNA.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results indicate the usefulness of bioinformatic analysis of the
draft genome sequences for clinically oriented research projects. It is hoped
that the mutation panel provided here will serve as a launchpad for a new
discourse on the genetic basis of human malformations.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11857506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Mech Dev. 2002 Mar;112(1-2):219-32.

Microarray analysis of novel cell lines representing two stages of metanephric
mesenchyme differentiation.

Valerius MT(1), Patterson LT, Witte DP, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Corrected and republished from
    Mech Dev. 2002 Jan;110(1-2):151-64.

Clonal cell lines representing different developmental stages of the metanephric 
mesenchyme were made from transgenic mice with the Simian Virus 40 T-antigen
(SV40 Tag) gene driven by the Hoxa 11 promoter. The resulting mK3 cell line
represented early metanephric mesenchyme, prior to induction by the ureteric bud.
These cells showed a spindle-shaped, fibroblast morphology. They expressed genes 
characteristic of early mesenchyme, including Hoxa 11, Hoxd 11, collagen I, and
vimentin. Moreover, the mK3 cells displayed early metanephric mesenchyme
biological function. In organ co-culture experiments they were able to induce
growth and branching of the ureteric bud. Another cell line, mK4, represented
later, induced metanephric mesenchyme undergoing epithelial conversion. These
cells were more polygonal, or epithelial in shape, and expressed genes diagnostic
of late mesenchyme, including Pax-2, Pax-8, Wnt-4, Cadherin-6, Collagen IV, and
LFB3. To better define the gene expression patterns of kidney metanephric
mesenchyme cells at these two stages of development, RNAs from the mK3 and mK4
cells were hybridized to Affymetrix GeneChip probe arrays. Over 4000 expressed
genes were identified and thereby implicated in kidney formation. Comparison of
the mK3 and mK4 gene expression profiles revealed 121 genes showing greater than 
a ten-fold difference in expression level. Several are known to be expressed
during metanephric mesenchyme differentiation, but most had not been previously
associated with this process. In situ hybridizations were used to confirm that
selected novel genes were expressed in the developing kidney.

PMID: 11850199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Br J Haematol. 2002 Feb;116(2):367-75.

Absence of mutations in the HoxA10, HoxA11 and HoxD11 nucleotide coding sequences
in thrombocytopenia with absent radius syndrome.

Fleischman RA(1), Letestu R, Mi X, Stevens D, Winters J, Debili N, Vainchenker W.

Author information: 
(1)University of Kentucky and VA Medical Center, Hematology/Oncology Division,
Lexington, KY 40511-1093, USA. raflei00@pop.uky.edu

Recent studies have suggested the HoxA10, HoxA11 and HoxD11 homeobox genes as
candidate loci for the thrombocytopenia with absent radius (TAR) syndrome. For
example, targeted disruptions of these Hox genes result in abnormal development
of the mouse radius, while overexpression of HoxA10 stimulates mouse
megakaryocyte (MK) development in vitro. To examine the expression of Hox genes
in human MK cells, we utilized reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
with degenerate oligonucleotides to study megakaryocytic cell lines (MEG-01,
DAMI), and primary human MK purified from adult and cord blood. Using this
approach, 13 out of 40 clones isolated from cell lines, 10 out of 21 from cord
MK, and 11 out of 21 from adult MK were identified as HoxA10, while HoxA11 and
HoxD11 sequences were not detected. The normal genomic sequences for the human
HoxA10, -A11, and -D11 genes were then determined and sequenced in 10 unrelated
individuals with TAR syndrome. In all patients the derived amino acid sequence
for the three Hox genes was identical to normal controls. Southern blotting did
not reveal genomic rearrangements or deletions at these loci, and in two patients
intact HoxA10 transcripts were detected by amplification in myeloid cells.
Although these studies cannot completely exclude the possibility that the TAR
syndrome results from non-coding mutations that affect the level of Hox gene
expression in megakaryocytes, mutations in the coding sequence of the Hox genes
known to affect radial development are not a common cause of TAR syndrome.

PMID: 11841440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Br J Haematol. 2002 Jan;116(1):170-2.

t(7;11)(p15;p15) Chronic myeloid leukaemia developed into blastic transformation 
showing a novel NUP98/HOXA11 fusion.

Suzuki A(1), Ito Y, Sashida G, Honda S, Katagiri T, Fujino T, Nakamura T,
Ohyashiki K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, Japan.

We encountered a patient with Philadelphia-negative chronic myeloid leukaemia,
with t(7;11)(p15;p15), in whom acute leukaemia phase (acute myeloid leukaemia-M2 
morphology) developed within a short period. We detected a novel gene fusion
between NUP98 and HOXA11 both in the chronic phase and in the acute leukaemia
phase in this case. Although it is well known that a fusion of NUP98-HOXA9 in
myeloid malignancies is created by the t(7;11)(p15;p15), this case suggests the
possibility that HOXA11 might be another partner gene for NUP98 in
t(7;11)(p15;p15) leukaemia.

PMID: 11841413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Blood. 2002 Feb 15;99(4):1428-33.

Single-translocation and double-chimeric transcripts: detection of NUP98-HOXA9 in
myeloid leukemias with HOXA11 or HOXA13 breaks of the chromosomal translocation
t(7;11)(p15;p15).

Fujino T(1), Suzuki A, Ito Y, Ohyashiki K, Hatano Y, Miura I, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.

It has been demonstrated that the chromosomal translocation t(7;11)(p15;p15) in
patients with human acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) and chronic myelogenous
leukemia (CML) invariably involves fusion of the nucleoporin gene, NUP98, on
chromosome 11 and the class 1 HOX gene, HOXA9, on chromosome 7, and that the
fusion gene NUP98-HOXA9 is an important gene in myeloid leukemogenesis. Here are 
reported 2 novel chromosome 7p15 targets of the t(7;11)(p15;p15) chromosomal
translocation in 2 patients with CML and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Southern
blot and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analyses of leukemia cell DNA failed to 
show rearrangement of HOXA9, whereas NUP98 was found to be rearranged in both
cases. Reverse transcription-PCR analysis using a NUP98 primer and a degenerate
primer corresponding to the third helix of the homeodomain of HOXA demonstrated
that NUP98 was fused in-frame to HOXA11 in the patient with CML and to HOXA13 in 
the patient with MDS. The chromosomal breakpoints on 7p15 were located within
introns of HOXA11 or HOXA13 genes. In both patients chimeric NUP98-HOXA9
transcripts were also observed. These findings suggest that AbdB-type HOXA genes 
are common targets of t(7;11)(p15;p15) chromosomal translocations and that a
single translocation can produce more than one NUP98-HOXA fusion gene, presumably
because of altered splicing.

PMID: 11830496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Dev Biol. 2001 Oct 15;238(2):224-38.

Estrogen receptor-alpha knockout mice exhibit resistance to the developmental
effects of neonatal diethylstilbestrol exposure on the female reproductive tract.

Couse JF(1), Dixon D, Yates M, Moore AB, Ma L, Maas R, Korach KS.

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Biology Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research
Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA. korach@niehs.nih.gov

Data indicate that estrogen-dependent and -independent pathways are involved in
the teratogenic/carcinogenic syndrome that follows developmental exposure to
17beta-estradiol or diethylstilbestrol (DES), a synthetic estrogen. However, the 
exact role and extent to which each pathway contributes to the resulting
pathology remain unknown. We employed the alphaERKO mouse, which lacks estrogen
receptor-alpha (ERalpha), to discern the role of ERalpha and estrogen signaling
in mediating the effects of neonatal DES exposure. The alphaERKO provides the
potential to expose DES actions mediated by the second known ER, ERbeta, and
those that are ER-independent. Wild-type and alphaERKO females were treated with 
vehicle or DES (2 microg/pup/day for Days 1-5) and terminated after 5 days and 2,
4, 8, 12, and 20 months for biochemical and histomorphological analyses. Assays
for uterine expression of the genes Hoxa10, Hoxa11, and Wnt7a shortly after
treatment indicated significant decreases in DES-treated wild-type but no effect 
in the alphaERKO. In contrast, the DES effect on uterine expression of Wnt4 and
Wnt5a was preserved in both genotypes, suggesting a developmental role for
ERbeta. Adult alphaERKO mice exhibited complete resistance to the chronic effects
of neonatal DES exposure exhibited in treated wild-type animals, including
atrophy, decreased weight, smooth muscle disorganization, and epithelial squamous
metaplasia in the uterus; proliferative lesions of the oviduct; and persistent
vaginal cornification. Therefore, the lack of DES effects on gene expression and 
tissue differentiation in the alphaERKO provides unequivocal evidence of an
obligatory role for ERalpha in mediating the detrimental actions of neonatal DES 
exposure in the murine reproductive tract.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11784006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Mol Carcinog. 2001 Dec;32(4):213-9.

Promoter CpG methylation of Hox-a10 and Hox-a11 in mouse uterus not altered upon 
neonatal diethylstilbestrol exposure.

Li S(1), Ma L, Chiang T, Burow M, Newbold RR, Negishi M, Barrett JC, McLachlan
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biosystems and Cancer, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Mouse abdominal B-like Hoxa genes are expressed and functionally required in the 
developing reproductive tracts. Mice lacking either Hoxa-10 or Hoxa-11, two of
the AbdB Hoxa genes, exhibit abnormal uterine development similar to that induced
by in utero diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure. Indeed, uterine Hoxa-10 and
Hoxa-11 expression is potently repressed by perinatal DES exposure, providing a
potential molecular mechanism for DES-induced reproductive tract malformations.
We have shown previously that DES can permanently alter uterine lactoferrin gene 
expression through modulation of the lactoferrin promoter methylation pattern.
Here we ask whether a similar mechanism also functions to deregulate uterine
Hoxa-10 or Hoxa-11 expression during neonatal DES exposure. We mapped the Hoxa-10
promoter by cloning a 1.485 kb DNA fragment 5' of the Hoxa-10 exon1a. A 5' rapid 
amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) experiment revealed a transcription start site 
for the a10-1 transcript. Functional analysis of the proximal 200-bp sequences
demonstrated significant promoter activity, confirming the location of the
Hoxa-10 promoter. Moreover, methylation assays performed on eight CpGs in Hoxa-10
and 19 CpGs in Hoxa-11 proximal promoters demonstrated that all these CpGs were
highly unmethylated in both control and DES-dosed mice from postnatal day 5 to
day 30. Significant methylation around Hoxa-10 and Hoxa-11 promoters was only
observed in DES-induced uterine carcinomas in 18-mo-old mice. Our results suggest
that DES-induced downregulations of Hoxa-10 or Hoxa-11 gene expression are not
associated with methylation changes in their proximal promoters and that gene
imprinting by developmental DES exposure may be a gene-specific phenomenon.

Published 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11746833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Mech Dev. 2002 Jan;110(1-2):151-64.

Microarray analysis of novel cell lines representing two stages of metanephric
mesenchyme differentiation.

Valerius MT(1), Patterson LT, Witte DP, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Corrected and republished in
    Mech Dev. 2002 Mar;112(1-2):219-32.

Clonal cell lines representing different developmental stages of the metanephric 
mesenchyme were made from transgenic mice with the Simian Virus 40 T-antigen
(SV40 Tag) gene driven by the Hoxa 11 promoter. The resulting mK3 cell line
represented early metanephric mesenchyme, prior to induction by the ureteric bud.
These cells showed a spindle-shaped, fibroblast morphology. They expressed genes 
characteristic of early mesenchyme, including Hoxa 11, Hoxd 11, collagen I, and
vimentin. Moreover, the mK3 cells displayed early metanephric mesenchyme
biological function. In organ co-culture experiments they were able to induce
growth and branching of the ureteric bud. Another cell line, mK4, represented
later, induced metanephric mesenchyme undergoing epithelial conversion. These
cells were more polygonal, or epithelial in shape, and expressed genes diagnostic
of late mesenchyme, including Pax-2, Pax-8, Wnt-4, Cadherin-6, Collagen IV, and
LFB3. To better define the gene expression patterns of kidney metanephric
mesenchyme cells at these two stages of development, RNAs from the mK3 and mK4
cells were hybridized to Affymetrix GeneChip probe arrays. Over 4000 expressed
genes were identified and thereby implicated in kidney formation. Comparison of
the mK3 and mK4 gene expression profiles revealed 121 genes showing greater than 
a ten-fold difference in expression level. Several are known to be expressed
during metanephric mesenchyme differentiation, but most had not been previously
associated with this process. In situ hybridizations were used to confirm that
selected novel genes were expressed in the developing kidney.

PMID: 11744376  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Development. 2001 Aug;128(16):3197-207.

Functional specificity of the Hoxa13 homeobox.

Zhao Y(1), Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, OH 45224, USA.

To better define Abd-B type homeodomain function, to test models that predict
functional equivalence of all Hox genes and to initiate a search for the
downstream targets of Hoxa13, we have performed a homeobox swap by replacing the 
homeobox of the Hoxa11 gene with that of the Hoxa13 gene. The Hoxa11 and Hoxa13
genes are contiguous Abd-B type genes located at the 5' end of the HoxA cluster. 
The modified Hoxa11 allele (A11(13hd)) showed near wild-type function in the
development of the kidneys, axial skeleton and male reproductive tract,
consistent with functional equivalence models. In the limbs and female
reproductive tract, however, the A11(13hd) allele appeared to assume dominant
Hoxa13 function. The uterus, in particular, showed a striking homeotic
transformation towards cervix/vagina, where Hoxa13 is normally expressed. Gene
chips were used to create a molecular portrait of this tissue conversion and
revealed over 100 diagnostic gene expression changes. This work identifies
candidate downstream targets of the Hoxa13 gene and demonstrates that even
contiguous Abd-B homeoboxes have functional specificity.

PMID: 11688568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Yi Chuan Xue Bao. 2001;28(9):832-9.

Cloning and sequence analysis of 5' fragment of Hoxa-11 gene in Latimeria
chalumnae.

Xue LY(1), Qian KX.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310027, China.
xue315@mail.nbptt.zj.cn

Hoxa-11 gene is essential for the development of fish fins and tetrapod limbs.
Based on the published nucleotide sequences of human and mouse Hoxa-11 genes, two
degenerate primers were designed. Latimeria Hoxa-11 gene fragment was amplified
by PCR, cloned and sequenced. The acquired Hox gene fragment, which encodes 204
amino acids, is comprised of 2,065 bp, including most exon 1, intron and partial 
exon 2. The homology of latimeria Hoxa-11 protein is 66.0% to human, 67.6% to
mouse, 74.4% to chick, 72.8% to frog, and 59.7% to zebrafish, respectively. The
exon 2 region including the homeobox and the splice site are highly conserved.
However, the exon 1 region has increased in size by 16% from latimeria to human. 
Sequence analysis further revealed that exon 1 of latimeria Hoxa-11 could be
divided into four regions: two highly conserved regions, a moderately conserved
region, and a variable region adjacent to the intron. The size variation is
primarily caused by the accumulation of alanine repeats and of flanking segments 
rich in glycine and serine in the variable region. It implies that the variable
region might be related to acquisition of new functions in the fin-limb
transition and vertebrate evolution. Besides the homeobox, two highly conserved
regions in exon 1 and two phylogenetic footprints in the intro were found. The
strong sequence conservation suggests an important functional role of these
regions.

PMID: 11582742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Development. 2001 Jun;128(11):2153-61.

Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 regulate branching morphogenesis of the ureteric bud in the
developing kidney.

Patterson LT(1), Pembaur M, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, The Children's Hospital Research
Foundation, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 are functionally redundant during kidney development. Mice with
homozygous null mutation of either gene have normal kidneys, but double mutants
have rudimentary, or in extreme cases, absent kidneys. We have examined the
mechanism for renal growth failure in this mouse model and find defects in
ureteric bud branching morphogenesis. The ureteric buds are either unbranched or 
have an atypical pattern characterized by lack of terminal branches in the
midventral renal cortex. The mutant embryos show that Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 control
development of a dorsoventral renal axis. By immunohistochemical analysis, Hoxa11
expression is restricted to the early metanephric mesenchyme, which induces
ureteric bud formation and branching. It is not found in the ureteric bud. This
suggests that the branching defect had been caused by failure of mesenchyme to
epithelium signaling. In situ hybridizations with Wnt7b, a marker of the
metanephric kidney, show that the branching defect was not simply the result of
homeotic transformation of metanephros to mesonephros. Absent Bf2 and Gdnf
expression in the midventral mesenchyme, findings that could by themselves
account for branching defects, shows that Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 are necessary for
normal gene expression in the ventral mesenchyme. Attenuation of normal gene
expression along with the absence of a detectable proliferative or apoptotic
change in the mutants show that one function of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 in the
developing renal mesenchyme is to regulate differentiation necessary for
mesenchymal-epithelial reciprocal inductive interactions.

PMID: 11493536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2001 Jun;13(3):269-74.

Molecular markers of implantation: clinical implications.

Daftary GS(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8063, USA.

The endometrium has been conventionally studied using histologic criteria. Our
understanding of endometrial physiology has been advanced tremendously by
research into the molecules that mediate its development and function. These
molecules demonstrate a dynamic expression pattern through the menstrual cycle
and have been implicated in endometrial growth, differentiation, and receptivity.
These molecules include secreted proteins (endometrial bleeding-associated
factor, glycodelin-A, insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1), cell-surface
receptors (integrins), and nuclear transcription factors (HOXA10 and HOXA11). The
homeobox genes Hoxa10 and Hoxa11 are necessary for implantation because mice with
mutations in these genes exhibit a failure of implantation. HOXA10 and HOXA11
have been shown to be important for implantation in humans as well. Knowledge of 
endometrial molecular dynamics may now be used to enhance our ability to diagnose
implantation defects. It may soon be possible to treat individual molecular
defects by protein supplementation or gene therapy.

PMID: 11396649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Semin Reprod Med. 2000;18(3):311-20.

Implantation in the human: the role of HOX genes.

Daftary GS(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut, 333 Cedar Street, PO Box 208063, New Haven, CT 06520,
USA.

HOX genes are transcription factors that are essential for the proper development
of the müllerian tract in the embryonic period. It has been discovered that HOX
genes are expressed in the adult uterus. Two of them, Hoxa10 and Hoxa11, have
been demonstrated to be necessary for uterine receptivity and implantation in
mice. Recent evidence also suggests such a role for HOX genes in humans. They are
likely to be essential regulators of endometrial development in preparation for
implantation. This article reviews the role of the HOX genes in the reproductive 
tract, their patterns of expression and regulation, the outcome of deficient HOX 
gene expression, and their potential mechanisms of action. The process of
implantation is complex, and many molecular markers have been found expressed at 
high levels in the endometrium in the peri-implantation window. Targeted
disruption has revealed that most of these molecules are redundant and not
essential for implantation. The importance of Hox genes in this process has been 
well documented, and they remain one of the few well-characterized molecules
necessary for implantation.

PMID: 11299969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Dev Dyn. 2001 Jan;220(1):87-90.

Characterisation of hoxa gene expression in the chick limb bud in response to
FGF.

Vargesson N(1), Kostakopoulou K, Drossopoulou G, Papageorgiou S, Tickle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
London, United Kingdom.

We tested a diffusion gradient model for setting up overlapping domains of Hoxa
gene expression in the chick limb bud. The model is based on morphogen production
at the limb bud tip where the apical ridge is located and assumes that cells
respond to a series of concentration thresholds. Consistent with the model,
Hoxa13 gene expression rapidly switches off when the ridge is removed from stage 
21/22 buds, while Hoxa11 and Hoxa10 expression is stable; Hoxa13 expression can
be initiated and maintained in absence of the ridge by FGF soaked beads; the
Hoxa13 domain first expands quickly and then slows up and the size is related to 
the dose of FGF4. Contrary to the model, addition of FGF4 to early limb buds does
not activate Hoxa13 prematurely nor extend the Hoxa13 expression domain
proximally. Therefore FGF4 signalling is necessary but not sufficient for Hoxa
gene expression in the limb bud.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11146510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Nat Genet. 2000 Dec;26(4):397-8.

Amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia and radio-ulnar synostosis are associated with
HOXA11 mutation.

Thompson AA(1), Nguyen LT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Gwynne Hazen Cherry
Memorial Laboratories, University of California, Los Angeles School of Medicine, 
Los Angeles, California, USA. athompsn@ucla.edu

PMID: 11101832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mol Phylogenet Evol. 2000 Nov;17(2):305-16.

Evolution of Hoxa-11 in lineages phylogenetically positioned along the fin-limb
transition.

Chiu CH(1), Nonaka D, Xue L, Amemiya CT, Wagner GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Yale University, New Haven,
Connecticut 06520-8106, USA. chi-hua.chiu@yale.edu

HOXA11 is a transcription factor implicated in paired appendage development. To
identify signatures of evolutionary change in the structural, and putative
functional, domains of HOXA11, we studied its evolution in tetrapod and
nontetrapod lineages that represent approximately 1.5 billion years of
evolutionary time. Here, Hoxa-11 gene proper sequences were determined for frog
(Xenopus tropicalis), coelacanth (Latimeria chalumnae), common zebrafish (Danio
rerio; Hoxa-11a and Hoxa-11b paralogs), and giant zebrafish (D. aequipinnatus;
Hoxa-11b) and aligned against previously published Hoxa-11 sequences of human,
mouse, chick, and newt. Based on aligned Hoxa-11 amino acid sequences, the
protein was demarcated into three segments: Domains I (N-terminal) and III
(homeobox + C-terminal), which varied slightly in rates and patterns of
evolution, and a variable, overall hydrophilic region (HyD), which partially
overlaps with Domain I. As judged by character reconstructions of HOXA11 Domains 
I and III, no significant changes in rates of coding sequence evolution occurred 
in tetrapods (frog and chick), relative to coelacanth (a lobe-finned fish), i.e.,
across the fin-limb transition. Accelerated rates of Hoxa-11 coding sequence
evolution were observed for the mammalian and newt lineages. This was shown to be
a gene-specific phenomenon. The duplicated Hoxa-11a and Hoxa-11b genes of
zebrafish exhibited accelerated rates of evolution and accumulated substitutions 
at sites that are conserved among coelacanth and all tetrapods examined. Amino
acid sequence comparisons of the HyD of HOXA11 suggested that a putative
repressor subdomain, containing stretches of consecutive alanine residues,
emerged within the tetrapods. A high degree of nucleotide conservation in the 5' 
half of the Hoxa-11 intron was observed for tetrapod and nontetrapod lineages.
Using electrophoretic mobility shift assays, a 35-bp intron sequence, which is
100% conserved in all Hoxa-11 loci except for the zebrafish Hoxa-11a paralog, was
found to bind protein(s) in HeLa and chick whole-cell extracts.

Copyright 2000 Academic Press.

PMID: 11083943  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Semin Reprod Endocrinol. 1999;17(3):205-16.

Genetic control of uterine receptivity during implantation.

Ma L(1), Yao M, Maas RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

Implantation involves complex molecular interactions between implanting
blastocysts and the hormonally primed uterus. Gene targeting allows the
generation of mice lacking a specific gene or genes and has proved to be of
considerable value when combined with classical physiology in understanding many 
biological questions, such as the process of implantation. In this article, we
review genes that have been demonstrated by gene targeting in mice to be required
in the uterus for implantation. In particular, we focus on a specific class of
developmental control genes, the mammalian Hox genes, and their role in this
process. Lastly, we attempt to synthesize current knowledge about the genetic
control of implantation and to build a working genetic model for the implantation
pathway.

PMID: 10797939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Hum Reprod Update. 2000 Jan-Feb;6(1):75-9.

The role of HOX genes in human implantation.

Taylor HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut, USA. hugh.taylor@yale.edu

HOX genes are transcriptional regulators that play an essential role in
determining tissue identity during embryonic development. HOX genes are involved 
in the development of the Müllerian system and then continue to be expressed in
the adult uterus. Two HOX genes have been demonstrated necessary for uterine
receptivity in knock-out mice. We have recently elucidated the expression
patterns and regulation of HOX genes in the development of the human endometrium 
during the menstrual cycle. HOX genes are likely key regulators of human
implantation. This paper will review the role of HOX genes in the reproductive
tract, specifically the evidence that HOX genes are important for human
endometrial development and receptivity.

PMID: 10711832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Dev Genes Evol. 2000 Feb;210(2):105-9.

A recombinogenic targeting method to modify large-inserts for cis-regulatory
analysis in transgenic mice: construction and expression of a 100-kb, zebrafish
Hoxa-11b-lacZ reporter gene.

Chiu CH(1), Amemiya CT, Carr JL, Bhargava J, Hwang JK, Shashikant CS, Ruddle FH, 
Wagner GP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Ecology and Evolutionary Biology, Osborn Memorial Laboratory
327, Yale University, P.O. Box 208106, New Haven, CT 06520-8106, USA.
chi-hua.chiu@yale.edu

The identification of cis-sequences responsible for spatiotemporal patterns of
gene expression often requires the functional analysis of large genomic regions. 
In this study a 100-kb zebrafish Hoxa-11b-lacZ reporter gene was constructed and 
expressed in transgenic mice. PAC clone 10-O19, containing a portion of the
zebrafish HoxA-b cluster, was captured into the yeast-bacterial shuttle vector,
pPAC-ResQ, by recombinogenic targeting. A lacZ reporter gene was then inserted
in-frame into exon 1 of the zfHoxa-11b locus by a second round of recombinogenic 
targeting. Expression of the zfHoxa-11b-lacZ reporter gene in 10.5 d.p.f.
transgenic mouse embryos was observed only in the posterior portion of the A-P
axis, in the paraxial mesoderm, neural tube, and somites. These findings
demonstrate the utility of recombinogenic targeting for the modification and
expression of large inserts captured from P1/PAC clones.

PMID: 10664153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Mech Dev. 2000 Feb;90(2):167-79.

Pattern formation and regulation of gene expressions in chick recombinant limbs.

Elisa Piedra M(1), Borja Rivero1 F, Fernandez-Teran M, Ros MA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Anatomía y Biología Celular, Facultad de Medicina, Universidad
de Cantabria, 39011, Santander, Spain.

Recombinant limbs were performed by ensembling dissociated-reaggregated wing bud 
mesoderm inside an ectodermal hull. The zone of polarizing activity was excluded 
from the mesoderm used to perform the recombinant limbs (non-polarized
recombinants), and grafted when desired (polarized recombinants). Reorganization 
of patterning progressively occurred in the newly formed progress zone under the 
influence of the apical ectodermal ridge (AER), explaining the proximo-distal
gradient of morphogenesis observed in developed recombinant limbs. The AER,
without the influence of the polarizing region (ZPA), was sufficient to direct
outgrowth and appropriate proximo-distal patterning, as observed in the
expression of the Hoxa-11 and Hoxa-13 genes. The development of the recombinant
limbs coursed with symmetric AER and downregulation of Bmp expression in the
mesoderm supporting a negative effect of Bmp signaling upon the apical ridge. The
recombinant ectoderm maintained previously established compartments of gene
expressions and organized a correct dorso-ventral patterning in the recombinant
progress zone. Finally, the ZPA effect was only detected on Bmp expression and
pattern formation along the antero-posterior axis.

PMID: 10640702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Int J Dev Biol. 1999 Jul;43(4):287-94.

Altered Hox expression and increased cell death distinguish Hypodactyly from
Hoxa13 null mice.

Post LC(1), Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor 48109-0618,
USA.

Hypodactyly (Hoxa13Hd) mice have a small deletion within the coding sequence of
Hoxa13 and a limb phenotype that is more severe than that of mice with an
engineered null allele of Hoxa13. We used whole-mount in situ hybridization, Nile
blue sulfate staining and genetic crosses to determine the basis for the
phenotypic differences between these two mutants. Expression of Hoxd13 was
unaffected in Hoxa13-/- mice, but its domain was reduced at the anterior and
posterior margins of the autopod in Hoxa13Hd/Hd limb buds. The maturation of
Hoxd11 expression was delayed and expression of Hoxa11 failed to become
restricted to the autopod/zeugopod junction in both Hoxa13Hd/Hd and Hoxa13-/-
limb buds compared to wild-type mice. Fgf8 expression was normal in both
Hoxa13Hd/Hd and Hoxa13-/- mice throughout limb development. A dramatic increase
in cell death was observed in limb bud mesenchyme of Hoxa13Hd/Hd mice as early as
E11.5 but not in mice homozygous for the null allele. Genetic background was
excluded as the basisforthe phenotypic differences. Compound heterozygotes
(Hoxa13-/Hd) displayed an intermediate phenotype relative to both homozygotes
suggesting that Hoxa13Hd has an effect on the development of the autopod beyond
that which may result from a loss of HOXA13 protein. These results showthat
Hoxa13Hd has a negative effect on the survival of the mesenchyme in the autopod, 
unlike the Hoxa13 null mutation, that cannot be explained by a failure of the AER
to express Fgfs. In addition, at least one target of HOXA13 may be Hoxa11.

PMID: 10470645  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Somat Cell Mol Genet. 1998 Jul;24(4):245-8.

PAC and cosmid contig spanning the HOXA cluster on human chromosome 7p15.

Kim MH(1), Park JH, Park HW, Chung IH, Park KA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Anatomy, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
mhkim1@yumc.yonsei.ac.kr

To construct the PAC and cosmid contig map spanning the HOXA cluster on human
chromosome 7, we used 9 DNA markers (D7S2243, D7S3010, HOXA1, EVX1, 750, pBH8,
p60, p8.0, and HOXA11), among which the final 4 were generated in this study by
shotgun cloning strategy. From the libraries, 5 PAC and 35 cosmid clones were
screened and as a result, an overlapping continuous array of cosmid and PAC
clones covering the genomic region (about 200 kb) spanning the entire cluster
were constructed. The isolated cosmids contained several consecutive HOX genes of
regional group, probably sharing the regulatory processes such as alternative
splicing or polyadenylation, and thus could be used as useful materials for
elucidating the molecular mechanism of HOX gene expression in the future.

PMID: 10410678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Jun;13(6):1005-17.

Hoxa-10 regulates uterine stromal cell responsiveness to progesterone during
implantation and decidualization in the mouse.

Lim H(1), Ma L, Ma WG, Maas RL, Dey SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, Ralph L. Smith Research
Center, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City 66160-7338, USA.

Hoxa-10 is an AbdominalB-like homeobox gene that is expressed in the developing
genitourinary tract during embryogenesis and in the adult uterus during early
pregnancy. Null mutation of Hoxa-10 in the mouse causes both male and female
infertility. Defective implantation and decidualization resulting from the loss
of maternal Hoxa-10 function in uterine stromal cells is the cause of female
infertility. However, the mechanisms by which Hoxa-10 regulates these uterine
events are unknown. We have identified two potential mechanisms for these uterine
defects in Hoxa-10(-/-) mice. First, two PGE2 receptor subtypes, EP3 and EP4, are
aberrantly expressed in the uterine stroma in Hoxa-10(-/-) mice, while expression
of several other genes in the stroma (TIMP-2, MMP-2, ER, and PR) and epithelium
(LIF, HB-EGF, Ar, and COX-1) are unaffected before implantation. Further, EP3 and
EP4 are inappropriately regulated by progesterone (P4) in the absence of Hoxa-10,
while PR, Hoxa-11 and c-myc, three other P4-responsive genes respond normally.
These results suggest that Hoxa-10 specifically mediates P4 regulation of EP3 and
EP4 in the uterine stroma. Second, since Hox genes are implicated in local cell
proliferation, we also examined steroid-responsive uterine cell proliferation in 
Hoxa-10(-/-) mice. Stromal cell proliferation in mutant mice in response to P4
and 17beta-estradiol (E2 was significantly reduced, while epithelial cell
proliferation was normal in response to E2. These results suggest that stromal
cell responsiveness to P4 with respect to cell proliferation is impaired in
Hoxa-10(-/-) mice, and that Hoxa-10 is involved in mediating stromal cell
proliferation. Collectively, these results suggest that Hoxa-10 mutation causes
specific stromal cell defects that can lead to implantation and decidualization
defects apparently without perturbing epithelial cell functions.

PMID: 10379898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Hum Reprod. 1999 May;14(5):1328-31.

HOX gene expression is altered in the endometrium of women with endometriosis.

Taylor HS(1), Bagot C, Kardana A, Olive D, Arici A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, 
PO Box 208063, New Haven, CT 06520-8063, USA.

HOXA10 and HOXA11 are homeobox genes that function as transcription factors
essential to embryonic development. We have recently described a role for each of
these two genes in regulating endometrial development in the adult during the
course of a menstrual cycle. Both Hoxa10 and Hoxa11 are essential for
implantation in the mouse and appear to play a similar role in women. To
investigate the role of HOX genes in the endometrium of women with endometriosis,
quantitative Northern blot analysis was performed on the endometrium of 40 normal
cycling controls and 40 patients with documented endometriosis. Patients with
endometriosis failed to show the expected mid-luteal rise in HOX gene expression 
as demonstrated in the controls. Aberrant HOX gene expression suggests that
altered development of the endometrium at the molecular level may contribute to
the aetiology of infertility in patients with endometriosis.

PMID: 10325287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 1999 Mar;84(3):1129-35.

Sex steroids mediate HOXA11 expression in the human peri-implantation
endometrium.

Taylor HS(1), Igarashi P, Olive DL, Arici A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA. Hugh.Taylor@Yale.edu

Under the influence of sex steroids, human endometrium undergoes sequential
development in preparation for implantation. Hoxa11 is essential for implantation
in the mouse. Here we describe a potential role for HOXA11 in human endometrial
development and implantation. Northern analysis demonstrates that HOXA11 is
expressed in a menstrual cycle phase-dependent fashion in adult human
endometrium. HOXA11 messenger RNA levels dramatically increase at the time of
implantation and remain increased in pregnancy. In vitro, HOXA11 expression is
increased in response to estrogen or progesterone. There is a dose-responsive
increase over the physiologic range of progesterone concentration. Pretreatment
with Cyclohexamide does not decrease the response to estrogen. Steroids are novel
regulators HOX gene expression. The spatial and temporal pattern of HOXA11
expression in the human endometrium suggests a role in endometrial development,
implantation, and maintenance of pregnancy.

PMID: 10084606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Development. 1999 Jan;126(1):13-21.

Gli3 (Xt) and formin (ld) participate in the positioning of the polarising region
and control of posterior limb-bud identity.

Zúñiga A(1), Zeller R.

Author information: 
(1)EMBL, Meyerhofstrasse 1, D-69117 Heidelberg, Germany.

During initiation of limb-bud outgrowth in vertebrate embryos, the polarising
region (limb-bud organizer) is established upon activation of the Sonic Hedgehog 
(SHH) signaling molecule at the posterior limb-bud margin. Another hallmark of
establishing anteroposterior limb-bud identities is the colinear activation of
HoxD genes located at the 5' end of the cluster (5'HoxD genes). The unique and
shared functions of Gli3 and formin in these determinative events were
genetically analyzed using single and double homozygous Extra-toes (Xt;
disrupting Gli3) and limb deformity (ld; disrupting formin) mouse embryos.
Analysis of the limb skeletal phenotypes reveals genetic interaction of the two
genes. In addition to loss of digit identity and varying degrees of polydactyly, 
proximal skeletal elements are severely shortened in Xt;ld double homozygous
limbs. The underlying molecular defects affect both establishment of the
polarising region and posterior limb-bud identity. In particular, the synergism
between Gli3- and formin-mediated mesenchyme-AER interactions positions the SHH
signaling center at the posterior limb-bud margin. The present study shows that
establishment and positioning of the polarising region is regulated both by
restriction of Shh through Gli3 and its positive feedback regulation through
formin. Concurrently, Gli3 functions independently of formin during initial
posterior nesting of 5'HoxD domains, whereas their subsequent distal restriction 
and anterior expansion depends on genetic interaction of Gli3 and formin.

PMID: 9834182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Mamm Genome. 1998 Oct;9(10):799-806.

Evolutionary conservation and tissue-specific processing of Hoxa 11 antisense
transcripts.

Potter SS(1), Branford WW.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center and
Department of Pediatrics, 3333 Burnet Ave., University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

We previously described the existence of abundant, processed, polyadenylated
murine Hoxa 11 antisense transcripts. Of particular interest, in the developing
limbs the antisense transcripts were observed to be present in a pattern
complementary to that of the sense transcripts, suggesting a possible regulatory 
function (Hsieh-Li et al. 1995). We have analyzed the human HOXA 11 genomic
locus, showing strong evolutionary conservation of regions potentially encoding
antisense transcripts. Human HOXA 11 fetal kidney antisense cDNAs were identified
and sequenced, demonstrating the evolutionary conservation of Hoxa 11 antisense
transcription. As for the mouse, the human antisense RNAs were polyadenylated and
showed several alternative processing patterns, but shared the sequences of a
common 3' exon. The evolutionary conservation of the opposite strand transcripts 
strongly suggests function. A significantly long open reading frame was observed,
but mouse-human comparisons argued against true coding function. Murine kidney
Hoxa 11 antisense transcription and processing was also examined, revealing
tissue-specific differences between limb and kidney. A novel procedure,
designated Race in Circles, was devised and used to define mouse limb antisense
transcription start sites. Furthermore, comparisons of human, mouse, and chicken 
sense transcript Hoxa 11 homeobox nucleotide sequences and their respective
encoded homeodomains indicate a very strong selective pressure in vertebrates
against mutations that result in coding changes. Given the significant
differences in amino acid sequences of the homeodomains of different Hox genes,
this observation argues for individual homeodomain functional specificity.

PMID: 9745033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Development. 1998 Aug;125(16):3201-11.

Wnt-7a maintains appropriate uterine patterning during the development of the
mouse female reproductive tract.

Miller C(1), Sassoon DA.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center of Developmental and Molecular Biology, One Gustave Levy
Place, Box 1126, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The murine female reproductive tract differentiates along the anteroposterior
axis during postnatal development. This process is marked by the emergence of
distinct cell types in the oviduct, uterus, cervix and vagina and is dependent
upon specific mesenchymal-epithelial interactions as demonstrated by earlier
heterografting experiments. Members of the Wnt family of signaling molecules have
been recently identified in this system and an early functional role in
reproductive tract development has been demonstrated. Mice were generated using
ES-mediated homologous recombination for the Wnt-7a gene (Parr, B. A. and
McMahon, A. P. (1995) Nature 374, 350-353). Since Wnt-7a is expressed in the
female reproductive tract, we examined the developmental consequences of lack of 
Wnt-7a in the female reproductive tract. We observe that the oviduct lacks a
clear demarcation from the anterior uterus, and acquires several cellular and
molecular characteristics of the uterine horn. The uterus acquires cellular and
molecular characteristics that represent an intermediate state between normal
uterus and vagina. Normal vaginas have stratified epithelium and normal uteri
have simple columnar epithelium, however, mutant uteri have stratified
epithelium. Additionally, Wnt-7a mutant uteri do not form glands. The changes
observed in the oviduct and uterus are accompanied by a postnatal loss of hoxa-10
and hoxa-11 expression, revealing that Wnt-7a is not required for early hoxa gene
expression, but is required for maintenance of expression. These clustered hox
genes have been shown to play a role in anteroposterior patterning in the female 
reproductive tract. In addition to this global posterior shift in the female
reproductive tract, we note that the uterine smooth muscle is disorganized,
indicating development along the radial axis is affected. Changes in the
boundaries and levels of other Wnt genes are detectable at birth, prior to
changes in morphologies. These results suggest that a mechanism whereby Wnt-7a
signaling from the epithelium maintains the molecular and morphological
boundaries of distinct cellular populations along the anteroposterior and radial 
axes of the female reproductive tract.

PMID: 9671592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Development. 1998 May;125(9):1669-77.

Genetic analysis of a Hoxd-12 regulatory element reveals global versus local
modes of controls in the HoxD complex.

Hérault Y(1), Beckers J, Kondo T, Fraudeau N, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 
Geneva, Switzerland.

Vertebrate Hoxd genes are essential determinants of limb morphogenesis. In order 
to understand the genetic control of their complex expression patterns, we have
used a combined approach involving interspecies sequence alignments in parallel
with transgenic analyses, followed by in vivo mutagenesis. Here, we report on the
identification of a regulatory element that is located in the vicinity of the
Hoxd-12 gene. While this element is well conserved in tetrapods, little sequence 
similarity was scored when compared to the cognate fish DNA. The regulatory
potential of this region XI (RXI) was first assayed in the context of a
Hoxd-12/lacZ reporter transgene and shown to direct reporter gene expression in
posterior limb buds. A deletion of this region was generated by targeted
mutagenesis in ES cells and introduced into mice. Analyses of animals homozygous 
for the HoxDRXI mutant allele revealed the function of this region in controlling
Hoxd-12 expression in the presumptive posterior zeugopod where it genetically
interacts with Hoxa-11. Downregulation of Hoxd-12 expression was also detected in
the trunk suggesting that RXI may mediate a rather general function in the
activation of Hoxd-12. These results support a model whereby global as well as
local regulatory influences are necessary to build up the complex expression
patterns of Hoxd genes during limb development.

PMID: 9521905  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. J Exp Zool. 1998 May 1;281(1):26-35.

Hox gene expression, AV-1 antigen expression, and cartilage pattern formation in 
chick recombinant limb buds.

Wada N(1), Ohsugi K, Yokouchi Y, Kuroiwa A, Ide H.

Author information: 
(1)Biological Institute, Graduate School of Science, Tohoku University, Sendai,
Japan.

A recombinant limb bud composed of dissociated and reaggregated mesenchyme and an
ectodermal jacket develops a limblike structure with bifurcated and segmented
cartilage. We compared the cartilage structure formed from recombinants that were
composed of mesenchymal cells derived from the limb bud progress zone at various 
stages. In the case of recombinants containing distal mesenchyme of early-stage
limb buds (stage 18 or 20), long and thick cartilage structures were formed in
the proximal region, and segmented digitlike structures were formed in the distal
region. On the contrary, in the case of recombinants containing distal mesenchyme
of late-stage limb buds (stage 25 or 27), only poorly developed cartilage
structures were formed. Next, we analyzed expression patterns of the
position-specific genes HoxA11, A13 and D12 and the position-specific antigen
AV-1 protein in recombinants containing distal mesenchyme of stage 20 limb buds
(stage 20 recombinants) or stage 25 limb buds (stage 25 recombinants). In stage
20 recombinants, HoxA11 was expressed throughout the mesenchyme, but HoxA13 was
expressed only in the distal half of the mesenchyme. In stage 25 recombinants,
HoxA13 was expressed throughout the mesenchyme, but HoxA11 was only faintly
expressed. The expression pattern of HoxD12 was similar to that of HoxA13 in both
stage 20 and stage 25 recombinants, and no asymmetric expression pattern, which
is observed in normal limb buds, was detected. AV-1 antigen was expressed in the 
core region of stage 20 recombinants, and anteroposterior asymmetry, which is
observed in the anterior-ventral-distal region of normal limb buds, was not
found. No AV-1 expression was observed in stage 25 recombinants. These results
suggest that the mesenchyme in recombinants shows spatially controlled
gene/protein expressions along the proximodistal axis, and that these differences
in gene/protein expressions may affect cartilage pattern formation in
recombinants.

PMID: 9571766  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Mech Dev. 1997 Dec;69(1-2):31-7.

Goosecoid misexpression alters the morphology and Hox gene expression of the
developing chick limb bud.

Heanue TA(1), Johnson RL, Izpisua-Belmonte JC, Stern CD, De Robertis EM, Tabin
CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The homeobox-containing gene goosecoid (gsc) has been implicated in a variety of 
embryonic processes from gastrulation to rib patterning. We have analyzed the
role it plays during chick limb development. Expression is initially observed at 
stage 20 in a proximal-anterior-ventral domain of the early limb bud which
expands during subsequent stages. Later in limb development a second domain of
expression appears distally which resolves to regions which surround the
condensing cartilage. In order to understand the function of gsc in limb
development, we have examined the effect of misexpressing gsc throughout the
limb. Two striking phenotypes are observed. The first, evident at stage 24, is an
alteration in the angle of femur outgrowth from the main body axis. The second,
which can be detected at day 10 of development, is an overall decrease in the
size of the limb with bones that are small, misshapen and bent. These phenotypes 
correlate with a decrease in levels of Hox gene expression in gsc-infected limb
buds. From these results we suggest that gsc may normally function to regulate
growth and patterning of the limb, perhaps through regulation of Hox gene
expression.

PMID: 9486529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Biol Reprod. 1997 May;56(5):1097-105.

Abnormal uterine stromal and glandular function associated with maternal
reproductive defects in Hoxa-11 null mice.

Gendron RL(1), Paradis H, Hsieh-Li HM, Lee DW, Potter SS, Markoff E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Children's Hospital Research Foundation,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA.

Here we describe in detail both the expression of Hoxa-11 in the wild-type mouse 
uterus and the defects resulting in maternal reproductive failure of Hoxa-11 null
female mice. The Hoxa-11 gene is expressed at peak levels in uterine stromal
cells during metestrus. Hoxa-11 transcripts were induced beginning on Day 2 of
gestation in the stromal cells underlying the uterine epithelium and appeared in 
the secondary decidual zone between Days 6 and 8 of gestation. At early
gestational stages, stromal, decidual, and glandular cell development were
deficient in Hoxa-11 null uteri in comparison to wild-type as assessed by
histology and immunohistochemical localization of the decidual cell marker
epitope, stage-specific embryonic antigen-3 (SSEA-3). Both steroid-induced
uterine stromal and glandular cell proliferation as well as oil-induced stromal
decidualization after induction of pseudopregnancy were deficient in mutant
uteri. Moreover, both Western blotting and immunohistochemistry demonstrated that
the burst of glandular leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) found in normal pregnant 
uteri at Day 4.5 of gestation was absent in Hoxa-11-deficient uteri. The LIF
burst was also not observed in the uteri of bilaterally ovariectomized,
hormonally stimulated Hoxa-11 mutants. These results demonstrate that the Hoxa-11
gene is required for normal uterine stromal cell and glandular differentiation
during pregnancy, as is the presence of the steroid-induced glandular LIF burst
initiating embryo implantation.

PMID: 9160706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8198-206.

The Abd-B-like Hox homeodomain proteins can be subdivided by the ability to form 
complexes with Pbx1a on a novel DNA target.

Shen WF(1), Rozenfeld S, Lawrence HJ, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center and
University of California, San Francisco, California 94121, USA.

Previous studies showed that the Hox homeodomain proteins from paralog groups 1-8
display cooperative DNA binding with the non-Hox homeodomain protein Pbx,
mediated by a canonical YPWM. Although the Abd-B-like Hox proteins in paralogs
9-13 lack this sequence, Hoxb-9 and Hoxa-10 were reported to bind with Pbx1a to
DNA. We show that these interactions require a tryptophan 6 amino acids
N-terminal to the homeodomain. Binding site selection for Hoxb-9 with Pbx1a
yielded ATGATTTACGAC, containing a novel TTAC Hox-binding site adjacent to a Pbx 
site. In the presence of Pbx1a, Hoxb-9 and Hoxa-10 bound to targets containing
either TTAC or TTAT. These data extend previous findings that interactions with
Pbx define a Hox protein binding code for different DNA sequences across paralog 
groups 1 through 10. Members of the 11, 12, and 13 paralogs do not cooperatively 
bind DNA with Pbx1a, despite the presence of tryptophan residues N-terminal to
the homeodomain in Hoxd-12 and Hoxd-13. Hoxa-11, Hoxd-12, or Hoxd-13, in the
presence of Pbx1a, selected a TTAC Hox site but lacking a Pbx1a site. These data 
suggest that Abd-B-like Hox proteins bind to a novel TTAC site and can be divided
by their cooperative binding to DNA with Pbx1a.

PMID: 9079637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Dev Biol. 1996 Jun 15;176(2):325-8.

Functional equivalence and rescue among group 11 Hox gene products in vertebral
patterning.

Zákány J(1), Gérard M, Favier B, Potter SS, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology and Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Switzerland.

Hoxa-11 and Hoxd-11 are paralogous genes required for proper development of the
vertebral column, the limbs, and the urogenital system. To further explore the
functional relationship between these genes, as well as the potential rescue of
one function by the other, we have introduced a Hoxd-11-expressing transgene into
Hoxa-11/Hoxd-11 mutant genetic backgrounds. A range of phenotypes was observed,
with transgenic mice displaying as few as four lumbar vertebrae while double
mutant mice had as many as eight. When transgenic, double homozygote mutant
animals showed six lumbar vertebrae, instead of the eight usually observed. The
phenotypic rescue of these genotypes shows that the Hoxa-11 and Hoxd-11 products 
are functionally equivalent and that extra doses of Hoxd-11 can rescue Hoxa-11
loss of function.

PMID: 8660870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Mamm Genome. 1996 Mar;7(3):174-9.

Chromosomal localization of homeobox genes and associated markers on porcine
chromosomes 3, 5, 12, 15, 16 and 18: comparative mapping study with human and
mouse.

Lahbib-Mansais Y(1), Yerle M, Pinton P, Gellin J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Genetique Cellulaire, Centre INRA Toulouse, France.

Four homeobox genes that belong to the four homeobox gene clusters known in
mammals have been regionally assigned to four distinct porcine chromosomes in
conserved regions between human and pig. HOXA11, HOXB6, HOXC8, and HOXD4 genes
were mapped by radioactive in situ hybridization to porcine Chromosomes (Chrs)
18q21-24 (with a secondary signal in 16q14-21), 12p11-12, 5p11-12, and 15q22-23
respectively. Besides, we have also revealed the presence of a porcine homeobox
(pig Hbx24) which, although showing DNA sequence homology with a mouse gene of
HOXB cluster, was located on porcine Chr 3 (3p14-13) outside the Hox clusters. To
support the identity of the homeobox gene clusters analyzed and in the light of
the high sequence similarity among homeobox genes, we also localized markers
known to be mapped near each Hox cluster in human. In this way, four genes were
also mapped in pig: GAPD (5q12-21), GAD1 (15q21-22), INHBA (18q24), and IGFBP3
(18q24). Mapping of HOXA11, INHBA, and IGFBP3 on pig Chr 18 constitutes the first
assignments of genes on this small chromosome. These new localizations extend the
information on the conservation of four human chromosomal regions in the pig
genome.

PMID: 8833235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Jan 23;93(2):900-5.

Restricted expression of homeobox genes distinguishes fetal from adult human
smooth muscle cells.

Miano JM(1), Firulli AB, Olson EN, Hara P, Giachelli CM, Schwartz SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Smooth muscle cell plasticity is considered a prerequisite for atherosclerosis
and restenosis following angioplasty and bypass surgery. Identification of
transcription factors that specify one smooth muscle cell phenotype over another 
therefore may be of major importance in understanding the molecular basis of
these vascular disorders. Homeobox genes exemplify one class of transcription
factors that could govern smooth muscle cell phenotypic diversity. Accordingly,
we screened adult and fetal human smooth muscle cell cDNA libraries with a
degenerate oligonucleotide corresponding to a highly conserved region of the
homeodomain with the idea that homeobox genes, if present, would display a smooth
muscle cell phenotype-dependent pattern of expression. No homeobox genes were
detected in the adult human smooth muscle cell library; however, five
nonparalogous homeobox genes were uncovered from the fetal library (HoxA5,
HoxA11, HoxB1, HoxB7, and HoxC9). Northern blotting of adult and fetal tissues
revealed low and restricted expression of all five homeobox genes. No significant
differences in transcripts of HoxA5, HoxA11, and HoxB1 were detected between
adult or fetal human smooth muscle cells in culture. HoxB7 and HoxC9, however,
showed preferential mRNA expression in fetal human smooth muscle cells that
appeared to correlate with the age of the donor. This phenotype-dependent
expression of homeobox genes was also noted in rat pup versus adult smooth muscle
cells. While similar differences in gene expression have been reported between
subsets of smooth muscle cells from rat vessels of different-aged animals or
clones of rat smooth muscle, our findings represent a demonstration of a
transcription factor distinguishing two human smooth muscle cell phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC40155
PMID: 8570656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Mamm Genome. 1995 Aug;6(8):559-60.

Mapping of the rat Hoxa11 homeobox gene to chromosome 4.

Hornum L(1), Markholst H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunogenetics, Hagedorn Research Institute, Gentofte, Denmark.

PMID: 8589533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Nature. 1995 Jun 29;375(6534):791-5.

Absence of radius and ulna in mice lacking hoxa-11 and hoxd-11.

Davis AP(1), Witte DP, Hsieh-Li HM, Potter SS, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Mice with targeted disruptions in Hox genes have been generated to evaluate the
role of the Hox complex in determining the mammalian body plan. This complex of
38 genes encodes transcription factors that specify regional information along
the embryonic axes. Early in vertebrate evolution an ancestral complex shared
with invertebrates was duplicated twice to give rise to the four linkage groups
(Hox A, B, C and D). As a consequence, corresponding genes on the separate
linkage groups, called paralogues, are most closely related to each other. Based 
on sequence similarities, the Hox genes have been subdivided into 13 paralogous
groups. The five most 5' groups (Hox 9-13) pattern the posterior region of the
vertebrate embryo and the appendicular skeleton. Mice with individual mutations
in the paralogous genes hoxa-11 and hoxd-11 have been described. By breeding
these two strains together we have generated double mutants which have dramatic
phenotypes not apparent in mice homozygous for the individual mutations. The
radius and the ulna of the forelimb are almost entirely eliminated, the axial
skeleton shows homeotic transformations, and there are severe kidney defects not 
present in either single mutant. The limb and axial phenotypes are quantitative: 
as more mutant alleles are added to the genotype, the phenotype becomes
progressively more severe. The appendicular skeleton defects suggest that
paralogous Hox genes function together to specify limb outgrowth and patterning
along the proximodistal axis.

PMID: 7596412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


