
1. Zoological Lett. 2016 Mar 21;2:6. doi: 10.1186/s40851-016-0043-6. eCollection
2016.

Mode of reduction in the number of pharyngeal segments within the
sarcopterygians.

Shone V(1), Oulion S(2), Casane D(2), Laurenti P(2), Graham A(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, Kings College London, London, SE1
1UL UK. (2)Laboratoire Évolution, génomes, comportement, écologie, CNRS
université Paris-Sud UMR 9191, IRD UMR 247, Avenue de la Terrasse, bâtiment 13,
boîte postale 1, 91198 Gif-sur-Yvette, France.

BACKGROUND: Pharyngeal segmentation is a defining feature of vertebrate embryos
and is apparent as a series of bulges found on the lateral surface of the
embryonic head, the pharyngeal arches. The ancestral condition for gnathostomes
is to have seven pharyngeal segments: jaw, hyoid, and five posterior branchial
arches. However, within the sarcopterygians, the pharyngeal region has undergone 
extensive remodelling that resulted in a reduction in the number of pharyngeal
segments, such that amniotes have only five pharyngeal arches. The aim of this
study is to probe the developmental basis of this loss of pharyngeal segments.
RESULTS: We have therefore compared the development of the pharyngeal arches in
an amniote, the chick, which has five segments, with those of a chondrichthyan,
the catshark, which has seven segments. We have analysed the early phase of
pharyngeal segmentation and we find that in both the most anterior segments form 
first with the posterior segments being added sequentially. We also documented
the patterns of innervation of the pharynx in several vertebrates and note that
the three most anterior segments receive distinct innervation: the first arch
being innervated by the Vth nerve, the second by the VIIth and the third by the
IXth. Finally, we have analysed Hox gene expression, and show that the anterior
limit of Hoxa2 aligns with the second pouch and arch in both chick and catshark, 
while Hoxa3 is transiently associated with the third arch and pouch.
Surprisingly, we have found that Hoxb1 expression is spatially and temporally
dynamic and that it is always associated with the last most recently formed pouch
and that this domains moves caudally as additional pouches are generated.
CONCLUSION: We propose that the first three pharyngeal segments are homologous,
as is the posterior limit of the pharynx, and that the loss of segments occurred 
between these two points. We suggest that this loss results from a curtailment of
the posterior expansion of the pharyngeal endoderm in amniotes at relatively
earlier time point, and thus the generation of fewer segments.

PMCID: PMC4802614
PMID: 27006783  [PubMed]


2. J Cell Mol Med. 2016 Jan 29. doi: 10.1111/jcmm.12783. [Epub ahead of print]

Integrated long non-coding RNA analyses identify novel regulators of
epithelial-mesenchymal transition in the mouse model of pulmonary fibrosis.

Sun H(1), Chen J(1,)(2), Qian W(3), Kang J(1), Wang J(3), Jiang L(1), Qiao L(1), 
Chen W(4), Zhang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Emergency, The First Affiliated Hospital with Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China. (2)Department of Intensive Care Unit, Yixing People's
Hospital, Yixing, China. (3)Key Lab of Modern Toxicology, Ministry of Education
and Department of Toxicology, School of Public Health, Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China. (4)Department of Hepatobiliary and Pancreatic
Surgery, The Second Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China.

Idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) is a chronic fatal lung disease characterized
by aberrant accumulation of fibroblast population and deposition of extra
cellular matrix. Increasing evidence support that epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) of alveolar epithelial cells is a critical process in the
pathogenesis of IPF. Although delivery of bleomycin to induce acute lung injury
is the most well-studied animal model of pulmonary fibrosis, there is
considerable interest to pursue other models to understand the common and/or
specific pathological mechanisms. In this study, we established a mouse model of 
pulmonary injury and progressive interstitial fibrosis via intraperitoneal
injection of paraquat, a widely used herbicide known to cause pulmonary fibrosis 
in human. Using transcriptome sequencing and microarray analysis, we profiled
expression of long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) and identified 513 up-regulated and 
204 down-regulated lncRNAs in paraquat-induced fibrotic lung tissues. Gene
ontology analysis revealed that the differentially expressed lncRNAs are
implicated in cell differentiation, epithelium morphogenesis and wound healing,
pathways closely associated with EMT. Furthermore, we identified the
evolutionally conserved target genes of two up-regulated lncRNAs, uc.77 and
2700086A05Rik, as Zeb2 and Hoxa3, respectively, both of which are important
modulators of EMT. Consistently, overexpression of uc.77 or 2700086A05Rik in
human lung epithelial cells induced EMT as demonstrated by changes in gene and
protein expression of various EMT markers and cell morphology. Collectively, our 
results uncovered a crucial role of lncRNA in the regulation of EMT during lung
fibrosis and provide potential avenues for the discovery of novel molecular
markers and therapeutic targets for IPF.

© 2016 The Authors. Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine published by John 
Wiley & Sons Ltd and Foundation for Cellular and Molecular Medicine.

PMID: 26824344  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Mol Hum Reprod. 2015 Dec;21(12):894-904. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gav054. Epub 2015
Oct 3.

Coordination of AUF1 and miR-148a destabilizes DNA methyltransferase 1 mRNA under
hypoxia in endometriosis.

Hsiao KY(1), Wu MH(2), Chang N(1), Yang SH(1), Wu CW(1), Sun HS(3), Tsai SJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University,
1 University Road, Tainan 70101, Taiwan. (2)Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, College of Medicine, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan 70101,
Taiwan. (3)Institute of Molecular Medicine, College of Medicine, National Cheng
Kung University, Tainan 70101, Taiwan seantsai@mail.ncku.edu.tw
hssun@mail.ncku.edu.tw. (4)Department of Physiology, College of Medicine,
National Cheng Kung University, 1 University Road, Tainan 70101, Taiwan
seantsai@mail.ncku.edu.tw hssun@mail.ncku.edu.tw.

STUDY HYPOTHESIS: DNA methylation is regulated by hypoxia in endometriosis.
STUDY FINDING: Hypoxia causes global hypomethylation through AU-rich element
binding factor 1 (AUF1)/microRNA-148a (miR-148a)-mediated destabilization of DNA 
methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) mRNA.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Eutopic endometrial and ectopic endometriotic stromal
cells have the same genetic background, but differ in several cellular and
molecular responses. Both hypoxia and DNA methylation regulate several genes
involved in the development of endometriosis.
STUDY DESIGN, SAMPLES/MATERIALS, METHODS: This laboratory study included 15
patients of reproductive age with endometriosis or normal menstrual cycles.
Paired endometrial and endometriotic tissues were collected for assaying the
levels of DNMT1, 3a and 3b using quantitative RT-PCR, western blot and
immunohistochemical (IHC) staining. Primary cultured endometrial stromal cells
maintained in normoxia/hypoxia (1% O2) or treated with hypoxia-mimetic compounds 
were also assayed. The levels of DNA 5-methylcytosine were assayed by using IHC
in clinical specimens and murine tissues, and by ELISA in cultured stromal cells.
The 3'-untranslated region reporter assay was used to evaluate the effect of
hypoxia, microRNAs (miRNAs) and human antigen R (HuR)/AUF1 on DNMT1 mRNA
stability. RNA immunoprecipitation was used to assess the interaction of HuR/AUF1
and miR-148a/DNMT1 mRNA under hypoxia. Finally, a transplant-induced mouse model 
of endometriosis using 20 mice was used to elucidate the alteration of Dnmt1
levels and DNA methylation in the endometriotic tissues.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Levels of DNMT1 mRNA and protein and
5-methylcytosine were lower in the ectopic stromal cells (P < 0.05) than in the
eutopic cells. Treatment with hypoxia and its mimetic compounds recapitulated the
reduced levels of DNMT1 and 5-methylcytosine levels (P < 0.05 versus control).
Hypoxia treatment destabilized DNMT1 mRNA through recruitment of miR-148a and
AUF1. Mutations introduced to the miR-148a targeting site or AU-rich element
(ARE) restored the hypoxia-suppressed DNMT1 3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR)
reporter activity (P < 0.05 versus control). Levels of proteins of three
hypermethylated genes in endometrial stroma cells, GATA6, HOXA3 and SLC16A5, were
elevated after 72 h of hypoxia treatment (P < 0.05 versus control). Finally, a
transplant-induced model of endometriosis demonstrated the down-regulation of
DNMT1 and a decrease in 5-methylcytosine in the endometriotic tissues (P < 0.05, 
eutopic versus ectopic).
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Primary human cell cultures and a murine model 
were used in this study, and thus the results may not fully represent the
situation in vivo.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: This is the first study to elucidate how
microenvironmental hypoxia links to the epigenetic effects of DNA methylation in 
the endometriosis, and to delineate the molecular mechanism of
hypoxia-coordinated AUF1/miR-148a interaction and recruitment to DNMT1 mRNA
during the pathogenesis of endometriosis. The development of future therapeutics 
in endometriosis may aim at disrupting this specific interaction and eventually
restore the epigenetic regulation.
STUDY FUNDING AND COMPETING INTERESTS: This work was supported by the National
Science Council of Taiwan (NSC101-2320-B-006-030-MY3). The author declares that
there are no conflicts of interest.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26433194  [PubMed - in process]


4. Mol Cells. 2015 Jun;38(6):548-61. doi: 10.14348/molcells.2015.0044. Epub 2015 May
27.

Expression Analyses Revealed Thymic Stromal Co-Transporter/Slc46A2 Is in Stem
Cell Populations and Is a Putative Tumor Suppressor.

Kim KY(1), Lee G(2), Yoon M(1), Cho EH(1), Park CS(3), Kim MG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Inha University, Incheon 402-720, Korea.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA. (3)Department of Pathology, University of
Ulsan College of Medicine, Asan Medical Center, Seoul 138-736, Korea.

By combining conventional single cell analysis with flow cytometry and public
database searches with bioinformatics tools, we extended the expression profiling
of thymic stromal cotransporter (TSCOT), Slc46A2/Ly110, that was shown to be
expressed in bipotent precursor and cortical thymic epithelial cells. Genome
scale analysis verified TSCOT expression in thymic tissue- and cell type-
specific fashion and is also expressed in some other epithelial tissues including
skin and lung. Coexpression profiling with genes, Foxn1 and Hoxa3, revealed the
role of TSCOT during the organogenesis. TSCOT expression was detected in all
thymic epithelial cells (TECs), but not in the CD31(+) endothelial cell lineage
in fetal thymus. In addition, ABC transporter-dependent side population and
Sca-1(+) fetal TEC populations both contain TSCOT-expressing cells, indicating
TEC stem cells express TSCOT. TSCOT expression was identified as early as in
differentiating embryonic stem cells. TSCOT expression is not under the control
of Foxn1 since TSCOT is present in the thymic rudiment of nude mice. By searching
variations in the expression levels, TSCOT is positively associated with Grhl3
and Irf6. Cytokines such as IL1b, IL22 and IL24 are the potential regulators of
the TSCOT expression. Surprisingly, we found TSCOT expression in the lung is
diminished in lung cancers, suggesting TSCOT may be involved in the suppression
of lung tumor development. Based on these results, a model for TEC
differentiation from the stem cells was proposed in context of multiple
epithelial organ formation.

PMCID: PMC4469913
PMID: 26013383  [PubMed - in process]


5. Clin Epigenetics. 2015 Apr 18;7(1):46. doi: 10.1186/s13148-015-0082-4.
eCollection 2015.

Genome-wide methylation and transcriptome analysis in penile carcinoma:
uncovering new molecular markers.

Kuasne H(1), Cólus IM(2), Busso AF(3), Hernandez-Vargas H(4), Barros-Filho MC(3),
Marchi FA(5), Scapulatempo-Neto C(6), Faria EF(7), Lopes A(8), Guimarães GC(8),
Herceg Z(4), Rogatto SR(9).

Author information: 
(1)CIPE - International Research Center, AC Camargo Cancer Center, Rua Taguá,
440, CEP: 01508-010, Liberdade, São Paulo, SP Brazil ; Department of Biology,
Londrina State University, Londrina, PR Brazil. (2)Department of Biology,
Londrina State University, Londrina, PR Brazil. (3)CIPE - International Research 
Center, AC Camargo Cancer Center, Rua Taguá, 440, CEP: 01508-010, Liberdade, São 
Paulo, SP Brazil. (4)Epigenetics Group, International Agency for Research on
Cancer (IARC), Lyon, France. (5)CIPE - International Research Center, AC Camargo 
Cancer Center, Rua Taguá, 440, CEP: 01508-010, Liberdade, São Paulo, SP Brazil ; 
Inter-institutional Grad Program on Bioinformatics, Institute of Mathematics and 
Statistics, USP, São Paulo, SP Brazil. (6)Department of Pathology, CPOM -
Molecular Oncology Research Center, Barretos Cancer Hospital, Barretos, SP
Brazil. (7)Department of Urology, Barretos Cancer Hospital, Barretos, SP Brazil. 
(8)Department of Pelvic Surgery, AC Camargo Cancer Center, São Paulo, Brazil.
(9)CIPE - International Research Center, AC Camargo Cancer Center, Rua Taguá,
440, CEP: 01508-010, Liberdade, São Paulo, SP Brazil ; Department of Urology,
Faculty of Medicine, UNESP, Botucatu, SP Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Despite penile carcinoma (PeCa) being a relatively rare neoplasm, it 
remains an important public health issue for poor and developing countries.
Contrary to most tumors, limited data are available for markers that are capable 
of assisting in diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of PeCa. We aimed to identify
molecular markers for PeCa by evaluating their epigenomic and transcriptome
profiles and comparing them with surrounding non-malignant tissue (SNT) and
normal glans (NG).
RESULTS: Genome-wide methylation analysis revealed 171 hypermethylated probes in 
PeCa. Transcriptome profiling presented 2,883 underexpressed and 1,378
overexpressed genes. Integrative analysis revealed a panel of 54 genes with an
inverse correlation between methylation and gene expression levels. Distinct
methylome and transcriptome patterns were found for human papillomavirus
(HPV)-positive (38.6%) and negative tumors. Interestingly, grade 3 tumors showed 
a distinct methylation profile when compared to grade 1. In addition, univariate 
analysis revealed that low BDNF methylation was associated with lymph node
metastasis and shorter disease-free survival. CpG hypermethylation and gene
underexpression were confirmed for a panel of genes, including TWIST1, RSOP2,
SOX3, SOX17, PROM1, OTX2, HOXA3, and MEIS1.
CONCLUSIONS: A unique methylome signature was found for PeCa compared to SNT,
with aberrant DNA methylation appearing to modulate the expression of specific
genes. This study describes new pathways with the potential to regulate penile
carcinogenesis, including stem cell regulatory pathways and markers associated to
a worse prognosis. These findings may be instrumental in the discovery and
application of new genetic and epigenetic biomarkers in PeCa.

PMCID: PMC4407795
PMID: 25908946  [PubMed]


6. Mol Genet Genomics. 2015 Apr;290(2):699-707. doi: 10.1007/s00438-014-0954-x. Epub
2014 Dec 4.

Differential lncRNA expression profiles in brown and white adipose tissues.

Chen J(1), Cui X, Shi C, Chen L, Yang L, Pang L, Zhang J, Guo X, Wang J, Ji C.

Author information: 
(1)Nanjing Maternity and Child Health Care Institute, Nanjing Maternity and Child
Health Care Hospital Affiliated with Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210029,
China.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) are an important class of pervasive genes involved
in a variety of biological functions. It can serve as key co-activators of
proteins involved in transcriptional regulation. Studies have found that white
and brown adipocytes both originate from the mesoderm. However, it remains
unclear whether lncRNAs function during adipogenesis or in energy metabolism in
brown adipose tissue (BAT) and white adipose tissue (WAT). In this study, we used
lncRNA microarray technology to evaluate differences in the lncRNA expression
profiles of WAT and BAT. We observed 735 up-regulated and 877 down-regulated
lncRNAs (fold change >4.0). To reveal the potential functions of these lncRNAs,
we applied GO and pathway analyses to study the differentially expressed lncRNAs.
We found that AK142386 and AK133540 may affect adipogenesis and metabolism. Our
data indicate that AK142386 and AK133540 may be involved in BAT and WAT
development through their target genes Hoxa3 and Acad10. Together, we have
identified numerous lncRNAs and these lncRNAs can potentially serve as a required
component for proper adipogenesis.

PMID: 25472036  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2015 Feb;11(2):90-100. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2014.185. Epub
2014 Nov 4.

Biology of upper-body and lower-body adipose tissue--link to whole-body
phenotypes.

Karpe F(1), Pinnick KE(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Radcliffe
Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Headington OX3 
7LE, UK. [2] NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, OUH Trust, Churchill
Hospital, Headington OX3 7LE, UK. (2)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Churchill
Hospital, Headington OX3 7LE, UK.

The distribution of adipose tissue in the body has wide-ranging and reproducible 
associations with health and disease. Accumulation of adipose tissue in the upper
body (abdominal obesity) is associated with the development of cardiovascular
disease, insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes mellitus and even all-cause
mortality. Conversely, accumulation of fat in the lower body (gluteofemoral
obesity) shows opposite associations with cardiovascular disease and type 2
diabetes mellitus when adjusted for overall fat mass. The abdominal depots are
characterized by rapid uptake of predominantly diet-derived fat and a high lipid 
turnover that is easily stimulated by adrenergic receptor activation. The
lower-body fat stores have a reduced lipid turnover with a capacity to
accommodate fat undergoing redistribution. Lower-body adipose tissue also seems
to retain the capacity to recruit additional adipocytes as a result of weight
gain and demonstrates fewer signs of inflammatory insult. New data suggest that
the profound functional differences between the upper-body and lower-body tissues
are controlled by site-specific sets of developmental genes, such as HOXA6,
HOXA5, HOXA3, IRX2 and TBX5 in subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue and HOTAIR, 
SHOX2 and HOXC11 in gluteofemoral adipose tissue, which are under epigenetic
control. This Review discusses the developmental and functional differences
between upper-body and lower-body fat depots and provides mechanistic insight
into the disease-protective effects of lower-body fat.

PMID: 25365922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Adv Wound Care (New Rochelle). 2014 Oct 1;3(10):605-613.

Secreted HoxA3 Promotes Epidermal Proliferation and Angiogenesis in Genetically
Modified Three-Dimensional Composite Skin Constructs.

Kuo JH(1), Cuevas I(2), Chen A(2), Dunn A(2), Kuri M(2), Boudreau N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California Davis , Sacramento,
California. (2)Surgical Research Laboratory, University of California San
Francisco , San Francisco, California.

Objective: Homeobox (HOX) transcription factors coordinate gene expression in
wound repair and angiogenesis. Previous studies have shown that gene transfer of 
HoxA3 to wounds of diabetic mice accelerates wound healing, increasing
angiogenesis and keratinocyte migration. In this study, we examined whether HoxA3
can also improve angiogenesis, epidermal integrity, and viability of composite
skin grafts. Approach: To determine the effects of HoxA3 on composite skin
grafts, we constructed bilayered composite grafts incorporating fibroblasts
engineered to constitutively secrete HoxA3. We then transplanted these composite 
grafts in vivo. Results: The composite grafts produced a stratified epidermal
layer after seventeen days in culture and following transplantation in vivo,
these grafts exhibit normal epidermal differentiation and reduced contraction
compared to controls. In addition, HoxA3 grafts showed increased angiogenesis.
Quantitative polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analyses of HoxA3 graft tissue
reveal an increase in the downstream HoxA3 target genes MMP-14 and uPAR
expression, as well as a reduction in CCL-2 and CxCl-12. Innovation: Expression
of secreted HoxA3 in composite grafts represents a comprehensive approach that
targets both keratinocytes and endothelial cells to promote epidermal
proliferation and angiogenesis. Conclusion: Secreted HoxA3 improves angiogenesis,
reduces expression of inflammatory mediators, and prolongs composite skin graft
integrity.

PMCID: PMC4183908
PMID: 25302136  [PubMed]


9. Development. 2014 Oct;141(19):3697-708. doi: 10.1242/dev.110833. Epub 2014 Sep 5.

Multiple roles for HOXA3 in regulating thymus and parathyroid differentiation and
morphogenesis in mouse.

Chojnowski JL(1), Masuda K(1), Trau HA(1), Thomas K(2), Capecchi M(3), Manley
NR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Paul D. Coverdell Center, 500 DW Brooks Drive,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA. (2)Division of Hematology and
Program in Molecular Medicine, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake
City, UT 84132, USA. (3)Department of Human Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical
Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84132, USA. 
(4)Department of Genetics, Paul D. Coverdell Center, 500 DW Brooks Drive,
University of Georgia, Athens, GA 30602, USA nmanley@uga.edu.

Hoxa3 was the first Hox gene to be mutated by gene targeting in mice and is
required for the development of multiple endoderm and neural crest cell
(NCC)-derived structures in the pharyngeal region. Previous studies have shown
that the Hoxa3 null mutant lacks third pharyngeal pouch derivatives, the thymus
and parathyroids by E18.5, and organ-specific markers are absent or downregulated
during initial organogenesis. Our current analysis of the Hoxa3 null mutant shows
that organ-specific domains did undergo initial patterning, but the location and 
timing of key regional markers within the pouch, including Tbx1, Bmp4 and Fgf8,
were altered. Expression of the parathyroid marker Gcm2 was initiated but was
quickly downregulated and differentiation failed; by contrast, thymus markers
were delayed but achieved normal levels, concurrent with complete loss through
apoptosis. To determine the cell type-specific roles of Hoxa3 in third pharyngeal
pouch development, we analyzed tissue-specific mutants using endoderm and/or
NCC-specific Cre drivers. Simultaneous deletion with both drivers resulted in
athymia at E18.5, similar to the null. By contrast, the individual
tissue-specific Hoxa3 deletions resulted in small, ectopic thymi, although each
had a unique phenotype. Hoxa3 was primarily required in NCCs for morphogenesis.
In endoderm, Hoxa3 temporally regulated initiation of the thymus program and was 
required in a cell-autonomous manner for parathyroid differentiation.
Furthermore, Hoxa3 was required for survival of third pharyngeal pouch-derived
organs, but expression in either tissue was sufficient for this function. These
data show that Hoxa3 has multiple complex and tissue-specific functions during
patterning, differentiation and morphogenesis of the thymus and parathyroids.

© 2014. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4197593
PMID: 25249461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;34(20):3867-79. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00567-14. Epub 2014 Aug 
18.

CTCF controls HOXA cluster silencing and mediates PRC2-repressive higher-order
chromatin structure in NT2/D1 cells.

Xu M(1), Zhao GN(1), Lv X(1), Liu G(1), Wang LY(2), Hao DL(1), Wang J(3), Liu
DP(4), Liang CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, People's Republic of 
China. (2)Department of Biochemistry, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China Shenzhen Institute of
Research and Innovation, The University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, People's Republic
of China. (3)Department of Biochemistry, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China Center for Genomic
Sciences, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
People's Republic of China Shenzhen Institute of Research and Innovation, The
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, People's Republic of China. (4)State Key
Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, People's Republic of China
iudp@pumc.edu.cn.

HOX cluster genes are activated sequentially in their positional order along the 
chromosome during vertebrate development. This phenomenon, known as temporal
colinearity, depends on transcriptional silencing of 5' HOX genes. Chromatin
looping was recently identified as a conserved feature of silent HOX clusters,
with CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding sites located at the loop bases.
However, the potential contribution of CTCF to HOX cluster silencing and the
underlying mechanism have not been established. Here, we demonstrate that the
HOXA locus is organized by CTCF into chromatin loops and that CTCF depletion
causes significantly enhanced activation of HOXA3 to -A7, -A9 to -A11, and -A13
in response to retinoic acid, with the highest effect observed for HOXA9. Our
subsequent analyses revealed that CTCF facilitates the stabilization of Polycomb 
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and trimethylated lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3) 
at the human HOXA locus. Our results reveal that CTCF functions as a controller
of HOXA cluster silencing and mediates PRC2-repressive higher-order chromatin
structure.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4187707
PMID: 25135475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Nat Commun. 2014 Jun 25;5:4221. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5221.

Development of oculomotor circuitry independent of hox3 genes.

Ma LH(1), Grove CL(1), Baker R(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Neuroscience and Physiology, New York University Langone
Medical Center, New York, New York 10016, USA [2]. (2)Department of Neuroscience 
and Physiology, New York University Langone Medical Center, New York, New York
10016, USA.

Hox genes have been shown to be essential in vertebrate neural circuit formation 
and their depletion has resulted in homeotic transformations with neuron loss and
miswiring. Here we quantifiy four eye movements in the zebrafish mutant valentino
and hox3 knockdowns, and find that contrary to the classical model, oculomotor
circuits in hindbrain rhombomeres 5-6 develop and function independently of hox3 
genes. All subgroups of oculomotor neurons are present, as well as their input
and output connections. Ectopic connections are also established, targeting two
specific subsets of horizontal neurons, and the resultant novel eye movements
coexists with baseline behaviours. We conclude that the high expression of hox3
genes in rhombomeres 5-6 serves to prevent aberrant neuronal identity and
behaviours, but does not appear to be necessary for a comprehensive assembly of
functional oculomotor circuits.

PMCID: PMC4482236
PMID: 24964400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. BMC Med Genomics. 2014 Apr 15;7:18. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-7-18.

DNA methylation study of fetus genome through a genome-wide analysis.

Wang HD, Hou QF, Guo QN, Li T, Wu D, Zhang XP, Chu Y, He M, Xiao H, Guo LJ, Yang 
K, Liao SX(1), Zhu BF.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetic Institute of Henan Province, Henan Provincial People's
Hospital, People's Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450003, PR China. 
syyliaoshixiu@163.com.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is a crucial epigenetic modification of the genome
which is involved in embryonic development, transcription, chromatin structure, X
chromosome inactivation, genomic imprinting and chromosome stability. Consistent 
with these important roles, DNA methylation has been demonstrated to be required 
for vertebrate early embryogenesis and essential for regulating temporal and
spatial expression of genes controlling cell fate and differentiation. Further
studies have shown that abnormal DNA methylation is associated with human
diseases including the embryonic development diseases. We attempt to study the
DNA methylation status of CpG islands in fetus related to fetus growth and
development.
METHODS: GeneChip® Human Tiling 2.0R Array set is used for analysis of methylated
DNA in a whole-genome wide in 8 pairs amniotic fluid and maternal blood DNA
samples.
RESULTS: We found 1 fetus hypermethylation DNA markers and 4 fetus
hypomethylation DNA markers though a Genome-wide analysis. These DNA markers all 
found to be associated with the critical genes for fetus growth and development
(SH2D3C gene, EML3 gene, TRIM71 gene, HOXA3 gene and HOXA5 gene).
CONCLUSIONS: These genes can be used as a biomarker for association studying of
embryonic development, pathological pregnancy and so on. The present study has
provided new and fundamental insights into the roles that DNA methylation has in 
embryonic development and in the pathological pregnancy.

PMCID: PMC3996908
PMID: 24731722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 30;8(10):e76251. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0076251.
eCollection 2013.

Novel genes associated with colorectal cancer are revealed by high resolution
cytogenetic analysis in a patient specific manner.

Eldai H(1), Periyasamy S, Al Qarni S, Al Rodayyan M, Muhammed Mustafa S, Deeb A, 
Al Sheikh E, Afzal M, Johani M, Yousef Z, Aziz MA.

Author information: 
(1)Bioinformatics, King Abdullah International Medical Research Center, Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2013;8(12).
doi:10.1371/annotation/3f97e271-6926-4766-8430-1b4a009e80c6. Afzal Khan, Mohammed
[corrected to Afzal, Mohammed].

Genomic abnormalities leading to colorectal cancer (CRC) include somatic events
causing copy number aberrations (CNAs) as well as copy neutral manifestations
such as loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and uniparental disomy (UPD). We studied the
causal effect of these events by analyzing high resolution cytogenetic microarray
data of 15 tumor-normal paired samples. We detected 144 genes affected by CNAs. A
subset of 91 genes are known to be CRC related yet high GISTIC scores indicate 24
genes on chromosomes 7, 8, 18 and 20 to be strongly relevant. Combining GISTIC
ranking with functional analyses and degree of loss/gain we identify three genes 
in regions of significant loss (ATP8B1, NARS, and ATP5A1) and eight in regions of
gain (CTCFL, SPO11, ZNF217, PLEKHA8, HOXA3, GPNMB, IGF2BP3 and PCAT1) as novel in
their association with CRC. Pathway and target prediction analysis of CNA
affected genes and microRNAs, respectively indicates TGF-ß signaling pathway to
be involved in causing CRC. Finally, LOH and UPD collectively affected nine
cancer related genes. Transcription factor binding sites on regions of >35% copy 
number loss/gain influenced 16 CRC genes. Our analysis shows patient specific CRC
manifestations at the genomic level and that these different events affect
individual CRC patients differently.

PMCID: PMC3813709
PMID: 24204606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2014 Mar;27(3-4):317-22. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2013-0289.

The absence of mutations in homeobox candidate genes HOXA3, HOXB3, HOXD3 and
PITX2 in familial and sporadic thyroid hemiagenesis.

Kizys MM, Nesi-França S, Cardoso MG, Harada MY, Melo MC, Chiamolera MI,
Dias-da-Silva MR, Maciel RM.

BACKGROUND: The molecular mechanisms leading to the formation of the two thyroid 
symmetrical lobes, which are impaired in thyroid hemiagenesis (TH), are little
known.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this work was to search for mutations in thyroid
developmental candidate genes HOXA3, HOXB3, HOXD3 and PITX2.
METHODS: Total DNA from peripheral blood was extracted and then the entire coding
region of all these genes was amplified by polymerase chain reaction and direct
sequencing.
RESULTS: Herein we describe familial cases of TH in two generations (proband and 
his father), in addition to other two sporadic cases. We have found polymorphisms
in the HOXB3 (rs2229304), HOXD3 (rs34729309, rs1051929, c.543-199G>T and
c.543-34G>A; and a new synonymous variant, NP_008829.3:p.314;C>G) and PITX2
(c.45+76C>T) genes, but no deleterious mutations.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest the existence of other left-right thyroid
asymmetry candidate genes in humans such as classical Mendelian mutation-causing 
disease, as well as other etiopathogenic mechanisms such as epigenetic
modifications, especially for sporadic hemiagenesis.

PMID: 24127533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Front Immunol. 2013 Jul 12;4:187. doi: 10.3389/fimmu.2013.00187. eCollection
2013.

FOXN1: A Master Regulator Gene of Thymic Epithelial Development Program.

Romano R(1), Palamaro L, Fusco A, Giardino G, Gallo V, Del Vecchio L, Pignata C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Medical Sciences, "Federico II" University ,
Naples , Italy.

T cell ontogeny is a sophisticated process, which takes place within the thymus
through a series of well-defined discrete stages. The process requires a proper
lympho-stromal interaction. In particular, cortical and medullary thymic
epithelial cells (cTECs, mTECs) drive T cell differentiation, education, and
selection processes, while the thymocyte-dependent signals allow thymic
epithelial cells (TECs) to maturate and provide an appropriate thymic
microenvironment. Alterations in genes implicated in thymus organogenesis,
including Tbx1, Pax1, Pax3, Pax9, Hoxa3, Eya1, and Six1, affect this
well-orchestrated process, leading to disruption of thymic architecture. Of note,
in both human and mice, the primordial TECs are yet unable to fully support T
cell development and only after the transcriptional activation of the
Forkhead-box n1 (FOXN1) gene in the thymic epithelium this essential function is 
acquired. FOXN1 is a master regulator in the TEC lineage specification in that it
down-stream promotes transcription of genes, which, in turn, regulate TECs
differentiation. In particular, FOXN1 mainly regulates TEC patterning in the
fetal stage and TEC homeostasis in the post-natal thymus. An inborn null mutation
in FOXN1 leads to Nude/severe combined immunodeficiency (SCID) phenotype in
mouse, rat, and humans. In Foxn1 (-/-) nude animals, initial formation of the
primordial organ is arrested and the primordium is not colonized by hematopoietic
precursors, causing a severe primary T cell immunodeficiency. In humans, the
Nude/SCID phenotype is characterized by congenital alopecia of the scalp,
eyebrows, and eyelashes, nail dystrophy, and a severe T cell immunodeficiency,
inherited as an autosomal recessive disorder. Aim of this review is to summarize 
all the scientific information so far available to better characterize the
pivotal role of the master regulator FOXN1 transcription factor in the TEC
lineage specifications and functionality.

PMCID: PMC3709140
PMID: 23874334  [PubMed]


16. J Cell Biochem. 2013 Oct;114(10):2375-83. doi: 10.1002/jcb.24586.

HOX antisense lincRNA HOXA-AS2 is an apoptosis repressor in all trans retinoic
acid treated NB4 promyelocytic leukemia cells.

Zhao H(1), Zhang X, Frazão JB, Condino-Neto A, Newburger PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Massachusetts Medical School,
Worcester, MA 01655, USA.

HOXA cluster antisense RNA 2 (HOXA-AS2) is a long non-coding RNA located between 
the HOXA3 and HOXA4 genes in the HOXA cluster. Its transcript is expressed in NB4
promyelocytic leukemia cells and human peripheral blood neutrophils, and
expression is increased in NB4 cells treated with all trans retinoic acid (ATRA).
Knockdown of HOXA-AS2 expression by transduced shRNA decreases the number of
viable cells and increases the proportion of apoptotic cells, measured by annexin
V binding and by activity and cleavage of caspases-3, -8, and -9. The increase in
death of HOXA-AS2 knockdown cells was accompanied by an elevated TNF-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) levels, but ATRA-induced NB4 cells treated with
TRAIL did show an increase in HOXA-AS2 expression. These results demonstrate that
ATRA induction of HOXA-AS2 suppresses ATRA-induced apoptosis, possibly through a 
TRAIL-mediated pathway. HOXA-AS2-mediated negative regulation thus contributes to
the fine-tuning of apoptosis during ATRA-induced myeloid differentiation in NB4
cells.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3999165
PMID: 23649634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Development. 2013 May;140(9):2015-26. doi: 10.1242/dev.087320.

Dynamics of thymus organogenesis and colonization in early human development.

Farley AM(1), Morris LX, Vroegindeweij E, Depreter ML, Vaidya H, Stenhouse FH,
Tomlinson SR, Anderson RA, Cupedo T, Cornelissen JJ, Blackburn CC.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, Institute for Stem Cell Research, School
of Biological Sciences, University of Edinburgh, CRM Building, 5 Little France
Drive, Edinburgh..

The thymus is the central site of T-cell development and thus is of fundamental
importance to the immune system, but little information exists regarding
molecular regulation of thymus development in humans. Here we demonstrate, via
spatial and temporal expression analyses, that the genetic mechanisms known to
regulate mouse thymus organogenesis are conserved in humans. In addition, we
provide molecular evidence that the human thymic epithelium derives solely from
the third pharyngeal pouch, as in the mouse, in contrast to previous suggestions.
Finally, we define the timing of onset of hematopoietic cell colonization and
epithelial cell differentiation in the human thymic primordium, showing,
unexpectedly, that the first colonizing hematopoietic cells are
CD45(+)CD34(int/-). Collectively, our data provide essential information for
translation of principles established in the mouse to the human, and are of
particular relevance to development of improved strategies for enhancing immune
reconstitution in patients.

PMCID: PMC3631974
PMID: 23571219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Dev Dyn. 2013 Feb;242(2):164-78. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.23905. Epub 2012 Dec 5.

Early development of the thymus in Xenopus laevis.

Lee YH(1), Williams A, Hong CS, You Y, Senoo M, Saint-Jeannet JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Anatomy, School of Dentistry and Institute of Oral
Biosciences, Chonbuk National University, Jeonju, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Although Xenopus laevis has been a model of choice for comparative
and developmental studies of the immune system, little is known about
organogenesis of the thymus, a primary lymphoid organ in vertebrates. Here we
examined the expression of three transcription factors that have been
functionally associated with pharyngeal gland development, gcm2, hoxa3, and
foxn1, and evaluated the neural crest contribution to thymus development.
RESULTS: In most species Hoxa3 is expressed in the third pharyngeal pouch
endoderm where it directs thymus formation. In Xenopus, the thymus primordium is 
derived from the second pharyngeal pouch endoderm, which is hoxa3-negative,
suggesting that a different mechanism regulates thymus formation in frogs. Unlike
other species foxn1 is not detected in the epithelium of the pharyngeal pouch in 
Xenopus, rather, its expression is initiated as thymic epithelial cell starts to 
differentiate and express MHC class II molecules. Using transplantation
experiments we show that while neural crest cells populate the thymus primordia, 
they are not required for the specification and initial development of this organ
or for T-cell differentiation in frogs.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies provide novel information on early thymus development 
in Xenopus, and highlight a number of features that distinguish Xenopus from
other organisms.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc., a Wiley company.

PMCID: PMC3640628
PMID: 23172757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jan;98(1):362-71. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-2953. Epub
2012 Nov 12.

Distinct developmental signatures of human abdominal and gluteal subcutaneous
adipose tissue depots.

Karastergiou K(1), Fried SK, Xie H, Lee MJ, Divoux A, Rosencrantz MA, Chang RJ,
Smith SR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Nutrition, Department of Medicine,
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

CONTEXT: Fat distribution differs in men and women, but in both sexes, a
predominantly gluteal-femoral compared with abdominal (central) fat distribution 
is associated with lower metabolic risk. Differences in cellular characteristics 
and metabolic functions of these depots have been described, but the molecular
mechanisms involved are not understood.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to identify depot- and sex-dependent differences in 
gene expression in human abdominal and gluteal sc adipose tissues.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Abdominal and gluteal adipose tissue aspirates were obtained 
from 14 premenopausal women [age 27.5 ± 7.0 yr, body mass index (BMI) 27.3 ± 6.2 
kg/m(2), and waist-to-hip ratio 0.82 ± 0.04] and 21 men (age 29.7±7.4 yr, BMI
27.2 ± 4.5 kg/m(2), and waist-to-hip ratio 0.91 ± 0.07) and transcriptomes were
analyzed using Illumina microarrays. Expression of selected genes was determined 
in isolated adipocytes and stromal vascular fractions from each depot, and in in 
vitro cultures before and after adipogenic differentiation.
RESULTS: A total of 284 genes were differentially expressed between the abdominal
and gluteal depot, either specifically in males (n = 66) or females (n = 159) or 
in both sexes (n = 59). Most notably, gene ontology and pathway analysis
identified homeobox genes (HOXA2, HOXA3, HOXA4, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB7, HOXB8,
HOXC8, and IRX2) that were down-regulated in the gluteal depot in both sexes (P =
2 × 10(-10)). Conversely, HOXA10 was up-regulated in gluteal tissue and HOXC13
was detected exclusively in this depot. These differences were independent of
BMI, were present in both adipocytes and stromal vascular fractions of adipose
tissue, and were retained throughout in vitro differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that developmentally programmed differences may
contribute to the distinct phenotypic characteristics of peripheral fat.

PMCID: PMC3537084
PMID: 23150689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. J Comp Neurol. 2013 Feb 15;521(3):697-708. doi: 10.1002/cne.23200.

The interfascicular trigeminal nucleus: a precerebellar nucleus in the mouse
defined by retrograde neuronal tracing and genetic fate mapping.

Fu Y(1), Tvrdik P, Makki N, Machold R, Paxinos G, Watson C.

Author information: 
(1)Neuroscience Research Australia, Randwick, New South Wales 2031, Australia.

We have found a previously unreported precerebellar nucleus located among the
emerging fibers of the motor root of the trigeminal nerve in the mouse, which we 
have called the interfascicular trigeminal nucleus (IF5). This nucleus had
previously been named the tensor tympani part of the motor trigeminal nucleus
(5TT) in rodent brain atlases, because it was thought to be a subset of small
motor neurons of the motor trigeminal nucleus innervating the tensor tympani
muscle. However, following injection of retrograde tracer in the cerebellum, the 
labeled neurons in IF5 were found to be choline acetyltransferase (ChAT)
negative, indicating that they are not motor neurons. The cells of IF5 are
strongly labeled in mice from Wnt1Cre and Atoh1 CreER lineage fate mapping, in
common with the major precerebellar nuclei that arise from the rhombic lip and
that issue mossy fibers. Analysis of sections from mouse Hoxa3, Hoxb1, and Egr2
Cre labeled lineages shows that the neurons of IF5 arise from rhombomeres caudal 
to rhombomere 4, most likely from rhombomeres 6-8. We conclude that IF5 is a
significant precerebellar nucleus in the mouse that shares developmental gene
expression characteristics with mossy fiber precerebellar nuclei that arise from 
the caudal rhombic lip.

Copyright © 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3936347
PMID: 22829396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2012 May;153(1):148-51.

Peptides tissue-specifically stimulate cell differentiation during their aging.

Khavinson VKh(1), Linkova NS, Polyakova VO, Kheifets OV, Tarnovskaya SI, Kvetnoy 
IM.

Author information: 
(1)I. P. Pavlov Institute of Physiology, Russian Academy of Sciences, St.
Petersburg, Russia.

We verified expression of CXCL12 and Hoxa3 transcription factors of
differentiation in cultures of human embryonic pancreatic and bronchial cells and
CXCL12 and WEGC1 factors in a culture of human prostatic fibroblasts. Reduced
expression of these differentiation markers was detected in late-passage (aging) 
cultures. The expression of differentiation factors CXCL12, Hoxa3, and WEGC1 was 
tissue-specifically stimulated by short peptides: pancragen (Lys-Glu-Asp-Trp) in 
pancreatic cells, bronchogen (Ala-Glu-Asp-Leu) in bronchial epithelial cells, and
vesugen (Lys-Glu-Asp) in fibroblasts. The inducing effect of peptides on the
expression of differentiation factors was more pronounced in aged cultures, which
can serve as a mechanism of their geroprotective effect.

PMID: 22808515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Transl Res. 2012 Nov;160(5):355-62. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2012.05.007. Epub 2012
Jun 23.

HOXA7, 9, and 10 are methylation targets associated with aggressive behavior in
meningiomas.

Di Vinci A(1), Brigati C, Casciano I, Banelli B, Borzì L, Forlani A, Ravetti GL, 
Allemanni G, Melloni I, Zona G, Spaziante R, Merlo DF, Romani M.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Tumor Genetics and Epigenetics, IRCCS AOU San Martino - IST, Genova,
Italy.

Meningioma is one of the most common intracranial tumors and is graded according 
to the World Health Organization (WHO) classification system. Although these
tumors are often surgically curable, a malignant behavior also may occur in
meningiomas with benign histologic profiles (WHO I). Thus, it is mandatory to
identify biomolecular parameters useful to improve the classification of these
tumors. HOXA genes belong to the HOX gene family that encodes
homeodomain-containing transcription factors known to be key regulators of
embryonic development, involved in cell growth and differentiation and in the
development of the central nervous system. Moreover, altered HOXA gene
methylation and expression have prognostic value in many tumors. The purpose of
this study was to determine whether the level of HOXA3, 7, 9, and 10 methylation 
in meningioma could be a biomarker linked to the pathologic characteristics of
the tumor. We found that methylation levels of HOXA7, 9, and 10 in 131 meningioma
samples were significantly higher in WHO II/III tumors compared with WHO I
tumors. Moreover, in newly diagnosed WHO I meningiomas, HOXA7, 9, and 10
methylation was significantly lower than in WHO I samples derived from recurring 
tumors, and multiple meningiomas presented significantly higher HOXA 10
methylation with respect to solitary meningiomas. This study demonstrates that
HOXA7, 9, and 10 are methylation targets in meningioma, associated with
histopathology and clinical aggressiveness parameters. Our findings suggest the
possibility of detecting the malignancy potential of meningioma by assessing the 
HOXA methylation level and identifying patients at higher risk who could benefit 
from closer follow-up or postoperative adjuvant treatments.

Copyright © 2012 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22735029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Hepatobiliary Pancreat Dis Int. 2012 Jun;11(3):319-24.

Induction, modulation and potential targets of miR-210 in pancreatic cancer
cells.

Chen WY(1), Liu WJ, Zhao YP, Zhou L, Zhang TP, Chen G, Shu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing,
China.

BACKGROUND: MiR-210 is induced by hypoxia and plays different roles in the
development of certain cancers. However, little is known about its role in
pancreatic cancer (PC). This study aimed to explore the induction and modulation 
of PC by miR-210 and its potential molecular targets.
METHODS: PC cells were cultured under normoxic and hypoxic conditions. Expression
of miR-210 and hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF)-1alpha was detected using
quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction. Cancer cells were
transiently transfected with HIF-1alpha small interfering RNA (siRNA) and miR-210
mimics, and cell proliferation was measured using the CCK-8 assay. Potential
targets for miR-210 were then identified using a dual luciferase reporter assay.
RESULTS: Hypoxic conditions induced miR-210 expression in six PC cell lines
(AsPC-1, BxPC-3, MIAPaCa-2, PANC-1, Su86.86 and SW1990), but not in Capan-1 or
T3M4 cells. Transfection of HIF-1alpha siRNA into PANC-1 cells markedly inhibited
HIF-1alpha expression, and subsequently down-regulated miR-210 expression under
hypoxic conditions. MiR-210 had no observable impact on the proliferation of
PANC-1 or Su86.86 cells and dual luciferase reporter assays showed significantly 
reduced luciferase activity in the wild-type E2F3, EFNA3, GIT2, MNT, ZNF462 and
EGR3 constructs, compared to the corresponding mutants, but not in HOXA3.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that miR-210 expression in PC cells is induced
by hypoxia through a HIF-1alpha-dependent pathway, but does not influence PC cell
proliferation. Also, E2F3, EFNA3, GIT2, MNT, ZNF462 and EGR3 may be potential
miR-210 targets in PC.

PMID: 22672828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Circ Cardiovasc Genet. 2012 Aug 1;5(4):430-40. doi:
10.1161/CIRCGENETICS.111.962415. Epub 2012 Jun 5.

Integrated computational and experimental analysis of the neuroendocrine
transcriptome in genetic hypertension identifies novel control points for the
cardiometabolic syndrome.

Friese RS(1), Ye C, Nievergelt CM, Schork AJ, Mahapatra NR, Rao F, Napolitan PS, 
Waalen J, Ehret GB, Munroe PB, Schmid-Schönbein GW, Eskin E, O'Connor DT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioengineering, University of California at San Diego School of 
Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0838, USA.

BACKGROUND: Essential hypertension, a common complex disease, displays
substantial genetic influence. Contemporary methods to dissect the genetic basis 
of complex diseases such as the genomewide association study are powerful, yet a 
large gap exists between the fraction of population trait variance explained by
such associations and total disease heritability.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We developed a novel, integrative method (combining animal
models, transcriptomics, bioinformatics, molecular biology, and trait-extreme
phenotypes) to identify candidate genes for essential hypertension and the
metabolic syndrome. We first undertook transcriptome profiling on adrenal glands 
from blood pressure extreme mouse strains: the hypertensive BPH (blood pressure
high) and hypotensive BPL (blood pressure low). Microarray data clustering
revealed a striking pattern of global underexpression of intermediary metabolism 
transcripts in BPH. The MITRA algorithm identified a conserved motif in the
transcriptional regulatory regions of the underexpressed metabolic genes, and we 
then hypothesized that regulation through this motif contributed to the global
underexpression. Luciferase reporter assays demonstrated transcriptional activity
of the motif through transcription factors HOXA3, SRY, and YY1. We finally
hypothesized that genetic variation at HOXA3, SRY, and YY1 might predict blood
pressure and other metabolic syndrome traits in humans. Tagging variants for each
locus were associated with blood pressure in a human population blood pressure
extreme sample with the most extensive associations for YY1 tagging single
nucleotide polymorphism rs11625658 on systolic blood pressure, diastolic blood
pressure, body mass index, and fasting glucose. Meta-analysis extended the YY1
results into 2 additional large population samples with significant effects
preserved on diastolic blood pressure, body mass index, and fasting glucose.
CONCLUSIONS: The results outline an innovative, systematic approach to the
genetic pathogenesis of complex cardiovascular disease traits and point to
transcription factor YY1 as a potential candidate gene involved in essential
hypertension and the cardiometabolic syndrome.

PMCID: PMC3467001
PMID: 22670052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27624. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027624. Epub 2011 Nov 16.

A retinoic acid responsive Hoxa3 transgene expressed in embryonic pharyngeal
endoderm, cardiac neural crest and a subdomain of the second heart field.

Diman NY(1), Remacle S, Bertrand N, Picard JJ, Zaffran S, Rezsohazy R.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Animal Embryology group, Life Sciences Institute,
Université catholique de Louvain, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

A transgenic mouse line harbouring a ß-galacdosidase reporter gene controlled by 
the proximal 2 kb promoter of Hoxa3 was previously generated to investigate the
regulatory cues governing Hoxa3 expression in the mouse. Examination of
transgenic embryos from embryonic day (E) 8.0 to E15.5 revealed regionally
restricted reporter activity in the developing heart. Indeed, transgene
expression specifically delineated cells from three distinct lineages: a
subpopulation of the second heart field contributing to outflow tract myocardium,
the cardiac neural crest cells and the pharyngeal endoderm. Manipulation of the
Retinoic Acid (RA) signaling pathway showed that RA is required for correct
expression of the transgene. Therefore, this transgenic line may serve as a
cardiosensor line of particular interest for further analysis of outflow tract
development.

PMCID: PMC3217993
PMID: 22110697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2012 Jan;138(1):35-47. doi: 10.1007/s00432-011-1070-5.
Epub 2011 Sep 27.

Quantitative methylation analysis of HOXA3, 7, 9, and 10 genes in glioma:
association with tumor WHO grade and clinical outcome.

Di Vinci A(1), Casciano I, Marasco E, Banelli B, Ravetti GL, Borzì L, Brigati C, 
Forlani A, Dorcaratto A, Allemanni G, Zona G, Spaziante R, Gohlke H, Gardin G,
Merlo DF, Mantovani V, Romani M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Genetics and Epigenetics, Istituto Nazionale per la
Ricerca sul Cancro, IST Largo Rosanna Benzi 10, 16132, Genoa, Italy.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether specific HOXA
epigenetic signatures could differentiate glioma with distinct biological,
pathological, and clinical characteristics.
METHODS: We evaluated HOXA3, 7, 9, and 10 methylation in 63 glioma samples by
MassARRAY and pyrosequencing.
RESULTS: We demonstrated the direct statistical correlation between the level of 
methylation of all HOXA genes examined and WHO grading. Moreover, in glioblastoma
patients, higher level of HOXA9 and HOXA10 methylation significantly correlated
with increased survival probability (HOXA9-HR: 0.36, P = 0.007; HOXA10-HR: 0.46, 
P = 0.045; combined HOXA9 and 10-HR 0.28, P = 0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: This study identifies HOXA3, 7, 9, and 10 as methylation targets
mainly in high-grade glioma and hypermethylation of the HOXA9 and 10 as
prognostic factor in glioblastoma patients. Our data indicate that these
epigenetic changes may be biomarkers of clinically different subgroups of glioma 
patients that could eventually benefit from personalized therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 21947269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Toxicol Sci. 2011 Dec;124(2):370-7. doi: 10.1093/toxsci/kfr245. Epub 2011 Sep 20.

Development of a neural teratogenicity test based on human embryonic stem cells: 
response to retinoic acid exposure.

Colleoni S(1), Galli C, Gaspar JA, Meganathan K, Jagtap S, Hescheler J,
Sachinidis A, Lazzari G.

Author information: 
(1)Avantea, Laboratory of Reproductive Technologies, 26100 Cremona, Italy.
silviacolleoni@avantea.it

The aim of this study was the development of an alternative testing method based 
on human embryonic stem cells for prenatal developmental toxicity with particular
emphasis on early neural development. To this purpose, we designed an in vitro
protocol based on the generation of neural rosettes, representing the in vitro
counterpart of the developing neural plate and neural tube, and we challenged
this complex cell model with retinoic acid (RA), a well-known teratogenic agent. 
The cells were exposed to different concentrations of RA during the process of
rosettes formation. Morphological and molecular parameters were evaluated in
treated as compared with untreated cells to detect both cytotoxicity and specific
neural toxicity. Transcriptomic analysis was performed with microarray Affymetrix
platform and validated by quantitative real-time PCR for genes relevant to early 
neural development such as HoxA1, HoxA3, HoxB1, HoxB4, FoxA2, FoxC1, Otx2, and
Pax7. The results obtained demonstrated that neural rosette forming cells respond
to RA with clear concentration-dependent morphological, and gene expression
changes remarkably similar to those induced in vivo, in the developing neural
tube, by RA exposure. This strict correspondence indicates that the neural
rosette protocol described is capable of detecting specific teratogenic
mechanisms causing perturbations of early neural development and therefore
represents a promising alternative test for human prenatal developmental
toxicity.

PMID: 21934132  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Mol Reprod Dev. 2011 Jun;78(6):436-49. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21321. Epub 2011 May 12.

HOX genes are expressed in bovine and mouse oocytes and early embryos.

Paul D(1), Bridoux L, Rezsöhazy R, Donnay I.

Author information: 
(1)Université Catholique de Louvain, Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Embryologie
Moléculaire et Cellulaire Animale, Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium.

HOX proteins are transcription factors that play a major role in patterning the
body axis of vertebrates from the gastrulation stage. While nothing has been
reported so far about their roles at earlier stages, there is evidence that some 
HOX genes are expressed before gastrulation. The objective of this work was to
study the pattern of expression of several HOX genes during oocyte maturation and
early embryonic development up to the blastocyst stage. Using nested PCR, HOXD1, 
HOXA3, HOXD4, HOXB7, HOXB9, and HOXC9 transcripts were detected in bovine oocytes
and early embryos at various frequencies depending on the stage of development.
Quantitative PCR was performed on bovine oocytes and early embryos: relative
expression of HOXD1, HOXA3, and HOXC9 decreased sharply after the 5-8 cell stage.
HOXB9 relative expression increased between the oocyte and the morula stage. All 
transcripts seemed to be of maternal origin before the maternal to embryonic
transition, as demonstrated by blocking transcription with a-amanitin. Reverse
transcription was performed with either hexamers or oligo-dT, allowing for the
determination that HOXC9 transcripts were slightly deadenylated during oocyte
maturation; HOXD1, HOXA3, and HOXB9 transcripts were not, indicating that they
could be translated. Hoxd1, Hoxa3, Hoxb9, and Hoxc9 expression was also detected 
in mouse oocytes and early embryos. A similar pattern of expression was found in 
the two species. In conclusion, mammalian HOX genes might be implicated in the
control of oocyte maturation, the maternal-to-embryonic transition or the first
steps of embryo differentiation.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21567651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Dev Biol. 2011 May 15;353(2):266-74. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.02.029. Epub 2011 
Mar 6.

Hox genes define distinct progenitor sub-domains within the second heart field.

Bertrand N(1), Roux M, Ryckebüsch L, Niederreither K, Dollé P, Moon A, Capecchi
M, Zaffran S.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire de Génétique Médicale et Génomique Fonctionnelle, Inserm UMR_S910,
Université d'Aix-Marseille, 27 Bd Jean Moulin, 13005 Marseille, France.
nicolas.bertrand@univmed.fr

Much of the heart, including the atria, right ventricle and outflow tract (OFT)
is derived from a progenitor cell population termed the second heart field (SHF) 
that contributes progressively to the embryonic heart during cardiac looping.
Several studies have revealed anterior-posterior patterning of the SHF, since the
anterior region (anterior heart field) contributes to right ventricular and OFT
myocardium whereas the posterior region gives rise to the atria. We have
previously shown that Retinoic Acid (RA) signal participates to this patterning. 
We now show that Hoxb1, Hoxa1, and Hoxa3, as downstream RA targets, are expressed
in distinct sub-domains within the SHF. Our genetic lineage tracing analysis
revealed that Hoxb1, Hoxa1 and Hoxa3-expressing cardiac progenitor cells
contribute to both atria and the inferior wall of the OFT, which subsequently
gives rise to myocardium at the base of pulmonary trunk. By contrast to
Hoxb1(Cre), the contribution of Hoxa1-enhIII-Cre and Hoxa3(Cre)-labeled cells is 
restricted to the distal regions of the OFT suggesting that proximo-distal
patterning of the OFT is related to SHF sub-domains characterized by
combinatorial Hox genes expression. Manipulation of RA signaling pathways showed 
that RA is required for the correct deployment of Hox-expressing SHF cells. This 
report provides new insights into the regulatory gene network in SHF cells
contributing to the atria and sub-pulmonary myocardium.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3115524
PMID: 21385575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Dev Biol. 2011 May 15;353(2):194-205. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2011.02.012. Epub 2011
Feb 22.

Shh signalling restricts the expression of Gcm2 and controls the position of the 
developing parathyroids.

Grevellec A(1), Graham A, Tucker AS.

Author information: 
(1)King's College London, Department of Craniofacial Development and
Orthodontics, Floor 27 Guy's Tower, Guy's Hospital, London Bridge, London SE1
9RT, UK.

The parathyroid glands originate from the endoderm of the caudal pharyngeal
pouches. How these parathyroids are restricted to developing in the caudal
pouches is unclear. In this paper we investigate the role of Shh signalling in
patterning the vertebrate pharyngeal pouches, and show that Hh signalling may be 
involved in restricting the expression of the parathyroid marker Gcm2 in the
pharyngeal epithelium. In the chick and mouse, Shh signalling is excluded or
highly reduced in the posterior/caudal pouches, where the parathyroid marker Gcm2
is expressed, while remaining at high levels in the more anterior pouches.
Moreover, though the block of Shh signalling at early developmental stages
results in the loss of chick Gcm2 expression, at later stages, it induces ectopic
Gcm2 expression domains in the second and first pharyngeal epithelium, suggesting
that HH signalling prevents Gcm2 in those tissues. These ectopic domains go on to
express other parathyroid markers but do not migrate and develop into ectopic
parathyroids. Differences in the expression of Gcm2 in the chick, mouse and
zebrafish, correlate with changing patterns of Shh signalling, indicating a
conserved regulatory mechanism that acts to define pouch derivatives.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21349263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Am J Med Genet A. 2011 Mar;155A(3):642-7. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33860. Epub 2011
Feb 22.

Molecular cytogenetic and clinical characterization of a patient with a 5.6-Mb
deletion in 7p15 including HOXA cluster.

Jun KR(1), Seo EJ, Lee JO, Yoo HW, Park IS, Yoon HK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Asan Medical Center, University of Ulsan
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Here, we describe the clinical features of a boy with a 5.6-Mb deletion at
chromosome 7p15.1-p15.3. He has mild facial anomalies, hand-foot abnormalities,
hypospadias, congenital heart defects, and supernumerary nipples. This deletion
was detected by array comparative genomic hybridization and verified by
fluorescence in situ hybridization using BACs selected from the USCS genome
browser. This deletion was not found in subsequent FISH analysis of the parental 
chromosomes. The deleted region contains several genes, including contiguous
developmental genes on the HOXA cluster, which play a role in regulating aspects 
of morphogenesis during normal embryonic development. The patient's limb and
urogenital features were similar to those observed in hand-foot-genital syndrome,
which is caused by haploinsufficiency of HOXA13, whereas the congenital heart
defect may reflect the deletion of HOXA3. We hypothesized that many clinical
features of the patient were due to combined haploinsufficiency of the HOXA
cluster. Our study also demonstrates the clinical usefulness of a molecular
cytogenetic tool that is capable of detecting imbalances in the genome.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21344639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Int J Biol Sci. 2011 Jan 19;7(1):87-101.

Chicken HOXA3 gene: its expression pattern and role in branchial nerve precursor 
cell migration.

Watari-Goshima N(1), Chisaka O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan.

In vertebrates, the proximal and distal sensory ganglia of the branchial nerves
are derived from neural crest cells (NCCs) and placodes, respectively. We
previously reported that in Hoxa3 knockout mouse embryos, NCCs and
placode-derived cells of the glossopharyngeal nerve were defective in their
migration. In this report, to determine the cell-type origin for this Hoxa3
knockout phenotype, we blocked the expression of the gene with antisense
morpholino oligonucleotides (MO) specifically in either NCCs/neural tube or
placodal cells of chicken embryos. Our results showed that HOXA3 function was
required for the migration of the epibranchial placode-derived cells and that
HOXA3 regulated this cell migration in both NCCs/neural tube and placodal cells. 
We also report that the expression pattern of chicken HOXA3 was slightly
different from that of mouse Hoxa3.

PMCID: PMC3030145
PMID: 21278919  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Cell Adh Migr. 2011 Mar-Apr;5(2):133-41. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Temporal changes in Hox gene expression accompany endothelial cell
differentiation of embryonic stem cells.

Bahrami SB(1), Veiseh M, Dunn AA, Boudreau NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery; University of California-San Francisco, CA, USA.

In pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESCs), expression of the Hox master
regulatory transcription factors that play essential roles in organogenesis,
angiogenesis, and maintenance of differentiated tissues, is globally suppressed. 
We investigated whether differentiation of endothelial cells (ECs) from mouse
ESCs was accompanied by activation of distinct Hox gene expression profiles.
Differentiation was observed within 3 days, as indicated by the appearance of
cells expressing specific endothelial marker genes (Flk-1+ /VE-Cadherin+ ).
Expression of HoxA3 and HoxD3, which drive adult endothelial cell invasion and
angiogenesis, peaked at day 3 and declined thereafter, whereas expression of
HoxA5 and HoxD10, which maintain a mature quiescent EC phenotype, was low at day 
3, but increased over time. The temporal and reciprocal changes in HoxD3 and
HoxA5 expression were accompanied by corresponding changes in expression of
established downstream target genes including integrin ß3 and Thrombospondin-2.
Our results indicate that differentiation and maturation of ECs derived from
cultured ESCs mimic changes in Hox gene expression that accompany maturation of
immature angiogenic endothelium into differentiated quiescent endothelium in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC3084978
PMID: 21200152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Nat Cell Biol. 2011 Jan;13(1):72-8. doi: 10.1038/ncb2137. Epub 2010 Dec 19.

HoxA3 is an apical regulator of haemogenic endothelium.

Iacovino M(1), Chong D, Szatmari I, Hartweck L, Rux D, Caprioli A, Cleaver O,
Kyba M.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute and Department of Pediatrics, University of
Minnesota, 312 Church St. SE, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

During development, haemogenesis occurs invariably at sites of vasculogenesis.
Between embryonic day (E) 9.5 and E10.5 in mice, endothelial cells in the caudal 
part of the dorsal aorta generate haematopoietic stem cells and are referred to
as haemogenic endothelium. The mechanisms by which haematopoiesis is restricted
to this domain, and how the morphological transformation from endothelial to
haematopoietic is controlled are unknown. We show here that HoxA3, a gene
uniquely expressed in the embryonic but not yolk sac vasculature, restrains
haematopoietic differentiation of the earliest endothelial progenitors, and
induces reversion of the earliest haematopoietic progenitors into CD41-negative
endothelial cells. This reversible modulation of endothelial-haematopoietic state
is accomplished by targeting key haematopoietic transcription factors for
downregulation, including Runx1, Gata1, Gfi1B, Ikaros, and PU.1. Through
loss-of-function, and gain-of-function epistasis experiments, and the
identification of antipodally regulated targets, we show that among these
factors, Runx1 is uniquely able to erase the endothelial program set up by HoxA3.
These results suggest both why a frank endothelium does not precede
haematopoiesis in the yolk sac, and why haematopoietic stem cell generation
requires Runx1 expression only in endothelial cells.

PMCID: PMC3079247
PMID: 21170035  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Leukemia. 2011 Mar;25(3):429-39. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.282. Epub 2010 Nov 30.

Hypermethylation of specific microRNA genes in MLL-rearranged infant acute
lymphoblastic leukemia: major matters at a micro scale.

Stumpel DJ(1), Schotte D, Lange-Turenhout EA, Schneider P, Seslija L, de Menezes 
RX, Marquez VE, Pieters R, den Boer ML, Stam RW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus Medical Center, Sophia
Children's Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

MLL-rearranged acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in infants (<1 year) is the
most aggressive type of childhood leukemia. To develop more suitable treatment
strategies, a firm understanding of the biology underlying this disease is of
utmost importance. MLL-rearranged ALL displays a unique gene expression profile, 
partly explained by erroneous histone modifications. We recently showed that
t(4;11)-positive infant ALL is also characterized by pronounced promoter CpG
hypermethylation. In this study, we investigated whether this widespread
hypermethylation also affected microRNA (miRNA) expression. We identified 11
miRNAs that were downregulated in t(4;11)-positive infant ALL as a consequence of
CpG hypermethylation. Seven of these miRNAs were re-activated after exposure to
the de-methylating agent Zebularine. Interestingly, five of these miRNAs are
associated either with MLL or MLL fusions, and for miR-152 we found both MLL and 
DNA methyltransferase 1 (DNMT1) as potential targeted genes. Finally, a high
degree of methylation of the miR-152 CpG island was strongly correlated with a
poor clinical outcome. Our data suggests that inhibitors of methylation have a
potential beyond re-expression of hypermethylated protein-coding genes in
t(4;11)-positive infant ALL. In this study, we provide additional evidence that
they should be tested for their efficacy in MLL-rearranged infant ALL in in vivo 
models.

PMID: 21116279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Blood. 2011 Jan 20;117(3):815-26. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-12-259549. Epub 2010
Oct 25.

Hoxa3 promotes the differentiation of hematopoietic progenitor cells into
proangiogenic Gr-1+CD11b+ myeloid cells.

Mahdipour E(1), Charnock JC, Mace KA.

Author information: 
(1)The Healing Foundation Centre, Faculty of Life Sciences, University of
Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Injury induces the recruitment of bone marrow-derived cells (BMDCs) that
contribute to the repair and regeneration process. The behavior of BMDCs in
injured tissue has a profound effect on repair, but the regulation of BMDC
behavior is poorly understood. Aberrant recruitment/retention of these cells in
wounds of diabetic patients and animal models is associated with chronic
inflammation and impaired healing. BMD Gr-1(+)CD11b(+) cells function as immune
suppressor cells and contribute significantly to tumor-induced
neovascularization. Here we report that Gr-1(+)CD11b(+) cells also contribute to 
injury-induced neovascularization, but show altered recruitment/retention
kinetics in the diabetic environment. Moreover, diabetic-derived Gr-1(+)CD11b(+) 
cells fail to stimulate neovascularization in vivo and have aberrant
proliferative, chemotaxis, adhesion, and differentiation potential. Previously we
demonstrated that gene transfer of HOXA3 to wounds of diabetic mice is taken up
by and expressed by recruited BMDCs. This is associated with a suppressed
inflammatory response, enhanced neovascularization, and accelerated wound
healing. Here we show that sustained expression of Hoxa3 in diabetic-derived BMD 
Gr-1(+)CD11b(+) cells reverses their diabetic phenotype. These findings
demonstrate that manipulation of adult stem/progenitor cells ex vivo could be
used as a potential therapy in patients with impaired wound healing.

PMID: 20974673  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2010;92:103-20. doi: 10.1016/S1877-1173(10)92005-X.

Transcriptional regulation of thymus organogenesis and thymic epithelial cell
differentiation.

Manley NR(1), Condie BG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia. Athens, Georgia, USA.

Transcriptional regulatory networks are the central regulatory mechanisms that
control organ identity, patterning, and differentiation. In the case of the
thymus, several key transcription factors have been identified that are critical 
for various aspects of thymus organogenesis and thymic epithelial cell (TEC)
differentiation. The thymus forms from the third pharyngeal pouch endoderm during
embryogenesis. Organ development progresses from initial thymus cell fate
specification, through multiple stages of TEC differentiation and cortical (cTEC)
and medullary (mTEC) formation. Transcription factors have been identified for
each of these stages: a Hoxa3-dependent cascade at initial fate specification,
Foxn1 for early (and later) TEC differentiation, and NF-kappaB for mTEC
differentiation. As important as these factors are, their interrelationships are 
not understood, and many more transcription factors are likely required for
complete thymus organogenesis to occur. In this chapter, we review the literature
on these known genes, as well as identify gaps in our knowledge for future
studies.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20800818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Immunol Cell Biol. 2011 Feb;89(2):314-21. doi: 10.1038/icb.2010.96. Epub 2010 Aug
3.

Differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells to thymic epithelial cells by
phenotype.

Inami Y(1), Yoshikai T, Ito S, Nishio N, Suzuki H, Sakurai H, Isobe K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine,
Showa-ku, Nagoya, Japan.

Thymic epithelial cells (TECs) are present in both cortical and medullary thymic 
areas, and have crucial roles in functional T-cell development. In this study, we
studied the differentiation of induced pluripotent stem cells (iPSCs) to TEC.
When iPSC were cultured for 4 days in collagen IV-coated dishes in the presence
of both activin A and lithium chloride (LiCl), the cells differentiated to
definitive endoderm through mesendoderm. Further treatment with Fgf8 followed by 
Fgf7, Fgf10 and BMP4 differentiated iPSC to thymic epithelial progenitor cells
(TEPCs) by phenotype. Gene expression of Hoxa3, Pax1 and Pax9 was observed and
cell surface proteins EpCAM1 and MTS24 were detected at day 14 of iPSC
differentiation. TEPCs differentiated to medullary TECs (mTECs) by phenotype
following the addition of receptor activator nuclear factor B ligand with LiCl.
Thus, we successfully induced efficient differentiation from mouse iPSC to TEPCs 
and mTEC by phenotype using chemically defined conditions.

PMID: 20680027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010 Dec 1;55(6):1072-82. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22749.

HOX gene expression in phenotypic and genotypic subgroups and low HOXA gene
expression as an adverse prognostic factor in pediatric ALL.

Starkova J(1), Zamostna B, Mejstrikova E, Krejci R, Drabkin HA, Trka J.

Author information: 
(1)CLIP, Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, 2nd Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
julia.starkova@lfmotol.cuni.cz

BACKGROUND: HOX genes play an important role in both normal lymphopoiesis and
leukemogenesis. However, HOX expression patterns in leukemia cells compared to
normal lymphoid progenitors have not been systematically studied in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) subtypes.
PROCEDURE: The RNA expression levels of HOXA, HOXB, and CDX1/2 genes were
analyzed by qRT-PCR in a cohort of 61 diagnostic pediatric ALL samples and
FACS-sorted subpopulations of normal lymphoid progenitors.
RESULTS: The RNA expression of HOXA7-10, HOXA13, and HOXB2-4 genes was
exclusively detected in leukemic cells and immature progenitors. The RNA
expression of HOXB6 and CDX2 genes was exclusively detected in leukemic cells but
not in B-lineage cells at any of the studied developmental stages. HOXA3-4,
HOXA7, and HOXB3-4 genes were differentially expressed between BCP-ALL and T-ALL 
subgroups, and among genotypically defined MLL/AF4, TEL/AML1, BCR/ABL,
hyperdiploid and normal karyotype subgroups. However, this differential
expression did not define specific clusters in hierarchical cluster analysis.
HOXA7 gene was low expressed at the RNA level in patients with hyperdiploid
leukemia, whereas HOXB7 and CDX2 genes were low expressed in TEL/AML1-positive
and BCR/ABL-positive cases, respectively. In contrast to previous findings in
acute myeloid leukemia, high HOXA RNA expression was associated with an excellent
prognosis in Cox's regression model (P = 0.03). In MLL/AF4-positive ALL, lower
HOXA RNA expression correlated with the methylation status of their promoters.
CONCLUSIONS: HOX gene RNA expression cannot discriminate leukemia subgroups or
relative maturity of leukemic cells. However, HOXA RNA expression correlates with
prognosis, and particular HOX genes are expressed in specific genotypically
characterized subgroups.

PMID: 20672366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2010 Jun 8;107(23):10555-60. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1005129107. Epub 2010 May 24.

Mouse and zebrafish Hoxa3 orthologues have nonequivalent in vivo protein
function.

Chen L(1), Zhao P, Wells L, Amemiya CT, Condie BG, Manley NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Paul D. Coverdell Center, Athens, GA 30602, USA.

Hox genes play evolutionarily conserved roles in specifying axial position during
embryogenesis. A prevailing paradigm is that changes in Hox gene expression drive
evolution of metazoan body plans. Conservation of Hox function across species,
and among paralogous Hox genes within a species, supports a model of functional
equivalence. In this report, we demonstrate that zebrafish hoxa3a (zfhoxa3a)
expressed from the mouse Hoxa3 locus can substitute for mouse Hoxa3 in some
tissues, but has distinct or null phenotypes in others. We further show, by using
an allele encoding a chimeric protein, that this difference maps primarily to the
zfhoxa3a C-terminal domain. Our data imply that the mouse and zebrafish proteins 
have diverged considerably since their last common ancestor, and that the major
difference between them resides in the C-terminal domain. Our data further show
that Hox protein function can evolve independently in different cell types or for
specific functions. The inability of zfhoxa3a to perform all of the normal roles 
of mouse Hoxa3 illustrates that Hox orthologues are not always functionally
interchangeable.

PMCID: PMC2890846
PMID: 20498049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Mol Reprod Dev. 2010 Jun;77(6):540-9. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21180.

Regulation of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 during early porcine embryonic development.

Gao Y(1), Hyttel P, Hall VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Animal and Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg C, Copenhagen, Denmark. ygao000@gmail.com

The epigenetic marks H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 are important repressive and permissive
histone modifications, respectively, which are involved in gene regulation such
as Hox gene expression during embryonic development. In this study, we
investigated the global levels of these two histone modifications. We also
investigated the expression of H3K27me3's methyltransferase (EZH2), EZH2
co-factors (EED and SUZ12) and demethylases (JMJD3 and UTX), as well as H3K4me3's
methylases (ASH1L and MLL1) and demethylase (RBP2) in porcine pre-implantation
embryos. In addition, the expression of Hox genes, HOXA2, HOXA3, HOXA7, HOXA10,
HOXB4, HOXB7, HOXC8, HOXD8, and HOXD10 was investigated. We found that global
levels of H3K27me3 decreased from the 1- to the 4-cell stage, corresponding to
the time of major embryonic genome activation. Subsequently, the levels increased
in hatched blastocysts, particularly in the trophectoderm. The expression levels 
of EZH2, EED, SUZ12, JMJD3, and UTX correlated well with these findings. The
global levels of H3K4me3 decreased from the 1-cell to the morula stage and
increased in hatched blastocysts, especially in trophectoderm. A peak in
expression of ASH1L was seen at the 4-cell stage, but overall, expression of
ASH1L, MLL1, and RBP2 correlated poorly with H3K4me3. HOXA3, A7, and B4 were
expressed in 4-cell embryos, and HOXA7, A10, B4, and D8 were expressed in hatched
blastocysts, and did not correlate well to global methylation of H3K27me3 or
H3K4me3. Thus, H3K4me3 may play a role in early porcine embryonic genome
activation, whereas, H3K27me3 may be involved in initial cell lineage segregation
in the blastocyst.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20422712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Dev Dyn. 2010 Apr;239(4):1155-61. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22273.

Placodal sensory ganglia coordinate the formation of the cranial visceral motor
pathway.

Takano-Maruyama M(1), Chen Y, Gaufo GO.

Author information: 
(1)Neurosciences Institute and Department of Biology, University of Texas at San 
Antonio, San Antonio, Texas 78249, USA.

The parasympathetic reflex circuit is controlled by three basic neurons. In the
vertebrate head, the sensory, and pre- and postganglionic neurons that comprise
each circuit have stereotypic positions along the anteroposterior (AP) axis,
suggesting that the circuit arises from a common developmental plan. Here, we
show that precursors of the VIIth circuit are initially aligned along the AP
axis, where the placode-derived sensory neurons provide a critical "guidepost"
through which preganglionic axons and their neural crest-derived postganglionic
targets navigate before reaching their distant target sites. In the absence of
the placodal sensory ganglion, preganglionic axons terminate and the neural crest
fated for postganglionic neurons undergo apoptosis at the site normally occupied 
by the placodal sensory ganglion. The stereotypic organization of the
parasympathetic cranial sensory-motor circuit thus emerges from the initial
alignment of its precursors along the AP axis, with the placodal sensory ganglion
coordinating the formation of the motor pathway.

PMCID: PMC2948960
PMID: 20235227  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Stem Cells Dev. 2010 Nov;19(11):1735-43. doi: 10.1089/scd.2009.0466. Epub 2010
Sep 13.

Differentiation of pharyngeal endoderm from mouse embryonic stem cell.

Hidaka K(1), Nitta T, Sugawa R, Shirai M, Schwartz RJ, Amagai T, Nitta S,
Takahama Y, Morisaki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioscience, National Cardiovascular Center Research Institute,
Suita, Osaka, Japan.

Embryonic stem cells are considered to be a good in vitro tool to study the
induction of various cell types including cardiomyocytes; however, induction of
the pharyngeal endoderm (PE), the underlying heart-forming region, in vivo has
been scarcely reported. In the present study, we found that many PE-related
genes, such as Paxl, Pax9, Sixl, and Tbxl, were up-regulated in
cardiomyocyte-rich embryoid bodies (EBs). The third pouch-related genes including
Hoxa3, Foxn1, and Aire, which are crucial for thymus development and function,
were also detected in later stages. Nkx2.5, a cardiac transcription factor gene, 
is known to be transiently expressed in the PE. By crossing Nkx2.5-Cre mice with 
Cre-dependent EGFP reporter mice, we found that Nkx2.5(+) lineage exclusively
contributed to thymic epithelial cell development, followed by thymus
development. Gene expression analysis using Nkx2.5-EGFP ES cells also revealed
that PE-related mRNAs were specifically enriched in the transiently appearing
E-cadherin(+)Nkx2.5(+) cell fraction. Interestingly, the EB-derived cells were
found capable of supporting T-cell differentiation to CD4 or CD8 double-positive 
cells in a reaggregation organ culture in vitro. Our results suggest that EBs
contain cells that resemble third pharyngeal pouch endoderm and confer a
thymus-like microenvironment.

PMID: 20230268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. PLoS One. 2009 Nov 17;4(11):e7856. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007856.

Correlating global gene regulation to angiogenesis in the developing chick
extra-embryonic vascular system.

Javerzat S(1), Franco M, Herbert J, Platonova N, Peille AL, Pantesco V, De Vos J,
Assou S, Bicknell R, Bikfalvi A, Hagedorn M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U920, Laboratoire des Mécanismes Moléculaires de l'Angiogenèse,
Université Bordeaux 1, Talence, France.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2010;5(3). doi:
10.1371/annotation/110bdc8c-b16e-4043-816c-a3f8105ca061.

BACKGROUND: Formation of blood vessels requires the concerted regulation of an
unknown number of genes in a spatial-, time- and dosage-dependent manner.
Determining genes, which drive vascular maturation is crucial for the
identification of new therapeutic targets against pathological angiogenesis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: [corrected] We accessed global gene regulation
throughout maturation of the chick chorio-allantoic membrane (CAM), a highly
vascularized tissue, using pan genomic microarrays. Seven percent of analyzed
genes showed a significant change in expression (>2-fold, FDR<5%) with a peak
occurring from E7 to E10, when key morphogenetic and angiogenic genes such as
BMP4, SMO, HOXA3, EPAS1 and FGFR2 were upregulated, reflecting the state of an
activated endothelium. At later stages, a general decrease in gene expression
occurs, including genes encoding mitotic factors or angiogenic mediators such as 
CYR61, EPAS1, MDK and MYC. We identified putative human orthologs for 77% of
significantly regulated genes and determined endothelial cell enrichment for 20% 
of the orthologs in silico. Vascular expression of several genes including ENC1, 
FSTL1, JAM2, LDB2, LIMS1, PARVB, PDE3A, PRCP, PTRF and ST6GAL1 was demonstrated
by in situ hybridization. Up to 9% of the CAM genes were also overexpressed in
human organs with related functions, such as placenta and lung or the thyroid.
21-66% of CAM genes enriched in endothelial cells were deregulated in several
human cancer types (P<.0001). Interfering with PARVB (encoding parvin, beta)
function profoundly changed human endothelial cell shape, motility and
tubulogenesis, suggesting an important role of this gene in the angiogenic
process.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our study underlines the complexity of gene regulation 
in a highly vascularized organ during development. We identified a restricted
number of novel genes enriched in the endothelium of different species and
tissues, which may play crucial roles in normal and pathological angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2774277
PMID: 19924294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Stem Cells. 2009 Jul;27(7):1654-65. doi: 10.1002/stem.90.

HOXA3 modulates injury-induced mobilization and recruitment of bone
marrow-derived cells.

Mace KA(1), Restivo TE, Rinn JL, Paquet AC, Chang HY, Young DM, Boudreau NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
California 94143-1302, USA. kimberly.mace@manchester.ac.uk

The regulated recruitment and differentiation of multipotent bone marrow-derived 
cells (BMDCs) to sites of injury are critical for efficient wound healing.
Previously we demonstrated that sustained expression of HOXA3 both accelerated
wound healing and promoted angiogenesis in diabetic mice. In this study, we have 
used green fluorescent protein-positive bone marrow chimeras to investigate the
effect of HOXA3 expression on recruitment of BMDCs to wounds. We hypothesized
that the enhanced neovascularization induced by HOXA3 is due to enhanced
mobilization, recruitment, and/or differentiation of BMDCs. Here we show that
diabetic mice treated with HOXA3 displayed a significant increase in both
mobilization and recruitment of endothelial progenitor cells compared with
control mice. Importantly, we also found that HOXA3-treated mice had
significantly fewer inflammatory cells recruited to the wound compared with
control mice. Microarray analyses of HOXA3-treated wounds revealed that indeed
HOXA3 locally increased expression of genes that selectively promote
stem/progenitor cell mobilization and recruitment while also suppressing
expression of numerous members of the proinflammatory nuclear factor kappaB
pathway, including myeloid differentiation primary response gene 88 and
toll-interacting protein. Thus HOXA3 accelerates wound repair by mobilizing
endothelial progenitor cells and attenuating the excessive inflammatory response 
of chronic wounds.

PMCID: PMC2733377
PMID: 19544454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Cell Tissue Res. 2009 May;336(2):165-78. doi: 10.1007/s00441-009-0760-7. Epub
2009 Mar 17.

Hoxa3 and signaling molecules involved in aortic arch patterning and remodeling.

Kameda Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa, Japan. kameda@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Anomalies of the aortic arch have long been of anatomicoclinical interest. Recent
studies on gene-targeted mice have identified the candidate genes that are
involved in the patterning and remodeling of the pharyngeal arch arteries. In
this review, we discuss our present knowledge with regard to the signaling
molecules that regulate specific aspects of arch artery development. We focus
first on Hoxa3, because it plays a critical role in the regulation of the
differentiation of the third pharyngeal arch. Hoxa3 is expressed by the neural
crest cells that originate from the rhombomeres, viz., (r)5, r6, and r7, and
populate the third pharyngeal arch; it is also expressed in the third pharyngeal 
pouch. In Hoxa3 homozygous null mutant mice, the third arch artery degenerates
bilaterally at embryonic day 11.5, resulting in the malformation of the carotid
artery system. Complex combinatorial signals among the neural crest cells,
pharyngeal mesoderm, ectoderm, and pouch endoderm are required for the proper
development of the arch arterial system. Therefore, we highlight the numerous
signaling pathways and individual genes expressed by the ectomesenchymal neural
crest cells and also by the other epithelial and mesodermal cells of the pharynx.
Defects in these genes result in malformations of the arch artery derivatives.
This review should deepen our understanding of congenital human syndromes with
abnormal patterns of pharyngeal arch arteries.

PMID: 19290546  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Development. 2009 Feb;136(4):637-45. doi: 10.1242/dev.028621.

Rostral and caudal pharyngeal arches share a common neural crest ground pattern.

Minoux M(1), Antonarakis GS, Kmita M, Duboule D, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, UMR 7104,
Strasbourg, France.

In vertebrates, face and throat structures, such as jaw, hyoid and thyroid
cartilages develop from a rostrocaudal metameric series of pharyngeal arches,
colonized by cranial neural crest cells (NCCs). Colinear Hox gene expression
patterns underlie arch specific morphologies, with the exception of the first
(mandibular) arch, which is devoid of any Hox gene activity. We have previously
shown that the first and second (hyoid) arches share a common, Hox-free,
patterning program. However, whether or not more posterior pharyngeal arch neural
crest derivatives are also patterned on the top of the same ground-state remained
an unanswered question. Here, we show that the simultaneous inactivation of all
Hoxa cluster genes in NCCs leads to multiple jaw and first arch-like structures, 
partially replacing second, third and fourth arch derivatives, suggesting that
rostral and caudal arches share the same mandibular arch-like ground patterning
program. The additional inactivation of the Hoxd cluster did not significantly
enhance such a homeotic phenotype, thus indicating a preponderant role of Hoxa
genes in patterning skeletogenic NCCs. Moreover, we found that Hoxa2 and Hoxa3
act synergistically to pattern third and fourth arch derivatives. These results
provide insights into how facial and throat structures are assembled during
development, and have implications for the evolution of the pharyngeal region of 
the vertebrate head.

PMCID: PMC4482666
PMID: 19168678  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. BMC Dev Biol. 2008 Sep 30;8:93. doi: 10.1186/1471-213X-8-93.

Evidence for Hox-specified positional identities in adult vasculature.

Pruett ND(1), Visconti RP, Jacobs DF, Scholz D, McQuinn T, Sundberg JP,
Awgulewitsch A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Medical University of South Carolina, 96 Jonathan
Lucas Street, Charleston, SC 29425, USA. pruettnd@musc.edu

BACKGROUND: The concept of specifying positional information in the adult
cardiovascular system is largely unexplored. While the Hox transcriptional
regulators have to be viewed as excellent candidates for assuming such a role,
little is known about their presumptive cardiovascular control functions and in
vivo expression patterns.
RESULTS: We demonstrate that conventional reporter gene analysis in transgenic
mice is a useful approach for defining highly complex Hox expression patterns in 
the adult vascular network as exemplified by our lacZ reporter gene models for
Hoxa3 and Hoxc11. These mice revealed expression in subsets of vascular smooth
muscle cells (VSMCs) and endothelial cells (ECs) located in distinct regions of
the vasculature that roughly correspond to the embryonic expression domains of
the two genes. These reporter gene patterns were validated as authentic
indicators of endogenous gene expression by immunolabeling and PCR analysis.
Furthermore, we show that persistent reporter gene expression in cultured cells
derived from vessel explants facilitates in vitro characterization of phenotypic 
properties as exemplified by the differential response of Hoxc11-lacZ-positive
versus-negative cells in migration assays and to serum.
CONCLUSION: The data support a conceptual model of Hox-specified positional
identities in adult blood vessels, which is of likely relevance for understanding
the mechanisms underlying regional physiological diversities in the
cardiovascular system. The data also demonstrate that conventional Hox reporter
gene mice are useful tools for visualizing complex Hox expression patterns in the
vascular network that might be unattainable otherwise. Finally, these mice are a 
resource for the isolation and phenotypic characterization of specific
subpopulations of vascular cells marked by distinct Hox expression profiles.

PMCID: PMC2570687
PMID: 18826643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2007 Aug;144(2):235-7.

Age-related differences in expression of signal differentiation factors for human
thymic epithelial cells.

Polyakova VO(1), Kvetnoy IM, Konovalov SS, Zezulin PN, Knyazkin IV.

Author information: 
(1)St. Petersburg Institute of Bioregulation and Gerontology, Northwestern
Division of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences. vopol@yandex.ru

Expression of transcription proteins PAX1, Hoxa3, and TLP regulating
differentiation of thymic epithelial cells is detected in human thymus starting
from gestation week 22 until the age of 95 years. Expression of transcription
factors significantly decreased during aging. Apart from the decrease in the
expression of signal differentiation factors in cultured thymic epithelial cells,
proliferative activity of T lymphocytes cocultured with thymic epithelial cells
also decreased in aging cultures, which demonstrated the important regulatory
effect of transcription proteins on maturation and maintenance of T lymphocytes. 
Taking into account the important role of transcription proteins in the
regulation of proliferation and function of T lymphocytes, whose number sharply
decreases during aging, the maintenance of the level of expression of
transcription factors during aging is a promising trend in modern biogerontology.

PMID: 18399289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Cir Pediatr. 2007 Oct;20(4):223-8.

[The etiology of congenital diaphragmatic hernia and esophageal atresia: the Hox 
genes].

[Article in Spanish]

Martínez L(1), Martínez-Calonge W, Matesanz R, Fernández-Dumont V, Pederiva F,
Vallejo MT, Salinas J, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Cirugía Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid.
lmartinezm.hulp@salud.madrid.org

BACKGROUND: Prenatal administration of adriamycin or nitrofen to pregnant mice
produce in the embryos, respectively, esophageal atresia/VACTERL association (EA)
or congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH). Various genes and signalling pathways
like sonic hedgehog, Gli family, retinoic acid and homeotic genes have been
pointed out in the origin of these malformations. Hox genes are master regulatory
genes involved in embryo segmentation and other main development processes.
Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxc3, Hoxc4 and Hoxa5 knock-out mice show cardiac, tracheal, lung 
and diaphragmatic malformations, EA and phenotypes that resemble that of VACTERL 
syndrome. We present herein some of our findings in the expression of these genes
in both experimental models.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Pregnant mice were exposed either to 4 mg/kg of adriamycin 
or vehicle on embryonic days 7,5 and 8,5; embryos were recovered at four
endpoints (E13 to 16). On the other hand, nitrofen was given to pregnant mice on 
embryonic day 8th and embryos were recovered at E14, E16 and E19. The embryos or,
separately, their lungs and hearts, were randomly processed for
immunohistochemical or molecular biology studies (RT-PCR). We used antibodies for
Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3 proteins and specific primers for Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxb3,
Hoxb5, Hoxc4 and Hoxd3 genes.
RESULTS: EA: Upon immunohistochemistry, adriamycin-exposed embryos showed a
severe decrease in expression of Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxb3 proteins in heart, skin, 
foregut but not in the heart. RT-PCR studies showed a statistically significant
decrease of the four genes studied in the lungs of OA mice when compared to
controls. CDH: Upon RT-PCR assessment the expression of Hoxa5 and Hoxb3 were
higher in nitrofen-exposed mice than in controls on E14 and E19 and weaker on
E16. As regards immunohistochemical localization, expression of the three genes
was similar in nitrofen and control animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Both experimental models exhibit an alteration in the expression of 
several proximal Hox genes, specially in lung and car- diac tissues. The
malformations in these organs associated with CDH and EA could be in part caused 
by these alterations. Due to their specific participation in lung and foregut
morphogenesis, their study could let us to better understand the mechanisms of
CDH and EA.

PMID: 18351244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008 Mar 1;75(5):1129-60. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2007.11.006. Epub
2007 Nov 22.

Gene expression profiling elucidates a specific role for RARgamma in the retinoic
acid-induced differentiation of F9 teratocarcinoma stem cells.

Su D(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College United States.

The biological effects of all-trans-retinoic acid (RA), a major active metabolite
of retinol, are mainly mediated through its interactions with retinoic acid
receptor (RARs alpha, beta, gamma) and retinoid X receptor (RXRs alpha, beta,
gamma) heterodimers. RAR/RXR heterodimers activate transcription by binding to
RA-response elements (RAREs or RXREs) in the promoters of primary target genes.
Murine F9 teratocarcinoma stem cells have been widely used as a model for
cellular differentiation and RA signaling during embryonic development. We
identified and characterized genes that are differentially expressed in F9 wild
type (Wt) and F9 RARgamma-/- cells, with and without RA treatment, through the
use of oligonucleotide-based microarrays. Our data indicate that RARgamma, in the
absence of exogenous RA, modulates gene expression. Genes such as Sfrp2, Tie1,
Fbp2, Emp1, and Emp3 exhibited higher transcript levels in RA-treated Wt,
RARalpha-/- and RARbeta2-/- lines than in RA-treated RARgamma-/- cells, and
represent specific RARgamma targets. Other genes, such as Runx1, were expressed
at lower levels in both F9 RARbeta2-/- and RARgamma-/- cell lines than in F9 Wt
and RARalpha-/-. Genes specifically induced by RA at 6h with the protein
synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide in F9 Wt, but not in RARgamma-/- cells,
included Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Gas1, Cyp26a1, Sfrp2, Fbp2, and Emp1. These genes
represent specific primary RARgamma targets in F9 cells. Several genes in the Wnt
signaling pathway were regulated by RARgamma. Delineation of the
receptor-specific actions of RA with respect to cell proliferation and
differentiation should result in more effective therapies with this drug.

PMCID: PMC2988767
PMID: 18164278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Biol Rep. 2009 Feb;36(2):227-35. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

HOX gene analysis of endothelial cell differentiation in human bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Chung N(1), Jee BK, Chae SW, Jeon YW, Lee KH, Rha HK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) have been shown to
possess multilineage differentiation potential. HOX genes function in
transcriptional regulators, and are involved in stem cell differentiation. The
aim of the present study was to demonstrate HOX genes that are related to
angiogenesis. To identify the expression patterns of 37 HOX genes in the
endothelial cell differentiation of hMSCs, we analyzed HOX genes through
profiling with multiplex RT-PCR. The results showed that the expression patterns 
of four HOX genes, HOXA7, HOXB3, HOXA3, and HOXB13, significantly changed during 
angiogenesis. The expression levels of HOXA7 and HOXB3 were dramatically
increased, whereas those of HOXA3 and HOXB13 were decreased during endothelial
cell differentiation. When further analysis of the expressions of these HOX genes
was performed with real-time PCR and an immunoblot assay, the expression patterns
were also found to be well-matched with the results of multiplex RT-PCR. Here, we
report that HOXA7, HOXB3, HOXA3, and HOXB13 might be involved in the angiogenesis
of hMSCs.

PMID: 17972163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. BMC Dev Biol. 2007 Aug 20;7:97.

A highly conserved regulatory element controls hematopoietic expression of GATA-2
in zebrafish.

Yang Z(1), Jiang H, Zhao F, Shankar DB, Sakamoto KM, Zhang MQ, Lin S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
California Los Angeles, Los Angeles, California 90095-1606, USA.
zyanghon@ucla.edu

BACKGROUND: GATA-2 is a transcription factor required for hematopoietic stem cell
survival as well as for neuronal development in vertebrates. It has been shown
that specific expression of GATA-2 in blood progenitor cells requires distal
cis-acting regulatory elements. Identification and characterization of these
elements should help elucidating transcription regulatory mechanisms of GATA-2
expression in hematopoietic lineage.
RESULTS: By pair-wise alignments of the zebrafish genomic sequences flanking
GATA-2 to orthologous regions of fugu, mouse, rat and human genomes, we
identified three highly conserved non-coding sequences in the genomic region
flanking GATA-2, two upstream of GATA-2 and another downstream. Using both
transposon and bacterial artificial chromosome mediated germline transgenic
zebrafish analyses, one of the sequences was established as necessary and
sufficient to direct hematopoietic GFP expression in a manner that recapitulates 
that of GATA-2. In addition, we demonstrated that this element has enhancer
activity in mammalian myeloid leukemia cell lines, thus validating its functional
conservation among vertebrate species. Further analysis of potential
transcription factor binding sites suggested that integrity of the putative HOXA3
and LMO2 sites is required for regulating GATA-2/GFP hematopoietic expression.
CONCLUSION: Regulation of GATA-2 expression in hematopoietic cells is likely
conserved among vertebrate animals. The integrated approach described here,
drawing on embryological, transgenesis and computational methods, should be
generally applicable to analyze tissue-specific gene regulation involving distal 
DNA cis-acting elements.

PMCID: PMC1988811
PMID: 17708765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cancer Biol Ther. 2007 Aug;6(8):1284-8. Epub 2007 May 24.

DNA methylation regulates MicroRNA expression.

Han L(1), Witmer PD, Casey E, Valle D, Sukumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Predoctoral Training Program in Human Genetics, McKusick-Nathans Institute of 
Genetic Medicine, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), an important class of small regulatory molecules for gene
expression, are transcribed by RNA polymerase II. But little is known about the
mechanisms that control miRNA expression. Comparing miRNA expression profiles
between colon cancer cell line HCT 116 and its derivative, DNA methyltransferase 
1 and 3b (DNMT1 and DNMT3b) double knockout cell line, we found that the
expression of about 10% miRNAs was regulated by DNA methylation. In addition,
neither 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine treatment nor deletion of DNMT1 alone
recapitulated miRNA expression profile seen in the double knockout cell line,
suggesting that miRNA expression was tightly controlled by DNA methylation and
partial methylation reduction was not sufficient for miRNA reexpression. We also 
found that HOXA3 and HOXD10 were putative targets of mir-10a, one of the
differentially expressed miRNAs that is located in HOX gene cluster.

PMID: 17660710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Pediatr Surg Int. 2007 May;23(5):419-24.

Expression of homeotic genes Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 is decreased in the
lungs but not in the hearts of adriamycin-exposed mice.

Calonge WM(1), Martinez L, Lacadena J, Fernandez-Dumont V, Matesanz R, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, P. de la
Castellana 261, 28046 Madrid, Spain.

Exposure of rat and mouse embryos to adriamycin (doxorubicin chlorhydrate)
induces esophageal atresia (EA) and VACTERL association. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and
Gli2/Gli3 pathways are involved in these conditions and knockout mice for
homeotic Hox genes Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxc3, Hoxc4 and Hoxa5 show phenotypes with some
of the associated VACTERL features. This study aims at evaluating the possible
influence of Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 as upstream regulators of this complex
signalling. Pregnant mice were exposed either to 4 mg/kg of adriamycin (EA group)
or vehicle (controls) on embryonic days 7.5 and 8.5. Embryos were recovered at
four endpoints (E12.5-E15.5) and randomly assigned for immunohistochemical or
molecular biology studies. Lungs and hearts were separately harvested and
processed for Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 quantitative RT-PCR measurements.
Antibodies for Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3 proteins were used for immunohistochemical 
studies. RT-PCR studies showed a drastic and statistically significant decrease
of the four genes in the lungs of EA mice when compared to controls, with a
slight recovery from E15.5. Hearts of both groups showed a similar expression of 
all the genes throughout gestation. Control embryos expressed the hox3 paralogous
genes in heart, skin, foregut derivatives and their surrounding mesoderm through 
E12.5-E15.5 whereas adriamycin-exposed embryos showed a severe decrease in
expression of these three proteins in the same tissues but not in the heart.
Adriamycin drastically reduced the expression of Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 in
mice embryonic lungs. Their expression in the heart did not seem to be influenced
by adriamycin in this experimental setting.

PMID: 17211587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Dev Biol. 2006 Sep 1;297(1):26-43. Epub 2006 Apr 21.

Conserved co-regulation and promoter sharing of hoxb3a and hoxb4a in zebrafish.

Hadrys T(1), Punnamoottil B, Pieper M, Kikuta H, Pezeron G, Becker TS, Prince V, 
Baker R, Rinkwitz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, NYU Medical School, New York, NY
10016, USA.

The expression of zebrafish hoxb3a and hoxb4a has been found to be mediated
through five transcripts, hoxb3a transcripts I-III and hoxb4a transcripts I-II,
driven by four promoters. A "master" promoter, located about 2 kb downstream of
hoxb5a, controls transcription of a pre-mRNA comprising exon sequences of both
genes. This unique gene structure is proposed to provide a novel mechanism to
ensure overlapping, tissue-specific expression of both genes in the posterior
hindbrain and spinal cord. Transgenic approaches were used to analyze the
functions of zebrafish hoxb3a/hoxb4a promoters and enhancer sequences containing 
regions of homology that were previously identified by comparative genomics. Two 
neural enhancers were shown to establish specific anterior expression borders
within the hindbrain and mediate expression in defined neuronal populations
derived from hindbrain rhombomeres (r) 5 to 8, suggesting a late role of the
genes in neuronal cell lineage specification. Species comparison showed that the 
zebrafish hoxb3a r5 and r6 enhancer corresponded to a sequence within the mouse
HoxA cluster controlling activity of Hoxa3 in r5 and r6, whereas a homologous
region within the HoxB cluster activated Hoxb3 expression but limited to r5. We
conclude that the similarity of hoxb3a/Hoxa3 regulatory mechanisms reflect the
shared descent of both genes from a single ancestral paralog group 3 gene.

PMID: 16860306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2006;580:93-7; discussion 351-9.

Dual origins of the mouse carotid body revealed by targeted disruption of Hoxa3
and Mash1.

Kameda Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan.

PMID: 16683703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Nihon Rinsho. 2006 Feb;64 Suppl 2:227-33.

[Molecular biology in regulation of kidney functions: PTH (parathyroid hormone)].

[Article in Japanese]

Iida R(1), Yoshida H, Hara S, Ookido I, Shigematsu T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Nephrology and Hypertension, Department of Internal Medicine, The 
Jikei University School of Medicine.

PMID: 16523893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Immunol Rev. 2006 Feb;209:28-46.

Cellular and molecular events during early thymus development.

Holländer G(1), Gill J, Zuklys S, Iwanami N, Liu C, Takahama Y.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Immunology, The Center for Biomedicine, Department of
Clinical-Biological Sciences, University of Basel, and The University Children's 
Hospital of Basel, Basel, Switzerland. georg-a.hollaender@unibas.ch

The thymic stromal compartment consists of several cell types that collectively
enable the attraction, survival, expansion, migration, and differentiation of
T-cell precursors. The thymic epithelial cells constitute the most abundant cell 
type of the thymic microenvironment and can be differentiated into
morphologically, phenotypically, and functionally separate subpopulations of the 
postnatal thymus. All thymic epithelial cells are derived from the endodermal
lining of the third pharyngeal pouch. Very soon after the formation of a thymus
primordium and prior to its vascularization, thymic epithelial cells orchestrate 
the first steps of intrathymic T-cell development, including the attraction of
lymphoid precursor cells to the thymic microenvironment. The correct segmentation
of pharyngeal epithelial cells and their subsequent crosstalk with cells in the
pharyngeal arches are critical prerequisites for the formation of a thymus
anlage. Mutations in several transcription factors and their target genes have
been informative to detail some of the complex mechanisms that control the
development of the thymus anlage. This review highlights recent findings related 
to the genetic control of early thymus organogenesis and provides insight into
the molecular basis by which lymphocyte precursors are attracted to the thymus.

PMID: 16448532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. J Anat. 2005 Nov;207(5):447-59.

Patterning the neural crest derivatives during development of the vertebrate
head: insights from avian studies.

Creuzet S(1), Couly G, Le Douarin NM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Embryologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Nogent-sur-Marne, France.

Studies carried out in the avian embryo and based on the construction of
quail-chick chimeras have shown that most of the skull and all the facial and
visceral skeleton are derived from the cephalic neural crest (NC). Contribution
of the mesoderm is limited to its occipital and (partly) to its otic domains. NC 
cells (NCCs) participating in membrane bones and cartilages of the vertebrate
head arise from the diencephalon (posterior half only), the mesencephalon and the
rhombencephalon. They can be divided into an anterior domain (extending down to
r2 included) in which genes of the Hox clusters are not expressed (Hox-negative
skeletogenic NC) and a posterior domain including r4 to r8 in which Hox genes of 
the four first paraloguous groups are expressed. The NCCs that form the facial
skeleton belong exclusively to the anterior Hox-negative domain and develop from 
the first branchial arch (BA1). This rostral domain of the crest is designated as
FSNC for facial skeletogenic neural crest. Rhombomere 3 (r3) participates
modestly to both BA1 and BA2. Forced expression of Hox genes (Hoxa2, Hoxa3 and
Hoxb4) in the neural fold of the anterior domain inhibits facial skeleton
development. Similarly, surgical excision of these anterior Hox-negative NCCs
results in the absence of facial skeleton, showing that Hox-positive NCCs cannot 
replace the Hox-negative domain for facial skeletogenesis. We also show that
excision of the FSNC results in dramatic down-regulation of Fgf8 expression in
the head, namely in ventral forebrain and in BA1 ectoderm. We have further
demonstrated that exogenous FGF8 applied to the presumptive BA1 territory at the 
5-6-somite stage (5-6ss) restores to a large extent facial skeleton development. 
The source of the cells responsible for this regeneration was shown to be r3,
which is at the limit between the Hox-positive and Hox-negative domain. NCCs that
respond to FGF8 by survival and proliferation are in turn necessary for the
expression/maintenance of Fgf8 expression in the ectoderm. These results strongly
support the emerging picture according to which the processes underlying
morphogenesis of the craniofacial skeleton are regulated by
epithelial-mesenchymal bidirectional crosstalk.

PMCID: PMC1571568
PMID: 16313387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Clin Invest. 2005 Nov;115(11):3239-49. Epub 2005 Oct 13.

Human skin cells support thymus-independent T cell development.

Clark RA(1), Yamanaka K, Bai M, Dowgiert R, Kupper TS.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Skin Disease Research Center and Department of Dermatology, Brigham
and Women's Hospital, Harvard Institutes of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Thymic tissue has previously been considered a requirement for the generation of 
a functional and diverse population of human T cells. We report that fibroblasts 
and keratinocytes from human skin arrayed on a synthetic 3-dimensional matrix
support the development of functional human T cells from hematopoietic precursor 
cells in the absence of thymic tissue. Newly generated T cells contained T cell
receptor excision circles, possessed a diverse T cell repertoire, and were
functionally mature and tolerant to self MHC, indicating successful completion of
positive and negative selection. Skin cell cultures expressed the AIRE, Foxn1,
and Hoxa3 transcription factors and a panel of autoantigens. Skin and bone marrow
biopsies can thus be used to generate de novo functional and diverse T cell
populations for potential therapeutic use in immunosuppressed patients.

PMCID: PMC1253623
PMID: 16224538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Dev Biol. 2005 Sep 15;285(2):554-69.

Microarray analysis detects differentially expressed genes in the pharyngeal
region of mice lacking Tbx1.

Ivins S(1), Lammerts van Beuren K, Roberts C, James C, Lindsay E, Baldini A,
Ataliotis P, Scambler PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Institute of Child Health, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

22q11-deletion (DiGeorge/velocardiofacial) syndrome (22q11DS) is modeled by
mutation of murine transcription factor Tbx1. As part of efforts to identify
transcriptional targets of Tbx1, we analyzed the transcriptome of the pharyngeal 
region of Df1/+;Tbx1+/- embryos at 9.5 days of embryonic development using two
independent microarray platforms. In this model, embryos are null for Tbx1, with 
hemizygosity of genes in cis with Tbx1 on one chromosome providing a positive
control for array sensitivity. Reduced mRNA levels of genes deleted from Df1 were
detected on both platforms. Expression level filtering and statistical analysis
identified several genes that were consistently differentially expressed between 
mutant and wild type embryos. Real-time quantitative PCR and in situ
hybridization validated diminished expression of Pax9 and Gcm2, genes known to be
required for normal thymus and parathyroid gland morphogenesis, whereas Pax1,
Hoxa3, Eya1, and Foxn1, which are similarly required, were not down-regulated.
Gbx2, a gene required for normal arch artery development, was down-regulated
specifically in the pharyngeal endoderm and the posterior part of pharyngeal arch
1, and is a potential point of cross talk between the Tbx1 and Fgf8 controlled
pathways. These experiments highlight which genes and pathways potentially
affected by lack of Tbx1, and whose role may be explored further by testing for
epistasis using mouse mutants.

PMID: 16109395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. J Cell Sci. 2005 Jun 15;118(Pt 12):2567-77. Epub 2005 May 24.

HOXA3 induces cell migration in endothelial and epithelial cells promoting
angiogenesis and wound repair.

Mace KA(1), Hansen SL, Myers C, Young DM, Boudreau N.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Research Laboratory, Department of Surgery, University of California 
San Francisco, San Francisco General Hospital, CA 94110, USA.

Wound repair requires both the recruitment and coordination of numerous cell
types including inflammatory cells, fibroblasts, endothelial and epithelial
cells. Each cell type has a distinct set of cell behavior such as formation of
granulation tissue and basement membrane, migration, proliferation and
redifferentiation. These processes are dependent on cell-cell and cell-ECM
signaling, intracellular signal transduction cascades, and ultimately, changes in
gene transcription. We have investigated the role of the transcription factor
HOXA3 in wound repair and angiogenesis. Here we show that HOXA3 increases
endothelial cell migration, induces angiogenesis in vivo, and leads to increased 
expression of the matrix metalloproteinase-14 (MMP-14) and urokinase-type
plasminogen activator receptor (uPAR) genes in endothelial cells in culture and
in vivo in response to injury. We find that HOXA3 gene expression is upregulated 
during wound healing in angiogenic endothelial cells and keratinocytes, and that 
HOXA3 is not induced in genetically diabetic mice that have impaired angiogenesis
and wound repair. We demonstrate that gene transfer of HOXA3 into diabetic mouse 
wounds leads to dramatic improvements in both angiogenesis and wound closure. In 
addition, we show that HOXA3 promotes migration of endothelial cells and
keratinocytes in a uPAR-dependent manner. Together these findings illustrate how 
the morphoregulatory protein, HOXA3 can facilitate tissue remodeling via
coordinated changes in both epithelial and endothelial cell gene expression and
behavior in adult tissues during wound repair.

PMID: 15914537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Cell Tissue Res. 2005 Apr;320(1):77-89. Epub 2005 Feb 16.

Hoxa3 regulates the proliferation and differentiation of the third pharyngeal
arch mesenchyme in mice.

Chisaka O(1), Kameda Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Biostudies,
Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8502, Japan.

Genetic disruption of Hoxa3 results in bilateral defects of the common carotid
artery, which is derived from the third branchial arch artery. The tunica media
of the great arteries derived from the arch arteries is formed by the
ectomesenchymal neural crest cells. To examine the etiology of the regression of 
the third arch artery, we generated Hoxa3 homozygous null mutant embryos that
expressed a lacZ marker transgene driven by a connexin43 (Cx43): promoter in the 
neural crest cells. The expression of beta-galactosidase in these mouse embryos
was examined by both whole-mount X-gal staining and immunohistochemistry with the
monoclonal beta-galactosidase antibody on sections. The migration of neural crest
cells from the neural tube to the third branchial arch was not affected in the
Hoxa3 homozygotes. The initial formation of the third arch artery was also not
disturbed. The artery, however, regressed at embryonic day 11.5 (E11.5), when
differentiation of the third pharyngeal arch began. The internal and external
carotid arteries arose from the dorsal aorta in E12.5 null mutants, which showed 
an abnormal persistence of the ductus caroticus. The third pharyngeal arch of
wild-type mice fuses with the fourth and second arches at E12.0. In the Hoxa3
null mutants, however, the fusion was delayed, and the hypoplastic third
pharyngeal arch was still discerned at E12.5. Moreover, the number of
proliferating cells in the third arch of the null mutants was small compared with
that in the wild-type. Thus, Hoxa3 is required for the growth and differentiation
of the third pharyngeal arch. The defective development of the third pharyngeal
arch may induce the anomalies of the carotid artery system.

PMID: 15714286  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Dev Biol. 2004 Dec 15;276(2):301-12.

Abnormalities of caudal pharyngeal pouch development in Pbx1 knockout mice mimic 
loss of Hox3 paralogs.

Manley NR(1), Selleri L, Brendolan A, Gordon J, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Life Sciences, B 420A, Athens, 
GA 30602, USA. nmanley@uga.edu

Pbx1 is a TALE-class homeodomain protein that functions in part as a cofactor for
Hox class homeodomain proteins. Previous analysis of the in vivo functions of
Pbx1 by targeted mutagenesis in mice has revealed roles for this gene in skeletal
patterning and development and in the organogenesis of multiple systems. Both RNA
expression and protein localization studies have suggested a possible role for
Pbx1 in pharyngeal region development. As several Hox mutants have distinct
phenotypes in this region, we investigated the potential requirement for Pbx1 in 
the development of the pharyngeal arches and pouches and their organ derivatives.
Pbx1 homozygous mutants exhibited delayed or absent formation of the caudal
pharyngeal pouches, and disorganized patterning of the third pharyngeal pouch.
Formation of the third pouch-derived thymus/parathyroid primordia was also
affected, with absent or hypoplastic primordia, delayed expression of
organ-specific differentiation markers, and reduced proliferation of thymic
epithelium. The fourth pouch and the fourth pouch-derived ultimobranchial bodies 
were usually absent. These phenotypes are similar to those previously reported in
Hoxa3(-/-) single mutants and Hoxa1(-/-);Hoxb1(-/-) or
Hoxa3(+/-);Hoxb3(-/-);Hoxd3(-/-) compound mutants, suggesting that Pbx1 acts
together with multiple Hox proteins in the development of the caudal pharyngeal
region. However, some aspects of the Pbx1 mutant phenotype included specific
defects that were less severe than those found in known Hox mutant mice,
suggesting that some functions of Hox proteins in this region are
Pbx1-independent.

PMID: 15581866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Glia. 2004 Oct;48(1):14-26.

Early stages of oligodendrocyte development in the embryonic murine spinal cord
proceed normally in the absence of Hoxa2.

Nicolay DJ(1), Doucette JR, Nazarali AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, College of Pharmacy and Nutrition, University
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan.

Recent discoveries have enhanced our knowledge of the transcriptional control of 
oligodendrocyte (OG) development. In particular, the transcription factors (TFs) 
Olig2, Pax6, and Nkx2.2 have been shown to be important in the specification
and/or maturation of the OG lineage. Although numerous other TFs are expressed by
OGs, little is known regarding their role(s) in oligodendrogenesis. One such TF
is the homeobox gene Hoxa2, which was recently shown to be expressed by O4(+)
pro-oligodendrocytes. The objectives of this study were to examine the expression
of Hoxa2 during the early stages of OG development, as well as to determine
whether Hoxa2 is required for specification and/or early maturation of OGs.
Immunocytochemical analysis of primary mixed glial cultures demonstrated that
Hoxa2 was expressed throughout oligodendrogenesis, diminishing only with the
acquisition of a myelinating phenotype. Serial transverse spinal cord sections
from embryonic days 12.5, 14.25, 16, and 18 Hoxa2(+/+), Hoxa2(+/-), and
Hoxa2(-/-) mice were subjected to single and double immunohistochemical analysis 
in order to examine Hoxa2, Olig2, Nkx2.2, and Pax6 expression profiles. Results
obtained from Hoxa2(+/+) and Hoxa2(+/-) mice suggested that Hoxa2 was expressed
by migratory oligodendroglial cells. In addition, comparison of spinal cord
sections obtained from Hoxa2(+/+), Hoxa2(+/-), and Hoxa2(-/-) mice suggested that
specification and early maturation of OGs proceeded normally in the absence of
Hoxa2, since there were no obvious alterations in the expression patterns of
Olig2, Nkx2.2, and/or Pax6. Hence, although Hoxa2 is expressed throughout OG
development, it does not appear to be critical for early stages of
oligodendrogenesis in the murine spinal cord.

PMID: 15326611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2004 Jun 21;150(2):211-3.

The proximal 2-kb of the Hoxa3 promoter directs gene expression in distinct
branchial compartments and cranial ganglia.

Diman NY(1), Chauvier E, Pacico N, Picard JJ, Rezsohazy R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Developmental Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, 73 (box 82) 
Avenue Mounier, Brussels 1200, Belgium.

Developing structures such as hindbrain, neural crest cells or spinal cord
express Hoxa3. Here, we have investigated the regulatory role of a 2-kb fragment 
spanning the proximal promoter of Hoxa3 by a reporter-based approach in mice. We 
show that this fragment promotes reporter activity in ganglionic and branchial
compartments known to express Hoxa3 but for which no cis-regulatory elements have
been identified so far. We also show that the 2-kb promoter fragment is active in
rhombomere 4 and in the ganglion of the cranial nerve complex VII/VIII that are
devoid of Hoxa3 expression.

PMID: 15158084  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. J Histochem Cytochem. 2004 May;52(5):641-51.

The role of Hoxa3 gene in parathyroid gland organogenesis of the mouse.

Kameda Y(1), Arai Y, Nishimaki T, Chisaka O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa, Japan. kameda@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Mice with a targeted deletion of the Hoxa3 gene have defects of derivatives of
the third branchial arch and pouch. To address the role of the Hoxa3 gene in
parathyroid organogenesis, we examined the third pharyngeal pouch development by 
immunohistochemistry (IHC) using the secretory protein (SP)-1/chromogranin A
antiserum, which recognizes the parathyroid from its initial formation onward. At
embryonic day (E) 11.5, the SP-1/chromogranin A-immunoreactive primary rudiment
of the parathyroid appeared in the cranial region of the third pharyngeal pouch
of wild-type embryos. In Hoxa3-null mutants, the third pharyngeal pouch was
normally formed but failed to differentiate into the parathyroid rudiment,
showing no immunoreactivity for SP-1/chromogranin A. Classic studies using
chick-quail chimeras have demonstrated that the ectomesenchymal neural crest
cells are required for proper development of the pharyngeal pouch-derived organs,
including the thymus and parathyroid glands. To visualize the migration and
development of mesenchymal neural crest cells in Hoxa3 mutants, the heterozygotes
were crossed with connexin43-lacZ transgenic mice in which beta-galactosidase
expression was specific to the neural crest cells. In Hoxa3 homozygotes and in
wild types, ectomesenchymal neural crest cells densely populated the pharyngeal
arches, including the third one, and surrounded the third pouch epithelium. These
results indicate that lack of the Hoxa3 gene affects the intrinsic ability of the
third pharyngeal pouch to form the parathyroid rudiment and has no detectable
effect on the migration of neural crest cells.

PMID: 15100241  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Gene. 2004 Apr 28;331:53-63.

Differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells are closely 
related with homeotic genes and a group of differentially expressed genes.

Mizusawa N(1), Hasegawa T, Ohigashi I, Tanaka-Kosugi C, Harada N, Itakura M,
Yoshimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima City, Japan.

To identify the genes that determine differentiation phenotypes, we compared gene
expression of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells, which are derived from the 
common precursor and secrete insulin and glucagon, respectively. The expression
levels of homeotic genes including Hox genes known to determine region
specificity in the antero-posterior (AP) body axis, tissue-specific homeobox
genes, and other 8,734 genes were compared in a beta- and alpha-cell line of MIN6
and alpha TC1.6. The expression of homeotic genes were surveyed with reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using degenerate primers
corresponding to invariant amino acid sequences within the homeodomain and
subsequently with specific primers. Expression of Hoxc6, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Pdx1,
Cdx2, Gbx2, Pax4, and Hlxb9 genes in MIN6 was higher than those in alpha TC1.6,
while expression of Hoxa2, Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hoxa13,
Hoxb3, Hoxb5, Hoxb6, Hoxb13, Hoxb8, and Brain4 genes in alpha TC1.6 was higher
than those in MIN6. Out of 8,734 mouse genes screened with high-density mouse
cDNA microarrays for MIN6- and alpha TC1.6-derived cDNA, 58 and 25 genes were
differentially over- and under-expressed in MIN6, respectively. GLUTag, which is 
derived from a large bowel tumor and expresses the proglucagon gene, showed a
comparatively similar expression profile to that of alpha TC1.6 in both homeotic 
and other genes analyzed in cDNA microarray. Our results are consistent with the 
interpretation that not only the tissue-specific homeotic genes, but also Hox
genes are related to differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic beta- and
alpha-cells rather than their regional specification of the body in vertebrates.

PMID: 15094191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. J Exp Zool B Mol Dev Evol. 2004 Mar 15;302(2):147-64.

Comparative genomic analysis of vertebrate Hox3 and Hox4 genes.

Hadrys T(1), Prince V, Hunter M, Baker R, Rinkwitz S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, NYU Medical School, New York, New
York 10016, USA.

We used a comparative genomic approach to identify putative cis-acting regulatory
sequences of the zebrafish hoxb3a and hoxb4a genes. We aligned genomic sequences 
spanning the clustered Hoxb1 to Hoxb5 genes from pufferfish, mice, and humans
with the zebrafish hoxba and hoxbb cluster sequences. We identified multiple
blocks of conserved sequences in non-coding regions within and surrounding the
Hoxb3/b4 gene locus; a subset of these blocks are conserved in the zebrafish
hoxbb cluster, despite loss of hoxb3/b4 genes. Overall, we find that the
architecture of the Hoxb3/b4 loci and of the conserved sequence elements is very 
similar in teleosts and mammals. Our analyses also revealed two alternative
transcripts of the zebrafish hoxb3a gene and an exon sequence unusually located
10 kb upstream of adjacent hoxb4a; an equivalent murine Hoxb3 exon has not yet
been confirmed. We show that many of the Hoxb3/b4 conserved non-coding sequences 
correlate with functional neural enhancers previously described in the mouse.
Further, within the conserved non-coding sequences we have identified binding
sites for transcription factors, including Kreisler/Valentino, Krox20, Hox, and
Pbx, some of which had not been previously described for the mouse. Finally, we
demonstrate that the regulatory sequences of zebrafish hoxa3a are divergent with 
respect to the mouse ortholog Hoxa3, or the paralog hoxb3a. Despite limited
conservation of regulatory sequences, zebrafish hoxa3a and hoxb3a genes share
very similar expression profiles.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15054858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Apr 9;316(3):898-902.

The Hoxa2 enhancer 2 contains a critical Hoxa2 responsive regulatory element.

Lampe X(1), Picard JJ, Rezsohazy R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Developmental Genetics, Université catholique de Louvain, 73 (boîte
82) avenue Mounier, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium.

Rhombomeres are embryonic territories arising from the transient segmentation of 
the hindbrain. Their identity is specified by Hox genes from paralogous groups
1-4. Hoxa2 is the only Hox gene to be expressed in the second rhombomere and the 
regulatory cues leading to this region-specific expression have been poorly
investigated. A 2.5-kb DNA fragment overlapping with the 3' end of Hoxa2 was
previously shown to specifically direct the expression of a reporter gene in the 
second rhombomere and the rostral somites of mouse embryos. Here, we report that 
this enhancer region is activated in vitro by Hoxa2 and that this activation is
strictly dependent on a short 10-bp sequence matching the consensus for Hox-Pbx
recognition sites.

PMID: 15033486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Development. 2003 Nov;130(21):5191-201. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

Hox3 genes coordinate mechanisms of genetic suppression and activation in the
generation of branchial and somatic motoneurons.

Gaufo GO(1), Thomas KR, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

In the developing hindbrain, the functional loss of individual Hox genes has
revealed some of their roles in specifying rhombomere (r) identity. However, it
is unclear how Hox genes act in concert to confer the unique identity to multiple
rhombomeres. Moreover, it remains to be elucidated how these genes interact with 
other transcriptional programs to specify distinct neuronal lineages within each 
rhombomere. We demonstrate that in r5, the combined mutation of Hoxa3 and Hoxb3
result in a loss of Pax6- and Olig2-expressing progenitors that give rise to
somatic motoneurons of the abducens nucleus. In r6, the absence of any
combination of the Hox3 paralogous genes results in ectopic expression of the
r4-specific determinant Hoxb1. This ectopic expression in turn results in the
differentiation of r4-like facial branchiomotoneurons within this rhombomere.
These studies reveal that members of the Hox1 and Hox3 paralogous groups
participate in a 'Hox code' that is necessary for coordinating both suppression
and activation mechanisms that ensure distinction between the multiple
rhombomeres in the developing hindbrain.

PMID: 12954718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2003 Jul 9;1628(1):71-7.

Genomic structure and expression analysis of the gene encoding a silkworm basic
Kunitz-type chymotrypsin inhibitor.

He N(1), Yakiyama M, Fujii H, Banno Y, Yamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Insect Genetic Resources, Graduate School of Bioresource and
Bioenvironmental Science, Kyushu University, 6-10-1, Hakozaki, Fukuoka 812-8581, 
Higashi, Japan.

Kunitz-type chymotrypsin inhibitor CIb1 of silkworm Bombyx mori is a basic
peptide consisting of 62 amino acid residues. To elucidate the mechanisms of
transcriptional regulation of CIb1 gene expression, we cloned it for genomic
structure analysis. CIb1 cDNA was used as a probe to screen a BAC sub-library.
One positive clone containing the upstream sequences was isolated and the
sequence result showed that CIb1 gene consists of three exons spaced by two
introns. In the 5'-flanking region, consensus TATA and CCAAT boxes were
identified. Other binding sites for transcription factors such as NF-kappaB,
GATA, C/EBP, COUP-TF/HNF-4, RORalpha1, SRY, and HOXA3 were also detected.
Southern blot analysis suggested a single copy of CIb1 gene in the silkworm
genome. Northern blot analysis indicated that the expression of CIb1 gene is
transcriptionally regulated during development and is apparently tissue-specific.
The CIb1 mRNA was detected in fat body, ovary, trachea, and skin. We furthermore 
investigated the CIb1 expression profiles after LPS and E. coli injection. The
fluctuations of CIb1 transcript in challenged larvae confirm our proposal that
CIb1 is an immune responsible gene. According to our data, we discussed the
transcriptional factors putatively responsible for the physiological role of CIb1
in the silkworm hemolymph.

PMID: 12850275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Development. 2003 Aug;130(15):3403-14.

Mesenchymal patterning by Hoxa2 requires blocking Fgf-dependent activation of
Ptx1.

Bobola N(1), Carapuço M, Ohnemus S, Kanzler B, Leibbrandt A, Neubüser A, Drouin
J, Mallo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Freiburg, Germany.

Hox genes are known key regulators of embryonic segmental identity, but little is
known about the mechanisms of their action. To address this issue, we have
analyzed how Hoxa2 specifies segmental identity in the second branchial arch.
Using a subtraction approach, we found that Ptx1 was upregulated in the second
arch mesenchyme of Hoxa2 mutants. This upregulation has functional significance
because, in Hoxa2(-/-);Ptx1(-/-) embryos, the Hoxa2(-/-) phenotype is partially
reversed. Hoxa2 interferes with the Ptx1 activating process, which is dependent
on Fgf signals from the epithelium. Consistently, Lhx6, another target of Fgf8
signaling, is also upregulated in the Hoxa2(-/-) second arch mesenchyme. Our
findings have important implications for the understanding of developmental
processes in the branchial area and suggest a novel mechanism for mesenchymal
patterning by Hox genes that acts to define the competence of mesenchymal cells
to respond to skeletogenic signals.

PMID: 12810588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Development. 2003 Jul;130(13):2981-96.

Somatic motoneurone specification in the hindbrain: the influence of
somite-derived signals, retinoic acid and Hoxa3.

Guidato S(1), Prin F, Guthrie S.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, 4th Floor New Hunt's House, King's 
College, Guy's Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK.

We have investigated the mechanisms involved in generating hindbrain motoneurone 
subtypes, focusing on somatic motoneurones, which are confined to the caudal
hindbrain within rhombomeres 5-8. Following heterotopic transplantation of
rhombomeres along the rostrocaudal axis at various developmental stages, we have 
found that the capacity of rhombomeres to generate somatic motoneurones is labile
at the neural plate stage but becomes fixed just after neural tube closure, at
stage 10-11. Grafting of somites or retinoic acid-loaded beads beneath the
rostral hindbrain induced the formation of somatic motoneurones in rhombomere 4
only, and Hox genes normally expressed more caudally (Hoxa3, Hoxd4) were induced 
in this region. Targeted overexpression of Hoxa3 in the rostral hindbrain led to 
the generation of ectopic somatic motoneurones in ventral rhombomeres 1-4, and
was accompanied by the repression of the dorsoventral patterning gene Irx3. Taken
together, these observations suggest that the somites, retinoic acid and Hox
genes play a role in patterning somatic motoneurones in vivo.

PMID: 12756180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Genomics. 2003 Apr;81(4):356-60.

Reversible gene inactivation in the mouse.

Mallo M(1), Kanzler B, Ohnemus S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Freiburg, Germany. mallo@igc.gulbenkian.pt

Gene-inactivation techniques in the mouse have become an essential tool for
modern biomedical research. Both ubiquitous and tissue-specific inactivation are 
possible with current approaches, and recent developments facilitate a temporal
control of the inactivation process. However, one of the limitations of current
procedures is that inactivation is irreversible. We have produced complete and
reversible inactivation of the Hoxa2 gene in the mouse using the control elements
of the tetracycline-resistance operon. We show that a Hoxa2 allele containing
tetracycline operator (tetO) sequences is susceptible to controlled regulation by
tTS, a chimeric molecule containing the tetracycline repressor and a
transcriptional repressing domain. This inhibition was specific to the
tetO-modified allele, did not affect neighboring genes, and was reversible by
administration of doxycycline to the pregnant female. This procedure allows the
production of gene inactivation that is complete, is reversible, and can be
controlled at the spatial and temporal levels.

PMID: 12676559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Cell Tissue Res. 2003 Mar;311(3):343-52. Epub 2003 Feb 11.

Disruption of the Hoxa3 homeobox gene results in anomalies of the carotid artery 
system and the arterial baroreceptors.

Kameda Y(1), Watari-Goshima N, Nishimaki T, Chisaka O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
228-8555, Kanagawa, Japan. kameda@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Homeobox gene Hoxa3 is expressed in the third pharyngeal arch and pouch and is
required for development of the third arch artery in addition to the thymus,
parathyroid gland and carotid body. We therefore statistically analyzed
malformations of the carotid artery system in Hoxa3 homozygous mutant mice, in
comparison with wild-type and heterozygous littermates. To identify the carotid
artery system, red carbon ink was injected, or vascular casts were made by
injection of Mercox resin and observed by scanning electron microscopy.
Furthermore, innervation of the carotid sinus and baroreceptor regions in the
aortic arch and right subclavian artery were studied in the Hoxa3 null mutants
having an abnormal carotid artery system by immunohistochemistry with TuJ1 and
protein gene product (PGP) 9.5 antibodies, which recognize nerve fibers and
neurons. The common carotid artery of Hoxa3 homozygous mutants was absent or very
short and therefore the internal and external carotid artery arose from a more
proximal level than those of wild types. The baroreceptor innervation, however,
persisted in the mutants, although vascular targets were changed. These results
indicate that Hoxa3 gene is crucial for the formation of the common carotid
artery and the null mutant mice are the first useful animal models to show that
the third arch arteries on both sides specifically degenerate but the fourth and 
sixth arch arteries are normal.

PMID: 12658442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Dev Dyn. 2002 Nov;225(3):332-5.

Tooth development is independent of a Hox patterning programme.

James CT(1), Ohazama A, Tucker AS, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, GKT Dental Institute, Kings College
London, Guy's Hospital, London Bridge, London, United Kingdom.

Hox genes have a critical role in controlling the patterning processes of many
tissues by imparting positional information in embryogenesis. Patterning of the
pharyngeal component of the skull (the visceroskeleton) has been proposed to be
influenced by this "Hox code." Recently, it has been shown that Hox genes are
associated with the evolution of jaws, loss of Hox gene expression in the first
branchial arch being necessary for the transition from the agnathan condition to 
the gnathostome condition. Teeth develop on the first branchial arch in mammals
and, therefore, might be expected to be under the control of Hox genes in a
manner similar to that of the cranial skeletal elements. However, we show that,
unlike cartilage and bone, the development of teeth is not affected by
alterations in Hoxa2 expression. Tooth development in the first arch was
unaffected by overexpression of Hoxa2, whereas recombinations of second arch
mesenchyme with first arch epithelium led to tooth development within a
Hoxa2-positive environment. These data demonstrate that teeth develop from local 
interactions and that tooth formation is not under the axial patterning program
specified by the Hox genes. We propose that the evolutionary development of teeth
in the first branchial arch is independent of the loss of Hox expression
necessary for the development of the jaw.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12412017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Dev Dyn. 2002 Nov;225(3):305-15.

Targeted insertion results in a rhombomere 2-specific Hoxa2 knockdown and ectopic
activation of Hoxa1 expression.

Ren SY(1), Angrand PO, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Illkirch Cedex, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Recent studies indicated that retention of selectable marker cassettes in
targeted Hox loci may cause unexpected phenotypes in mutant mice, due to
neighborhood effects. However, the molecular mechanisms have been poorly
investigated. Here, we analysed the effects of the targeted insertion of a
PGK-neo cassette in the 3' untranslated region of Hoxa2. Even at this 3'
position, the insertion resulted in homozygous mutants that unexpectedly did not 
survive beyond 3 weeks of age. Molecular analysis of the targeted allele revealed
a selective "knockdown" of Hoxa2 expression in rhombomere 2 and associated
patterning abnormalities. Moreover, Hoxa1 was ectopically expressed in the
hindbrain and branchial arches of mutant embryos. Of interest, we demonstrated
that the ectopic expression was due to the generation of neo-Hoxa1 fusion
transcripts, resulting from aberrant alternative splicing. These defects could be
rescued after removal of the PGK-neo cassette by Flp-mediated recombination.
These results underscore the complexity of transcriptional regulation at Hox loci
and provide insights into the in vivo regulation of Hoxa2 segmental expression.
They also provide a molecular basis for the interpretation of unexpected Hox
knockout phenotypes in which the targeted selectable marker is retained in the
locus.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12412013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Neuron. 2002 Sep 26;36(1):31-43.

Changing requirements for Gbx2 in development of the cerebellum and maintenance
of the mid/hindbrain organizer.

Li JY(1), Lao Z, Joyner AL.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute and Developmental Genetics Program, Skirball
Institute of Biomolecular Medicine, New York, NY 10016, USA.

We examined whether Gbx2 is required after embryonic day 9 (E9) to repress Otx2
in the cerebellar anlage and position the midbrain/hindbrain organizer. In
contrast to Gbx2 null mutants, mice lacking Gbx2 in rhombomere 1 (r1) after E9
(Gbx2-CKO) are viable and develop a cerebellum. A Gbx2-independent pathway can
repress Otx2 in r1 after E9. Mid/hindbrain organizer gene expression, however,
continues to be dependent on Gbx2. We found that Fgf8 expression normally
correlates with the isthmus where cells undergo low proliferation and that in
Gbx2-CKO mutants this domain is expanded. We propose that Fgf8 permits lateral
cerebellar development through repression of Otx2 and also suppresses medial
cerebellar growth in Gbx2-CKO embryos. Our work has uncovered distinct
requirements for Gbx2 during cerebellum formation and provided a model for how a 
transcription factor can play multiple roles during development.

PMID: 12367504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. BMC Immunol. 2002 Sep 19;3:12.

Stage-specific changes in fetal thymocyte proliferation during the CD4-8- to
CD4+8+ transition in wild type, Rag1-/-, and Hoxa3,Pax1 mutant mice.

Su DM(1), Manley NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30602 USA.
dmsu@arches.uga.edu

BACKGROUND: The function of the thymic microenvironment is to promote thymocyte
maturation, in part via regulation of thymocyte proliferation and cell death.
Defects in fetal thymic epithelial cell (TEC) development and function, and
therefore in the formation of a functional microenvironment, can be caused either
directly by TEC differentiation defects or indirectly by defective thymocyte
maturation. In this paper we studied fetal thymocyte proliferation during the
early transition from the CD3-4-8- (triple negative, TN) to CD4+8+ (double
positive, DP) stages. We compared wild type mice with Rag1-/- mice and with
Hoxa3+/-Pax1-/- compound mutant mice, which have blocks at different stages of
thymocyte development.
RESULTS: Wild type fetal and adult thymus showed stage-specific differences in
the proliferation profiles of developing thymocytes, with fetal stages showing
generally higher levels of proliferation. The proliferation profile of fetal
thymocytes from Rag1-/- mutants also had stage-specific increases in
proliferation compared to wild type fetal thymocytes, in contrast to the lower
proliferation previously reported for thymocytes from adult Rag1-/- mutants. We
have previously shown that Hoxa3+/-Pax1-/- mice have abnormal fetal TEC
development, resulting in increased apoptosis at the TN to DP transition and
decreased DP cell numbers. Fetal thymocytes from Hoxa3+/-Pax1-/- compound mutants
had increased proliferation, but fewer proliferating cells, at the DP stage. We
also observed a decrease in the level of the cytokines IL-7 and SCF produced by
Hoxa3+/-Pax1-/-TECs.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate complex and stage-specific effects of abnormal
TEC development on thymocyte proliferation.

PMCID: PMC130029
PMID: 12241558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Development. 2002 Sep;129(18):4301-13.

Negative effect of Hox gene expression on the development of the neural
crest-derived facial skeleton.

Creuzet S(1), Couly G, Vincent C, Le Douarin NM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Embryologie cellulaire et moléculaire du CNRS et du Collège de
France, 49bis, av. de la Belle Gabrielle - 94736 Nogent-sur-Marne cedex, France.

Diencephalic, mesencephalic and metencephalic neural crest cells are skeletogenic
and derive from neural folds that do not express Hox genes. In order to examine
the influence of Hox gene expression on skull morphogenesis, expression of Hoxa2,
Hoxa3 and Hoxb4 in conjunction with that of the green fluorescent protein has
been selectively targeted to the Hox-negative neural folds of the avian embryo
prior to the onset of crest cell emigration. Hoxa2 expression precludes the
development of the entire facial skeleton. Transgenic Hoxa2 embryos such as those
from which the Hox-negative domain of the cephalic neural crest has been removed 
have no upper or lower jaws and no frontonasal structures. Embryos subjected to
the forced expression of Hoxa3 and Hoxb4 show severe defects in the facial
skeleton but not a complete absence of facial cartilage. Hoxa3 prevents the
formation of the skeleton derived from the first branchial arch, but allows the
development (albeit reduced) of the nasal septum. Hoxb4, by contrast, hampers the
formation of the nasal bud-derived skeleton, while allowing that of a proximal
(but not distal) segment of the lower jaw. The combined effect of Hoxa3 and Hoxb4
prevents the formation of facial skeletal structures, comparable with Hoxa2. None
of these genes impairs the formation of neural derivatives of the crest. These
results suggest that over the course of evolution, the absence of Hox gene
expression in the anterior part of the chordate embryo was crucial in the
vertebrate phylum for the development of a face, jaws and brain case, and, hence,
also for that of the forebrain.

PMID: 12183382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Dev Biol. 2002 Jul 1;247(1):197-209.

Homeobox gene hoxa3 is essential for the formation of the carotid body in the
mouse embryos.

Kameda Y(1), Nishimaki T, Takeichi M, Chisaka O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kitasato University School of Medicine, Sagamihara,
Kanagawa 228-8555, Japan. kameda@med.kitasato-u.ac.jp

Homeobox gene Hoxa3 is strongly expressed in the third pharyngeal arch and pouch.
We found that Hoxa3 homozygous null mutant mice had the lack of the carotid body.
In all late-term mutant embryos examined (n = 10), no carotid body was present.
The carotid body rudiment is formed in the wall of the third branchial artery,
which develops into the common carotid artery and the first part of the internal 
carotid artery. The symmetrical patterns of the third, fourth, and sixth arch
arteries were observed in wild-type littermates at embryonic day (E) 10.5-12.5.
In Hoxa3 homozygous mutant embryos, however, the third arch artery began to
degenerate at E10.5 and almost disappeared at E11.5. Furthermore, the bifurcation
of the common carotid artery at the normal position, i.e., at the upper end of
the larynx, was never detected in the mutant embryos at E16.5-E18.5. The common
carotid artery of the homozygous mutants was separated into the internal and
external carotid arteries immediately after its origin. Thus, the present study
evidenced that the absence of the carotid body in Hoxa3 homozygous mutants is due
to the defect of development of the third arch artery, resulting in malformation 
of the carotid artery system. During fetal development, the carotid body of mice 
is in close association with the superior cervical ganglion of the sympathetic
trunk. The superior cervical ganglion rather showed hypertrophic features in
Hoxa3 homozygous mutants lacking the carotid body.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12074562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Nat Immunol. 2002 Jul;3(7):635-42. Epub 2002 Jun 17.

Generation of a complete thymic microenvironment by MTS24(+) thymic epithelial
cells.

Gill J(1), Malin M, Holländer GA, Boyd R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Monash University Medical School,
Commercial Road, Prahran, Melbourne 3181, Australia. jason.gill@med.monash.edu.au

Comment in
    Nat Immunol. 2002 Jul;3(7):604-5.

The epithelial component of the thymic microenvironment is indispensable for the 
generation of T lymphocytes. Although the heterogeneity of this epithelium is
well documented, little is known about precursor-progeny relationships between
distinct thymic epithelial lineages. Here we characterized a thymic epithelial
cell subpopulation identified by the cell surface glycoprotein MTS24. These cells
contained epithelial progenitor cells that were competent and sufficient to fully
reconstitute the complex thymic epithelial microenvironment that supported normal
T cell development.

PMID: 12068292  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Dev Biol. 2002 Jun 1;246(1):45-56.

Conservation and diversity in the cis-regulatory networks that integrate
information controlling expression of Hoxa2 in hindbrain and cranial neural crest
cells in vertebrates.

Tümpel S(1), Maconochie M, Wiedemann LM, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute, 1000 East 50th, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA.

The Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 genes are members of paralogy group II and display segmental 
patterns of expression in the developing vertebrate hindbrain and cranial neural 
crest cells. Functional analyses have demonstrated that these genes play critical
roles in regulating morphogenetic pathways that direct the regional identity and 
anteroposterior character of hindbrain rhombomeres and neural crest-derived
structures. Transgenic regulatory studies have also begun to characterize
enhancers and cis-elements for those mouse and chicken genes that direct
restricted patterns of expression in the hindbrain and neural crest. In light of 
the conserved role of Hoxa2 in neural crest patterning in vertebrates and the
similarities between paralogs, it is important to understand the extent to which 
common regulatory networks and elements have been preserved between species and
between paralogs. To investigate this problem, we have cloned and sequenced the
intergenic region between Hoxa2 and Hoxa3 in the chick HoxA complex and used it
for making comparative analyses with the respective human, mouse, and horn shark 
regions. We have also used transgenic assays in mouse and chick embryos to test
the functional activity of Hoxa2 enhancers in heterologous species. Our analysis 
reveals that three of the critical individual components of the Hoxa2 enhancer
region from mouse necessary for hindbrain expression (Krox20, BoxA, and TCT
motifs) have been partially conserved. However, their number and organization are
highly varied for the same gene in different species and between paralogs within 
a species. Other essential mouse elements appear to have diverged or are absent
in chick and shark. We find the mouse r3/r5 enhancer fails to work in chick
embryos and the chick enhancer works poorly in mice. This implies that new motifs
have been recruited or utilized to mediate restricted activity of the enhancer in
other species. With respect to neural crest regulation, cis-components are
embedded among the hindbrain control elements and are highly diverged between
species. Hence, there has been no widespread conservation of sequence identity
over the entire enhancer domain from shark to humans, despite the common function
of these genes in head patterning. This provides insight into how apparently
equivalent regulatory regions from the same gene in different species have
evolved different components to potentiate their activity in combination with a
selection of core components.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12027433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Development. 2002 Apr;129(7):1645-55.

spiel ohne grenzen/pou2 is required for zebrafish hindbrain segmentation.

Hauptmann G(1), Belting HG, Wolke U, Lunde K, Söll I, Abdelilah-Seyfried S,
Prince V, Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Institut für Biologie I, Hauptstrasse 1, 
D-79104 Freiburg i. Br., Germany.

Segmentation of the vertebrate hindbrain leads to the formation of a series of
rhombomeres with distinct identities. In mouse, Krox20 and kreisler play
important roles in specifying distinct rhombomeres and in controlling segmental
identity by directly regulating rhombomere-specific expression of Hox genes. We
show that spiel ohne grenzen (spg) zebrafish mutants develop rhombomeric
territories that are abnormal in both size and shape. Rhombomere boundaries are
malpositioned or absent and the segmental pattern of neuronal differentiation is 
perturbed. Segment-specific expression of hoxa2, hoxb2 and hoxb3 is severely
affected during initial stages of hindbrain development in spg mutants and the
establishment of krx20 (Krox20 ortholog) and valentino (val; kreisler ortholog)
expression is impaired. spg mutants carry loss-of-function mutations in the pou2 
gene. pou2 is expressed at high levels in the hindbrain primordium of wild-type
embryos prior to activation of krx20 and val. Widespread overexpression of Pou2
can rescue the segmental krx20 and val domains in spg mutants, but does not
induce ectopic expression of these genes. This suggests that spg/pou2 acts in a
permissive manner and is essential for normal expression of krx20 and val. We
propose that spg/pou2 is an essential component of the regulatory cascade
controlling hindbrain segmentation and acts before krx20 and val in the
establishment of rhombomere precursor territories.

PMID: 11923201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Development. 2002 Mar;129(6):1477-85.

Requirement for downregulation of kreisler during late patterning of the
hindbrain.

Theil T(1), Ariza-McNaughton L, Manzanares M, Brodie J, Krumlauf R, Wilkinson DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK.

Pattern formation in the hindbrain is governed by a segmentation process that
provides the basis for the organisation of cranial motor nerves. A cascade of
transcriptional activators, including the bZIP transcription factor encoded by
the kreisler gene controls this segmentation process. In kreisler mutants, r5
fails to form and this correlates with abnormalities in the neuroanatomical
organisation of the hindbrain. Studies of Hox gene regulation suggest that
kreisler may regulate the identity as well as the formation of r5, but such a
role cannot be detected in kreisler mutants since r5 is absent. To gain further
insights into the function of kreisler we have generated transgenic mice in which
kreisler is ectopically expressed in r3 and for an extended period in r5. In
these transgenic mice, the Fgf3, Krox20, Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 genes have ectopic or
prolonged expression domains in r3, indicating that it acquires molecular
characteristics of r5. Prolonged kreisler expression subsequently causes
morphological alterations of r3/r5 that are due to an inhibition of neuronal
differentiation and migration from the ventricular zone to form the mantle layer.
We find that these alterations in r5 correlate with an arrest of facial
branchiomotor neurone migration from r4 into the caudal hindbrain, which is
possibly due to the deficiency in the mantle layer through which they normally
migrate. We propose that the requirement for the downregulation of segmental
kreisler expression prior to neuronal differentiation reflects the stage-specific
roles of this gene and its targets.

PMID: 11880356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Genesis. 2002 Feb;32(2):109-11.

A Hoxa2 knockin allele that expresses EGFP upon conditional Cre-mediated
recombination.

Pasqualetti M(1), Ren SY, Poulet M, LeMeur M, Dierich A, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Strasbourg, France.

PMID: 11857792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Genesis. 2002 Feb;32(2):105-8.

A Hoxa2 mutant conditional allele generated by Flp- and Cre-mediated
recombination.

Ren SY(1), Pasqualetti M, Dierich A, Le Meur M, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Strasbourg, France.

PMID: 11857791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Leukemia. 2002 Feb;16(2):186-95.

Quantitative HOX expression in chromosomally defined subsets of acute myelogenous
leukemia.

Drabkin HA(1), Parsy C, Ferguson K, Guilhot F, Lacotte L, Roy L, Zeng C, Baron A,
Hunger SP, Varella-Garcia M, Gemmill R, Brizard F, Brizard A, Roche J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado Health Sciences and
Cancer Centers, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

We used a degenerate RT-PCR screen and subsequent real-time quantitative RT-PCR
assays to examine the expression of HOX and TALE-family genes in 34 cases of
chromosomally defined AML for which outcome data were available. AMLs with
favorable cytogenetic features were associated with low overall HOX gene
expression whereas poor prognostic cases had high levels. Characteristically,
multiple HOXA family members including HOXA3-HOXA10 were jointly overexpressed in
conjunction with HOXB3, HOXB6, MEIS1 and PBX3. Higher levels of expression were
also observed in the FAB subtype, AML-M1. Spearmann correlation coefficients
indicated that the expression levels for many of these genes were highly
inter-related. While we did not detect any significant correlations between HOX
expression and complete response rates or age in this limited set of patients,
there was a significant correlation between event-free survival and HOXA7 with a 
trend toward significance for HoxA9, HoxA4 and HoxA5. While patients with
elevated HOX expression did worse, there were notable exceptions. Thus, although 
HOX overexpression and clinical resistance to chemotherapy often coincide, they
are not inextricably linked. Our results indicate that quantitative HOX analysis 
has the potential to add new information to the management of patients with AML, 
especially where characteristic chromosomal alterations are lacking.

PMID: 11840284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. EMBO J. 2002 Feb 1;21(3):365-76.

Krox20 and kreisler co-operate in the transcriptional control of segmental
expression of Hoxb3 in the developing hindbrain.

Manzanares M(1), Nardelli J, Gilardi-Hebenstreit P, Marshall H, Giudicelli F,
Martínez-Pastor MT, Krumlauf R, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

In the segmented vertebrate hindbrain, the Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 genes are expressed at
high relative levels in the rhombomeres (r) 5 and 6, and 5, respectively. The
single enhancer elements responsible for these activities have been identified
previously and shown to constitute direct targets of the transcription factor
kreisler, which is expressed in r5 and r6. Here, we have analysed the
contribution of the transcription factor Krox20, present in r3 and r5. Genetic
analyses demonstrated that Krox20 is required for activity of the Hoxb3 r5
enhancer, but not of the Hoxa3 r5/6 enhancer. Mutational analysis of the Hoxb3 r5
enhancer, together with ectopic expression experiments, revealed that Krox20
binds to the enhancer and synergizes with kreisler to promote Hoxb3
transcription, restricting enhancer activity to their domain of overlap, r5.
These analyses also suggested contributions from an Ets-related factor and from
putative factors likely to heterodimerize with kreisler. The integration of
multiple independent inputs present in overlapping domains by a single enhancer
is likely to constitute a general mechanism for the patterning of subterritories 
during vertebrate development.

PMCID: PMC125344
PMID: 11823429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Dev Biol. 2001 Dec 1;240(1):15-31.

Hoxa3 regulates integration of glossopharyngeal nerve precursor cells.

Watari N(1), Kameda Y, Takeichi M, Chisaka O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto, 606-8502, Japan.

In vertebrates, certain Hox genes are known to control cellular identities along 
the anterior-posterior (A-P) axis in the developing hindbrain. In mouse Hoxa3
mutants, truncation of the glossopharyngeal (IXth) nerve or the fusion of the
IXth and vagus (Xth) nerves was reported, although its underlying mechanism is
largely unknown. To elucidate the mechanism of the IXth nerve defects, we
reexamined the phenotype of Hoxa3 mutant embryos. In Hoxa3 mutants, we observed
an abnormal caudal stream of the migrating Hoxa3-expressing neural crest cells at
the prospective IXth nerve-forming area. Dorsomedial migration of the
placode-derived neuronal precursor cells of the IXth nerve was also affected.
Motor neurons at rhombomere 6 (r6), where those of the IXth nerve were
positioned, often projected axons to the Xth nerve. In summary, the Hoxa3 gene
has crucial roles in ensuring the correct axon projection pattern of all three
components of the IXth nerve, i.e., motor neurons and sensory neurons of the
proximal and distal ganglia.

(c) 2001 Elsevier Science.

PMID: 11784044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Endocrinology. 2001 Nov;142(11):4983-93.

PTH regulates fetal blood calcium and skeletal mineralization independently of
PTHrP.

Kovacs CS(1), Chafe LL, Fudge NJ, Friel JK, Manley NR.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine-Endocrinology, Memorial University of Newfoundland, St.
John's, Newfoundland, Canada A1B 3V6. ckovacs@mun.ca

PTH and PTHrP both act in the regulation of fetal mineral metabolism. PTHrP
regulates placental calcium transfer, fetal blood calcium, and differentiation of
the cartilaginous growth plate into endochondral bone. PTH has been shown to
influence fetal blood calcium, but its role in skeletal formation remains
undefined. We compared skeletal morphology, mineralization characteristics, and
gene expression in growth plates of fetal mice that lack parathyroids and PTH
(Hoxa3 null) with the effects of loss of PTHrP (Pthrp null), loss of PTH/PTHrP
receptor (Pthr1 null), and loss of both PTH and PTHrP (Hoxa3 null x Pthrp null). 
Loss of PTH alone does not affect morphology or gene expression in the skeletal
growth plates, but skeletal mineralization and blood calcium are significantly
reduced. In double-mutant fetuses (Hoxa3 null/Pthrp null), combined loss of PTH
and PTHrP caused fetal growth restriction, limb shortening, greater reduction of 
fetal blood calcium, and reduced mineralization. These findings suggest that 1)
PTH may play a more dominant role than PTHrP in regulating fetal blood calcium;
2) blood calcium and PTH levels are rate-limiting determinants of skeletal
mineral accretion; and 3) lack of both PTH and PTHrP will cause fetal growth
restriction.

PMID: 11606467  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Mol Reprod Dev. 2001 Nov;60(3):297-301.

Expression of homeobox-containing genes in cDNA libraries derived from cattle
oocytes and preimplantation stage embryo.

Ponsuksili S(1), Wimmers K, Adjaye J, Schellander K.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Breeding Science, University of Bonn, Endenicher Allee,
53115 Bonn, Germany. spon@itz.uni-bonn.de

The homeobox-containing gene family plays a pivotal role in regulating,
patterning, and axial morphogenesis in the developing embryo. But there is still 
very little known about the expression and function of these genes in mammalian
oocytes and preimplantation stage embryos. In this study we have used degenerate 
primers corresponding to the highly conserved regions of Antennapedia class
homeodomains as a rapid and an efficient method to survey bovine cDNA libraries
derived from unfertilised oocytes, single 2-cell, 4-cell, 8-cell, morula, and
blastocyst stage embryos for the presence of homeobox sequences. Our results
provide, for the first time, evidence for the transcription of Hoxa3 and Hoxd1 in
oocytes; Cdx1 and Cdx2 in the 2-cell; Cdx1, Hoxa1, Hoxd1, and Hoxd4 in the
4-cell; Cdx1, Hoxa1, and Hoxc9 in the 8-cell; Cdx2, Hoxb9, and Hoxc9 in the
morula; Cdx2, Hoxb7, Hoxb9, and Hoxc9 in blastocyst stage cattle embryos. These
are candidate genes for the developmental capacity of in vivo and in vitro
produced bovine embryos.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11599040  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Mech Dev. 2001 Oct;108(1-2):135-47.

Different levels of Hoxa2 are required for particular developmental processes.

Ohnemus S(1), Bobola N, Kanzler B, Mallo M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology, Stübeweg 51 79108 Freiburg, Germany.

Hoxa2 is required for a variety of developmental processes in the branchial
arches and in the hindbrain. We have created a Hoxa2 allele that is about 45% as 
active in transcription as its wild-type counterpart. This allele, together with 
the Hoxa2 null and wild-type alleles, allowed the generation of embryos
developing in the presence of different levels of Hoxa2 activity. Analysis of
these embryos indicates that in general the hindbrain is more resistant to Hoxa2 
deficiencies than the second branchial arch. Also, within the second arch,
proximo-caudal areas are more sensitive than the rostro-distal. In the hindbrain,
basic segmentation and patterning processes seem to occur normally at Hoxa2
levels as low as 20% of the normal. In addition, specific neuronal markers along 
the dorso-ventral axis of the hindbrain seem differentially affected by reduced
Hoxa2 levels. These results provide new clues to understand the role of Hoxa2 in 
the different embryonic areas where it is required.

PMID: 11578867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Development. 2001 Sep;128(18):3595-607.

Independent regulation of initiation and maintenance phases of Hoxa3 expression
in the vertebrate hindbrain involve auto- and cross-regulatory mechanisms.

Manzanares M(1), Bel-Vialar S, Ariza-McNaughton L, Ferretti E, Marshall H,
Maconochie MM, Blasi F, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

During development of the vertebrate hindbrain, Hox genes play multiple roles in 
the segmental processes that regulate anteroposterior (AP) patterning. Paralogous
Hox genes, such as Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3, generally have very similar patterns
of expression, and gene targeting experiments have shown that members of paralogy
group 3 can functionally compensate for each other. Hence, distinct functions for
individual members of this family may primarily depend upon differences in their 
expression domains. The earliest domains of expression of the Hoxa3 and Hoxb3
genes in hindbrain rhombomeric (r) segments are transiently regulated by
kreisler, a conserved Maf b-Zip protein, but the mechanisms that maintain
expression in later stages are unknown. In this study, we have compared the
segmental expression and regulation of Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 in mouse and chick embryos
to investigate how they are controlled after initial activation. We found that
the patterns of Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 expression in r5 and r6 in later stages during
mouse and chick hindbrain development were differentially regulated. Hoxa3
expression was maintained in r5 and r6, while Hoxb3 was downregulated. Regulatory
comparisons of cis-elements from the chick and mouse Hoxa3 locus in both
transgenic mouse and chick embryos have identified a conserved enhancer that
mediates the late phase of Hoxa3 expression through a conserved
auto/cross-regulatory loop. This block of similarity is also present in the human
and horn shark loci, and contains two bipartite Hox/Pbx-binding sites that are
necessary for its in vivo activity in the hindbrain. These HOX/PBC sites are
positioned near a conserved kreisler-binding site (KrA) that is involved in
activating early expression in r5 and r6, but their activity is independent of
kreisler. This work demonstrates that separate elements are involved in
initiating and maintaining Hoxa3 expression during hindbrain segmentation, and
that it is regulated in a manner different from Hoxb3 in later stages. Together, 
these findings add further strength to the emerging importance of positive auto- 
and cross-regulatory interactions between Hox genes as a general mechanism for
maintaining their correct spatial patterns in the vertebrate nervous system.

PMID: 11566863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Dev Biol. 2001 Aug 15;236(2):316-29.

Hoxa3 and pax1 regulate epithelial cell death and proliferation during thymus and
parathyroid organogenesis.

Su D(1), Ellis S, Napier A, Lee K, Manley NR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Medical College of Georgia,
Augusta, Georgia 30912, USA.

The thymus and parathyroid glands in mice develop from a thymus/parathyroid
primordium that forms from the endoderm of the third pharyngeal pouch. We
investigated the molecular mechanisms that promote this unique process in which
two distinct organs form from a single primordium, using mice mutant for Hoxa3
and Pax1. Thymic ectopia in Hoxa3(+/-)Pax1(-/-) compound mutants is due to
delayed separation of the thymus/parathyroid primordium from the pharynx. The
primordium is hypoplastic at its formation, and has increased levels of
apoptosis. The developing third pouch in Hoxa3(+/-)Pax1(-/-) compound mutants
initiates normal expression of the parathyroid-specific Gcm2 and thymus-specific 
Foxn1 genes. However, Gcm2 expression is reduced at E11.5 in Pax1(-/-) single
mutants, and further reduced or absent in Hoxa3(+/-)Pax1(-/-) compound mutants.
Subsequent to organ-specific differentiation from the shared primordium, both the
parathyroids and thymus developed defects. Parathyroids in compound mutants were 
smaller at their formation, and absent at later stages. Parathyroids were also
reduced in Pax1(-/-) mutants, revealing a new function for Pax1 in parathyroid
organogenesis. Thymic hypoplasia at later fetal stages in compound mutants was
associated with increased death and decreased proliferation of thymic epithelial 
cells. Our results suggest that a Hoxa3-Pax1 genetic pathway is required for both
epithelial cell growth and differentiation throughout thymus and parathyroid
organogenesis.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11476574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Dev Biol. 2001 May 15;233(2):468-81.

Differences in Krox20-dependent regulation of Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 during hindbrain
development.

Maconochie MK(1), Nonchev S, Manzanares M, Marshall H, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

During hindbrain development, segmental regulation of the paralogous Hoxa2 and
Hoxb2 genes in rhombomeres (r) 3 and 5 involves Krox20-dependent enhancers that
have been conserved during the duplication of the vertebrate Hox clusters from a 
common ancestor. Examining these evolutionarily related control regions could
provide important insight into the degree to which the basic Krox20-dependent
mechanisms, cis-regulatory components, and their organization have been
conserved. Toward this goal we have performed a detailed functional analysis of a
mouse Hoxa2 enhancer capable of directing reporter expression in r3 and r5. The
combined activities of five separate cis-regions, in addition to the conserved
Krox20 binding sites, are involved in mediating enhancer function. A CTTT (BoxA) 
motif adjacent to the Krox20 binding sites is important for r3/r5 activity. The
BoxA motif is similar to one (Box1) found in the Hoxb2 enhancer and indicates
that the close proximity of these Box motifs to Krox20 sites is a common feature 
of Krox20 targets in vivo. Two other rhombomeric elements (RE1 and RE3) are
essential for r3/r5 activity and share common TCT motifs, indicating that they
interact with a similar cofactor(s). TCT motifs are also found in the Hoxb2
enhancer, suggesting that they may be another common feature of Krox20-dependent 
control regions. The two remaining Hoxa2 cis-elements, RE2 and RE4, are not
conserved in the Hoxb2 enhancer and define differences in some of components that
can contribute to the Krox20-dependent activities of these enhancers.
Furthermore, analysis of regulatory activities of these enhancers in a Krox20
mutant background has uncovered differences in their degree of dependence upon
Krox20 for segmental expression. Together, this work has revealed a surprising
degree of complexity in the number of cis-elements and regulatory components that
contribute to segmental expression mediated by Krox20 and sheds light on the
diversity and evolution of Krox20 target sites and Hox regulatory elements in
vertebrates.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11336508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Clin Invest. 2001 Apr;107(8):1007-15.

Fetal parathyroids are not required to maintain placental calcium transport.

Kovacs CS(1), Manley NR, Moseley JM, Martin TJ, Kronenberg HM.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medicine-Endocrinology, Memorial University of Newfoundland, 300
Prince Philip Drive, St. John's, Newfoundland A1B 3V6, Canada. ckovacs@mun.ca

We used Hoxa3 knockout mice and other mouse models to study the role of the fetal
parathyroids in fetal calcium homeostasis. Hoxa3-null fetuses lack parathyroid
glands, and absence of parathyroid hormone (PTH) was confirmed with a rodent PTH 
immunoradiometric assay. The ionized calcium level of Hoxa3-null fetuses was
significantly lower than that of wild-type or heterozygous littermates or of the 
mother. Both the rate of placental calcium transfer and the plasma PTHrP level
were normal in Hoxa3 mutants and their heterozygous siblings. Because we had
previously observed an increase in placental calcium transfer in PTH/PTHrP
receptor 1-null (Pthr1-null) fetuses, we assayed plasma PTHrP in those mice.
Pthr1-null fetuses had plasma PTHrP levels 11-fold higher than those of their
littermates. Northern analysis, immunohistochemical, and in situ hybridization
studies of Pthr1-null fetuses indicated that liver and placenta had increased
expression of PTHRP: In summary, loss of fetal parathyroids in Hoxa3-null fetuses
caused marked hypocalcemia but did not alter placental calcium transfer or the
circulating PTHrP level. The findings in the Pthr1-null fetuses indicate that
several tissues may contribute to the circulating PTHrP level in fetal mice.

PMCID: PMC199555
PMID: 11306604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Dev Biol. 2001 Apr 1;232(1):176-90.

Regulatory analysis of the mouse Hoxb3 gene: multiple elements work in concert to
direct temporal and spatial patterns of expression.

Kwan CT(1), Tsang SL, Krumlauf R, Sham MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, 5 Sassoon Road, Hong 
Kong, Pokfulam, China.

The expression pattern of the mouse Hoxb3 gene is exceptionally complex and
dynamic compared with that of other members of the Hoxb cluster. There are
multiple types of transcripts for Hoxb3 gene, and the anterior boundaries of its 
expression vary at different stages of development. Two enhancers flanking Hoxb3 
on the 3' and 5' sides regulate Hoxb2 and Hoxb4, respectively, and these control 
regions define the two ends of a 28-kb interval in and around the Hoxb3 locus. To
assay the regulatory potential of DNA fragments in this interval we have used
transgenic analysis with a lacZ reporter gene to locate cis-elements for
directing the dynamic patterns of Hoxb3 expression. Our detailed analysis has
identified four new and widely spaced cis-acting regulatory regions that can
together account for major aspects of the Hoxb3 expression pattern. Elements Ib, 
IIIa, and IVb control gene expression in neural and mesodermal tissues; element
Va controls mesoderm-specific gene expression. The most anterior neural
expression domain of Hoxb3 is controlled by an r5 enhancer (element IVa); element
IIIa directs reporter expression in the anterior spinal cord and hindbrain up to 
r6, and the region A enhancer (in element I) mediates posterior neural
expression. Hence, the regulation of segmental expression of Hoxb3 in the
hindbrain is different from that of Hoxa3, as two separate enhancer elements
contribute to expression in r5 and r6. The mesoderm-specific element (Va) directs
reporter expression to prevertebra C1 at 12.5 dpc, which is the anterior limit of
paraxial mesoderm expression for Hoxb3. When tested in combinations, these
cis-elements appear to work as modules in an additive manner to recapitulate the 
major endogenous expression patterns of Hoxb3 during embryogenesis. Together our 
study shows that multiple control elements direct reporter gene expression in
diverse tissue-, temporal-, and spatially restricted subset of the endogenous
Hoxb3 expression domains and work in concert to control the neural and mesodermal
patterns of expression.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11254356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Neuroreport. 2001 Feb 12;12(2):329-33.

Coordinated expression of Hoxa2, Hoxd1 and Pax6 in the developing diencephalon.

Wolf LV(1), Yeung JM, Doucette JR, Nazarali AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, College of Pharmacy and Nutrition, University
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

Coordinated expression of Hoxa2, Hoxd1 and Pax6 proteins were found to coincide
with the three developmental stages of the diencephalon, as described for the
mouse brain. In the first stage (embryonic day (E) 10-12) Hoxa2, Hoxd1 and Pax6
(an early marker gene of the diencephalon) were expressed as early as E10.5 in
prosomeres (p), p2 and p3. All three proteins continue to exhibit overlapping
domains of expression at E12.5-13 (beginning of the second stage) when the
primitive dense cell layer begins to differentiate into the internal germinal,
external germinal and mantle layers. Towards the end of the second stage (E15),
Pax6 expression was down-regulated whereas Hoxa2 and Hoxd1 continued to exhibit
overlapping domains of expression for both protein and mRNA. Hoxd1 expression
decreased significantly in the third stage of diencephalic development
(E16-postnatal) such that only Hoxa2 expression persisted in the diencephalon of 
newborn mice. The temporal and spatial expression of these three proteins imply
that coordinated waves of Hoxa2, Hoxd1 and Pax6 expression may be required to
provide positional information for the specification of the diencephalon.

PMID: 11209945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Development. 2000 Dec;127(24):5367-78.

Ectopic Hoxa2 induction after neural crest migration results in homeosis of jaw
elements in Xenopus.

Pasqualetti M(1), Ori M, Nardi I, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, BP 163 - 67404 Illkirch Cedex, C.U. de
Strasbourg, France.

Hox genes are required to pattern neural crest (NC) derived craniofacial and
visceral skeletal structures. However, the temporal requirement of Hox patterning
activity is not known. Here, we use an inducible system to establish Hoxa2
activity at distinct NC migratory stages in Xenopus embryos. We uncover
stage-specific effects of Hoxa2 gain-of-function suggesting a multistep
patterning process for hindbrain NC. Most interestingly, we show that Hoxa2
induction at postmigratory stages results in mirror image homeotic transformation
of a subset of jaw elements, normally devoid of Hox expression, towards hyoid
morphology. This is the reverse phenotype to that observed in the Hoxa2 knockout.
These data demonstrate that the skeletal pattern of rhombomeric mandibular crest 
is not committed before migration and further implicate Hoxa2 as a true selector 
of hyoid fate. Moreover, the demonstration that the expression of Hoxa2 alone is 
sufficient to transform the upper jaw and its joint selectively may have
implications for the evolution of jaws.

PMID: 11076758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Development. 2000 Dec;127(23):5093-100.

Loss- and gain-of-function mutations show a polycomb group function for Ring1A in
mice.

del Mar Lorente M(1), Marcos-Gutiérrez C, Pérez C, Schoorlemmer J, Ramírez A,
Magin T, Vidal M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental and Cell Biology, Centro de Investigaciones Biológicas,
Velázquez 144, Spain.

The products of the Polycomb group (PcG) of genes act as transcriptional
repressors involved in the maintenance of homeotic gene expression patterns
throughout development, from flies to mice. Biochemical and molecular evidence
suggests that the mouse Ring1A gene is a member of the PcG of genes. However,
genetic evidence is needed to establish PcG function for Ring1A, since contrary
to all other murine PcG genes, there is no known Drosophila PcG gene encoding a
homolog of the Ring1A protein. To study Ring1A function we have generated a mouse
line lacking Ring1A and mouse lines overexpressing Ring1A. Both Ring1A(-/-)and
Ring1A(+/-) mice show anterior transformations and other abnormalities of the
axial skeleton, which indicates an unusual sensitivity of axial skeleton
patterning to Ring1A gene dosage. Ectopic expression of Ring1A also results in
dose-dependent anterior transformations of vertebral identity, many of which,
interestingly, are shared by Ring1A(-/-) mice. In contrast, the alterations of
Hox gene expression observed in both type of mutant mice are subtle and involve a
reduced number of Hox genes. Taken together, these results provide genetic
evidence for a PcG function of the mouse Ring1A gene.

PMID: 11060235  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Teratology. 2000 Oct;62(4):214-26.

Effects of excess vitamin A on development of cranial neural crest-derived
structures: a neonatal and embryologic study.

Mulder GB(1), Manley N, Grant J, Schmidt K, Zeng W, Eckhoff C, Maggio-Price L.

Author information: 
(1)University Laboratory Animal Resources, University of California, Irvine,
California 92697, USA.

BACKGROUND: Vitamin A and its metabolites have been shown to be teratogenic in
animals and humans producing defects of neural crest derived structures that
include abnormalities of the craniofacial skeleton, heart, and thymus. Our prior 
studies with retinoic acid have established that gestational day (gd) 9 is a
sensitive embryonic age in the mouse for inducing craniofacial and thymic
defects.
METHODS: We exposed pregnant mice to variable doses of vitamin A (retinyl
acetate) on gd 9 and embryos were evaluated for changes in developing pharyngeal 
arch and pouch morphology, neural crest cell migration and marker gene
expression. Additionally, we investigated whether a single organ system was more 
sensitive to low doses of vitamin A and could potentially be used as an indicator
of vitamin A exposure during early gestation.
RESULTS: High (100 mg/kg) and moderate (50 and 25 mg/kg) doses of vitamin A
resulted in significant craniofacial, cardiac outflow tract and thymic
abnormalities. Low doses of vitamin A (10 mg/kg) produced craniofacial and thymic
abnormalities that were mild and of low penetrance. Exposed embryos showed
morphologic changes in the 2nd and 3rd pharyngeal arches and pouches, changes in 
neural crest migration, abnormalities in cranial ganglia, and altered expression 
of Hoxa3.
CONCLUSIONS: These animal studies, along with recent epidemiologic reports on
human teratogenicity with vitamin A, raise concerns about the potential for
induction of defects (perhaps subtle) in offspring of women ingesting even
moderate to low amounts of supplemental vitamin A during the early gestational
period.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10992263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. J Immunol. 2000 Jun 1;164(11):5753-60.

Hoxa3 and pax1 transcription factors regulate the ability of fetal thymic
epithelial cells to promote thymocyte development.

Su DM(1), Manley NR.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Medicine and Genetics and Department of Pediatrics,
Medical College of Georgia, Augusta, GA 30912, USA. nmanley@mail.mcg.edu

Thymocyte maturation into T cells depends on interactions between thymocytes and 
thymic epithelial cells. In this study, we show that mutations in two
transcription factors, Hoxa3 and Pax1, act synergistically to cause defective
thymic epithelial cell development, resulting in thymic ectopia and hypoplasia.
Hoxa3+/-Pax1-/- compound mutant mice exhibited more severe thymus defects than
Pax1-/- single mutants. Fetal liver adoptive transfer experiments revealed that
the defect resided in radio-resistant stromal cells and not in hematopoietic
cells. Compound mutants have fewer MHC class II+ epithelial cells, and the level 
of MHC expression detected was lower. Thymic epithelial cells in these mutants
have reduced ability to promote thymocyte development, causing a specific block
in thymocyte maturation at an early stage that resulted in a dramatic reduction
in the number of CD4+8+ thymocytes. This phenotype was accompanied by increased
apoptosis of CD4+8+ thymocytes and their immediate precursors, CD44-25-(CD3-4-8-)
cells. Our results identify a transcriptional regulatory pathway required for
thymic epithelial cell development and define multiple roles for epithelial cell 
regulation of thymocyte maturation at the CD4-8- to CD4+8+ transition.

PMID: 10820253  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cell Mol Neurobiol. 2000 Jun;20(3):269-90.

Temporal and spatial expression of Hoxa-2 during murine palatogenesis.

Nazarali A(1), Puthucode R, Leung V, Wolf L, Hao Z, Yeung J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, College of Pharmacy and Nutrition, University
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

1. Mice homozygous for a targeted mutation of the Hoxa-2 gene are born with a
bilateral cleft of the secondary palate associated with multiple head and cranial
anomalies and these animals die within 24 hr of birth (Gendron-Maguire et al.,
1993; Rijli et al., 1993; Mallo and Gridley, 1996). We have determined the
spatial and temporal expression of the Hoxa-2 homeobox protein in the developing 
mouse palate at embryonic stages E12, E13, E13.5, E14, E14.5, and E15. 2. Hoxa-2 
is expressed in the mesenchyme and epithelial cells of the palate at E12, but is 
progressively restricted to the tips of the growing palatal shelves at E13. 3. By
the E13.5 stage of development, Hoxa-2 protein was found to be expressed
throughout the palatal shelf. These observations correlate with palatal shelf
orientation and Hoxa-2 protein may play a direct or indirect role in guiding the 
palatal shelves vertically along side the tongue, starting with the tips of the
palatal shelves at E13, followed by the entire palatal shelf at E13.5. 4. As
development progresses to E14, the stage at which shelf elevation occurs, Hoxa-2 
protein is downregulated in the palatal mesenchyme but remains in the medial edge
epithelium. Expression of Hoxa-2 continues in the medial edge epithelium until
the fusion of opposing palatal shelves. 5. By the E15 stage of development,
Hoxa-2 is downregulated in the palate and expression is localized in the nasal
and oral epithelia. 6. In an animal model of phenytoin-induced cleft palate, we
report that Hoxa-2 mRNA and protein expression were significantly decreased,
implicating a possible functional role of the Hoxa-2 gene in the development of
phenytoin-induced cleft palate. 7. A recent report by Barrow and Capecchi (1999),
has illustrated the importance of tongue posture during palatal shelf closure in 
Hoxa-2 mutant mice. This along with our new findings of the expression of the
Hoxa-2 protein during palatogenesis has shed some light on the putative role of
this gene in palate development.

PMID: 10789828  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Nature. 2000 Feb 10;403(6770):661-5.

Maintenance of functional equivalence during paralogous Hox gene evolution.

Greer JM(1), Puetz J, Thomas KR, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt
Lake City 84112, USA.

Comment in
    Nature. 2000 Feb 10;403(6770):607, 609-10.

Biological diversity is driven mainly by gene duplication followed by mutation
and selection. This divergence in either regulatory or protein-coding sequences
can result in quite different biological functions for even closely related
genes. This concept is exemplified by the mammalian Hox gene complex, a group of 
39 genes which are located on 4 linkage groups, dispersed on 4 chromosomes. The
evolution of this complex began with amplification in cis of a primordial Hox
gene to produce 13 members, followed by duplications in trans of much of the
entire unit. As a consequence, Hox genes that occupy the same relative position
along the 5' to 3' chromosomal coordinate (trans-paralogous genes) share more
similarity in sequence and expression pattern than do adjacent Hox genes on the
same chromosome. Studies in mice indicate that although individual family members
may have unique biological roles, they also share overlapping functions with
their paralogues. Here we show that the proteins encoded by the paralogous genes,
Hoxa3 and Hoxd3, can carry out identical biological functions, and that the
different roles attributed to these genes are the result of quantitative
modulations in gene expression.

PMID: 10688203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Development. 2000 Mar;127(5):933-44.

Roles of Hoxa1 and Hoxa2 in patterning the early hindbrain of the mouse.

Barrow JR(1), Stadler HS, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Early in its development, the vertebrate hindbrain is transiently subdivided into
a series of compartments called rhombomeres. Genes have been identified whose
expression patterns distinguish these cellular compartments. Two of these genes, 
Hoxa1 and Hoxa2, have been shown to be required for proper patterning of the
early mouse hindbrain and the associated neural crest. To determine the extent to
which these two genes function together to pattern the hindbrain, we generated
mice simultaneously mutant at both loci. The hindbrain patterning defects were
analyzed in embryos individually mutant for Hoxa1 and Hoxa2 in greater detail and
extended to embryos mutant for both genes. From these data a model is proposed to
describe how Hoxa1, Hoxa2, Hoxb1, Krox20 (Egr2) and kreisler function together to
pattern the early mouse hindbrain. Critical to the model is the demonstration
that Hoxa1 activity is required to set the anterior limit of Hoxb1 expression at 
the presumptive r3/4 rhombomere boundary. Failure to express Hoxb1 to this
boundary in Hoxa1 mutant embryos initiates a cascade of gene misexpressions that 
result in misspecification of the hindbrain compartments from r2 through r5.
Subsequent to misspecification of the hindbrain compartments, ectopic induction
of apoptosis appears to be used to regulate the aberrant size of the misspecified
rhombomeres.

PMID: 10662633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Development. 2000 Jan;127(2):307-17.

Regulation of mouse lens fiber cell development and differentiation by the Maf
gene.

Ring BZ(1), Cordes SP, Overbeek PA, Barsh GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford,
California 94305-5428, USA.

Maf is a basic domain/leucine zipper domain protein originally identified as a
proto-oncogene whose consensus target site in vitro, the T-MARE, is an extended
version of an AP-1 site normally recognized by Fos and Jun. Maf and the closely
related family members Neural retina leucine zipper (Nrl), L-Maf, and Krml1/MafB 
have been implicated in a wide variety of developmental and physiologic roles;
however, mutations in vivo have been described only for Krml1/MafB, in which a
loss-of-function causes abnormalities in hindbrain development due to failure to 
activate the Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 genes. We have used gene targeting to replace Maf
coding sequences with those of lacZ, and have carried out a comprehensive
analysis of embryonic expression and the homozygous mutant phenotype in the eye. 
Maf is expressed in the lens vesicle after invagination, and becomes highly
upregulated in the equatorial zone, the site at which self-renewing anterior
epithelial cells withdraw from the cell cycle and terminally differentiate into
posterior fiber cells. Posterior lens cells in Maf(lacZ) mutant mice exhibit
failure of elongation at embryonic day 11.5, do not express (&agr;)A- and all of 
the (beta)-crystallin genes, and display inappropriately high levels of DNA
synthesis. This phenotype partially overlaps with those reported for gene
targeting of Prox1 and Sox1; however, expression of these genes is grossly
normal, as is expression of Eya1, Eya2, Pax6, and Sox2. Recombinant Maf protein
binds to T-MARE sites in the (alpha)A-, (beta)B2-, and (beta)A4-crystallin
promoters but fails to bind to a point mutation in the (alpha)A-crystallin
promoter that has been shown previously to be required for promoter function. Our
results indicate that Maf directly activates many if not all of the
(beta)-crystallin genes, and suggest a model for coordinating cell cycle
withdrawal with terminal differentiation.

PMID: 10603348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Genes Dev. 1999 Jun 15;13(12):1524-8.

Targeting genes for self-excision in the germ line.

Bunting M(1), Bernstein KE, Greer JM, Capecchi MR, Thomas KR.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Division, Department of Internal Medicine, University of Utah, Salt
Lake City, Utah 84112, USA.

A procedure is described that directs the self-induced deletion of DNA sequences 
as they pass through the male germ line of mice. The testes-specific promoter
from the angiotensin-converting enzyme gene was used to drive expression of the
Cre-recombinase gene. Cre was linked to the selectable marker Neor, and the two
genes flanked with loxP elements. This cassette was targeted to the Hoxa3 gene in
mouse ES cells that were in turn used to generate chimeric mice. In these
chimeras, somatic cells derived from the ES cells retained the cassette, but
self-excision occurred in all ES-cell-derived sperm.

PMCID: PMC316811
PMID: 10385621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Am J Hum Genet. 1999 Jul;65(1):249-51.

Haploinsufficiency of the HOXA gene cluster, in a patient with hand-foot-genital 
syndrome, velopharyngeal insufficiency, and persistent patent Ductus botalli.

Devriendt K, Jaeken J, Matthijs G, Van Esch H, Debeer P, Gewillig M, Fryns JP.

PMCID: PMC1378097
PMID: 10364539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Teratology. 1998 Dec;58(6):263-75.

Retinoic acid-induced thymic abnormalities in the mouse are associated with
altered pharyngeal morphology, thymocyte maturation defects, and altered
expression of Hoxa3 and Pax1.

Mulder GB(1), Manley N, Maggio-Price L.

Author information: 
(1)University Laboratory Animal Resources, University of California at Irvine
92697-1310, USA.

Exogenous retinoic acid is teratogenic in animals and man, causing a spectrum of 
abnormalities termed retinoic acid embryopathy. Using a mouse model of retinoic
acid embryopathy, our results show that exposure to all-trans retinoic acid (RA) 
on gestational day (gd) 9 results in thymic ectopia, hypoplasia, and thymocyte
maturational defects. Immunohistochemical and flow cytometric analyses showed
aberrant expression of stromal and thymocyte markers, and abnormalities in
thymocyte development. RNA in situ hybridization for the transcription factors
Hoxa3 and Pax1 was used to investigate the basis of this defect. Hoxa3 and Pax1
have been shown to be required for normal thymus development, and are normally
expressed in the cells of the third pharyngeal pouch and third and fourth
pharyngeal arches, involved in thymus organogenesis RA-exposed embryos showed an 
increased level of Hoxa3 expression in the neural tube and caudal pharyngeal
arches as soon as 6 hr after exposure. The Pax1 expression pattern, in
conjunction with analysis of the external pharyngeal morphology, showed that the 
development and structure of the third pharyngeal pouch and cleft were disrupted,
resulting in a reduced third pharyngeal arch and/or fusion of the third and
fourth arches. Changes in the expression of cellular retinoic acid binding
protein (CRABP) and in the morphology of the cranial ganglia were consistent with
altered neural crest cell migration from the caudal hindbrain after RA exposure. 
Together, our findings suggest that the teratogenic effects of RA on thymus
development include changes in both the cranial neural crest and pharyngeal
endoderm that contribute to thymus development. Further, the observed defects in 
thymus development may be mediated by RA-induced alterations in the expression of
Hoxa3.

PMID: 9894676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Development. 1999 Feb;126(4):759-69.

Conserved and distinct roles of kreisler in regulation of the paralogous Hoxa3
and Hoxb3 genes.

Manzanares M(1), Cordes S, Ariza-McNaughton L, Sadl V, Maruthainar K, Barsh G,
Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

During anteroposterior patterning of the developing hindbrain, the anterior
expression of 3' Hox genes maps to distinct rhombomeric boundaries and, in many
cases, is upregulated in specific segments. Paralogous genes frequently have
similar anterior boundaries of expression but it is not known if these are
controlled by common mechanisms. The expression of the paralogous Hoxa3 and Hoxb3
genes extends from the posterior spinal cord up to the rhombomere (r) 4/5
boundary and both genes are upregulated specifically in r5. However, in this
study, we have found that Hoxa3 expression is also upregulated in r6, showing
that there are differences in segmental expression between paralogues. We have
used transgenic analysis to investigate the mechanisms underlying the pattern of 
segmental expression of Hoxa3. We found that the intergenic region between Hoxa3 
and Hoxa4 contains several enhancers, which summed together mediate a pattern of 
expression closely resembling that of the endogenous Hoxa3 gene. One enhancer
specifically directs expression in r5 and r6, in a manner that reflects the
upregulation of the endogenous gene in these segments. Deletion analysis
localized this activity to a 600 bp fragment that was found to contain a single
high-affinity binding site for the Maf bZIP protein Krml1, encoded by the
kreisler gene. This site is necessary for enhancer activity and when multimerized
it is sufficient to direct a kreisler-like pattern in transgenic embryos.
Furthermore the r5/r6 enhancer activity is dependent upon endogenous kreisler and
is activated by ectopic kreisler expression. This demonstrates that Hoxa3, along 
with its paralog Hoxb3, is a direct target of kreisler in the mouse hindbrain.
Comparisons between the Krml1-binding sites in the Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 enhancers
reveal that there are differences in both the number of binding sites and way
that kreisler activity is integrated and restricted by these two control regions.
Analysis of the individual sites revealed that they have different requirements
for mediating r5/r6 and dorsal roof plate expression. Therefore, the restriction 
of Hoxb3 to r5 and Hoxa3 to r5 and r6, together with expression patterns of Hoxb3
in other vertebrate species suggests that these regulatory elements have a common
origin but have later diverged during vertebrate evolution.

PMID: 9895323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Dev Biol. 1998 Mar 1;195(1):1-15.

Hox group 3 paralogs regulate the development and migration of the thymus,
thyroid, and parathyroid glands.

Manley NR(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112-5331.

The thymus, thyroid, and parathyroid glands in vertebrates develop from the
pharyngeal region, with contributions both from pharyngeal endoderm and from
neural crest cells in the pharyngeal arches. Hoxa3 mutant homozygotes have
defects in the development of all three organs. Roles for the Hoxa3 paralogs,
Hoxb3 and Hoxd3, were investigated by examining various mutant combinations. The 
thyroid defects seen in Hoxa3 single mutants are exacerbated in double mutants
with either of its paralogs, although none of the double-mutant combinations
resulted in thyroid agenesis. The results indicate that the primary role of these
genes in thyroid development is their effect on the development and migration of 
the ultimobranchial bodies, which contribute the parafollicular or C-cells to the
thyroid. Hoxb3, Hoxd3 double mutants show no obvious defects in the thymus or
parathyroids. However, the removal of one functional copy of Hoxa3 from the
Hoxb3, Hoxd3 double mutants (Hoxa3 +/-, Hoxb3-/-, Hoxd3-/-) results in the
failure of the thymus and parathyroid glands to migrate to their normal positions
in the throat. Very little is known about the molecular mechanisms used to
mediate the movement of tissues during development. These results indicate that
Hoxa3, Hoxb3, and Hoxd3 have highly overlapping functions in mediating the
migration of pharyngeal organ primordia. In addition, Hoxa3 has a unique function
with respect to its paralogs in thymus, parathyroid, and thyroid development.
This unique function may be conferred by the expression of Hoxa3, but not Hoxb3
nor Hoxd3, in the pharyngeal pouch endoderm.

PMID: 9520319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Dev Biol. 1997 Dec 15;192(2):274-88.

Hox group 3 paralogous genes act synergistically in the formation of somitic and 
neural crest-derived structures.

Manley NR(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Hox genes encode transcription factors that are used to regionalize the mammalian
embryo. Analysis of mice carrying targeted mutations in individual and multiple
Hox genes is beginning to reveal a complex network of interactions among these
closely related genes which is responsible for directing the formation of
spatially restricted tissues and structures. In this report we present an
analysis of the genetic interactions between all members of the third paralogous 
group, Hoxa3, Hoxb3, and Hoxd3. Previous analysis has shown that although mice
homozygous for loss-of-function mutations in either Hoxa3 or Hoxd3 have no
defects in common, mice mutant for both genes demonstrate that these two genes
strongly interact in a dosage-dependent manner. To complete the analysis of this 
paralogous gene family, mice with a targeted disruption of the Hoxb3 gene were
generated. Homozygous mutants have minor defects at low penetrance in the
formation of both the cervical vertebrae and the IXth cranial nerve. Analysis and
comparison of all double-mutant combinations demonstrate that all three members
of this paralogous group interact synergistically to affect the development of
both neuronal and mesenchymal neural crest-derived structures, as well as somitic
mesoderm-derived structures. Surprisingly, with respect to the formation of the
cervical vertebrae, mice doubly mutant for Hoxa3 and Hoxd3 or Hoxb3 and Hoxd3
show an indistinguishable defect, loss of the entire atlas. This suggests that
the identity of the specific Hox genes that are functional in a given region may 
not be as critical as the total number of Hox genes operating in that region.

PMID: 9441667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Aug 6;93(16):8247-52.

Sequence and expression of the murine Hoxd-3 homeobox gene.

Tan DP(1), Shao X, Pu L, Guo V, Nirenberg M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemical Genetics, National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, 
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Murine Hoxd-3 (Hox 4.1) genomic DNA and cDNA and Hoxa-3 (Hox 1.5) cDNA were
cloned and sequenced. The homeodomains of Hoxd-3 and Hoxa-3 and regions before
and after the homeodomain are highly conserved. Both Hoxa-3 and Hoxa-3 proteins
have a proline-rich region that contains consensus amino acid sequences for
binding to Src homology 3 domains of some signal transduction proteins. Northern 
blot analysis of RNA from 8- to 11-day-old mouse embryos revealed a 4.3-kb
species of Hoxd-3 RNA, whereas a less abundant 3.0-kb species of Hoxd-3 RNA was
found in RNA from 9- to 11-day-old embryos. Two species of Hoxd-3 poly(A)+ RNA,
4.3 and 6.0 kb in length, were found in poly(A)+ RNA from adult mouse kidney, but
not in RNA from other adult tissues tested. Hoxd-3 mRNA was detected by in situ
hybridization in 12-, 14-, and 17-day-old mouse embryos in the posterior half of 
the myelencephalon, spinal cord, dorsal root ganglia, first cervical vertebra,
thyroid gland, kidney tubules, esophagus, stomach, and intestines.

PMCID: PMC38655
PMID: 8710855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Development. 1996 Mar;122(3):895-904.

Rhombomere of origin determines autonomous versus environmentally regulated
expression of Hoxa-3 in the avian embryo.

Saldivar JR(1), Krull CE, Krumlauf R, Ariza-McNaughton L, Bronner-Fraser M.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Center, University of California Irvine 92717, USA.

We have investigated the pattern and regulation of Hoxa3 expression in the
hindbrain and associated neural crest cells in the chick embryo, using whole
mount in situ hybridization in conjunction with DiI labeling of neural crest
cells and microsurgical manipulations. Hoxa3 is expressed in the neural plate and
later in the neural tube with a rostral border of expression corresponding to the
boundary between rhombomeres (r) 4 and 5. Initial expression is diffuse and
becomes sharp after boundary formation. Hoxa3 exhibits uniform expression within 
r5 after formation of rhombomeric borders. Cell marking experiments reveal that
neural crest cells migrating caudally, but not rostrally, from r5 and caudally
from r6 express Hoxa3 in normal embryo. Results from transposition experiments
demonstrate that expression of Hoxa3 in r5 neural crest cells is not strictly
cell-autonomous. When r5 is transposed with r4 by rostrocaudal rotation of the
rhomobomeres, Hoxa3 is expressed in cells migrating lateral to transposed r5 and 
for a short time, in condensing ganglia, but not by neural crest within the
second branchial arch. Since DiI-labeled cells from transposed r5 are present in 
the second arch, Hoxa3-expressing neural crest cells from r5 appear to
down-regulate their Hoxa3 expression in their new environment. In contrast, when 
r6 is transposed to the position of r4 after boundary formation, Hoxa3 is
maintained in both migrating neural crest cells and those positioned within the
second branchial arch and associated ganglia. These results suggest that Hoxa3
expression is cell-autonomous in r6 and its associated neural crest. Our results 
suggest that neural crest cells expressing the same Hox gene are not eqivalent;
they respond differently to environmental signals and exhibit distinct degrees of
cell autonomy depending upon their rhombomere of origin.

PMID: 8631267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Biochemistry. 1995 May 30;34(21):7127-34.

Multiple amino acids determine the DNA binding specificity of the Msx-1
homeodomain.

Isaac VE(1), Sciavolino P, Abate C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Piscataway, New Jersey
08854-5638, USA.

This study investigates the sequence features that contribute to the differential
DNA binding properties of two divergent homeodomains, Msx-1 and HoxA3. We show
that these homeodomains have overlapping, but nonidentical, DNA binding site
preferences. We defined the amino acid residues that contribute to the observed
differences in DNA binding specificity by producing a series of mutated
polypeptides in which selected residues in Msx-1 were replaced with the
corresponding ones in HoxA3. These analyses show that the DNA binding specificity
of Msx-1 versus HoxA3 results from the cumulative action of multiple residues in 
all segments of the homeodomain (i.e., the N-terminal arm and helices I, II, and 
III). Therefore, substitutions of residues in both helix III and the N-terminal
arm (but not in either segment alone) produced an Msx-1 polypeptide whose binding
site preference was indistinguishable from that of HoxA3. Residues in helices I
and II also influence DNA binding activity; these oppositely charged residues
(e.g., lysine 19 and glutamate 30) may mediate ionic interactions between helices
I and II which stabilize DNA binding by Msx-1. These findings demonstrate a
critical interplay between residues in each homeodomain segment for appropriate
conformation of the protein-DNA complex.

PMID: 7766623  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Cell Biol. 1993 Apr;13(4):2354-65.

Nucleotides flanking a conserved TAAT core dictate the DNA binding specificity of
three murine homeodomain proteins.

Catron KM(1), Iler N, Abate C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Rutgers University,
Piscataway, New Jersey.

Murine homeobox genes play a fundamental role in directing embryogenesis by
controlling gene expression during development. The homeobox encodes a DNA
binding domain (the homeodomain) which presumably mediates interactions of
homeodomain proteins with specific DNA sites in the control regions of target
genes. However, the bases for these selective DNA-protein interactions are not
well defined. In this report, we have characterized the DNA binding specificities
of three murine homeodomain proteins, Hox 7.1, Hox 1.5, and En-1. We have
identified optimal DNA binding sites for each of these proteins by using a random
oligonucleotide selection strategy. Comparison of the sequences of the selected
binding sites predicted a common consensus site that contained the motif
(C/G)TAATTG. The TAAT core was essential for DNA binding activity, and the
nucleotides flanking this core directed binding specificity. Whereas variations
in the nucleotides flanking the 5' side of the TAAT core produced modest
alterations in binding activity for all three proteins, perturbations of the
nucleotides directly 3' of the core distinguished the binding specificity of Hox 
1.5 from those of Hox 7.1 and En-1. These differences in binding activity
reflected differences in the dissociation rates rather than the equilibrium
constants of the protein-DNA complexes. Differences in DNA binding specificities 
observed in vitro may contribute to selective interactions of homeodomain
proteins with potential binding sites in the control regions of target genes.

PMCID: PMC359556
PMID: 8096059  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


