
1. Exp Hematol Oncol. 2016 Feb 3;5:4. doi: 10.1186/s40164-016-0033-6. eCollection
2015.

miR-199b, a novel tumor suppressor miRNA in acute myeloid leukemia with
prognostic implications.

Favreau AJ(1), McGlauflin RE(2), Duarte CW(3), Sathyanarayana P(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, 81
Research Drive, Scarborough, ME 04074 USA ; The Graduate School of Biomedical
Science and Engineering, University of Maine, Orono, ME 04469 USA. (2)Center for 
Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, 81 Research Drive,
Scarborough, ME 04074 USA. (3)Center for Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center
Research Institute, 81 Research Drive, Scarborough, ME 04074 USA ; Department of 
Medicine, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA USA. (4)Center for
Molecular Medicine, Maine Medical Center Research Institute, 81 Research Drive,
Scarborough, ME 04074 USA ; The Graduate School of Biomedical Science and
Engineering, University of Maine, Orono, ME 04469 USA ; Department of Medicine,
Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA USA.

BACKGROUND: Dysregulation of miRNAs that can act as tumor suppressors or
oncogenes can result in tumorigenesis. Previously we demonstrated that miR-199b
was significantly downregulated in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and targets
podocalyxin and discoidin domain receptor 1. Herein we investigated the
functional role of miR-199b in AML and its prognostic implications.
METHODS: Major approaches include transduction of hematopoietic stem cells and
bone marrow transplantation, analyses of blood lineages, histone deacetylases
(HDAC) inhibitors, and molecular and clinical data analyses of AML patients using
The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).
RESULTS: We first examined the relative miR-199b expression in steady state
hematopoiesis and showed CD33(+) myeloid progenitors had the highest miR-199b
expression. Further, silencing of miR-199b in CD34(+) cells resulted in
significant increases in CFU-GM colonies. Via TCGA we analyzed the molecular and 
clinical characteristics of 166 AML cases to investigate a prognostic role for
miR-199b. The Kaplan-Meier curves for high and low expression values of miR-199b 
and the observed distribution of miRNA expression revealed the highly expressed
group had significantly better survival outcomes (p < 0.016, log rank test).
Additionally, there was significant difference between miR-199b expression across
the AML subtypes with particularly low expression found in the FAB-M5 subtype.
Furthermore, FAB-M5 subtype showed a poor prognosis with a 1-year survival rate
of only 25 %, compared with 51 % survival in the overall sample (p < 0.024).
Furthermore, significant inverse correlation of HoxA7 and HoxB6 expression with
miR-199b was observed in FAB-M5 AML patients. Molecular mutations were analyzed
among miR-199b high and low AML cases. Significant correlations in terms of
association and survival outcomes were observed for NPMc and IDH1 mutations.
Treatment of THP-1 cells (represents M5-subtype) with HDAC inhibitors AR-42,
Panobinostat, or Decitabine showed miR-199b expression was significantly elevated
upon AR-42 and Panobinostat treatment. To further understand the
hematopathological consequences of decreased miR-199b, we employed a bone-marrow 
transduce/transplant (BMT) mouse model. Interestingly, in vivo miR-199b silencing
per-se in HSCs did not result in profound perturbations.
CONCLUSIONS: Loss of miR-199b can lead to myeloproliferation while HDAC
inhibitors restore miR-199b expression and promote apoptosis. Low miR-199b in AML
patients correlates with worse overall survival and has prognostic significance
for FAB-M5 subtype.

PMCID: PMC4740997
PMID: 26848406  [PubMed]


2. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 2016 Jan 22;62(1):63-6.

All-trans retinoic acid inhibits HOXA7 expression in leukemia cell NB4.

Guo Q(1), Jiang Q(1), Liu W(2), Bai Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Luzhou Medical University Affiliated Hospital Department of Paediatrics Luzhou
China. (2)Luzhou Medical University Affiliated Hospital Department of Paediatrics
Luzhou China wenjun_liu1@yahoo.com.

Leukemia is a malignant proliferative disease of blood system, which is caused by
hyperplasia of white blood cells and infiltration into other tissues and organs
with blood flow, leading to a series of clinical manifestations. In this study,
we detected the expression of HOXA7 gene in human acute promyelocytic leukemia
cell line NB4. The expression level of HOXA7 decreased in the presence of ATRA,
which was able to inhibit the proliferation of NB4 cells. Furthermore, ATRA
altered the morphology of NB4 cells. The study suggested that HOXA7 might be a
new gene candidate that influences the maturation of acute myeloid leukemia, and 
provided the molecular basis for the treatment for acute promyelocyticleukemia.

PMID: 26828989  [PubMed - in process]


3. Mol Cell. 2015 Feb 5;57(3):572. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2015.01.032.

Retraction notice to: The noncoding RNA mistral activates Hoxa6 and Hoxa7
expression and stem cell differentiation by recruiting MLL1 to chromatin.

[No authors listed]

Retraction of
    Bertani S, Sauer S, Bolotin E, Sauer F. Mol Cell. 2011 Sep 16;43(6):1040-6.

PMCID: PMC4410674
PMID: 25811052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Feb 5;401:189-201. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.12.012. Epub
2014 Dec 17.

Transcriptional profiling of five isolated size-matched stages of human preantral
follicles.

Kristensen SG(1), Ebbesen P(2), Andersen CY(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology - Copenhagen University Hospital,
Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen, Denmark. Electronic address:
stine.gry.kristensen@rh.regionh.dk. (2)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology -
Copenhagen University Hospital, Rigshospitalet, Blegdamsvej 9, 2100 Copenhagen,
Denmark.

Little is known of the early stages of human follicular development and the
complex processes that regulate follicular growth. To identify genes of potential
importance, we analysed follicle-related transcripts in five populations of
isolated size-matched human preantral follicles by microarray analysis.
Oocyte-specific genes were found to be the most abundant and differentially
expressed transcripts and included germ cell transcription factors LHX8 and
SOHLH2 which were significantly down-regulated during preantral follicle
development. Differentially expressed genes also included transcription factors
of NOTCH signalling, IGF2, orphan nuclear receptor LRH-1, and homeobox gene
HOXA7, indicating potentially important regulatory roles for these genes during
early human folliculogenesis. We also found that FSHR mRNA and protein were
present in the earliest stages of preantral follicles, whereas LHR was absent. In
conclusion, our data identify specific oocyte and somatic genes in small human
follicles that impact early follicle growth, and provide foundation for further
analysis of the signalling pathways involved in early human folliculogenesis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25528519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Oncol Rep. 2015 Feb;33(2):990-6. doi: 10.3892/or.2014.3668. Epub 2014 Dec 11.

HOXA7 stimulates human hepatocellular carcinoma proliferation through cyclin
E1/CDK2.

Li Y(1), Yang XH(2), Fang SJ(1), Qin CF(1), Sun RL(1), Liu ZY(1), Jiang BY(1), Wu
X(1), Li G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Tumor Immunobiology Laboratory of the Cancer Research Institute, Key
Laboratory of Carcinogenesis and Cancer Invasion, Ministry of Education, Key
Laboratory of Carcinogenesis, Ministry of Health, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, P.R. China. (2)Xiangya Third Hospital, Central South University,
Changsha, Hunan, P.R. China.

HOX genes are transcription factors that control morphogenesis, organogenesis and
differentiation. Increasing evidence suggests that HOX genes play a role in
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression; however few studies have defined the 
functional roles and mechanisms of action. In the present study, we used siRNA
and forced-expression in multiple cell lines to define the role of HOXA7 in the
regulation of proliferation of HCC in vitro and in vivo. Knockdown of endogenous 
HOXA7 decreased the proliferation of HepG2 and QGY-7703 cells. These changes were
not associated with significant changes in cyclin D1 and CDK4. However,
downregulation of HOXA7 significantly reduced cyclin E1 and CDK2 protein levels. 
Conversely, overexpression of HOXA7 in QSG-7701 cells stimulated proliferation
and increased cyclin E1 and CDK2 protein levels. Our results confirmed that HOXA7
promoted cell proliferation, and these changes were mediated by cyclin E1/CDK2.
These observations contribute to our understanding of the important roles of
HOXA7 in HCC development and progression and HOXA7 could be a promising molecular
target for the development of new diagnostic and therapeutic strategies for HCC.

PMID: 25501982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Reprod Biomed Online. 2014 Nov;29(5):595-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2014.07.012. Epub
2014 Aug 12.

Mutation screening of HOXA7 and HOXA9 genes in Chinese women with Müllerian duct 
abnormalities.

Chen X(1), Mu Y(2), Li C(2), Li G(2), Zhao H(3), Qin Y(2), Chen ZJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, National Research Center for Assisted Reproductive Technology and
Reproductive Genetics, The Key Laboratory for Reproductive Endocrinology of
Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Reproductive
Medicine, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, China; School of Nursing, Shandong
University, 44 Wenhua Road, Jinan 250012, China. (2)Center for Reproductive
Medicine, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, National
Research Center for Assisted Reproductive Technology and Reproductive Genetics,
The Key Laboratory for Reproductive Endocrinology of Ministry of Education,
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, 324 Jingwu Road,
Jinan 250021, China. (3)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region,
China; School of Biomedical Sciences Core Laboratory, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute, 10 Yuexing Erdao, Nanshan District,
Shenzhen 518000, China. (4)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Provincial Hospital 
Affiliated to Shandong University, National Research Center for Assisted
Reproductive Technology and Reproductive Genetics, The Key Laboratory for
Reproductive Endocrinology of Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, China; Center
for Reproductive Medicine, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai Key Laboratory for Assisted Reproduction and Reproductive
Genetics, 145 Middle Shandong Rd, Shanghai 200001, China. Electronic address:
chenzijiang@hotmail.com.

HOXA genes in groups 7-13 have been proven to play a role in determining
positional identity along the genitalia axis. The aim of the present study was to
explore the relationship between HOXA7 and HOXA9 mutations and Müllerian duct
abnormalities (MDA). One hundred and ninety-two Chinese patients with MDA
abnormalities and 192 healthy controls were recruited. All coding regions of
HOXA7 and HOXA9 were amplified and sequenced directly. Rs2301721 and rs2301720 in
HOXA7, rs35355140 and rs7810502 in HOXA9 were identified in patients with MDA and
controls. One rare single nucleotide polymorphism rs189587233 in 3' UTR of HOXA9 
gene was detected in one patient with didelphic uterus and absent in the 192
controls. This polymorphism, however, is known to exist in the normal Chinese
population. Our results indicated that variants in the HOXA7 and HOXA9 genes were
not common in Chinese women with Müllerian duct abnormalities.

Copyright © 2014 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 25246116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Haematologica. 2014 Sep;99(9):1465-71. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.100917. Epub
2014 Jun 20.

Potent co-operation between the NUP98-NSD1 fusion and the FLT3-ITD mutation in
acute myeloid leukemia induction.

Thanasopoulou A(1), Tzankov A(2), Schwaller J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University Children's Hospital of Basel (UKBB),
Switzerland. (2)Institute for Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Switzerland. 
(3)Department of Biomedicine, University Children's Hospital of Basel (UKBB),
Switzerland j.schwaller@unibas.ch.

The NUP98-NSD1 fusion, product of the t(5;11)(q35;p15.5) chromosomal
translocation, is one of the most prevalent genetic alterations in
cytogenetically normal pediatric acute myeloid leukemias and is associated with
poor prognosis. Co-existence of an FLT3-ITD activating mutation has been found in
more than 70% of NUP98-NSD1-positive patients. To address functional synergism,
we determined the transforming potential of retrovirally expressed NUP98-NSD1 and
FLT3-ITD in the mouse. Expression of NUP98-NSD1 provided mouse strain-dependent, 
aberrant self-renewal potential to bone marrow progenitor cells. Co-expression of
FLT3-ITD increased proliferation and maintained self-renewal in vitro.
Transplantation of immortalized progenitors co-expressing NUP98-NSD1 and FLT3-ITD
into mice resulted in acute myeloid leukemia after a short latency. In contrast, 
neither NUP98-NSD1 nor FLT3-ITD single transduced cells were able to initiate
leukemia. Interestingly, as reported for patients carrying NUP98-NSD1, an
increased Flt3-ITD to wild-type Flt3 mRNA expression ratio with increased
FLT3-signaling was associated with rapidly induced disease. In contrast, there
was no difference in the expression levels of the NUP98-NSD1 fusion or its
proposed targets HoxA5, HoxA7, HoxA9 or HoxA10 between animals with different
latencies to develop disease. Finally, leukemic cells co-expressing NUP98-NSD1
and FLT3-ITD were very sensitive to a small molecule FLT3 inhibitor, which
underlines the significance of aberrant FLT3 signaling for NUP98-NSD1-positive
leukemias and suggests new therapeutic approaches that could potentially improve 
patient outcome.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4562535
PMID: 24951466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Arch Oral Biol. 2014 Aug;59(8):783-9. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2014.05.001.
Epub 2014 May 10.

Epigenetic repression of HOXB cluster in oral cancer cell lines.

Xavier FC(1), Destro MF(2), Duarte CM(2), Nunes FD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Propaedeutics and Integrated Clinic, School of Dentistry,
Federal University of Bahia, Av. Araujo Pinho, 62, Canela, Salvador 40110-150
Bahia, Brazil. (2)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of
São Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil.
(3)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Av.
Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil. Electronic
address: fadnunes@usp.br.

OBJECTIVE: Aberrant DNA methylation is a fundamental transcriptional control
mechanism in carcinogenesis. The expression of homeobox genes is usually
controlled by an epigenetic mechanism, such as the methylation of CpG islands in 
the promoter region. The aim of this study was to describe the differential
methylation pattern of HOX genes in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell
lines and transcript status in a group of hypermethylated and hypomethylated
genes.
DESIGN: Quantitative analysis of DNA methylation was performed on two OSCC cell
lines (SCC4 and SCC9) using a method denominated Human Homeobox Genes EpiTect
Methyl qPCR Arrays, which allowed fast, precise methylation detection of 24 HOX
specific genes without bisulfite conversion.
RESULTS: Methylation greater than 50% was detected in HOXA11, HOXA6, HOXA7,
HOXA9, HOXB1, HOXB2, HOXB3, HOXB4, HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXC8 and HOXD10. Both cell
lines demonstrated similar hypermethylation status for eight HOX genes. A similar
pattern of promoter hypermethylation and hypomethylation was demonstrated for the
HOXB cluster and HOXA cluster, respectively. Moreover, the hypermethylation
profile of the HOXB cluster, especially HOXB4, was correlated with decreased
transcript expression, which was restored following treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
CONCLUSIONS: The homeobox methylation profile in OSCC cell lines is consistent
with an epigenetic biomarker.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24859765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Front Genet. 2013 Dec 5;4:271. doi: 10.3389/fgene.2013.00271. eCollection 2013.

Aberrantly methylated genes in human papillary thyroid cancer and their
association with BRAF/RAS mutation.

Kikuchi Y(1), Tsuji E(2), Yagi K(3), Matsusaka K(4), Tsuji S(3), Kurebayashi
J(5), Ogawa T(2), Aburatani H(3), Kaneda A(6).

Author information: 
(1)Genome Science Division, Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, 
The University of Tokyo Tokyo, Japan ; Department of Metabolic Care and Endocrine
Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo Tokyo, Japan.
(2)Department of Metabolic Care and Endocrine Surgery, Graduate School of
Medicine, The University of Tokyo Tokyo, Japan. (3)Genome Science Division,
Research Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo
Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Pathology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo Tokyo, Japan. (5)Department of Breast and Endocrine Surgery, 
Kawasaki Medical University Okayama, Japan. (6)Genome Science Division, Research 
Center for Advanced Science and Technology, The University of Tokyo Tokyo, Japan 
; Department of Molecular Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University
Chiba, Japan ; CREST, Japan Science and Technology Agency Saitama, Japan.

Cancer arises through accumulation of epigenetic and genetic alteration. Aberrant
promoter methylation is a common epigenetic mechanism of gene silencing in cancer
cells. We here performed genome-wide analysis of DNA methylation of promoter
regions by Infinium HumanMethylation27 BeadChip, using 14 clinical papillary
thyroid cancer samples and 10 normal thyroid samples. Among the 14 papillary
cancer cases, 11 showed frequent aberrant methylation, but the other three cases 
showed no aberrant methylation at all. Distribution of the hypermethylation among
cancer samples was non-random, which implied existence of a subset of
preferentially methylated papillary thyroid cancer. Among 25 frequently
methylated genes, methylation status of six genes (HIST1H3J, POU4F2, SHOX2,
PHKG2, TLX3, HOXA7) was validated quantitatively by pyrosequencing. Epigenetic
silencing of these genes in methylated papillary thyroid cancer cell lines was
confirmed by gene re-expression following treatment with 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine
and trichostatin A, and detected by real-time RT-PCR. Methylation of these six
genes was validated by analysis of additional 20 papillary thyroid cancer and 10 
normal samples. Among the 34 cancer samples in total, 26 cancer samples with
preferential methylation were significantly associated with mutation of BRAF/RAS 
oncogene (P = 0.04, Fisher's exact test). Thus, we identified new genes with
frequent epigenetic hypermethylation in papillary thyroid cancer, two subsets of 
either preferentially methylated or hardly methylated papillary thyroid cancer,
with a concomitant occurrence of oncogene mutation and gene methylation. These
hypermethylated genes may constitute potential biomarkers for papillary thyroid
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3851831
PMID: 24367375  [PubMed]


10. J Toxicol Sci. 2013;38(6):959-62.

Gene expression analysis using DNA microarray in HK-2 human proximal tubular
cells treated with cadmium.

Lee JY(1), Tokumoto M, Fujiwara Y, Satoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Health Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Aichi Gakuin
University.

We examined the alteration of gene expression in HK-2 human proximal tubular
cells exposed to cadmium (Cd) using DNA microarray analysis. Cd increased the
expression of 30 genes, including 7 genes coding for heat shock proteins, more
than 2.0-fold and decreased the expression of 21 genes, including
transcription-related genes, such as AP2B1, HOXA7, HOXA9 and TCEB2, less than
0.5-fold prior to the appearance of cytotoxicity in HK-2 cells.

PMID: 24284285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2013 Nov 1;440(4):652-7. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2013.09.121. Epub 2013 Oct 4.

Homeobox A7 stimulates breast cancer cell proliferation by up-regulating estrogen
receptor-alpha.

Zhang Y(1), Cheng JC, Huang HF, Leung PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Endocrinology, Women's Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310006, China; Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, Child and Family Research Institute, University of British
Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia V5Z 4H4, Canada.

Breast cancer is the most common hormone-dependent malignancy in women. Homeobox 
(HOX) transcription factors regulate many cellular functions, including cell
migration, proliferation and differentiation. The aberrant expression of HOX
genes has been reported to be associated with human reproductive cancers.
Estradiol (E2) and its nuclear receptors, estrogen receptor (ER)-alpha and
ER-beta, are known to play critical roles in the regulation of breast cancer cell
growth. However, an understanding of the potential relationship between HOXA7 and
ER in breast cancer cells is limited. In this study, our results demonstrate that
knockdown of HOXA7 in MCF7 cells significantly decreased cell proliferation and
ERa expression. In addition, HOXA7 knockdown attenuated E2-induced cell
proliferation as well as progesterone receptor (PR) expression. The stimulatory
effects of E2 on cell proliferation and PR expression were abolished by
co-treatment with ICI 182780, a selective ERa antagonist. In contrast,
overexpression of HOXA7 significantly stimulated cell proliferation and ERa
expression. Moreover, E2-induced cell proliferation, as well as PR expression,
was enhanced by the overexpression of HOXA7. Neither knockdown nor overexpression
of HOXA7 affected the ER-beta levels. Our results demonstrate a novel mechanistic
role for HOXA7 in modulating breast cancer cell proliferation via regulation of
ERa expression. This finding contributes to our understanding of the role HOXA7
plays in regulating the proliferation of ER-positive cancer cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24099775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Dec;40(12):6811-9. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2798-6. Epub 2013
Sep 22.

MicroRNA-142-3p inhibits cell proliferation in human acute lymphoblastic leukemia
by targeting the MLL-AF4 oncogene.

Dou L(1), Li J, Zheng D, Li Y, Gao X, Xu C, Gao L, Wang L, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Fuxing Road 28th,
Beijing, 100853, China.

The mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL)-AF4 fusion protein encoded by the chromosomal
translocation t(4;11) predicts a poorer prognosis in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) than in other MLL-associated leukemias. However, the detailed mechanism
underlying regulation of MLL-AF4 expression remains largely unknown. In this
study, we showed that microRNA (miR)-142-3p was significantly downregulated in
ALL patients expressing MLL-AF4. Upregulation of miR-142-3p decreased MLL-AF4
expression in the RS4;11 leukemic cell line, which suggests that MLL-AF4 is a
direct target of miR-142-3p. Ectopic expression of miR-142-3p remarkably
suppressed cell proliferation and induced apoptosis in RS4;11 cells expressing
the MLL-AF4 fusion protein. We also found that exogenous expression of miR-142-3p
strongly reduced the expression of MLL-AF4 target genes such as homeobox A
(HOXA)9, HOXA7, and HOXA10 in RS4;11 cells. Taken together, our results indicate 
that miR-142-3p functions as a growth suppressor in MLL-AF4(+) ALL, and its
suppressive effects are mediated primarily through repression of MLL-AF4
expression.

PMID: 24057258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Nov;8(5):1373-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1686. Epub 2013 Sep 17.

Characterization of amplification patterns and target genes on the short arm of
chromosome 7 in early-stage lung adenocarcinoma.

Kang JU(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, Korea Nazarene University,
Cheonan-si, Chungcheongnam-do 330-718, Republic of Korea.

Chromosomal alterations are a predominant genomic force contributing to the
development of lung adenocarcinoma (ADC). High density genomic arrays were
conducted to identify critical genetic landmarks that may be important mediators 
in the formation or progression of early-stage ADC. In this study, the most
noteworthy and consistent observation was a copy number gain on the short arm of 
chromosome 7, which was detected in 85.7% (12/14) of cases. Notably, three
distinct regions of amplification were identified between the 7p22.3 and q11.2
regions in 28.6% (4/14) of cases; at a size of 4.1 Mbp (7p22.3-p21.1), 2.6 Mbp
(7p15.2-p14.1) and 1.5 Mbp (7p12.3-p11.2). Variations of the 7p11.2 locus that
encodes EGFR are known to be oncogenic. Furthermore, potential target genes were 
identified that were previously not assumed to be involved in the pathogenesis of
ADC, including CALM1P2 (7p11.2), HOXA4, HOXA5, HOXA6, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10,
HOXA11 and HOXA13 (7p15.2) and LOC442586, LOC442589, LOC442282, FAM20C and
LOC442651 (7p22.3). The present study determined critical regions on the 7p arm
of chromosome 7, which were implicated in ADC. The pattern of rearrangements on
the 7p arm may be a consequence of the high density of potential targets and the 
identified genes at the 7p regions may aid in the development of therapeutic
targets for ADC.

PMID: 24045431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Blood. 2013 Aug 29;122(9):1545-55. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-04-496281. Epub 2013
Jun 18.

RNAi screen identifies Jarid1b as a major regulator of mouse HSC activity.

Cellot S(1), Hope KJ, Chagraoui J, Sauvageau M, Deneault É, MacRae T, Mayotte N, 
Wilhelm BT, Landry JR, Ting SB, Krosl J, Humphries K, Thompson A, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal,
Montréal, QC, Canada.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Aug 29;122(9):1533-4.

Histone methylation is a dynamic and reversible process proposed to directly
impact on stem cell fate. The Jumonji (JmjC) domain-containing family of
demethylases comprises 27 members that target mono-, di-, and trimethylated
lysine residues of histone (or nonhistone) proteins. To evaluate their role in
regulation of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) behavior, we performed an in vivo
RNAi-based functional screen and demonstrated that Jarid1b and Jhdm1f play
opposing roles in regulation of HSC activity. Decrease in Jarid1b levels
correlated with an in vitro expansion of HSCs with preserved long-term in vivo
lymphomyeloid differentiation potential. Through RNA sequencing analysis, Jarid1b
knockdown was associated with increased expression levels of several HSC
regulators (Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hes1, Gata2) and reduced levels of
differentiation-associated genes. shRNA against Jhdmlf, in contrast, impaired
hematopoietic reconstitution of bone marrow cells. Together, our studies
identified Jarid1b as a negative regulator of HSC activity and Jhdmlf as a
positive regulator of HSC activity.

PMID: 23777767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 11;110(24):9920-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1305172110. Epub 2013 May 28.

HMGA2/TET1/HOXA9 signaling pathway regulates breast cancer growth and metastasis.

Sun M(1), Song CX, Huang H, Frankenberger CA, Sankarasharma D, Gomes S, Chen P,
Chen J, Chada KK, He C, Rosner MR.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, Department of Chemistry and Institute 
for Biophysical Dynamics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The ten-eleven translocation (TET) family of methylcytosine dioxygenases
initiates demethylation of DNA and is associated with tumorigenesis in many
cancers; however, the mechanism is mostly unknown. Here we identify upstream
activators and downstream effectors of TET1 in breast cancer using human breast
cancer cells and a genetically engineered mouse model. We show that depleting the
architectural transcription factor high mobility group AT-hook 2 (HMGA2) induces 
TET1. TET1 binds and demethylates its own promoter and the promoter of homeobox A
(HOXA) genes, enhancing its own expression and stimulating expression of HOXA
genes including HOXA7 and HOXA9. Both TET1 and HOXA9 suppress breast tumor growth
and metastasis in mouse xenografts. The genes comprising the HMGA2-TET1-HOXA9
pathway are coordinately regulated in breast cancer and together encompass a
prognostic signature for patient survival. These results implicate the
HMGA2-TET1-HOX signaling pathway in the epigenetic regulation of human breast
cancer and highlight the importance of targeting methylation in specific
subpopulations as a potential therapeutic strategy.

PMCID: PMC3683728
PMID: 23716660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;45(8):1647-56. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.04.024. Epub 2013 May 6.

Transcription factor AP-2a regulates acute myeloid leukemia cell proliferation by
influencing Hoxa gene expression.

Ding X(1), Yang Z, Zhou F, Wang F, Li X, Chen C, Li X, Hu X, Xiang S, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Development Biology of State Education
Ministry of China, College of Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha
410081, PR China.

Transcription factor AP-2a mediates transcription of a number of genes implicated
in mammalian development, cell proliferation and carcinogenesis. In the current
study, we identified Hoxa7, Hoxa9 and Hox cofactor Meis1 as AP-2a target genes,
which are involved in myeloid leukemogenesis. Luciferase reporter assays revealed
that overexpression of AP-2a activated transcription activities of Hoxa7, Hoxa9
and Meis1, whereas siRNA of AP-2a inhibited their transcription activities. We
found that AP-2 binding sites in regulatory regions of three genes activated
their transcription by mutant analysis and AP-2a could interact with AP-2 binding
sites in vivo by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Further results showed
that the AP-2a shRNA efficiently inhibited mRNA and protein levels of Hoxa7,
Hoxa9 and Meis1 in AML cell lines U937 and HL60. Moreover, decreased expression
of AP-2a resulted in a significant reduction in the growth and proliferation of
AML cells in vitro. Remarkably, AP-2a knockdown leukemia cells exhibit decreased 
tumorigenicity in vivo compared with controls. Finally, AP-2a and target genes in
clinical acute myeloid leukemia samples of M5b subtype revealed variable
expression levels and broadly paralleled expression. These data support a role of
AP-2a in mediating the expression of Hoxa genes in acute myeloid leukemia to
influence the proliferation and cell survival.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23660297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. ISRN Obstet Gynecol. 2013;2013:628717. doi: 10.1155/2013/628717. Epub 2013 Feb 4.

Mayer-rokitansky-kuster-hauser syndrome: embryology, genetics and clinical and
surgical treatment.

Pizzo A(1), Laganà AS, Sturlese E, Retto G, Retto A, De Dominici R, Puzzolo D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynaecological and Obstetrical Sciences and Reproductive
Medicine, University of Messina, Via C. Valeria 1, 98125 Messina, Italy.

Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome is a pathological condition
characterized by primary amenorrhea and infertility and by congenital aplasia of 
the uterus and of the upper vagina. The development of secondary sexual
characters is normal as well as that the karyotype (46,XX). Etiologically, this
syndrome may be caused by the lack of development of the Müllerian ducts between 
the fifth and the sixth weeks of gestation. To explain this condition, it has
been suggested that in patients with MRKH syndrome, there is a very strong
hyperincretion of Müllerian-inhibiting factor (MIF), which would provoke the lack
of development of the Müllerian ducts from primitive structures (as what normally
occurs in male phenotype). These alterations are commonly associated with renal
agenesis or ectopia. Specific mutations of several genes such as WT1, PAX2,
HOXA7-HOXA13, PBX1, and WNT4 involved in the earliest stages of embryonic
development could play a key role in the etiopathogenesis of this syndrome.
Besides, it seems that the other two genes, TCF2 (HNF1B) and LHX1, are involved
in the determinism of this pathology. Currently, the most widely nonsurgical used
techniques include the "Frank's dilators method," while the surgical ones most
commonly used are those developed by McIndoe, Williams, Vecchietti, Davydov, and 
Baldwin.

PMCID: PMC3575620
PMID: 23431465  [PubMed]


18. Blood. 2013 Feb 21;121(8):1422-31. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-07-442004. Epub 2012
Dec 20.

PBX3 is an important cofactor of HOXA9 in leukemogenesis.

Li Z(1), Zhang Z, Li Y, Arnovitz S, Chen P, Huang H, Jiang X, Hong GM, Kunjamma
RB, Ren H, He C, Wang CZ, Elkahloun AG, Valk PJ, Döhner K, Neilly MB, Bullinger
L, Delwel R, Löwenberg B, Liu PP, Morgan R, Rowley JD, Yuan CS, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. zjli@uchicago.edu

Although PBX proteins are known to increase DNA-binding/transcriptional activity 
of HOX proteins through their direct binding, the functional importance of their 
interaction in leukemogenesis is unclear.We recently reported that overexpression
of a 4-homeobox-gene signature (ie, PBX3/HOXA7/HOXA9/HOXA11) is an independent
predictor of poor survival in patients with cytogenetically abnormal acute
myeloid leukemia (CA-AML). Here we show that it is PBX3, but not PBX1 or PBX2,
that is consistently coexpressed with HOXA9 in various subtypes of CA-AML,
particularly MLL-rearranged AML, and thus appears as a potential pathologic
cofactor of HOXA9 in CA-AML. We then show that depletion of endogenous Pbx3
expression by shRNA significantly inhibits MLL-fusion-mediated cell
transformation, and coexpressed PBX3 exhibits a significantly synergistic effect 
with HOXA9 in promoting cell transformation in vitro and leukemogenesis in vivo. 
Furthermore, as a proof of concept, we show that a small peptide, namely HXR9,
which was developed to specifically disrupt the interactions between HOX and PBX 
proteins, can selectively kill leukemic cells with overexpression of HOXA/PBX3
genes. Collectively, our data suggest that PBX3 is a critical cofactor of HOXA9
in leukemogenesis, and targeting their interaction is a feasible strategy to
treat presently therapy resistant CA-AML (eg, MLL-rearranged leukemia) in which
HOXA/PBX3 genes are overexpressed.

PMCID: PMC3578957
PMID: 23264595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e40644. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0040644. Epub 2012 Jul 23.

ADP ribosylation by PARP-1 suppresses HOXB7 transcriptional activity.

Wu X(1), Ellmann S, Rubin E, Gil M, Jin K, Han L, Chen H, Kwon EM, Guo J, Ha HC, 
Sukumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland, United States of America. xinyan@jhmi.edu

Interactions with cofactors regulate transcriptional activity and also help HOX
proteins to achieve the specificity required for transcriptional regulation of
target genes. In this study, we describe a novel protein/protein interaction of
HOXB7 with poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) that involves the homeodomain 
of HOXB7 and the first zinc finger domain of PARP-1. Upon binding to PARP-1,
HOXB7 undergoes poly(ADP-ribosyl)altion resulting in a reduction of its
transcriptional activity. Since aspartic acid and glutamic acid residues are
acceptors of the ADP ribose moiety transferred by PARP-1, deletion of the
evolutionarily conserved C-terminal Glu-rich tail of HOXB7 dramatically
attenuates ADP-ribosylation of HOXB7 by PARP-1. Further, a mutant of HOXB7
without the Glu-rich tail loses the ability to be negatively regulated by PARP-1 
and becomes transcriptionally more active in luciferase reporter assays. Since
the homeodomain is highly conserved among HOX proteins, five other HOX proteins
were tested. All six showed interaction with, and were poly(ADP-ribosyl)ated by
PARP-1. However, among them, this modification altered the DNA binding activity
of only HOXA7 and HOXB7. In summary, this study identifies a new interacting
partner of HOX proteins. More importantly, this study reveals a novel mechanism
whereby polyADP-ribosylation regulates transcriptional activities of HOX proteins
such as HOXB7 and HOXA7.

PMCID: PMC3402478
PMID: 22844406  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Transl Res. 2012 Nov;160(5):355-62. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2012.05.007. Epub 2012
Jun 23.

HOXA7, 9, and 10 are methylation targets associated with aggressive behavior in
meningiomas.

Di Vinci A(1), Brigati C, Casciano I, Banelli B, Borzì L, Forlani A, Ravetti GL, 
Allemanni G, Melloni I, Zona G, Spaziante R, Merlo DF, Romani M.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Tumor Genetics and Epigenetics, IRCCS AOU San Martino - IST, Genova,
Italy.

Meningioma is one of the most common intracranial tumors and is graded according 
to the World Health Organization (WHO) classification system. Although these
tumors are often surgically curable, a malignant behavior also may occur in
meningiomas with benign histologic profiles (WHO I). Thus, it is mandatory to
identify biomolecular parameters useful to improve the classification of these
tumors. HOXA genes belong to the HOX gene family that encodes
homeodomain-containing transcription factors known to be key regulators of
embryonic development, involved in cell growth and differentiation and in the
development of the central nervous system. Moreover, altered HOXA gene
methylation and expression have prognostic value in many tumors. The purpose of
this study was to determine whether the level of HOXA3, 7, 9, and 10 methylation 
in meningioma could be a biomarker linked to the pathologic characteristics of
the tumor. We found that methylation levels of HOXA7, 9, and 10 in 131 meningioma
samples were significantly higher in WHO II/III tumors compared with WHO I
tumors. Moreover, in newly diagnosed WHO I meningiomas, HOXA7, 9, and 10
methylation was significantly lower than in WHO I samples derived from recurring 
tumors, and multiple meningiomas presented significantly higher HOXA 10
methylation with respect to solitary meningiomas. This study demonstrates that
HOXA7, 9, and 10 are methylation targets in meningioma, associated with
histopathology and clinical aggressiveness parameters. Our findings suggest the
possibility of detecting the malignancy potential of meningioma by assessing the 
HOXA methylation level and identifying patients at higher risk who could benefit 
from closer follow-up or postoperative adjuvant treatments.

Copyright © 2012 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22735029  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Blood. 2012 Mar 8;119(10):2314-24. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-386235. Epub 2012
Jan 17.

Up-regulation of a HOXA-PBX3 homeobox-gene signature following down-regulation of
miR-181 is associated with adverse prognosis in patients with cytogenetically
abnormal AML.

Li Z(1), Huang H, Li Y, Jiang X, Chen P, Arnovitz S, Radmacher MD, Maharry K,
Elkahloun A, Yang X, He C, He M, Zhang Z, Dohner K, Neilly MB, Price C, Lussier
YA, Zhang Y, Larson RA, Le Beau MM, Caligiuri MA, Bullinger L, Valk PJ, Delwel R,
Lowenberg B, Liu PP, Marcucci G, Bloomfield CD, Rowley JD, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
IL 60637, USA.

Increased expression levels of miR-181 family members have been shown to be
associated with favorable outcome in patients with cytogenetically normal acute
myeloid leukemia. Here we show that increased expression of miR-181a and miR-181b
is also significantly (P < .05; Cox regression) associated with favorable overall
survival in cytogenetically abnormal AML (CA-AML) patients. We further show that 
up-regulation of a gene signature composed of 4 potential miR-181 targets
(including HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA11, and PBX3), associated with down-regulation of
miR-181 family members, is an independent predictor of adverse overall survival
on multivariable testing in analysis of 183 CA-AML patients. The independent
prognostic impact of this 4-homeobox-gene signature was confirmed in a validation
set of 271 CA-AML patients. Furthermore, our in vitro and in vivo studies
indicated that ectopic expression of miR-181b significantly promoted apoptosis
and inhibited viability/proliferation of leukemic cells and delayed
leukemogenesis; such effects could be reversed by forced expression of PBX3.
Thus, the up-regulation of the 4 homeobox genes resulting from the
down-regulation of miR-181 family members probably contribute to the poor
prognosis of patients with nonfavorable CA-AML. Restoring expression of miR-181b 
and/or targeting the HOXA/PBX3 pathways may provide new strategies to improve
survival substantially.

PMCID: PMC3311258
PMID: 22251480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Dec 9;416(1-2):86-91. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.10.152. Epub 2011 Nov 9.

Inhibition of PCGF2 enhances granulocytic differentiation of acute promyelocytic 
leukemia cell line HL-60 via induction of HOXA7.

Jo S(1), Lee H, Kim S, Hwang EM, Park JY, Kang SS, Chung H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science, Graduate School of Biomedical Science and
Bioengineering, Hanyang University, 222 Wangsimni-ro, Seongdong-gu, Seoul
133-791, Republic of Korea. joejo0517@hotmail.com

This study tested the hypothesis that Polycomb Repressive Complex 1 (PRC1) may
play a negative role in the granulocytic differentiation of acute promyelocytic
leukemia (APL) cells. We first examined the expression of PRC1 genes during
all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA)-mediated differentiation of human HL-60 cells, and
identified PCGF2 as a gene down-regulated by ATRA in a time-dependent manner.
Upon gene silencing of PCGF2 with lentiviral short hairpin RNA, granulocytic
differentiation was induced as assessed by differentiation marker gene
expression, nitroblue tetrazolium staining, Wright-Giemsa staining, and cell
cycle analysis. We next identified HOXA7 as a homeobox gene up-regulated by ATRA 
and successfully induced granulocytic differentiation by overexpression of HOXA7.
We next tested the relationship between PCGF2 and HOXA7 by quantifying the
changes in HOXA7 and PCGF2 expression upon PCGF2 gene silencing and HOXA7
overexpression, respectively. HOXA7 expression was up-regulated by PCGF2 gene
silencing, while PCGF2 expression remained unchanged by ectopic HOXA7 expression,
suggesting PCGF2 as acting upstream of HOXA7. Finally, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay was performed with HOXA7 chromatin. We observed
gene-specific reduction in direct binding of Pcgf2 protein to HOXA7 chromatin
upon PCGF2 gene silencing. Taken together, these results support the notion that 
down-regulation of PCGF2 is sufficient to induce granulocytic differentiation of 
HL-60 cells via de-repression of HOXA7 gene expression. In conclusion, we report 
that PCGF2, a PRC1 gene, played a negative role in the granulocytic
differentiation of human APL cells.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22085718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Blood. 2011 Dec 8;118(24):6247-57. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-328880. Epub 2011
Sep 26.

NUP98 gene fusions and hematopoietic malignancies: common themes and new biologic
insights.

Gough SM(1), Slape CI, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia Biology Section, Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Structural chromosomal rearrangements of the Nucleoporin 98 gene (NUP98),
primarily balanced translocations and inversions, are associated with a wide
array of hematopoietic malignancies. NUP98 is known to be fused to at least 28
different partner genes in patients with hematopoietic malignancies, including
acute myeloid leukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia in blast crisis, myelodysplastic
syndrome, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and bilineage/biphenotypic leukemia.
NUP98 gene fusions typically encode a fusion protein that retains the amino
terminus of NUP98; in this context, it is important to note that several recent
studies have demonstrated that the amino-terminal portion of NUP98 exhibits
transcription activation potential. Approximately half of the NUP98 fusion
partners encode homeodomain proteins, and at least 5 NUP98 fusions involve known 
histone-modifying genes. Several of the NUP98 fusions, including NUP98-homeobox
(HOX)A9, NUP98-HOXD13, and NUP98-JARID1A, have been used to generate animal
models of both lymphoid and myeloid malignancy; these models typically
up-regulate HOXA cluster genes, including HOXA5, HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA10. In
addition, several of the NUP98 fusion proteins have been shown to inhibit
differentiation of hematopoietic precursors and to increase self-renewal of
hematopoietic stem or progenitor cells, providing a potential mechanism for
malignant transformation.

PMCID: PMC3236115
PMID: 21948299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2012 Jan;138(1):35-47. doi: 10.1007/s00432-011-1070-5.
Epub 2011 Sep 27.

Quantitative methylation analysis of HOXA3, 7, 9, and 10 genes in glioma:
association with tumor WHO grade and clinical outcome.

Di Vinci A(1), Casciano I, Marasco E, Banelli B, Ravetti GL, Borzì L, Brigati C, 
Forlani A, Dorcaratto A, Allemanni G, Zona G, Spaziante R, Gohlke H, Gardin G,
Merlo DF, Mantovani V, Romani M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Genetics and Epigenetics, Istituto Nazionale per la
Ricerca sul Cancro, IST Largo Rosanna Benzi 10, 16132, Genoa, Italy.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether specific HOXA
epigenetic signatures could differentiate glioma with distinct biological,
pathological, and clinical characteristics.
METHODS: We evaluated HOXA3, 7, 9, and 10 methylation in 63 glioma samples by
MassARRAY and pyrosequencing.
RESULTS: We demonstrated the direct statistical correlation between the level of 
methylation of all HOXA genes examined and WHO grading. Moreover, in glioblastoma
patients, higher level of HOXA9 and HOXA10 methylation significantly correlated
with increased survival probability (HOXA9-HR: 0.36, P = 0.007; HOXA10-HR: 0.46, 
P = 0.045; combined HOXA9 and 10-HR 0.28, P = 0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: This study identifies HOXA3, 7, 9, and 10 as methylation targets
mainly in high-grade glioma and hypermethylation of the HOXA9 and 10 as
prognostic factor in glioblastoma patients. Our data indicate that these
epigenetic changes may be biomarkers of clinically different subgroups of glioma 
patients that could eventually benefit from personalized therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 21947269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Mol Cell. 2011 Sep 16;43(6):1040-6. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.08.019.

The noncoding RNA Mistral activates Hoxa6 and Hoxa7 expression and stem cell
differentiation by recruiting MLL1 to chromatin.

Bertani S(1), Sauer S, Bolotin E, Sauer F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, University of California, Riverside, Riverside, CA
92521, USA.

Retraction in
    Mol Cell. 2015 Feb 5;57(3):572.

The epigenetic activator Mixed lineage leukemia 1 (MLL1) is paramount for
embryonic development and hematopoiesis. Here, we demonstrate that the long,
noncoding RNA (lncRNA) Mistral (Mira) activates transcription of the homeotic
genes Hoxa6 and Hoxa7 in mouse embryonic stem cells (mESC) by recruiting MLL1 to 
chromatin. The Mira gene is located in the spacer DNA region (SDR) separating
Hoxa6 and Hoxa7, transcriptionally silent in mESCs, and activated by retinoic
acid. Mira-mediated recruitment of MLL1 to the Mira gene triggers dynamic changes
in chromosome conformation, culminating in activation of Hoxa6 and Hoxa7
transcription. Hoxa6 and Hoxa7 activate the expression of genes involved in germ 
layer specification during mESC differentiation in a cooperative and redundant
fashion. Our results connect the lncRNA Mira with the recruitment of MLL1 to
target genes and implicate lncRNAs in epigenetic activation of gene expression
during vertebrate cell-fate determination.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3176448
PMID: 21925392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Oncogene. 2012 Jan 26;31(4):507-17. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.248. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Methylation-mediated repression of microRNA-143 enhances MLL-AF4 oncogene
expression.

Dou L(1), Zheng D, Li J, Li Y, Gao L, Wang L, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.

Fusion proteins containing the amino terminus of mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) are
common in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) due to translocations. The MLL-AF4
fusion protein is generated by the translocation t(4;11)(q21;q23), and
t(4;11)-positive ALL patients (MLL-AF4 ALL), have a notoriously poorer prognosis 
compared with patients with other MLL-associated leukemias. The detailed role of 
this fusion protein in leukemogenesis is not well understood. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) 
targeting the AF4 3' untranslated regions may modulate MLL-AF4 fusion protein
levels, raising the question of whether regulation of these miRNAs are involved
in the progression of MLL-AF4 ALL. In this study, we show that miR-143 was
identified as a regulator of MLL-AF4 expression in MLL-AF4 ALL samples.
Restoration of miR-143 in MLL-AF4-positive RS4;11 and MV4-11 cells induced
apoptosis, negatively contributing to leukemia cell growth by reducing MLL-AF4
fusion protein levels. Furthermore, miR-143 was epigenetically repressed by
promoter hypermethylation in MLL-AF4-positive primary blasts and cell lines, but 
not in normal bone marrow cells and MLL-AF4-negative primary blasts, which was
directly associated with expression of the MLL-AF4 oncogene. This is the first
study to show that miR-143 functions as a tumor suppressor in MLL-AF4 B-cell ALL.
These data reveal the therapeutic promise of upregulating miR-143 expression for 
MLL-AF4 B-cell ALL.

PMID: 21706045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Int J Cancer. 2011 Dec 1;129(11):2577-87. doi: 10.1002/ijc.25941. Epub 2011 May
30.

The HOX gene network in hepatocellular carcinoma.

Cillo C(1), Schiavo G, Cantile M, Bihl MP, Sorrentino P, Carafa V, D' Armiento M,
Roncalli M, Sansano S, Vecchione R, Tornillo L, Mori L, De Libero G, Zucman-Rossi
J, Terracciano L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Federico II University
Medical School, Naples, Italy. clecillo@unina.it

Liver organogenesis and cancerogenesis share common mechanisms. HOX genes control
normal development, primary cellular processes and are characterized by a unique 
genomic network organization. Less is known about the involvement of HOX genes
with liver cancerogenesis. The comparison of the HOX gene network expression
between nontumorous livers and hepatocellular carcinomas (HCCs) highlights
significant differences in the locus A HOX genes, located on chromosome 7, with a
consistent overexpression of HOXA13 mRNA thus validating this gene deregulation
as a feature of HCC. HOXA13 is a determinant of gut primordia and posterior body 
structures. Transcriptome analysis of HCC/nontumorous liver mRNAs, selected on
the basis of HOXA13 overexpression, recognizes a set of deregulated genes. The
matching of these genes with previously reported HCC transcriptome analysis
identifies cell-cycle and nuclear pore-related HCC phenotype displaying poor
prognosis. HOXA13 and HOXA7 homeoproteins share a consensus sequence that
physically links eIF4E nuclear bodies acting on the export of specific mRNAs
(c-myc, FGF-2, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), ornithine decarboxylase
(ODC) and cyclin D1). We report the protein-protein interaction between HOXA13
and eIF4E in liver cancer cells and the deregulation of eIF4E mRNA and protein in
cell cycle/nuclear pore HCC group phenotype and in T4 stage HCCs, respectively.
Thus, transcriptional and post-transcriptional HOXA13 deregulation is involved in
HCC possibly through the mRNA nuclear export of eIF4E-dependent transcripts.

Copyright © 2011 UICC.

PMID: 21626505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Jun 3;8(6):649-62. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2011.05.004.

Functional crosstalk between Bmi1 and MLL/Hoxa9 axis in establishment of normal
hematopoietic and leukemic stem cells.

Smith LL(1), Yeung J, Zeisig BB, Popov N, Huijbers I, Barnes J, Wilson AJ,
Taskesen E, Delwel R, Gil J, Van Lohuizen M, So CW.

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia and Stem Cell Biology Lab, Department of Haematological Medicine,
King's College London, London SE5 9NU, UK.

Bmi1 is required for efficient self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
and leukemic stem cells (LSCs). In this study, we investigated whether
leukemia-associated fusion proteins, which differ in their ability to activate
Hox expression, could initiate leukemia in the absence of Bmi1. AML1-ETO and
PLZF-RARa, which do not activate Hox, triggered senescence in Bmi1(-/-) cells. In
contrast, MLL-AF9, which drives expression of Hoxa7 and Hoxa9, readily
transformed Bmi1(-/-) cells. MLL-AF9 could not initiate leukemia in
Bmi1(-/-)Hoxa9(-/-) mice, which have further compromised HSC functions. But
either gene could restore the ability of MLL-AF9 to establish LSCs in the double 
null background. As reported for Bmi1, Hoxa9 regulates expression of
p16(Ink4a)/p19(ARF) locus and could overcome senescence induced by AML1-ETO.
Together, these results reveal an important functional interplay between MLL/Hox 
and Bmi1 in regulating cellular senescence for LSC development, suggesting that a
synergistic targeting of both molecules is required to eradicate a broader
spectrum of LSCs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21624810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. J Mol Signal. 2011 May 30;6:5. doi: 10.1186/1750-2187-6-5.

Dual function of polycomb group proteins in differentiated murine T helper (CD4+)
cells.

Jacob E(1), Hod-Dvorai R, Ben-Mordechai OL, Boyko Y, Avni O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Rappaport Faculty of Medicine, Technion-Israel
Institute of Technology, Haifa 31096, Israel. oavni@tx.technion.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: Following antigen recognition, naive T helper (Th; CD4+) cells can
differentiate toward one of several effector lineages such as Th1 and Th2; each
expressing distinctive transcriptional profiles of cytokine genes. These
cytokines eventually instruct the strategy of the immune response. In our search 
for factors that propagate the transcriptional programs of differentiated Th
cells, we previously found that Polycomb group (PcG) proteins, which are known as
epigenetic regulators that maintain repressive chromatin states, bind
differentially the signature cytokine genes. Unexpectedly, their binding to the
Ifng (Interferon-g) in Th1 cells and Il4 (Interleukin-4) in Th2 cells, was
correlated with transcriptional activation. Therefore, in this study we aimed to 
determine the functional role of PcG proteins in the regulation of the expression
of the signature cytokine genes.
METHODS: PcG proteins were knocked down in primary and established murine Th
cells using transduction of lentiviruses encoding short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs)
directed to Mel-18, Ezh2, Eed and Ring1A, representative of two different PcG
complexes. The chromatin structure and the binding activity of PcG proteins and
transcription factors at the Ifng promoter were assessed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays.
RESULTS: Downregulation of PcG proteins was consistent with their function as
positive regulators of the signature cytokine genes in primary and established
Th1 and Th2 cells. Moreover, the PcG protein Mel-18 was necessary to recruit the 
Th1-lineage specifying transcription factor T-bet, and the T cell receptor
(TCR)-inducible transcription factor NFAT1 to the Ifng promoter in Th1 cells.
Nevertheless, our results suggest that PcG proteins can function also as
conventional transcriptional repressors in Th cells of their known target the
Hoxa7 gene.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data support a model whereby the non-differentially expressed
PcG proteins are recruited in a Th-lineage specific manner to their target genes 
to enforce the maintenance of specific transcriptional programs as
transcriptional repressors or activators. Although our results suggest a direct
effect of PcG proteins in the regulation of cytokine gene expression, indirect
functions cannot be excluded.

PMCID: PMC3127800
PMID: 21624129  [PubMed]


30. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 May 10;108(19):7956-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1103154108. Epub 2011 Apr 25.

Down-regulation of homeobox genes MEIS1 and HOXA in MLL-rearranged acute leukemia
impairs engraftment and reduces proliferation.

Orlovsky K(1), Kalinkovich A, Rozovskaia T, Shezen E, Itkin T, Alder H, Ozer HG, 
Carramusa L, Avigdor A, Volinia S, Buchberg A, Mazo A, Kollet O, Largman C, Croce
CM, Nakamura T, Lapidot T, Canaani E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Rearrangements of the MLL (ALL1) gene are very common in acute infant and
therapy-associated leukemias. The rearrangements underlie the generation of MLL
fusion proteins acting as potent oncogenes. Several most consistently
up-regulated targets of MLL fusions, MEIS1, HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA10 are
functionally related and have been implicated in other types of leukemias. Each
of the four genes was knocked down separately in the human precursor B-cell
leukemic line RS4;11 expressing MLL-AF4. The mutant and control cells were
compared for engraftment in NOD/SCID mice. Engraftment of all mutants into the
bone marrow (BM) was impaired. Although homing was similar, colonization by the
knockdown cells was slowed. Initially, both types of cells were confined to the
trabecular area; this was followed by a rapid spread of the WT cells to the
compact bone area, contrasted with a significantly slower process for the
mutants. In vitro and in vivo BrdU incorporation experiments indicated reduced
proliferation of the mutant cells. In addition, the CXCR4/SDF-1 axis was
hampered, as evidenced by reduced migration toward an SDF-1 gradient and loss of 
SDF-1-augmented proliferation in culture. The very similar phenotype shared by
all mutant lines implies that all four genes are involved and required for
expansion of MLL-AF4 associated leukemic cells in mice, and down-regulation of
any of them is not compensated by the others.

PMCID: PMC3093458
PMID: 21518888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. J Urol. 2011 May;185(5):1894-8. doi: 10.1016/j.juro.2010.12.095. Epub 2011 Mar
21.

Molecular effects of genistein on male urethral development.

Ross AE(1), Marchionni L, Phillips TM, Miller RM, Hurley PJ, Simons BW, Salmasi
AH, Schaeffer AJ, Gearhart JP, Schaeffer EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, The Johns Hopkins School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21287, USA.

Comment in
    J Urol. 2011 May;185(5):1898-9.

PURPOSE: The increasing incidence of hypospadias is partly attributed to
increased gestational exposure to endocrine disruptors. We investigated the
effects of genistein, the primary phytoestrogen in soy, on the molecular program 
of male urethral development.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Female mice were fed diets supplemented with genistein
(500 mg/kg diet) or control diets before breeding and throughout gestation.
Urethras from embryonic day 17.5 male fetuses were harvested, and RNA was
prepared, amplified, labeled and hybridized on whole genome microarrays. Data
were analyzed using packages from the R/Bioconductor project. Immunohistochemical
analysis and immunoblotting were used to confirm the activity of MAPK and the
presence of Ntrk1 and Ntrk2 during urethral development.
RESULTS: Gestational exposure to genistein altered the urethral expression of 277
genes (p <0.008). Among the most affected were hormonally regulated genes,
including IGFBP-1, Kap and Rhox5. Differentially expressed genes were grouped
into functional pathways of cell proliferation, adhesion, apoptosis and tube
morphogenesis (p <0.0001), and were enriched for members of the MAPK (p <0.00001)
and TGF-ß (p <0.01) signaling cascades. Differentially expressed genes
preferentially contained ELK1, Myc/Max, FOXO, HOX and ER control elements. The
MAPK pathway was active, and its upstream genistein affected tyrosine kinase
receptors Ntrk1 and Ntrk2 were present in the developing male urethra.
CONCLUSIONS: Gestational exposure to genistein contributes to hypospadias by
altering pathways of tissue morphogenesis, cell proliferation and cell survival. 
In particular, genes in the MAPK and TGF-ß signaling pathways and those
controlled by FOXO, HOX and ER transcription factors are disrupted.

Copyright © 2011 American Urological Association Education and Research, Inc.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21421236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Mamm Genome. 2011 Apr;22(3-4):249-59. doi: 10.1007/s00335-011-9318-6. Epub 2011
Mar 4.

DNA methylation changes in murine breast adenocarcinomas allow the identification
of candidate genes for human breast carcinogenesis.

Acosta D(1), Suzuki M, Connolly D, Thompson RF, Fazzari MJ, Greally JM, Montagna 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Albert Einstein College of Medicine of Yeshiva
University, Bronx, NY 10461, USA.

Epigenetic inactivation due to aberrant promoter methylation is a key process in 
breast tumorigenesis. Murine models for human breast cancer have been established
for nearly every important human oncogene or tumor suppressor gene.
Mouse-to-human comparative gene expression and cytogenetic profiling have been
widely investigated for these models; however, little is known about the
conservation of epigenetic alterations during tumorigenesis. To determine if this
key process in human breast tumorigenesis is also mirrored in a murine breast
cancer model, we mapped cytosine methylation changes in primary adenocarcinomas
and paired lung metastases derived from the polyomavirus middle T antigen mouse
model. Global changes in methylcytosine levels were observed in all tumors when
compared to the normal mammary gland. Aberrant methylation and associated gene
silencing was observed for Hoxa7, a gene that is differentially methylated in
human breast tumors, and Gata2, a novel candidate gene. Analysis of HOXA7 and
GATA2 expression in a bank of human primary tumors confirms that the expression
of these genes is also reduced in human breast cancer. In addition, HOXA7
hypermethylation is observed in breast cancer tissues when compared to adjacent
tumor-free tissue. Based on these studies, we present a model in which
comparative epigenetic techniques can be used to identify novel candidate genes
important for human breast tumorigenesis, in both primary and metastatic tumors.

PMID: 21373886  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Histopathology. 2011 Jan;58(2):225-33. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2559.2011.03751.x.

In situ hybridization detection of homeobox genes reveals distinct expression
patterns in oral squamous cell carcinomas.

Libório TN(1), Acquafreda T, Matizonkas-Antonio LF, Silva-Valenzuela MG, Ferraz
AR, Nunes FD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Pathology, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo,
São Paulo, Brazil.

AIMS: To analyse the expression of three homeobox genes (HOXA7, PITX1 and PRRX1) 
in oral squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC) and the relationship of such expression
to certain distinct histopathological features of OSCC and in comparison to
adjacent non-neoplastic epithelium (NT).
METHODS AND RESULTS: Digoxigenin-labelled riboprobes that are specific for each
homeobox gene were generated and in situ hybridization was carried out on frozen 
sections. In NT samples, HOXA7 and PITX1 transcripts were found more frequently
in all epithelial layers, while PRRX1 was expressed in the basal layer. With OSCC
samples, expression of the three genes was associated with all histological
features. However, the HOXA7 and PITX1 signals were more intense in sheets and
nests and PRRX1 in small nests and isolated cells.
CONCLUSION: HOXA7, PIXT1 and PRRX1 homeobox genes have different patterns of
expression in OSCC depending on its histological features.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Limited.

PMID: 21323949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Aug;20(8):1465-76. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0226. Epub 2011 Jan
5.

Differential Hox expression in murine embryonic stem cell models of normal and
malignant hematopoiesis.

Wheadon H(1), Ramsey JM, Dobbin E, Dickson GJ, Corrigan PM, Freeburn RW, Thompson
A.

Author information: 
(1)Paul O'Gorman Leukaemia Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow,
United Kingdom.

The Hox family are master transcriptional regulators of developmental processes, 
including hematopoiesis. The Hox regulators, caudal homeobox factors (Cdx1-4),
and Meis1, along with several individual Hox proteins, are implicated in stem
cell expansion during embryonic development, with gene dosage playing a
significant role in the overall function of the integrated Hox network. To
investigate the role of this network in normal and aberrant, early hematopoiesis,
we employed an in vitro embryonic stem cell differentiation system, which
recapitulates mouse developmental hematopoiesis. Expression profiles of Hox,
Pbx1, and Meis1 genes were quantified at distinct stages during the hematopoietic
differentiation process and compared with the effects of expressing the leukemic 
oncogene Tel/PDGFRß. During normal differentiation the Hoxa cluster, Pbx1 and
Meis1 predominated, with a marked reduction in the majority of Hox genes (27/39) 
and Meis1 occurring during hematopoietic commitment. Only the posterior Hoxa
cluster genes (a9, a10, a11, and a13) maintained or increased expression at the
hematopoietic colony stage. Cdx4, Meis1, and a subset of Hox genes, including a7 
and a9, were differentially expressed after short-term oncogenic (Tel/PDGFRß)
induction. Whereas Hoxa4-10, b1, b2, b4, and b9 were upregulated during oncogenic
driven myelomonocytic differentiation. Heterodimers between Hoxa7/Hoxa9, Meis1,
and Pbx have previously been implicated in regulating target genes involved in
hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) expansion and leukemic progression. These results
provide direct evidence that transcriptional flux through the Hox network occurs 
at very early stages during hematopoietic differentiation and validates embryonic
stem cell models for gaining insights into the genetic regulation of normal and
malignant hematopoiesis.

PMID: 21083428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Leukemia. 2010 Oct;24(10):1751-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.155. Epub 2010 Aug 5.

Leukemic fusion genes MLL/AF4 and AML1/MTG8 support leukemic self-renewal by
controlling expression of the telomerase subunit TERT.

Gessner A(1), Thomas M, Castro PG, Büchler L, Scholz A, Brümmendorf TH, Soria NM,
Vormoor J, Greil J, Heidenreich O.

Author information: 
(1)Northern Institute for Cancer Research, Newcastle University, Newcastle upon
Tyne, UK.

MLL/AF4 and AML/MTG8 represent two leukemic fusion genes, which are most
frequently found in infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), respectively. We examined the influence of MLL/AF4 and AML1/MTG8 
fusion genes on the expression of TERT coding for the telomerase protein subunit,
and subsequently telomerase activity in t(4;11)-positive ALL and t(8;21)-positive
cell lines, respectively. MLL/AF4 suppression diminished telomerase activity and 
expression of TERT. Blocking pro-apoptotic caspase activation in conjunction with
MLL/AF4 knockdown enhanced the inhibition of TERT gene expression, which suggests
that MLL/AF4 depletion does not reduce TERT expression levels by inducing
apoptosis. Knockdown of HOXA7, a direct transcriptional target of MLL/AF4 fusion 
gene, caused a reduction of telomerase and TERT to an extent similar to that
observed with MLL/AF4 suppression. Chromatin immunoprecipitation of SEM cells,
using ectopically expressed FLAG-tagged Hoxa7, indicates HOXA7 binding site in
the TERT promoter region. Furthermore, suppression of the AML1/MTG8 fusion gene
was associated with severely reduced clonogenicity, induction of replicative
senescence, impaired TERT expression and accelerated telomere shortening. We thus
present findings that show a mechanistic link between leukemic fusion proteins,
essential for development and maintenance of leukemia, and telomerase, a key
element of both normal and malignant self-renewal.

PMID: 20686504  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2010 Dec 1;55(6):1072-82. doi: 10.1002/pbc.22749.

HOX gene expression in phenotypic and genotypic subgroups and low HOXA gene
expression as an adverse prognostic factor in pediatric ALL.

Starkova J(1), Zamostna B, Mejstrikova E, Krejci R, Drabkin HA, Trka J.

Author information: 
(1)CLIP, Childhood Leukaemia Investigation Prague, 2nd Faculty of Medicine,
Charles University in Prague, Prague, Czech Republic.
julia.starkova@lfmotol.cuni.cz

BACKGROUND: HOX genes play an important role in both normal lymphopoiesis and
leukemogenesis. However, HOX expression patterns in leukemia cells compared to
normal lymphoid progenitors have not been systematically studied in acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) subtypes.
PROCEDURE: The RNA expression levels of HOXA, HOXB, and CDX1/2 genes were
analyzed by qRT-PCR in a cohort of 61 diagnostic pediatric ALL samples and
FACS-sorted subpopulations of normal lymphoid progenitors.
RESULTS: The RNA expression of HOXA7-10, HOXA13, and HOXB2-4 genes was
exclusively detected in leukemic cells and immature progenitors. The RNA
expression of HOXB6 and CDX2 genes was exclusively detected in leukemic cells but
not in B-lineage cells at any of the studied developmental stages. HOXA3-4,
HOXA7, and HOXB3-4 genes were differentially expressed between BCP-ALL and T-ALL 
subgroups, and among genotypically defined MLL/AF4, TEL/AML1, BCR/ABL,
hyperdiploid and normal karyotype subgroups. However, this differential
expression did not define specific clusters in hierarchical cluster analysis.
HOXA7 gene was low expressed at the RNA level in patients with hyperdiploid
leukemia, whereas HOXB7 and CDX2 genes were low expressed in TEL/AML1-positive
and BCR/ABL-positive cases, respectively. In contrast to previous findings in
acute myeloid leukemia, high HOXA RNA expression was associated with an excellent
prognosis in Cox's regression model (P = 0.03). In MLL/AF4-positive ALL, lower
HOXA RNA expression correlated with the methylation status of their promoters.
CONCLUSIONS: HOX gene RNA expression cannot discriminate leukemia subgroups or
relative maturity of leukemic cells. However, HOXA RNA expression correlates with
prognosis, and particular HOX genes are expressed in specific genotypically
characterized subgroups.

PMID: 20672366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2010 Jun 14;8:61. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-8-61.

Homeobox A7 increases cell proliferation by up-regulation of epidermal growth
factor receptor expression in human granulosa cells.

Zhang Y(1), Huang Q, Cheng JC, Nishi Y, Yanase T, Huang HF, Leung PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Endocrinology, Women's Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 310006, China.

BACKGROUND: Homeobox (HOX) genes encode transcription factors, which regulate
cell proliferation, differentiation, adhesion, and migration. The deregulation of
HOX genes is frequently associated with human reproductive system disorders.
However, knowledge regarding the role of HOX genes in human granulosa cells is
limited.
METHODS: To determine the role of HOXA7 in the regulation and associated
mechanisms of cell proliferation in human granulosa cells, HOXA7 and epidermal
growth factor receptor (EGFR) expressions were examined in primary granulosa
cells (hGCs), an immortalized human granulosa cell line, SVOG, and a granulosa
tumor cell line, KGN, by real-time PCR and Western blotting. To manipulate the
expression of HOXA7, the HOXA7 specific siRNA was used to knockdown HOXA7 in KGN.
Conversely, HOXA7 was overexpressed in SVOG by transfection with the
pcDNA3.1-HOAX7 vector. Cell proliferation was measured by the MTT assay.
RESULTS: Our results show that HOXA7 and EGFR were overexpressed in KGN cells
compared to hGCs and SVOG cells. Knockdown of HOXA7 in KGN cells significantly
decreased cell proliferation and EGFR expression. Overexpression of HOXA7 in SVOG
cells significantly promoted cell growth and EGFR expression. Moreover, the
EGF-induced KGN proliferation was abrogated, and the activation of downstream
signaling was diminished when HOXA7 was knocked down. Overexpression of HOXA7 in 
SVOG cells had an opposite effect.
CONCLUSIONS: Our present study reveals a novel mechanistic role for HOXA7 in
modulating granulosa cell proliferation via the regulation of EGFR. This finding 
contributes to the knowledge of the pro-proliferation effect of HOXA7 in
granulosa cell growth and differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2904782
PMID: 20540809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. PLoS One. 2010 May 12;5(5):e10600. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010600.

Multiple promoters and alternative splicing: Hoxa5 transcriptional complexity in 
the mouse embryo.

Coulombe Y(1), Lemieux M, Moreau J, Aubin J, Joksimovic M, Bérubé-Simard FA,
Tabariès S, Boucherat O, Guillou F, Larochelle C, Tuggle CK, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec, Québec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The genomic organization of Hox clusters is fundamental for the
precise spatio-temporal regulation and the function of each Hox gene, and hence
for correct embryo patterning. Multiple overlapping transcriptional units exist
at the Hoxa5 locus reflecting the complexity of Hox clustering: a major form of
1.8 kb corresponding to the two characterized exons of the gene and
polyadenylated RNA species of 5.0, 9.5 and 11.0 kb. This transcriptional
intricacy raises the question of the involvement of the larger transcripts in Hox
function and regulation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have undertaken the molecular characterization
of the Hoxa5 larger transcripts. They initiate from two highly conserved distal
promoters, one corresponding to the putative Hoxa6 promoter, and a second located
nearby Hoxa7. Alternative splicing is also involved in the generation of the
different transcripts. No functional polyadenylation sequence was found at the
Hoxa6 locus and all larger transcripts use the polyadenylation site of the Hoxa5 
gene. Some larger transcripts are potential Hoxa6/Hoxa5 bicistronic units.
However, even though all transcripts could produce the genuine 270 a.a. HOXA5
protein, only the 1.8 kb form is translated into the protein, indicative of its
essential role in Hoxa5 gene function. The Hoxa6 mutation disrupts the larger
transcripts without major phenotypic impact on axial specification in their
expression domain. However, Hoxa5-like skeletal anomalies are observed in Hoxa6
mutants and these defects can be explained by the loss of expression of the 1.8
kb transcript. Our data raise the possibility that the larger transcripts may be 
involved in Hoxa5 gene regulation.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our observation that the Hoxa5 larger transcripts possess a
developmentally-regulated expression combined to the increasing sum of data on
the role of long noncoding RNAs in transcriptional regulation suggest that the
Hoxa5 larger transcripts may participate in the control of Hox gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2868907
PMID: 20485555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Mol Reprod Dev. 2010 Jun;77(6):540-9. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21180.

Regulation of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 during early porcine embryonic development.

Gao Y(1), Hyttel P, Hall VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Animal and Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg C, Copenhagen, Denmark. ygao000@gmail.com

The epigenetic marks H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 are important repressive and permissive
histone modifications, respectively, which are involved in gene regulation such
as Hox gene expression during embryonic development. In this study, we
investigated the global levels of these two histone modifications. We also
investigated the expression of H3K27me3's methyltransferase (EZH2), EZH2
co-factors (EED and SUZ12) and demethylases (JMJD3 and UTX), as well as H3K4me3's
methylases (ASH1L and MLL1) and demethylase (RBP2) in porcine pre-implantation
embryos. In addition, the expression of Hox genes, HOXA2, HOXA3, HOXA7, HOXA10,
HOXB4, HOXB7, HOXC8, HOXD8, and HOXD10 was investigated. We found that global
levels of H3K27me3 decreased from the 1- to the 4-cell stage, corresponding to
the time of major embryonic genome activation. Subsequently, the levels increased
in hatched blastocysts, particularly in the trophectoderm. The expression levels 
of EZH2, EED, SUZ12, JMJD3, and UTX correlated well with these findings. The
global levels of H3K4me3 decreased from the 1-cell to the morula stage and
increased in hatched blastocysts, especially in trophectoderm. A peak in
expression of ASH1L was seen at the 4-cell stage, but overall, expression of
ASH1L, MLL1, and RBP2 correlated poorly with H3K4me3. HOXA3, A7, and B4 were
expressed in 4-cell embryos, and HOXA7, A10, B4, and D8 were expressed in hatched
blastocysts, and did not correlate well to global methylation of H3K27me3 or
H3K4me3. Thus, H3K4me3 may play a role in early porcine embryonic genome
activation, whereas, H3K27me3 may be involved in initial cell lineage segregation
in the blastocyst.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20422712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. J Oncol. 2009;2009:581939. doi: 10.1155/2009/581939. Epub 2010 Jan 17.

Autoantibodies to tumor-associated antigens in epithelial ovarian carcinoma.

Piura B(1), Piura E.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Gynecologic Oncology, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Soroka 
Medical Center and Faculty of Health Sciences, Ben Gurion University of the
Negev, Beer Sheva 84101, Israel.

This review will focus on recent knowledge related to circulating autoantibodies 
(AAbs) to tumor-associated antigens (TAAs) in epithelial ovarian carcinoma. So
far, the following TAAs have been identified to elicit circulating AAbs in
epithelial ovarian carcinoma: p53, homeobox proteins (HOXA7, HOXB7), heat shock
proteins (HSP-27, HSP-90), cathepsin D, cancer-testis antigens (NY-ESO-1/LAGE-1),
MUC1, GIPC-1, IL-8, Ep-CAM, and S100A7. Since AAbs to TAAs have been identified
in the circulation of patients with early-stage cancer, it has been speculated
that the assessment of a panel of AAbs specific for epithelial ovarian carcinoma 
TAAs might hold great potential as a novel tool for early diagnosis of epithelial
ovarian carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2817389
PMID: 20145720  [PubMed]


41. BMC Genomics. 2010 Jan 18;11:41. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-41.

Deletions of immunoglobulin heavy chain and T cell receptor gene regions are
uniquely associated with lymphoid blast transformation of chronic myeloid
leukemia.

Nacheva EP(1), Brazma D, Virgili A, Howard-Reeves J, Chanalaris A, Gancheva K,
Apostolova M, Valgañon M, Mazzullo H, Grace C.

Author information: 
(1)UCL School of Medicine, Cancer Institute, Academic Haematology, Royal Free
Campus, Rowland Hill Street, Hampstead, London NW3 2PF, UK. e.nacheva@ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) results from the neoplastic
transformation of a haematopoietic stem cell. The hallmark genetic abnormality of
CML is a chimeric BCR/ABL1 fusion gene resulting from the Philadelphia chromosome
rearrangement t(9;22)(q34;q11). Clinical and laboratory studies indicate that the
BCR/ABL1 fusion protein is essential for initiation, maintenance and progression 
of CML, yet the event(s) driving the transformation from chronic phase to blast
phase are poorly understood.
RESULTS: Here we report multiple genome aberrations in a collection of 78 CML and
14 control samples by oligonucleotide array comparative genomic hybridization. We
found a unique signature of genome deletions within the immunoglobulin heavy
chain (IGH) and T cell receptor regions (TCR), frequently accompanied by
concomitant loss of sequences within the short arm regions of chromosomes 7 and
9, including IKZF1, HOXA7, CDKN2A/2B, MLLT3, IFNA/B, RNF38, PAX5, JMJD2C and
PDCD1LG2 genes.
CONCLUSIONS: None of these genome losses were detected in any of the CML samples 
with myeloid transformation, chronic phase or controls, indicating that their
presence is obligatory for the development of a malignant clone with a lymphoid
phenotype. Notably, the coincidental deletions at IGH and TCR regions appear to
precede the loss of IKZF1 and/or p16 genes in CML indicating a possible
involvement of RAG in these deletions.

PMCID: PMC2822760
PMID: 20082691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. J Bone Miner Res. 2010 Jul;25(7):1564-71. doi: 10.1359/jbmr.091102.

Hip geometry variation is associated with bone mineralization pathway gene
variants: The Framingham Study.

Cheung CL(1), Livshits G, Zhou Y, Meigs JB, McAteer JB, Florez JC, Cupples LA,
Demissie S, Kiel DP, Karasik D.

Author information: 
(1)Hebrew SeniorLife Institute for Aging Research, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA.

Mineralization of bone matrix is an important process in bone formation; thus
defects in mineralization have been implicated in bone mineral density (BMD) and 
bone structure alterations. Three central regulators of phosphate balance, ALPL, 
ANKH, and ENPP1, are central in the matrix mineralization process; therefore, the
genes encoding them are considered important candidates genes for BMD and bone
geometry. To test for an association between these three candidate genes and BMD 
and bone geometry traits, 124 informative singlenucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
were selected and genotyped in 1513 unrelated subjects from the Framingham
offspring cohort. Initial results showed that SNP rs1974201 in the gene ENPP1 was
a susceptibility variant associated with several hip geometric indices, with the 
strongest p value of 3.8 × 10(7) being observed for femoral neck width. A few
modest associations were observed between SNPs in or near ALPL and several bone
traits, but no association was observed with ANKH. The association signals
observed for SNPs around rs1974201 were attenuated after conditional analysis on 
rs1974201. Transcription factor binding-site prediction revealed that the HOXA7
binding site was present in the reference sequence with the major allele, whereas
this potential binding site is lost in the sequence with the minor allele of
rs1974201. In conclusion, we found evidence for association of bone geometry
variation with an SNP in ENPP1, a gene in the mineralization pathway. The
alteration of a binding site of the deregulator of extracellular matrix HOXA7
warrants further investigation.

2010 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.

PMCID: PMC3312740
PMID: 19888898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. J Immunol. 2009 Nov 15;183(10):6227-35. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901121. Epub 2009 
Oct 19.

A NUP98-HOXD13 fusion gene impairs differentiation of B and T lymphocytes and
leads to expansion of thymocytes with partial TCRB gene rearrangement.

Choi CW(1), Chung YJ, Slape C, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20889-5105, USA.

Expression of a NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) fusion gene leads to myelodysplastic
syndrome in mice. In addition to ineffective hematopoiesis, we observed that
NHD13 mice were lymphopenic; the lymphopenia was due to a decrease in both T and 
B lymphocytes. Although the pro-B cell (B220(+)/CD43(+)) populations from the
NHD13 and wild-type mice were similar, the NHD13 mice showed decreased pre-B
cells (B220(+)/CD43(-)), indicating impaired differentiation at the pro-B to
pre-B stage. Thymi from NHD13 mice were smaller and overexpressed Hoxa cluster
genes, including Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and Hoxa10. In addition, the NHD13 thymi contained
fewer thymocytes, with an increased percentage of CD4(-)/CD8(-) (double-negative 
(DN)) cells and a decreased percentage of CD4(+)/CD8(+) (double-positive) cells; 
the DN1/DN2 population was increased and the DN3/DN4 population was decreased,
suggesting a partial block at the DN2 to DN3 transition. To determine clonality
of the thymocytes, we used degenerate RT-PCR to identify clonal Tcrb gene
rearrangements. Five of six NHD13 thymi showed an unusual Tcrb gene rearrangement
pattern with common, clonal DJ rearrangements, but distinct V-D junctions,
suggesting a marked clonal expansion of thymocytes that had undergone a DJ
rearrangement, but not completed a VDJ rearrangement. Taken together, these
findings demonstrate that expression of the NHD13 transgene inhibits lymphoid as 
well as myeloid and erythroid differentiation, results in overexpression of Hoxa 
cluster genes, and leads to a precursor T cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC3422874
PMID: 19841179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Dev Biol. 2010 Jan 1;337(1):9-15. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2009.10.004. Epub 2009 Oct
13.

Additional sex combs-like 1 belongs to the enhancer of trithorax and polycomb
group and genetically interacts with Cbx2 in mice.

Fisher CL(1), Lee I, Bloyer S, Bozza S, Chevalier J, Dahl A, Bodner C, Helgason
CD, Hess JL, Humphries RK, Brock HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of British Columbia, 2350 Health Sciences
Mall, Vancouver, British Columbia V6T1Z3, Canada.

The Additional sex combs (Asx) gene of Drosophila behaves genetically as an
enhancer of trithorax and polycomb (ETP) in displaying bidirectional homeotic
phenotypes, suggesting that is required for maintenance of both activation and
silencing of Hox genes. There are three murine homologs of Asx called Additional 
sex combs-like1, 2, and 3. Asxl1 is required for normal adult hematopoiesis;
however, its embryonic function is unknown. We used a targeted mouse mutant line 
Asxl1(tm1Bc) to determine if Asxl1 is required to silence and activate Hox genes 
in mice during axial patterning. The mutant embryos exhibit simultaneous anterior
and posterior transformations of the axial skeleton, consistent with a role for
Asxl1 in activation and silencing of Hox genes. Transformations of the axial
skeleton are enhanced in compound mutant embryos for the polycomb group gene
M33/Cbx2. Hoxa4, Hoxa7, and Hoxc8 are derepressed in Asxl1(tm1Bc) mutants in the 
antero-posterior axis, but Hoxc8 expression is reduced in the brain of mutants,
consistent with Asxl1 being required both for activation and repression of Hox
genes. We discuss the genetic and molecular definition of ETPs, and suggest that 
the function of Asxl1 depends on its cellular context.

PMCID: PMC2807749
PMID: 19833123  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Mol Ther. 2009 Nov;17(11):1910-8. doi: 10.1038/mt.2009.172. Epub 2009 Jul 28.

Self-inactivating retroviral vector-mediated gene transfer induces oncogene
activation and immortalization of primary murine bone marrow cells.

Bosticardo M(1), Ghosh A, Du Y, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Candotti F.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch, National Human Genome Research
Institute, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Insertional mutagenesis leading to insurgence of leukemia has been shown as a
consequence of retroviral (RV)-mediated gene transfer in animal models and in
clinical trials of gene therapy for X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency.
Aberrant expression of oncogenes neighboring the gamma-RV vector insertion site
via induction by the enhancer element of the viral long terminal repeats (LTRs)
is thought to have played a role in leukemogenesis. Consequently, RV vectors
devoid of LTR enhancer elements could prove as safer tools for gene transfer. To 
test this hypothesis, we evaluated the immortalization ability of two RV vectors:
one carrying the full-length Moloney leukemia virus (MLV) LTR and one with the
same LTR in which the enhancer element was deleted [MLV self-inactivating (SIN)].
Unexpectedly, transduction with MLV SIN resulted in an only slightly and not
significant decreased immortalization frequency of primary bone marrow (BM)
cultures (about 37%) compared to transduction with MLV (about 48%). Similar to
MLV, immortalization by MLV SIN is likely caused by insertional activation of
oncogenes including Evi1, Mds1, Mef2c, and Hoxa7. Our results indicate that the
MLV SIN, devoid of the LTR enhancer element, was still able to immortalize BM
cells by activating nearby gene expression, indicating the need of an accurate
selection of the internal promoter to obtain safer SIN RV vectors.

PMCID: PMC2835037
PMID: 19638958  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Dev Dyn. 2010 Jan;239(1):126-39. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.22020.

Xwnt8 directly initiates expression of labial Hox genes.

In der Rieden PM(1), Vilaspasa FL, Durston AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hubrecht Laboratorium, Nederlands Instituut voor Ontwikkelingsbiologie,
Utrecht, The Netherlands.

Hox transcription factors play an essential role in patterning the
anteroposterior axis during embryogenesis and exhibit a complex array of spatial 
and temporal patterns of expression. Their earliest onset of expression in
vertebrates is during gastrulation in a temporally collinear sequence in the
presomitic/ventrolateral mesoderm, and it is not clear which upstream signal
transduction events initiate this expression. Using Xenopus, we present evidence 
that Xwnt8 is necessary for initiation of this collinear sequence by activating
Hox-1 expression in three Hox clusters: hoxd, hoxa, and hoxb. All three labial
genes appear to be direct targets of canonical Wnt signaling through Tcf/Lef. In 
addition, Xwnt8 loss- and gain-of-function leads to indirect regulation of other 
Hox genes: Hoxb4, Hoxd4, Hoxa7, Hoxc6, and Hoxc8. These findings shed new light
on the early role of Wnt8 as well as of a proposed WNT gradient in patterning the
Xenopus central nervous system (Kiecker and Niehrs [2001] Development
128:4189-4201).

(c) 2009 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 19623617  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. FEBS J. 2009 Jun;276(12):3299-307. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.07055.x. Epub
2009 May 5.

Overexpression of human histone methylase MLL1 upon exposure to a food
contaminant mycotoxin, deoxynivalenol.

Ansari KI(1), Hussain I, Das HK, Mandal SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas at
Arlington, TX 76019, USA.

Mixed lineage leukemias (MLLs) are histone-methylating enzymes with critical
roles in gene expression, epigenetics and cancer. Although MLLs are important
gene regulators little is known about their own regulation. Herein, to understand
the effects of toxic stress on MLL gene regulation, we treated human cells with a
common food contaminant mycotoxin, deoxynivalenol (DON). Our results demonstrate 
that MLLs and Hox genes are overexpressed upon exposure to DON. Studies using
specific inhibitors demonstrated that Src kinase families are involved in
upstream events in DON-mediated upregulation of MLL1. Sequence analysis
demonstrated that the MLL1 promoter contains multiple Sp1-binding sites and
importantly, the binding of Sp1 is enriched in the MLL1 promoter upon exposure to
DON. Moreover, antisense-mediated knockdown of Sp1 diminished DON-induced MLL1
upregulation. These results demonstrated that MLL1 gene expression is sensitive
to toxic stress and Sp1 plays crucial roles in the stress-induced upregulation of
MLL1.

PMID: 19438726  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 Sep;21(9):1016-23. doi:
10.1097/MEG.0b013e32831d7b9c.

A tumorigenic homeobox (HOX) gene expressing human gastric cell line derived from
putative gastric stem cell.

Yang YC(1), Wang SW, Wu IC, Chang CC, Huang YL, Lee OK, Chang JG, Chen A, Kuo FC,
Wang WM, Wu DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Graduate Institute of Medicine, I-Shou
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

GOAL: Study the mechanism of gastric tumor development.
BACKGROUND: We have generated and characterized a novel human gastric cell line, 
KMU-CS12 (CS12), from an immortal cell line, KMU-CSN (CSN; formerly named as
GI2CS) which was derived from putative human gastric stem cell/progenitor cell
clone, KMU-GI2.
STUDY: The characterization of the CS12 cell line includes gene expression by
immunocytochemical staining, cell proliferation and differentiation potential,
cyotogenetic analysis by Giemsa banding and spectral karyotype analysis (SKY),
and tumorigenicity in immune-deficient congenic inbred, nude mice
(BALB/cAnN-Foxn1nu/CrlNarl). The Agilent Human 1A oligo-array and RT-PCR were
also employed to analyze the expression of homeobox (HOX) genes.
RESULTS: The CS12 gastric cell line showed cancer cell phenotypes, i.e. the
ability of anchorage-independent growth high frequency (44%) and to the
expression of Oct-4, a transcription factor expressed in embryonic stem cells and
many types of cancer cells, and tumor development in immune deficient mice. SKY
analysis indicated a characteristic duplication of the short arm of chromosome 7 
to chromosome 12. Agilent Human 1A oligo-array analysis showed that the
expression of 1145 genes was upregulated while that of 890 genes was
downregulated in CS12 cells. RT-PCR revealed that homeobox genes (HOXA4, HOXA5,
HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA13) were highly expressed in CS12 cells in culture, as well
as tumor tissues developed by CS12 cells in immunodeficient mice for six to eight
weeks.
CONCLUSION: Except for the duplication of the short arm of Chromosome 7 on
Chromosome12, the karyotype of the tumorigenic CS12 cells is similar to the
parental GI2 cells which are non-tumorigenic and normal in karyotype. This
chromosomal change could be the cause for the high expression of HOXA genes and
tumorigenicity of these cells found in this study. Thus HOXA genes might play an 
important role in gastric carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19424076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. World J Gastroenterol. 2009 May 7;15(17):2089-96.

High miR-196a levels promote the oncogenic phenotype of colorectal cancer cells.

Schimanski CC(1), Frerichs K, Rahman F, Berger M, Lang H, Galle PR, Moehler M,
Gockel I.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Johannes Gutenberg University of Mainz,
Langenbeckstrasse 1, 55131 Mainz, Germany. dr_schimanski@yahoo.de

AIM: To analyze the relevance of the microRNA miR-196a for colorectal
oncogenesis.
METHODS: The impact of miR-196a on the restriction targets HoxA7, HoxB8, HoxC8
and HoxD8 was analyzed by reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) after transient transfection of SW480 cancer cells. The miR-196a
transcription profile in colorectal cancer samples, mucosa samples and diverse
cancer cell lines was quantified by RT-PCR. Transiently miR-196a-transfected
colorectal cancer cells were used for diverse functional assays in vitro and for 
a xenograft lung metastasis model in vivo.
RESULTS: HoxA7, HoxB8, HoxC8 and HoxD8 were restricted by miR-196a in a
dose-dependent and gene-specific manner. High levels of miR-196a activated the
AKT signaling pathway as indicated by increased phosphorylation of AKT. In
addition, high levels of miR-196a promoted cancer cell detachment, migration,
invasion and chemosensitivity towards platin derivatives but did not impact on
proliferation or apoptosis. Furthermore, miR-196a increased the development of
lung metastases in mice after tail vein injection.
CONCLUSION: miR-196a exerts a pro-oncogenic influence in colorectal cancer.

PMCID: PMC2678579
PMID: 19418581  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Differentiation. 2009 Feb;77(2):162-71. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2008.09.018. Epub
2008 Oct 25.

Expression and function of HOXA genes in normal and neoplastic ovarian epithelial
cells.

Ota T(1), Klausen C, Salamanca MC, Woo HL, Leung PC, Auersperg N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
British Columbia, 2H30-4490 Oak St., B.C. Women's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada
V6H 3V5.

We studied the roles of three HOXA genes in cultured normal ovarian surface
epithelial (OSE) cells and ovarian cancer cells. They included HOXA4 and HOXA7
because, by cDNA microarray analysis, these were more highly expressed in
invasive ovarian carcinomas than in benign or borderline (noninvasive) ovarian
tumors, and HOXA9 because it characterizes normal oviductal epithelium, which
resembles ovarian serous adenocarcinomas. The three HOXA genes were more highly
expressed when OSE cells were dividing and motile than when they were confluent
and stationary, and also when they dispersed in response to EGF treatment or to
reduced calcium concentrations in culture media. The expression of the HOXA genes
varied among ovarian cancer cell lines, but was highest in lines with compact
epithelial morphologies. We focused on HOXA4 as the most highly expressed in the 
ovarian carcinoma array. HOXA4 expression did not parallel proliferative
activities of either OSE or ovarian cancer lines. Moreover, modifying HOXA4
expression in ovarian cancer cell lines did not alter either E-cadherin
expression or CA125 secretion. However, HOXA4 downregulation enhanced EGFR
phosphorylation and migration in serum-starved OSE and ovarian cancer cells in
response to EGF, and enhanced migration of all ovarian cancer lines in 5% serum
even without EGF treatment. Thus, HOXA4 expression does not correlate with
proliferation or with epithelial differentiation, but it increases in response to
OSE cell dispersion and negatively regulates EGFR activation and the motility of 
OSE and of ovarian cancer cells. HOXA4 expression was highest in cancer lines
with compact epithelial growth patterns, suggesting, again, an anti-dispersion
function. In summary, increased HOXA4 expression in ovarian cancer appears to
constitute a tumor-suppressive, homeostatic response to aberrant cell behavior,
and, in particular, to cell dispersion and migration.

PMID: 19281776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Med Rep. 2009 Mar-Apr;2(2):241-4. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000090.

Down-regulation of HOXA4, HOXA7, HOXA10, HOXA11 and MEIS1 during
monocyte-macrophage differentiation in THP-1 cells.

Martino V(1), Bianchera A, Reia L, Bussolati O, Fazzina R, Marino F, Montemurro
L, Tonelli R, Pession A, Gazzola GC, Sala R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma,
I-43100 Parma, Italy.

The translocation t(9;11)(p22;q23) generates the MLL-AF9 oncogene and is commonly
associated with monocytic acute myeloid leukemia (AML-M5; FAB-classification).
For the oncogenicity of MLL-AF9, the (over)expression of several other genes,
including selected HOXA cluster genes as well as MEIS1 (a HOX cofactor), is
required. We previously showed that the down-regulation of MLL-AF9 expression is 
not obligatory for monocyte-macrophage maturation in AML-M5 cells carrying
t(9;11)(p22;q23). In this study, we analyzed the expression patterns of HOXA4, 5,
6, 7, 9, 10 and 11 (defined as 'HOXA-code' genes) and MEIS1 by semiquantitative
RT-PCR during the monocyte-macrophage differentiation induced by phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) in THP-1 cells carrying t(9;11)(p22;q23) and
expressing MLL-AF9. The analyses were performed in THP-1 cells expressing MLL-AF9
even after PMA treatment. The results showed that all the analyzed genes were
expressed in untreated THP-1 cells. After the induction of differentiation, we
observed a down-regulation of HOXA4, 7, 10, 11 and MEIS1, an up-regulation of
HOXA6, and no significant variation in the expression of HOXA5 and 9. These data 
indicate that the expression of most HOXA-code genes, as well as MEIS1, could be 
implicated in the differentiation blockage observed in MLL-AF9-related leukemias.

PMID: 21475819  [PubMed]


52. FEBS J. 2009 Mar;276(6):1629-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.06895.x. Epub 2009
Feb 7.

Dynamic association of MLL1, H3K4 trimethylation with chromatin and Hox gene
expression during the cell cycle.

Mishra BP(1), Ansari KI, Mandal SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas at
Arlington, Arlington 76019, TX, USA.

Mixed lineage leukemias (MLLs) are histone H3 at lysine 4 (H3K4)-specific
methylases that play a critical role in regulating gene expression in humans. As 
chromatin condensation, relaxation and differential gene expression are keys to
correct cell cycle progression, we analyzed the dynamic association of MLL and
H3K4 trimethylation at different stages of the cell cycle. Interestingly, MLL1,
which is normally associated with transcriptionally active chromatins (G1 phase),
dissociates from condensed mitotic chromatin and returns at the end of telophase 
when the nucleus starts to relax. In contrast, H3K4 trimethylation mark, which is
also normally associated with euchromatins (in G1), remains associated, even with
condensed chromatin, throughout the cell cycle. The global levels of MLL1 and
H3K4 trimethylation are not affected during the cell cycle, and H3Ser28
phosphorylation is only observed during mitosis. Interestingly, MLL target
homeobox-containing (Hox) genes (HoxA5, HoxA7 and HoxA10) are differentially
expressed during the cell cycle, and the recruitment of MLL1 and H3K4
trimethylation levels are modulated in the promoter of these Hox genes as a
function of their expression. In addition, down-regulation of MLL1 results in
cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase. The fluctuation of H3K4 trimethylation marks
at specific promoters, but not at the global level, indicates that H3K4
trimethylation marks that are present in the G1 phase may not be the same as the 
marks in other phases of the cell cycle; rather, old marks are removed and new
marks are introduced. In conclusion, our studies demonstrate that MLL1 and H3K4
methylation have distinct dynamics during the cell cycle and play critical roles 
in the differential expression of Hox genes associated with cell cycle
regulation.

PMID: 19220463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2008 Oct 30;6:49. doi: 10.1186/1477-7827-6-49.

HOX cofactors expression and regulation in the human ovary.

Ota T(1), Asahina H, Park SH, Huang Q, Minegishi T, Auersperg N, Leung PC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, V6H 3V5, Canada. takayo.ota@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: HOX cofactors enhance HOX binding affinities and specificities and
increase HOX's unique functional activities. The expression and the regulation of
HOX cofactors in human ovaries are unknown.
METHODS: In this study, the expression of HOX cofactors, PBX1, PBX2, and MEIS1/2,
were examined by using RT-PCR, immunofluorescence in cultured immortalized human 
granulosa (SVOG) cells. The distribution of these HOX cofactors in human ovaries 
was examined by immunohistochemistry. The effects of growth differentiation
factor-9 (GDF-9) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) on PBX2 in SVOG cells
were investigated by western blot analysis. Binding activities of HOXA7 and PBX2 
to the specific sequences in granulosa cells were determined by electrophoretic
mobility shift assay (EMSA).
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: In SVOG cells, PBX1, PBX2 and MEIS1/2 were expressed
during cell culture. In normal human ovaries, PBX1 and MEIS1/2 were expressed in 
granulosa cells at essentially all stages of follicular development. These
cofactors were expressed in the nuclei of the granulosa cells from the primordial
to the secondary follicles, whereas beyond multilayered follicles was observed in
the cytoplasm. The co-expression of PBX1 and MEIS1/2 in granulosa cells in normal
human ovaries suggested that MEIS1/2 might control PBX1 sublocalization, as seen 
in other systems. PBX2 was not expressed or weakly expressed in the primordial
follicles. From the primary follicles to the preovulatory follicles, PBX2
expression was inconsistent and the expression was found in the granulosa cell
nuclei. The PBX2 expression pattern is similar to HOXA7 expression in ovarian
follicular development. Furthermore, FSH down-regulated, GDF-9 did not change
PBX2 expression, but co-treatment of the granulosa cells with FSH and GDF-9
up-regulated PBX2 expression. These results implicated a role for PBX2 expression
in the steroidogenic activities of granulosa cells in humans. Moreover, PBX2 and 
HOXA7 bound together to the Pbx sequence, but not to the EMX2 promoter sequence, 
in SVOG cells. Our findings indicate that HOX cofactors expression in normal
human ovary is temporally and spatially specific and regulated by FSH and GDF-9
in granulosa cells. HOX proteins may use different HOX cofactors, depending on
DNA sequences that are specific to the granulosa cells.

PMCID: PMC2585084
PMID: 18973687  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Oncogene. 2008 Oct 23;27(49):6356-64. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.233. Epub 2008 Aug 4.

Evidence for Hox and E2A-PBX1 collaboration in mouse T-cell leukemia.

Bijl J(1), Krosl J, Lebert-Ghali CE, Vacher J, Mayotte N, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Hematopoietic Stem Cells, Institute for
Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec,
Canada. jbijl.hmr@ssss.gouv.qc.ca

Using murine Moloney leukemia virus (MMLV)-based proviral insertional
mutagenesis, we previously showed a preferential targeting of a small region in
the Hoxa gene locus in E2A-PBX1-induced lymphoid leukemia resulting in the
overexpression of several Hoxa genes including Hoxa10, Hoxa9 and Hoxa7. This
observation suggested a functional interaction between Hox gene overexpression
and E2A-PBX1 in lymphoid tumors. To further explore this possibility, we
generated a series of compound E2A-PBX1 x Hox transgenic mice and tested the
genetic interaction between these genes in the generation of lymphoid leukemia in
vivo. Results presented in this report show that the onset of T-cell leukemia is 
significantly accelerated in E2A-PBX1 x Hoxb4 compound transgenic animals when
compared with control E2A-PBX1 or Hoxb4 littermates. Hoxa9 appears less potent
than Hoxb4 to accelerate E2A-PBX1-induced T-cell leukemia in mice.
E2A-PBX1-induced T-cell leukemias express much higher levels of Hoxa genes than
MMLV-induced counterparts, possibly suggesting a contribution of these genes to
T-cell transformation by E2A-PBX1. Collectively, these data provide the first
genetic evidence showing oncogenic collaboration between E2A-PBX1 and a Hox gene 
in lymphoid malignancies in vivo and document the specific deregulation of a
subgroup of Hoxa genes in these leukemias.

PMID: 18679416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Development. 2008 Aug;135(15):2511-20. doi: 10.1242/dev.015909. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Increased Cdx protein dose effects upon axial patterning in transgenic lines of
mice.

Gaunt SJ(1), Drage D, Trubshaw RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, The Babraham Institute, Babraham,
Cambridge, UK. stephen.gaunt@bbsrc.ac.uk

To investigate the link between Cdx protein concentration and axial patterning in
embryos, we made lines of mice OE1, OE2 and OE4 that overexpress each of the Cdx 
genes Cdx1, Cdx2 and Cdx4, respectively. The lines carry Cdx transgenes under the
transcriptional control of their own promoter/enhancer elements. Transgenic
embryos show Cdx transcription at 8.5 to 8.7 days within normal spatial domains
for Cdx expression (primitive streak/tailbud), yet, overall, they contain
elevated levels of Cdx proteins. Increased doses of Cdx proteins result in
homeotic shifts in vertebral types along most of the vertebral column, with
transformations being most obvious within the cervical region. Most of the shifts
are anterior-to-posterior transformations and the anterior limits of these are
commonly skull/vertebra 1 (v1) for OE1, v1/v2 for OE2 and v7 for OE4. OE embryos 
display anterior shifts in the expression of a Hoxa7/lacZ reporter within neural,
paraxial and lateral plate mesoderm tissues. Hoxa7/lacZ expression commences at
the normal time in OE1 and OE4 embryos. OE2 embryos display a forward shift in
the gradient of Cdx2 protein along the axis, suggesting that a Cdx morphogen
gradient model could account, at least in part, for the homeotic shifts in
vertebral types. OE mice display additional defects: forelimb deficiencies in
OE1, multiple tail axes, vertebral mis-alignments and axial truncations in OE2.

PMID: 18579683  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Toxicol In Vitro. 2008 Sep;22(6):1447-51. doi: 10.1016/j.tiv.2008.04.010. Epub
2008 Apr 22.

Cadmium exposure induces expression of the HOXB8 gene in COS-7 cells.

Nakagawa K(1), Lee MJ, Sasaki N, Hayashi C, Nishio H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Public Health and Genetic Epidemiology, Kobe University Graduate
School of Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe, Japan.

Cadmium (Cd) is a serious toxic metal, which is classified as a possible human
carcinogen. We assessed the effects of Cd on the expression levels of homeobox
genes, which are associated with carcinogenesis. Among 6 homeobox genes examined 
in this study, only HOXB8 exhibited increased mRNA expression in COS-7 cells
treated with 10 microM CdCl(2). Semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase
chain reaction analysis revealed that the HOXB8 mRNA level was increased by a
maximum of 5.4-fold after 6h of Cd exposure. The levels of HOXA7, A9, C4, C9 and 
C10 mRNAs decreased from 0.1 to 0.3-fold. Silencing of HOXB8 mRNA expression
using a siRNA increased HOXC9 and C10 mRNA expression levels by 6.6- and
1.9-fold, respectively. These results suggest that HOXB8 upregulation is
associated with suppression of HOXC9 and C10, and that decreased expression of
HOXC9 and C10 after Cd exposure is partly due to HOXB8 induction. In conclusion, 
Cd disrupts the HOX network. Comprehensive analyses of all the HOX gene
expression levels in the presence of Cd may afford clues toward understanding
Cd-induced carcinogenesis and teratogenesis.

PMID: 18534812  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jun;36(11):3590-9. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn243. Epub 2008 May
6.

Cooperation between EZH2, NSPc1-mediated histone H2A ubiquitination and Dnmt1 in 
HOX gene silencing.

Wu X(1), Gong Y, Yue J, Qiang B, Yuan J, Peng X.

Author information: 
(1)School of Basic Medicine, Peking Union Medical College; National Key
Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences,
Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences, Beijing 100005, China.

An intricate interplay between DNA methylation and polycomb-mediated gene
silencing has been highlighted recently. Here we provided evidence that Nervous
System Polycomb 1 (NSPc1), a BMI1 homologous polycomb protein, plays important
roles in promoting H2A ubiquitination and cooperates with DNA methylation in HOX 
gene silencing. We showed that NSPc1 stimulates H2A ubiquitination in vivo and in
vitro through direct interaction with both RING2 and H2A. RT-PCR analysis
revealed that loss of NSPc1, EZH2 or DNA methyltransferase 1 (Dnmt1), or
inhibition of DNA methylation in HeLa cells de-represses the expression of HOXA7.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays demonstrated that NSPc1, EZH2 and
Dnmt1 bind to the promoter of HOXA7, which is frequently hypermethylated in
tumors. Knockdown of NSPc1 results in significant reduction of H2A ubiquitination
and DNA demethylation as well as Dnmt1 dissociation in the HOXA7 promoter.
Meanwhile Dnmt1 deficiency affects NSPc1 recruitment and H2A ubiquitination,
whereas on both cases EZH2-mediated H3K27 trimethylation remains unaffected. When
EZH2 was depleted, however, NSPc1 and Dnmt1 enrichment was abolished concomitant 
with local reduction of H3K27 trimethylation, H2A ubiquitination and DNA
methylation. Taken together, our findings indicated that NSPc1-mediated H2A
ubiquitination and DNA methylation, both being directed by EZH2, are
interdependent in long-term target gene silencing within cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC2441805
PMID: 18460542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Mol Biotechnol. 2008 Jul;39(3):201-6. doi: 10.1007/s12033-008-9035-x. Epub 2008
Jan 29.

An alternative approach to synthesize cDNA bypassing traditional reverse
transcription.

Li XX(1), Zheng F, Jiao YL, Guo G, Wang BL, Yao Z.

Author information: 
(1)Key Research Lab of Hormone and Development Affiliated to the Ministry of
Health, Tianjin Medical University, Tianjin 300070, PR China.

cDNAs of certain target genes are difficult to obtain by traditional reverse
transcription. Herein we describe a novel method to synthesize cDNA based upon
the use of the class IIS restriction enzymes. Briefly, the exons of a certain
gene are separately PCR-amplified, each using the primers containing a
recognition sequence of a certain class IIS restriction enzyme. All the fragments
are restricted using the enzyme(s), resulting in the cohesive end of each exon
that is complementary to the one in its adjacent exon. Then the fragments can be 
assembled together in their naturally occurring order. We successfully applied
this method to acquire the coding sequence of Hoxa7 gene. This approach is
simple, highly efficient, less error prone and cost-effective, and can also be
used to fuse different PCR-fragments from distinct genes to create a chimeric
gene or to perform site-directed mutagenesis.

PMID: 18228164  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Int J Hematol. 2008 Jan;87(1):10-8. doi: 10.1007/s12185-007-0009-8. Epub 2007 Dec
4.

Mechanisms of transcriptional regulation by MLL and its disruption in acute
leukemia.

Dou Y(1), Hess JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109-5602, USA.

Fusion of the mixed lineage leukemia protein (MLL) to one of over 50 different
translocation partners converts it into a potent leukemogenic oncoprotein. The
resulting fusion proteins transform primarily through upregulation of A-cluster
Hox genes, including Hoxa9 and the Hox cofactor Meis1. Considerable progress has 
been made in delineating the differences between normal Hox gene regulation by
MLL and deregulated transcription in MLL-induced leukemias. Some MLL
translocation partners dimerize the truncated MLL molecule. Other translocation
partners appear to recruit nuclear coactivator complexes that have diverse
enzymatic activities that impinge on transcriptional elongation pathways. These
enzymatic activities, including RNA polymerase II phosphorylation as well as
histone H3 lysine 79 methylation present attractive targets for the development
of future MLL-directed therapy.

PMID: 18224408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. PLoS One. 2008 Jan 2;3(1):e1396. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001396.

MiR-10 represses HoxB1a and HoxB3a in zebrafish.

Woltering JM(1), Durston AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biology, Leiden University, Leiden, The Netherlands.
jmwoltering@hotmail.com

BACKGROUND: The Hox genes are involved in patterning the anterior-posterior axis.
In addition to the protein coding Hox genes, the miR-10, miR-196 and miR-615
families of microRNA genes are conserved within the vertebrate Hox clusters. The 
members of the miR-10 family are located at positions associated with Hox-4
paralogues. No function is yet known for this microRNA family but the genomic
positions of its members suggest a role in anterior-posterior patterning.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Using sensor constructs, overexpression and
morpholino knockdown, we show in Zebrafish that miR-10 targets HoxB1a and HoxB3a 
and synergizes with HoxB4 in the repression of these target genes. Overexpression
of miR-10 also induces specific phenotypes related to the loss of function of
these targets. HoxB1a and HoxB3a have a dominant hindbrain expression domain
anterior to that of miR-10 but overlap in a weaker expression domain in the
spinal cord. In this latter domain, miR-10 knockdown results in upregulation of
the target genes. In the case of a HoxB3a splice variant that includes miR-10c
within its primary transcript, we show that the microRNA acts in an
autoregulatory fashion.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: We find that miR-10 acts to repress HoxB1a and HoxB3a
within the spinal cord and show that this repression works cooperatively with
HoxB4. As with the previously described interactions between miR-196 and HoxA7
and Hox-8 paralogues, the target genes are located in close proximity to the
microRNA. We present a model in which we postulate a link between the clustering 
of Hox genes and post-transcriptional gene regulation. We speculate that the high
density of transcription units and enhancers within the Hox clusters places
constraints on the precision of the transcriptional control that can be achieved 
within these clusters and requires the involvement of post-transcriptional gene
silencing to define functional domains of genes appropriately.

PMCID: PMC2148072
PMID: 18167555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2008 Jan;1779(1):66-73. Epub 2007 Dec 3.

Human CpG binding protein interacts with MLL1, MLL2 and hSet1 and regulates Hox
gene expression.

Ansari KI(1), Mishra BP, Mandal SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas at
Arlington, Arlington, Texas 76019, USA.

Human encodes several histone H3-Lysine 4 (H3K4) specific methyl-transferases
(HMTs) such as MLL1 (mixed lineage leukemia 1), MLL2, MLL3, hSet1 etc, that play 
critical roles in gene expression. These HMTs are present as distinct
multi-protein complexes with several proteins in common. Herein, we have affinity
purified and characterized human CpG binding protein (CGBP) and its interacting
proteins from human cells. We demonstrated that CGBP is co-purified with three
H3K4 specific HMTs MLL1, MLL2, and hSet1. We also performed independent
immuno-precipitation of MLL1, MLL2 and hSet1 complexes from human cell and
demonstrated that each of these complexes contains CGBP. In addition, CGBP is
co-localized with MLL1, MLL2 and hSet1 in vivo and binds to the promoter of MLL
target gene HoxA7. Antisense mediated knock down of CGBP diminished the
recruitment of MLL1 and down regulated levels of H3K4 trimethylation in HoxA7
promoter affecting its expression. These results demonstrated that CGBP interacts
with MLL1, MLL2 as well as hSet1 HMTs and plays critical roles in regulations of 
MLL target genes.

PMID: 18082152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Neural Dev. 2007 Nov 5;2:23.

A procephalic territory in Drosophila exhibiting similarities and dissimilarities
compared to the vertebrate midbrain/hindbrain boundary region.

Urbach R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetics, University of Mainz, Johannes-Joachim Becherweg 32,
Mainz, Germany, D-55128. urbach@uni-mainz.de

BACKGROUND: In vertebrates, the primordium of the brain is subdivided by the
expression of Otx genes (forebrain/anterior midbrain), Hox genes (posterior
hindbrain), and the genes Pax2, Pax5 and Pax8 (intervening region). The latter
includes the midbrain/hindbrain boundary (MHB), which acts as a key organizer
during brain patterning. Recent studies in Drosophila revealed that orthologous
sets of genes are expressed in a similar tripartite pattern in the late embryonic
brain, which suggested correspondence between the Drosophila
deutocerebral/tritocerebral boundary region and the vertebrate MHB. To gain more 
insight into the evolution of brain regions, and particularly the MHB, I examined
the expression of a comprehensive array of MHB-specific gene orthologs in the
procephalic neuroectoderm and in individually identified neuroblasts during early
embryonic stages 8-11, at which the segmental organization of the brain is most
clearly displayed.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSION: I show that the early embryonic brain exhibits an
anterior Otx/otd domain and a posterior Hox1/lab domain, but that Pax2/5/8
orthologs are not expressed in the neuroectoderm and neuroblasts of the
intervening territory. Furthermore, the expression domains of Otx/otd and
Gbx/unpg exhibit a small common interface within the anterior deutocerebrum. In
contrast to vertebrates, Fgf8-related genes are not expressed posterior to the
otd/unpg interface. However, at the otd/unpg interface the early expression of
other MHB-specific genes (including btd, wg, en), and of dorsoventral patterning 
genes, closely resembles the situation at the vertebrate MHB. Altogether, these
results suggest the existence of an ancestral territory within the primordium of 
the deutocerebrum and adjacent protocerebrum, which might be the evolutionary
equivalent of the region of the vertebrate MHB. However, lack of expression of
Pax2/5/8 and Fgf8-related genes, and significant differences in the expression
onset of other key regulators at the otd/unpg interface, imply that genetic
interactions crucial for the vertebrate organizer activity are absent in the
early embryonic brain of Drosophila.

PMCID: PMC2206033
PMID: 17983473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Mol Biol Rep. 2009 Feb;36(2):227-35. Epub 2007 Oct 30.

HOX gene analysis of endothelial cell differentiation in human bone
marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells.

Chung N(1), Jee BK, Chae SW, Jeon YW, Lee KH, Rha HK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biotechnology, College of Life Sciences and Biotechnology, Korea
University, Seoul, Republic of Korea.

Human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) have been shown to
possess multilineage differentiation potential. HOX genes function in
transcriptional regulators, and are involved in stem cell differentiation. The
aim of the present study was to demonstrate HOX genes that are related to
angiogenesis. To identify the expression patterns of 37 HOX genes in the
endothelial cell differentiation of hMSCs, we analyzed HOX genes through
profiling with multiplex RT-PCR. The results showed that the expression patterns 
of four HOX genes, HOXA7, HOXB3, HOXA3, and HOXB13, significantly changed during 
angiogenesis. The expression levels of HOXA7 and HOXB3 were dramatically
increased, whereas those of HOXA3 and HOXB13 were decreased during endothelial
cell differentiation. When further analysis of the expressions of these HOX genes
was performed with real-time PCR and an immunoblot assay, the expression patterns
were also found to be well-matched with the results of multiplex RT-PCR. Here, we
report that HOXA7, HOXB3, HOXA3, and HOXB13 might be involved in the angiogenesis
of hMSCs.

PMID: 17972163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Reprod Sci. 2007 Sep;14(6):605-14.

HOXA7 in epithelial ovarian cancer: interrelationships between differentiation
and clinical features.

Ota T(1), Gilks CB, Longacre T, Leung PC, Auersperg N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Interrelationships between HOXA7 expression and ovarian cancer progression are
investigated by cDNA array and by immunohistochemistry of normal ovaries and 538 
epithelial ovarian tumor microarrays. Outcomes of patients and HOXA7 expression
were compared by Kaplan-Meier survival curves. HOXA7 mRNA expression was higher
in carcinomas than in benign tumors. HOXA7 protein was absent in normal surface
epithelium but appeared in metaplastic regions. All carcinomas stained for HOXA7 
protein, with staining intensities unrelated to histotype, grade, or patient
outcome. There were significant associations of strong HOXA7 staining of stroma
and tumor nuclei with the clear cell histotype (stroma: P = .0022, nuclei: P =
.0003) and of weak/absent staining with serous carcinomas. Tumor E-cadherin
expression correlated significantly with HOX7 staining in stroma (P = .0002) but 
not within tumors. HOXA7 staining of tumor cell nuclei is correlated
significantly with improved disease-specific survival (P = .0104), which is
suggestive of the biological and potentially clinical importance of subcellular
HOXA7 localization.

PMID: 17959889  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;10(4):365-7.

[Expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Gu ZD(1), Chen XM, Zhang W, Gu J, Chen KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 
Cancer Hospital, Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing 100036, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify whether HOX genes can be used as markers of esophageal
cancer.
METHODS: The expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines was
examined. Specific primers were designed and RT- PCR was performed for each HOX
gene members in above esophageal cancer cell lines, EC109 and CAES.
RESULTS: Fifteen out of 39 HOX genes were expressed in esophageal cancer cell
lines. They were HOXA2, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXA13, HOXB7, HOXB9, HOXC4, HOXC5,
HOXC6, HOXC8, HOXC9, HOXD9, HOXD10, and HOXD13 respectively. Of them. Eleven
genes were overlapped with the ones detected in human esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma(ESCC) in our former study.
CONCLUSION: This study reconfirms our former that some HOX genes are deregulated 
expressed in ESCC, which provides more positive evidence for their roles in ESCC.

PMID: 17659465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;9(7):804-12. Epub 2007 Jun 24.

NUP98-NSD1 links H3K36 methylation to Hox-A gene activation and leukaemogenesis.

Wang GG(1), Cai L, Pasillas MP, Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California at San Diego, School of
Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Nuclear receptor-binding SET domain protein 1 (NSD1) prototype is a family of
mammalian histone methyltransferases (NSD1, NSD2/MMSET/WHSC1, NSD3/WHSC1L1) that 
are essential in development and are mutated in human acute myeloid leukemia
(AML), overgrowth syndromes, multiple myeloma and lung cancers. In AML, the
recurring t(5;11)(q35;p15.5) translocation fuses NSD1 to nucleoporin-98 (NUP98). 
Here, we present the first characterization of the transforming properties and
molecular mechanisms of NUP98-NSD1. We demonstrate that NUP98-NSD1 induces AML in
vivo, sustains self-renewal of myeloid stem cells in vitro, and enforces
expression of the HoxA7, HoxA9, HoxA10 and Meis1 proto-oncogenes.
Mechanistically, NUP98-NSD1 binds genomic elements adjacent to HoxA7 and HoxA9,
maintains histone H3 Lys 36 (H3K36) methylation and histone acetylation, and
prevents EZH2-mediated transcriptional repression of the Hox-A locus during
differentiation. Deletion of the NUP98 FG-repeat domain, or mutations in NSD1
that inactivate the H3K36 methyltransferase activity or that prevent binding of
NUP98-NSD1 to the Hox-A locus precluded both Hox-A gene activation and myeloid
progenitor immortalization. We propose that NUP98-NSD1 prevents EZH2-mediated
repression of Hox-A locus genes by colocalizing H3K36 methylation and histone
acetylation at regulatory DNA elements. This report is the first to link
deregulated H3K36 methylation to tumorigenesis and to link NSD1 to
transcriptional regulation of the Hox-A locus.

PMID: 17589499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Genes Cells. 2007 May;12(5):581-92.

Critical role of the p400/mDomino chromatin-remodeling ATPase in embryonic
hematopoiesis.

Ueda T(1), Watanabe-Fukunaga R, Ogawa H, Fukuyama H, Higashi Y, Nagata S,
Fukunaga R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics (B-3), Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences and
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Japan Science and Technology
Corporation, Osaka, Japan.

The SWI2/SNF2 family ATPase, p400/mDomino, is a core subunit of a large
chromatin-remodeling complex, and is currently suggested to play a unique
function in histone variant exchange, a process by which chromatin structure is
altered. Here, we investigated the role of p400/mDomino in mammalian development 
by generating mutant mice with a targeted deletion of the N-terminal domain of
p400/mDomino (referred to as mDom(DeltaN/DeltaN)). The mDom(DeltaN/DeltaN) mice
died on embryonic day 11.5 (E11.5), and displayed an anemic appearance and slight
deformity of the neural tube. DNA microarray and quantitative RT-PCR analyses
revealed that all of the embryonic globin genes and a globin chaperone gene were 
poorly expressed in the mDom(DeltaN/DeltaN) embryo and yolk sac on E8.5,
indicating that primitive erythropoiesis was impaired. A hematopoietic colony
assay indicated that the hematopoietic activity of the yolk sac was significantly
blocked in the mutant mice. We also found that the expression of a limited set of
Hox genes, including Hoxa7, Hoxa9 and Hoxb9, was drastically enhanced in the
mDom(DeltaN/DeltaN) yolk sacs. These results suggest that p400/mDomino plays a
critical role in embryonic hematopoiesis by regulating the expression of
developmentally essential genes such as those in the Hox gene cluster.

PMID: 17535249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2006 Dec;1090:182-7.

Jpk, a novel cell death inducer, regulates the expression of Hoxa7 in F9
teratocarcinoma cells, but not during apoptosis.

Lee EY(1), Kim MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Laboratory, Brain Korea 21 Project for
Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, C.P.O. Box 8044, Seoul
120-752, Korea.

Hox proteins play critical role in animal pattern formation during embryogenesis.
During the study on the regulation of Hox gene expression, a novel gene, Jpk, has
been isolated as a putative regulatory factor associating with the upstream
regulatory sequence of murine Hoxa7. Since overexpression of Jpk caused cell
death in bacteria as well as in eukaryotic cells and Hox has been reported to
participate in apoptosis, we tried to analyze the relationship between Jpk and
Hoxa7 during apoptosis after confirming the regulatory effect of Jpk on the
expression of Hoxa7 in F9 teratocarcinoma cells. For that purpose, an effector
(pEGFP-Jpk) and reporter (pGL2-NM307) plasmid containing a luciferase gene under 
the 307 bp (NM307) of Hoxa7 upstream regulatory sequence was constructed. In the 
presence of Jpk (effector), luciferase activity was increased and this
enhancement was decreased by siRNA against Jpk, suggesting that Jpk is a
regulatory factor of Hoxa7. In order to see whether Jpk still regulates the
expression of Hoxa7 during apoptosis, F9 cells were transiently transfected with 
pcDNA-Jpk, and the expression of Jpk, Hoxa7, and CHOP-10 was analyzed using
RT-PCR. Hoxa7 and CHOP-10 were not upregulated in the presence of Jpk although
Jpk seemed to cause apoptosis, indicating that the regulatory mechanism of Jpk on
the expression of Hoxa7 might be different depending on the cell status, that is,
an apoptotic or proliferative condition.

PMID: 17384261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Mar 27;104(13):5527-32. Epub 2007 Mar 16.

Homeobox gene methylation in lung cancer studied by genome-wide analysis with a
microarray-based methylated CpG island recovery assay.

Rauch T(1), Wang Z, Zhang X, Zhong X, Wu X, Lau SK, Kernstine KH, Riggs AD,
Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte,
CA 91010, USA.

De novo methylation of CpG islands is a common phenomenon in human cancer, but
the mechanisms of cancer-associated DNA methylation are not known. We have used
tiling arrays in combination with the methylated CpG island recovery assay to
investigate methylation of CpG islands genome-wide and at high resolution. We
find that all four HOX gene clusters on chromosomes 2, 7, 12, and 17 are
preferential targets for DNA methylation in cancer cell lines and in early-stage 
lung cancer. CpG islands associated with many other homeobox genes, such as SIX, 
LHX, PAX, DLX, and Engrailed, were highly methylated as well. Altogether, more
than half (104 of 192) of all CpG island-associated homeobox genes in the lung
cancer cell line A549 were methylated. Analysis of paralogous HOX genes showed
that not all paralogues undergo cancer-associated methylation simultaneously. The
HOXA cluster was analyzed in greater detail. Comparison with ENCODE-derived data 
shows that lack of methylation at CpG-rich sequences correlates with presence of 
the active chromatin mark, histone H3 lysine-4 methylation in the HOXA region.
Methylation analysis of HOXA genes in primary squamous cell carcinomas of the
lung led to the identification of the HOXA7- and HOXA9-associated CpG islands as 
frequent methylation targets in stage 1 tumors. Homeobox genes are potentially
useful as DNA methylation markers for early diagnosis of the disease. The finding
of widespread methylation of homeobox genes lends support to the hypothesis that 
a substantial fraction of genes methylated in human cancer are targets of the
Polycomb complex.

PMCID: PMC1838508
PMID: 17369352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Curr Opin Hematol. 2007 Mar;14(2):85-9.

The role of HOX genes in malignant myeloid disease.

Eklund EA(1).

Author information: 
(1)The Feinberg School at Northwestern University and Jesse Brown VHA Medical
Center, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. e-eklund@northwestern.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: The Hox family of homeodomain transcription factors plays an
important role in regulating definitive hematopoiesis. Recent studies indicate
that a common characteristic of poor prognosis acute myeloid leukemia is
dysregulated expression of a key group of these Hox proteins. The purpose of this
review is to outline recent progress in understanding the role that dysregulation
of HOX-gene expression plays in the pathogenesis of myeloid leukemogenesis.
RECENT FINDINGS: A number of recent studies correlate increased expression of
HOXA-genes with poor prognosis cytogenetics in acute myeloid leukemia and mixed
lineage leukemia. These studies determine that specific ABD HOXA-genes (HoxA7, 9 
and 10) are dysregulated as a group. Many such studies also document
co-overexpression of homeodomain proteins of the Meis and Pbx families in poor
prognosis leukemia. This is of interest, since Meis and Pbx proteins are common
DNA-binding partners for Hox proteins.
SUMMARY: These findings suggest that a key characteristic of poor prognosis acute
myeloid leukemia is increased, differentiation-stage inappropriate expression of 
the Abd HoxA proteins and their DNA-binding partners. Such results suggest that
dysregulation of the 'Hox code' is important in the pathogenesis of myeloid
malignancy.

PMID: 17255784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Clin Invest. 2006 Oct;116(10):2707-16. Epub 2006 Sep 14.

Mll partial tandem duplication induces aberrant Hox expression in vivo via
specific epigenetic alterations.

Dorrance AM(1), Liu S, Yuan W, Becknell B, Arnoczky KJ, Guimond M, Strout MP,
Feng L, Nakamura T, Yu L, Rush LJ, Weinstein M, Leone G, Wu L, Ferketich A,
Whitman SP, Marcucci G, Caligiuri MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43220, USA.

We previously identified a rearrangement of mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) gene
(also known as ALL-1, HRX, and HTRX1), consisting of an in-frame partial tandem
duplication (PTD) of exons 5 through 11 in the absence of a partner gene,
occurring in approximately 4%-7% of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
and normal cytogenetics, and associated with a poor prognosis. The mechanism by
which the MLL PTD contributes to aberrant hematopoiesis and/or leukemia is
unknown. To examine this, we generated a mouse knockin model in which exons 5
through 11 of the murine Mll gene were targeted to intron 4 of the endogenous Mll
locus. Mll(PTD/WT) mice exhibit an alteration in the boundaries of normal
homeobox (Hox) gene expression during embryogenesis, resulting in axial skeletal 
defects and increased numbers of hematopoietic progenitor cells. Mll(PTD/WT) mice
overexpress Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and Hoxa10 in spleen, BM, and blood. An increase in
histone H3/H4 acetylation and histone H3 lysine 4 (Lys4) methylation within the
Hoxa7 and Hoxa9 promoters provides an epigenetic mechanism by which this
overexpression occurs in vivo and an etiologic role for MLL PTD gain of function 
in the genesis of AML.

PMCID: PMC1564428
PMID: 16981007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 May;26(10):3902-16.

Persistent transactivation by meis1 replaces hox function in myeloid
leukemogenesis models: evidence for co-occupancy of meis1-pbx and hox-pbx
complexes on promoters of leukemia-associated genes.

Wang GG(1), Pasillas MP, Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Pathology Graduate Program, Leichtag
249B, University of California at San Diego School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Dr., 
La Jolla, California 92093, USA. gawang@ucsd.edu

Homeobox transcription factors Meis1 and Hoxa9 promote hematopoietic progenitor
self-renewal and cooperate to cause acute myeloid leukemia (AML). While Hoxa9
alone blocks the differentiation of nonleukemogenic myeloid cell-committed
progenitors, coexpression with Meis1 is required for the production of
AML-initiating progenitors, which also transcribe a group of hematopoietic stem
cell genes, including Cd34 and Flt3 (defined as Meis1-related leukemic signature 
genes). Here, we use dominant trans-activating (Vp16 fusion) or trans-repressing 
(engrailed fusion) forms of Meis1 to define its biochemical functions that
contribute to leukemogenesis. Surprisingly, Vp16-Meis1 (but not engrailed-Meis1) 
functioned as an autonomous oncoprotein that mimicked combined activities of
Meis1 plus Hoxa9, immortalizing early progenitors, inducing low-level expression 
of Meis1-related signature genes, and causing leukemia without coexpression of
exogenous or endogenous Hox genes. Vp16-Meis1-mediated transformation required
the Meis1 function of binding to Pbx and DNA but not its C-terminal domain (CTD).
The absence of endogenous Hox gene expression in Vp16-Meis1-immortalized
progenitors allowed us to investigate how Hox alters gene expression and cell
biology in early hematopoietic progenitors. Strikingly, expression of Hoxa9 or
Hoxa7 stimulated both leukemic aggressiveness and transcription of Meis1-related 
signature genes in Vp16-Meis1 progenitors. Interestingly, while the Hoxa9
N-terminal domain (NTD) is essential for cooperative transformation with
wild-type Meis1, it was dispensable in Vp16-Meis1 progenitors. The fact that a
dominant transactivation domain fused to Meis1 replaces the essential functions
of both the Meis1 CTD and Hoxa9 NTD suggests that Meis-Pbx and Hox-Pbx (or
Hox-Pbx-Meis) complexes co-occupy cellular promoters that drive leukemogenesis
and that Meis1 CTD and Hox NTD cooperate in gene activation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation confirmed co-occupancy of Hoxa9 and Meis1 on the Flt3
promoter.

PMCID: PMC1488994
PMID: 16648484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 May;12(5):283-9. Epub 2006 Apr 5.

cDNA cloning and expression of the human NOBOX gene in oocytes and ovarian
follicles.

Huntriss J(1), Hinkins M, Picton HM.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction and Early Development Research Group, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. j.huntriss@leeds.ac.uk

Nobox is a homeobox gene that is preferentially expressed in the oocytes and is
essential for folliculogenesis and the regulation of oocyte-specific gene
expression in the mouse. The likely human homologue has been identified in silico
but has not as yet been confirmed experimentally. Here, we present the first cDNA
cloning and transcript expression analysis of the human NOBOX gene. Using RT-PCR,
we reveal that expression within adult human tissues is limited to the ovary,
testis and pancreas. Expression within the ovary is oocyte specific, with
expression observed from the primordial stage ovarian follicle through to the
metaphase II (MII) oocyte. In complementary studies, we reveal dynamic expression
profiles of 14 additional homeobox genes throughout human oogenesis and early
development. The expression of HOXA10 is restricted to primordial and early
primary follicles. HOXB7 is expressed from primordial and early primary stage
follicles through to germinal vesicle (GV) oocytes. Gastrulation brain homeobox 1
(GBX1) and HOXA7 genes are homeobox markers preferentially expressed by GV
oocytes. HOXA1 and HEX are homeobox markers preferentially expressed by MII
oocytes. In summary, the homeobox gene transcripts that are detected in ovarian
follicles and oocytes are distinct from those expressed in human blastocysts
(HOXB4, CDX2 and HOXC9) and granulosa cells (HOXC9, HOXC8, HOXC6, HOXA7, HOXA5
and HOXA4).

PMID: 16597639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. J Negat Results Biomed. 2006 Mar 23;5:4.

Role of HOXA7 to HOXA13 and PBX1 genes in various forms of MRKH syndrome
(congenital absence of uterus and vagina).

Burel A(1), Mouchel T, Odent S, Tiker F, Knebelmann B, Pellerin I, Guerrier D.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 6061, Génétique et Développement, Université de Rennes 1, Groupe IPD,
IFR140 GFAS, Faculté de Médecine, Rennes, France. agnes.burel@univ-rennes1.fr

The Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome refers to the congenital
absence or severe hypoplasia of the female genital tract, often described as
uterovaginal aplasia which is the prime feature of the syndrome. It is the second
cause of primary amenorrhea after gonadal dysgenesis and occurs in approximately 
1 in 4500 women. Aetiology of this syndrome remains poorly understood. Frequent
association of other malformations with the MRKH syndrome, involving kidneys,
skeleton and ears, suggests the involvement of major developmental genes such as 
those of the HOX family. Indeed mammalian HOX genes are well known for their
crucial role during embryogenesis, particularly in axial skeleton, hindbrain and 
limb development. More recently, their involvement in organogenesis has been
demonstrated notably during urogenital differentiation. Although null mutations
of HOX genes in animal models do not lead to MRKH-like phenotypes, dominant
mutations in their coding sequences or aberrant expression due to mutated
regulatory regions could well account for it. Sequence analysis of coding regions
of HOX candidate genes and of PBX1, a likely HOX cofactor during Müllerian duct
differentiation and kidney morphogenesis, did not reveal any mutation in patients
showing various forms of MRKH syndrome. This tends to show that HOX genes are not
involved in MRKH syndrome. However it does not exclude that other mechanisms
leading to HOX dysfunction may account for the syndrome.

PMCID: PMC1444933
PMID: 16556301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Blood. 2006 Jul 15;108(2):622-9. Epub 2006 Feb 9.

Molecular dissection of Meis1 reveals 2 domains required for leukemia induction
and a key role for Hoxa gene activation.

Mamo A(1), Krosl J, Kroon E, Bijl J, Thompson A, Mayotte N, Girard S, Bisaillon
R, Beslu N, Featherstone M, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Stem Cells, Institute of Research in
Immunology and Cancer (IRIC), Université de Montréal, QC, Canada.

The Hoxa9 and Meis1 genes represent important oncogenic collaborators activated
in a significant proportion of human leukemias with genetic alterations in the
MLL gene. In this study, we show that the transforming property of Meis1 is
modulated by 3 conserved domains, namely the Pbx interaction motif (PIM), the
homeodomain, and the C-terminal region recently described to possess
transactivating properties. Meis1 and Pbx1 interaction domain-swapping mutants
are dysfunctional separately, but restore the full oncogenic activity of Meis1
when cotransduced in primary cells engineered to overexpress Hoxa9, thus implying
a modular nature for PIM in Meis1-accelerated transformation. Moreover, we show
that the transactivating domain of VP16 can restore, and even enhance, the
oncogenic potential of the Meis1 mutant lacking the C-terminal 49 amino acids. In
contrast to Meis1, the fusion VP16-Meis1 is spontaneously oncogenic, and all
leukemias harbor genetic activation of endogenous Hoxa9 and/or Hoxa7, suggesting 
that Hoxa gene activation represents a key event required for the oncogenic
activity of VP16-Meis1.

PMID: 16469876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Differentiation. 2006 Feb;74(1):1-10.

Cell type- and stage-specific changes in HOXA7 protein expression in human
ovarian folliculogenesis: possible role of GDF-9.

Ota T(1), Choi KB, Gilks CB, Leung PC, Auersperg N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of British Columbia (UBC),
2H30-4490 Oak St., B.C. Women's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada V6H 3V5.

Homeobox (HOX) genes are important transcriptional regulators in development and 
in adult tissues. A major obstacle to the understanding of their roles in humans 
has been the lack of well-defined anti-human HOX antibodies. We generated a
thoroughly characterized polyclonal rabbit antibody against human HOXA7 and used 
it to study the distribution, role, and regulation of HOXA7 in human ovarian
folliculogenesis and in granulosa cell tumors. Immunohistochemically, follicles
were strongly HOXA7-positive compared with stroma. Oocytes expressed little
HOXA7. Granulosa cells were predominantly negative in primordial follicles, had
uniformly HOXA7-positive nuclei in primary follicles, and, as follicles matured, 
the subcellular localization of HOXA7 changed from nuclear to predominantly
cytoplasmic. HOXA7 was mainly cytoplasmic in theca interna, but completely absent
in theca externa. Granulosa cell tumors were mainly HOXA7 positive and, like in
preovulatory follicles and theca interna, staining was predominantly cytoplasmic.
The change in HOXA7 expression from negative primordial to positive primary
follicles suggested a relationship with granulosa cell proliferation. To test
this hypothesis, SV40 Tag-immortalized human granulosa cells (SVOG) were double
stained with anti-HOXA7 antibody and with Ki-67 as proliferation marker. HOXA7
expression was highest in mitotic cells. In addition, growth differentiation
factor-9 (GDF-9), known to be secreted by oocytes in primary human follicles,
up-regulated HOXA7 protein, and stimulated proliferation of SVOG, while TGF-beta1
inhibited HOXA7 expression and proliferation. This is the first report on the
expression of any HOX gene in human ovarian follicles and granulosa cell tumors. 
It shows that HOXA7 undergoes cell type- and stage-specific changes during
ovarian folliculogenesis, likely regulates granulosa cell proliferation, and in
subcellular location differs between proliferating and secretory cells. The
increase in HOXA7 protein in response to GDF-9 represents the first demonstration
of a possible regulatory role of oocytes in ovarian follicular HOX gene
expression.

PMID: 16466395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2005 Dec 30;338(4):1759-65. Epub 2005 Nov 2.

Murine mesenchymal and embryonic stem cells express a similar Hox gene profile.

Phinney DG(1), Gray AJ, Hill K, Pandey A.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Gene Therapy, Tulane University Health Science Center, New Orleans,
LA 70112, USA. dphinne@tulane.edu

Using degenerate oligonucleotide primers targeting the homeobox domain, we
amplified by PCR and sequenced 723 clones from five murine cell populations and
lines derived from embryonic mesoderm and adult bone marrow. Transcripts from all
four vertebrate Hox clusters were expressed by the different populations.
Hierarchical clustering of the data revealed that mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs)
and the embryonic stem (ES) cell line D3 shared a similar Hox expression profile.
These populations exclusively expressed Hoxb2, Hoxb5, Hoxb7, and Hoxc4,
transcripts regulating self-renewal and differentiation of other stem cells.
Additionally, Hoxa7 transcript quantified by real-time PCR strongly correlated
(r2=0.89) with the number of Hoxa7 clones identified by sequencing, validating
that data from the PCR screen reflects differences in Hox mRNA abundance between 
populations. This is the first study to catalogue Hox transcripts in murine MSCs 
and by comparative analyses identify specific Hox genes that may contribute to
their stem cell character.

PMID: 16288716  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2005 Aug;54(2):55-62.

Anti-tumor antibodies in ovarian cancer.

Luborsky JL(1), Barua A, Shatavi SV, Kebede T, Abramowicz J, Rotmensch J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Rush Univerity Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612, 
USA. jluborsk@rush.edu

Anti-tumor antibodies have potential as cancer biomarkers. There is relatively
limited identification of anti-tumor antibodies in response to ovarian cancer,
compared with studies for other cancers. There is also very limited information
on the prevalence of anti-tumor antibodies among ovarian cancer patients.
Although most anti-tumor antibodies react with antigens common to both tumor and 
normal tissue, the anti-tumor response tends to be confined to individuals with
ovarian cancer, similar to other cancers. Antibodies to HOXA7, a differentiation 
antigen, have the highest reported prevalence in ovarian cancer (67%). Antibodies
to other ubiquitous antigens including NY-ESO-1, Ep-CAM (epithelial cell adhesion
molecule), HSP-90 (heat shock protein 90), and mutated p53 have been identified
in ovarian cancer. Anti-tumor antibody specificity reflects the heterogeneity of 
antigen expression in tumors. Tests based on panels of a combination of
anti-tumor antibodies may be more predictive for ovarian cancer, as no single
specificity accounts for ovarian tumors. In addition to characterization of
anti-tumor antibodies as diagnostic markers, study of anti-tumor antibodies is
likely to provide insights into mechanisms of tumor development. There is
evidence of antibodies to tumor antigens and of activated T cells, suggesting
immune recognition of tumor antigens occurred. Nonetheless, as tumors are not
'rejected', it is likely that there are alterations in the immune system. The
basis for tumor growth in the face of immune activity remains to be determined.

PMID: 16105096  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Blood. 2005 Nov 15;106(10):3559-66. Epub 2005 Jul 26.

Targeting MLL-AF4 with short interfering RNAs inhibits clonogenicity and
engraftment of t(4;11)-positive human leukemic cells.

Thomas M(1), Gessner A, Vornlocher HP, Hadwiger P, Greil J, Heidenreich O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology,
Eberhard Karls University of Tuebingen, Germany.

The chromosomal translocation t(4;11) marks infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia
associated with a particularly dismal prognosis. The leukemogenic role of the
corresponding fusion gene MLL-AF4 is not well understood. We show that transient 
inhibition of MLL-AF4 expression with small interfering RNAs impairs the
proliferation and clonogenicity of the t(4; 11)-positive human leukemic cell
lines SEM and RS4;11. Reduction of mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL)-ALL-1 fused gene 
from chromosome 4 (AF4) levels induces apoptosis associated with caspase-3
activation and diminished BCL-X(L) expression. Suppression of MLL-AF4 is
paralleled by a decreased expression of the homeotic genes HOXA7, HOXA9, and
MEIS1. MLL-AF4 depletion inhibits expression of the stem-cell marker CD133,
indicating hematopoietic differentiation. Transfection of leukemic cells with
MLL-AF4 siRNAs reduces leukemia-associated morbidity and mortality in SCID mice
that received a xenotransplant, suggesting that MLL-AF4 depletion negatively
affects leukemia-initiating cells. Our findings demonstrate that MLL-AF4 is
important for leukemic clonogenicity and engraftment of this highly aggressive
leukemia. Targeted inhibition of MLL-AF4 fusion gene expression may lead to an
effective and highly specific treatment of this therapy-resistant leukemia.

PMID: 16046533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cell. 2005 Apr 22;121(2):167-78.

hDOT1L links histone methylation to leukemogenesis.

Okada Y(1), Feng Q, Lin Y, Jiang Q, Li Y, Coffield VM, Su L, Xu G, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2005 Jun 3;121(5):809.

Epigenetic modifications play an important role in human cancer. One such
modification, histone methylation, contributes to human cancer through
deregulation of cancer-relevant genes. The yeast Dot1 and its human counterpart, 
hDOT1L, methylate lysine 79 located within the globular domain of histone H3.
Here we report that hDOT1L interacts with AF10, an MLL (mixed lineage leukemia)
fusion partner involved in acute myeloid leukemia, through the OM-LZ region of
AF10 required for MLL-AF10-mediated leukemogenesis. We demonstrate that direct
fusion of hDOT1L to MLL results in leukemic transformation in an hDOT1L
methyltransferase activity-dependent manner. Transformation by MLL-hDOT1L and
MLL-AF10 results in upregulation of a number of leukemia-relevant genes, such as 
Hoxa9, concomitant with hypermethylation of H3-K79. Our studies thus establish
that mistargeting of hDOT1L to Hoxa9 plays an important role in MLL-AF10-mediated
leukemogenesis and suggests that the enzymatic activity of hDOT1L may provide a
potential target for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 15851025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Nat Med. 2005 May;11(5):531-7. Epub 2005 Apr 10.

Lineage infidelity of epithelial ovarian cancers is controlled by HOX genes that 
specify regional identity in the reproductive tract.

Cheng W(1), Liu J, Yoshida H, Rosen D, Naora H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Box 184, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Although epithelial ovarian cancers (EOCs) have been thought to arise from the
simple epithelium lining the ovarian surface or inclusion cysts, the major
subtypes of EOCs show morphologic features that resemble those of the müllerian
duct-derived epithelia of the reproductive tract. We found that HOX genes, which 
normally regulate mullerian duct differentiation, are not expressed in normal
ovarian surface epithelium (OSE), but are expressed in different EOC subtypes
according to the pattern of mullerian-like differentiation of these cancers.
Ectopic expression of Hoxa9 in tumorigenic mouse OSE cells gave rise to papillary
tumors resembling serous EOCs. In contrast, Hoxa10 and Hoxa11 induced
morphogenesis of endometrioid-like and mucinous-like EOCs, respectively. Hoxa7
showed no lineage specificity, but promoted the abilities of Hoxa9, Hoxa10 and
Hoxa11 to induce differentiation along their respective pathways. Therefore,
inappropriate activation of a molecular program that controls patterning of the
reproductive tract could explain the morphologic heterogeneity of EOCs and their 
assumption of müllerian-like features.

PMID: 15821746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Feb 1;11(3):1044-9.

Expression of 11 HOX genes is deregulated in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Chen KN(1), Gu ZD, Ke Y, Li JY, Shi XT, Xu GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 
Cancer Hospital, Beijing, China 100 036. chenkeneng@yahoo.com.cn

PURPOSE: HOX genes are vital for all aspects of mammalian growth and
differentiation, and recent data have shown that their deregulated expression is 
related to carcinogenesis. To date, there has been no systemic study on
expression of HOX genes in esophageal carcinoma. We investigated the expression
pattern of 39 known HOX genes in cancerous and noncancerous tissue from 36
patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma to determine whether their
expression is altered in esophageal cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Thirty-six patients with resectable esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) were enrolled in this study. Specific primers were designed for 
each of 39 HOX genes, and reverse transcription-PCR was done in cancerous and
noncancerous samples of these 36 patients. Furthermore, the expression of HOXA9
protein was subjected to Western blot analysis in all 36 paired tissue samples.
RESULTS: Eight of 39 HOX genes were expressed in cancerous but not in
noncancerous tissue. Five of 39 HOX genes were expressed both in cancerous and
noncancerous tissue. Of the latter, expression of HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXC6 was
significantly higher in cancerous tissue (P < 0.05). The remaining 26 HOX genes
were not detected in either types of tissue. HOXA9 protein was expressed in both 
kinds of tissue (cancer tissue versus noncancerous mucosa: 0.34 +/- 0.32 versus
0.24 +/- 0.27, P = 0.121).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first comprehensive survey of 39 HOX gene expression in 
ESCC and noncancerous mucosa. Five of the 39 HOX genes were expressed in both
types of tissue indicating their possible role in maintaining normal structure
and function of adult esophageal mucosa. Eleven of the 39 HOX genes were
deregulated in cancer tissue. These genes possibly participate in the
carcinogenesis of ESCC.

PMID: 15709170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Blood. 2005 Feb 1;105(3):1222-30. Epub 2004 Oct 12.

Meis1-mediated apoptosis is caspase dependent and can be suppressed by
coexpression of HoxA9 in murine and human cell lines.

Wermuth PJ(1), Buchberg AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Jefferson
Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, 233 S 10th St, Philadelphia, PA
19107-5541, USA.

Coexpression of the homeodomain protein Meis1 and either HoxA7 or HoxA9 is
characteristic of many acute myelogenous leukemias. Although Meis1 can be
overexpressed in bone marrow long-term repopulating cells, it is incapable of
mediating their transformation. Although overexpressing HoxA9 alone transforms
murine bone marrow cells, concurrent Meis1 overexpression greatly accelerates
oncogenesis. Meis1-HoxA9 cooperation suppresses several myeloid differentiation
pathways. We now report that Meis1 overexpression strongly induces apoptosis in a
variety of cell types in vitro through a caspase-dependent process. Meis1
requires a functional homeodomain and Pbx-interaction motif to induce apoptosis. 
Coexpressing HoxA9 with Meis1 suppresses this apoptosis and provides protection
from several apoptosis inducers. Pbx1, another Meis1 cofactor, also induces
apoptosis; however, coexpressing HoxA9 is incapable of rescuing Pbx-mediated
apoptosis. This resistance to apoptotic stimuli, coupled with the previously
reported ability to suppress multiple myeloid differentiation pathways, would
provide a strong selective advantage to Meis1-HoxA9 coexpressing cells in vivo,
leading to leukemogenesis.

PMID: 15479723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Int J Dev Biol. 2004 Sep;48(7):613-22.

Additional enhancer copies, with intact cdx binding sites, anteriorize
Hoxa-7/lacZ expression in mouse embryos: evidence in keeping with an
instructional cdx gradient.

Gaunt SJ(1), Cockley A, Drage D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Development and Genetics, The Babraham Institute, Babraham,
Cambridge, UK. stephen.gaunt@bbsrc.ac.uk.

Expression of a Hoxa-7/lacZ reporter construct in transgenic mouse embryos is
shifted anteriorly when the upstream enhancer is multimerized. The shift occurs
in spinal ganglia, neurectoderm and in both paraxial and lateral plate mesoderms.
Much of the multimer effect is inhibited by destruction of a single caudal (cdx) 
binding motif in the additional copies of the enhancer. These observations are in
agreement with earlier enhancer multimerization analyses made for Hoxb-8 (Charite
et al., 1998). Our findings therefore provide further evidence that the anterior 
limit of a Hox gene's expression domain is normally dependent upon and is
determined by, the dosage of transcription factor(s) which bind to its enhancer
element(s) and that these factors may be, or must include, the cdx proteins. We
consider these findings in terms of both instructional (morphogen-like) gradient 
and timing models for the establishment of Hox gene expression domains. Enhancer 
multimerization results in an earlier onset of Hoxa-7/lacZ activity in the
embryo. In neurectoderm at 8.7 days and in mesoderm at 10.5 days, the anterior
boundaries of expression are located posterior to those seen at some earlier
stages of development. We discuss how these findings are in keeping with a model 
where Hox expression boundaries become set along instructional cdx gradients,
formed by cdx decay in cells moving away from the primitive streak region.

PMID: 15470633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Leuk Lymphoma. 2004 Mar;45(3):567-74.

Expression of HOX genes in acute leukemia cell lines with and without MLL
translocations.

Quentmeier H(1), Dirks WG, Macleod RA, Reinhardt J, Zaborski M, Drexler HG.

Author information: 
(1)DSMZ--German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Department of
Human and Animal Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany. hqu@dsmz.de

In primary cells from acute leukemia patients, expression of the genes MEIS1,
HOXA5, HOXA7 and HOXA9 has been reported to be correlated with the occurrence of 
MLL translocations. It was our aim to find out whether MLL mutant (MLLmu) and MLL
wild-type (MLLwt) acute leukemia-derived cell lines might likewise be
discriminated on the basis of HOX gene expression. Southern blot analysis,
performed to verify the MLL status of the cells, showed that NOMO-1 was the only 
cell line not tested previously carrying a rearranged MLL gene. Fluorescence in
situ hybridization analysis demonstrated that this cell line exhibited a
reciprocal t(9;11)(q23;p22). Sequencing of RT-PCR products thereof identified
unique MLL exon 10/AF-9 exon 5 fusion transcripts. We divided the acute
leukemia-derived cell lines (n = 37) according to the results of Southern blot
analysis into MLLmu (n = 19) and MLLwt (n = 18). Expression of HOX genes was then
analyzed by applying reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, Northern
and Western blot analyses. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines expressed the 
HOX genes significantly more often than acute lymphoblastic (ALL) cell lines. In 
ALL, cells with MLL translocations expressed the genes 4 times more often than
MLLwt cells. Most distinct was the correlation between MLL status and MEIS1
expression in ALL-derived cell lines: 8/8 MLLmu but 0/10 MLLwt cell lines
expressed MEIS1. Northern and Western blot analysis confirmed that also HOXA9 and
FLT3 were significantly more often and stronger expressed in MLLmu than in MLLwt 
ALL cell lines. These results suggest that MLL aberrations may regulate MEIS1 and
HOXA9 gene expression in ALL-derived cell lines, while AML-derived cell lines
express these genes independently of the MLL status.

PMID: 15160920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Science. 2004 Apr 23;304(5670):594-6.

MicroRNA-directed cleavage of HOXB8 mRNA.

Yekta S(1), Shih IH, Bartel DP.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute for Biomedical Research, Nine Cambridge Center, Cambridge,
MA 02142, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous approximately 22-nucleotide RNAs, some of which
are known to play important regulatory roles in animals by targeting the messages
of protein-coding genes for translational repression. We find that miR-196, a
miRNA encoded at three paralogous locations in the A, B, and C mammalian HOX
clusters, has extensive, evolutionarily conserved complementarity to messages of 
HOXB8, HOXC8, and HOXD8. RNA fragments diagnostic of miR-196-directed cleavage of
HOXB8 were detected in mouse embryos. Cell culture experiments demonstrated
down-regulation of HOXB8, HOXC8, HOXD8, and HOXA7 and supported the cleavage
mechanism for miR-196-directed repression of HOXB8. These results point to a
miRNA-mediated mechanism for the posttranscriptional restriction of HOX gene
expression during vertebrate development and demonstrate that metazoan miRNAs can
repress expression of their natural targets through mRNA cleavage in addition to 
inhibiting productive translation.

PMID: 15105502  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Gene. 2004 Apr 28;331:53-63.

Differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells are closely 
related with homeotic genes and a group of differentially expressed genes.

Mizusawa N(1), Hasegawa T, Ohigashi I, Tanaka-Kosugi C, Harada N, Itakura M,
Yoshimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima City, Japan.

To identify the genes that determine differentiation phenotypes, we compared gene
expression of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells, which are derived from the 
common precursor and secrete insulin and glucagon, respectively. The expression
levels of homeotic genes including Hox genes known to determine region
specificity in the antero-posterior (AP) body axis, tissue-specific homeobox
genes, and other 8,734 genes were compared in a beta- and alpha-cell line of MIN6
and alpha TC1.6. The expression of homeotic genes were surveyed with reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using degenerate primers
corresponding to invariant amino acid sequences within the homeodomain and
subsequently with specific primers. Expression of Hoxc6, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Pdx1,
Cdx2, Gbx2, Pax4, and Hlxb9 genes in MIN6 was higher than those in alpha TC1.6,
while expression of Hoxa2, Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hoxa13,
Hoxb3, Hoxb5, Hoxb6, Hoxb13, Hoxb8, and Brain4 genes in alpha TC1.6 was higher
than those in MIN6. Out of 8,734 mouse genes screened with high-density mouse
cDNA microarrays for MIN6- and alpha TC1.6-derived cDNA, 58 and 25 genes were
differentially over- and under-expressed in MIN6, respectively. GLUTag, which is 
derived from a large bowel tumor and expresses the proglucagon gene, showed a
comparatively similar expression profile to that of alpha TC1.6 in both homeotic 
and other genes analyzed in cDNA microarray. Our results are consistent with the 
interpretation that not only the tissue-specific homeotic genes, but also Hox
genes are related to differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic beta- and
alpha-cells rather than their regional specification of the body in vertebrates.

PMID: 15094191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Oncogene. 2004 Apr 22;23(19):3385-94.

Functional contribution of EEN to leukemogenic transformation by MLL-EEN fusion
protein.

Liu H(1), Chen B, Xiong H, Huang QH, Zhang QH, Wang ZG, Li BL, Chen Z, Chen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory for Medical Genomics, Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Ruijin Hospital affiliated to Shanghai Second Medical University, 197 Ruijin Road
II, Shanghai 200025, PR China.

The EEN (extra eleven nineteen) gene was originally cloned from a case of acute
myeloid leukemia M5 subtype with translocation t (11; 19)(q23; p13), in which EEN
was fused with MLL. To explore the involvement of EEN in leukemogenesis caused by
MLL-EEN, we studied the transformation potential of the MLL-EEN fusion protein.
MLL-EEN had oncogenic features, while, as a control, MLLDelta, the truncated form
of MLL lacking the EEN moiety, did not show any oncogenic potential. MLL-EEN
exerted a dominant-negative effect over wild-type EEN in terms of subcellular
localization. Normally, EEN was found in the cytoplasm, but the MLL-EEN fusion
protein was located in the nucleus, and EEN could be delocalized by MLL-EEN. This
interaction is via a coiled-coil dimerization domain of EEN, which is reserved in
the fusion protein. In addition, MLL-EEN might act as a potential transcriptional
factor with the MLL part providing the DNA-binding domain and the EEN part
providing the transcription activation domain, though EEN seems to have no direct
role in transcriptional regulation. As an aberrant transcriptional factor,
MLL-EEN could transactivate the promoter of HoxA7, a potential target gene of
MLL.

Copyright 2004 Nature Publishing Group

PMID: 15077184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Blood. 2004 Apr 15;103(8):3192-9. Epub 2003 Dec 30.

Leukemic transformation of hematopoietic progenitors by MLL-GAS7 in the absence
of Hoxa7 or Hoxa9.

So CW(1), Karsunky H, Wong P, Weissman IL, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford
94305, USA.

Differential expression of Hox genes is associated with normal hematopoiesis,
whereas inappropriate maintenance of Hox gene expression, particularly Hoxa7 and 
Hoxa9, is a feature of leukemias harboring mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL)
mutations. To understand the pathogenic roles of Hox genes in MLL leukemias, we
assessed the impact of Hoxa7 or Hoxa9 nullizygosity on hematopoietic progenitor
compartments and their susceptibility to MLL-induced leukemias. Selective
reductions in the absolute numbers of committed progenitors, but not of
hematopoietic stem cells, distinguished Hoxa7- and Hoxa9-deficient mice.
Megakaryocytic/erythroid progenitor (MEP) reductions in Hoxa7(-/-) mice
correlated with reticulocytosis and thrombocytopenia without anemia. Conversely, 
Hoxa9(-/-) mice displayed marked lymphopenia and substantial reductions of common
lymphoid progenitors (CLPs) and lymphoid precursors, in addition to significant
reductions of common myeloid progenitors (CMPs) and granulocyte/monocyte
progenitors (GMPs). In retroviral transduction/transplantation assays, Hoxa7- and
Hoxa9-deficient progenitors remained susceptible to transformation by MLL-GAS7,
which activates MLL through a dimerization-dependent mechanism. However,
Hoxa7(-/-) or Hoxa9(-/-) progenitors were less efficient in generating
transformed blast colony-forming units (CFUs) in vitro and induced leukemias with
longer disease latencies, reduced penetrance, and less mature phenotypes. Thus,
Hoxa7 and Hoxa9 contribute to hematopoietic progenitor homeostasis but are not
necessary for MLL-GAS7-mediated leukemogenesis, yet they appear to affect disease
latency, penetrance, and phenotypes consistent with their critical roles as
downstream targets of MLL fusion proteins.

PMID: 15070702  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2003;17(6):346-56.

Axial skeletal and Hox expression domain alterations induced by retinoic acid,
valproic acid, and bromoxynil during murine development.

Kawanishi CY(1), Hartig P, Bobseine KL, Schmid J, Cardon M, Massenburg G,
Chernoff N.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Toxicology Division, NHEERL (MD-67), U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, NC 27711, USA.

Retinoic acid (RA) alters the developmental fate of the axial skeletal anlagen.
"Anteriorizations" or "posteriorizations," the assumption of characteristics of
embryonic areas normally anterior or posterior to the affected tissues, are
correlated with altered embryonal expression domains of Hox genes after in utero 
RA treatment. These "homeotic" changes have been hypothesized to result from
alterations of a "Hox cod" which imparts positional identity in the axial
skeleton. To investigate whether such developmental alterations were specific to 
RA, or were a more general response to xenobiotic exposure, CD-1 pregnant mice
were exposed to RA, valproic acid (VA), or bromoxynil (Br) during organogenesis. 
Additionally, the expression domains of two Hox genes, Hoxa7 and Hoxa10, were
examined in gestation day (GD) 12.5 embryos obtained from control, RA, VA, or Br,
treated gravid dams exposed on GD 6, 7, or 8. The anterior expression boundary of
Hoxa7 is at the level of the C7/T1 vertebrae and that of Hoxa10 is at L6/S1.
Compound-induced changes in the incidence of skeletal variants were observed.
These included supernumerary cervical ribs (CSNR) lateral to C7, 8
vertebrosternal ribs, supernumerary lumbar ribs (LSNR) lateral to L1, extra
presacral vertebrae, and the induction of vertebral and/or rib malformations. RA 
and VA administration on GD 6 caused posteriorization in the cervico-thoracic
region (CSNR) while GD 8 exposure to any of the three compounds resulted in
anteriorizations in the thoraco-lumbar area (LSNR and an increase in the number
of presacral vertebrae). These effects occurred across regions of the axial
skeleton. Analysis of gene expression demonstrated changes in the anterior
boundaries of Hoxa7 expression domains in embryos treated on GD 6 and 8 with RA. 
VA and Br did not induce any statistically significant alterations in Hoxa7 and
none of the compounds caused alterations in Hoxa10 expression domains. The
studies indicate that RA GD 6 treatment-induced Hoxa7 shifts were rostral
(posteriorization) while the RA-induced GD 8 anterior expression boundary shift
was caudal (anteriorization), correlating with the axial skeletal changes noted. 
These data suggest that xenobiotic compounds such as VA and Br may induce similar
axial skeletal changes by affecting different components of the developmental
processes involved in the patterning of the axial skeleton.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biochem Mol Toxicol 17:346-356, 2003;
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI
10.1002/jbt.10098

PMID: 14708090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. J Leukoc Biol. 2004 Apr;75(4):680-8. Epub 2004 Jan 2.

Down-regulation of Hox A7 is required for cell adhesion and migration on
fibronectin during early HL-60 monocytic differentiation.

Leroy P(1), Berto F, Bourget I, Rossi B.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U364, Faculty of Medicine, Nice, France. pleroy@itsa.ucsf.edu

Hox genes, which are key regulators of cell fate and pattern formation during
embryogenesis, are also important regulators of hematopoiesis, and different
combinations of Hox gene products are involved in lineage commitment or
maturation. However, their molecular and cellular modes of action are not yet
completely understood. Recent studies have indicated that Hox genes are involved 
in the regulation of cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions and cell
migration. Here, we report that Hox A7, a gene frequently overexpressed in acute 
myeloid leukemia, is down-regulated during HL-60 monocytic differentiation. Using
a model in which HL-60 cells are induced to differentiate toward the monocytic
lineage with bone marrow stromal-like cells, we demonstrate that Hox A7-sustained
expression disturbs the regulation of cell adhesive and migratory capacities on
fibronectin during early differentiation. We show that this is accompanied by a
partial blockage of the transcriptional induction of proline-rich tyrosine kinase
2, a gene coding for a focal adhesion kinase active in monocytes, and of tissue
transglutaminase, a gene coding for a fibronectin coreceptor in monocytes. This
is the first report that demonstrates the involvement of a Hox gene in the
regulation of adhesion and migration of hematopoietic cells and that links it to 
the deregulation of genes involved in cell-ECM interactions and downstream
signaling pathways.

PMID: 14704364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(2):617-28.

Hoxa9 and Meis1 are key targets for MLL-ENL-mediated cellular immortalization.

Zeisig BB(1), Milne T, García-Cuéllar MP, Schreiner S, Martin ME, Fuchs U,
Borkhardt A, Chanda SK, Walker J, Soden R, Hess JL, Slany RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University Erlangen, Staudtstrasse 5, 91058 Erlangen, 
Germany.

MLL fusion proteins are oncogenic transcription factors that are associated with 
aggressive lymphoid and myeloid leukemias. We constructed an inducible MLL
fusion, MLL-ENL-ERtm, that rendered the transcriptional and transforming
properties of MLL-ENL strictly dependent on the presence of 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen. 
MLL-ENL-ERtm-immortalized hematopoietic cells required 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen for
continuous growth and differentiated terminally upon tamoxifen withdrawal.
Microarray analysis performed on these conditionally transformed cells revealed
Hoxa9 and Hoxa7 as well as the Hox coregulators Meis1 and Pbx3 among the targets 
upregulated by MLL-ENL-ERtm. Overexpression of the Hox repressor Bmi-1 inhibited 
the growth-transforming activity of MLL-ENL. Moreover, the enforced expression of
Hoxa9 in combination with Meis1 was sufficient to substitute for MLL-ENL-ERtm
function and to maintain a state of continuous proliferation and differentiation 
arrest. These results suggest that MLL fusion proteins impose a reversible block 
on myeloid differentiation through aberrant activation of a limited set of
homeobox genes and Hox coregulators that are consistently expressed in
MLL-associated leukemias.

PMCID: PMC343796
PMID: 14701735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Dev Biol. 2003 Dec 1;264(1):77-90.

In vivo mutagenesis of the Hoxb8 hexapeptide domain leads to dominant homeotic
transformations that mimic the loss-of-function mutations in genes of the Hoxb
cluster.

Medina-Martínez O(1), Ramírez-Solis R.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Extracellular Matrix, Institute of Biosciences and Technology,
Texas A&M University, Houston, TX 77030, USA.olgamm@bcm.tmc.edu

Hox proteins are transcription factors that control developmental pathways along 
the anteroposterior axis of vertebrates. On their own, Hox proteins bind DNA
weakly, but they gain specificity and affinity by interaction with members of the
PBC subfamily of homeobox proteins. In vitro studies indicate that most of these 
interactions are mediated by the conserved hexapeptide motif of the Hox proteins.
To study the significance of these interactions in vivo, we have generated mice
that carry mutations in the Hoxb8 hexapeptide motif. Analysis of skeletal
features of these mice reveals the presence of a dominant phenotype consisting of
homeotic transformations, similar to those observed in mice with a
loss-of-function of Hox genes, such as Hoxa7, Hoxb7, and Hoxb9. Genetic tests
demonstrate that the mutations in the Hoxb8 hexapeptide motif are affecting the
function of other genes located in the Hoxb cluster. The expression pattern of
these genes is not affected; rather it appears that the mutant Hoxb8 protein
interferes with the function of other Hox genes by binding to their targets. Our 
findings suggest that the homeotic transformations result from altered DNA
binding specificity of the mutant Hoxb8 protein, implicating the cooperative
binding between Hoxb8 hexapeptide motif and cofactors as a critical element in
the fine-tuning of Hoxb8 protein target specificity. This is the first time the
function of the hexapeptide domain has been evaluated in vivo in mouse
development.

PMID: 14623233  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Blood. 2004 Mar 1;103(5):1823-8. Epub 2003 Nov 13.

Hoxa9 influences the phenotype but not the incidence of Mll-AF9 fusion gene
leukemia.

Kumar AR(1), Hudson WA, Chen W, Nishiuchi R, Yao Q, Kersey JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA.

Identification of the targets of mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion genes will
assist in understanding the biology of MLL fusion gene leukemias and in
development of better therapies. Numerous studies have implicated HOXA9 as one of
the possible targets of MLL fusion proteins. To determine if HOXA9 was required
for leukemia development by MLL fusion genes, we compared the effects of the
Mll-AF9 knock-in mutation in mice in the presence or absence of Hoxa9. Both
groups of mice showed myeloid expansion at 8 weeks and then developed myeloid
leukemia with a similar incidence and time course. The leukemia in the mice
lacking Hoxa9 generally displayed a more immature myeloid phenotype than that in 
the mice that were wild-type for Hoxa9. Gene expression profiling revealed that
expression of Mll-AF9 led to overexpression of Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and
Hoxa10. Thus, genes of the Hox-a cluster are important in defining the phenotype 
but not the incidence of Mll-AF9 leukemia. These results demonstrate that the
Mll-AF9 fusion gene disrupts the expression of several Hox genes, none of which
as a single gene is likely to be necessary for development of leukemia. Instead, 
we propose that the "Hox code" minimally defined by the Hoxa5-a9 cluster is
central to MLL leukemogenesis.

PMID: 14615372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Leukemia. 2003 Dec;17(12):2454-9.

B-cell development in the presence of the MLL/AF4 oncoprotein proceeds in the
absence of HOX A7 and HOX A9 expression.

Bertrand FE(1), Spengeman JD, Shah N, LeBien TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine at East
Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27858, USA.

Infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is frequently characterized by the
t(4;11)(q21;q23) cytogenetic abnormality encoding the MLL/AF4 oncogene, increased
HOX gene expression and a pro-B/monocytoid phenotype. We have previously
established a novel MLL/AF4-positive cell line, B-lineage 3 (BLIN-3), which
retains several features of normal B-lineage development (functional Ig gene
rearrangement and apoptotic sensitivity to stromal cell withdrawal) not generally
observed in infant ALL. We now use microarray analysis to identify patterns of
gene expression in BLIN-3 that may modulate MLL/AF4 oncogenesis and contribute to
the retention of normal B-lineage developmental characteristics. Comparison of
6815 expressed genes in BLIN-3 with published microarray data on leukemic blasts 
from t(4;11) patients indicated that BLIN-3 was unique in lacking the expression 
of certain HOX-A cluster genes. These results were validated by RT-PCR showing no
expression of HOX A7 or HOX A9 in BLIN-3. A HOX C8 promoter reporter was active
in BLIN-3, indicating that lack of HOX gene expression in BLIN-3 was not due to a
nonfunctional MLL/AF4. Our results suggest that B-lineage development can proceed
in t(4;11) leukemic blasts in the absence of HOX-A gene expression.

PMID: 14562113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Cancer Cell. 2003 Sep;4(3):197-207.

Dimerization of MLL fusion proteins immortalizes hematopoietic cells.

Martin ME(1), Milne TA, Bloyer S, Galoian K, Shen W, Gibbs D, Brock HW, Slany R, 
Hess JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania
School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.

MLL fusion proteins are leukemogenic, but their mechanism is unclear. Induced
dimerization of a truncated MLL immortalizes bone marrow and imposes a reversible
block on myeloid differentiation associated with upregulation of Hox a7, a9, and 
Meis1. Both dimerized MLL and exon-duplicated MLL are potent transcriptional
activators, suggesting a link between dimerization and partial tandem duplication
of DNA binding domains of MLL. Dimerized MLL binds with higher affinity than
undimerized MLL to a CpG island within the Hox a9 locus. However, MLL-AF9 is not 
dimerized in vivo. The data support a model in which either MLL dimerization/exon
duplication or fusion to a transcriptional activator results in Hox gene
upregulation and ultimately transformation.

PMID: 14522254  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Genes Dev. 2003 Sep 15;17(18):2298-307. Epub 2003 Sep 2.

Transformation of myeloid progenitors by MLL oncoproteins is dependent on Hoxa7
and Hoxa9.

Ayton PM(1), Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305, USA.

Transcriptional deregulation through the production of dominant-acting chimeric
transcription factors derived from chromosomal translocations is a common theme
in the pathogenesis of acute leukemias; however, the essential target genes for
acute leukemogenesis are unknown. We demonstrate here that primary myeloid
progenitors immortalized by various MLL oncoproteins exhibit a characteristic
Hoxa gene cluster expression profile, which reflects that preferentially
expressed in the myeloid clonogenic progenitor fraction of normal bone marrow.
Continued maintenance of this MLL-dependent Hoxa gene expression profile is
associated with conditional MLL-associated myeloid immortalization. Moreover,
Hoxa7 and Hoxa9 were specifically required for efficient in vitro myeloid
immortalization by an MLL fusion protein but not other leukemogenic fusion
proteins. Finally, in a bone marrow transduction/transplantation model, Hoxa9 is 
essential for MLL-dependent leukemogenesis in vivo, a primary requirement
detected at the earliest stages of disease initiation. Thus, a genetic reliance
on Hoxa7 and Hoxa9 in MLL-mediated transformation demonstrates a gain-of-function
mechanism for MLL oncoproteins as upstream constitutive activators that promote
myeloid transformation via a Hox-dependent mechanism.

PMCID: PMC196466
PMID: 12952893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Apr;23(8):2942-52.

Novel SWI/SNF chromatin-remodeling complexes contain a mixed-lineage leukemia
chromosomal translocation partner.

Nie Z(1), Yan Z, Chen EH, Sechi S, Ling C, Zhou S, Xue Y, Yang D, Murray D,
Kanakubo E, Cleary ML, Wang W.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics, National Institute on Aging, National Institutes of
Health, Baltimore, Maryland 21224, USA.

The SWI/SNF family of chromatin-remodeling complexes has been discovered in many 
species and has been shown to regulate gene expression by assisting
transcriptional machinery to gain access to their sites in chromatin. Several
complexes of this family have been reported for humans. In this study, two
additional complexes are described that belong to the same SWI/SNF family. These 
new complexes contain as many as eight subunits identical to those found in other
SWI/SNF complexes, and they possess a similar ATP-dependent nucleosome disruption
activity. But unlike known SWI/SNFs, the new complexes are low in abundance and
contain an extra subunit conserved between human and yeast SWI/SNF complexes.
This subunit, ENL, is a homolog of the yeast SWI/SNF subunit, ANC1/TFG3.
Moreover, ENL is a fusion partner for the gene product of MLL that is a common
target for chromosomal translocations in human acute leukemia. The resultant
MLL-ENL fusion protein associates and cooperates with SWI/SNF complexes to
activate transcription of the promoter of HoxA7, a downstream target essential
for oncogenic activity of MLL-ENL. Our data suggest that human SWI/SNF complexes 
show considerable heterogeneity, and one or more may be involved in the etiology 
of leukemia by cooperating with MLL fusion proteins.

PMCID: PMC152562
PMID: 12665591  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Dev Biol. 2003 Apr 1;256(1):89-99.

An inducible system for the study of FGF signalling in early amphibian
development.

Pownall ME(1), Welm BE, Freeman KW, Spencer DM, Rosen JM, Isaacs HV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, PO Box 373, University of York, YO10 5YW, York, United 
Kingdom.

The use of a novel inducible FGF signalling system in the frog Xenopus laevis is 
reported. We show that the lipophilic, synthetic, dimerizing agent AP20187 is
able to rapidly activate signalling through an ectopically expressed mutant form 
of FGFR1 (iFGFR1) in Xenopus embryos. iFGFR1 lacks an extracellular ligand
binding domain and contains an AP20187 binding domain fused to the intracellular 
domain of mouse FGFR1. Induction of signalling by AP20187 is possible until at
least early neurula stages, and we demonstrate that ectopically expressed iFGFR1 
protein persists until late neurula stages. We show that activation of signalling
through iFGFR1 can mimic a number of previously reported FGF activities,
including mesoderm induction, repression of anterior development, and neural
posteriorization. We show that competence to morphological posteriorization of
the anteroposterior axis by FGF signalling only extends until about stage 10.5.
We demonstrate that the competence of neural tissue to express the posterior
markers Hoxa7 and Xcad3, in response to FGF signalling, is lost by the end of
gastrula stages. We also show that activation of FGF signalling stimulates
morphogenetic movements in neural tissue until at least the end of the gastrula
stage.

PMID: 12654294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Oncogene. 2002 Oct 17;21(47):7247-55.

Large-scale identification of novel potential disease loci in mouse leukemia
applying an improved strategy for cloning common virus integration sites.

Joosten M(1), Vankan-Berkhoudt Y, Tas M, Lunghi M, Jenniskens Y, Parganas E, Valk
PJ, Löwenberg B, van den Akker E, Delwel R.

Author information: 
(1)The Institute of Hematology, Erasmus University Rotterdam, Dr. Molewaterplein 
50, 3015GE Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The identification of common virus integration sites (cVIS) in retrovirally
induced tumors in mice provides a powerful strategy to isolate novel transforming
genes. Applying virus LTR-specific inverse-PCR and RT-PCR combined with automated
sequencing on CasBr-M Murine Leukemia Virus (MuLV) induced myeloid leukemias, 126
virus integration sites were cloned. Using locus- and LTR-specific primers, a
nested-PCR/Southern-blotting procedure was developed on genomic DNA from a large 
panel of MuLV-induced leukemias, to analyse whether a particular virus insertion 
represented a cVIS. In fact 39 out of 41 integrations analysed this way appeared 
to represent a common virus integration. We recognized six previously cloned
cVISs, i.e. Evi1, Hoxa7, c-Myb, Cb2/Evi11, Evi12, and His1 and 33 novel common
insertions, designated Cas-Br Virus Integration Site (Casvis). Among this group
we found integrations in or near genes encoding nuclear proteins, e.g. Dnmt-2,
Nm23-M2, Ctbp1 or Erg, within receptor genes, e.g. Cb2 or mrc1, novel putative
signaling or transporter genes, the ringfinger-protein gene Mid1 and a panel of
genes encoding novel proteins with unknown function. The finding that 39 out of
41 integrations analysed represented a cVIS, suggests that the majority of the
other virus insertions that were not yet analysed by the PCR/Southern-blotting
method are located in a cVIS as well and may therefore also harbor novel disease 
genes.

PMID: 12370816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Development. 2002 Aug;129(16):3957-64.

Ectopic expression of Gcm1 induces congenital spinal cord abnormalities.

Nait-Oumesmar B(1), Stecca B, Fatterpekar G, Naidich T, Corbin J, Lazzarini RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular, Cellular and Developmental Biology and. Department of
Radiology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York,
NY 10029, USA.

Brief ectopic expression of Gcm1 in mouse embryonic tail bud profoundly affects
the development of the nervous system. All mice from 5 independently derived
transgenic lines exhibited either one or both of two types of congenital spinal
cord pathologies: failure of the neural tube to close (spina bifida) and multiple
neural tubes (diastematomyelia). Because the transgene is expressed only in a
restricted caudal region and only for a brief interval (E8.5 to E13.5), there was
no evidence of embryonic lethality. The dysraphisms develop during the period and
within the zone of transgene expression. We present evidence that these
dysraphisms result from an inhibition of neuropore closure and a stimulation of
secondary neurulation. After transgene expression ceases, the spinal dysraphisms 
are progressively resolved and the neonatal animals, while showing signs of
scarring and tissue resorption, have a closed vertebral column. The multiple
spinal cords remain but are enclosed in a single spinal column as in the human
diastematomyelia. The animals live a normal life time, are fertile and do not
exhibit any obvious weakness or motor disabilities.

PMID: 12135932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Oncogene. 2002 Jun 20;21(27):4247-56.

Nup98-HoxA9 immortalizes myeloid progenitors, enforces expression of Hoxa9, Hoxa7
and Meis1, and alters cytokine-specific responses in a manner similar to that
induced by retroviral co-expression of Hoxa9 and Meis1.

Calvo KR(1), Sykes DB, Pasillas MP, Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)University of California School of Medicine, Department of Pathology 9500
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California, CA 92093-0612, USA.

The association between acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) and the aberrant expression
of Hoxa9 is evidenced by (1) proviral activation of Hoxa9 and Meis1 in BXH-2
murine AML, (2) formation of the chimeric Nup98-HoxA9 transactivator protein as a
consequence of the t(7;11) translocation in human AML, and (3) the strong
expression of HoxA9 and Meis1 in human AML. In mouse models, enforced retroviral 
expression of Hoxa9 alone in marrow is not sufficient to cause rapid AML, while
co-expression of Meis1 and Hoxa9 induces rapid AML. In contrast, retroviral
expression of Nup98-HoxA9 is sufficient to cause rapid AML in the absence of
enforced Meis1 expression. Previously, we demonstrated that Hoxa9 could block the
differentiation of murine marrow progenitors cultured in granulocyte-macrophage
colony-simulating factor (GM-CSF). These progenitors lacked Meis1 expression,
could not proliferate in stem cell factor (SCF), but could differentiate into
neutrophils when switched into granulocyte colony-simulating factor (G-CSF).
Ectopic expression of Meis1 in these Hoxa9 cells suppressed their G-CSF-induced
differentiation, permitted proliferation in SCF, and therein offered a potential 
explanation of cooperative function. Because Meis1 binds N-terminal Hoxa9
sequences that are replaced by Nup98, we hypothesized that Nup98-HoxA9 might
consolidate the biochemical functions of both Hoxa9 and Meis1 on target gene
promoters and might evoke their same lymphokine-responsive profile in
immortalized progenitors. Here we report that Nup98-HoxA9, indeed mimicks Hoxa9
plus Meis1 coexpression - it immortalizes myeloid progenitors, prevents
differentiation in response to GM-CSF, IL-3, G-CSF, and permits proliferation in 
SCF. Unexpectedly, however, Nup98-Hoxa9 also enforced strong transcription of the
cellular Hoxa9, Hoxa7 and Meis1 genes at levels similar to those found in mouse
AML's generated by proviral activation of Hoxa9 and Meis1. Using Hoxa9(-/-)
marrow, we demonstrate that expression of Hoxa9 is not required for myeloid
immortalization by Nup98-HoxA9. Rapid leukaemogenesis by Nup98-HoxA9 may
therefore result from both the intrinsic functions of Nup98-HoxA9, as well as of 
those of coexpressed HOX and MEIS1 genes.

PMID: 12082612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Leukemia. 2002 Feb;16(2):186-95.

Quantitative HOX expression in chromosomally defined subsets of acute myelogenous
leukemia.

Drabkin HA(1), Parsy C, Ferguson K, Guilhot F, Lacotte L, Roy L, Zeng C, Baron A,
Hunger SP, Varella-Garcia M, Gemmill R, Brizard F, Brizard A, Roche J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado Health Sciences and
Cancer Centers, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

We used a degenerate RT-PCR screen and subsequent real-time quantitative RT-PCR
assays to examine the expression of HOX and TALE-family genes in 34 cases of
chromosomally defined AML for which outcome data were available. AMLs with
favorable cytogenetic features were associated with low overall HOX gene
expression whereas poor prognostic cases had high levels. Characteristically,
multiple HOXA family members including HOXA3-HOXA10 were jointly overexpressed in
conjunction with HOXB3, HOXB6, MEIS1 and PBX3. Higher levels of expression were
also observed in the FAB subtype, AML-M1. Spearmann correlation coefficients
indicated that the expression levels for many of these genes were highly
inter-related. While we did not detect any significant correlations between HOX
expression and complete response rates or age in this limited set of patients,
there was a significant correlation between event-free survival and HOXA7 with a 
trend toward significance for HoxA9, HoxA4 and HoxA5. While patients with
elevated HOX expression did worse, there were notable exceptions. Thus, although 
HOX overexpression and clinical resistance to chemotherapy often coincide, they
are not inextricably linked. Our results indicate that quantitative HOX analysis 
has the potential to add new information to the management of patients with AML, 
especially where characteristic chromosomal alterations are lacking.

PMID: 11840284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Dec 18;98(26):15209-14. Epub 2001 Dec 11.

Aberrant expression of homeobox gene HOXA7 is associated with müllerian-like
differentiation of epithelial ovarian tumors and the generation of a specific
autologous antibody response.

Naora H(1), Montz FJ, Chai CY, Roden RB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA. hnaora@jhmi.edu

Autologous serum antibodies to molecules that are aberrantly expressed in tumors 
represent potential biomarkers for early diagnosis of cancer. In this study, we
identified the homeobox gene HOXA7 as encoding an antigen in epithelial tumors of
the ovary. These tumors are thought to arise from the simple epithelium lining
the ovarian surface, but they often resemble the specialized epithelia derived
from the müllerian ducts. Expression of HOXA7 was detected in ovarian tumors
exhibiting müllerian-like features and correlated with the generation of
anti-HOXA7 antibodies by patients. In contrast, it was observed that healthy
women lack anti-HOXA7 antibodies (P < 0.0001) and that HOXA7 expression is absent
from normal ovarian surface epithelium. Interestingly, HOXA7 expression was
detected in the müllerian-like epithelium lining inclusion cysts in normal
ovaries and in the müllerian duct-derived epithelium of normal fallopian tubes.
Furthermore, ectopic expression of HOXA7 enhanced the epithelial phenotype of
immortalized ovarian surface epithelial cells, as indicated by the appearance of 
cobblestone morphology, induction of E-cadherin expression, and down-regulation
of vimentin. These findings associate aberrant HOXA7 expression with the
müllerian-like differentiation of epithelial ovarian tumors and suggest
diagnostic utility of serum antibodies to HOXA7.

PMCID: PMC65008
PMID: 11742062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Leukemia. 2001 Nov;15(11):1743-9.

Targeted down-regulation of MLL-AF9 with antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotide
reduces the expression of the HOXA7 and -A10 genes and induces apoptosis in a
human leukemia cell line, THP-1.

Kawagoe H(1), Kawagoe R, Sano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University School of Medicine, Japan.

The MLL gene is frequently rearranged in leukemias, and MLL chimeric proteins
generated by chromosomal translocations play crucial roles in leukemogenesis.
Targets of murine Mll include HOX proteins that regulate body pattern formation
and hematopoiesis. However, it is not known whether or not the MLL chimeric
proteins regulate the HOX gene expression in human leukemia. To address this
issue, THP-1 cells, a human leukemia cell line expressing MLL-AF9, were treated
with antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotide (ODN) complementary to the coding
sequence of the MLL-AF9 junction. Down-regulation of the MLL-AF9 transcript was
accompanied by the reduced expression of the HOXA7 and -A10 genes, but not of the
HOXA2, -A4, -A5, and -A9 genes. The number of viable cells cultured with 20
microM antisense ODN for 5 days was 10-fold lower than that of the sense
ODN-treated control. And the number of the annexin V-/propidium iodide- apoptotic
cells in the antisense ODN-treated cells after 3 days of culture was two-fold
higher than that in the control. Staining of the antisense ODN-treated cells with
Hoechst 33258 showed the morphology characteristic to apoptosis. These results
indicate that MLL-AF9 regulates the expression of the selected HOX genes as well 
as prevents the leukemic cells from apoptosis.

PMID: 11681416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 31;276(35):32844-53. Epub 2001 Jul 2.

Human homeobox HOXA7 regulates keratinocyte transglutaminase type 1 and inhibits 
differentiation.

La Celle PT(1), Polakowska RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA. peter_lacelle@urmc.rochester.edu

Keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation result from expression of specific
groups of genes regulated by unique combinations of transcription factors. To
better understand these regulatory processes, we studied HOXA7 expression and its
regulation of differentiation-specific keratinocyte genes. We isolated the
homeobox transcription factor HOXA7 from keratinocytes through binding to a
differentiation-dependent viral enhancer and analyzed its effect on endogenous
differentiation-dependent genes, primarily transglutaminase 1. HOXA7
overexpression repressed transglutaminase 1-reporter activity. HOXA7 message
markedly decreased, and transglutaminase RNA increased, upon phorbol
ester-induced differentiation, in a protein kinase C-dependent manner.
Overexpression of HOXA7 attenuated the transglutaminase 1 induction by phorbol
ester, demonstrating that HOXA7 expression is inversely related to keratinocyte
differentiation, and to transglutaminase 1 expression. Antisense HOXA7 expression
activated transglutaminase 1, involucrin, and keratin 10 message and protein
levels, demonstrating that endogenous HOXA7 down-regulates multiple
differentiation-specific keratinocyte genes. In keeping with these observations, 
epidermal growth factor receptor activation stimulated HOXA7 expression. HOX
genes function in groups, and we found that HOXA5 and HOXB7 were also
down-regulated by phorbol ester. These results provide the first example of
protein kinase C-mediated homeobox gene regulation in keratinocytes, and new
evidence that HOXA7, potentially in conjunction with HOXA5 and HOXAB7, silences
differentiation-specific genes during keratinocyte proliferation, that are then
released from inhibition in response to differentiation signals.

PMID: 11435435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 15;20(7):874-8.

Upregulation of Meis1 and HoxA9 in acute lymphocytic leukemias with the t(4 : 11)
abnormality.

Rozovskaia T(1), Feinstein E, Mor O, Foa R, Blechman J, Nakamura T, Croce CM,
Cimino G, Canaani E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Rearrangements of the human ALL-1 gene are frequently encountered in acute
lymphocytic leukemias (ALL) and acute myeloid leukemias (AML). These
rearrangements are mostly due to chromosome translocations and result in
production of chimeric proteins composed of the N-terminal fragment of ALL-1 and 
the C-terminal segments of the partner proteins. The most common chromosome
translocation involving ALL-1 is the t(4 : 11) associated with ALL. ALL-1 is the 
human homologue of Drosophila trithorax and directly activates transcription of
multiple Hox genes. A preliminary DNA microarray screen indicated that the Meis1,
HoxA9 and AC133 genes were overexpressed in ALLs with t(4 : 11), compared to ALLs
with very similar phenotype but without the chromosomal abnormality. These genes,
as well as additional five Hox genes, were subjected to comprehensive
semi-quantitative or quantitative RT-PCR analysis in 57 primary ALL and AML
tumors. Meis1 and HoxA9 were found expressed in 13/14 of ALLs with the t(4 : 11) 
and in 8/8 of AMLs with ALL-1 rearrangements. The two genes were not consistently
transcribed in other types of ALL. AC133 was transcribed in 13/14 of ALLs with
t(4 : 11), but in only 4/8 of AMLs with ALL-1 rearrangements. HoxA10 was
expressed in most leukemias with ALL-1 alterations, but was also transcribed in
PrePreB CD10(-) ALLs lacking the t(4 : 11). Expression of HoxA5, HoxA7, HoxC8 and
HoxC10 did not correlate with ALL-1 rearrangements. Coexpression of Meis1 and
HoxA9, overexpression of HoxA10, and overexpression or fusion of HoxA9 were
previously implicated in certain acute myeloid leukemias in mice and humans. The 
present work suggests that upregulation of Meis1, HoxA9, and possibly HoxA10
might also play a role in pathogenesis of acute lymphocytic and acute myeloid
leukemias associated with ALL-1 fusions.

PMID: 11314021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Blood. 2000 Dec 1;96(12):3887-93.

A carboxy-terminal domain of ELL is required and sufficient for immortalization
of myeloid progenitors by MLL-ELL.

DiMartino JF(1), Miller T, Ayton PM, Landewe T, Hess JL, Cleary ML, Shilatifard
A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA. jorged@leland.stanford.edu

The t(11;19)(q23;p13.1) chromosomal translocation in acute myeloid leukemias
fuses the gene encoding transcriptional elongation factor ELL to the MLL gene
with consequent expression of an MLL-ELL chimeric protein. To identify potential 
mechanisms of leukemogenesis by MLL-ELL, its transcriptional and oncogenic
properties were investigated. Fusion with MLL preserves the transcriptional
elongation activity of ELL but relocalizes it from a diffuse nuclear distribution
to the nuclear bodies characteristic of MLL. Using a serial replating assay, it
was demonstrated that the MLL-ELL chimeric protein is capable of immortalizing
clonogenic myeloid progenitors in vitro after its retroviral transduction into
primary murine hematopoietic cells. However, a structure-function analysis
indicates that the elongation domain is not essential for myeloid transformation 
because mutants lacking elongation activity retain a potent ability to
immortalize myeloid progenitors. Rather, the highly conserved carboxyl terminal
R4 domain is both a necessary and a sufficient contribution from ELL for the
immortalizing activity associated with MLL-ELL. The R4 domain demonstrates potent
transcriptional activation properties and is required for transactivation of a
HoxA7 promoter by MLL-ELL in a transient transcriptional assay. These data
indicate that neoplastic transformation by the MLL-ELL fusion protein is likely
to result from aberrant transcriptional activation of MLL target genes. Thus, in 
spite of the extensive diversity of MLL fusion partners, these data, in
conjunction with previous studies of MLL-ENL, suggest that conversion of MLL to a
constitutive transcriptional activator may be a general model for its oncogenic
conversion in myeloid leukemias. (Blood. 2000;96:3887-3893)

PMID: 11090074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Nov 7;97(23):12776-81.

Altered HOX and WNT7A expression in human lung cancer.

Calvo R(1), West J, Franklin W, Erickson P, Bemis L, Li E, Helfrich B, Bunn P,
Roche J, Brambilla E, Rosell R, Gemmill RM, Drabkin HA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, and Department of Pathology, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, 4200 East 9th Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

HOX genes encode transcription factors that control patterning and cell fates.
Alterations in HOX expression have been clearly implicated in leukemia, but their
role in most other malignant diseases remains unknown. By using degenerate
reverse transcription-PCR and subsequent real-time quantitative assays, we
examined HOX expression in lung cancer cell lines, direct tumor-control pairs,
and bronchial epithelial cultures. As in leukemia, genes of the HOX9 paralogous
group and HOXA10 were frequently overexpressed. For HOXB9, we confirmed that
elevated RNA was associated with protein overexpression. In some cases, marked
HOX overexpression was associated with elevated FGF10 and FGF17. During
development, the WNT pathway affects cell fate, polarity, and proliferation, and 
WNT7a has been implicated in the maintenance of HOX expression. In contrast to
normal lung and mortal short-term bronchial epithelial cultures, WNT7a was
frequently reduced or absent in lung cancers. In immortalized bronchial
epithelial cells, WNT7a was lost concomitantly with HOXA1, and a statistically
significant correlation between the expression of both genes was observed in lung
cancer cell lines. Furthermore, we identified a homozygous deletion of
beta-catenin in the mesothelioma, NCI-H28, associated with reduced WNT7a and the 
lowest overall cell line expression of HOXA1, HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA10, whereas
HOXB9 levels were unaffected. Of note, both WNT7a and beta-catenin are encoded on
chromosome 3p, which undergoes frequent loss of heterozygosity in these tumors.
Our results suggest that alterations in regulatory circuits involving HOX, WNT,
and possibly fibroblast growth factor pathways occur frequently in lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC18840
PMID: 11070089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Leuk Res. 2000 Oct;24(10):849-55.

MEIS1 and HOXA7 genes in human acute myeloid leukemia.

Afonja O(1), Smith JE Jr, Cheng DM, Goldenberg AS, Amorosi E, Shimamoto T,
Nakamura S, Ohyashiki K, Ohyashiki J, Toyama K, Takeshita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, New York University School of Medicine, 550 First
Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Co-activation of Meisl with Hoxa7 or Hoxa9 homeobox genes by retroviral gene
insertion has recently been reported to be leukemogenic in murine myeloid
leukemia. In this study we determined their expression in human leukemia. Most
human myeloid leukemia cell lines co-expressed MEIS1 with HOXA7 and HOXA9. Among 
patients with acute leukemia, 50% of AML patients expressed MEIS1, while the
majority of ALL patients were negative. A total of 89.5% of patients expressing
MEIS1 co-expressed HOXA7. In unadjusted models, poorer response to chemotherapy
was associated with expression of HOXA7 regardless of MEIS1 status and older
patients were more likely to express either gene.

PMID: 10996203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Mol Biotechnol. 2000 Jan;14(1):19-24.

Sequence analysis and tissue specific expression of human HOXA7.

Kim MH(1), Jin H, Seol EY, Yoo M, Park HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
mhkim1@yumc.yonsei.ac.kr

A 3071-bp fragment containing the human HOXA7 gene was sequenced. It contained
two exons, one intron, and two polyadenylation signals (AATAAA) at positions 1844
and 2923. The exon encoded 230 aa residues, while the hexapeptide, homeodomain,
and C-terminal acidic domains were detected. When the total sequences were
compared with those of murine Hoxa-7, the 5' untranslated region (UTR), exon I,
intron, exon II, and 3' UTR exhibited 99, 92, 65, 85, and 72% homology,
respectively. Through Northern analysis, about a 1.9-kb transcript was detected
in the fetal kidney. Minor transcripts of 1.5 and 1.1-kb were also detected in
the fetal liver as well as in the kidney. In the case of adult tissues, most of
the tissues tested (lung, liver, skeletal muscle, kidney, pancreas, and
placenta), except brain tissue, expressed a 5.3 kb transcript with various
intensities. Our results here suggested that not only Abd-B type Hox genes, but
the ones in paralogous groups I-VIII could generate multiple transcripts. The
characterization of these tissue-specific and stage-specific alternative
transcripts would help to understand the regulatory function of the HOXA7 gene
during development, and possibly the pathology of human disease caused by Hox
genes.

PMID: 10911612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Mol Hum Reprod. 2000 Aug;6(8):707-11.

Transcription of homeobox-containing genes detected in cDNA libraries derived
from human unfertilized oocytes and preimplantation embryos.

Adjaye J(1), Monk M.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine Unit, Molecular Embryology Unit, Institute of Child Health,
30 Guilford Street, London WC1N 1EH, UK.

Genes containing the evolutionarily conserved homeodomain sequence encode a
family of DNA-binding transcription factors whose functions are crucial for
embryonic development in vertebrates, invertebrates and plants. We describe the
detection and analysis of transcripts of homeobox-containing genes present in
cDNA libraries generated from human unfertilized oocytes, single cleavage stage
embryos (2-cell, 4-cell, 8-cell and blastocyst) and a 10-week old whole fetus.
Using degenerate primers derived from sequences within helix 1 and helix 3 of the
highly conserved region of the ANTENNAPEDIA:-class homeodomain, a 166 bp band was
detected in all the cDNA libraries tested. Subcloning of the oocyte-derived band 
revealed that it contained a heterogeneous group of 166 bp fragments. Sequence
analysis of 40 independent clones demonstrated the presence of HOXA7, HOXD8, and 
HOXD1 sequences, the ubiquitously expressed POU family member, OCT1, and HEX, a
homeotic gene expressed in haematopoietic cells.

PMID: 10908280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Somat Cell Mol Genet. 1998 Nov;24(6):371-4.

Sequence analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the gene encoding human HOXA-7.

Kim MH(1), Cho M, Park D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

We have isolated and characterized the immediate 5'-flanking region (886 bp) of
the gene encoding human HOXA-7. When the total sequence was compared with those
of mice, 93% of the 3' 518 bp (nt 370-886) sequences were identical, in which the
245 bases just preceding the AUG initiator codon (nt 614) was as highly conserved
as in the coding region (nt 614-886). Sequences further upstream (nt 1-370) by
comparison were highly diverged. In the 245 bp region, 8 stop and 3 initiation
(including the initiator) codons were located, and a 50-aa long presumptive
polypeptide was encoded. Nucleotide sequence analysis revealed three Sp1 and one 
AP2 binding sites, as well as one CAAT box. However, there was no consensus
sequence for a TATA box in the 5' flanking region. One RARE repeat, one krox20
and three Hox-PBC binding sites were detected. Since many of the factor
recognition sites were located in the immediate 5' flanking sequences of a
highly-conserved region, it might be speculated that a regulatory mechanism for
Hox gene expression is conserved throughout the evolution and one possible
mechanism could be at the post-translational level.

PMID: 10763416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Leukemia. 1999 Oct;13(10):1525-33.

The leukemogenic fusion of MLL with ENL creates a novel transcriptional
transactivator.

Schreiner SA(1), García-Cuéllar MP, Fey GH, Slany RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Erlangen, Staudtstrasse 5, 91058
Erlangen, Germany.

Translocations affecting the chromosomal locus 11q23 are hallmarks of infant
leukemias. These events disrupt the MLL gene (also ALL-1 or HRX) and fuse the MLL
amino terminus in frame with a variety of unrelated proteins. The ENL gene on
19p13.1 is a recurrent fusion partner of MLL. Whereas potential functions have
been suggested for isolated domains of either MLL or ENL no experimental data
exist for the biological properties of the complete chimeric MLL-ENL protein. We 
show here that the fusion of MLL with ENL creates a novel molecule that is a
potent general transcriptional transactivator in transient reporter gene assays. 
MLL-ENL strongly transactivated several unrelated promoters including the
promoter of Hoxa7 a potential target gene for the unaltered MLL protein. This
transactivation capability was cell type specific and it was critically dependent
on the contributions of the methyltransferase-homology (MT) region of MLL in
combination with the C-terminus of ENL. Squelching experiments and gel
retardation studies identified the ENL C-terminus as a binding partner for an
unknown factor and the MLL MT region as a unique general DNA binding motif. The
potential implications of these findings for the leukemogenesis by MLL-ENL are
discussed.

PMID: 10516753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. J Exp Zool. 1999 Apr 15;285(1):41-9.

Genomic organization of the Hoxa4-Hoxa10 region from Morone saxatilis:
implications for Hox gene evolution among vertebrates.

Snell EA(1), Scemama JL, Stellwag EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, East Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina
27858, USA.

The physical mapping of Hox gene clusters from a limited number of vertebrates
has shown an overall conservation in gene organization in which major
evolutionary changes appear to be primarily restricted to the deletion of one or 
more genes, with the exception of the amplification of additional clusters as
postulated from zebrafish. We have sequenced a 31 kb region of the HoxA cluster
from the teleost Morone saxatilis (striped bass), both to provide a detailed
physical map of this region and to better understand the nature of Hox cluster
evolution among vertebrate taxa. We identified five linked Hox genes: Hoxa4,
Hoxa5, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and Hoxa10, which are organized similarly to those of other 
vertebrates. Furthermore, we have documented the absence of the Hoxa6 and Hoxa8
genes within the 31 kb contig. Comparison of our results to those published for
other vertebrates suggests that the absence of Hoxa6 is a common characteristic
of teleosts, whereas the absence of Hoxa8 is common to vertebrates in general,
with the possible exception of zebrafish. Further comparisons between the HoxA
genes from Morone with those from the pufferfish, Fugu rubripes, revealed the
likely presence of a previously unreported Hoxa7 gene, or gene fragment, in the
Fugu genome, which suggests that the Hoxa7 gene, unlike Hoxa6 or Hoxa8, is
present in teleosts. In addition to these differences in vertebrate Hox cluster
structure, we also observed a marked reduction in the length of the Hoxa4--a10
region between vertebrate lineages representative of teleosts and mammals.
Comparative analysis of HoxA cluster organization among teleosts and mammals
suggests that cluster length reduction and lineage-specific gene loss events are 
hallmarks of Hox cluster evolution.

PMID: 10327649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Apr 21;257(3):738-45.

HOXC5 and HOXC8 expression are selectively turned on in human cervical cancer
cells compared to normal keratinocytes.

Alami Y(1), Castronovo V, Belotti D, Flagiello D, Clausse N.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Research Laboratory, University of Liege, Liege, Belgium.

A growing number of data have sustained the involvement of homeobox genes
expression deregulation in cancer. In this study, we have performed an exhaustive
survey of the expression of the 39 class I HOX genes expressed in normal and
malignant human cervix keratinocytes. Using RT-PCR, we observed that the vast
majority (34/39) of HOX genes are expressed in normal keratinocytes. Only HOXA2, 
HOXA7, HOXC5, HOXC8 and HOXD12 were found to be silent. Interestingly, this
pattern is conserved in the transformed keratinocytes (SiHa cells) except for the
appearance of HOXC5 and HOXC8 mRNA. The HOXC5 and HOXC8 expression was also
observed in two other transformed keratinocytes cell lines of independent
origins, Eil-8 and 18-11S3, and confirmed by in situ hybridization. Our data add 
weight to the body of evidence attributing to a specific adult tissue a
particular combination of expressed HOX genes and suggest that HOXC5 and/or HOXC8
could be involved in the process leading to the transformation of cervical
keratinocytes.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10208853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Oncogene. 1999 Jan 28;18(4):1125-30.

Establishment of an inducible expression system of chimeric MLL-LTG9 protein and 
inhibition of Hox a7, Hox b7 and Hox c9 expression by MLL-LTG9 in 32Dcl3 cells.

Joh T(1), Hosokawa Y, Suzuki R, Takahashi T, Seto M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chemotherapy, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute, Nagoya,
Japan.

The MLL (HRX/ALL-1 gene is frequently disrupted in infantile leukemias and
therapy-related leukemias and fused to various translocation partner genes. We
previously showed that chimeric MLL proteins localize in the nuclei in a fashion 
similar to that of MLL protein even if the partner gene encodes a cytoplasmic
protein and indicated the importance of the N-terminal portion of MLL common to
various MLL translocations. This time we established an inducible expression
system for chimeric MLL-LTG9 and truncated N-terminal MLL proteins (MLL-Zf(-)) in
32Dcl3 cells. By utilizing this system, we were able to show inhibition of Hox
a7, Hox b7 and Hox c9 genes' expression by induced MLL-LTG9 and MLL-Zf(-).
Up-regulation of Hox a7, Hox b7 and Hox c9 was observed when 32Dcl3 cells were
cultured with granulocyte colony stimulating factor (G-CSF) in place of
interleukin 3 and induction of MLL-LTG9 and MLL-Zf(-) was shown to suppress this 
upregulation. At the same time, expression of two mammalian Polycomb group genes,
M33 and mel-18, which both reportedly affect Hox genes' expression, was not
inhibited by MLL-LTG9 and MLL-Zf(-) induction. These results indicate that MLL
has an important effect on the expression of at least some Hox genes in
hematopoietic cells and suggest that inhibition of the proper expression of Hox
genes by chimeric MLL proteins may dysregulate hematopoietic cell differentiation
and proliferation, which then can lead to leukemogenesis.

PMID: 10023690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1998 Nov 8;1442(2-3):329-33.

Sequence characterisation and expression of homeobox HOX A7 in the
multi-potential erythroleukaemic cell line TF-1.

McIlhatton MA(1), Bremner P, McMullin MF, Maxwell AP, Winter PC, Lappin TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Institute of Clinical Science, The Queen's
University of Belfast, Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast BT12 6BA, UK.

Homeobox gene expression was examined in the erythroleukaemic cell line TF-1.
Expression of a number of HOX A, B and C genes, including HOX A7 was detected.
Expression of this gene has not previously been reported in erythroleukaemic cell
lines. A 2.1 kb full length cDNA of the HOX A7 gene was cloned. The predicted
amino acid sequence C-terminal to the homeodomain consists of an alanine-rich
region and a strongly negatively charged domain consisting entirely of aspartic
and glutamic acid residues.

PMID: 9804983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mech Dev. 1998 Sep;77(1):49-57.

Analysis of Hoxa7/Hoxb7 mutants suggests periodicity in the generation of the
different sets of vertebrae.

Chen F(1), Greer J, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Mice were generated with targeted disruptions in Hoxa7 and Hoxb7, respectively.
Mice carrying the Hoxa7 mutation are healthy. No abnormalities in the formation
of the skeleton or other tissues were found in these mutants. Twelve percent of
Hoxb7-/- mutants show first and second rib defects similar to those observed in
mice homozygous for a Hoxb9 mutation (Chen, F., Capecchi, M.R., 1997. Dev. Biol. 
181, 186-196). Hoxb7-/- mice are also fertile and were used to generate double
mutants with Hoxa7 to reveal potential interactions between these two paralogous 
genes. Mice homozygous for both mutations have first and second rib defects with 
higher penetrance and increased expressivity, indicating a functional role for
Hoxa7 in the patterning of the upper thoracic region. Although Hoxb6, Hoxa7,
Hoxb7, and Hoxb9 have distinctive anterior expression limits in axial mesoderm,
the disruptions of these genes all yield first and second rib defects. A
hypothesis is suggested to explain the observation that axial defects in these
and other mouse Hox mutants appear to concentrate along the axial column at zones
of transition between vertebral types.

Copyright 1998 Elsevier Science Ireland Ltd. All Rights Reserved.

PMID: 9784603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1998 Sep 1;95(18):10632-6.

MLL, a mammalian trithorax-group gene, functions as a transcriptional maintenance
factor in morphogenesis.

Yu BD(1), Hanson RD, Hess JL, Horning SE, Korsmeyer SJ.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Division of Molecular Oncology, Departments
of Medicine and Pathology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO 63110, USA.

Determinative events in vertebrate embryogenesis appear to require the continuous
expression of spatial regulators such as the clustered homeobox genes. The
mechanisms that govern long-term patterns of gene expression are not well
understood. In Drosophila, active and silent states of developmentally regulated 
loci are maintained by trithorax and Polycomb group. We have examined the
developmental role of a mammalian homolog of trx and putative oncogene, Mll.
Knockout mice reveal that Mll is required for maintenance of gene expression
early in embryogenesis. Downstream targets of Mll including Hoxa7 are activated
appropriately in the absence of Mll but require Mll for sustaining their
expression. The Mll-/- phenotype manifests later in development and is
characterized by branchial arch dysplasia and aberrant segmental boundaries of
spinal ganglia and somites. Thus, Mll represents an essential mechanism of
transcriptional maintenance in mammalian development, which functions in multiple
morphogenetic processes.

PMCID: PMC27946
PMID: 9724755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. DNA Cell Biol. 1998 Mar;17(3):293-9.

307-bp fragment in HOXA7 upstream sequence is sufficient for anterior boundary
formation.

Min W(1), Woo HJ, Lee CS, Lee KK, Yoon WK, Park HW, Kim MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

The HOX genes are expressed in a positionally and temporally restricted manner
involving anteroposterior axial pattern formation during early embryogenesis.
Previously, we studied the sequence and function of an upstream regulatory region
of the human HOXA7 gene. To identify a critical cis-acting element, a deletion
analysis was performed along the human control region (HCR) (about 1.1 kb), which
was sufficient for setting the anterior boundary of expression in transgenic
mice. We demonstrated that a 307-bp control region contains a cis-acting
element(s) specifying an anterior boundary as well as a dorsal-ventral
restriction in the neural tube at day 12.5 postconception (p.c.). The distinct
anterior limit of expression was noted at the level of C7/T1 in the neural tube
and spinal ganglia. In addition, our deletion experiments revealed that the HCR
consisted of several cis-acting elements which were individually capable of
driving regionally restricted expression patterns in the neural tube and limb
buds.

PMID: 9539109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. J Invest Dermatol. 1998 Feb;110(2):110-5.

HOX homeobox genes exhibit spatial and temporal changes in expression during
human skin development.

Stelnicki EJ(1), Kömüves LG, Kwong AO, Holmes D, Klein P, Rozenfeld S, Lawrence
HJ, Adzick NS, Harrison M, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, USA.

The spatial and temporal deployment of HOX homeobox genes along the spinal axis
and in limb buds during fetal development is a key program in embryonic pattern
formation. Although we have previously reported that several of the HOX homeobox 
genes are expressed during murine skin development, there is no information about
developmental expression of HOX genes in human skin. We have now used reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, in conjunction with a set of degenerate 
oligonucleotide primers, to identify a subset of HOX genes that are expressed
during human fetal skin development. In situ hybridization analyses demonstrated 
that there were temporal and spatial shifts in expression of these genes. Strong 
HOXA4 expression was detected in the basal cell layers of 10 wk fetal epidermis
and throughout the epidermis and dermis of 17 wk skin, whereas weak signal was
present in the granular layer of newborn and adult skin. The expression patterns 
of HOXA5 and HOXA7 were similar, but their expression was weaker. In situ
hybridization analysis also revealed strong HOXC4 and weaker HOXB7 expression
throughout fetal development, whereas HOXB4 was expressed at barely detectable
levels. Differential HOX gene expression was also observed in developing hair
follicles, and sebaceous and sweat glands. None of the HOX genes examined were
detected in the adult dermis.

PMID: 9457903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1997 Dec 23;94(26):14553-8.

Meis1 and pKnox1 bind DNA cooperatively with Pbx1 utilizing an interaction
surface disrupted in oncoprotein E2a-Pbx1.

Knoepfler PS(1), Calvo KR, Chen H, Antonarakis SE, Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California at San Diego School of
Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA. pknoepfler@ucsd.edu

E2a-Pbx1 is a chimeric transcription factor oncoprotein produced by the t(1;19)
translocation in human pre-B cell leukemia. Class I Hox proteins bind DNA
cooperatively with both Pbx proteins and oncoprotein E2a-Pbx1, suggesting that
leukemogenesis by E2a-Pbx1 and Hox proteins may alter transcription of cellular
genes regulated by Pbx-Hox motifs. Likewise, in murine myeloid leukemia,
transcriptional coactivation of Meis1 with HoxA7/A9 suggests that Meis1-HoxA7/9
heterodimers may evoke aberrant gene transcription. Here, we demonstrate that
both Meis1 and its relative, pKnox1, dimerize with Pbx1 on the same TGATTGAC
motif selected by dimers of Pbx proteins and unidentified partner(s) in nuclear
extracts, including those from t(1;19) pre-B cells. Outside their homeodomains,
Meis1 and pKnox1 were highly conserved only in two motifs required for
cooperativity with Pbx1. Like the unidentified endogenous partner(s), both Meis1 
and pKnox1 failed to dimerize significantly with E2a-Pbx1. The
Meis1/pKnox1-interaction domain in Pbx1 resided predominantly in a conserved
N-terminal Pbx domain deleted in E2a-Pbx1. Thus, the leukemic potential of
E2a-Pbx1 may require abrogation of its interaction with members of the Meis and
pKnox families of transcription factors, permitting selective targeting of genes 
regulated by Pbx-Hox complexes. In addition, because most motifs bound by
Pbx-Meis1/pKnox1 were not bound by Pbx1-Hox complexes, the leukemic potential of 
Meis1 in myeloid leukemias may involve shifting Pbx proteins from promoters
containing Pbx-Hox motifs to those containing Pbx-Meis motifs.

PMCID: PMC25052
PMID: 9405651  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Gene. 1996 Dec 5;182(1-2):1-6.

Sequence and functional analysis of an upstream regulatory region of human HOXA7 
gene.

Min W(1), Cho M, Jang SI, Chang HH, Lee CS, Jun MH, Kim MH.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Program, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and Biotechnology,
Taejon, Korea.

The Hox genes have been known to be involved in pattern formation during
vertebrate development through differential expression along the anteroposterior 
body axis. Human homologue of position-specific regulatory region of murine
Hoxa-7 was cloned from human genomic library. The restriction map of the 18-kb
insert was determined, of which a 3.9-kb region was sequenced. Homology plot
between the murine and the corresponding human sequence showed high sequence
conservation over 70% in several regions. The homologous region has been reduced 
to about 1.1 kb (HCR: human control region), which contained several putative
factor binding sites. The function of HCR was analyzed in transgenic mice and
turned out to be a position-specific regulatory element of human, setting the
precise anterior boundary of expression in transgenic embryos; at day 12.5
post-coitum a distinct anterior limit of expression was noted at the level of C5 
in neural tube and spinal ganglia in transgenic embryos. These results indicate
that the regulatory sequences as well as the molecular mechanism for Hox gene
expression are highly conserved among vertebrates.

PMID: 8982060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Development. 1996 Dec;122(12):3881-92.

eFGF, Xcad3 and Hox genes form a molecular pathway that establishes the
anteroposterior axis in Xenopus.

Pownall ME(1), Tucker AS, Slack JM, Isaacs HV.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Biology Programme, School of Biology and Biochemistry,
University of Bath, UK.

Classical embryological experiments suggest that a posterior signal is required
for patterning the developing anteroposterior axis. In this paper, we investigate
a potential role for FGF signalling in this process. During normal development,
embryonic fibroblast growth factor (eFGF) is expressed in the posterior of the
Xenopus embryo. We have previously shown that overexpression of eFGF from the
start of gastrulation results in a posteriorised phenotype of reduced head and
enlarged proctodaeum. We have now determined the molecular basis of this
phenotype and we propose a role for eFGF in normal anteroposterior patterning. In
this study, we show that the overexpression of eFGF causes the up-regulation of a
number of posteriorly expressed genes, and prominent among these are Xcad3, a
caudal homologue, and the Hox genes, in particular HoxA7. There is both an
increase of expression within the normal domains and an extension of expression
towards the anterior. Application of eFGF-loaded beads to specific regions of
gastrulae reveals that anterior truncations arise from an effect on the
developing dorsal axis. Similar anterior truncations are caused by the dorsal
overexpression of Xcad3 or HoxA7. This suggests that this aspect of the eFGF
overexpression phenotype is caused by the ectopic activation of posterior genes
in anterior regions. Further results using the dominant negative FGF receptor
show that the normal expression of posterior Hox genes is dependent on FGF
signalling and that this regulation is likely mediated by the activation of
Xcad3. The biological activity of eFGF, together with its expression in the
posterior of the embryo, make it a good candidate to fulfil the role of the
'transforming' activity proposed by Nieuwkoop in his 'activation and
transformation' model for neural patterning.

PMID: 9012508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Oncogene. 1996 Nov 21;13(10):2235-42.

Identification of a new family of Pbx-related homeobox genes.

Nakamura T(1), Jenkins NA, Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)ABL-Basic Research Program, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development
Center, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

The expression of Meis1 (a novel Pbx-related homeobox gene) and either Hoxa7 or
Hoxa9 are coactivated by retroviral integration in BXH2 murine myeloid leukemias 
(T Nakamura, DA Largaespada, JD Shaughnessy Jr, NA Jenkins and NG Copeland (1996)
Nature Genet. 12: 149-153). As Pbx proteins are Hox cofactors, which
cooperatively bind DNA with Hox proteins to modulate the otherwise similar DNA
bind specificities of Hox proteins, these results suggested that Meis1 may
function as a cofactor for Hoxa7 and Hoxa9 in the induction of murine myeloid
leukemias. By DNA cross-hybridization we have identified two Meis1-related genes,
Meis2 and Meis3. Sequence analysis revealed extensive amino acid similarity among
the three Meis proteins both within and outside of the homeodomain. Phylogenetic 
analysis showed that the Meis genes belong to a distinct family of Pbx-related
genes. Chromosome mapping studies indicated that Meis2 and Meis3 are unlinked to 
Meis1 and map to mouse chromosome 2 and 7, respectively. The Meis genes displayed
distinct but overlapping patterns of expression in normal tissues and were
expressed in some cases of murine myeloid leukemia. The identification of two
additional Meis genes identifies a new family of potential Hox cofactors as well 
as two new potential disease genes.

PMID: 8950991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Jun;16(6):2678-88.

Repression by HoxA7 is mediated by the homeodomain and the modulatory action of
its N-terminal-arm residues.

Schnabel CA(1), Abate-Shen C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, Piscataway, New Jersey 08854, 
USA.

Hox genes encode homeodomain-containing proteins that are presumed to control
spatial patterning during murine embryogenesis through their actions as
transcriptional regulatory proteins. In this study, we have investigated the
transcriptional function of a prototypic member of this family, HoxA7. We
demonstrate that HoxA7 function as a potent transcriptional repressor and that
its action as such requires several domains, including both activator and
repressor regions. The repressor regions are contained within the homeodomain and
a C-terminal acidic region, both of which are well conserved among members of the
Hox family. Accordingly, we show that two other members of this family also
function as repressors, although they vary in their relative repressor potency.
Finally, we explore the novel observation that the homeodomain of HoxA7 functions
as a transcriptional repressor domain. We show that the homeodomain compared with
two other DNA-binding domains, is unique in its ability to function as a
repressor domain and that repression requires conserved residues, in helix III.
We further show that residues in the N-terminal arm of the homeodomain contribute
to the differential repressor actions of various Hox proteins. These findings
demonstrate that the transcriptional function of HoxA7 and possibility of Hox
proteins in general is determined by their unique combination of conserved and
nonconserved regions as well as through the complex actions of their
homeodomains.

PMCID: PMC231258
PMID: 8649375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. J Assist Reprod Genet. 1996 Feb;13(2):177-81.

Expression of homebox-containing genes in human preimplantation development and
in embryos with chromosomal aneuploidies.

Kuliev A(1), Kukharenko V, Morozov G, Freidine M, Rechitsky S, Verlinsky O,
Ivakhnenko V, Gindilis V, Strom C, Verlinsky Y.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Genetics Institute, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

PURPOSE: The purpose of the study was to investigate homeobox gene expression in 
human oocytes and preembryos and in postimplantation embryos with impaired
embryonic development determined by chromosomal abnormalities.
METHODS: Reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) with intron
spanning primer sets for Homeobox gene sequences was used.
RESULTS: The homeobox genes HoxA4, HoxA7, HoxB4, and HoxB5 were present in human 
oocytes and cleaving normal and triploid embryos. The expression pattern was
different between chromosomally abnormal and normal first-trimester embryos. Of
four homeobox transcripts (HoxA7, HoxB4+ ++, HoxB5, and HoxC6) that are expressed
in diploid embryos, only HoxA7, HoxB4 and HoxC6 were present in a trisomy 7
embryo, and only HoxB4 and HoxB 5 in triploid embryos and an embryo with trisomy 
9. Cloning experiments revealed differences in the number of homeobox clones
obtained from trisomy 7 and control embryos.
CONCLUSIONS: The transcripts of homeobox genes, HoxA4, HoxA7, HoxB4, and HoxB5,
were present in oocytes and cleaving embryos. The pattern of expression of
homeobox genes in cultured fibroblasts derived from spontaneously aborted embryos
with aneuploidies was different from that in control diploid cells.

PMID: 8688592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Nat Genet. 1996 Feb;12(2):154-8.

Fusion of the nucleoporin gene NUP98 to HOXA9 by the chromosome translocation
t(7;11)(p15;p15) in human myeloid leukaemia.

Nakamura T(1), Largaespada DA, Lee MP, Johnson LA, Ohyashiki K, Toyama K, Chen
SJ, Willman CL, Chen IM, Feinberg AP, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Shaughnessy JD Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development
Center, Maryland 21702, USA.

Expression of Hoxa7 and Hoxa9 is activated by proviral integration in BXH2 murine
myeloid leukaemias. This result, combined with the mapping of the HOXA locus to
human chromosome 7p15, suggested that one of the HOXA genes might be involved in 
the t(7;11)(p15;p15) translocation found in some human myeloid leukaemia
patients. Here we show that in three patients with t(7;11), the chromosome
rearrangement creates a genomic fusion between the HOXA9 gene and the nucleoporin
gene NUP98 on chromosome 11p15. The translocation produces an invariant chimaeric
NUP98/HOXA9 transcript containing the amino terminal half of NUP98 fused in frame
to HOXA9. These studies identify HOXA9 as an important human myeloid leukaemia
gene and suggest an important role for nucleoporins in human myeloid leukaemia
given that a second nucleoporin, NUP214, has also been implicated in human
myeloid leukaemia.

PMID: 8563753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Nat Genet. 1996 Feb;12(2):149-53.

Cooperative activation of Hoxa and Pbx1-related genes in murine myeloid
leukaemias.

Nakamura T(1), Largaespada DA, Shaughnessy JD Jr, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development
Center, Maryland 21702, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1996 Feb;12(2):113-4.

Retroviruses induce myeloid leukaemia in BXH-2 mice by the insertional mutation
of cellular proto-oncogenes or tumour suppressor genes. Disease genes can thus be
identified by proviral tagging through the identification of common viral
integration sites in BXH-2 leukaemia. Here, we describe a new approach for
proviral tagging that greatly facilitates the identification of BXH-2 leukaemia
genes. Using this approach, we identify three genes whose expression is activated
by proviral integration in BXH-2 leukaemias; Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and a Pbx1-related
homeobox gene, Meis1. Proviral activation of Hoxa7 or Hoxa9 is strongly
correlated with proviral activation of Meis1 implying that Hoxa7 and Hoxa9
cooperate with Meis1 in leukaemia formation. These studies provide the first
genetic evidence that Pbx1-related genes cooperate with Hox genes in leukaemia
formation and identify a number of new murine myeloid leukaemia genes.

PMID: 8563752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Mol Reprod Dev. 1995 Jun;41(2):127-32.

Homeobox gene expression in human oocytes and preembryos.

Verlinsky Y(1), Morozov G, Gindilis V, Strom CM, Freidin M, Rechitsky S,
Verlinsky O, Ivakhnenko V, Zdanovsky V, Kuliev A.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Genetics Institute, Illinois Masonic Medical Center, Chicago
60657, USA.

Homeobox gene expression in human preimplantation development has not been
established. We used reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
with intron spanning primer sets to investigate the presence of mRNA of homeobox 
genes in human oocytes and preembryos. RT-PCR products obtained from normal and
unfertilized oocytes, from cleaving normal and triploid embryos, and from morulae
and blastocysts were cloned, sequenced, and analyzed for the presence of homeobox
sequences. The presence of mRNA of homeoboxes HoxA4 and HoxA7 was demonstrated;
HoxA4 was present in normal and unfertilized oocytes and also in a 4-cell embryo.
HoxA7 was present in normal oocytes and cleaving triploid embryos.

PMID: 7654365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Development. 1995 Apr;121(4):1077-88.

A conserved enhancer of the human and murine Hoxa-7 gene specifies the anterior
boundary of expression during embryonal development.

Knittel T(1), Kessel M, Kim MH, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Abteilung für molekulare Zellbiologie, Max Planck Institut für
biophysikalische Chemie, Göttingen, Germany.

The murine homeobox-containing gene Hoxa-7 is expressed in restricted patterns
during embryogenesis and plays an important role in the control of
region-specific differentiation. Previous studies have shown that separate
elements specify lineage restriction and expression boundaries of Hoxa-7. In
particular 3.6 kb of 5' flanking sequences were sufficient to establish an
anterior boundary of Hoxa-7 gene expression. To identify the minimal regulatory
element specifying the anterior boundary of expression, transgenic mice were
generated carrying chimeric constructs with deletions of 5' flanking sequences
fused to a thymidine kinase minimal promoter/E. coli lacZ reporter construct. By 
deletion analysis, a 470 bp long control element (AX 470) located 1.6 kb upstream
of the transcription start site was identified that directed expression of the
beta-galactosidase protein in a pattern reflecting the anterior boundary of
expression of the endogenous Hoxa-7 gene. This element was active in either
orientation and conferred region-specific expression to unrelated promoters,
thereby behaving like an enhancer element. In contrast, transgenic mice carrying 
further 5' and 3' deletions of the 470 bp long element did not exhibit an
anterior boundary of Hoxa-7 expression. Based on these results the minimal
control element (AX 470) specifying the anterior boundary of Hox expression was
designated as Hoxa-7 enhancer. Furthermore, 3 kb of the human HOXA7 upstream
region were sequenced and compared to its mouse homologue in order to identify
conserved regions. Sequence comparison revealed motifs that were strongly
conserved between both species. The human homologue of the mouse Hoxa-7 enhancer 
was 70% identical at the nucleotide level and was also capable of directing an
anterior boundary in transgenic mice. Using transgenic lines a detailed analysis 
of the Hoxa-7 enhancer-directed expression during embryogenesis was performed.
lacZ expression was first detected in the allantois at day 7.5 p.c. and in
mesoderm and ectoderm at day 8.5 of gestation. Between gestational ages E8.5 to
E12.5 beta-gal expression was observed in the somites, spinal cord, spinal
ganglia and paraxial mesoderm as well as in mesenchymal layers of the kidney. A
distinct anterior limit of expression was noted in transgenic lines at level C4
(neural tube) and C5 (spinal ganglia). Our deletion experiments defined a minimal
enhancer element specifying the anterior boundary of Hox gene expression in early
and late phases of development. Further studies aim at characterizing the
trans-acting factors that mediate the spatial and temporal expression of Hox
genes in the developing embryo.

PMID: 7538068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jul;14(7):4532-45.

Hox proteins have different affinities for a consensus DNA site that correlate
with the positions of their genes on the hox cluster.

Pellerin I(1), Schnabel C, Catron KM, Abate C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway.

The hox genes, members of a family of essential developmental regulators, have
the intriguing property that their expression in the developing murine embryo is 
colinear with their chromosomal organization. Members of the hox gene family
share a conserved DNA binding domain, termed the homeodomain, which mediates
interactions of Hox proteins with DNA regulatory elements in the transcriptional 
control regions of target genes. In this study, we characterized the DNA binding 
properties of five representative members of the Hox family: HoxA5, HoxB4, HoxA7,
HoxC8, and HoxB1. To facilitate a comparative analysis of their DNA binding
properties, we produced the homeodomain regions of these Hox proteins in
Escherichia coli and obtained highly purified polypeptides. We showed that these 
Hox proteins interact in vitro with a common consensus DNA site that contains the
motif (C/G)TAATTG. We further showed that the Hox proteins recognize the
consensus DNA site in vivo, as determined by their ability to activate
transcription through this site in transient transfection assays. Although they
interact optimally with the consensus DNA site, the Hox proteins exhibit subtle, 
but distinct, preferences for DNA sites that contain variations of the
nucleotides within the consensus motif. In addition to their modest differences
in DNA binding specificities, the Hox proteins also vary in their relative
affinities for DNA. Intriguingly, their relative affinities correlate with the
positions of their respective genes on the hox cluster. These findings suggest
that subtle differences in DNA binding specificity combined with differences in
DNA binding affinity constitute features of the "Hox code" that contribute to the
selective functions of Hox proteins during murine embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC358825
PMID: 7911971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Cell. 1989 Oct 6;59(1):81-93.

Interference with function of a homeobox gene in Xenopus embryos produces
malformations of the anterior spinal cord.

Wright CV(1), Cho KW, Hardwicke J, Collins RH, De Robertis EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California School of
Medicine, Los Angeles 90024-1737.

XIHbox 1 is expressed in a narrow band across the cervical region of Xenopus
embryos. The gene produces two related proteins: "long" and "short" XIHbox 1
homeodomain proteins. Injection of antibodies to the long XIHbox 1 protein into
1-cell embryos caused a phenotype in which the anterior spinal cord was
morphologically transformed into a hindbrain-like structure. This alteration was 
restricted to the region normally expressing long XIHbox 1 protein. Injection of 
long protein mRNA disrupted segmentation and tissue organization without
inhibiting cell proliferation. Injection of short protein mRNA into 1-cell
embryos produced spinal cord malformations similar, but not identical, to those
caused by the antibodies, suggesting antagonistic roles for long and short XIHbox
1 proteins. We immunostained tadpoles carrying extended hindbrains for N-CAM and 
consistently found defective organization of spinal nerves over the affected
region.

PMID: 2477158  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Cell. 1989 Jul 28;58(2):337-47.

Craniofacial abnormalities induced by ectopic expression of the homeobox gene
Hox-1.1 in transgenic mice.

Balling R(1), Mutter G, Gruss P, Kessel M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology Max Planck Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry Göttingen, Federal Republic of Germany.

Hox-1.1 is a murine homeobox-containing gene expressed in a time- and
cell-specific manner during embryogenesis. We have generated transgenic mice that
ectopically express Hox-1.1 from the chicken beta-actin promoter. In these mice
Hox-1.1 expression was changed to an almost ubiquitous pattern. Ectopic
expression of Hox-1.1 leads to death of the transgenic animals shortly after
birth and is associated with multiple craniofacial anomalies, such as cleft
palate, open eyes at birth, and nonfused pinnae. This phenotype is similar to the
effects seen after systemic administration of retinoic acid during gestation.
This suggests that retinoic acid embryopathy and the specific developmental
defects caused by ectopic expression of a potential developmental control gene
share a common pathogenic mechanism.

PMID: 2568891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Cell. 1988 Dec 23;55(6):1017-24.

A gradient of homeodomain protein in developing forelimbs of Xenopus and mouse
embryos.

Oliver G(1), Wright CV, Hardwicke J, De Robertis EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, University of California, Los Angeles
90024-1737.

The expression of the homeodomain protein XIHbox 1 in developing Xenopus limbs
was analyzed using specific antibodies. In the forelimb bud mesoderm XIHbox 1
shows a clear antero-posterior gradient that is strongest in the anterior and
proximal region of the forelimb. Hindlimb bud mesoderm is devoid of XIHbox 1,
indicating an early molecular difference between arm and leg. The innermost
ectodermal cell layer is positive throughout the forelimb and hindlimb bud
ectoderm, but no other areas of the skin. Similar results are obtained in
developing mouse limbs, suggesting that XIHbox 1 participates in forelimb
development in a variety of tetrapods. In early tadpoles analyzed at stages
preceding limb bud formation, the lateral plate mesoderm is positive in the
region corresponding to the earliest "field" of forelimb information, but not in 
the hindlimb field. These results suggest a molecular link between morphogenetic 
fields, gradients, and homeobox genes in vertebrate development.

PMID: 2904837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1987;511:88-100.

The murine homeo domain protein Hox 1.1.

Kessel M(1), Drescher U, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Zentrum für Molekulare Biologie Heidelberg, Federal Republic of Germany.

PMID: 2894195  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Differentiation. 1987;36(2):130-7.

The murine homeo box gene product, Hox 1.1 protein, is growth-controlled and
associated with chromatin.

Schulze F(1), Chowdhury K, Zimmer A, Drescher U, Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max Planck Institute of Biophysical
Chemistry, Göttingen, Federal Republic of Germany.

In order to gain insight into the function of the Hox 1.1 gene, we studied the
expression of the murine homeo box gene product, the Hox 1.1 protein. Monoclonal 
antibodies were raised against synthetic peptides of the Hox 1.1 protein to study
the localization and expression pattern of this protein under various culture
conditions. By means of indirect immunofluorescence we localized the Hox 1.1
protein to the nucleus in differentiated F9 and NIH 3T3 cells. During mitosis the
protein was found to be associated with chromatin. Confluent NIH 3T3 cells
harbored little if any Hox 1.1 protein. After "wounding" the cells in this
confluent monolayer, we observed an induction of the expression of the Hox 1.1
protein. However, addition of insulin to F9 and contact-inhibited NIH 3T3 cells
led to an increase of the Hox 1.1 RNA and protein expression. Thus, the induction
of the Hox 1.1 protein is associated not only with the differentiation of
embryonal carcinoma (EC) cells, but may also correlate with stages of cell
growth.

PMID: 2452109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


