
1. Exp Hematol. 2016 Mar 23. pii: S0301-472X(16)30035-2. doi:
10.1016/j.exphem.2016.03.006. [Epub ahead of print]

Transient Potential Receptor Melastatin-2 (TRPM2) Does Not Influence Murine
MLL-AF9 Driven AML Leukemogenesis or in Vitro Response to Chemotherapy.

Haladyna JN(1), Pastuer T(1), Riedel SS(1), Perraud AL(2), Bernt KM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders, Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora,
CO. (2)Dept. of Biomedical Research and Dept. of Microbiology and Immunology,
National Jewish Health, Denver, CO. (3)Center for Cancer and Blood Disorders,
Children's Hospital Colorado, Aurora, CO. Electronic address:
Kathrin.Bernt@ucdenver.edu.

Transient potential receptor melastatin-2 (TRPM2) is a non-selective cationic,
Ca(2+) permeable transmembrane pore that is preferentially expressed in cells of 
the myeloid lineage, and modulates signaling pathways converging onto NF-kB. This
is of potential interest for AML therapy, as NF-<U+03BA>B signaling is emerging as a key
pathway mediating drug resistance and leukemia initiating cell survival in AML,
and inhibition of NF-<U+03BA>B signaling has been shown to be synergistic with
chemotherapy. TRPM2 is overexpressed in AML compared to normal bone marrow, with 
highest levels in the FAB M3-6 subtypes. To determine the effect of loss of Trpm2
in a defined genetic model, we established MLL-AF9 driven AML on a Trpm2(-/-)
genetic background. Trpm2(-/-) MLL-AF9 leukemias displayed reduced NF-<U+03BA>B
phosphorylation and nuclear translocation. In vivo, primary and secondary
recipients of Trpm2(-/-) MLL-AF9 leukemias showed increased latency compared to
recipients of wild type leukemia cells. However, the difference in latency was
small, and lost in tertiary transplants. The effect of loss of Trpm2 in a
BCR-ABL/NUP98-HOXA9 fusion model was even smaller. Given reports that loss or
inhibition of TRPM2 enhanced killing by DNA damaging agents in neuroblastoma,
breast and prostate cancer cell lines, we exposed Trpm2(-/-) and Trpm2(wt)
primary MLL-AF9 leukemias to doxorubicin, cytarabine and etoposide, but found no 
difference in IC50. The in vitro response to decitabine was also unaffected. In
summary, TRPM2 does not seem to play a major role in myeloid leukemogenesis. In
addition, loss of TRPM2 does not augment the cytotoxicity of standard AML
chemotherapeutic agents.

Copyright © 2016 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 27033163  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2016 Mar 28. [Epub ahead of print]

Functional Assessment of Clubfoot Associated HOXA9, TPM1, and TPM2 Variants
Suggests a Potential Gene Regulation Mechanism.

Weymouth KS(1), Blanton SH(2), Powell T(3), Patel CV(4), Savill SA(5), Hecht
JT(3,)(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, UTHealth McGovern Medical School, 6431 Fannin St.,
MSB 3.306, Houston, TX, 77030, USA. katelyn.s.weymouth@uth.tmc.edu. (2)Department
of Human Genetics, John P. Hussman Institute for Human Genomics, University of
Miami, Miller School of Medicine, Miami, FL, USA. (3)Department of Pediatrics,
UTHealth McGovern Medical School, 6431 Fannin St., MSB 3.306, Houston, TX, 77030,
USA. (4)Department of Cell Biology and Anatomy, University of South Carolina
School of Medicine, Columbia, SC, USA. (5)Diabetes and Endocrinology Research
Group, Wrexham Academic Unit, Betsi Cadwaladr University Health Board, Wrexham,
UK. (6)UTHealth School of Dentistry, Houston, TX, USA.

BACKGROUND: Isolated nonsyndromic clubfoot is a common birth defect affecting
135,000 newborns worldwide each year. Although treatment has improved,
substantial long-term morbidity persists. Genetic causes have been implicated in 
family-based studies but the genetic changes have eluded identification.
Previously, using a candidate gene approach in our family-based dataset, we
identified associations between clubfoot and four single nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) located in potential regulatory regions of genes involved in muscle
development and patterning (HOXA9) and muscle function (TPM1 and TPM2) were
identified.
QUESTIONS/PURPOSES: Four SNPs, rs3801776/HOXA9, rs4075583/TPM1, rs2025126/TPM2,
and rs2145925/TPM2, located in potential regulatory regions, were evaluated to
determine whether they altered promoter activity.
METHODS: Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were performed on these four SNPs 
to identify allele-specific DNA-protein interactions. SNPs showing differential
banding patterns were assessed for effect on promoter activity by luciferase
assay. Undifferentiated (for HOXA9) and differentiated (for TPM1 and TPM2) mouse 
cells were used in functional assays as a proxy for the in vivo developmental
stage.
RESULTS: Functional analyses showed that the ancestral alleles of
rs3801776/HOXA9, rs4075583/TPM1, and rs2025126/TPM2 and the alternate allele of
rs2145925/TPM2 created allele-specific nuclear protein interactions and caused
higher promoter activity. Interestingly, while rs4075583/TPM1 showed an
allele-specific nuclear protein interaction, an effect on promoter activity was
observed only when rs4075583/TPM1 was expressed in the 1.7kb haplotype construct.
CONCLUSION: Our results show that associated promoter variants in HOXA9, TPM1,
and TPM2, alter promoter expression suggesting that they have a functional role. 
Moreover and importantly, we show that alterations in promoter activity may be
observed only in the context of the genomic architecture. Therefore, future
studies focusing on proteins binding to these regulatory SNPs may provide
important key insights into gene regulation in clubfoot.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Identifying the genetic risk signature for clubfoot is
important to provide accurate genetic counseling for at-risk families, for
development of prevention programs and new treatments.

PMID: 27020427  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. J Clin Invest. 2016 Mar 28. pii: 81516. doi: 10.1172/JCI81516. [Epub ahead of
print]

MEIS1-mediated transactivation of synaptotagmin-like 1 promotes CXCL12/CXCR4
signaling and leukemogenesis.

Yokoyama T, Nakatake M, Kuwata T, Couiznet A, Goitsuka R, Tsutsumi S, Aburatani
H, Valk PJ, Delwel R, Nakamura T.

The TALE-class homeoprotein MEIS1 specifically collaborates with HOXA9 to drive
myeloid leukemogenesis. Although MEIS1 alone has only a moderate effect on cell
proliferation in vitro, it is essential for the development of HOXA9-induced
leukemia in vivo. Here, using murine models of leukemogenesis, we have shown that
MEIS1 promotes leukemic cell homing and engraftment in bone marrow and enhances
cell-cell interactions and cytokine-mediated cell migration. We analyzed global
DNA binding of MEIS1 in leukemic cells as well as gene expression alterations in 
MEIS1-deficent cells and identified synaptotagmin-like 1 (Sytl1, also known as
Slp1) as the MEIS1 target gene that cooperates with Hoxa9 in leukemogenesis.
Replacement of SYTL1 in MEIS1-deficent cells restored both cell migration and
engraftment. Further analysis revealed that SYTL1 promotes cell migration via
activation of the CXCL12/CXCR4 axis, as SYTL1 determines intracellular
trafficking of CXCR4. Together, our results reveal that MEIS1, through induction 
of SYTL1, promotes leukemogenesis and supports leukemic cell homing and
engraftment, facilitating interactions between leukemic cells and bone marrow
stroma.

PMID: 27018596  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Nat Commun. 2016 Mar 24;7:10924. doi: 10.1038/ncomms10924.

DNMT3A R882 mutants interact with polycomb proteins to block haematopoietic stem 
and leukaemic cell differentiation.

Koya J(1), Kataoka K(1), Sato T(1,)(2), Bando M(3), Kato Y(3), Tsuruta-Kishino
T(1), Kobayashi H(1), Narukawa K(1), Miyoshi H(4), Shirahige K(3), Kurokawa
M(1,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.
(2)Department of Transfusion Medicine, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 7-3-1,
Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan. (3)Laboratory of Genome Structure and
Function, Research Center for Epigenetic Disease, Institute for Molecular and
Cellular Biosciences, The University of Tokyo, 7-3-1, Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo
113-8655, Japan. (4)Subteam for Manipulation of Cell Fate, RIKEN BioResource
Center, 3-1-1, Koyadai, Tsukuba-shi, Ibaraki 305-0074, Japan. (5)Department of
Cell Therapy and Transplantation, The University of Tokyo Hospital, 7-3-1, Hongo,
Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

Despite the clinical impact of DNMT3A mutation on acute myeloid leukaemia, the
molecular mechanisms regarding how this mutation causes leukaemogenesis in vivo
are largely unknown. Here we show that, in murine transplantation experiments,
recipients transplanted with DNMT3A mutant-transduced cells exhibit aberrant
haematopoietic stem cell (HSC) accumulation. Differentiation-associated genes are
downregulated without accompanying changes in methylation status of their
promoter-associated CpG islands in DNMT3A mutant-transduced stem/progenitor
cells, representing a DNA methylation-independent role of mutated DNMT3A. DNMT3A 
R882H also promotes monoblastic transformation in vitro in combination with
HOXA9. Molecularly, the DNMT3A mutant interacts with polycomb repressive complex 
1 (PRC1), causing transcriptional silencing, revealing a DNA
methylation-independent role of DNMT3A mutation. Suppression of PRC1 impairs
aberrant HSC accumulation and monoblastic transformation. From our data, it is
shown that DNMT3A mutants can block the differentiation of HSCs and leukaemic
cells via PRC1. This interaction could be targetable in DNMT3A-mutated
leukaemias.

PMID: 27010239  [PubMed - in process]


5. Nutr Cancer. 2016 Mar 23:1-5. [Epub ahead of print]

Reduction in Cell Viability and in Homeobox Protein Levels Following in Vitro
Exposure to d-tocopherol in Acute Myeloid Leukemia.

Collins J(1), Safah H(2), Lobelle-Rich P(2), Whaley S(3), Campbell S(3), S Saba
N(2).

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medicine , Tulane University , New Orleans , Louisiana , USA. 
(2)b Section of Hematology and Medical Oncology , Department of Medicine, Tulane 
University , New Orleans , Louisiana , USA. (3)c Department of Biomedical
Sciences , Quillen College of Medicine, East Tennessee State University , Johnson
City , Tennessee , USA.

d-Tocopherol (d-T), the least prevalent tocopherol in our diet, was described to 
have a more potent anticancer activity in solid tumors compared to the other
tocopherols. d-T induces tumor cell death through peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor <U+03B3> (PPAR-<U+03B3>) induction, cyclin-D1 inhibition, and
modulation of redox balance. Nevertheless, the role of d-T in preventing or
treating hematologic malignancies has not been studied. In this study, we
screened the efficacy of d-T against six cell lines representing a wide spectrum 
of hematologic malignancies: Jurkat (acute T-cell leukemia), K-562 (chronic
myeloid leukemia), KG-1 [acute myeloid leukemia (AML)], THP-1 (acute monocytic
leukemia), TOM-1 (acute lymphoblastic leukemia), and UMCL01-101 (AIDS-associated 
diffuse large B-cell lymphoma). Interestingly, the AML cell line KG-1 was the
only one to be significantly affected at concentrations of d-T as low as 20 µM.
The antileukemic activity of d-T in AML was verified in a set of primary cells
collected from patients newly diagnosed with AML. Apoptotic induction and cell
cycle arrest explained the efficacy of d-T against KG-1 cells. The mechanism of
cell growth inhibition of d-T was through downregulation of cyclin-D1 and a set
of homeobox proteins (HOXA9, PBX1, and Cdx2) that have a well-documented role in 
the pathobiology of AML.

PMID: 27008503  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. J Acquir Immune Defic Syndr. 2016 Apr 15;71(5):467-73. doi:
10.1097/QAI.0000000000000892.

The Role of HIV-1 in Affecting the Proliferation Ability of HPCs Derived From BM.

Guo X(1), He S, Lv X, Ding H, Li S, Kang J, Liu J, Qin C, Geng W, Jiang Y, Shang 
H.

Author information: 
(1)*Key Laboratory of AIDS Immunology of National Health and Family Planning
Commission, Department of Laboratory Medicine, The First Affiliated Hospital,
China Medical University, Shenyang, China;Collaborative Innovation Center for
Diagnosis and Treatment of Infectious Diseases, Hangzhou, China;Department of
Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital, China Medical University, Shenyang,
China; and§Department of Clinical Laboratory, Dongying People's Hospital,
Dongying, China.

HIV-1 causes chronic infection characterized by the depletion of CD4+ T
lymphocytes and the development of AIDS. Current antiretroviral drugs inhibit
viral spread, but they do not lead to a full immune recovery. Hematopoietic stem 
cells (HSCs) and multipotent hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) give rise to
all blood and immune cells, and in HIV infection, hematological abnormalities
frequently occur in patients. Here, we used bone marrow samples from
HIV-1-infected people to study the relationship between the proliferation ability
of HSCs/HPCs and peripheral CD4+ T lymphocytes. Three indexes were used to
reflect the proliferation ability of HSCs and HPCs: (1) colony-forming units of
bone marrow mononuclear cells (BMMCs), (2) amplification of CD34+ cells purified 
from bone marrow mononuclear cells, (3) expression of HOXB4 and HOXA9 in CD34+
cells. We observed a direct correlation between peripheral number of CD4+ T
lymphocytes and the HSCs/HPCs proliferation ability in our study. We also
compared HIV-infected patients with or without antiretroviral therapy (ART). Our 
results demonstrated that after antiretroviral therapy, CD4+ T-cell recovery and 
HPCs proliferation ability are correlated. Our findings have implications in
understanding whether bone marrow-derived HPCs can supplement for the loss of
CD4+ T lymphocytes during HIV-1 infection.

PMID: 26974413  [PubMed - in process]


7. Onco Targets Ther. 2016 Feb 9;9:711-22. doi: 10.2147/OTT.S95279. eCollection
2016.

Higher expression levels of the HOXA9 gene, closely associated with MLL-PTD and
EZH2 mutations, predict inferior outcome in acute myeloid leukemia.

Gao L(1), Sun J(2), Liu F(3), Zhang H(1), Ma Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, China-Japan Friendship Hospital, Beijing, People's
Republic of China. (2)Department of Hematology and Oncology, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(3)Department of Hematology and Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, People's Republic of China; Department of 
Oncology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: Although the biological insight of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) has
increased in the past few years, the discovery of novel discriminative biomarkers
remains of utmost value for improving outcome predictions. Systematical studies
concerning the clinical implications and genetic correlations of HOXA9
aberrations in patients with AML are relatively promising.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Here, we investigated mutational status and the mRNA
levels of the HOXA9 gene in 258 patients with AML. Furthermore, hematological
characteristics, chromosome abnormalities, and genetic mutations associated with 
AML were analyzed, followed by the assessment of clinical survival. Besides, the 
expression level and mutational status of MEIS1, a cofactor of HOXA9, were also
detected in patients with AML with the aim of a deeper understanding about the
homeodomain-containing transcription factors associated with hematological
characteristics.
RESULTS: HOXA9 and MEIS1 mutations were detected in 4.26% and 3.49% AML cases,
respectively. No correlations were detected between mutation status and clinical 
characteristics, cytogenetic and genetic aberrations, and clinical survival.
Higher HOXA9 expression levels were correlated with white blood cell count and
closely associated with unfavorable karyotype as well as MLL-PTD and EZH2
mutations, whereas, there was an inverse correlation with the
French-American-British M3 subtype. Compared with patients with lower HOXA9
expression levels, those with higher HOXA9 expression levels had a lower complete
remission rate and inferior survivals in both AML and cytogenetically normal AML.
CONCLUSION: HOXA9 expression may serve as a promising biomarker to ameliorate a
prognostic model for predicting clinical outcome and consummating individualized 
treatment in patients with AML.

PMCID: PMC4755436
PMID: 26929642  [PubMed]


8. J Clin Invest. 2016 Apr 1;126(4):1438-50. doi: 10.1172/JCI80825. Epub 2016 Feb
29.

MLL1 and DOT1L cooperate with meningioma-1 to induce acute myeloid leukemia.

Riedel SS, Haladyna JN, Bezzant M, Stevens B, Pollyea DA, Sinha AU, Armstrong SA,
Wei Q, Pollock RM, Daigle SR, Jordan CT, Ernst P, Neff T, Bernt KM.

Meningioma-1 (MN1) overexpression is frequently observed in patients with acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) and is predictive of poor prognosis. In murine models,
forced expression of MN1 in hematopoietic progenitors induces an aggressive
myeloid leukemia that is strictly dependent on a defined gene expression program 
in the cell of origin, which includes the homeobox genes Hoxa9 and Meis1 as key
components. Here, we have shown that this program is controlled by two histone
methyltransferases, MLL1 and DOT1L, as deletion of either Mll1 or Dot1l in
MN1-expressing cells abrogated the cell of origin-derived gene expression
program, including the expression of Hoxa cluster genes. In murine models,
genetic inactivation of either Mll1 or Dot1l impaired MN1-mediated
leukemogenesis. We determined that HOXA9 and MEIS1 are coexpressed with MN1 in a 
subset of clinical MN1hi leukemia, and human MN1hi/HOXA9hi leukemias were
sensitive to pharmacologic inhibition of DOT1L. Together, these data point to
DOT1L as a potential therapeutic target in MN1hi AML. In addition, our findings
suggest that epigenetic modulation of the interplay between an oncogenic lesion
and its cooperating developmental program has therapeutic potential in AML.

PMID: 26927674  [PubMed - in process]


9. J Clin Invest. 2016 Mar 1;126(3):997-1011. doi: 10.1172/JCI82978. Epub 2016 Feb
15.

MLL-AF9- and HOXA9-mediated acute myeloid leukemia stem cell self-renewal
requires JMJD1C.

Zhu N, Chen M, Eng R, DeJong J, Sinha AU, Rahnamay NF, Koche R, Al-Shahrour F,
Minehart JC, Chen CW, Deshpande AJ, Xu H, Chu SH, Ebert BL, Roeder RG, Armstrong 
SA.

Self-renewal is a hallmark of both hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and leukemia
stem cells (LSCs); therefore, the identification of mechanisms that are required 
for LSC, but not HSC, function could provide therapeutic opportunities that are
more effective and less toxic than current treatments. Here, we employed an in
vivo shRNA screen and identified jumonji domain-containing protein JMJD1C as an
important driver of MLL-AF9 leukemia. Using a conditional mouse model, we showed 
that loss of JMJD1C substantially decreased LSC frequency and caused
differentiation of MLL-AF9- and homeobox A9-driven (HOXA9-driven) leukemias. We
determined that JMJD1C directly interacts with HOXA9 and modulates a
HOXA9-controlled gene-expression program. In contrast, loss of JMJD1C led to only
minor defects in blood homeostasis and modest effects on HSC self-renewal.
Together, these data establish JMJD1C as an important mediator of MLL-AF9- and
HOXA9-driven LSC function that is largely dispensable for HSC function.

PMCID: PMC4767347 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 26878175  [PubMed - in process]


10. Front Pharmacol. 2016 Jan 28;6:324. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00324. eCollection
2015.

MicroRNA-mRNA Pairs Associated with Outcome in AML: From In Vitro Cell-Based
Studies to AML Patients.

Bhise NS(1), Chauhan L(2), Shin M(2), Cao X(3), Pounds S(3), Lamba V(2), Lamba
JK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy and Translational Research, University of
FloridaGainesville, FL, USA; Department of Experimental and Clinical
Pharmacology, University of MinnesotaMinneapolis, MN, USA. (2)Department of
Pharmacotherapy and Translational Research, University of Florida Gainesville,
FL, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Memphis, TN, USA.

Cytarabine is the primary chemotherapeutic agent used for treatment of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). Disease relapse after initial remission remains one of
the most pressing therapeutic challenges in the treatment of AML. Relapsed
disease is often resistant to cytarabine and subsequent salvage therapy is
ineffective. Recent studies have shown that some microRNAs (miRNAs) are
associated with prognosis, but have not yet explored the role of miRNAs in
cellular response to cytarabine. We identified 20 miRNAs that associate with the 
in vitro cytarabine chemo-sensitivity or apoptotic response of eight AML cell
lines. Out of the 20 miRNAs, data on 18 miRNAs was available in AML patients from
The Cancer Genome Atlas database. Our stepwise-integrated analyses (step 1 -
miRNA-target mRNA that were significantly correlated in AML patients; step 2 -
mRNAs from step 1 with significant association with overall survival (OS))
identified 23 unique miRNA-mRNA pairs predictive of OS in AML patients. As
expected HOX genes (HOXA9, HOXB7, and HOXA10) were identified to be regulated by 
miRs as well as predictive of worse OS. Additionally, miR107-Myb,
miR-378-granzyme B involved in granzyme signaling and miR10a-MAP4K4 were
identified to be predictive of outcome through integrated analysis. Although
additional functional validations to establish clinical/pharmacologic importance 
of miRNA-mRNA pairs are needed, our results from RNA electrophoretic mobility
shift assay confirmed binding of miR-10a, miR-378, and miR-107 with their target 
genes GALNT1, GZMB, and MYB, respectively. Integration of pathogenic and
pharmacologically significant miRNAs and miRNA-mRNA relationships identified in
our study opens up opportunities for development of targeted/miRNA-directed
therapies.

PMCID: PMC4729948
PMID: 26858643  [PubMed]


11. BMC Genomics. 2016 Jan 14;17(1):56. doi: 10.1186/s12864-016-2370-6.

Identification of genomic aberrations in hemangioblastoma by droplet digital PCR 
and SNP microarray highlights novel candidate genes and pathways for
pathogenesis.

Mehrian-Shai R(1), Yalon M(2), Moshe I(3), Barshack I(4,)(5), Nass D(6), Jacob
J(7), Dor C(8), Reichardt JK(9), Constantini S(10,)(11), Toren A(12,)(13).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly Safra Children's Hospital and
Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer affiliated to the
Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
ruty.shai@sheba.health.gov.il. (2)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly
Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel. michal@droren.co.il. (3)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly
Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel. itaimoshe@gmail.com. (4)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel. Iris.Barshack@sheba.health.gov.il. (5)Institute of 
Pathology, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel.
Iris.Barshack@sheba.health.gov.il. (6)Institute of Pathology, Sheba Medical
Center, Tel Hashomer, Israel. Dvora.Nass@sheba.health.gov.il. (7)Pediatric
Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research
Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Jasmine.Jacob@sheba.health.gov.il. (8)Pediatric Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly
Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel
Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel
Aviv, Israel. Chen.Gefen@sheba.health.gov.il. (9)Division of Tropical Health and 
Medicine, James Cook University, Townsville, QLD, Australia.
Juergen.reichardt@jcu.edu.au. (10)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv
University, Tel Aviv, Israel. sconsts@netvision.net.il. (11)Department of
Pediatric Neurosurgery, Dana Children's Hospital, Tel-Aviv-Sourasky Medical
Center, Tel-Aviv, Israel. sconsts@netvision.net.il. (12)Pediatric
Hemato-Oncology, Edmond and Lilly Safra Children's Hospital and Cancer Research
Center, Sheba Medical Center, Tel Hashomer affiliated to the Sackler School of
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel. amost@post.tau.ac.il.
(13)Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
amost@post.tau.ac.il.

BACKGROUND: The genetic mechanisms underlying hemangioblastoma development are
still largely unknown. We used high-resolution single nucleotide polymorphism
microarrays and droplet digital PCR analysis to detect copy number variations
(CNVs) in total of 45 hemangioblastoma tumors.
RESULTS: We identified 94 CNVs with a median of 18 CNVs per sample. The most
frequently gained regions were on chromosomes 1 (p36.32) and 7 (p11.2). These
regions contain the EGFR and PRDM16 genes. Recurrent losses were located at
chromosome 12 (q24.13), which includes the gene PTPN11.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings provide the first high-resolution genome-wide view of
chromosomal changes in hemangioblastoma and identify 23 candidate genes: EGFR,
PRDM16, PTPN11, HOXD11, HOXD13, FLT3, PTCH, FGFR1, FOXP1, GPC3, HOXC13, HOXC11,
MKL1, CHEK2, IRF4, GPHN, IKZF1, RB1, HOXA9, and micro RNA, such as hsa-mir-196a-2
for hemangioblastoma pathogenesis. Furthermore, our data implicate that cell
proliferation and angiogenesis promoting pathways may be involved in the
molecular pathogenesis of hemangioblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4712606
PMID: 26768750  [PubMed - in process]


12. Cancer Res. 2016 Feb 1;76(3):619-29. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-1566. Epub
2016 Jan 8.

PBX3 and MEIS1 Cooperate in Hematopoietic Cells to Drive Acute Myeloid Leukemias 
Characterized by a Core Transcriptome of the MLL-Rearranged Disease.

Li Z(1), Chen P(2), Su R(3), Hu C(4), Li Y(2), Elkahloun AG(5), Zuo Z(6),
Gurbuxani S(7), Arnovitz S(2), Weng H(6), Wang Y(4), Li S(2), Huang H(2), Neilly 
MB(2), Wang GG(8), Jiang X(6), Liu PP(5), Jin J(9), Chen J(10).

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois. chen3jj@uc.edu zli7@bsd.uchicago.edu. (2)Section of
Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois. (3)Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio. (4)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of
Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois. Department of Cancer Biology,
University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio. Institute of
Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University College of
Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (5)Genetics and Molecular Biology Branch,
National Human Genome Research Institute, NIH, Bethesda, Maryland. (6)Section of 
Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois. Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio. (7)Department of Pathology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, Illinois. (8)UNC Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of
North Carolina at Chapel Hill School of Medicine, Chapel Hill, North Carolina.
(9)Institute of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Zhejiang University
College of Medicine, Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China. (10)Section of
Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago,
Illinois. Department of Cancer Biology, University of Cincinnati College of
Medicine, Cincinnati, Ohio. chen3jj@uc.edu zli7@bsd.uchicago.edu.

Overexpression of HOXA/MEIS1/PBX3 homeobox genes is the hallmark of mixed lineage
leukemia (MLL)-rearranged acute myeloid leukemia (AML). HOXA9 and MEIS1 are
considered to be the most critical targets of MLL fusions and their coexpression 
rapidly induces AML. MEIS1 and PBX3 are not individually able to transform cells 
and were therefore hypothesized to function as cofactors of HOXA9. However, in
this study, we demonstrate that coexpression of PBX3 and MEIS1 (PBX3/MEIS1),
without ectopic expression of a HOX gene, is sufficient for transformation of
normal mouse hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells in vitro. Moreover, PBX3/MEIS1
overexpression also caused AML in vivo, with a leukemic latency similar to that
caused by forced expression of MLL-AF9, the most common form of MLL fusions.
Furthermore, gene expression profiling of hematopoietic cells demonstrated that
PBX3/MEIS1 overexpression, but not HOXA9/MEIS1, HOXA9/PBX3, or HOXA9
overexpression, recapitulated the MLL-fusion-mediated core transcriptome,
particularly upregulation of the endogenous Hoxa genes. Disruption of the binding
between MEIS1 and PBX3 diminished PBX3/MEIS1-mediated cell transformation and HOX
gene upregulation. Collectively, our studies strongly implicate the PBX3/MEIS1
interaction as a driver of cell transformation and leukemogenesis, and suggest
that this axis may play a critical role in the regulation of the core
transcriptional programs activated in MLL-rearranged and HOX-overexpressing AML. 
Therefore, targeting the MEIS1/PBX3 interaction may represent a promising
therapeutic strategy to treat these AML subtypes. Cancer Res; 76(3); 619-29.
©2016 AACR.

©2016 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4810030 [Available on 2017-02-01]
PMID: 26747896  [PubMed - in process]


13. Elife. 2016 Jan 7;5. pii: e09540. doi: 10.7554/eLife.09540.

Chromatin-prebound Crm1 recruits Nup98-HoxA9 fusion to induce aberrant expression
of Hox cluster genes.

Oka M(1,)(2), Mura S(3), Yamada K(1), Sangel P(1), Hirata S(4), Maehara K(4),
Kawakami K(5), Tachibana T(6), Ohkawa Y(4), Kimura H(7), Yoneda Y(2,)(8).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Nuclear Transport Dynamics, National Institutes of Biomedical
Innovation, Health and Nutrition, Osaka, Japan. (2)Laboratory of Biomedical
Innovation, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, 
Japan. (3)Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka University, Osaka,
Japan. (4)Department of Advanced Medical Initiatives, Kyushu University, Fukuoka,
Japan. (5)Division of Molecular and Developmental Biology, National Institute of 
Genetics, Shizuoka, Japan. (6)Department of Bioengineering, Osaka City
University, Graduate School of Engineering, Osaka, Japan. (7)Department of
Biological Sciences, Graduate School of Bioscience and Technology, Tokyo
Institute of Technology, Yokohama, Japan. (8)National Institutes of Biomedical
Innovation, National Institutes of Biomedical Innovation, Health and Nutrition,
Osaka, Japan.

The nucleoporin Nup98 is frequently rearranged to form leukemogenic Nup98-fusion 
proteins with various partners. However, their function remains largely elusive. 
Here, we show that Nup98-HoxA9, a fusion between Nup98 and the homeobox
transcription factor HoxA9, forms nuclear aggregates that frequently associate
with facultative heterochromatin. We demonstrate that stable expression of
Nup98-HoxA9 in mouse embryonic stem cells selectively induces the expression of
Hox cluster genes. Genome-wide binding site analysis revealed that Nup98-HoxA9 is
preferentially targeted and accumulated at Hox cluster regions where the export
factor Crm1 is originally prebound. In addition, leptomycin B, an inhibitor of
Crm1, disassembled nuclear Nup98-HoxA9 dots, resulting in the loss of chromatin
binding of Nup98-HoxA9 and Nup98-HoxA9-mediated activation of Hox genes.
Collectively, our results indicate that highly selective targeting of
Nup98-fusion proteins to Hox cluster regions via prebound Crm1 induces the
formation of higher order chromatin structures that causes aberrant Hox gene
regulation.

PMCID: PMC4718815
PMID: 26740045  [PubMed - in process]


14. Epigenomics. 2016 Jan;8(1):55-66. doi: 10.2217/epi.15.97. Epub 2015 Dec 18.

Global measures of peripheral blood-derived DNA methylation as a risk factor in
the development of mature B-cell neoplasms.

Wong Doo N(1,)(2), Makalic E(3), Joo JE(4), Vajdic CM(5), Schmidt DF(3), Wong
EM(4), Jung CH(6), Severi G(7), Park DJ(4), Chung J(6), Baglietto L(1,)(3),
Prince HM(8,)(9), Seymour JF(8,)(9), Tam C(8), Hopper JL(3), English DR(1,)(3),
Milne RL(1,)(3), Harrison SJ(8), Southey MC(4), Giles GG(1,)(3).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Epidemiology Centre, Cancer Council Victoria, Australia. (2)Concord
General & Repatriation Hospital, NSW, Australia. (3)Centre for Epidemiology &
Biostatistics, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (4)Department of
Pathology, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia. (5)Centre for Big
Data Research in Health, University of New South Wales, Australia. (6)VLSCI Life 
Sciences Computation Centre, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
(7)Human Genetics Foundation, Torino, Italy. (8)Department of Haematology, Peter 
MacCallum Cancer Centre, Victoria, Australia. (9)Sir Peter MacCallum Department
of Oncology, The University of Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.

AIM: To examine whether peripheral blood methylation is associated with risk of
developing mature B-cell neoplasms (MBCNs).
MATERIALS & METHODS: We conducted a case-control study nested within a large
prospective cohort. Peripheral blood was collected from healthy participants.
Cases of MBCN were identified by linkage to cancer registries. Methylation was
measured using the Infinium(®) HumanMethylation450.
RESULTS: During a median of 10.6-year follow-up, 438 MBCN cases were evaluated.
Global hypomethylation was associated with increased risk of MBCN (odds ratio:
2.27, [95% CI: 1.59-3.25]). Within high CpG promoter regions, hypermethylation
was associated with increased risk (odds ratio: 1.76 [95% CI: 1.25-2.48]).
Promoter hypermethylation was observed in HOXA9 and CDH1 genes.
CONCLUSION: Aberrant global DNA methylation is detectable in peripheral blood
collected years before diagnosis and is associated with increased risk of MBCN,
suggesting changes to DNA methylation are an early event in MBCN development.

PMID: 26679037  [PubMed - in process]


15. J Exp Med. 2015 Dec 14;212(13):2223-34. doi: 10.1084/jem.20150452. Epub 2015 Dec 
7.

Hif-1a and Hif-2a synergize to suppress AML development but are dispensable for
disease maintenance.

Vukovic M(1), Guitart AV(1), Sepulveda C(1), Villacreces A(1), O'Duibhir E(1),
Panagopoulou TI(1), Ivens A(2), Menendez-Gonzalez J(1), Iglesias JM(3), Allen
L(1), Glykofrydis F(1), Subramani C(1), Armesilla-Diaz A(1), Post AE(1), Schaak
K(1), Gezer D(4), So CW(5), Holyoake TL(6), Wood A(7), O'Carroll D(8), Ratcliffe 
PJ(9), Kranc KR(10).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 
4UU, Scotland, UK. (2)Centre for Infection, Immunity, and Evolution, King's
Buildings, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH9 3FL, Scotland, UK.
(3)Synpromics Limited, Edinburgh EH16 4UX, Scotland, UK. (4)MRC Centre for
Regenerative Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4UU, Scotland, UK 
Klinik fuer Haematologie, Onkologie und Stammzelltransplantation,
Universitaetsklinikum Aachen, 52074 Aachen, Germany Paul O'Gorman Leukaemia
Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G120 ZD, Scotland, UK.
(5)Department of Haematological Medicine, King's College London, London SE5 9RS, 
England, UK. (6)Paul O'Gorman Leukaemia Research Centre, University of Glasgow,
Glasgow G120 ZD, Scotland, UK. (7)Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine,
University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, Scotland, UK. (8)MRC Centre for
Regenerative Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4UU, Scotland, UK 
European Molecular Biology Laboratory (EMBL), Mouse Biology Unit, 00015
Monterotondo Scalo, Italy. (9)Nuffield Department of Clinical Medicine,
University of Oxford, Oxford OX3 7BN, England, UK. (10)MRC Centre for
Regenerative Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH16 4UU, Scotland, UK 
Edinburgh Cancer Research UK Centre, Institute of Genetics and Molecular
Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Edinburgh EH4 2XR, Scotland, UK
kamil.kranc@ed.ac.uk.

Comment in
    J Exp Med. 2015 Dec 14;212(13):2187-8.

Leukemogenesis occurs under hypoxic conditions within the bone marrow (BM).
Knockdown of key mediators of cellular responses to hypoxia with shRNA, namely
hypoxia-inducible factor-1a (HIF-1a) or HIF-2a, in human acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) samples results in their apoptosis and inability to engraft, implicating
HIF-1a or HIF-2a as therapeutic targets. However, genetic deletion of Hif-1a has 
no effect on mouse AML maintenance and may accelerate disease development. Here, 
we report the impact of conditional genetic deletion of Hif-2a or both Hif-1a and
Hif-2a at different stages of leukemogenesis in mice. Deletion of Hif-2a
accelerates development of leukemic stem cells (LSCs) and shortens AML latency
initiated by Mll-AF9 and its downstream effectors Meis1 and Hoxa9. Notably, the
accelerated initiation of AML caused by Hif-2a deletion is further potentiated by
Hif-1a codeletion. However, established LSCs lacking Hif-2a or both Hif-1a and
Hif-2a propagate AML with the same latency as wild-type LSCs. Furthermore,
pharmacological inhibition of the HIF pathway or HIF-2a knockout using the
lentiviral CRISPR-Cas9 system in human established leukemic cells with MLL-AF9
translocation have no impact on their functions. We therefore conclude that
although Hif-1a and Hif-2a synergize to suppress the development of AML, they are
not required for LSC maintenance.

© 2015 Vukovic et al.

PMCID: PMC4689165 [Available on 2016-06-14]
PMID: 26642852  [PubMed - in process]


16. Nat Med. 2015 Dec;21(12):1481-90. doi: 10.1038/nm.3993. Epub 2015 Nov 23.

Synthetic lethal targeting of oncogenic transcription factors in acute leukemia
by PARP inhibitors.

Esposito MT(1), Zhao L(1), Fung TK(1), Rane JK(1), Wilson A(1), Martin N(2), Gil 
J(2), Leung AY(3), Ashworth A(4), So CW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia and Stem Cell Biology Group, Department of Haematological Medicine,
Division of Cancer Studies, King's College London, London, UK. (2)Cell
Proliferation Group, Medical Research Council Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial 
College London, London, UK. (3)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong
Kong, Hong Kong, China. (4)University of California, San Francisco (UCSF) Helen
Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Med. 2015 Dec;21(12):1393-4.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is mostly driven by oncogenic transcription factors,
which have been classically viewed as intractable targets using small-molecule
inhibitor approaches. Here we demonstrate that AML driven by repressive
transcription factors, including AML1-ETO (encoded by the fusion oncogene
RUNX1-RUNX1T1) and PML-RARa fusion oncoproteins (encoded by PML-RARA) are
extremely sensitive to poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) inhibition, in part
owing to their suppressed expression of key homologous recombination
(HR)-associated genes and their compromised DNA-damage response (DDR). In
contrast, leukemia driven by mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL, encoded by KMT2A)
fusions with dominant transactivation ability is proficient in DDR and
insensitive to PARP inhibition. Intriguingly, genetic or pharmacological
inhibition of an MLL downstream target, HOXA9, which activates expression of
various HR-associated genes, impairs DDR and sensitizes MLL leukemia to PARP
inhibitors (PARPis). Conversely, HOXA9 overexpression confers PARPi resistance to
AML1-ETO and PML-RARa transformed cells. Together, these studies describe a
potential utility of PARPi-induced synthetic lethality for leukemia treatment and
reveal a novel molecular mechanism governing PARPi sensitivity in AML.

PMID: 26594843  [PubMed - in process]


17. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Nov 20. doi: 10.1002/mc.22439. [Epub ahead of print]

Homeobox A9 directly targeted by miR-196b regulates aggressiveness through
nuclear Factor-kappa B activity in non-small cell lung cancer cells.

Yu SL(1), Lee DC(2), Sohn HA(2), Lee SY(3), Jeon HS(4), Lee JH(5), Park CG(1),
Lee HY(1), Yeom YI(2), Son JW(3), Yoon YS(6), Kang J(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, Konyang University, Daejeon, 
Republic of Korea. (2)Genome Structure Research Center, Korea Research Institute 
of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. (3)Department of
Internal Medicine, Konyang University Hospital, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, School of Medicine, Kyungpook National University,
Daegu, Republic of Korea. (5)Department of Cell Biology, College of Medicine,
Konyang University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea. (6)Department of Thoracic
Surgery, College of Medicine, Konyang University, Daejeon, Republic of Korea.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are recognized as crucial posttranscriptional regulators of
gene expression, and play critical roles as oncogenes or tumor suppressors in
various cancers. Here, we show that miR-196b is upregulated in
mesenchymal-like-state non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) cells and lung cancer
tissues. Moreover, miR-196b upregulation stimulates cell invasion and a change in
cell morphology to a spindle shape via loss of cell-to-cell contacts. We
identified homeobox A9 (HOXA9) as a target gene of miR-196b by using public
databases such as TargetScan, miRDB, and microRNA.org. HOXA9 expression is
inversely correlated with miR-196b levels in clinical NSCLC samples as compared
to that in corresponding control samples, and with the migration and invasion of 
NSCLC cells. Ectopic expression of HOXA9 resulted in a suppression of
miR-196b-induced cell invasion, and HOXA9 reexpression increased E-cadherin
expression. Furthermore, HOXA9 potently attenuated the expression of snail family
zinc finger 2 (SNAI2/SLUG) and matrix metallopeptidase 9 (MMP9) by controlling
the binding of nuclear factor-kappa B to the promoter of SLUG and MMP9 genes,
respectively. Therefore, we suggest that HOXA9 plays a central role in
controlling the aggressive behavior of lung cancer cells and that miR-196b can
serve as a potential target for developing anticancer agents. © 2015 Wiley
Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26586336  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


18. Blood. 2016 Jan 7;127(1):87-90. doi: 10.1182/blood-2015-02-626390. Epub 2015 Nov 
19.

Hoxa cluster genes determine the proliferative activity of adult mouse
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.

Lebert-Ghali CÉ(1), Fournier M(1), Kettyle L(2), Thompson A(2), Sauvageau G(3),
Bijl JJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital Research Center, Montreal, QC, Canada;
Department of Microbiology, Infectiology and Immunology, University of Montreal, 
Montreal, QC, Canada; (2)Center for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's
University, Belfast, United Kingdom; (3)Institute for Research in Immunology and 
Cancer, University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada; Division of Hematology,
Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada; and Department of Medicine, 
University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada. (4)Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital
Research Center, Montreal, QC, Canada; Division of Hematology,
Maisonneuve-Rosemont Hospital, Montreal, QC, Canada; and.

Determination of defined roles for endogenous homeobox (Hox) genes in adult
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell (HSPC) activity has been hampered by a
combination of embryonic defects and functional redundancy. Here we show that
conditional homozygous deletion of the Hoxa cluster (Hoxa(-/-)) results in a
marked reduction of adult HSPC activity, both in vitro and in vivo. Specifically,
proliferation of Hoxa(-/-) HSPCs is reduced compared with wild-type (WT) cells in
vitro and they are less competitive in vivo. Notably, the loss of Hoxa genes had 
little impact on HSPC differentiation. Comparative RNA sequencing analyses of
Hoxa(-/-) and WT hematopoietic stem cells
(CD150(+)/CD48(-)/Lineage(-)/c-kit(+)/Sca-1(+)) identified a large number of
differentially expressed genes, three of which (Nr4a3, Col1a1, and Hnf4a) showed 
>10-fold reduced levels. Engineered overexpression of Hoxa9 in Hoxa(-/-) HSPCs
resulted in partial phenotypic rescue in vivo with associated recovery in
expression of a large proportion of deregulated genes. Together, these results
provide definitive evidence linking Hoxa gene expression to proliferation of
adult HSPCs.

© 2016 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 26585953  [PubMed - in process]


19. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2016 Mar;55(3):242-50. doi: 10.1002/gcc.22327. Epub
2015 Nov 6.

ETV6-LPXN fusion transcript generated by t(11;12)(q12.1;p13) in a patient with
relapsing acute myeloid leukemia with NUP98-HOXA9.

Abe A(1), Yamamoto Y(1), Iba S(1), Kanie T(1), Okamoto A(1), Tokuda M(1), Inaguma
Y(1), Yanada M(1), Morishima S(1), Mizuta S(1), Akatsuka Y(1), Okamoto M(1),
Kameyama T(2), Mayeda A(2), Emi N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan.
(2)Division of Gene Expression Mechanism, Institute for Comprehensive Medical
Science, Fujita Health University, Toyoake, Aichi, Japan.

ETV6, which encodes an ETS family transcription factor, is frequently rearranged 
in human leukemias. We show here that a patient with acute myeloid leukemia with 
t(7;11)(p15;p15) gained, at the time of relapse, t(11;12)(q12.1;p13) with a split
ETV6 FISH signal. Using 3'-RACE PCR analysis, we found that ETV6 was fused to
LPXN at 11q12.1, which encodes leupaxin. ETV6-LPXN, an in-frame fusion between
exon 4 of ETV6 and exon 2 of LPXN, did not transform the interleukin-3-dependent 
32D myeloid cell line to cytokine independence; however, an enhanced
proliferative response was observed when these cells were treated with G-CSF
without inhibition of granulocytic differentiation. The 32D and human leukemia
cell lines each transduced with ETV6-LPXN showed enhanced migration towards the
chemokine CXCL12. We show here for the first time that LPXN is a fusion partner
of ETV6 and present evidence indicating that ETV6-LPXN plays a crucial role in
leukemia progression through enhancing the response to G-CSF and CXCL12. © 2015
Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

© 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 26542893  [PubMed - in process]


20. Taiwan J Obstet Gynecol. 2015 Oct;54(5):572-9. doi: 10.1016/j.tjog.2015.08.010.

Quantitative DNA methylation analysis of selected genes in endometrial
carcinogenesis.

Chen YC(1), Tsao CM(2), Kuo CC(3), Yu MH(4), Lin YW(5), Yang CY(4), Li HJ(3), Yan
MD(6), Wang TJ(4), Chou YC(7), Su HY(8).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care, Department of Internal Medicine,
Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan,
ROC; Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, National Defense Medical Center,
Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (2)Bureau of Investigation, Ministry of Justice, New Taipei 
City, Taiwan, ROC. (3)Graduate Institute of Medical Sciences, National Defense
Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, 
Tri-Service General Hospital, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan,
ROC. (5)Department and Graduate Institute of Microbiology and Immunology,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC; Graduate Institute of Life 
Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (6)Cancer Center,
Wan Fang Hospital, Taipei Medical University, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (7)School of
Public Health, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. (8)Graduate 
Institute of Medical Sciences, National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan,
ROC; Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tri-Service General Hospital,
National Defense Medical Center, Taipei, Taiwan, ROC. Electronic address:
su108868@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: Most endometrial carcinomas appear to develop from precursors (e.g.,
endometrial hyperplasia) that progress for several years. Patients who are
ultimately diagnosed with carcinoma often present clinically with complaints of
abnormal vaginal bleeding years before diagnosis, which offers an opportunity for
early diagnosis and curative treatment. The analysis of DNA methylation may be
used as a method for detecting endometrial cancer (EC). To test the potential
clinical application of this method, we used quantitative methylation analysis of
five genes in a full spectrum of endometrial lesions.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: This hospital-based, prospective, case-controlled study
was conducted on 68 patients, which included patients who had a normal
endometrium (n = 18), hyperplasia of the endometrium (n = 24), and EC (n = 26).
Methylation levels of the following genes were determined by using real-time
methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification: zinc finger
protein 177 (ZNF177), collagen type XIV a1 (COL14A1), dihydropyrimidinase-like 4 
(DPYSL4), homeobox A9 (HOXA9), transmembrane protein with epidermal growth
factor-like and two follistatin-like domains 2 (TMEFF2). The methylation index
(MI) cutoff values for the different diagnoses were determined to test the
sensitivity and specificity of the method and to generate the receiver operating 
characteristic (ROC) curves. The Mann-Whitney U test was used to test
between-group differences in the MI.
RESULTS: The MI of the five genes was significantly higher in EC than the MIs in 
specimens of hyperplasia of endometrium and normal appearance (p < 0.001). The
ROC analysis demonstrated that the sensitivity, specificity, and accuracy for
detecting EC were 92.3%, 94.4%, and 95.1%, respectively, for ZNF177; 92.3%,
94.4%, and 95.7%, respectively, for COL14A1; 80.8%, 94.4%, and 81.4%,
respectively, for HOXA9; 65.4%, 94.4%, and 89.5%, respectively, for TMEFF2; and
61.5%, 94.4%, and 63.3%, respectively, for DPYSL4. The combined testing of ZNF177
and COL14A1 had the best specificity (100%), but compromised sensitivity (88.5%).
CONCLUSION: Promoter methylation of ZNF177, COL14A1, HOXA9, DPYSL4, and TMEFF2
genes is a frequent epigenetic event in EC. Furthermore, the epigenetic
hypermethylation of TMEFF2 may be a valuable marker for identifying undetected EC
within endometrial hyperplasia.

Copyright © 2015. Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMID: 26522113  [PubMed - in process]


21. Biochem Soc Trans. 2015 Oct;43(5):1104-7. doi: 10.1042/BST20150110.

The role of Trib1 in myeloid leukaemogenesis and differentiation.

Nakamura T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan takuro-ind@umin.net.

Tribbles homolog 1 (Trib1) was identified as a common integration site of the
Homeobox a9 (Hoxa9)/murine ecotropic virus integration site 1 (Meis1) retrovirus 
in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). Trib1 is by itself a transforming gene for
myeloid cells but also significantly accelerates progression of
Hoxa9/Meis1-induced AML. The strong transforming activity of Trib1 depends on its
bi-directional function in CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein (C/EBPa) degradation
and MAPK/ERK kinase (MEK)/extracellular-signal-regulated kinase (ERK) activation.
TRIB1 is also involved in a certain type of human AML and a TRIB1 somatic point
mutation R107L was identified in a case of Down syndrome (DS)-related acute
megakaryocytic leukaemia. Although Trib1 knockout (KO) did not suppress
haematopoiesis in mouse bone marrow significantly, increase in mature
granulocytes was observed and promotion of myeloid differentiation was associated
with the increased C/EBPa protein. Trib1 thus plays an important role in myeloid 
cell development and transformation.

© 2015 Authors; published by Portland Press Limited.

PMID: 26517931  [PubMed - in process]


22. Genom Data. 2015 May 19;5:54-8. doi: 10.1016/j.gdata.2015.05.010. eCollection
2015.

Transcriptional profiling of HOXA9-regulated genes in human glioblastoma cell
models.

Gonçalves CS(1), Xavier-Magalhães A(1), Pojo M(1), Oliveira AI(1), Correia S(2), 
Reis RM(3), Sousa N(1), Rocha M(2), Costa BM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences,
University of Minho, Braga, Portugal ; ICVS/3B's-PT Government Associate
Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Portugal. (2)Centre of Biological Engineering,
Department of Informatics, University of Minho, Campus de Gualtar, 4710-057
Braga, Portugal. (3)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of
Health Sciences, University of Minho, Braga, Portugal ; ICVS/3B's-PT Government
Associate Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Portugal ; Barretos Cancer Hospital,
Molecular Oncology Research Center, Rua Antenor Duarte Vilela, 1331-Doutor Paulo 
Prata, Barretos, SP 14780-000, Brazil.

The data here described pertain to the article by Pojo et al. (2015) [10] titled 
A transcriptomic signature mediated by HOXA9 promotes human glioblastoma
initiation, aggressiveness and resistance to temozolomide (Pojoet al., 2015
[10]). HOX genes are part of the homeobox gene family, which encodes
transcription factors crucial during embryonic development (Grier et al., 2005;
Pearson et al., 2005 [6,9]) and also in post developmental regulation(Neville et 
al., 2002; Yamamoto et al., 2003; Takahashi et al., 2004;Morgan 2006
[8,14,13,7]). Alterations interfering with the regulation of these genes may lead
to tumorigenesis in adults. Due to their contributions in the control of
important cellular processes, the deregulation of HOX genes is ultimately
correlated with cancer treatment failure and patients' poor prognosis (Golub et
al., 1999; Abdel-Fattah et al., 2006 [5,1]; Costa et al.,2010 [4]; Pojo et al.,
2015 [10]). Recently, our studies showed that HOXA9 overexpression is associated 
with poor prognosis in patients with glioblastoma (GBM), the most common and most
malignant primary brain tumor. Mechanistically, HOXA9 is associated with
resistance to chemotherapy and with pro-proliferative, pro invasive and
anti-apoptotic features (Costa et al., 2010 [4]; Pojo et al., 2015 [10]) in GBM
in vitro models. Since HOXA9 is a transcription factor, its target genes can be
the true biological effectors of its aggressiveness. In this context, whole
genome Agilent's microarrays were used to obtain the full transcriptome of HOXA9 
in a variety of GBM cell models, including human immortalized astrocytes,
established GBM cell lines, and GBM patient derived cell cultures. Here, we
provide detailed methods, including experimental design and microarray data
analyses,which can be accessed in Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) under the
accession number GSE56517. Additional interpretation of the data is included and 
supplemented in (Pojo et al., 2015 [10]).

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMCID: PMC4583997
PMID: 26484224  [PubMed]


23. Nanoscale. 2015 Nov 7;7(41):17547-55. doi: 10.1039/c5nr04956c.

Highly sensitive detection of DNA methylation levels by using a quantum dot-based
FRET method.

Ma Y(1), Zhang H, Liu F, Wu Z, Lu S, Jin Q, Zhao J, Zhong X, Mao H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Applied Chemistry, East China University of Science and
Technology, Shanghai, 200237, PR China. zhongxh@ecust.edu.cn.

DNA methylation is the most frequently studied epigenetic modification that is
strongly involved in genomic stability and cellular plasticity. Aberrant changes 
in DNA methylation status are ubiquitous in human cancer and the detection of
these changes can be informative for cancer diagnosis. Herein, we reported a
facile quantum dot-based (QD-based) fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET)
technique for the detection of DNA methylation. The method relies on
methylation-sensitive restriction enzymes for the differential digestion of
genomic DNA based on its methylation status. Digested DNA is then subjected to
PCR amplification for the incorporation of Alexa Fluor-647 (A647) fluorophores.
DNA methylation levels can be detected qualitatively through gel analysis and
quantitatively by the signal amplification from QDs to A647 during FRET.
Furthermore, the methylation levels of three tumor suppressor genes, PCDHGB6,
HOXA9 and RASSF1A, in 20 lung adenocarcinoma and 20 corresponding adjacent
nontumorous tissue (NT) samples were measured to verify the feasibility of the
QD-based FRET method and a high sensitivity for cancer detection (up to 90%) was 
achieved. Our QD-based FRET method is a convenient, continuous and
high-throughput method, and is expected to be an alternative for detecting DNA
methylation as a biomarker for certain human cancers.

PMID: 26446775  [PubMed - in process]


24. Int J Lab Hematol. 2016 Feb;38(1):64-71. doi: 10.1111/ijlh.12435. Epub 2015 Sep
29.

NUP98-HOXA9 bearing therapy-related myeloid neoplasm involves myeloid-committed
cell and induces HOXA5, EVI1, FLT3, and MEIS1 expression.

Burillo-Sanz S(1), Morales-Camacho RM(2), Caballero-Velázquez T(2), Vargas MT(2),
García-Lozano JR(1), Falantes JF(2), Prats-Martín C(2), Bernal R(2), Pérez-Simón 
JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla,
Spain. (2)Department of Hematology, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla
(IBIS)/Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla,
Sevilla, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Chromosomal rearrangements involving NUP98 gene have been
associated with human leukemias such as de novo AML, therapy-related AML (t-AML),
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Genetic
fusion NUP98-HOXA9, caused by t(7;11)(p15;p15), is a recurrent cytogenetic
alteration in de novo acute myeloid leukemia (AML) usually found in young Asian
patients and its description in therapy-related myeloid neoplasms (t-MN) is rare.
Only one Asian case with molecular demonstration of the NUP98-HOXA9 fusion has
been reported in therapy-related leukemia. NUP98-HOXA9 leukemogenic mechanism is 
derived from the transcription factor activity of the chimeric protein, which
enhances the expression of genes related to cellular differentiation arrest and
proliferation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We studied a Caucasian woman with a therapy-related acute
myeloid leukemia after Ewing's sarcoma. Molecular demonstration of the genetic
fusion NUP98-HOXA9 was performed by RT-PCR, and gene expression was analyzed by
real-time PCR, including four AML patients with MLL rearrangements for
comparative analysis. Cytologic and flow cytometric analysis was also carried
out.
RESULTS: After cytologic and flow cytometric analysis diagnostics was
therapy-related myeloid neoplasm (t-MN). The major component of blasts in the
acute leukemia was with neutrophilic differentiation, but 13% erythroid lineage
blasts were also found. Cytogenetic and FISH analysis revealed t(7;11)(p15;p15)
and NUP98-HOXA9 fusion gene was demonstrated. Gene expression analysis showed
upregulation of EVI1 and MEIS1 in the index patient, both of them previously
related to a worst outcome.
CONCLUSION: In this work, we include a detailed molecular, clinical, cytological,
and cytometric study of the second t-AML bearing NUP98-HOXA9 genetic fusion.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26418229  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


25. Cancer Immunol Immunother. 2015 Dec;64(12):1505-15. doi:
10.1007/s00262-015-1755-8. Epub 2015 Sep 16.

RNA and protein expression of herpesvirus entry mediator (HVEM) is associated
with molecular markers, immunity-related pathways and relapse-free survival of
patients with AML.

Lichtenegger FS(1,)(2,)(3), Kondla I(4,)(5), Krempasky M(4,)(5), Weber AL(4,)(5),
Herold T(4,)(6), Krupka C(4,)(5), Spiekermann K(4,)(6), Schneider S(4), Büchner
T(7), Berdel WE(7), Wörmann BJ(8), Hiddemann W(4,)(6), Subklewe M(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Klinikum der Universität München,
Marchioninistraße 15, 81377, Munich, Germany.
Felix.Lichtenegger@med.uni-muenchen.de. (2)Clinical Cooperation Group
Immunotherapy, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany.
Felix.Lichtenegger@med.uni-muenchen.de. (3)Division of Clinical Pharmacology,
Department of Internal Medicine IV, Klinikum der Universität München, Munich,
Germany. Felix.Lichtenegger@med.uni-muenchen.de. (4)Department of Internal
Medicine III, Klinikum der Universität München, Marchioninistraße 15, 81377,
Munich, Germany. (5)Clinical Cooperation Group Immunotherapy, Helmholtz Zentrum
München, Munich, Germany. (6)Clinical Cooperation Group Pathogenesis of Acute
Leukemia, Helmholtz Zentrum München, Munich, Germany. (7)Department of Medicine
A, Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Münster, Germany. (8)German Society
of Hematology and Oncology, Berlin, Germany.

Immune checkpoint molecules are highly relevant as potential prognostic markers
and therapeutic targets in malignant diseases. HVEM belongs to the TNF receptor
family and provides stimulatory as well as inhibitory signals depending on the
ligand. Abnormal HVEM expression has been described in various malignancies, but 
the role in AML is unknown. Here we report extensive data on HVEM surface protein
expression analyzed by flow cytometry on bone marrow leukemic cells of 169 AML
patients at diagnosis. An independent cohort of 512 AML patients was analyzed for
HVEM mRNA expression in bone marrow samples by Affymetrix microarrays.
Consistently for both cohorts and methods, we show that HVEM was differentially
expressed and that expression levels were associated with defined genetic
markers. HVEM expression was lower in cases with FLT3-ITD (p = 0.001, p < 0.001),
with mutations in NPM1 (p = 0.001, p < 0.001) or with the combination of NPM1
mutation and FLT3 wild type (p = 0.049, p = 0.050), while a biallelic mutation in
CEBPA correlated positively with higher HVEM expression (p = 0.015, p < 0.001).
In a differential gene expression analysis, we found 13 genes including HOXA9,
MEIS1 and MN1 that were closely associated with HVEM expression. Besides, four
gene sets closely linked to immunity were enriched in HVEM (high) samples.
Finally, high expression of HVEM was associated with a trend toward longer
relapse-free survival. The results of this study provide new information on the
potential significance of HVEM in AML.

PMID: 26377688  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cancer Cell. 2015 Sep 14;28(3):329-42. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.07.017.

Frequent Derepression of the Mesenchymal Transcription Factor Gene FOXC1 in Acute
Myeloid Leukemia.

Somerville TD(1), Wiseman DH(1), Spencer GJ(1), Huang X(1), Lynch JT(1), Leong
HS(2), Williams EL(1), Cheesman E(3), Somervaille TC(4).

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia Biology Laboratory, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The
University of Manchester, Manchester M20 4BX, UK. (2)Computational Biology
Support Group, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The University of
Manchester, Manchester M20 4BX, UK. (3)Department of Diagnostic Paediatric
Pathology, Royal Manchester Children's Hospital, Manchester M13 9WL, UK.
(4)Leukaemia Biology Laboratory, Cancer Research UK Manchester Institute, The
University of Manchester, Manchester M20 4BX, UK. Electronic address:
tim.somervaille@cruk.manchester.ac.uk.

Through in silico and other analyses, we identified FOXC1 as expressed in at
least 20% of human AML cases, but not in normal hematopoietic populations. FOXC1 
expression in AML was almost exclusively associated with expression of the HOXA/B
locus. Functional experiments demonstrated that FOXC1 contributes to a block in
monocyte/macrophage differentiation and enhances clonogenic potential. In in vivo
analyses, FOXC1 collaborates with HOXA9 to accelerate significantly the onset of 
symptomatic leukemia. A FOXC1-repressed gene set identified in murine leukemia
exhibited quantitative repression in human AML in accordance with FOXC1
expression, and FOXC1(high) human AML cases exhibited reduced morphologic
monocytic differentiation and inferior survival. Thus, FOXC1 is frequently
derepressed to functional effect in human AML.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26373280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2015 Aug;56(8):1045-52. doi: 10.11406/rinketsu.56.1045.

[IDH mutations activate Hoxa9/Meis1 and hypoxia pathways in acute myeloid
leukemia model mice].

[Article in Japanese]

Ogawara Y(1), Kitabayashi I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematological Malignancy, National Cancer Center Research
Institute.

Mutations in isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) 1 and 2 are frequently observed in
acute myeloid leukemia (AML), glioma, and many other cancers. While wild-type
IDHs mediate exchanges between isocitrate and a-ketoglutarate (a-KG), mutant IDHs
convert a-KG to oncometabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG), which causes
dysregulation of a set of a-KG-dependent dioxygenases such as TET, histone
demethylase and others. Because mutant IDH has no necessary functions in normal
cells, inhibitors directed against mutant IDH are not expected to have the side
effects as anti-cancer agents. To determine whether mutant IDH enzymes are valid 
targets for cancer therapy, we created a mouse model of mutant IDH2-dependent
AML. By using a combination of AML model mice with cre-loxp, we conditionally
deleted mutant IDH2 from AML mice, which resulted in the loss of leukemia stem
cells and significantly delayed the progression of AML. These results indicate
that mutant IDHs are promising targets for anticancer therapy.

PMID: 26345565  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. PLoS One. 2015 Sep 2;10(9):e0137003. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0137003.
eCollection 2015.

Methylation of HOXA9 and ISL1 Predicts Patient Outcome in High-Grade Non-Invasive
Bladder Cancer.

Kitchen MO(1), Bryan RT(2), Haworth KE(3), Emes RD(4), Luscombe C(5), Gommersall 
L(5), Cheng KK(2), Zeegers MP(6), James ND(7), Devall AJ(2), Fryer AA(3), Farrell
WE(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Science and Technology in Medicine, Keele University,
Stoke-on-Trent, United Kingdom; Urology Department, University Hospitals of North
Midlands NHS Trust, Stoke-on-Trent, United Kingdom. (2)School of Cancer Sciences,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, United Kingdom. (3)Institute for Science
and Technology in Medicine, Keele University, Stoke-on-Trent, United Kingdom.
(4)Advanced Data Analysis Centre, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, United
Kingdom. (5)Urology Department, University Hospitals of North Midlands NHS Trust,
Stoke-on-Trent, United Kingdom. (6)Department of Complex Genetics, NUTRIM School 
for Nutrition, Toxicology and Metabolism, Maastricht University Medical Centre,
Maastricht, The Netherlands. (7)Cancer Research Unit, University of Warwick,
Coventry, United Kingdom.

INTRODUCTION: Inappropriate DNA methylation is frequently associated with human
tumour development, and in specific cases, is associated with clinical outcomes. 
Previous reports of DNA methylation in low/intermediate grade non-muscle invasive
bladder cancer (NMIBC) have suggested that specific patterns of DNA methylation
may have a role as diagnostic or prognostic biomarkers. In view of the aggressive
and clinically unpredictable nature of high-grade (HG) NMIBC, and the current
shortage of the preferred treatment option (Bacillus:Calmette-Guerin), novel
methylation analyses may similarly reveal biomarkers of disease outcome that
could risk-stratify patients and guide clinical management at initial diagnosis.
METHODS: Promoter-associated CpG island methylation was determined in primary
tumour tissue of 36 initial presentation high-grade NMIBCs, 12
low/intermediate-grade NMIBCs and 3 normal bladder controls. The genes HOXA9,
ISL1, NKX6-2, SPAG6, ZIC1 and ZNF154 were selected for investigation on the basis
of previous reports and/or prognostic utility in low/intermediate-grade NMIBC.
Methylation was determined by Pyrosequencing of sodium-bisulphite converted DNA, 
and then correlated with gene expression using RT-qPCR. Methylation was
additionally correlated with tumour behaviour, including tumour recurrence and
progression to muscle invasive bladder cancer or metastases.
RESULTS: The ISL1 genes' promoter-associated island was more frequently
methylated in recurrent and progressive high-grade tumours than their
non-recurrent counterparts (60.0% vs. 18.2%, p = 0.008). ISL1 and HOXA9 showed
significantly higher mean methylation in recurrent and progressive tumours
compared to non-recurrent tumours (43.3% vs. 20.9%, p = 0.016 and 34.5% vs 17.6%,
p = 0.017, respectively). Concurrent ISL1/HOXA9 methylation in HG-NMIBC reliably 
predicted tumour recurrence and progression within one year (Positive Predictive 
Value 91.7%), and was associated with disease-specific mortality (DSM).
CONCLUSIONS: In this study we report methylation differences and similarities
between clinical sub-types of high-grade NMIBC. We report the potential ability
of methylation biomarkers, at initial diagnosis, to predict tumour recurrence and
progression within one year of diagnosis. We found that specific biomarkers
reliably predict disease outcome and therefore may help guide patient treatment
despite the unpredictable clinical course and heterogeneity of high-grade NMIBC. 
Further investigation is required, including validation in a larger patient
cohort, to confirm the clinical utility of methylation biomarkers in high-grade
NMIBC.

PMCID: PMC4558003
PMID: 26332997  [PubMed - in process]


29. Zhonghua Wei Zhong Bing Ji Jiu Yi Xue. 2015 Aug;27(8):662-6. doi:
10.3760/cma.j.issn.2095-4352.2015.08.009.

[shRNAs targeting high mobility group box-1 lead to inhibition of E-selectin
expression via homeobox A9 in human umbilical vein endothelial cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang X(1), Jiao L, Luan Z, Ma X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Critical Care Medicine, the First Hospital, China Medical
University, Shenyang 110001, Liaoning, China. Corresponding author: Ma Xiaochun, 
Email: xcma2972@sina.com.

OBJECTIVE: To approach the regulatory mechanism of high mobility group box-1 (
HMGB1 ) on the expression of E-selectin in human umbilical vein endothelial cell 
( HUVEC ).
METHODS: Homeobox A9 ( HOXA9 ) siRNA was transfected to HUVEC at logarithmic
phase, real-time fluorescence quantitative polymerase chain reaction ( real-time 
qPCR ) and Western Blot were used to determine the HOXA9 mRNA expression and
protein expressions; a blank control group and a nonsilence negative control
group were set. HUVEC stable transfected with pRNA-u6.1/Neo-HMGB1 shRNA plasmids 
( HUVEC with low-expression HMGB1 ) was obtained, and HOXA9 and E-selectin mRNA
expressions were determined with real-time qPCR; a nonsilence transfection group 
served as the negative control. The HOXA9 siRNA was transfected to HUVEC with
low-expression HMGB1 as co-transfection group, and the E-selectin expressions was
determined with real-time qPCR; a HMGB1 shRNA group and a HOXA9 nonsilence group 
served as control.
RESULTS: (1) HOXA9 mRNA ( 2(-<U+0394> <U+0394>CT) ) and protein expression ( integral A value )
in blank control group were 1.094±0.115 and 1.031±0.060. Compared with nonsilence
transfection group, HOXA9 siRNA transfection group could significantly reduced
mRNA and protein expression of HOXA9 [ HOXA9 mRNA ( 2(-<U+0394> <U+0394>CT) ): 0.257±0.030 vs. 
1.035±0.091, t = 14.010, P = 0.002; HOXA9 protein ( integral A value ):
0.278±0.042 vs. 0.975±0.014, t = 27.310, P = 0.002 ]. (2) Compared with
nonsilence transfection group, HMGB1 shRNA transfection could up-regulate HOXA9
mRNA expression in HUVEC ( 2(-<U+0394> <U+0394>CT) : 2.519±0.278 vs. 0.856±0.063, t = 10.100, P
= 0.001 ), also could down-regulate E-selectin mRNA expression ( 0.311±0.046 vs. 
1.080±0.201, t = 7.415, P = 0.000 ). (3) Compared with HOXA9 nonsilence group and
HMGB1 shRNA group, HMGB1 shRNA and HOXA9 siRNA co-transfected HUVEC cells could
significantly elevate E-selectin mRNA expression ( 2(-<U+0394> <U+0394>CT) : 3.445±0.428 vs.
1.085±0.212, 1.004±0.104, t(1) = 8.507, t(2) = 9.603, both P < 0.001 ).
CONCLUSIONS: HMGB1 may regulate E-selectin expression through the HOXA9
regulation in HUVEC.

PMID: 26255015  [PubMed - in process]


30. Cell Biosci. 2015 Jul 17;5:39. doi: 10.1186/s13578-015-0020-3. eCollection 2015.

Hypoxic metabolism in human hematopoietic stem cells.

Kocabas F(1), Xie L(2), Xie J(3), Yu Z(2), DeBerardinis RJ(4), Kimura W(5), Thet 
S(5), Elshamy AF(6), Abouellail H(7), Muralidhar S(5), Liu X(8), Chen C(9), Sadek
HA(5), Zhang CC(10), Zheng J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, UT Southwestern
Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390 USA ; Department of Genetics and
Bioengineering, Faculty of Engineering, Yeditepe University, Istanbul, 34755
Turkey. (2)Hongqiao International Institute of Medicine, Shanghai Tongren
Hospital / Faculty of Basic Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of
Medicine, Shanghai, 200025 China ; Key Laboratory of Cell Differentiation and
Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School 
of Medicine, Chongqing South Road 280, Shanghai, 200025 China. (3)Bingzhou
Medical University, Taishan Scholar Program, Yantai, 264003 China. (4)Departments
of Pediatrics and Genetics, UT Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX 
75390 USA. (5)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Cardiology, UT
Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, Dallas, TX 75390 USA. (6)Department of
Clinical Pathology, El Galaa Hospital, Cairo, Egypt. (7)Faculty of Medicine Ain
Shams University, El Abbaseya, Cairo, Egypt. (8)Key Laboratory of Cell
Differentiation and Apoptosis of Chinese Ministry of Education, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University School of Medicine, Chongqing South Road 280, Shanghai, 200025
China. (9)Hongqiao International Institute of Medicine, Shanghai Tongren Hospital
/ Faculty of Basic Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine,
Shanghai, 200025 China. (10)Departments of Physiology and Developmental Biology, 
UT Southwestern Medical Center at Dallas, 5323 Harry Hines Blvd, Dallas, TX 75390
USA.

BACKGROUND: Adult hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are maintained in a
microenvironment, known as niche in the endosteal regions of the bone marrow.
This stem cell niche with low oxygen tension requires HSCs to adopt a unique
metabolic profile. We have recently demonstrated that mouse long-term
hematopoietic stem cells (LT-HSCs) utilize glycolysis instead of mitochondrial
oxidative phosphorylation as their main energy source. However, the metabolic
phenotype of human hematopoietic progenitor and stem cells (HPSCs) remains
unknown.
RESULTS: We show that HPSCs have a similar metabolic phenotype, as shown by high 
rates of glycolysis, and low rates of oxygen consumption. Fractionation of human 
mobilized peripheral blood cells based on their metabolic footprint shows that
cells with a low mitochondrial potential are highly enriched for HPSCs.
Remarkably, low MP cells had much better repopulation ability as compared to high
MP cells. Moreover, similar to their murine counterparts, we show that Hif-1a is 
upregulated in human HPSCs, where it is transcriptionally regulated by Meis1.
Finally, we show that Meis1 and its cofactors Pbx1 and HoxA9 play an important
role in transcriptional activation of Hif-1a in a cooperative manner.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings highlight the unique metabolic properties of human
HPSCs and the transcriptional network that regulates their metabolic phenotype.

PMCID: PMC4517642
PMID: 26221532  [PubMed]


31. Mol Med. 2015 Jul 21. doi: 10.2119/molmed.2015.00071. [Epub ahead of print]

An EG-VEGF-dependent decrease in homeobox gene NKX3.1 contributes to
cytotrophoblast dysfunction: a possible mechanism in human fetal growth
restriction.

Murthi P(1,)(2), Brouillet S(3,)(4,)(5,)(6), Pratt A(1), Borg A(1), Kalionis
B(7), Goffin F(7), Tsatsaris V(8), Munaut C(7), Feige J(3,)(4,)(5), Benharouga
M(9), Fournier T(10), Alfaidy N(3,)(4,)(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Perinatal Medicine Pregnancy Research Centre, The Royal Women's 
Hospital and The University of Melbourne Department of Obstetrics and
Gynaecology, The Royal Women's Hospital, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.
(2)Department of Medicine, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria 3168, Australia. 
(3)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 1036,
Grenoble. France. (4)Univ. Grenoble-Alpes, 38000, Grenoble, France.
(5)Commissariat à l'Energie Atomique (CEA), iRTSV-Biology of Cancer and
infection, Grenoble, France. (6)Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Grenoble,
Hôpital Couple-Enfant, Centre Clinique et Biologique d'Assistance Médicale à la
Procréation, 38700, La Tronche, France. (7)Laboratory of Tumor and Developmental 
Biology University of Liège, Belgium. (8)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Hôpital Cochin, Maternité Port-Royal, Université Rene Descartes, F-75014 Paris,
France. (9)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche
5249, Laboratoire de Chimie et Biologie des Métaux, Grenoble, France. (10)INSERM,
U1139, Paris, F-75006, France, Universite Paris Descartes, UMR-S1139, Sorbonne
Paris Cite, Paris, F-75006, France, PremUp Foundation, Paris, F-75006, France.

Idiopathic fetal growth restriction (FGR) is frequently associated with placental
insufficiency. Previous reports have provided evidence that EG-VEGF (endocrine
gland derived-vascular endothelial growth factor), a placental secreted protein, 
is expressed during the first trimester of pregnancy, controls both trophoblast
proliferation and invasion, and its increased expression is associated with human
FGR. In this study, we hypothesise that EG-VEGF-dependent change in placental
homeobox gene expressions contribute to trophoblast dysfunction in idiopathic
FGR. The changes in EG-VEGF-dependent homeobox gene expressions were determined
using a Homeobox gene cDNA array on placental explants of 8-12 weeks' gestation
after stimulation with EG-VEGF in vitro for 24 hours. The Homeobox gene array
identified a >5-fold increase in HOXA9, HOXC8, HOXC10, HOXD1, HOXD8, HOXD9 and
HOXD11, while NKX 3.1 showed a >2 fold-decrease in mRNA expression compared to
untreated controls. Homeobox gene NKX3.1 was selected as a candidate because it
is a downstream target of EG-VEGF and its expression and functional role are
largely unknown in control and idiopathic FGR-affected placentae. Real-time PCR
and immunoblotting showed a significant decrease in NKX3.1 mRNA and protein
levels, respectively, in placentae from FGR compared to control pregnancies. Gene
inactivation in vitro using short-interference RNA specific for NKX3.1
demonstrated an increase in BeWo cell differentiation and a decrease in
HTR8-SVneo proliferation. We conclude that the decreased expression of homeobox
gene NKX3.1 down-stream of EG-VEGF may contribute to the trophoblast dysfunction 
associated with idiopathic FGR pregnancies.

PMCID: PMC4749495
PMID: 26208047  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


32. BMC Dev Biol. 2015 Jul 19;15:28. doi: 10.1186/s12861-015-0078-5.

Key pathways regulated by HoxA9,10,11/HoxD9,10,11 during limb development.

Raines AM(1), Magella B(2), Adam M(3), Potter SS(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, 3333 
Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. annaraines516@gmail.com. (2)Division of 
Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave.,
Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA. bliss.magella@cchmc.org. (3)Division of Developmental
Biology, Cincinnati Children's Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH, 
45229, USA. mike.adam@cchmc.org. (4)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati
Children's Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Ave., Cincinnati, OH, 45229, USA.
steve.potter@cchmc.org.

BACKGROUND: The 39 mammalian Hox genes show problematic patterns of functional
overlap. In order to more fully define the developmental roles of Hox genes it is
necessary to remove multiple combinations of paralogous and flanking genes. In
addition, the downstream molecular pathways regulated by Hox genes during limb
development remain incompletely delineated.
RESULTS: In this report we examine limb development in mice with frameshift
mutations in six Hox genes, Hoxa9,10,11 and Hoxd9,10,11. The mice were made with 
a novel recombineering method that allows the simultaneous targeting of
frameshift mutations into multiple flanking genes. The Hoxa9,10,11 (-/-)
/Hoxd9,10,11 (-/-) mutant mice show a reduced ulna and radius that is more severe
than seen in Hoxa11 (-/-)/Hoxd11 (-/-) mice, indicating a minor role for the
flanking Hox9,10 genes in zeugopod development, as well as their primary function
in stylopod development. The mutant mice also show severe reduction of Shh
expression in the zone of polarizing activity, and decreased Fgf8 expression in
the apical ectodermal ridge, thereby better defining the roles of these specific 
Hox genes in the regulation of critical signaling centers during limb
development. Importantly, we also used laser capture microdissection coupled with
RNA-Seq to characterize the gene expression programs in wild type and mutant
limbs. Resting, proliferative and hypertrophic compartments of E15.5 forelimb
zeugopods were examined. The results provide an RNA-Seq characterization of the
progression of gene expression patterns during normal endochondral bone
formation. In addition of the Hox mutants showed strongly altered expression of
Pknox2, Zfp467, Gdf5, Bmpr1b, Dkk3, Igf1, Hand2, Shox2, Runx3, Bmp7 and Lef1, all
of which have been previously shown to play important roles in bone formation.
CONCLUSIONS: The recombineering based frameshift mutation of the six flanking and
paralogous Hoxa9,10,11 and Hoxd9,10,11 genes provides a resource for the analysis
of their overlapping functions. Analysis of the Hoxa9,10,11 (-/-) /Hoxd9,10,11
(-/-) mutant limbs confirms and extends the results of previous studies using
mice with Hox mutations in single paralogous groups or with entire Hox cluster
deletions. The RNA-Seq analysis of specific compartments of the normal and mutant
limbs defines the multiple key perturbed pathways downstream of these Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC4506574
PMID: 26186931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Genomics Inform. 2015 Jun;13(2):45-52. doi: 10.5808/GI.2015.13.2.45. Epub 2015
Jun 30.

Elucidation of the Molecular Interaction between miRNAs and the HOXA9 Gene,
Involved in Acute Myeloid Leukemia, by the Assistance of Argonaute Protein
through a Computational Approach.

Das RP(1), Konkimalla VB(2), Rath SN(1), Hansa J(3), Jagdeb M(1).

Author information: 
(1)BIF Centre, Department of Bioinformatics, Orissa University of Agriculture &
Technology, Bhubaneswar 751003, India. (2)School of Biological Sciences, National
Institute of Science Education and Research, Bhubaneswar 751005, India.
(3)Department of Surgical Oncology, IMS and SUM Hospital, SOA University,
Bhubaneswar 751003, India.

Acute myeloid leukemia is a well characterized blood cancer in which the
unnatural growth of immature white blood cell takes place, where several genes
transcription is regulated by the micro RNAs (miRNAs). Argonaute (AGO) protein is
a protein family that binds to the miRNAs and mRNA complex where a strong binding
affinity is crucial for its RNA silencing function. By understanding pattern
recognition between the miRNAs-mRNA complex and its binding affinity with AGO
protein, one can decipher the regulation of a particular gene and develop
suitable siRNA for the same in disease condition. In the current work, HOXA9 gene
has been selected from literature, whose deregulation is well-established in
acute myeloid leukemia. Four miRNAs (mir-145, mir-126, let-7a, and mir-196b) have
been selected to target mRNA of HOXA9 (NCBI accession No. NM_152739.3). The
binding interaction between mRNAs and mRNA of HOXA9 gene was studied
computationally. From result, it was observed mir-145 has highest affinity for
HOXA9 gene. Furthermore, the interaction between miRNAs-mRNA duplex of all chosen
miRNAs are docked with AGO protein (PDB ID: 3F73, chain A) to study their
interaction at molecular level through an in silico approach. The residual
interaction and hydrogen bonding are inspected in Discovery Studio 3.5 suites.
The current investigation throws light on understanding of AGO-assisted miRNA
based gene silencing mechanism in HOXA9 gene associated in acute myeloid leukemia
computationally.

PMCID: PMC4500798
PMID: 26175662  [PubMed]


34. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 7;10(7):e0131889. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0131889.
eCollection 2015.

Filtration Device for On-Site Collection, Storage and Shipment of Cells from
Urine and Its Application to DNA-Based Detection of Bladder Cancer.

Andersson E(1), Dahmcke CM(2), Steven K(3), Larsen LK(1), Guldberg P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Danish Cancer Society Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark. (2)Danish Cancer
Society Research Center, Copenhagen, Denmark; Department of Pathology, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark. (3)Department of Urology, Copenhagen
University Hospital, Herlev, Denmark.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Urol. 2015 Aug;12(8):420.

Molecular analysis of cells from urine provides a convenient approach to
non-invasive detection of bladder cancer. The practical use of urinary cell-based
tests is often hampered by difficulties in handling and analyzing large sample
volumes, the need for rapid sample processing to avoid degradation of cellular
content, and low sensitivity due to a high background of normal cells. We present
a filtration device, designed for home or point-of-care use, which enables
collection, storage and shipment of urinary cells. A special feature of this
device is a removable cartridge housing a membrane filter, which after filtration
of urine can be transferred to a storage unit containing an appropriate
preserving solution. In spiking experiments, the use of this device provided
efficient recovery of bladder cancer cells with elimination of >99% of excess
smaller-sized cells. The performance of the device was further evaluated by
DNA-based analysis of urinary cells collected from 57 patients subjected to
transurethral resection following flexible cystoscopy indicating the presence of 
a tumor. All samples were tested for FGFR3 mutations and seven DNA methylation
markers (BCL2, CCNA1, EOMES, HOXA9, POU4F2, SALL3 and VIM). In the group of
patients where a transitional cell tumor was confirmed at histopathological
evaluation, urine DNA was positive for one or more markers in 29 out of 31 cases 
(94%), including 19 with FGFR3 mutation (61%). In the group of patients with
benign histopathology, urine DNA was positive for methylation markers in 13 out
of 26 cases (50%). Only one patient in this group was positive for a FGFR3
mutation. This patient had a stage Ta tumor resected 6 months later. The ability 
to easily collect, store and ship diagnostic cells from urine using the presented
device may facilitate non-invasive testing for bladder cancer.

PMCID: PMC4495058
PMID: 26151138  [PubMed - in process]


35. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Aug;1849(8):1066-80. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.06.014. Epub 2015 Jul 2.

MicroRNA-196b is transcribed from an autonomous promoter and is directly
regulated by Cdx2 and by posterior Hox proteins during embryogenesis.

Fantini S(1), Salsi V(1), Vitobello A(2), Rijli FM(2), Zappavigna V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via G.
Campi 213/d, Modena 41125, Italy. (2)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical 
Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland. (3)Department of Life
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via G. Campi 213/d, Modena
41125, Italy. Electronic address: zappavigna.vincenzo@unimore.it.

The miR-196 miRNA gene family located within the Hox gene clusters has been shown
to function during embryogenesis and to be aberrantly expressed in various
malignancies, including leukaemia, melanoma, and colorectal cancer. Despite its
involvement in numerous biological processes, the control of miR-196 expression
is still poorly defined. We identified the miR-196b promoter and found that the
mature miR-196b originates from a large, non-coding primary transcript, which
starts within an autonomous TATA box promoter and is not in physical continuity
with either the Hoxa10 or Hoxa9 main primary transcripts. A ~680bp genomic
fragment, spanning the pri-miR-196b transcription start site, is sufficient to
recapitulate the neural tube expression pattern of miR-196 during embryogenesis. 
This region contains potential binding sites for Cdx and 5'Hox transcription
factors. Two of these sites revealed to be necessary for neural tube expression
and were bound in vivo by Cdx2 and Hoxd13. We show that Cdx2 is required for
miR-196 expression and that both Cdx2 and 5'Hox, but not 3'Hox, are able to
activate the miR-196b promoter. The possible role of Cdx2- and 5'Hox-mediated
regulation of miR-196 expression in vertebrate anterior-posterior (AP) axis
formation during embryogenesis is discussed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26141604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Thorac Oncol. 2015 Jul;10(7):1037-48. doi: 10.1097/JTO.0000000000000560.

An Integrated Prognostic Classifier for Stage I Lung Adenocarcinoma Based on
mRNA, microRNA, and DNA Methylation Biomarkers.

Robles AI(1), Arai E, Mathé EA, Okayama H, Schetter AJ, Brown D, Petersen D,
Bowman ED, Noro R, Welsh JA, Edelman DC, Stevenson HS, Wang Y, Tsuchiya N, Kohno 
T, Skaug V, Mollerup S, Haugen A, Meltzer PS, Yokota J, Kanai Y, Harris CC.

Author information: 
(1)*Laboratory of Human Carcinogenesis, NCI-CCR, National Institutes of Health,
Bethesda, Maryland; Division of Molecular Pathology, National Cancer Center
Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan; Genetics Branch, NCI-CCR, National Institutes 
of Health, Bethesda, Maryland; §Division of Genome Biology, National Cancer
Center Research Institute, Tokyo, Japan; <U+2016>Department of Chemical and Biological
Working Environment, National Institute of Occupational Health, Oslo, Norway; and
¶Genomics and Epigenomics of Cancer Prediction Program, Institute of Predictive
and Personalized Medicine of Cancer (IMPPC), Badalona (Barcelona), Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Up to 30% stage I lung cancer patients suffer recurrence within 5
years of curative surgery. We sought to improve existing protein-coding gene and 
microRNA expression prognostic classifiers by incorporating epigenetic
biomarkers.
METHODS: Genome-wide screening of DNA methylation and pyrosequencing analysis of 
HOXA9 promoter methylation were performed in two independently collected cohorts 
of stage I lung adenocarcinoma. The prognostic value of HOXA9 promoter
methylation alone and in combination with mRNA and miRNA biomarkers was assessed 
by Cox regression and Kaplan-Meier survival analysis in both cohorts.
RESULTS: Promoters of genes marked by polycomb in embryonic stem cells were
methylated de novo in tumors and identified patients with poor prognosis. The
HOXA9 locus was methylated de novo in stage I tumors (p < 0.0005). High HOXA9
promoter methylation was associated with worse cancer-specific survival (hazard
ratio [HR], 2.6; p = 0.02) and recurrence-free survival (HR, 3.0; p = 0.01), and 
identified high-risk patients in stratified analysis of stages IA and IB. Four
protein-coding gene (XPO1, BRCA1, HIF1a, and DLC1), miR-21 expression, and HOXA9 
promoter methylation were each independently associated with outcome (HR, 2.8; p 
= 0.002; HR, 2.3; p = 0.01; and HR, 2.4; p = 0.005, respectively), and when
combined, identified high-risk, therapy naive, stage I patients (HR, 10.2; p =
3<U+2009>×<U+2009>10). All associations were confirmed in two independently collected cohorts.
CONCLUSION: A prognostic classifier comprising three types of genomic and
epigenomic data may help guide the postoperative management of stage I lung
cancer patients at high risk of recurrence.

PMCID: PMC4493931 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 26134223  [PubMed - in process]


37. Haematologica. 2015 Jul;100(7):850-3. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2015.129932.

Dangerous liaisons: cooperation between Pbx3, Meis1 and Hoxa9 in leukemia.

Thorne RM(1), Milne TA(2).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine,
University of Oxford, UK. (2)MRC Molecular Haematology Unit, Weatherall Institute
of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford, UK thomas.milne@imm.ox.ac.uk.

PMCID: PMC4486217
PMID: 26130510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Stem Cells. 2015 Nov;33(11):3304-14. doi: 10.1002/stem.2086. Epub 2015 Jul 14.

The Corepressor Rcor1 Is Essential for Normal Myeloerythroid Lineage
Differentiation.

Yao H(1), Goldman DC(2,)(3,)(4), Fan G(5), Mandel G(1,)(6), Fleming
WH(2,)(3,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Vollum Institute, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland, Oregon, USA.
(2)Department of Pediatrics, Oregon Health & Science University, Portland,
Oregon, USA. (3)Oregon Stem Cell Center, Oregon Health & Science University,
Portland, Oregon, USA. (4)Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health & Science
University, Portland, Oregon, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, Oregon Health &
Science University, Portland, Oregon, USA. (6)Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Portland, Oregon, USA.

Based on its physical interactions with histone-modifying enzymes, the
transcriptional corepressor Rcor1 has been implicated in the epigenetic
regulation blood cell development. Previously, we have demonstrated that Rcor1 is
essential for the maturation of definitive erythroid cells and fetal survival. To
determine the functional role of Rcor1 in steady-state hematopoiesis in the
adult, we used a conditional knockout approach. Here, we show that the loss of
Rcor1 expression results in the rapid onset of severe anemia due to a complete,
cell autonomous block in the maturation of committed erythroid progenitors. By
contrast, both the frequency of megakaryocyte progenitors and their capacity to
produce platelets were normal. Although the frequency of common lymphoid
progenitors and T cells was not altered, B cells were significantly reduced and
showed increased apoptosis. However, Rcor1-deficient bone marrow sustained normal
levels of B-cells following transplantation, indicating a non-cell autonomous
requirement for Rcor1 in B-cell survival. Evaluation of the myelomonocytic
lineage revealed an absence of mature neutrophils and a significant increase in
the absolute number of monocytic cells. Rcor1-deficient monocytes were less
apoptotic and showed ~100-fold more colony-forming activity than their normal
counterparts, but did not give rise to leukemia. Moreover, Rcor1(-/-) monocytes
exhibited extensive, cytokine-dependent self-renewal and overexpressed genes
associated with hematopoietic stem/progenitor cell expansion including Gata2,
Meis1, and Hoxa9. Taken together, these data demonstrate that Rcor1 is essential 
for the normal differentiation of myeloerythroid progenitors and for
appropriately regulating self-renewal activity in the monocyte lineage.

© 2015 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 26119982  [PubMed - in process]


39. Biomaterials. 2015 Sep;63:189-201. doi: 10.1016/j.biomaterials.2015.06.022. Epub 
2015 Jun 16.

Lentiviral vector system for coordinated constitutive and drug controlled
tetracycline-regulated gene co-expression.

Stahlhut M(1), Schwarzer A(2), Eder M(3), Yang M(2), Li Z(2), Morgan M(1),
Schambach A(4), Kustikova OS(5).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover,
Germany. (2)Institute of Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School,
Hannover, Germany; Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology and Stem Cell
Transplantation, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. (3)Department of
Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation, Hannover Medical 
School, Hannover, Germany. (4)Institute of Experimental Hematology, Hannover
Medical School, Hannover, Germany; Division of Hematology/Oncology, Boston
Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, USA. (5)Institute of
Experimental Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. Electronic
address: Kustikova.Olga@mh-hannover.de.

Constitutive co-expression of cooperating transgenes using retroviral integrating
vectors is frequently used for genetic modification of different cell types to
establish therapeutic or cancer models. However, such approaches are unable to
dissect the influence of dose, order and reversibility of transgene expression on
the fate of newly developed therapeutic/malignant phenotypes. We present a
modular lentiviral vector system, which provides expression of constitutive and
inducible components. To demonstrate its functionality, we constitutively
expressed the well-described transcription factor Meis1 followed by inducible
co-expression of collaborating partner Hoxa9 under the control of tetracycline
responsive promoters in murine fibroblasts and primary hematopoietic progenitor
cells (HPCs). Fluorescent markers to track transgene co-expression revealed
tightly controlled, efficiently inducible and reversible but cell type dependent 
gene transfer over time. We demonstrated dose-dependent blockade of myeloid
differentiation when both Meis1/Hoxa9 were concomitantly overexpressed in primary
HPCs in vitro, but the absence of the transformed phenotype in non-induced
samples or when Hoxa9 expression was down-regulated. This system combines the
advantages of lentiviral gene transfer and the opportunity for drug-controlled
co-expression of multiple transgenes to dissect, among others, gene networks
governing complex cell behavior, such as proto-oncogene dose-dependent
leukemogenic pathways or collaborating mechanisms of genes enhancing competitive 
fitness of hematopoietic cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26113075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 22;10(6):e0130495. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130495.
eCollection 2015.

Retrovirus-Mediated Expression of E2A-PBX1 Blocks Lymphoid Fate but Permits
Retention of Myeloid Potential in Early Hematopoietic Progenitors.

Woodcroft MW(1), Nanan K(1), Thompson P(1), Tyryshkin K(1), Smith SP(2), Slany
RK(3), LeBrun DP(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Medicine, Queen's University, Kingston, 
Ontario, Canada. (2)Department of Biomedical and Molecular Sciences, Queen's
University, Kingston, Ontario, Canada. (3)Department of Genetics, University
Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

The oncogenic transcription factor E2A-PBX1 is expressed consequent to
chromosomal translocation 1;19 and is an important oncogenic driver in cases of
pre-B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). Elucidating the mechanism by which
E2A-PBX1 induces lymphoid leukemia would be expedited by the availability of a
tractable experimental model in which enforced expression of E2A-PBX1 in
hematopoietic progenitors induces pre-B-cell ALL. However, hematopoietic
reconstitution of irradiated mice with bone marrow infected with
E2A-PBX1-expressing retroviruses consistently gives rise to myeloid, not
lymphoid, leukemia. Here, we elucidate the hematopoietic consequences of forced
E2A-PBX1 expression in primary murine hematopoietic progenitors. We show that
introducing E2A-PBX1 into multipotent progenitors permits the retention of
myeloid potential but imposes a dense barrier to lymphoid development prior to
the common lymphoid progenitor stage, thus helping to explain the eventual
development of myeloid, and not lymphoid, leukemia in transplanted mice. Our
findings also indicate that E2A-PBX1 enforces the aberrant, persistent expression
of some genes that would normally have been down-regulated in the subsequent
course of hematopoietic maturation. We show that enforced expression of one such 
gene, Hoxa9, a proto-oncogene associated with myeloid leukemia, partially
reproduces the phenotype produced by E2A-PBX1 itself. Existing evidence suggests 
that the 1;19 translocation event takes place in committed B-lymphoid
progenitors. However, we find that retrovirus-enforced expression of E2A-PBX1 in 
committed pro-B-cells results in cell cycle arrest and apoptosis. Our findings
indicate that the neoplastic phenotype induced by E2A-PBX1 is determined by the
developmental stage of the cell into which the oncoprotein is introduced.

PMCID: PMC4476730
PMID: 26098938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Leuk Res. 2015 Aug;39(8):874-82. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2015.04.012. Epub 2015
Apr 27.

HOXA9 and MEIS1 gene overexpression in the diagnosis of childhood acute
leukemias: Significant correlation with relapse and overall survival.

Adamaki M(1), Lambrou GI(2), Athanasiadou A(2), Vlahopoulos S(2), Papavassiliou
AG(3), Moschovi M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Unit, First Department of Pediatrics, University
of Athens, "Aghia Sofia" Children's Hospital, 11527 Athens, Greece. Electronic
address: madamaki@med.uoa.gr. (2)Pediatric Hematology/Oncology Unit, First
Department of Pediatrics, University of Athens, "Aghia Sofia" Children's
Hospital, 11527 Athens, Greece. (3)Department of Biological Chemistry, University
of Athens Medical School, 11527 Athens, Greece.

Homeobox genes HOXA9 and MEIS1 are evolutionarily conserved transcription factors
with essential roles in both hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis. They act as
dominant cooperating oncoproteins that cause acute leukemias bearing MLL
translocations and to a lesser extent T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL)
characterized by other gene fusions. Overexpression is associated with an adverse
prognosis in adults. In childhood, the genes have only been investigated in
leukemias bearing MLL translocations. The aim of this study was to determine
whether overexpression extends to leukemic subtypes other than the MLL-positive
subtype in childhood. We use quantitative real-time PCR methodology to
investigate gene expression in 100 children with acute leukemias and compare them
to those of healthy controls. We show that abnormally high HOXA9 and MEIS1 gene
expression is associated with a variety of leukemic subtypes, including various
maturation stages of B-cell ALL and cytogenetic types other than the MLL-positive
population, thus suggesting that the genes are implicated in the development of a
broad range of leukemic subtypes in childhood. In addition, we show that HOXA9
and MEIS1 overexpression are inversely correlated with relapse and overall
survival, so the genes could become useful predictive markers of the clinical
course of pediatric acute leukemias.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26059450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Sep 5;412:131-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.06.003. Epub
2015 Jun 4.

Roles of miR-196a on gene regulation of neuroendocrine tumor cells.

Li SC(1), Shi H(1), Khan M(2), Caplin M(3), Meyer T(4), Öberg K(5), Giandomenico 
V(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden.
(2)Neuroendocrine Tumour Unit, Centre for Gastroenterology, Royal Free Hospital, 
London, UK; The Royal Marsden NHS Foundation Trust, London, UK. (3)Neuroendocrine
Tumour Unit, Centre for Gastroenterology, Royal Free Hospital, London, UK.
(4)Department of Oncology, UCL Cancer Institute, University College London,
London, UK. (5)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala,
Sweden; Science for Life Laboratory,Endocrine Oncology Clinic, Uppsala University
Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden. (6)Department of Medical Sciences, Uppsala University,
Uppsala, Sweden; Science for Life Laboratory,Endocrine Oncology Clinic, Uppsala
University Hospital, Uppsala, Sweden. Electronic address:
valeria.giandomenico@medsci.uu.se.

This study aims at investigating miR-196a roles using in vitro models. miR-196a
was detected in small intestinal neuroendocrine tumors (SI-NETs) and lung NETs.
miR-196a target prediction analysis suggested HOXA9, HOXB7, LRP4 and RSPO2 genes 
for further investigation. The level of these four genes is detectable in SI-NET 
tissue specimens at different disease stages and serum samples of untreated and
somatostatin analogs treated patients with liver metastases. A miR-196a inhibitor
was used to silence its effects in NET cells. We show that the four target genes 
were significantly upregulated at transcriptional level in silenced NET cells.
HOXA9, HOXB7, LRP4 and RSPO2 encoded proteins are also upregulated at
translational level in miR-196a silenced NET cells. miR-196a downstream genes
BMP4, ETS1, CTNNB1, FZD5, LRP5 and LRP6 were significantly upregulated at
transcriptional level in miR-196a silenced CNDT2.5 and NCI-H727 cells. In
addition, miR-196a clearly does not play a role in NET cell growth control.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26052033  [PubMed - in process]


43. Oncogene. 2016 Mar 3;35(9):1090-8. doi: 10.1038/onc.2015.174. Epub 2015 Jun 1.

Role of HOXA9 in leukemia: dysregulation, cofactors and essential targets.

Collins CT(1), Hess JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(2)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine and Department of Medicine,
Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA.

HOXA9 is a homeodomain-containing transcription factor that has an important role
in hematopoietic stem cell expansion and is commonly deregulated in acute
leukemias. A variety of upstream genetic alterations in acute myeloid leukemia
lead to overexpression of HOXA9, which is a strong predictor of poor prognosis.
In many cases, HOXA9 has been shown to be necessary for maintaining leukemic
transformation; however, the molecular mechanisms through which it promotes
leukemogenesis remain elusive. Recent work has established that HOXA9 regulates
downstream gene expression through binding at promoter distal enhancers along
with a subset of cell-specific cofactor and collaborator proteins. Increasing
efforts are being made to identify both the critical cofactors and target genes
required for maintaining transformation in HOXA9-overexpressing leukemias. With
continued advances in understanding HOXA9-mediated transformation, there is a
wealth of opportunity for developing novel therapeutics that would be applicable 
for greater than 50% of AML with overexpression of HOXA9.

PMCID: PMC4666810
PMID: 26028034  [PubMed - in process]


44. Leukemia. 2015 Oct;29(10):2086-97. doi: 10.1038/leu.2015.126. Epub 2015 May 28.

Epigenetic therapy restores normal hematopoiesis in a zebrafish model of
NUP98-HOXA9-induced myeloid disease.

Deveau AP(1,)(2), Forrester AM(1,)(2), Coombs AJ(2,)(3), Wagner GS(2,)(3),
Grabher C(4,)(5), Chute IC(6), Léger D(6), Mingay M(7), Alexe G(4,)(8), Rajan
V(1,)(2), Liwski R(9,)(10), Hirst M(7,)(11), Steigmaier K(4,)(8), Lewis
SM(1,)(6,)(12,)(13), Look AT(4), Berman JN(1,)(2,)(10,)(14).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology & Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada. (2)Department of Pediatrics, IWK Health Centre, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada. (3)Department of Marine Biology, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Nova Scotia, Canada. (4)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer
Institute, Boston, MA, USA. (5)Institute of Toxicology & Genetics, Karlsruhe
Institute of Technology, Karlsruhe, Germany. (6)Department of Biology, University
of New Brunswick, Saint John, New Brunswick, Canada. (7)Department of
Microbiology & Immunology, Centre for High-Throughput Biology, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada. (8)Harvard Medical School,
Boston, MA, USA. (9)Department of Pathology, Queen Elizabeth II Health Science
Centre, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. (10)Department of Pathology, Dalhousie
University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada. (11)Canada's Michael Smith Genome
Sciences Centre, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.
(12)Department of Chemistry & Biochemistry, Université de Moncton, Moncton, New
Brunswick, Canada. (13)Atlantic Cancer Research Institute, Moncton, New
Brunswick, Canada. (14)Department of Pediatrics, Dalhousie University, Halifax,
Nova Scotia, Canada.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) occurs when multiple genetic aberrations alter white
blood cell development, leading to hyperproliferation and arrest of cell
differentiation. Pertinent animal models link in vitro studies with the use of
new agents in clinical trials. We generated a transgenic zebrafish expressing
human NUP98-HOXA9 (NHA9), a fusion oncogene found in high-risk AML. Embryos
developed a preleukemic state with anemia and myeloid cell expansion, and adult
fish developed a myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN). We leveraged this model to
show that NHA9 increases the number of hematopoietic stem cells, and that
oncogenic function of NHA9 depends on downstream activation of meis1, the
PTGS/COX pathway and genome hypermethylation through the DNA methyltransferase,
dnmt1. We restored normal hematopoiesis in NHA9 embryos with knockdown of meis1
or dnmt1, as well as pharmacologic treatment with DNA
(cytosine-5)-methyltransferase (DNMT) inhibitors or cyclo-oxygenase (COX)
inhibitors. DNMT inhibitors reduced genome methylation to near normal levels.
Strikingly, we discovered synergy when we combined sub-monotherapeutic doses of a
histone deacetylase inhibitor plus either a DNMT inhibitor or COX inhibitor to
block the effects of NHA9 on zebrafish blood development. Our work proposes novel
drug targets in NHA9-induced myeloid disease, and suggests rational therapies by 
combining minimal doses of known bioactive compounds.

PMID: 26017032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Cancer Cell Microenviron. 2014 Nov 13;1(6):e379.

Adaptation of ovarian cancer cells to the peritoneal environment: Multiple
mechanisms of the developmental patterning gene HOXA9.

Ko SY(1), Naora H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

The lethality of ovarian cancer stems from its propensity to involve the
peritoneal cavity. However, the mechanisms that enable ovarian cancer cells to
readily adapt to the peritoneal environment are not well understood. Here, we
describe our recent studies in which we identified the mechanisms by which the
transcription factor encoded by the patterning gene HOXA9 promotes the aggressive
behavior of ovarian cancer. Firstly, we identified that HOXA9 promotes ovarian
tumor growth and angiogenesis by activating the gene encoding transforming growth
factor-ß2 (TGF-ß2), which in turn stimulates peritoneal fibroblasts and
mesenchymal stem cells to acquire features of cancer-associated fibroblasts.
Secondly, by inducing TGF-ß2 and chemokine (C-C motif) ligand 2, HOXA9 stimulates
peritoneal macrophages to acquire an immunosuppressive phenotype. Thirdly, HOXA9 
stimulates attachment of ovarian cancer cells to peritoneal mesothelial cells by 
inducing expression of P-cadherin. By inducing P-cadherin, HOXA9 also enables
floating cancer cells in the peritoneal cavity to form aggregates and escape
anoikis. Together, our studies demonstrate that HOXA9 enables ovarian cancer
cells to adapt to the peritoneal environment and 'educates' different types of
stromal cells to become permissive for tumor growth. Our studies provide new
insights into the regulation of tumor-stroma interactions in ovarian cancer and
implicate several key effector molecules as candidate therapeutic targets.

PMCID: PMC4437227
PMID: 26000332  [PubMed]


46. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(9):3941-4.

Aberrant Expression of HOXA5 and HOXA9 in AML.

Zhao P(1), Tan L, Ruan J, Wei XP, Zheng Y, Zheng LX, Jiang WQ, Fang WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China E-mail : weijiafang@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant expression of HOX gene expression has been observed in
cancer. The purpose of this study was to investigate the alteration of HOXA5 and 
HOXA9 expression and their clinical significance in acute meloid leukemia (AML).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The expression of HOXA5 and HOXA9 genes of bone marrow
samples from 75 newly diagnosed AML patients and 22 healthy controls for
comparison were examined by Real- time quantitative PCR (RQ-PCR) assay.
Statistical analysis was conducted to evaluate HOXA5 and HOXA9 expression as
possible biomarkers for AML.
RESULTS: The results showed that the complete remission rate (52.6%) of the
patients who highly expressed HOXA5 and HOXA9 was significantly lower than that
(88.9%) in patients who lowly express the genes (P=0.015). Spearmann correlation 
coefficients indicated that the expression levels for HOXA5 and HOXA9 genes were 
highly interrelated (r=0.657, P<0.001). Meanwhile, we detected significant
correlations between HOXA9 expression and age in this limited set of patients
(P=0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest a prognostic impact of increased expression of
HOXA5 and HOXA9 in AML patients.

PMID: 25987065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Genet Mol Res. 2015 May 4;14(2):4532-40. doi: 10.4238/2015.May.4.11.

Cumulative methylation alternations of gene promoters and protein markers for
diagnosis of epithelial ovarian cancer.

Xing BL(1), Li T(2), Tang ZH(2), Jiao L(2), Ge SM(2), Qiang X(2), OuYang J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Changzhou Maternal and Child Health Care Hospital,
Changzhou, China 793506861@qq.com. (2)Department of Pathology, Changzhou Maternal
and Child Health Care Hospital, Changzhou, China.

DNA methylation plays an important role in carcinogenesis and cancer development.
In this study, we examined gene methylation in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC)
using cationic conjugated polymer (CCP)-based fluorescence resonance energy
transfer (FRET) to evaluate the application of cumulative methylation
alternations of genes associated with cancer antigen 125 for early cancer
diagnosis. The methylation status of 3 genes (Ras association domain family 1
isoform A, RASSF1A; opioid-binding protein/cell adhesion molecule, OPCML;
homeobox A9, HOXA9) were examined and compared in 35 EOC samples and 11 normal
ovarian tissue samples using CCP-based FRET. Gene methylation levels were
clustered into 3 sections and assigned a value; values for the 3 genes were
summed. Although methylation of the OPCML gene was significantly associated with 
stage, histological types, grade, and ascites and that of RASSF1A and HOXA9 was
not, the sum for the 3 genes was significantly associated with stage and ascites.
The sum showed higher sensitivity (85.7%) and specificity (100%) for
discriminating EOC from normal ovarian tissues than did the methylation status of
RASSF1A, OPCML, and HOXA9 (48.6, 77.1, 77.1, and 100, 88.1, 100%, respectively). 
Combining cancer antigen 125 levels with the sum increased the sensitivity to
94.3%. The detection and analysis of a panel of genes' methylation status with
the CCP-based FRET technique may be useful for diagnosis and screening of EOC;
the associated cancer antigen 125 can be used to increase diagnostic sensitivity.

PMID: 25966226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Iran J Ped Hematol Oncol. 2015;5(1):27-42. Epub 2015 Mar 15.

Expression profiling of microarray gene signatures in acute and chronic myeloid
leukaemia in human bone marrow.

Sakhinia E(1), Estiar MA(2), Andalib S(3), Rezamand A(4).

Author information: 
(1)Connective Tissue Disease Research Center, Department of Medical Genetics,
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran. (2)Department of Medical
Genetics, School of Medicine, Tehran University of Medical Sciences, Tehran,
Iran. (3)Neurosciences Research Center, Imam Reza Hospital, Tabriz University of 
Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran. (4)Department of Pediatrics, Children Hospital,
Tabriz University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.

BACKGROUND: Classification of cancer subtypes by means of microarray signatures
is becoming increasingly difficult to ignore as a potential to transform
pathological diagnosis; nonetheless, measurement of Indicator genes in routine
practice appears to be arduous. In a preceding published study, we utilized
real-time PCR measurement of Indicator genes in acute lymphoid leukaemia (ALL)
and acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) as a way of application of microarray gene
signatures. More to the point, the specificity of such genes for this distinction
was investigated by their measurement in cases afflicted with chronic myeloid
leukaemia (CML) and with normal bone marrow (BM).
MATERIAL AND METHOD: Mononuclear cells were sorted into unselected (total),
CD34+ve, and CD34-ve fractions, mRNA globally amplified by using PolyA PCR.
Moreover, the level of expression of 17 Indicator genes was identified by using
real-time PCR.
RESULTS: No statistically significant difference was observed in expression for
any gene among CML cases. Cyclin D3 (p=0.04) was exclusively upregulated in CML
in the CD34+ fraction, notwithstanding upregulation of HkrT-1 (p=0.02) and
fumarylacetoacetate (p=0.03) in AML. HOXA9 experienced a non-significant
upregulation in AML; however, in combination with proteoglycan 1 distinguished
between AML and normal samples in the CD34- fraction in unsupervised clustering. 
Unsupervised clustering distinguished among AML and the other diagnostic groups.
CONCLUSION: The evidence from the present study suggests that the genes
discriminatory between ALL and AML are uninformative in the context of CML and
normal BM, excepting for distinction with AML.

PMCID: PMC4402154
PMID: 25914800  [PubMed]


49. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):10840-52.

The long non-coding RNA HOTTIP enhances pancreatic cancer cell proliferation,
survival and migration.

Cheng Y(1), Jutooru I(1,)(2), Chadalapaka G(1), Corton JC(3), Safe S(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843, USA. (2)Covance, Inc., Madison, WI 53704, USA.
(3)Integrated Systems Toxicology Division, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, USA.
(4)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

HOTTIP is a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) transcribed from the 5' tip of the HOXA 
locus and is associated with the polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2) and WD
repeat containing protein 5 (WDR5)/mixed lineage leukemia 1 (MLL1) chromatin
modifying complexes. HOTTIP is expressed in pancreatic cancer cell lines and
knockdown of HOTTIP by RNA interference (siHOTTIP) in Panc1 pancreatic cancer
cells decreased proliferation, induced apoptosis and decreased migration. In
Panc1 cells transfected with siHOTTIP, there was a decrease in expression of 757 
genes and increased expression of 514 genes, and a limited gene analysis
indicated that HOTTIP regulation of genes is complex. For example, Aurora kinase 
A, an important regulator of cell growth, is coregulated by MLL and not WDR5 and,
in contrast to previous studies in liver cancer cells, HOTTIP does not regulate
HOXA13 but plays a role in regulation of several other HOX genes including
HOXA10, HOXB2, HOXA11, HOXA9 and HOXA1. Although HOTTIP and the HOX-associated
lncRNA HOTAIR have similar pro-oncogenic functions, they regulate strikingly
different sets of genes in Panc1 cells and in pancreatic tumors.

PMCID: PMC4484423
PMID: 25912306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Haematologica. 2015 Jul;100(7):905-13. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2015.124032. Epub
2015 Apr 24.

Pbx3 and Meis1 cooperate through multiple mechanisms to support Hox-induced
murine leukemia.

Garcia-Cuellar MP(1), Steger J(1), Füller E(1), Hetzner K(1), Slany RK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-University, Erlangen, Germany.
(2)Department of Genetics, Friedrich-Alexander-University, Erlangen, Germany
robert.slany@fau.de.

Hox homeobox transcription factors drive leukemogenesis efficiently only in the
presence of Meis or Pbx proteins. Here we show that Pbx3 and Meis1 need to
dimerize to support Hox-induced leukemia and we analyze the molecular details of 
this cooperation. In the absence of Pbx3, Meis1 was highly unstable. As shown by 
a deletion analysis Meis1 degradation was contingent on a motif coinciding with
the Pbx-binding domain. Either deletion of this sequence or binding to Pbx3
prolonged the half-life of Meis1 by preventing its ubiquitination. Meis1
break-down could also be blocked by inhibition of the ubiquitin proteasome
system, indicating tight post-transcriptional control. In addition, Meis1 and
Pbx3 cooperated genetically as overexpression of Pbx3 induced endogenous Meis1
transcription. These functional interactions translated into in vivo activity.
Blocking Meis1/Pbx3 dimerization abrogated the ability to enhance proliferation
and colony-forming cell numbers in primary cells transformed by Hoxa9.
Furthermore, expression of Meis1 target genes Flt3 and Trib2 was dependent on
Pbx3/Meis1 dimerization. This correlated with the requirement of Meis1 to bind
Pbx3 in order to form high affinity DNA/Hoxa9/Meis1/Pbx3 complexes in vitro.
Finally, kinetics and severity of disease in transplantation assays indicated
that Pbx3/Meis1 dimers are rate-limiting factors for Hoxa9-induced leukemia.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4486225
PMID: 25911551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Exp Hematol. 2015 Jul;43(7):565-77.e1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2015.04.002. Epub
2015 Apr 20.

Low-level GATA2 overexpression promotes myeloid progenitor self-renewal and
blocks lymphoid differentiation in mice.

Nandakumar SK(1), Johnson K(2), Throm SL(2), Pestina TI(2), Neale G(3), Persons
DA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, USA. Electronic address: Satish-kumar.nandakumar@stjude.org.
(2)Department of Experimental Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, 
Memphis, TN, USA. (3)Hartwell Center for Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, St.
Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, USA.

The transcription factor GATA2 is highly expressed in hematopoietic stem cells
and is downregulated during lineage maturation. Gain of function mutations, loss 
of function mutations, and overexpression of GATA2 have been reported in acute
myeloid leukemia. In previous studies, we and others showed that GATA2
overexpression at high levels, similar to that seen in hematopoietic stem cells, 
blocked differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells and progenitors. To better
understand the effects of GATA2, we designed a Tamoxifen-inducible GATA2-estrogen
receptor (ERT) vector. In the absence of Tamoxifen, small amounts of GATA2-ERT
were still able to enter the nucleus in mouse bone marrow (BM) cells, providing
us with a tool to test the effects of low-level GATA2 overexpression. We observed
that this low-level GATA2 overexpression enhanced self-renewal of myeloid
progenitors in vitro and resulted in immortalization of BM cells to myeloid cell 
lines. Continuous GATA2-ERT expression was required for the proliferation of
these immortalized lines. Myeloid expansion and a block in T and B lineage
differentiation were observed in mice transplanted with GATA2-ERT-expressing BM
cells. Myeloid expansion occurred after the granulocyte monocyte progenitor
stage, and lymphoid block was distal to the common lymphoid progenitor in
transgenic mice. GATA2 appeared to induce growth via downstream activation of
Nmyc and Hoxa9. Our results demonstrate that GATA2 overexpression at low level
confers self-renewal capacity to myeloid progenitors and is relevant to myeloid
leukemia development.

Copyright © 2015 ISEH - International Society for Experimental Hematology.
Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25907033  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. J Immunol. 2015 Jun 1;194(11):5375-87. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401909. Epub 2015
Apr 20.

HoxA10 Terminates Emergency Granulopoiesis by Increasing Expression of Triad1.

Wang H(1), Bei L(2), Shah CA(1), Hu L(1), Eklund EA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine and Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611; and. (2)Feinberg School of Medicine
and Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University,
Chicago, IL 60611; and Jesse Brown Veteran's Administration Medical Center,
Chicago, IL 60612. (3)Feinberg School of Medicine and Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611; and
Jesse Brown Veteran's Administration Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612
e-eklund@northwestern.edu.

Expression of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Triad1 is greater in mature granulocytes
than in myeloid progenitor cells. HoxA10 actives transcription of the gene
encoding Triad1 (ARIH2) during myeloid differentiation, but the contribution of
increased Triad1 expression to granulocyte production or function is unknown.
Mice with bone marrow-specific disruption of the ARIH2 gene exhibit constitutive 
inflammation with tissue infiltration by granulocytes and B cells. In contrast,
disruption of the HOXA10 gene in mice neither constitutively activates the innate
immune response nor significantly alters steady-state granulopoiesis. This study 
explores the impact of HoxA10-induced Triad1 expression on emergency (stress)
granulopoiesis. We found that mice with HOXA10 gene disruption exhibited an
overwhelming and fatal emergency granulopoiesis response that was characterized
by tissue infiltration with granulocytes, but reversed by re-expression of Triad1
in the bone marrow. We determined that HoxA9 repressed ARIH2 transcription in
myeloid progenitor cells, antagonizing the effect of HoxA10 on Triad1 expression.
Also, we found that differentiation-stage-specific ARIH2 transcription was
regulated by the tyrosine phosphorylation states of HoxA9 and HoxA10. Our studies
demonstrate a previously undescribed role for HoxA10 in terminating emergency
granulopoiesis, suggesting an important contribution by Hox proteins to the
innate immune response.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4433877 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25895533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Discovering Small Molecules that Overcome Differentiation Arrest in Acute Myeloid
Leukemia.

Sykes DB, Haynes MK, Waller A, Garcia M, Ursu O, Gouveia KE, Sklar L, Lewis TA,
Dandapani S, Munoz B, Scadden DT, Palmer M, Schreiber SL.
In: Probe Reports from the NIH Molecular Libraries Program [Internet]. Bethesda
(MD): National Center for Biotechnology Information (US); 2010-.
2013 Dec 15.

Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML) in adults is a clinically devastating disease with a
5-year survival rate of only 25%. We lack new and effective therapies for AML,
and the chemotherapy standard of care remains unchanged in thirty years. One
success story has been the discovery of drugs that trigger the differentiation of
leukemic blasts in a small subset of patients, approximately 10%, with acute
pro-myelocytic leukemia. Differentiation therapy is not available for the
remaining 90% of acute myeloid leukemia patients. We generated a novel cell line 
model of acute myeloid leukemia, based on the potent ability of the homeobox
protein HoxA9 to block differentiation in primary murine cultures of immature
myeloblasts. These cells were engineered with a built-in reporter of
differentiation, permitting a high-throughput flow-cytometry-based phenotypic
differentiation screen against more than 330,000 small molecules. 2,500 compounds
were retested resulting in twenty-nine confirmed hits. Active compounds and
analogs were obtained, validated, and tested in dose against the screening cell
line as well as other murine and human cell lines. This identified twelve active 
compounds from which two distinct scaffolds were chosen for further study based
upon chemical tractability and availability. One of the two hits demonstrated
stereospecificity, hence we chose to explore SAR about this lead. Of
approximately thirty synthesized analogs, we identified four compounds that were 
more active in three cell lines (THP-1, U937 and ERHOXA9). We have chosen
compound ML390 as the probe given its potent activity. Of note, the lead compound
and its analog ML390 are both very well-tolerated with limited cytotoxicity at
high concentrations when assayed against cultures of normal human primary bone
marrow cells. ML390 exerts its potent differentiation effect on multiple leukemia
models, though its mechanism of action is currently unknown. Target
identification assays as well as experiments for testing the compound in vivo are
currently underway. Mechanism of action studies will be performed in parallel
using a combination of gene expression studies (Library of Integrated
Network-Based Cellular Signatures, LINCS), stable isotope labeling by amino acids
in cell culture (SILAC), and next-generation sequencing of compound-resistant
cell clones. ML390 will be tested in mice harboring a HoxA9-driven acute myeloid 
leukemia to assess its differentiation effect as well as its effect on leukemic
progression and overall survival. The chemotherapy standard of care in acute
myeloid leukemia relies on traditional cytotoxic chemotherapy and has not changed
in more than thirty years. We need new, and less toxic, therapeutic agents. In
the context of our novel cell line model of AML, we hope to have identified a
clinically relevant pro-differentiation therapy for acute myeloid leukemia. If
successful, we anticipate that ML390 will offer insight into the mechanism of
overcoming differentiation arrest, and will translate into a starting point for a
much-needed new and potent treatment for patients with acute myeloid leukemia.

PMID: 25834907  [PubMed]


54. Cancer Res. 2015 May 15;75(10):2005-16. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-14-2200. Epub 
2015 Mar 20.

IDH2 and NPM1 Mutations Cooperate to Activate Hoxa9/Meis1 and Hypoxia Pathways in
Acute Myeloid Leukemia.

Ogawara Y(1), Katsumoto T(1), Aikawa Y(1), Shima Y(1), Kagiyama Y(1), Soga T(2), 
Matsunaga H(3), Seki T(3), Araki K(3), Kitabayashi I(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematological Malignancy, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Institute for Advanced Biosciences, Keio University, 
Tsuruoka, Yamagata, Japan. (3)R&D Division, Daiichi Sankyo Co., Ltd., Tokyo,
Japan. (4)Division of Hematological Malignancy, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, Tokyo, Japan. ikitabay@ncc.go.jp.

IDH1 and IDH2 mutations occur frequently in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and
other cancers. The mutant isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH) enzymes convert
a-ketoglutarate (a-KG) to the oncometabolite 2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG), which
dysregulates a set of a-KG-dependent dioxygenases. To determine whether mutant
IDH enzymes are valid targets for cancer therapy, we created a mouse model of AML
in which mice were transplanted with nucleophosmin1 (NPM)(+/-) hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cells cotransduced with four mutant genes (NPMc, IDH2/R140Q,
DNMT3A/R882H, and FLT3/ITD), which often occur simultaneously in human AML
patients. Conditional deletion of IDH2/R140Q blocked 2-HG production and
maintenance of leukemia stem cells, resulting in survival of the AML mice.
IDH2/R140Q was necessary for the engraftment or survival of NPMc(+) cells in
vivo. Gene expression analysis indicated that NPMc increased expression of Hoxa9.
IDH2/R140Q also increased the level of Meis1 and activated the hypoxia pathway in
AML cells. IDH2/R140Q decreased the 5hmC modification and expression of some
differentiation-inducing genes (Ebf1 and Spib). Taken together, our results
indicated that IDH2 mutation is critical for the development and maintenance of
AML stem-like cells, and they provided a preclinical justification for targeting 
mutant IDH enzymes as a strategy for anticancer therapy.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 25795706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Spine (Phila Pa 1976). 2015 Mar 17. [Epub ahead of print]

The Molecular feature of HOX Gene Family in the Intramedullary Spinal Tumors.

Gu S(1), Gu W, Shou J, Xiong J, Liu X, Sun B, Yang D, Xie R.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Neurosurgery, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai
200040, China 2Department of Neuropathology, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, 
Shanghai 200040, China.

STUDY DESIGN: The protein expression of HOXB13 and HOXA9 were detected.
OBJECTIVE: The purpose of this study is to investigate the molecular signature of
spinal ependymoma (EPN) and astrocytoma, two most common types of intramedullary 
spinal tumor.
SUMMARY OF BACKGROUND DATA: Intramedullary spinal tumor is unusual. It will lead 
to high neurological morbidity and mortality without treatment. Till now, little 
molecular feature has been elucidated.
METHOD: A total of 37 cases of spinal EPN including 12 myxopapillary EPN, 18
classic EPN, and 7 anaplastic EPN, and another 12 cases of astrocytoma were
enrolled in this study. Immunohistochemistry analysis in a large cohort of
clinical tumor samples to compare the expressions of HOXB13 and HOXA9 not only
between spinal EPN and astrocytoma, but also among all three WHO grades of spinal
EPN.
RESULTS: The results showed that HOXB13 and HOXA9 were selectively expressed in
spinal EPN instead of astrocytoma. Further, we found the strongest positive
response of HOXB13 in MEPN, while that of HOXA9 was ubiquitously detected in all 
subgroups of EPN.
CONCLUSION: The specificity and sensitivity of HOXB13 in MEPN indicated that
HOXB13 might be a diagnostic marker to distinguish MEPN from other two types of
EPN, and a promising therapeutic target for MEPN. The strong immunoreactivity of 
HOXA9 in spinal EPN suggested an indispensible role in the progression of spinal 
EPN, and further researches on its molecular function will provide new clues for 
developing treatment options.

PMID: 25785959  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


56. Cancer. 2015 Jun 15;121(12):1957-65. doi: 10.1002/cncr.29303. Epub 2015 Mar 13.

Correlation of gene methylation in surgical margin imprints with locoregional
recurrence in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma.

Hayashi M(1), Wu G(1), Roh JL(1), Chang X(1), Li X(1), Ahn J(1), Goldsmith M(1), 
Khan Z(1), Bishop J(2), Zhang Z(3), Zhou XC(3), Richmon J(1), Agrawal N(1), Koch 
WM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (2)Department of Pathology, Johns
Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland. (3)Department of
Oncology, Biostatistics, and Bioinformatics, Johns Hopkins University School of
Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland.

Comment in
    Cancer. 2015 Jun 15;121(12):1914-6.

BACKGROUND: Securing negative surgical margins is a critical goal for head and
neck surgery. Local recurrence develops even in some patients who have
histologically negative surgical margins. Minimal residual tumor cells may lead
to locoregional recurrence despite clear histologic margins reported at the time 
of resection of head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC). To identify
subclinical residual disease, the authors analyzed deep margin imprint samples
collected on 1-layer nitrocellulose sheets.
METHODS: Bisulfite-treated DNA samples from 73 eligible patients were amplified
by quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (QMSP) targeting 6
genes (deleted in colorectal cancer [DCC], endothelin receptor type B [EDNRB],
homeobox protein A9 [HOXA9], kinesin family member 1A [KIF1A], nidogen-2 [NID2], 
and N-methyl D-aspartate receptor subtype 2B [NR2B]). QMSP values were
dichotomized as positive or negative. Associations between the QMSP status of
deep margin samples and clinical outcomes were evaluated.
RESULTS: Two-gene methylation combinations among the genes DCC, EDNRB, and HOXA9 
were associated with decreased locoregional recurrence-free survival,
recurrence-free survival, and overall survival. The methylated gene combination
of EDNRB and HOXA9 in margin imprints was the most powerful predictor of poor
locoregional recurrence-free survival (hazard ratio [HR], 3.31; 95% confidence
interval [CI], 1.30-8.46; P =<U+2009>.012) independent of standard histologic factors.
In addition, methylation of both EDNRB and HOXA9 indicated a trend toward reduced
recurrence-free survival (HR, 2.74; 95% CI, 0.90-8.33; P =<U+2009>.075) and reduced OS
(HR, 5.78; 95% CI, 0.75-44.7; P =<U+2009>.093) in multivariable analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: A panel of gene methylation targets in deep surgical margin imprints
provides a potential predictive marker of postoperative locoregional recurrence. 
Intraoperative use of molecular margin imprint analysis may assist surgeons in
obtaining rigorously negative surgical margins and improve the outcome of head
and neck surgery.

© 2015 American Cancer Society.

PMCID: PMC4457542 [Available on 2016-06-15]
PMID: 25773145  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Oncotarget. 2015 Apr 10;6(10):7657-74.

A transcriptomic signature mediated by HOXA9 promotes human glioblastoma
initiation, aggressiveness and resistance to temozolomide.

Pojo M(1,)(2), Gonçalves CS(1,)(2), Xavier-Magalhães A(1,)(2), Oliveira
AI(1,)(2), Gonçalves T(1,)(2), Correia S(3), Rodrigues AJ(1,)(2), Costa S(1,)(2),
Pinto L(1,)(2), Pinto AA(4), Lopes JM(5,)(6,)(7), Reis RM(1,)(2,)(8), Rocha M(3),
Sousa N(1,)(2), Costa BM(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health Sciences,
University of Minho, Campus de Gualtar 4710-057 Braga, Portugal. (2)ICVS/3B's-PT 
Government Associate Laboratory, Braga/Guimarães, Campus de Gualtar 4710-057
Braga, Portugal. (3)Centre of Biological Engineering/Department of Informatics,
University of Minho, Campus de Gualtar 4710-057 Braga, Portugal. (4)Department of
Neurosurgery, Hospital de Braga, Sete Fontes, 4710-243 São Victor, Braga,
Portugal. (5)Department of Pathology, Hospital S. João, Alameda Professor Hernâni
Monteiro, 4200-319 Porto, Portugal. (6)Institute of Molecular Pathology and
Immunology at The University of Porto (IPATIMUP), Rua Dr. Roberto Frias s/n
4200-465 Porto, Portugal. (7)Medical Faculty, University of Porto, Alameda
Professor Hernâni Monteiro, 4200-319 Porto, Portugal. (8)Barretos Cancer
Hospital, Molecular Oncology Research Center, Rua Antenor Duarte Vilela,
1331-Doutor Paulo Prata, Barretos-SP, 14780-000, Brasil.

Glioblastoma is the most malignant brain tumor, exhibiting remarkable resistance 
to treatment. Here we investigated the oncogenic potential of HOXA9 in
gliomagenesis, the molecular and cellular mechanisms by which HOXA9 renders
glioblastoma more aggressive, and how HOXA9 affects response to chemotherapy and 
survival. The prognostic value of HOXA9 in glioblastoma patients was validated in
two large datasets from TCGA and Rembrandt, where high HOXA9 levels were
associated with shorter survival. Transcriptomic analyses identified novel
HOXA9-target genes with key roles in cancer-related processes, including cell
proliferation, DNA repair, and stem cell maintenance. Functional studies with
HOXA9-overexpressing and HOXA9-silenced glioblastoma cell models revealed that
HOXA9 promotes cell viability, stemness and invasion, and inhibits apoptosis.
Additionally, HOXA9 promoted the malignant transformation of human immortalized
astrocytes in an orthotopic in vivo model, and caused tumor-associated death.
HOXA9 also mediated resistance to temozolomide treatment in vitro and in vivo via
upregulation of BCL2. Importantly, the pharmacological inhibition of BCL2 with
the BH3 mimetic ABT-737 reverted temozolomide resistance in HOXA9-positive cells.
These data establish HOXA9 as a driver of glioma initiation, aggressiveness and
resistance to therapy. In the future, the combination of BH3 mimetics with
temozolomide should be further explored as an alternative treatment for
glioblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4480707
PMID: 25762636  [PubMed - in process]


58. Biochem J. 2015 May 1;467(3):415-24. doi: 10.1042/BJ20141392.

PAQR3 modulates H3K4 trimethylation by spatial modulation of the regulatory
subunits of COMPASS-like complexes in mammalian cells.

Liu C(1), Zhang Y(1), Hou Y(1), Shen L(2), Li Y(3), Guo W(1), Xu D(1), Liu G(1), 
Zhao Z(1), Man K(4), Pan Y(1), Wang Z(1), Chen Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Key Laboratory of Nutrition and Metabolism, Institute for Nutritional
Sciences, Shanghai Institutes for Biological Sciences, Graduate School of the
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 200031, China.
(2)College of Horticulture and Landscape Architecture, Southwest University,
Chongqing 400716, China. (3)Department of Biochemistry, School of Life Sciences,
Fudan University, Shanghai 200438, China. (4)§School of Life Sciences and
Technology, ShanghaiTech University, Shanghai 200031, China.

Histone modification plays important roles in many biological processes such as
development and carcinogenesis. Methylation of histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4) is
commonly associated with transcriptional activation of genes. H3K4 methylation in
mammalian cells is carried out by COMPASS (complex of proteins associated with
Set1)-like complexes that are composed of catalytic subunits such as MLL1
(mixed-lineage leukaemia 1) and multiple regulatory subunits in which WDR5 (WD40 
repeat-containing protein 5), RBBP5 (retinoblastoma-binding protein 5), ASH2
(absent, small or homoeotic discs 2) and DPY30 [constituting the WRAD sub-complex
(WDR5-ASH2-RBBP5-DPY30 complex)] are the major ones shared from yeast to
metazoans. We report, in the present paper, a new mode of spatial regulation of
H3K4 methyltransferase complexes. PAQR3 (progestin and adipoQ receptors member
3), a tumour suppressor specifically localized in the Golgi apparatus, negatively
regulates H3K4 trimethylation (H3K4me3) in mammalian cells. Consistently, HOXC8
and HOXA9 gene expression was negatively regulated by PAQR3 expression levels.
Hypoxia-induced H3K4me3 was augmented by PAQR3 knockdown and suppressed by PAQR3 
overexpression in AGS gastric cancer cells. PAQR3 was able to interact directly
or indirectly with the four members of the WRAD sub-complex and tether them to
the Golgi apparatus, accompanied by reduction in histone methyltransferase
activity in the nucleus. PAQR3 also interfered with the interaction of WDR5 with 
the C-terminus of MLL1 (C-ter). Collectively, our study indicates that PAQR3
negatively modulates H3K4 methylation via altering the subcellular
compartmentalization of the core regulatory subunits of the COMPASS-like
complexes in mammalian cells.

PMID: 25706881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Science. 2015 Feb 13;347(6223):760-4. doi: 10.1126/science.1260880.

Mammalian evolution. Evolutionary development in basal mammaliaforms as revealed 
by a docodontan.

Luo ZX(1), Meng QJ(2), Ji Q(3), Liu D(4), Zhang YG(4), Neander AI(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, University of Chicago, Chicago, 
IL 60637, USA. zxluo@uchicago.edu mengqingjin@bmnh.org.cn. (2)Beijing Museum of
Natural History, Beijing 100050, China. zxluo@uchicago.edu
mengqingjin@bmnh.org.cn. (3)Institute of Geology, Chinese Academy of Geological
Sciences, Beijing 100037, China. (4)Beijing Museum of Natural History, Beijing
100050, China. (5)Department of Organismal Biology and Anatomy, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

A new Late Jurassic docodontan shows specializations for a subterranean
lifestyle. It is similar to extant subterranean golden moles in having reduced
digit segments as compared to the ancestral phalangeal pattern of mammaliaforms
and extant mammals. The reduction of digit segments can occur in mammals by
fusion of the proximal and intermediate phalangeal precursors, a developmental
process for which a gene and signaling network have been characterized in mouse
and human. Docodontans show a positional shift of thoracolumbar ribs, a
developmental variation that is controlled by Hox9 and Myf5 genes in extant
mammals. We argue that these morphogenetic mechanisms of modern mammals were
operating before the rise of modern mammals, driving the morphological disparity 
in the earliest mammaliaform diversification.

Copyright © 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science.

PMID: 25678660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Gynecol Oncol. 2015 Apr;137(1):14-22. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2015.01.552. Epub 2015
Feb 10.

Detection of endometrial cancer via molecular analysis of DNA collected with
vaginal tampons.

Bakkum-Gamez JN(1), Wentzensen N(2), Maurer MJ(3), Hawthorne KM(3), Voss JS(4),
Kroneman TN(4), Famuyide AO(5), Clayton AC(4), Halling KC(6), Kerr SE(4), Cliby
WA(5), Dowdy SC(5), Kipp BR(4), Mariani A(5), Oberg AL(3), Podratz KC(5),
Shridhar V(7), Sherman ME(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Gynecologic Surgery, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. Electronic address: Bakkum.jamie@mayo.edu.
(2)Hormonal and Reproductive Branch (HREB), Division of Cancer Epidemiology and
Genetics (DCEG), National Cancer Institute (NCI), USA. (3)Department of Health
Sciences Research, Division of Biomedical Statistics and Informatics, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (4)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology,
Division of Anatomic Pathology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (5)Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Gynecologic Surgery, Mayo Clinic,
Rochester, MN, USA. (6)Department of Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Division 
of Laboratory Genetics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA. (7)Department of
Laboratory Medicine and Pathology, Division of Experimental Pathology, Mayo
Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

OBJECTIVE: We demonstrate the feasibility of detecting EC by combining
minimally-invasive specimen collection techniques with sensitive molecular
testing.
METHODS: Prior to hysterectomy for EC or benign indications, women collected
vaginal pool samples with intravaginal tampons and underwent endometrial
brushing. Specimens underwent pyrosequencing for DNA methylation of genes
reported to be hypermethylated in gynecologic cancers and recently identified
markers discovered by profiling over 200 ECs. Methylation was evaluated
individually across CpGs and averaged across genes. Differences between EC and
benign endometrium (BE) were assessed using two-sample t-tests and area under the
curve (AUC).
RESULTS: Thirty-eight ECs and 28 BEs were included. We evaluated 97 CpGs within
12 genes, including previously reported markers (RASSF1, HSP2A, HOXA9, CDH13,
HAAO, and GTF2A1) and those identified in discovery work (ASCL2, HTR1B, NPY,
HS3ST2, MME, ADCYAP1, and additional CDH13 CpG sites). Mean methylation was
higher in tampon specimens from EC v. BE for 9 of 12 genes (ADCYAP1, ASCL2,
CDH13, HS3ST2, HTR1B, MME, HAAO, HOXA9, and RASSF1) (all p<0.05). Among these
genes, relative hypermethylation was observed in EC v. BE across CpGs.
Endometrial brush and tampon results were similar. Within tampon specimens, AUC
was highest for HTR1B (0.82), RASSF1 (0.75), and HOXA9 (0.74). This is the first 
report of HOXA9 hypermethylation in EC.
CONCLUSION: DNA hypermethylation in EC tissues can also be identified in vaginal 
pool DNA collected via intravaginal tampon. Identification of additional EC
biomarkers and refined collection methods are needed to develop an early
detection tool for EC.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4380654
PMID: 25677060  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. J Clin Invest. 2015 Mar 2;125(3):1286-98. doi: 10.1172/JCI78440. Epub 2015 Feb 9.

Musashi2 sustains the mixed-lineage leukemia-driven stem cell regulatory program.

Park SM, Gönen M, Vu L, Minuesa G, Tivnan P, Barlowe TS, Taggart J, Lu Y, Deering
RP, Hacohen N, Figueroa ME, Paietta E, Fernandez HF, Tallman MS, Melnick A,
Levine R, Leslie C, Lengner CJ, Kharas MG.

Leukemia stem cells (LSCs) are found in most aggressive myeloid diseases and
contribute to therapeutic resistance. Leukemia cells exhibit a dysregulated
developmental program as the result of genetic and epigenetic alterations.
Overexpression of the RNA-binding protein Musashi2 (MSI2) has been previously
shown to predict poor survival in leukemia. Here, we demonstrated that
conditional deletion of Msi2 in the hematopoietic compartment results in delayed 
leukemogenesis, reduced disease burden, and a loss of LSC function in a murine
leukemia model. Gene expression profiling of these Msi2-deficient animals
revealed a loss of the hematopoietic/leukemic stem cell self-renewal program and 
an increase in the differentiation program. In acute myeloid leukemia patients,
the presence of a gene signature that was similar to that observed in
Msi2-deficent murine LSCs correlated with improved survival. We determined that
MSI2 directly maintains the mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) self-renewal program by 
interacting with and retaining efficient translation of Hoxa9, Myc, and Ikzf2
mRNAs. Moreover, depletion of MLL target Ikzf2 in LSCs reduced colony formation, 
decreased proliferation, and increased apoptosis. Our data provide evidence that 
MSI2 controls efficient translation of the oncogenic LSC self-renewal program and
suggest MSI2 as a potential therapeutic target for myeloid leukemia.

PMCID: PMC4362230
PMID: 25664853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Eur J Immunol. 2015 May;45(5):1313-25. doi: 10.1002/eji.201445319. Epub 2015 Feb 
26.

Toll-like receptor 9 and interferon-<U+03B3> receptor signaling suppress the B-cell fate
of uncommitted progenitors in mice.

Baratono SR(1), Chu N(1), Richman LP(1), Behrens EM(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Rheumatology, The Children's Hospital of Philadelphia,
Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Systemic inflammatory response syndrome describes a heterogeneous group of
cytokine storm disorders, with different immunogens and cytokines leading to
variations in organ pathology. The severe inflammation generated by the cytokine 
storm results in widespread organ pathology including alterations in T- and
B-lymphocyte counts. This study explores the roles of TLR9 and IFN-<U+03B3>R stimulation
in decreasing T- and B-cell lymphopoiesis in a mouse model of hyperinflammation. 
We demonstrate that early B-cell lymphopoiesis is severely compromised during
TLR9- and IFN-<U+03B3>-driven hyperinflammation from the Ly-6D(+) common lymphoid
progenitor stage onwards with different effects inhibiting development at
multiple stages. We show that TLR9 signaling directly decreases in vitro B-cell
yields while increasing T-cell yields. IFN-<U+03B3> also directly inhibits B-cell and
T-cell differentiation in vitro as well as when induced by TLR9 in vivo.
Microarray and RT-PCR analysis of Ly-6D(-) common lymphoid progenitors point to
HOXa9 and EBF-1 as transcription factors altered by TLR9-induced inflammation.
Our work demonstrates both cellular and molecular targets that lead to diminished
B-cell lymphopoiesis in sustained TLR9- and IFN-<U+03B3>-driven inflammation that may be
relevant in a number of infectious and autoimmune/inflammatory settings.

© 2015 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.

PMID: 25639361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Epigenetics. 2014 Dec;9(12):1577-87. doi: 10.4161/15592294.2014.983374.

Epigenetic analysis of sporadic and Lynch-associated ovarian cancers reveals
histology-specific patterns of DNA methylation.

Niskakoski A(1), Kaur S, Staff S, Renkonen-Sinisalo L, Lassus H, Järvinen HJ,
Mecklin JP, Bützow R, Peltomäki P.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medical Genetics; Biomedicum Helsinki ; University of Helsinki
; Helsinki , Finland.

Diagnosis and treatment of epithelial ovarian cancer is challenging due to the
poor understanding of the pathogenesis of the disease. Our aim was to investigate
epigenetic mechanisms in ovarian tumorigenesis and, especially, whether tumors
with different histological subtypes or hereditary background (Lynch syndrome)
exhibit differential susceptibility to epigenetic inactivation of growth
regulatory genes. Gene candidates for epigenetic regulation were identified from 
the literature and by expression profiling of ovarian and endometrial cancer cell
lines treated with demethylating agents. Thirteen genes were chosen for
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification assays on
104 (85 sporadic and 19 Lynch syndrome-associated) ovarian carcinomas. Increased 
methylation (i.e., hypermethylation) of variable degree was characteristic of
ovarian carcinomas relative to the corresponding normal tissues, and
hypermethylation was consistently more prominent in non-serous than serous tumors
for individual genes and gene sets investigated. Lynch syndrome-associated clear 
cell carcinomas showed the highest frequencies of hypermethylation. Among
endometrioid ovarian carcinomas, lower levels of promoter methylation of RSK4,
SPARC, and HOXA9 were significantly associated with higher tumor grade; thus, the
methylation patterns showed a shift to the direction of high-grade serous tumors.
In conclusion, we provide evidence of a frequent epigenetic inactivation of RSK4,
SPARC, PROM1, HOXA10, HOXA9, WT1-AS, SFRP2, SFRP5, OPCML, and MIR34B in the
development of non-serous ovarian carcinomas of Lynch and sporadic origin, as
compared to serous tumors. Our findings shed light on the role of epigenetic
mechanisms in ovarian tumorigenesis and identify potential targets for
translational applications.

PMCID: PMC4622692
PMID: 25625843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Oncotarget. 2014 Dec 30;5(24):12675-93.

A role for BMP-induced homeobox gene MIXL1 in acute myelogenous leukemia and
identification of type I BMP receptor as a potential target for therapy.

Raymond A(1), Liu B(2), Liang H(3), Wei C(4), Guindani M(4), Lu Y(5), Liang S(6),
St John LS(7), Molldrem J(7), Nagarajan L(8).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. Graduate Program in Genes and Development, the University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (2)Department of
Genetics, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. Center for Cancer Genetics and Genomics, the University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (3)Department of Genetics, the University 
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (4)Department of
Biostatistics, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX
77030, USA. (5)Dept. of Leukemia, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Dept. of Molecular Carcinogenesis, the University
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (6)Dept. of
Bioinformatics and Computational Biology, the University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (7)Section of Transplantation Immunology, 
Department of Stem Cell Transplantation and Cellular Therapy, the University of
Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. (8)Department of
Genetics, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. Graduate Program in Genes and Development, the University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Center for Cancer Genetics and
Genomics, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030,
USA. Dept. of Leukemia, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA. Graduate Program in Human Molecular Genetics, the
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. Center for
Stem cell and Developmental biology, the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Mesoderm Inducer in Xenopus Like1 (MIXL1), a paired-type homeobox transcription
factor induced by TGF-ß family of ligands is required for early embryonic
specification of mesoderm and endoderm. Retrovirally transduced Mixl1 is reported
to induce acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) with a high penetrance. But the
mechanistic underpinnings of MIXL1 mediated leukemogenesis are unknown. Here, we 
establish the protooncogene c-REL to be a transcriptional target of MIXL1 by
genome wide chromatin immune precipitation. Accordingly, expression of c-REL and 
its downstream targets BCL2L1 and BCL2A2 are elevated in MIXL1 expressing cells. 
Notably, MIXL1 regulates c-REL through a zinc finger binding motif, potentially
by a MIXL1-Zinc finger protein transcriptional complex. Furthermore, MIXL1
expression is detected in the cancer genome atlas (TCGA) AML samples in a pattern
mutually exclusive from that of HOXA9, CDX2 and HLX suggesting the existence of a
core, yet distinct HOX transcriptional program. Finally, we demonstrate MIXL1 to 
be induced by BMP4 and not TGF-ß in primary human hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells. Consequently, MIXL1 expressing AML cells are preferentially
sensitive to the BMPR1 kinase inhibitor LDN-193189. These findings support the
existence of a novel MIXL1-c REL mediated survival axis in AML that can be
targeted by BMPR1 inhibitors. (MIXL1- human gene, Mixl1- mouse ortholog, MIXL1-
protein).

PMCID: PMC4350356
PMID: 25544748  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Oncogenesis. 2014 Dec 22;3:e135. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2014.49.

Regulation of CDX4 gene transcription by HoxA9, HoxA10, the Mll-Ell oncogene and 
Shp2 during leukemogenesis.

Bei L(1), Shah C(2), Wang H(1), Huang W(1), Platanias LC(2), Eklund EA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL, USA. (2)1] Department of Medicine, The Feinberg School
of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA [2] The Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA [3] Jesse 
Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.

Cdx and Hox proteins are homeodomain transcription factors that regulate
hematopoiesis. Transcription of the HOX and CDX genes decreases during normal
myelopoiesis, but is aberrantly sustained in leukemias with translocation or
partial tandem duplication of the MLL1 gene. Cdx4 activates transcription of the 
HOXA9 and HOXA10 genes, and HoxA10 activates CDX4 transcription. The events that 
break this feedback loop, permitting a decreased Cdx4 expression during normal
myelopoiesis, were previously undefined. In the current study, we find that HoxA9
represses CDX4 transcription in differentiating myeloid cells, antagonizing
activation by HoxA10. We determine that tyrosine phosphorylation of HoxA10
impairs transcriptional activation of CDX4, but tyrosine phosphorylation of HoxA9
facilitates repression of this gene. As HoxA9 and HoxA10 are phosphorylated
during myelopoiesis, this provides a mechanism for differentiation stage-specific
Cdx4 expression. HoxA9 and HoxA10 are increased in cells expressing Mll-Ell, a
leukemia-associated MLL1 fusion protein. We find that Mll-Ell induces a
HoxA10-dependent increase in Cdx4 expression in myeloid progenitor cells.
However, Cdx4 decreases in a HoxA9-dependent manner on exposure of
Mll-Ell-expressing cells to differentiating cytokines. Leukemia-associated,
constitutively active mutants of Shp2 block cytokine-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of HoxA9 and HoxA10. In comparison with myeloid progenitor cells 
that are expressing Mll-Ell alone, we find increased CDX4 transcription and Cdx4 
expression in cells co-expressing Mll-Ell plus constitutively active Shp2.
Increased Cdx4 expression is sustained on exposure of these cells to
differentiating cytokines. Our results identify a mechanism for increased and
sustained CDX4 transcription in leukemias co-overexpressing HoxA9 and HoxA10 in
combination with constitutive activation of Shp2. This is clinically relevant,
because MLL1 translocations and constitutive Shp2 activation co-exist in human
myeloid leukemias.

PMCID: PMC4275563
PMID: 25531430  [PubMed]


66. Development. 2015 Jan 1;142(1):70-81. doi: 10.1242/dev.109454.

Geminin deletion increases the number of fetal hematopoietic stem cells by
affecting the expression of key transcription factors.

Karamitros D(1), Patmanidi AL(1), Kotantaki P(1), Potocnik AJ(2), Bähr-Ivacevic
T(3), Benes V(3), Lygerou Z(4), Kioussis D(5), Taraviras S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Medical School, University of Patras, Rio, Patras
26504, Greece. (2)Division of Molecular Immunology, MRC/National Institute for
Medical Research, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK. (3)European Molecular Biology
Laboratory (EMBL), Core Facilities and Services, Meyerhofstraße 1, Heidelberg
69117, Germany. (4)Department of Biology, Medical School, University of Patras,
Rio, Patras 26504, Greece. (5)Division of Molecular Immunology, MRC/National
Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK
dkiouss@nimr.mrc.ac.uk taraviras@med.upatras.gr. (6)Department of Physiology,
Medical School, University of Patras, Rio, Patras 26504, Greece
dkiouss@nimr.mrc.ac.uk taraviras@med.upatras.gr.

Balancing stem cell self-renewal and initiation of lineage specification programs
is essential for the development and homeostasis of the hematopoietic system. We 
have specifically ablated geminin in the developing murine hematopoietic system
and observed profound defects in the generation of mature blood cells, leading to
embryonic lethality. Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) accumulated in the fetal
liver following geminin ablation, while committed progenitors were reduced.
Genome-wide transcriptome analysis identified key HSC transcription factors as
being upregulated upon geminin deletion, revealing a gene network linked with
geminin that controls fetal hematopoiesis. In order to obtain mechanistic insight
into the ability of geminin to regulate transcription, we examined Hoxa9 as an
example of a key gene in definitive hematopoiesis. We demonstrate that in human
K562 cells geminin is associated with HOXA9 regulatory elements and its absence
increases HOXA9 transcription similarly to that observed in vivo. Moreover,
silencing geminin reduced recruitment of the PRC2 component SUZ12 to the HOXA9
locus and resulted in an increase in RNA polymerase II recruitment and H3K4
trimethylation (H3K4me3), whereas the repressive marks H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 were 
reduced. The chromatin landscape was also modified at the regulatory regions of
HOXA10 and GATA1. K562 cells showed a reduced ability to differentiate to
erythrocytes and megakaryocytes upon geminin silencing. Our data suggest that
geminin is indispensable for fetal hematopoiesis and regulates the generation of 
a physiological pool of stem and progenitor cells in the fetal hematopoietic
system.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25516969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Adv Exp Med Biol. 2014;844:59-84. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4939-2095-2_4.

Systems biology of megakaryocytes.

Kaushansky A(1), Kaushansky K.

Author information: 
(1)Malaria Program, Seattle Biomedical Research Institute, 307 Westlake Ave.,
North, Suite 500, 98109, Seattle, WA, USA, alexis.kaushansky@seattlebiomed.org.

The molecular pathways that regulate megakaryocyte production have historically
been identified through multiple candidate gene approaches. Several transcription
factors critical for generating megakaryocytes were identified by promoter
analysis of megakaryocyte-specific genes, and their biological roles then
verified by gene knockout studies; for example, GATA-1, NF-E2, and RUNX1 were
identified in this way. In contrast, other transcription factors important for
megakaryopoiesis were discovered through a systems approach; for example, c-Myb
was found to be critical for the erythroid versus megakaryocyte lineage decision 
by genome-wide loss-of-function studies. The regulation of the levels of these
transcription factors is, for the most part, cell intrinsic, although that
assumption has recently been challenged. Epigenetics also impacts megakaryocyte
gene expression, mediated by histone acetylation and methylation. Several
cytokines have been identified to regulate megakaryocyte survival, proliferation,
and differentiation, most prominent of which is thrombopoietin. Upon binding to
its receptor, the product of the c-Mpl proto-oncogene, thrombopoietin induces a
conformational change that activates a number of secondary messengers that
promote cell survival, proliferation, and differentiation, and down-modulate
receptor signaling. Among the best studied are the signal transducers and
activators of transcription (STAT) proteins; phosphoinositol-3-kinase;
mitogen-activated protein kinases; the phosphatases PTEN, SHP1, SHP2, and SHIP1; 
and the suppressors of cytokine signaling (SOCS) proteins. Additional signals
activated by these secondary mediators include mammalian target of rapamycin;
ß(beta)-catenin; the G proteins Rac1, Rho, and CDC42; several transcription
factors, including hypoxia-inducible factor 1a(alpha), the homeobox-containing
proteins HOXB4 and HOXA9, and a number of signaling mediators that are reduced,
including glycogen synthase kinase 3a(alpha) and the FOXO3 family of forkhead
proteins. More recently, systematic interrogation of several aspects of
megakaryocyte formation have been conducted, employing genomics, proteomics, and 
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) analyses, among others, and have yielded
many previously unappreciated signaling mechanisms that regulate megakaryocyte
lineage determination, proliferation, and differentiation. This chapter focuses
on these pathways in normal and neoplastic megakaryopoiesis, and suggests areas
that are ripe for further study.

PMID: 25480637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 17;9(11):e112671. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112671.
eCollection 2014.

Cell fate decisions in malignant hematopoiesis: leukemia phenotype is determined 
by distinct functional domains of the MN1 oncogene.

Lai CK(1), Moon Y(2), Kuchenbauer F(3), Starzcynowski DT(4), Argiropoulos B(5),
Yung E(6), Beer P(6), Schwarzer A(7), Sharma A(7), Park G(8), Leung M(6), Lin
G(6), Vollett S(6), Fung S(6), Eaves CJ(1), Karsan A(9), Weng AP(10), Humphries
RK(1), Heuser M(11).

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada;
Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical School of
Inha University, Incheon, Korea. (3)Department of Internal Medicine III,
University Hospital of Ulm, Ulm, Germany; Institute of Experimental Cancer
Research, Comprehensive Cancer Centre, University Hospital of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. 
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America. (5)Department of Medical Genetics,
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. (6)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer
Agency Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (7)Institute of Experimental
Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. (8)Department of Hospital
Pathology, Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea. (9)Genome Sciences Centre,
BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (10)Terry Fox
Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Department
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada. (11)Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology, and Stem Cell
Transplantation, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Extensive molecular profiling of leukemias and preleukemic diseases has revealed 
that distinct clinical entities, like acute myeloid (AML) and T-lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL), share similar pathogenetic mutations. It is not well understood
how the cell of origin, accompanying mutations, extracellular signals or
structural differences in a mutated gene determine the phenotypic identity of
leukemias. We dissected the functional aspects of different protein regions of
the MN1 oncogene and their effect on the leukemic phenotype, building on the
ability of MN1 to induce leukemia without accompanying mutations. We found that
the most C-terminal region of MN1 was required to block myeloid differentiation
at an early stage, and deletion of an extended C-terminal region resulted in loss
of myeloid identity and cell differentiation along the T-cell lineage in vivo.
Megakaryocytic/erythroid lineage differentiation was blocked by the N-terminal
region. In addition, the N-terminus was required for proliferation and
leukemogenesis in vitro and in vivo through upregulation of HoxA9, HoxA10 and
Meis2. Our results provide evidence that a single oncogene can modulate cellular 
identity of leukemic cells based on its active gene regions. It is therefore
likely that different mutations in the same oncogene may impact cell fate
decisions and phenotypic appearance of malignant diseases.

PMCID: PMC4234417
PMID: 25401736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Blood. 2014 Nov 13;124(20):3035-6. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-09-600452.

Engraftment's Holy Grail: is one signal enough?

Lako M(1), Armstrong L(1).

Author information: 
(1)NEWCASTLE UNIVERSITY.

Comment on
    Blood. 2014 Nov 13;124(20):3065-75.

In this issue of Blood, Ramos-Mejía et al provide compelling evidence for HOXA9
as a key factor that can enhance and accelerate the differentiation of these
cells to blood progenitor cells in vitro.

PMID: 25395139  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Blood. 2014 Nov 6;124(19):3023-5. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-04-567636.

Cryptic XPO1-MLLT10 translocation is associated with HOXA locus deregulation in
T-ALL.

Bond J(1), Bergon A(2), Durand A(1), Tigaud I(3), Thomas X(4), Asnafi V(1),
Spicuglia S(5), Macintyre E(6).

Author information: 
(1)Université Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculty of Medicine Descartes, INSERM U1151,
Laboratory of Onco-Hematology, Assistance Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital
Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France. (2)Transcriptomic and Genomic
Marseille-Luminy, Infrastructures en Biologie Santé et Agronomie Platform,
Marseille, France Technological Advances for Genomics and Clinics, INSERM U1090, 
Aix-Marseille University Unité Mixtes de Recherche-S 1090, Marseille, France.
(3)Cytogenetic and Molecular Biology Laboratory, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud,
Pierre-Bénite, France. (4)Department of Hematology, Hôpital Edouard Herriot,
Lyon, France. (5)Technological Advances for Genomics and Clinics, INSERM U1090,
Aix-Marseille University Unité Mixtes de Recherche-S 1090, Marseille, France.
(6)Université Sorbonne Paris Cité, Faculty of Medicine Descartes, Institut
Necker-Enfants Malades, INSERM U1151, Laboratory of Onco-Hematology, Assistance
Publique-Hôpitaux de Paris, Hôpital Necker-Enfants Malades, Paris, France.

PMCID: PMC4224197
PMID: 25377562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Blood. 2014 Nov 20;124(22):3284-94. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-10-532523. Epub 2014 
Oct 7.

GPR84 sustains aberrant ß-catenin signaling in leukemic stem cells for
maintenance of MLL leukemogenesis.

Dietrich PA(1), Yang C(1), Leung HH(1), Lynch JR(1), Gonzales E(1), Liu B(2),
Haber M(3), Norris MD(3), Wang J(4), Wang JY(5).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer and Stem Cell Biology Group, Children's Cancer Institute Australia,
Lowy Cancer Research Centre, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW,
Australia; (2)Kids Cancer Alliance, Translational Cancer Research Centre for
Kids, Cancer Institute New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia; Children's Cancer
Institute Australia, Lowy Cancer Research Centre, University of New South Wales, 
Sydney, NSW, Australia; (3)Children's Cancer Institute Australia, Lowy Cancer
Research Centre, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia;
(4)Department of Developmental and Regenerative Biology, Black Family Stem Cell
Institute, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, NY; and. (5)Cancer 
and Stem Cell Biology Group, Children's Cancer Institute Australia, Lowy Cancer
Research Centre, University of New South Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia; School of
Women's and Children's Health, Faculty of Medicine, University of New South
Wales, Sydney, NSW, Australia.

ß-catenin is required for establishment of leukemic stem cells (LSCs) in acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). Targeted inhibition of ß-catenin signaling has been
hampered by the lack of pathway components amenable to pharmacologic
manipulation. Here we identified a novel ß-catenin regulator, GPR84, a member of 
the G protein-coupled receptor family that represents a highly tractable class of
drug targets. High GPR84 expression levels were confirmed in human and mouse AML 
LSCs compared with hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). Suppression of GPR84
significantly inhibited cell growth by inducing G1-phase cell-cycle arrest in
pre-LSCs, reduced LSC frequency, and impaired reconstitution of stem cell-derived
mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) AML, which represents an aggressive and
drug-resistant subtype of AML. The GPR84-deficient phenotype in established AML
could be rescued by expression of constitutively active ß-catenin. Furthermore,
GPR84 conferred a growth advantage to Hoxa9/Meis1a-transduced stem cells.
Microarray analysis demonstrated that GPR84 significantly upregulated a small set
of MLL-fusion targets and ß-catenin coeffectors, and downregulated a
hematopoietic cell-cycle inhibitor. Altogether, our data reveal a previously
unrecognized role of GPR84 in maintaining fully developed AML by sustaining
aberrant ß-catenin signaling in LSCs, and suggest that targeting the oncogenic
GPR84/ß-catenin signaling axis may represent a novel therapeutic strategy for
AML.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 25293777  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Oct 7;16(5):450. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0450-6.

DNA methylation profiling in the Carolina Breast Cancer Study defines cancer
subclasses differing in clinicopathologic characteristics and survival.

Conway K, Edmiston SN, May R, Kuan PF, Chu H, Bryant C, Tse CK, Swift-Scanlan T, 
Geradts J, Troester MA, Millikan RC.

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, with several intrinsic
subtypes differing by hormone receptor (HR) status, molecular profiles, and
prognosis. However, the role of DNA methylation in breast cancer development and 
progression and its relationship with the intrinsic tumor subtypes are not fully 
understood.
METHODS: A microarray targeting promoters of cancer-related genes was used to
evaluate DNA methylation at 935 CpG sites in 517 breast tumors from the Carolina 
Breast Cancer Study, a population-based study of invasive breast cancer.
RESULTS: Consensus clustering using methylation (ß) values for the 167 most
variant CpG loci defined four clusters differing most distinctly in HR status,
intrinsic subtype (luminal versus basal-like), and p53 mutation status.
Supervised analyses for HR status, subtype, and p53 status identified 266
differentially methylated CpG loci with considerable overlap. Genes relatively
hypermethylated in HR+, luminal A, or p53 wild-type breast cancers included
FABP3, FGF2, FZD9, GAS7, HDAC9, HOXA11, MME, PAX6, POMC, PTGS2, RASSF1, RBP1, and
SCGB3A1, whereas those more highly methylated in HR-, basal-like, or p53 mutant
tumors included BCR, C4B, DAB2IP, MEST, RARA, SEPT5, TFF1, THY1, and SERPINA5.
Clustering also defined a hypermethylated luminal-enriched tumor cluster 3 that
gene ontology analysis revealed to be enriched for homeobox and other
developmental genes (ASCL2, DLK1, EYA4, GAS7, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB13, IHH, IPF1,
ISL1, PAX6, TBX1, SOX1, and SOX17). Although basal-enriched cluster 2 showed
worse short-term survival, the luminal-enriched cluster 3 showed worse long-term 
survival but was not independently prognostic in multivariate Cox proportional
hazard analysis, likely due to the mostly early stage cases in this dataset.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that epigenetic patterns are strongly
associated with HR status, subtype, and p53 mutation status and may show
heterogeneity within tumor subclass. Among HR+ breast tumors, a subset exhibiting
a gene signature characterized by hypermethylation of developmental genes and
poorer clinicopathologic features may have prognostic value and requires further 
study. Genes differentially methylated between clinically important tumor subsets
have roles in differentiation, development, and tumor growth and may be critical 
to establishing and maintaining tumor phenotypes and clinical outcomes.

PMCID: PMC4303129
PMID: 25287138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Leukemia. 2015 Apr;29(4):901-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.287. Epub 2014 Sep 25.

Insulin-like growth factor 1 is a direct HOXA9 target important for hematopoietic
transformation.

Steger J(1), Füller E(1), Garcia-Cuellar MP(1), Hetzner K(1), Slany RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University of Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

HOX homeobox proteins are key oncogenic drivers in hematopoietic malignancies.
Here we demonstrate that HOXA1, HOXA6 and predominantly HOXA9 are able to induce 
the production of insulin-like growth factor 1 (Igf1). In chromatin
immunoprecipitations, HOXA9 bound directly to the putative promoter and a
DNase-hypersensitive region in the first intron of the Igf1 gene. Transcription
rates of the Igf1 gene paralleled HOXA9 activity. Primary cells transformed by
HOXA9 expressed functional Igf1 receptors and activated the protein kinase Akt in
response to Igf1 stimulation, suggesting the existence of an autocrine signaling 
loop. Genomic deletion of the Igf1 gene by Cre-mediated recombination increased
sensitivity toward apoptosis after serum starvation. In addition, the
leukemogenic potential of Igf1-negative, HOXA9-transformed cells was impaired,
leading to a significant delay in disease development on transplantation into
recipient animals.

PMID: 25252870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Reprod Biomed Online. 2014 Nov;29(5):595-9. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2014.07.012. Epub
2014 Aug 12.

Mutation screening of HOXA7 and HOXA9 genes in Chinese women with Müllerian duct 
abnormalities.

Chen X(1), Mu Y(2), Li C(2), Li G(2), Zhao H(3), Qin Y(2), Chen ZJ(4).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong
University, National Research Center for Assisted Reproductive Technology and
Reproductive Genetics, The Key Laboratory for Reproductive Endocrinology of
Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Reproductive
Medicine, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, China; School of Nursing, Shandong
University, 44 Wenhua Road, Jinan 250012, China. (2)Center for Reproductive
Medicine, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to Shandong University, National
Research Center for Assisted Reproductive Technology and Reproductive Genetics,
The Key Laboratory for Reproductive Endocrinology of Ministry of Education,
Shandong Provincial Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, 324 Jingwu Road,
Jinan 250021, China. (3)School of Biomedical Sciences, The Chinese University of 
Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong Special Administrative Region,
China; School of Biomedical Sciences Core Laboratory, The Chinese University of
Hong Kong Shenzhen Research Institute, 10 Yuexing Erdao, Nanshan District,
Shenzhen 518000, China. (4)Center for Reproductive Medicine, Provincial Hospital 
Affiliated to Shandong University, National Research Center for Assisted
Reproductive Technology and Reproductive Genetics, The Key Laboratory for
Reproductive Endocrinology of Ministry of Education, Shandong Provincial Key
Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine, 324 Jingwu Road, Jinan 250021, China; Center
for Reproductive Medicine, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School
of Medicine, Shanghai Key Laboratory for Assisted Reproduction and Reproductive
Genetics, 145 Middle Shandong Rd, Shanghai 200001, China. Electronic address:
chenzijiang@hotmail.com.

HOXA genes in groups 7-13 have been proven to play a role in determining
positional identity along the genitalia axis. The aim of the present study was to
explore the relationship between HOXA7 and HOXA9 mutations and Müllerian duct
abnormalities (MDA). One hundred and ninety-two Chinese patients with MDA
abnormalities and 192 healthy controls were recruited. All coding regions of
HOXA7 and HOXA9 were amplified and sequenced directly. Rs2301721 and rs2301720 in
HOXA7, rs35355140 and rs7810502 in HOXA9 were identified in patients with MDA and
controls. One rare single nucleotide polymorphism rs189587233 in 3' UTR of HOXA9 
gene was detected in one patient with didelphic uterus and absent in the 192
controls. This polymorphism, however, is known to exist in the normal Chinese
population. Our results indicated that variants in the HOXA7 and HOXA9 genes were
not common in Chinese women with Müllerian duct abnormalities.

Copyright © 2014 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 25246116  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Blood. 2014 Nov 13;124(20):3065-75. doi: 10.1182/blood-2014-03-558825. Epub 2014 
Sep 3.

HOXA9 promotes hematopoietic commitment of human embryonic stem cells.

Ramos-Mejía V(1), Navarro-Montero O(1), Ayllón V(1), Bueno C(2), Romero T(1),
Real PJ(1), Menendez P(3).

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Genomics and Oncological Research, Pfizer/University of
Granada/Andalusian Regional Government, Granada, Spain; (2)Josep Carreras
Leukemia Research Institute, Cell Therapy Program, School of Medicine, University
of Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain; and. (3)Josep Carreras Leukemia Research
Institute, Cell Therapy Program, School of Medicine, University of Barcelona,
Barcelona, Spain; and Institució Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats,
Barcelona, Spain.

Comment in
    Blood. 2014 Nov 13;124(20):3035-6.

The molecular determinants regulating the specification of human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) into hematopoietic cells remain elusive. HOXA9 plays a relevant
role in leukemogenesis and hematopoiesis. It is highly expressed in hematopoietic
stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) and is downregulated upon differentiation.
Hoxa9-deficient mice display impaired hematopoietic development, and deregulation
of HOXA9 expression is frequently associated with acute leukemia. Analysis of the
genes differentially expressed in cord blood HSPCs vs hESC-derived HSPCs
identified HOXA9 as the most downregulated gene in hESC-derived HSPCs, suggesting
that expression levels of HOXA9 may be crucial for hematopoietic differentiation 
of hESC. Here we show that during hematopoietic differentiation of hESCs, HOXA9
expression parallels hematopoietic development, but is restricted to the
hemogenic precursors (HEP) (CD31(+)CD34(+)CD45(-)), and diminishes as HEPs
differentiate into blood cells (CD45(+)). Different gain-of-function and
loss-of-function studies reveal that HOXA9 enhances hematopoietic differentiation
of hESCs by specifically promoting the commitment of HEPs into primitive and
total CD45(+) blood cells. Gene expression analysis suggests that nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B signaling could be collaborating with HOXA9 to increase hematopoietic
commitment. However, HOXA9 on its own is not sufficient to confer in vivo
long-term engraftment potential to hESC-hematopoietic derivatives, reinforcing
the idea that additional molecular regulators are needed for the generation of
definitive in vivo functional HSPCs from hESC.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMID: 25185710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Mol Cell Biol. 2014 Oct;34(20):3867-79. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00567-14. Epub 2014 Aug 
18.

CTCF controls HOXA cluster silencing and mediates PRC2-repressive higher-order
chromatin structure in NT2/D1 cells.

Xu M(1), Zhao GN(1), Lv X(1), Liu G(1), Wang LY(2), Hao DL(1), Wang J(3), Liu
DP(4), Liang CC(1).

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, People's Republic of 
China. (2)Department of Biochemistry, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of 
Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China Shenzhen Institute of
Research and Innovation, The University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, People's Republic
of China. (3)Department of Biochemistry, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University 
of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR, People's Republic of China Center for Genomic
Sciences, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR,
People's Republic of China Shenzhen Institute of Research and Innovation, The
University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, People's Republic of China. (4)State Key
Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
and Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, People's Republic of China
iudp@pumc.edu.cn.

HOX cluster genes are activated sequentially in their positional order along the 
chromosome during vertebrate development. This phenomenon, known as temporal
colinearity, depends on transcriptional silencing of 5' HOX genes. Chromatin
looping was recently identified as a conserved feature of silent HOX clusters,
with CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding sites located at the loop bases.
However, the potential contribution of CTCF to HOX cluster silencing and the
underlying mechanism have not been established. Here, we demonstrate that the
HOXA locus is organized by CTCF into chromatin loops and that CTCF depletion
causes significantly enhanced activation of HOXA3 to -A7, -A9 to -A11, and -A13
in response to retinoic acid, with the highest effect observed for HOXA9. Our
subsequent analyses revealed that CTCF facilitates the stabilization of Polycomb 
repressive complex 2 (PRC2) and trimethylated lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3K27me3) 
at the human HOXA locus. Our results reveal that CTCF functions as a controller
of HOXA cluster silencing and mediates PRC2-repressive higher-order chromatin
structure.

Copyright © 2014, American Society for Microbiology. All Rights Reserved.

PMCID: PMC4187707
PMID: 25135475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Blood. 2014 Sep 11;124(11):1737-47. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-10-534735. Epub 2014 
Jul 31.

Downregulation of Prdm16 mRNA is a specific antileukemic mechanism during
HOXB4-mediated HSC expansion in vivo.

Yu H(1), Neale G(2), Zhang H(3), Lee HM(3), Ma Z(4), Zhou S(4), Forget BG(3),
Sorrentino BP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Hematology Division, Department of Hematology, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN; Integrated Program in Biomedical
Sciences, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN; (2)Hartwell
Center for Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN; and. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT. (4)Experimental Hematology Division,
Department of Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN;

Overexpression of HOXB4 in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) leads to increased
self-renewal without causing hematopoietic malignancies in transplanted mice. The
molecular basis of HOXB4-mediated benign HSC expansion in vivo is not well
understood. To gain further insight into the molecular events underlying
HOXB4-mediated HSC expansion, we analyzed gene expression changes at multiple
time points in Lin(-)Sca1(+)c-kit(+) cells from mice transplanted with bone
marrow cells transduced with a MSCV-HOXB4-ires-YFP vector. A distinct HOXB4
transcriptional program was reproducibly induced and stabilized by 12 weeks after
transplant. Dynamic expression changes were observed in genes critical for HSC
self-renewal as well as in genes involved in myeloid and B-cell differentiation. 
Prdm16, a transcription factor associated with human acute myeloid leukemia, was 
markedly repressed by HOXB4 but upregulated by HOXA9 and HOXA10, suggesting that 
Prdm16 downregulation was involved in preventing leukemia in HOXB4 transplanted
mice. Functional evidence to support this mechanism was obtained by enforcing
coexpression of sPrdm16 and HOXB4, which led to enhanced self-renewal, myeloid
expansion, and leukemia. Altogether, these studies define the transcriptional
pathways involved in HOXB4 HSC expansion in vivo and identify repression of
Prdm16 transcription as a mechanism by which expanding HSCs avoid leukemic
transformation.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4162106
PMID: 25082879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Aug;42(14):9021-32. doi: 10.1093/nar/gku647. Epub 2014
Jul 23.

Psip1/Ledgf p75 restrains Hox gene expression by recruiting both trithorax and
polycomb group proteins.

Pradeepa MM(1), Grimes GR(2), Taylor GC(2), Sutherland HG(2), Bickmore WA(1).

Author information: 
(1)MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of Genetics and Molecular Medicine at
University of Edinburgh, Crewe Road, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK
Wendy.Bickmore@igmm.ed.ac.uk. (2)MRC Human Genetics Unit, MRC Institute of
Genetics and Molecular Medicine at University of Edinburgh, Crewe Road, Edinburgh
EH4 2XU, UK.

Trithorax and polycomb group proteins are generally thought to antagonize one
another. The trithorax family member MLL (myeloid/lymphoid or mixed-lineage
leukemia) is presumed to activate Hox expression, counteracting polycomb-mediated
repression. PC4 and SF2 interacting protein 1 (PSIP1)/p75, also known as LEDGF,
whose PWWP domain binds to H3K36me3, interacts with MLL and tethers MLL fusion
proteins to HOXA9 in leukaemias. Here we show, unexpectedly, that Psip1/p75
regulates homeotic genes by recruiting not only MLL complexes, but also the
polycomb group protein Bmi1. In Psip1(-/-) cells binding of Mll1/2, Bmi1 and the 
co-repressor Ctbp1 at Hox loci are all abrogated and Hoxa and Hoxd mRNA
expression increased. Our data not only reveal a potential mechanism of action
for Psip1 in the regulation of Hox genes but also suggest an unexpected interplay
between proteins usually considered as transcriptional activators and repressors.

© The Author(s) 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of Nucleic
Acids Research.

PMCID: PMC4132756
PMID: 25056311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 May 15;7(6):2998-3007. eCollection 2014.

HOXA9 regulates angiogenesis in human hypertrophic scars: induction of VEGF
secretion by epidermal stem cells.

Cao PF(1), Xu YB(1), Tang JM(1), Yang RH(2), Liu XS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Burn Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University Guangzhou, Guangdong, China. (2)Department of Burn Surgery, The First 
People's Hospital of Foshan Foshan, Guangdong, China.

Hypertrophic scars are fibroproliferative disorders of excessive wound healing
after skin injury. Vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)-induced angiogenesis
plays a major role in fibrogenesis and hypertrophic scar formation. Over recent
years, there has been a major interest in homeobox gene regulation of VEGF-VEGFR 
mediated angiogenesis in dermal tissue. In the current study, we investigated the
role of homeobox genes in the epidermis, for their role in angiogenesis, with a
focus on epidermal-mesenchymal interactions. As epidermal stem cells (ESCs) have 
a central role in epidermal homeostasis, we tested the hypothesis that these
cells play a key role in the pathogenesis of hypertrophic scars through the
HOXA9-VEGF/VEGFR signaling pathways. We found significant differences in the
expression of homeobox A9 in hyperplastic scar tissue during different phases of 
development. These differences coincided with similar regulations in VEGF
expression and with the distribution of ESCs. HOXA9 is expressed in cultured
human ESCs in vitro. Antisense suppression of HOXA9 expression was found to
suppress VEGF levels in ESCs. Together these findings indicate that homeobox A9
regulates the expression of VEGF in ESCs.

PMCID: PMC4097228
PMID: 25031718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Mol Cancer. 2014 Jul 14;13:170. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-13-170.

HOXA9 promotes homotypic and heterotypic cell interactions that facilitate
ovarian cancer dissemination via its induction of P-cadherin.

Ko SY, Naora H(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular & Cellular Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA. hnaora@mdanderson.org.

BACKGROUND: Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is a lethal disease that frequently
involves the peritoneal cavity. Dissemination of EOC is a multi-step process in
which exfoliated tumor cells survive in the peritoneal fluid as multi-cellular
aggregates and then form invasive implants on peritoneal surfaces. The mechanisms
that control this process are poorly understood. We previously identified that
high expression of the developmental patterning gene HOXA9 is associated with
poor survival in EOC patients. In this study, we investigated the significance
and mechanisms of HOXA9 in controlling aggregation and implantation of floating
EOC cells.
METHODS: HOXA9 was inhibited by shRNAs or expressed in EOC cells that were
propagated in suspension cultures and in the peritoneal cavity of mice. Cell
death was assayed by flow cytometry and ELISA. Cell aggregation, attachment and
migration were evaluated by microscopy, transwell chamber assays and
histopathologic analysis. DNA-binding of HOXA9 and its effect on expression of
the cell adhesion molecule P-cadherin were assayed by chromatin
immunoprecipitation, quantitative RT-PCR and Western blot. HOXA9 and P-cadherin
expression was evaluated in publicly available datasets of EOC clinical
specimens.
RESULTS: We identified that HOXA9 promotes aggregation and inhibits anoikis in
floating EOC cells in vitro and in xenograft models. HOXA9 also stimulated the
ability of EOC cells to attach to peritoneal cells and to migrate. HOXA9 bound
the promoter of the CDH3 gene that encodes P-cadherin, induced CDH3 expression in
EOC cells, and was associated with increased CDH3 expression in clinical
specimens of EOC. Inhibiting P-cadherin in EOC cells that expressed HOXA9
abrogated the stimulatory effects of HOXA9 on cell aggregation, implantation and 
migration. Conversely, these stimulatory effects of HOXA9 were restored when
P-cadherin was reconstituted in EOC cells in which HOXA9 was inhibited.
CONCLUSION: These findings indicate that HOXA9 contributes to poor outcomes in
EOC in part by promoting intraperitoneal dissemination via its induction of
P-cadherin.

PMCID: PMC4105245
PMID: 25023983  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Nihon Rinsho. 2014 Jun;72(6):1047-51.

[Discovered roles of MLL in pathogenesis of multiple myeloma].

[Article in Japanese]

Imai Y, Ohta E.

Multiple myeloma is one of incurable hematological malignancies and targeted
therapies for novel oncogenes are to be exploited. Analyses of multiple myeloma
patients revealed that HOXA9 was overexpressed in patients lacking known IgH
translocation and it was evaluated as a candidate oncogene in multiple myeloma.
This overexpression of HOXA9 was supposed to be due to dysfunction of histone
methyltransferases (HMT) and mutations in MLL encoding HMT were found.
Panobinostat, an HDAC inhibitor is currently undergoing preclinical and clinical 
evaluation as a novel drug for multiple myeloma. We found that panobinostat
suppresses expression of MLL protein through modulation of its stability as well 
as Hsp90 inhibitor. More precise roles of MLL in pathogenesis of multiple myeloma
are to be elucidated.

PMID: 25016802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. J Mol Med (Berl). 2014 Aug;92(8):811-23. doi: 10.1007/s00109-014-1181-y. Epub
2014 Jul 5.

HOX genes and their role in the development of human cancers.

Bhatlekar S(1), Fields JZ, Boman BM.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Translational Cancer Research, Helen F. Graham Cancer Center and
Research Institute, University of Delaware, 4701 Ogletown-Stanton Road, Newark,
DE, 19713, USA.

In this review, we summarize published findings on the involvement of HOX genes
in oncogenesis. HOX genes are developmental genes--they code for proteins that
function as critical master regulatory transcription factors during
embryogenesis. Many reports have shown that the protein products of HOX genes
also play key roles in the development of cancers. Based on our review of the
literature, we found that the expression of HOX genes is not only up- or
downregulated in most solid tumors but also that the expression of specific HOX
genes in cancers tends to differ based on tissue type and tumor site. It was also
observed that HOXC family gene expression is upregulated in most solid tumor
types, including colon, lung, and prostate cancer. The two HOX genes that were
reported to be most commonly altered in solid tumors were HOXA9 and HOXB13. HOXA 
were often reported to have altered expression in breast and ovarian cancers,
HOXB genes in colon cancers, HOXC genes in prostate and lung cancers, and HOXD
genes in colon and breast cancers. It was found that HOX genes are also regulated
at the nuclear-cytoplasmic transport level in carcinomas. Tumors arising from
tissue having similar embryonic origin (endodermal), including colon, prostate,
and lung, showed relatively similar HOXA and HOXB family gene expression patterns
compared to breast tumors arising from mammary tissue, which originates from the 
ectoderm. The differential expression of HOX genes in various solid tumors thus
provides an opportunity to advance our understanding of cancer development and to
develop new therapeutic agents.

PMID: 24996520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Mol Cytogenet. 2014 Jun 20;7:42. doi: 10.1186/1755-8166-7-42. eCollection 2014.

Blast crisis Ph+ chronic myeloid leukemia with NUP98/HOXA13 up-regulating MSI2.

Di Giacomo D(1), Pierini V(1), Barba G(1), Ceccarelli V(2), Vecchini A(2),
Mecucci C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Hematology and Bone Marrow Transplantation Unit, University of Perugia, Polo
Unico S. Maria della Misericordia, Perugia, Italy. (2)Department of Internal
Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.

BACKGROUND: Musashi2(Msi2)-Numb pathway de-regulation is a molecular mechanism
underlying the transition of chronic phase Ph<U+2009>+<U+2009>CML to deadly blast crisis,
particularly in cases with a NUP98/HOXA9 fusion from a t(7;11)(p15;p15). This
study provides new insights on the mechanisms cooperating in driving MSI2
over-expression and progression of Ph-positive CML.
RESULTS: Herein we describe a t(7;11)(p15;p15) originating a NUP98 fusion with
HOXA13, at 7p15, in a 39 year-old man in blast crisis of Ph-positive CML. Both
MSI2 and HOXA9 were evaluated by quantitative RT-PCR in our patient and in a
series of haematological malignancies. Up-regulation of both genes emerged only
in the presence of NUP98/HOXA13 gene fusion. However, over-expression of MSI2,
but not HOXA9, was found in 2 cases of Ph<U+2009>+<U+2009>blast crisis with additional
chromosome aberrations other than t(7;11). To determine the mechanisms underlying
MSI2 over-expression in our patient we performed Chromatin Immunoprecipitation
and found that NUP98/HOXA13 fusion protein deregulates MSI2 gene by binding its
promoter.
CONCLUSIONS: To the best of our knowledge, this is the first molecular
characterization of NUP98/HOXA13 fusion in blast crisis of Ph<U+2009>+<U+2009>CML. Our findings
suggest cooperative mechanisms of MSI2 over-expression driven by HOXA proteins
and strongly supports MSI2 as a prognostic marker and a candidate in target
treatment of CML.

PMCID: PMC4071805
PMID: 24971156  [PubMed]


84. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2014 Jul 8;111(27):9899-904. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1402238111. Epub 2014 Jun 23.

C/EBPa is an essential collaborator in Hoxa9/Meis1-mediated leukemogenesis.

Collins C(1), Wang J(1), Miao H(1), Bronstein J(1), Nawer H(1), Xu T(1), Figueroa
M(1), Muntean AG(1), Hess JL(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109; and.
(2)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109;
andIndiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN 46202 jayhess@iu.edu.

Homeobox A9 (HOXA9) is a homeodomain-containing transcription factor that plays a
key role in hematopoietic stem cell expansion and is commonly deregulated in
human acute leukemias. A variety of upstream genetic alterations in acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) lead to overexpression of HOXA9, almost always in association with
overexpression of its cofactor meis homeobox 1 (MEIS1) . A wide range of data
suggests that HOXA9 and MEIS1 play a synergistic causative role in AML, although 
the molecular mechanisms leading to transformation by HOXA9 and MEIS1 remain
elusive. In this study, we identify CCAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha (C/EBPa)
as a critical collaborator required for Hoxa9/Meis1-mediated leukemogenesis. We
show that C/EBPa is required for the proliferation of Hoxa9/Meis1-transformed
cells in culture and that loss of C/EBPa greatly improves survival in both
primary and secondary murine models of Hoxa9/Meis1-induced leukemia. Over 50% of 
Hoxa9 genome-wide binding sites are cobound by C/EBPa, which coregulates a number
of downstream target genes involved in the regulation of cell proliferation and
differentiation. Finally, we show that Hoxa9 represses the locus of the
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors Cdkn2a/b in concert with C/EBPa to overcome a 
block in G1 cell cycle progression. Together, our results suggest a previously
unidentified role for C/EBPa in maintaining the proliferation required for
Hoxa9/Meis1-mediated leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4103350
PMID: 24958854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Nat Commun. 2014 Jun 23;5:4177. doi: 10.1038/ncomms5177.

Ezh2 loss promotes development of myelodysplastic syndrome but attenuates its
predisposition to leukaemic transformation.

Sashida G(1), Harada H(2), Matsui H(3), Oshima M(1), Yui M(1), Harada Y(4),
Tanaka S(5), Mochizuki-Kashio M(1), Wang C(1), Saraya A(1), Muto T(5), Hayashi
Y(6), Suzuki K(7), Nakajima H(7), Inaba T(3), Koseki H(8), Huang G(6), Kitamura
T(9), Iwama A(1).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, Graduate School of Medicine,
Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan [2] JST, CREST, 7
Gobancho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan. (2)1] Department of Hematology and
Oncology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima
University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan [2]. (3)Division
of Molecular Oncology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine,
Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan. (4)1]
Division of Radiation Information Registry, Research Institute for Radiation
Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University, 1-2-3 Kasumi, Minami-ku, Hiroshima
734-8553, Japan [2]. (5)1] Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine,
Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba
260-8670, Japan [2] Department of Hematology, Chiba University Hospital, 1-8-1
Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670, Japan. (6)1] Division of Pathology, Cincinnati 
Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio
45229-3026, USA [2] Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology,
Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333 Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati,
Ohio 45229-3026, USA. (7)Department of Allergy and Clinical Immunology, Graduate 
School of Medicine, Chiba University, 1-8-1 Inohana, Chuo-ku, Chiba 260-8670,
Japan. (8)1] JST, CREST, 7 Gobancho, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0076, Japan [2]
Laboratory for Lymphocyte Development, RIKEN Center for Integrative Medical
Sciences, 1-7-22 Suehiro-cho, Tsurumi-ku, Yokohama, Kanagawa 230-0045, Japan.
(9)Division of Cellular Therapy and Division of Stem Cell Signaling, Institute of
Medical Science, University of Tokyo, 4-6-1 Shirokanedai, Minato, Tokyo 108-8639,
Japan.

Loss-of-function mutations of EZH2, a catalytic component of polycomb repressive 
complex 2 (PRC2), are observed in ~\n10% of patients with myelodysplastic
syndrome (MDS), but are rare in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). Recent studies
have shown that EZH2 mutations are often associated with RUNX1 mutations in MDS
patients, although its pathological function remains to be addressed. Here we
establish an MDS mouse model by transducing a RUNX1S291fs mutant into
hematopoietic stem cells and subsequently deleting Ezh2. Ezh2 loss significantly 
promotes RUNX1S291fs-induced MDS. Despite their compromised proliferative
capacity of RUNX1S291fs/Ezh2-null MDS cells, MDS bone marrow impairs normal
hematopoietic cells via selectively activating inflammatory cytokine responses,
thereby allowing propagation of MDS clones. In contrast, loss of Ezh2 prevents
the transformation of AML via PRC1-mediated repression of Hoxa9. These findings
provide a comprehensive picture of how Ezh2 loss collaborates with RUNX1 mutants 
in the pathogenesis of MDS in both cell autonomous and non-autonomous manners.

PMID: 24953053  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Haematologica. 2014 Sep;99(9):1465-71. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.100917. Epub
2014 Jun 20.

Potent co-operation between the NUP98-NSD1 fusion and the FLT3-ITD mutation in
acute myeloid leukemia induction.

Thanasopoulou A(1), Tzankov A(2), Schwaller J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University Children's Hospital of Basel (UKBB),
Switzerland. (2)Institute for Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Switzerland. 
(3)Department of Biomedicine, University Children's Hospital of Basel (UKBB),
Switzerland j.schwaller@unibas.ch.

The NUP98-NSD1 fusion, product of the t(5;11)(q35;p15.5) chromosomal
translocation, is one of the most prevalent genetic alterations in
cytogenetically normal pediatric acute myeloid leukemias and is associated with
poor prognosis. Co-existence of an FLT3-ITD activating mutation has been found in
more than 70% of NUP98-NSD1-positive patients. To address functional synergism,
we determined the transforming potential of retrovirally expressed NUP98-NSD1 and
FLT3-ITD in the mouse. Expression of NUP98-NSD1 provided mouse strain-dependent, 
aberrant self-renewal potential to bone marrow progenitor cells. Co-expression of
FLT3-ITD increased proliferation and maintained self-renewal in vitro.
Transplantation of immortalized progenitors co-expressing NUP98-NSD1 and FLT3-ITD
into mice resulted in acute myeloid leukemia after a short latency. In contrast, 
neither NUP98-NSD1 nor FLT3-ITD single transduced cells were able to initiate
leukemia. Interestingly, as reported for patients carrying NUP98-NSD1, an
increased Flt3-ITD to wild-type Flt3 mRNA expression ratio with increased
FLT3-signaling was associated with rapidly induced disease. In contrast, there
was no difference in the expression levels of the NUP98-NSD1 fusion or its
proposed targets HoxA5, HoxA7, HoxA9 or HoxA10 between animals with different
latencies to develop disease. Finally, leukemic cells co-expressing NUP98-NSD1
and FLT3-ITD were very sensitive to a small molecule FLT3 inhibitor, which
underlines the significance of aberrant FLT3 signaling for NUP98-NSD1-positive
leukemias and suggests new therapeutic approaches that could potentially improve 
patient outcome.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4562535
PMID: 24951466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Oncotarget. 2014 Nov 15;5(21):10356-67.

Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation is involved in the epigenetic control of TET1 gene
transcription.

Ciccarone F(1), Valentini E(1), Bacalini MG(2), Zampieri M(1), Calabrese R(1),
Guastafierro T(1), Mariano G(1), Reale A(1), Franceschi C(2), Caiafa P(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biotechnologies and Hematology, "Sapienza" University
of Rome, Rome, Italy. Pasteur Institute-Fondazione Cenci Bolognetti, Rome, Italy.
(2)Department of Experimental Pathology, Alma Mater Studiorum, University of
Bologna, Bologna, Italy.

TET enzymes are the epigenetic factors involved in the formation of the sixth DNA
base 5-hydroxymethylcytosine, whose deregulation has been associated with
tumorigenesis. In particular, TET1 acts as tumor suppressor preventing cell
proliferation and tumor metastasis and it has frequently been found
down-regulated in cancer. Thus, considering the importance of a tight control of 
TET1 expression, the epigenetic mechanisms involved in the transcriptional
regulation of TET1 gene are here investigated. The involvement of
poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation in the control of DNA and histone methylation on TET1 gene
was examined. PARP activity is able to positively regulate TET1 expression
maintaining a permissive chromatin state characterized by DNA hypomethylation of 
TET1 CpG island as well as high levels of H3K4 trimethylation. These epigenetic
modifications were affected by PAR depletion causing TET1 down-regulation and in 
turn reduced recruitment of TET1 protein on HOXA9 target gene. In conclusion,
this work shows that PARP activity is a transcriptional regulator of TET1 gene
through the control of epigenetic events and it suggests that deregulation of
these mechanisms could account for TET1 repression in cancer.

PMCID: PMC4279378
PMID: 24939750  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Epigenetics. 2014 Aug;9(8):1138-48. doi: 10.4161/epi.29499. Epub 2014 Jun 17.

Development of a multiplex methylation specific PCR suitable for (early)
detection of non-small cell lung cancer.

Nawaz I(1), Qiu X(2), Wu H(2), Li Y(2), Fan Y(2), Hu LF(3), Zhou Q(2), Ernberg
I(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology; Tumor and Cell Biology; Karolinska Institute;
Stockholm, Sweden; Department of Microbiology; Faculty of Life Sciences;
University of Balochistan; Quetta, Pakistan. (2)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Lung
Cancer Metastasis and Tumor Microenvironment; Tianjin Lung Cancer Institute;
Tianjin Medical University General Hospital; Tianjin, PR China. (3)Department of 
Microbiology; Tumor and Cell Biology; Karolinska Institute; Stockholm, Sweden.

Lung cancer is a worldwide health problem and a leading cause of cancer-related
deaths. Silencing of potential tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) by aberrant promoter
methylation is an early event in the initiation and development of cancer. Thus, 
methylated cancer type-specific TSGs in DNA can serve as useful biomarkers for
early cancer detection. We have now developed a "Multiplex Methylation Specific
PCR" (MMSP) assay for analysis of the methylation status of multiple potential
TSGs by a single PCR reaction. This method will be useful for early diagnosis and
treatment outcome studies of non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Genome-wide CpG 
methylation and expression microarrays were performed on lung cancer tissues and 
matched distant non-cancerous tissues from three NSCLC patients from China.
Thirty-eight potential TSGs were selected and analyzed by methylation PCR on
bisulfite treated DNA. On the basis of sensitivity and specificity, six marker
genes, HOXA9, TBX5, PITX2, CALCA, RASSF1A, and DLEC1, were selected to establish 
the MMSP assay. This assay was then used to analyze lung cancer tissues and
matched distant non-cancerous tissues from 70 patients with NSCLC, as well as 24 
patients with benign pulmonary lesion as controls. The sensitivity of the assay
was 99% (69/70). HOXA9 and TBX5 were the 2 most sensitive marker genes: 87%
(61/70) and 84% (59/70), respectively. RASSF1A and DLEC1 showed the highest
specificity at 99% (69/70). Using the criterion of identifying at least any two
methylated marker genes, 61/70 cancer samples were positive, corresponding to a
sensitivity of 87% and a specificity of 94%. Early stage I or II NSCLC could even
be detected with a 100% specificity and 86% sensitivity. In conclusion, MMSP has 
the potential to be developed into a population-based screening tool and can be
useful for early diagnosis of NSCLC. It might also be suitable for monitoring
treatment outcome and recurrence.

PMCID: PMC4164499
PMID: 24937636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. BMC Cancer. 2014 May 21;14:353. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-353.

Investigation of HOXA9 promoter methylation as a biomarker to distinguish oral
cancer patients at low risk of neck metastasis.

Uchida K, Veeramachaneni R, Huey B, Bhattacharya A, Schmidt BL, Albertson DG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California San 
Francisco, 1450 Third Street, San Francisco CA 94158-9001, USA. da66@nyu.edu.

BACKGROUND: Metastasis to the cervical (neck) lymph nodes is one of the most
significant clinical factors responsible for death from oral squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC). Therefore, the lymph nodes are frequently removed when the tumor
is excised (neck dissection), even though the majority of patients will not
benefit from the extra surgery. Two subtypes of oral SCC distinguished by the
presence of tumor genomic aberrations +3q, -8p, +8q and/or +20 differ in risk for
metastasis - high for the 3q8pq20 subtype, harboring one or more of the
aberrations and low for the non-3q8pq20 subtype, lacking these alterations. A
prior analysis of the literature suggested genes differentially methylated in the
two subtypes. Therefore, the goal of this study was to further investigate the
methylation status of candidate biomarkers of the non-3q8pq20 subtype, and
evaluate their utility for identifying patients at low risk for metastasis.
METHODS: Methylation status of genes in a cohort of 52 oral SCC patients with at 
least five year follow up was determined by pyrosequencing. Gene expression
levels were determined by quantitative RT-PCR. Growth following re-expression of 
HOXA9 in cultured oral SCC cells was assessed by proliferation and colony
formation assays.
RESULTS: A pilot study evaluating methylation levels of HOXA9, MT1A and HOXA11
promoters in DNA from 12 tumors (six each of the 3q8pq20 and non-3q8pq20
subtypes) revealed that only HOXA9 was differentially methylated. Significant
differences in methylation levels of HOXA9 were observed amongst the 52 oral SCCs
with respect to genomic subtype and nodal status (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.014, and p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.024,
respectively, Wilcoxon rank sum test). High levels of HOXA9 methylation and low
levels of expression in oral SCC cell lines were observed compared to HaCaT, a
non-tumorigenic keratinocyte cell line. Re-expression of HOXA9 in the SCC4 oral
cancer cell line resulted in diminished proliferation and colony formation.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXA9 methylation is frequent in oral cancers and levels are higher 
in tumors with greater risk of metastasis. Expression of HOXA9 is low in cells
with high levels of methylation and reduced expression appears to confer a growth
advantage.

PMCID: PMC4045880
PMID: 24886209  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Leukoc Biol. 2014 Sep;96(3):419-26. doi: 10.1189/jlb.2AB0314-145R. Epub 2014
May 27.

The Cebpa +37-kb enhancer directs transgene expression to myeloid progenitors and
to long-term hematopoietic stem cells.

Guo H(1), Ma O(1), Friedman AD(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
USA. (2)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA afriedm2@jhmi.edu.

C/EBPa is expressed preferentially in myeloid compared with lymphoid or erythroid
cells and directs myeloid lineage specification. C/EBPa is also expressed at
lower levels in HSCs and in several nonhematopoietic tissues. The Cebpa gene has 
a conserved, 450-bp segment at +37 kb that harbors enhancer-specific epigenetic
marks and is activate in a myeloid cell line. Herein, we characterize transgenic 
C57BL/6 mice, in which the Cebpa enhancer and 845-bp promoter regulate a hCD4
reporter. FACS analysis, in vitro colony assays, and in vivo competitive and
secondary transplantation revealed that myeloid but not MEPs or lymphoid
progenitors and also functional LT-HSCs are found almost exclusively in the
Cebpa-hCD4(+) compared with hCD4(-) marrow population. hCD4(+) CMP yielded
predominantly myeloid, whereas hCD4(-) CMP generated mainly Meg/E colonies.
Providing insight into control of CMP maturation, Cebpa and Pu.1 RNAs were
preferentially expressed in hCD4(+) CMP, Scl, Gata2, Gata1, Klf1, Ets1, and Fli1 
predominated in hCD4(-) CMP, and Runx1, Myb, HoxA9, and Erg levels were similar
in both. Cebpa-hCD4 transgene expression was lacking in multiple nonhematopoietic
tissues. In summary, the +37-kb Cebpa enhancer and promoter are sufficient for
marrow myeloid progenitor and LT-HSC-specific expression.

© 2014 Society for Leukocyte Biology.

PMCID: PMC4138201
PMID: 24868087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Arch Oral Biol. 2014 Aug;59(8):783-9. doi: 10.1016/j.archoralbio.2014.05.001.
Epub 2014 May 10.

Epigenetic repression of HOXB cluster in oral cancer cell lines.

Xavier FC(1), Destro MF(2), Duarte CM(2), Nunes FD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Propaedeutics and Integrated Clinic, School of Dentistry,
Federal University of Bahia, Av. Araujo Pinho, 62, Canela, Salvador 40110-150
Bahia, Brazil. (2)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of
São Paulo, Av. Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil.
(3)Department of Stomatology, School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Av.
Prof. Lineu Prestes, 2227, Butantã São Paulo, 05508-000 Brazil. Electronic
address: fadnunes@usp.br.

OBJECTIVE: Aberrant DNA methylation is a fundamental transcriptional control
mechanism in carcinogenesis. The expression of homeobox genes is usually
controlled by an epigenetic mechanism, such as the methylation of CpG islands in 
the promoter region. The aim of this study was to describe the differential
methylation pattern of HOX genes in oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) cell
lines and transcript status in a group of hypermethylated and hypomethylated
genes.
DESIGN: Quantitative analysis of DNA methylation was performed on two OSCC cell
lines (SCC4 and SCC9) using a method denominated Human Homeobox Genes EpiTect
Methyl qPCR Arrays, which allowed fast, precise methylation detection of 24 HOX
specific genes without bisulfite conversion.
RESULTS: Methylation greater than 50% was detected in HOXA11, HOXA6, HOXA7,
HOXA9, HOXB1, HOXB2, HOXB3, HOXB4, HOXB5, HOXB6, HOXC8 and HOXD10. Both cell
lines demonstrated similar hypermethylation status for eight HOX genes. A similar
pattern of promoter hypermethylation and hypomethylation was demonstrated for the
HOXB cluster and HOXA cluster, respectively. Moreover, the hypermethylation
profile of the HOXB cluster, especially HOXB4, was correlated with decreased
transcript expression, which was restored following treatment with
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
CONCLUSIONS: The homeobox methylation profile in OSCC cell lines is consistent
with an epigenetic biomarker.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24859765  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. PLoS One. 2014 May 23;9(5):e98270. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098270. eCollection
2014.

DOT1L inhibition sensitizes MLL-rearranged AML to chemotherapy.

Liu W(1), Deng L(2), Song Y(2), Redell M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Section of Hematology-Oncology, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of America. (2)Department of
Pharmacology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, Texas, United States of
America.

DOT1L, the only known histone H3-lysine 79 (H3K79) methyltransferase, has been
shown to be essential for the survival and proliferation of mixed-linkage
leukemia (MLL) gene rearranged leukemia cells, which are often resistant to
conventional chemotherapeutic agents. To study the functions of DOT1L in
MLL-rearranged leukemia, SYC-522, a potent inhibitor of DOT1L developed in our
laboratory, was used to treat MLL-rearranged leukemia cell lines and patient
samples. SYC-522 significantly inhibited methylation at H3K79, but not H3K4 or
H3K27, and decreased the expression of two important leukemia-relevant genes,
HOXA9 and MEIS1, by more than 50%. It also significantly reduced the expression
of CCND1 and BCL2L1, which are important regulators of cell cycle and
anti-apoptotic signaling pathways. Exposure of MLL-rearranged leukemia cells to
this compound caused cell cycle arrest and promoted differentiation of those
cells, both morphologically and by increased CD14 expression. SYC-522 did not
induce apoptosis, even at 10 µM for as long as 6 days. However, treatment with
this DOT1L inhibitor decreased the colony formation ability of primary
MLL-rearranged AML cells by up to 50%, and promoted monocytic differentiation.
Notably, SYC-522 treatment significantly increased the sensitivity of
MLL-rearranged leukemia cells to chemotherapeutics, such as mitoxantrone,
etoposide and cytarabine. A similar sensitization was seen with primary
MLL-rearranged AML cells. SYC-522 did not affect chemotherapy-induced apoptosis
in leukemia cells without MLL-rearrangement. Suppression of DOT1L activity
inhibited the mitoxantrone-induced increase in the DNA damage response marker,
<U+03B3>H2AX, and increased the level of cPARP, an intracellular marker of apoptosis.
These results demonstrated that SYC-522 selectively inhibited DOT1L, and thereby 
altered gene expression, promoted differentiation, and increased chemosensitivity
by preventing DNA damage response. Therefore, inhibition of DOT1L, in combination
with DNA damaging chemotherapy, represents a promising approach to improving
outcomes for MLL-rearranged leukemia.

PMCID: PMC4032273
PMID: 24858818  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Mol Carcinog. 2015 Jun;54 Suppl 1:E72-80. doi: 10.1002/mc.22180. Epub 2014 May 9.

HOXA9 inhibits migration of lung cancer cells and its hypermethylation is
associated with recurrence in non-small cell lung cancer.

Hwang JA(1), Lee BB(2), Kim Y(2), Hong SH(1), Kim YH(3), Han J(4), Shim YM(5),
Yoon CY(1), Lee YS(1), Kim DH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genomics Branch, Research Institute, National Cancer Center, Goyang-si,
Korea. (2)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Samsung Biomedical Research
Institute, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Suwon, Korea.
(3)Department of Internal Medicine, Samsung Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan
University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. (4)Department of Pathology, Samsung 
Medical Center, Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.
(5)Department of Thoracic and Cardiovascular Surgery, Samsung Medical Center,
Sungkyunkwan University School of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

This study was aimed at understanding the clinicopathological significance of
HOXA9 hypermethylation in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). HOXA9
hypermethylation was characterized in six lung cancer cell lines, and its
clinicopathological significance was analyzed using methylation-specific PCR in
271 formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded tissues and 27 fresh-frozen tumor and
matched normal tissues from 298 NSCLC patients, and Ki-67 expression was analyzed
using immunohistochemistry. The promoter region of HOXA9 was highly methylated in
six lung cancer cell lines, but not in normal bronchial epithelial cells. The
loss of expression was restored by treatment of the cells with a demethylating
agent, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-Aza-dC). Transient transfection of HOXA9 into
H23 lung cancer cells resulted in the inhibition of cell migration but not
proliferation. Conversely, sequence-specific siRNA-mediated knockdown of HOXA9
enhanced cell migration. The mRNA levels of HOXA9 in 27 fresh-frozen tumor
tissues were significantly lower than in matched normal tissues (P<0.0001;
Wilcoxon signed-rank test). HOXA9 hypermethylation was found in 191 (70%) of 271 
primary NSCLCs. HOXA9 hypermethylation was not associated with tumor size
(P=0.12) and Ki-67 proliferation index (P=0.15). However, patients with HOXA9
hypermethylation had poor recurrence-free survival (hazard ratio=3.98, 95%
confidence interval<U+2009>=<U+2009>1.07-17.09, P=0.01) in never-smokers, after adjusting for
age, sex, tumor size, adjuvant therapy, pathologic stage, and histology. In
conclusion, the present study suggests that HOXA9 inhibits migration of lung
cancer cells and its hypermethylation is an independent prognostic factor for
recurrence-free survival in never-smokers with NSCLC.

© 2014 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24817037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. PLoS One. 2014 May 8;9(5):e96711. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0096711. eCollection 
2014.

The deficiency of tumor suppressor prep1 accelerates the onset of meis1- hoxa9
leukemogenesis.

Dardaei L(1), Modica L(1), Iotti G(1), Blasi F(1).

Author information: 
(1)Fondazione Istituto FIRC di Oncologia Molecolare (IFOM), Milan, Italy.

Prep1 and Meis1 ortholog TALE transcription factors have opposing roles in
tumorigenesis: Meis1 serves as an oncogene, Prep1 as a tumor suppressor. We now
report that, Meis1 overexpression in primary Prep1-deficient (Prep1i/i) embryonic
hematopoietic cells increases self-renewal potential of cells in vitro but not in
vivo, whereas leukemia is instead obtained when Meis1 is combined with another
oncogene, HoxA9. Prep1i/i Meis1-HoxA9-generated leukemic cells are less
differentiated and grow more aggressively after the second passage in the mouse. 
These data indicate that Prep1 represents a barrier to the transforming activity 
of Meis1 in vitro, but its absence is not sufficient to induce early
leukemogenesis. On the other hand, the Prep1i/i background appears to favor the
insurgence of mutations that cause a more aggressive Meis1-HoxA9-generated
leukemia. Indeed, the Prep1i/i leukemic cells upregulate the Polycomb protein
Bmi-1 and expectedly down-regulate the Ink4a/Arf locus products. Finally, an
important feature contributed by the Prep1i/i background is the
post-transcriptional increase in Meis1 protein level.

PMCID: PMC4014505
PMID: 24809472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Oncogene. 2014 Oct 16;33(42):5028-38. doi: 10.1038/onc.2014.108. Epub 2014 Apr
21.

Evi1 defines leukemia-initiating capacity and tyrosine kinase inhibitor
resistance in chronic myeloid leukemia.

Sato T(1), Goyama S(2), Kataoka K(2), Nasu R(2), Tsuruta-Kishino T(2), Kagoya
Y(2), Nukina A(2), Kumagai K(3), Kubota N(3), Nakagawa M(2), Arai S(2), Yoshimi
A(2), Honda H(4), Kadowaki T(3), Kurokawa M(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan [2] Department of Transfusion Medicine, The
University of Tokyo Hospital, Tokyo, Japan. (2)Department of Hematology
and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Department of Metabolic and Diabetic Diseases, Graduate School of Medicine,
The University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan. (4)Department of Disease Model, Research
Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima,
Japan.

Relapse of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) is triggered by stem cells with a
reconstituting capacity similar to that of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and
CML stem cells are a source of resistance in drug therapy with tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs). Ecotropic viral integration site 1 (EVI1), a key transcription
factor in HSC regulation, is known to predict poor outcomes in myeloid
malignancies, however, incapability of prospective isolation of EVI1-high
leukemic cells precludes the functional evaluation of intraindividual EVI1-high
cells. Introduction of CML into Evi1-internal ribosomal entry site (IRES)-green
fluorescent protein (GFP) knock-in mice, a versatile HSC-reporter strain, enables
us to separate Evi1-high CML cells from the individual. Evi1-IRES-GFP allele
models of CML in chronic phase (CML-CP), by retroviral overexpression of BCR-ABL 
and by crossing BCR-ABL transgenic mice, revealed that Evi1 is predominantly
enriched in the stem cell fraction and associated with an enhanced proliferative 
as well as a leukemia-initiating capacity and that Evi1-high CML-CP cells exhibit
resistance to TKIs. Overexpressing BCR-ABL and NUP98-HOXA9 in Evi1-IRES-GFP
knock-in mice to model CML in blast crisis (CML-BC), in which Evi1-high cells
turned to be a major population as opposed to a minor population in CML-CP
models, showed that Evi1-high CML-BC cells have a greater potential to
recapitulate the disease and appear resistant to TKIs. Furthermore, given that
Evi1 heterozygosity ameliorates CML-CP and CML-BC development and that the
combination of Evi1 and BCR-ABL causes acute myeloid leukemia resembling CML-BC, 
Evi1 could regulate CML development as a potent driver. In addition, in human
CML-CP cases, we show that EVI1 is highly expressed in stem cell-enriched
CD34+CD38-CD90+ fraction at single-cell level. This is the first report to
clarify directly that Evi1-high leukemic cells themselves possess the superior
potential to Evi1-low cells in oncogenic self-renewal, which highlights the role 
of Evi1 as a valuable and a functional marker of CML stem cells.

PMCID: PMC4217142
PMID: 24747972  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Nat Med. 2014 Apr;20(4):332-3. doi: 10.1038/nm.3523.

ECM stiffness paves the way for tumor cells.

Seewaldt V(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Med. 2014 Oct;20(10):1217.

PMID: 24710372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2014 Aug;52(8):1235-45. doi: 10.1515/cclm-2013-0780.

Frequent methylation of HOXA9 gene in tumor tissues and plasma samples from human
hepatocellular carcinomas.

Kuo CC, Lin CY, Shih YL, Hsieh CB, Lin PY, Guan SB, Hsieh MS, Lai HC, Chen CJ,
Lin YW.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant DNA methylation is associated with the development of
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), suggesting that gene methylation could be a
potential biomarker for detection of HCC. The aim of this study is to identify
potential biomarkers in HCC.
METHODS: We used the Infinium methylation array and a DNA-pooling strategy to
analyze the genome-wide methylation profile in HCC. Quantitative
methylation-specific PCR (Q-MSP) was used to validate homeobox A9 (HOXA9)
methylation in 29 normal controls, 100 HCC samples and adjacent non-tumor tissues
and in 74 plasma samples, including 40 patients with HCC.
RESULTS: Ten genes (HOXA9, NEUROG1, TNFRSF10C, IRAK3, GFPT2, ZNF177, DPYSL4,
ELOVL4, FSD1, and CACNA1G) showed differences in methylation between controls and
HCCs. Of these, HOXA9 was significantly hypermethylated in HCCs (76.7%; 23/30)
compared with controls (3.4%; 1/29). In addition, combination analysis of two-
and three-gene sets for HCC detection showed greater sensitivity (90%-96.7%) and 
comparable specificity (93.1%-96.6%) to each individual gene (33.3%-76.7% and
55.2%-100.0%). HOXA9 methylation was further validated by Q-MSP in two
independent set of clinical samples including 100 HCC and paired non-tumor
tissues. Further, HOXA9 methylation could be detected in plasma from HCC patients
(n=40) but not in normal plasma (n=34) (p<0.0005). Combined testing (either
parameter positive) for a-fetoprotein (AFP, a plasma protein biomarker) and HOXA9
methylation showed greater sensitivity (94.6%) for detection of HCC than AFP
alone (75.7%).
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that methylation of HOXA9 could be a helpful
biomarker to assist in HCC detection.

PMID: 24681432  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Ann Surg Oncol. 2014 Sep;21(9):3124-31. doi: 10.1245/s10434-014-3661-2. Epub 2014
Mar 27.

Innovative rapid gene methylation analysis of surgical margin tissues in head and
neck cancer.

Hayashi M(1), Guerrero-Preston R, Okamura J, Michailidi C, Kahn Z, Li X, Ahn J,
Goldsmith M, Koch W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD, USA.

BACKGROUND: Securing the negative surgical margin is the first step in surgical
cancer treatment. However, tumor recurrence sometimes occurs even with
histologically negative surgical margins. To detect minimal residual cancer cells
in the deep margin intraoperatively, a time-efficient molecular approach is
required.
METHODS: We established an innovative rapid quantitative methylation PCR (QMSP)
assay, which consists of substantially time-minimized DNA extraction, bisulfite
treatment, and QMSP assays. To demonstrate the feasibility of this procedure, 10 
serial surgical specimens of primary head and neck squamous cell carcinoma
(HNSCC) were evaluated by both rapid and conventional QMSP. Two frequently
methylated genes in head and neck cancer, homeobox A9 (HOXA9) and endothelin
receptor type B (EDNRB) were analyzed in 10 HNSCCs and surgical margin tissues,
as well as normal muscle and oral mucosa samples.
RESULTS: The product quality of DNA extraction and bisulfite treatment using the 
time-saving procedure was comparable to the conventional procedure. In the QMSP
assay, target gene methylation and reference gene methylation were equally
detected by both the rapid and conventional method. Finally, relative results of 
rapid and conventional QMSP were quite similar to each other in tumors, margins, 
and normal tissues. The average total time required for the rapid QMSP procedure 
was less than 3 h and could be accomplished by a single person.
CONCLUSION: From the viewpoint of accuracy, cost, and time consumption, the
innovative rapid QMSP maintains highly sensitive methylation detection
accomplished within the time frame of a major ablative and reconstructive
procedure.

PMID: 24671639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Nat Med. 2014 Apr;20(4):360-7. doi: 10.1038/nm.3497. Epub 2014 Mar 16.

Tissue mechanics modulate microRNA-dependent PTEN expression to regulate
malignant progression.

Mouw JK(1), Yui Y(1), Damiano L(1), Bainer RO(1), Lakins JN(1), Acerbi I(1), Ou
G(1), Wijekoon AC(1), Levental KR(2), Gilbert PM(3), Hwang ES(4), Chen YY(5),
Weaver VM(6).

Author information: 
(1)Center for Bioengineering and Tissue Regeneration, Department of Surgery,
University of California San Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, California, USA.
(2)Department of Integrative Biology and Pharmacology, The University of Texas
Health Science Center at Houston-Medical School, Houston, Texas, USA.
(3)Institute of Biomaterials and Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Department of Surgery, Duke University Comprehensive
Cancer Center, Durham, North Carolina, USA. (5)Department of Pathology, UCSF, San
Francisco, California, USA. (6)1] Center for Bioengineering and Tissue
Regeneration, Department of Surgery, University of California San Francisco
(UCSF), San Francisco, California, USA. [2] Department of Anatomy and Department 
of Bioengineering and Therapeutic Sciences, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA.
[3] Eli and Edythe Broad Center of Regeneration Medicine and Stem Cell Research, 
UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA. [4] UCSF Helen Diller Comprehensive Cancer 
Center, UCSF, San Francisco, California, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2014 May;14(5):296.

Tissue mechanics regulate development and homeostasis and are consistently
modified in tumor progression. Nevertheless, the fundamental molecular mechanisms
through which altered mechanics regulate tissue behavior and the clinical
relevance of these changes remain unclear. We demonstrate that increased matrix
stiffness modulates microRNA expression to drive tumor progression through
integrin activation of ß-catenin and MYC. Specifically, in human and mouse
tissue, increased matrix stiffness induced miR-18a to reduce levels of the tumor 
suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), both directly and indirectly by
decreasing levels of homeobox A9 (HOXA9). Clinically, extracellular matrix
stiffness correlated directly and significantly with miR-18a expression in human 
breast tumor biopsies. miR-18a expression was highest in basal-like breast
cancers in which PTEN and HOXA9 levels were lowest, and high miR-18a expression
predicted poor prognosis in patients with luminal breast cancers. Our findings
identify a mechanically regulated microRNA circuit that can promote malignancy
and suggest potential prognostic roles for HOXA9 and miR-18a levels in
stratifying patients with luminal breast cancers.

PMCID: PMC3981899
PMID: 24633304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Cancer Sci. 2014 May;105(5):512-9. doi: 10.1111/cas.12386. Epub 2014 Mar 30.

Inhibition of histone methyltransferase EZH2 depletes leukemia stem cell of mixed
lineage leukemia fusion leukemia through upregulation of p16.

Ueda K(1), Yoshimi A, Kagoya Y, Nishikawa S, Marquez VE, Nakagawa M, Kurokawa M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Leukemia stem cells (LSC) are resistant to conventional chemotherapy and
persistent LSC after chemotherapy are supposed to be a major cause of relapse.
However, information on genetic or epigenetic regulation of stem cell properties 
is still limited and LSC-targeted drugs have scarcely been identified. Epigenetic
regulators are associated with many cellular processes including maintenance of
stem cells. Of note are polycomb group proteins, because they potentially control
stemness, and can be pharmacologically targeted by a selective inhibitor (DZNep).
Therefore, we investigated the therapeutic potential of EZH2 inhibition in mixed 
lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion leukemia. Intriguingly, EZH2 inhibition by DZNep or
shRNA not only suppressed MLL fusion leukemia proliferation but also reduced
leukemia initiating cells (LIC) frequency. Expression analysis suggested that p16
upregulation was responsible for LICs reduction. Knockdown of p16 canceled the
survival advantage of mice treated with DZNep. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays demonstrated that EZH2 was highly enriched around the
transcription-start-site of p16, together with H3K27 methylation marks in MLL/ENL
and Hoxa9/Meis1 transduced cells but not in E2A/HLF transduced cells. Although
high expression of Hoxa9 in MLL fusion leukemia is supposed to be responsible for
the recruitment of EZH2, our data also suggest that there may be some other
mechanisms independent of Hoxa9 activation to suppress p16 expression, because
expression levels of Hoxa9 and p16 were not inversely related between MLL/ENL and
Hoxa9/Meis1 transduced cells. In summary, our findings show that EZH2 is a
potential therapeutic target of MLL fusion leukemia stem cells.

© 2014 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4317832
PMID: 24612037  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Hum Reprod. 2014 Apr;29(4):781-90. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deu004. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Regulation of endometrial receptivity by the highly expressed HOXA9, HOXA11 and
HOXD10 HOX-class homeobox genes.

Xu B(1), Geerts D, Bu Z, Ai J, Jin L, Li Y, Zhang H, Zhu G.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medicine College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 JieFang Avenue, Wuhan 430030,
People's Republic of China.

STUDY QUESTION: Are other HOX genes, in addition to HOXA10, involved in
endometrial receptivity?
SUMMARY ANSWER: The highly expressed HOXA9, HOXA11 and HOXD10 genes also appear
to be involved in endometrial receptivity.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Within the HOX family of homeobox transcription factor
genes are the leading candidates for the regulation of embryonic implantation. A 
crucial role of HOXA10 in endometrial receptivity has been well established.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: To identify HOX candidate genes, we performed data 
mining on all 39 human HOX genes in the 'Human body index' gene expression
database of normal human tissue. The temporal and spatial expression pattern of
four highly expressed HOX genes in the human endometrium was determined. To
further investigate the function of these Hox genes, we used a robust in vivo
mouse model in which we blocked maternal Hox gene expression.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING AND METHODS: Analysis of a gene expression
profile set in the public domain consisting of 504 samples representing 95
different normal human tissues, showed that in addition to HOXA10, also HOXA9,
HOXA11, HOXB6 and HOXD10 mRNA showed increased expression in the human
endometrium (16 samples). The temporal and spatial expression pattern of these
four HOX genes throughout the menstrual cycle was determined in the endometrium
from 27 female patients eligible for IVF-embryo transfer with a normal cycle by
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), western blot and immunohistochemistry. The 
role of maternal Hoxa9, Hoxa11 and Hoxd10 was assessed in a mouse implantation
model by expression knockdown using RNA interference. Forty mice were transfected
with Hoxa9-, Hoxa11- or Hoxd10-specific small hairpin RNA (shRNA) constructs or a
vector control by injection into the uterine horn at Day 2 after vaginal plug
detection (Day 1) (160 mice in total). The effects were examined by qRT-PCR and
western blot at Day 4 and litter sizes counted at Day 9 of pregnancy.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: HOXA10, HOXA9, HOXA11 and HOXD10 all showed 
increased expression during the mid-secretory phase of the menstrual cycle (P <
0.01). Knockdown of Hoxa9, Hoxa11 and Hoxd10 in the murine uterus resulted in
significantly reduced average implantation rates (P < 0.01) and, with regard to
four Hox target genes, also correlated with a significantly increased empty
spiracles homolog 2 (Emx2) and insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1
(Igfbp1), and decreased integrin ß3 (Itgb3) and leukemia inhibitory factor (Lif),
expression (P < 0.01).
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Menstrual cycle stage was not confirmed by
serum hormone analysis. We verified the absence of significant differences in
stage-specific expression of the reference genes used in our study (ACTB/Actb and
GAPDH/Gapdh) and therefore possible limitations of this approach were minimized. 
In addition, the translatability of our data from a mouse model to patients needs
to be investigated further.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: We provide evidence that three other HOX
genes in addition to HOXA10 are involved in endometrial receptivity, and that
part of their function is asserted through several known HOX target genes,
suggesting the presence of a central HOX signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 24549215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Leukemia. 2014 Sep;28(9):1838-43. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.74. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

The leukemogenicity of Hoxa9 depends on alternative splicing.

Stadler CR(1), Vegi N(2), Mulaw MA(2), Edmaier KE(2), Rawat VP(2), Dolnik A(3),
Bullinger L(3), Heilmeier B(4), Quintanilla-Fend L(5), Spiekermann K(1),
Hiddemann W(1), Döhner K(3), Döhner H(3), Feuring-Buske M(3), Buske C(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Internal Medicine III, Klinikum Grosshadern,
Ludwig-Maximilians-University of Munich, Munich, Germany [2] Clinical Cooperative
Group 'Pathogenesis of Acute Myeloid Leukemia', Helmholtz Center Munich for
Environmental Health, Munich, Germany. (2)Institute of Experimental Cancer
Research, Comprehensive Cancer Center, University Hospital of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. 
(3)Department of Internal Medicine III, University Hospital Ulm, Ulm, Germany.
(4)Department of Oncology and Hematology, Hospital Barmherzige Brüder,
Regensburg, Germany. (5)Institute of Pathology, University of Tübingen, Tübingen,
Germany.

Although the transforming potential of Hox genes is known for a long time, it is 
not precisely understood to which extent splicing is important for the
leukemogenicity of this gene family. To test this for Hoxa9, we compared the
leukemogenic potential of the wild-type Hoxa9, which undergoes natural splicing, 
with a full-length Hoxa9 construct, which was engineered to prevent natural
splicing (Hoxa9FLim). Inability to undergo splicing significantly reduced in vivo
leukemogenicity compared to Hoxa9-wild-typed. Importantly, Hoxa9FLim could
compensate for the reduced oncogenicity by collaborating with the natural splice 
variant Hoxa9T, as co-expression of Hoxa9T and Hoxa9FLim induced acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) after a comparable latency time as wild-type Hoxa9. Hoxa9T on its 
own induced AML after a similar latency as Hoxa9FLim, despite its inability to
bind DNA. These data assign splicing a central task in Hox gene mediated
leukemogenesis and suggest an important role of homeodomain-less splice variants 
in hematological neoplasms.

PMID: 24535405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Genes Dev. 2014 Feb 15;28(4):317-27. doi: 10.1101/gad.236794.113.

The methyltransferase G9a regulates HoxA9-dependent transcription in AML.

Lehnertz B(1), Pabst C, Su L, Miller M, Liu F, Yi L, Zhang R, Krosl J, Yung E,
Kirschner J, Rosten P, Underhill TM, Jin J, Hébert J, Sauvageau G, Humphries RK, 
Rossi FM.

Author information: 
(1)University of British Columbia, Biomedical Research Centre, Vancouver, British
Columbia V6T 1Z3, Canada;

Chromatin modulators are emerging as attractive drug targets, given their
widespread implication in human cancers and susceptibility to pharmacological
inhibition. Here we establish the histone methyltransferase G9a/EHMT2 as a
selective regulator of fast proliferating myeloid progenitors with no discernible
function in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). In mouse models of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), loss of G9a significantly delays disease progression and reduces 
leukemia stem cell (LSC) frequency. We connect this function of G9a to its
methyltransferase activity and its interaction with the leukemogenic
transcription factor HoxA9 and provide evidence that primary human AML cells are 
sensitive to G9A inhibition. Our results highlight a clinical potential of G9A
inhibition as a means to counteract the proliferation and self-renewal of AML
cells by attenuating HoxA9-dependent transcription.

PMCID: PMC3937511
PMID: 24532712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Meat Sci. 2014 May;97(1):32-41. doi: 10.1016/j.meatsci.2013.12.017. Epub 2014 Jan
4.

Transcriptional background of beef marbling - novel genes implicated in
intramuscular fat deposition.

Sadkowski T(1), Ciecierska A(2), Majewska A(2), Oprzadek J(3), Dasiewicz K(4),
Ollik M(5), Wicik Z(2), Motyl T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw
University of Life Sciences - SGGW, Warsaw, Poland. Electronic address:
tomasz_sadkowski@sggw.pl. (2)Department of Physiological Sciences, Faculty of
Veterinary Medicine, Warsaw University of Life Sciences - SGGW, Warsaw, Poland.
(3)Institute of Genetics and Animal Breeding, Polish Academy of Sciences,
Jastrzebiec, Poland. (4)Department of Food Technology, Faculty of Food Sciences, 
Warsaw University of Life Sciences - SGGW, Warsaw, Poland. (5)Department of
Experimental Design and Bioinformatics, Warsaw University of Life Sciences -
SGGW, Warsaw, Poland.

The purpose of this study was to identify novel marbling-related genes by
comparison of the global gene expression in semitendinosus muscle of 15-month-old
Limousin (LIM), Holstein-Friesian (HF) and Hereford (HER) bulls. Muscle of LIM
was lean with low intramuscular fat (IMF) content (0.53%) unlike the marbled
muscles of HER and HF characterized by higher amounts of IMF (1.10 and 0.81%,
respectively). The comparison of muscle transcriptional profile between marbled
and lean beef revealed significant differences in expression of 144 genes,
presumably involved in consecutive stages of adipose tissue development, such as 
preadipocyte proliferation and differentiation, adipocyte maturation, lipid
filling and lipid metabolism leading to increased IMF deposition and marbling
development. Correlation coefficients and regression analysis for nine of them
(gadd45a, pias3, ccrn4l, diras3, pou5f1, hoxa9, atp2a2 and pim1) validated by
real-time qPCR confirmed their moderate-high correlation with IMF% and explained 
up to 70.5% of the total variability in IMF deposition in the bulls.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24491505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Hum Mol Genet. 2014 Jun 15;23(12):3278-88. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddu040. Epub 2014 Jan
31.

A distinct set of long non-coding RNAs in childhood MLL-rearranged acute
lymphoblastic leukemia: biology and epigenetic target.

Fang K(1), Han BW(1), Chen ZH(1), Lin KY(1), Zeng CW(1), Li XJ(1), Li JH(1), Luo 
XQ(2), Chen YQ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the Ministry of Education, State Key
Laboratory for Biocontrol, School of Life Science, Sun Yat-sen University,
Guangzhou 510275, China and. (2)The First Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-sen
University, Guangzhou 510080, China. (3)Key Laboratory of Gene Engineering of the
Ministry of Education, State Key Laboratory for Biocontrol, School of Life
Science, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510275, China and
lsscyq@mail.sysu.edu.cn.

Long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) have been recently found to be pervasively
transcribed in human genome and link to diverse human diseases. However, the
expression patterns and regulatory roles of lncRNAs in hematopoietic malignancies
have not been reported. Here, we carried out a genome-wide lncRNA expression
study in MLL-rearranged acute lymphoblastic leukemia (MLL-r ALL) and established 
lncRNA/messenger RNA coexpression networks to gain insight into the biological
roles of these dysregulated lncRNAs. We detected a number of lncRNAs that were
differentially expressed in MLL-r ALL samples compared with MLL-r wild-type and
identified unique lncRNA expression patterns between MLL-r subtypes with
different translocations as well as between infant MLL-r ALL with other MLL-r ALL
patients, suggesting that they might be served as novel biomarkers for the
disease. Importantly, several lncRNAs that correspond with membrane protein
genes, including a lysosome-associated membrane protein, were identified. No such
link between the membrane proteins and MLL-r leukemia has been reported
previously. Impressively, the functional analysis showed that several lncRNAs
corresponded to the expression of MLL-fusion protein target genes, including
HOXA9, MEIS1, etc., while some other associated with histone-related functions or
membrane proteins. Further experiments characterize the effect of some lncRNAs on
MLL-r leukemia apoptosis and proliferation as the function of the coexpressed
HOXA gene cluster. Finally, a set of lncRNAs epigenetically regulated by H3K79
methylation were also discovered. These findings may provide novel insights into 
the mechanisms of lncRNAs involved in the initiation of MLL-r leukemia. This is
the first study linking lncRNAs to leukemogenesis.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24488769  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Apr 1;20(7):1856-64. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-13-2109.
Epub 2014 Jan 31.

Functional identification of cancer-specific methylation of CDO1, HOXA9, and TAC1
for the diagnosis of lung cancer.

Wrangle J(1), Machida EO, Danilova L, Hulbert A, Franco N, Zhang W, Glöckner SC, 
Tessema M, Van Neste L, Easwaran H, Schuebel KE, Licchesi J, Hooker CM, Ahuja N, 
Amano J, Belinsky SA, Baylin SB, Herman JG, Brock MV.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns 
Hopkins, Baltimore, Maryland; Department of Molecular Biotechnology, Faculty of
Bioscience Engineering, Ghent University, Ghent, Belgium; MDxHealth Inc, Irvine, 
California; Shinshu University School of Medicine, Asahi, Matsumoto, Nagano,
Japan; and Lovelace Respiratory Research Institute, Albuquerque, New Mexico.

PURPOSE: Non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is the leading cause of cancer
mortality in the world. Novel diagnostic biomarkers may augment both existing
NSCLC screening methods as well as molecular diagnostic tests of surgical
specimens to more accurately stratify and stage candidates for adjuvant
chemotherapy. Hypermethylation of CpG islands is a common and important
alteration in the transition from normal tissue to cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Following previously validated methods for the discovery of 
cancer-specific hypermethylation changes, we treated eight NSCLC cell lines with 
the hypomethylating agent deoxyazacitidine or trichostatin A. We validated the
findings using a large publicly available database and two independent cohorts of
primary samples.
RESULTS: We identified >300 candidate genes. Using The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA)
and extensive filtering to refine our candidate genes for the greatest ability to
distinguish tumor from normal, we define a three-gene panel, CDO1, HOXA9, and
TAC1, which we subsequently validate in two independent cohorts of primary NSCLC 
samples. This three-gene panel is 100% specific, showing no methylation in 75
TCGA normal and seven primary normal samples and is 83% to 99% sensitive for
NSCLC depending on the cohort.
CONCLUSION: This degree of sensitivity and specificity may be of high value to
diagnose the earliest stages of NSCLC. Addition of this three-gene panel to other
previously validated methylation biomarkers holds great promise in both early
diagnosis and molecular staging of NSCLC.

©2014 AACR.

PMCID: PMC4019442
PMID: 24486589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Nucleic Acids Res. 2014 Apr;42(7):4241-56. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt1394. Epub 2014
Jan 23.

MLL fusion proteins link transcriptional coactivators to previously active
CpG-rich promoters.

Okuda H(1), Kawaguchi M, Kanai A, Matsui H, Kawamura T, Inaba T, Kitabayashi I,
Yokoyama A.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Malignancy Control Research, Medical Innovation Center, Kyoto
University Graduate School of Medicine, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan, Division of
Hematological Malignancy, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo
104-0045, Japan, Department of Molecular Oncology and Leukemia Program Project,
Research Institute for Radiation Biology and Medicine, Hiroshima University,
Hiroshima 734-8553, Japan and Department of Molecular Biology and Medicine,
Laboratory for System Biology and Medicine (LSBM), Research Center for Advanced
Science and Technology (RCAST), The University of Tokyo, Tokyo 153-8904, Japan.

Mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) maintains the expression of cellular memory genes
during development, while leukemic MLL fusion proteins aberrantly maintain
expression of hematopoietic stem cell program genes such as HOXA9 to cause
leukemia. However, the molecular mechanism of gene activation is unclear. Here we
show that only two functional modules are necessary and sufficient for target
recognition: those that bind to non-methylated CpGs and di-/tri-methylated
histone H3 lysine 36 (H3K36me2/3). An artificial protein composed of the two
targeting modules and an interaction domain for AF4-family coactivators can
functionally substitute for MLL fusion proteins. Because H3K36me2/3 markers are
indicative of active transcription, MLL fusion proteins target previously active 
CpG-rich genes and activate transcription by recruiting coactivators thereto. Our
results indicate that such chromatin context-dependent gene activation is the
fundamental mechanism by which MLL fusion proteins maintain the expression of the
cellular memory/hematopoietic stem cell program genes.

PMCID: PMC3985622
PMID: 24465000  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Leukemia. 2014 Jul;28(7):1427-35. doi: 10.1038/leu.2014.40. Epub 2014 Jan 21.

Efficacy of cyclin-dependent-kinase 9 inhibitors in a murine model of
mixed-lineage leukemia.

Garcia-Cuellar MP(1), Füller E(1), Mäthner E(1), Breitinger C(1), Hetzner K(1),
Zeitlmann L(2), Borkhardt A(3), Slany RK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany. (2)Ingenium
Pharmaceuticals AG, Munich, Germany. (3)Clinic of Paediatric Oncology,
Haematology and Clinical Immunology, Centre for Child and Adolescent Health,
Medical Faculty, Heinrich-Heine-University Düsseldorf, Düsseldorf, Germany.

Mixed-lineage leukemia fusion proteins activate their target genes predominantly 
by stimulating transcriptional elongation. A core component necessary for this
activity is cyclin-dependent kinase 9. Here we explored the effectiveness of
small molecules targeting this enzyme as potential therapeutics. A screen of
seven compounds with anti-CDK9 activity applied to a panel of leukemia cell lines
identified flavopiridol and the experimental inhibitor PC585 as superior in
efficacy with inhibitory concentrations in the submicromolar range. Both
substances induced rapid dephosphorylation of the RNA polymerase II C-terminal
domain, accompanied by downregulation of CDK9-dependent transcripts for MYC and
HOXA9. Global gene expression analysis indicated the induction of a general
stress response program, culminating in widespread apoptosis. Importantly,
colony-forming activity in leukemia lines and primary patient samples could be
completely inhibited under conditions that did not affect native precursors from 
bone marrow. In vivo application in a mouse transplant model significantly
delayed disease with PC585 showing also oral activity. These results suggest CDK9
inhibition as novel treatment option for mixed-lineage leukemia.

PMID: 24445865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Leukemia. 2014 Jul;28(7):1436-48. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.384. Epub 2013 Dec 26.

PU.1 is essential for MLL leukemia partially via crosstalk with the MEIS/HOX
pathway.

Zhou J(1), Wu J(1), Li B(2), Liu D(3), Yu J(4), Yan X(5), Zheng S(3), Wang J(6), 
Zhang L(3), Zhang L(1), He F(1), Li Q(1), Chen A(2), Zhang Y(5), Zhao X(5), Guan 
Y(7), Zhao X(1), Yan J(1), Ni J(8), Nobrega MA(9), Löwenberg B(10), Delwel R(10),
Valk PJ(10), Kumar A(11), Xie L(4), Tenen DG(12), Huang G(5), Wang QF(1).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genome Variations and Precision Bio-Medicine, Beijing Institute 
of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China.
(2)1] Laboratory of Genome Variations and Precision Bio-Medicine, Beijing
Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of
China [2] University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic
of China [3] Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati
Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA. (3)1] Laboratory of
Genome Variations and Precision Bio-Medicine, Beijing Institute of Genomics,
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China [2] University
of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China. (4)Shanghai 
Center for Bioinformation Technology, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.
(5)Division of Experimental Hematology and Cancer Biology, Cincinnati Children's 
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, OH, USA. (6)1] Laboratory of Genome
Variations and Precision Bio-Medicine, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, People's Republic of China [2] Department of
Biomedical Informatics and Center for Computational Biology and Bioinformatics,
Columbia University, New York, NY, USA. (7)Respiratory Department, 2nd Branch of 
First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, People's Republic of China.
(8)Tongji Medical College of Huazhong University of Science & Technology, Wuhan, 
People's Republic of China. (9)Department of Human Genetics, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA. (10)Department of Hematology, Erasmus University
Medical Center, Rotterdam, Netherlands. (11)Division of Bone Marrow Transplant
and Immune Deficiency, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati,
OH, USA. (12)1] Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, Singapore, Singapore [2]
Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA.

Mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion proteins directly activate the expression of 
key downstream genes such as MEIS1, HOXA9 to drive an aggressive form of human
leukemia. However, it is still poorly understood what additional transcriptional 
regulators, independent of the MLL fusion pathway, contribute to the development 
of MLL leukemia. Here we show that the transcription factor PU.1 is essential for
MLL leukemia and is required for the growth of MLL leukemic cells via the
promotion of cell-cycle progression and inhibition of apoptosis. Importantly,
PU.1 expression is not under the control of MLL fusion proteins. We further
identified a PU.1-governed 15-gene signature, which contains key regulators in
the MEIS-HOX program (MEIS1, PBX3, FLT3, and c-KIT). PU.1 directly binds to the
genomic loci of its target genes in vivo, and is required to maintain active
expression of those genes in both normal hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells 
and in MLL leukemia. Finally, the clinical significance of the identified PU.1
signature was indicated by its ability to predict survival in acute myelogenous
leukemia patients. Together, our findings demonstrate that PU.1 contributes to
the development of MLL leukemia, partially via crosstalk with the MEIS/HOX
pathway.

PMCID: PMC4410691
PMID: 24445817  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Cell Stem Cell. 2014 Mar 6;14(3):329-41. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.12.016. Epub
2014 Jan 16.

Proto-oncogenic role of mutant IDH2 in leukemia initiation and maintenance.

Kats LM(1), Reschke M(1), Taulli R(1), Pozdnyakova O(2), Burgess K(1), Bhargava
P(1), Straley K(3), Karnik R(4), Meissner A(4), Small D(5), Su SM(3), Yen K(3),
Zhang J(6), Pandolfi PP(7).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center, Department of 
Medicine and Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (2)Department of Pathology, Brigham and Women's
Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. (3)Agios
Pharmaceuticals, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. (4)Broad Institute of MIT and Harvard,
Cambridge, MA 02142, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA; 
Department of Stem Cell and Regenerative Biology, Harvard University, Cambridge, 
MA 02138, USA. (5)Oncology and Pediatrics, The Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.
(6)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR.
(7)Cancer Research Institute, Beth Israel Deaconess Cancer Center, Department of 
Medicine and Pathology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA 02215, USA. Electronic address: ppandolf@bidmc.harvard.edu.

Mutations in the metabolic enzymes isocitrate dehydrogenase-1 (IDH1) and IDH2
that produce the oncometabolite D-2-hydroxyglutarate (2-HG) occur frequently in
human acute myeloid leukemia (AML). 2-HG modulates numerous biological pathways
implicated in malignant transformation, but the contribution of mutant IDH
proteins to maintenance and progression of AML in vivo is currently unknown. To
answer this crucial question we have generated transgenic mice that express
IDH2(R140Q) in an on/off- and tissue-specific manner using a
tetracycline-inducible system. We found that IDH2(R140Q) can cooperate with
overexpression of HoxA9 and Meis1a and with mutations in FMS-like tyrosine kinase
3 (FLT3) to drive acute leukemia in vivo. Critically, we show that genetic
deinduction of mutant IDH2 in leukemic cells in vivo has profound effects on
their growth and/or maintenance. Our data demonstrate the proto-oncogenic role of
mutant IDH2 and support its relevance as a therapeutic target for the treatment
of human AML.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4380188
PMID: 24440599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Turk J Haematol. 2013 Dec;30(4):359-65. doi: 10.4274/Tjh.2012.0083. Epub 2013 Dec
5.

Does HOXA9 Gene Expression in Egyptian Chronic Myelogenous Leukemia Patients
Affect Disease Progression? A Retrospective Cohort Study.

Mohamad Ismail MM(1), Manar MM(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Medicine Department, Faculty of Applied Medical Science, Um Al Qura
University, Saudi Arabia. (2)Epidemiology and Biostatistics Department, National 
Cancer Institute, Cairo University, Egypt.

OBJECTIVE: Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a clonal stem cell disease and
is consistently associated with the BCR-ABL fusion gene. The chronic phase of the
disease tends to pass into an accelerated phase and eventually leads to acute
leukemia if left untreated. Oncoproteins necessary for leukemic transformation
are both fundamentally and clinically relevant to identify as they might be new
molecular targets for the development of specific anti-leukemic drugs. This study
is an initial step to define the proportion of HOXA9 gene expression in some
Egyptians with chronic-phase CML at diagnosis and to evaluate its relation with
BCR-ABL expression and its clinical significance.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Sixty-two newly diagnosed CML patients (56 in chronic
phase, 1 in accelerated phase, and 5 in blastic crises) were enrolled in the
study. HOXA9 and BCR-ABL gene expressions were detected by one-step RT-PCR. ABL
was chosen as a control gene to calculate HOXA9/ABL and BCR-ABL/ABL ratios from
densitometric values of PCR product intensities.
RESULTS: HOXA9 expression was encountered in 25/56 (44.6%) of newly diagnosed CML
patients in the chronic phase. The median expression was 0.31 (range: 0.08-1.37) 
in relation to the ABL gene, with a higher frequency of expression in CML
patients presenting with splenomegaly (p<0.001), high Sokal score (p<0.001), and 
BCR-ABL expression from the first round (p=0.004). No association could be
detected with other clinical parameters, overall survival, or disease-free
survival.
CONCLUSION: HOXA9 expression is closely related to poor prognostic factors, but
we could not demonstrate its relationship to patient survival.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST: None declared.

Publisher: Abstract available from the publisher.
PMCID: PMC3874969
PMID: 24385825  [PubMed]


112. Mol Cell Oncol. 2014;1(4):e969169.

The next new target in leukemia: The embryonic stem cell gene SALL4.

Wang F(1), Zhao W(2), Kong N(2), Cui W(3), Chai L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology Brigham and Women's Hospital; Harvard Medical School; 
Boston, MA USA ; Department of Clinical Laboratory; Peking Union Medical College 
Hospital; Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences;
Beijing, China. (2)Department of Pathology Brigham and Women's Hospital; Harvard 
Medical School; Boston, MA USA. (3)Department of Clinical Laboratory; Peking
Union Medical College Hospital; Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy 
of Medical Sciences; Beijing, China.

The embryonic stem (ES) cell gene SALL4 has recently been identified as a new
target for cancer therapy, including leukemia. SALL4 is expressed in ES cells and
during embryonic development, but is absent in most adult tissues. It is,
however, aberrantly expressed in various solid tumors and hematologic
malignancies such as myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). Aberrant expression of SALL4 is frequently associated with a more
aggressive cancer phenotype, which includes high-risk MDS and its progression to 
AML. SALL4 contributes to leukemogenesis through multiple pathways including the 
repression of PTEN and the activation of HOXA9 expression. Targeting the
SALL4/PTEN pathway by blocking the protein-protein interaction of SALL4 and its
associated epigenetic complex, nucleosome remodeling and deacetylase complex
(NuRD), might be a novel approach to treating AML and holds great potential for
the treatment of other SALL4-mediated oncogenic processes such as high-risk MDS
and solid tumors.

PMCID: PMC4428154
PMID: 25977939  [PubMed]


113. Exp Mol Pathol. 2014 Feb;96(1):98-107. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2013.12.004. Epub
2013 Dec 22.

miR-126 in human cancers: clinical roles and current perspectives.

Ebrahimi F(1), Gopalan V(1), Smith RA(1), Lam AK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Molecular Pathology, Griffith Health Institute, Griffith University,
Gold Coast, Australia. (2)Cancer Molecular Pathology, Griffith Health Institute, 
Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia. Electronic address:
a.lam@griffith.edu.au.

miR-126 has been implicated in the processes of inflammation and angiogenesis.
Through these processes, miR-126 is implicated in cancer biology, but its role
there has not been well reviewed. The aim of this review is to examine the
molecular mechanisms and clinicopathological significance of miR-126 in human
cancers. miR-126 was shown to have roles in cancers of the gastrointestinal
tract, genital tracts, breast, thyroid, lung and some other cancers. Its
expression was suppressed in most of the cancers studied. The molecular
mechanisms that are known to cause aberrant expression of miR-126 include
alterations in gene sequence, epigenetic modification and alteration of dicer
abundance. miR-126 can inhibit progression of some cancers via negative control
of proliferation, migration, invasion, and cell survival. In some instances,
however, miR-126 supports cancer progression via promotion of blood vessel
formation. Downregulation of miR-126 induces cancer cell proliferation,
migration, and invasion via targeting specific oncogenes. Also, reduced levels of
miR-126 are a significant predictor of poor survival of patients in many cancers.
In addition, miR-126 can alter a multitude of cellular mechanisms in cancer
pathogenesis via suppressing gene translation of numerous validated targets such 
as PI3K, KRAS, EGFL7, CRK, ADAM9, HOXA9, IRS-1, SOX-2, SLC7A5 and VEGF. To
conclude, miR-126 is commonly down-regulated in cancer, most likely due to its
ability to inhibit cancer cell growth, adhesion, migration, and invasion through 
suppressing a range of important gene targets. Understanding these mechanisms by 
which miR-126 is involved with cancer pathogenesis will be useful in the
development of therapeutic targets for the management of patients with cancer.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24368110  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. J Exp Med. 2014 Jan 13;211(1):5-13. doi: 10.1084/jem.20130932. Epub 2013 Dec 23.

Initiation of MLL-rearranged AML is dependent on C/EBPa.

Ohlsson E(1), Hasemann MS, Willer A, Lauridsen FK, Rapin N, Jendholm J, Porse BT.

Author information: 
(1)The Finsen Laboratory, Rigshospitalet, Faculty of Health Sciences; 2 Biotech
Research and Innovation Center (BRIC); 3 Danish Stem Cell Centre (DanStem)
Faculty of Health Sciences; 4 The Bioinformatic Centre, Department of Biology,
Faculty of Natural Sciences, University of Copenhagen, 2200 Copenhagen, Denmark.

MLL-fusion proteins are potent inducers of oncogenic transformation, and their
expression is considered to be the main oncogenic driving force in ~10% of human 
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients. These oncogenic fusion proteins are
responsible for the initiation of a downstream transcriptional program leading to
the expression of factors such as MEIS1 and HOXA9, which in turn can replace
MLL-fusion proteins in overexpression experiments. To what extent MLL fusion
proteins act on their own during tumor initiation, or if they collaborate with
other transcriptional regulators, is unclear. Here, we have compared gene
expression profiles from human MLL-rearranged AML to normal progenitors and
identified the myeloid tumor suppressor C/EBPa as a putative collaborator in
MLL-rearranged AML. Interestingly, we find that deletion of Cebpa rendered murine
hematopoietic progenitors completely resistant to MLL-ENL-induced leukemic
transformation, whereas C/EBPa was dispensable in already established AMLs.
Furthermore, we show that Cebpa-deficient granulocytic-monocytic progenitors were
equally resistant to transformation and that C/EBPa collaborates with MLL-ENL in 
the induction of a transcriptional program, which is also apparent in human AML. 
Thus, our studies demonstrate a key role of C/EBPa in MLL fusion-driven
transformation and find that it sharply demarcates tumor initiation and
maintenance.

PMCID: PMC3892979
PMID: 24367003  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Science. 2013 Dec 13;342(6164):1375-9. doi: 10.1126/science.1241796.

Progressive specification rather than intercalation of segments during limb
regeneration.

Roensch K(1), Tazaki A, Chara O, Tanaka EM.

Author information: 
(1)Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG)-Center for Regenerative Therapies
Dresden, Technische Universität Dresden, Germany.

An amputated salamander limb regenerates the correct number of segments. Models
explaining limb regeneration were largely distinct from those for limb
development, despite the presence of common patterning molecules. Intercalation
has been an important concept to explain salamander limb regeneration, but clear 
evidence supporting or refuting this model was lacking. In the intercalation
model, the first blastema cells acquire fingertip identity, creating a gap in
positional identity that triggers regeneration of the intervening region from the
stump. We used HOXA protein analysis and transplantation assays to show that
axolotl limb blastema cells acquire positional identity in a proximal-to-distal
sequence. Therefore, intercalation is not the primary mechanism for segment
formation during limb regeneration in this animal. Patterning in development and 
regeneration uses similar mechanisms.

PMID: 24337297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jan;124(1):222-36. doi: 10.1172/JCI66005. Epub 2013 Dec 16.

Therapeutic antagonists of microRNAs deplete leukemia-initiating cell activity.

Velu CS, Chaubey A, Phelan JD, Horman SR, Wunderlich M, Guzman ML, Jegga AG,
Zeleznik-Le NJ, Chen J, Mulloy JC, Cancelas JA, Jordan CT, Aronow BJ, Marcucci G,
Bhat B, Gebelein B, Grimes HL.

Acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) subtypes that result from oncogenic activation
of homeobox (HOX) transcription factors are associated with poor prognosis. The
HOXA9 transcription activator and growth factor independent 1 (GFI1)
transcriptional repressor compete for occupancy at DNA-binding sites for the
regulation of common target genes. We exploited this HOXA9 versus GFI1 antagonism
to identify the genes encoding microRNA-21 and microRNA-196b as transcriptional
targets of HOX-based leukemia oncoproteins. Therapeutic inhibition of microRNA-21
and microRNA-196b inhibited in vitro leukemic colony forming activity and
depleted in vivo leukemia-initiating cell activity of HOX-based leukemias, which 
led to leukemia-free survival in a murine AML model and delayed disease onset in 
xenograft models. These data establish microRNA as functional effectors of
endogenous HOXA9 and HOX-based leukemia oncoproteins, provide a concise in vivo
platform to test RNA therapeutics, and suggest therapeutic value for microRNA
antagonists in AML.

PMCID: PMC3871218
PMID: 24334453  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Am J Pathol. 2014 Jan;184(1):271-81. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2013.09.017.

Expression of the homeobox gene HOXA9 in ovarian cancer induces peritoneal
macrophages to acquire an M2 tumor-promoting phenotype.

Ko SY(1), Ladanyi A(2), Lengyel E(2), Naora H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (2)Section of Gynecologic Oncology, the Department
of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois.
(3)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. Electronic address: hnaora@mdanderson.org.

Tumor-associated macrophages (TAMs) exhibit an M2 macrophage phenotype that
suppresses anti-tumor immune responses and often correlates with poor outcomes in
patients with cancer. Patients with ovarian cancer frequently present with
peritoneal carcinomatosis, but the mechanisms that induce naïve peritoneal
macrophages into TAMs are poorly understood. In this study, we found an increased
abundance of TAMs in mouse i.p. xenograft models of ovarian cancer that expressed
HOXA9, a homeobox gene that is associated with poor prognosis in patients with
ovarian cancer. HOXA9 expression in ovarian cancer cells stimulated chemotaxis of
peritoneal macrophages and induced macrophages to acquire TAM-like features.
These features included induction of the M2 markers, CD163 and CD206, and the
immunosuppressive cytokines, IL-10 and chemokine ligand 17, and down-regulation
of the immunostimulatory cytokine, IL-12. HOXA9-mediated induction of TAMs was
primarily due to the combinatorial effects of HOXA9-induced, tumor-derived
transforming growth factor-ß2 and chemokine ligand 2 levels. High HOXA9
expression in clinical specimens of ovarian cancer was strongly associated with
increased abundance of TAMs and intratumoral T-regulatory cells and decreased
abundance of CD8(+) tumor-infiltrating lymphocytes. Levels of immunosuppressive
cytokines were also elevated in ascites fluid of patients with tumors that highly
expressed HOXA9. HOXA9 may, therefore, stimulate ovarian cancer progression by
promoting an immunosuppressive microenvironment via paracrine effects on
peritoneal macrophages.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3873497
PMID: 24332016  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Anal Chem. 2014 Jan 7;86(1):346-50. doi: 10.1021/ac402720g. Epub 2013 Dec 16.

Associated analysis of DNA methylation for cancer detection using CCP-based FRET 
technique.

Zhang J(1), Xing B, Song J, Zhang F, Nie C, Jiao L, Liu L, Lv F, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Beijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Organic 
Solids, Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences , Beijing 100190, P. 
R. China.

This paper describes an associated analysis method of DNA methylation for the
detection of cancer using an optically amplifying cationic conjugated polymer
(CCP, poly{(1,4-phenylene)-2,7-[9,9-bis(6'-N,N,N-trimethyl ammonium)-hexyl
fluorene] dibromide)}. Genomic DNA is digested by methylation-sensitive
restriction endonuclease, followed by PCR amplification to incorporate
fluorescein-labeled dNTP. Only methylated DNA can be amplified by PCR, and the
methylation level is detected through fluorescence resonance energy transfer
(FRET) between CCP and fluorescein that is incorporated into the PCR product. The
methylation levels of RASSF1A, OPCML, and HOXA9 promoters of 35 ovarian cancer
samples and 11 normal samples were assayed. In accordance with the degree of
methylation levels, they are clustered to three sections and assigned a value.
Through an associated analysis, we acquired a threshold for cancer detection with
a sensitivity of 85.7%. The assay takes about 20 h to obtain the detection
results and shows great potential as a useful tool for diagnostic and screening
of cancer.

PMID: 24320047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Oncol Res. 2013;20(10):467-72.

The role of HOXA9 in human laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma.

Sun X(1), Liu B, Ji W, Ma X, Wang X, Gu H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otorhinolaryngology, Shengjing Hospital, China Medical
University, Shenyang City, Liaoning Province, PR China.

The present study was performed to investigate the expression of HOXA9 in human
laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma and its possible roles in the progression. The 
levels of HOXA9 mRNA and protein were evaluated in human laryngeal squamous cell 
carcinoma. Hep-2 cells were transfected with h-HOXA9-siRNA. CCK-8 was used to
analyze cell proliferation. Flow cytometry (FCM) was used to analyze cell cycle. 
The mobility of cells was tested by transwell migration assay. The expression of 
HOXA9 in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma was significantly higher than normal
mucosa tissues. In in vitro experiments, downregulation of HOXA9 strongly
inhibited cell growth in Hep-2 by arresting cells in G1 phase (p < 0.05).
Transwell migration assay showed that more HOXA9-negative cells migrated to the
lower side of the membrane than positive ones (p < 0.01). HOXA9 acts as an
oncogene in laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma. It could promote the proliferation
and migration of Hep-2 cells.

PMID: 24308157  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Dev Dyn. 2014 Jan;243(1):172-81. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24070. Epub 2013 Dec 4.

c-Met inhibition in a HOXA9/Meis1 model of CN-AML.

Mulgrew NM(1), Kettyle LM, Ramsey JM, Cull S, Smyth LJ, Mervyn DM, Bijl JJ,
Thompson A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast,
Northern Ireland, United Kingdom.

BACKGROUND: Hematopoiesis is a paradigm for developmental processes,
hierarchically organized, with stem cells at its origin. Hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs) replenish progenitor and precursor cells of multiple lineages, which
normally differentiate into short-lived mature circulating cells. Hematopoiesis
has provided insight into the molecular basis of tissue homeostasis and
malignancy. Malignant hematopoiesis, in particular acute myeloid leukemia (AML), 
results from impaired development or differentiation of HSCs and progenitors.
Co-overexpression of HOX and TALE genes, particularly the HOXA cluster and MEIS1,
is associated with AML. Clinically relevant models of AML are required to advance
drug development for an aging patient cohort.
RESULTS: Molecular analysis identified altered gene, microRNA, and protein
expression in HOXA9/Meis1 leukemic bone marrow compared to normal controls. A
candidate drug screen identified the c-Met inhibitor SU11274 for further
analysis. Altered cell cycle status, apoptosis, differentiation, and impaired
colony formation were shown for SU11274 in AML cell lines and primary leukemic
bone marrow.
CONCLUSIONS: The clonal HOXA9/Meis1 AML model is amenable to drug screening
analysis. The data presented indicate that human AML cells respond in a similar
manner to the HOXA9/Meis1 cells, indicating pre-clinical relevance of the mouse
model.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24307265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. J Toxicol Sci. 2013;38(6):959-62.

Gene expression analysis using DNA microarray in HK-2 human proximal tubular
cells treated with cadmium.

Lee JY(1), Tokumoto M, Fujiwara Y, Satoh M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Health Sciences, School of Pharmacy, Aichi Gakuin
University.

We examined the alteration of gene expression in HK-2 human proximal tubular
cells exposed to cadmium (Cd) using DNA microarray analysis. Cd increased the
expression of 30 genes, including 7 genes coding for heat shock proteins, more
than 2.0-fold and decreased the expression of 21 genes, including
transcription-related genes, such as AP2B1, HOXA7, HOXA9 and TCEB2, less than
0.5-fold prior to the appearance of cytotoxicity in HK-2 cells.

PMID: 24284285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Int J Hematol. 2014 Jan;99(1):21-31. doi: 10.1007/s12185-013-1466-x. Epub 2013
Nov 21.

Bromodomain-PHD finger protein 1 is critical for leukemogenesis associated with
MOZ-TIF2 fusion.

Shima H(1), Yamagata K, Aikawa Y, Shino M, Koseki H, Shimada H, Kitabayashi I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematological Malignancy, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, 104-0045, Japan.

Chromosomal translocations that involve the monocytic leukemia zinc finger (MOZ) 
gene are typically associated with human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and often
predict a poor prognosis. Overexpression of HOXA9, HOXA10, and MEIS1 was observed
in AML patients with MOZ fusions. To assess the functional role of HOX
upregulation in leukemogenesis by MOZ-TIF2, we focused on bromodomain-PHD finger 
protein 1 (BRPF1), a component of the MOZ complex that carries out histone
acetylation for generating and maintaining proper epigenetic programs in
hematopoietic cells. Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that MOZ-TIF2 forms a
stable complex with BRPF1, and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that
MOZ-TIF2 and BRPF1 interact with HOX genes in MOZ-TIF2-induced AML cells.
Depletion of BRPF1 decreased the MOZ localization on HOX genes, resulting in loss
of transformation ability induced by MOZ-TIF2. Furthermore, mutant MOZ-TIF2
engineered to lack histone acetyltransferase activity was incapable of
deregulating HOX genes as well as initiating leukemia. These data indicate that
MOZ-TIF2/BRPF1 complex upregulates HOX genes mediated by MOZ-dependent histone
acetylation, leading to the development of leukemia. We suggest that activation
of BRPF1/HOX pathway through MOZ HAT activity is critical for MOZ-TIF2 to induce 
AML.

PMID: 24258712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Clin Invest. 2013 Nov;123(11):4627-40.

Myelodysplastic syndromes are induced by histone methylationaltering ASXL1
mutations.

Inoue D, Kitaura J, Togami K, Nishimura K, Enomoto Y, Uchida T, Kagiyama Y,
Kawabata KC, Nakahara F, Izawa K, Oki T, Maehara A, Isobe M, Tsuchiya A, Harada
Y, Harada H, Ochiya T, Aburatani H, Kimura H, Thol F, Heuser M, Levine RL,
Abdel-Wahab O, Kitamura T.

Recurrent mutations in the gene encoding additional sex combs-like 1 (ASXL1) are 
found in various hematologic malignancies and associated with poor prognosis. In 
particular, ASXL1 mutations are common in patients with hematologic malignancies 
associated with myelodysplasia, including myelodysplastic syndromes (MDSs), and
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia. Although loss-of-function ASXL1 mutations
promote myeloid transformation, a large subset of ASXL1 mutations is thought to
result in stable truncation of ASXL1. Here we demonstrate that
C-terminaltruncating Asxl1 mutations (ASXL1-MTs) inhibited myeloid
differentiation and induced MDS-like disease in mice. ASXL1-MT mice displayed
features of human-associated MDS, including multi-lineage myelodysplasia,
pancytopenia, and occasional progression to overt leukemia. ASXL1-MT resulted in 
derepression of homeobox A9 (Hoxa9) and microRNA-125a (miR-125a) expression
through inhibition of polycomb repressive complex 2mediated (PRC2-mediated)
methylation of histone H3K27. miR-125a reduced expression of C-type lectin domain
family 5, member a (Clec5a), which is involved in myeloid differentiation. In
addition, HOXA9 expression was high in MDS patients with ASXL1-MT, while CLEC5A
expression was generally low. Thus, ASXL1-MTinduced MDS-like disease in mice is 
associated with derepression of Hoxa9 and miR-125a and with Clec5a dysregulation.
Our data provide evidence for an axis of MDS pathogenesis that implicates both
ASXL1 mutations and miR-125a as therapeutic targets in MDS.

PMCID: PMC3809801
PMID: 24216483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Oncotarget. 2013 Nov;4(11):1933-47.

HoxA9 regulated Bcl-2 expression mediates survival of myeloid progenitors and the
severity of HoxA9-dependent leukemia.

Brumatti G(1), Salmanidis M, Kok CH, Bilardi RA, Sandow JJ, Silke N, Mason K,
Visser J, Jabbour AM, Glaser SP, Okamoto T, Bouillet P, D'Andrea RJ, Ekert PG.

Author information: 
(1)Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade,
Parkville, Australia.

Deregulated expression of Hox genes such as HoxA9 is associated with development 
of myeloproliferative disorders and leukemia and indicates a poor prognosis. To
investigate the molecular mechanisms by which HoxA9 promotes immortalization of
hematopoietic cells, we generated growth factor dependent myeloid cells in which 
HoxA9 expression is regulated by administration of 4-hydroxy-tamoxifen.
Maintenance of HoxA9 overexpression is required for continued cell survival and
proliferation, even in the presence of growth factors. We show for the first time
that maintenance of Bcl-2 expression is critical for HoxA9-dependent
immortalization and influences the latency of HoxA9-dependent leukemia.
Hematopoietic cells lacking Bcl-2 were not immortalized by HoxA9 in vitro.
Furthermore, deletion of Bcl-2 delayed the onset and reduced the severity of
HoxA9/Meis1 and MLL-AF9 leukemias. This is the first description of a molecular
link between HoxA9 and the regulation of Bcl-2 family members in acute myeloid
leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3875760
PMID: 24177192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2013 Oct;21(5):1126-32. doi:
10.7534/j.issn.1009-2137.2013.05.008.

[Establishment of the retrovirus-mediated murine model with MLL-AF9 leukemia].

[Article in Chinese]

Xu SM(1), Yang Y, Zhou M, Zhao XJ, Qin Y, Zhang PL, Yuan RF, Zhou JF, Fang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, Hubei Province, China.

This study was purposed to establish a retrovirus-mediated murine model with
MLL-AF9 leukemia, so as to provide a basis for further investigation of the
pathogenesis and therapeutic strategy of MLL associated leukemia. Murine (CD45.2)
primary hematopoietic precursor positively selected for expression of the
progenitor marker c-Kit by means of MACS were transduced with a retrovirus
carrying MLL-AF9 fusion gene. After cultured in vitro, the transduced cells were 
injected intravenously through the tail vein into the lethally irradiated mice
(CD45.1). PCR, flow cytometry and morphological observation were employed to
evaluate the murine leukemia model system. The results showed that MLL-AF9 fusion
gene was expressed in the infected cells, and the cells had a dramatically
enhanced potential to generate myeloid colonies with primitive and immature
morphology. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that the immortalized cells highly 
expressed myeloid lineage surface markers Gr-1 and Mac-1. Moreover, the
expression levels of Hoxa9 and Meis1 mRNA were significantly higher in the
MLL-AF9 cells than that in control. The mice transplanted with MLL-AF9 cells
displayed typical signs of leukemia within 6-12 weeks. Extensive infiltration
leukemic cells was observed in the Wright-Giemsa stained peripheral blood smear
and bone marrow, and also in the histology of liver and spleen. Flow cytometric
analysis of the bone marrow and spleen cells demonstrated that the CD45.2
populations expressed highly myeloid markers Gr-1 and Mac-1. The leukemic mice
died within 12 weeks. It is concluded that the retrovirus-mediated murine model
with MLL-AF9 leukemia is successfully established, which can be applied in the
subsequent researches.

PMID: 24156419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 2014 Jan;73(1):53-60. doi: 10.1007/s00280-013-2316-5.
Epub 2013 Oct 20.

Peptide-based inhibition of the HOXA9/PBX interaction retards the growth of human
meningioma.

Ando H(1), Natsume A, Senga T, Watanabe R, Ito I, Ohno M, Iwami K, Ohka F,
Motomura K, Kinjo S, Ito M, Saito K, Morgan R, Wakabayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya University,
65, Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, 466-8550, Japan.

BACKGROUND: Meningiomas are the most common type of intracranial tumor,
accounting for between 24 and 30 % of primary intracranial tumors. Thus far, no
biomarkers exist to reliably predict the clinical outcome of meningiomas. A
previous genome-wide methylation analysis revealed that HOXA9 is one of the most 
functionally relevant biomarkers. In this study, we have examined whether HOXA9
is a potential therapeutic target in meningiomas, using HXR9, a peptide inhibitor
of the interaction between HOXA9 and its cofactor PBX.
METHODS: We determined the expression level of HOXA9 in human meningiomas,
meningioma cell lines, and normal brain tissue. Meningioma in culture and in
subcutaneous tumors was treated with HXR9. We also examined the disruption of
HOXA9/PBX dimers.
RESULTS: We first confirmed that HOXA9 is highly expressed in meningiomas, but
not in normal brain tissue. The HXR9 peptide blocks the binding of HOXA9 to PBX, 
leading to an alteration of DNA binding, and subsequent regulation of their
target genes. HXR9 markedly inhibited the growth of meningioma cells and
subcutaneous meningeal tumors.
CONCLUSION: There is no effective chemotherapy for meningiomas at present, and
targeting the HOXA9/PBX interaction may represent a novel treatment option for
this disease.

PMID: 24141373  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Exp Hematol. 2014 Jan;42(1):46-58. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2013.09.010. Epub 2013
Oct 2.

The orphan nuclear receptor Ear-2 (Nr2f6) is a novel negative regulator of T cell
development.

Ichim CV(1), Dervovic DD(2), Zúñiga-Pflücker JC(2), Wells RA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada;
Biological Sciences, Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, Canada; Salk
Institute for Biological Studies, La Jolla, CA, USA. (2)Biological Sciences,
Sunnybrook Research Institute, Toronto, Canada; Department of Immunology,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. (3)Department of Medical Biophysics,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada; Biological Sciences, Sunnybrook Research 
Institute, Toronto, Canada; Department of Medicine, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada; Department of Medical Oncology, Myelodysplastic Syndromes
Program, Toronto Sunnybrook Regional Cancer Centre, Toronto, Canada. Electronic
address: rwells@sri.utoronto.ca.

We describe a novel role for the orphan nuclear receptor Ear-2 in regulating T
cell development. Retrovirus-mediated overexpression of Ear-2 (EAR-2++) in a bone
marrow (BM) transplantation assay resulted in limited T cell development and a
greater than tenfold decrease in thymus size and cellularity relative to
controls. Ear-2-transduced murine BM hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) in OP9-DL1
cultures showed a proliferation deficit during days 1-5 after induction of
differentiation, which corresponded to increased expression of the cell cycle
regulators p21 (cdkn1a) and p27 (cdkn1b), as well as increased expression of
Hes1, Notch3, Egr1, and Scl (Tal1) and decreased expression of Gli1, Gfi-1,
HoxA9, PU.1, Nrarp, and Tcf1. In addition, there was a block in differentiation
at the DN4 to double-positive (DP) transition accompanied by an increase in
apoptosis, similar to the deficit seen in the ROR<U+03B3>t null mouse. Gene expression
profiling revealed that, like the ROR<U+03B3>t-deficient mouse, EAR-2++ DP cells had
decreased expression of BclXL and increased expression of the proapoptosis gene
Bad. In addition, EAR-2++ DP cells had decreased expression of Bcl11b, PU.1, and 
HoxA9, and increased expression of Id2. Based on these findings, we conclude that
EAR-2++ cells were able to migrate to, but not fully repopulate, the thymus
because of a cell-intrinsic defect in the proliferation of DN1 cells followed by 
a block in differentiation from the DN4 to DP stage of T cell development. We
conclude that Ear-2 is a novel negative regulator of T-cell development and that 
downregulation of Ear-2 is indispensable for the proliferation of DN1 cells and
the survival of DN4-DP cells.

Copyright © 2014 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24096122  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Cell Stem Cell. 2013 Oct 3;13(4):459-70. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2013.09.002.

Induction of multipotential hematopoietic progenitors from human pluripotent stem
cells via respecification of lineage-restricted precursors.

Doulatov S(1), Vo LT, Chou SS, Kim PG, Arora N, Li H, Hadland BK, Bernstein ID,
Collins JJ, Zon LI, Daley GQ.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Transplantation Program, Division of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, 
Manton Center for Orphan Disease Research, Howard Hughes Medical Institute,
Children's Hospital Boston and Dana Farber Cancer Institute; Department of
Biological Chemistry and Molecular Pharmacology, Harvard Medical School, Boston, 
MA 02115, USA; Harvard Stem Cell Institute, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA.

Human pluripotent stem cells (hPSCs) represent a promising source of
patient-specific cells for disease modeling, drug screens, and cellular
therapies. However, the inability to derive engraftable human hematopoietic stem 
and progenitor cells (HSPCs) has limited their characterization to in vitro
assays. We report a strategy to respecify lineage-restricted CD34(+)CD45(+)
myeloid precursors derived from hPSCs into multilineage progenitors that can be
expanded in vitro and engrafted in vivo. HOXA9, ERG, and RORA conferred
self-renewal and multilineage potential in vitro and maintained primitive
CD34(+)CD38(-) cells. Screening cells via transplantation revealed that two
additional factors, SOX4 and MYB, conferred engraftment. Progenitors specified
with all five factors gave rise to reproducible short-term engraftment with
myeloid and erythroid lineages. Erythroid precursors underwent hemoglobin
switching in vivo, silencing embryonic and activating adult globin expression.
Our combinatorial screening approach establishes a strategy for obtaining
transcription-factor-mediated engraftment of blood progenitors from human
pluripotent cells.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3888026
PMID: 24094326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 8;288(45):32490-505. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.496109. Epub
2013 Oct 2.

The leukemia-associated Mll-Ell oncoprotein induces fibroblast growth factor 2
(Fgf2)-dependent cytokine hypersensitivity in myeloid progenitor cells.

Shah CA(1), Bei L, Wang H, Platanias LC, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)From The Feinberg School of Medicine and Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer 
Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611 and.

The subset of acute myeloid leukemias (AML) with chromosomal translocations
involving the MLL gene have a poor prognosis (referred to as 11q23-AML). The MLL 
fusion proteins that are expressed in 11q23-AML facilitate transcription of a set
of HOX genes, including HOXA9 and HOXA10. Because Hox proteins are transcription 
factors, this suggests the possibility that Hox target genes mediate the adverse 
effects of MLL fusion proteins in leukemia. Identifying such Hox target genes
might provide insights to the pathogenesis and treatment of 11q23-AML. In the
current study we found that Mll-Ell (an MLL fusion protein) induced
transcriptional activation of the FGF2 gene in a HoxA9- and HoxA10-dependent
manner. FGF2 encodes fibroblast growth factor 2 (also referred to as basic
fibroblast growth factor). Fgf2 influences proliferation and survival of
hematopoietic stem cells and myeloid progenitor cells, and increased
Fgf2-expression has been described in AMLs. We determined that expression of
Mll-Ell in myeloid progenitor cells resulted in autocrine production of Fgf2 and 
Fgf2-dependent cytokine hypersensitivity. Therefore, our results implicated
increased Fgf2 expression in progenitor proliferation and expansion in 11q23-AML.
Because small molecule inhibitors of Fgf-receptors are in human clinical trials, 
this suggested a potential therapeutic approach to this treatment refractory
leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3820883
PMID: 24089521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2013 Dec;6(12):1348-55. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-13-0104. Epub 2013 Oct 2.

Aberrant DNA methylation at genes associated with a stem cell-like phenotype in
cholangiocarcinoma tumors.

Sriraksa R(1), Zeller C, Dai W, Siddiq A, Walley AJ, Limpaiboon T, Brown R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery and Cancer, Imperial College London, IRDB Building,
Hammersmith Hospital Campus, London W12 0NN, United Kingdom. Phone:
44-(0)-2075-941804; Fax: 44-(0)-2075-942129; b.brown@imperial.ac.uk; and Temduang
Limpaiboon, Centre for Research and Development of Medical Diagnostic
Laboratories, Faculty of Associated Medical Sciences, Khon Kaen University, Khon 
Kaen 40002, Thailand. temduang@kku.ac.th.

Genetic abnormalities of cholangiocarcinoma have been widely studied; however,
epigenomic changes related to cholangiocarcinogenesis have been less well
characterized. We have profiled the DNA methylomes of 28 primary
cholangiocarcinoma and six matched adjacent normal tissues using Infinium's
HumanMethylation27 BeadChips with the aim of identifying gene sets aberrantly and
epigenetically regulated in this tumor type. Using a linear model for microarray 
data, we identified 1610 differentially methylated autosomal CpG sites, with 809 
hypermethylated (representing 603 genes) and 801 hypomethylated (representing 712
genes) in cholangiocarcinoma versus adjacent normal tissues (false-discovery rate
= 0.05). Gene ontology and gene set enrichment analyses identified gene sets
significantly associated with hypermethylation at linked CpG sites in
cholangiocarcinoma including homeobox genes and target genes of PRC2, EED, SUZ12,
and histone H3 trimethylation at lysine 27. We confirmed frequent
hypermethylation at the homeobox genes HOXA9 and HOXD9 by bisulfite
pyrosequencing in a larger cohort of cholangiocarcinoma (n = 102). Our findings
indicate a key role for hypermethylation of multiple CpG sites at genes
associated with a stem cell-like phenotype as a common molecular aberration in
cholangiocarcinoma. These data have implications for cholangiocarcinogenesis, as 
well as possible novel treatment options using histone methyltransferase
inhibitors.

PMCID: PMC3855864
PMID: 24089088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. J Clin Oncol. 2013 Nov 10;31(32):4140-7. doi: 10.1200/JCO.2012.48.5516. Epub 2013
Sep 30.

A prognostic DNA methylation signature for stage I non-small-cell lung cancer.

Sandoval J(1), Mendez-Gonzalez J, Nadal E, Chen G, Carmona FJ, Sayols S, Moran S,
Heyn H, Vizoso M, Gomez A, Sanchez-Cespedes M, Assenov Y, Müller F, Bock C, Taron
M, Mora J, Muscarella LA, Liloglou T, Davies M, Pollan M, Pajares MJ, Torre W,
Montuenga LM, Brambilla E, Field JK, Roz L, Lo Iacono M, Scagliotti GV, Rosell R,
Beer DG, Esteller M.

Author information: 
(1)Juan Sandoval, Jesus Mendez-Gonzalez, F. Javier Carmona, Sergi Sayols,
Sebastian Moran, Holger Heyn, Miguel Vizoso, Antonio Gomez, Montse
Sanchez-Cespedes, and Manel Esteller, Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute;
Josefina Mora, Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau; Manel Esteller, University
of Barcelona and Institucio Catalana de Recerca i Estudis Avançats, Barcelona;
Miquel Taron and Rafael Rosell, Catalan Institute of Oncology, Badalona,
Catalonia; Marina Pollan, Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Madrid; Maria J. Pajares
and Luis M. Montuenga, University of Navarra; Wenceslao Torre, Clínica University
de Navarra, Pamplona, Spain; Ernest Nadal, Guoan Chen, and David G. Beer,
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI; Yassen Assenov and Fabian
Müller, Max Planck Institute, Saarbrücken, Germany; Christoph Bock, Center for
Molecular Medicine of the Austrian Academy of Sciences, Vienna, Austria; Lucia A.
Muscarella, Istituto Di Ricovero e Cura a Carattere Scientifico (IRCCS) Casa
Sollievo della Sofferenza, San Giovanni Rotondo, Italy; Triantafillos Liloglou,
Michael Davies, and John K. Field, The University of Liverpool Cancer Research
Centre, Liverpool, United Kingdom; Elisabeth Brambilla, Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire A Michallon, Grenoble, France; Luca Roz, IRCCS Foundation National 
Cancer Institute, Milan; Marco Lo Iacono and Giorgio V. Scagliotti, University of
Torino, Orbassano (Torino), Italy.

PURPOSE: Non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is a tumor in which only small
improvements in clinical outcome have been achieved. The issue is critical for
stage I patients for whom there are no available biomarkers that indicate which
high-risk patients should receive adjuvant chemotherapy. We aimed to find DNA
methylation markers that could be helpful in this regard.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A DNA methylation microarray that analyzes 450,000 CpG
sites was used to study tumoral DNA obtained from 444 patients with NSCLC that
included 237 stage I tumors. The prognostic DNA methylation markers were
validated by a single-methylation pyrosequencing assay in an independent cohort
of 143 patients with stage I NSCLC.
RESULTS: Unsupervised clustering of the 10,000 most variable DNA methylation
sites in the discovery cohort identified patients with high-risk stage I NSCLC
who had shorter relapse-free survival (RFS; hazard ratio [HR], 2.35; 95% CI, 1.29
to 4.28; P = .004). The study in the validation cohort of the significant
methylated sites from the discovery cohort found that hypermethylation of five
genes was significantly associated with shorter RFS in stage I NSCLC: HIST1H4F,
PCDHGB6, NPBWR1, ALX1, and HOXA9. A signature based on the number of
hypermethylated events distinguished patients with high- and low-risk stage I
NSCLC (HR, 3.24; 95% CI, 1.61 to 6.54; P = .001).
CONCLUSION: The DNA methylation signature of NSCLC affects the outcome of stage I
patients, and it can be practically determined by user-friendly polymerase chain 
reaction assays. The analysis of the best DNA methylation biomarkers improved
prognostic accuracy beyond standard staging.

PMID: 24081945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Leukemia. 2014 Apr;28(4):804-12. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.281. Epub 2013 Sep 27.

MicroRNA expression at diagnosis adds relevant prognostic information to
molecular categorization in patients with intermediate-risk cytogenetic acute
myeloid leukemia.

Díaz-Beyá M(1), Brunet S(2), Nomdedéu J(3), Tejero R(4), Díaz T(4), Pratcorona
M(1), Tormo M(5), Ribera JM(6), Escoda L(7), Duarte R(8), Gallardo D(9), Heras
I(10), Queipo de Llano MP(11), Bargay J(12), Monzo M(13), Sierra J(2), Navarro
A(4), Esteve J(1); Cooperative AML group CETLAM (Grupo Cooperativo Para el
Estudio y Tratamiento de las Leucemias Agudas y Mielodisplasias).

Author information: 
(1)1] Hematology Department, Hospital Clinic, Institut d'Investigacions
Bomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer (IDIBAPS), University of Barcelona, Barcelona,
Spain [2] Josep Carreras Leukemia Research Institute (IJC), Barcelona, Spain.
(2)1] Josep Carreras Leukemia Research Institute (IJC), Barcelona, Spain [2]
Hematology Service, Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica Sant Pau. Hospital de la
Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Banc de Sang i Teixits 
de Catalunya, Spain. (3)1] Josep Carreras Leukemia Research Institute (IJC),
Barcelona, Spain [2] Laboratory of Hematology Service, Institut d'Investigació
Biomèdica Sant Pau. Hospital de la Santa Creu i Sant Pau, Universitat Autònoma de
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain. (4)Molecular Oncology and Embryology Laboratory,
Human Anatomy Unit, School of Medicine, University of Barcelona, IDIBAPS,
Barcelona, Spain. (5)Hematology Department, Hospital Clínico, Valencia, Spain.
(6)Hematology Department, Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO), Hospital Germans
Trias i Pujol, Badalona, Spain. (7)Hematology Department, Hospital Joan XXIII,
Tarragona, Spain. (8)Department of Hematology, Catalan Institute of Oncology
(ICO), Hospital Duran i Reynals, Barcelona, Spain. (9)Hematology Department,
Catalan Institute of Oncology (ICO), Girona, Spain. (10)Department of Hematology,
University Hospital Morales Meseguer, Murcia, Spain. (11)Department of
Hematology, Hospital Virgen de la Victoria, Málaga, Spain. (12)Department of
Hematology, Hospital de Son Llàtzer, Palma de Mallorca, Spain. (13)Hematology
Service, Institut d'Investigació Biomèdica Sant Pau. Hospital de la Santa Creu i 
Sant Pau, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, Banc de Sang i Teixits de Catalunya,
Spain.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous disease, and optimal treatment
varies according to cytogenetic risk factors and molecular markers. Several
studies have demonstrated the prognostic importance of microRNAs (miRNAs) in AML.
Here we report a potential association between miRNA expression and clinical
outcome in 238 intermediate-risk cytogenetic AML (IR-AML) patients from 16
institutions in the CETLAM cooperative group. We first profiled 670 miRNAs in a
subset of 85 IR-AML patients from a single institution and identified 10
outcome-related miRNAs. We then validated these 10 miRNAs by individual assays in
the total cohort and confirmed the prognostic impact of 4 miRNAs. High levels of 
miR-196b and miR-644 were independently associated with shorter overall survival,
and low levels of miR-135a and miR-409-3p with a higher risk of relapse.
Interestingly, miR-135a and miR-409-3p maintained their independent prognostic
value within the unfavorable molecular subcategory (wild-type NPM1 and CEBPA
and/or FLT3-ITD), and miR-644 retained its value within the favorable molecular
subcategory. miR-409-3p, miR-135a, miR-196b and mir-644 arose as prognostic
markers for IR-AML, both overall and within specific molecular subgroups.

PMID: 24072101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Cell Cycle. 2013 Jul 15;12(14):2194-9. doi: 10.4161/cc.25331.

Co-regulation of senescence-associated genes by oncogenic homeobox proteins and
polycomb repressive complexes.

Martin N(1), Raguz S, Dharmalingam G, Gil J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Proliferation Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, London, UK.

Cellular senescence is a stable cell cycle arrest that can be induced by stresses
such as telomere shortening, oncogene activation or DNA damage. Senescence is a
potent anticancer barrier that needs to be circumvented during tumorigenesis. The
cell cycle regulator p16(INK4a) is a key effector upregulated during senescence. 
Polycomb repressive complexes (PRCs) play a crucial role in silencing the
INK4/ARF locus, which encodes for p16(INK4a), but the mechanisms by which PRCs
are recruited to this locus as well as to other targets remain poorly understood.
Recently we discovered the ability of the homeobox proteins HLX1 (H2.0-like
homeobox 1) and HOXA9 (Homeobox A9) to bypass senescence. We showed that HLX1 and
HOXA9 recruit PRCs to repress INK4a, which constitutes a key mechanism explaining
their effects on senescence. Here we provide evidence for the regulation of
additional senescence-associated PRC target genes by HLX1 and HOXA9. As both HLX1
and HOXA9 are oncogenes implicated in leukemogenesis, we discuss the implications
that the collaboration between Homeobox proteins and PRCs has for senescence and 
cancer.

PMCID: PMC3755069
PMID: 24067365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. J Clin Invest. 2013 Oct;123(10):4195-207. doi: 10.1172/JCI62891. Epub 2013 Sep
24.

A SALL4/MLL/HOXA9 pathway in murine and human myeloid leukemogenesis.

Li A, Yang Y, Gao C, Lu J, Jeong HW, Liu BH, Tang P, Yao X, Neuberg D, Huang G,
Tenen DG, Chai L.

The embryonic self-renewal factor SALL4 has been implicated in the development of
human acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Transgenic mice expressing the human SALL4B
allele develop AML, which indicates that this molecule contributes to leukemia
development and maintenance. However, the underlying mechanism of SALL4-dependent
AML progression is unknown. Using SALL4B transgenic mice, we observed that HoxA9 
was significantly upregulated in SALL4B leukemic cells compared with wild-type
controls. Downregulation of HoxA9 in SALL4B leukemic cells led to decreased
replating capacity in vitro and delayed AML development in recipient mice. In
primary human AML cells, downregulation of SALL4 led to decreased HOXA9
expression and enhanced apoptosis. We found that SALL4 bound a specific region of
the HOXA9 promoter in leukemic cells. SALL4 overexpression led to enhanced
binding of histone activation markers at the HOXA9 promoter region, as well as
increased HOXA9 expression in these cells. Furthermore, we observed that SALL4
interacted with mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) and co-occupied the HOXA9 promoter
region with MLL in AML leukemic cells, which suggests that a SALL4/MLL pathway
may control HOXA9 expression. In summary, our findings revealed a molecular
mechanism for SALL4 function in leukemogenesis and suggest that targeting of the 
SALL4/MLL/HOXA9 pathway would be an innovative approach in treating AML.

PMCID: PMC3784519
PMID: 24051379  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Nov;8(5):1373-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1686. Epub 2013 Sep 17.

Characterization of amplification patterns and target genes on the short arm of
chromosome 7 in early-stage lung adenocarcinoma.

Kang JU(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, Korea Nazarene University,
Cheonan-si, Chungcheongnam-do 330-718, Republic of Korea.

Chromosomal alterations are a predominant genomic force contributing to the
development of lung adenocarcinoma (ADC). High density genomic arrays were
conducted to identify critical genetic landmarks that may be important mediators 
in the formation or progression of early-stage ADC. In this study, the most
noteworthy and consistent observation was a copy number gain on the short arm of 
chromosome 7, which was detected in 85.7% (12/14) of cases. Notably, three
distinct regions of amplification were identified between the 7p22.3 and q11.2
regions in 28.6% (4/14) of cases; at a size of 4.1 Mbp (7p22.3-p21.1), 2.6 Mbp
(7p15.2-p14.1) and 1.5 Mbp (7p12.3-p11.2). Variations of the 7p11.2 locus that
encodes EGFR are known to be oncogenic. Furthermore, potential target genes were 
identified that were previously not assumed to be involved in the pathogenesis of
ADC, including CALM1P2 (7p11.2), HOXA4, HOXA5, HOXA6, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10,
HOXA11 and HOXA13 (7p15.2) and LOC442586, LOC442589, LOC442282, FAM20C and
LOC442651 (7p22.3). The present study determined critical regions on the 7p arm
of chromosome 7, which were implicated in ADC. The pattern of rearrangements on
the 7p arm may be a consequence of the high density of potential targets and the 
identified genes at the 7p regions may aid in the development of therapeutic
targets for ADC.

PMID: 24045431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Leukemia. 2014 Jan;28(1):138-46. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.260. Epub 2013 Sep 11.

Regulation of MEIS1 by distal enhancer elements in acute leukemia.

Wang QF(1), Li YJ(2), Dong JF(3), Li B(4), Kaberlein JJ(3), Zhang L(4), Arimura
FE(5), Luo RT(3), Ni J(6), He F(4), Wu J(4), Mattison R(3), Zhou J(4), Wang
CZ(7), Prabhakar S(8), Nobrega MA(5), Thirman MJ(3).

Author information: 
(1)1] Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of
Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA [2] CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and
Information, Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing,
China. (2)1] CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information, Beijing
Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China [2] Beijing
Institute of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Beijing Hospital of Traditional
Chinese Medicine Affiliated to Capital Medical University, Beijing, China.
(3)Department of Medicine, Section of Hematology/Oncology, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA. (4)CAS Key Laboratory of Genome Sciences and Information,
Beijing Institute of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.
(5)Department of Human Genetics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.
(6)Tongji Medical College of Huazhong, University of Science & Technology, Wuhan,
China. (7)Department of Anesthesia & Critical Care, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA. (8)Genome Institute of Singapore, Singapore.

Aberrant activation of the three-amino-acid-loop extension homeobox gene MEIS1
shortens the latency and accelerates the onset and progression of acute leukemia,
yet the molecular mechanism underlying persistent activation of the MEIS1 gene in
leukemia remains poorly understood. Here we used a combined comparative genomics 
analysis and an in vivo transgenic zebrafish assay to identify six regulatory DNA
elements that are able to direct green fluorescent protein expression in a
spatiotemporal manner during zebrafish embryonic hematopoiesis. Analysis of
chromatin characteristics and regulatory signatures suggests that many of these
predicted elements are potential enhancers in mammalian hematopoiesis.
Strikingly, one of the enhancer elements (E9) is a frequent integration site in
retroviral-induced mouse acute leukemia. The genomic region corresponding to
enhancer E9 is differentially marked by H3K4 monomethylation and H3K27
acetylation, hallmarks of active enhancers, in multiple leukemia cell lines.
Decreased enrichment of these histone marks is associated with downregulation of 
MEIS1 expression during hematopoietic differentiation. Further, MEIS1/HOXA9
transactivate this enhancer via a conserved binding motif in vitro, and
participate in an autoregulatory loop that modulates MEIS1 expression in vivo.
Our results suggest that an intronic enhancer regulates the expression of MEIS1
in hematopoiesis and contributes to its aberrant expression in acute leukemia.

PMID: 24022755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Blood. 2013 Oct 17;122(16):2888-92. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-08-453662. Epub 2013 
Sep 10.

Essential role of PR-domain protein MDS1-EVI1 in MLL-AF9 leukemia.

Zhang Y(1), Owens K, Hatem L, Glass CH, Karuppaiah K, Camargo F, Perkins AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Rochester
Medical Center, Rochester, NY; and.

A subgroup of leukemogenic mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion proteins (MFPs)
including MLL-AF9 activates the Mecom locus and exhibits extremely poor clinical 
prognosis. Mecom encodes EVI1 and MDS1-EVI1 (ME) proteins via alternative
transcription start sites; these differ by the presence of a PRDI-BF1-RIZ1 (PR)
domain with histone methyltransferase activity in the ME isoform. Using an
ME-deficient mouse, we show that ME is required for MLL-AF9-induced
transformation both in vitro and in vivo. And, although Nup98-HOXA9, MEIS1-HOXA9,
and E2A-Hlf could transform ME-deficient cells, both MLL-AF9 and MLL-ENL were
ineffective, indicating that the ME requirement is specific to MLL fusion
leukemia. Further, we show that the PR domain is essential for MFP-induced
transformation. These studies clearly indicate an essential role of PR-domain
protein ME in MFP leukemia, suggesting that ME may be a novel target for
therapeutic intervention for this group of leukemias.

PMCID: PMC3799001
PMID: 24021671  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. PLoS Genet. 2013 Aug;9(8):e1003740. doi: 10.1371/journal.pgen.1003740. Epub 2013 
Aug 29.

Recurrent modification of a conserved cis-regulatory element underlies fruit fly 
pigmentation diversity.

Rogers WA(1), Salomone JR, Tacy DJ, Camino EM, Davis KA, Rebeiz M, Williams TM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Dayton, Dayton, Ohio, United States of
America.

The development of morphological traits occurs through the collective action of
networks of genes connected at the level of gene expression. As any node in a
network may be a target of evolutionary change, the recurrent targeting of the
same node would indicate that the path of evolution is biased for the relevant
trait and network. Although examples of parallel evolution have implicated
recurrent modification of the same gene and cis-regulatory element (CRE), little 
is known about the mutational and molecular paths of parallel CRE evolution. In
Drosophila melanogaster fruit flies, the Bric-à-brac (Bab) transcription factors 
control the development of a suite of sexually dimorphic traits on the posterior 
abdomen. Female-specific Bab expression is regulated by the dimorphic element, a 
CRE that possesses direct inputs from body plan (ABD-B) and sex-determination
(DSX) transcription factors. Here, we find that the recurrent evolutionary
modification of this CRE underlies both intraspecific and interspecific variation
in female pigmentation in the melanogaster species group. By reconstructing the
sequence and regulatory activity of the ancestral Drosophila melanogaster
dimorphic element, we demonstrate that a handful of mutations were sufficient to 
create independent CRE alleles with differing activities. Moreover, intraspecific
and interspecific dimorphic element evolution proceeded with little to no
alterations to the known body plan and sex-determination regulatory linkages.
Collectively, our findings represent an example where the paths of evolution
appear biased to a specific CRE, and drastic changes in function were accompanied
by deep conservation of key regulatory linkages.

PMCID: PMC3757066
PMID: 24009528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Dev Dyn. 2014 Jan;243(1):145-58. doi: 10.1002/dvdy.24056. Epub 2013 Oct 7.

Hoxa9 collaborates with E2A-PBX1 in mouse B cell leukemia in association with
Flt3 activation and decrease of B cell gene expression.

Hassawi M(1), Shestakova EA, Fournier M, Lebert-Ghali CÉ, Vaisson G, Frison H,
Sinnett D, Vidal R, Thompson A, Bijl JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hospital Maisonneuve-Rosemont Research Center, Montreal, QC.

BACKGROUND: The fusion protein E2A-PBX1 induces pediatric B cell leukemia in
human. Previously, we reported oncogenic interactions between homeobox (Hox)
genes and E2A-PBX1 in murine T cell leukemia. A proviral insertional mutagenesis 
screen with our E2A-PBX1 B cell leukemia mouse model identified Hoxa genes as
potential collaborators to E2A-PBX1. Here we studied whether Hoxa9 could enhance 
E2A-PBX1 leukemogenesis.
RESULTS: We show that Hoxa9 confers a proliferative advantage to E2A-PBX1 B
cells. Transplantation experiments with E2A-PBX1 transgenic B cells
overexpressing Hoxa9 isolated from bone marrow chimeras showed that Hoxa9
accelerates the generation of E2A-PBX1 B cell leukemia, but Hoxa9 is unable to
transform B cells alone. Quantitative-reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction analysis demonstrated a strong repression of B cell specific genes in
these E2A-PBX1/Hoxa9 leukemias in addition to Flt3 activation, indicating
inhibition of B cell differentiation in combination with enhanced proliferation. 
Overexpression of Hoxa9 in established E2A-PBX1 mouse leukemic B cells resulted
in a growth advantage in vitro, which was also characterized by an enhanced
expression of Flt3.
CONCLUSIONS: we show for the first time that Hoxa9 collaborates with E2A-PBX1 in 
the oncogenic transformation of B cells in a mouse model that involves Flt3
signaling, which is potentially relevant to human disease.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 23996689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1833(12):3054-63. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.08.013. Epub 2013 Aug 27.

Symplekin, a polyadenylation factor, prevents MOZ and MLL activity on HOXA9 in
hematopoietic cells.

Largeot A(1), Paggetti J, Broséus J, Aucagne R, Lagrange B, Martin RZ, Berthelet 
J, Quéré R, Lucchi G, Ducoroy P, Bastie JN, Delva L.

Author information: 
(1)Inserm U866, Labex LipSTIC team, Faculté de Médecine, Université de Bourgogne,
21000 Dijon, France.

MOZ and MLL encoding a histone acetyltransferase and a histone methyltransferase,
respectively, are targets for recurrent chromosomal translocations found in acute
myeloblastic or lymphoblastic leukemia. We have previously shown that MOZ and MLL
cooperate to activate HOXA9 gene expression in hematopoietic stem/progenitors
cells. To dissect the mechanism of action of this complex, we decided to identify
new proteins interacting with MOZ. We found that the scaffold protein Symplekin
that supports the assembly of polyadenylation machinery was identified by mass
spectrometry. Symplekin interacts and co-localizes with both MOZ and MLL in
immature hematopoietic cells. Its inhibition leads to a decrease of the HOXA9
protein level but not of Hoxa9 mRNA and to an over-recruitment of MOZ and MLL
onto the HOXA9 promoter. Altogether, our results highlight the role of Symplekin 
in transcription repression involving a regulatory network between MOZ, MLL and
Symplekin.

© 2013.

PMID: 23994619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. J Biol Chem. 2013 Oct 11;288(41):29901-10. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.474858. Epub
2013 Aug 29.

Functional specificity of CpG DNA-binding CXXC domains in mixed lineage leukemia.

Risner LE(1), Kuntimaddi A, Lokken AA, Achille NJ, Birch NW, Schoenfelt K,
Bushweller JH, Zeleznik-Le NJ.

Author information: 
(1)From the Molecular Biology Program, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood,
Illinois 60153.

The MLL CXXC domain binds nonmethylated CpG-containing DNA and is essential for
the oncogenic properties of MLL fusion proteins. To determine potential
functional promiscuity of similar DNA binding domains, we replaced the MLL CXXC
domain in the context of the leukemogenic MLL-AF9 fusion with CXXC domains from
DNMT1, CGBP (CFP1), and MBD1, or with a methyl-CpG-binding domain (MBD) from
MBD1. MLL(DNMT1 CXXC)-AF9 shows robust in vitro colony forming activity and in
vivo leukemogenesis, similar to MLL-AF9. However, colony forming ability and
leukemogenicity are abrogated in MLL-AF9 containing either the CGBP or MBD1 CXXC 
domains or the MBD1 MBD domain. Direct comparison of in vitro DNA binding
affinity of the isolated CXXC or MBD domains demonstrated that MLL, DNMT1, and
CGBP CXXC domains could each bind to unmethylated DNA but with differing
affinity. In contrast, the isolated MBD1 CXXC and MBD1 MBD domains were unable to
bind to the same DNA. However, all substituted domains still allowed targeting of
the MLL fusions to the functionally important Hoxa9 locus in primary bone marrow 
progenitor cells. In addition to DNA binding activity, it was critical that
specific CpG residues in the Hoxa9 locus were protected from methylation for
leukemia development. This ultimately prevented histone 3 lysine 9 trimethylation
(H3K9me3) of the locus and enabled Hoxa9 expression. These were properties shared
by MLL and DNMT1 CXXC domains but not by CGBP CXXC or the other swapped fusions
tested. We demonstrate that similar CXXC domains can be mechanistically
distinguished by specificity of CpG nucleotides preferentially protected from DNA
methylation.

PMCID: PMC3795288
PMID: 23990460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Mol Oncol. 2013 Dec;7(6):1069-82. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2013.07.011. Epub 2013
Aug 20.

p27kip1 maintains a subset of leukemia stem cells in the quiescent state in
murine MLL-leukemia.

Zhang J(1), Seet CS, Sun C, Li J, You D, Volk A, Breslin P, Li X, Wei W, Qian Z, 
Zeleznik-Le NJ, Zhang Z, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, College of Life and Environment Science, Shanghai
Normal University, 100 Guilin Road, Shanghai 200234, PR China; Oncology
Institute, Cardinal Bernardin Cancer Center and Department of Pathology, Loyola
University Chicago, Maywood, IL 60153, United States.

MLL (mixed-lineage leukemia)-fusion genes induce the development of leukemia
through deregulation of normal MLL target genes, such as HOXA9 and MEIS1. Both
HOXA9 and MEIS1 are required for MLL-fusion gene-induced leukemogenesis.
Co-expression of HOXA9 and MEIS1 induces acute myeloid leukemia (AML) similar to 
that seen in mice in which MLL-fusion genes are over-expressed. p27(kip1) (p27
hereafter), a negative regulator of the cell cycle, has also been defined as an
MLL target, the expression of which is up-regulated in MLL leukemic cells (LCs). 
To investigate whether p27 plays a role in the pathogenesis of MLL-leukemia, we
examined the effects of p27 deletion (p27(-/-)) on MLL-AF9 (MA9)-induced murine
AML development. HOXA9/MEIS1 (H/M)-induced, p27 wild-type (p27(+/+)) and p27(-/-)
AML were studied in parallel as controls. We found that LCs from both MA9-AML and
H/M-AML can be separated into three fractions, a CD117(-)CD11b(hi) differentiated
fraction as well as CD117(+)CD11b(hi) and CD117(+)CD11b(lo), two less
differentiated fractions. The CD117(+)CD11b(lo) fraction, comprising only 1-3% of
total LCs, expresses higher levels of early hematopoietic progenitor markers but 
lower levels of mature myeloid cell markers compared to other populations of LCs.
p27 is expressed and is required for maintaining the quiescent and drug-resistant
states of the CD117(+)CD11b(lo) fraction of MA9-LCs but not of H/M-LCs. p27
deletion significantly compromises the leukemogenic capacity of CD117(+)CD11b(lo)
MA9-LCs by reducing the frequency of leukemic stem cells (LSCs) but does not do
so in H/M-LCs. In addition, we found that p27 is highly expressed and required
for cell cycle arrest in the CD117(-)CD11b(hi) fraction in both types of LCs.
Furthermore, we found that c-Myc expression is required for maintaining LCs in an
undifferentiated state independently of proliferation. We concluded that p27
represses the proliferation of LCs, which is specifically required for
maintaining the quiescent and drug-resistant states of a small subset of MA9-LSCs
in collaboration with the differentiation blockage function of c-Myc.

Published by Elsevier B.V.

PMCID: PMC3898829
PMID: 23988911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Mol Cancer Res. 2013 Nov;11(11):1387-400. doi: 10.1158/1541-7786.MCR-13-0218-T.
Epub 2013 Aug 27.

The twist box domain is required for Twist1-induced prostate cancer metastasis.

Gajula RP(1), Chettiar ST, Williams RD, Thiyagarajan S, Kato Y, Aziz K, Wang R,
Gandhi N, Wild AT, Vesuna F, Ma J, Salih T, Cades J, Fertig E, Biswal S, Burns
TF, Chung CH, Rudin CM, Herman JM, Hales RK, Raman V, An SS, Tran PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology & Molecular Radiation Sciences, Sidney Kimmel
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Johns Hopkins Hospital, 1550 Orleans Street, CRB2 Rm
406, Baltimore, MD 21231. tranp@jhmi.edu.

Twist1, a basic helix-loop-helix transcription factor, plays a key role during
development and is a master regulator of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition
(EMT) that promotes cancer metastasis. Structure-function relationships of Twist1
to cancer-related phenotypes are underappreciated, so we studied the requirement 
of the conserved Twist box domain for metastatic phenotypes in prostate cancer.
Evidence suggests that Twist1 is overexpressed in clinical specimens and
correlated with aggressive/metastatic disease. Therefore, we examined a
transactivation mutant, Twist1-F191G, in prostate cancer cells using in vitro
assays, which mimic various stages of metastasis. Twist1 overexpression led to
elevated cytoskeletal stiffness and cell traction forces at the migratory edge of
cells based on biophysical single-cell measurements. Twist1 conferred additional 
cellular properties associated with cancer cell metastasis including increased
migration, invasion, anoikis resistance, and anchorage-independent growth. The
Twist box mutant was defective for these Twist1 phenotypes in vitro. Importantly,
we observed a high frequency of Twist1-induced metastatic lung tumors and
extrathoracic metastases in vivo using the experimental lung metastasis assay.
The Twist box was required for prostate cancer cells to colonize metastatic lung 
lesions and extrathoracic metastases. Comparative genomic profiling revealed
transcriptional programs directed by the Twist box that were associated with
cancer progression, such as Hoxa9. Mechanistically, Twist1 bound to the Hoxa9
promoter and positively regulated Hoxa9 expression in prostate cancer cells.
Finally, Hoxa9 was important for Twist1-induced cellular phenotypes associated
with metastasis. These data suggest that the Twist box domain is required for
Twist1 transcriptional programs and prostate cancer metastasis.IMPLICATIONS:
Targeting the Twist box domain of Twist1 may effectively limit prostate cancer
metastatic potential.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3833995
PMID: 23982216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Blood. 2013 Oct 17;122(16):2877-87. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-03-491571. Epub 2013 
Aug 16.

Mutant IDH1 promotes leukemogenesis in vivo and can be specifically targeted in
human AML.

Chaturvedi A(1), Araujo Cruz MM, Jyotsana N, Sharma A, Yun H, Görlich K, Wichmann
M, Schwarzer A, Preller M, Thol F, Meyer J, Haemmerle R, Struys EA, Jansen EE,
Modlich U, Li Z, Sly LM, Geffers R, Lindner R, Manstein DJ, Lehmann U, Krauter J,
Ganser A, Heuser M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology, and Stem Cell Transplantation.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Oct 17;122(16):2770-1.

Mutations in the metabolic enzymes isocitrate dehydrogenase 1 (IDH1) and 2 (IDH2)
are frequently found in glioma, acute myeloid leukemia (AML), melanoma, thyroid
cancer, and chondrosarcoma patients. Mutant IDH produces 2-hydroxyglutarate
(2HG), which induces histone- and DNA-hypermethylation through inhibition of
epigenetic regulators. We investigated the role of mutant IDH1 using the mouse
transplantation assay. Mutant IDH1 alone did not transform hematopoietic cells
during 5 months of observation. However, mutant IDH1 greatly accelerated onset of
myeloproliferative disease-like myeloid leukemia in mice in cooperation with
HoxA9 with a mean latency of 83 days compared with cells expressing HoxA9 and
wild-type IDH1 or a control vector (167 and 210 days, respectively, P = .001).
Mutant IDH1 accelerated cell-cycle transition through repression of
cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitors Cdkn2a and Cdkn2b, and activated
mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling. By computational screening, we
identified an inhibitor of mutant IDH1, which inhibited mutant IDH1 cells and
lowered 2HG levels in vitro, and efficiently blocked colony formation of AML
cells from IDH1-mutated patients but not of normal CD34(+) bone marrow cells.
These data demonstrate that mutant IDH1 has oncogenic activity in vivo and
suggest that it is a promising therapeutic target in human AML cells.

PMID: 23954893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Leukemia. 2014 Apr;28(4):894-903. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.233. Epub 2013 Aug 8.

Transcription factor-pathway coexpression analysis reveals cooperation between
SP1 and ESR1 on dysregulating cell cycle arrest in non-hyperdiploid multiple
myeloma.

Wang X(1), Yan Z(2), Fulciniti M(3), Li Y(1), Gkotzamanidou M(3), Amin SB(2),
Shah PK(2), Zhang Y(1), Munshi NC(3), Li C(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China. (2)Department of Biostatistics and Computational
Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute 
and Harvard Medical School, VA Boston Healthcare System, Boston, MA, USA. (4)1]
Department of Bioinformatics, School of Life Science and Technology, Tongji
University, Shanghai, China [2] Department of Biostatistics and Computational
Biology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard School of Public Health,
Boston, MA, USA.

Multiple myeloma is a hematological cancer of plasma B cells and remains
incurable. Two major subtypes of myeloma, hyperdiploid MM (HMM) and
non-hyperdiploid MM (NHMM), have distinct chromosomal alterations and different
survival outcomes. Transcription factors (TrFs) have been implicated in myeloma
oncogenesis, but their dysregulation in myeloma subtypes are less studied. Here, 
we developed a TrF-pathway coexpression analysis to identify altered coexpression
between two sample types. We apply the method to the two myeloma subtypes and the
cell cycle arrest pathway, which is significantly differentially expressed
between the two subtypes. We find that TrFs MYC, nuclear factor-<U+03BA>B and HOXA9 have
significantly lower coexpression with cell cycle arrest in HMM, co-occurring with
their overactivation in HMM. In contrast, TrFs ESR1 (estrogen receptor 1), SP1
and E2F1 have significantly lower coexpression with cell cycle arrest in NHMM.
SP1 chromatin immunoprecipitation targets are enriched by cell cycle arrest
genes. These results motivate a cooperation model of ESR1 and SP1 in regulating
cell cycle arrest, and a hypothesis that their overactivation in NHMM disrupts
proper regulation of cell cycle arrest. Cotargeting ESR1 and SP1 shows a
synergistic effect on inhibiting myeloma proliferation in NHMM cell lines.
Therefore, studying TrF-pathway coexpression dysregulation in human cancers
facilitates forming novel hypotheses toward clinical utility.

PMCID: PMC4155324
PMID: 23925045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. J Vasc Res. 2013;50(4):265-78. doi: 10.1159/000353287. Epub 2013 Jul 5.

Role of HOXA9 and VEZF1 in endothelial biology.

Bruderer M(1), Alini M, Stoddart MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Musculoskeletal Regeneration Program, AO Research Institute Davos, Davos,
Switzerland.

Proper development of the vascular system as one of the earliest and most
critical steps during vertebrate embryogenesis is ensured by the exact spatial
and temporal control of gene expression in cells forming the vessel network.
Whereas the regulation of vascular system development is well elucidated on the
level of ligand-receptor signaling, the processes on the transcriptional level
are much less understood. As the signaling mechanisms in embryogenesis and
pathological conditions are similar, the study of embryonic blood vessel
development is of great interest for the treatment of cardiovascular diseases and
cancer. This review discusses two transcription factors, HOXA9 and VEZF1, which
are relevant for endothelial biology but are excluded in the bulk of
transcription factor references discussing endothelial biology. To our knowledge,
there is no comprehensive overview of these two transcription factors available
to date. Here, we summarize the current knowledge of human HOXA9 and VEZF1
biology and function, we detail their target genes and roles in endothelial
biology and propose that HOXA9 and VEZF1 also deserve consideration as relevant
transcriptional regulators of endothelial biology. Due to their broad role in
multiple aspects of endothelial biology, they might potentially become
interesting targets for therapeutic manipulation of pathological blood vessel
growth.

Copyright © 2013 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 23921720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Blood. 2013 Sep 19;122(12):2039-46. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-03-486647. Epub 2013 
Aug 1.

Distinct pathways regulated by menin and by MLL1 in hematopoietic stem cells and 
developing B cells.

Li BE(1), Gan T, Meyerson M, Rabbitts TH, Ernst P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Geisel
School of Medicine at Dartmouth, Hanover, NH;

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Sep 19;122(12):1995.

Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL1) translocations encode fusion proteins retaining the
N terminus of MLL1, which interacts with the tumor suppressor, menin. This
interaction is essential for leukemogenesis and thus is a promising drug target. 
However, wild-type MLL1 plays a critical role in sustaining hematopoietic stem
cells (HSCs); therefore, disruption of an essential MLL1 cofactor would be
expected to obliterate normal hematopoiesis. Here we show that rather than
working together as a complex, menin and MLL1 regulate distinct pathways during
normal hematopoiesis, particularly in HSCs and B cells. We demonstrate the lack
of genetic interaction between menin and MLL1 in steady-state or regenerative
hematopoiesis and in B-cell differentiation despite the fact that MLL1 is
critical for these processes. In B cells, menin- or MLL1-regulated genes can be
classified into 3 categories: (1) a relatively small group of coregulated genes
including previously described targets Hoxa9 and Meis1 but also Mecom and Eya1,
and much larger groups of (2) exclusively menin-regulated and (3) exclusively
MLL1-regulated genes. Our results highlight the large degree of independence of
these 2 proteins and demonstrate that menin is not a requisite cofactor for MLL1 
during normal hematopoiesis. Furthermore, our data support the development of
menin-MLL1-disrupting drugs as safe and selective leukemia targeting agents.

PMCID: PMC3778547
PMID: 23908472  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Blood. 2013 Sep 12;122(11):1914-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-02-486977. Epub 2013 
Jul 30.

MLL fusion protein-driven AML is selectively inhibited by targeted disruption of 
the MLL-PAFc interaction.

Muntean AG(1), Chen W, Jones M, Granowicz EM, Maillard I, Hess JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Department of Medicine;

MLL rearrangements are common in leukemia and considered an adverse risk factor. 
Through interactions with the polymerase-associated factor complex (PAFc), mixed 
lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion proteins activate genes critical for blocking
differentiation, such as HOXA9. Here we investigate whether the MLL-PAFc
interaction can be exploited therapeutically using both genetic and biochemical
approaches. We tested the genetic requirement of the PAFc in acute myeloid
leukemia (AML) using a conditional allele of the PAFc subunit, Cdc73. We show
that the PAFc is indiscriminately necessary for the proliferation of AML cells
through the epigenetic regulation of proleukemogenic target genes, such as MEIS1 
and Bcl2. To investigate the therapeutic potential of targeting the MLL-PAFc
interaction, we engineered a dominant negative fragment of MLL capable of binding
to the PAFc. Disruption of the MLL-PAFc interaction selectively inhibits the
proliferation of MLL leukemic cells without affecting cells transformed by an
unrelated E2A-HLF fusion protein. Using in vivo hematopoietic reconstitution
assays, we demonstrate that disruption of the MLL-PAFc does not alter normal
hematopoietic stem cell function. Together, our data show a selective growth
inhibition of MLL-associated leukemic cells and tolerance of normal hematopoiesis
to disruption of the MLL-PAFc interaction establishing the MLL-PAFc interaction
as an attractive therapeutic target.

PMCID: PMC3772498
PMID: 23900238  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 19;8(7):e68442. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0068442. Print 2013.

Low expression of miR-196b enhances the expression of BCR-ABL1 and HOXA9
oncogenes in chronic myeloid leukemogenesis.

Liu Y(1), Zheng W, Song Y, Ma W, Yin H.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Engineering, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
China.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) can function as tumor suppressors or oncogene promoters during
tumor development. In this study, low levels of expression of miR-196b were
detected in patients with chronic myeloid leukemia. Bisulfite genomic sequencing 
PCR and methylation-specific PCR were used to examine the methylation status of
the CpG islands in the miR-196b promoter in K562 cells, patients with leukemia
and healthy individuals. The CpG islands showed more methylation in patients with
chronic myeloid leukemia compared with healthy individuals (P<0.05), which
indicated that low expression of miR-196b may be associated with an increase in
the methylation of CpG islands. The dual-luciferase reporter assay system
demonstrated that BCR-ABL1 and HOXA9 are the target genes of miR-196b, which was 
consistent with predictions from bioinformatics software analyses. Further
examination of cell function indicated that miR-196b acts to reduce BCR-ABL1 and 
HOXA9 protein levels, decrease cell proliferation rate and retard the cell cycle.
A low level of expression of miR-196b can cause up-regulation of BCR-ABL1 and
HOXA9 expression, which leads to the development of chronic myeloid leukemia.
MiR-196b may represent an effective target for chronic myeloid leukemia therapy.

PMCID: PMC3716876
PMID: 23894305  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Cell Death Differ. 2013 Oct;20(10):1370-80. doi: 10.1038/cdd.2013.92. Epub 2013
Jul 19.

Hoxb8 regulates expression of microRNAs to control cell death and
differentiation.

Salmanidis M(1), Brumatti G, Narayan N, Green BD, van den Bergen JA, Sandow JJ,
Bert AG, Silke N, Sladic R, Puthalakath H, Rohrbeck L, Okamoto T, Bouillet P,
Herold MJ, Goodall GJ, Jabbour AM, Ekert PG.

Author information: 
(1)Cell signalling and Cell Death Division, Walter and Eliza Hall Institute of
Medical Research, 1G Royal Parade, Parkville, Victoria 3052, Australia.

Hoxb8 overexpression immortalises haematopoietic progenitor cells in a
growth-factor-dependant manner and co-operates with interleukin-3 (IL-3) to cause
acute myeloid leukaemia. To further understand how Hoxb8 contributes to myeloid
cell immortalisation, we generated IL-3-dependant myeloid cells expressing Hoxb8 
under the control of an inducible promoter. Downregulation of Hoxb8, in the
presence of IL-3, caused cell-cycle arrest and apoptosis in the majority of
cells. Apoptosis was dependant on Bax and Bak and, in part, on Bim, which was
repressed by Hoxb8. Deletion of the miR-17~92 seed sequences in the Bim 3'UTR
abolished Hoxb8-dependant regulation of Bim reporter constructs. Expression of
all six miRNAs from this cluster were elevated when Hoxb8 was overexpressed. The 
miR-17~92 cluster was required for repression of Bim in Hoxb8-immortalised cells 
and deletion of the miR-17~92 cluster substantially inhibited Hoxb8, but not
Hoxa9, mediated survival and proliferation. Hoxb8 appears to promote miR-17~92
expression through c-Myc, a known transcriptional regulator of the miR-17~92
cluster. We have uncovered a previously unrecognised link between Hoxb8
expression and microRNAs that provides a new insight into the oncogenic functions
of Hoxb8.

PMCID: PMC3770316
PMID: 23872792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. PLoS One. 2013 Jun 26;8(6):e67032. Print 2013.

Dynein Light Chain 1 (DYNLT1) Interacts with Normal and Oncogenic Nucleoporins.

Sarma NJ(1), Yaseen NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, Saint Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

The chimeric oncoprotein NUP98-HOXA9 results from the t(7;11)(p15;p15)
chromosomal translocation and is associated with acute myeloid leukemia. It
causes aberrant gene regulation and leukemic transformation through mechanisms
that are not fully understood. NUP98-HOXA9 consists of an N-terminal portion of
the nucleoporin NUP98 that contains many FG repeats fused to the DNA-binding
homeodomain of HOXA9. We used a Cytotrap yeast two-hybrid assay to identify
proteins that interact with NUP98-HOXA9. We identified Dynein Light Chain 1
(DYNLT1), an integral 14 KDa protein subunit of the large microtubule-based
cytoplasmic dynein complex, as an interaction partner of NUP98-HOXA9. Binding was
confirmed by in vitro pull down and co-immunoprecipitation assays and the FG
repeat region of NUP98-HOXA9 was shown to be essential for the interaction.
RNAi-mediated knockdown of DYNLT1 resulted in reduction of the ability of
NUP98-HOXA9 to activate transcription and also inhibited the ability of
NUP98-HOXA9 to induce proliferation of primary human hematopoietic CD34+ cells.
DYNLT1 also showed a strong interaction with wild-type NUP98 and other
nucleoporins containing FG repeats. Immunofluorescence analysis showed that
DYNLT1 localizes primarily to the nuclear periphery, where it co-localizes with
the nuclear pore complex, and to the cytoplasm. Deletion studies showed that the 
interactions of the nucleoporins with DYNLT1 are dependent predominantly on the
C-terminal half of the DYNLT1. These data show for the first time that DYNLT1
interacts with nucleoporins and plays a role in the dysregulation of gene
expression and induction of hematopoietic cell proliferation by the leukemogenic 
nucleoporin fusion, NUP98-HOXA9.

PMCID: PMC3694108
PMID: 23840580  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


152. Blood. 2013 Aug 15;122(7):1271-83. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-09-456665. Epub 2013
Jul 9.

Plzf drives MLL-fusion-mediated leukemogenesis specifically in long-term
hematopoietic stem cells.

Ono R(1), Masuya M, Nakajima H, Enomoto Y, Miyata E, Nakamura A, Ishii S, Suzuki 
K, Shibata-Minoshima F, Katayama N, Kitamura T, Nosaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Molecular Genetics, Mie University Graduate
School of Medicine, Edobashi, Tsu, Japan.

Oncogenic transformation requires unlimited self-renewal. Currently, it remains
unclear whether a normal capacity for self-renewal is required for acquiring an
aberrant self-renewal capacity. Our results in a new conditional transgenic mouse
showed that a mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion oncogene, MLL-ENL, at an
endogenous-like expression level led to leukemic transformation selectively in a 
restricted subpopulation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) through upregulation 
of promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger (Plzf). Interestingly, forced expression of
Plzf itself immortalized HSCs and myeloid progenitors in vitro without
upregulation of Hoxa9/Meis1, which are well-known targets of MLL fusion proteins,
whereas its mutant lacking the BTB/POZ domain did not. In contrast, depletion of 
Plzf suppressed the MLL-fusion-induced leukemic transformation of HSCs in vitro
and in vivo. Gene expression analyses of human clinical samples showed that a
subtype of PLZF-high MLL-rearranged myeloid leukemia cells was closely associated
with the gene expression signature of HSCs. These findings suggested that MLL
fusion protein enhances the self-renewal potential of normal HSCs to develop
leukemia, in part through a Plzf-driven self-renewal program.

PMID: 23838347  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jul 16;110(29):11994-9. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1310656110. Epub 2013 Jul 1.

TET1 plays an essential oncogenic role in MLL-rearranged leukemia.

Huang H(1), Jiang X, Li Z, Li Y, Song CX, He C, Sun M, Chen P, Gurbuxani S, Wang 
J, Hong GM, Elkahloun AG, Arnovitz S, Wang J, Szulwach K, Lin L, Street C,
Wunderlich M, Dawlaty M, Neilly MB, Jaenisch R, Yang FC, Mulloy JC, Jin P, Liu
PP, Rowley JD, Xu M, He C, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The ten-eleven translocation 1 (TET1) gene is the founding member of the TET
family of enzymes (TET1/2/3) that convert 5-methylcytosine to
5-hydroxymethylcytosine. Although TET1 was first identified as a fusion partner
of the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene in acute myeloid leukemia carrying
t(10,11), its definitive role in leukemia is unclear. In contrast to the frequent
down-regulation (or loss-of-function mutations) and critical tumor-suppressor
roles of the three TET genes observed in various types of cancers, here we show
that TET1 is a direct target of MLL-fusion proteins and is significantly
up-regulated in MLL-rearranged leukemia, leading to a global increase of
5-hydroxymethylcytosine level. Furthermore, our both in vitro and in vivo
functional studies demonstrate that Tet1 plays an indispensable oncogenic role in
the development of MLL-rearranged leukemia, through coordination with MLL-fusion 
proteins in regulating their critical cotargets, including homeobox A9
(Hoxa9)/myeloid ecotropic viral integration 1 (Meis1)/pre-B-cell leukemia
homeobox 3 (Pbx3) genes. Collectively, our data delineate an
MLL-fusion/Tet1/Hoxa9/Meis1/Pbx3 signaling axis in MLL-rearranged leukemia and
highlight TET1 as a potential therapeutic target in treating this presently
therapy-resistant disease.

PMCID: PMC3718141
PMID: 23818607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Leuk Res. 2013 Sep;37(9):1010-5. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2013.05.020. Epub 2013
Jun 22.

Clinical and laboratory studies of 17 patients with acute myeloid leukemia
harboring t(7;11)(p15;p15) translocation.

Wei S(1), Wang S, Qiu S, Qi J, Mi Y, Lin D, Zhou C, Liu B, Li W, Wang Y, Wang M, 
Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology and Blood Diseases Hospital, Chinese Academy of
Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, No. 288 Nanjing Road, Tianjin
300020, China.

The cellular and molecular genetic aberrations of hematopoietic and lymphoid
tissues are increasingly important in leukemia classification and are
prognostically significant. Although some recurrent molecular cytogenetic
abnormalities in AML have been extensively studied, others including
t(7;11)(p15;p15) have not been well characterized. In this paper, seventeen AML
patients with t(7;11)(p15;p15) were retrospectively reviewed for cell morphology,
immuno-phenotype, cytogenetics as well as clinical features and prognosis. Among 
them, thirteen were female; nine were AML-M2. Six patients who were newly
diagnosed were alive, one was lost for followed up and ten died. The median
survival was 8 months. Taking together, AML with t(7;11)(p15;p15) is a rare and
distinct disease. Most patients with this translocation are female at younger age
and have special clinical and hematological characteristics such as M2-subtype of
AML, easy to relapse and poor prognosis.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23800796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Blood. 2013 Aug 29;122(9):1545-55. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-04-496281. Epub 2013
Jun 18.

RNAi screen identifies Jarid1b as a major regulator of mouse HSC activity.

Cellot S(1), Hope KJ, Chagraoui J, Sauvageau M, Deneault É, MacRae T, Mayotte N, 
Wilhelm BT, Landry JR, Ting SB, Krosl J, Humphries K, Thompson A, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal,
Montréal, QC, Canada.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Aug 29;122(9):1533-4.

Histone methylation is a dynamic and reversible process proposed to directly
impact on stem cell fate. The Jumonji (JmjC) domain-containing family of
demethylases comprises 27 members that target mono-, di-, and trimethylated
lysine residues of histone (or nonhistone) proteins. To evaluate their role in
regulation of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) behavior, we performed an in vivo
RNAi-based functional screen and demonstrated that Jarid1b and Jhdm1f play
opposing roles in regulation of HSC activity. Decrease in Jarid1b levels
correlated with an in vitro expansion of HSCs with preserved long-term in vivo
lymphomyeloid differentiation potential. Through RNA sequencing analysis, Jarid1b
knockdown was associated with increased expression levels of several HSC
regulators (Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hes1, Gata2) and reduced levels of
differentiation-associated genes. shRNA against Jhdmlf, in contrast, impaired
hematopoietic reconstitution of bone marrow cells. Together, our studies
identified Jarid1b as a negative regulator of HSC activity and Jhdmlf as a
positive regulator of HSC activity.

PMID: 23777767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. J Immunol. 2013 Jul 15;191(2):745-54. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1203294. Epub 2013
Jun 14.

Hoxa9 and Flt3 signaling synergistically regulate an early checkpoint in
lymphopoiesis.

Gwin KA(1), Shapiro MB, Dolence JJ, Huang ZL, Medina KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Hoxa9 and Flt3 signaling are individually important for the generation of
lymphoid lineage precursors from multipotent hematopoietic progenitors (MPP) in
bone marrow. Mice deficient for Hoxa9, Flt3, or Flt3 ligand (FL) have reduced
numbers of lymphoid-primed multipotential progenitors (LMPP), common lymphoid
progenitors (CLP), and B/T cell precursors. Hoxa9 regulates lymphoid development,
in part, through transcriptional regulation of Flt3. However, it was unclear
whether Hoxa9 has functions in lymphopoiesis independent of, or alternatively,
synergistically with Flt3 signaling. In this study, we show that
Hoxa9(-/-)Flt3l(-/-) mice have more severe deficiencies in all B lineage cells,
CLP, LMPP, and total Flt3(+) MPP in bone marrow than the single knockouts.
Although LMPP and Flt3(+) CLP contain precursors for NK and dendritic cell
lineage cells, no deficiencies in these lineages beyond that in Flt3l(-/-) mice
was found. Thymocyte cellularity was significantly reduced in the compound
knockout, although peripheral T cell numbers mirrored Flt3l(-/-) mice. Analysis
of the hematopoietic progenitor compartment revealed elevated numbers of
CD150(+hi)CD34(-)CD41(+) myeloid-biased stem cells in Hoxa9(-/-)Flt3l(-/-) mice. 
In contrast, CD150(-) MPP enriched for lymphoid potential were synergistically
reduced, suggesting Hoxa9 and Flt3 signaling function coordinately to regulate
lymphopoiesis at a very early stage. Real-time PCR analysis of CD150(-)Flt3(+)
cells from wild-type control, Hoxa9(-/-), and Flt3l(-/-) single knockouts
revealed decreased lymphoid transcripts, corroborating the importance of these
regulators in lymphoid development. Taken together, these studies reveal a very
early checkpoint in lymphopoiesis dependent on the combinatorial activities of
Hoxa9 function and Flt3 signaling.

PMCID: PMC3702669
PMID: 23772038  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Development. 2013 Jul;140(14):2942-52. doi: 10.1242/dev.092569. Epub 2013 Jun 12.

Recombineering-based dissection of flanking and paralogous Hox gene functions in 
mouse reproductive tracts.

Raines AM(1), Adam M, Magella B, Meyer SE, Grimes HL, Dey SK, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Hox genes are key regulators of development. In mammals, the study of these genes
is greatly confounded by their large number, overlapping functions and
interspersed shared enhancers. Here, we describe the use of a novel
recombineering strategy to introduce simultaneous frameshift mutations into the
flanking Hoxa9, Hoxa10 and Hoxa11 genes, as well as their paralogs on the HoxD
cluster. The resulting Hoxa9,10,11 mutant mice displayed dramatic synergistic
homeotic transformations of the reproductive tracts, with the uterus anteriorized
towards oviduct and the vas deferens anteriorized towards epididymis. The
Hoxa9,10,11 mutant mice also provided a genetic setting that allowed the
discovery of Hoxd9,10,11 redundant reproductive tract patterning function. Both
shared and distinct Hox functions were defined. Hoxd9,10,11 play a crucial role
in the regulation of uterine immune function. Non-coding non-polyadenylated RNAs 
were among the key Hox targets, with dramatic downregulation in mutants. We
observed Hox cross-regulation of transcription and splicing. In addition, we
observed a surprising anti-dogmatic apparent posteriorization of the uterine
epithelium. In caudal regions of the uterus, the normal simple columnar
epithelium flanking the lumen was replaced by a pseudostratified transitional
epithelium, normally found near the more posterior cervix. These results identify
novel molecular functions of Hox genes in the development of the male and female 
reproductive tracts.

PMCID: PMC3699281
PMID: 23760953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Int J Hematol. 2013 Aug;98(2):143-4. doi: 10.1007/s12185-013-1381-1. Epub 2013
Jun 11.

Atypical chronic myeloid leukemia harboring NUP98-HOXA9.

Murayama H(1), Matsushita H, Ando K.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal Medicine, Tokai
University School of Medicine, 143 Shimokasuya, Isehara, Kanagawa 259-1193,
Japan.

PMID: 23754767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 11;110(24):9920-5. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1305172110. Epub 2013 May 28.

HMGA2/TET1/HOXA9 signaling pathway regulates breast cancer growth and metastasis.

Sun M(1), Song CX, Huang H, Frankenberger CA, Sankarasharma D, Gomes S, Chen P,
Chen J, Chada KK, He C, Rosner MR.

Author information: 
(1)Ben May Department for Cancer Research, Department of Chemistry and Institute 
for Biophysical Dynamics, University of Chicago, Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

The ten-eleven translocation (TET) family of methylcytosine dioxygenases
initiates demethylation of DNA and is associated with tumorigenesis in many
cancers; however, the mechanism is mostly unknown. Here we identify upstream
activators and downstream effectors of TET1 in breast cancer using human breast
cancer cells and a genetically engineered mouse model. We show that depleting the
architectural transcription factor high mobility group AT-hook 2 (HMGA2) induces 
TET1. TET1 binds and demethylates its own promoter and the promoter of homeobox A
(HOXA) genes, enhancing its own expression and stimulating expression of HOXA
genes including HOXA7 and HOXA9. Both TET1 and HOXA9 suppress breast tumor growth
and metastasis in mouse xenografts. The genes comprising the HMGA2-TET1-HOXA9
pathway are coordinately regulated in breast cancer and together encompass a
prognostic signature for patient survival. These results implicate the
HMGA2-TET1-HOX signaling pathway in the epigenetic regulation of human breast
cancer and highlight the importance of targeting methylation in specific
subpopulations as a potential therapeutic strategy.

PMCID: PMC3683728
PMID: 23716660  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2013 Aug;45(8):1647-56. doi:
10.1016/j.biocel.2013.04.024. Epub 2013 May 6.

Transcription factor AP-2a regulates acute myeloid leukemia cell proliferation by
influencing Hoxa gene expression.

Ding X(1), Yang Z, Zhou F, Wang F, Li X, Chen C, Li X, Hu X, Xiang S, Zhang J.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Protein Chemistry and Development Biology of State Education
Ministry of China, College of Life Science, Hunan Normal University, Changsha
410081, PR China.

Transcription factor AP-2a mediates transcription of a number of genes implicated
in mammalian development, cell proliferation and carcinogenesis. In the current
study, we identified Hoxa7, Hoxa9 and Hox cofactor Meis1 as AP-2a target genes,
which are involved in myeloid leukemogenesis. Luciferase reporter assays revealed
that overexpression of AP-2a activated transcription activities of Hoxa7, Hoxa9
and Meis1, whereas siRNA of AP-2a inhibited their transcription activities. We
found that AP-2 binding sites in regulatory regions of three genes activated
their transcription by mutant analysis and AP-2a could interact with AP-2 binding
sites in vivo by chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP). Further results showed
that the AP-2a shRNA efficiently inhibited mRNA and protein levels of Hoxa7,
Hoxa9 and Meis1 in AML cell lines U937 and HL60. Moreover, decreased expression
of AP-2a resulted in a significant reduction in the growth and proliferation of
AML cells in vitro. Remarkably, AP-2a knockdown leukemia cells exhibit decreased 
tumorigenicity in vivo compared with controls. Finally, AP-2a and target genes in
clinical acute myeloid leukemia samples of M5b subtype revealed variable
expression levels and broadly paralleled expression. These data support a role of
AP-2a in mediating the expression of Hoxa genes in acute myeloid leukemia to
influence the proliferation and cell survival.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23660297  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Clin Cancer Res. 2013 Jun 15;19(12):3268-75. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-3496. 
Epub 2013 May 1.

EDNRB and DCC salivary rinse hypermethylation has a similar performance as expert
clinical examination in discrimination of oral cancer/dysplasia versus benign
lesions.

Schussel J(1), Zhou XC, Zhang Z, Pattani K, Bermudez F, Jean-Charles G, McCaffrey
T, Padhya T, Phelan J, Spivakovsky S, Brait M, Li R, Bowne HY, Goldberg JD,
Rolnitzky L, Robbins M, Kerr AR, Sirois D, Califano JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, Baltimore, Maryland 21287, USA.

PURPOSE: Promoter hypermethylation has been recently proposed as a means for head
and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) detection in salivary rinses. In a
prospective study of a high-risk population, we showed that endothelin receptor
type B (EDNRB) promoter methylation in salivary rinses is a useful biomarker for 
oral cancer and premalignancy.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Using that cohort, we evaluated EDNRB methylation status and
8 additional genes. Clinical risk assessment by expert clinicians was conducted
and compared with biomarker performance in the prediction of premalignant and
malignant disease. Methylation status of 9 genes was analyzed in salivary rinses 
of 191 patients by quantitative methylation-specific PCR.
RESULTS: HOXA9, EDNRB, and deleted in colorectal cancer (DCC) methylation were
associated (P = 0.012; P < 0.0001; P = 0.0005) with premalignant or malignant
disease. On multivariable modeling, histological diagnosis was only independently
associated with EDNRB (P = 0.0003) or DCC (P = 0.004) methylation. A subset of
patients received clinical risk classification (CRC) by expert clinicians based
on lesion examination. CRC, DCC, and EDNRB were associated with diagnosis of
dysplasia/cancer on univariate (P = 0.008; P = 0.026; P = 0.046) and multivariate
analysis (P = 0.012; P = 0.037; P = 0.047). CRC identified dysplasia/cancer with 
56% of sensitivity and 66% of specificity with a similar area under curve [AUC;
0.61, 95% confidence interval (CI) = 0.60-0.81] when compared to EDNRB and DCC
combined AUC (0.60, 95% CI = 0.51-0.69), sensitivity of 46% and specificity of
72%. A combination of EDNRB, DCC, and CRC was optimal AUC (0.67, 95% CI =
0.58-0.76).
CONCLUSIONS: EDNRB and/or DCC methylation in salivary rinses compares well to
examination by an expert clinician in CRC of oral lesions. These salivary
biomarkers may be particularly useful in oral premalignancy and malignancy
screening in clinical care settings in which expert clinicians are not available.

PMCID: PMC3687013
PMID: 23637120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. J Exp Med. 2013 May 6;210(5):987-1001. doi: 10.1084/jem.20121608. Epub 2013 Apr
29.

Sirt1 ablation promotes stress-induced loss of epigenetic and genomic
hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell maintenance.

Singh SK(1), Williams CA, Klarmann K, Burkett SS, Keller JR, Oberdoerffer P.

Author information: 
(1)Mouse Cancer Genetics Program, SAIC-Frederick, Inc, Frederick National
Laboratory, National Cancer Institute, Frederick, MD 21702, USA.

The (histone) deacetylase Sirt1 is a mediator of genomic and epigenetic
maintenance, both of which are critical aspects of stem cell homeostasis and
tightly linked to their functional decline in aging and disease. We show that
Sirt1 ablation in adult hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HSPCs) promotes 
aberrant HSPC expansion specifically under conditions of hematopoietic stress,
which is associated with genomic instability as well as the accumulation of DNA
damage and eventually results in a loss of long-term progenitors. We further
demonstrate that progenitor cell expansion is mechanistically linked to the
selective up-regulation of the HSPC maintenance factor and polycomb target gene
Hoxa9. We show that Sirt1 binds to the Hoxa9 gene, counteracts acetylation of its
histone target H4 lysine 16, and in turn promotes polycomb-specific repressive
histone modification. Together, these findings demonstrate a dual role for Sirt1 
in HSPC homeostasis, both via epigenetic regulation of a key developmental gene
and by promoting genome stability in adult stem cells.

PMCID: PMC3646499
PMID: 23630229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 23;8(4):e61706. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061706. Print 2013.

Mapping of MN1 sequences necessary for myeloid transformation.

Kandilci A(1), Surtel J, Janke L, Neale G, Terranova S, Grosveld GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, United States of America.

The MN1 oncogene is deregulated in human acute myeloid leukemia and its
overexpression induces proliferation and represses myeloid differentiation of
primitive human and mouse hematopoietic cells, leading to myeloid leukemia in
mouse models. To delineate the sequences within MN1 necessary for MN1-induced
leukemia, we tested the transforming capacity of in-frame deletion mutants, using
retroviral transduction of mouse bone marrow. We found that integrity of the
regions between amino acids 12 to 458 and 1119 to 1273 are required for MN1's in 
vivo transforming activity, generating myeloid leukemia with some mutants also
producing T-cell lympho-leukemia and megakaryocytic leukemia. Although both full 
length MN1 and a mutant that lacks the residues between 12-228 (<U+0394>12-228 mutant)
repressed myeloid differentiation and increased myeloproliferative activity in
vitro, the mutant lost its transforming activity in vivo. Both MN1 and <U+0394>12-228
increased the frequency of common myeloid progentiors (CMP) in vitro and
microarray comparisons of purified MN1-CMP and <U+0394>12-228-CMP cells showed many
differentially expressed genes including Hoxa9, Meis1, Myb, Runx2, Cebpa, Cebpb
and Cebpd. This collection of immediate MN1-responsive candidate genes
distinguishes the leukemic activity from the in vitro myeloproliferative capacity
of this oncoprotein.

PMCID: PMC3634013
PMID: 23626719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Jpn J Clin Oncol. 2013 Jun;43(6):641-5. doi: 10.1093/jjco/hyt058. Epub 2013 Apr
25.

Stronger prognostic power of the CpG island methylator phenotype than methylation
of individual genes in neuroblastomas.

Asada K(1), Watanabe N, Nakamura Y, Ohira M, Westermann F, Schwab M, Nakagawara
A, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epigenomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, 5-1-1
Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The CpG island methylator phenotype is strongly associated with poor
survival in neuroblastomas. Neuroblastomas with the CpG island methylator
phenotype include almost all neuroblastomas with MYCN amplification, and, even
among neuroblastomas without MYCN amplification, have worse prognosis. At the
same time, methylation of individual tumor-suppressor genes is also reported to
be associated with poor survival. The purpose of this study was to compare the
prognostic power of the CpG island methylator phenotype with that of methylation 
of individual genes.
METHODS: Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction was performed for five
individual genes (CASP8, EMP3, HOXA9, NR1I2 and CD44) in 140 Japanese and 152
German neuroblastomas. Kaplan-Meier analysis and log-rank tests were conducted to
compare the survival between groups defined by methylation status.
RESULTS: Among the five individual genes, only CASP8 methylation had a
significant association with poor overall survival both in Japanese (hazard ratio
= 3.1; 95% confidence interval = 1.5-6.4; P = 0.002) and German (hazard ratio =
4.8; 95% confidence interval = 2.1-11; P = 0.0002) neuroblastomas. HOXA9 and
NR1I2 methylation were associated with poor survival only in German
neuroblastomas. On the other hand, the CpG island methylator phenotype had a
strong and consistent association in Japanese (hazard ratio = 22; 95% confidence 
interval = 5.3-93; P = 1.5 × 10(-5)) and German (hazard ratio = 9.5; 95%
confidence interval = 3.2-28; P = 4.7 × 10(-5)) neuroblastomas.
CONCLUSION: The CpG island methylator phenotype is likely to have stronger
prognostic power than methylation of individual genes in neuroblastomas.

PMID: 23619990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2013 Apr;15(4):268-72.

[Expression of homeobox gene HOXA9 in childhood acute leukemia, and its clinical 
significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Jia XH(1), Zhu LP, Li JC, Wang CC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical University,
Binzhou, Shandong, China. jiaxiuhong001@163.com

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the expression of homeobox gene HOXA9 in the bone
marrow mononuclear cells of children with acute leukemia (AL) and its clinical
significance.
METHODS: Forty-six children with AL were divided into acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) groups. Fifteen children with
idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura were selected as a control group. The mRNA
expression of HOXA9 was measured by reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: HOXA9 expression was detected in 63% of the 52 bone marrow samples from 
46 AL children. The positive HOXA9 expression rate in the AML group was
significantly higher than in the ALL and control groups (86% vs 35% and 13%;
P<0.05). The mRNA expression of HOXA9 in the AML group was significantly higher
than in the ALL and control groups (P<0.05). Among the children with AML, those
with M5 AML had the highest HOXA9 mRNA level, followed by children with M4 AML
and children with M1 and/or M2 AML, but HOXA9 expression was not detected in
children with M3 AML. The high-risk subgroup of AML children had relatively high 
levels of HOXA9 expression. In the children with AML, the initial treatment
subgroup had significantly higher positive HOXA9 expression rate and HOXA9 mRNA
levels than in the remission subgroup and control group (P<0.05), but there were 
no significant differences between the latter two groups (P>0.05). The
non-remission subgroup had significantly higher HOXA9 expression than the
remission subgroup and control group (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: High expression of HOXA9 is associated with the occurrence of AL,
and its expression level is significantly higher in children with AML than in
those with ALL. There is a positive correlation between the expression level of
HOXA9 and the risk of childhood leukemia, and high expression of HOXA9 suggests
poor prognosis. Therefore, HOXA9 can be used as one of the indices in the
diagnosis, treatment and prognosis prediction of childhood AL.

PMID: 23607948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Stem Cells. 2013 Jul;31(7):1434-45. doi: 10.1002/stem.1398.

Entinostat prevents leukemia maintenance in a collaborating oncogene-dependent
model of cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia.

Ramsey JM(1), Kettyle LM, Sharpe DJ, Mulgrew NM, Dickson GJ, Bijl JJ, Austin P,
Mayotte N, Cellot S, Lappin TR, Zhang SD, Mills KI, Krosl J, Sauvageau G,
Thompson A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University Belfast,
Northern Ireland, UK.

The incidence of refractory acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is on the increase due
in part to an aging population that fails to respond to traditional therapies.
High throughput genomic analysis promises better diagnosis, prognosis, and
therapeutic intervention based on improved patient stratification. Relevant
preclinical models are urgently required to advance drug development in this
area. The collaborating oncogenes, HOXA9 and MEIS1, are frequently
co-overexpressed in cytogenetically normal AML (CN-AML), and a conditional
transplantation mouse model was developed that demonstrated oncogene dependency
and expression levels comparable to CN-AML patients. Integration of gene
signatures obtained from the mouse model and a cohort of CN-AML patients using
statistically significant connectivity map analysis identified Entinostat as a
drug with the potential to alter the leukemic condition toward the normal state. 
Ex vivo treatment of leukemic cells, but not age-matched normal bone marrow
controls, with Entinostat validated the gene signature and resulted in reduced
viability in liquid culture, impaired colony formation, and loss of the leukemia 
initiating cell. Furthermore, in vivo treatment with Entinostat resulted in
prolonged survival of leukemic mice. This study demonstrates that the HDAC
inhibitor Entinostat inhibits disease maintenance and prolongs survival in a
clinically relevant murine model of cytogenetically normal AML.

Copyright © 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 23592435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Pigment Cell Melanoma Res. 2013 Jul;26(4):542-54. doi: 10.1111/pcmr.12096. Epub
2013 Apr 17.

Genome-wide promoter methylation analysis identifies epigenetic silencing of
MAPK13 in primary cutaneous melanoma.

Gao L(1), Smit MA, van den Oord JJ, Goeman JJ, Verdegaal EM, van der Burg SH,
Stas M, Beck S, Gruis NA, Tensen CP, Willemze R, Peeper DS, van Doorn R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The
Netherlands.

The involvement of epigenetic alterations in the pathogenesis of melanoma is
increasingly recognized. Here, we performed genome-wide DNA methylation analysis 
of primary cutaneous melanoma and benign melanocytic nevus interrogating 14 495
genes using BeadChip technology. This genome-wide view of promoter methylation in
primary cutaneous melanoma revealed an array of recurrent DNA methylation
alterations with potential diagnostic applications. Among 106 frequently
hypermethylated genes, there were many novel methylation targets and tumor
suppressor genes. Highly recurrent methylation of the HOXA9, MAPK13, CDH11,
PLEKHG6, PPP1R3C, and CLDN11 genes was established. Promoter methylation of
MAPK13, encoding p38d, was present in 67% of primary and 85% of metastatic
melanomas. Restoration of MAPK13 expression in melanoma cells exhibiting
epigenetic silencing of this gene reduced proliferation, indicative of tumor
suppressive functions. This study demonstrates that DNA methylation alterations
are widespread in melanoma and suggests that epigenetic silencing of MAPK13
contributes to melanoma progression.

© 2013 John Wiley & Sons A/S.

PMID: 23590314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2013;67(3):935-8. doi: 10.1007/s12013-013-9586-8.

HOXA9 gene expression in acute myeloid leukemia.

Li DP(1), Li ZY, Sang W, Cheng H, Pan XY, Xu KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The Affiliated Hospital of Xuzhou Medical College,
No.99 West Huaihai Road, Xuzhou, 221002, China.

Homeobox genes encode the class of transcription factors in vertebrates and are
found in clusters called A, B, C, and D on four separate chromosomes. HOXA9 gene 
is part of the cluster A on chromosome 7 and encodes a DNA-binding transcription 
factor which may regulate gene expression, morphogenesis, and differentiation.
The objective of this study was to determine the HOXA9 gene expression in acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). For this purpose, semi-quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction was used to measure HOXA9 gene expression
in human erythroleukemia (HEL) cell line and bone marrow mononuclear cells from
54 AML patients and 20 healthy individuals. The data show that HOXA9 mRNA
expression was negative in 20 healthy individuals but was positive in HEL cells
and in 22 out of 54 (40.74%) AML patients. The complete remission rate (45.45%)
of the patients who expressed the gene was significantly lower than that (71.86%)
in patients who did not express the gene after chemotherapy. Therefore, it was
concluded that HOXA9 gene might be involved in the pathogenesis of AML and played
as a worse prognostic factor in AML.

PMID: 23575938  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 May;98(5):E981-9. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-4006. Epub
2013 Apr 8.

DNA microarray and miRNA analyses reinforce the classification of follicular
thyroid tumors.

Jacques C(1), Guillotin D, Fontaine JF, Franc B, Mirebeau-Prunier D, Fleury A,
Malthiery Y, Savagner F.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale U694, rue des
Capucins, F-49033 Angers, France.

CONTEXT: Focusing on mitochondrial function and thyroid tumorigenesis, we used an
integrative approach to identify relevant biomarkers for borderline thyroid
lesions.
DESIGN: Using cDNA and microRNA (miRNA) microarrays and quantitative RT-PCR
analysis (qPCR), we explored samples of various types of thyroid tumors including
25 benign follicular adenomas represented by macrofollicular variants of thyroid 
adenomas, 38 oncocytic variants of follicular thyroid tumors, 19 papillary
thyroid carcinomas, and 10 tumors of uncertain malignant potential, together with
53 normal thyroid tissue samples.
RESULTS: Our transcriptomic analysis, which highlighted discrepancies between
controls and tumor tissues, as well as between various tumor types, led to the
identification of 13 genes, allowing discrimination between the thyroid adenomas,
oncocytic variants of follicular thyroid tumors, and papillary thyroid
carcinomas, whereas the tumors of uncertain malignant potential were found to
overlap these classes. Five of these genes (TP53, HOXA9, RUNX1, MYD88, and
CITED1), with a differential expression confirmed by qPCR analysis, are
implicated in tumorigenesis, 4 in mitochondrial metabolism (MRPL14, MRPS2,
MRPS28, and COX6A1), and 2 in thyroid metabolic pathways (CaMKIINalpha and TPO). 
The global miRNA analysis revealed 62 differential miRNAs, the expression level
for 10 of these being confirmed by qPCR. The differential expression of the
miRNAs was in accordance with the modulation of gene expression and the
ontologies revealed by our transcriptomic analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings reinforce the classification of follicular thyroid
tumors established by the World Health Organization, and our technique offers a
novel molecular approach to refine the classification of thyroid tumors of
uncertain malignant potential.

PMID: 23569218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Haematologica. 2013 Aug;98(8):1216-25. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2012.079012. Epub
2013 Mar 28.

HOXA/PBX3 knockdown impairs growth and sensitizes cytogenetically normal acute
myeloid leukemia cells to chemotherapy.

Dickson GJ(1), Liberante FG, Kettyle LM, O'Hagan KA, Finnegan DP, Bullinger L,
Geerts D, McMullin MF, Lappin TR, Mills KI, Thompson A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queens University Belfast,
Northern Ireland, UK.

The cytogenetically normal subtype of acute myeloid leukemia is associated with
an intermediate risk which complicates therapeutic options. Lower overall
HOX/TALE expression appears to correlate with more favorable prognosis/better
response to treatment in some leukemias and solid cancer. The functional
significance of the associated gene expression and response to chemotherapy is
not known. Three independent microarray datasets obtained from large cohorts of
patients along with quantitative polymerase chain reaction validation were used
to identify a four-gene HOXA/TALE signature capable of prognostic stratification.
Biochemical analysis was used to identify interactions between the four encoded
proteins and targeted knockdown used to examine the functional importance of
sustained expression of the signature in leukemia maintenance and response to
chemotherapy. An 11 HOXA/TALE code identified in an intermediate-risk group of
patients (n=315) compared to a group with a favorable risk (n=105) was reduced to
a four-gene signature of HOXA6, HOXA9, PBX3 and MEIS1 by iterative analysis of
independent platforms. This signature maintained the favorable/intermediate risk 
partition and where applicable, correlated with overall survival in
cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia. We further showed that cell growth
and function are dependent on maintained levels of these core genes and that
direct targeting of HOXA/PBX3 sensitizes cytogenetically normal acute myeloid
leukemia cells to standard chemotherapy. Together the data support a key role for
HOXA/TALE in cytogenetically normal acute myeloid leukemia and demonstrate that
targeting of clinically significant HOXA/PBX3 elements may provide therapeutic
benefit to patients with this subtype of leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3729901
PMID: 23539541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Cardiovasc Hematol Disord Drug Targets. 2013 Mar 1;13(1):16-34.

Targeting of NF-kappaB signaling pathway, other signaling pathways and
epigenetics in therapy of multiple myeloma.

Fuchs O(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Hematology and Blood Transfusion, Prague 2, Czech Republic.
Ota.Fuchs@uhkt.cz

Multiple myeloma (MM) remains an incurable disease, at least for the big majority
of patients, in spite of the great progress with new drugs in the last years. New
treatment strategies are needed to improve the outcome of patients. NF-<U+03BA>B
activation in MM is caused by mutations in the factors involved in the NF-<U+03BA>B
pathways contributing to their dysregulation and by signals from the bone marrow 
microenvironment. Agents with NF-<U+03BA>B inhibitory activity enhance the anti-MM
effects of conventional chemotherapeutic agents. Bortezomib was the first
approved member of a new class of anti-MM agents, the proteasome inhibitors. At
least, five proteasome inhibitors of the next generation with greater efficacy
(carfilzomib, marizomib (salinosporamide A, NPI-0052), threonine boronic
acid-derived proteasome inhibitor CEP-18770, the peptide-semicarbazone S-2209,
the tripeptide mimetic BSc2118, and MLN9708/2238) have been recently tested in
preclinical models of MM. Carfilzomib has been recently approved for the
treatment of patients with MM who have received at least two prior therapies,
including bortezomib and immunomodulatory derivatives (IMiDs, thalidomide,
lenalidomide or pomalidomide). More specific I<U+03BA>B kinase inhibitors were also used
in preclinical studies. The analysis of MM genomes revealed also mutations in
genes for histone methyltransferases (HMTases), histone demethylase (UTX) and
serine/threonine protein kinase BRAF. Aberrant histone 3 lysine 27 trimethylation
(H3K27me3) by mutant HMTases or UTX induces overexpression of the homeobox A9
(HOXA9) gene. HOXA9 is normally expressed in primitive bone marrow cells and is
silenced when cells differentiate. HOXA9 is a MM oncogene and targeting of its
expression by histone deacetylases inhibitors or by a phosphoinositide 3-kinase
(PI3K) inhibitors through an epigenetic mechanism involving H3K27me3. Mutant BRAF
kinase small-molecule, ATP-competitive, a highly selective, potent and orally
bioavailable inhibitors (GDC-0879, PLX 4032 and PLX 4720) are already under
investigation and PLX 4032 is in phase II and phase III clinical trials. Two key 
signaling pathways involved in the regulation of MM cell growth are the
Ras/Raf/MEK/ERK and PI3K/Akt/mTOR pathways and their inhibition are
anti-proliferative and pro-apoptotic and can overcome the development of
resistance to common drugs.

PMID: 23534949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Leukemia. 2013 Jun;27(6):1301-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.80. Epub 2013 Mar 14.

Multiple mechanisms deregulate EZH2 and histone H3 lysine 27 epigenetic changes
in myeloid malignancies.

Khan SN(1), Jankowska AM, Mahfouz R, Dunbar AJ, Sugimoto Y, Hosono N, Hu Z,
Cheriyath V, Vatolin S, Przychodzen B, Reu FJ, Saunthararajah Y, O'Keefe C,
Sekeres MA, List AF, Moliterno AR, McDevitt MA, Maciejewski JP, Makishima H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Translational Hematology and Oncology Research, Taussig Cancer
Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

Comment in
    Epigenomics. 2013;5(5):481.

Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) is involved in trimethylation of histone H3 
lysine 27 (H3K27), chromatin condensation and transcriptional repression. The
silencing function of PRC2 complex is mostly attributed to its intrinsic activity
for methylating H3K27. Unlike in B-cell lymphomas, enhancer of zeste homolog 2
(EZH2) mutations in myeloid malignancies are inactivating/hypomorphic. When we
assessed the mutational status in myeloid malignancies (N=469 cases examined), we
found EZH2 and EED/SUZ12 mutations in 8% and 3.3% of cases, respectively. In
addition to mutant cases, reduced EZH2 expression was also found in 78% cases
with hemizygous deletion (-7/del7q cases involving EZH2 locus) and 41% of cases
with diploid chromosome 7, most interestingly cases with spliceosomal mutations
(U2AF1/SRSF2 mutations; 63% of cases). EZH2 mutations were characterized by
decreased H3K27 trimethylation and increased chromatin relaxation at specific
gene loci accompanied by higher transcriptional activity. One of the major
downstream target is HOX gene family, involved in the regulation of stem cell
self-renewal. HOXA9 was found to be overexpressed in cases with decreased EZH2
expression either by EZH2/spliceosomal mutations or because of -7/del7q. In
summary, our results suggest that loss of gene repression through a variety of
mutations resulting in reduced H3K27 trimethylation may contribute to
leukemogenesis.

PMID: 23486531  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Aug 1;22(15):2211-20. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0611. Epub 2013 
Apr 9.

Nkx2-5 mediates differential cardiac differentiation through interaction with
Hoxa10.

Behrens AN(1), Iacovino M, Lohr JL, Ren Y, Zierold C, Harvey RP, Kyba M, Garry
DJ, Martin CM.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
55455, USA.

The regulation of cardiac differentiation is complex and incompletely understood.
Recent studies have documented that Nkx2-5-positive cells are not limited to the 
cardiac lineage, but can give rise to endothelial and smooth muscle lineages.
Other work has elucidated that, in addition to promoting cardiac development,
Nkx2-5 plays a larger role in mesodermal patterning although the transcriptional 
networks that govern this developmental patterning are undefined. By profiling
early Nkx2-5-positive progenitor cells, we discovered that the progenitor pools
of the bisected cardiac crescent are differentiating asynchronously. This
asymmetry requires Nkx2-5 as it is lost in the Nkx2-5 mutant. Surprisingly, the
posterior Hox genes Hoxa9 and Hoxa10 were expressed on the right side of the
cardiac crescent, independently of Nkx2-5. We describe a novel, transient, and
asymmetric cardiac-specific expression pattern of the posterior Hox genes, Hoxa9 
and Hoxa10, and utilize the embryonic stem cell/embryoid body (ES/EB) model
system to illustrate that Hoxa10 impairs cardiac differentiation. We suggest a
model whereby Hoxa10 cooperates with Nkx2-5 to regulate the timing of cardiac
mesoderm differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3715789
PMID: 23477547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Med Hypotheses. 2013 May;80(5):629-32. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2013.02.007. Epub 2013
Mar 5.

Potential roles for Gfi1 in the pathogenesis and proliferation of glioma.

Huang H(1), Xiang Y, Su B, Xiong W, Zhang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Xijing Institute of Clinical Neuroscience, Fourth 
Military Medical University, 17 Changle Western Road, Xi'an, PR China.

Glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is a major form of adult brain tumour with
relatively poor prognosis and high mortality. Temozolomide (TMZ)-based
chemotherapy following neurosurgery and radiotherapy has been suggested as the
first line of treatment and is proven to effectively prolong overall survival and
enhance patient quality of life. However, not all patients benefit from this
treatment because of drug resistance. Even patients with TMZ-sensitive GBM may
become resistant, which is partly due to the restoration of activity of the DNA
repair enzyme O(6)-methylguanine-DNA-methyltransferase (MGMT); thus, patients
cannot evade eventual tumour recurrence. The cellular activity of MGMT is the
most important determinant of TMZ-resistance. However, some patients with a low
level of activated MGMT are also TMZ-resistant. The aberrant expression of HOXA9,
one of the 39 class I homeobox genes, is a marker of poor prognosis, and its
level gradually increases with histologic malignant progression, shorter time to 
overall survival (OS) and free progression survival (FPS) in glioma patients,
which further supports an oncogenic role for HOXA9 in gliomas. The HOXA9-PI3K
signalling pathway is an important mechanism in GBM that is independent of MGMT
promoter methylation status. The DNA binding sites of growth factor independent-1
(Gfi1) can overlap with the HOXA9 promoter through the "AATC" versus "GATT" core 
sequence. The competition for this binding site inhibits the expression of HOXA9 
and induces different transcriptional outcomes, which suggests a new direction
for investigation of the mechanism underlying targeted therapy of malignant
gliomas.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23466061  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. EMBO J. 2013 Apr 3;32(7):982-95. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2013.37. Epub 2013 Mar 1.

Interplay between Homeobox proteins and Polycomb repressive complexes in p16INK4a
regulation.

Martin N(1), Popov N, Aguilo F, O'Loghlen A, Raguz S, Snijders AP, Dharmalingam
G, Li S, Thymiakou E, Carroll T, Zeisig BB, So CW, Peters G, Episkopou V, Walsh
MJ, Gil J.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Proliferation Group, MRC Clinical Sciences Centre, Imperial College
London, London, UK.

The INK4/ARF locus regulates senescence and is frequently altered in cancer. In
normal cells, the INK4/ARF locus is found silenced by Polycomb repressive
complexes (PRCs). Which are the mechanisms responsible for the recruitment of
PRCs to INK4/ARF and their other target genes remains unclear. In a genetic
screen for transcription factors regulating senescence, we identified the
homeodomain-containing protein HLX1 (H2.0-like homeobox 1). Expression of HLX1
extends cellular lifespan and blunts oncogene-induced senescence. Using
quantitative proteomics, we identified p16(INK4a) as the key target mediating the
effects of HLX1 in senescence. HLX1 represses p16(INK4a) transcription by
recruiting PRCs and HDAC1. This mechanism has broader implications, as HLX1 also 
regulates a subset of PRC targets besides p16(INK4a). Finally, sampling members
of the Homeobox family, we identified multiple genes with ability to repress
p16(INK4a). Among them, we found HOXA9 (Homeobox A9), a putative oncogene in
leukaemia, which also recruits PRCs and HDAC1 to regulate p16(INK4a). Our results
reveal an unexpected and conserved interplay between homeodomain-containing
proteins and PRCs with implications in senescence, development and cancer.

PMCID: PMC3616285
PMID: 23455154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Mol Cell. 2013 Mar 28;49(6):1108-20. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2013.01.033. Epub 2013
Feb 28.

ASH2L regulates ubiquitylation signaling to MLL: trans-regulation of H3 K4
methylation in higher eukaryotes.

Wu L(1), Lee SY, Zhou B, Nguyen UT, Muir TW, Tan S, Dou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Crosstalk between H2B ubiquitylation (H2Bub) and H3 K4 methylation plays
important roles in coordinating functions of diverse cofactors during
transcription activation. The underlying mechanism for this trans-tail signaling 
pathway is poorly defined in higher eukaryotes. Here, we show the following: (1) 
ASH2L in the MLL complex is essential for H2Bub-dependent H3 K4 methylation.
Deleting or mutating K99 of the N-terminal winged helix (WH) motif in ASH2L
abrogates H2Bub-dependent regulation. (2) Crosstalk can occur in trans and does
not require ubiquitin to be on nucleosomes or histones to exert regulatory
effects. (3) trans-regulation by ubiquitin promotes MLL activity for all three
methylation states. (4) MLL3, an MLL homolog, does not respond to H2Bub,
highlighting regulatory specificity for MLL family histone methyltransferases.
Altogether, our results potentially expand the classic histone crosstalk to
nonhistone proteins, which broadens the scope of chromatin regulation by
ubiquitylation signaling.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3615107
PMID: 23453805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Jun;33(6):1248-56. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.112.300539. Epub 2013 Feb 28.

Embryological-origin-dependent differences in homeobox expression in adult aorta:
role in regional phenotypic variability and regulation of NF-<U+03BA>B activity.

Trigueros-Motos L(1), González-Granado JM, Cheung C, Fernández P, Sánchez-Cabo F,
Dopazo A, Sinha S, Andrés V.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Epidemiología, Aterotrombosis e Imagen, Centro Nacional de
Investigaciones Cardiovasculares (CNIC), Madrid, Spain.

Comment in
    Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2013 Jun;33(6):1113-5.

OBJECTIVE: Different vascular beds show differing susceptibility to the
development of atherosclerosis, but the molecular mechanisms underlying these
differences are incompletely understood. This study aims to identify factors that
contribute to the phenotypic heterogeneity of distinct regions of the adult
vasculature.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: High-throughput mRNA profiling in adult mice reveals higher
expression of the homeobox paralogous genes 6 to 10 (Hox6-10) in the
athero-resistant thoracic aorta (TA) than in the athero-susceptible aortic arch
(AA). Higher homeobox gene expression also occurs in rat and porcine TA, and is
maintained in primary smooth muscle cells isolated from TA (TA-SMCs) compared
with cells from AA (AA-SMCs). This region-specific homeobox gene expression
pattern is also observed in human embryonic stem cells differentiated into
neuroectoderm-SMCs and paraxial mesoderm-SMCs, which give rise to AA-SMCs and
TA-SMCs, respectively. We also find that, compared with AA and AA-SMCs, TA and
TA-SMCs have lower activity of the proinflammatory and proatherogenic nuclear
factor-<U+03BA>B (NF-<U+03BA>B) and lower expression of NF-<U+03BA>B target genes, at least in part
attributable to HOXA9-dependent inhibition. Conversely, NF-<U+03BA>B inhibits HOXA9
promoter activity and mRNA expression in SMCs.
CONCLUSION: Our findings support a model of Hox6-10-specified positional identity
in the adult vasculature that is established by embryonic cues independently of
environmental factors and is conserved in different mammalian species.
Differential homeobox gene expression contributes to maintaining phenotypic
differences between SMCs from athero-resistant and athero-susceptible regions, at
least in part through feedback regulatory mechanisms involving inflammatory
mediators, for example, reciprocal inhibition between HOXA9 and NF-<U+03BA>B.

PMID: 23448971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Int J Cancer. 2013 Sep 1;133(5):1135-42. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28121. Epub 2013 Mar
16.

HOXA9, ISL1 and ALDH1A3 methylation patterns as prognostic markers for nonmuscle 
invasive bladder cancer: array-based DNA methylation and expression profiling.

Kim YJ(1), Yoon HY, Kim JS, Kang HW, Min BD, Kim SK, Ha YS, Kim IY, Ryu KH, Lee
SC, Kim WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, College of Medicine, Chungbuk National University,
Cheongju, South Korea.

DNA methylation patterns are associated with the development and prognosis of
cancer. The aim of this study was to identify novel methylation markers for the
prediction of patient outcomes using microarray analysis of DNA methylation and
RNA expression patterns in samples from long-term follow-up patients with
nonmuscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC). A total of 187 human bladder specimens
were used for microarray array or pyrosequencing (PSQ) analyses: 6 normal
controls (NC) and 181 NMIBC. Tumor-specific hypermethylated genes were selected
from a data set comprising 24 matched microarray-based DNA methylation and gene
expression profiles (6 controls and 18 NMIBC), and their clinical relevance was
verified by quantitative PSQ analysis. The methylation status of Homeobox A9
(HOXA9), ISL LIM homeobox 1 (ISL1) and Aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 family, member A3
(ALDH1A3) was significantly associated with decreased gene expression levels and 
aggressive clinicopathological characteristics. Multivariate regression analyses 
showed that hypermethylation of these genes was an independent predictor of
disease recurrence (HOXA9, ISL1 and ALDH1A3, either alone or in combination) and 
progression (ISL1 and ALDH1A3, either alone or in combination) (each p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.05).
The results of this study suggest that these novel methylation markers are
independent prognostic indicators in NMIBC patients, which may facilitate the
assessment of disease recurrence and progression in NMIBC patients and inform
clinical decision making regarding treatment.

Copyright © 2013 UICC.

PMID: 23436614  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Exp Hematol. 2013 Jun;41(6):518-529.e5. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2013.02.006. Epub
2013 Feb 19.

Isolated Hoxa9 overexpression predisposes to the development of lymphoid but not 
myeloid leukemia.

Beachy SH(1), Onozawa M, Silverman D, Chung YJ, Rivera MM, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 20892, USA.

Hoxa9 is expressed in hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells, although this
expression is usually diminished as these cells undergo differentiation. In
addition, aberrant expression of Hoxa9 is strongly associated with both T cell
and myeloid leukemia in mice and humans. Despite this strong association,
enforced expression of Hoxa9 in murine bone marrow or thymus has only shown a
modest ability to transform cells. To investigate this question, we used Vav
regulatory elements to generate a transgenic mouse that targets Hoxa9
overexpression to all hematopoietic tissues. High-level expression of the Hoxa9
transgene in the hematopoietic compartment was associated with embryonic
lethality, as no pups from founders that expressed high levels of the transgene
were born live. However, offspring of an additional founder line, which expressed
lower levels of Hoxa9, developed a precursor T cell lymphoblastic
leukemia/lymphoma, accompanied by spontaneous Notch1 mutations. In contrast to
most murine models of leukemia associated with Hoxa9 overexpression, the
Vav-Hoxa9 mice did not overexpress other Hoxa cluster genes, mir196b (a microRNA 
that is embedded in the Hoxa locus), Meis1, or Pbx3. The Hoxa9 transgenic mouse
reported in this study provides a suitable system for the study of Hoxa9
collaborators that drive myeloid and lymphoid malignant transformation.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3718276
PMID: 23435313  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. BMC Genomics. 2013 Feb 21;14:117. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-14-117.

Phylogenetic patterns of emergence of new genes support a model of frequent de
novo evolution.

Neme R(1), Tautz D.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute for Evolutionary Biology, August-Thienemannstrasse 2,
Plön, 24306, Germany.

BACKGROUND: New gene emergence is so far assumed to be mostly driven by
duplication and divergence of existing genes. The possibility that entirely new
genes could emerge out of the non-coding genomic background was long thought to
be almost negligible. With the increasing availability of fully sequenced genomes
across broad scales of phylogeny, it has become possible to systematically study 
the origin of new genes over time and thus revisit this question.
RESULTS: We have used phylostratigraphy to assess trends of gene evolution across
successive phylogenetic phases, using mostly the well-annotated mouse genome as a
reference. We find several significant general trends and confirm them for three 
other vertebrate genomes (humans, zebrafish and stickleback). Younger genes are
shorter, both with respect to gene length, as well as to open reading frame
length. They contain also fewer exons and have fewer recognizable domains.
Average exon length, on the other hand, does not change much over time. Only the 
most recently evolved genes have longer exons and they are often associated with 
active promotor regions, i.e. are part of bidirectional promotors. We have also
revisited the possibility that de novo evolution of genes could occur even within
existing genes, by making use of an alternative reading frame (overprinting). We 
find several cases among the annotated Ensembl ORFs, where the new reading frame 
has emerged at a higher phylostratigraphic level than the original one. We
discuss some of these overprinted genes, which include also the Hoxa9 gene where 
an alternative reading frame covering the homeobox has emerged within the lineage
leading to rodents and primates (Euarchontoglires).
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that the overall trends of gene emergence are more
compatible with a de novo evolution model for orphan genes than a general
duplication-divergence model. Hence de novo evolution of genes appears to have
occurred continuously throughout evolutionary time and should therefore be
considered as a general mechanism for the emergence of new gene functions.

PMCID: PMC3616865
PMID: 23433480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Apr;24(8):1222-31. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-08-0585. Epub 2013
Feb 20.

In vivo analysis of human nucleoporin repeat domain interactions.

Xu S(1), Powers MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.

The nuclear pore complex (NPC), assembled from ~30 proteins termed nucleoporins
(Nups), mediates selective nucleocytoplasmic trafficking. A subset of
nucleoporins bear a domain with multiple phenylalanine-glycine (FG) motifs. As
binding sites for transport receptors, FG Nups are critical in translocation
through the NPC. Certain FG Nups are believed to associate via low-affinity,
cohesive interactions to form the permeability barrier of the pore, although the 
form and composition of this functional barrier are debated. We used green
fluorescent protein-Nup98/HoxA9 constructs with various numbers of repeats and
also substituted FG domains from other nucleoporins for the Nup98 domain to
directly compare cohesive interactions in live cells by fluorescence recovery
after photobleaching (FRAP). We find that cohesion is a function of both number
and type of FG repeats. Glycine-leucine-FG (GLFG) repeat domains are the most
cohesive. FG domains from several human nucleoporins showed no interactions in
this assay; however, Nup214, with numerous VFG motifs, displayed measurable
cohesion by FRAP. The cohesive nature of a human nucleoporin did not necessarily 
correlate with that of its yeast orthologue. The Nup98 GLFG domain also functions
in pore targeting through binding to Nup93, positioning the GLFG domain in the
center of the NPC and supporting a role for this nucleoporin in the permeability 
barrier.

PMCID: PMC3623642
PMID: 23427268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Mar 5;110(10):3901-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1301045110. Epub 2013 Feb 14.

Histone H2B ubiquitin ligase RNF20 is required for MLL-rearranged leukemia.

Wang E(1), Kawaoka S, Yu M, Shi J, Ni T, Yang W, Zhu J, Roeder RG, Vakoc CR.

Author information: 
(1)Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory, Cold Spring Harbor, NY 11724, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2013 May 15;12(10):1475-6.

Mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) fusions are potent oncogenes that initiate
aggressive forms of acute leukemia. As aberrant transcriptional regulators,
MLL-fusion proteins alter gene expression in hematopoietic cells through
interactions with the histone H3 lysine 79 (H3K79) methyltransferase DOT1L.
Notably, interference with MLL-fusion cofactors like DOT1L is an emerging
therapeutic strategy in this disease. Here, we identify the histone H2B E3
ubiquitin ligase ring finger protein 20 (RNF20) as an additional chromatin
regulator that is necessary for MLL-fusion-mediated leukemogenesis. Suppressing
the expression of Rnf20 in diverse models of MLL-rearranged leukemia leads to
inhibition of cell proliferation, under tissue culture conditions as well as in
vivo. Rnf20 knockdown leads to reduced expression of MLL-fusion target genes,
effects resembling Dot1l inhibition. Using ChIP-seq, we found that H2B
ubiquitination is enriched in the body of MLL-fusion target genes, correlating
with sites of H3K79 methylation and transcription elongation. Furthermore, Rnf20 
is required to maintain local levels of H3K79 methylation by Dot1l at Hoxa9 and
Meis1. These findings support a model whereby cotranscriptional recruitment of
Rnf20 at MLL-fusion target genes leads to amplification of Dot1l-mediated H3K79
methylation, thereby rendering leukemia cells dependent on Rnf20 to maintain
their oncogenic transcriptional program.

PMCID: PMC3593849
PMID: 23412334  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Apr;7(4):1251-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1314. Epub 2013 Feb 7.

shRNAs targeting high-mobility group box-1 inhibit E-selectin expression via
homeobox A9 in human umbilical vein endothelial cells.

Zhang XJ(1), Luan ZG, Ma XC.

Author information: 
(1)Intensive Care Unit, First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University,
Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, P.R. China.

The nucleus of the endothelial cell contains large amounts of high-mobility group
box protein 1 (HMGB1), a cytokine mediator of inflammation, and the endothelium
may be a crucial source of HMGB1 during the inflammatory response. Therefore, the
downregulation of HMGB1 expression by RNA interference (RNAi) may decrease
inflammatory activity. The aim of this study was to investigate the possible
mechanism of action and the effect of HMGB1 on homeobox A9 (HOXA9) and E-selectin
expression. Recombinant human full-length HMGB1 was cloned by PCR amplification
from human umbilical vein endothelial cells (HUVECs) and then subcloned into a
pcDNA-3.1-myc-his-B vector. Specific short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) for the HMGB1
target sequence and a scrambled sequence were designed, synthesized and cloned
into a pRNA-U6.1/Neo vector. Specific small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) for the
HOXA9 target sequence were commercially prepared and the expression levels of
HMGB1, HOXA9, intracellular adhesion molecule 1 (ICAM1), vascular cell adhesion
molecule 1 (VCAM1) and E-selectin were detected using real-time PCR and western
blot analysis. The expression of the full-length HMGB1 gene and protein was
verified in HUVECs. The shRNA for HMGB1 and siRNA for HOXA9 successfully
decreased the expression levels of HMGB1 and HOXA9, respectively. ICAM1, VCAM1
and E-selectin were downregulated through HMGB1 interference in HUVECs, and HMGB1
shRNA decreased E-selectin expression by HOXA9. These results demonstrated the
potential use of specific siRNA targeting HMGB1 expression for the development of
novel therapeutic agents for inflammatory disorders.

PMID: 23403989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. BMC Immunol. 2013 Jan 30;14:5. doi: 10.1186/1471-2172-14-5.

Differential requirement for Hoxa9 in the development and differentiation of B,
NK, and DC-lineage cells from Flt3+ multipotential progenitors.

Gwin K(1), Dolence JJ, Shapiro MB, Medina KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, 200 First Street
SW, Rochester, MN 55905, USA.

Hoxa9 is a homeodomain transcription factor important for the generation of
Flt3+hiIL-7R- lymphoid biased-multipotential progenitors, Flt3+IL-7R+ common
lymphoid progenitors (CLPs), and B cell precursors (BCP) in bone marrow (BM). In 
addition to B-cell, Flt3+IL-7R+ CLPs possess NK and DC developmental potentials, 
although DCs arise from Flt3+IL-7R- myeloid progenitors as well. In this study,
we investigated the requirement for Hoxa9, from Flt3+ or Flt3- progenitor
subsets, in the development of NK and DC lineage cells in BM. Flt3+IL-7R+Ly6D-
CLPs and their Flt3+IL-7R+Ly6D+ B lineage-restricted progeny (BLP) were
significantly reduced in hoxa9-/- mice. Interestingly, the reduction in
Flt3+IL-7R+ CLPs in hoxa9-/- mice had no impact on the generation of NK precursor
(NKP) subsets, the differentiation of NKP into mature NK cells, or NK
homeostasis. Similarly, percentages and numbers of common dendritic progenitors
(CDP), as well as their plasmacytoid or conventional dendritic cell progeny in
hoxa9-/- mice were comparable to wildtype. These findings reveal distinct
requirements for Hoxa9 or Hoxa9/Flt3 molecular circuits in regulation of B versus
NK and DC development in BM.

PMCID: PMC3565875
PMID: 23363389  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e54114. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0054114. Epub 2013 Jan 22.

DNA methylation in the malignant transformation of meningiomas.

Gao F(1), Shi L, Russin J, Zeng L, Chang X, He S, Chen TC, Giannotta SL,
Weisenberger DJ, Zada G, Mack WJ, Wang K.

Author information: 
(1)Zilkha Neurogenetic Institute, Keck School of Medicine, University of Southern
California, Los Angeles, USA.

Meningiomas are central nervous system tumors that originate from the meningeal
coverings of the brain and spinal cord. Most meningiomas are pathologically
benign or atypical, but 3-5% display malignant features. Despite previous studies
on benign and atypical meningiomas, the key molecular pathways involved in
malignant transformation remain to be determined, as does the extent of
epigenetic alteration in malignant meningiomas. In this study, we explored the
landscape of DNA methylation in ten benign, five atypical and four malignant
meningiomas. Compared to the benign tumors, the atypical and malignant
meningiomas demonstrate increased global DNA hypomethylation. Clustering analysis
readily separates malignant from atypical and benign tumors, implicating that DNA
methylation patterns may serve as diagnostic biomarkers for malignancy. Genes
with hypermethylated CpG islands in malignant meningiomas (such as HOXA6 and
HOXA9) tend to coincide with the binding sites of polycomb repressive complexes
(PRC) in early developmental stages. Most genes with hypermethylated CpG islands 
at promoters are suppressed in malignant and benign meningiomas, suggesting the
switching of gene silencing machinery from PRC binding to DNA methylation in
malignant meningiomas. One exception is the MAL2 gene that is highly expressed in
benign group and silenced in malignant group, representing de novo gene silencing
induced by DNA methylation. In summary, our results suggest that malignant
meningiomas have distinct DNA methylation patterns compared to their benign and
atypical counterparts, and that the differentially methylated genes may serve as 
diagnostic biomarkers or candidate causal genes for malignant transformation.

PMCID: PMC3551961
PMID: 23349797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Leukemia. 2013 Jul;27(7):1487-96. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.23. Epub 2013 Jan 23.

C/EBPa and MYB regulate FLT3 expression in AML.

Volpe G(1), Walton DS, Del Pozzo W, Garcia P, Dassé E, O'Neill LP, Griffiths M,
Frampton J, Dumon S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Biomedical Research, College of Medical and Dental Sciences,
University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.

The interaction between the receptor FLT3 (FMS-like tyrosine kinase-3) and its
ligand FL leads to crucial signalling during the early stages of the commitment
of haematopoietic stem cells. Mutation or over-expression of the FLT3 gene,
leading to constitutive signalling, enhances the survival and expansion of a
variety of leukaemias and is associated with an unfavourable clinical outcome for
acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) patients. In this study, we used a murine cellular 
model for AML and primary leukaemic cells from AML patients to investigate the
molecular mechanisms underlying the regulation of FLT3 gene expression and
identify its key cis- and trans-regulators. By assessing DNA accessibility and
epigenetic markings, we defined regulatory domains in the FLT3 promoter and first
intron. These elements permit in vivo binding of several AML-related
transcription factors, including the proto-oncogene MYB and the CCAAT/enhancer
binding protein C/EBPa, which are recruited to the FLT3 promoter and intronic
module, respectively. Substantiating their relevance to the human disease, our
analysis of gene expression profiling arrays from AML patients uncovered
significant correlations between FLT3 expression level and that of MYB and CEBPA.
The latter relationship permits discrimination between patients with CEBPA mono- 
and bi-allelic mutations, and thus connects two major prognostic factors for AML.

PMCID: PMC4214120
PMID: 23340802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53161. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053161. Epub 2013 Jan 11.

Hoxa9 transduction induces hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell activity
through direct down-regulation of geminin protein.

Ohno Y(1), Yasunaga S, Janmohamed S, Ohtsubo M, Saeki K, Kurogi T, Mihara K,
Iscove NN, Takihara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and 
Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Hoxb4, a 3'-located Hox gene, enhances hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) activity,
while a subset of 5'-located Hox genes is involved in hematopoiesis and
leukemogenesis, and some of them are common translocation partners for
Nucleoporin 98 (Nup98) in patients with leukemia. Although these Hox gene
derivatives are believed to act as transcription regulators, the molecular
involvement of the Hox gene derivatives in hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis
remains largely elusive. Since we previously showed that Hoxb4 forms a complex
with a Roc1-Ddb1-Cul4a ubiquitin ligase core component and functions as an E3
ubiquitin ligase activator for Geminin, we here examined the E3 ubiquitin ligase 
activities of the 5'-located Hox genes, Hoxa9 and Hoxc13, and Nup98-Hoxa9. Hoxa9 
formed a similar complex with the Roc1-Ddb1-Cul4a component to induce
ubiquitination of Geminin, but the others did not. Retroviral
transduction-mediated overexpression or siRNA-mediated knock-down of Hoxa9
respectively down-regulated or up-regulated Geminin in hematopoietic cells. And
Hoxa9 transduction-induced repopulating and clonogenic activities were suppressed
by Geminin supertransduction. These findings suggest that Hoxa9 and Hoxb4 differ 
from Hoxc13 and Nup98-Hoxa9 in their molecular role in hematopoiesis, and that
Hoxa9 induces the activity of HSCs and hematopoietic progenitors at least in part
through direct down-regulation of Geminin.

PMCID: PMC3543444
PMID: 23326393  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Leukemia. 2013 Jun;27(6):1245-53. doi: 10.1038/leu.2013.10. Epub 2013 Jan 15.

Impairing MLL-fusion gene-mediated transformation by dissecting critical
interactions with the lens epithelium-derived growth factor (LEDGF/p75).

Méreau H(1), De Rijck J, Cermáková K, Kutz A, Juge S, Demeulemeester J, Gijsbers 
R, Christ F, Debyser Z, Schwaller J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University Hospital and Children's Hospital
Base(UKBB) ZLF, Lab 318, Basel, Switzerland.

The lens epithelium-derived growth factor (LEDGF/p75) tethers the mixed-lineage
leukemia (MLL1) protein complex to chromatin. Likewise, LEDGF/p75 tethers the
HIV-1 pre-integration complex to chromatin. We previously demonstrated that
expression of the C-terminal fragment fused to enhanced green fluorescent protein
(eGFP) (eGFP-LEDGF(325-530)) impaired HIV-1 replication. Here, we explored this
strategy to selectively interfere with the leukemogenic activity of MLL-fusion
proteins. We found that expression of LEDGF(325-530) impaired the clonogenic
growth of MLL-fusion gene transformed human and mouse hematopoietic cells,
without affecting the growth of control cells immortalized by the FLT3-ITD mutant
or normal lineage-marker-depleted murine bone marrow cells. Expression of
LEDGF(325-530) was associated with downregulation of the MLL target Hoxa9 and
impaired cell cycle progression. Structure-function analysis revealed two small
eGFP-fused LEDGF/p75 peptides, LEDGF(424-435) and LEDGF(375-386) phenocopying
these effects. Both LEDGF(325-530) and the smaller active peptides were able to
disrupt the LEDGF/p75-MLL interaction. Expression of LEDGF(325-530) or
LEDGF(375-386) fragments increased the latency period to disease development in
vivo in a mouse bone marrow transplant model of MLL-AF9-induced AML. We conclude 
that small peptides disrupting the LEDGF/p75-MLL interface have selective
anti-leukemic activity providing a direct rationale for the design of small
molecule inhibitors targeting this interaction.

PMID: 23318960  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Blood. 2013 Feb 21;121(8):1422-31. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-07-442004. Epub 2012
Dec 20.

PBX3 is an important cofactor of HOXA9 in leukemogenesis.

Li Z(1), Zhang Z, Li Y, Arnovitz S, Chen P, Huang H, Jiang X, Hong GM, Kunjamma
RB, Ren H, He C, Wang CZ, Elkahloun AG, Valk PJ, Döhner K, Neilly MB, Bullinger
L, Delwel R, Löwenberg B, Liu PP, Morgan R, Rowley JD, Yuan CS, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA. zjli@uchicago.edu

Although PBX proteins are known to increase DNA-binding/transcriptional activity 
of HOX proteins through their direct binding, the functional importance of their 
interaction in leukemogenesis is unclear.We recently reported that overexpression
of a 4-homeobox-gene signature (ie, PBX3/HOXA7/HOXA9/HOXA11) is an independent
predictor of poor survival in patients with cytogenetically abnormal acute
myeloid leukemia (CA-AML). Here we show that it is PBX3, but not PBX1 or PBX2,
that is consistently coexpressed with HOXA9 in various subtypes of CA-AML,
particularly MLL-rearranged AML, and thus appears as a potential pathologic
cofactor of HOXA9 in CA-AML. We then show that depletion of endogenous Pbx3
expression by shRNA significantly inhibits MLL-fusion-mediated cell
transformation, and coexpressed PBX3 exhibits a significantly synergistic effect 
with HOXA9 in promoting cell transformation in vitro and leukemogenesis in vivo. 
Furthermore, as a proof of concept, we show that a small peptide, namely HXR9,
which was developed to specifically disrupt the interactions between HOX and PBX 
proteins, can selectively kill leukemic cells with overexpression of HOXA/PBX3
genes. Collectively, our data suggest that PBX3 is a critical cofactor of HOXA9
in leukemogenesis, and targeting their interaction is a feasible strategy to
treat presently therapy resistant CA-AML (eg, MLL-rearranged leukemia) in which
HOXA/PBX3 genes are overexpressed.

PMCID: PMC3578957
PMID: 23264595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Gene. 2013 Dec 10;532(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2012.12.009. Epub 2012 Dec 14.

Regulation of the MIR155 host gene in physiological and pathological processes.

Elton TS(1), Selemon H, Elton SM, Parinandi NL.

Author information: 
(1)Davis Heart and Lung Research Institute, The Ohio State University, Columbus, 
OH, USA; College of Pharmacy, Division of Pharmacology, The Ohio State
University, Columbus, OH, USA; Department of Medicine, Division of Cardiology,
The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH, USA. Electronic address:
terry.elton@osumc.edu.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), a family of small nonprotein-coding RNAs, play a critical
role in posttranscriptional gene regulation by acting as adaptors for the
miRNA-induced silencing complex to inhibit gene expression by targeting mRNAs for
translational repression and/or cleavage. miR-155-5p and miR-155-3p are processed
from the B-cell Integration Cluster (BIC) gene (now designated, MIR155 host gene 
or MIR155HG). MiR-155-5p is highly expressed in both activated B- and T-cells and
in monocytes/macrophages. MiR-155-5p is one of the best characterized miRNAs and 
recent data indicate that miR-155-5p plays a critical role in various
physiological and pathological processes such as hematopoietic lineage
differentiation, immunity, inflammation, viral infections, cancer, cardiovascular
disease, and Down syndrome. In this review we summarize the mechanisms by which
MIR155HG expression can be regulated. Given that the pathologies mediated by
miR-155-5p result from the over-expression of this miRNA it may be possible to
therapeutically attenuate miR-155-5p levels in the treatment of several
pathological processes.

© 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23246696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. J Am Chem Soc. 2013 Jan 16;135(2):669-82. doi: 10.1021/ja306028q. Epub 2012 Dec
27.

High-affinity, small-molecule peptidomimetic inhibitors of MLL1/WDR5
protein-protein interaction.

Karatas H(1), Townsend EC, Cao F, Chen Y, Bernard D, Liu L, Lei M, Dou Y, Wang S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan
48109, USA.

Mixed lineage leukemia 1 (MLL1) is a histone H3 lysine 4 (H3K4)
methyltransferase, and targeting the MLL1 enzymatic activity has been proposed as
a novel therapeutic strategy for the treatment of acute leukemia harboring MLL1
fusion proteins. The MLL1/WDR5 protein-protein interaction is essential for MLL1 
enzymatic activity. In the present study, we designed a large number of
peptidomimetics to target the MLL1/WDR5 interaction based upon -CO-ARA-NH-, the
minimum binding motif derived from MLL1. Our study led to the design of
high-affinity peptidomimetics, which bind to WDR5 with K(i) < 1 nM and function
as potent antagonists of MLL1 activity in a fully reconstituted in vitro H3K4
methyltransferase assay. Determination of co-crystal structures of two potent
peptidomimetics in complex with WDR5 establishes their structural basis for
high-affinity binding to WDR5. Evaluation of one such peptidomimetic, MM-102, in 
bone marrow cells transduced with MLL1-AF9 fusion construct shows that the
compound effectively decreases the expression of HoxA9 and Meis-1, two critical
MLL1 target genes in MLL1 fusion protein mediated leukemogenesis. MM-102 also
specifically inhibits cell growth and induces apoptosis in leukemia cells
harboring MLL1 fusion proteins. Our study provides the first proof-of-concept for
the design of small-molecule inhibitors of the WDR5/MLL1 protein-protein
interaction as a novel therapeutic approach for acute leukemia harboring MLL1
fusion proteins.

PMID: 23210835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. Mol Cell Biol. 2013 Feb;33(4):644-60. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00974-12. Epub 2012 Dec 3.

Scmh1 has E3 ubiquitin ligase activity for geminin and histone H2A and regulates 
geminin stability directly or indirectly via transcriptional repression of Hoxa9 
and Hoxb4.

Yasunaga S(1), Ohtsubo M, Ohno Y, Saeki K, Kurogi T, Tanaka-Okamoto M, Ishizaki
H, Shirai M, Mihara K, Brock HW, Miyoshi J, Takihara Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Biology, Research Institute for Radiation Biology and 
Medicine, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Polycomb-group (PcG) complex 1 acts as an E3 ubiquitin ligase both for histone
H2A to silence transcription and for geminin to regulate its stability. Scmh1 is 
a substoichiometric component of PcG complex 1 that provides the complex with an 
interaction domain for geminin. Scmh1 is unstable and regulated through the
ubiquitin-proteasome system, but its molecular roles are unknown, so we generated
Scmh1-deficient mice to elucidate its function. Loss of Scmh1 caused derepression
of Hoxb4 and Hoxa9, direct targets of PcG complex 1-mediated transcriptional
silencing in hematopoietic cells. Double knockdown of Hoxb4 and Hoxa9 or
transduction of a dominant-negative Hoxb4N<U+2192>A mutant caused geminin accumulation. 
Age-related transcriptional downregulation of derepressed Hoxa9 also leads to
geminin accumulation. Transduction of Scmh1 lacking a geminin-binding domain
restored derepressed expression of Hoxb4 and Hoxa9 but did not downregulate
geminin like full-length Scmh1. Each of Hoxb4 and Hoxa9 can form a complex with
Roc1-Ddb1-Cul4a to act as an E3 ubiquitin ligase for geminin. We suggest that
geminin dysregulation may be restored by derepressed Hoxb4 and Hoxa9 in
Scmh1-deficient mice. These findings suggest that PcG and a subset of Hox genes
compose a homeostatic regulatory system for determining expression level of
geminin.

PMCID: PMC3571339
PMID: 23207902  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jan;98(1):362-71. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-2953. Epub
2012 Nov 12.

Distinct developmental signatures of human abdominal and gluteal subcutaneous
adipose tissue depots.

Karastergiou K(1), Fried SK, Xie H, Lee MJ, Divoux A, Rosencrantz MA, Chang RJ,
Smith SR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Nutrition, Department of Medicine,
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

CONTEXT: Fat distribution differs in men and women, but in both sexes, a
predominantly gluteal-femoral compared with abdominal (central) fat distribution 
is associated with lower metabolic risk. Differences in cellular characteristics 
and metabolic functions of these depots have been described, but the molecular
mechanisms involved are not understood.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to identify depot- and sex-dependent differences in 
gene expression in human abdominal and gluteal sc adipose tissues.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Abdominal and gluteal adipose tissue aspirates were obtained 
from 14 premenopausal women [age 27.5 ± 7.0 yr, body mass index (BMI) 27.3 ± 6.2 
kg/m(2), and waist-to-hip ratio 0.82 ± 0.04] and 21 men (age 29.7±7.4 yr, BMI
27.2 ± 4.5 kg/m(2), and waist-to-hip ratio 0.91 ± 0.07) and transcriptomes were
analyzed using Illumina microarrays. Expression of selected genes was determined 
in isolated adipocytes and stromal vascular fractions from each depot, and in in 
vitro cultures before and after adipogenic differentiation.
RESULTS: A total of 284 genes were differentially expressed between the abdominal
and gluteal depot, either specifically in males (n = 66) or females (n = 159) or 
in both sexes (n = 59). Most notably, gene ontology and pathway analysis
identified homeobox genes (HOXA2, HOXA3, HOXA4, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB7, HOXB8,
HOXC8, and IRX2) that were down-regulated in the gluteal depot in both sexes (P =
2 × 10(-10)). Conversely, HOXA10 was up-regulated in gluteal tissue and HOXC13
was detected exclusively in this depot. These differences were independent of
BMI, were present in both adipocytes and stromal vascular fractions of adipose
tissue, and were retained throughout in vitro differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that developmentally programmed differences may
contribute to the distinct phenotypic characteristics of peripheral fat.

PMCID: PMC3537084
PMID: 23150689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Cancer Cell. 2012 Oct 16;22(4):524-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2012.08.028.

Blockade of miR-150 maturation by MLL-fusion/MYC/LIN-28 is required for
MLL-associated leukemia.

Jiang X(1), Huang H, Li Z, Li Y, Wang X, Gurbuxani S, Chen P, He C, You D, Zhang 
S, Wang J, Arnovitz S, Elkahloun A, Price C, Hong GM, Ren H, Kunjamma RB, Neilly 
MB, Matthews JM, Xu M, Larson RA, Le Beau MM, Slany RK, Liu PP, Lu J, Zhang J, He
C, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637, USA.

Expression of microRNAs (miRNAs) is under stringent regulation at both
transcriptional and posttranscriptional levels. Disturbance at either level could
cause dysregulation of miRNAs. Here, we show that MLL fusion proteins negatively 
regulate production of miR-150, an miRNA widely repressed in acute leukemia, by
blocking miR-150 precursors from being processed to mature miRNAs through
MYC/LIN28 functional axis. Forced expression of miR-150 dramatically inhibited
leukemic cell growth and delayed MLL-fusion-mediated leukemogenesis, likely
through targeting FLT3 and MYB and thereby interfering with the
HOXA9/MEIS1/FLT3/MYB signaling network, which in turn caused downregulation of
MYC/LIN28. Collectively, we revealed a
MLL-fusion/MYC/LIN28<U+22A3>miR-150<U+22A3>FLT3/MYB/HOXA9/MEIS1 signaling circuit underlying
the pathogenesis of leukemia, where miR-150 functions as a pivotal gatekeeper and
its repression is required for leukemogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3480215
PMID: 23079661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. PLoS One. 2012;7(10):e46297. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0046297. Epub 2012 Oct 3.

Diagnosis of bladder cancer recurrence based on urinary levels of EOMES, HOXA9,
POU4F2, TWIST1, VIM, and ZNF154 hypermethylation.

Reinert T(1), Borre M, Christiansen A, Hermann GG, Ørntoft TF, Dyrskjøt L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

BACKGROUND: Non muscle invasive bladder cancer (NMIBC) has the highest recurrence
rate of any malignancy and as many as 70% of patients experience relapse.
Aberrant DNA methylation is present in all bladder tumors and can be detected in 
urine specimens. Previous studies have identified DNA methylation markers that
showed significant diagnostic value. We evaluated the significance of the
biomarkers for early detection of tumor recurrence in urine.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The methylation levels of EOMES, HOXA9, POU4F2,
TWIST1, VIM, and ZNF154 in urine specimens were measured by real-time PCR
(MethyLight). We analyzed 390 urine sediments from 184 patients diagnosed with
NMIBC. Urine from 35 age-matched control individuals was used to determine the
methylation baseline levels. Recurrence was diagnosed by cystoscopy and verified 
by histology. Initially, we compared urine from bladder cancer patients and
healthy individuals and detected significant hypermethylation of all six markers 
(P<0.0001) achieving sensitivity in the range 82%-89% and specificity in the
range 94%-100%. Following, we validated the urinary hypermethylation for use in
recurrence surveillance and found sensitivities of 88-94% and specificities of
43-67%. EOMES, POU4F2, VIM and ZNF154 were more frequently methylated in urine
from patients with higher grade tumors (P = 0.08). Univariate Cox regression
analysis showed that five markers were significantly associated with disease
recurrence; HOXA9 (HR=7.8, P=0.006), POU4F2 (HR=8.5, P=0.001), TWIST1 (HR=12.0,
P=0.015), VIM (HR=8.0, P=0.001), and ZNF154 (HR=13.9, P<0.001). Interestingly,
for one group of patients (n=15) we found that hypermethylation was consistently 
present in the urine samples despite the lack of tumor recurrences, indicating
the presence of a field defect.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Methylation levels of EOMES, HOXA9, POU4F2, TWIST1, VIM,
and ZNF154 in urine specimens are promising diagnostic biomarkers for bladder
cancer recurrence surveillance.

PMCID: PMC3463582
PMID: 23056278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Hum Genet. 2013 Jan;58(1):51-3. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.118. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

HOX gene methylation status analysis in patients with hereditary breast cancer.

Pilato B(1), Pinto R, De Summa S, Lambo R, Paradiso A, Tommasi S.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Research Centre, Istituto Tumori Giovanni Paolo II, Bari,
Italy.

Cancer development is related not only to genetic alterations but also to
aberrant epigenetic changes that could lead to heritable gene patterns critical
for neoplastic initiation and progression. Knowledge of epigenetic regulation in 
cancer cells is useful for both the understanding of carcinogenesis and for the
possibility of using epigenetic drugs. HOX genes deregulation have a crucial role
in oncogenesis process and tumor suppression. In this report, the methylation of 
HOXA1, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXB13, HNF1B, OTX1, TLX1 genes have been analyzed in
patients with hereditary breast cancer. This is the first study analyzing BRCA
mutational status of patients with respect to methylation of HOX genes. HOXA10
has been found to be methylated in all patients analyzed but never in healthy
subjects. With respect to clinical pathological information, hypermethylation of 
all studied genes, with the exception of OTX1, was significantly associated with 
absence of HER2 neu expression (P<0.05). Moreover, hypermethylation of HOXB13,
HOXA10 and HOXA1 was associated with a high proliferation index (Mib1=10%,
P<0.05) and hypermethylation of HOXB13 and HOXA10 also with high expression of
estrogen and progesterone receptors. These preliminary data suggest a possible
involvement of HOX genes in familial breast cancer as marker helpful to identify 
high-risk patients.

PMID: 23051705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Nucleus. 2012 Nov-Dec;3(6):508-15. doi: 10.4161/nucl.22427. Epub 2012 Oct 9.

The new nucleoporin: regulator of transcriptional repression and beyond.

Sarma NJ(1), Willis K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Washington University School of Medicine, St. Louis,
MO, USA.

Transcriptional regulation is a complex process that requires the integrated
action of many multi-protein complexes. The way in which a living cell
coordinates the action of these complexes in time and space is still poorly
understood. Recent work has shown that nuclear pores, well known for their role
in 3' processing and export of transcripts, also participate in the control of
transcriptional initiation. We have recently begun to explore how nuclear pores
interface with the well-described machinery that regulates initiation. This work 
led to the discovery that specific nucleoporins are required for binding of the
repressor protein Mig1 to its site in target promoters. Nuclear pores are
therefore involved in repressing, as well as activating, transcription. Here we
discuss in detail the main models explaining our result and consider what each
implies about the roles that nuclear pores play in the regulation of gene
expression.

PMCID: PMC3515533
PMID: 23047597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45369. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045369. Epub 2012 Sep 20.

The homeobox transcription factor HOXA9 is a regulator of SHOX in U2OS cells and 
chicken micromass cultures.

Durand C(1), Decker E, Roeth R, Schneider KU, Rappold G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Molecular Genetics, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, 
Germany.

The homeobox gene SHOX encodes for a transcription factor that plays an important
role during limb development. Mutations or deletions of SHOX in humans cause
short stature in Turner, Langer and Leri-Weill syndrome as well as idiopathic
short stature. During embryonic development, SHOX is expressed in a complex
spatio-temporal pattern that requires the presence of specific regulatory
mechanisms. Up to now, it was known that SHOX is regulated by two upstream
promoters and several enhancers on either side of the gene, but no regulators
have been identified that can activate or repress the transcription of SHOX by
binding to these regulatory elements. We have now identified the homeodomain
protein HOXA9 as a positive regulator of SHOX expression in U2OS cells. Using
luciferase assays, chromatin immunoprecipitation and electrophoretic mobility
shift assays, we could narrow down the HOXA9 binding site to two AT-rich
sequences of 31 bp within the SHOX promoter 2. Virus-induced Hoxa9 overexpression
in a chicken micromass model validated the regulation of Shox by Hoxa9 (negative 
regulation). As Hoxa9 and Shox are both expressed in overlapping regions of the
developing limb buds, a regulatory relationship of Hoxa9 and Shox during the
process of limb development can be assumed.

PMCID: PMC3447975
PMID: 23028966  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Blood. 2012 Nov 8;120(19):4018-27. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-384685. Epub 2012
Sep 18.

The homeodomain region controls the phenotype of HOX-induced murine leukemia.

Breitinger C(1), Maethner E, Garcia-Cuellar MP, Slany RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

HOX proteins are widely involved in hematopoietic development. These
transcription factors combine a conserved DNA-binding homeobox with a divergent
N-terminus that mediates interaction with variable cofactors. The resulting
combinatorial diversity is thought to be responsible for mammalian HOX
specificity. Contrasting this proposed mechanism for normal HOX function, here we
demonstrate that, in the context of hematopoietic immortalization and
leukemogenesis, individual HOX properties are governed almost exclusively by the 
homeodomain. Swap experiments between HOXA1 and HOXA9, 2 members of nonrelated
paralog groups, revealed that gene expression patterns of HOX transformed cells
in vitro are determined by the nature of the homeodomain. Similar results were
seen in vivo during HOX-mediated leukemogenesis. An exchange of the homeodomains 
was sufficient to convert the slow, low-penetrance phenotype of HOXA1-induced
leukemia to the aggressive fast-acting disease elicited by HOXA9 and vice versa. 
Mutation and deletion studies identified several subregions within the DNA
binding domain responsible for paralog specificity. Previously defined binding
sites for PBX cofactors within the exchangeable, nonhomeobox segment were
dispensable for in vitro oncogenic HOX activity but affected in vivo disease
development. The transcriptional activator domain shared by HOXA1 and HOXA9 at
the very N-terminus proved essential for all transformation.

PMID: 22990017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Epigenetics. 2012 Nov;7(11):1230-7. doi: 10.4161/epi.22140. Epub 2012 Sep 13.

Genome-wide aberrant DNA methylation of microRNA host genes in hepatocellular
carcinoma.

Shen J(1), Wang S, Zhang YJ, Kappil MA, Chen Wu H, Kibriya MG, Wang Q, Jasmine F,
Ahsan H, Lee PH, Yu MW, Chen CJ, Santella RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Health Sciences, Mailman School of Public Health
of Columbia University, New York, NY USA.

Mature microRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small non-coding RNAs involved in
posttranslational gene silencing. Previous studies found that downregulation of
miRNAs is a common feature observed in solid tumors, including hepatocellular
carcinoma (HCC). We employed a genome-wide approach to test the hypothesis that
DNA methylation alterations in miRNA host genes may cause deregulated miRNA
expression in HCC. We analyzed tumor and adjacent non-tumor tissues from 62
Taiwanese HCC cases using Infinium HumanMethylation27 DNA Analysis BeadChips that
include 254 CpG sites covering 110 miRNAs from 64 host genes. Expression levels
of three identified miRNAs (miR-10a, miR-10b and miR-196b) were measured in a
subset of 37 HCC tumor and non-tumor tissues. After Bonferroni adjustment, a
total of 54 CpG sites from 27 host genes significantly differed in DNA
methylation levels between tumor and adjacent non-tumor tissues with 53 sites
significantly hypermethylated in tumor tissues. Among the 54 significant CpG
sites, 15 sites had more than 2-fold tumor/non-tumor changes, 17 sites had
differences > 10%, and 10 sites had both features [including 8 significantly
hypermethylated CpG sites in the host genes of miR-10a, miR-10b and miR-196b
(HOXB4, HOXD4 and HOXA9, respectively)]. Significant downregulation of miR-10a
was observed in tumor compared with non-tumor tissues (0.50 vs. 1.73, p = 0.031).
The concordance for HOXB4 methylation alteration and dysregulation of miR-10a was
73.5%. No significant change was observed for miR-10b expression. Unexpectedly,
miR-196b was significantly upregulated in tumor compared with non-tumor tissues
(p = 0.0001). These data suggest that aberrant DNA methylation may lead to
dysregulation of miR-10a in HCC tumor tissues.

PMCID: PMC3499324
PMID: 22976466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Oncogene. 2013 Aug 1;32(31):3648-54. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.398. Epub 2012 Sep 10.

miRNA let-7c promotes granulocytic differentiation in acute myeloid leukemia.

Pelosi A(1), Careccia S, Lulli V, Romania P, Marziali G, Testa U, Lavorgna S,
Lo-Coco F, Petti MC, Calabretta B, Levrero M, Piaggio G, Rizzo MG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Experimental Oncology, Laboratory of Molecular Oncogenesis,
Regina Elena National Cancer Institute, Rome, Italy.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs), small non-coding RNAs that regulate gene expression
post-transcriptionally, are involved in many complex cellular processes. Several 
miRNAs are differentially expressed in hematopoietic tissues and play important
roles in normal differentiation, but, when aberrantly regulated, contribute to
the abnormal proliferation and differentiation of leukemic cells. Recently, we
reported that a small subset of miRNAs is differentially expressed in acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) blasts and is modulated by treatment with
all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA). In particular, PML/RARa-positive blasts from APL 
patients display lower levels of miRNA let-7c, a member of the let-7 family, than
normal promyelocytes and its expression increases after ATRA treatment. In this
study, we investigated the effects of let-7c in acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
cells. We found that ectopic expression of let-7c promotes granulocytic
differentiation of AML cell lines and primary blasts. Moreover, we identified
PBX2, a well-known homeodomain protein whose aberrant expression enhances
HoxA9-dependent leukemogenesis, as a novel let-7c target that may contribute to
the AML phenotype. Together, these studies raise the possibility that
perturbation of the let-7c-PBX2 pathway may have a therapeutic value in AML.

PMID: 22964640  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Oct 5;426(4):664. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.09.001. Epub 2012 Sep 7.

Letter to the editor on "regulation of HOXA9 activity by predominant expression
of DACH1 against C/EBPa and GATA-1 in myeloid leukemia with MLL-AF9".

Kapoor S.

Comment on
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Sep 28;426(3):299-305.

PMID: 22960594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. J Clin Invest. 2012 Oct;122(10):3603-17. doi: 10.1172/JCI62229. Epub 2012 Sep 4.

HOXA9 promotes ovarian cancer growth by stimulating cancer-associated
fibroblasts.

Ko SY(1), Barengo N, Ladanyi A, Lee JS, Marini F, Lengyel E, Naora H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, Texas 77054, USA.

Epithelial ovarian cancers (EOCs) often exhibit morphologic features of embryonic
Müllerian duct-derived tissue lineages and colonize peritoneal surfaces that
overlie connective and adipose tissues. However, the mechanisms that enable EOC
cells to readily adapt to the peritoneal environment are poorly understood. In
this study, we show that expression of HOXA9, a Müllerian-patterning gene, is
strongly associated with poor outcomes in patients with EOC and in mouse
xenograft models of EOC. Whereas HOXA9 promoted EOC growth in vivo, HOXA9 did not
stimulate autonomous tumor cell growth in vitro. On the other hand, expression of
HOXA9 in EOC cells induced normal peritoneal fibroblasts to express markers of
cancer-associated fibroblasts (CAFs) and to stimulate growth of EOC and
endothelial cells. Similarly, expression of HOXA9 in EOC cells induced normal
adipose- and bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) to acquire
features of CAFs. These effects of HOXA9 were due in substantial part to its
transcriptional activation of the gene encoding TGF-ß2 that acted in a paracrine 
manner on peritoneal fibroblasts and MSCs to induce CXCL12, IL-6, and VEGF-A
expression. These results indicate that HOXA9 expression in EOC cells promotes a 
microenvironment that is permissive for tumor growth.

PMCID: PMC3461910
PMID: 22945634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Ann Vasc Surg. 2012 Oct;26(7):1002-10. doi: 10.1016/j.avsg.2012.05.011.

High glucose-induced dysfunction of endothelial cells can be restored by HoxA9EC.

Zhang N(1), Gong L, Zhang H, Cao C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, Sir Run Run Shaw Hospital, College of Medicine,
Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, PR China. doczkm@yahoo.com.cn

BACKGROUND: High glucose (HG)-induced endothelial dysfunction is a common
pathologic process of vascular disease in patients with diabetes. HoxA9EC is a
transcriptional regulator of genes involved in the stabilization of endothelial
function. We sought to elucidate the effect of HG on HoxA9EC expression in human 
umbilical venous endothelial cells (HUVECs), and the potential role of HoxA9EC in
antagonizing HG-induced endothelial dysfunction.
METHODS: HUVECs treated with HoxA9EC transfection were cultured in media with HG,
and those treated either by HG or HoxA9EC knockdown were incubated without HG.
These cells were then subjected to experiments including mRNA expression analysis
for eNOS, VEGFR-2, and HoxA9EC by quantitative RT-PCR; protein level analysis for
eNOS, VEGFR-2, and HoxA9EC by Western blot; detection of nitric oxide (NO)
concentration; and migration assay.
RESULTS: Expression levels of eNOS, VEGFR-2, and HoxA9EC, as well as cell
migration and NO concentration, decreased rapidly in HUVECs with HoxA9EC
knockdown or under HG conditions. Overexpression of HoxA9EC significantly
repaired expression of eNOS and VEGFR-2, cell migration, and NO release of
endothelial cells under HG conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: Inhibition of HoxA9EC induced by HG contributed to endothelial cell 
dysfunction, which could be rescued by augmentation of HoxA9EC under HG
conditions.

Copyright © 2012 Annals of Vascular Surgery Inc. Published by Elsevier Inc. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 22944570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Blood. 2012 Nov 29;120(23):4461-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2012-05-429274. Epub 2012
Aug 30.

Structural insights into inhibition of the bivalent menin-MLL interaction by
small molecules in leukemia.

Shi A(1), Murai MJ, He S, Lund G, Hartley T, Purohit T, Reddy G, Chruszcz M,
Grembecka J, Cierpicki T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Menin functions as a critical oncogenic cofactor of mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) 
fusion proteins in the development of acute leukemias, and inhibition of the
menin interaction with MLL fusion proteins represents a very promising strategy
to reverse their oncogenic activity. MLL interacts with menin in a bivalent mode 
involving 2 N-terminal fragments of MLL. In the present study, we reveal the
first high-resolution crystal structure of human menin in complex with a
small-molecule inhibitor of the menin-MLL interaction, MI-2. The structure shows 
that the compound binds to the MLL pocket in menin and mimics the key
interactions of MLL with menin. Based on the menin-MI-2 structure, we developed
MI-2-2, a compound that binds to menin with low nanomolar affinity (K(d) = 22nM) 
and very effectively disrupts the bivalent protein-protein interaction between
menin and MLL. MI-2-2 demonstrated specific and very pronounced activity in MLL
leukemia cells, including inhibition of cell proliferation, down-regulation of
Hoxa9 expression, and differentiation. Our results provide the rational and
essential structural basis to design next generation of inhibitors for effective 
targeting of the menin-MLL interaction in leukemia and demonstrate a proof of
concept that inhibition of complex multivalent protein-protein interactions can
be achieved by a small-molecule inhibitor.

PMCID: PMC3512226
PMID: 22936661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Transfusion. 2013 May;53(5):1037-49. doi: 10.1111/j.1537-2995.2012.03888.x. Epub 
2012 Aug 31.

SALL4 is a key transcription regulator in normal human hematopoiesis.

Gao C(1), Kong NR, Li A, Tatetu H, Ueno S, Yang Y, He J, Yang J, Ma Y, Kao GS,
Tenen DG, Chai L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Joint Program in Transfusion Medicine, Brigham and
Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

BACKGROUND: Stem cell factor SALL4 is a zinc finger transcription factor. It
plays vital roles in the maintenance of embryonic stem cell properties, functions
as an oncogene in leukemia, and has been recently proposed to use for cord blood 
expansion. The mechanism(s) by which SALL4 functions in normal human
hematopoiesis, including identification of its target genes, still need to be
explored.
STUDY DESIGN AND METHODS: Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by microarray
hybridization (ChIP-chip) was used for mapping SALL4 global gene targets in
normal primary CD34+ cells. The results were then correlated with SALL4
functional studies in the CD34+ cells.
RESULTS: More than 1000 potential SALL4 downstream target genes have been
identified, and validation of binding by ChIP-quantitative polymerase chain
reaction was performed for 5% of potential targets. These include genes that are 
involving in hematopoietic differentiation and self-renewal, such as HOXA9,
RUNX1, CD34, and PTEN. Down regulation of SALL4 expression using small-hairpin
RNA in these cells led to decreased in vitro myeloid colony-forming abilities and
impaired in vivo engraftment. Furthermore, HOXA9 was identified to be a major
SALL4 target in normal human hematopoiesis and the loss of either SALL4 or HOXA9 
expression in CD34+ cells shared a similar phenotype.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, SALL4 is a key regulator in normal human
hematopoiesis and the mechanism of its function is at least in part through the
HOXA9. Future study will determine whether modulating the SALL4/HOXA9 pathway can
be used in cellular therapy such as cord blood expansion and/or myeloid
engraftment.

© 2012 American Association of Blood Banks.

PMCID: PMC3653586
PMID: 22934838  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Blood. 2012 Nov 8;120(19):4006-17. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-02-334722. Epub 2012
Aug 28.

The human GFI136N variant induces epigenetic changes at the Hoxa9 locus and
accelerates K-RAS driven myeloproliferative disorder in mice.

Khandanpour C(1), Krongold J, Schütte J, Bouwman F, Vassen L, Gaudreau MC, Chen
R, Calero-Nieto FJ, Diamanti E, Hannah R, Meyer SE, Grimes HL, van der Reijden
BA, Jansen JH, Patel CV, Peeters JK, Löwenberg B, Dührsen U, Göttgens B, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal, Montreal, QC, Canada.

The coding single nucleotide polymorphism GFI136N in the human gene growth factor
independence 1 (GFI1) is present in 3%-7% of whites and increases the risk for
acute myeloid leukemia (AML) by 60%. We show here that GFI136N, in contrast to
GFI136S, lacks the ability to bind to the Gfi1 target gene that encodes the
leukemia-associated transcription factor Hoxa9 and fails to initiate histone
modifications that regulate HoxA9 expression. Consistent with this, AML patients 
heterozygous for the GFI136N variant show increased HOXA9 expression compared
with normal controls. Using ChipSeq, we demonstrate that GFI136N specific
epigenetic changes are also present in other genes involved in the development of
AML. Moreover, granulomonocytic progenitors, a bone marrow subset from which AML 
can arise in humans and mice, show a proliferative expansion in the presence of
the GFI136N variant. In addition, granulomonocytic progenitors carrying the
GFI136N variant allele have altered gene expression patterns and differ in their 
ability to grow after transplantation. Finally, GFI136N can accelerate a K-RAS
driven fatal myeloproliferative disease in mice. Our data suggest that the
presence of a GFI136N variant allele induces a preleukemic state in myeloid
precursors by deregulating the expression of Hoxa9 and other AML-related genes.

PMID: 22932805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Sep 28;426(3):299-305. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.08.048. Epub 2012 Aug 17.

Regulation of HOXA9 activity by predominant expression of DACH1 against C/EBPa
and GATA-1 in myeloid leukemia with MLL-AF9.

Lee JW(1), Kim HS, Hwang J, Kim YH, Lim GY, Sohn WJ, Yoon SR, Kim JY, Park TS, Oh
SH, Park KM, Choi SU, Ryoo ZY, Lee S.

Author information: 
(1)School of Life Science and Biotechnology, Kyungpook National University, Daegu
702-701, Republic of Korea.

Comment in
    Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Oct 5;426(4):664.

Although MLL-AF9 caused by the chromosomal translocation t(9;11) has a critical
role in acute myeloid leukemia, the molecular pathogenesis is poorly understood. 
Here, we identified that the cell fate determination factor DACH1 is directly
up-regulated by MLL-AF9. Recently we showed that the forced expression of DACH1
in myeloid cells induced p27(Kip1) and repressed p21(Cip1), which is a pivotal
characteristic of the myeloid progenitor. Consistent with our previous study,
ectopic expression of DACH1 contributed to the maintenance of colonogenic
activity and blocked the differentiation of myeloid progenitors. Moreover, we
here identified an endogenous HOXA9-DACH1 complex mediated by the carboxyl
terminus of DACH1 in t(9;11) leukemia cells. qRT-PCR revealed that DACH1 has a
stronger transcription-promoting activity with HOXA9 than does PBX2 with HOXA9.
Furthermore, C/EBPa and GATA-1 can directly bind to the promoter of DACH1 and act
as a transcriptional suppressor. Expression of DACH1 is down-regulated during
myeloid differentiation and shows an inverse pattern compared to C/EBPa and
GATA-1 expression. However, ectopic expression of C/EBPa and/or GATA-1 could not 
abrogate the over-expression of DACH1 induced by MLL-AF9. Therefore, we postulate
that the inability of C/EBPa and GATA-1 to down-regulate DACH1 expression induced
by MLL-AF9 during myeloid differentiation may contribute to t(9;11)
leukemogenesis.

Copyright © 2012. Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 22902925  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Sci Transl Med. 2012 Aug 15;4(147):147ra112. doi: 10.1126/scitranslmed.3003778.

Targeted tumor-penetrating siRNA nanocomplexes for credentialing the ovarian
cancer oncogene ID4.

Ren Y(1), Cheung HW, von Maltzhan G, Agrawal A, Cowley GS, Weir BA, Boehm JS,
Tamayo P, Karst AM, Liu JF, Hirsch MS, Mesirov JP, Drapkin R, Root DE, Lo J,
Fogal V, Ruoslahti E, Hahn WC, Bhatia SN.

Author information: 
(1)Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.

The comprehensive characterization of a large number of cancer genomes will
eventually lead to a compendium of genetic alterations in specific cancers.
Unfortunately, the number and complexity of identified alterations complicate
endeavors to identify biologically relevant mutations critical for tumor
maintenance because many of these targets are not amenable to manipulation by
small molecules or antibodies. RNA interference provides a direct way to study
putative cancer targets; however, specific delivery of therapeutics to the tumor 
parenchyma remains an intractable problem. We describe a platform for the
discovery and initial validation of cancer targets, composed of a systematic
effort to identify amplified and essential genes in human cancer cell lines and
tumors partnered with a novel modular delivery technology. We developed a
tumor-penetrating nanocomplex (TPN) that comprised small interfering RNA (siRNA) 
complexed with a tandem tumor-penetrating and membrane-translocating peptide,
which enabled the specific delivery of siRNA deep into the tumor parenchyma. We
used TPN in vivo to evaluate inhibitor of DNA binding 4 (ID4) as a novel
oncogene. Treatment of ovarian tumor-bearing mice with ID4-specific TPN
suppressed growth of established tumors and significantly improved survival.
These observations not only credential ID4 as an oncogene in 32% of high-grade
ovarian cancers but also provide a framework for the identification, validation, 
and understanding of potential therapeutic cancer targets.

PMCID: PMC3633234
PMID: 22896676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Exp Hematol. 2012 Dec;40(12):1016-27. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.08.001. Epub
2012 Aug 8.

Gene expression profiling and candidate gene resequencing identifies pathways and
mutations important for malignant transformation caused by leukemogenic fusion
genes.

Novak RL(1), Harper DP, Caudell D, Slape C, Beachy SH, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia Biology Section, Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) and CALM-AF10 (CA10) are oncogenic fusion proteins produced 
by recurrent chromosomal translocations in patients with acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). Transgenic mice that express these fusions develop AML with a long latency
and incomplete penetrance, suggesting that collaborating genetic events are
required for leukemic transformation. We employed genetic techniques to identify 
both preleukemic abnormalities in healthy transgenic mice as well as
collaborating events leading to leukemic transformation. Candidate gene
resequencing revealed that 6 of 27 (22%) CA10 AMLs spontaneously acquired a Ras
pathway mutation and 8 of 27 (30%) acquired an Flt3 mutation. Two CA10 AMLs
acquired an Flt3 internal-tandem duplication, demonstrating that these mutations 
can be acquired in murine as well as human AML. Gene expression profiles revealed
a marked upregulation of Hox genes, particularly Hoxa5, Hoxa9, and Hoxa10 in both
NHD13 and CA10 mice. Furthermore, mir196b, which is embedded within the Hoxa
locus, was overexpressed in both CA10 and NHD13 samples. In contrast, the Hox
cofactors Meis1 and Pbx3 were differentially expressed; Meis1 was increased in
CA10 AMLs but not NHD13 AMLs, whereas Pbx3 was consistently increased in NHD13
but not CA10 AMLs. Silencing of Pbx3 in NHD13 cells led to decreased
proliferation, increased apoptosis, and decreased colony formation in vitro,
suggesting a previously unexpected role for Pbx3 in leukemic transformation.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3496069
PMID: 22885519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2012 Aug 24;425(2):333-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.07.092. Epub 2012 Jul 25.

Quantitative multiplex quantum dot in-situ hybridisation based gene expression
profiling in tissue microarrays identifies prognostic genes in acute myeloid
leukaemia.

Tholouli E(1), MacDermott S, Hoyland J, Yin JL, Byers R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Manchester Royal Infirmary, Oxford Road,
Manchester, M13 9WL, UK.

Measurement and validation of microarray gene signatures in routine clinical
samples is problematic and a rate limiting step in translational research. In
order to facilitate measurement of microarray identified gene signatures in
routine clinical tissue a novel method combining quantum dot based
oligonucleotide in situ hybridisation (QD-ISH) and post-hybridisation spectral
image analysis was used for multiplex in-situ transcript detection in archival
bone marrow trephine samples from patients with acute myeloid leukaemia (AML).
Tissue-microarrays were prepared into which white cell pellets were spiked as a
standard. Tissue microarrays were made using routinely processed bone marrow
trephines from 242 patients with AML. QD-ISH was performed for six candidate
prognostic genes using triplex QD-ISH for DNMT1, DNMT3A, DNMT3B, and for HOXA4,
HOXA9, Meis1. Scrambled oligonucleotides were used to correct for background
staining followed by normalisation of expression against the expression values
for the white cell pellet standard. Survival analysis demonstrated that low
expression of HOXA4 was associated with poorer overall survival (p=0.009), whilst
high expression of HOXA9 (p<0.0001), Meis1 (p=0.005) and DNMT3A (p=0.04) were
associated with early treatment failure. These results demonstrate application of
a standardised, quantitative multiplex QD-ISH method for identification of
prognostic markers in formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded clinical samples,
facilitating measurement of gene expression signatures in routine clinical
samples.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22842570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. Blood Cancer J. 2012 Jun;2(6):e76. doi: 10.1038/bcj.2012.20. Epub 2012 Jun 29.

Distinct regulation of c-myb gene expression by HoxA9, Meis1 and Pbx proteins in 
normal hematopoietic progenitors and transformed myeloid cells.

Dassé E, Volpe G, Walton DS, Wilson N, Del Pozzo W, O'Neill LP, Slany RK,
Frampton J, Dumon S.

The proto-oncogenic protein c-Myb is an essential regulator of hematopoiesis and 
is frequently deregulated in hematological diseases such as lymphoma and
leukemia. To gain insight into the mechanisms underlying the aberrant expression 
of c-Myb in myeloid leukemia, we analyzed and compared c-myb gene transcriptional
regulation using two cell lines modeling normal hematopoietic progenitor cells
(HPCs) and transformed myelomonocytic blasts. We report that the transcription
factors HoxA9, Meis1, Pbx1 and Pbx2 bind in vivo to the c-myb locus and maintain 
its expression through different mechanisms in HPCs and leukemic cells. Our
analysis also points to a critical role for Pbx2 in deregulating c-myb expression
in murine myeloid cells cotransformed by the cooperative activity of HoxA9 and
Meis1. This effect is associated with an intronic positioning of epigenetic marks
and RNA polymerase II binding in the orthologous region of a previously described
alternative promoter for c-myb. Taken together, our results could provide a first
hint to explain the abnormal expression of c-myb in leukemic cells.

PMCID: PMC3389162
PMID: 22829978  [PubMed]


213. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2012 Aug 21;109(34):E2258-66. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1116738109. Epub 2012 Jul 24.

Reconstitution of the central and peripheral nervous system during salamander
tail regeneration.

McHedlishvili L(1), Mazurov V, Grassme KS, Goehler K, Robl B, Tazaki A, Roensch
K, Duemmler A, Tanaka EM.

Author information: 
(1)Max Planck Institute of Molecular Cell Biology and Genetics, 01307 Dresden,
Germany.

We show that after tail amputation in Ambystoma mexicanum (Axolotl) the correct
number and spacing of dorsal root ganglia are regenerated. By transplantation of 
spinal cord tissue and nonclonal neurospheres, we show that the central spinal
cord represents a source of peripheral nervous system cells. Interestingly,
melanophores migrate from preexisting precursors in the skin. Finally, we
demonstrate that implantation of a clonally derived spinal cord neurosphere can
result in reconstitution of all examined cell types in the regenerating central
spinal cord, suggesting derivation of a cell with spinal cord stem cell
properties.

PMCID: PMC3427070
PMID: 22829665  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Bioessays. 2012 Sep;34(9):771-80. doi: 10.1002/bies.201200007. Epub 2012 Jul 24.

Menin as a hub controlling mixed lineage leukemia.

Thiel AT(1), Huang J, Lei M, Hua X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology, Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute,
Abramson Cancer Center, The University of Pennsylvania, Perelman School of
Medicine, Philadelphia, PA, USA.

Mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion protein (FP)-induced acute leukemia is highly
aggressive and often refractory to therapy. Recent progress in the field has
unraveled novel mechanisms and targets to combat this disease. Menin, a nuclear
protein, interacts with wild-type (WT) MLL, MLL-FPs, and other partners such as
the chromatin-associated protein LEDGF and the transcription factor C-Myb to
promote leukemogenesis. The newly solved co-crystal structure illustrating the
menin-MLL interaction, coupled with the role of menin in recruiting both WT MLL
and MLL-FPs to target genes, highlights menin as a scaffold protein and a central
hub controlling this type of leukemia. The menin/WT MLL/MLL-FP hub may also
cooperate with several signaling pathways, including Wnt, GSK3, and
bromodomain-containing Brd4-related pathways to sustain MLL-FP-induced
leukemogenesis, revealing new therapeutic targets to improve the treatment of
MLL-FP leukemias.

Copyright © 2012 WILEY Periodicals, Inc.

PMCID: PMC3536020
PMID: 22829075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Blood. 2012 Aug 23;120(8):e17-27. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-12-397844. Epub 2012
Jul 16.

Posttranslational regulation of self-renewal capacity: insights from proteome and
phosphoproteome analyses of stem cell leukemia.

Trost M(1), Sauvageau M, Hérault O, Deleris P, Pomiès C, Chagraoui J, Mayotte N, 
Meloche S, Sauvageau G, Thibault P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal,
Montreal, QC, Canada.

We recently generated 2 phenotypically similar Hoxa9+Meis1 overexpressing acute
myeloid leukemias that differ by their in vivo biologic behavior. The first
leukemia, named FLA2, shows a high frequency of leukemia stem cells (LSCs; 1 in
1.4 cells), whereas the second, FLB1, is more typical with a frequency of LSCs in
the range of 1 per several hundred cells. To gain insights into possible
mechanisms that determine LSC self-renewal, we profiled and compared the
abundance of nuclear and cytoplasmic proteins and phosphoproteins from these
leukemias using quantitative proteomics. These analyses revealed differences in
proteins associated with stem cell fate, including a hyperactive p38 MAP kinase
in FLB1 and a differentially localized Polycomb group protein Ezh2, which is
mostly nuclear in FLA2 and predominantly cytoplasmic in FLB1. Together, these
newly documented proteomes and phosphoproteomes represent a unique resource with 
more than 440 differentially expressed proteins and 11 543 unique
phosphopeptides, of which 80% are novel and 7% preferentially phosphorylated in
the stem cell-enriched leukemia.

PMID: 22802335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Clin Cancer Res. 2012 Aug 15;18(16):4291-302. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-12-0373.
Epub 2012 Jun 21.

Deregulation of a Hox protein regulatory network spanning prostate cancer
initiation and progression.

Chen JL(1), Li J, Kiriluk KJ, Rosen AM, Paner GP, Antic T, Lussier YA, Vander
Griend DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Chicago, Chicago, IL, USA.

PURPOSE: The aberrant activity of developmental pathways in prostate cancer may
provide significant insight into predicting tumor initiation and progression, as 
well as identifying novel therapeutic targets. To this end, despite shared
androgen-dependence and functional similarities to the prostate gland, seminal
vesicle cancer is exceptionally rare.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We conducted genomic pathway analyses comparing
patient-matched normal prostate and seminal vesicle epithelial cells to identify 
novel pathways for tumor initiation and progression. Derived gene expression
profiles were grouped into cancer biomodules using a protein-protein network
algorithm to analyze their relationship to known oncogenes. Each resultant
biomodule was assayed for its prognostic ability against publically available
prostate cancer patient gene array datasets.
RESULTS: Analyses show that the embryonic developmental biomodule containing four
homeobox gene family members (Meis1, Meis2, Pbx1, and HoxA9) detects a survival
difference in a set of watchful-waiting patients (n = 172, P = 0.05), identify
men who are more likely to recur biochemically postprostatectomy (n = 78, P =
0.02), correlate with Gleason score (r = 0.98, P = 0.02), and distinguish between
normal prostate, primary tumor, and metastatic disease. In contrast to other
cancer types, Meis1, Meis2, and Pbx1 expression is decreased in poor-prognosis
tumors, implying that they function as tumor suppressor genes for prostate
cancer. Immunohistochemical staining documents nuclear basal-epithelial and
stromal Meis2 staining, with loss of Meis2 expression in prostate tumors.
CONCLUSION: These data implicate deregulation of the Hox protein cofactors Meis1,
Meis2, and Pbx1 as serving a critical function to suppress prostate cancer
initiation and progression.

PMCID: PMC3479663
PMID: 22723371  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Genes Dev. 2012 Jun 15;26(12):1376-91. doi: 10.1101/gad.188359.112.

Combinatorial readout of unmodified H3R2 and acetylated H3K14 by the tandem PHD
finger of MOZ reveals a regulatory mechanism for HOXA9 transcription.

Qiu Y(1), Liu L, Zhao C, Han C, Li F, Zhang J, Wang Y, Li G, Mei Y, Wu M, Wu J,
Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale, University 
of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230026, China.

Histone acetylation is a hallmark for gene transcription. As a histone
acetyltransferase, MOZ (monocytic leukemia zinc finger protein) is important for 
HOX gene expression as well as embryo and postnatal development. In vivo, MOZ
forms a tetrameric complex with other subunits, including several
chromatin-binding modules with regulatory functions. Here we report the solution 
structure of the tandem PHD (plant homeodomain) finger (PHD12) of human MOZ in a 
free state and the 1.47 Å crystal structure in complex with H3K14ac peptide,
which reveals the structural basis for the recognition of unmodified R2 and
acetylated K14 on histone H3. Moreover, the results of chromatin
immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and RT-PCR assays indicate that PHD12 facilitates the 
localization of MOZ onto the promoter locus of the HOXA9 gene, thereby promoting 
the H3 acetylation around the promoter region and further up-regulating the HOXA9
mRNA level. Taken together, our findings suggest that the combinatorial readout
of the H3R2/K14ac by PHD12 might represent an important epigenetic regulatory
mechanism that governs transcription and also provide a clue of cross-talk
between the MOZ complex and histone H3 modifications.

PMCID: PMC3387664
PMID: 22713874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Leukemia. 2013 Jan;27(1):236-8. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.166. Epub 2012 Jun 20.

HOX genes regulate Rac1 activity in hematopoietic cells through control of Vav2
expression.

Breitinger C, Maethner E, Garcia-Cuellar MP, Schambony A, Fischer KD, Schilling
K, Slany RK.

PMID: 22713647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Leukemia. 2012 Sep;26(9):2039-51. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.157. Epub 2012 Jun 13.

Lysine-specific demethylase 1 restricts hematopoietic progenitor proliferation
and is essential for terminal differentiation.

Sprüssel A(1), Schulte JH, Weber S, Necke M, Händschke K, Thor T, Pajtler KW,
Schramm A, König K, Diehl L, Mestdagh P, Vandesompele J, Speleman F, Jastrow H,
Heukamp LC, Schüle R, Dührsen U, Buettner R, Eggert A, Göthert JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, West German Cancer Center (WTZ), University 
Hospital Essen, Essen, Germany.

Lysine (K)-specific demethylase 1A (LSD1/KDM1A) has been identified as a
potential therapeutic target in solid cancers and more recently in acute myeloid 
leukemia. However, the potential side effects of a LSD1-inhibitory therapy remain
elusive. Here, we show, with a newly established conditional in vivo knockdown
model, that LSD1 represents a central regulator of hematopoietic stem and
progenitor cells. LSD1 knockdown (LSD1-kd) expanded progenitor numbers by
enhancing their proliferative behavior. LSD1-kd led to an extensive expansion of 
granulomonocytic, erythroid and megakaryocytic progenitors. In contrast, terminal
granulopoiesis, erythropoiesis and platelet production were severely inhibited.
The only exception was monopoiesis, which was promoted by LSD1 deficiency.
Importantly, we showed that peripheral blood granulocytopenia, monocytosis,
anemia and thrombocytopenia were reversible after LSD1-kd termination.
Extramedullary splenic hematopoiesis contributed to the phenotypic reversion, and
progenitor populations remained expanded. LSD1-kd was associated with the
upregulation of key hematopoietic genes, including Gfi1b, Hoxa9 and Meis1, which 
are known regulators of the HSC/progenitor compartment. We also demonstrated that
LSD1-kd abrogated Gfi1b-negative autoregulation by crossing LSD1-kd with
Gfi1b:GFP mice. Taken together, our findings distinguish LSD1 as a critical
regulator of hematopoiesis and point to severe, but reversible, side effects of a
LSD1-targeted therapy.

PMID: 22699452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2012 Aug 15;49(2):102-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bcmd.2012.05.003.
Epub 2012 May 25.

Two isoforms of HOXA9 function differently but work synergistically in human
MLL-rearranged leukemia.

He M(1), Chen P, Arnovitz S, Li Y, Huang H, Neilly MB, Wei M, Rowley JD, Chen J, 
Li Z.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL, USA.

HOXA9 plays a critical role in both normal hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis,
particularly in the development and maintenance of mixed lineage leukemia
(MLL)-rearranged leukemia. Through reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) analysis of HOXA9 transcripts in human leukemia and normal bone
marrow samples, we identified a truncated isoform of HOXA9, namely HOXA9T, and
found that both HOXA9T and canonical HOXA9 were highly expressed in leukemia cell
lines bearing MLL rearrangements, relative to human normal bone marrow cells or
other subtypes of leukemia cells. A frameshift in HOXA9T in exon I causes a
premature stop codon upstream of the PBX-binding domain and the homeodomain,
which leads to the generation of a non-homeodomain-containing protein. Unlike the
canonical HOXA9, HOXA9T alone cannot transform normal bone marrow progenitor
cells. Moreover, HOXA9T cannot cooperate with MEIS1 to transform cells, despite
the presence of a MEIS1-binding domain. Remarkably, although the truncated
isoforms of many proteins function as dominant-negative competitors or inhibitors
of their full-length counterparts, this is not the case for HOXA9T; instead,
HOXA9T synergized with HOXA9 in transforming mouse normal bone marrow progenitor 
cells through promoting self-renewal and proliferation of the cells.
Collectively, our data indicate that both truncated and full-length forms of
HOXA9 are highly expressed in human MLL-rearranged leukemia, and the truncated
isoform of HOXA9 might also play an oncogenic role by cooperating with canonical 
HOXA9 in cell transformation and leukemogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3399022
PMID: 22633751  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Blood. 2012 Jun 21;119(25):6099-108. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-388710. Epub 2012
May 7.

Setbp1 promotes the self-renewal of murine myeloid progenitors via activation of 
Hoxa9 and Hoxa10.

Oakley K(1), Han Y, Vishwakarma BA, Chu S, Bhatia R, Gudmundsson KO, Keller J,
Chen X, Vasko V, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Du Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Rd, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

Acquisition of self-renewal capability by myeloid progenitors to become leukemic 
stem cells during myeloid leukemia development is poorly understood. Here, we
show that Setbp1 overexpression efficiently confers self-renewal capability to
myeloid progenitors in vitro, causing their immortalization in the presence of
stem cell factor and IL-3. Self-renewal after immortalization requires continuous
Setbp1 expression. We also found that Hoxa9 and Hoxa10 mRNA are present at
dramatically higher levels in Setbp1-immortalized cells compared with other
immortalized cells, and are induced shortly after Setbp1 expression in primary
myeloid progenitors. Suppression of either gene in Setbp1-immortalized cells
drastically reduces their colony-forming capability. Interestingly, Setbp1
protein associates with Hoxa9 and Hoxa10 promoters in chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays in these cells, suggesting that both are direct
transcriptional targets of Setbp1. Setbp1 also promotes self-renewal of myeloid
progenitors in vivo as its coexpression with BCR/ABL transforms primary mouse
myeloid progenitors, generating aggressive leukemias in recipient mice resembling
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) myeloid blast crisis. Increased SETBP1 mRNA
levels were also detected in a subset of CML advanced phase/blast crisis patients
with high levels of HOXA9 and HOXA10 expression. Thus, Setbp1 activation
represents a novel mechanism conferring self-renewal capability to myeloid
progenitors in myeloid leukemia development.

PMCID: PMC3383018
PMID: 22566606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2012 Apr;20(2):300-4.

[Expression of homeobox A9 in myeloid leukemia cell line HL-60 and effect of
drugs on its expression].

[Article in Chinese]

Guo WW(1), Liu WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Luzhou Medical College, Luzhou, Sichuan Province,
China.

This study was aimed to investigate the homeobox A9 (HOXA9) mRNA and protein
expression in myeloid leukemia cell line HL-60 and effect of all-trans retinoic
acid (ATRA 1 µmol/L) or arsenic trioxide (As2O3 1 µmol/L) on its expression, and 
to explore the pathogenesis of leukemia mediated by HOXA9 at mRNA and protein
levels. The expression of HOXA9 mRNA and protein were detected by real-time
fluorescent quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
(FQ-RT-PCR) and Western blot, respectively. HL-60 cells were divided into 3
group: normal control added with RPMI 1640 medium, ATRA group and As2O3 group.
The results indicated that HOXA9 mRNA expression in each group showed a firstly
increasing and then decreasing tendency, in which the expression of HOXA9 mRNA
was observed at day 1, increased at day 2, and decreased at day 3; while HOXA9
protein expression in each group was observed at day 1, the expression of HOXA9
protein in control group and ATRA group showed firstly increase and then
decrease. The expression of HOXA9 protein in As2O3 group showed a decreased
tendency gradually. The expression of HOXA9 mRNA in ATRA groups at day 1-3 was
higher than that in control group (P < 0.05). The differences of HOXA9 mRNA
expression between As2O3 groups and the control group were not significant at day
1 and day 3, but was higher than that in control group at day 2 (P < 0.05). The
expression of HOXA9 protein in ATRA group at day 1- day 3 was higher than that in
control group (P < 0.05). Compared with control group, the expression of HOXA9
protein in As2O3 group was higher at day 1 (P < 0.05), lower at day 2 (P < 0.05),
and no significant differences at day 3. It is concluded that HOXA9 mRNA and
protein express in HL-60 cells. ATRA 1 µmol/L can up-regulate the expression of
HOXA9 mRNA and protein in HL-60 cells. The mechanisms of treatment of leukemia by
ATRA and As2O3 may be associated with the regulation of the HOXA9 mRNA or protein
expression.

PMID: 22541086  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. Epigenetics. 2012 Jun 1;7(6):559-66. doi: 10.4161/epi.20219. Epub 2012 Jun 1.

Key epigenetic changes associated with lung cancer development: results from
dense methylation array profiling.

Nelson HH(1), Marsit CJ, Christensen BC, Houseman EA, Kontic M, Wiemels JL,
Karagas MR, Wrensch MR, Zheng S, Wiencke JK, Kelsey KT.

Author information: 
(1)Masonic Cancer Center, Division of Epidemiology and Community Health,
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA. hhnelson@umn.edu

Epigenetic alterations are a common event in lung cancer and their identification
can serve to inform on the carcinogenic process and provide clinically relevant
biomarkers. Using paired tumor and non-tumor lung tissues from 146 individuals
from three independent populations we sought to identify common changes in DNA
methylation associated with the development of non-small cell lung cancer.
Pathologically normal lung tissue taken at the time of cancer resection was
matched to tumorous lung tissue and together were probed for methylation using
Illumina GoldenGate arrays in the discovery set (n = 47 pairs) followed by
bisulfite pyrosequencing for validation sets (n = 99 pairs). For each matched
pair the change in methylation at each CpG was calculated (the odds ratio), and
these ratios were averaged across individuals and ranked by magnitude to identify
the CpGs with the greatest change in methylation associated with tumor
development. We identified the top gene-loci representing an increase in
methylation (HOXA9, 10.3-fold and SOX1, 5.9-fold) and decrease in methylation
(DDR1, 8.1-fold). In replication testing sets, methylation was higher in tumors
for HOXA9 (p < 2.2 × 10 (-16) ) and SOX1 (p < 2.2 × 10 (-16) ) and lower for DDR1
(p < 2.2 × 10 (-16) ). The magnitude and strength of these changes were
consistent across squamous cell and adenocarcinoma tumors. Our data indicate that
the identified genes consistently have altered methylation in lung tumors. Our
identified genes should be included in translational studies that aim to develop 
screening for early disease detection.

PMCID: PMC3398985
PMID: 22522909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. J Exp Med. 2012 May 7;209(5):895-901. doi: 10.1084/jem.20102386. Epub 2012 Apr
16.

A role for GPx3 in activity of normal and leukemia stem cells.

Herault O(1), Hope KJ, Deneault E, Mayotte N, Chagraoui J, Wilhelm BT, Cellot S, 
Sauvageau M, Andrade-Navarro MA, Hébert J, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec, Canada.

The determinants of normal and leukemic stem cell self-renewal remain poorly
characterized. We report that expression of the reactive oxygen species (ROS)
scavenger glutathione peroxidase 3 (GPx3) positively correlates with the
frequency of leukemia stem cells (LSCs) in Hoxa9+Meis1-induced leukemias.
Compared with a leukemia with a low frequency of LSCs, a leukemia with a high
frequency of LSCs showed hypomethylation of the Gpx3 promoter region, and
expressed high levels of Gpx3 and low levels of ROS. LSCs and normal
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) engineered to express Gpx3 short hairpin RNA
(shRNA) were much less competitive in vivo than control cells. However,
progenitor cell proliferation and differentiation was not affected by Gpx3 shRNA.
Consistent with this, HSCs overexpressing Gpx3 were significantly more
competitive than control cells in long-term repopulation experiments, and
overexpression of the self-renewal genes Prdm16 or Hoxb4 boosted Gpx3 expression.
In human primary acute myeloid leukemia samples, GPX3 expression level directly
correlated with adverse prognostic outcome, revealing a potential novel target
for the eradication of LSCs.

PMCID: PMC3348115
PMID: 22508837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. Nucleic Acids Res. 2012 Jul;40(12):5201-14. doi: 10.1093/nar/gks175. Epub 2012
Feb 23.

MicroRNA and transcription factor co-regulatory network analysis reveals miR-19
inhibits CYLD in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Ye H(1), Liu X, Lv M, Wu Y, Kuang S, Gong J, Yuan P, Zhong Z, Li Q, Jia H, Sun J,
Chen Z, Guo AY.

Author information: 
(1)Hubei Bioinformatics and Molecular Imaging Key Laboratory, Department of
Systems Biology, College of Life Science and Technology, Huazhong University of
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, China.

T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) is an aggressive hematological
malignancy. The understanding of its gene expression regulation and molecular
mechanisms still remains elusive. Started from experimentally verified
T-ALL-related miRNAs and genes, we obtained 120 feed-forward loops (FFLs) among
T-ALL-related genes, miRNAs and TFs through combining target prediction.
Afterwards, a T-ALL miRNA and TF co-regulatory network was constructed, and its
significance was tested by statistical methods. Four miRNAs in the miR-17-92
cluster and four important genes (CYLD, HOXA9, BCL2L11 and RUNX1) were found as
hubs in the network. Particularly, we found that miR-19 was highly expressed in
T-ALL patients and cell lines. Ectopic expression of miR-19 represses CYLD
expression, while miR-19 inhibitor treatment induces CYLD protein expression and 
decreases NF-<U+03BA>B expression in the downstream signaling pathway. Thus, miR-19,
CYLD and NF-<U+03BA>B form a regulatory FFL, which provides new clues for sustained
activation of NF-<U+03BA>B in T-ALL. Taken together, we provided the first miRNA-TF
co-regulatory network in T-ALL and proposed a model to demonstrate the roles of
miR-19 and CYLD in the T-cell leukemogenesis. This study may provide potential
therapeutic targets for T-ALL and shed light on combining bioinformatics with
experiments in the research of complex diseases.

PMCID: PMC3384304
PMID: 22362744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Nat Commun. 2012 Feb 21;3:688. doi: 10.1038/ncomms1681.

miR-196b directly targets both HOXA9/MEIS1 oncogenes and FAS tumour suppressor in
MLL-rearranged leukaemia.

Li Z(1), Huang H, Chen P, He M, Li Y, Arnovitz S, Jiang X, He C, Hyjek E, Zhang
J, Zhang Z, Elkahloun A, Cao D, Shen C, Wunderlich M, Wang Y, Neilly MB, Jin J,
Wei M, Lu J, Valk PJ, Delwel R, Lowenberg B, Le Beau MM, Vardiman J, Mulloy JC,
Zeleznik-Le NJ, Liu PP, Zhang J, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA.

HOXA9 and MEIS1 have essential oncogenic roles in mixed lineage leukaemia
(MLL)-rearranged leukaemia. Here we show that they are direct targets of
miRNA-196b, a microRNA (miRNA) located adjacent to and co-expressed with HOXA9,
in MLL-rearranged leukaemic cells. Forced expression of miR-196b significantly
delays MLL-fusion-mediated leukemogenesis in primary bone marrow transplantation 
through suppressing Hoxa9/Meis1 expression. However, ectopic expression of
miR-196b results in more aggressive leukaemic phenotypes and causes much faster
leukemogenesis in secondary transplantation than MLL fusion alone, likely through
the further repression of Fas expression, a proapoptotic gene downregulated in
MLL-rearranged leukaemia. Overexpression of FAS significantly inhibits
leukemogenesis and reverses miR-196b-mediated phenotypes. Targeting Hoxa9/Meis1
and Fas by miR-196b is probably also important for normal haematopoiesis. Thus,
our results uncover a previously unappreciated miRNA-regulation mechanism by
which a single miRNA may target both oncogenes and tumour suppressors,
simultaneously, or, sequentially, in tumourigenesis and normal development per
cell differentiation, indicating that miRNA regulation is much more complex than 
previously thought.

PMCID: PMC3514459
PMID: 22353710  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Feb 3;10(2):210-7. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2012.01.004.

Decoupling of tumor-initiating activity from stable immunophenotype in
HoxA9-Meis1-driven AML.

Gibbs KD Jr(1), Jager A, Crespo O, Goltsev Y, Trejo A, Richard CE, Nolan GP.

Author information: 
(1)Baxter Laboratory in Stem Cell Biology, Department of Microbiology and
Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 94305, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Apr 6;10(4):480.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2012 Feb 3;10(2):109-10.

Increasing evidence suggests tumors are maintained by cancer stem cells; however,
their nature remains controversial. In a HoxA9-Meis1 (H9M) model of acute myeloid
leukemia (AML), we found that tumor-initiating activity existed in three,
immunophenotypically distinct compartments, corresponding to disparate lineages
on the normal hematopoietic hierarchy--stem/progenitor cells (Lin(-)kit(+)) and
committed progenitors of the myeloid (Gr1(+)kit(+)) and lymphoid lineages
(Lym(+)kit(+)). These distinct tumor-initiating cells (TICs) clonally
recapitulated the immunophenotypic spectrum of the original tumor in vivo
(including cells with a less-differentiated immunophenotype) and shared signaling
networks, such that in vivo pharmacologic targeting of conserved TIC survival
pathways (DNA methyltransferase and MEK phosphorylation) significantly increased 
survival. Collectively, H9M AML is organized as an atypical hierarchy that defies
the strict lineage marker boundaries and unidirectional differentiation of normal
hematopoiesis. Moreover, this suggests that in certain malignancies
tumor-initiation activity (or "cancer stemness") can represent a cellular state
that exists independently of distinct immunophenotypic definition.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3273989
PMID: 22305570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Mol Cell Biol. 2012 Apr;32(7):1202-13. doi: 10.1128/MCB.05977-11. Epub 2012 Jan
23.

HOXA9 methylation by PRMT5 is essential for endothelial cell expression of
leukocyte adhesion molecules.

Bandyopadhyay S(1), Harris DP, Adams GN, Lause GE, McHugh A, Tillmaand EG, Money 
A, Willard B, Fox PL, Dicorleto PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Lerner Research Institute and Cleveland Clinic
Lerner College of Medicine, Cleveland Clinic Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio, USA.

The induction of proinflammatory proteins in stimulated endothelial cells (EC)
requires activation of multiple transcription programs. The homeobox
transcription factor HOXA9 has an important regulatory role in cytokine induction
of the EC-leukocyte adhesion molecules (ELAM) E-selectin and vascular cell
adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1). However, the mechanism underlying
stimulus-dependent activation of HOXA9 is completely unknown. Here, we elucidate 
the molecular mechanism of HOXA9 activation by tumor necrosis factor alpha
(TNF-a) and show an unexpected requirement for arginine methylation by protein
arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5). PRMT5 was identified as a TNF-a-dependent
binding partner of HOXA9 by mass spectrometry. Small interfering RNA
(siRNA)-mediated depletion of PRMT5 abrogated stimulus-dependent HOXA9
methylation with concomitant loss in E-selectin or VCAM-1 induction. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed that PRMT5 is recruited to the E-selectin
promoter following transient HOXA9 binding to its cognate recognition sequence.
PRMT5 induces symmetric dimethylation of Arg140 on HOXA9, an event essential for 
E-selectin induction. In summary, PRMT5 is a critical coactivator component in a 
newly defined, HOXA9-containing transcription complex. Moreover,
stimulus-dependent methylation of HOXA9 is essential for ELAM expression during
the EC inflammatory response.

PMCID: PMC3302442
PMID: 22269951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Blood. 2012 Mar 8;119(10):2314-24. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-386235. Epub 2012
Jan 17.

Up-regulation of a HOXA-PBX3 homeobox-gene signature following down-regulation of
miR-181 is associated with adverse prognosis in patients with cytogenetically
abnormal AML.

Li Z(1), Huang H, Li Y, Jiang X, Chen P, Arnovitz S, Radmacher MD, Maharry K,
Elkahloun A, Yang X, He C, He M, Zhang Z, Dohner K, Neilly MB, Price C, Lussier
YA, Zhang Y, Larson RA, Le Beau MM, Caligiuri MA, Bullinger L, Valk PJ, Delwel R,
Lowenberg B, Liu PP, Marcucci G, Bloomfield CD, Rowley JD, Chen J.

Author information: 
(1)Section of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of Chicago,
IL 60637, USA.

Increased expression levels of miR-181 family members have been shown to be
associated with favorable outcome in patients with cytogenetically normal acute
myeloid leukemia. Here we show that increased expression of miR-181a and miR-181b
is also significantly (P < .05; Cox regression) associated with favorable overall
survival in cytogenetically abnormal AML (CA-AML) patients. We further show that 
up-regulation of a gene signature composed of 4 potential miR-181 targets
(including HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA11, and PBX3), associated with down-regulation of
miR-181 family members, is an independent predictor of adverse overall survival
on multivariable testing in analysis of 183 CA-AML patients. The independent
prognostic impact of this 4-homeobox-gene signature was confirmed in a validation
set of 271 CA-AML patients. Furthermore, our in vitro and in vivo studies
indicated that ectopic expression of miR-181b significantly promoted apoptosis
and inhibited viability/proliferation of leukemic cells and delayed
leukemogenesis; such effects could be reversed by forced expression of PBX3.
Thus, the up-regulation of the 4 homeobox genes resulting from the
down-regulation of miR-181 family members probably contribute to the poor
prognosis of patients with nonfavorable CA-AML. Restoring expression of miR-181b 
and/or targeting the HOXA/PBX3 pathways may provide new strategies to improve
survival substantially.

PMCID: PMC3311258
PMID: 22251480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Med Oncol. 2012 Dec;29(4):2332-6. doi: 10.1007/s12032-011-0142-3. Epub 2011 Dec
31.

A new dic(7;12)(p12.21;p12.2) and i(12)(q10) during the lymphoid blast crisis of 
patient with Ph+ chronic myeloid leukemia.

de Oliveira FM(1), de Carvalho Palma L, Falcão RP, Simões BP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine of
Ribeirão Preto, University of São Paulo, Av. Bandeirantes, 3900, 14049-900,
Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil. morato.oliveira@yahoo.com.br

Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a common myeloproliferative disease that is
characterized by the clonal expansion of marrow stem cells, and is associated
with the Philadelphia chromosome. As the disease progresses, additional
chromosome abnormalities may arise. The prognostic impact of secondary
chromosomal abnormalities in CML is complex, heterogeneous, and sometimes related
to previous treatment. Here, we describe a CML patient in lymphoid blast crisis
associated with a new chromosomal abnormality identified, dic(7;12)(p12.21;p12.2)
and i(12)(q10) using classical cytogenetics and spectral karyotype analysis. To
the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of t(7;12)(p11.1;q11.1) and
i(12)(q10) in a CML patient with lymphoid evolution.

PMID: 22209840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Blood. 2012 Feb 2;119(5):1151-61. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-362079. Epub 2011
Dec 15.

ECSASB2 mediates MLL degradation during hematopoietic differentiation.

Wang J(1), Muntean AG, Hess JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.

Mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) is a key epigenetic regulator of normal
hematopoietic development and chromosomal translocations involving MLL are one of
the most common genetic alterations in human leukemia. Here we show that ASB2, a 
component of the ECS(ASB) E3 ubiquitin ligase complex, mediates MLL degradation
through interaction with the PHD/Bromodomain region of MLL. Forced expression of 
ASB2 degrades MLL and reduces MLL transactivation activity. In contrast, the
MLL-AF9 fusion protein does not interact with ASB2 and is resistant to ASB2
mediated degradation. Increased expression of ASB2 during hematopoietic
differentiation is associated with decreased levels of MLL protein and
down-regulation of MLL target genes. Knockdown of ASB2 leads to increased
expression of HOXA9 and delayed cell differentiation. Our data support a model
whereby ASB2 contributes to hematopoietic differentiation, in part, through MLL
degradation and HOX gene down-regulation. Moreover, deletion of the PHD/Bromo
region renders MLL fusion proteins resistant to ASB2-mediated degradation and may
contribute to leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3277351
PMID: 22174154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Blood. 2012 Jan 19;119(3):727-35. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-06-362277. Epub 2011
Nov 30.

Expansion of functionally defined mouse hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells
by a short isoform of RUNX1/AML1.

Tsuzuki S(1), Seto M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine, Aichi Cancer Center Research Institute,
Nagoya, Japan. stsuzuki@aichi-cc.jp

Self-renewal activity is essential for the maintenance and regeneration of the
hematopoietic system. The search for molecules capable of promoting self-renewal 
and expanding hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) has met with limited success. Here,
we show that a short isoform (AML1a) of RUNX1/AML1 has such activities. Enforced 
AML1a expression expanded functionally defined HSCs, with an efficiency that was 
at least 20 times greater than that of the control in vivo and by 18-fold within 
7 days ex vivo. The ex vivo-expanded HSCs could repopulate hosts after secondary 
transplantations. Moreover, AML1a expression resulted in vigorous and long-term
(> 10(6)-fold at 4 weeks) ex vivo expansion of progenitor cell populations
capable of differentiating into multilineages. Gene expression analysis revealed 
that AML1a expression was associated with up-regulation of genes, including
Hoxa9, Meis1, Stat1, and Ski. shRNA-mediated silencing of these genes attenuated 
AML1a-mediated activities. Overall, these findings establish AML1a as an
isoform-specific molecule that can influence several transcriptional regulators
associated with HSCs, leading to enhanced self-renewal activity and hematopoietic
stem/progenitor cell expansion ex vivo and in vivo. Therefore, the abilities of
AML1a may have implications for HSC transplantation and transfusion medicine,
given that the effects also can be obtained by cell-penetrating AML1a protein.

PMID: 22130803  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Gynecol Oncol. 2012 Mar;124(3):582-8. doi: 10.1016/j.ygyno.2011.11.026. Epub 2011
Nov 22.

Prognostic and diagnostic significance of DNA methylation patterns in high grade 
serous ovarian cancer.

Montavon C(1), Gloss BS, Warton K, Barton CA, Statham AL, Scurry JP, Tabor B,
Nguyen TV, Qu W, Samimi G, Hacker NF, Sutherland RL, Clark SJ, O'Brien PM.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Research Program, Garvan Institute of Medical Research, Sydney NSW
2010, Australia.

OBJECTIVE: Altered DNA methylation patterns hold promise as cancer biomarkers. In
this study we selected a panel of genes which are commonly methylated in a
variety of cancers to evaluate their potential application as biomarkers for
prognosis and diagnosis in high grade serous ovarian carcinoma (HGSOC); the most 
common and lethal subtype of ovarian cancer.
METHODS: The methylation patterns of 10 genes (BRCA1, EN1, DLEC1, HOXA9, RASSF1A,
GATA4, GATA5, HSULF1, CDH1, SFN) were examined and compared in a cohort of 80
primary HGSOC and 12 benign ovarian surface epithelium (OSE) samples using
methylation-specific headloop suppression PCR.
RESULTS: The genes were variably methylated in primary HGSOC, with HOXA9
methylation observed in 95% of cases. Most genes were rarely methylated in benign
OSE, with the exception of SFN which was methylated in all HGSOC and benign OSE
samples examined. Methylation of DLEC1 was associated with disease recurrence,
independent of tumor stage and suboptimal surgical debulking (HR 3.5 (95%
CI:1.10-11.07), p=0.033). A combination of the methylation status of HOXA9 and
EN1 could discriminate HGSOC from benign OSE with a sensitivity of 98.8% and a
specificity of 91.7%, which increased to 100% sensitivity with no loss of
specificity when pre-operative CA125 levels were also incorporated.
CONCLUSIONS: This study provides further evidence to support the feasibility of
detecting altered DNA methylation patterns as a potential diagnostic and
prognostic approach for HGSOC.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22115852  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Carcinogenesis. 2012 Feb;33(2):436-41. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgr260. Epub 2011 Nov 
18.

Epigenetic subclassification of meningiomas based on genome-wide DNA methylation 
analyses.

Kishida Y(1), Natsume A, Kondo Y, Takeuchi I, An B, Okamoto Y, Shinjo K, Saito K,
Ando H, Ohka F, Sekido Y, Wakabayashi T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Nagoya University School of Medicine, 65
Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya, Aichi 466-8550, Japan.

Meningiomas are among the most common intracranial tumors and are mostly curable 
by surgical resection. However, some populations of meningiomas with benign
histological profiles show malignant behavior. The reasons for this inconsistency
are yet to be ascertained, and novel diagnostic criteria other than the
histological one are urgently needed. The aim of the present study is to
subclassify meningiomas from the viewpoint of gene methylation and to determine
the subgroup with malignant characteristics. Thirty meningiomas were analyzed
using microarrays for 6157 genes and were classified into three clusters on the
basis of their methylation status; these were found to be independent of the
histological grading. One of the clusters showed a high frequency of recurrence, 
with a marked accumulation of methylation in a subset of genes. We hypothesized
that the aggressive meningiomas universally share characteristic methylation in
certain genes; therefore, we chose the genes that strongly contributed to cluster
formation. The quantified methylation values of five chosen genes (HOXA6, HOXA9, 
PENK, UPK3A and IGF2BP1) agreed well with microarray findings, and a scoring
system consisting of the five genes significantly correlated with a high
frequency of recurrence in an additional validation set of 32 patients. Of
particular note is that three cases with malignant transformation already showed 
hypermethylation at histologically benign stage. In conclusion, a subgroup of
meningiomas is characterized by aberrant hypermethylation of the subset of genes 
in the early stage of tumorigenesis, and our findings highlight the possibility
of speculating potential malignancy of meningiomas by assessing methylation
status.

PMID: 22102699  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Blood. 2012 Jan 12;119(2):388-98. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-03-341081. Epub 2011
Nov 9.

Identification and characterization of Hoxa9 binding sites in hematopoietic
cells.

Huang Y(1), Sitwala K, Bronstein J, Sanders D, Dandekar M, Collins C, Robertson
G, MacDonald J, Cezard T, Bilenky M, Thiessen N, Zhao Y, Zeng T, Hirst M, Hero A,
Jones S, Hess JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 48109-0602, USA.

The clustered homeobox proteins play crucial roles in development, hematopoiesis,
and leukemia, yet the targets they regulate and their mechanisms of action are
poorly understood. Here, we identified the binding sites for Hoxa9 and the Hox
cofactor Meis1 on a genome-wide level and profiled their associated epigenetic
modifications and transcriptional targets. Hoxa9 and the Hox cofactor Meis1
cobind at hundreds of highly evolutionarily conserved sites, most of which are
distant from transcription start sites. These sites show high levels of histone
H3K4 monomethylation and CBP/P300 binding characteristic of enhancers.
Furthermore, a subset of these sites shows enhancer activity in transient
transfection assays. Many Hoxa9 and Meis1 binding sites are also bound by PU.1
and other lineage-restricted transcription factors previously implicated in
establishment of myeloid enhancers. Conditional Hoxa9 activation is associated
with CBP/P300 recruitment, histone acetylation, and transcriptional activation of
a network of proto-oncogenes, including Erg, Flt3, Lmo2, Myb, and Sox4.
Collectively, this work suggests that Hoxa9 regulates transcription by
interacting with enhancers of genes important for hematopoiesis and leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3257007
PMID: 22072553  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Blood. 2012 Jan 5;119(1):64-71. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-354050. Epub 2011 Oct 
24.

AAV8 vector expressing IL24 efficiently suppresses tumor growth mediated by
specific mechanisms in MLL/AF4-positive ALL model mice.

Tamai H(1), Miyake K, Yamaguchi H, Takatori M, Dan K, Inokuchi K, Shimada T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Division of Gene Therapy
Research Center for Advanced Medical Technology, Nippon Medical School, Sendagi
1-1-5, Bunkyo-Ku, Tokyo113-8603, Japan. s6056@nms.ac.jp

Mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL)/AF4-positive acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is a
common type of leukemia in infants, which is associated with a high relapse rate 
and poor prognosis. IL24 selectively induces apoptosis in cancer cells and exerts
immunomodulatory and antiangiogenic effects. We examined the effects of
adeno-associated virus type 8 (AAV8) vector-mediated muscle-directed systemic
gene therapy in MLL/AF4-positive ALL using IL24. In a series of in vitro studies,
we examined the effects of AAV8-IL24-transduced C2C12 cell-conditioned medium. We
also examined the effects of AAV8-IL24 in MLL/AF4 transgenic mice. The results
revealed the effects of AAV8-IL24 in MLL/AF4-positive ALL both in vitro and in
vivo. With regard to the mechanism of therapy using AAV8-IL24 in MLL/AF4-positive
ALL, we demonstrated the antiangiogenicity and effects on the ER stress pathway
and unreported pathways through inhibition of S100A6 and HOXA9, which is specific
to MLL/AF4-positive ALL. Inhibition of S100A6 by IL24 was dependent on TNF-a and 
induced acetylation of p53 followed by activation of the caspase 8-caspase 3
apoptotic pathway. Inhibition of HOXA9 by IL24, which was independent of TNF-a,
induced MEIS1 activation followed by activation of the caspase 8-caspase 3
apoptotic pathway. Thus, gene therapy using AAV8-IL24 is a promising treatment
for MLL/AF4-positive ALL.

PMID: 22025528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Pediatr Surg Int. 2012 Feb;28(2):115-21. doi: 10.1007/s00383-011-2992-3.

The spatio-temporal patterning of Hoxa9 and Hoxa13 in the developing zebrafish
enteric nervous system.

Doodnath R(1), Wride M, Puri P.

Author information: 
(1)National Children's Research Centre, Our Lady's Children's Hospital, Crumlin, 
Dublin 12, Ireland.

BACKGROUND: Hirschsprung's disease is characterised by the absence of ganglion
cells in the distal bowel, a process which is controlled by complex genetic
pathways. Homeobox genes have a major role in gut development and this is
depicted by the enteric Hox code which describes the different spatial and
temporal expression of Hox genes. Hoxa9 and Hoxa13 mutations have been discovered
in patients with Hirschsprung's disease (HD). The aim of this study was to
determine the spatio-temporal pattern of Hoxa9 and Hoxa13 in enteric nervous
system (ENS) development using the zebrafish model.
METHODS: Purified plasmids that contained the gene of interest were obtained and 
inoculated into culture medium to exponentially increase the number of bacteria
containing the plasmid. Cells were then harvested by centrifugation and plasmid
DNA was extracted, which was then linearised and precipitated. RNA
digoxigenin-labelled probes were made by in vitro transcription reaction. In situ
hybridisation was carried out using these probes on zebrafish embryos which were 
collected from 24 to 120 h post fertilisation (hpf), by which time the zebrafish 
intestine is fully developed. Embryos were then mounted in glycerol and imaged
using an Olympus B40 microscope and images were taken using an Olympus Super F1.8
digital camera.
RESULTS: At 24 hpf, Hoxa9 expression is seen in the forebrain and hindbrain and
also in the very distal myotome whereas Hoxa13 expression, however, is seen only 
at the forebrain and hindbrain. At 48 hpf, Hoxa9- and Hoxa13-labelled cells are
seen migrating distally from the forebrain into the notochord and spinal cord. At
72 hpf, Hoxa9-labelled cells can be seen throughout the spinal cord whereas
Hoxa13 positive cells are seen migrating down from the spinal cord and in the
proximal gut. By 96 hpf, Hoxa9- and Hoxa13-labelled cells have migrated down the 
full length of the spinal cord and along the proximal and mid intestine. By 120
hpf, Hoxa9 and Hoxa13 positive cells can be seen along the entire length of the
zebrafish intestine.
CONCLUSIONS: These results show further evidence that Hoxa9 and Hoxa13 are
involved in the early and organised patterning of ENS development in the
zebrafish model.

PMID: 21971947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Blood. 2011 Dec 8;118(24):6247-57. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-328880. Epub 2011
Sep 26.

NUP98 gene fusions and hematopoietic malignancies: common themes and new biologic
insights.

Gough SM(1), Slape CI, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia Biology Section, Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Structural chromosomal rearrangements of the Nucleoporin 98 gene (NUP98),
primarily balanced translocations and inversions, are associated with a wide
array of hematopoietic malignancies. NUP98 is known to be fused to at least 28
different partner genes in patients with hematopoietic malignancies, including
acute myeloid leukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia in blast crisis, myelodysplastic
syndrome, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and bilineage/biphenotypic leukemia.
NUP98 gene fusions typically encode a fusion protein that retains the amino
terminus of NUP98; in this context, it is important to note that several recent
studies have demonstrated that the amino-terminal portion of NUP98 exhibits
transcription activation potential. Approximately half of the NUP98 fusion
partners encode homeodomain proteins, and at least 5 NUP98 fusions involve known 
histone-modifying genes. Several of the NUP98 fusions, including NUP98-homeobox
(HOX)A9, NUP98-HOXD13, and NUP98-JARID1A, have been used to generate animal
models of both lymphoid and myeloid malignancy; these models typically
up-regulate HOXA cluster genes, including HOXA5, HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA10. In
addition, several of the NUP98 fusion proteins have been shown to inhibit
differentiation of hematopoietic precursors and to increase self-renewal of
hematopoietic stem or progenitor cells, providing a potential mechanism for
malignant transformation.

PMCID: PMC3236115
PMID: 21948299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2012 Jan;138(1):35-47. doi: 10.1007/s00432-011-1070-5.
Epub 2011 Sep 27.

Quantitative methylation analysis of HOXA3, 7, 9, and 10 genes in glioma:
association with tumor WHO grade and clinical outcome.

Di Vinci A(1), Casciano I, Marasco E, Banelli B, Ravetti GL, Borzì L, Brigati C, 
Forlani A, Dorcaratto A, Allemanni G, Zona G, Spaziante R, Gohlke H, Gardin G,
Merlo DF, Mantovani V, Romani M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Genetics and Epigenetics, Istituto Nazionale per la
Ricerca sul Cancro, IST Largo Rosanna Benzi 10, 16132, Genoa, Italy.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether specific HOXA
epigenetic signatures could differentiate glioma with distinct biological,
pathological, and clinical characteristics.
METHODS: We evaluated HOXA3, 7, 9, and 10 methylation in 63 glioma samples by
MassARRAY and pyrosequencing.
RESULTS: We demonstrated the direct statistical correlation between the level of 
methylation of all HOXA genes examined and WHO grading. Moreover, in glioblastoma
patients, higher level of HOXA9 and HOXA10 methylation significantly correlated
with increased survival probability (HOXA9-HR: 0.36, P = 0.007; HOXA10-HR: 0.46, 
P = 0.045; combined HOXA9 and 10-HR 0.28, P = 0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: This study identifies HOXA3, 7, 9, and 10 as methylation targets
mainly in high-grade glioma and hypermethylation of the HOXA9 and 10 as
prognostic factor in glioblastoma patients. Our data indicate that these
epigenetic changes may be biomarkers of clinically different subgroups of glioma 
patients that could eventually benefit from personalized therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 21947269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. J Biol Chem. 2011 Nov 11;286(45):38989-9001. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.297952. Epub
2011 Sep 21.

Amino-terminal enhancer of split (AES) interacts with the oncoprotein NUP98-HOXA9
and enhances its transforming ability.

Sarma NJ(1), Yaseen NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

NUP98-HOXA9 is the prototype of NUP98 fusion oncoproteins that cause acute
myeloid leukemia. It consists of an N-terminal FG-rich portion of the nucleoporin
NUP98 fused to the homeodomain region of the homeobox protein HOXA9, and acts as 
an aberrant transcription factor. To identify interacting partners of
NUP98-HOXA9, we used a cytoplasmic yeast two-hybrid assay to avoid the
nonspecific trans-activation that would occur with the traditional yeast
two-hybrid assay due to the transactivating properties of NUP98-HOXA9. We
identified amino-terminal enhancer of split (AES), a transcriptional regulator of
the transducin-like enhancer/Groucho family as a novel interaction partner of
NUP98-HOXA9. The interaction was confirmed by in vitro pulldown and
co-immunoprecipitation assays and was shown to require the FG repeat region of
NUP98-HOXA9. Immunofluorescence analysis showed that AES localizes primarily to
the interior of the nucleus. AES also showed a strong interaction with wild-type 
NUP98. AES augmented the transcriptional activity of NUP98-HOXA9. In the presence
of NUP98-HOXA9, AES caused an increase in long-term proliferation of primary
human CD34+ cells with a marked increase in the numbers of primitive cells. These
effects of AES were not observed in the absence of NUP98-HOXA9. AES knockdown
diminished the transcriptional and proliferative effects of NUP98-HOXA9. AES
caused a shift away from the erythroid lineage in cells expressing NUP98-HOXA9.
These data establish AES as an interacting partner of NUP98-HOXA9 and show that
it cooperates with NUP98-HOXA9 in transcriptional regulation and cell
transformation.

PMCID: PMC3234724
PMID: 21937451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Blood. 2011 Oct 27;118(17):4682-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-05-354076. Epub 2011
Sep 7.

C-terminal domain of MEIS1 converts PKNOX1 (PREP1) into a HOXA9-collaborating
oncoprotein.

Bisaillon R(1), Wilhelm BT, Krosl J, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)University of Montreal, Montreal, QC, Canada.

The three-amino-acid loop extension (TALE) class homeodomain proteins MEIS1 and
PKNOX1 (PREP1) share the ability to interact with PBX and HOX family members and 
bind similar DNA sequences but appear to play opposing roles in tumor
development. Elevated levels of MEIS1 accelerate development of HOX- and
MLL-induced leukemias, and this pro-tumorigenic property has been associated with
transcriptional activity of MEIS1. In contrast, reduction of PKNOX1 levels has
been linked with cancer development despite the absence of an identifiable
transactivating domain. In this report, we show that a chimeric protein generated
by fusion of the MEIS1 C-terminal region encompassing the transactivating domain 
with the full-length PKNOX1 (PKNOX1-MC) acquired the ability to accelerate the
onset of Hoxa9-induced leukemia in the mouse bone marrow
transduction/transplantation model. Gene expression profiling of primary bone
marrow cells transduced with Hoxa9 plus Meis1, or Hoxa9 plus Pknox1-MC revealed
perturbations in overlapping functional gene subsets implicated in DNA packaging,
chromosome organization, and in cell cycle regulation. Together, results
presented in this report suggest that the C-terminal domain of MEIS1 confers to
PKNOX1 an ectopic transactivating function that promotes leukemogenesis by
regulating expression of genes involved in chromatin accessibility and cell cycle
progression.

PMID: 21900201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


242. Leuk Res. 2011 Dec;35(12):1585-90. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2011.08.006. Epub 2011 
Sep 6.

High expression of IGFBP2 is associated with chemoresistance in adult acute
myeloid leukemia.

Kühnl A(1), Kaiser M, Neumann M, Fransecky L, Heesch S, Radmacher M, Marcucci G, 
Bloomfield CD, Hofmann WK, Thiel E, Baldus CD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology and Oncology, Charité University Hospital, Campus
Benjamin Franklin, Berlin, Germany. andrea.kuehnl@charite.de

Insulin-like growth factor (IGF) signaling plays an important role in many tumors
and overexpression of IGF Binding Protein (IGFBP) 2 has been associated with
adverse outcome in childhood leukemia. Here, we evaluated IGFBP2 mRNA expression 
and its prognostic implications in 99 adult acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients
by quantitative real-time RT-PCR. High IGFBP2 was associated with a high
incidence of primary resistant disease (IGFBP2 high 65%, IGFBP2 low 32%; P=0.02) 
and was independently predictive for therapy resistance [OR 3.6 (95% CI 1.2-11); 
P=0.02] in multivariate analyses. Gene-expression profiling revealed an
up-regulation of genes implicated in leukemogenesis (MYB, MEIS1, HOXB3, HOXA9)
and genes associated with adverse outcome (ERG, WT1) in patients with high IGFBP2
expression. Thus, our data suggest a role of IGFBP2 and IGF signaling in
chemoresistance of AML. Patients with high IGFBP2 expression might benefit from
molecular therapies targeting the IGF pathway.

Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4023812
PMID: 21899885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2011 Aug;52(8):679-85.

[Molecular mechanisms of leukemogenesis in MLL-leukemias].

[Article in Japanese]

Yokoyama A.

PMID: 21897075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Sep 20;108(38):15751-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1111498108. Epub 2011 Sep 6.

Function of leukemogenic mixed lineage leukemia 1 (MLL) fusion proteins through
distinct partner protein complexes.

Biswas D(1), Milne TA, Basrur V, Kim J, Elenitoba-Johnson KS, Allis CD, Roeder
RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY 10065, USA.

A number of acute leukemias arise from fusion of the mixed lineage leukemia 1
protein (MLL) N terminus to a variety of fusion partners that have been reported 
to reside in one or more poorly defined complexes linked to transcription
elongation through interactions with the histone H3-K79 methyltransferase DOT1
and positive transcription elongation factor b (P-TEFb). Here we first identify
natural complexes (purified through fusion partners AF9, AF4, and ELL) with
overlapping components, different elongation activities, and different cofactor
associations that suggest dynamic interactions. Then, through reconstitution of
defined, functionally active minimal complexes, we identify stable subcomplexes
that, through newly defined protein-protein interactions, form distinct higher
order complexes. These definitive analyses show, for example, that (i) through
direct interactions with AF9 and cyclinT1, family members AF4 and AFF4
independently mediate association of P-TEFb with AF9, (ii) P-TEFb, through direct
interactions, provides the link for association of ELL and ELL-associated factors
1 and 2 (EAF1 and EAF2) with AF4, and (iii) in the absence of other factors, DOT1
forms a stable complex with AF9 and does not interact with AF9AF4P-TEFb
complexes. Finally, we show the importance of defined higher order complex
formation in MLL-AF9-mediated transcriptional up-regulation and cell
immortalization potential in vivo. Thus, our study provides direct mechanistic
insight into the role of fusion partners in MLL fusion-mediated leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3179097
PMID: 21896721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. J Biol Chem. 2011 Oct 21;286(42):36944-55. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.244400. Epub
2011 Aug 31.

Recognition of unmodified histone H3 by the first PHD finger of bromodomain-PHD
finger protein 2 provides insights into the regulation of histone
acetyltransferases monocytic leukemic zinc-finger protein (MOZ) and MOZ-related
factor (MORF).

Qin S(1), Jin L, Zhang J, Liu L, Ji P, Wu M, Wu J, Shi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at the Microscale and School
of Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui
230026, China.

MOZ (monocytic leukemic zinc-finger protein) and MORF (MOZ-related factor) are
histone acetyltransferases important for HOX gene expression as well as embryo
and postnatal development. They form complexes with other regulatory subunits
through the scaffold proteins BRPF1/2/3 (bromodomain-PHD (plant homeodomain)
finger proteins 1, 2, or 3). BRPF proteins have multiple domains, including two
PHD fingers, for potential interactions with histones. Here we show that the
first PHD finger of BRPF2 specifically recognizes the N-terminal tail of
unmodified histone H3 (unH3) and report the solution structures of this PHD
finger both free and in complex with the unH3 peptide. Structural analysis
revealed that the unH3 peptide forms a third antiparallel ß-strand that pairs
with the PHD1 two-stranded antiparallel ß-sheet. The binding specificity was
determined primarily through the recognition of arginine 2 and lysine 4 of the
unH3 by conserved aspartic acids of PHD1 and of threonine 6 of the unH3 by a
conserved asparagine. Isothermal titration calorimetry and NMR assays showed that
post-translational modifications such as H3R2me2as, H3T3ph, H3K4me, H3K4ac, and
H3T6ph antagonized the interaction between histone H3 and PHD1. Furthermore,
histone binding by PHD1 was important for BRPF2 to localize to the HOXA9 locus in
vivo. PHD1 is highly conserved in yeast NuA3 and other histone acetyltransferase 
complexes, so the results reported here also shed light on the function and
regulation of these complexes.

PMCID: PMC3196140
PMID: 21880731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Anticancer Res. 2011 Sep;31(9):2787-96.

Acquired drug resistance to vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2
tyrosine kinase inhibitor in human vascular endothelial cells.

Arao T(1), Matsumoto K, Furuta K, Kudo K, Kaneda H, Nagai T, Sakai K, Fujita Y,
Tamura D, Aomatsu K, Koizumi F, Nishio K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genome Biology, Kinki University School of Medicine,
Osaka-Sayama, Japan.

Acquired resistance to antiangiogenic drugs has emerged as a potentially
important issue in clinical settings; however, the underlying molecular and
cellular mechanism of resistance to vascular endothelial growth factor receptor 2
(VEGFR2) tyrosine kinase inhibitor (TKI) remains largely unclear. We evaluated
the cellular characteristics of human umbilical vein endothelial cell (HUVEC)
clones, which are resistant to VEGFR2-TKI (Ki8751) to elucidate this mechanism of
resistance to antiangiogenic drugs. Resistant HUVEC clones were 10-fold more
resistant to VEGFR2-TKI than the parental cells and they exhibited an almost
complete absence of VEGF-mediated cellular proliferation. The mRNA expression
analysis revealed that expression of VEGFR1, VEGFR2 and VEGFR3 was lower in
resistant clones, while that of several angiogenic ligands was increased. The
protein expression of VEGFR2 was markedly down-regulated in two (R5 and R6 clone)
out of five resistant clones. Focusing on the R5 clone, VEGF stimulation did not 
increase the phosphorylation of VEGFR2 or the dimerization of VEGFR2. The
inhibition of phospho-AKT by VEGFR2-TKI was also weakened more than 10-fold in
the R5 clone. Finally, a microarray analysis revealed that some
angiogenesis-associated, and some angiogenesis-specific genes, including platelet
endothelial cell adhesion molecule 1 (PECAM1)/CD31, homeobox A9 (HOXA9), and
endothelial cell-specific molecule 1 (ESM1), were remarkably down-regulated in
all the resistant clones compared with the parental cells. HUVEC clones resistant
to VEGFR2-TKI exhibited down-regulation of VEGFR2, a decreased signal response to
VEGF stimulation, and the loss of vascular endothelial markers. These results
strongly suggest that an escape from VEGFR2 signaling-dependency is one of the
cellular mechanisms of resistance to VEGFR2-TKI in vascular endothelial cells.

PMID: 21868521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Pediatr Blood Cancer. 2012 May;58(5):715-21. doi: 10.1002/pbc.23279. Epub 2011
Aug 4.

Differentially expressed miRNAs in cytogenetic and molecular subtypes of
pediatric acute myeloid leukemia.

Danen-van Oorschot AA(1), Kuipers JE, Arentsen-Peters S, Schotte D, de Haas V,
Trka J, Baruchel A, Reinhardt D, Pieters R, Zwaan CM, van den Heuvel-Eibrink MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

BACKGROUND: miRNAs regulate gene expression, and thus play an important role in
critical cellular processes. Aberrant miRNA expression patterns have been found
in various types of cancer. So far, information about the expression of miRNAs in
pediatric acute myeloid leukemia is limited.
PROCEDURE: We studied expression of miR-29a, -155, -196a, and -196b by stem-loop 
based RT-qPCR in 82 pediatric acute myeloid leukemia patients selected to
represent relevant cytogenetic and molecular subgroups.
RESULTS: High miR-196a and -b expression was observed in patients carrying MLL
gene rearrangements (P < 0.001), NPM1 mutations (P < 0.001), or FLT3-ITD in a
cytogenetically normal background (P = 0.02), compared to all other patients. In 
contrast, CEBPA mutated cases had a low expression of miR-196a and -b (P =
0.001). Expression of miR-196a and -b was correlated with expression of
neighboring HOXA and HOXB genes (Spearman's r = 0.46-0.82, P < 0.01). Expression 
of miR-155 was not related to cytogenetic features but high expression of miR-155
was observed in FLT3-ITD (P = 0.001) and NPM1-mutated cases (P = 0.04). Lower
miR-29a expression was mainly observed in MLL-rearranged pediatric acute myeloid 
leukemia, specifically in cases carrying t(10;11) (P < 0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: We show aberrant expression of specific miRNAs in clinically
relevant cytogenetic and molecular subgroups of pediatric acute myeloid leukemia,
suggesting a role for these miRNAs in the underlying biology in these specific
subgroups.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 21818844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Br J Haematol. 2011 Oct;155(2):167-81. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2141.2011.08810.x.
Epub 2011 Aug 2.

NUP98-HOXA9-transgenic zebrafish develop a myeloproliferative neoplasm and
provide new insight into mechanisms of myeloid leukaemogenesis.

Forrester AM(1), Grabher C, McBride ER, Boyd ER, Vigerstad MH, Edgar A, Kai FB,
Da'as SI, Payne E, Look AT, Berman JN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova
Scotia, Canada.

NUP98-HOXA9 [t(7;11) (p15;p15)] is associated with inferior prognosis in de novo 
and treatment-related acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) and contributes to blast
crisis in chronic myeloid leukaemia (CML). We have engineered an inducible
transgenic zebrafish harbouring human NUP98-HOXA9 under the zebrafish spi1(pu.1) 
promoter. NUP98-HOXA9 perturbed zebrafish embryonic haematopoiesis, with
upregulated spi1 expression at the expense of gata1a. Markers associated with
more differentiated myeloid cells, lcp1, lyz, and mpx were also elevated, but to 
a lesser extent than spi1, suggesting differentiation of early myeloid
progenitors may be impaired by NUP98-HOXA9. Following irradiation,
NUP98-HOXA9-expressing embryos showed increased numbers of cells in G2-M
transition compared to controls and absence of a normal apoptotic response, which
may result from an upregulation of bcl2. These data suggest NUP98-HOXA9-induced
oncogenesis may result from a combination of defects in haematopoiesis and an
aberrant response to DNA damage. Importantly, 23% of adult NUP98-HOXA9-transgenic
fish developed a myeloproliferative neoplasm (MPN) at 19-23 months of age. In
summary, we have identified an embryonic haematopoietic phenotype in a transgenic
zebrafish line that subsequently develops MPN. This tool provides a unique
opportunity for high-throughput in vivo chemical modifier screens to identify
novel therapeutic agents in high risk AML.

© 2011 Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMID: 21810091  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Clin Cancer Res. 2011 Sep 1;17(17):5582-92. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-10-2659.
Epub 2011 Jul 25.

Comprehensive genome methylation analysis in bladder cancer: identification and
validation of novel methylated genes and application of these as urinary tumor
markers.

Reinert T(1), Modin C, Castano FM, Lamy P, Wojdacz TK, Hansen LL, Wiuf C, Borre
M, Dyrskjøt L, Orntoft TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Urology, Aarhus University Hospital,
Aarhus N, Denmark.

PURPOSE: Epigenetic alterations are common and can now be addressed in a parallel
fashion. We investigated the methylation in bladder cancer with respect to
location in genome, consistency, variation in metachronous tumors, impact on
transcripts, chromosomal location, and usefulness as urinary markers.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: A microarray assay was utilized to analyze methylation in 56
samples. Independent validation was conducted in 63 samples by a PCR-based method
and bisulfite sequencing. The methylation levels in 174 urine specimens were
quantified. Transcript levels were analyzed using expression microarrays and
pathways were analyzed using dedicated software.
RESULTS: Global methylation patterns were established within and outside CpG
islands. We validated methylation of the eight tumor markers genes ZNF154 (P <
0.0001), HOXA9 (P < 0.0001), POU4F2 (P < 0.0001), EOMES (P = 0.0005), ACOT11 (P =
0.0001), PCDHGA12 (P = 0.0001), CA3 (P = 0.0002), and PTGDR (P = 0.0110), the
candidate marker of disease progression TBX4 (P < 0.04), and other genes with
stage-specific methylation. The methylation of metachronous tumors was stable and
targeted to certain pathways. The correlation to expression was not stringent.
Chromosome 21 showed most differential methylation (P < 0.0001) and specifically 
hypomethylation of keratins, which together with keratin-like proteins were
epigenetically regulated. In DNA from voided urine, we detected differential
methylation of ZNF154 (P < 0.0001), POU4F2 (P < 0.0001), HOXA9 (P < 0.0001), and 
EOMES (P < 0.0001), achieving 84% sensitivity and 96% specificity.
CONCLUSIONS: We initiated a detailed mapping of the methylome in metachronous
bladder cancer. Novel genes with tumor, chromosome, as well as pathway-specific
differential methylation in bladder cancer were identified. The methylated genes 
were promising cancer markers for early detection of bladder cancer.

©2011 AACR.

PMID: 21788354  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. J Immunol. 2011 Aug 15;187(4):1653-63. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1100311. Epub 2011
Jul 18.

Graft-versus-leukemia (GVL) against mouse blast-crisis chronic myelogenous
leukemia (BC-CML) and chronic-phase chronic myelogenous leukemia (CP-CML): shared
mechanisms of T cell killing, but programmed death ligands render CP-CML and not 
BC-CML GVL resistant.

Matte-Martone C(1), Venkatesan S, Tan HS, Athanasiadis I, Chang J, Pavisic J,
Shlomchik WD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Yale Comprehensive Cancer Center, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Graft-versus-leukemia (GVL) against chronic-phase chronic myelogenous leukemia
(CP-CML) is potent, but it is less efficacious against acute leukemias and
blast-crisis chronic myelogenous leukemia (BC-CML). The mechanisms underlying GVL
resistance are unknown. Previously, we found that alloreactive T cell targeting
of GVL-sensitive bcr-abl-induced mouse CP-CML (mCP-CML) required TCR-MHC
interactions and that multiple and redundant killing mechanisms were in play. To 
better understand why BC-CML is resistant to GVL, we performed a comprehensive
analysis of GVL against mouse BC-CML (mBC-CML) induced by the retroviral transfer
of the bcr-abl and NUP98/HOXA9 fusion cDNAs. Like human BC-CML, mBC-CML was GVL
resistant, and this was not due to accelerated kinetics or a greater leukemia
burden. To study T cell recognition and killing mechanisms, we generated a panel 
of gene-deficient leukemias by transducing bone marrow from gene-deficient mice. 
T cell target recognition absolutely required that mBC-CML cells express MHC
molecules. GVL against both mCP-CML and mBC-CML required leukemia expression of
ICAM-1. We hypothesized that mBC-CML would be resistant to some of the killing
mechanisms sufficient to eliminate mCP-CML, but we found instead that the same
mechanisms were effective against both types of leukemia, because GVL was similar
against wild-type or mBC-CML genetically lacking Fas, TRAIL-R, Fas/TRAIL-R, or
TNFR1/R2 or when donor T cells were perforin(-/-). However, mCP-CML, but not
mBC-CML, relied on expression of programmed death-1 ligands 1 and 2 (PD-L1/L2) to
resist T cell killing, because only GVL against mCP-CML was augmented when
leukemias lacked PD-L1/L2. Thus, mBC-CML cells have cell-intrinsic mechanisms,
distinct from mCP-CML cells, which protect them from T cell killing.

PMCID: PMC3150287
PMID: 21768400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Cancer Lett. 2011 Dec 1;311(1):29-37. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2011.06.021. Epub
2011 Jun 24.

Genome-wide combination profiling of DNA copy number and methylation for
deciphering biomarkers in non-small cell lung cancer patients.

Son JW(1), Jeong KJ, Jean WS, Park SY, Jheon S, Cho HM, Park CG, Lee HY, Kang J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Konyang University Hospital, Daejeon 302-718,
Republic of Korea.

Early detection of lung cancer provides the highest potential for saving lives.
To date, no routine screening method enabling early detection is available, which
is a key factor in the disease's high mortality rate. Copy number changes and DNA
methylation alterations are good indicators of carcinogenesis and cancer
prognosis. In this study, we attempted to combine profiles of DNA copy number and
methylation patterns in 20 paired cancerous and noncancerous tissue samples from 
non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients, and we detected several clinically
important genes with genetic and epigenetic relationships. Using array
comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), statistically significant differences
were observed across the histological subtypes for gains at 1p31.1, 3q26.1, and
3q26.31-3q29 as well as for losses at 1p21.1, 2q33.3, 2q37.3, 3p12.3, 4q35.2, and
13q34 in squamous cell carcinoma (SQ) patients, and losses at 12q24.33 were
measured in adenocarcinoma (AD) patients (p < 0.05). In an analysis of DNA
methylation at 1505 autosomal CpG loci that are associated with 807
cancer-related genes, we identified six and nine loci with higher and lower DNA
methylation levels, respectively, in tumor tissue compared to non-tumor lung
tissues from AD patients. In addition, three loci with higher and seven loci with
lower DNA methylation levels were identified in tumor tissue from SQ patients
compared to non-tumor lung tissue. Subsequently, we searched for regions
exhibiting concomitant hypermethylation and genomic loss in both ADs and SQs. One
clone representing 7p15.2 (which includes candidate genes such as HOXA9 and
HOXA11) and one target ID representing HOXA9_E252_R were detected. Quantitative
real-time PCR identified the potential candidate gene HOXA9 as being
down-regulated in the majority of NSCLC patients. Moreover, following HOXA9
over-expression, the invasion of representative cell lines, A549 and HCC95, were 
significantly inhibited. Taken together, our results show that the combined
profiling analysis technique is a useful tool for identifying biomarkers in lung 
cancer and that HOXA9 might be a potential candidate gene for the pathogenesis
and diagnosis of NSCLC patients.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21757291  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Cancer Cell. 2011 Jul 12;20(1):66-78. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2011.06.010.

MLL-rearranged leukemia is dependent on aberrant H3K79 methylation by DOT1L.

Bernt KM(1), Zhu N, Sinha AU, Vempati S, Faber J, Krivtsov AV, Feng Z, Punt N,
Daigle A, Bullinger L, Pollock RM, Richon VM, Kung AL, Armstrong SA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Department of Pediatric 
Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02115,
USA.

The histone 3 lysine 79 (H3K79) methyltransferase Dot1l has been implicated in
the development of leukemias bearing translocations of the Mixed Lineage Leukemia
(MLL) gene. We identified the MLL-fusion targets in an MLL-AF9 leukemia model,
and conducted epigenetic profiling for H3K79me2, H3K4me3, H3K27me3, and H3K36me3 
in hematopoietic progenitor and leukemia stem cells (LSCs). We found abnormal
profiles only for H3K79me2 on MLL-AF9 fusion target loci in LSCs. Inactivation of
Dot1l led to downregulation of direct MLL-AF9 targets and an MLL
translocation-associated gene expression signature, whereas global gene
expression remained largely unaffected. Suppression of MLL
translocation-associated gene expression corresponded with dependence of MLL-AF9 
leukemia on Dot1l in vivo. These data point to DOT1L as a potential therapeutic
target in MLL-rearranged leukemia.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3329803
PMID: 21741597  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. Stem Cells. 2011 Feb;29(2):376-85. doi: 10.1002/stem.575.

Growth factor independence 1 protects hematopoietic stem cells against apoptosis 
but also prevents the development of a myeloproliferative-like disease.

Khandanpour C(1), Kosan C, Gaudreau MC, Dührsen U, Hébert J, Zeng H, Möröy T.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de recherches cliniques de Montréal (IRCM), Université de Montréal,
Montréal, Quebec, Canada.

The regulation of gene transcription is elementary for the function of
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs). The transcriptional repressor growth factor
independence 1 (Gfi1) restricts HSC proliferation and is essential to maintain
their self-renewal capacity and multipotency after transplantation. In addition, 
Gfi1(-/-) HSCs are severely compromised in their ability to compete with
wild-type (wt) HSCs after transplantation. We now report that Gfi1 protects HSCs 
against stress-induced apoptosis, probably, by repressing the proapoptotic target
gene Bax, since irradiated Gfi1(-/-) HSCs display higher expression of Bax and
show a higher rate of apoptosis than wt HSCs. This protective function of Gfi1
appears to be functionally relevant since Gfi1(-/-) HSCs that express Bcl-2,
which antagonizes the effects of Bax, regain their ability to self renew and to
initiate multilineage differentiation after transplantation. Surprisingly,
Gfi1(-/-) xBcl-2 transgenic mice also show a strong, systemic expansion of
Mac-1(+) Gr-1(-) myeloid cells in bone marrow and peripheral lymphoid organs.
These cells express high levels of the proleukemogenic transcription factor Hoxa9
and, in older mice, appear as atypical monocytoid-blastoid cells in the
peripheral blood. As a result of this massive expansion of myeloid cells, all
Gfi1(-/-) xBcl-2 mice eventually succumb to a myeloproliferative-like disease
resembling a preleukemic state. In summary, our data demonstrate that Gfi1's
ability to protect against apoptosis is essential for HSC function. In addition, 
our finding show that Gfi1 prevents the development of myeloproliferative
diseases and provides evidence how Gfi1 deficiency could be linked to myeloid
leukemia.

Copyright © 2010 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21732494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. Mol Cell. 2011 Jul 8;43(1):132-44. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2011.05.015.

The RING finger protein MSL2 in the MOF complex is an E3 ubiquitin ligase for H2B
K34 and is involved in crosstalk with H3 K4 and K79 methylation.

Wu L(1), Zee BM, Wang Y, Garcia BA, Dou Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2011 Jul 8;43(1):5-7.

We demonstrate that RING finger protein MSL2 in the MOF-MSL complex is a histone 
ubiquitin E3 ligase. MSL2, together with MSL1, has robust histone ubiquitylation 
activity that mainly targets nucleosomal H2B on lysine 34 (H2B K34ub), a site
within a conserved basic patch on H2B tail. H2B K34ub by MSL1/2 directly
regulates H3 K4 and K79 methylation through trans-tail crosstalk both in vitro
and in cells. The significance of MSL1/2-mediated histone H2B ubiquitylation is
underscored by the facts that MSL1/2 activity is important for transcription
activation at HOXA9 and MEIS1 loci and that this activity is evolutionarily
conserved in the Drosophila dosage compensation complex. Altogether, these
results indicate that the MOF-MSL complex possesses two distinct
chromatin-modifying activities (i.e., H4 K16 acetylation and H2B K34
ubiquitylation) through MOF and MSL2 subunits. They also shed light on how an
intricate network of chromatin-modifying enzymes functions coordinately in gene
activation.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4119175
PMID: 21726816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Oncogene. 2012 Jan 26;31(4):507-17. doi: 10.1038/onc.2011.248. Epub 2011 Jun 27.

Methylation-mediated repression of microRNA-143 enhances MLL-AF4 oncogene
expression.

Dou L(1), Zheng D, Li J, Li Y, Gao L, Wang L, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Beijing, China.

Fusion proteins containing the amino terminus of mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) are
common in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) due to translocations. The MLL-AF4
fusion protein is generated by the translocation t(4;11)(q21;q23), and
t(4;11)-positive ALL patients (MLL-AF4 ALL), have a notoriously poorer prognosis 
compared with patients with other MLL-associated leukemias. The detailed role of 
this fusion protein in leukemogenesis is not well understood. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) 
targeting the AF4 3' untranslated regions may modulate MLL-AF4 fusion protein
levels, raising the question of whether regulation of these miRNAs are involved
in the progression of MLL-AF4 ALL. In this study, we show that miR-143 was
identified as a regulator of MLL-AF4 expression in MLL-AF4 ALL samples.
Restoration of miR-143 in MLL-AF4-positive RS4;11 and MV4-11 cells induced
apoptosis, negatively contributing to leukemia cell growth by reducing MLL-AF4
fusion protein levels. Furthermore, miR-143 was epigenetically repressed by
promoter hypermethylation in MLL-AF4-positive primary blasts and cell lines, but 
not in normal bone marrow cells and MLL-AF4-negative primary blasts, which was
directly associated with expression of the MLL-AF4 oncogene. This is the first
study to show that miR-143 functions as a tumor suppressor in MLL-AF4 B-cell ALL.
These data reveal the therapeutic promise of upregulating miR-143 expression for 
MLL-AF4 B-cell ALL.

PMID: 21706045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Cell Stem Cell. 2011 Jun 3;8(6):649-62. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2011.05.004.

Functional crosstalk between Bmi1 and MLL/Hoxa9 axis in establishment of normal
hematopoietic and leukemic stem cells.

Smith LL(1), Yeung J, Zeisig BB, Popov N, Huijbers I, Barnes J, Wilson AJ,
Taskesen E, Delwel R, Gil J, Van Lohuizen M, So CW.

Author information: 
(1)Leukaemia and Stem Cell Biology Lab, Department of Haematological Medicine,
King's College London, London SE5 9NU, UK.

Bmi1 is required for efficient self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
and leukemic stem cells (LSCs). In this study, we investigated whether
leukemia-associated fusion proteins, which differ in their ability to activate
Hox expression, could initiate leukemia in the absence of Bmi1. AML1-ETO and
PLZF-RARa, which do not activate Hox, triggered senescence in Bmi1(-/-) cells. In
contrast, MLL-AF9, which drives expression of Hoxa7 and Hoxa9, readily
transformed Bmi1(-/-) cells. MLL-AF9 could not initiate leukemia in
Bmi1(-/-)Hoxa9(-/-) mice, which have further compromised HSC functions. But
either gene could restore the ability of MLL-AF9 to establish LSCs in the double 
null background. As reported for Bmi1, Hoxa9 regulates expression of
p16(Ink4a)/p19(ARF) locus and could overcome senescence induced by AML1-ETO.
Together, these results reveal an important functional interplay between MLL/Hox 
and Bmi1 in regulating cellular senescence for LSC development, suggesting that a
synergistic targeting of both molecules is required to eradicate a broader
spectrum of LSCs.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21624810  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. PLoS One. 2011;6(5):e19736. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0019736. Epub 2011 May 16.

Identification of methylated genes associated with aggressive clinicopathological
features in mantle cell lymphoma.

Enjuanes A(1), Fernàndez V, Hernández L, Navarro A, Beà S, Pinyol M,
López-Guillermo A, Rosenwald A, Ott G, Campo E, Jares P.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopathology Section, Department of Anatomic Pathology, Hospital Clínic,
Institut d'Investigacions Biomèdiques August Pi i Sunyer, University of
Barcelona, Barcelona, Spain.

BACKGROUND: Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is genetically characterized by the
t(11;14)(q13;q32) translocation and a high number of secondary chromosomal
alterations. The contribution of DNA methylation to MCL lymphomagenesis is not
well known. We sought to identify epigenetically silenced genes in these tumours 
that might have clinical relevance.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: To identify potential methylated genes in MCL we 
initially investigated seven MCL cell lines treated with epigenetic drugs and
gene expression microarray profiling. The methylation status of selected
candidate genes was validated by a quantitative assay and subsequently analyzed
in a series of primary MCL (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>38). After pharmacological reversion we
identified 252 potentially methylated genes. The methylation analysis of a subset
of these genes (n<U+200A>=<U+200A>25) in the MCL cell lines and normal B lymphocytes confirmed 
that 80% of them were methylated in the cell lines but not in normal lymphocytes.
The subsequent analysis in primary MCL identified five genes (SOX9, HOXA9, AHR,
NR2F2, and ROBO1) frequently methylated in these tumours. The gene methylation
events tended to occur in the same primary neoplasms and correlated with higher
proliferation, increased number of chromosomal abnormalities, and shorter
survival of the patients.
CONCLUSIONS: We have identified a set of genes whose methylation degree and gene 
expression levels correlate with aggressive clinicopathological features of MCL. 
Our findings also suggest that a subset of MCL might show a CpG island methylator
phenotype (CIMP) that may influence the behaviour of the tumours.

PMCID: PMC3095614
PMID: 21603610  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. Cancer Prev Res (Phila). 2011 Jul;4(7):1061-72. doi:
10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-11-0006. Epub 2011 May 10.

NID2 and HOXA9 promoter hypermethylation as biomarkers for prevention and early
detection in oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma tissues and saliva.

Guerrero-Preston R(1), Soudry E, Acero J, Orera M, Moreno-López L, Macía-Colón G,
Jaffe A, Berdasco M, Ili-Gangas C, Brebi-Mieville P, Fu Y, Engstrom C, Irizarry
RA, Esteller M, Westra W, Koch W, Califano J, Sidransky D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Johns Hopkins Medical
Institutions, 1550 Orleans Street, Baltimore, Maryland 21231, USA.

Differentially methylated oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) biomarkers,
identified in vitro and validated in well-characterized surgical specimens, have 
shown poor clinical correlation in cohorts with different risk profiles. To
overcome this lack of relevance, we used the HumanMethylation27 BeadChip,
publicly available methylation and expression array data, and quantitative
methylation specific PCR to uncover differential methylation in OSCC clinical
samples with heterogeneous risk profiles. A two stage design consisting of
discovery and prevalence screens was used to identify differential promoter
methylation and deregulated pathways in patients diagnosed with OSCC and head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma. Promoter methylation of KIF1A (<U+03BA> = 0.64), HOXA9 (<U+03BA> 
= 0.60), NID2 (<U+03BA> = 0.60), and EDNRB (<U+03BA> = 0.60) had a moderate to substantial
agreement with clinical diagnosis in the discovery screen. HOXA9 had 68%
sensitivity, 100% specificity, and a 0.81 Area Under the Curve (AUC). NID2 had
71% sensitivity, 100% specificity, and a 0.79 AUC. In the prevalence screen,
HOXA9 (<U+03BA> = 0.82) and NID2 (<U+03BA> = 0.80) had an almost perfect agreement with
histologic diagnosis. HOXA9 had 85% sensitivity, 97% specificity, and a 0.95 AUC.
NID2 had 87% sensitivity, 95% specificity, and a 0.91 AUC. A HOXA9 and NID2 gene 
panel had 94% sensitivity, 97% specificity, and a 0.97 AUC. In saliva, from OSCC 
cases and controls, HOXA9 had 75% sensitivity, 53% specificity, and a 0.75 AUC.
NID2 had 87% sensitivity, 21% specificity, and a 0.73 AUC. This phase I Biomarker
Development Trial identified a panel of differentially methylated genes in normal
and OSCC clinical samples from patients with heterogeneous risk profiles. This
panel may be useful for early detection and cancer prevention studies.

PMCID: PMC3131432
PMID: 21558411  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Blood. 2011 Jun 23;117(25):6895-905. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-324699. Epub 2011
Apr 25.

MLL fusion proteins preferentially regulate a subset of wild-type MLL target
genes in the leukemic genome.

Wang QF(1), Wu G, Mi S, He F, Wu J, Dong J, Luo RT, Mattison R, Kaberlein JJ,
Prabhakar S, Ji H, Thirman MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Disease Genomics and Individualized Medicine, Beijing Institute 
of Genomics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, China.

MLL encodes a histone methyltransferase that is critical in maintaining gene
expression during embryonic development and hematopoiesis. 11q23 translocations
result in the formation of chimeric MLL fusion proteins that act as potent
drivers of acute leukemia. However, it remains unclear what portion of the
leukemic genome is under the direct control of MLL fusions. By comparing
patient-derived leukemic cell lines, we find that MLL fusion-bound genes are a
small subset of that recognized by wild-type MLL. In an inducible MLL-ENL model, 
MLL fusion protein binding and changes in H3K79 methylation are limited to a
specific portion of the genome, whereas wild-type MLL distributes to a much
larger set of gene loci. Surprisingly, among 223 MLL-ENL-bound genes, only 12
demonstrate a significant increase in mRNA expression on induction of the fusion 
protein. In addition to Hoxa9 and Meis1, this includes Eya1 and Six1, which
comprise a heterodimeric transcription factor important in several developmental 
pathways. We show that Eya1 has the capacity to immortalize hematopoietic
progenitor cells in vitro and collaborates with Six1 in hematopoietic
transformation assays. Altogether, our data suggest that MLL fusions contribute
to the development of acute leukemia through direct activation of a small set of 
target genes.

PMCID: PMC3128481
PMID: 21518926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 May 10;108(19):7956-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1103154108. Epub 2011 Apr 25.

Down-regulation of homeobox genes MEIS1 and HOXA in MLL-rearranged acute leukemia
impairs engraftment and reduces proliferation.

Orlovsky K(1), Kalinkovich A, Rozovskaia T, Shezen E, Itkin T, Alder H, Ozer HG, 
Carramusa L, Avigdor A, Volinia S, Buchberg A, Mazo A, Kollet O, Largman C, Croce
CM, Nakamura T, Lapidot T, Canaani E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Rearrangements of the MLL (ALL1) gene are very common in acute infant and
therapy-associated leukemias. The rearrangements underlie the generation of MLL
fusion proteins acting as potent oncogenes. Several most consistently
up-regulated targets of MLL fusions, MEIS1, HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA10 are
functionally related and have been implicated in other types of leukemias. Each
of the four genes was knocked down separately in the human precursor B-cell
leukemic line RS4;11 expressing MLL-AF4. The mutant and control cells were
compared for engraftment in NOD/SCID mice. Engraftment of all mutants into the
bone marrow (BM) was impaired. Although homing was similar, colonization by the
knockdown cells was slowed. Initially, both types of cells were confined to the
trabecular area; this was followed by a rapid spread of the WT cells to the
compact bone area, contrasted with a significantly slower process for the
mutants. In vitro and in vivo BrdU incorporation experiments indicated reduced
proliferation of the mutant cells. In addition, the CXCR4/SDF-1 axis was
hampered, as evidenced by reduced migration toward an SDF-1 gradient and loss of 
SDF-1-augmented proliferation in culture. The very similar phenotype shared by
all mutant lines implies that all four genes are involved and required for
expansion of MLL-AF4 associated leukemic cells in mice, and down-regulation of
any of them is not compensated by the others.

PMCID: PMC3093458
PMID: 21518888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Cancer Res. 2011 Jun 15;71(12):4117-29. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-0176. Epub 
2011 Apr 19.

Common and overlapping oncogenic pathways contribute to the evolution of acute
myeloid leukemias.

Kvinlaug BT(1), Chan WI, Bullinger L, Ramaswami M, Sears C, Foster D, Lazic SE,
Okabe R, Benner A, Lee BH, De Silva I, Valk PJ, Delwel R, Armstrong SA, Döhner H,
Gilliland DG, Huntly BJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research,
University of Cambridge, United Kingdom.

Fusion oncogenes in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) promote self-renewal from
committed progenitors, thereby linking transformation and self-renewal pathways. 
Like most cancers, AML is a genetically and biologically heterogeneous disease,
but it is unclear whether transformation results from common or overlapping
genetic programs acting downstream of multiple mutations or by the engagement of 
unique genetic programs acting cooperatively downstream of individual mutations. 
This distinction is important, because the involvement of common programs would
imply the existence of common molecular targets to treat AML, no matter which
oncogenes are involved. Here we show that the ability to promote self-renewal is 
a generalized property of leukemia-associated oncogenes. Disparate oncogenes
initiated overlapping transformation and self-renewal gene expression programs,
the common elements of which were defined in established leukemic stem cells from
an animal model as well as from a large cohort of patients with differing AML
subtypes, where they strongly predicted pathobiological character. Notably,
individual genes commonly activated in these programs could partially phenocopy
the self-renewal function of leukemia-associated oncogenes in committed murine
progenitors. Furthermore, they could generate AML following expression in murine 
bone marrow. In summary, our findings reveal the operation of common programs of 
self-renewal and transformation downstream of leukemia-associated oncogenes,
suggesting that mechanistically common therapeutic approaches to AML are likely
to be possible, regardless of the identity of the driver oncogene involved.

PMCID: PMC3119437
PMID: 21505102  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Cell Res. 2011 Aug;21(8):1182-95. doi: 10.1038/cr.2011.71. Epub 2011 Apr 19.

Modulations of hMOF autoacetylation by SIRT1 regulate hMOF recruitment and
activities on the chromatin.

Lu L(1), Li L, Lv X, Wu XS, Liu DP, Liang CC.

Author information: 
(1)National Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology, Institute of Basic Medical
Sciences, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences & Peking Union Medical College, 5
Dong Dan San Tiao, Beijing 100005, China.

A wide variety of nuclear regulators and enzymes are subjected to acetylation of 
the lysine residue, which regulates different aspects of protein functions. The
MYST family histone acetyltransferase, human ortholog of MOF (hMOF), plays
critical roles in transcription activation by acetylating nucleosomal H4K16. In
this study, we found that hMOF acetylates itself in vitro and in vivo, and the
acetylation is restricted to the conserved MYST domain (C2HC zinc finger and
HAT), of which the K274 residue is the major autoacetylation site. Furthermore,
the class III histone deacetylase SIRT1 was found to interact with the MYST
domain of hMOF through the deacetylase catalytic region and deacetylate
autoacetylated hMOF. In vitro binding assays showed that non-acetylated hMOF
robustly binds to nucleosomes while acetylation decreases the binding ability. In
HeLa cells, the recruitment of hMOF to the chromatin increases in response to
SIRT1 overexpression and decreases after knockdown of SIRT1. The acetylation
mimic mutation K274Q apparently decreases the chromatin recruitment of hMOF as
well as the global H4K16Ac level in HeLa cells. Finally, upon SIRT1 knockdown,
hMOF recruitment to the gene body region of its target gene HoxA9 decreases,
accompanied with decrease of H4K16Ac at the same region and repression of HoxA9
transcription. These results suggest a dynamic interplay between SIRT1 and hMOF
in regulating H4K16 acetylation.

PMCID: PMC3193486
PMID: 21502975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Clin Chem Lab Med. 2011 Apr;49(4):699-704. doi: 10.1515/CCLM.2011.108.

Detection of HOXA9 gene methylation in tumor tissues and induced sputum samples
from primary lung cancer patients.

Hwang SH(1), Kim KU, Kim JE, Kim HH, Lee MK, Lee CH, Lee SY, Oh T, An S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pusan National University Hospital, School 
of Medicine Pusan National University, Busan, Republic of Korea.

BACKGROUND: Lung cancer is a leading cause of cancer deaths. Unfortunately, no
effective early screening modality exists for lung cancer. We aimed to evaluate
the prevalence of HOXA9 promoter methylation in tissue and induced sputum samples
from Korean patients with lung cancer.
METHODS: Using pyrosequencing, HOXA9 methylation was analyzed for 40 pairs of
primary lung cancer and normal tissues and 185 induced sputum specimens,
including 76 patients with lung cancer.
RESULTS: The methylation of HOXA9 in lung cancer tissue was significantly higher 
compared with normal tissues (67.4% ± 17.6% vs. 23.6% ± 10.3%, respectively;
p<0.001). With a cut-off of >45.6% of HOXA9 gene methylation in tissues, the
sensitivity was 90.5% and the specificity was 97.5%. In induced sputum specimens,
the HOXA9 gene in lung cancer patients was significantly more hypermethylated
compared with patients with benign lung diseases and the healthy group (23.4% ±
15.9%, 14.9% ± 7.9%, and 9.7% ± 5.0%, respectively; p<0.001).
CONCLUSIONS: The HOXA9 gene was hypermethylated in 32 of 40 tumors (80%),
especially in early stages of lung cancer. HOXA9 methylation could be a potential
biomarker to aid early detection and prognosis.

PMID: 21480815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Blood. 2011 Jun 2;117(22):5918-30. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-08-301879. Epub 2011
Apr 6.

Smad4 binds Hoxa9 in the cytoplasm and protects primitive hematopoietic cells
against nuclear activation by Hoxa9 and leukemia transformation.

Quéré R(1), Karlsson G, Hertwig F, Rissler M, Lindqvist B, Fioretos T,
Vandenberghe P, Slovak ML, Cammenga J, Karlsson S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Lund Stem Cell Center, Lund, Sweden.

We studied leukemic stem cells (LSCs) in a Smad4(-/-) mouse model of acute
myelogenous leukemia (AML) induced either by the HOXA9 gene or by the fusion
oncogene NUP98-HOXA9. Although Hoxa9-Smad4 complexes accumulate in the cytoplasm 
of normal hematopoietic stem cells and progenitor cells (HSPCs) transduced with
these oncogenes, there is no cytoplasmic stabilization of HOXA9 in Smad4(-/-)
HSPCs, and as a consequence increased levels of Hoxa9 is observed in the nucleus 
leading to increased immortalization in vitro. Loss of Smad4 accelerates the
development of leukemia in vivo because of an increase in transformation of
HSPCs. Therefore, the cytoplasmic binding of Hoxa9 by Smad4 is a mechanism to
protect Hoxa9-induced transformation of normal HSPCs. Because Smad4 is a potent
tumor suppressor involved in growth control, we developed a strategy to modify
the subcellular distribution of Smad4. We successfully disrupted the interaction 
between Hoxa9 and Smad4 to activate the TGF-ß pathway and apoptosis, leading to a
loss of LSCs. Together, these findings reveal a major role for Smad4 in the
negative regulation of leukemia initiation and maintenance induced by
HOXA9/NUP98-HOXA9 and provide strong evidence that antagonizing Smad4
stabilization by these oncoproteins might be a promising novel therapeutic
approach in leukemia.

PMID: 21471525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Cell Cycle. 2011 May 1;10(9):1456-67. Epub 2011 May 1.

RNA export factor RAE1 contributes to NUP98-HOXA9-mediated leukemogenesis.

Funasaka T(1), Nakano H, Wu Y, Hashizume C, Gu L, Nakamura T, Wang W, Zhou P,
Moore MA, Sato H, Wong RW.

Author information: 
(1)Kanazawa University; Kanazawa, Japan.

Comment in
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jul 1;10(13):2056.
    Cell Cycle. 2011 Jun 15;10(12):1896.

Chromosomal translocations involving chimeric fusions of the nucleoporin NUP98
protein have often been described in acute myelogenous leukemia (AML). All the
fusion proteins have an identical NUP98 N terminus, which contains the GLEBS
motif for interaction with the mRNA export factor RAE1 and FG repeats that
associate with the transcription factors HDAC1 and p300. It is virtually unknown 
whether these interaction partners affect leukemogenesis. We previously showed
that RAE1 depletion caused aneuploidy, which enhanced tumorigenesis. We
speculated that RAE1 may also be directly involved in NUP98 fusion-mediated
leukemogenesis. We show here that RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated knockdown of
NUP98 caused severe chromosome segregation defects and disrupted RAE1 but not
HDAC1 expression and localization. Next, we performed rescue experiments to
confirm that the RAE1-NUP98 complex orchestrates proper chromosome segregation.
Interestingly, we found diverse behaviors of NUP98 and the leukemogenic fusion
protein NUP98-HOXA9 throughout the cell cycle. Strikingly, in
NUP98-HOXA9-transfected cells, RAE1 protein were reduced and mis-localized. Our
cellular interpretations were further confirmed by NUP98-HOXA9 transgenic mice
and the NUP98-HOXA9 AML patient. These data suggest that RAE1 orchestrates
NUP98-mediated leukemogenesis and raise the possibility that targeting this
negative feedback loop may provide a new strategy for the therapy of aggressive
leukemias.

PMID: 21467841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Nature. 2011 Mar 24;471(7339):467-72. doi: 10.1038/nature09837.

Initial genome sequencing and analysis of multiple myeloma.

Chapman MA(1), Lawrence MS, Keats JJ, Cibulskis K, Sougnez C, Schinzel AC,
Harview CL, Brunet JP, Ahmann GJ, Adli M, Anderson KC, Ardlie KG, Auclair D,
Baker A, Bergsagel PL, Bernstein BE, Drier Y, Fonseca R, Gabriel SB, Hofmeister
CC, Jagannath S, Jakubowiak AJ, Krishnan A, Levy J, Liefeld T, Lonial S, Mahan S,
Mfuko B, Monti S, Perkins LM, Onofrio R, Pugh TJ, Rajkumar SV, Ramos AH, Siegel
DS, Sivachenko A, Stewart AK, Trudel S, Vij R, Voet D, Winckler W, Zimmerman T,
Carpten J, Trent J, Hahn WC, Garraway LA, Meyerson M, Lander ES, Getz G, Golub
TR.

Author information: 
(1)The Eli and Edythe L. Broad Institute, 7 Cambridge Center, Cambridge,
Massachusetts 02412, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2011 May;11(5):312.

Multiple myeloma is an incurable malignancy of plasma cells, and its pathogenesis
is poorly understood. Here we report the massively parallel sequencing of 38
tumour genomes and their comparison to matched normal DNAs. Several new and
unexpected oncogenic mechanisms were suggested by the pattern of somatic mutation
across the data set. These include the mutation of genes involved in protein
translation (seen in nearly half of the patients), genes involved in histone
methylation, and genes involved in blood coagulation. In addition, a broader than
anticipated role of NF-<U+03BA>B signalling was indicated by mutations in 11 members of 
the NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. Of potential immediate clinical relevance, activating
mutations of the kinase BRAF were observed in 4% of patients, suggesting the
evaluation of BRAF inhibitors in multiple myeloma clinical trials. These results 
indicate that cancer genome sequencing of large collections of samples will yield
new insights into cancer not anticipated by existing knowledge.

PMCID: PMC3560292
PMID: 21430775  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Blood. 2011 May 5;117(18):4759-68. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-12-327668. Epub 2011
Feb 25.

Requirement for Dot1l in murine postnatal hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis by MLL
translocation.

Jo SY(1), Granowicz EM, Maillard I, Thomas D, Hess JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Disruptor of telomeric silencing 1-like (Dot1l) is a histone 3 lysine 79
methyltransferase. Studies of constitutive Dot1l knockout mice show that Dot1l is
essential for embryonic development and prenatal hematopoiesis. DOT1L also
interacts with translocation partners of Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL) gene, which
is commonly translocated in human leukemia. However, the requirement of Dot1l in 
postnatal hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis of MLL translocation proteins has not 
been conclusively shown. With a conditional Dot1l knockout mouse model, we
examined the consequences of Dot1l loss in postnatal hematopoiesis and MLL
translocation leukemia. Deletion of Dot1l led to pancytopenia and failure of
hematopoietic homeostasis, and Dot1l-deficient cells minimally reconstituted
recipient bone marrow in competitive transplantation experiments. In addition,
MLL-AF9 cells required Dot1l for oncogenic transformation, whereas cells with
other leukemic oncogenes, such as Hoxa9/Meis1 and E2A-HLF, did not. These
findings illustrate a crucial role of Dot1l in normal hematopoiesis and
leukemogenesis of specific oncogenes.

PMCID: PMC3100687
PMID: 21398221  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Feb;16(2):249-59. doi: 10.1111/j.1582-4934.2011.01291.x.

Elevated levels of hypoxia-inducible microRNA-210 in pre-eclampsia: new insights 
into molecular mechanisms for the disease.

Zhang Y(1), Fei M, Xue G, Zhou Q, Jia Y, Li L, Xin H, Sun S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, Second Military Medical University, Shanghai, 
China.

Comment in
    J Cell Mol Med. 2012 Apr;16(4):943-4.

Pre-eclampsia is a leading cause of maternal and foetal morbidity and mortality
worldwide. Insufficient uteroplacental oxygenation is believed to be responsible 
for the disease. However, what molecular events involve in hypoxic responses and 
how they affect placental development remain unclear. Recently, miRNAs have
emerged as a new class of molecules in response to hypoxia. We show here that the
expression of microRNA-210 (mir-210) is up-regulated in patients with
pre-eclampsia, as well as in trophoblast cells cultured under hypoxic conditions.
Ectopic expression of mir-210 inhibited the migration and invasion capability of 
trophoblast cells. Ephrin-A3 and Homeobox-A9, which related with cell migration
and vascular remodelling, were then experimentally validated as the functional
targets of mir-210 both in vivo and in vitro. Using luciferase reporter,
chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and small interfering RNA (siRNA)
experiments, we finally identified a new transcriptional mechanism that the
overexpression of mir-210 under hypoxia was regulated by NF-<U+03BA>B transcriptional
factor p50, apart from the well-known HIF 1a. Taken together, our study
implicates an important role for mir-210 in the molecular mechanism of
pre-eclampsia.

© 2011 The Authors Journal of Cellular and Molecular Medicine © 2011 Foundation
for Cellular and Molecular Medicine/Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

PMCID: PMC3823289
PMID: 21388517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 Mar 22;108(12):4888-91. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1018161108. Epub 2011 Mar 7.

Axial Hox9 activity establishes the posterior field in the developing forelimb.

Xu B(1), Wellik DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.

Current models hold that the early limb field becomes polarized into anterior and
posterior domains by the opposing activities of Hand2 and Gli3. This polarization
is essential for the initiation of Shh expression in the posterior margin of the 
limb bud, but how this polarity is established is not clear. Here we show that
initial anteroposterior polarization of the early forelimb field requires the
function of all four Hox9 paralogs (Hoxa9, Hoxb9, Hoxc9, and Hoxd9). This is
unexpected, given that only HoxA and HoxD AbdB group genes have been shown to
play a role in forelimb patterning, regulating the activation and maintenance of 
Shh expression and subsequent proximal-distal patterning of the forelimb. Our
analysis of Hox9 quadruple mutants demonstrates that Hox9 function is required
for the expression of Hand2 in the posterior limb field. Subsequently, Gli3
expression is not repressed posteriorly, Shh expression is not initiated, and
collinear expression of HoxA/D10-13 is not established, resulting in severely
malformed forelimbs lacking all posterior, Shh-regulated elements. This Hox9
mutant phenotype is restricted to the forelimbs; mutant hindlimbs are normal,
revealing fundamental differences in the patterning mechanisms governing the
establishment of forelimb and hindlimb fields.

PMCID: PMC3064354
PMID: 21383175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Neuro Oncol. 2011 Mar;13(3):280-9. doi: 10.1093/neuonc/noq190.

DNA hypermethylation profiles associated with glioma subtypes and EZH2 and IGFBP2
mRNA expression.

Zheng S(1), Houseman EA, Morrison Z, Wrensch MR, Patoka JS, Ramos C, Haas-Kogan
DA, McBride S, Marsit CJ, Christensen BC, Nelson HH, Stokoe D, Wiemels JL, Chang 
SM, Prados MD, Tihan T, Vandenberg SR, Kelsey KT, Berger MS, Wiencke JK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California-San Francisco,
Helen Diller Family Cancer Center, 1450 3rd Street, San Francisco, CA 94158, USA.

We explored the associations of aberrant DNA methylation patterns in 12 candidate
genes with adult glioma subtype, patient survival, and gene expression of
enhancer of zeste human homolog 2 (EZH2) and insulin-like growth factor-binding
protein 2 (IGFBP2). We analyzed 154 primary glioma tumors (37 astrocytoma II and 
III, 52 primary glioblastoma multiforme (GBM), 11 secondary GBM, 54
oligodendroglioma/oligoastrocytoma II and III) and 13 nonmalignant brain tissues 
for aberrant methylation with quantitative methylation-specific PCR (qMS-PCR) and
for EZH2 and IGFBP2 expression with quantitative reverse transcription PCR
(qRT-PCR). Global methylation was assessed by measuring long interspersed nuclear
element-1 (LINE1) methylation. Unsupervised clustering analyses yielded 3
methylation patterns (classes). Class 1 (MGMT, PTEN, RASSF1A, TMS1, ZNF342, EMP3,
SOCS1, RFX1) was highly methylated in 82% (75/91) of lower-grade astrocytic and
oligodendroglial tumors, 73% (8/11) of secondary GBMs, and 12% (6/52) of primary 
GBMs. The primary GBMs in this class were early onset (median age 37 years).
Class 2 (HOXA9 and SLIT2) was highly methylated in 37% (19/52) of primary GBMs.
None of the 10 genes for class 3 that were differentially methylated in classes 1
and 2 were hypermethylated in 92% (12/13) of nonmalignant brain tissues and 52%
(27/52) of primary GBMs. Class 1 tumors had elevated EZH2 expression but not
elevated IGFBP2; class 2 tumors had both high IGFBP2 and high EZH2 expressions.
The gene-specific hypermethylation class correlated with higher levels of global 
LINE1 methylation and longer patient survival times. These findings indicate a
generalized hypermethylation phenotype in glioma linked to improved survival and 
low IGFBP2. DNA methylation markers are useful in characterizing distinct glioma 
subtypes and may hold promise for clinical applications.

PMCID: PMC3064601
PMID: 21339190  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Xi Bao Yu Fen Zi Mian Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2011 Feb;27(2):166-9.

[HOXA9 is direct target of miR-196a].

[Article in Chinese]

Dou LP(1), Li YH, Wang LL, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA Genearal Hospital, Beijing 100853,
China. lipingdou@yahoo.com.cn

AIM: To analyze the possible epigenetic regulation mechanism of HOXA9 gene
expression and find the possible microRNA regulating HOXA9 gene expression.
METHODS: Targetscan software was used to analyze potential microRNA target sites 
in 3'-UTR of human HOXA9. 3'-UTR fragment of HOXA9 was amplified by PCR. PCR
products were cloned into Xba I/Pst I-digested pGL3-M reporter vector, placing
the 3'-UTR with potential microRNA binding sites downstream of coding sequence of
luciferase. Mutant 3'UTRs were generated by overlap extension PCR method. The
construct was cotransfected in 293T cells with control plasmid or plasmids
expressing microRNAs regulating HOXA9 potentially. Western blot and RT-PCR were
used to detect the expression level of HOXA9 protein and mRNA in MV4-11 cells
after transfection of miR196a.
RESULTS: The results of luciferase assays revealed that overexpression of
miR-196a could reduce the luciferase activity from the reporter construct
containing the HOXA9 3'-UTR significantly. The activity of the reporter construct
mutated at the specific miR-196a target site was unaffected. Protein and mRNA of 
HOXA9 was found to be downregulated by miR-196a.
CONCLUSION: Theses results suggested that miR-196a regulates the expression of
HOXA9 by targeting the complementary sites.

PMID: 21315047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Blood. 2011 Apr 7;117(14):3869-80. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-10-312736. Epub 2011
Feb 10.

KDM2b/JHDM1b, an H3K36me2-specific demethylase, is required for initiation and
maintenance of acute myeloid leukemia.

He J(1), Nguyen AT, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, and Department of Biochemistry and
Biophysics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of North Carolina 
at Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.

The histone H3 lysine 36 dimethyl-specific demethylase KDM2b/JHDM1b, which is
highly expressed in various human leukemias, was previously found to be important
in regulating cell proliferation and cellular senescence. However, its functions 
in leukemia development and maintenance are unclear. Here, we demonstrate that
ectopic expression of Kdm2b/Jhdm1b is sufficient to transform hematopoietic
progenitors. Conversely, depletion of Kdm2b/Jhdm1b in hematopoietic progenitors
significantly impairs Hoxa9/Meis1-induced leukemic transformation. In leukemic
stem cells, knockdown of Kdm2b/Jhdm1b impairs their self-renewing capability in
vitro and in vivo. The functions of Kdm2b/Jhdm1b are mediated by its silencing of
p15(Ink4b) expression through active demethylation of histone H3 lysine 36
dimethyl. Thus, our study suggests that Kdm2b/Jhdm1b functions as an oncogene and
plays a critical role in leukemia development and maintenance.

PMCID: PMC3083299
PMID: 21310926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. J Biomol Struct Dyn. 2011 Apr;28(5):729-42.

Two models of Smad4 and Hoxa9 complex are proposed: structural and interactional 
perspective.

Roy S(1), Thakur AR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Bioinformatics, West Bengal University of Technology
BF-142.Sector-I Salt Lake Kolkata, India.

Transforming growth factor-beta superfamily growth factors (TGF-ß) regulate a
diverse range of cellular functions, including proliferation, differentiation,
extracellular matrix secretion and cell adhesion. TGF-ß is also one of the most
abundant of the known growth factors. Osteopontin (OPN), the major
non-collagenous bone matrix protein is a secreted, arginine-glycine-aspertate
containing phosphorylated glycoprotein. Analysis of the OPN promoter sequence
reveals both Hoxc8 and Hoxa9 (mouse homeotic gene) recognize and utilize the same
consensus TAAT motif in the binding sequence to mediate the repression. Hoxa9
functions as a strong transcriptional repressor, similar to Hoxc-8 (X. Shi, X.
Yang, D. Chen, Z. Chang, and X. Cao, J Biol Chem 274, 13711-13717, 1999). The
DNA-binding protein Hoxa9 interacts with Smad4 (X. Shi, S. Bai, L. Li and X, and 
Cao X, J Biol Chem 276, 850-855, 2001), but not with Smad3 (which binds to OPN
promoter), and the interaction between Smad4 and Hoxa9 results in the
transcriptional activation of OPN in response to TGF- stimulation. In this paper 
we have proposed two possible model structures of Hoxa9 and Smad4 complex. These 
have been modeled based on homology modeling and a new method has been used to
model the flexible loop part. Manual docking has been used to achieve the final
model involving the Hoxa9 -Smad4 complex which tallies with the experimental
results. We have mutated some selective important residues and looked at their
effect in terms of interaction energy in complex formation in both the models.

PMID: 21294585  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Leuk Lymphoma. 2011 Feb;52(2):290-7. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2010.537003. Epub 2011
Jan 24.

Transcriptional deregulation of oncogenic myocyte enhancer factor 2C in T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Nagel S(1), Venturini L, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Scherr M, Drexler HG, Macleod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, DSMZ - German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany. sna@dsmz.de

Myocyte enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C) encodes a transcription factor which is
ectopically expressed in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) cell lines, 
deregulated directly by ectopically expressed homeodomain protein NKX2-5 or by
loss of promoter regions via del(5)(q14). Here, we analyzed the MEF2C 5'-region, 
thus identifying potential regulatory binding sites for GFI1B, basic
helix-loop-helix proteins, STAT5, and HOXA9/HOXA10. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
and overexpression analyses demonstrated direct activation by GFI1B and LYL1 and 
inhibition by STAT5. HOXA9/HOXA10 activated expression of NMYC which in turn
mediated MEF2C repression, indicating an indirect mode of regulation via NMYC
interactor (NMI) and STAT5. Lacking comma: Chromosomal deletion of the STAT5
binding site in LOUCY cells reduced protein levels of STAT5 in some MEF2C-positve
T-ALL cell lines, and the presence of inhibitory IL7-JAK-STAT5 signaling
highlighted the repressive impact of this factor in MEF2C regulation. Taken
together, our results indicate that the expression of MEF2C in T-ALL cells is
principally deregulated via activating leukemic transcription factors GFI1B or
NKX2-5 and by escaping inhibitory developmental STAT5 signaling.

PMID: 21261500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Med Oncol. 2012 Mar;29(1):151-60. doi: 10.1007/s12032-010-9816-5. Epub 2011 Jan
23.

Association of ß-catenin, Wnt1, Smad4, Hoxa9, and Bmi-1 with the prognosis of
esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Lv J(1), Cao XF, Ji L, Zhu B, Wang DD, Tao L, Li SQ.

Author information: 
(1)Affiliated Nanjing First Hospital, Department of Oncology Surgery, Nanjing
Medical University, Oncology Center of Nanjing Medical University, No 68 Changle 
Road, 210006 Nanjing, Jiangsu Province, China. cxf551101@sina.com

In our previous study, Human Signal Transduction in Cancer Gene Array was used in
12 fresh tumor samples to detect the gene expression profiles in the esophageal
squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) tissues matched adjacent non-cancerous samples.
Among genes up-regulated at least twofold, ß-catenin, Wnt1, Smad4, Hoxa9, and
Bmi-1 were found. So subsequently, the aim of this study was to investigate the
prognosis and clinicopathologic roles of ß-catenin, Wnt1, Smad4, Hoxa9, and Bmi-1
in ESCC tissue. The mRNA and protein expression levels of ß-catenin, Wnt1, Smad4,
Hoxa9, and Bmi-1 genes in 70 ESCC and adjacent non-cancerous paraffin-embedded
samples were determined by Real-Time Quantitative PCR (RT-PCR) and
immunohistochemical staining. The mRNA expression level of ß-catenin, Wnt1,
Smad4, Hoxa9, and Bmi-1 in ESCC was significantly higher than that in the
adjacent non-cancerous tissues (0.0821 ± 0.0416 vs. 0.0185 ± 0.0201, P = 0.0000; 
1.9934 ± 1.9888 vs. 0.8863 ± 0.665, P = 0.0184; 0.0298 ± 0.0215 vs. 0.0189 ±
0.0187, P = 0.0017; 2.098 ± 0.091 vs. 1.016 ± 0.078, P = 0.0000; 2.181 ± 2.158
vs. 0.931 ± 0.894, P = 0.0152; respectively), and the protein expression level of
determined genes was also significantly higher than that in the adjacent
non-cancerous tissues (0.2835 ± 0.0844 vs. 0.2352 ± 0.0670, P = 0.0003; 0.3830 ± 
0.0947 vs. 0.2721 ± 0.1474, P = 0.0000; 0.2637 ± 0.0348 vs. 0.2042 ± 0.0180, P = 
0.0000; 0.2058 ± 0.0316 vs. 0.1218 ± 0.0518, P = 0.0000; 0.2736 ± 0.0834 vs.
0.2251 ± 0.0571, P = 0.0001; respectively). Then, the overexpression of mRNA and 
protein levels of ß-catenin, Wnt1 and Bmi-1 was aggressively associated with
lymph node metastasis, advanced pathological stage, and prognosis of the patients
with ESCC (P < 0.05). The up-expression of Hoxa9 mRNA and protein was also
aggressively associated with lymph node metastasis and advanced pathological
stage (P < 0.05); however, the overexpression of Hoxa9 protein was not associated
with the prognosis (P > 0.05). Meanwhile, the hypo-expression of Smad4 mRNA was
aggressively associated with advanced pathological stage and prognosis of the
patients with ESCC (P < 0.05); however, the hypo-expression of Smad4 protein was 
neutral to the prognosis and lymph node metastasis (P > 0.05). ß-catenin, Wnt1,
Smad4, Hoxa9, and Bmi-1 protein expression analysis showed that the positive
outcomes of the combined detection of Wnt1 and ß-catenin expression or Wnt1,
ß-catenin and Bmi-1 expression were significantly worse than those of a single
target protein expression (P < 0.05). Meantime, the prognosis of the combined
positive expression of Wnt1, ß-catenin, and Bmi-1 was poorer than that in the
combined positive expression of Wnt1 and ß-catenin (P < 0.05). The prognosis of
ESCC patients with the overexpression of Wnt1/ß-catenin and Bmi-1 was relatively 
poor, and the level of Wnt1/ß-catenin and Bmi-1 was conversely correlated with
advanced pathological stage and lymph node metastasis. The expression level of
Smad4 and Hoxa9 mRNA was also associated with the prognosis of the patients with 
ESCC, pathological stage, and lymph node metastasis; however, they might not be
the independent prognostic factor.

PMID: 21259057  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. J Vis Exp. 2010 Dec 18;(46). pii: 2195. doi: 10.3791/2195.

Colony forming cell (CFC) assay for human hematopoietic cells.

Sarma NJ(1), Takeda A, Yaseen NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, USA.

Human hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells are usually obtained from bone marrow, 
cord blood, or peripheral blood and are used to study hematopoiesis and
leukemogenesis. They have the capacity to differentiate into lymphoid and myeloid
lineages. The colony forming cell (CFC) assay is used to study the proliferation 
and differentiation pattern of hematopoietic progenitors by their ability to form
colonies in a semisolid medium. The number and the morphology of the colonies
formed by a fixed number of input cells provide preliminary information about the
ability of progenitors to differentiate and proliferate. Cells can be harvested
from individual colonies or from the whole plate to further assess their numbers 
and differentiation states using flow cytometry and morphologic evaluation of
Giemsa-stained slides. This assay is useful for assessing myeloid but not
lymphoid differentiation. The term myeloid in this context is used in its wider
sense to encompass granulocytic, monocytic, erythroid, and megakaryocytic
lineages. We have used this assay to assess the effects of oncogenes on the
differentiation of primary human CD34+ cells derived from peripheral blood. For
this purpose cells are transduced with either control retroviral construct or a
construct expressing the oncogene of interest, in this case NUP98-HOXA9. We
employ a commonly used retroviral vector, MSCV-IRES-GFP, that expresses a
bicistronic mRNA that produces the gene of interest and a GFP marker. Cells are
pre-activated by growing in the presence of cytokines for two days prior to
retroviral transduction. After another two days, GFP+ cells are isolated by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACS) and mixed with a
methylcellulose-containing semisolid medium supplemented with cytokines and
incubated till colonies appear on the surface, typically 14 days. The number and 
morphology of the colonies are documented. Cells are then removed from the
plates, washed, counted, and subjected to flow cytometry and morphologic
examination. Flow cytometry with antibodies specific to the cell surface markers 
expressed during hematopoiesis provides information about lineage and maturation 
stage. Morphological studies of individual cells under a microscope after Wright-
Giemsa staining provide further information with regard to lineage and
maturation. Comparison of cells transduced with control empty vector to those
transduced with an oncogene reveals the effects of the oncogene on hematopoietic 
differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3159642
PMID: 21252854  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Mol Oncol. 2011 Feb;5(1):61-76. doi: 10.1016/j.molonc.2010.11.004. Epub 2010 Nov 
25.

Methylation profiling with a panel of cancer related genes: association with
estrogen receptor, TP53 mutation status and expression subtypes in sporadic
breast cancer.

Rønneberg JA(1), Fleischer T, Solvang HK, Nordgard SH, Edvardsen H, Potapenko I, 
Nebdal D, Daviaud C, Gut I, Bukholm I, Naume B, Børresen-Dale AL, Tost J,
Kristensen V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Institute for Cancer Research, Oslo University
Hospital Radiumhospitalet, Oslo, Norway.

Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease that can be divided in subtypes based on
histology, gene expression profiles as well as differences in genomic
aberrations. Distinct global DNA methylation profiles have been reported in
normal breast epithelial cells as well as in breast tumors. However, the
influence of the tumor methylome on the previously described subgroups of breast 
cancer is not fully understood. Here we report the DNA methylation profiles of 80
breast tumors using a panel of 807 cancer related genes interrogating 1505 CpG
sites. We identified three major clusters based on the methylation profiles; one 
consisting of mainly tumors of myoepithelial origin and two other clusters with
tumors of predominantly luminal epithelial origin. The clusters were different
with respect to estrogen receptor status, TP53 status, ErbB2 status and grade.
The most significantly differentially methylated genes including HDAC1, TFF1,
OGG1, BMP3, FZD9 and HOXA11 were confirmed by pyrosequencing. Gene Ontology
analysis revealed enrichment for genes involved in developmental processes
including homeobox domain genes (HOXA9, HOXA11, PAX6, MYBL2, ISL1 and IPF1) and
(ETS1, HDAC1, CREBBP, GAS7, SPI1 and TBX1). Extensive correlation to mRNA
expression was observed. Pathway analyses identified a significant association
with canonical (curated) pathways such as hepatic fibrosis including genes like
EGF, NGFR and TNF, dendritic cell maturation and the NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathway. Our
results show that breast tumor expression subtypes harbor major epigenetic
differences and tumors with similar gene expression profiles might belong to
epigenetically different subtypes. Some of the transcription factors identified, 
with key roles in differentiation and development might play a role in inducing
and maintaining the different phenotypes.

Copyright © 2010 Federation of European Biochemical Societies. Published by
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21212030  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. Stem Cells Dev. 2011 Aug;20(8):1465-76. doi: 10.1089/scd.2010.0226. Epub 2011 Jan
5.

Differential Hox expression in murine embryonic stem cell models of normal and
malignant hematopoiesis.

Wheadon H(1), Ramsey JM, Dobbin E, Dickson GJ, Corrigan PM, Freeburn RW, Thompson
A.

Author information: 
(1)Paul O'Gorman Leukaemia Research Centre, University of Glasgow, Glasgow,
United Kingdom.

The Hox family are master transcriptional regulators of developmental processes, 
including hematopoiesis. The Hox regulators, caudal homeobox factors (Cdx1-4),
and Meis1, along with several individual Hox proteins, are implicated in stem
cell expansion during embryonic development, with gene dosage playing a
significant role in the overall function of the integrated Hox network. To
investigate the role of this network in normal and aberrant, early hematopoiesis,
we employed an in vitro embryonic stem cell differentiation system, which
recapitulates mouse developmental hematopoiesis. Expression profiles of Hox,
Pbx1, and Meis1 genes were quantified at distinct stages during the hematopoietic
differentiation process and compared with the effects of expressing the leukemic 
oncogene Tel/PDGFRß. During normal differentiation the Hoxa cluster, Pbx1 and
Meis1 predominated, with a marked reduction in the majority of Hox genes (27/39) 
and Meis1 occurring during hematopoietic commitment. Only the posterior Hoxa
cluster genes (a9, a10, a11, and a13) maintained or increased expression at the
hematopoietic colony stage. Cdx4, Meis1, and a subset of Hox genes, including a7 
and a9, were differentially expressed after short-term oncogenic (Tel/PDGFRß)
induction. Whereas Hoxa4-10, b1, b2, b4, and b9 were upregulated during oncogenic
driven myelomonocytic differentiation. Heterodimers between Hoxa7/Hoxa9, Meis1,
and Pbx have previously been implicated in regulating target genes involved in
hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) expansion and leukemic progression. These results
provide direct evidence that transcriptional flux through the Hox network occurs 
at very early stages during hematopoietic differentiation and validates embryonic
stem cell models for gaining insights into the genetic regulation of normal and
malignant hematopoiesis.

PMID: 21083428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Blood. 2011 Jan 13;117(2):e27-38. doi: 10.1182/blood-2010-07-293332. Epub 2010
Oct 27.

RNA-seq analysis of 2 closely related leukemia clones that differ in their
self-renewal capacity.

Wilhelm BT(1), Briau M, Austin P, Faubert A, Boucher G, Chagnon P, Hope K, Girard
S, Mayotte N, Landry JR, Hébert J, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Canada.

The molecular mechanisms regulating self-renewal of leukemia stem cells remain
poorly understood. Here we report the generation of 2 closely related leukemias
created through the retroviral overexpression of Meis1 and Hoxa9. Despite their
apparent common origin, these clonal leukemias exhibit enormous differences in
stem cell frequency (from 1 in 1.4, FLA2; to 1 in 347, FLB1), suggesting that one
of these leukemias undergoes nearly unlimited self-renewal divisions. Using
next-generation RNA-sequencing, we characterized the transcriptomes of these
phenotypically similar, but biologically distinct, leukemias, identifying
hundreds of differentially expressed genes and a large number of structural
differences (eg, alternative splicing and promoter usage). Focusing on
ligand-receptor pairs, we observed high expression levels of Sdf1-Cxcr4;
Jagged2-Notch2/1; Osm-Gp130; Scf-cKit; and Bmp15-Tgfb1/2. Interestingly, the
integrin beta 2-like gene (Itgb2l) is both highly expressed and differentially
expressed between our 2 leukemias (~ 14-fold higher in FLA2 than FLB1). In
addition, gene ontology analysis indicated G-protein-coupled receptor had a much 
higher proportion of differential expression (22%) compared with other classes (~
5%), suggesting a potential role regulating subtle changes in cellular behavior. 
These results provide the first comprehensive transcriptome analysis of a
leukemia stem cell and document an unexpected level of transcriptome variation
between phenotypically similar leukemic cells.

PMID: 20980679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. J Biol Chem. 2011 Feb 4;286(5):3707-16. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.188193. Epub 2010
Oct 27.

Single domain intracellular antibodies from diverse libraries: emphasizing dual
functions of LMO2 protein interactions using a single VH domain.

Tanaka T(1), Sewell H, Waters S, Phillips SE, Rabbitts TH.

Author information: 
(1)Leeds Institute of Molecular Medicine, St. James's University Hospital,
University of Leeds, Leeds LS9 7TF, United Kingdom.

Interfering intracellular antibodies are valuable for biological studies as drug 
surrogates and as potential macromolecular drugs per se. Their application is
still limited because of the difficulty of acquisition of functional
intracellular antibodies. We describe the use of the new intracellular antibody
capture procedure (IAC(3)) to facilitate direct isolation of functional single
domain antibody fragments using four independent target molecules (LMO2, TP53,
CRAF1, and Hoxa9) from a set of diverse libraries. Initially, these have
variability in only one of the three antigen-binding CDR regions of VH or VL and 
first round single domains are affinity matured by iterative randomization of the
two other CDRs and reselection. We highlight the approach using a single domain
binding to LMO2 protein. Our results show that interfering with LMO2 protein
function demonstrates a role specifically in erythroid differentiation, confirm a
necessary and sufficient function for LMO2 as a cancer therapy target in T-cell
neoplasia and allowed for the first time production of soluble recombinant LMO2
protein by co-expression with intracellular domain antibodies. Co-crystallization
of LMO2 and the anti-LMO2 VH protein was successful. These results demonstrate
that this third generation IAC(3) offers a robust toolbox for various biomedical 
applications and consolidates functional features of the LMO2 protein complex,
which includes the importance of Lmo2-Ldb1 protein interaction.

PMCID: PMC3030373
PMID: 20980262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. J Immunol. 2010 Dec 1;185(11):6572-83. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0904203. Epub 2010
Oct 22.

Hoxa9 regulates Flt3 in lymphohematopoietic progenitors.

Gwin K(1), Frank E, Bossou A, Medina KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, College of Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN
55905, USA.

Early B cell factor (EBF) is a transcription factor essential for specification
and commitment to the B cell fate. In this study, we show downregulation of a
developmentally regulated cluster of hoxa genes, notably hoxa9, coincides with
induction of EBF at the Pro-B cell stage of B cell differentiation. Analysis of
the hematopoietic progenitor compartment in Hoxa9(-/-) mice revealed
significantly reduced frequencies and expression levels of Flt3, a cytokine
receptor important for lymphoid priming and the generation of B cell precursors
(BCPs). We show that Hoxa9 directly regulates the flt3 gene. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation analysis revealed binding of Hoxa9 to the flt3 promoter in a 
lymphoid progenitor cell line. Knockdown of Hoxa9 significantly reduced Flt3
transcription and expression. Conversely, forced expression of Hoxa9 increased
Flt3 transcription and expression in a Pro-B cell line that expressed low levels 
of Flt3. Hoxa9 inversely correlated with ebf1 in ex vivo-isolated bone marrow
progenitors and BCPs, suggesting that EBF might function to silence a Hoxa9
transcriptional program. Restoration of EBF function in an EBF(-/-) cell line
induced B lineage gene expression but did not directly suppress hoxa9
transcription, revealing alternate mechanisms of Hoxa9 regulation in BCPs. These 
data provide new insight into Hoxa9 function and regulation during lymphoid and B
cell development. Furthermore, they suggest that failure to upregulate Flt3
provides a molecular basis for the lymphoid/early B cell deficiencies in
Hoxa9(-/-) mice.

PMCID: PMC3907951
PMID: 20971928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 15;70(22):9243-52. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1250. Epub 
2010 Oct 8.

MGMT-independent temozolomide resistance in pediatric glioblastoma cells
associated with a PI3-kinase-mediated HOX/stem cell gene signature.

Gaspar N(1), Marshall L, Perryman L, Bax DA, Little SE, Viana-Pereira M, Sharp
SY, Vassal G, Pearson AD, Reis RM, Hargrave D, Workman P, Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Oncology, and Cancer Research UK Centre for Cancer Therapeutics,
The Institute of Cancer Research, and Paediatric Oncology, The Royal Marsden NHS 
Foundation Trust, Sutton, United Kingdom.

Sensitivity to temozolomide is restricted to a subset of glioblastoma patients,
with the major determinant of resistance being a lack of promoter methylation of 
the gene encoding the repair protein DNA methyltransferase MGMT, although other
mechanisms are thought to be active. There are, however, limited preclinical data
in model systems derived from pediatric glioma patients. We screened a series of 
cell lines for temozolomide efficacy in vitro, and investigated the differential 
mechanisms of resistance involved. In the majority of cell lines, a lack of MGMT 
promoter methylation and subsequent protein overexpression were linked to
temozolomide resistance. An exception was the pediatric glioblastoma line KNS42. 
Expression profiling data revealed a coordinated upregulation of HOX gene
expression in resistant lines, especially KNS42, which was reversed by
phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway inhibition. High levels of HOXA9/HOXA10 gene
expression were associated with a shorter survival in pediatric high-grade glioma
patient samples. Combination treatment in vitro of pathway inhibition and
temozolomide resulted in a highly synergistic interaction in KNS42 cells. The
resistance gene signature further included contiguous genes within the 12q13-q14 
amplicon, including the Akt enhancer PIKE, significantly overexpressed in the
KNS42 line. These cells were also highly enriched for CD133 and other stem cell
markers. We have thus shown an in vitro link between phosphoinositide
3-kinase-mediated HOXA9/HOXA10 expression, and a drug-resistant, progenitor cell 
phenotype in MGMT-independent pediatric glioblastoma.

Copyright © 2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3935452
PMID: 20935218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Exp Hematol. 2011 Jan;39(1):77-86.e1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2010.09.003. Epub
2010 Sep 18.

MLL-AF9 and MLL-ENL alter the dynamic association of transcriptional regulators
with genes critical for leukemia.

Monroe SC(1), Jo SY, Sanders DS, Basrur V, Elenitoba-Johnson KS, Slany RK, Hess
JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to better understand how mixed lineage
leukemia (MLL) fusion proteins deregulate the expression of genes critical for
leukemia.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The transforming domain of one of the most common MLL
fusion partners, AF9, was immunopurified after expression in myeloblastic M1
cells, and associating proteins were identified by mass spectrometric analysis.
Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by quantitative polymerase chain reaction 
was used to determine how binding of associating proteins compare across Hoxa9
and Meis1 in cell lines with and without MLL fusion proteins and how binding is
altered during gene down-regulation and differentiation.
RESULTS: Consistent with earlier purifications of ENL and AF4 from 293 cells, the
90 amino acid C-terminal domain of AF9 associates with many other MLL
translocation partners including Enl, Af4, Laf4, Af5q31, Ell, and Af10. This
complex, termed elongation assisting proteins (EAPs), also contains the RNA
polymerase II C-terminal domain kinase Cdk9/Cyclin T1/T2 (pTEFb) and the histone 
H3 lysine 79 methyltransferase Dot1L. Myeloid cells transformed by MLL fusions
show higher levels and a broader distribution of EAP components at genes critical
for leukemia. Inhibition of EAP components pTEFb and Dot1l show that both
contribute significantly to activation of Hoxa9 and Meis1 expression. EAP is
dynamically associated with the Hoxa9 and Meis1 loci in hematopoietic cells and
rapidly dissociates during induction of differentiation. In the presence of MLL
fusion proteins, its dissociation is prevented.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that MLL fusion proteins deregulate genes
critical for leukemia by excessive recruitment and impaired dissociation of EAP
from target loci.

Copyright © 2011 ISEH - Society for Hematology and Stem Cells. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3038424
PMID: 20854876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. J Renin Angiotensin Aldosterone Syst. 2010 Dec;11(4):205-13. doi:
10.1177/1470320310379876. Epub 2010 Aug 31.

Pathobiological aspects of the local bone marrow renin-angiotensin system: a
review.

Haznedaroglu IC(1), Beyazit Y.

Author information: 
(1)Hacettepe University School of Medicine, Department of Hematology, Ankara,
Turkey.

The local haematopoietic bone marrow (BM) renin-angiotensin system (RAS) mediates
pathobiological alterations of haematopoiesis in an
autocrine/paracrine/intracrine fashion. Recent data further indicated the
existence of angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) in human primitive
lympho-haematopoietic cells, embryonic, foetal and adult haematopoietic tissues. 
Human umbilical cord blood cells also express renin, angiotensinogen, and ACE
mRNAs. As ACE and other angiotensin peptides function in human haematopoietic
stem cells (HSCs) throughout haematopoietic ontogeny and adulthood, local RAS
could also have a function in HSC plasticity, and the development of
haematological neoplastic disorders. The presence of ACE on leukaemic blast cells
within leukaemic BM, on erythroleukaemic cells, ACE-expressing macrophages in
lymph nodes of Hodgkin disease, renin activity in leukaemic blasts, angiotensin
II as an autocrine growth factor for AML, increased renin gene activity during
NUP98-HOXA9 enhanced blast formation, higher levels of BB9/ACE (+) AML isoforms, 
and altered JAK-STAT pathway as a link between RAS and leukaemia indicated the
wide pathobiological aspects of local BM RAS. The comparable biological actions
of local RASs throughout the human body (including myocardium, pancreas,
pituitary gland, ovary and kidney) represent the true basis for the search of
their prominence in tissue functions. Recent data and perspectives of the local
BM RAS in health and disease are reviewed in this paper.

PMID: 20807797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. PLoS One. 2010 Aug 27;5(8):e12464. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0012464.

In vitro transformation of primary human CD34+ cells by AML fusion oncogenes:
early gene expression profiling reveals possible drug target in AML.

Abdul-Nabi AM(1), Yassin ER, Varghese N, Deshmukh H, Yaseen NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

Different fusion oncogenes in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) have distinct clinical
and laboratory features suggesting different modes of malignant transformation.
Here we compare the in vitro effects of representatives of 4 major groups of AML 
fusion oncogenes on primary human CD34+ cells. As expected from their clinical
similarities, MLL-AF9 and NUP98-HOXA9 had very similar effects in vitro. They
both caused erythroid hyperplasia and a clear block in erythroid and myeloid
maturation. On the other hand, AML1-ETO and PML-RARA had only modest effects on
myeloid and erythroid differentiation. All oncogenes except PML-RARA caused a
dramatic increase in long-term proliferation and self-renewal. Gene expression
profiling revealed two distinct temporal patterns of gene deregulation. Gene
deregulation by MLL-AF9 and NUP98-HOXA9 peaked 3 days after transduction. In
contrast, the vast majority of gene deregulation by AML1-ETO and PML-RARA
occurred within 6 hours, followed by a dramatic drop in the numbers of
deregulated genes. Interestingly, the p53 inhibitor MDM2 was upregulated by
AML1-ETO at 6 hours. Nutlin-3, an inhibitor of the interaction between MDM2 and
p53, specifically inhibited the proliferation and self-renewal of primary human
CD34+ cells transduced with AML1-ETO, suggesting that MDM2 upregulation plays a
role in cell transformation by AML1-ETO. These data show that differences among
AML fusion oncogenes can be recapitulated in vitro using primary human CD34+
cells and that early gene expression profiling in these cells can reveal
potential drug targets in AML.

PMCID: PMC2929205
PMID: 20805992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Prog Mol Biol Transl Sci. 2010;92:121-56. doi: 10.1016/S1877-1173(10)92006-1.

Early T cell differentiation lessons from T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Tremblay CS(1), Hoang T, Hoang T.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Research in Immunology and Cancer, University of Montreal,
Montréal, Québec, Canada.

T cells develop from bone marrow-derived self-renewing hematopoietic stem cells
(HSC). Upon entering the thymus, these cells undergo progressive commitment and
differentiation driven by the thymic stroma and the pre-T cell receptor
(pre-TCR). These processes are disrupted in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(T-ALL). More than 70% of recurring chromosomal rearrangements in T-ALL activate 
the expression of oncogenic transcription factors, belonging mostly to three
families, basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH), homeobox (HOX), and c-MYB. This
prevalence is indicative of their importance in the T lineage, and their dominant
mechanisms of transformation. For example, bHLH oncoproteins inhibit E2A and HEB,
revealing their tumor suppressor function in the thymus. The induction of T-ALL, 
nonetheless, requires collaboration with constitutive NOTCH1 signaling and the
pre-TCR, as well as loss-of-function mutations for CDKN2A and PTEN.
Significantly, NOTCH1, the pre-TCR pathway, and E2A/HEB proteins control critical
checkpoints and branchpoints in early thymocyte development whereas several
oncogenic transcription factors, HOXA9, c-MYB, SCL, and LYL-1 control HSC
self-renewal. Together, these genetic lesions alter key regulatory processes in
the cell, favoring self-renewal and subvert the normal control of thymocyte
homeostasis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20800819  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Breast Cancer Res. 2010;12(4):306. doi: 10.1186/bcr2600. Epub 2010 Jul 23.

BRCA1: linking HOX to breast cancer suppression.

Jin K(1), Sukumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Program, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns,
Hopkins, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 1650 Orleans Street, Room
143 CRB1, Baltimore, MD 21231, USA.

Homeobox (HOX) genes play key roles in embryogenesis and tissue differentiation. 
Recently, a number of groups have reported altered HOX gene expression in breast 
cancer. However, the mechanism of HOX gene regulation and the search for direct
targets of its transcriptional regulatory function have been minimally fruitful. 
Recently, Gilbert and colleagues reported that HOXA9 restrains breast cancer
progression by upregulation of BRCA1, a tumor suppressor. This finding raises our
hope that more, rather elusive targets of HOX genes important in tumor
progression or suppression will be found in the future.

PMCID: PMC2949630
PMID: 20727230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Biochemistry. 2010 Aug 10;49(31):6576-86. doi: 10.1021/bi1009387.

The PHD3 domain of MLL acts as a CYP33-regulated switch between MLL-mediated
activation and repression .

Park S(1), Osmers U, Raman G, Schwantes RH, Diaz MO, Bushweller JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia 22908, USA.

The mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene plays a critical role in epigenetic
regulation of gene expression and is a frequent target of chromosomal
translocations leading to leukemia. MLL plant homeodomain 3 (PHD3) is lost in all
MLL translocation products, and reinsertion of PHD3 into MLL fusion proteins
abrogates their transforming activity. PHD3 has been shown to interact with the
RNA-recognition motif (RRM) domain of human nuclear Cyclophilin33 (CYP33). Here, 
we show that CYP33 mediates downregulation of the expression of MLL target genes 
HOXC8, HOXA9, CDKN1B, and C-MYC, in a proline isomerase-dependent manner. This
downregulation correlates with the reduction of trimethylated lysine 4 of histone
H3 (H3K4me3) and histone H3 acetylation. We have structurally characterized both 
the PHD3 and CYP33 RRM domains and analyzed their binding to one another. The
PHD3 domain binds H3K4me3 (preferentially) and the CYP33 RRM domain at distinct
sites. Our binding data show that binding of H3K4me3 to PHD3 and binding of the
CYP33 RRM domain to PHD3 are mutually inhibitory, implying that PHD3 is a
molecular switch for the transition between activation and repression of target
genes. To explore the possible mechanism of CYP33/PHD3-mediated repression, we
have analyzed the CYP33 proline isomerase activity on various H3 and H4 peptides 
and shown selectivity for two sites in H3. Our results provide a possible
mechanism for the MLL PHD3 domain to act as a switch between activation and
repression.

PMCID: PMC2916634
PMID: 20677832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. J Korean Med Sci. 2010 Aug;25(8):1152-9. doi: 10.3346/jkms.2010.25.8.1152. Epub
2010 Jul 20.

Identification of novel methylation markers in hepatocellular carcinoma using a
methylation array.

Shin SH(1), Kim BH, Jang JJ, Suh KS, Kang GH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Epigenetics, Cancer Research Institute and Brain Korea 2nd
Stage, Seoul National University, Seoul, Korea.

Promoter CpG island hypermethylation has become recognized as an important
mechanism for inactivating tumor suppressor genes or tumor-related genes in human
cancers of various tissues. Gene inactivation in association with promoter CpG
island hypermethylation has been reported to be four times more frequent than
genetic changes in human colorectal cancers. Hepatocellular carcinoma is also one
of the human cancer types in which aberrant promoter CpG island hypermethylation 
is frequently found. However, the number of genes identified to date as
hypermethylated for hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is fewer than that for
colorectal cancer or gastric cancer, which can be attributed to fewer attempts to
perform genome-wide methylation profiling for HCC. In the present study, we used 
bead-array technology and coupled methylation-specific PCR to identify new genes 
showing cancer-specific methylation in HCC. Twenty-four new genes have been
identified as hypermethylated at their promoter CpG island loci in a
cancer-specific manner. Of these, TNFRSF10C, HOXA9, NPY, and IRF5 were frequently
hypermethylated in hepatocellular carcinoma tissue samples and their methylation 
was found to be closely associated with inactivation of gene expression. Further 
study will be required to elucidate the clinicopathological implications of these
newly found DNA methylation markers in hepatocellular carcinoma.

PMCID: PMC2908783
PMID: 20676325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. Med Oncol. 2011 Dec;28(4):1201-9. doi: 10.1007/s12032-010-9634-9. Epub 2010 Jul
27.

Knockdown of BMI-1 causes cell-cycle arrest and derepresses p16INK4a, HOXA9 and
HOXC13 mRNA expression in HeLa cells.

Chen F(1), Li Y, Wang L, Hu L.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory Department, Union Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Jiefang Road 1277#, 430022, Wuhan, Hubei,
People's Republic of China.

The human oncogene B-cell-specific Moloney murine leukemia virus integration site
1 (BMI-1) is a member of the mammalian Polycomb group family. The overexpression 
of BMI-1 is associated with human malignancies. In this study, the effects of
knockdown of BMI-1 by shRNA-mediated RNA interference on cell cycle and possible 
downstream targets in human cervical adenocarcinoma HeLa cells were investigated.
As a result, when the shRNA plasmid was stably introduced into the cell line, the
mRNA and protein of BMI-1 were specifically down-regulated, and the cells
increased in the phase of G1 and cells in S phase significantly decreased by flow
cytometric analysis; the knockdown of BMI-1 expression could lead to significant 
up-regulation of p16INK4a, HOXA9 and HOXC13 mRNA expression, but hTERT and HOXB4 
mRNA expression did not change significantly. In conclusion, RNAi-mediated
knockdown of BMI-1 expression can induce cell-cycle arrest and up-regulate
p16INK4a, HOXA9 and HOXC13 in HeLa cells. Our results suggest that targeting
BMI-1 might be a therapeutic potential for the treatment of cancer.

PMID: 20661663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. Nature. 2010 Aug 5;466(7307):765-8. doi: 10.1038/nature09171. Epub 2010 Jul 18.

Regulation of myeloid leukaemia by the cell-fate determinant Musashi.

Ito T(1), Kwon HY, Zimdahl B, Congdon KL, Blum J, Lento WE, Zhao C, Lagoo A,
Gerrard G, Foroni L, Goldman J, Goh H, Kim SH, Kim DW, Chuah C, Oehler VG, Radich
JP, Jordan CT, Reya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, North Carolina 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Sep;10(9):602.

Chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML) can progress from a slow growing chronic
phase to an aggressive blast crisis phase, but the molecular basis of this
transition remains poorly understood. Here we have used mouse models of CML to
show that disease progression is regulated by the Musashi-Numb signalling axis.
Specifically, we find that the chronic phase is marked by high levels of Numb
expression whereas the blast crisis phase has low levels of Numb expression, and 
that ectopic expression of Numb promotes differentiation and impairs
advanced-phase disease in vivo. As a possible explanation for the decreased
levels of Numb in the blast crisis phase, we show that NUP98-HOXA9, an oncogene
associated with blast crisis CML, can trigger expression of the RNA-binding
protein Musashi2 (Msi2), which in turn represses Numb. Notably, loss of Msi2
restores Numb expression and significantly impairs the development and
propagation of blast crisis CML in vitro and in vivo. Finally we show that Msi2
expression is not only highly upregulated during human CML progression but is
also an early indicator of poorer prognosis. These data show that the
Musashi-Numb pathway can control the differentiation of CML cells, and raise the 
possibility that targeting this pathway may provide a new strategy for the
therapy of aggressive leukaemias.

PMCID: PMC2918284
PMID: 20639863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Blood. 2010 Oct 14;116(15):2768-75. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-10-246264. Epub 2010 
Jul 7.

Trib1 links the MEK1/ERK pathway in myeloid leukemogenesis.

Yokoyama T(1), Kanno Y, Yamazaki Y, Takahara T, Miyata S, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Tokyo, Japan.

Trib1 is a myeloid oncogene that cooperates with Hoxa9 and Meis1. Although the
MAPK pathway and C/EBP transcription factors are known to interact with Trib
proteins, the mechanisms by which Trib1 contributes to myeloid leukemogenesis
remains to be clarified. Here we report that interaction between Trib1 and MEK1
is required for Trib1-induced leukemogenesis. The C-terminal ILLHPWF motif that
is well conserved among Trib family proteins is required for MEK1 binding,
enhancement of ERK phosphorylation, enhanced self-renewal activity of bone marrow
cells and leukemogenic activity by Trib1. The motif is also important for
Trib1-induced C/EBPa degradation though interaction between Trib1 and C/EBPa is
not necessary. Inhibition of ERK phosphorylation suppressed Trib1-induced C/EBPa 
degradation, indicating an important role for Trib1/MEK1 interaction. These
results suggest that Trib1 may be a key mediator between the RTK-MAPK pathway and
the C/EBP transcription factor in myeloid leukemogenesis.

PMID: 20610816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. BMC Genomics. 2010 Jun 21;11:388. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-388.

Expression of a retinoic acid signature in circulating CD34 cells from coronary
artery disease patients.

van der Pouw Kraan TC(1), Schirmer SH, Fledderus JO, Moerland PD, Baggen JM,
Leyen TA, van der Laan AM, Piek JJ, van Royen N, Horrevoets AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology, VU University Medical
Center, Van der Boechorststraat, 1081BT Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
t.vanderpouwkraan@vumc.nl

BACKGROUND: Circulating CD34+ progenitor cells have the potential to
differentiate into a variety of cells, including endothelial cells. Knowledge is 
still scarce about the transcriptional programs used by CD34+ cells from
peripheral blood, and how these are affected in coronary artery disease (CAD)
patients.
RESULTS: We performed a whole genome transcriptome analysis of CD34+ cells, CD4+ 
T cells, CD14+ monocytes, and macrophages from 12 patients with CAD and 11
matched controls. CD34+ cells, compared to other mononuclear cells from the same 
individuals, showed high levels of KRAB box transcription factors, known to be
involved in gene silencing. This correlated with high expression levels in CD34+ 
cells for the progenitor markers HOXA5 and HOXA9, which are known to control
expression of KRAB factor genes. The comparison of expression profiles of CD34+
cells from CAD patients and controls revealed a less naïve phenotype in patients'
CD34+ cells, with increased expression of genes from the Mitogen Activated Kinase
network and a lowered expression of a panel of histone genes, reaching levels
comparable to that in more differentiated circulating cells. Furthermore, we
observed a reduced expression of several genes involved in CXCR4-signaling and
migration to SDF1/CXCL12.
CONCLUSIONS: The altered gene expression profile of CD34+ cells in CAD patients
was related to activation/differentiation by a retinoic acid-induced
differentiation program. These results suggest that circulating CD34+ cells in
CAD patients are programmed by retinoic acid, leading to a reduced capacity to
migrate to ischemic tissues.

PMCID: PMC2901320
PMID: 20565948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jun 17;9:151. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-151.

Polycomb repressor complex 2 regulates HOXA9 and HOXA10, activating ID2 in
NK/T-cell lines.

Nagel S(1), Venturini L, Marquez VE, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Scherr M, MacLeod RA,
Drexler HG.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Human and Animal Cell Lines, DSMZ - German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Inhoffenstr. 7B, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
sna@dsmz.de

BACKGROUND: NK- and T-cells are closely related lymphocytes, originating from the
same early progenitor cells during hematopoiesis. In these differentiation
processes deregulation of developmental genes may contribute to leukemogenesis.
Here, we compared expression profiles of NK- and T-cell lines for identification 
of aberrantly expressed genes in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL)
which physiologically regulate the differentiation program of the NK-cell
lineage.
RESULTS: This analysis showed high expression levels of HOXA9, HOXA10 and ID2 in 
NK-cell lines in addition to T-cell line LOUCY, suggesting leukemic deregulation 
therein. Overexpression experiments, chromatin immuno-precipitation and promoter 
analysis demonstrated that HOXA9 and HOXA10 directly activated expression of ID2.
Concomitantly elevated expression levels of HOXA9 and HOXA10 together with ID2 in
cell lines containing MLL translocations confirmed this form of regulation in
both ALL and acute myeloid leukemia. Overexpression of HOXA9, HOXA10 or ID2
resulted in repressed expression of apoptosis factor BIM. Furthermore, profiling 
data of genes coding for chromatin regulators of homeobox genes, including
components of polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2), indicated lacking expression
of EZH2 in LOUCY and exclusive expression of HOP in NK-cell lines. Subsequent
treatment of T-cell lines JURKAT and LOUCY with DZNep, an inhibitor of EZH2/PRC2,
resulted in elevated and unchanged HOXA9/10 expression levels, respectively.
Moreover, siRNA-mediated knockdown of EZH2 in JURKAT enhanced HOXA10 expression, 
confirming HOXA10-repression by EZH2. Additionally, profiling data and
overexpression analysis indicated that reduced expression of E2F cofactor TFDP1
contributed to the lack of EZH2 in LOUCY. Forced expression of HOP in JURKAT
cells resulted in reduced HOXA10 and ID2 expression levels, suggesting
enhancement of PRC2 repression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that major differentiation factors of the NK-cell
lineage, including HOXA9, HOXA10 and ID2, were (de)regulated via PRC2 which
therefore contributes to T-cell leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2894765
PMID: 20565746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Dev Biol. 2010 Aug 15;344(2):827-35. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.05.516. Epub 2010 
Jun 8.

EGL-5/ABD-B plays an instructive role in male cell fate determination in the C.
elegans somatic gonad.

Kalis AK(1), Murphy MW, Zarkower D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Cell Biology, and Development, University of
Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.

Hox genes of the Abdominal-B (Abd-B) class regulate gonadal development in
diverse metazoans. Here we have investigated the role of the Abd-B homolog egl-5 
in C. elegans gonadal development. Previous work showed that egl-5 is required
male-specifically in the gonad and that mutant gonads are highly dysgenic and
possibly feminized. We have used sex-specific gonadal reporter genes to confirm
that the gonads of egl-5 males are extensively feminized. Sex-specific expression
of egl-5 requires the global sex determination gene tra-1 and the gonadal
masculinizing gene fkh-6, but mutagenesis of a short male gonadal enhancer
element in egl-5 suggested that this regulation is indirect. Ectopic expression
of EGL-5 in hermaphrodites is sufficient to induce male gonadal gene expression, 
indicating that EGL-5 plays an instructive role in male gonadal fate
determination. EGL-5 acts in parallel with a Wnt/beta-catenin pathway to regulate
male gonadal fates and can physically interact with the Wnt pathway transcription
factor POP-1 and modulate activity of a POP-1 dependent reporter gene. We propose
that EGL-5 imparts sex-specific function on POP-1 by recruiting it to
male-specific gonadal target genes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2921588
PMID: 20553900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 9;5(6):e11033. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011033.

Switch from stress response to homeobox transcription factors in adipose tissue
after profound fat loss.

Dankel SN(1), Fadnes DJ, Stavrum AK, Stansberg C, Holdhus R, Hoang T, Veum VL,
Christensen BJ, Våge V, Sagen JV, Steen VM, Mellgren G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

BACKGROUND: In obesity, impaired adipose tissue function may promote secondary
disease through ectopic lipid accumulation and excess release of adipokines,
resulting in systemic low-grade inflammation, insulin resistance and organ
dysfunction. However, several of the genes regulating adipose tissue function in 
obesity are yet to be identified.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In order to identify novel candidate genes that
may regulate adipose tissue function, we analyzed global gene expression in
abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue before and one year after bariatric surgery
(biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch, BPD/DS) (n = 16). Adipose tissue
from lean healthy individuals was also analyzed (n = 13). Two different
microarray platforms (AB 1700 and Illumina) were used to measure the differential
gene expression, and the results were further validated by qPCR. Surgery reduced 
BMI from 53.3 to 33.1 kg/m(2). The majority of differentially expressed genes
were down-regulated after profound fat loss, including transcription factors
involved in stress response, inflammation, and immune cell function (e.g., FOS,
JUN, ETS, C/EBPB, C/EBPD). Interestingly, a distinct set of genes was
up-regulated after fat loss, including homeobox transcription factors (IRX3,
IRX5, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB5, HOXC6, EMX2, PRRX1) and extracellular matrix
structural proteins (COL1A1, COL1A2, COL3A1, COL5A1, COL6A3).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The data demonstrate a marked switch of transcription
factors in adipose tissue after profound fat loss, providing new molecular
insight into a dichotomy between stress response and metabolically favorable
tissue development. Our findings implicate homeobox transcription factors as
important regulators of adipose tissue function.

PMCID: PMC2882947
PMID: 20543949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2010 Sep;299(3):H837-46. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00002.2010. Epub 2010 Jun 11.

Environment and vascular bed origin influence differences in endothelial
transcriptional profiles of coronary and iliac arteries.

Burridge KA(1), Friedman MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 
27708, USA.

Atherosclerotic plaques tend to form in the major arteries at certain predictable
locations. As these arteries vary in atherosusceptibility, interarterial
differences in endothelial cell biology are of considerable interest. To explore 
the origin of differences observed between typical atheroprone and
atheroresistant arteries, we used DNA microarrays to compare gene expression
profiles of harvested porcine coronary (CECs) and iliac artery endothelial cells 
(IECs) grown in static culture out to passage 4. Fewer differences were observed 
between the transcriptional profiles of CECs and IECs in culture compared with in
vivo, suggesting that most differences observed in vivo were due to distinct
environmental cues in the two arteries. One-class significance of microarrays
revealed that most in vivo interarterial differences disappeared in culture, as
fold differences after passaging were not significant for 85% of genes identified
as differentially expressed in vivo at 5% false discovery rate. However, the
three homeobox genes, HOXA9, HOXA10, and HOXD3, remained underexpressed in
coronary endothelium for all passages by at least nine-, eight-, and twofold,
respectively. Continued differential expression, despite removal from the in vivo
environment, suggests that primarily heritable or epigenetic mechanism(s)
influences transcription of these three genes. Quantitative real-time polymerase 
chain reaction confirmed expression ratios for seven genes associated with
atherogenesis and over- or underexpressed by threefold in CECs relative to IECs. 
The present study provides evidence that both local environment and vascular bed 
origin modulate gene expression in arterial endothelium. The transcriptional
differences observed here may provide new insights into pathways responsible for 
coronary artery susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2944485
PMID: 20543076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Cancer Cell. 2010 Jun 15;17(6):597-608. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.04.024.

GSK-3 promotes conditional association of CREB and its coactivators with MEIS1 to
facilitate HOX-mediated transcription and oncogenesis.

Wang Z(1), Iwasaki M, Ficara F, Lin C, Matheny C, Wong SH, Smith KS, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Aug;10(8):529.
    Cancer Cell. 2010 Jun 15;17(6):529-31.

Acute leukemias induced by MLL chimeric oncoproteins are among the subset of
cancers distinguished by a paradoxical dependence on GSK-3 kinase activity for
sustained proliferation. We demonstrate here that GSK-3 maintains the MLL
leukemia stem cell transcriptional program by promoting the conditional
association of CREB and its coactivators TORC and CBP with homedomain protein
MEIS1, a critical component of the MLL-subordinate program, which in turn
facilitates HOX-mediated transcription and transformation. This mechanism also
applies to hematopoietic cells transformed by other HOX genes, including CDX2,
which is highly expressed in a majority of acute myeloid leukemias, thus
providing a molecular approach based on GSK-3 inhibitory strategies to target
HOX-associated transcription in a broad spectrum of leukemias.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2919232
PMID: 20541704  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Cancer Cell. 2010 Jun 15;17(6):609-21. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2010.04.012.

The PAF complex synergizes with MLL fusion proteins at HOX loci to promote
leukemogenesis.

Muntean AG(1), Tan J, Sitwala K, Huang Y, Bronstein J, Connelly JA, Basrur V,
Elenitoba-Johnson KS, Hess JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Aug;10(8):529.

MLL is involved in chromosomal rearrangements that generate fusion proteins with 
deregulated transcriptional activity. The mechanisms of MLL fusion
protein-mediated transcriptional activation are poorly understood. Here we show
MLL interacts directly with the polymerase associated factor complex (PAFc)
through sequences flanking the CxxC domain. PAFc interacts with RNA polymerase II
and stimulates posttranslational histone modifications. PAFc augments MLL and
MLL-AF9 mediated transcriptional activation of Hoxa9. Conversely, knockdown of
PAFc disrupts MLL fusion protein-mediated transcriptional activation and MLL
recruitment to target loci. PAFc gene expression is downregulated during
hematopoiesis and likely serves to regulate MLL function. Deletions of MLL that
abolish interactions with PAFc also eliminate MLL-AF9 mediated immortalization
indicating an essential function for this interaction in leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2888888
PMID: 20541477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. Mol Cell. 2010 Jun 25;38(6):853-63. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.05.011. Epub 2010 
Jun 10.

Multiple interactions recruit MLL1 and MLL1 fusion proteins to the HOXA9 locus in
leukemogenesis.

Milne TA(1), Kim J, Wang GG, Stadler SC, Basrur V, Whitcomb SJ, Wang Z,
Ruthenburg AJ, Elenitoba-Johnson KS, Roeder RG, Allis CD.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Chromatin Biology and Epigenetics, The Rockefeller University,
New York, NY 10065, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Aug;10(8):529.

MLL1 fusion proteins activate HoxA9 gene expression and cause aggressive
leukemias that respond poorly to treatment, but how they recognize and stably
bind to HoxA9 is not clearly understood. In a systematic analysis of MLL1 domain 
recruitment activity, we identified an essential MLL1 recruitment domain that
includes the CXXC domain and PHD fingers and is controlled by direct interactions
with the PAF elongation complex and H3K4Me2/3. MLL1 fusion proteins lack the PHD 
fingers and require prebinding of a wild-type MLL1 complex and CXXC domain
recognition of DNA for stable HoxA9 association. Together, these results suggest 
that specific recruitment of MLL1 requires multiple interactions and is a
precondition for stable recruitment of MLL1 fusion proteins to HoxA9 in
leukemogenesis. Since wild-type MLL1 and oncogenic MLL1 fusion proteins have
overlapping yet distinct recruitment mechanisms, this creates a window of
opportunity that could be exploited for the development of targeted therapies.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2902588
PMID: 20541448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. Cell. 2010 Jun 25;141(7):1183-94. doi: 10.1016/j.cell.2010.05.016. Epub 2010 Jun 
10.

Pro isomerization in MLL1 PHD3-bromo cassette connects H3K4me readout to CyP33
and HDAC-mediated repression.

Wang Z(1), Song J, Milne TA, Wang GG, Li H, Allis CD, Patel DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, 
NY 10065, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Aug;10(8):529.
    Cell. 2010 Jun 25;141(7):1108-10.

The MLL1 gene is a frequent target for recurrent chromosomal translocations,
resulting in transformation of hematopoietic precursors into leukemia stem cells.
Here, we report on structure-function studies that elucidate molecular events in 
MLL1 binding of histone H3K4me3/2 marks and recruitment of the cyclophilin CyP33.
CyP33 contains a PPIase and a RRM domain and regulates MLL1 function through HDAC
recruitment. We find that the PPIase domain of CyP33 regulates the conformation
of MLL1 through proline isomerization within the PHD3-Bromo linker, thereby
disrupting the PHD3-Bromo interface and facilitating binding of the MLL1-PHD3
domain to the CyP33-RRM domain. H3K4me3/2 and CyP33-RRM target different surfaces
of MLL1-PHD3 and can bind simultaneously to form a ternary complex. Furthermore, 
the MLL1-CyP33 interaction is required for repression of HOXA9 and HOXC8 genes in
vivo. Our results highlight the role of PHD3-Bromo cassette as a regulatory
platform, orchestrating MLL1 binding of H3K4me3/2 marks and cyclophilin-mediated 
repression through HDAC recruitment.

PMCID: PMC4690531
PMID: 20541251  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Exp Mol Med. 2010 Jul 31;42(7):484-502.

Integrative epigenomic and genomic analysis of malignant pheochromocytoma.

Sandgren J(1), Andersson R, Rada-Iglesias A, Enroth S, Akerstrom G, Dumanski JP, 
Komorowski J, Westin G, Wadelius C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, Uppsala University, Uppsala University
Hospital, SE-75185 Uppsala, Sweden.

Epigenomic and genomic changes affect gene expression and contribute to tumor
development. The histone modifications trimethylated histone H3 lysine 4
(H3K4me3) and lysine 27 (H3K27me3) are epigenetic regulators associated to active
and silenced genes, respectively and alterations of these modifications have been
observed in cancer. Furthermore, genomic aberrations such as DNA copy number
changes are common events in tumors. Pheochromocytoma is a rare endocrine tumor
of the adrenal gland that mostly occurs sporadic with unknown epigenetic/genetic 
cause. The majority of cases are benign. Here we aimed to combine the genome-wide
profiling of H3K4me3 and H3K27me3, obtained by the ChIP-chip methodology, and DNA
copy number data with global gene expression examination in a malignant
pheochromocytoma sample. The integrated analysis of the tumor expression levels, 
in relation to normal adrenal medulla, indicated that either histone
modifications or chromosomal alterations, or both, have great impact on the
expression of a substantial fraction of the genes in the investigated sample.
Candidate tumor suppressor genes identified with decreased expression, a H3K27me3
mark and/or in regions of deletion were for instance TGIF1, DSC3, TNFRSF10B,
RASSF2, HOXA9, PTPRE and CDH11. More genes were found with increased expression, 
a H3K4me3 mark, and/or in regions of gain. Potential oncogenes detected among
those were GNAS, INSM1, DOK5, ETV1, RET, NTRK1, IGF2, and the H3K27 trimethylase 
gene EZH2. Our approach to associate histone methylations and DNA copy number
changes to gene expression revealed apparent impact on global gene transcription,
and enabled the identification of candidate tumor genes for further exploration.

PMCID: PMC2912476
PMID: 20534969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. J Mol Biol. 2010 Jul 9;400(2):145-54. doi: 10.1016/j.jmb.2010.04.067. Epub 2010
May 8.

Molecular mechanism of MLL PHD3 and RNA recognition by the Cyp33 RRM domain.

Hom RA(1), Chang PY, Roy S, Musselman CA, Glass KC, Selezneva AI, Gozani O,
Ismagilov RF, Cleary ML, Kutateladze TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Colorado Denver School of Medicine, 
12801 East 17th Avenue, Aurora, CO 80045, USA.

The nuclear protein cyclophilin 33 (Cyp33) is a peptidyl-prolyl cis-trans
isomerase that catalyzes cis-trans isomerization of the peptide bond preceding a 
proline and promotes folding and conformational changes in folded and unfolded
proteins. The N-terminal RNA-recognition motif (RRM) domain of Cyp33 has been
found to associate with the third plant homeodomain (PHD3) finger of the mixed
lineage leukemia (MLL) proto-oncoprotein and a poly(A) RNA sequence. Here, we
report a 1.9 A resolution crystal structure of the RRM domain of Cyp33 and
describe the molecular mechanism of PHD3 and RNA recognition. The Cyp33 RRM
domain folds into a five-stranded antiparallel beta-sheet and two alpha-helices. 
The RRM domain, but not the catalytic module of Cyp33, binds strongly to PHD3,
exhibiting a 2 muM affinity as measured by isothermal titration calorimetry. NMR 
chemical shift perturbation (CSP) analysis and dynamics data reveal that the beta
strands and the beta2-beta3 loop of the RRM domain are involved in the
interaction with PHD3. Mutations in the PHD3-binding site or deletions in the
beta2-beta3 loop lead to a significantly reduced affinity or abrogation of the
interaction. The RNA-binding pocket of the Cyp33 RRM domain, mapped on the basis 
of NMR CSP and mutagenesis, partially overlaps with the PHD3-binding site, and
RNA association is abolished in the presence of MLL PHD3. Full-length Cyp33 acts 
as a negative regulator of MLL-induced transcription and reduces the expression
levels of MLL target genes MEIS1 and HOXA9. Together, these in vitro and in vivo 
data provide insight into the multiple functions of Cyp33 RRM and suggest a
Cyp33-dependent mechanism for regulating the transcriptional activity of MLL.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3204800
PMID: 20460131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Nucleic Acids Res. 2010 Sep;38(16):5472-8. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkq337. Epub 2010 May
5.

HOXA9 regulates miR-155 in hematopoietic cells.

Hu YL(1), Fong S, Largman C, Shen WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center and
University of California, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

HOXA9-mediated up-regulation of miR-155 was noted during an array-based analysis 
of microRNA expression in Hoxa9(-/-)bone marrow (BM) cells. HOXA9 induction of
miR-155 was confirmed in these samples, as well as in wild-type versus
Hoxa9-deficient marrow, using northern analysis and qRT-PCR. Infection of
wild-type BM with HOXA9 expressing or GFP(+) control virus further confirmed
HOXA9-mediated regulation of miR-155. miR-155 expression paralleled Hoxa9 mRNA
expression in fractionated BM progenitors, being highest in the stem cell
enriched pools. HOXA9 capacity to induce myeloid colony formation was blunted in 
miR-155-deficient BM cells, indicating that miR-155 is a downstream mediator of
HOXA9 function in blood cells. Pu.1, an important regulator of myelopoiesis, was 
identified as a putative down stream target for miR-155. Although miR-155 was
shown to down-regulate the Pu.1 protein, HOXA9 did not appear to modulate Pu.1
expression in murine BM cells.

PMCID: PMC2938212
PMID: 20444872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Stem Cell Res. 2010 Jul;5(1):40-50. doi: 10.1016/j.scr.2010.03.004. Epub 2010 Mar
27.

The HOX Code as a "biological fingerprint" to distinguish functionally distinct
stem cell populations derived from cord blood.

Liedtke S(1), Buchheiser A, Bosch J, Bosse F, Kruse F, Zhao X, Santourlidis S,
Kögler G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Transplantation Diagnostics and Cell Therapeutics,
Heinrich-Heine-University Medical Center, Düsseldorf, Germany.
liedtke@itz.uni-duesseldorf.de

Mesenchymal stem cells (MSC) have been isolated from almost every adult tissue.
In cord blood (CB), different non-hematopoietic CD45-, CD34- adherent cell
populations can be generated: the cord blood derived MSC (CB-MSC), that behave
almost like MSC from bone marrow (BM-MSC), and unrestricted somatic stem cells
(USSC) which show a distinct differentiation potential into all three germ
layers. However, distinguishing these populations easily by molecular markers is 
still a concern. In this study we were able to present the HOX expression pattern
of USSC, CB-MSC and BM-MSC, which in fact allows a discrimination of these
populations. Briefly, RT-PCR analysis of the HOX code revealed a high similarity 
between BM-MSC and CB-MSC, which are both HOX-positive, whereas USSC resembled H9
embryonic stem cells HOX-negative.Especially HOXA9, HOXB7, HOXC10 and HOXD8 are
good candidate markers to discriminate MSC from USSC. Thus, our data suggest that
the "biological fingerprint" based on the HOX code can be used to distinguish
functionally distinct MSC populations derived from bone marrow and cord blood.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20434420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Clin Invest. 2010 May;120(5):1535-50. doi: 10.1172/JCI39534. Epub 2010 Apr 12.

HOXA9 regulates BRCA1 expression to modulate human breast tumor phenotype.

Gilbert PM(1), Mouw JK, Unger MA, Lakins JN, Gbegnon MK, Clemmer VB, Benezra M,
Licht JD, Boudreau NJ, Tsai KK, Welm AL, Feldman MD, Weber BL, Weaver VM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Institute for Medicine and Engineering, University of
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Rev Cancer. 2010 Jun;10(6):382.

Breast cancer 1, early onset (BRCA1) expression is often reduced in sporadic
breast tumors, even in the absence of BRCA1 genetic modifications, but the
molecular basis for this is unknown. In this study, we identified homeobox A9
(HOXA9) as a gene frequently downregulated in human breast cancers and tumor cell
lines and noted that reduced HOXA9 transcript levels associated with tumor
aggression, metastasis, and patient mortality. Experiments revealed that loss of 
HOXA9 promoted mammary epithelial cell growth and survival and perturbed tissue
morphogenesis. Restoring HOXA9 expression repressed growth and survival and
inhibited the malignant phenotype of breast cancer cells in culture and in a
xenograft mouse model. Molecular studies showed that HOXA9 restricted breast
tumor behavior by directly modulating the expression of BRCA1. Indeed, ectopic
expression of wild-type BRCA1 phenocopied the tumor suppressor function of HOXA9,
and reducing BRCA1 levels or function inhibited the antitumor activity of HOXA9. 
Consistently, HOXA9 expression correlated with BRCA1 in clinical specimens and
with tumor aggression in patients lacking estrogen receptor/progesterone receptor
expression in their breast tissue. These findings indicate that HOXA9 restricts
breast tumor aggression by modulating expression of the tumor suppressor gene
BRCA1, which we believe provides an explanation for the loss of BRCA1 expression 
in sporadic breast tumors in the absence of BRCA1 genetic modifications.

PMCID: PMC2860938
PMID: 20389018  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Cell Cycle. 2010 Mar 1;9(5):909-12. Epub 2010 Mar 6.

Biologic and experimental variation of measured cancer stem cells.

Heuser M(1), Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada;
Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology and Stem Cell Transplantation,
Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Whereas it has become clear that measured stem cell frequencies in tumors greatly
depend on the assay system used, the research focus now shifts towards
identification of the biologic variability of cancer stem cells in different
disease subsets. In a recent study we quantified the frequency and in vitro
expansion potential of leukemia initiating cells in a murine model of acute
myeloid leukemia driven either by retroviral overexpression of MN1 and a control 
vector, or by MN1 and a HOX gene through limiting dilution transplantation assays
in syngeneic mice. Both leukemia-initiating cell frequency and expansion
potential were increased by over two orders of magnitude in the two-oncogene
compared to the one-oncogene model, documenting the functional heterogeneity of
leukemia-initiating cells. Loss-of-function studies showed that STAT5b and STAT1 
are critical for the enhanced self-renewal activity. Here we discuss implications
of our findings and potential sources of experimental variability of measured
leukemia or cancer stem cell frequencies.

PMID: 20348851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Leukemia. 2010 May;24(5):1001-11. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.42. Epub 2010 Mar 25.

Effects of the NUP98-DDX10 oncogene on primary human CD34+ cells: role of a
conserved helicase motif.

Yassin ER(1), Abdul-Nabi AM, Takeda A, Yaseen NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, MO 63110, USA.

NUP98 gene rearrangements occur in acute myeloid leukemia and result in the
expression of fusion proteins. One of the most frequent is NUP98-DDX10 that fuses
a portion of NUP98 to a portion of DDX10, a putative DEAD-box RNA helicase. Here,
we show that NUP98-DDX10 dramatically increases proliferation and self-renewal of
primary human CD34+ cells, and disrupts their erythroid and myeloid
differentiation. It localizes to their nuclei and extensively deregulates gene
expression. Comparison to another leukemogenic NUP98 fusion, NUP98-HOXA9, reveals
a number of genes deregulated by both oncoproteins, including HOX genes, COX-2,
MYCN, ANGPT1, REN, HEY1, SOX4 and others. These genes may account for the similar
leukemogenic properties of NUP98 fusion oncogenes. The YIHRAGRTAR sequence in the
DDX10 portion of NUP98-DDX10 represents a major motif shared by DEAD-box RNA
helicases that is required for ATP binding, RNA-binding and helicase functions.
Mutating this motif diminished the in vitro transforming ability of NUP98-DDX10, 
indicating that it has a role in leukemogenesis. These data show for the first
time the in vitro transforming ability of NUP98-DDX10 and show that it is
partially dependent on one of the consensus helicase motifs of DDX10. They also
point to common pathways that may underlie leukemogenesis by different NUP98
fusions.

PMCID: PMC2868946
PMID: 20339440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Science. 2010 Mar 26;327(5973):1650-3. doi: 10.1126/science.1186624.

The Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is required for the development of leukemia stem
cells in AML.

Wang Y(1), Krivtsov AV, Sinha AU, North TE, Goessling W, Feng Z, Zon LI,
Armstrong SA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Leukemia stem cells (LSCs) are capable of limitless self-renewal and are
responsible for the maintenance of leukemia. Because selective eradication of
LSCs could offer substantial therapeutic benefit, there is interest in
identifying the signaling pathways that control their development. We studied
LSCs in mouse models of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) induced either by
coexpression of the Hoxa9 and Meis1a oncogenes or by the fusion oncoprotein
MLL-AF9. We show that the Wnt/beta-catenin signaling pathway is required for
self-renewal of LSCs that are derived from either hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) 
or more differentiated granulocyte-macrophage progenitors (GMP). Because the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway is normally active in HSCs but not in GMP, these results
suggest that reactivation of beta-catenin signaling is required for the
transformation of progenitor cells by certain oncogenes. beta-catenin is not
absolutely required for self-renewal of adult HSCs; thus, targeting the
Wnt/beta-catenin pathway may represent a new therapeutic opportunity in AML.

PMCID: PMC3084586
PMID: 20339075  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Dev Biol. 2010 May 15;341(2):488-98. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2010.03.006. Epub 2010 
Mar 18.

Additive and global functions of HoxA cluster genes in mesoderm derivatives.

Di-Poï N(1), Koch U, Radtke F, Duboule D.

Author information: 
(1)National Research Center Frontiers in Genetics, Department of Zoology and
Animal Biology, University of Geneva, Sciences III, 1211 Geneva 4, Switzerland.

Hox genes encode transcription factors that play a central role in the
specification of regional identities along the anterior to posterior body axis.
In the developing mouse embryo, Hox genes from all four genomic clusters are
involved in range of developmental processes, including the patterning of
skeletal structures and the formation of several organs. However, the functional 
redundancy observed either between paralogous genes, or among neighboring genes
from the same cluster, has hampered functional analyses, in particular when
synergistic, cluster-specific functions are considered. Here, we report that
mutant mice lacking the entire HoxA cluster in mesodermal lineages display the
expected spectrum of postnatal respiratory, cardiac and urogenital defects,
previously reported for single gene mutations. Likewise, mild phenotypes are
observed in both appendicular and axial skeleton. However, a striking effect was 
uncovered in the hematopoietic system, much stronger than that seen for Hoxa9
inactivation alone, which involves stem cells (HSCs) as well as the erythroid
lineage, indicating that several Hoxa genes are necessary for normal
hematopoiesis to occur. Finally, the combined deletions of Hoxa and Hoxd genes
reveal abnormalities in axial elongation as well as skin morphogenesis that are
likely the results of defects in epithelial-mesenchymal interactions.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20303345  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Mar 23;55(12):1227-36. doi: 10.1016/j.jacc.2009.10.047.

Sustained inflammation due to nuclear factor-kappa B activation in irradiated
human arteries.

Halle M(1), Gabrielsen A, Paulsson-Berne G, Gahm C, Agardh HE, Farnebo F,
Tornvall P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Section of Reconstructive
Plastic Surgery, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden. martin.halle@ki.se

Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol. 2010 Mar 23;55(12):1237-9.

OBJECTIVES: The aim of this study was to investigate gene expression networks
related to cardiovascular disease in radiated human arteries.
BACKGROUND: Recent epidemiological studies have shown that radiotherapy is
associated with cardiovascular disease years after treatment. However, the
molecular mechanisms underlying late effects of radiation are poorly described.
METHODS: Arterial biopsies from radiated and nonradiated human conduit arteries, 
from the same patient, were simultaneously harvested during microvascular free
tissue transfer for cancer-reconstruction in 13 patients, 4 to 500 weeks from
radiation treatment. Radiated and nonradiated arteries were compared, with
Affymetrix (Santa Clara, California) microarrays on a subset of the material to
generate candidate genes. A Taqman (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, California) 
low-density array of 45 selected genes was designed for analysis of the whole
material.
RESULTS: Thirteen genes were synchronously expressed in all patients (p =
0.0015), including CCL8, CCL3, CXCL2, DUSP5, FGFR2, HMOX1, HOXA9, IL-6, MMP-1,
PTX3, RDH10, SOD2, and TNFAIP3. A majority of differentially regulated genes
related to the nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB) signaling pathway and were
dysregulated even years after radiation. The NF-kappaB activation was confirmed
by immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence.
CONCLUSIONS: In the present study, we found sustained inflammation due to
NF-kappaB activation in human radiated arteries. The results are supported by
previous in vitro findings suggesting that deoxyribonucleic acid injury, after
radiation, activates NF-kappaB. We also suggest that HOXA9 might be involved in
the regulation of NF-kappaB activation. The observed sustained inflammatory
response can explain cardiovascular disease years after radiation.

Copyright (c) 2010 American College of Cardiology Foundation. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20298930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. Mol Biol Cell. 2010 May 1;21(9):1585-96. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E09-07-0561. Epub 2010 
Mar 17.

Nup98-homeodomain fusions interact with endogenous Nup98 during interphase and
localize to kinetochores and chromosome arms during mitosis.

Xu S(1), Powers MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Emory University School of Medicine, Atlanta, GA
30322, USA.

Chromosomal translocations involving the Nup98 gene are implicated in leukemias, 
especially acute myelogenous leukemia. These translocations generate chimeric
fusion proteins, all of which have in common the N-terminal half of Nup98, which 
contains the nucleoporin FG/GLFG repeat motifs. The homeodomain group of Nup98
fusion proteins retain the C-terminus of a homeodomain transcription factor,
including the homeobox responsible for DNA binding. Current models for Nup98
leukemogenesis invoke aberrant transcription resulting from recruitment of
coregulators by the Nup98 repeat domain. Here we have investigated the behavior
of Nup98-homeodomain fusion proteins throughout the cell cycle. At all stages,
the fusion proteins exhibit a novel localization distinct from the component
proteins or fragments. During interphase, there are dynamic interactions between 
the Nup98 fusions and endogenous Nup98 that lead to mislocalization of the
intranuclear fraction of Nup98, but do not alter the level of Nup98 at the
nuclear pore complex. During mitosis, no interaction between the fusion proteins 
and endogenous Nup98 is observed. However, the fusions are entirely concentrated 
at kinetochores and on chromosome arms, sites where the APC/C, a target of Nup98 
regulation, is also found. Our observations suggest new possibilities for
misregulation by which Nup98 translocations may contribute to cellular
transformation and leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2861616
PMID: 20237156  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. J Biol Chem. 2010 May 21;285(21):16248-57. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M109.048785. Epub
2010 Mar 16.

Inhibition of CRM1-mediated nuclear export of transcription factors by
leukemogenic NUP98 fusion proteins.

Takeda A(1), Sarma NJ, Abdul-Nabi AM, Yaseen NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St Louis, Missouri 63110, USA.

NUP98 is a nucleoporin that plays complex roles in the nucleocytoplasmic
trafficking of macromolecules. Rearrangements of the NUP98 gene in human leukemia
result in the expression of numerous fusion oncoproteins whose effect on
nucleocytoplasmic trafficking is poorly understood. The present study was
undertaken to determine the effects of leukemogenic NUP98 fusion proteins on
CRM1-mediated nuclear export. NUP98-HOXA9, a prototypic NUP98 fusion, inhibited
the nuclear export of two known CRM1 substrates: mutated cytoplasmic
nucleophosmin and HIV-1 Rev. In vitro binding assays revealed that NUP98-HOXA9
binds CRM1 through the FG repeat motif in a Ran-GTP-dependent manner similar to
but stronger than the interaction between CRM1 and its export substrates. Two
NUP98 fusions, NUP98-HOXA9 and NUP98-DDX10, whose fusion partners are
structurally and functionally unrelated, interacted with endogenous CRM1 in
myeloid cells as shown by co-immunoprecipitation. These leukemogenic NUP98 fusion
proteins interacted with CRM1, Ran, and the nucleoporin NUP214 in a manner
fundamentally different from that of wild-type NUP98. NUP98-HOXA9 and NUP98-DDX10
formed characteristic aggregates within the nuclei of a myeloid cell line and
primary human CD34+ cells and caused aberrant localization of CRM1 to these
aggregates. These NUP98 fusions caused nuclear accumulation of two transcription 
factors, NFAT and NFkappaB, that are regulated by CRM1-mediated export. The
nuclear entrapment of NFAT and NFkappaB correlated with enhanced transcription
from promoters responsive to these transcription factors. Taken together, the
results suggest a new mechanism by which NUP98 fusions dysregulate transcription 
and cause leukemia, namely, inhibition of CRM1-mediated nuclear export with
aberrant nuclear retention of transcriptional regulators.

PMCID: PMC2871492
PMID: 20233715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Mar;197(2):122-9. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.11.018.

Array comparative genomic hybridization analysis of adult acute leukemia
patients.

Yasar D(1), Karadogan I, Alanoglu G, Akkaya B, Luleci G, Salim O, Timuragaoglu A,
Toruner GA, Berker-Karauzum S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Akdeniz University, Antalya 07508,
Turkey.

We have performed a retrospective array-based comparative hybridization
(array-CGH) study on 41 acute leukemia samples [n=17 acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) patients only at diagnosis, n=3 ALL patients both at diagnosis and relapse;
n=20 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients only at diagnosis and n=1 AML patient 
both at diagnosis and relapse] using an Agilent 44K array. In addition to
previously detected cytogenetic aberrations, we observed cryptic aberrations in
95% of ALL and 90.5% of AML cases. ALL-specific recurrent abnormalities were RB1 
(n=3), PAX5 (n=4), and CDKN2B (n=3) deletions; AML-specific recurrent
abnormalities were HOXA9 and HOXA10 (n=2) deletions and NOTCH1 duplication (n=2).
Recurrent duplication of the ELK1 oncogene was observed in both ALL (n=2) and AML
(n=3) cases. Our results demonstrate that oligo-array CGH (oaCGH) is an effective
method for defining copy number alterations and identification of novel recurring
unbalanced abnormalities. At least for now, however, the use of oaCGH for routine
diagnosis still has some restrictions.

PMID: 20193845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. Mol Cell. 2010 Feb 12;37(3):429-37. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.01.026.

AFF4, a component of the ELL/P-TEFb elongation complex and a shared subunit of
MLL chimeras, can link transcription elongation to leukemia.

Lin C(1), Smith ER, Takahashi H, Lai KC, Martin-Brown S, Florens L, Washburn MP, 
Conaway JW, Conaway RC, Shilatifard A.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2010 Feb 26;37(4):449-50.

Chromosomal translocations involving the MLL gene are associated with infant
acute lymphoblastic and mixed lineage leukemia. There are a large number of
translocation partners of MLL that share very little sequence or seemingly
functional similarities; however, their translocations into MLL result in the
pathogenesis of leukemia. To define the molecular reason why these translocations
result in the pathogenesis of leukemia, we purified several of the commonly
occurring MLL chimeras. We have identified super elongation complex (SEC)
associated with all chimeras purified. SEC includes ELL, P-TEFb, AFF4, and
several other factors. AFF4 is required for SEC stability and proper
transcription by poised RNA polymerase II in metazoans. Knockdown of AFF4 in
leukemic cells shows reduction in MLL chimera target gene expression, suggesting 
that AFF4/SEC could be a key regulator in the pathogenesis of leukemia through
many of the MLL partners.

PMCID: PMC2872029
PMID: 20159561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Leuk Lymphoma. 2010 May;51(5):892-6. doi: 10.3109/10428190903586326.

Co-expression of HoxA9 and bcr-abl genes in chronic myeloid leukemia.

Tedeschi FA(1), Cardozo MA, Valentini R, Zalazar FE.

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Bioquímica y Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional del
Litoral, Hospital Dr. J. M. Cullen, Avenida Freyre 2150 (S3000EOZ), Santa Fe,
Argentina. fzalazar@fbcb.unl.edu.ar

We have analyzed the co-expression of the bcr-abl and HoxA9 genes in the
follow-up of patients with chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). In the present work we
measured the HoxA9 and bcr-abl gene expression in sequential samples. In all
patients, bcr-abl and HoxA9 were expressed at detectable levels in every sample. 
When the results were expressed in relation to abl, two different situations were
found: (a) patients clinically stable at second sampling, with low relative risk 
at diagnosis (low Sokal's score), did not show significant differences in both
bcr-abl and HoxA9 levels in the sequential samples analyzed, and (b) patients
with poor prognosis (showing intermediate or high Sokal's score at diagnosis) had
increased expression of bcr-abl as well as HoxA9 genes (p < 0.05). Since HoxA9
gene expression remains at relatively constant levels throughout adult life, our 
results could reflect actual changes in the expression rate of this gene
associated with bcr-abl during the progression of CML.

PMID: 20141430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Blood. 2010 Apr 8;115(14):2910-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-04-216606. Epub 2010
Feb 3.

Leukemogenic transformation by HOXA cluster genes.

Bach C(1), Buhl S, Mueller D, García-Cuéllar MP, Maethner E, Slany RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

HOX homeobox genes are important regulators of normal and malignant
hematopoiesis. Abdominal-type HOXA genes like HOXA9 are highly leukemogenic.
However, little is known about transformation by anterior HOXA genes. Here we
performed a comprehensive assessment of the oncogenic potential of every HOXA
gene in primary hematopoietic cells. With exception of HOXA2 and HOXA5, all HOXA 
genes caused a block or delay of hematopoietic differentiation and cooperated
with Meis1. No evidence for the alleged tumor-suppressor function of HOXA5 could 
be found. Whereas all active HOXA genes immortalized mixed granulocytic/monocytic
populations, HOXA13 preferentially specified monocytoid development. The anterior
HOXA genes HOXA1, HOXA4, and HOXA6 transformed cells, generating permanent cell
lines, although they did so less potently than HOXA9. Upon transplantation these 
lines induced myeloproliferation and acute myeloid leukemia in recipient animals.
Kinetic studies with inducible HOX derivatives demonstrated that anterior HOXA
genes autonomously contributed to cellular transformation. This function was not 
mediated by endogenous Hoxa9, which was persistently expressed in cells
transformed by anterior HOX genes. In summary our results demonstrate a hitherto 
unexpected role of anterior HOXA genes in hematopoietic malignancy.

PMID: 20130239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. J Clin Invest. 2010 Feb;120(2):593-606. doi: 10.1172/JCI38030. Epub 2010 Jan 19.

c-Myb binds MLL through menin in human leukemia cells and is an important driver 
of MLL-associated leukemogenesis.

Jin S(1), Zhao H, Yi Y, Nakata Y, Kalota A, Gewirtz AM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Medicine, University of
Pennsylvania School of Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) is a proto-oncogene frequently involved in
chromosomal translocations associated with acute leukemia. These chromosomal
translocations commonly result in MLL fusion proteins that dysregulate
transcription. Recent data suggest that the MYB proto-oncogene, which is an
important regulator of hematopoietic cell development, has a role in
leukemogenesis driven by the MLL-ENL fusion protein, but exactly how is unclear. 
Here we have demonstrated that c-Myb is recruited to the MLL histone methyl
transferase complex by menin, a protein important for MLL-associated leukemic
transformation, and that it contributes substantially to MLL-mediated methylation
of histone H3 at lysine 4 (H3K4). Silencing MYB in human leukemic cell lines and 
primary patient material evoked a global decrease in H3K4 methylation, an
unexpected decrease in HOXA9 and MEIS1 gene expression, and decreased MLL and
menin occupancy in the HOXA9 gene locus. This decreased occupancy was associated 
with a diminished ability of an MLL-ENL fusion protein to transform normal mouse 
hematopoietic cells. Previous studies have shown that MYB expression is regulated
by Hoxa9 and Meis1, indicating the existence of an autoregulatory feedback loop. 
The finding that c-Myb has the ability to direct epigenetic marks, along with its
participation in an autoregulatory feedback loop with genes known to transform
hematopoietic cells, lends mechanistic and translationally relevant insight into 
its role in MLL-associated leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2810070
PMID: 20093773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. Exp Mol Pathol. 2010 Apr;88(2):287-92. doi: 10.1016/j.yexmp.2010.01.002. Epub
2010 Jan 14.

DNA methylation changes in normal liver tissues and hepatocellular carcinoma with
different viral infection.

Feng Q(1), Stern JE, Hawes SE, Lu H, Jiang M, Kiviat NB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of Washington,
Seattle, Washington 98109, USA. qf@u.washington.edu

Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is known to be associated with both HBV and HCV.
While epigenetic changes have been previously reported to be associated with
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), whether the epigenetic profile of HBC associated 
HCC differs from that of HCV-associated HCC is unclear. We analyzed DNA
methylation of ten genes (APC, CCND2, CDKN2A, GSTP1, HOXA9, RARB, RASSF1, RUNX,
SFRP1, and TWIST1) using MethyLight assays on 65 archived liver tissue blocks.
Three genes (APC, CCND2, and GSTP1) were frequently methylated in normal liver
tissues. Five genes (APC, CDKN2A, HOXA9, RASSF1, and RUNX) were significantly
more frequently methylated in malignant liver tissues than normal liver tissues. 
Among HCC cases, HOXA9, RASSF1 and SFRP1 were methylated more frequently in
HBV-positive HCC cases, while CDKN2A were significantly more frequently
methylated in HCV-positive HCC cases. Our data support the hypothesis that HCC
resulting from different viral etiologies is associated with different epigenetic
changes.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC2848881
PMID: 20079733  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Cancer Res. 2010 Jan 15;70(2):453-62. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-2189. Epub
2010 Jan 12.

Reversing HOXA9 oncogene activation by PI3K inhibition: epigenetic mechanism and 
prognostic significance in human glioblastoma.

Costa BM(1), Smith JS, Chen Y, Chen J, Phillips HS, Aldape KD, Zardo G, Nigro J, 
James CD, Fridlyand J, Reis RM, Costello JF.

Author information: 
(1)The Brain Tumor Research Center, Department of Neurological Surgery,
University of California-San Francisco, San Francisco, California 94158-9001,
USA.

HOXA genes encode critical transcriptional regulators of embryonic development
that have been implicated in cancer. In this study, we documented functional
relevance and mechanism of activation of HOXA9 in glioblastoma (GBM), the most
common malignant brain tumor. Expression of HOXA genes was investigated using
reverse transcription-PCR in primary gliomas and glioblastoma cell lines and was 
validated in two sets of expression array data. In a subset of GBM, HOXA genes
are aberrently activated within confined chromosomal domains. Transcriptional
activation of the HOXA cluster was reversible by a phosphoinostide 3-kinase
(PI3K) inhibitor through an epigenetic mechanism involving histone H3K27
trimethylation. Functional studies of HOXA9 showed its capacity to decrease
apoptosis and increase cellular proliferation along with tumor necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-including ligand resistance. Notably, aberrant
expression of HOXA9 was independently predictive of shorter overall and
progression-free survival in two GBM patient sets and improved survival
prediction by MGMT promoter methylation. Thus, HOXA9 activation is a novel,
independent, and negative prognostic marker in GBM that is reversible through a
PI3K-associated epigenetic mechanism. Our findings suggest a transcriptional
pathway through which PI3K activates oncogenic HOXA expression with implications 
for mTOR or PI3K targeted therapies.

PMCID: PMC2849935
PMID: 20068170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Nat Struct Mol Biol. 2010 Jan;17(1):62-8. doi: 10.1038/nsmb.1714. Epub 2009 Dec
13.

Structure of the MLL CXXC domain-DNA complex and its functional role in MLL-AF9
leukemia.

Cierpicki T(1), Risner LE, Grembecka J, Lukasik SM, Popovic R, Omonkowska M,
Shultis DD, Zeleznik-Le NJ, Bushweller JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology and Biological Physics, University of
Virginia, Charlottesville, Virginia, USA.

The gene MLL (encoding the protein mixed-lineage leukemia) is the target of
chromosomal translocations that cause leukemias with poor prognosis. All
leukemogenic MLL fusion proteins retain the CXXC domain, which binds to
nonmethylated CpG DNA sites. We present the solution structure of the MLL CXXC
domain in complex with DNA, showing how the CXXC domain distinguishes
nonmethylated from methylated CpG DNA. On the basis of the structure, we
generated point mutations that disrupt DNA binding. Introduction of these
mutations into the MLL-AF9 fusion protein resulted in increased DNA methylation
of specific CpG nucleotides in Hoxa9, increased H3K9 methylation, decreased
expression of Hoxa9-locus transcripts, loss of immortalization potential, and
inability to induce leukemia in mice. These results establish that DNA binding by
the CXXC domain and protection against DNA methylation is essential for MLL
fusion leukemia. They also provide support for viewing this interaction as a
potential target for therapeutic intervention.

PMCID: PMC2908503
PMID: 20010842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Blood. 2010 Jan 28;115(4):824-33. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-07-233445. Epub 2009
Nov 23.

A small molecule inhibitor of Pim protein kinases blocks the growth of precursor 
T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.

Lin YW(1), Beharry ZM, Hill EG, Song JH, Wang W, Xia Z, Zhang Z, Aplan PD, Aster 
JC, Smith CD, Kraft AS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hollings Cancer Center, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, SC, USA.

The serine/threonine Pim kinases are up-regulated in specific hematologic
neoplasms, and play an important role in key signal transduction pathways,
including those regulated by MYC, MYCN, FLT3-ITD, BCR-ABL, HOXA9, and EWS
fusions. We demonstrate that SMI-4a, a novel benzylidene-thiazolidine-2, 4-dione 
small molecule inhibitor of the Pim kinases, kills a wide range of both myeloid
and lymphoid cell lines with precursor T-cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma
(pre-T-LBL/T-ALL) being highly sensitive. Incubation of pre-T-LBL cells with
SMI-4a induced G1 phase cell-cycle arrest secondary to a dose-dependent induction
of p27(Kip1), apoptosis through the mitochondrial pathway, and inhibition of the 
mammalian target of rapamycin C1 (mTORC1) pathway based on decreases in
phospho-p70 S6K and phospho-4E-BP1, 2 substrates of this enzyme. In addition,
treatment of these cells with SMI-4a was found to induce phosphorylation of
extracellular signal-related kinase1/2 (ERK1/2), and the combination of SMI-4a
and a mitogen-activated protein kinase kinase 1/2 (MEK1/2) inhibitor was highly
synergistic in killing pre-T-LBL cells. In immunodeficient mice carrying
subcutaneous pre-T-LBL tumors, treatment twice daily with SMI-4a caused a
significant delay in the tumor growth without any change in the weight, blood
counts, or chemistries. Our data suggest that inhibition of the Pim protein
kinases may be developed as a therapeutic strategy for the treatment of
pre-T-LBL.

PMCID: PMC2941996
PMID: 19965690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Cancer Res. 2009 Dec 15;69(24):9360-6. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-09-1490.

High DNA methyltransferase 3B expression mediates 5-aza-deoxycytidine
hypersensitivity in testicular germ cell tumors.

Beyrouthy MJ(1), Garner KM, Hever MP, Freemantle SJ, Eastman A, Dmitrovsky E,
Spinella MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, New Hamsphire
03755, USA.

Testicular germ cell tumors (TGCT) are the most common solid tumors of 15- to
35-year-old men. TGCT patients are frequently cured with cytotoxic
cisplatin-based therapy. However, TGCT patients refractory to cisplatin-based
chemotherapy have a poor prognosis, as do those having a late relapse.
Pluripotent embryonal carcinomas (EC) are the malignant counterparts to embryonic
stem cells and are considered the stem cells of TGCTs. Here, we show that human
EC cells are highly sensitive to 5-aza-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR) compared with
somatic solid tumor cells. Decreased proliferation and survival with low
nanomolar concentrations of 5-aza-CdR is associated with ATM activation, H2AX
phosphorylation, increased expression of p21, and the induction of genes known to
be methylated in TGCTs (MGMT, RASSF1A, and HOXA9). Notably, 5-aza-CdR
hypersensitivity is associated with markedly abundant expression of the
pluripotency-associated DNA methyltransferase 3B (DNMT3B) compared with somatic
tumor cells. Knockdown of DNMT3B in EC cells results in substantial resistance to
5-aza-CdR, strongly indicating that 5-aza-CdR sensitivity is mechanistically
linked to high levels of DNMT3B. Intriguingly, cisplatin-resistant EC cells
retain an exquisite sensitivity to low-dose 5-aza-CdR treatment, and pretreatment
of 5-aza-CdR resensitizes these cells to cisplatin-mediated toxicity. This
resensitization is also partially dependent on high DNMT3B levels. These novel
findings indicate that high expression of DNMT3B, a likely byproduct of their
pluripotency and germ cell origin, sensitizes TGCT-derived EC cells to low-dose
5-aza-CdR treatment.

PMCID: PMC2795063
PMID: 19951990  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Am J Med Genet A. 2009 Dec;149A(12):2745-52. doi: 10.1002/ajmg.a.33130.

Altered transmission of HOX and apoptotic SNPs identify a potential common
pathway for clubfoot.

Ester AR(1), Weymouth KS, Burt A, Wise CA, Scott A, Gurnett CA, Dobbs MB, Blanton
SH, Hecht JT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Texas Medical School at Houston,
Houston, TX, USA.

Clubfoot is a common birth defect that affects 135,000 newborns each year
worldwide. It is characterized by equinus deformity of one or both feet and
hypoplastic calf muscles. Despite numerous study approaches, the cause(s) remains
poorly understood although a multifactorial etiology is generally accepted. We
considered the HOXA and HOXD gene clusters and insulin-like growth factor binding
protein 3 (IGFBP3) as candidate genes because of their important roles in limb
and muscle morphogenesis. Twenty SNPs from the HOXA and HOXD gene clusters and 12
SNPs in IGFBP3 were genotyped in a sample composed of non-Hispanic white and
Hispanic multiplex and simplex families (discovery samples) and a second sample
of non-Hispanic white simplex trios (validation sample). Four SNPs (rs6668,
rs2428431, rs3801776, and rs3779456) in the HOXA cluster demonstrated altered
transmission in the discovery sample, but only rs3801776, located in the HOXA
basal promoter region, showed altered transmission in both the discovery and
validation samples (P = 0.004 and 0.028). Interestingly, HOXA9 is expressed in
muscle during development. An SNP in IGFBP3, rs13223993, also showed altered
transmission (P = 0.003) in the discovery sample. Gene-gene interactions were
identified between variants in HOXA, HOXD, and IGFBP3 and with previously
associated SNPs in mitochondrial-mediated apoptotic genes. The most significant
interactions were found between CASP3 SNPS and variants in HOXA, HOXD, and
IGFBP3. These results suggest a biologic model for clubfoot in which perturbation
of HOX and apoptotic genes together affect muscle and limb development, which may
cause the downstream failure of limb rotation into a plantar grade position.

PMCID: PMC2795347
PMID: 19938081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. Blood. 2010 Feb 18;115(7):1319-30. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-11-188938. Epub 2009
Nov 6.

Proteomics-based discovery of a novel, structurally unique, and developmentally
regulated plasminogen receptor, Plg-RKT, a major regulator of cell surface
plasminogen activation.

Andronicos NM(1), Chen EI, Baik N, Bai H, Parmer CM, Kiosses WB, Kamps MP, Yates 
JR 3rd, Parmer RJ, Miles LA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, The Scripps Research Institute, La Jolla, CA
92037, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2010 Feb 18;115(7):1315-6.

Activation of plasminogen, the zymogen of the primary thrombolytic enzyme,
plasmin, is markedly promoted when plasminogen is bound to cell surfaces, arming 
cells with the broad spectrum proteolytic activity of plasmin. In addition to its
role in thrombolysis, cell surface plasmin facilitates a wide array of
physiologic and pathologic processes. Carboxypeptidase B-sensitive plasminogen
binding sites promote plasminogen activation on eukaryotic cells. However, no
integral membrane plasminogen receptors exposing carboxyl terminal basic residues
on cell surfaces have been identified. Here we use the exquisite sensitivity of
multidimensional protein identification technology and an inducible progenitor
cell line to identify a novel differentiation-induced integral membrane
plasminogen receptor that exposes a C-terminal lysine on the cell surface,
Plg-R(KT) (C9orf46 homolog). Plg-R(KT) was highly colocalized on the cell surface
with the urokinase receptor, uPAR. Our data suggest that Plg-R(KT) also interacts
directly with tissue plasminogen activator. Furthermore, Plg-R(KT) markedly
promoted cell surface plasminogen activation. Database searching revealed that
Plg-R(KT) mRNA is broadly expressed by migratory cell types, including
leukocytes, and breast cancer, leukemic, and neuronal cells. This structurally
unique plasminogen receptor represents a novel control point for regulating cell 
surface proteolysis.

PMCID: PMC2826757
PMID: 19897580  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. J Immunol. 2009 Nov 15;183(10):6227-35. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901121. Epub 2009 
Oct 19.

A NUP98-HOXD13 fusion gene impairs differentiation of B and T lymphocytes and
leads to expansion of thymocytes with partial TCRB gene rearrangement.

Choi CW(1), Chung YJ, Slape C, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20889-5105, USA.

Expression of a NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) fusion gene leads to myelodysplastic
syndrome in mice. In addition to ineffective hematopoiesis, we observed that
NHD13 mice were lymphopenic; the lymphopenia was due to a decrease in both T and 
B lymphocytes. Although the pro-B cell (B220(+)/CD43(+)) populations from the
NHD13 and wild-type mice were similar, the NHD13 mice showed decreased pre-B
cells (B220(+)/CD43(-)), indicating impaired differentiation at the pro-B to
pre-B stage. Thymi from NHD13 mice were smaller and overexpressed Hoxa cluster
genes, including Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and Hoxa10. In addition, the NHD13 thymi contained
fewer thymocytes, with an increased percentage of CD4(-)/CD8(-) (double-negative 
(DN)) cells and a decreased percentage of CD4(+)/CD8(+) (double-positive) cells; 
the DN1/DN2 population was increased and the DN3/DN4 population was decreased,
suggesting a partial block at the DN2 to DN3 transition. To determine clonality
of the thymocytes, we used degenerate RT-PCR to identify clonal Tcrb gene
rearrangements. Five of six NHD13 thymi showed an unusual Tcrb gene rearrangement
pattern with common, clonal DJ rearrangements, but distinct V-D junctions,
suggesting a marked clonal expansion of thymocytes that had undergone a DJ
rearrangement, but not completed a VDJ rearrangement. Taken together, these
findings demonstrate that expression of the NHD13 transgene inhibits lymphoid as 
well as myeloid and erythroid differentiation, results in overexpression of Hoxa 
cluster genes, and leads to a precursor T cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC3422874
PMID: 19841179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. BMC Cancer. 2009 Oct 14;9:363. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-9-363.

Establishment of canine hemangiosarcoma xenograft models expressing endothelial
growth factors, their receptors, and angiogenesis-associated homeobox genes.

Kodama A(1), Sakai H, Matsuura S, Murakami M, Murai A, Mori T, Maruo K, Kimura T,
Masegi T, Yanai T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Gifu
University, Gifu, Japan. l5102402@edu.gifu-u.ac.jp

BACKGROUND: Human hemangiosarcoma (HSA) tends to have a poor prognosis; its
tumorigenesis has not been elucidated, as there is a dearth of HSA clinical
specimens and no experimental model for HSA. However, the incidence of
spontaneous HSA is relatively high in canines; therefore, canine HSA has been
useful in the study of human HSA. Recently, the production of angiogenic growth
factors and their receptors in human and canine HSA has been reported. Moreover, 
the growth-factor environment of HSA is very similar to that of
pathophysiological angiogenesis, which some homeobox genes regulate in the
transcription of angiogenic molecules. In the present study, we established 6
xenograft canine HSA tumors and detected the expression of growth factors, their 
receptors, and angiogenic homeobox genes.
METHODS: Six primary canine HSAs were xenografted to nude mice subcutaneously and
serially transplanted. Subsequently, the expressions of vascular endothelial
growth factor (VEGF)-A, basic fibroblast growth factors (bFGF), flt-1 and flk-1
(receptors of VEGF-A), FGFR-1, and angiogenic homeobox genes HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxB7,
HoxD3, Pbx1, and Meis1 were investigated in original and xenograft tumors by
histopathology, immunostaining, and reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), using canine-specific primer sets.
RESULTS: Histopathologically, xenograft tumors comprised a proliferation of
neoplastic cells that were varied in shape, from spindle-shaped and polygonal to 
ovoid; some vascular-like structures and vascular clefts of channels were
observed, similar to those in the original tumors. The expression of endothelial 
markers (CD31 and vWF) was detected in xenograft tumors by immunohistochemistry
and RT-PCR. Moreover, the expression of VEGF-A, bFGF, flt-1, flk-1, FGFR-1,
HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxB7, HoxD3, Pbx1, and Meis1 was detected in xenograft tumors.
Interestingly, expressions of bFGF tended to be higher in 3 of the xenograft HSA 
tumors than in the other tumors.
CONCLUSION: We established 6 xenograft canine HSA tumors in nude mice and found
that the expressions of angiogenic growth factors and their receptors in
xenograft HSAs were similar to those in spontaneous HSA. Furthermore, we detected
the expression of angiogenic homeobox genes; therefore, xenograft models may be
useful in analyzing malignant growth in HSA.

PMCID: PMC2768746
PMID: 19825192  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Mol Cell. 2009 Sep 24;35(6):856-67. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.09.006.

Hypoxia-inducible mir-210 regulates normoxic gene expression involved in tumor
initiation.

Huang X(1), Ding L, Bennewith KL, Tong RT, Welford SM, Ang KK, Story M, Le QT,
Giaccia AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiation Oncology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94025, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2009 Sep 24;35(6):737-8.

Previous studies have suggested that the HIF transcription factors can both
activate and inhibit gene expression. Here we show that HIF1 regulates the
expression of mir-210 in a variety of tumor types through a hypoxia-responsive
element. Expression analysis in primary head and neck tumor samples indicates
that mir-210 may serve as an in vivo marker for tumor hypoxia. By Argonaute
protein immunoprecipitation, we identified 50 potential mir-210 targets and
validated randomly selected ones. The majority of these 50 genes are not
classical hypoxia-inducible genes, suggesting mir-210 represses genes expressed
under normoxia that are no longer necessary to adapt and survive in a hypoxic
environment. When human head and neck or pancreatic tumor cells ectopically
expressing mir-210 were implanted into immunodeficient mice, mir-210 repressed
initiation of tumor growth. Taken together, these data implicate an important
role for mir-210 in regulating the hypoxic response of tumor cells and tumor
growth.

PMCID: PMC2782615
PMID: 19782034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Mol Cell. 2009 Sep 24;35(6):737-8. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2009.09.008.

mir-210: a sensor for hypoxic stress during tumorigenesis.

Mathew LK(1), Simon MC.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 
19104, USA.

Comment on
    Mol Cell. 2009 Sep 24;35(6):856-67.

In this issue of Molecular Cell, Huang et al. (2009) demonstrate that
hypoxia-inducible mir-210 acts as a rheostat for cellular adaptation and survival
by inhibiting tumor initiation.

PMCID: PMC2869244
PMID: 19782023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Leukemia. 2009 Dec;23(12):2197-209. doi: 10.1038/leu.2009.177. Epub 2009 Aug 27.

Mixed-lineage-leukemia (MLL) fusion protein collaborates with Ras to induce acute
leukemia through aberrant Hox expression and Raf activation.

Ono R(1), Kumagai H, Nakajima H, Hishiya A, Taki T, Horikawa K, Takatsu K, Satoh 
T, Hayashi Y, Kitamura T, Nosaka T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematopoietic Factors, The Institute of Medical Science, The
University of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Mixed-lineage-leukemia (MLL) fusion oncogenes are closely involved in infant
acute leukemia, which is frequently accompanied by mutations or overexpression of
FMS-like receptor tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3). Earlier studies have shown that MLL
fusion proteins induced acute leukemia together with another mutation, such as an
FLT3 mutant, in mouse models. However, little has hitherto been elucidated
regarding the molecular mechanism of the cooperativity in leukemogenesis. Using
murine model systems of the MLL-fusion-mediated leukemogenesis leading to
oncogenic transformation in vitro and acute leukemia in vivo, this study
characterized the molecular network in the cooperative leukemogenesis. This
research revealed that MLL fusion proteins cooperated with activation of Ras in
vivo, which was substitutable for Raf in vitro, synergistically, but not with
activation of signal transducer and activator of transcription 5 (STAT5), to
induce acute leukemia in vivo as well as oncogenic transformation in vitro.
Furthermore, Hoxa9, one of the MLL-targeted critical molecules, and activation of
Ras in vivo, which was replaceable with Raf in vitro, were identified as
fundamental components sufficient for mimicking MLL-fusion-mediated
leukemogenesis. These findings suggest that the molecular crosstalk between
aberrant expression of Hox molecule(s) and activated Raf may have a key role in
the MLL-fusion-mediated-leukemogenesis, and may thus help develop the novel
molecularly targeted therapy against MLL-related leukemia.

PMID: 19710696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. PLoS One. 2009 Aug 21;4(8):e6719. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0006719.

Dissection of the transformation of primary human hematopoietic cells by the
oncogene NUP98-HOXA9.

Yassin ER(1), Sarma NJ, Abdul-Nabi AM, Dombrowski J, Han Y, Takeda A, Yaseen NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Immunology, Washington University School of
Medicine, St. Louis, Missouri, United States of America.

NUP98-HOXA9 is the prototype of a group of oncoproteins associated with acute
myeloid leukemia. It consists of an N-terminal portion of NUP98 fused to the
homeodomain of HOXA9 and is believed to act as an aberrant transcription factor
that binds DNA through the homeodomain. Here we show that NUP98-HOXA9 can
regulate transcription without binding to DNA. In order to determine the relative
contributions of the NUP98 and HOXA9 portions to the transforming ability of
NUP98-HOXA9, the effects of NUP98-HOXA9 on primary human CD34+ cells were
dissected and compared to those of wild-type HOXA9. In contrast to previous
findings in mouse cells, HOXA9 had only mild effects on the differentiation and
proliferation of primary human hematopoietic cells. The ability of NUP98-HOXA9 to
disrupt the differentiation of primary human CD34+ cells was found to depend
primarily on the NUP98 portion, whereas induction of long-term proliferation
required both the NUP98 moiety and an intact homeodomain. Using oligonucleotide
microarrays in primary human CD34+ cells, a group of genes was identified whose
dysregulation by NUP98-HOXA9 is attributable primarily to the NUP98 portion.
These include RAP1A, HEY1, and PTGS2 (COX-2). Their functions may reflect the
contribution of the NUP98 moiety of NUP98-HOXA9 to leukemic transformation. Taken
together, these results suggest that the effects of NUP98-HOXA9 on gene
transcription and cell transformation are mediated by at least two distinct
mechanisms: one that involves promoter binding through the homeodomain with
direct transcriptional activation, and another that depends predominantly on the 
NUP98 moiety and does not involve direct DNA binding.

PMCID: PMC2725295
PMID: 19696924  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. Stem Cells Dev. 2010 Mar;19(3):321-32. doi: 10.1089/scd.2008.0397.

Increased levels of NOTCH1, NF-kappaB, and other interconnected transcription
factors characterize primitive sets of hematopoietic stem cells.

Panepucci RA(1), Oliveira LH, Zanette DL, Viu Carrara Rde C, Araujo AG, Orellana 
MD, Bonini de Palma PV, Menezes CC, Covas DT, Zago MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Medicine of the Faculty of Medicine of Ribeirao
Preto-USP, Center for Cell Therapy and Regional Blood Center, Araraquara, São
Paulo, Brazil. rapane@gmail.com

As previously shown, higher levels of NOTCH1 and increased NF-kappaB signaling is
a distinctive feature of the more primitive umbilical cord blood (UCB) CD34+
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), as compared to bone marrow (BM). Differences
between BM and UCB cell composition also account for this finding. The CD133
marker defines a more primitive cell subset among CD34+ HSC with a proposed
hemangioblast potential. To further evaluate the molecular basis related to the
more primitive characteristics of UCB and CD133+ HSC, immunomagnetically purified
human CD34+ and CD133+ cells from BM and UCB were used on gene expression
microarrays studies. UCB CD34+ cells contained a significantly higher proportion 
of CD133+ cells than BM (70% and 40%, respectively). Cluster analysis showed that
BM CD133+ cells grouped with the UCB cells (CD133+ and CD34+) rather than to BM
CD34+ cells. Compared with CD34+ cells, CD133+ had a higher expression of many
transcription factors (TFs). Promoter analysis on all these TF genes revealed a
significantly higher frequency (than expected by chance) of NF-kappaB-binding
sites (BS), including potentially novel NF-kappaB targets such as RUNX1, GATA3,
and USF1. Selected transcripts of TF related to primitive hematopoiesis and
self-renewal, such as RUNX1, GATA3, USF1, TAL1, HOXA9, HOXB4, NOTCH1, RELB, and
NFKB2 were evaluated by real-time PCR and were all significantly positively
correlated. Taken together, our data indicate the existence of an interconnected 
transcriptional network characterized by higher levels of NOTCH1, NF-kappaB, and 
other important TFs on more primitive HSC sets.

PMID: 19686049  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Blood. 2009 Nov 5;114(19):3983-93. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-06-227603. Epub 2009
Aug 10.

Modeling the functional heterogeneity of leukemia stem cells: role of STAT5 in
leukemia stem cell self-renewal.

Heuser M(1), Sly LM, Argiropoulos B, Kuchenbauer F, Lai C, Weng A, Leung M, Lin
G, Brookes C, Fung S, Valk PJ, Delwel R, Löwenberg B, Krystal G, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 1L3
Canada.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Nov 5;114(19):3976-7.

Although the cancer stem cell (CSC) concept implies that CSCs are rare, recent
reports suggest that CSCs may be frequent in some cancers. We hypothesized that
the proportion of leukemia stem cells would vary as a function of the number of
dysregulated pathways. Constitutive expression of MN1 served as a 1-oncogene
model, and coexpression of MN1 and a HOX gene served as a 2-oncogene model.
Leukemia-initiating cell (LIC) number and in vitro expansion potential of LICs
were functionally assessed by limiting dilution analyses. LIC expansion potential
was 132-fold increased in the 2- compared with the 1-oncogene model, although
phenotypically, both leukemias were similar. The 2-oncogene model was
characterized by granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF)
hypersensitivity and activated STAT/ERK signaling. GM-CSF hypersensitivity of the
2-oncogene model (MN1/HOXA9) was lost in Stat5b(-/-) cells, and the LIC expansion
potential was reduced by 86- and 28-fold in Stat5b(-/-) and Stat1(-/-) cells,
respectively. Interestingly, in 201 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients,
coexpression of MN1 and HOXA9 was restricted to patients with the poorest
prognosis and was associated with highly active STAT signaling. Our data
demonstrate the functional heterogeneity of LICs and show that STAT signaling is 
critical for leukemia stem cell self-renewal in MN1- and HOXA9-expressing
leukemias.

PMID: 19667399  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Blood. 2009 Sep 24;114(13):2733-43. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-213496. Epub 2009 
Jul 28.

Combined epigenetic therapy with the histone methyltransferase EZH2 inhibitor
3-deazaneplanocin A and the histone deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat against
human AML cells.

Fiskus W(1), Wang Y, Sreekumar A, Buckley KM, Shi H, Jillella A, Ustun C, Rao R, 
Fernandez P, Chen J, Balusu R, Koul S, Atadja P, Marquez VE, Bhalla KN.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Georgia Cancer Center, Augusta, GA30912, USA.

The polycomb repressive complex (PRC) 2 contains 3 core proteins, EZH2, SUZ12,
and EED, in which the SET (suppressor of variegation-enhancer of zeste-trithorax)
domain of EZH2 mediates the histone methyltransferase activity. This induces
trimethylation of lysine 27 on histone H3, regulates the expression of HOX genes,
and promotes proliferation and aggressiveness of neoplastic cells. In this study,
we demonstrate that treatment with the S-adenosylhomocysteine hydrolase inhibitor
3-deazaneplanocin A (DZNep) depletes EZH2 levels, and inhibits trimethylation of 
lysine 27 on histone H3 in the cultured human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) HL-60 
and OCI-AML3 cells and in primary AML cells. DZNep treatment induced p16, p21,
p27, and FBXO32 while depleting cyclin E and HOXA9 levels. Similar findings were 
observed after treatment with small interfering RNA to EZH2. In addition, DZNep
treatment induced apoptosis in cultured and primary AML cells. Furthermore,
compared with treatment with each agent alone, cotreatment with DZNep and the
pan-histone deacetylase inhibitor panobinostat caused more depletion of EZH2,
induced more apoptosis of AML, but not normal CD34(+) bone marrow progenitor
cells, and significantly improved survival of nonobese diabetic/severe combined
immunodeficiency mice with HL-60 leukemia. These findings indicate that the
combination of DZNep and panobinostat is effective and relatively selective
epigenetic therapy against AML cells.

PMCID: PMC2756128
PMID: 19638619  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. J Thromb Haemost. 2009 Jul;7 Suppl 1:235-8. doi:
10.1111/j.1538-7836.2009.03419.x.

Molecular mechanisms of thrombopoietin signaling.

Kaushansky K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Diego, La Jolla, CA
92093-0671, USA. kkaushansky@ucsd.edu

The molecular pathways that regulate thrombopoiesis are becoming increasingly
understood. Upon binding to its receptor, the product of the c-Mpl
proto-oncogene, thrombopoietin activates a number of secondary messengers that
promote cell survival, proliferation and differentiation. Amongst the best
studied are the signal transducers and activators of transcription,
phosphoinositol-3-kinase, and the mitogen-activated protein kinases. Additional
signals activated by these secondary mediators include mammalian target of
rapamycin, beta-catenin, hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha and the homeobox
proteins HOXB4 and HOXA9, and a number that are reduced, including glycogen
synthase kinase 3alpha and the FOXO3 family of forkhead proteins. More recently, 
a number of signaling pathways have been identified that turn the thrombopoietin 
signal off, a step necessary to avoid uncontrolled myeloproliferation, and
include the phosphatases PTEN, SHP1 and SHIP1, the suppressors of cytokine
signaling, and down-modulation of surface expression of c-Mpl. This review will
focus on these pathways in normal and neoplastic hematopoiesis.

PMID: 19630807  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Int J Cancer. 2009 Nov 1;125(9):2214-8. doi: 10.1002/ijc.24599.

HOXA methylation in normal endometrium from premenopausal women is associated
with the presence of ovarian cancer: a proof of principle study.

Widschwendter M(1), Apostolidou S, Jones AA, Fourkala EO, Arora R, Pearce CL,
Frasco MA, Ayhan A, Zikan M, Cibula D, Iyibozkurt CA, Yavuz E, Hauser-Kronberger 
C, Dubeau L, Menon U, Jacobs IJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecological Oncology, Institute for Women's Health, University
College London, United Kingdom. M.Widschwendter@ucl.ac.uk

DNA methylation of polycomb group target (PCGT) genes is an early step in
carcinogenesis and could potentially be assayed to determine cancer risk
prediction. To assess whether methylation changes in PCGT genes in normal tissue 
is able to predict the presence of cancer, we studied HOXA gene methylation in
normal endometrium from premenopausal ovarian cancer patients and age-matched
healthy controls without ovarian cancer. DNA methylation of HOXA9 and HOXA11
genes in normal endometrium was associated with ovarian cancer in an initial test
set and this was subsequently confirmed in independent validation sample sets.
The overall risk of ovarian cancer was increased 12.3-fold by high HOXA9
methylation for all stages, and 14.8-fold for early stage ovarian cancers,
independent of age, phase of the menstrual cycle and histology of the cancer. The
results of this proof of principle study demonstrate the potential to detect
ovarian cancer via analysis of normal endometrial cells and provide insight into 
the possible contribution of this novel approach in ovarian cancer risk
prediction and prevention.

(c) 2009 UICC.

PMID: 19621443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


337. Mol Cell Biol. 2009 Sep;29(18):5181-92. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00545-09. Epub 2009 Jul 
20.

HOXA9 modulates its oncogenic partner Meis1 to influence normal hematopoiesis.

Hu YL(1), Fong S, Ferrell C, Largman C, Shen WF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco,
CA 94143, USA.

While investigating the mechanism of action of the HOXA9 protein, we
serendipitously identified Meis1 as a HOXA9 regulatory target. Since HOXA9 and
MEIS1 play key developmental roles, are cooperating DNA binding proteins and
leukemic oncoproteins, and are important for normal hematopoiesis, the regulation
of Meis1 by its partner protein is of interest. Loss of Hoxa9 caused
downregulation of the Meis1 mRNA and protein, while forced HOXA9 expression
upregulated Meis1. Hoxa9 and Meis1 expression was correlated in hematopoietic
progenitors and acute leukemias. Meis1(+/-) Hoxa9(-/-) deficient mice, generated 
to test HOXA9 regulation of endogenous Meis1, were small and had reduced bone
marrow Meis1 mRNA and significant defects in fluorescence-activated cell
sorting-enumerated monocytes, mature and pre/pro-B cells, and functional B-cell
progenitors. These data indicate that HOXA9 modulates Meis1 during normal murine 
hematopoiesis. Chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis did not reveal direct
binding of HOXA9 to Meis1 promoter/enhancer regions. However, Creb1 and Pknox1,
whose protein products have previously been reported to induce Meis1, were shown 
to be direct targets of HOXA9. Loss of Hoxa9 resulted in a decrease in Creb1 and 
Pknox1 mRNA, and forced expression of CREB1 in Hoxa9(-/-) bone marrow cells
increased Meis1 mRNA almost as well as HOXA9, suggesting that CREB1 may mediate
HOXA9 modulation of Meis1 expression.

PMCID: PMC2738281
PMID: 19620287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. J Nutr Biochem. 2010 Aug;21(8):710-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2009.04.011. Epub
2009 Jul 18.

Suppression of retinoic acid receptors may contribute to embryonic skeleton
hypoplasia in maternal rats with chronic vitamin A deficiency.

Li N(1), Sun S, Wang D, Yao P, Yang X, Yan H, Du Y, Ying C, Liu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, PR China.

Vitamin A (VA) is essential for embryonic development and the retinoic acid
receptors (RARs) are crucial in mediating the diverse actions of VA in
embryogenesis. However, the association between RARs and teratogenicity on
skeleton growth and development of vitamin A deficiency (VAD) is not clear. In
this present study, weaning female Sprague-Dawley rats were fed purified diets
containing graded levels of VA (0, 0.4, 4 IU/g diet) for 70 days before mating,
and some of them were supplemented with VA (10 IU/g diet) through pregnancy.
Embryos were recovered at embryonic day 19.5 (E19.5) for the analysis of skeleton
growth and development and the E12.5 embryos were collected for analysis of
select mRNA of RARalpha, RARbeta, RARgamma, Hoxa2, Hoxa5 and Hoxa9. Normal gene
expressions and morphogenesis were observed in all embryos from group fed 4 IU/g 
diet. The embryos from group fed VA-free diet showed a comprehensive suppression 
of all the genes and general fetal resorption. The embryos from group fed 0.4
IU/g diet exhibited a moderate down-regulation on RARbeta, RARgamma, Hoxa2 and
Hoxa5, and the E19.5 fetuses displayed a series of skeletal hypoplasia. The VA
supplement groups fed 10 IU/g diet displayed normal gene expressions and
morphologic appearances. These findings suggested that the suppression of RARs
resulted from VAD could disturb the proper expression of homeobox genes, which
might, at least in part, contribute to the embryonic skeletal hypoplasia due to
maternal rats with chronic VAD.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19616926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. J Comp Pathol. 2009 Aug-Oct;141(2-3):199-203. doi: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2009.04.004.
Epub 2009 Jun 7.

Immunohistochemical demonstration of angiogenesis-associated homeobox proteins in
canine vascular tumours.

Kodama A(1), Sakai H, Murakami M, Murai A, Mori T, Maruo K, Yanai T, Masegi T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Veterinary Pathology, Department of Veterinary Medicine, Faculty
of Applied Biological Sciences, Gifu University, 1-1 Yanagido, Gifu 501-1193,
Japan.

Angiogenic homeobox genes regulate the behaviour of endothelial cells (ECs)
during angiogenesis, so the aim of this study was to determine whether expression
of these genes may be a determinant of malignancy in canine haemangiosarcoma
(HSA). Homeobox proteins were evaluated immunohistochemically in tissue samples
from canine HSAs (n=78), haemangiomas (HAs; n=30) and samples of granulation
tissue (n=8). Active ECs in granulation tissue were positively labelled by
antisera specific for HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxD3, HoxB7, Pbx1 and Meis1. Quiescent ECs
in granulation tissue did not express HoxD3 and Pbx1. There were significantly
more neoplastic cells positively labelled for HoxA9, HoxB3, HoxD3 and Pbx1 in HSA
compared with HA. Almost all tumours were positive for HoxB7 and Meis1. HoxB3,
HoxD3, Pbx1 and Meis1 proteins were detected in 80-90% of the HSAs, but in <20%
of the HAs. Overall, homeobox protein expression in HSA appears to have a
phenotype similar to that of active ECs in angiogenesis. The expression of
homeobox genes associated with angiogenesis might be associated with the
malignant growth of HSA.

PMID: 19505696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Cancer. 2009 Aug 1;115(15):3412-26. doi: 10.1002/cncr.24394.

The presence of aberrant DNA methylation in noncancerous esophageal mucosae in
association with smoking history: a target for risk diagnosis and prevention of
esophageal cancers.

Oka D(1), Yamashita S, Tomioka T, Nakanishi Y, Kato H, Kaminishi M, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tokyo,
Japan.

BACKGROUND: Esophageal squamous cell carcinomas (ESCCs) tend to have multiple
primary lesions, and it is believed that they arise from background mucosae with 
accumulation of genetic/epigenetic alterations. In this study, the objective was 
to elucidate the effects of smoking and drinking on the accumulation of
epigenetic alterations in background mucosae.
METHODS: Genes that are silenced in human ESCCs were searched for by treating 3
ESCC cell lines with the demethylating agent, 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine and
performing oligonucleotide microarrays. Methylation levels were analyzed by
quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction analysis of 60 ESCCs 
and their corresponding background mucosae.
RESULTS: Forty-seven genes were identified as methylation-silenced in at least 1 
of the 3 ESCC cell lines, and 14 of those genes (claudin 6 [CLDN6]; G
protein-coupled receptor 158 [GPR158]; homeobox A9 [HOXA9]; metallothionein 1M
[MT1M]; neurofilament, heavy polypeptide 200 kDa [NEFH]; plakophilin 1 [PKP1];
protein phosphatase 1, regulatory [inhibitor] subunit 14A [PPP1R14A]; pyrin
domain and caspase recruitment domain containing [PYCARD]; R-spondin family,
member 4 [RSPO4]; testis-specific protein, Y-encoded-like 5 [TSPYL5]; ubiquitin
carboxyl-terminal esterase L1 [UCHL1]; zinc-finger protein 42 homolog [ZFP42];
zinc-finger protein interacting with K protein 1 homolog [ZIK1]; and zinc-finger 
and SCAN domain containing 18 [ZSCAN18]) were used as markers. In the background 
mucosae, methylation levels of 5 genes (HOXA9, MT1M, NEFH, RSPO4, and UCHL1) had 
significant correlations with smoking duration (rho=.268; P=.044; rho=.405;
P=.002; rho=.285; P=.032; rho=.300; P=.024; and rho=.437; P=.001, respectively). 
In contrast, an inverse correlation between PYCARD methylation levels and alcohol
intake was observed (rho=-.334, P=.025) among individuals with the inactive
aldehyde dehydrogenase 2 (ALDH2) genotype.
CONCLUSIONS: The current results suggested that ESCCs developed from an
epigenetic field for cancerization, which was induced by exposure to carcinogenic
factors, such as tobacco smoking. The epigenetic field defect will be a novel
target for risk diagnosis and prevention of ESCCs.

Copyright (c) 2009 American Cancer Society.

PMID: 19472401  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 Sep;21(9):1016-23. doi:
10.1097/MEG.0b013e32831d7b9c.

A tumorigenic homeobox (HOX) gene expressing human gastric cell line derived from
putative gastric stem cell.

Yang YC(1), Wang SW, Wu IC, Chang CC, Huang YL, Lee OK, Chang JG, Chen A, Kuo FC,
Wang WM, Wu DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Graduate Institute of Medicine, I-Shou
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

GOAL: Study the mechanism of gastric tumor development.
BACKGROUND: We have generated and characterized a novel human gastric cell line, 
KMU-CS12 (CS12), from an immortal cell line, KMU-CSN (CSN; formerly named as
GI2CS) which was derived from putative human gastric stem cell/progenitor cell
clone, KMU-GI2.
STUDY: The characterization of the CS12 cell line includes gene expression by
immunocytochemical staining, cell proliferation and differentiation potential,
cyotogenetic analysis by Giemsa banding and spectral karyotype analysis (SKY),
and tumorigenicity in immune-deficient congenic inbred, nude mice
(BALB/cAnN-Foxn1nu/CrlNarl). The Agilent Human 1A oligo-array and RT-PCR were
also employed to analyze the expression of homeobox (HOX) genes.
RESULTS: The CS12 gastric cell line showed cancer cell phenotypes, i.e. the
ability of anchorage-independent growth high frequency (44%) and to the
expression of Oct-4, a transcription factor expressed in embryonic stem cells and
many types of cancer cells, and tumor development in immune deficient mice. SKY
analysis indicated a characteristic duplication of the short arm of chromosome 7 
to chromosome 12. Agilent Human 1A oligo-array analysis showed that the
expression of 1145 genes was upregulated while that of 890 genes was
downregulated in CS12 cells. RT-PCR revealed that homeobox genes (HOXA4, HOXA5,
HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA13) were highly expressed in CS12 cells in culture, as well
as tumor tissues developed by CS12 cells in immunodeficient mice for six to eight
weeks.
CONCLUSION: Except for the duplication of the short arm of Chromosome 7 on
Chromosome12, the karyotype of the tumorigenic CS12 cells is similar to the
parental GI2 cells which are non-tumorigenic and normal in karyotype. This
chromosomal change could be the cause for the high expression of HOXA genes and
tumorigenicity of these cells found in this study. Thus HOXA genes might play an 
important role in gastric carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19424076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Mech Dev. 2009 Jul;126(7):517-22. doi: 10.1016/j.mod.2009.04.001. Epub 2009 Apr
22.

In vitro hematopoietic differentiation of mouse embryonic stem cells requires the
tumor suppressor menin and is mediated by Hoxa9.

Novotny E(1), Compton S, Liu PP, Collins FS, Chandrasekharappa SC.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Technology Branch, National Human Genome Research Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Inactivating mutations in the tumor suppressor gene MEN1 cause the inherited
cancer syndrome multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1). The ubiquitously
expressed MEN1 encoded protein, menin, interacts with MLL (mixed-lineage leukemia
protein), and together they are essential components of a multiprotein complex
with histone methyl transferase activity. MLL is also essential for
hematopoiesis, and plays a critical role in leukemogenesis via epigenetic
regulation of Hoxa9 expression that also requires menin. Therefore we chose to
explore the role of menin in hematopoiesis. We generated Men1(-/-) embryonic stem
(ES) cell lines, and induced them to differentiate in vitro. While these cells
were able to form embryoid bodies (EBs) expressing the early markers Flk-1 and
c-Kit, their ability to further differentiate into hematopoietic colonies was
compromised. The Men1(-/-) ES cells show reduced expression of Hoxa9 that can be 
recovered by reexpression of Menin. We demonstrate that the block in
differentiation of Men1(-/-) ES cell lines can be rescued not only by the
expression of menin but also that of Hoxa9. These results suggest that, similar
to MLL, menin is required for hematopoiesis, and this requirement may be mediated
through regulation of Hoxa9 expression.

PMCID: PMC2717021
PMID: 19393316  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Mol Hum Reprod. 2009 Jul;15(7):451-7. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gap030. Epub 2009 Apr
22.

Thrombin and interleukin-1beta decrease HOX gene expression in human first
trimester decidual cells: implications for pregnancy loss.

Sarno J(1), Schatz F, Huang SJ, Lockwood C, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Bleeding or inflammation in early pregnancy may result in pregnancy loss or
defective implantation. Their effect on HOX gene expression in first trimester
decidua is unknown. Bleeding results in thrombin generation, although infection
or inflammation results in production of cytokines typified by Interleukin-1beta 
(IL-1beta). First trimester decidual cells were pretreated with 17beta estradiol 
(E(2)), medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) or both and subsequently treated with
thrombin or IL-1beta. Affymetrix microarray analysis was used to assess the
expression of all HOX genes and confirmed using real-time RT-PCR. E(2) or MPA
treatment resulted in significant increases in HOXA10 and HOXA11. Subsequent
treatment with thrombin resulted in diminished expression of HOXA10 and HOXA9.
Treatment with IL-1beta resulted in decreased expression of HOXA1, 3, 9, 10 and
11. HOXA10 expression was reduced by 70% after thrombin treatment (P = 0.018) and
by 90% after IL-1beta treatment (P = 0.004). HOXA11 mRNA expression was decreased
by 88% after IL-1beta treatment (P < 0.001), but not by thrombin treatment.
Decidua was collected at the time of elective termination of pregnancy (n = 10)
or surgical treatment of spontaneous pregnancy loss (n = 10). Real-time PCR and
western analysis demonstrated decreased HOXA10 and HOXA11 RNA and protein
expression in the decidua of spontaneous pregnancy loss compared with that of
viable pregnancies. In conclusion, multiple HOX genes are expressed in decidual
cells and inhibited by thrombin and IL-1beta. Since HOXA10 and HOXA11 are known
to be necessary for successful pregnancy, these findings suggest a molecular
mechanism by which bleeding or inflammation may affect pregnancy outcome.

PMCID: PMC2722817
PMID: 19389728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. Blood. 2009 May 28;113(22):5466-75. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-09-179747. Epub 2009 
Apr 3.

Gfi1 integrates progenitor versus granulocytic transcriptional programming.

Horman SR(1), Velu CS, Chaubey A, Bourdeau T, Zhu J, Paul WE, Gebelein B, Grimes 
HL.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunobiology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, OH
45229, USA.

In patients with severe congenital neutropenia (SCN) and mice with growth factor 
independent-1 (Gfi1) loss of function, arrested myeloid progenitors accumulate,
whereas terminal granulopoiesis is blocked. One might assume that Gfi-null
progenitors accumulate because they lack the ability to differentiate. Instead,
our data indicate that Gfi1 loss of function deregulates 2 separable
transcriptional programs, one of which controls the accumulation and lineage
specification of myeloid progenitors, but not terminal granulopoiesis. We
demonstrate that Gfi1 directly represses HoxA9, Pbx1, and Meis1 during normal
myelopoiesis. Gfi1-/- progenitors exhibit elevated levels of HoxA9, Pbx1 and
Meis1, exaggerated HoxA9-Pbx1-Meis1 activity, and progenitor transformation in
collaboration with oncogenic K-Ras. Limiting HoxA9 alleles corrects, in a
dose-dependent manner, in vivo and in vitro phenotypes observed with loss of Gfi1
in myeloid progenitor cells but did not rescue Gfi1-/- blocked granulopoiesis.
Thus, Gfi1 integrates 2 events during normal myeloid differentiation; the
suppression of a HoxA9-Pbx1-Meis1 progenitor program and the induction of a
granulopoietic transcription program.

PMCID: PMC2689047
PMID: 19346496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Am J Hematol. 2009 May;84(5):295-7. doi: 10.1002/ajh.21373.

Juvenile myelomonocytic leukemia with t(7;11)(p15;p15) and NUP98-HOXA11 fusion.

Mizoguchi Y(1), Fujita N, Taki T, Hayashi Y, Hamamoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Hiroshima Red Cross Hospital and Atomic Bomb
Survivors Hospital, Hiroshima, Japan. yoyotti129@yahoo.co.jp

The t(7;11)(p15;p15) translocation has been reported as a rare and recurrent
chromosomal abnormality in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients. The NUP98-HOXA9
fusion gene with t(7;11)(p15;p15) was identified and revealed to be essential for
leukemogenesis and myeloproliferative disease. To date, t(7;11)(p15;p15) with
NUP98-HOXA11 fusion has been reported only in one case of ph-negative chronic
myeloid leukemia (CML). Here, we report a case of a 3-year-old girl with juvenile
myelomonocytic leukemia (JMML) carrying t(7;11)(p15;p15) abnormality with
NUP98-HOXA11 fusion. AML chemotherapy followed by bone marrow transplantation
(BMT) was found to be effective in treating this disorder, and she remains in
complete remission for 3 years after BMT. We suggest the possibility that AML
chemotherapy might be effective for treating JMML with t(7;11)(p15;p15)
abnormality and NUP98-HOXA11 fusion.

PMID: 19338047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Differentiation. 2009 Feb;77(2):162-71. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2008.09.018. Epub
2008 Oct 25.

Expression and function of HOXA genes in normal and neoplastic ovarian epithelial
cells.

Ota T(1), Klausen C, Salamanca MC, Woo HL, Leung PC, Auersperg N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, University of
British Columbia, 2H30-4490 Oak St., B.C. Women's Hospital, Vancouver, BC, Canada
V6H 3V5.

We studied the roles of three HOXA genes in cultured normal ovarian surface
epithelial (OSE) cells and ovarian cancer cells. They included HOXA4 and HOXA7
because, by cDNA microarray analysis, these were more highly expressed in
invasive ovarian carcinomas than in benign or borderline (noninvasive) ovarian
tumors, and HOXA9 because it characterizes normal oviductal epithelium, which
resembles ovarian serous adenocarcinomas. The three HOXA genes were more highly
expressed when OSE cells were dividing and motile than when they were confluent
and stationary, and also when they dispersed in response to EGF treatment or to
reduced calcium concentrations in culture media. The expression of the HOXA genes
varied among ovarian cancer cell lines, but was highest in lines with compact
epithelial morphologies. We focused on HOXA4 as the most highly expressed in the 
ovarian carcinoma array. HOXA4 expression did not parallel proliferative
activities of either OSE or ovarian cancer lines. Moreover, modifying HOXA4
expression in ovarian cancer cell lines did not alter either E-cadherin
expression or CA125 secretion. However, HOXA4 downregulation enhanced EGFR
phosphorylation and migration in serum-starved OSE and ovarian cancer cells in
response to EGF, and enhanced migration of all ovarian cancer lines in 5% serum
even without EGF treatment. Thus, HOXA4 expression does not correlate with
proliferation or with epithelial differentiation, but it increases in response to
OSE cell dispersion and negatively regulates EGFR activation and the motility of 
OSE and of ovarian cancer cells. HOXA4 expression was highest in cancer lines
with compact epithelial growth patterns, suggesting, again, an anti-dispersion
function. In summary, increased HOXA4 expression in ovarian cancer appears to
constitute a tumor-suppressive, homeostatic response to aberrant cell behavior,
and, in particular, to cell dispersion and migration.

PMID: 19281776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Int J Hematol. 2009 Mar;89(2):253-6. doi: 10.1007/s12185-009-0267-8. Epub 2009
Feb 26.

Enhanced expression of the EVI1 gene in NUP98/HOXA-expressing leukemia cells.

Eguchi-Ishimae M, Eguchi M, Ohyashiki K, Yamagata T, Mitani K.

PMID: 19241117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Blood. 2009 Feb 19;113(8):1661-9. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-01-135012.

Menin regulates the function of hematopoietic stem cells and lymphoid
progenitors.

Maillard I(1), Chen YX, Friedman A, Yang Y, Tubbs AT, Shestova O, Pear WS, Hua X.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Stem Cell Biology, Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA. imaillar@umich.edu

Men1 is a tumor suppressor gene mutated in endocrine neoplasms. Besides its
endocrine role, the Men1 gene product menin interacts with the mixed lineage
leukemia (MLL) protein, a histone H3 lysine 4 methyltransferase. Although menin
and MLL fusion proteins cooperate to activate Homeobox (Hox) gene expression
during transformation, little is known about the normal hematopoietic functions
of menin. Here, we studied hematopoiesis after Men1 ablation. Menin loss modestly
impaired blood neutrophil, lymphocyte, and platelet counts. Without hematopoietic
stress, multilineage and myelo-erythroid bone marrow progenitor numbers were
preserved, while B lymphoid progenitors were decreased. In contrast, competitive 
transplantation revealed a marked functional defect of long-term hematopoietic
stem cells (HSC) in the absence of menin, despite normal initial homing of
progenitors to the bone marrow. HoxA9 gene expression was only modestly decreased
in menin-deficient HSCs. These observations reveal a novel and essential role for
menin in HSC homeostasis that was most apparent during situations of
hematopoietic recovery, suggesting that menin regulates molecular pathways that
are essential during the adaptive HSC response to stress.

PMCID: PMC2647667
PMID: 19228930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Leukemia. 2009 Jul;23(7):1303-10. doi: 10.1038/leu.2009.25. Epub 2009 Feb 19.

Acute myeloid leukemia bearing t(7;11)(p15;p15) is a distinct cytogenetic entity 
with poor outcome and a distinct mutation profile: comparative analysis of 493
adult patients.

Chou WC(1), Chen CY, Hou HA, Lin LI, Tang JL, Yao M, Tsay W, Ko BS, Wu SJ, Huang 
SY, Hsu SC, Chen YC, Huang YN, Tseng MH, Huang CF, Tien HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital,
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with t(7;11)(p15;p15), which results in a
NUP98-HOXA9 fusion, is a distinct entity, but this subtype has not been
characterized in detail. In a comprehensive study comparing 11 such patients with
another 482 adult patients, we found that those with t(7;11) were younger
(P=0.0076) and female (P=0.0111), with almost all having the M2-subtype of AML
(P<0.0001). Even when those with low-risk karyotypes were excluded, patients with
t(7;11) had poorer overall survival than the other AML group (median 13.5 and 20 
months, respectively, P=0.045) and poorer relapse-free survival (median 6 and 12 
months, respectively, P=0.003). The NUP98-HOXA9 fusion was strongly associated
with KRAS and WT1 mutations (P=0.015 and P=0.0018, respectively). We
characterized four varieties of this fusion, among which NUP98 exon 12/HOXA9 exon
1b was present in all 11 patients. We developed a highly sensitive and specific
assay to quantify the abundance of leukemic cells, and found that the fusion
remained detectable in morphological complete remission, even after allogeneic
stem cell transplantation, suggesting that this disease was highly refractory to 
very intensive treatment. AML with NUP98-HOXA9 fusion therefore appears to have a
distinct clinical and biological profile, and should be regarded as a poor
prognostic group.

PMID: 19225539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 17;106(7):2441-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0813002106. Epub 2009 Feb 3.

Systems-level analysis of cell-specific AQP2 gene expression in renal collecting 
duct.

Yu MJ(1), Miller RL, Uawithya P, Rinschen MM, Khositseth S, Braucht DW, Chou CL, 
Pisitkun T, Nelson RD, Knepper MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Kidney and Electrolyte Metabolism, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We used a systems biology-based approach to investigate the basis of
cell-specific expression of the water channel aquaporin-2 (AQP2) in the renal
collecting duct. Computational analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the AQP2
gene (Genomatix) revealed 2 conserved clusters of putative transcriptional
regulator (TR) binding elements (BEs) centered at -513 bp (corresponding to the
SF1, NFAT, and FKHD TR families) and -224 bp (corresponding to the AP2, SRF,
CREB, GATA, and HOX TR families). Three other conserved motifs corresponded to
the ETS, EBOX, and RXR TR families. To identify TRs that potentially bind to
these BEs, we carried out mRNA profiling (Affymetrix) in mouse mpkCCDc14
collecting duct cells, revealing expression of 25 TRs that are also expressed in 
native inner medullary collecting duct. One showed a significant positive
correlation with AQP2 mRNA abundance among mpkCCD subclones (Ets1), and 2 showed 
a significant negative correlation (Elf1 and an orphan nuclear receptor Nr1h2).
Transcriptomic profiling in native proximal tubules (PT), medullary thick
ascending limbs (MTAL), and IMCDs from kidney identified 14 TRs (including Ets1
and HoxD3) expressed in the IMCD but not PT or MTAL (candidate AQP2 enhancer
roles), and 5 TRs (including HoxA5, HoxA9 and HoxA10) expressed in PT and MTAL
but not in IMCD (candidate AQP2 repressor roles). In luciferase reporter assays, 
overexpression of 3 ETS family TRs transactivated the mouse proximal AQP2
promoter. The results implicate ETS family TRs in cell-specific expression of
AQP2 and point to HOX, RXR, CREB and GATA family TRs as playing likely additional
roles.

PMCID: PMC2650175
PMID: 19190182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Blood. 2009 Apr 2;113(14):3314-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-04-154310. Epub 2009
Feb 2.

Regulation of mir-196b by MLL and its overexpression by MLL fusions contributes
to immortalization.

Popovic R(1), Riesbeck LE, Velu CS, Chaubey A, Zhang J, Achille NJ, Erfurth FE,
Eaton K, Lu J, Grimes HL, Chen J, Rowley JD, Zeleznik-Le NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL, USA.

Chromosomal translocations involving the Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL) gene
produce chimeric proteins that cause abnormal expression of a subset of HOX genes
and leukemia development. Here, we show that MLL normally regulates expression of
mir-196b, a hematopoietic microRNA located within the HoxA cluster, in a pattern 
similar to that of the surrounding 5' Hox genes, Hoxa9 and Hoxa10, during
embryonic stem (ES) cell differentiation. Within the hematopoietic lineage,
mir-196b is most abundant in short-term hematopoietic stem cells and is
down-regulated in more differentiated hematopoietic cells. Leukemogenic MLL
fusion proteins cause overexpression of mir-196b, while treatment of MLL-AF9
transformed bone marrow cells with mir-196-specific antagomir abrogates their
replating potential in methylcellulose. This demonstrates that mir-196b function 
is necessary for MLL fusion-mediated immortalization. Furthermore, overexpression
of mir-196b was found specifically in patients with MLL associated leukemias as
determined from analysis of 55 primary leukemia samples. Overexpression of
mir-196b in bone marrow progenitor cells leads to increased proliferative
capacity and survival, as well as a partial block in differentiation. Our results
suggest a mechanism whereby increased expression of mir-196b by MLL fusion
proteins significantly contributes to leukemia development.

PMCID: PMC2665896
PMID: 19188669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. Exp Hematol. 2009 Mar;37(3):322-33.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2008.10.015. Epub
2009 Jan 20.

Hoxa6 potentiates short-term hemopoietic cell proliferation and extended
self-renewal.

Dickson GJ(1), Kwasniewska A, Mills KI, Lappin TR, Thompson A.

Author information: 
(1)Haematology, Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen's University
Belfast, Northern Ireland, UK. glenda.dickson@qub.ac.uk

Hemopoietic progenitor cells express clustered homeobox (Hox) genes in a pattern 
characteristic of their lineage and stage of differentiation. In general, HOX
expression tends to be higher in more primitive and lower in lineage-committed
cells. These trends have led to the hypothesis that self-renewal of hemopoietic
stem/progenitor cells is HOX-dependent and that dysregulated HOX expression
underlies maintenance of the leukemia-initiating cell. Gene expression profile
studies support this hypothesis and specifically highlight the importance of the 
HOXA cluster in hemopoiesis and leukemogenesis. Within this cluster HOXA6 and
HOXA9 are highly expressed in patients with acute myeloid leukemia and form part 
of the "Hox code" identified in murine models of this disease. We have examined
endogenous expression of Hoxa6 and Hoxa9 in purified primary progenitors as well 
as four growth factor-dependent cell lines FDCP-Mix, EML, 32Dcl3, and Ba/F3,
representative of early multipotential and later committed precursor cells
respectively. Hoxa6 was consistently higher expressed than Hoxa9, preferentially 
expressed in primitive cells and was both growth-factor and cell-cycle regulated.
Enforced overexpression of HOXA6 or HOXA9 in FDCP-Mix resulted in increased
proliferation and colony formation but had negligible effect on differentiation. 
In both FDCP-Mix and the more committed Ba/F3 precursor cells overexpression of
HOXA6 potentiated factor-independent proliferation. These findings demonstrate
that Hoxa6 is directly involved in fundamental processes of hemopoietic
progenitor cell development.

PMID: 19157684  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Cancer Res. 2009 Feb 1;69(3):1109-16. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3381. Epub
2009 Jan 20.

Consistent deregulation of gene expression between human and murine MLL
rearrangement leukemias.

Li Z(1), Luo RT, Mi S, Sun M, Chen P, Bao J, Neilly MB, Jayathilaka N, Johnson
DS, Wang L, Lavau C, Zhang Y, Tseng C, Zhang X, Wang J, Yu J, Yang H, Wang SM,
Rowley JD, Chen J, Thirman MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Important biological and pathologic properties are often conserved across
species. Although several mouse leukemia models have been well established, the
genes deregulated in both human and murine leukemia cells have not been studied
systematically. We performed a serial analysis of gene expression in both human
and murine MLL-ELL or MLL-ENL leukemia cells and identified 88 genes that seemed 
to be significantly deregulated in both types of leukemia cells, including 57
genes not reported previously as being deregulated in MLL-associated leukemias.
These changes were validated by quantitative PCR. The most up-regulated genes
include several HOX genes (e.g., HOX A5, HOXA9, and HOXA10) and MEIS1, which are 
the typical hallmark of MLL rearrangement leukemia. The most down-regulated genes
include LTF, LCN2, MMP9, S100A8, S100A9, PADI4, TGFBI, and CYBB. Notably, the
up-regulated genes are enriched in gene ontology terms, such as gene expression
and transcription, whereas the down-regulated genes are enriched in signal
transduction and apoptosis. We showed that the CpG islands of the down-regulated 
genes are hypermethylated. We also showed that seven individual microRNAs (miRNA)
from the mir-17-92 cluster, which are overexpressed in human MLL rearrangement
leukemias, are also consistently overexpressed in mouse MLL rearrangement
leukemia cells. Nineteen possible targets of these miRNAs were identified, and
two of them (i.e., APP and RASSF2) were confirmed further by luciferase reporter 
and mutagenesis assays. The identification and validation of consistent changes
of gene expression in human and murine MLL rearrangement leukemias provide
important insights into the genetic base for MLL-associated leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2633429
PMID: 19155294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Mol Cancer. 2008 Dec 31;7:94. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-7-94.

Gene methylation profiles of normal mucosa, and benign and malignant colorectal
tumors identify early onset markers.

Ahlquist T(1), Lind GE, Costa VL, Meling GI, Vatn M, Hoff GS, Rognum TO, Skotheim
RI, Thiis-Evensen E, Lothe RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Prevention, Institute for Cancer Research, Norwegian
Radium Hospital, Rikshospitalet University Hospital, Oslo, Norway.
terje.c.ahlquist@rr-research.no

BACKGROUND: Multiple epigenetic and genetic changes have been reported in
colorectal tumors, but few of these have clinical impact. This study aims to
pinpoint epigenetic markers that can discriminate between non-malignant and
malignant tissue from the large bowel, i.e. markers with diagnostic potential.
The methylation status of eleven genes (ADAMTS1, CDKN2A, CRABP1, HOXA9, MAL,
MGMT, MLH1, NR3C1, PTEN, RUNX3, and SCGB3A1) was determined in 154 tissue samples
including normal mucosa, adenomas, and carcinomas of the colorectum. The
gene-specific and widespread methylation status among the carcinomas was related 
to patient gender and age, and microsatellite instability status. Possible CIMP
tumors were identified by comparing the methylation profile with microsatellite
instability (MSI), BRAF-, KRAS-, and TP53 mutation status.
RESULTS: The mean number of methylated genes per sample was 0.4 in normal colon
mucosa from tumor-free individuals, 1.2 in mucosa from cancerous bowels, 2.2 in
adenomas, and 3.9 in carcinomas. Widespread methylation was found in both
adenomas and carcinomas. The promoters of ADAMTS1, MAL, and MGMT were frequently 
methylated in benign samples as well as in malignant tumors, independent of
microsatellite instability. In contrast, normal mucosa samples taken from bowels 
without tumor were rarely methylated for the same genes. Hypermethylated CRABP1, 
MLH1, NR3C1, RUNX3, and SCGB3A1 were shown to be identifiers of carcinomas with
microsatellite instability. In agreement with the CIMP concept, MSI and mutated
BRAF were associated with samples harboring hypermethylation of several target
genes.
CONCLUSION: Methylated ADAMTS1, MGMT, and MAL are suitable as markers for early
tumor detection.

PMCID: PMC2639620
PMID: 19117505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Blood. 2009 Mar 12;113(11):2375-85. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-09-113597. Epub 2008 
Dec 3.

HOXA9 is required for survival in human MLL-rearranged acute leukemias.

Faber J(1), Krivtsov AV, Stubbs MC, Wright R, Davis TN, van den Heuvel-Eibrink M,
Zwaan CM, Kung AL, Armstrong SA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Mar 12;113(11):2372-3.

Leukemias that harbor translocations involving the mixed lineage leukemia gene
(MLL) possess unique biologic characteristics and often have an unfavorable
prognosis. Gene expression analyses demonstrate a distinct profile for
MLL-rearranged leukemias with consistent high-level expression of select Homeobox
genes, including HOXA9. Here, we investigated the effects of HOXA9 suppression in
MLL-rearranged and MLL-germline leukemias using RNA interference. Gene expression
profiling after HOXA9 suppression demonstrated co-down-regulation of a program
highly expressed in human MLL-AML and murine MLL-leukemia stem cells, including
HOXA10, MEIS1, PBX3, and MEF2C. We demonstrate that HOXA9 depletion in 17 human
AML/ALL cell lines (7 MLL-rearranged, 10 MLL-germline) induces proliferation
arrest and apoptosis specifically in MLL-rearranged cells (P = .007). Similarly, 
assessment of primary AMLs demonstrated that HOXA9 suppression induces apoptosis 
to a greater extent in MLL-rearranged samples (P = .01). Moreover, mice
transplanted with HOXA9-depleted t(4;11) SEMK2 cells revealed a significantly
lower leukemia burden, thus identifying a role for HOXA9 in leukemia survival in 
vivo. Our data indicate an important role for HOXA9 in human MLL-rearranged
leukemias and suggest that targeting HOXA9 or downstream programs may be a novel 
therapeutic option.

PMCID: PMC2656267
PMID: 19056693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Nutr Metab Cardiovasc Dis. 2008 Dec;18(10):651-8. doi:
10.1016/j.numecd.2008.08.001.

Homeobox genes in normal and abnormal vasculogenesis.

Cantile M(1), Schiavo G, Terracciano L, Cillo C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, Federico II University
Medical School, Naples, Italy.

Homeobox containing genes are a family of transcription factors regulating normal
development and controlling primary cellular processes (cell identity, cell
division and differentiation) recently enriched by the discovery of their
interaction with miRNAs and ncRNAs. Class I human homeobox genes (HOX genes) are 
characterized by a unique genomic network organization: four compact chromosomal 
loci where 39 sequence corresponding genes can be aligned with each other in 13
antero-posterior paralogous groups. The cardiovascular system is the first
mesoderm organ-system to be generated during embryonic development; subsequently 
it generates the blood and lymphatic vascular systems. Cardiovascular remodelling
is involved through homeobox gene regulation and deregulation in adult physiology
(menstrual cycle and wound healing) and pathology (atherosclerosis, arterial
restenosis, tumour angiogenesis and lymphangiogenesis). Understanding the role
played by homeobox genes in endothelial and smooth muscle cell phenotype
determination will be crucial in identifying the molecular processes involved in 
vascular cell differentiation, as well as to support future therapeutic
strategies. We report here on the current knowledge of the role played by
homeobox genes in normal and abnormal vasculogenesis and postulate a common
molecular mechanism accounting for the involvement of homeobox genes in the
regulation of the nuclear export of specific transcripts potentially capable of
generating endothelial phenotype modification involved in new vessel formation.

PMID: 19013779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Int J Hematol. 2008 Dec;88(5):571-4. doi: 10.1007/s12185-008-0198-9. Epub 2008
Nov 13.

Additional acquisition of t(1;21)(p32;q22) in a patient relapsing with acute
myelogenous leukemia with NUP98-HOXA9.

Aoki T(1), Miyamoto T, Yoshida S, Yamamoto A, Yamauchi T, Yoshimoto G, Mori Y,
Kamezaki K, Iwasaki H, Takenaka K, Harada N, Nagafuji K, Teshima T, Akashi K.

Author information: 
(1)Medicine and Biosystemic Science, Kyushu University Graduate School of Medical
Sciences, Fukuoka, Japan.

We report a 29-year-old Japanese male with acute myelogenous leukemia (AML)-M4
with a cryptic t(7;11)(p15;p15), in which a chimeric NUP98-HOXA9 fusion was
detected by polymerase chain reaction analysis and a chromosomal analysis showed 
46,XY. The patient received intensive chemotherapy and underwent autologous stem 
cell transplantation, and remission was confirmed by the disappearance of
NUP98-HOXA9. However, 6 months after transplantation, the patient relapsed;
NUP98-HOXA9 was detected again and karyotypic analysis revealed 46,XY,
t(1;21)(p32;q22). Fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis using an
AML1-ETO translocation dual probe, showed that the 21q22 breakpoint involved AML1
locus. A retrospective FISH analysis showed that t(1;21) was absent at onset.
This is the first reported case with AML who had a cryptic t(7;11)(p15;p15), and 
additionally acquired t(1;21)(p32;q22) at relapse.

PMID: 19005624  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. Cell Prolif. 2008 Oct;41(5):709-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2008.00553.x.

Human amnion-derived mesenchymal stem cells are a potential source for uterine
stem cell therapy.

Han K(1), Lee JE, Kwon SJ, Park SY, Shim SH, Kim H, Moon JH, Suh CS, Lim HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, Research Center for Drugs,
Institute of Biomedical Science and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul, South
Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Human amnion is an easy-to-obtain novel source of human mesenchymal
stem cells, which poses little or no ethical dilemmas. We have previously shown
that human amnion-derived mesenchymal (HAM) cells exhibit certain mesenchymal
stem cell-like characteristics with respect to expression of stem cell markers
and differentiation potentials.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, we further characterized HAM cells'
potential for in vivo therapeutic application.
RESULTS: Flow cytometric analyses of HAM cells show that they express several
stem cell-related cell surface markers, including CD90, CD105, CD59, CD49d, CD44 
and HLA-ABC, but not CD45, CD34, CD31, CD106 or HLA-DR. HAM cells at the 10th
passage showed normal karyotype. More interestingly, the AbdB-like HOXA genes
HOXA9, HOXA10 and HOXA11 that are expressed in the mesenchyme of the developing
female reproductive tract and pregnant uteri are also expressed in HAM cells,
suggesting similarities between these two mesenchymal cell types. Progesterone
receptor is also highly expressed in HAM cells and expression of genes or
proteins in HAM cells could be manipulated with the aid of lentivirus technology 
or cell-permeable peptides. To test potentials of HAM cells for in vivo
application, we introduced enhanced green fluorescence protein (EGFP)-expressing 
HAM cells to mice by intrauterine infusion (into uteri) or by intravenous
injection (into the circulation). Presence of EGFP-expressing cells within the
uterine mesenchyme after intrauterine infusion or in lungs after intravenous
injection was noted within 1-4 weeks.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these results suggest that HAM cells are a potential
source of mesenchymal stem cells with therapeutic potential.

PMID: 18823496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. Blood. 2008 Dec 1;112(12):4690-3. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-01-134056. Epub 2008
Sep 16.

The PHD fingers of MLL block MLL fusion protein-mediated transformation.

Muntean AG(1), Giannola D, Udager AM, Hess JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department ofPathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, USA.

Chromosomal translocations involving the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene are
associated with aggressive acute lymphoid and myeloid leukemias. These
translocations are restricted to an 8.3-kb breakpoint region resulting in fusion 
of amino terminal MLL sequences in frame to 1 of more than 60 different
translocation partners. The translocations consistently delete the plant
homeodomain (PHD) fingers and more carboxyl terminal MLL sequences. The function 
of the PHD fingers is obscure and their specific role in transformation has not
been explored. Here we show that inclusion of the PHD fingers in the MLL fusion
protein MLL-AF9 blocked immortalization of hematopoietic progenitors. Inclusion
of 2 or more PHD fingers reduced association with the Hoxa9 locus and suppressed 
Hoxa9 up-regulation in hematopoietic progenitors. These data provide an
explanation for why MLL translocation breakpoints exclude the PHD fingers and
suggest a possible role for these domains in regulating the function of wild-type
MLL.

PMCID: PMC2597135
PMID: 18796627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2008 Mar 30;1(6):461-74.

HOX proteins and leukemia.

Sitwala KV(1), Dandekar MN, Hess JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The University of Michigan Medical School Ann Arbor, 
Michigan, USA.

HOX and three amino acid loop extension (TALE) proteins cooperate to induce
transformation in mouse leukemia models, and are dysregulated in a variety of
human leukemias. Despite decades of research, the mechanism of action for Hox
proteins in embryogenesis and hematopoiesis remains unclear. Recent studies on
the roles of Hoxa9 and Meis1 in leukemia has led to a wealth of new data, but
their molecular mechanisms of action and synergy remain obscure. Advances in
genome-wide technologies offer new avenues for understanding how
homeodomain-containing transcription factors exert their programs in normal and
neoplastic development.

PMCID: PMC2480589
PMID: 18787682  [PubMed]


361. Hum Mol Genet. 2008 Dec 15;17(24):3864-75. doi: 10.1093/hmg/ddn286. Epub 2008 Sep
9.

Putative direct and indirect Wnt targets identified through consistent gene
expression changes in APC-mutant intestinal adenomas from humans and mice.

Segditsas S(1), Sieber O, Deheragoda M, East P, Rowan A, Jeffery R, Nye E, Clark 
S, Spencer-Dene B, Stamp G, Poulsom R, Suraweera N, Silver A, Ilyas M, Tomlinson 
I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Population Genetics Laboratory, London Research Institute,
Cancer Research UK, London WC2A 3PX, UK. stefania.segditsas@cancer.org.uk

In order to identify new genes with differential expression in early intestinal
tumours, we performed mRNA (messenger ribonucleic acid) expression profiling of
16 human and 63 mouse adenomas. All individuals had germline APC mutations to
ensure that tumorigenesis was driven by 'second hits' at APC. Using stringent
filtering to identify changes consistent between humans and mice, we identified
60 genes up-regulated and 151 down-regulated in tumours. For 22 selected
genes--including known Wnt targets--expression differences were confirmed by
qRT-PCR (quantitative reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction). Most, but
not all, differences were also present in colorectal carcinomas. In situ analysis
showed a complex picture. Expression of up-regulated genes in adenomas was
usually uniform/diffuse (e.g. ITGA6) or prominent in the tumour core (e.g. LGR5);
in normal tissue, these genes were expressed at crypt bases or the transit
amplifying zone. Down-regulated genes were often undetectable in adenomas, but in
normal tissue were expressed in mesenchyme (e.g. GREM1/2) or differentiated cells
towards crypt tops (e.g. SGK1). In silico analysis of TCF4-binding motifs showed 
that some of our genes were probably direct Wnt targets. Previous studies, mostly
focused on human tumours, showed partial overlap with our 'expression signature',
but 37 genes were unique to our study, including TACSTD2, SEMA3F, HOXA9 and IER3 
(up-regulated), and TAGLN, GREM1, GREM2, MAB21L2 and RARRES2 (down-regulated).
Combined analysis of our and published human data identified additional genes
differentially expressed in adenomas, including decreased BMPs (bone
morphogenetic proteins) and increased BUB1/BUB1B. Several of the newly
identified, differentially expressed genes represent potential diagnostic or
therapeutic targets for intestinal tumours.

PMCID: PMC2638572
PMID: 18782851  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2008 Oct;295(4):H1556-61. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00540.2008. Epub 2008 Aug 8.

In vivo differences between endothelial transcriptional profiles of coronary and 
iliac arteries revealed by microarray analysis.

Zhang J(1), Burridge KA, Friedman MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 
27708, USA.

Endothelial cells (ECs) from different vascular beds display a remarkable
heterogeneity in both structure and function. Phenotypic heterogeneity among
arterial ECs is particularly relevant to atherosclerosis since the disease occurs
predominantly in major arteries, which vary in their atherosusceptibility. To
explore EC heterogeneity between typical atheroprone and atheroresistant
arteries, we used DNA microarrays to compare gene expression profiles of freshly 
harvested porcine coronary (CECs) and iliac artery (IECs) ECs. Statistical
analysis revealed 51 genes that were differentially expressed in CECs relative to
IECs at a false discovery rate of 5%. Seventeen of these genes are known to be
involved in atherogenesis. Consistent with coronary arteries being more
atherosusceptible, almost all putative atherogenic genes were overexpressed in
CECs, whereas all atheroprotective genes were downregulated, relative to IECs. A 
subset of the identified genes was validated by quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). PCR results suggest that the differences in expression levels
between CECs and IECs for the HOXA10 and HOXA9 genes were >100-fold. Gene
ontology (GO) and biological pathway analysis revealed a global expression
difference between CECs and IECs. Genes in twelve GO categories, including
complement immune activation, immunoglobulin-mediated response, and system
development, were significantly upregulated in CECs. CECs also overexpressed
genes involved in several inflammatory pathways, including the classical pathway 
of complement activation and the IGF-1-mediated pathway. The in vivo
transcriptional differences between CECs and IECs found in this study may provide
new insights into the factors responsible for coronary artery
atherosusceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2593512
PMID: 18689496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. Oncogene. 2008 Oct 23;27(49):6356-64. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.233. Epub 2008 Aug 4.

Evidence for Hox and E2A-PBX1 collaboration in mouse T-cell leukemia.

Bijl J(1), Krosl J, Lebert-Ghali CE, Vacher J, Mayotte N, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Hematopoietic Stem Cells, Institute for
Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec,
Canada. jbijl.hmr@ssss.gouv.qc.ca

Using murine Moloney leukemia virus (MMLV)-based proviral insertional
mutagenesis, we previously showed a preferential targeting of a small region in
the Hoxa gene locus in E2A-PBX1-induced lymphoid leukemia resulting in the
overexpression of several Hoxa genes including Hoxa10, Hoxa9 and Hoxa7. This
observation suggested a functional interaction between Hox gene overexpression
and E2A-PBX1 in lymphoid tumors. To further explore this possibility, we
generated a series of compound E2A-PBX1 x Hox transgenic mice and tested the
genetic interaction between these genes in the generation of lymphoid leukemia in
vivo. Results presented in this report show that the onset of T-cell leukemia is 
significantly accelerated in E2A-PBX1 x Hoxb4 compound transgenic animals when
compared with control E2A-PBX1 or Hoxb4 littermates. Hoxa9 appears less potent
than Hoxb4 to accelerate E2A-PBX1-induced T-cell leukemia in mice.
E2A-PBX1-induced T-cell leukemias express much higher levels of Hoxa genes than
MMLV-induced counterparts, possibly suggesting a contribution of these genes to
T-cell transformation by E2A-PBX1. Collectively, these data provide the first
genetic evidence showing oncogenic collaboration between E2A-PBX1 and a Hox gene 
in lymphoid malignancies in vivo and document the specific deregulation of a
subgroup of Hoxa genes in these leukemias.

PMID: 18679416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. Leukemia. 2008 Nov;22(11):2041-7. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.198. Epub 2008 Jul 31.

HOX expression patterns identify a common signature for favorable AML.

Andreeff M(1), Ruvolo V, Gadgil S, Zeng C, Coombes K, Chen W, Kornblau S, Barón
AE, Drabkin HA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Stem Cell Transplantation, Section of Molecular Hematology and
Therapy, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA.

Deregulated HOX expression, by chromosomal translocations and myeloid-lymphoid
leukemia (MLL) rearrangements, is causal in some types of leukemia. Using
real-time reverse transcription-PCR, we examined the expression of 43 clustered
HOX, polycomb, MLL and FLT3 genes in 119 newly diagnosed adult acute myeloid
leukemias (AMLs) selected from all major cytogenetic groups. Downregulated HOX
expression was a consistent feature of favorable AMLs and, among these cases,
inv(16) cases had a distinct expression profile. Using a 17-gene predictor in 44 
additional samples, we observed a 94.7% specificity for classifying favorable vs 
intermediate/unfavorable cytogenetic groups. Among other AMLs, HOX overexpression
was associated with nucleophosmin (NPM) mutations and we also identified a
phenotypically similar subset with wt-NPM. In many unfavorable and other
intermediate cytogenetic AMLs, HOX levels resembled those in normal CD34+ cells, 
except that the homogeneity characteristic of normal samples was not present. We 
also observed that HOXA9 levels were significantly inversely correlated with
survival and that BMI-1 was overexpressed in cases with 11q23 rearrangements,
suggesting that p19(ARF) suppression may be involved in MLL-associated leukemia. 
These results underscore the close relationship between HOX expression patterns
and certain forms of AML and emphasize the need to determine whether these
differences play a role in the disease process.

PMCID: PMC2676170
PMID: 18668134  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Cancer Cell. 2008 Jul 8;14(1):36-46. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.05.003.

Menin critically links MLL proteins with LEDGF on cancer-associated target genes.

Yokoyama A(1), Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA. ayokoyam@ncc.go.jp

Comment in
    Cancer Cell. 2008 Jul 8;14(1):3-5.

Menin displays the unique ability to either promote oncogenic function in the
hematopoietic lineage or suppress tumorigenesis in the endocrine lineage;
however, its molecular mechanism of action has not been defined. We demonstrate
here that these discordant functions are unified by menin's ability to serve as a
molecular adaptor that physically links the MLL (mixed-lineage leukemia) histone 
methyltransferase with LEDGF (lens epithelium-derived growth factor), a
chromatin-associated protein previously implicated in leukemia, autoimmunity, and
HIV-1 pathogenesis. LEDGF is required for both MLL-dependent transcription and
leukemic transformation. Conversely, a subset of menin mutations in multiple
endocrine neoplasia type 1 patients abrogate interaction with LEDGF while
preserving MLL interaction but nevertheless compromise MLL/menin-dependent
functions. Thus, LEDGF critically associates with MLL and menin at the nexus of
transcriptional pathways that are recurrently targeted in diverse diseases.

PMCID: PMC2692591
PMID: 18598942  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Cancer Cell. 2008 Jul 8;14(1):3-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ccr.2008.06.009.

A MENage à Trois in leukemia.

Roudaia L(1), Speck NA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Dartmouth Medical School, Hanover, NH 03755, USA.

Comment on
    Cancer Cell. 2008 Jul 8;14(1):36-46.

Menin binds to the N terminus of the chromatin-remodeling histone
methyltransferase MLL and is essential for the transforming activity of at least 
several oncogenic MLL fusion proteins. In this issue, Yokoyama and Cleary (2008) 
show that menin's essential, and perhaps only, contribution to leukemia is to
tether a third protein, LEDGF--a chromatin-associated protein implicated in
leukemia and several other disease states--to MLL. Thus, this study identifies a 
new, critical player in leukemias caused by MLL fusion proteins and defines the
biochemical function of menin in the MLL complex.

PMID: 18598937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. Endocr Relat Cancer. 2008 Sep;15(3):777-86. doi: 10.1677/ERC-08-0072. Epub 2008
May 22.

Evaluation of a functional epigenetic approach to identify promoter region
methylation in phaeochromocytoma and neuroblastoma.

Margetts CD(1), Morris M, Astuti D, Gentle DC, Cascon A, McRonald FE, Catchpoole 
D, Robledo M, Neumann HP, Latif F, Maher ER.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical and Molecular Genetics, Institute of Biomedical Research
Cancer Research, UK.

The molecular genetics of inherited phaeochromocytoma have received considerable 
attention, but the somatic genetic and epigenetic events that characterise
tumourigenesis in sporadic phaeochromocytomas are less well defined. Previously, 
we found considerable overlap between patterns of promoter region tumour
suppressor gene (TSG) hypermethylation in two neural crest tumours, neuroblastoma
and phaeochromocytoma. In order to identify candidate biomarkers and
epigenetically inactivated TSGs in phaeochromocytoma and neuroblastoma, we
characterised changes in gene expression in three neuroblastoma cell lines after 
treatment with the demethylating agent 5-azacytidine. Promoter region methylation
status was then determined for 28 genes that demonstrated increased expression
after demethylation. Three genes HSP47, homeobox A9 (HOXA9) and opioid binding
protein (OPCML) were methylated in >10% of phaeochromocytomas (52, 17 and 12%
respectively). Two of the genes, epithelial membrane protein 3 (EMP3) and HSP47, 
demonstrated significantly more frequent methylation in neuroblastoma than
phaeochromocytoma. These findings extend epigenotype of phaeochromocytoma and
identify candidate genes implicated in sporadic phaeochromocytoma tumourigenesis.

PMCID: PMC2519165
PMID: 18499731  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 May 27;105(21):7517-22. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0800090105. Epub 2008 May 15.

MLL protects CpG clusters from methylation within the Hoxa9 gene, maintaining
transcript expression.

Erfurth FE(1), Popovic R, Grembecka J, Cierpicki T, Theisler C, Xia ZB, Stuart T,
Diaz MO, Bushweller JH, Zeleznik-Le NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Oncology Institute, Molecular Biology Program, Department of Medicine, Loyola 
University Chicago, Maywood, IL 60153, USA.

Homeobox (HOX) genes play a definitive role in determination of cell fate during 
embryogenesis and hematopoiesis. MLL-related leukemia is coincident with
increased expression of a subset of HOX genes, including HOXA9. MLL functions to 
maintain, rather than initiate, expression of its target genes. However, the
mechanism of MLL maintenance of target gene expression is not understood. Here,
we demonstrate that Mll binds to specific clusters of CpG residues within the
Hoxa9 locus and regulates expression of multiple transcripts. The presence of Mll
at these clusters provides protection from DNA methylation. shRNA knock-down of
Mll reverses the methylation protection status at the previously protected CpG
clusters; methylation at these CpG residues is similar to that observed in Mll
null cells. Furthermore, reconstituting MLL expression in Mll null cells can
reverse DNA methylation of the same CpG residues, demonstrating a dominant effect
of MLL in protecting this specific region from DNA methylation. Intriguingly, an 
oncogenic MLL-AF4 fusion can also reverse DNA methylation, but only for a subset 
of these CpGs. This method of transcriptional regulation suggests a mechanism
that explains the role of Mll in transcriptional maintenance, but it may extend
to other CpG DNA binding proteins. Protection from methylation may be an
important mechanism of epigenetic inheritance by regulating the function of both 
de novo and maintenance DNA methyltransferases.

PMCID: PMC2396713
PMID: 18483194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Jul;28(14):4609-19. doi: 10.1128/MCB.01652-07. Epub 2008 May 
12.

MicroRNA-126 regulates HOXA9 by binding to the homeobox.

Shen WF(1), Hu YL, Uttarwar L, Passegue E, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco, California,
USA. wfshen@itsa.ucsf.edu

The PicTar program predicted that microRNA-126 (miR-126), miR-145, and let-7s
target highly conserved sites within the Hoxa9 homeobox. There are increased
nucleotide constraints in the three microRNA seed sites among Hoxa9 genes beyond 
that required to maintain protein identity, suggesting additional functional
conservation. In preliminary experiments, forced expression of these microRNAs in
Hoxa9-immortalized bone marrow cells downregulated the HOXA9 protein and caused
loss of biological activity. The microRNAs were shown to target their predicted
sites within the homeobox. miR-126 and Hoxa9 mRNA are coexpressed in
hematopoietic stem cells and downregulated in parallel during progenitor cell
differentiation; however, miR-145 is barely detectable in hematopoietic cells,
and let-7s are highly expressed in bone marrow progenitors, suggesting that
miR-126 may function in normal hematopoietic cells to modulate HOXA9 protein. In 
support of this hypothesis, expression of miR-126 alone in MLL-ENL-immortalized
bone marrow cells decreased endogenous HOXA9 protein, while inhibition of
endogenous miR-126 increased expression of HOXA9 in F9 cells.

PMCID: PMC2447122
PMID: 18474618  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Eur J Haematol. 2008 Aug;81(2):112-22. doi: 10.1111/j.1600-0609.2008.01083.x.
Epub 2008 Jun 28.

Gene expression profiling of Polycomb, Hox and Meis genes in patients with acute 
myeloid leukaemia.

Grubach L(1), Juhl-Christensen C, Rethmeier A, Olesen LH, Aggerholm A, Hokland P,
Ostergaard M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Aarhus University Hospital, Aarhus, Denmark.

The Polycomb group (PcG) of genes is important for differentiation and cell-cycle
regulation and is aberrantly expressed in several cancers. To analyse the role of
deregulated PcG genes in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), we determined by RQ-PCR
the expression of the PcG genes BMI-1, MEL18, SCML2, YY1 and EZH2, and the
downstream PcG targets HOXA4, HOXA9 and MEIS1 in diagnostic bone marrow samples
from 126 AML patients. There was a general overexpression of the genes in AML
patients compared to 20 healthy donors, except of HOXA4 and MEL18, which both
displayed a wide range of expression levels within the AML subgroups. Among the
AML patients with normal karyotype, a low HOXA4 level was associated with a
shorter overall survival (P = 0.005). In addition, expression levels of MEL18 and
EZH2 were significantly (P < 0.025) higher in patients with complex karyotype and
lower in CBF-mutated patients. The t(8;21) vs. inv(16) positive patients showed
significantly different expression of SCML2, BMI-1, YY1, HOXA9 and MEIS1 (P < or 
= 0.01). Comparisons between the PcG and PcG-regulated genes and a number of
clinical and molecular data revealed correlations to genes involved in DNA
methylation (DNMT1, DNMT3B), apoptosis (BAX, CASPASE 3) and multidrug-resistance 
(MDR1, MRP ) (P < 0.01). In conclusion, our data suggest that the role of PcG and
PcG-regulated genes in leukaemogenesis varies between, as well as within
karyotypic subgroups.

PMID: 18410541  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Int Surg. 2007 Sep-Oct;92(5):287-95.

Novel mutations of the HOXD13 gene in hand and foot malformations.

Nakano K(1), Sakai N, Yamazaki Y, Watanabe H, Yamada N, Sezaki K, Susami T,
Tokunaga K, Takato T, Uchinuma E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Aesthetic Surgery, Kitasato University School of
Medicine, Sagamihara, Kanagawa, Japan.

Homeobox genes encode a set of transcription factors of fundamental importance
for body patterning during embryogenesis. Hoxa9-a13 and Hoxd9-d13 play an
especially important part in vertebrate limb development. Synpolydactyly (SPD) is
characterized by various malformations of the limbs. The expansion of the
polyalanine tract in 1OXD13 is one of its major causes. Recently, there have been
many analysis studies of HOXD13 in patients with SPD and limb malformations. We
analyzed HOXD13 in 100 patients with limb malformations, which affects the limbs 
in the distal parts of the metacarpal and/or metatarsal bones. Seven mutations in
the coding region and two mutations in the 5'-untranslated region were
identified. All were novel mutations. In this study, the mutations were located
upstream in the homeobox. Thus, translation of the homeobox was affected by
upstream mutations. Consequently, this suggested the possibility that
abnormalities in the hands and feet could be caused by novel HOXD13 gene
mutations.

PMID: 18399101  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Blood. 2008 Jun 15;111(12):5672-82. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-09-108175. Epub 2008 
Apr 3.

Leukemogenic mechanisms and targets of a NUP98/HHEX fusion in acute myeloid
leukemia.

Jankovic D(1), Gorello P, Liu T, Ehret S, La Starza R, Desjobert C, Baty F,
Brutsche M, Jayaraman PS, Santoro A, Mecucci C, Schwaller J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

We have studied a patient with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and t(10;11)(q23;p15)
as the sole cytogenetic abnormality. Molecular analysis revealed a translocation 
involving nucleoporin 98 (NUP98) fused to the DNA-binding domain of the
hematopoietically expressed homeobox gene (HHEX). Expression of NUP98/HHEX in
murine bone marrow cells leads to aberrant self-renewal and a block in normal
differentiation that depends on the integrity of the NUP98 GFLG repeats and the
HHEX homeodomain. Transplantation of bone marrow cells expressing NUP98/HHEX
leads to transplantable acute leukemia characterized by extensive infiltration of
leukemic blasts expressing myeloid markers (Gr1(+)) as well as markers of the
B-cell lineage (B220(+)). A latency period of 9 months and its clonal character
suggest that NUP98/HHEX is necessary but not sufficient for disease induction.
Expression of EGFP-NUP98/HHEX fusions showed a highly similar nuclear
localization pattern as for other NUP98/homeodomain fusions, such as NUP98/HOXA9.
Comparative gene expression profiling in primary bone marrow cells provided
evidence for the presence of common targets in cells expressing NUP98/HOXA9 or
NUP98/HHEX. Some of these genes (Hoxa5, Hoxa9, Flt3) are deregulated in
NUP98/HHEX-induced murine leukemia as well as in human blasts carrying this
fusion and might represent bona fide therapeutic targets.

PMID: 18388181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Cell Stem Cell. 2007 Nov;1(5):541-54. doi: 10.1016/j.stem.2007.08.009.

Imaging hematopoietic precursor division in real time.

Wu M(1), Kwon HY, Rattis F, Blum J, Zhao C, Ashkenazi R, Jackson TL, Gaiano N,
Oliver T, Reya T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Cancer Biology, Duke University Medical Center,
Durham, NC 27710, USA.

Comment in
    Cell Stem Cell. 2007 Nov;1(5):479-81.

Stem cells are thought to balance self-renewal and differentiation through
asymmetric and symmetric divisions, but whether such divisions occur during
hematopoietic development remains unknown. Using a Notch reporter mouse, in which
GFP acts as a sensor for differentiation, we image hematopoietic precursors and
show that they undergo both symmetric and asymmetric divisions. In addition we
show that the balance between these divisions is not hardwired but responsive to 
extrinsic and intrinsic cues. Precursors in a prodifferentiation environment
preferentially divide asymmetrically, whereas those in a prorenewal environment
primarily divide symmetrically. Oncoproteins can also influence division pattern:
although BCR-ABL predominantly alters the rate of division and death, NUP98-HOXA9
promotes symmetric division, suggesting that distinct oncogenes subvert different
aspects of cellular function. These studies establish a system for tracking
division of hematopoietic precursors and show that the balance of symmetric and
asymmetric division can be influenced by the microenvironment and subverted by
oncogenes.

PMCID: PMC2267762
PMID: 18345353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Leukemia. 2008 Jun;22(6):1161-9. doi: 10.1038/leu.2008.57. Epub 2008 Mar 13.

HoxA9 induces insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor expression in B-lineage acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Whelan JT(1), Ludwig DL, Bertrand FE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, The Brody School of Medicine at
East Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27834, USA.

The homeobox (Hox) gene family encodes a group of transcription factors
preferentially expressed during embryonic development and hematopoiesis.
Deregulation of Hox gene expression is frequently associated with acute leukemia.
HoxA9 is the most commonly overexpressed Hox gene in acute leukemia. However,
little is known regarding specific pathways regulated by HoxA9 that promote the
growth and survival of leukemic cells. We have generated a conditional model of
HoxA9 activity in the stromal cell dependent, HoxA9 negative, pre-B-cell line
B-lineage-2 (BLIN-2). Conditional HoxA9 activation in BLIN-2 resulted in
increased proliferation in the presence and absence of stromal cell support.
Stimulation of HoxA9 activity resulted in increased expression of the c-Myb
transcription factor and induction of insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor
(IGF-1R) surface expression. HoxA9-mediated proliferative effects in BLIN-2 cells
were abrogated when the cells were treated with specific IGF-1R tyrosine kinase
inhibitors or with an IGF-1R mAb (A12). IGF-1R expression correlated with
endogenous HoxA9 expression in a small panel of mixed lineage leukemia (MLL)/AF4 
cell lines. siRNA knockdown of endogenous HoxA9 expression in the
MLL/AF4-positive cell line RS4;11 resulted in loss of IGF-1R expression. These
data indicate that HoxA9 overexpression induces IGF-1R expression and
subsequently promotes leukemic cell growth.

PMID: 18337761  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Haematologica. 2008 Mar;93(3):347-55. doi: 10.3324/haematol.12081. Epub 2008 Feb 
11.

Pegylated granulocyte colony-stimulating factor mobilizes CD34+ cells with
different stem and progenitor subsets and distinct functional properties in
comparison with unconjugated granulocyte colony-stimulating factor.

Bruns I(1), Steidl U, Fischer JC, Czibere A, Kobbe G, Raschke S, Singh R, Fenk R,
Rosskopf M, Pechtel S, von Haeseler A, Wernet P, Tenen DG, Haas R, Kronenwett R.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Hematology, Oncology and Clinical Immunology,
Heinrich-Heine-University. Moorenstr. 5, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
brunsin@med.uni-duessel-dorf.de

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2008 Mar;93(3):321-4.

BACKGROUND: Pegylated granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) has recently 
been introduced as a new compound for mobilization of CD34(+) hematopoietic stem 
and progenitor cells. In this study, we compared the molecular and functional
characteristics of CD34(+) cells mobilized by pegylated G-CSF with those
mobilized by unconjugated G-CSF.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Gene expression of immunomagnetically enriched CD34(+) cells 
from leukapheresis products of patients who were given pegylated-G-CSF or
unconjugated G-CSF was analyzed using Affymetrix HG Focus microarrays and
quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction. Flow cytometry and 
fluorescence activated cell sorting was conducted to assess the CD34(+) subset
composition and to obtain Lin(-), CD34(+), CD38(-) hematopoietic stem cells. Cell
cycle assays and clonogenic assays were performed for functional corroboration.
RESULTS: Pegylated G-CSF and unconjugated G-CSF mobilized CD34(+) and
hematopoietic stem cells with different molecular phenotypes and functional
properties. The CD34(+) cells mobilized by pegylated G-CSF had higher expression 
levels of genes indicative of early hematopoiesis, including HOXA9, MEIS1 and
GATA3. We found lower expression of genes characteristic of erythroid and later
stages of myeloid differentiation and a lower functional burst-forming unit
erythroid/colony-forming unit-granulocyte-macrophage ratio. Consistently, greater
numbers of hematopoietic stem cells and common myeloid progenitors and fewer
megakaryocyte-erthrocyte progenitors were found in the pegylated-G-CSF-mobilized 
CD34(+) cells. Additionally, sorted pegylated-G-CSF-mobilized hematopoietic stem 
cells displayed higher expression of HOXA9 in comparison to G-CSF-mobilized
hematopoietic stem cells. In line with the gene expression data, CD34(+) cells
mobilized by pegylated G-CSF, as well as sorted hematopoietic stem cells, showed 
a significantly greater cell cycle activity.
CONCLUSIONS: Stimulation with pegylated-G-CSF or G-CSF results in different
expression of key regulatory genes and different functional properties of
mobilized hematopoietic stem cells as well as their progeny, a finding that might
be relevant for the application of these cells in blood stem cell
transplantation.

PMID: 18268278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Clin Cancer Res. 2008 Feb 1;14(3):692-700. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-07-1927.

T cell receptor genotyping and HOXA/TLX1 expression define three T lymphoblastic 
lymphoma subsets which might affect clinical outcome.

Baleydier F(1), Decouvelaere AV, Bergeron J, Gaulard P, Canioni D, Bertrand Y,
Lepretre S, Petit B, Dombret H, Beldjord K, Molina T, Asnafi V, Macintyre E.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM EMI0210, and Université Paris V, Hopital Necker Enfants-Malades,
Assistance Publique-Hopitaux de Paris (AP-HP), Paris, France.

PURPOSE: T lymphoblastic lymphomas (T-LBL) are rare disorders of immature T cells
which predominantly involve the mediastinum. Their oncogenic pathways and
prognostic variables are not clear.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We undertook a retrospective study of 41 cytoplasmic CD3+
T-LBL (nine cases aged <16 years) by assessing stage of maturation arrest based
on T cell receptor (TCR) immunogenotyping, immunohistochemistry, and
quantification of the oncogenes thought to be important in immature T cell
malignancies.
RESULTS: Application of a TCR-based immunogenetic classification allowed the
identification of three subcategories: 11 immature IM0/D-LBL showed no TCR or
only incomplete TCRD DJ rearrangement and corresponded to cytoplasmic CD3+
precursors of uncertain lineage. Sixteen mature TCRD(del)-LBL showed biallelic
TCRD deletion and both TCRG and TCRB rearrangement, consistent with TCRalphabeta 
lineage restriction. Fourteen intermediate LBL (Int-LBL) showed complete TCRD VDJ
and TCRG VJ rearrangement, with TCRB VDJ rearrangement in the majority. All
Int-LBL expressed HOX11/TLX1 or HOXA9 transcripts and a proportion of the latter 
were associated with CALM-AF10 or NUP214-ABL fusion transcripts. IM0/D-LBL were
restricted to adults with extrathymic disease and bone marrow involvement,
whereas Int-LBL and TCRD(del)-LBL were found in children and adults with
predominantly thymic disease. In adults, the Int-LBL subgroup was associated with
a significantly superior clinical outcome. This subgroup can be identified either
by TCR immunogenotyping or HOXA9/TLX1 transcript quantification.
CONCLUSION: Application of this molecular classification will allow the
prospective evaluation of prognostic effects within pediatric and adult
protocols.

PMID: 18245528  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. Int J Hematol. 2008 Jan;87(1):10-8. doi: 10.1007/s12185-007-0009-8. Epub 2007 Dec
4.

Mechanisms of transcriptional regulation by MLL and its disruption in acute
leukemia.

Dou Y(1), Hess JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109-5602, USA.

Fusion of the mixed lineage leukemia protein (MLL) to one of over 50 different
translocation partners converts it into a potent leukemogenic oncoprotein. The
resulting fusion proteins transform primarily through upregulation of A-cluster
Hox genes, including Hoxa9 and the Hox cofactor Meis1. Considerable progress has 
been made in delineating the differences between normal Hox gene regulation by
MLL and deregulated transcription in MLL-induced leukemias. Some MLL
translocation partners dimerize the truncated MLL molecule. Other translocation
partners appear to recruit nuclear coactivator complexes that have diverse
enzymatic activities that impinge on transcriptional elongation pathways. These
enzymatic activities, including RNA polymerase II phosphorylation as well as
histone H3 lysine 79 methylation present attractive targets for the development
of future MLL-directed therapy.

PMID: 18224408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Oncogene. 2008 Jun 19;27(27):3865-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.onc.1211043. Epub 2008 Jan
28.

Acceleration of chronic myeloproliferation by enforced expression of Meis1 or
Meis3 in Icsbp-deficient bone marrow cells.

Hara T(1), Schwieger M, Kazama R, Okamoto S, Minehata K, Ziegler M, Löhler J,
Stocking C.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell Project Group, The Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, 
Tokyo Metropolitan Organization for Medical Research, Tokyo, Japan.
thara@rinshoken.or.jp

Identifying genetic pathways that cooperate in leukemogenesis facilitates our
understanding of the molecular mechanisms at play. Interferon consensus
sequence-binding protein (ICSBP) is a tumor suppressor, whose downregulation
cooperates with BCR-ABL and NUP98-TOP1 gene products to accelerate leukemia
induction in mouse models. Similarly, Meis1 synergizes with HoxA9 or NUP98-HOX
(but not NUP98-TOP1) fusion genes to promote the early onset of leukemia. To
investigate whether Icsbp deficiency interacts with Meis1 or its family member
Meis3, we transplanted Icsbp(-/-) bone marrow (BM) cells after transduction with 
Meis1 or Meis3 retroviral vectors. Here, we show that enforced expression of
Meis1 or Meis3 in Icsbp(-/-) BM cells induces a fatal, invasive
myeloproliferative disease. Secondary mutations, such as activation of Mn1, led
to the progression to acute myeloid leukemia in a few mice. Interestingly,
expression of endogenous Meis1 and Meis3 mRNAs was repressed in the granulocytic 
progenitor population of Icsbp(-/-) mice. These results reveal a novel
collaboration between Icsbp deficiency and Meis1/Meis3 in the acceleration of
chronic myeloid leukemia-like disease.

PMID: 18223676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. Ai Zheng. 2008 Jan;27(1):1-7.

[Effect of Epstein-Barr virus reactivation on gene expression profile of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen X(1), Ma WL, Liang S, Liao ZJ, Shang T, Zheng WL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Genetic Engineering, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou,
Guangdong, PR China.

BACKGROUND & OBJECTIVE: Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection plays a key role in
the pathogenesis of nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC). This study was to explore the
effects of the recurrent infection by EBV reactivation on the genomic expression 
profile of NPC.
METHODS: The microarray expression data from different cell lines subjected to
primary infection of EBV+ vs. EBV- targets in NPC and recurrent EBV reactivation 
were collected from public data depository. Cross comparison, t-test analysis as 
well as filtering by flag, expression level and fold change were used to analyze 
the data and identify differential genes. Moreover, a set of web-based
applications, such as DAVID (database for annotation, visualization and
integrated discovery), pSTIING (protein, signaling, transcriptional interactions 
and inflammation networks gateway), GATHER (gene annotation tool to help explain 
relationships) and TELiS (transcription element listening system), were used to
analyze and predict the probable expression profile of the differential genes.
RESULTS: As compared with the genes expressed during primary infection of EBV, 25
genes, including DUSP1, TOP1, HOXA9, DEK, PABPC1 and IMPDH2, were differentially 
expressed during EBV reactivation. Many of them were oncogenic. The differential 
genes together with related transcriptional factors were interacted mainly
through 2 mechanisms: one mainly included TOP1, DUSP1, DUSP6, and RPS28; the
other one was a circuit of PITX1, CD9, HOXA9 and IMPDH2.
CONCLUSION: The differential genes might participate in EBV reactivation by
changing their expression level through two mechanisms, which contributes to the 
final development of NPC.

PMID: 18184455  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. Gene. 2008 Jan 31;408(1-2):187-95. Epub 2007 Nov 13.

Differential regulation of HOXA9 expression by nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB)
and HOXA9.

Trivedi CM(1), Patel RC, Patel CV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Anatomy, School of Medicine, 
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC 29209, USA.

HOXA9 is a homeobox transcription factor expressed in endothelial cells (EC) and 
its expression is rapidly downregulated during EC activation by inflammatory
signals like tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and lipopolysaccharide
(LPS). Recently, we have shown that HOXA9 overexpression prevents EC activation
by inhibiting NF-kappaB activity, which suggests that HOXA9 downregulation is an 
essential event for EC activation. The present study is directed towards
understanding the mechanism of HOXA9 regulation during EC activation. Here we
show that nuclear factor-kappaB (NF-kappaB) activation is an essential step for
HOXA9 downregulation. Deletion analyses of HOXA9 promoter in EC and NF-kappaB
knockout cells have shown that NF-kappaB is a major transcription factor that is 
absolutely required for HOXA9 downregulation. Our 5' deletion analysis of HOXA9
promoter shows that NF-kappaB response element is localized within first 400
nucleotides, while minimal basal promoter is within 100 nucleotides upstream of
its transcriptional start site. We demonstrate that HOXA9 regulates its own
expression by positive feedback mechanism. To define mechanism by which HOXA9
autoregulates its expression, we show that HOXA9 DNA binding and transactivation 
domains are essential.

PMID: 18068911  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2008 Jan-Feb;40(1):119-21. Epub 2007 Nov 7.

Tribbles homolog 2 (Trib2) and HoxA9 cooperate to accelerate acute myelogenous
leukemia.

Keeshan K(1), Shestova O, Ussin L, Pear WS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of Pennsylvania,
Philadelphia, PA 19104-6160, USA.

Trib2 is a member of the Trib family of serine/threonine kinase-like proteins
(Trib1, Trib2, Trib3). Mice reconstituted with hematopoietic stem cells (HSC)
retrovirally expressing Trib2 uniformly developed fatal transplantable acute
myelogenous leukemia (AML). Trib2-induced AML was clonal and we sought to
identify cooperating genes in Trib2-induced AML. Using Splinkerette PCR
techniques, we identified proviral insertion near HoxA9 in a Trib2 monoclonal
tumor, which resulted in greatly elevated HoxA9 expression. Mice reconstituted
with HSC cotransduced with HoxA9 and Trib2 had accelerated onset of AML compared 
to either gene alone. These data identify Trib2 and HoxA9 as cooperating genes in
AML.

PMID: 17988908  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2008 Jan 18;365(3):589-94. Epub 2007 Nov 5.

Regulation of early T cell development by the PHD finger of histone lysine
methyltransferase ASH1.

Tanaka Y(1), Nakayama Y, Taniguchi M, Kioussis D.

Author information: 
(1)Genome Structure and Expression, School of Biomedical Science, Tokyo Medical
and Dental University, 1-5-45 Yushima, Bunkyoku, Tokyo 113-8610, Japan.

We have previously isolated a mammalian homologue of Drosophila discsabsent,
small, orhomeotic-1 (ash1) from the murine thymus, and recently shown that its
SET domain methylates histone H3 lysine 36 (K36). Expression of ASH1 has been
reported to be increased in NOD thymocytes in a BDC2.5 clonotype background, but 
its function in T cell development has remained elusive. Here we report that the 
ash1 gene is expressed at high levels in thymocytes of mice deficient for rag1 or
tcra genes. ASH1 proteins are present at peri-nuclei and as nuclear speckles in
thymocytes. Some of the nuclear ASH1 co-localize with RAG2. Expression of the
evolutionarily conserved PHD finger of ASH1 impairs T cell development at the DP 
stage, and causes increased transcription from the HoxA9 promoter in vitro.
Moreover, the C-terminal part of ASH1 interacts with HDAC1 repression complexes, 
suggesting that the PHD finger of ASH1 may be involved in down-regulation of
genes for normal development of alphabeta T cells.

PMID: 17981149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Oncogene. 2008 Apr 10;27(17):2412-21. Epub 2007 Oct 29.

Differentially expressed genes are marked by histone 3 lysine 9 trimethylation in
human cancer cells.

Wiencke JK(1), Zheng S, Morrison Z, Yeh RF.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Neuro and Molecular Epidemiology, Ambulatory Care AC-34,
Department of Neurological Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San
Francisco, CA, USA. john.wiencke@ucsf.edu

Histone H3 lysine 9 trimethylation (H3K9Me3) has been associated with
transcriptional repression, but recent findings implicate this chromatin
modification in transcriptional activation and mRNA elongation by RNA polymerase 
II. Here, we applied immunoprecipitation (IP) with a custom DNA tiling microarray
containing many transcription factors important in development and cancer (for
example homeotic genes; N=683 total genes) to explore the relationship between
H3K9Me3 and other histone modifications with the differential expression of
genes. Cancer cell lines derived from different tissues (2 leukemia, 2
medulloblastoma) were characterized with IP antibodies to H3K9Me3, H3K4
dimethylation (H3K4Me2) and H3K9 acetylation (H3K9Ac). MV4-11 is known to
overexpress the HOXA9 and MEIS1 genes, whereas D283 overexpresses the OTX2
homeobox gene. Gene expression was assessed by Affymetrix U133 array. Mapping the
number and size of histone markings demonstrated significant colocalization of
H3K9Ac and H3K4Me2 with H3K9Me3, indicating a pattern of putative 'activating'
and 'repressive' markings. The median site size was 600-821 bp and 72-95% or
53-80% of chromatin signal sites were located within 1 kb or 500 bp of
transcription start sites (TSS), respectively. A relatively small number of genes
displayed additional H3K9Me3 sites in the 5'-region distant from the TSS.
Comparing genes with modification sites to those without sites in their promoters
confirmed the positive associations of H3K9Ac and H3K4Me2 with gene expression
and revealed that H3K9Me3 is associated with active genes rather than being a
repressive marking as previously thought. The positive regulatory effect of all
three types of modifications were quantitatively correlated with site size, and
applied to absolute gene expression within a single cell line as well as relative
expression among pairs of cell lines. Extended patterns of H3K9Me3 upstream of
some genes (for example HOXA9 and OTX2) may result from the action of multiple
promoter elements. We found an inverse relationship between promoter DNA
hypermethylation and H3K9Me3 in three studied genes (HOXA9, TMS1, RASSF1A). The
localization of H3K9Me3 downstream of the TSSs of expressed genes and not within 
promoter regions of hypermethylated and silenced genes is consistent with the
proposed coupling of H3K9Me3 with RNA polymerase II. Our results indicate a need 
for revising aspects of the histone code involving H3 lysine methylation.
Awareness of H3K9Me3 as a mark of gene activity, not repression, is especially
important for the classification of human cancer using chromatin and histone
profiles.

PMID: 17968314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Blood Cells Mol Dis. 2008 Mar-Apr;40(2):156-9. Epub 2007 Oct 3.

Transcriptional complexity of the HOXA9 locus.

Popovic R(1), Erfurth F, Zeleznik-Le N.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Loyola University Chicago, Maywood, IL, USA.

Evolutionarily conserved HOX genes play an important role during development and 
hematopoiesis. HOX protein products are transcription factors whose precise
mechanism of action is still poorly understood. Regulation of HOX gene expression
has been the topic of various studies. While alternative splicing and alternative
promoter usage have been known to increase the number of transcripts across the
HOX clusters, more recently high-throughput analyses have identified a number of 
new coding and noncoding RNA molecules whose function is not known. Here we
review the transcriptome of the most studied HOX locus, HOXA9. Strict control of 
HOXA9 expression has been shown to play a critical role in hematopoiesis while
aberrant expression has been shown to be important to the development of
leukemia. However, it is still unclear how various transcripts from this locus
are regulated and what specific role(s) each one of them plays.

PMCID: PMC2268101
PMID: 17916434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Oct;9(10):1208-15. Epub 2007 Sep 23.

Protein arginine-methyltransferase-dependent oncogenesis.

Cheung N(1), Chan LC, Thompson A, Cleary ML, So CW.

Author information: 
(1)Haemato-Oncology Section, The Institute of Cancer Research, Sutton, Greater
London SM2 5NG, UK.

Enzymes that mediate reversible epigenetic modifications have not only been
recognized as key in regulating gene expression and oncogenesis, but also provide
potential targets for molecular therapy. Although the methylation of arginine 3
of histone 4 (H4R3) by protein arginine methyltransferase 1 (PRMT1) is a critical
modification for active chromatin and prevention of heterochromatin spread, there
has been no direct evidence of any role of PRMTs in cancer. Here, we show that
PRMT1 is an essential component of a novel Mixed Lineage Leukaemia (MLL)
oncogenic transcriptional complex with both histone acetylation and H4R3
methylation activities, which also correlate with the expression of critical MLL 
downstream targets. Direct fusion of MLL with PRMT1 or Sam68, a bridging molecule
in the complex for PRMT1 interaction, could enhance self-renewal of primary
haematopoietic cells. Conversely, specific knockdown of PRMT1 or Sam68 expression
suppressed MLL-mediated transformation. This study not only functionally dissects
the oncogenic transcriptional machinery associated with an MLL fusion complex,
but also uncovers--for the first time--an essential function of PRMTs in
oncogenesis and reveals their potential as novel therapeutic targets in human
cancer.

PMID: 17891136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Exp Hematol. 2007 Oct;35(10):1538-49.

Establishing long-term cultures with self-renewing acute myeloid leukemia
stem/progenitor cells.

van Gosliga D(1), Schepers H, Rizo A, van der Kolk D, Vellenga E, Schuringa JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The 
Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: With the emergence of the concept of the leukemia stem cell, assays to
study them remain pivotal in understanding (leukemic) stem cell biology.
METHODS: We have cultured acute myeloid leukemia CD34(+) cells on bone marrow
stroma. Long-term expansion was monitored and self-renewal was addressed by
replating of Leukemic-cobblestone area-forming cells (L-CAs). Also, lentiviral
vectors were generated that could target L-CAs.
RESULTS: A strong expansion was observed in about 75% of the acute myeloid
leukemia cases (n = 30) and long-term cultures could be maintained for up to 24
weeks on MS5 bone marrow stromal cells. Cells that were able to initiate leukemic
cobblestone areas resided in the CD34(+) population and were absent from the
CD34(-) population. Self-renewal within these L-CAs was determined by sequential 
passaging of these L-CAs onto new MS5 stromal layers, which resulted in the
generation of second, third, and fourth L-CAs, which were able to sustain
long-term expansion and generated high numbers of immature undifferentiated
suspension cells. CD34(+) cells that were able to initiate long-term cultures all
coexpressed MEIS1 and HOXA9, and expressed elevated BMI1 levels.
CONCLUSION: We present a novel long-term leukemic stem/progenitor assay in which 
new drugs can be tested and in which genes can be overexpressed or downmodulated 
using a lentiviral approach in order to obtain more insight into the process of
leukemic transformation and self-renewal.

PMID: 17889721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. J Hypertens. 2007 Oct;25(10):2093-9.

Reduced number of circulating endothelial progenitors and HOXA9 expression in
CD34+ cells of hypertensive patients.

Pirro M(1), Schillaci G, Menecali C, Bagaglia F, Paltriccia R, Vaudo G, Mannarino
MR, Mannarino E.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Internal Medicine, Angiology and Arteriosclerosis Diseases, Department
of Clinical and Experimental Medicine, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy.
mpirro@unipg.it

OBJECTIVE: Circulating endothelial progenitor cells (EPCs) differentiate into
mature endothelial cells and regenerate the injured endothelium. The role of
homeobox A9 (HOXA9) is critical for endothelial commitment during progenitor cell
maturation, postnatal neovascularization and vascular repair. The objective of
our study was to measure the expression of HOXA9 in CD34+ cells from hypertensive
patients and to investigate its correlation with the number of circulating EPCs.
METHODS: Thirty patients with newly diagnosed, never-treated essential
hypertension and 30 age- and sex-matched normotensive controls were recruited for
the study. Total RNA was extracted from peripheral CD34+ cells and quantitative
real-time polymerase chain reaction for measurement of HOXA9 expression was
performed. The number of CD34+/human kinase insert domain protein receptor +
(KDR+) EPCs was measured and the Framingham risk estimated.
RESULTS: Hypertensive patients had reduced HOXA9 expression compared to
normotensive subjects (-26%, P < 0.001), and lower levels of peripheral
CD34+/KDR+ EPCs (421 +/- 93 versus 582 +/- 101, P < 0.001). HOXA9 expression was 
inversely associated with systolic blood pressure (r = -0.54, P < 0.001) and the 
Framingham risk (r = -0.50, P < 0.001). A direct association was observed between
the number of EPCs and HOXA9 expression (r = 0.50, P < 0.001), which was
independent of blood pressure levels and Framingham risk. In a subgroup of 15
hypertensive patients, a 4-week treatment with ramipril was associated with a
significant 15% increase in HOXA9 expression and 25% increase in EPC levels.
CONCLUSIONS: In hypertensive patients, downregulation of HOXA9 expression in
peripheral CD34+ cells may have a role in the loss of circulating EPCs, thus
potentially impairing postnatal neovascularization and vascular repair.

PMID: 17885552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. Exp Hematol. 2007 Sep;35(9):1421-8.

Hoxa9/hoxb3/hoxb4 compound null mice display severe hematopoietic defects.

Magnusson M(1), Brun AC, Lawrence HJ, Karlsson S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Institute of Laboratory Medicine, The
Lund Strategic Center for Stem Cell Biology and Cell Therapy, Lund University
Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

OBJECTIVE: Members of the hox family of homeodomain-containing transcription
factors, including hoxa9, hoxb3, and hoxb4 play an important role in the
regulation of differentiation, proliferation and self-renewal of hematopoietic
stem and progenitor cells. Lack-of-function studies using hoxa9, hoxb4, or
hoxb3/hoxb4 null mice demonstrate that all these mutations compromise the
repopulating ability of hematopoietic stem cells (HSC), implying similar
functions of each of these genes in hematopoiesis. Because cross regulation and
cooperativity are known features of hox proteins, we investigated mice with a
compound deficiency in hoxa9, hoxb3 and hoxb4 (hoxa9/b3/b4) for evidence of
synergy between these genes in hematopoiesis.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Hoxa9/b3/b4 were generated by mating the hoxb3/hoxb4 null 
mice with the hoxa9 null strain and HSC function was measured by competitive
repopulating assay and by immunophenotype using fluorescence-activated cell
sorting.
RESULTS: Our findings demonstrate that the hoxa9/b3/b4 null mice are smaller in
body weight, and display a marked reduction in spleen size and cellularity
compared to control mice. The numbers of colony-forming unit (CFU)-granulocyte
macrophage and CFU-spleen progenitor colonies were normal but hoxa9/b3/b4 null
bone marrow contained increased numbers of immunophenotypic HSC (Lin(-),
c-kit(+), Sca-1(+), CD150(+)). However the reconstitution defect in hoxa9 null
HSC was not enhanced further in the hoxa9/b3/b4 null HSC.
CONCLUSION: These findings demonstrate overlapping functions of hoxa9, hoxb3, and
hoxb4 in hematopoietic cells, and emphasize an important role for these
transcription factors for regulation of HSC proliferation. However, none of these
hox proteins is absolutely essential for generation or maintenance of all major
blood lineages.

PMID: 17761289  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Cancer Res. 2007 Aug 1;67(15):7275-83.

Interaction of MLL amino terminal sequences with menin is required for
transformation.

Caslini C(1), Yang Z, El-Osta M, Milne TA, Slany RK, Hess JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor,
Michigan 48109, USA.

Rearrangements of the mixed lineage leukemia gene MLL are associated with
aggressive lymphoid and myeloid leukemias. The resulting MLL fusion proteins
enforce high-level expression of HOX genes and the HOX cofactor MEIS1, which is
pivotal for leukemogenesis. Both wild-type MLL and MLL fusion proteins interact
with the tumor suppressor menin and with the Hoxa9 locus in vivo. Here, we show
that MLL sequences between amino acids 5 and 44 are required for interaction with
menin and for the transformation of hematopoietic progenitors. Blocking the
MLL-menin interaction by the expression of a dominant negative inhibitor composed
of amino terminal MLL sequences down-regulates Meis1 expression and inhibits cell
proliferation, suggesting that targeting this interaction may be an effective
therapeutic strategy for leukemias with MLL rearrangements.

PMID: 17671196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;10(4):365-7.

[Expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Gu ZD(1), Chen XM, Zhang W, Gu J, Chen KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 
Cancer Hospital, Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing 100036, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify whether HOX genes can be used as markers of esophageal
cancer.
METHODS: The expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines was
examined. Specific primers were designed and RT- PCR was performed for each HOX
gene members in above esophageal cancer cell lines, EC109 and CAES.
RESULTS: Fifteen out of 39 HOX genes were expressed in esophageal cancer cell
lines. They were HOXA2, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXA13, HOXB7, HOXB9, HOXC4, HOXC5,
HOXC6, HOXC8, HOXC9, HOXD9, HOXD10, and HOXD13 respectively. Of them. Eleven
genes were overlapped with the ones detected in human esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma(ESCC) in our former study.
CONCLUSION: This study reconfirms our former that some HOX genes are deregulated 
expressed in ESCC, which provides more positive evidence for their roles in ESCC.

PMID: 17659465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Mol Cancer. 2007 Jul 10;6:45.

DNA methylation profiling of ovarian carcinomas and their in vitro models
identifies HOXA9, HOXB5, SCGB3A1, and CRABP1 as novel targets.

Wu Q(1), Lothe RA, Ahlquist T, Silins I, Tropé CG, Micci F, Nesland JM, Suo Z,
Lind GE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Center, Oslo,
Norway. qinghuaw@labmed.uio.no

BACKGROUND: The epigenetics of ovarian carcinogenesis remains poorly described.
We have in the present study investigated the promoter methylation status of 13
genes in primary ovarian carcinomas (n = 52) and their in vitro models (n = 4;
ES-2, OV-90, OVCAR-3, and SKOV-3) by methylation-specific polymerase chain
reaction (MSP). Direct bisulphite sequencing analysis was used to confirm the
methylation status of individual genes. The MSP results were compared with
clinico- pathological features.
RESULTS: Eight out of the 13 genes were hypermethylated among the ovarian
carcinomas, and altogether 40 of 52 tumours were methylated in one or more genes.
Promoter hypermethylation of HOXA9, RASSF1A, APC, CDH13, HOXB5, SCGB3A1 (HIN-1), 
CRABP1, and MLH1 was found in 51% (26/51), 49% (23/47), 24% (12/51), 20% (10/51),
12% (6/52), 10% (5/52), 4% (2/48), and 2% (1/51) of the carcinomas, respectively,
whereas ADAMTS1, MGMT, NR3C1, p14ARF, and p16INK4a were unmethylated in all
samples. The methylation frequencies of HOXA9 and SCGB3A1 were higher among
relatively early-stage carcinomas (FIGO I-II) than among carcinomas of later
stages (FIGO III-IV; P = 0.002, P = 0.020, respectively). The majority of the
early-stage carcinomas were of the endometrioid histotype. Additionally, HOXA9
hypermethylation was more common in tumours from patients older than 60 years of 
age (15/21) than among those of younger age (11/30; P = 0.023). Finally, there
was a significant difference in HOXA9 methylation frequency among the
histological types (P = 0.007).
CONCLUSION: DNA hypermethylation of tumour suppressor genes seems to play an
important role in ovarian carcinogenesis and HOXA9, HOXB5, SCGB3A1, and CRABP1
are identified as novel hypermethylated target genes in this tumour type.

PMCID: PMC1964763
PMID: 17623056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Blood. 2007 Oct 1;110(7):2578-85. Epub 2007 Jun 29.

Leukemia stem cells in a genetically defined murine model of blast-crisis CML.

Neering SJ(1), Bushnell T, Sozer S, Ashton J, Rossi RM, Wang PY, Bell DR,
Heinrich D, Bottaro A, Jordan CT.

Author information: 
(1)James P Wilmot Cancer Center, University of Rochester Medical Center, NY
14642, USA.

Myeloid leukemia arises from leukemia stem cells (LSCs), which are resistant to
standard chemotherapy agents and likely to be a major cause of drug-resistant
disease and relapse. To investigate the in vivo properties of LSCs, we developed 
a mouse model in which the biologic features of human LSCs are closely mimicked. 
Primitive normal hematopoietic cells were modified to express the BCR/ABL and
Nup98/HoxA9 translocation products, and a distinct LSC population, with the
aberrant immunophenotype of lineage(-), Kit(+/-), Flt3(+), Sca(+), CD34(+), and
CD150(-), was identified. In vivo studies were then performed to assess the
response of LSCs to therapeutic insult. Treatment of animals with the ABL kinase 
inhibitor imatinib mesylate induced specific modulation of blasts and progenitor 
cells but not stem- cell populations, thereby recapitulating events inferred to
occur in human chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) patients. In addition,
challenge of leukemic mice with total body irradiation was selectively toxic to
normal hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), suggesting that LSCs are resistant to
apoptosis and/or senescence in vivo. Taken together, the system provides a
powerful means by which the in vivo behavior of LSCs versus HSCs can be
characterized and candidate treatment regimens can be optimized for maximal
specificity toward primitive leukemia cells.

PMCID: PMC1988942
PMID: 17601986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Leukemia. 2007 Sep;21(9):2000-9. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

Pediatric acute myeloid leukemia with NPM1 mutations is characterized by a gene
expression profile with dysregulated HOX gene expression distinct from
MLL-rearranged leukemias.

Mullighan CG(1), Kennedy A, Zhou X, Radtke I, Phillips LA, Shurtleff SA, Downing 
JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN,
USA.

Comment in
    Leukemia. 2007 Sep;21(9):1849-50.

Somatic mutations in nucleophosmin (NPM1) occur in approximately 35% of adult
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). To assess the frequency of NPM1 mutations in
pediatric AML, we sequenced NPM1 in the diagnostic blasts from 93 pediatric AML
patients. Six cases harbored NPM1 mutations, with each case lacking common
cytogenetic abnormalities. To explore the phenotype of the AMLs with NPM1
mutations, gene expression profiles were obtained using Affymetrix U133A
microarrays. NPM1 mutations were associated with increased expression of multiple
homeobox genes including HOXA9, A10, B2, B6 and MEIS1. As dysregulated homeobox
gene expression is also a feature of MLL-rearranged leukemia, the gene expression
signatures of NPM1-mutated and MLL-rearranged leukemias were compared.
Significant differences were identified between these leukemia subtypes including
the expression of different HOX genes, with NPM1-mutated AML showing higher
levels of expression of HOXB2, B3, B6 and D4. These results confirm recent
reports of perturbed HOX expression in NPM1-mutated adult AML, and provide the
first evidence that the NPM1-mutated signature is distinct from MLL-rearranged
AML. These findings suggest that mutated NPM1 leads to dysregulated HOX
expression via a different mechanism than MLL rearrangement.

PMID: 17597811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;9(7):804-12. Epub 2007 Jun 24.

NUP98-NSD1 links H3K36 methylation to Hox-A gene activation and leukaemogenesis.

Wang GG(1), Cai L, Pasillas MP, Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California at San Diego, School of
Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Nuclear receptor-binding SET domain protein 1 (NSD1) prototype is a family of
mammalian histone methyltransferases (NSD1, NSD2/MMSET/WHSC1, NSD3/WHSC1L1) that 
are essential in development and are mutated in human acute myeloid leukemia
(AML), overgrowth syndromes, multiple myeloma and lung cancers. In AML, the
recurring t(5;11)(q35;p15.5) translocation fuses NSD1 to nucleoporin-98 (NUP98). 
Here, we present the first characterization of the transforming properties and
molecular mechanisms of NUP98-NSD1. We demonstrate that NUP98-NSD1 induces AML in
vivo, sustains self-renewal of myeloid stem cells in vitro, and enforces
expression of the HoxA7, HoxA9, HoxA10 and Meis1 proto-oncogenes.
Mechanistically, NUP98-NSD1 binds genomic elements adjacent to HoxA7 and HoxA9,
maintains histone H3 Lys 36 (H3K36) methylation and histone acetylation, and
prevents EZH2-mediated transcriptional repression of the Hox-A locus during
differentiation. Deletion of the NUP98 FG-repeat domain, or mutations in NSD1
that inactivate the H3K36 methyltransferase activity or that prevent binding of
NUP98-NSD1 to the Hox-A locus precluded both Hox-A gene activation and myeloid
progenitor immortalization. We propose that NUP98-NSD1 prevents EZH2-mediated
repression of Hox-A locus genes by colocalizing H3K36 methylation and histone
acetylation at regulatory DNA elements. This report is the first to link
deregulated H3K36 methylation to tumorigenesis and to link NSD1 to
transcriptional regulation of the Hox-A locus.

PMID: 17589499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Atherosclerosis. 2007 Dec;195(2):e50-60. Epub 2007 Jun 27.

Homeobox gene HOXA9 inhibits nuclear factor-kappa B dependent activation of
endothelium.

Trivedi CM(1), Patel RC, Patel CV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology and Anatomy, School of Medicine, 
University of South Carolina, Columbia, SC-29209, USA.

Cytokine-induced expression of adhesion molecules such as ICAM-1, VCAM-1, and
E-selectin, on activated endothelial cells (EC) plays an essential role in the
development of inflammatory diseases like atherosclerosis. Transcription factor
nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-kappaB) is mainly responsible for the induced
expression of these adhesion molecules in response to pro-inflammatory cytokines.
The mechanisms that maintain EC in a "basal" state and negatively regulate EC
activation remain to be characterized. HOXA9 is a homeobox transcription factor
expressed in EC and its expression is rapidly down-regulated in response to
inflammatory signals. In the present study, we demonstrate that HOXA9
overexpression inhibits the induction of ICAM-1, VCAM-1, and E-selectin in
response to pro-inflammatory cytokines. HOXA9 inhibits the adhesion molecule
expression by inhibiting NF-kappaB dependent transcriptional activation of these 
promoters. HOXA9 inhibits EC activation downstream of NF-kappaB nuclear
localization by interfering with NF-kappaB DNA binding, but not transactivation
capacity. Trichostatin A (TSA) rescues HOXA9 mediated suppression of NF-kappaB
activity, but HOXA9 interaction with p300 is not responsible for inhibition of EC
activation. Thus, our results suggest involvement of HOXA9 in maintaining the
"basal" state of EC and demonstrate that downregulation of HOXA9 is an essential 
event during EC activation in response to inflammatory signals.

PMID: 17586512  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. Genes Cells. 2007 May;12(5):581-92.

Critical role of the p400/mDomino chromatin-remodeling ATPase in embryonic
hematopoiesis.

Ueda T(1), Watanabe-Fukunaga R, Ogawa H, Fukuyama H, Higashi Y, Nagata S,
Fukunaga R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics (B-3), Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences and
Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka University, Japan Science and Technology
Corporation, Osaka, Japan.

The SWI2/SNF2 family ATPase, p400/mDomino, is a core subunit of a large
chromatin-remodeling complex, and is currently suggested to play a unique
function in histone variant exchange, a process by which chromatin structure is
altered. Here, we investigated the role of p400/mDomino in mammalian development 
by generating mutant mice with a targeted deletion of the N-terminal domain of
p400/mDomino (referred to as mDom(DeltaN/DeltaN)). The mDom(DeltaN/DeltaN) mice
died on embryonic day 11.5 (E11.5), and displayed an anemic appearance and slight
deformity of the neural tube. DNA microarray and quantitative RT-PCR analyses
revealed that all of the embryonic globin genes and a globin chaperone gene were 
poorly expressed in the mDom(DeltaN/DeltaN) embryo and yolk sac on E8.5,
indicating that primitive erythropoiesis was impaired. A hematopoietic colony
assay indicated that the hematopoietic activity of the yolk sac was significantly
blocked in the mutant mice. We also found that the expression of a limited set of
Hox genes, including Hoxa7, Hoxa9 and Hoxb9, was drastically enhanced in the
mDom(DeltaN/DeltaN) yolk sacs. These results suggest that p400/mDomino plays a
critical role in embryonic hematopoiesis by regulating the expression of
developmentally essential genes such as those in the Hox gene cluster.

PMID: 17535249  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Jun;27(12):4207-16. Epub 2007 Apr 23.

HOXA9 participates in the transcriptional activation of E-selectin in endothelial
cells.

Bandyopadhyay S(1), Ashraf MZ, Daher P, Howe PH, DiCorleto PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Lerner Research Institute and Cleveland Clinic
Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland Clinic
Foundation, Cleveland, OH 44195, USA.

The homeobox gene HOXA9 has recently been shown to be an important regulator of
endothelial cell (EC) differentiation and activation in addition to its role in
embryonic development and hematopoiesis. In this report, we have determined that 
the EC-leukocyte adhesion molecule E-selectin is a key target for HOXA9. The
depletion of HOXA9 protein in ECs resulted in a significant and specific decrease
in tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha)-induced E-selectin gene expression. In
addition, HOXA9 specifically activated the E-selectin gene promoter in ECs.
Progressive deletional analyses together with site-specific mutagenesis of the
E-selectin promoter indicated that the Abd-B-like HOX DNA-binding motif,
CAATTTTATTAA, located in the proximal region spanning bp -210 to -221 upstream of
the transcription start site was crucial for the promoter induction by HOXA9.
Both HOXA9 in EC nuclear extract and recombinant HOXA9 protein bound to this
sequence in vitro. Moreover, we showed that HOXA9 binds temporally, in a
TNF-alpha-dependent manner, to the region containing this Abd-B-like element in
vivo. We have thus identified a novel and functionally critical cis-regulatory
element for TNF-alpha-mediated transient expression of the E-selectin gene.
Further, we provide evidence that HOXA9 acts as an obligate proinflammatory
factor by mediating cytokine induction of E-selectin.

PMCID: PMC1900059
PMID: 17452460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2007 Jun;1106:114-42. Epub 2007 Apr 18.

NUP98 dysregulation in myeloid leukemogenesis.

Moore MA(1), Chung KY, Plasilova M, Schuringa JJ, Shieh JH, Zhou P, Morrone G.

Author information: 
(1)Moore Laboratory, Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center, New York, NY 10021, USA. m-moore@ski.mskcc.org

Nucleoporin 98 (NUP98) is a component of the nuclear pore complex that
facilitates mRNA export from the nucleus. It is mapped to 11p15.5 and is fused to
a number of distinct partners, including nine members of the homeobox family as a
consequence of leukemia-associated chromosomal translocations. NUP98-HOXA9 is
associated with the t(7;11)(p15;p15) translocation in acute myeloid leukemia
(AML), myelodysplastic syndrome, and blastic crisis of chronic myeloid leukemia. 
Expression of NUP98-HOXA9 in murine bone marrow resulted in a myeloproliferative 
disease progressing to AML by 7-8 months. Transduction of NUP98 fusion genes into
human CD34(+) cells confers a proliferative advantage in long-term
cytokine-stimulated and stromal cocultures and in NOD-SCID engrafted mice,
associated with a five- to eight-fold increase in hematopoietic stem cells.
NUP98-HOXA9 expression inhibited erythroid and myeloid differentiation but
enhanced serial progenitor replating. NUP98-HOXA9 upregulated a number of
homeobox genes of the A and B cluster as well as MEIS1 and Pim-1, and
downmodulated globin genes and C/EBPalpha. The HOXA9 component of the NUP98-HOXA9
fusion protein was protected from cullin-4A-mediated ubiquitination and
subsequent proteasome-dependent degradation. In NUP98-HOX-transduced CD34(+)
cells and cells from AML patients with t(7;11)(p15;p15) NUP98 was no longer
associated with the nuclear pore complex but formed intranuclear aggregation
bodies. Analysis of NUP98 allelic expression in AML and myelodysplastic syndrome 
showed loss of heterozygosity observed in 29% of the former and 8% of the latter.
This was associated with poor prognosis.

PMID: 17442773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Exp Hematol. 2007 Apr;35(4 Suppl 1):105-16.

Constitutive activation of Flt3 and STAT5A enhances self-renewal and alters
differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells.

Moore MA(1), Dorn DC, Schuringa JJ, Chung KY, Morrone G.

Author information: 
(1)Moore Laboratory, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, 
USA. m-moore@ski.mskcc.org

OBJECTIVE: To model human leukemogenesis by transduction of human hematopoietic
stem cells (HSC) with genes associated with leukemia and expressed in leukemic
stem cells.
METHODS: Constitutive activation of Flt3 (Flt3-ITD) has been reported in 25 to
30% of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Retroviral vectors expressing 
constitutively activated Flt3 and STAT5A were used to transduce human cord blood 
CD34(+) cells and HSC cell self-renewal and differentiation were evaluated.
RESULTS: We have demonstrated that retroviral transduction of Flt3 mutations into
CD34(+) cells enhanced HSC self-renewal as measured in vitro in competitive
stromal coculture and limiting-dilution week-2 cobblestone (CAFC) assays.
Enhanced erythropoiesis and decreased myelopoiesis were noted together with
strong activation of STAT5A. Consequently, transduction studies were undertaken
with a constitutively active mutant of STAT5A (STAT5A[1( *)6]) and here also a
marked, selective expansion of transduced CD34(+) cells was noted, with a massive
increase in self-renewing CAFC detectable at both 2 and 5 weeks of stromal
coculture. Differentiation was biased to erythropoiesis, including erythropoietin
independence, with myeloid maturation inhibition. The observed phenotypic changes
correlated with differential gene expression, with a number of genes
differentially regulated by both the Flt3 and STAT5A mutants. These included
upregulation of genes involved in erythropoiesis and downregulation of genes
involved in myelopoiesis. The phenotype of week-2 self-renewing CAFC also
characterized primary Flt3-ITD(+) AML bone marrow samples. Isolation of leukemic 
stem cells (LSC) with a CD34(+), CD38(-), HLA-DR(-) phenotype was undertaken with
Flt3-ITD(+) AML samples resulting in co-purification of early CAFC. Gene
expression of LSC relative to the bulk leukemic population revealed upregulation 
of homeobox genes (HOXA9, HOXA5) implicated in leukemogenesis, and hepatic
leukemia factor (HLF) involved in stem cell proliferation.
CONCLUSION: Myeloid leukemogenesis is a multi-stage process that can involve
constitutively activated receptors and downstream pathways involving STAT5, HOX
genes, and HLF.

PMID: 17379095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2007 Mar 27;104(13):5527-32. Epub 2007 Mar 16.

Homeobox gene methylation in lung cancer studied by genome-wide analysis with a
microarray-based methylated CpG island recovery assay.

Rauch T(1), Wang Z, Zhang X, Zhong X, Wu X, Lau SK, Kernstine KH, Riggs AD,
Pfeifer GP.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biology, Beckman Research Institute of the City of Hope, Duarte,
CA 91010, USA.

De novo methylation of CpG islands is a common phenomenon in human cancer, but
the mechanisms of cancer-associated DNA methylation are not known. We have used
tiling arrays in combination with the methylated CpG island recovery assay to
investigate methylation of CpG islands genome-wide and at high resolution. We
find that all four HOX gene clusters on chromosomes 2, 7, 12, and 17 are
preferential targets for DNA methylation in cancer cell lines and in early-stage 
lung cancer. CpG islands associated with many other homeobox genes, such as SIX, 
LHX, PAX, DLX, and Engrailed, were highly methylated as well. Altogether, more
than half (104 of 192) of all CpG island-associated homeobox genes in the lung
cancer cell line A549 were methylated. Analysis of paralogous HOX genes showed
that not all paralogues undergo cancer-associated methylation simultaneously. The
HOXA cluster was analyzed in greater detail. Comparison with ENCODE-derived data 
shows that lack of methylation at CpG-rich sequences correlates with presence of 
the active chromatin mark, histone H3 lysine-4 methylation in the HOXA region.
Methylation analysis of HOXA genes in primary squamous cell carcinomas of the
lung led to the identification of the HOXA7- and HOXA9-associated CpG islands as 
frequent methylation targets in stage 1 tumors. Homeobox genes are potentially
useful as DNA methylation markers for early diagnosis of the disease. The finding
of widespread methylation of homeobox genes lends support to the hypothesis that 
a substantial fraction of genes methylated in human cancer are targets of the
Polycomb complex.

PMCID: PMC1838508
PMID: 17369352  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. Mech Dev. 2007 May;124(5):364-76. Epub 2007 Feb 8.

Identification of a new type of PBX1 partner that contains zinc finger motifs and
inhibits the binding of HOXA9-PBX1 to DNA.

Laurent A(1), Bihan R, Deschamps S, Guerrier D, Dupé V, Omilli F, Burel A,
Pellerin I.

Author information: 
(1)UMR CNRS 6061, Génétique et Développement, IFR 140, Faculté de Médecine,
Université de Rennes 1, Campus Villejean, 2 avenue du Professeur Léon Bernard,
CS34317, F-35043 Rennes Cedex, France.

PBX1 belongs to the TALE-class of homeodomain protein and has a wide functional
diversity during development. Indeed, PBX1 is required for haematopoiesis as well
as for multiple developmental processes such as skeletal patterning and
organogenesis. It has furthermore been shown that PBX1 functions as a HOX
cofactor during development. More recent data suggest that PBX1 may act even more
broadly by modulating the activity of non-homeodomain transcription factors. To
better understand molecular mechanisms triggered by PBX1 during female genital
tract development, we searched for additional PBX1 partners that might be
involved in this process. Using a two hybrid screen, we identified a new PBX1
interacting protein containing several zinc finger motifs that we called ZFPIP
for Zinc Finger PBX1 Interacting Protein. We demonstrated that ZFPIP is expressed
in embryonic female genital tract but also in other PBX1 expression domains such 
as the developing head and the limb buds. We further showed that ZFPIP is able to
bind physically and in vivo to PBX1 and moreover, that it prevents the binding of
HOXA9/PBX complexes to their consensus DNA site. We suggest that ZFPIP is a new
type of PBX1 partner that could participate in PBX1 function during several
developmental pathways.

PMID: 17353115  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Blood. 2007 Jun 1;109(11):4732-8. Epub 2007 Feb 27.

Evidence that the Pim1 kinase gene is a direct target of HOXA9.

Hu YL(1), Passegué E, Fong S, Largman C, Lawrence HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Hematology Research, Medical Service, UCSF Veterans Affairs Medical Center,
University of California-San Francisco, 4150 Clement Street, San Francisco, CA
94121, USA.

The HOXA9 homeoprotein exerts dramatic effects in hematopoiesis. Enforced
expression of HOXA9 enhances proliferation of primitive blood cells, expands
hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), and leads to myeloid leukemia. Conversely, loss 
of HOXA9 inhibits proliferation and impairs HSC function. The pathways by which
HOXA9 acts are largely unknown, and although HOXA9 is a transcription factor, few
direct target genes have been identified. Our previous study suggested that HOXA9
positively regulates Pim1, an oncogenic kinase. The hematologic phenotypes of
Hoxa9- and Pim1-deficient animals are strikingly similar. Here we show that HOXA9
protein binds to the Pim1 promoter and induces Pim1 mRNA and protein in
hematopoietic cells. Pim1 protein is diminished in Hoxa9(-/-) cells, and Hoxa9
and Pim1 mRNA levels track together in early hematopoietic compartments.
Induction of Pim1 protein by HOXA9 increases the phosphorylation and inactivation
of the proapoptotic BAD protein, a target of Pim1. Hoxa9(-/-) cells show
increased apoptosis and decreased proliferation, defects that are ameliorated by 
reintroduction of Pim1. Thus Pim1 appears to be a direct transcriptional target
of HOXA9 and a mediator of its antiapoptotic and proproliferative effects in
early cells. Since HOXA9 is frequently up-regulated in acute myeloid leukemia,
Pim1 may be a therapeutic target in human disease.

PMCID: PMC1885524
PMID: 17327400  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Turk J Pediatr. 2006 Oct-Dec;48(4):380-2.

A case with proximal femoral focal deficiency (PFFD) and fibular A/hypoplasia
(FA/H) associated with urogenital anomalies.

Ergin H(1), Semerci CN, Bican M, Düzcan F, Yagci AB, Erdogan KM, Tufan AC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Pamukkale University Faculty of Medicine, Denizli,
Turkey.

Malformations of the lower limbs are rare and heterogeneous anomalies. Some
congenital anomalies involving face, gastrointestinal system, skeletal system,
urogenital system, heart, lung and diaphragma associated with lower limb
malformations have been described in the literature. Here, we report a case of
left proximal femoral focal deficiency (PFFD) together with fibular aplasia
associated with left undescended testis and hypospadias. The putative embryologic
mechanisms of lower limb defects and their possible association with lower
urogenital tract malformations are also discussed.

PMID: 17290579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. Leukemia. 2007 Mar;21(3):494-504. Epub 2007 Jan 25.

Molecular signature of CD34(+) hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells of
patients with CML in chronic phase.

Diaz-Blanco E(1), Bruns I, Neumann F, Fischer JC, Graef T, Rosskopf M, Brors B,
Pechtel S, Bork S, Koch A, Baer A, Rohr UP, Kobbe G, von Haeseler A, Gattermann
N, Haas R, Kronenwett R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Oncology and Clinical Immunology, University of
Duesseldorf, Duesseldorf, Germany.

In this study, we provide a molecular signature of highly enriched CD34+ cells
from bone marrow of untreated patients with chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) in
chronic phase in comparison with normal CD34+ cells using microarrays covering
8746 genes. Expression data reflected several BCR-ABL-induced effects in primary 
CML progenitors, such as transcriptional activation of the classical
mitogen-activated protein kinase pathway and the phosphoinositide-3 kinase/AKT
pathway as well as downregulation of the proapoptotic gene IRF8. Moreover, novel 
transcriptional changes in comparison with normal CD34+ cells were identified.
These include upregulation of genes involved in the transforming growth
factorbeta pathway, fetal hemoglobin genes, leptin receptor, sorcin, tissue
inhibitor of metalloproteinase 1, the neuroepithelial cell transforming gene 1
and downregulation of selenoprotein P. Additionally, genes associated with early 
hematopoietic stem cells (HSC) and leukemogenesis such as HoxA9 and MEIS1 were
transcriptionally activated. Differential expression of
differentiation-associated genes suggested an altered composition of the CD34+
cell population in CML. This was confirmed by subset analyses of chronic phase
CML CD34+ cells showing an increase of the proportion of megakaryocyte-erythroid 
progenitors, whereas the proportion of HSC and granulocyte-macrophage progenitors
was decreased in CML. In conclusion, our results give novel insights into the
biology of CML and could provide the basis for identification of new therapeutic 
targets.

PMID: 17252012  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Blood. 2007 May 1;109(9):3998-4005. Epub 2007 Jan 16.

Trib1 and Evi1 cooperate with Hoxa and Meis1 in myeloid leukemogenesis.

Jin G(1), Yamazaki Y, Takuwa M, Takahara T, Kaneko K, Kuwata T, Miyata S,
Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Genome Center, Japanese
Foundation for Cancer Research, 3-10-6 Ariake, Koto-ku, Tokyo 135-8550, Japan.

Cooperative activation of Meis1 and Hoxa9 perturbs myeloid differentiation and
eventually leads myeloid progenitors to leukemia, yet it remains to be clarified 
what kinds of subsequent molecular processes are required for development of
overt leukemia. To understand the molecular pathway in Hoxa9/Meis1-induced
leukemogenesis, retroviral insertional mutagenesis was applied using
retrovirus-mediated gene transfer. The mice that received Hoxa9/Meis1-transduced 
bone marrow cells developed acute myeloid leukemia (AML), and Trib1, Evi1, Ahi1, 
Raralpha, Pitpnb, and AK039950 were identified as candidate cooperative genes
located near common retroviral integration sites. Trib1 and Evi1 were
up-regulated due to retroviral insertions, and coexpression of these genes
significantly accelerated the onset of Hoxa9/Meis1-induced AML, suggesting that
Trib1 and Evi1 are the key collaborators. Furthermore, Trib1 by itself is a novel
myeloid oncogene, enhancing phosphorylation of ERK, resulting in inhibition of
apoptosis. These results demonstrate the importance of specific oncogene
interaction in myeloid leukemogenesis.

PMID: 17227832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Blood. 2007 May 1;109(9):4020-2. Epub 2007 Jan 3.

Flt3 is dispensable to the Hoxa9/Meis1 leukemogenic cooperation.

Morgado E(1), Albouhair S, Lavau C.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Unité Mixte de Recherche 7151,
Hôpital Saint-Louis, 1 Avenue Claude Vellefaux, 75010 Paris, France.

HOX genes, MEIS1, and FLT3 are frequently up-regulated in human myeloid
leukemias. Meis1 cooperates with Hox genes to induce leukemias in mice,
hypothetically the consequence of Meis1-induced Flt3 overexpression. To test
this, we compared the properties of Flt3(-/-) and Flt3(+/+) progenitors
transduced with Hoxa9 or Hoxa9/Meis1. In a myeloid clonogenic assay, Meis1
greatly enhanced the proliferation of Hoxa9-expressing cells, massively
up-regulating Flt3 protein. However, the transforming potential of Hoxa9/Meis1
was unaltered in Flt3(-/-) cells. All mice that received Hoxa9/Meis1-transduced
progenitors succumbed to rapid acute myeloid leukemias regardless of Flt3
genotype. Flt3 expression levels in leukemic blasts did not correlate with
parameters reflecting their proliferative rate or their impaired differentiation.
Furthermore, analysis of c-Myb expression levels in Hoxa9/Meis1-transformed cells
showed that the up-regulation of this critical downstream effector was
independent of Flt3. Altogether, our findings demonstrate that Flt3 is
dispensable to the oncogenic cooperation of Meis1 with Hoxa9.

PMID: 17202314  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. PLoS One. 2006 Dec 20;1:e47.

Cdx4 and menin co-regulate Hoxa9 expression in hematopoietic cells.

Yan J(1), Chen YX, Desmond A, Silva A, Yang Y, Wang H, Hua X.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Department of Cancer Biology,
Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States of America.

BACKGROUND: Transcription factor Cdx4 and transcriptional coregulator menin are
essential for Hoxa9 expression and normal hematopoiesis. However, the precise
mechanism underlying Hoxa9 regulation is not clear.
METHODS AND FINDINGS: Here, we show that the expression level of Hoxa9 is
correlated with the location of increased trimethylated histone 3 lysine 4
(H3K4M3). The active and repressive histone modifications co-exist along the
Hoxa9 regulatory region. We further demonstrate that both Cdx4 and menin bind to 
the same regulatory region at the Hoxa9 locus in vivo, and co-activate the
reporter gene driven by the Hoxa9 cis-elements that contain Cdx4 binding sites.
Ablation of menin abrogates Cdx4 access to the chromatin target and significantly
reduces both active and repressive histone H3 modifications in the Hoxa9 locus.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest a functional link among Cdx4, menin and histone
modifications in Hoxa9 regulation in hematopoietic cells.

PMCID: PMC1762371
PMID: 17183676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Cancer Res. 2006 Dec 15;66(24):11781-91.

Enforced expression of NUP98-HOXA9 in human CD34(+) cells enhances stem cell
proliferation.

Chung KY(1), Morrone G, Schuringa JJ, Plasilova M, Shieh JH, Zhang Y, Zhou P,
Moore MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine and Moore Laboratory, Cell Biology Program, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, USA.

The t(7;11)(p15;p15) translocation, observed in acute myelogenous leukemia and
myelodysplastic syndrome, generates a chimeric gene where the 5' portion of the
sequence encoding the human nucleoporin NUP98 protein is fused to the 3' region
of HOXA9. Here, we show that retroviral-mediated enforced expression of the
NUP98-HOXA9 fusion protein in cord blood-derived CD34(+) cells confers a
proliferative advantage in both cytokine-stimulated suspension cultures and
stromal coculture. This advantage is reflected in the selective expansion of
hematopoietic stem cells as measured in vitro by cobblestone area-forming cell
assays and in vivo by competitive repopulation of nonobese diabetic/severe
combined immunodeficient mice. NUP98-HOXA9 expression inhibited erythroid
progenitor differentiation and delayed neutrophil maturation in transduced
progenitors but strongly enhanced their serial replating efficiency. Analysis of 
the transcriptosome of transduced cells revealed up-regulation of several
homeobox genes of the A and B cluster as well as of Meis1 and Pim-1 and
down-modulation of globin genes and of CAAT/enhancer binding protein alpha. The
latter gene, when coexpressed with NUP98-HOXA9, reversed the enhanced
proliferation of transduced CD34(+) cells. Unlike HOXA9, the NUP98-HOXA9 fusion
was protected from ubiquitination mediated by Cullin-4A and subsequent
proteasome-dependent degradation. The resulting protein stabilization may
contribute to the leukemogenic activity of the fusion protein.

PMID: 17178874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Rinsho Ketsueki. 2006 Nov;47(11):1423-30.

[Homeobox genes and leukemia: the role of HOX-MEIS interaction].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakamura T.

PMID: 17176884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Mol Cancer Ther. 2006 Dec;5(12):3096-104.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors deplete enhancer of zeste 2 and associated
polycomb repressive complex 2 proteins in human acute leukemia cells.

Fiskus W(1), Pranpat M, Balasis M, Herger B, Rao R, Chinnaiyan A, Atadja P,
Bhalla K.

Author information: 
(1)Medical College of Georgia Cancer Center, 1120 15th Street, CN2101A, Augusta, 
GA 30912, USA.

Human enhancer of zeste 2 (EZH2) protein belongs to the multiprotein polycomb
repressive complex 2, which also includes suppressor of zeste 12 (SUZ12) and
embryonic ectoderm development (EED). The polycomb repressive complex 2 complex
possesses histone methyltransferase activity mediated by the Su(var)3-9, enhancer
of zeste, and trithorax domain of EZH2, which methylates histone H3 on lysine
(K)-27 (H3K27). In the present studies, we determined that treatment with the
hydroxamate histone deacetylase inhibitor LBH589 or LAQ824 depleted the protein
levels of EZH2, SUZ12, and EED in the cultured (K562, U937, and HL-60) and
primary human acute leukemia cells. This was associated with decreased levels of 
trimethylated and dimethylated H3K27, with concomitant depletion of the homeobox 
domain containing HOXA9 and of MEIS1 transcription factors. Knockdown of EZH2 by 
EZH2 small interfering RNA also depleted SUZ12 and EED, inhibited histone
methyltransferase activity, and reduced trimethylated and dimethylated H3K27
levels, with a concomitant loss of clonogenic survival of the cultured acute
myelogenous leukemia (AML) cells. EZH2 small interfering RNA sensitized the AML
cells to LBH589-mediated depletion of EZH2, SUZ12, and EED; loss of clonogenic
survival; and LBH589-induced differentiation of the AML cells. These findings
support the rationale to test anti-EZH2 treatment combined with hydroxamate
histone deacetylase inhibitors as an antileukemia epigenetic therapy, especially 
against AML with coexpression of EZH2, HOXA9, and MEIS1 genes.

PMID: 17172412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. J Leukoc Biol. 2007 Mar;81(3):711-9. Epub 2006 Dec 8.

Quantitative expansion of ES cell-derived myeloid progenitors capable of
differentiating into macrophages.

Odegaard JI(1), Vats D, Zhang L, Ricardo-Gonzalez R, Smith KL, Sykes DB, Kamps
MP, Chawla A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Metabolism and Gerontology, Department of Medicine 
and Graduate Program in Immunology, Stanford University School of Medicine,
Stanford, CA 94305-5103, USA.

Macrophages participate in physiologic and pathologic processes through
elaboration of distinct activation programs. Studies with macrophage cell systems
have revealed much concerning the importance of this pleiotropic cell; however,
these studies are inherently limited by three factors: heterogeneity of the
target cell population, poor capacity to elaborate various activation programs,
and lack of a genetically tractable model system for loss- and gain-of-function
studies. Although definitive, hematopoietic lineages can be isolated from
embryonic stem (ES) cells, these isolation procedures are inefficient and
time-consuming and require elaborate cell-sorting protocols. We therefore
examined whether myeloid precursors, capable of differentiating into macrophages,
could be conditionally expanded in vitro. Here, we report methods for selective
isolation and immortalization of ES cell-derived myeloid precursors by
estrogen-regulated HoxA9 protein. Using this new macrophage differentiation
system, an unlimited number of custom-designed macrophages with defined
functional characteristics can be generated from any targeted ES cell. In
combination with knockout or small interfering RNA knockdown technologies, this
macrophage differentiation system provides a powerful tool for high throughput
analysis of regulatory mechanisms controlling macrophage activation in health and
disease.

PMCID: PMC1904487
PMID: 17158607  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Endocrinology. 2007 Mar;148(3):1235-45. Epub 2006 Nov 30.

Posterior Hox gene expression and differential androgen regulation in the
developing and adult rat prostate lobes.

Huang L(1), Pu Y, Hepps D, Danielpour D, Prins GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 820 South Wood
Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Axis positioning and tissue determination during development involve coordinated 
expression of Hox genes throughout the body. The most posterior Hox gene clusters
are involved in prostate organogenesis. In the present study, we characterized
and compared the expression profiles of posterior (5') Hox genes in the separate 
lobes of the adult rat prostate gland, the coagulating gland, seminal vesicles,
and epididymis using quantitative real-time RT-PCR. These genes include Hoxa9-11,
Hoxa13, Hoxd13, and Hoxb13. We identified a unique Hox code for each of these
organs and propose that this contributes to the organ-specific and prostate
lobe-specific identities in the adult rat. Using the ventral prostate (VP) as a
model, we characterized the Hox genes expression patterns over time from birth
through adulthood. Expression levels of the three Hox13 genes and Hoxa10 were
significantly higher in the adult VP compared with the neonatal developing VP
suggesting an important role during adult homeostasis. In contrast, Hoxa9 and
Hoxa11 levels declined after morphogenesis suggesting a specific developmental
role. Overall, the Hoxb13 gene exhibited the most striking temporal and
organ-specific differences. Using in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry,
a distinct Hoxb13 anterior-to-posterior expression gradient was observed with the
highest expression levels in the VP luminal epithelial cells, moderate levels in 
the lateral prostate, and low expression in the dorsal prostate. An expression
gradient was also observed along the ductal length in all three prostate lobes
with strongest expression at the distal tips and limited expression in the
proximal ducts. After infection with a lentivirus expressing the Hoxb13 gene,
NRP-152 cells cultured under nondifferentiating conditions exhibited robust
cytokeratin 8 immunostain indicating that Hoxb13 expression drives luminal cell
differentiation in the rat epithelium. Androgen regulation of prostatic Hox gene 
expression was examined during development in vitro and after castration in the
adult rat. In the neonatal VP, all six Hox genes were significantly up-regulated 
by androgens, whereas none of the genes were affected by testosterone in the
lateral prostate. In the adult rat, castration resulted in up-regulation of Hoxa9
and Hoxa13 in the VP and down-regulation of Hoxb13 in the dorsal prostate and
lateral prostate. Taken together, we conclude that the prostatic Hox genes reach 
a destined expression level at specific developmental time points in the prostate
gland and possess differential androgenic regulation in a temporal and
lobe-specific manner. We suggest that this timely Hox code participates in
determining lobe-specific prostatic identity and cellular differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2276874
PMID: 17138648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Zhonghua Lao Dong Wei Sheng Zhi Ye Bing Za Zhi. 2006 Oct;24(10):591-3.

[Brain impairment induced by oral intake of lead and its effects on expression of
Hoxa9 Gen in Rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Li MJ(1), Xie L, Liu YZ, Liu YX, Ge Y, Zou W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Toxicology, Shandong Provincial Institute of Occupational Health
and Medicine, Jinan 250062, China.

OBJECTIVE: To observe effects of oral intake of lead on the expression of Hoxa9
gen and the ability of learning and memory and explore the the toxic molecular
mechanisms of lead.
METHODS: Thirty male Wistar rats were chosen and randomly divided into the low
lead dosage group, the high lead dosage group and the control group, 10 rats in
each group. The low lead dosage group and the high lead dosage group were given
respectively 0.06%, 0.2% lead acetate orally while the control group was given
distilled water orally. The Y-maze test was used to measure the ability of
learning and memory, the graphite heat atomic absorption spectrum method to
determine the lead concentration in blood and brain, and the in situ
hybridization (ISH) method to determine the expression of Hoxa9 mRNA in brain.
RESULTS: (1) The number of electric shocks of the lead poisoned rats were
significantly increased over time. The number of electric shocks of the lead
poisoning rats was much higher than that of the control group (P < 0.01) (at the 
end of the experiment, the low lead dosage group: 31.8 +/- 2.26; the high lead
dosage group: 37.3 +/- 1.70; the control group: 18.4 +/- 1.51). (2) The brain of 
the lead poisoned rats including the hippocampus, the cerebellum and the cerebral
cortex were significantly atrophic and the apoptosis and necrosis occurred in the
cells of the brain. Purkinje's cells in the cerebellum showed significant
necrosis and disappearance. The structure of brain in rats of the control group
demonstrated no atrophy. (3) The expression of Hoxa9 mRNA in the lead poisoned
rats was significantly decreased compared with the control group. There were few 
Hoxa9 positive cells in the brain of the lead poisoned rats, but many of them
were observed in the control group.
CONCLUSION: Lead may inhibit the expression of Hoxa9 and induce atrophy and
necrosis of brain, which gives rise to a damage of learning and memory.

PMID: 17096941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Lung. 2006 Nov-Dec;184(6):355-62. Epub 2006 Nov 3.

Comparative genomic hybridization array analysis and real-time PCR reveals
genomic copy number alteration for lung adenocarcinomas.

Choi JS(1), Zheng LT, Ha E, Lim YJ, Kim YH, Wang YP, Lim Y.

Author information: 
(1)Catholic Neuroscience Center, The Catholic University, Seoul, Korea.

Genomic alterations in lung cancer tissues have been observed in various studies.
To analyze the aberrations in the genome of lung cancer patients, we used array
comparative genomic hybridization (array CGH) in 15 lung adenocarcinoma (AdC)
tissues. Copy number gains and losses in chromosomal regions were detected and
corresponding genes were confirmed by real-time polymerase chain reaction (PCR). 
As for the results, several frequently altered loci, including gain of 16p (46%
of samples), were found, and the most common losses were found in 14q32.33 (26%
of samples). High-level DNA amplifications (> 0.8 log(2) ratio) were detected at 
1p, 5p, 7p, 9p, 11p, 11q, 12q, 14q, 16p, 17q, 19q, 20p, 21q, and 22q. A subset of
genes, gained or lost, was checked for over- or underrepresentation by means of
real-time PCR. The degree of fold change was highest in ECGF1 (22q13.33), HOXA9
(7p15.2), MAFG (17q25.3), TSC2 (16p13.3), and ICAM1 (19p13.2) genes and the 16p
chromosome terminal region (16p13.3pter). Taken together, these results show that
array CGH could be used as a powerful tool for identification of genomic
alteration for lung cancer, and the above-mentioned genes may represent potential
candidate genes in the study of lung cancer pathogenesis and diagnosis.

PMID: 17086460  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Development. 2006 Dec;133(23):4709-19. Epub 2006 Nov 1.

Cdx-Hox code controls competence for responding to Fgfs and retinoic acid in
zebrafish neural tissue.

Shimizu T(1), Bae YK, Hibi M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory for Vertebrate Axis Formation, Center for Developmental Biology,
RIKEN, 2-2-3 Minatojima-minamimachi, Kobe, Hyogo 650-0047, Japan.

Fibroblast growth factor (Fgf) and retinoic acid (RA) signals control the
formation and anteroposterior patterning of posterior hindbrain. They are also
involved in development processes in other regions of the embryo. Therefore,
responsiveness to Fgf and RA signals must be controlled in a context-dependent
manner. Inhibiting the caudal-related genes cdx1a and cdx4 in zebrafish embryos
caused ectopic expression of genes that are normally expressed in the posterior
hindbrain and anterior spinal cord, and ectopic formation of the hindbrain motor 
and commissure neurons in the posteriormost neural tissue. Combinational marker
analyses suggest mirror-image duplication in the Cdx1a/4-defective embryos, and
cell transplantation analysis further revealed that Cdx1a and Cdx4 repress a
posterior hindbrain-specific gene expression cell-autonomously in the posterior
neural tissue. Expression of fgfs and retinaldehyde dehydrogenase 2 suggested
that in the Cdx1a/4-defective embryos, the Fgf and RA signaling activities
overlap in the posterior body and display opposing gradients, compared with those
in the hindbrain region. We found that Fgf and RA signals were required for
ectopic expression. Expression of the posterior hox genes hoxb7a, hoxa9a or
hoxb9a, which function downstream of Cdx1a/4, or activator fusion genes of hoxa9a
or hoxb9a (VP16-hoxa9a, VP16-hoxb9a) suppressed this loss-of-function phenotype. 
These data suggest that Cdx suppresses the posterior hindbrain fate through
regulation of the posterior hox genes; the posterior Hox proteins function as
transcriptional activators and indirectly repress the ectopic expression of the
posterior hindbrain genes in the posterior neural tissue. Our results indicate
that the Cdx-Hox code modifies tissue competence to respond to Fgfs and RA in
neural tissue.

PMID: 17079270  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Blood. 2007 Feb 15;109(4):1472-8. Epub 2006 Oct 17.

The histone methyltransferase MLL is an upstream regulator of endothelial-cell
sprout formation.

Diehl F(1), Rössig L, Zeiher AM, Dimmeler S, Urbich C.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine III, University of
Frankfurt, Germany.

Posttranslational histone modification by acetylation or methylation regulates
gene expression. Here, we investigated the role of the histone lysine
methyltransferase MLL for angiogenic functions in human umbilical vein
endothelial cells. Suppression of MLL expression by siRNA or incubation with the 
pharmacologic methyltransferase inhibitor 5'-deoxy-5'-(methylthio)adenosine
significantly decreased endothelial-cell migration and capillary sprout
formation, indicating that methyltransferase activity is required for
proangiogenic endothelial-cell functions. Because the expression of homeodomain
transcription factors (Hox) is regulated by MLL, we elucidated the role of Hox
gene expression. MLL silencing was associated with reduced mRNA and protein
expression of HoxA9 and HoxD3, whereas HoxB3, HoxB4, HoxB5, and HoxB9 were not
altered. Overexpression of HoxA9 or HoxD3 partially compensated for impaired
migration in MLL siRNA-transfected endothelial cells, suggesting that HoxA9 and
HoxD3 both contribute to MLL-dependent migration. As a potential underlying
mechanism, MLL siRNA down-regulated mRNA and protein levels of the
HoxA9-dependent axon guidance factor EphB4. In contrast, MLL knockdown effects on
capillary sprouting were not rescued by HoxA9 or HoxD3 overexpression, indicating
that MLL affects additional targets required for 3-dimensional sprout formation. 
We conclude that MLL regulates endothelial-cell migration via HoxA9 and EphB4,
whereas sprout formation requires MLL-dependent signals beyond HoxA9 and HoxD3.

PMID: 17047146  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. J Pathol. 2006 Dec;210(4):441-9.

Novel epigenetically deregulated genes in testicular cancer include homeobox
genes and SCGB3A1 (HIN-1).

Lind GE(1), Skotheim RI, Fraga MF, Abeler VM, Esteller M, Lothe RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Prevention, Institute for Cancer Research,
Rikshospitalet-Radiumhospitalet Medical Centre, Oslo, Norway.

Testicular germ cell tumours (TGCTs) are classified into two main histological
subgroups: seminomas and non-seminomas. The latter comprise several subtypes:
embryonal carcinomas, yolk sac tumours, choriocarcinomas, and teratomas. These
embryonal and extra-embryonal-like differentiation lineages represent a
caricature of early normal development, and inactivation of gene expression
through promoter hypermethylation may therefore be of particular importance in
germ cell tumourigenesis. The promoter methylation status of ten candidate
genes-CDH13, DLX6, EMX2, HOXA9, HOXB5, MSX1, MSX2, RASSF1A, RUNX3, and SCGB3A1
(alias HIN-1)-was assessed by methylation-specific PCR in seven intratubular germ
cell neoplasias and 55 primary TGCTs. Furthermore, by a discovery-based global
approach, comparing cDNA microarray expression profiles of two germ cell tumour
cell lines before and after treatment with the demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine, a gene list of potentially epigenetic targets was
identified, from which CGGBP1, CGRRF1, SMARCC2, SORBS1, and XPA were analysed
further. Overall, the non-seminomas were significantly more often methylated than
were seminomas (p < 0.001). The three most frequently methylated genes among this
subtype were SCGB3A1 (54%), RASSF1A (29%), and HOXA9 (26%). CDH13 and HOXB5 were 
methylated at low frequencies (10-15%), and EMX2, MSX1, RUNX3, SORBS1, and XPA
only rarely (<10%). In conclusion, this study has identified several novel
epigenetically deregulated target genes in TGCT development, including homeobox
genes and SCGB3A1, suggesting that epigenetic inactivation of key genes in normal
development also has an important role in TGCTs.

PMID: 17029216  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Novartis Found Symp. 2006;274:214-23; discussion 223-7, 272-6.

Restoration of cardiac function with progenitor cells.

Urbich C(1), Rössig L, Dimmeler S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine III, University of
Frankfurt, Theodor-Stern-Kai 7, Frankfurt, Germany.

The biological limitations to cardiac regenerative growth create a clinical need 
to promote more efficient cardiac repair. Experimental studies and early-phase
clinical trials indicate that progenitor cells may be useful as a therapeutic
tool to improve heart function after myocardial ischaemia. This paper will
summarize experimental studies to determine (1) the mechanisms underlying
progenitor cell homing to ischaemic tissue and (2) to define transcription
factors involved in endothelial maturation of progenitor cells. Homing seems to
be assisted by a proteolytic enzyme, cathepsin L, which degrades the
extracellular matrix. In an in vitro assay, a cathepsin inhibitor prevented
different progenitor cell populations from passing through a matrigel layer. In
vivo, progenitor cells lacking cathepsin L had an impaired capacity to promote
neovascularization in ischaemic mouse limbs compared with normal, wild-type
cells. Differentiation of progenitor cells towards the endothelial phenotype
involves a member of the homeobox gene family, HoxA9. HoxA9 regulates endothelial
gene expression (eNOS, KDR, VE-cadherin). Moreover, HoxA9-deficient mice have a
severe impairment of neovascularization capacity after ischaemia. In the second
part of the paper, we describe clinical studies using bone marrow or the
peripheral blood-derived cells for functional recovery of patients with acute and
chronic heart failure (TOPCARE-AMI, TOPCARE-CHF). Whereas blood-derived and bone 
marrow-derived progenitor cells were equally effective in patients with acute
myocardial infarction, bone marrow-derived cells were significantly better than
blood-derived progenitor cells in patients with chronic ischaemic heart disease.

PMID: 17019814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Clin Invest. 2006 Oct;116(10):2707-16. Epub 2006 Sep 14.

Mll partial tandem duplication induces aberrant Hox expression in vivo via
specific epigenetic alterations.

Dorrance AM(1), Liu S, Yuan W, Becknell B, Arnoczky KJ, Guimond M, Strout MP,
Feng L, Nakamura T, Yu L, Rush LJ, Weinstein M, Leone G, Wu L, Ferketich A,
Whitman SP, Marcucci G, Caligiuri MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43220, USA.

We previously identified a rearrangement of mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) gene
(also known as ALL-1, HRX, and HTRX1), consisting of an in-frame partial tandem
duplication (PTD) of exons 5 through 11 in the absence of a partner gene,
occurring in approximately 4%-7% of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
and normal cytogenetics, and associated with a poor prognosis. The mechanism by
which the MLL PTD contributes to aberrant hematopoiesis and/or leukemia is
unknown. To examine this, we generated a mouse knockin model in which exons 5
through 11 of the murine Mll gene were targeted to intron 4 of the endogenous Mll
locus. Mll(PTD/WT) mice exhibit an alteration in the boundaries of normal
homeobox (Hox) gene expression during embryogenesis, resulting in axial skeletal 
defects and increased numbers of hematopoietic progenitor cells. Mll(PTD/WT) mice
overexpress Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and Hoxa10 in spleen, BM, and blood. An increase in
histone H3/H4 acetylation and histone H3 lysine 4 (Lys4) methylation within the
Hoxa7 and Hoxa9 promoters provides an epigenetic mechanism by which this
overexpression occurs in vivo and an etiologic role for MLL PTD gain of function 
in the genesis of AML.

PMCID: PMC1564428
PMID: 16981007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. J Virol. 2006 Oct;80(19):9544-56.

Delayed biosynthesis of varicella-zoster virus glycoprotein C: upregulation by
hexamethylene bisacetamide and retinoic acid treatment of infected cells.

Storlie J(1), Jackson W, Hutchinson J, Grose C.

Author information: 
(1)University Hospital/2501 JCP, 200 Hawkins Dr., Iowa City, IA 52242, USA.

In the course of examining the trafficking pathways of varicella-zoster virus
(VZV) glycoproteins gE, gI, gH, and gB, we discovered that all four are
synthesized within 4 to 6 h postinfection (hpi) in cultured cells. Thereafter,
they travel via the trans-Golgi network to the outer cell membrane. When we
carried out a similar analysis on VZV gC, we observed little gC biosynthesis in
the first 72 hpi. Further examination disclosed that gC was present in the
inocula of infected cells, but no new gC biosynthesis occurred during the first
24 to 48 h thereafter, during which time new synthesis of gE, gH, and major
capsid protein was easily detectable. Similarly, delayed gC biosynthesis was
confirmed with three different VZV strains and two different cell lines.
Bioinformatics analyses disclosed the presence of PBX/HOX consensus binding
domains in the promoter/enhancer regions of the genes for VZV gC and ORF4 protein
(whose orthologs transactivate gC in other herpesviruses). Bioinformatics
analysis also identified two HOXA9 activation regions on ORF4 protein. Treatment 
of infected cultures with chemicals known to induce the production of PBX/HOX
transcription proteins, namely, hexamethylene bisacetamide (HMBA) and retinoic
acid, led to more rapid gC biosynthesis. Immunoblotting demonstrated a fivefold
increase in the HOXA9 protein after HMBA treatment. In summary, these results
documented that gC was not produced during early VZV replication cycles,
presumably related to a deficiency in the PBX/HOX transcription factors.
Furthermore, these results explain the apparent spontaneous loss of VZV gC in
some passaged viruses, as well as other anomalous gC results.

PMCID: PMC1617256
PMID: 16973558  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Blood. 2006 Dec 1;108(12):3898-905. Epub 2006 Aug 15.

High meningioma 1 (MN1) expression as a predictor for poor outcome in acute
myeloid leukemia with normal cytogenetics.

Heuser M(1), Beutel G, Krauter J, Döhner K, von Neuhoff N, Schlegelberger B,
Ganser A.

Author information: 
(1)British Columbia Cancer Research Centre, 675 West 10th Ave, Vancouver, BC,
Canada. heuser.michael@mh-hannover.de

The translocation t(12;22) involves MN1 and TEL and is rarely found in acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). Recently, it has been shown in a mouse model that the
fusion protein MN1-TEL can promote growth of primitive hematopoietic progenitor
cells (HPCs) and, in cooperation with HOXA9, induce AML. We quantified MN1
expression by real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) 
in 142 adult patients with AML with normal cytogenetics treated uniformly in
trial AML-SHG 01/99. AML samples were dichotomized at the median MN1 expression. 
High MN1 expression was significantly correlated with unmutated NPM1 (P < .001), 
poor response to the first course of induction treatment (P = .02), a higher
relapse rate (P = .03), and shorter relapse-free (P = .002) and overall survivals
(P = .03). In multivariate analysis, MN1 expression was an independent prognostic
marker (P = .02) in addition to age and Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG)
performance status. Excluding patients with NPM1(mutated)/FLT3ITD(negative), high
MN1 expression was associated with shorter relapse-free survival (P = .057). MN1 
was highly expressed in some patients with acute lymphoblastic but not chronic
lymphocytic or myeloid leukemia. MN1 was highly expressed in HPCs compared with
differentiated cells and was down-regulated during in vitro differentiation of
CD34(+) cells, suggesting a functional role in HPCs. In conclusion, our data
suggest MN1 overexpression as a new prognostic marker in AML with normal
cytogenetics.

PMID: 16912223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Cancer Res. 2006 Jul 15;66(14):6947-54.

Gene expression profiling of acute myeloid leukemia with translocation
t(8;16)(p11;p13) and MYST3-CREBBP rearrangement reveals a distinctive signature
with a specific pattern of HOX gene expression.

Camós M(1), Esteve J, Jares P, Colomer D, Rozman M, Villamor N, Costa D, Carrió
A, Nomdedéu J, Montserrat E, Campo E.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopathology Unit, Hematology Department, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS,
University of Barcelona, Spain.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with translocation t(8;16)(p11;p13) is an infrequent
leukemia subtype with characteristic clinicobiological features. This
translocation leads to fusion of MYST3 (MOZ) and CREBBP (CBP) genes, probably
resulting in a disturbed transcriptional program of a myelomonocytic precursor.
Nonetheless, its gene expression profile is unknown. We have analyzed the gene
expression profile of 23 AML patients, including three with molecularly confirmed
MYST3-CREBBP fusion gene, using oligonucleotide U133A arrays (Affymetrix).
MYST3-CREBBP cases clustered together and clearly differentiated from samples
with PML-RARalpha, RUNX1-RUNX1T1, and CBFbeta-MYH11 rearrangements. The relative 
expression of 46 genes, selected according to their differential expression in
the high-density array study, was analyzed by low-density arrays in an additional
series of 40 patients, which included 7 MYST3-CREBBP AML cases. Thus, genes such 
as prolactin (PRL) and proto-oncogene RET were confirmed to be specifically
overexpressed in MYST3-CREBBP samples whereas genes such as CCND2, STAT5A, and
STAT5B were differentially underexpressed in this AML category. Interestingly,
MYST3-CREBBP AML exhibited a characteristic pattern of HOX expression, with
up-regulation of HOXA9, HOXA10, and cofactor MEIS1 and marked down-regulation of 
other homeobox genes. This profile, with overexpression of FLT3, HOXA9, MEIS1,
AKR7A2, CHD3, and APBA2, partially resembles that of AML with MLL rearrangement. 
In summary, this study shows the distinctive gene expression profile of
MYST3-CREBBP AML, with overexpression of RET and PRL and a specific pattern of
HOX gene expression.

PMID: 16849538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Am J Hematol. 2006 Oct;81(10):779-86.

Transcriptosome and serum cytokine profiling of an atypical case of
myelodysplastic syndrome with progression to acute myelogenous leukemia.

Mahadevan D(1), DiMento J, Croce KD, Riley C, George B, Fuchs D, Mathews T,
Wilson C, Lobell M.

Author information: 
(1)University of Arizona Cancer Center, Tucson, Arizona 85724, USA.
dmahadevan@azcc.arizona.edu

A Native American-Indian female presenting with anemia and thrombocytosis was
diagnosed with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS, refractory anemia). Over the course
of 5 years she developed cytopenias and periods of leukocytosis with normal bone 
marrow (BM) blast counts, features of an unclassifiable MDS/MPS syndrome. The
patient ultimately progressed to acute myelogenous leukemia (AML, FAB M2) and had
a normal karyotype throughout her course. The episodes of leukocytosis were
associated with infectious complications. Transformation to AML was characterized
by a BM blast percentage of 49%. Peripheral blood and BM samples were obtained
for serum protein analysis and gene expression profiling (GEP) to elucidate her
disease process. An ELISA assay of the serum analyzed approximately 80 cytokines,
which demonstrated that hepatocyte growth factor/scatter factor and insulin-like 
growth factor binding protein 1 were markedly elevated compared to normal. GEP
demonstrated a unique "tumor molecular profile," which included overexpression of
oncogenes (HOXA9, N-MYC, KOC1), proliferative genes (PAWR, DLG5, AKR1C3),
invasion/metastatic genes (FN1, N-CAM-1, ITGB5), pro-angiogenesis genes (c-Kit), 
and down regulation of tumor suppressor genes (SUI1, BARD1) and anti-apoptotic
genes (PGLYRP, SERPINB2, MPO). Hence, a biomics approach has provided insight
into elucidating disease mechanisms, molecular prognostic factors, and discovery 
of novel targets for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 16838325  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Cancer Res. 2006 Jul 1;66(13):6628-37.

NUP98-HOXA9 induces long-term proliferation and blocks differentiation of primary
human CD34+ hematopoietic cells.

Takeda A(1), Goolsby C, Yaseen NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University,
303 East Chicago Avenue, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

NUP98-HOXA9, the chimeric protein resulting from the t(7;11)(p15;p15) chromosomal
translocation, is a prototype of several NUP98 fusions that occur in
myelodysplastic syndromes and acute myeloid leukemia. We examined its effect on
differentiation, proliferation, and gene expression in primary human CD34+
hematopoietic cells. Colony-forming cell (CFC) assays in semisolid medium
combined with morphologic examination and flow cytometric immunophenotyping
revealed that NUP98-HOXA9 increased the numbers of erythroid precursors and
impaired both myeloid and erythroid differentiation. In continuous liquid
culture, cells transduced with NUP98-HOXA9 exhibited a biphasic growth curve with
initial growth inhibition followed by enhanced long-term proliferation,
suggesting an increase in the numbers of primitive self-renewing cells. This was 
confirmed by a dramatic increase in the numbers of long-term culture-initiating
cells, the most primitive hematopoietic cells detectable in vitro. To understand 
the molecular mechanisms underlying the effects of NUP98-HOXA9 on hematopoietic
cell proliferation and differentiation, oligonucleotide microarray analysis was
done at several time points over 16 days, starting at 6 hours posttransduction.
The early growth suppression was preceded by up-regulation of IFNbeta1 and
accompanied by marked up-regulation of IFN-induced genes, peaking at 3 days
posttransduction. In contrast, oncogenes such as homeobox transcription factors, 
FLT3, KIT, and WT1 peaked at 8 days or beyond, coinciding with increased
proliferation. In addition, several putative tumor suppressors and genes
associated with hematopoietic differentiation were repressed at later time
points. These findings provide a comprehensive picture of the changes in
proliferation, differentiation, and global gene expression that underlie the
leukemic transformation of human hematopoietic cells by NUP98-HOXA9.

PMID: 16818636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Dev Biol. 2006 Sep 15;297(2):493-507. Epub 2006 May 26.

A group 13 homeodomain is neither necessary nor sufficient for posterior
prevalence in the mouse limb.

Williams ME(1), Lehoczky JA, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109,
USA.

Posterior prevalence is the general property attributed to HOX proteins
describing the dominant effect of more posterior HOX proteins over the function
of anterior orthologs in common areas of expression. To explore the HOX group 13 
protein domains required for this property, we used the mouse Prx-1 promoter to
drive transgenic expression of Hox constructs throughout the entire limb bud
during development. This system allowed us to conclusively demonstrate a
hierarchy of Hox function in developing limbs. Furthermore, by substituting the
HOXD11 or HOXA9 homeodomain for that of HOXD13, we show that a HOXD13 homeodomain
is not necessary for posterior prevalence. Proximal expression of these chimeric 
proteins unexpectedly caused defects consistent with wild-type HOXD13 mediated
posterior prevalence. Moreover, group 13 non-homeodomain residues appear to
confer the property as proximal expression of HOXA9 containing the HOXD13
homeodomain did not result in limb reductions characteristic of HOXD13. These
data are most compatible with models of posterior prevalence based on
protein-protein interactions and support examination of the N-terminal
non-homeodomain regions of Hox group 13 proteins as necessary agents for
posterior prevalence.

PMID: 16806154  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2006 May-Jun;16(3):1289-96.

A subgroup of HOX Abd-B gene is differentially expressed in cervical cancer.

López R(1), Garrido E, Vázquez G, Piña P, Pérez C, Alvarado I, Salcedo M.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Genética y Biología Molecular, CINVESTAV-IPN,Unidad de
Investigación Médica en Enfermedades Oncológicas, Hospital de Oncología, Centro
Médico Nacional Siglo XXI-IMSS, Av. Cuauhtemoc 330, Col. Doctores, México DF
07780, Mexico.

The HOX genes are a family of transcription factors that bind to specific
sequences of DNA in target genes regulating their expression. The role of HOX
genes in adult cell differentiation is still obscure, but growing evidence
suggests that they may play an important role in the development of cancer. In
order to study the role of the HOX Abd-B genes in cervical cancer, we analyzed
their expression in cervical tissues. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction and RNA in situ hybridization were used to detect HOX Abd-B messenger
RNA expression in nine normal cervical tissues and ten cervical carcinomas. The
normal tissues were human papillomavirus (HPV) negative, whereas all invasive
carcinomas included were HPV16 positive. In this study, we show that HOXA9, A10, 
A11, A13, B9, D11, and D13 genes are expressed in both the epithelium of normal
tissues and neoplastic cells from squamous cervical carcinomas. Interestingly,
the HOXC10 and D12 genes were not expressed in any cervical tissues; however,
HOXB13, C9, C11, C12, C13, D9, and D10 genes were expressed only in the tumoral
tissues but not in the normal cervix. Our findings suggest that the expression of
HOXB13, D9, D10, and HOXC cluster (HOXC9, C11-C13) genes might be an important
step involved in cervical cancer.

PMID: 16803519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Cancer Res. 2006 Jun 15;66(12):6080-6.

Silencing of Peroxiredoxin 2 and aberrant methylation of 33 CpG islands in
putative promoter regions in human malignant melanomas.

Furuta J(1), Nobeyama Y, Umebayashi Y, Otsuka F, Kikuchi K, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Carcinogenesis Division, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tsukiji,
Tokyo, Japan.

Aberrant methylation of promoter CpG islands (CGI) is involved in silencing of
tumor suppressor genes and is also a potential cancer biomarker. Here, to
identify CGIs aberrantly methylated in human melanomas, we did a genome-wide
search using methylation-sensitive representational difference analysis. CGIs in 
putative promoter regions of 34 genes (ABHD9, BARHL1, CLIC5, CNNM1, COL2A1,
CPT1C, DDIT4L, DERL3, DHRS3, DPYS, EFEMP2, FAM62C, FAM78A, FLJ33790, GBX2, GPR10,
GPRASP1, HOXA9, HOXD11, HOXD12, HOXD13, p14ARF, PAX6, PRDX2, PTPRG, RASD1, RAX,
REC8L1, SLC27A3, TGFB2, TLX2, TMEM22, TMEM30B, and UNC5C) were found to be
methylated in at least 1 of 13 melanoma cell lines but not in two cultured normal
melanocytes. Among these genes, Peroxiredoxin 2 (PRDX2) was expressed in normal
melanocytes, and its expression was lost in melanomas with methylation. The loss 
of expression was restored by treatment of melanomas with a demethylating agent
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine. In surgical melanoma specimens, methylation of PRDX2 was 
detected in 3 of 36 (8%). Furthermore, immunohistochemical analysis of PRDX2
showed that disappearance of immunoreactivity tends to associate with its
methylation. PRDX2 was recently reported to be a negative regulator of
platelet-derived growth factor signaling, and its silencing was suggested to be
involved in melanomas. On the other hand, 12 CGIs were methylated in >or=9 of the
13 melanoma cell lines and are considered as candidate melanoma biomarkers.

PMID: 16778180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. J Biol Chem. 2006 Aug 25;281(34):24790-802. Epub 2006 Jun 9.

Tumor suppressor p16INK4A regulates polycomb-mediated DNA hypermethylation in
human mammary epithelial cells.

Reynolds PA(1), Sigaroudinia M, Zardo G, Wilson MB, Benton GM, Miller CJ, Hong C,
Fridlyand J, Costello JF, Tlsty TD.

Author information: 
(1)Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of California, San Francisco, San
Francisco, California 94143-0511, USA.

Alterations in DNA methylation are important in cancer, but the acquisition of
these alterations is poorly understood. Using an unbiased global screen for CpG
island methylation events, we have identified a non-random pattern of DNA
hypermethylation acquired in p16-repressed cells. Interestingly, this pattern
included loci located upstream of a number of homeobox genes. Upon removal of
p16(INK4A) activity in primary human mammary epithelial cells, polycomb
repressors, EZH2 and SUZ12, are up-regulated and recruited to HOXA9, a locus
expressed during normal breast development and epigenetically silenced in breast 
cancer. We demonstrate that at this targeted locus, the up-regulation of polycomb
repressors is accompanied by the recruitment of DNA methyltransferases and the
hypermethylation of DNA, an endpoint, which we show to be dependent on SUZ12
expression. These results demonstrate a causal role of p16(INK4A) disruption in
modulating DNA hypermethylation, and identify a dynamic and active process
whereby epigenetic modulation of gene expression is activated as an early event
in breast tumor progression.

PMID: 16766534  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Int J Cancer. 2006 Oct 15;119(8):1829-36.

Transcriptional census of 36 microdissected colorectal cancers yields a gene
signature to distinguish UICC II and III.

Groene J(1), Mansmann U, Meister R, Staub E, Roepcke S, Heinze M, Klaman I,
Brümmendorf T, Hermann K, Loddenkemper C, Pilarsky C, Mann B, Adams HP, Buhr HJ, 
Rosenthal A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General, Vascular and Thoracic Surgery, Campus Benjamin
Franklin, Charité Universitaetsmedizin, Berlin, Germany.
mansmann@ibe.med.uni-muenchen.de

Erratum in
    Int J Cancer. 2007 Jul 15;121(2):466.

UICC stage II and III colorectal cancers (CRC) differ fundamentally in prognosis 
and therapeutic concepts. To analyze differential gene expression between both
stages and to establish a relationship between molecular background and clinical 
presentation, tumor material from 36 unselected consecutive patients presenting
with sporadic CRC, 18 UICC stage II and 18 UICC stage III, were laser
microdissected to separate epithelial tumor cells. Gene expression levels were
measured using U133A Affymetrix gene arrays. Twelve CRC associated signal
transduction pathways as well as all 22,000 probe sets were screened for
differential gene expression. We identified a signature consisting of 45 probe
sets that allowed discrimination between UICC stage II and stage III with a rate 
of correct classification of about 80%. The most distinctive elements in this
signature were the gene GSTP-binding elongation factor (GSPT2) and the
transcription factor HOXA9. Differential expression of these genes was confirmed 
by quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction (p(HOXA9) = 0.04, p(GSTP2) = 
0.02). Despite the reliability of the presented data, there was no substantial
differential expression of genes in cancer-related pathways. However, the
comparison with recently published data corroborates the 45 gene signature
showing structural agreement in the direction of fold changes of gene expression 
levels for our set of genes chosen to discriminate between both stages.

Copyright 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16721809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. Haematologica. 2006 May;91(5 Suppl):ECR09.

Two consecutive immunophenotypic switches in a child with MLL-rearranged acute
lymphoblastic leukemia.

Germano G(1), Pigazzi M, del Giudice L, Campo Dell'Orto M, Spinelli M, Zangrando 
A, Paolucci P, Ladogana S, Basso G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pediatric Onco-Hematology, Department of Pediatrics, University 
Hospital of Padua, Padua, Italy.

An 18-month-old girl was diagnosed with pre-pre-B ALL/t(4;11) leukemia, which
during the treatment and after matched bone marrow transplantation (BMT),
underwent two consecutive switches from lymphoid to myeloid lineage and vice
versa. The high expression of HOXA9 and FLT3 genes remaining genotypically stable
in a leukemia throughout phenotypic switches, suggests that this leukemia may
have originated as a common B/myeloid progenitors.

PMID: 16709517  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Genes Dev. 2006 May 15;20(10):1321-30.

MOZ is essential for maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells.

Katsumoto T(1), Aikawa Y, Iwama A, Ueda S, Ichikawa H, Ochiya T, Kitabayashi I.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Oncology Division, National Cancer Institute, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Monocytic leukemia zinc-finger protein (MOZ), a MYST family histone
acetyltransferase, is involved in the chromosome translocations associated with
acute myeloid leukemia. MOZ acts as a transcriptional coactivator for AML1, which
is essential for establishment of definitive hematopoiesis. To investigate the
roles of MOZ in normal hematopoiesis, we generated MOZ-null mice. MOZ-/- mice
died around embryonic day 15 (E15). In MOZ-/- E14.5 embryos, hematopoietic stem
cells, lineage-committed progenitors, and B lineage cells were severely reduced. 
On the other hand, arrest of erythroid maturation and elevated myeloid lineage
populations were observed. MOZ-deficient fetal liver cells could not reconstitute
hematopoiesis of recipients after transplantation. Analysis using microarray and 
flow cytometry revealed that expression of thrombopoietin receptor (c-Mpl),
HoxA9, and c-Kit was down-regulated. These results show that MOZ is required for 
maintenance of hematopoietic stem cells, and that it plays a role in
differentiation of erythroid and myeloid cells. Some aspects of the MOZ-/-
phenotype are similar to that observed in PU.1-deficient mice. MOZ was able to
interact with PU.1 and activate PU.1-dependent transcription, thus suggesting a
physical and functional link between PU.1 and MOZ.

PMCID: PMC1472906
PMID: 16702405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. Cancer Res. 2006 May 1;66(9):4584-90.

Trans-repressive effect of NUP98-PMX1 on PMX1-regulated c-FOS gene through
recruitment of histone deacetylase 1 by FG repeats.

Bai XT(1), Gu BW, Yin T, Niu C, Xi XD, Zhang J, Chen Z, Chen SJ.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Medical Genomics and Shanghai Institute of Hematology,
Ruijin Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai,
P.R. China.

The formation of fusion genes between NUP98 and members of the HOX family
represents a critical factor for the genesis of acute leukemia or acute
transformation of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). To gain insights into the
molecular mechanisms underlying the leukemogenesis of NUP98-HOX fusion products, 
we cloned NUP98-PMX1 from a CML-blast crisis patient with t(1;11) as a secondary 
chromosomal translocation, and functionally studied the fusion products in detail
through various molecular and protein biochemical assays. In addition to many
interesting features, we have found that the NUP98-PMX1 fusion protein exerts a
repressive effect on PMX1 or serum response factor-mediated c-FOS activation,
probably through the recruitment of a common corepressor histone deacetylase 1 by
FG domains of the NUP98-PMX1 fusion protein. Moreover, we have provided evidence 
that the FG domains of NUP98-PMX1 and two other NUP98-containing fusion proteins,
i.e., NUP98-HOXA9 and NUP98-HOXC11, all exhibit dual binding ability to both CREB
binding protein, a coactivator, and histone deacetylase 1, a corepressor.
Accordingly, we have hypothesized that this dual binding activity is shared by
most, if not all, NUP98-HOX-involved fusion proteins, enabling these fusion
proteins to act as both trans-activators and trans-repressors, and contributing
to the genesis of acute leukemia or acute transformation of CML.

PMID: 16651408  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Mol Cell Biol. 2006 May;26(10):3902-16.

Persistent transactivation by meis1 replaces hox function in myeloid
leukemogenesis models: evidence for co-occupancy of meis1-pbx and hox-pbx
complexes on promoters of leukemia-associated genes.

Wang GG(1), Pasillas MP, Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Pathology Graduate Program, Leichtag
249B, University of California at San Diego School of Medicine, 9500 Gilman Dr., 
La Jolla, California 92093, USA. gawang@ucsd.edu

Homeobox transcription factors Meis1 and Hoxa9 promote hematopoietic progenitor
self-renewal and cooperate to cause acute myeloid leukemia (AML). While Hoxa9
alone blocks the differentiation of nonleukemogenic myeloid cell-committed
progenitors, coexpression with Meis1 is required for the production of
AML-initiating progenitors, which also transcribe a group of hematopoietic stem
cell genes, including Cd34 and Flt3 (defined as Meis1-related leukemic signature 
genes). Here, we use dominant trans-activating (Vp16 fusion) or trans-repressing 
(engrailed fusion) forms of Meis1 to define its biochemical functions that
contribute to leukemogenesis. Surprisingly, Vp16-Meis1 (but not engrailed-Meis1) 
functioned as an autonomous oncoprotein that mimicked combined activities of
Meis1 plus Hoxa9, immortalizing early progenitors, inducing low-level expression 
of Meis1-related signature genes, and causing leukemia without coexpression of
exogenous or endogenous Hox genes. Vp16-Meis1-mediated transformation required
the Meis1 function of binding to Pbx and DNA but not its C-terminal domain (CTD).
The absence of endogenous Hox gene expression in Vp16-Meis1-immortalized
progenitors allowed us to investigate how Hox alters gene expression and cell
biology in early hematopoietic progenitors. Strikingly, expression of Hoxa9 or
Hoxa7 stimulated both leukemic aggressiveness and transcription of Meis1-related 
signature genes in Vp16-Meis1 progenitors. Interestingly, while the Hoxa9
N-terminal domain (NTD) is essential for cooperative transformation with
wild-type Meis1, it was dispensable in Vp16-Meis1 progenitors. The fact that a
dominant transactivation domain fused to Meis1 replaces the essential functions
of both the Meis1 CTD and Hoxa9 NTD suggests that Meis-Pbx and Hox-Pbx (or
Hox-Pbx-Meis) complexes co-occupy cellular promoters that drive leukemogenesis
and that Meis1 CTD and Hox NTD cooperate in gene activation. Chromatin
immunoprecipitation confirmed co-occupancy of Hoxa9 and Meis1 on the Flt3
promoter.

PMCID: PMC1488994
PMID: 16648484  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. J Clin Pathol. 2006 Oct;59(10):1059-65. Epub 2006 Apr 27.

Comparison of gene-expression profiles in parallel bone marrow and peripheral
blood samples in acute myeloid leukaemia by real-time polymerase chain reaction.

Sakhinia E(1), Farahangpour M, Tholouli E, Liu Yin JA, Hoyland JA, Byers RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Faculty of Medical and Human Sciences, Division of Laboratory and Regenerative
Medicine, School of Medicine, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

BACKGROUND: Gene signatures (Indicator genes) in bone marrow that provide more
precise prognostication in haematological malignancy have been identified by
microarray expression studies. It would be beneficial to measure these diagnostic
signatures in peripheral blood.
AIMS: To determine the degree of correspondence of gene expression for a set of
Indicator genes between bone marrow and peripheral blood in acute myeloid
leukaemia (AML).
METHODS: Parallel bone marrow aspirate and peripheral blood samples were obtained
from 19 patients diagnosed with AML and mononuclear cells isolated from both
sample types. mRNA was globally amplified by polyadenylated real-time polymerase 
chain reaction (polyA RT-PCR); the expression of 15 AML Indicator genes,
identified from previous microarray studies, was measured by RT-PCR. All values
were normalised to the mean expression of three housekeeping genes (IF2-beta, GAP
and RbS9) and were statistically compared using SPSS software.
RESULTS: No significant difference in expression between bone marrow and
peripheral blood was observed for 10 of the genes (leptin receptor, CD33,
adipsin, proteoglycan 1, MB-1, cyclin D3, hSNF2b, proteasome iota, HkrT-1 and
E2A), indicating its possible use in monitoring disease activity in peripheral
blood samples, whereas c-myb, HOXA9, LYN, cystatin c and LTC4s showed
significantly different expression between bone marrow and peripheral blood
samples.
CONCLUSION: These results indicate a possible use for the method in monitoring
AML in peripheral blood by RT-PCR measurement of Indicator genes. In addition,
the initial use of polyA PCR facilitates translation to very small clinical
samples, including fractionated cell populations, of particular importance for
monitoring haematological malignancy.

PMCID: PMC1861748
PMID: 16644881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Leuk Res. 2006 Nov;30(11):1453-6. Epub 2006 Apr 19.

HOXA9 gene expression in the chronic myeloid leukemia progression.

Tedeschi FA(1), Zalazar FE.

Author information: 
(1)Facultad de Bioquimica y Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional del
Litoral, Santa Fe, Argentina.

In the present work we study the HOXA9 expression in sequential samples of
patients with CML using RT-PCR. To obtain a semi-quantitative value, the HOXA9
expression was referred to the ABL gene in the same sample. The relative HOXA9
expression was higher in patients in the accelerated phase of the disease
(p<0.005). Interestingly, a patient with poorer prognosis (high Sokal's score),
showing the highest HOXA9/ABL ratio, quickly entered a blast crisis and died 5
months later. These first results could be considered as an evidence of an actual
biological phenomenon that could provide additional information about the HOXA9
role in the CML progression.

PMID: 16630659  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Jun;91(6):2366-72. Epub 2006 Mar 21.

Thrombin and interleukin-1beta regulate HOXA10 expression in human term decidual 
cells: implications for preterm labor.

Sarno JL(1), Schatz F, Lockwood CJ, Huang ST, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Fertility, Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of
Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

CONTEXT: Preterm delivery is commonly caused by intraamniotic infection with
expression of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1beta) or by abruption resulting in
generation of decidual thrombin. Although human parturition is not preceded by
overt progesterone withdrawal, progesterone resistance likely leads to labor. The
uteri of Hoxa10(-/-) mice demonstrate progesterone resistance; several genes,
including prostaglandin receptors, are inappropriately regulated in response to
progesterone.
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that IL-1beta or thrombin would decrease HOXA10
expression, contributing to the progestin-resistant environment. We analyzed
expression of HOX genes and their regulation by IL-1beta or thrombin in decidual 
cells.
DESIGN AND SETTING: We conducted an in vitro experiment at an academic medical
center.
INTERVENTION: Term decidual cells were treated with estradiol (E(2)) or E(2) plus
medroxyprogesterone acetate followed by addition of thrombin or IL-1beta.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: HOX mRNA was evaluated by microarray and confirmed by
quantitative RT-PCR. Protein expression was detected using immunohistochemistry
and Western analysis.
RESULTS: HOXA9, HOXA10, and HOXA11 were expressed in decidual cells and regulated
by IL-1beta and thrombin. HOXA10 was further analyzed because of its association 
with progesterone responsiveness. After E(2) treatment, IL-1beta and thrombin
decreased HOXA10 mRNA by 94 and 81%, respectively. After E(2) plus
medroxyprogesterone acetate treatment, IL-1beta and thrombin resulted in an 86
and 72% decrease in HOXA10 mRNA, respectively. A similar decrease was noted in
HOXA10 protein expression.
CONCLUSION: The expression of HOXA10 protein at term indicates that it may have a
role in maintaining decidual cell phenotype and pregnancy. The dramatic decrease 
of HOXA10 in response to IL-1beta or thrombin may contribute to progestin
resistance in preterm labor, mimicking progesterone resistance seen in
Hoxa10(-/-) mice.

PMID: 16551735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. EMBO J. 2006 Apr 5;25(7):1469-80. Epub 2006 Mar 9.

TGFbeta/BMP inhibits the bone marrow transformation capability of Hoxa9 by
repressing its DNA-binding ability.

Wang N(1), Kim HG, Cotta CV, Wan M, Tang Y, Klug CA, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL
35294, USA.

Homeobox (Hox) gene mutations and their altered expressions are frequently linked
to human leukemia. Here, we report that transforming growth factor beta
(TGFbeta)/bone morphogenetic protein (BMP) inhibits the bone marrow
transformation capability of Hoxa9 and Nup98-Hoxa9, the chimeric fusion form of
Hoxa9 identified in human acute myeloid leukemia (AML), through Smad4, the common
Smad (Co-Smad) in the TGFbeta/BMP signaling pathway. Smad4 interacts directly
with the homeodomain of Hoxa9 and blocks the ability of Nup98-Hoxa9 to bind DNA, 
thereby suppressing its ability to regulate downstream gene transcription.
Mapping data revealed that the amino-terminus of Smad4 mediates this interaction 
and overexpression of the Hoxa9 interaction domain of Smad4 was sufficient to
inhibit the enhanced serial replating ability of primary bone marrow cells
induced by Nup98-Hoxa9. These studies establish a novel mechanism by which
TGFbeta/BMP regulates hematopoiesis and suggest that modification of Hox
DNA-binding activity may serve as a novel therapeutic intervention for those
leukemias that involve deregulation of Hox.

PMCID: PMC1440313
PMID: 16525506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2006 Jun;45(6):575-82.

Acute monocytic leukemia with coexpression of minor BCR-ABL1 and PICALM-MLLT10
fusion genes along with overexpression of HOXA9.

Sindt A(1), Deau B, Brahim W, Staal A, Visanica S, Villarese P, Rault JP,
Macintyre E, Delabesse E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genetics, CHU Brabois, Nancy, France.

The t(9;22)(q34;q11) translocation occurs in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and
adult B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), leading to fusion of BCR to ABL1
and constitutive activation of ABL1 tyrosine kinase activity. The main BCR-ABL1
breakpoints result in P190 BCR-ABL1 or P210 BCR-ABL1 fusion proteins. The latter 
is found in almost all cases of CML and in one third of the cases of
t(9;22)-positive adult B-ALL. P190 BCR-ABL1 is found in the remaining two thirds 
of t(9;22)-positive adult B-ALL cases but only exceptionally in CML. We describe 
here the first case of t(9;22)(q34;q11) associated with t(10;11)(p13;q14) in
acute monocytic leukemia. The recurrent t(10;11)(p13;q14) translocation, usually 
found in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and T-ALL, merges PICALM to MLLT10. RT-PCR 
enabled identification of PICALM-MLLT10 and BCR-ABL1 e1-a2 fusion transcripts; in
the context of chronic and acute myeloid leukemia, the latter usually has a
monocytic presentation. We also identified overexpression of HOXA9, a gene
essential to myeloid differentiation that is expressed in PICALM-MLLT10 and
MLL-rearranged acute leukemias. This case fits with and extends a recently
proposed multistage AML model in which constitutive activation of tyrosine
kinases by mutations (BCR-ABL1) are associated with deregulation of transcription
factors central to myeloid differentiation (HOXA9 secondary to PICALM-MLLT10).

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16518848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. Blood. 2006 Jul 1;108(1):297-304. Epub 2006 Feb 28.

c-Myb is an essential downstream target for homeobox-mediated transformation of
hematopoietic cells.

Hess JL(1), Bittner CB, Zeisig DT, Bach C, Fuchs U, Borkhardt A, Frampton J,
Slany RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI,
USA.

Abdominal-type HoxA genes in combination with Meis1 are well-documented
on-cogenes in various leukemias but it is unclear how they exert their
transforming function. Here we used a system of conditional transformation by an 
inducible mixed lineage leukemia-eleven-nineteen leukemia (MLL-ENL) oncoprotein
to overexpress Hoxa9 and Meis1 in primary hematopoietic cells. Arrays identified 
c-Myb and a c-Myb target (Gstm1) among the genes with the strongest response to
Hoxa9/Meis1. c-Myb overexpression was verified by Northern blot and quantitative 
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR). Also MLL-ENL activated 
c-Myb through up-regulation of Hoxa9 and Meis1. Consequently, short-term
suppression of c-Myb by small inhibitory RNA (siRNA) efficiently inhibited
transformation by MLL-ENL but did not impair transformation by transcription
factor E2A-hepatic leukemia factor (E2A-HLF). The anti c-Myb siRNA effect was
abrogated by coexpression of a c-Myb derivative with a mutated siRNA target site.
The introduction of a dominant-negative c-Myb mutant had a similar but weaker
effect on MLL-ENL-mediated transformation. Hematopoietic precursors from mice
homozygous for a hypo-morphic c-Myb allele were more severely affected and could 
be transformed neither by MLL-ENL nor by E2A-HLF. Ectopic expression of c-Myb
induced a differentiation block but c-Myb alone was not transforming in a
replating assay similar to Hoxa9/Meis1. These results suggest that c-Myb is
essential but not sufficient for Hoxa9/Meis1 mediated transformation.

PMCID: PMC1895838
PMID: 16507773  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Blood. 2006 Jul 15;108(2):622-9. Epub 2006 Feb 9.

Molecular dissection of Meis1 reveals 2 domains required for leukemia induction
and a key role for Hoxa gene activation.

Mamo A(1), Krosl J, Kroon E, Bijl J, Thompson A, Mayotte N, Girard S, Bisaillon
R, Beslu N, Featherstone M, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Stem Cells, Institute of Research in
Immunology and Cancer (IRIC), Université de Montréal, QC, Canada.

The Hoxa9 and Meis1 genes represent important oncogenic collaborators activated
in a significant proportion of human leukemias with genetic alterations in the
MLL gene. In this study, we show that the transforming property of Meis1 is
modulated by 3 conserved domains, namely the Pbx interaction motif (PIM), the
homeodomain, and the C-terminal region recently described to possess
transactivating properties. Meis1 and Pbx1 interaction domain-swapping mutants
are dysfunctional separately, but restore the full oncogenic activity of Meis1
when cotransduced in primary cells engineered to overexpress Hoxa9, thus implying
a modular nature for PIM in Meis1-accelerated transformation. Moreover, we show
that the transactivating domain of VP16 can restore, and even enhance, the
oncogenic potential of the Meis1 mutant lacking the C-terminal 49 amino acids. In
contrast to Meis1, the fusion VP16-Meis1 is spontaneously oncogenic, and all
leukemias harbor genetic activation of endogenous Hoxa9 and/or Hoxa7, suggesting 
that Hoxa gene activation represents a key event required for the oncogenic
activity of VP16-Meis1.

PMID: 16469876  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Jan 24;103(4):1018-23. Epub 2006 Jan 13.

The tumor suppressor menin regulates hematopoiesis and myeloid transformation by 
influencing Hox gene expression.

Chen YX(1), Yan J, Keeshan K, Tubbs AT, Wang H, Silva A, Brown EJ, Hess JL, Pear 
WS, Hua X.

Author information: 
(1)Abramson Family Cancer Research Institute, Department of Cancer Biology,
Abramson Cancer Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA 19104-6160, 
USA.

Menin is the product of the tumor suppressor gene Men1 that is mutated in the
inherited tumor syndrome multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1). Menin has
been shown to interact with SET-1 domain-containing histone 3 lysine 4 (H3K4)
methyltransferases including mixed lineage leukemia proteins to regulate homeobox
(Hox) gene expression in vitro. Using conditional Men1 knockout mice, we have
investigated the requirement for menin in hematopoiesis and myeloid
transformation. Men1 excision causes reduction of Hoxa9 expression, colony
formation by hematopoietic progenitors, and the peripheral white blood cell
count. Menin directly activates Hoxa9 expression, at least in part, by binding to
the Hoxa9 locus, facilitating methylation of H3K4, and recruiting the methylated 
H3K4 binding protein chd1 to the locus. Consistent with signaling downstream of
menin, ectopic expression of both Hoxa9 and Meis1 rescues colony formation
defects in Men1-excised bone marrow. Moreover, Men1 excision also suppresses
proliferation of leukemogenic mixed lineage leukemia-AF9
fusion-protein-transformed myeloid cells and Hoxa9 expression. These studies
uncover an important role for menin in both normal hematopoiesis and myeloid
transformation and provide a mechanistic understanding of menin's function in
these processes that may be used for therapy.

PMCID: PMC1326489
PMID: 16415155  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. Cancer Res. 2005 Dec 15;65(24):11367-74.

Leukemogenic MLL fusion proteins bind across a broad region of the Hox a9 locus, 
promoting transcription and multiple histone modifications.

Milne TA(1), Martin ME, Brock HW, Slany RK, Hess JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pennsylvania School of Medicine,
Philadelphia, USA.

Chromosome translocations involving the mixed lineage leukemia gene MLL are
associated with aggressive acute leukemias in both children and adults.
Leukemogenic MLL fusion proteins delete the MLL SET domain Lys(4)
methyltransferase activity and fuse MLL to 1 of >40 different translocation
partners. Some MLL fusion proteins involve nuclear proteins that are
transcriptional activators, whereas others have transcriptional activating
activity but instead dimerize the truncated MLL molecule. Both types of MLL
fusion proteins enforce persistent expression of Hox a9 and Meis1, which is
pivotal for leukemogenesis through mechanisms that remain obscure. Here, we show 
that nuclear and dimerizable forms of MLL bind with a similar pattern to the Hox 
a9 locus that overlaps the distribution of wild-type MLL and deregulate
transcription of three isoforms of Hox a9. Induction of MLL fusion protein
activity is associated with increased levels of histone acetylation and Lys(4)
methylation at Hox target genes. In addition, the MLL-ENL-ER protein, but not
dimerized MLL, also induces dimethylation of histone H3 at Lys(79), suggesting
alternative mechanisms for transcriptional activation.

PMID: 16357144  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. Cell Cycle. 2005 Dec;4(12):1729-31. Epub 2005 Dec 22.

Thrombopoietin stimulates vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF)
production in hematopoietic stem cells.

Kirito K(1), Kaushansky K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, University of Yamanashi, Yamanashi, Japan.

Thrombopoietin (TPO) is a pivotal and nonredundant hematopoietic cytokine,
supporting the survival, self-renewal activity and proliferation of hematopoietic
stem and progenitor cells, the growth and differentiation of megakaryocytes, and 
the functional activation of their progeny, blood platelets. TPO exerts these
effects through regulating the abundance or subcellular localization of several
transcription factors, including the homeodomain proteins HOXB4 and HOXA9. In
addition to these effects, TPO helps orchestrate a cytokine-network in the bone
marrow microenvironment that supports hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) function. In 
recent studies we have shown that TPO stimulates production of vascular
endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF), another cytokine vital for HSC physiology,
promoting their survival and expansion into committed hematopoietic progenitors. 
Like several other effects of the cytokine, the effect of TPO on VEGF expression 
is mediated by stabilization and activation of the primary transcription factor
responsible for VEGF expression, the oxygen tension responsive hypoxia inducible 
factor-1 (HIF-1). Together with the observation that bone marrow microenvironment
is hypoxic and hypoxia simulates the repopulating activity of HSCs, our
observations suggest that TPO mimics hypoxia and controls important genes
required for HSC cycling, including VEGF, adding to our understanding of how the 
hormone contributes to HSC function.

PMID: 16258288  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Science. 2005 Oct 14;310(5746):306-10.

Akt-mediated phosphorylation of EZH2 suppresses methylation of lysine 27 in
histone H3.

Cha TL(1), Zhou BP, Xia W, Wu Y, Yang CC, Chen CT, Ping B, Otte AP, Hung MC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Cellular Oncology, the University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Enhancer of Zeste homolog 2 (EZH2) is a methyltransferase that plays an important
role in many biological processes through its ability to trimethylate lysine 27
in histone H3. Here, we show that Akt phosphorylates EZH2 at serine 21 and
suppresses its methyltransferase activity by impeding EZH2 binding to histone H3,
which results in a decrease of lysine 27 trimethylation and derepression of
silenced genes. Our results imply that Akt regulates the methylation activity,
through phosphorylation of EZH2, which may contribute to oncogenesis.

PMID: 16224021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Int J Dev Biol. 2005;49(7):851-8.

PBX1 intracellular localization is independent of MEIS1 in epithelial cells of
the developing female genital tract.

Dintilhac A(1), Bihan R, Guerrier D, Deschamps S, Bougerie H, Watrin T, Bonnec G,
Pellerin I.

Author information: 
(1)UMR 6061, Genetique et Developpement, IFR 140, Universite de Rennes 1, Campus 
Villejean, Rennes, France.

While studies have highlighted the role of HOXA9-13 and PBX1 homeobox genes
during the development of the female genital tract, the molecular mechanisms
triggered by these genes are incompletely elucidated. In several developmental
pathways, PBX1 binds to MEINOX family members in the cytoplasm to be imported
into the nucleus where they associate with HOX proteins to form a higher complex 
that modulates gene expression. This concept has been challenged by a recent
report showing that in some cell cultures, PBX1 nuclear localization might be
regulated independently of MEINOX proteins (Kilstrup-Nielsen et al., 2003). Our
work gives the first illustration of this alternative mechanism in an
organogenesis process. Indeed, we show that PBX1 is mostly cytoplasmic in
epithelial endometrial cells of the developing female genital tract despite the
nuclear localization of MEIS1. We thus provide evidence for a control of PBX1
intracellular distribution which is independent of MEINOX proteins, but is cell
cycle correlated.

PMID: 16172981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Leuk Res. 2005 Oct;29(10):1221-2. Epub 2005 Apr 9.

HOXA9 expression increases with age in human haemopoietic cells.

Morgan R(1), Begum R, Theti D, Chansa M, Pettengell R, Sohal J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences (Anatomy), St. George's Hospital Medical 
School, Cranmer Terrace, London SW17 0RE, UK. rmorgan@sghms.ac.uk

HOXA9 is a transcription factor with a central role in both haemopoiesis and
leukaemia, and has been extensively studied over the past decade. Most notably,
high levels of HOXA9 expression in haemopoietic cells is a characteristic feature
of acute myeloid leukaemia (AML), and indeed may be sufficient in its own right
to cause this disease. Here, we show that HOXA9 expression changes dramatically
with age, whereby a uniformly low level of expression during early adulthood is
replaced by a frequently very high expression in adults over sixty.

PMID: 16111538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. Leukemia. 2005 Nov;19(11):1948-57.

CALM-AF10+ T-ALL expression profiles are characterized by overexpression of HOXA 
and BMI1 oncogenes.

Dik WA(1), Brahim W, Braun C, Asnafi V, Dastugue N, Bernard OA, van Dongen JJ,
Langerak AW, Macintyre EA, Delabesse E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The t(10;11)(p13;q14-21) is found in T-ALL and acute myeloid leukemia and fuses
CALM (Clathrin-Assembly protein-like Lymphoid-Myeloid leukaemia gene) to AF10. In
order to gain insight into the transcriptional consequences of this fusion,
microarray-based comparison of CALM-AF10+ vs CALM-AF10- T-ALL was performed. This
analysis showed upregulation of HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXA10 and BMI1 in the CALM-AF10+
cases. Microarray results were validated by quantitative RT-PCR on an independent
group of T-ALL and compared to mixed lineage leukemia-translocated acute
leukemias (MLL-t AL). The overexpression of HOXA genes was associated with
overexpression of its cofactor MEIS1 in CALM-AF10+ T-ALL, reaching levels of
expression similar to those observed in MLL-t AL. Consequently, CALM-AF10+ T-ALL 
and MLL-t AL share a specific HOXA overexpression, indicating they activate
common oncogenic pathways. In addition, BMI1, located close to AF10 breakpoint,
was overexpressed only in CALM-AF10+ T-ALL and not in MLL-t AL. BMI1 controls
cellular proliferation through suppression of the tumor suppressors encoded by
the CDKN2A locus. This locus, often deleted in T-ALL, was conserved in CALM-AF10+
T-ALL. This suggests that decreased CDKN2A activity, as a result of BMI1
overexpression, contributes to leukemogenesis in CALM-AF10+ T-ALL. We propose to 
define a HOXA+ leukemia group composed of at least MLL-t, CALM-AF10 and HOXA-t
AL, which may benefit from adapted management.

PMID: 16107895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Blood. 2005 Dec 15;106(13):4269-77. Epub 2005 Aug 16.

Conditional MN1-TEL knock-in mice develop acute myeloid leukemia in conjunction
with overexpression of HOXA9.

Kawagoe H(1), Grosveld GC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Tumor Cell Biology, St Jude Children's Research
Hospital, 332 North Lauderdale, Memphis, TN 38105, USA.

The chromosomal translocation t(12; 22)(p13;q11) in human myeloid leukemia
generates an MN1-TEL (meningioma 1-translocation-ETS-leukemia) fusion
oncoprotein. This protein consists of N-terminal MN1 sequences, a transcriptional
coactivator fused to C-terminal TEL sequences, an ETS (E26
transformation-specific) transcription factor. Enforced expression of MN1-TEL in 
multipotent hematopoietic progenitors in knock-in mice perturbed growth and
differentiation of myeloid as well as lymphoid cells. Depending on obligatory
secondary mutations, these mice developed T-cell lympholeukemia. Here we
addressed the role of MN1-TEL in myeloid leukemogenesis using the same mouse
model. Expression of MN1-TEL enhanced the growth of myeloid progenitors in an
interleukin 3/stem cell factor (IL-3/SCF)-dependent manner in vitro whereas 10%
of MN1-TEL-expressing mice developed altered myelopoiesis with severe anemia
after long latency. Coexpression of MN1-TEL and IL-3, but not SCF, rapidly caused
a fatal myeloproliferative disease rather than acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
Because MN1-TEL+ AML patient cells overexpress HOXA9 (homeobox A9), we tested the
effect of coexpression of MN1-TEL and HOXA9 in mice and found that 90% of
MN1-TEL+/HOXA9+ mice developed AML much more rapidly than control HOXA9+ mice.
Thus, the leukemogenic effect of MN1-TEL in our knock-in mice is pleiotropic, and
the type of secondary mutation determines disease outcome.

PMCID: PMC1895240
PMID: 16105979  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. Int J Hematol. 2005 Jul;82(1):21-7.

NUP98 fusion in human leukemia: dysregulation of the nuclear pore and homeodomain
proteins.

Nakamura T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan. takuro-ind@umin.ac.jp

NUP98 is fused to a variety of partner genes, including abdominal B-like HOX, in 
human myeloid and T-cell malignancies via chromosomal translocation involving
11p15. NUP98 encodes a 98-kd nucleoporin that is a component of the nuclear pore 
complex and functions in nucleocytoplasmic transport, with its N-terminal GLFG
repeats used as a docking site for karyopherins. Disruption of NUP98 may affect
the nuclear pore function, and the abnormal expression and altered function of
fusion partners may also be critical for leukemia development. Recent studies
using mouse models expressing NUP98-HOX have confirmed its leukemogenic
potential, and cooperative genes for NUP98-HOXA9 in leukemogenesis have been
identified in these studies.Thus, the NUP98 chimera is a unique molecule that
provides valuable information regarding nuclear pore function and the role of the
homeobox protein in leukemogenesis/carcinogenesis.

PMID: 16105755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Leuk Res. 2006 Feb;30(2):211-21. Epub 2005 Aug 15.

IgH and TCRgamma gene rearrangements, cyclin A1 and HOXA9 gene expression in
biphenotypic acute leukemias.

Golemovic M(1), Sucic M, Zadro R, Mrsic S, Mikulic M, Labar B, Rajic LJ, Batinic 
D.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Immunology, Clinical Institute of Laboratory Diagnosis, Zagreb
University School of Medicine, Zagreb Clinical Hospital Center, 10000 Zagreb,
Croatia. mgolemov@inet.hr

In this study we investigated IgH and TCRgamma gene rearrangements, cyclin A1 and
HOXA9 gene expression as well as the in vitro growth of biphenotypic acute
leukemia (BAL) blasts in relation to acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) and acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). The aim of the study was to correlate BAL morphology and 
its biological parameters in order to get information that might be used for
additional stratification of BAL. This rare form of AL was identified in a total 
of 10 patients, comprising 4.3% of adult and 3.0% of pediatric patients with de
novo AL referred to our institution during the 1999-2003 period. Our results
indicate that IgH and TCRgamma gene rearrangements correlated well with lymphoid 
BAL morphology, whereas the expression of cyclin A1 correlated with myeloid and
undifferentiated BAL morphology. Surprisingly, HOXA9 expression, a marker
associated with myeloid cell lineage, showed no strong correlation with BAL
morphology. Finally, in vitro growth of blasts during a 7-day culture showed
autonomous cell growth in 3/10 AML and 3/8 myeloid BAL samples tested, but not in
any of the AL with lymphoid features. Further studies are needed to confirm these
findings and to extend research to a broader spectrum of cell markers.

PMID: 16102826  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Blood. 2005 Dec 1;106(12):3988-94. Epub 2005 Aug 9.

Loss of expression of the Hoxa-9 homeobox gene impairs the proliferation and
repopulating ability of hematopoietic stem cells.

Lawrence HJ(1), Christensen J, Fong S, Hu YL, Weissman I, Sauvageau G, Humphries 
RK, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine,
University of California School of Medicine, Hematology Research (151H), Veterans
Affairs (VA) Medical Center, 4150 Clement St, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.
jeffl@medicine.ucsf.edu

The homeobox gene Hoxa-9 is normally expressed in primitive bone marrow cells,
and overexpression of Hoxa-9 markedly expands hematopoietic stem cells,
suggesting a function in early hematopoiesis. We present evidence for major
functional defects in Hoxa-9-/- hematopoietic stem cells. Hoxa-9-/- marrow cells 
have normal numbers of immunophenotypic stem cells (Lin(-)c-kit(+)flk-2(-)Sca-1+ 
[KLFS] cells). However, sublethally irradiated Hoxa-9-/- mice develop persistent 
pancytopenia, indicating unusual sensitivity to ionizing irradiation. In
competitive transplantation assays, Hoxa-9-/- cells showed an 8-fold reduction in
multilineage long-term repopulating ability, a defect not seen in marrow cells
deficient for the adjacent Hoxa-10 gene. Single-cell cultures of KLFS cells
showed a 4-fold reduction in large high-proliferation potential colonies. In
liquid cultures, Hoxa-9-deficient Lin(-)Sca-1(+) cells showed slowed
proliferation (a 5-fold reduction in cell numbers at day 8) and delayed emergence
of committed progenitors (a 5-fold decrease in colony-forming cells). Slowing of 
proliferation was accompanied by a delay in myeloid maturation, with a decrease
in Gr-1hiMac-1hi cells at the end of the culture. Retroviral transduction with a 
Hoxa-9 expression vector dramatically enhanced the cytokine-driven proliferation 
and in vivo engraftment of Hoxa-9-/- marrow cells. Hoxa-9 appears to be
specifically required for normal hematopoietic stem cell function both in vitro
and in vivo.

PMCID: PMC1895111
PMID: 16091451  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Aug 8;33(14):4475-84. Print 2005.

Group 13 HOX proteins interact with the MH2 domain of R-Smads and modulate Smad
transcriptional activation functions independent of HOX DNA-binding capability.

Williams TM(1), Williams ME, Heaton JH, Gelehrter TD, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan Ann Arbor, MI, USA.

Interactions with co-factors provide a means by which HOX proteins exert
specificity. To identify candidate protein interactors of HOXA13, we created and 
screened an E11.5-E12.5, distal limb bud yeast two-hybrid prey library. Among the
interactors, we isolated the BMP-signaling effector Smad5, which interacted with 
the paralogous HOXD13 but not with HOXA11 or HOXA9, revealing unique interaction 
capabilities of the AbdB-like HOX proteins. Using deletion mutants, we determined
that the MH2 domain of Smad5 is necessary for HOXA13 interaction. This is the
first report demonstrating an interaction between HOX proteins and the MH2 domain
of Smad proteins. HOXA13 and HOXD13 also bind to other BMP and
TGF-beta/Activin-regulated Smad proteins including Smad1 and Smad2, but not
Smad4. Furthermore, HOXD13 could be co-immunoprecipitated with Smad1 from cells. 
Expression of HOXA13, HOXD13 or a HOXD13 homeodomain mutant (HOXD13(IQN>AAA))
antagonized TGF-beta-stimulated transcriptional activation of the
pAdtrack-3TP-Lux reporter vector in Mv1Lu cells as well as the
Smad3/Smad4-activated pTRS6-E1b promoter in Hep3B cells. Finally, using mammalian
one-hybrid assay, we show that transcriptional activation by a
GAL4/Smad3-C-terminus fusion protein is specifically inhibited by HOXA13. Our
results identify a new co-factor for HOX group 13 proteins and suggest that HOX
proteins may modulate Smad-mediated transcriptional activity through
protein-protein interactions without the requirement for HOX monomeric
DNA-binding capability.

PMCID: PMC1183491
PMID: 16087734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Cancer Res. 2005 Aug 1;65(15):6521-5.

AF4p12, a human homologue to the furry gene of Drosophila, as a novel MLL fusion 
partner.

Hayette S(1), Cornillet-Lefebvre P, Tigaud I, Struski S, Forissier S, Berchet A, 
Doll D, Gillot L, Brahim W, Delabesse E, Magaud JP, Rimokh R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratoire d'Hématologie et de Cytogénétique, Centre Hospitalier Lyon Sud and
EA 3737, Pierre-Benite, France. dandrine.hayette@chu-lyon.fr

More than 35 different partner genes with the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene
have been cloned from leukemia cells with translocations involving chromosome 11 
band q23. In this study, we report on a novel fusion partner of the MLL gene,
AF4p12, which we have identified as the human homologue to the furry gene of
Drosophila. AF4p12, highly conserved in evolution, encodes a large protein of
3,105 amino acids. The expression of AF4p12 has been preferentially detected in
colon, placenta, and brain tissues and in tumor cells of lymphoid origin. We show
that the t(4;11)(p12;q23) translocation results in the creation of a chimeric RNA
encoding a putative fusion protein containing 1,362 amino acids from the
NH2-terminal part of MLL and 712 amino acids from the COOH-terminal part of
AF4p12. FLT3 and HOXA9 genes are overexpressed in this leukemia. We found that
the COOH-terminal part of AF4p12 fused to MLL contains a leucine zipper motif and
exhibits transcriptional activation properties when fused to Gal4 DNA-binding
domains in transient transfection assays. The AF4p12 fragment fused to MLL may
contribute to the oncogenic activation of MLL, possibly through specific
recruitment of the transcriptional machinery.

PMID: 16061630  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Blood. 2005 Nov 15;106(10):3559-66. Epub 2005 Jul 26.

Targeting MLL-AF4 with short interfering RNAs inhibits clonogenicity and
engraftment of t(4;11)-positive human leukemic cells.

Thomas M(1), Gessner A, Vornlocher HP, Hadwiger P, Greil J, Heidenreich O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Interfaculty Institute for Cell Biology,
Eberhard Karls University of Tuebingen, Germany.

The chromosomal translocation t(4;11) marks infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia
associated with a particularly dismal prognosis. The leukemogenic role of the
corresponding fusion gene MLL-AF4 is not well understood. We show that transient 
inhibition of MLL-AF4 expression with small interfering RNAs impairs the
proliferation and clonogenicity of the t(4; 11)-positive human leukemic cell
lines SEM and RS4;11. Reduction of mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL)-ALL-1 fused gene 
from chromosome 4 (AF4) levels induces apoptosis associated with caspase-3
activation and diminished BCL-X(L) expression. Suppression of MLL-AF4 is
paralleled by a decreased expression of the homeotic genes HOXA7, HOXA9, and
MEIS1. MLL-AF4 depletion inhibits expression of the stem-cell marker CD133,
indicating hematopoietic differentiation. Transfection of leukemic cells with
MLL-AF4 siRNAs reduces leukemia-associated morbidity and mortality in SCID mice
that received a xenotransplant, suggesting that MLL-AF4 depletion negatively
affects leukemia-initiating cells. Our findings demonstrate that MLL-AF4 is
important for leukemic clonogenicity and engraftment of this highly aggressive
leukemia. Targeted inhibition of MLL-AF4 fusion gene expression may lead to an
effective and highly specific treatment of this therapy-resistant leukemia.

PMID: 16046533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Br J Haematol. 2005 Jul;130(2):233-48.

Routine expression profiling of microarray gene signatures in acute leukaemia by 
real-time PCR of human bone marrow.

Sakhinia E(1), Faranghpour M, Liu Yin JA, Brady G, Hoyland JA, Byers RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Laboratory and Regenerative Medicine, School of Medicine, Faculty 
of Medical and Human Sciences, The University of Manchester, Manchester, UK.

Cancer subtype diagnosis using microarray signatures has the potential to
transform pathological diagnosis but the routine measurement of genes signatures 
remains difficult. Reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR)
measurement of Indicator genes for acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) and acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL) was used to determine gene signatures. Bone marrow 
(BM) mononuclear cells were sorted into total, CD34(+) and CD34(-) fractions, and
mRNAs globally amplified from each fraction using polyA PCR. The expression
profile of the 17 top-ranked genes distinguishing AML and ALL were measured by
RT-PCR in five ALL, 26 AML, 12 AML remission, four chronic myeloid leukaemia
(CML) and nine morphologically normal BM samples. All but two of the genes
measured showed similar expression in AML and ALL to that reported previously.
Specifically, c-MYB (P </= 0.04) was significantly increased in ALL in the total 
fraction, whilst HOXA9 (P </= 0.19) and cystatin c (P </= 0.01) were increased in
AML in the CD34(+) and CD34(-) fractions, respectively. c-MYB, hSNF2, RBAP48,
HKRT-1, LYN, CD33, Adipsin and HOXA9 were increased in AML compared with
remission AML, indicating an ability to determine disease activity. The method
used is simple, sensitive and robust, enabling routine clinical use, and it can
also be extended to other tumours types with gene signatures.

PMID: 16029452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Leuk Lymphoma. 2005 Jul;46(7):1061-6.

Upregulated hoxC4 induces CD14 expression during the differentiation of acute
promyelocytic leukemia cells.

Kim DY(1), Choi SJ, Kim SH, Chung HY, Yi S, Kim DW, Kim CC, Han TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, SBRI, Sungkyunkwan University School of 
Medicine, Suwon, Korea.

Homeobox (hox) genes encode transcription factors which are critically involved
in embryonic development. The 39 different hox genes are organized into four
unlinked chromosomal gene clusters (hoxA-D) in mammals and a number of studies
have suggested that hox genes play important roles in human leukemogenesis. Acute
promyelocytic leukemia (APL) cells carrying the PML-RARa fusion protein, respond 
well by differentiating in their response to an all-trans-retinoic acid (ATRA)
treatment. We examined the expression of the individual hox genes during this
differentiation. Besides the constitutive expression of hoxA9 and no expression
of hoxB7, the expression of hoxC4 increased significantly during differentiation 
of NB4 cells (PML-RAR(alpha)+). We also examined the expression of hoxC4 in bone 
marrow cells from APL patients and found that the hoxC4 expression was
reproducibly induced during an ATRA treatment. To further examine this finding,
HoxC4 was stably expressed in NB4 cells by retroviral transduction. The NB4 cells
expressing HoxC4 showed differentiated phenotypes including a CD14 expression,
which strongly suggests that upregulated hoxC4 is functionally involved in NB4
cell differentiation in response to ATRA. Upregulation of CD14 is at the
transcription level and mediated by the homeodomain of the HoxC4.

PMID: 16019559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Br J Haematol. 2005 Jul;130(1):83-6.

CD34+ cell selection is required to assess HOXA9 expression levels in patients
with myelodysplastic syndrome.

Heinrichs S(1), Berman JN, Ortiz TM, Kornblau SM, Neuberg DS, Estey EH, Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Overexpression of HOXA9 is linked to the molecular pathogenesis of acute myeloid 
leukaemia (AML) and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), conferring a poor prognosis. 
HOXA9 expression levels were analysed in the diagnostic bone marrow (BM) samples 
of 13 MDS patients. HOXA9 was expressed by CD34(+) BM cells at median levels
3.1-fold higher than in CD34(-) cells from the same patient and at median levels 
4.3-fold higher than in CD34(+) cells from healthy donors. These results indicate
that CD34(+) cell selection is required to accurately assess the expression
levels of HOXA9 and related genes in the multipotential malignant progenitor
cells of MDS patients.

PMID: 15982348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Exp Hematol. 2005 Jul;33(7):719-37.

Converging pathways in leukemogenesis and stem cell self-renewal.

Moore MA(1).

Author information: 
(1)James Ewing Laboratory of Developmental Hematopoiesis, Cell Biology Program,
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY, USA. m-moore@ski.mskcc.org

Studies over the last 40 years have led to an understanding of the hierarchical
organization of the hematopoietic system and the role of the pluripotential
hematopoietic stem cell. Earlier recognition of the importance of bone marrow
hematopoietic microenvironments has evolved into the recognition of specific
niches that regulate stem cell pool size, proliferative status, mobilization, and
differentiation. The discovery of the role of multiple hematopoietic growth
factors and their receptors in the orchestration of stem cell self-renewal and
differentiation has been followed by recognition of the importance of the Notch
and Wnt pathways. The homeobox family of transcription factors serve as master
regulators of development and are increasingly found to be critical regulators of
hematopoiesis. In parallel with this understanding of normal hematopoiesis has
come a recognition that stem cell dysregulation at various levels is involved in 
leukemogenesis. Furthermore, the progression from chronic leukemia or
myelodysplasia to acute leukemia involves accumulation of at least two mutational
events that lead to enhancement of stem cell proliferation, or acquisition of
stem cell behavior by a progenitor cell, coupled with maturation inhibition.
Translocations resulting in development of oncogenic fusion genes are found in
AML and the transforming potential of two of these, AML1-ETO and NUP98-HOXA9,
will be discussed. Secondary, constitutively activating mutations of the Flt3 and
c-kit receptors and of K- and N-ras are found with high frequency in AML, and the
transforming potential of mutated FLT3 and the role of STAT5A activation in human
stem cell transformation will be reviewed.

PMID: 15963848  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Cell. 2005 Jun 17;121(6):873-85.

Physical association and coordinate function of the H3 K4 methyltransferase MLL1 
and the H4 K16 acetyltransferase MOF.

Dou Y(1), Milne TA, Tackett AJ, Smith ER, Fukuda A, Wysocka J, Allis CD, Chait
BT, Hess JL, Roeder RG.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, The Rockefeller University, 
New York, New York 10021, USA.

A stable complex containing MLL1 and MOF has been immunoaffinity purified from a 
human cell line that stably expresses an epitope-tagged WDR5 subunit. Stable
interactions between MLL1 and MOF were confirmed by reciprocal
immunoprecipitation, cosedimentation, and cotransfection analyses, and
interaction sites were mapped to MLL1 C-terminal and MOF zinc finger domains. The
purified complex has a robust MLL1-mediated histone methyltransferase activity
that can effect mono-, di-, and trimethylation of H3 K4 and a MOF-mediated
histone acetyltransferase activity that is specific for H4 K16. Importantly, both
activities are required for optimal transcription activation on a chromatin
template in vitro and on an endogenous MLL1 target gene, Hox a9, in vivo. These
results indicate an activator-based mechanism for joint MLL1 and MOF recruitment 
and targeted methylation and acetylation and provide a molecular explanation for 
the closely correlated distribution of H3 K4 methylation and H4 K16 acetylation
on active genes.

PMID: 15960975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005 Jun;1044:139-41.

Thrombopoietin and the hematopoietic stem cell.

Kaushansky K(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, 402 Dickinson Street, Suite 380, San Diego, CA
92103-8811, USA. kkaushansky@ucsd.edu

The molecular mechanisms that underlie the favorable effects of thrombopoietin on
stem cell survival, self-renewal, and expansion are unknown. On the basis of
known effects of HoxB4, HoxA9, and vascular endothelial cell growth factor on
stem cells, we explored whether TPO might affect these pathways. We found that
TPO enhances the transcription of HoxB4, induces the nuclear localization of
HoxA9, and upregulates VEGF expression by reducing the ubiquination of hypoxia
inducible factor.

PMID: 15958707  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005 Jun;1044:109-16.

Hox genes: from leukemia to hematopoietic stem cell expansion.

Abramovich C(1), Pineault N, Ohta H, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, 675 West 10th Avenue, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 1L3, Canada.

Hox genes are clearly implicated in leukemia; however, neither the specificity of
the leukemogenic potential among Hox genes of different paralog groups nor the
role of the homeodomain is clear. We tested the leukemogenic potential of various
NUP98-Hox fusion genes alone and with MEIS1. All genes tested had a significant
overlapping effect in bone marrow cells in vitro. However, not all formed strong 
leukemogenic NUP98 fusion genes; but together with overexpression of MEIS1, all
induced myeloid leukemia. This phenomenon was also seen with NUP98 fusions
containing only the homeodomain of the corresponding Hox protein. We then
exploited the strong transforming potential of NUP98-HOXD13 and NUP98-HOXA10 to
establish preleukemic myeloid lines composed of early myeloid progenitors with
extensive in vitro self-renewal capacity, short-term myeloid repopulating
activity, and low propensity for spontaneous leukemic conversion. We also showed 
that MEIS1 can efficiently induce their conversion to leukemic stem cells, thus
providing a novel model for the study of leukemic progression. In contrast to the
leukemogenic effect of most of the Hox genes tested, HOXB4 has the ability to
increase the self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells without disrupting normal
differentiation. On the basis of the discovery that the leukemogenic gene HOXA9
can also expand hematopoietic stem cells, we compared the ability of NUP98-Hox
fusions to that of HOXB4 to trigger HSC expansion in vitro. Our preliminary
results indicate that the expanding potential of HOXB4 is retained and even
augmented by fusion to NUP98. Moreover, even greater expansion may be possible
using Abd-B-like Hox fusions genes.

PMID: 15958703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. J Exp Med. 2005 Jun 6;201(11):1825-35. Epub 2005 May 31.

Histone deacetylase activity is essential for the expression of HoxA9 and for
endothelial commitment of progenitor cells.

Rössig L(1), Urbich C, Brühl T, Dernbach E, Heeschen C, Chavakis E, Sasaki K,
Aicher D, Diehl F, Seeger F, Potente M, Aicher A, Zanetta L, Dejana E, Zeiher AM,
Dimmeler S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Cardiology, Department of Internal Medicine III, University of
Frankfurt, 60590 Frankfurt am Main, Germany.

The regulation of acetylation is central for the epigenetic control of
lineage-specific gene expression and determines cell fate decisions. We provide
evidence that the inhibition of histone deacetylases (HDACs) blocks the
endothelial differentiation of adult progenitor cells. To define the mechanisms
by which HDAC inhibition prevents endothelial differentiation, we determined the 
expression of homeobox transcription factors and demonstrated that HoxA9
expression is down-regulated by HDAC inhibitors. The causal involvement of HoxA9 
in the endothelial differentiation of adult progenitor cells is supported by the 
finding that HoxA9 overexpression partially rescued the endothelial
differentiation blockade induced by HDAC inhibitors. Knockdown and overexpression
studies revealed that HoxA9 acts as a master switch to regulate the expression of
prototypical endothelial-committed genes such as endothelial nitric oxide
synthase, VEGF-R2, and VE-cadherin, and mediates the shear stress-induced
maturation of endothelial cells. Consistently, HoxA9-deficient mice exhibited
lower numbers of endothelial progenitor cells and showed an impaired postnatal
neovascularization capacity after the induction of ischemia. Thus, HoxA9 is
regulated by HDACs and is critical for postnatal neovascularization.

PMCID: PMC2213253
PMID: 15928198  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. J Leukoc Biol. 2005 Aug;78(2):481-90. Epub 2005 May 13.

Identification of CCR2, flotillin, and gp49B genes as new G-CSF targets during
neutrophilic differentiation.

Iida S(1), Kohro T, Kodama T, Nagata S, Fukunaga R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, B-3, Graduate School of Frontier Biosciences, Osaka
University, 2-2 Yamadaoka, Suita, Osaka 565-0871, Japan.

Granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) is a cytokine that stimulates
myeloid progenitor cells to proliferate and differentiate into neutrophilic
granulocytes. To identify genes induced by G-CSF during neutrophil
differentiation, interleukin-3-dependent murine myeloid precursor FDC-P1 cells
expressing the G-CSF receptor were stimulated with G-CSF, and the gene expression
profile was characterized by DNA microarray analysis. In addition to known signal
transducer and activator of transcription-3 target genes, such as suppressor of
cytokine signaling-3 (SOCS3), JunB, and p19(INK4D), we newly identified several
G-CSF targets, including genes for the CC chemokine receptor-2 (CCR2), raft
proteins flotillin-1 and flotillin-2, and immunoglobulin-like receptor gp49B.
Real-time, quantitative polymerase chain reaction analyses revealed that the
expression of these genes was induced in various myeloid cell lines by G-CSF.
Furthermore, when HoxA9-immortalized bone marrow progenitors were induced by
G-CSF to differentiate into mature neutrophils, all of these genes were strongly 
activated. These genes could be categorized into three groups based on their
time-course of expression: immediate-early (approximately 20 min, SOCS3),
mid-early (2-4 h, flotillin-1/2 and gp49B), and late (>12 h, CCR2). This suggests
that different transcriptional mechanisms are involved in the regulation of these
genes. We show that bone marrow neutrophils express functional CCR2, which
suggest that CC chemokines may play previously unknown roles in neutrophil
activation and chemotaxis.

PMID: 15894583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


464. Cell. 2005 Apr 22;121(2):167-78.

hDOT1L links histone methylation to leukemogenesis.

Okada Y(1), Feng Q, Lin Y, Jiang Q, Li Y, Coffield VM, Su L, Xu G, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, North Carolina 27599, USA.

Erratum in
    Cell. 2005 Jun 3;121(5):809.

Epigenetic modifications play an important role in human cancer. One such
modification, histone methylation, contributes to human cancer through
deregulation of cancer-relevant genes. The yeast Dot1 and its human counterpart, 
hDOT1L, methylate lysine 79 located within the globular domain of histone H3.
Here we report that hDOT1L interacts with AF10, an MLL (mixed lineage leukemia)
fusion partner involved in acute myeloid leukemia, through the OM-LZ region of
AF10 required for MLL-AF10-mediated leukemogenesis. We demonstrate that direct
fusion of hDOT1L to MLL results in leukemic transformation in an hDOT1L
methyltransferase activity-dependent manner. Transformation by MLL-hDOT1L and
MLL-AF10 results in upregulation of a number of leukemia-relevant genes, such as 
Hoxa9, concomitant with hypermethylation of H3-K79. Our studies thus establish
that mistargeting of hDOT1L to Hoxa9 plays an important role in MLL-AF10-mediated
leukemogenesis and suggests that the enzymatic activity of hDOT1L may provide a
potential target for therapeutic intervention.

PMID: 15851025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


465. Stem Cells. 2005 May;23(5):644-55.

Activation of stem-cell specific genes by HOXA9 and HOXA10 homeodomain proteins
in CD34+ human cord blood cells.

Ferrell CM(1), Dorsam ST, Ohta H, Humphries RK, Derynck MK, Haqq C, Largman C,
Lawrence HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of
California, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

There is growing evidence for a role of HOX homeodomain proteins in normal
hematopoiesis. Several HOX genes, including HOXA9 and HOXA10, are expressed in
primitive hematopoietic cells, implying a role in early hematopoietic
differentiation. To identify potential target genes of these two closely related 
transcription factors, human CD34+ umbilical cord blood cells were transduced
with vectors expressing either HOXA9 or HOXA10 and analyzed with cDNA
micro-arrays. Statistical analysis using significance analysis of microarrays
revealed a common signature of several hundred genes, demonstrating that the
transcriptomes of HOXA9 and HOXA10 largely overlap in this cellular context.
Seven genes that were upregulated by both HOX proteins were validated by
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. HOXA9 and HOXA10
showed positive regulation of genes in the Wnt pathway, including Wnt10B and two 
Wnt receptors Frizzled 1 and Frizzled 5, an important pathway for hematopoietic
stem cell (HSC) self-renewal. Other validated genes included v-ets-related gene
(ERG), Iroquois 3 (IRX3), aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1), and very long-chain
acyl-CoA synthetase homolog 1 (VLCS-H1). GenMAPP (Gene Micro Array Pathway
Profiler) analysis indicated that HOXA10 repressed expression of several genes
involved in heme biosynthesis and three globin genes, indicating a general
suppression of erythroid differentiation. A number of genes regulated by HOXA9
and HOXA10 are expressed in normal HSC populations.

PMID: 15849172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


466. Nat Med. 2005 May;11(5):531-7. Epub 2005 Apr 10.

Lineage infidelity of epithelial ovarian cancers is controlled by HOX genes that 
specify regional identity in the reproductive tract.

Cheng W(1), Liu J, Yoshida H, Rosen D, Naora H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Box 184, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Although epithelial ovarian cancers (EOCs) have been thought to arise from the
simple epithelium lining the ovarian surface or inclusion cysts, the major
subtypes of EOCs show morphologic features that resemble those of the müllerian
duct-derived epithelia of the reproductive tract. We found that HOX genes, which 
normally regulate mullerian duct differentiation, are not expressed in normal
ovarian surface epithelium (OSE), but are expressed in different EOC subtypes
according to the pattern of mullerian-like differentiation of these cancers.
Ectopic expression of Hoxa9 in tumorigenic mouse OSE cells gave rise to papillary
tumors resembling serous EOCs. In contrast, Hoxa10 and Hoxa11 induced
morphogenesis of endometrioid-like and mucinous-like EOCs, respectively. Hoxa7
showed no lineage specificity, but promoted the abilities of Hoxa9, Hoxa10 and
Hoxa11 to induce differentiation along their respective pathways. Therefore,
inappropriate activation of a molecular program that controls patterning of the
reproductive tract could explain the morphologic heterogeneity of EOCs and their 
assumption of müllerian-like features.

PMID: 15821746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


467. Reprod Toxicol. 2005 May-Jun;20(1):39-45.

Vertebral malformations induced by sodium salicylate correlate with shifts in
expression domains of Hox genes.

Wéry N(1), Foulon O, Blacker A, Picard JJ, Gofflot F.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Developmental Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium.

Several embryotoxic agents, which includes sodium salicylate, were reported to
induce vertebral variations in the form of supernumerary ribs (SNR) when
administered to pregnant rodents. Because the biological significance of SNR in
toxicological studies is still a matter of debate, we investigated the molecular 
basis of this defect by analyzing the possible involvement of Hox genes, known to
specify vertebrae identity. Sodium salicylate (300mg/kg) was administered to
pregnant rats on gestational day 9 (GD 9). On GD 13, the expression of several
Hox genes, selected according to the position of their anterior limit of
expression, namely upstream (Hoxa9), at the level (Hoxa10) and downstream (Hoxd9)
to the morphological alteration, were analyzed. Posterior shifts in the anterior 
limit of expression of Hoxa10 and Hoxd9 were observed following exposure to
salicylate, which could explain an effect at the level of the axial skeleton.
This finding suggests that the appearance of ectopic ribs can be attributed to an
anterior transformation of lumbar vertebrae identity into thoracic vertebrae
identity. Whether this transformation occurs with all compounds inducing SNR in
rats remains to be determined.

PMID: 15808784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


468. Blood. 2005 Jul 1;106(1):254-64. Epub 2005 Mar 8.

Meis1 programs transcription of FLT3 and cancer stem cell character, using a
mechanism that requires interaction with Pbx and a novel function of the Meis1
C-terminus.

Wang GG(1), Pasillas MP, Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Molecular Pathology Program, School of Medicine,
University of California at San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093,
USA.

Meis1 is a homeodomain transcription factor coexpressed with Hoxa9 in most human 
acute myeloid leukemias (AMLs). In mouse models of leukemia produced by Hoxa9,
Meis1 accelerates leukemogenesis. Because Hoxa9 immortalizes myeloid progenitors 
in the absence of Meis1 expression, the contribution of Meis1 toward leukemia
remains unclear. Here, we describe a cultured progenitor model in which Meis1
programs leukemogenicity. Progenitors immortalized by Hoxa9 in culture are
myeloid-lineage restricted and only infrequently caused leukemia after more than 
250 days. Coexpressed Meis1 programmed rapid AML-initiating character, maintained
multipotent progenitor potential, and induced expression of genes associated with
short-term hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs), such as FLT3 and CD34, whose
expression also characterizes the leukemia-initiating stem cells of human AML.
Meis1 leukemogenesis functions required binding to Pbx, binding to DNA, and a
conserved function of its C-terminal tail. We hypothesize that Meis1 is required 
for the homing and survival of leukemic progenitors within their hematopoietic
niches, functions mediated by HSC-specific genes such as CD34 and Fms-like
tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3), respectively. This is the first example of a
transcription factor oncoprotein (Meis1) that establishes expression of a
tyrosine kinase oncoprotein (FLT3), and explains their coexpression in human
leukemia. This cultured progenitor model will be useful to define the genetic
basis of leukemogenesis involving Hoxa9 and Meis1.

PMCID: PMC1895124
PMID: 15755900  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


469. Dev Biol. 2005 Mar 15;279(2):462-80.

Candidate downstream regulated genes of HOX group 13 transcription factors with
and without monomeric DNA binding capability.

Williams TM(1), Williams ME, Kuick R, Misek D, McDonagh K, Hanash S, Innis JW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI
48109-0618, USA.

Hox genes encode transcription factors that regulate the morphogenesis of
developing embryos. In mammals, knowledge of the genetic pathways, including the 
possible direct or indirect targets, regulated by HOX proteins is extremely
limited. To identify the downstream genes regulated by posterior HOX proteins, we
expressed HOXA13 in mouse embryonic fibroblasts lacking paralog group 13
expression using a bicistronic HOXA13/EGFP retroviral vector. Microarray analysis
identified 68 genes with significant, reproducible RNA expression changes (50
activated; 18 repressed) in stable HOXA13-expressing cells. Genes with the GO
annotation terms "extracellular matrix" and "basement membrane" were greatly
overrepresented, and several were shown to be regulated by HOX proteins in other 
studies. Among the genes strongly activated by HOXA13 were Enpp2, a bifunctional 
enzyme known to modulate tumor and normal cell motility and which is expressed in
precartilaginous condensations; Fhl1, a transcription factor implicated in muscle
cell differentiation and development; and M32486, a putative integral membrane
molecule expressed in the female reproductive tract. Expression differences in
the HOXA13-expressing cells were confirmed for selected downstream genes using
semi-quantitative RT-PCR, and in vivo coexpression with Hoxa13 in the limb
interdigital mesenchyme was demonstrated for many. For two candidates, Igfbp4 and
Fstl, interdigital limb bud expression was reduced in Hoxa13 mutants. To explore 
whether paralogous and nonparalogous HOX proteins could regulate the same genes, 
we created new HOX cell lines and examined the expression of selected genes
identified by the HOXA13 screen. HOXD13 similarly activated/repressed 6 tested
candidates, demonstrating that multiple downstream genetic pathways may be
regulated by paralog HOX proteins. In contrast, HOXA9 was only able to repress
expression of some gene targets. A HOXD13 mutant, HOXD13(IQN >)(AAA), incapable
of monomeric DNA-binding, activated the expression of 5 HOXA13-upregulated genes;
but was incapable of repressing the expression of Ngef and Casp8ap2. Our results 
suggest that HOX protein-protein interactions without direct HOX DNA-binding may 
play a larger role in HOX transcriptional regulation than generally assumed, and 
DNA-binding appears critical for repression.

PMID: 15733672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


470. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2005 Mar;157(2):151-6.

NUP98 is fused to HOXA9 in a variant complex t(7;11;13;17) in a patient with
AML-M2.

Lahortiga I(1), Belloni E, Vázquez I, Agirre X, Larrayoz MJ, Vizmanos JL,
Valgañón M, Zudaire I, Sáez B, Mateos MC, Di Fiore PP, Calasanz MJ, Odero MD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, School of Science, University of Navarra, C/
Irunlarrea s/n, 31008-Pamplona, Spain. ilahortiga@unav.es

Erratum in
    Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2005 Jun;159(2):194.

The t(7;11)(p15;p15.4) has been reported to fuse the NUP98 gene (11p15), a
component of the nuclear pore complex, with the class-1 homeobox gene HOXA9 at
7p15. This translocation has been associated with myeloid leukemias,
predominantly acute myeloid leukemia (AML) M2 subtype with trilineage
myelodysplastic features, and with a poor prognosis. The derived fusion protein
retains the FG repeat motif of NUP98 N-terminus and the homeodomain shared by the
HOX genes, acting as an oncogenic transcription factor critical for
leukemogenesis. We report here a new complex t(7;11)-variant, i.e.,
t(7;11;13;17)(p15;p15;p?;p1?2) in a patient with AML-M2 and poor prognosis. The
NUP98-HOXA9 fusion transcript was detected by RT-PCR, suggesting its role in the 
malignant transformation as it has been postulated for other t(7;11)-associated
leukemias. No other fusion transcripts involving the NUP98 or HOXA9 genes were
present, although other mechanisms involving several genes on chromosomes 13 and 
17 may also be involved. To our knowledge, this is the first t(7;11) variant
involving NUP98 described in hematological malignancies.

PMID: 15721637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


471. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 Feb 1;11(3):1044-9.

Expression of 11 HOX genes is deregulated in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma.

Chen KN(1), Gu ZD, Ke Y, Li JY, Shi XT, Xu GW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 
Cancer Hospital, Beijing, China 100 036. chenkeneng@yahoo.com.cn

PURPOSE: HOX genes are vital for all aspects of mammalian growth and
differentiation, and recent data have shown that their deregulated expression is 
related to carcinogenesis. To date, there has been no systemic study on
expression of HOX genes in esophageal carcinoma. We investigated the expression
pattern of 39 known HOX genes in cancerous and noncancerous tissue from 36
patients with esophageal squamous cell carcinoma to determine whether their
expression is altered in esophageal cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Thirty-six patients with resectable esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma (ESCC) were enrolled in this study. Specific primers were designed for 
each of 39 HOX genes, and reverse transcription-PCR was done in cancerous and
noncancerous samples of these 36 patients. Furthermore, the expression of HOXA9
protein was subjected to Western blot analysis in all 36 paired tissue samples.
RESULTS: Eight of 39 HOX genes were expressed in cancerous but not in
noncancerous tissue. Five of 39 HOX genes were expressed both in cancerous and
noncancerous tissue. Of the latter, expression of HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXC6 was
significantly higher in cancerous tissue (P < 0.05). The remaining 26 HOX genes
were not detected in either types of tissue. HOXA9 protein was expressed in both 
kinds of tissue (cancer tissue versus noncancerous mucosa: 0.34 +/- 0.32 versus
0.24 +/- 0.27, P = 0.121).
CONCLUSIONS: This is the first comprehensive survey of 39 HOX gene expression in 
ESCC and noncancerous mucosa. Five of the 39 HOX genes were expressed in both
types of tissue indicating their possible role in maintaining normal structure
and function of adult esophageal mucosa. Eleven of the 39 HOX genes were
deregulated in cancer tissue. These genes possibly participate in the
carcinogenesis of ESCC.

PMID: 15709170  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


472. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):12359-70. Epub 2005 Jan 28.

HOXA9 activates transcription of the gene encoding gp91Phox during myeloid
differentiation.

Bei L(1), Lu Y, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

The CYBB gene encodes gp91Phox; a component of the phagocyte respiratory burst
oxidase. CYBB transcription is restricted to myeloid cells differentiated beyond 
the promyelocyte stage. In undifferentiated myeloid cells, the homeodomain (HD)
transcription factor HoxA10 represses CYBB transcription via a cis element in the
proximal promoter. During myelopoiesis, phosphorylation of conserved tyrosine
residues in the HD decreases HoxA10 binding to this CYBB cis element. In the
current studies, we found HoxA9 activates CYBB transcription in differentiated
myeloid cells via the same cis element. We find HoxA9-mediated CYBB-transcription
requires Pbx1 but is inhibited by Meis1. Additionally, phosphorylation of the
conserved HD tyrosines increases HoxA9 binding to the CYBB promoter. The HOXA9
gene is involved in leukemia-associated translocations with the gene encoding
Nup98, a nucleopore protein. We find expression of a Nup98-hoxA9 fusion protein
blocks HoxA9-induced CYBB transcription in differentiating myeloid cells. In
comparison to HoxA9, Nup98-hoxA9 has greater binding affinity for the CYBB cis
element, but binding is not altered by HD tyrosine phosphorylation. Therefore,
these studies identify CYBB as a common target gene repressed by HoxA10 and
activated by HoxA9. These studies also suggest overexpression of Meis1 or
Nup98-hoxA9 represses myeloid-specific gene transcription, thereby contributing
to differentiation block in leukemogenesis.

PMID: 15681849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


473. FEBS Lett. 2005 Jan 31;579(3):757-62.

Synergistic action of MLL, a TRX protein with template activating factor-I, a
histone chaperone.

Shimoyama T(1), Kato K, Miyaji-Yamaguchi M, Nagata K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Infection Biology, Graduate School of Comprehensive Human
Sciences and Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, University of Tsukuba, 1-1-1
Tenno-dai, Tsukuba 305-8505, Japan.

MLL is involved in the process of gene activity maintenance. It is shown that the
amino-terminal region of MLL (MLLN) interacts with TAF-Ibeta/SET. In this study, 
using yeast two-hybrid assays, we have found that the acidic region of TAF-Ibeta 
is essential for its binding to MLLN. Pull-down assays using GST-MLLN
demonstrated that TAF-Ibeta and histones interact with GST-MLLN. MLLN and
TAF-Ibeta synergistically upregulated the transcription level of Hoxa9 and
co-immunoprecipitated in chromatin containing the Hoxa9 promoter region. These
results suggest that TAF-Ibeta plays an important role in MLL-mediated
transcription and possibly chromatin maintenance.

PMID: 15670842  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


474. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;25(3):1100-12.

Eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E activity is modulated by HOXA9 at
multiple levels.

Topisirovic I(1), Kentsis A, Perez JM, Guzman ML, Jordan CT, Borden KL.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunovirology and Cancer, University of Montreal,
Montreal, Quebec H3T 1J4, Canada.

The eukaryotic translation initiation factor 4E (eIF4E) alters gene expression on
multiple levels. In the cytoplasm, eIF4E acts in the rate-limiting step of
translation initiation. In the nucleus, eIF4E facilitates nuclear export of a
subset of mRNAs. Both of these functions contribute to eIF4E's ability to
oncogenically transform cells. We report here that the homeodomain protein,
HOXA9, is a positive regulator of eIF4E. HOXA9 stimulates eIF4E-dependent export 
of cyclin D1 and ornithine decarboxylase (ODC) mRNAs in the nucleus, as well as
increases the translation efficiency of ODC mRNA in the cytoplasm. These
activities depend on direct interactions of HOXA9 with eIF4E and are independent 
of the role of HOXA9 in transcription. At the biochemical level, HOXA9 mediates
these effects by competing with factors that repress eIF4E function, in
particular the proline-rich homeodomain PRH/Hex. This competitive mechanism of
eIF4E regulation is disrupted in a subset of leukemias, where HOXA9 displaces PRH
from eIF4E, thereby contributing to eIF4E's dysregulation. In regard to these
results and our previous finding that approximately 200 homeodomain proteins
contain eIF4E binding sites, we propose that homeodomain modulation of eIF4E
activity is a novel means through which this family of proteins implements their 
effects on growth and development.

PMCID: PMC544005
PMID: 15657436  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


475. Cell Cycle. 2005 Feb;4(2):266-8. Epub 2005 Feb 20.

Hematopoietic stem cells, leukemic stem cells and chronic myelogenous leukemia.

Passegué E(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, StanfordUniversity School of Medicine, Beckman
Center, California 94305, USA. passegue@stanford.edu

Blood-related cancers, or leukemias, have been shown to arise from a rare subset 
of cells that escape normal regulation and drive the formation and growth of the 
tumor. The finding that these so-called cancer stem cells, or leukemic stem cells
(LSC), can be purified away from the other cells in the tumor allows their
precise analysis to identify candidate molecules and regulatory pathways that
play a role in progression, maintenance, and spreading of leukemias. The analyses
of the other, numerically dominant, cells in the tumor, while also interesting,
do not directly interrogate these key properties of malignancies. Mouse models of
human myeloproliferative disorder and acute myelogenous leukemia have highlighted
the remarkable conservation of disease mechanisms between both species. They can 
now be used to identify the LSC for each type of human leukemia and understand
how they escape normal regulation and become malignant. Given the clinical
importance of LSC identification, the insights gained through these approaches
will quickly translate into clinical applications and lead to improved treatments
for human leukemias.

PMID: 15655369  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


476. Cancer Sci. 2005 Jan;96(1):7-12.

Retroviral insertional mutagenesis identifies oncogene cooperation.

Nakamura T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, 1-37-1 Kami-Ikebukuro, Toshima-ku, Tokyo 170-8455.
takuro-ind@umin.ac.jp

Retroviral insertional mutagenesis has been applied to identify oncogenes that
are important for both human and rodent carcinogenesis. The method reveals not
only primary oncogenes but also cooperative genes that might be affected as
second or third hits in multistep carcinogenesis. The use of genetically
engineered mice such as NUP98-HOXA9 transgenic mice enabled efficient
identification of cooperative genes, which provides important information for the
molecular pathway in carcinogenesis/leukemogenesis. With use of the retrovirus
mediated gene transfer system, retroviral insertional mutagenesis will provide
invaluable information to understand genetic interaction in complex mechanisms of
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 15649248  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


477. Immunogenetics. 2005 Jan;56(10):710-21. Epub 2004 Dec 1.

Characterization of two genes encoding leucine-rich repeat-containing proteins in
grass carp Ctenopharyngodon idellus.

Chang MX(1), Nie P, Xie HX, Sun BJ, Gao Q.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Freshwater Ecology and Biotechnology, Chinese Academy 
of Sciences, Wuhan, 430072, Hubei Province, PR China. pinnie@ihb.ac.cn

The cDNAs and genes of two different types of leucine-rich repeat-containing
proteins from grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idellus) were cloned. Homology search 
revealed that the two genes, designated as GC-GARP and GC-LRG, have 37% and 32%
deduced amino-acid sequence similarities with human glycoprotein A repetitions
predominant precursor (GARP) and leucine-rich alpha2-glycoprotein (LRG),
respectively. The cDNAs of GC-GARP and GC-LRG encoded 664 and 339 amino acid
residues, respectively. GC-GARP and GC-LRG contain many distinct structural
and/or functional motifs of the leucine-rich repeat (LRR) subfamily, such as
multiple conserved 11-residue segments with the consensus sequence LxxLxLxxN/CxL 
(x can be any amino acid). The genes GC-GARP and GC-LRG consist of two exons,
with 4,782 bp and 2,119 bp in total length, respectively. The first exon of each 
gene contains a small 5'-untranslated region and partial open reading frame. The 
putative promoter region of GC-GARP was found to contain transcription factor
binding sites for GATA-1, IRF4, Oct-1, IRF-7, IRF-1, AP1, GATA-box and NFAT, and 
the promoter region of GC-LRG for MYC-MAX, MEIS1, ISRE, IK3, HOXA9 and C/EBP
alpha. Phylogenetic analysis showed that GC-GARP and mammalian GARPs were
clustered into one branch, while GC-LRG and mammalian LRGs were in another
branch. The GC-GARP gene was only detected in head kidney, and GC-LRG in the
liver, spleen and heart in the copepod (Sinergasilus major)-infected grass carp, 
indicating the induction of gene expression by the parasite infection. The
results obtained in the present study provide insight into the structure of fish 
LRR genes, and further study should be carried out to understand the importance
of LRR proteins in host-pathogen interactions.

PMID: 15578176  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


478. Blood. 2005 Feb 15;105(4):1456-66. Epub 2004 Nov 2.

HOXB6 overexpression in murine bone marrow immortalizes a myelomonocytic
precursor in vitro and causes hematopoietic stem cell expansion and acute myeloid
leukemia in vivo.

Fischbach NA(1), Rozenfeld S, Shen W, Fong S, Chrobak D, Ginzinger D, Kogan SC,
Radhakrishnan A, Le Beau MM, Largman C, Lawrence HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA
94121, USA. fischba@itsa.ucsf.edu

The HOX family of homeobox genes plays an important role in normal and malignant 
hematopoiesis. Dysregulated HOX gene expression profoundly effects the
proliferation and differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and
committed progenitors, and aberrant activation of HOX genes is a common event in 
human myeloid leukemia. HOXB6 is frequently overexpressed in human acute myeloid 
leukemia (AML). To gain further insight into the role of HOXB6 in hematopoiesis, 
we overexpressed HOXB6 in murine bone marrow using retrovirus-mediated gene
transfer. We also explored structure-function relationships using mutant HOXB6
proteins unable to bind to DNA or a key HOX-binding partner, pre-B-cell leukemia 
transcription factor-1 (PBX1). Additionally, we investigated the potential
cooperative interaction with myeloid ecotropic viral integration site 1 homolog
(MEIS1). In vivo, HOXB6 expanded HSCs and myeloid precursors while inhibiting
erythropoiesis and lymphopoiesis. Overexpression of HOXB6 resulted in AML with a 
median latency of 223 days. Coexpression of MEIS1 dramatically shortened the
onset of AML. Cytogenetic analysis of a subset of HOXB6-induced AMLs revealed
recurrent deletions of chromosome bands 2D-E4, a region frequently deleted in
HOXA9-induced AMLs. In vitro, HOXB6 immortalized a factor-dependent
myelomonocytic precursor capable of granulocytic and monocytic differentiation.
These biologic effects of HOXB6 were largely dependent on DNA binding but
independent of direct interaction with PBX1.

PMID: 15522959  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


479. Blood. 2005 Feb 1;105(3):1222-30. Epub 2004 Oct 12.

Meis1-mediated apoptosis is caspase dependent and can be suppressed by
coexpression of HoxA9 in murine and human cell lines.

Wermuth PJ(1), Buchberg AM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Kimmel Cancer Center, Jefferson
Medical College, Thomas Jefferson University, 233 S 10th St, Philadelphia, PA
19107-5541, USA.

Coexpression of the homeodomain protein Meis1 and either HoxA7 or HoxA9 is
characteristic of many acute myelogenous leukemias. Although Meis1 can be
overexpressed in bone marrow long-term repopulating cells, it is incapable of
mediating their transformation. Although overexpressing HoxA9 alone transforms
murine bone marrow cells, concurrent Meis1 overexpression greatly accelerates
oncogenesis. Meis1-HoxA9 cooperation suppresses several myeloid differentiation
pathways. We now report that Meis1 overexpression strongly induces apoptosis in a
variety of cell types in vitro through a caspase-dependent process. Meis1
requires a functional homeodomain and Pbx-interaction motif to induce apoptosis. 
Coexpressing HoxA9 with Meis1 suppresses this apoptosis and provides protection
from several apoptosis inducers. Pbx1, another Meis1 cofactor, also induces
apoptosis; however, coexpressing HoxA9 is incapable of rescuing Pbx-mediated
apoptosis. This resistance to apoptotic stimuli, coupled with the previously
reported ability to suppress multiple myeloid differentiation pathways, would
provide a strong selective advantage to Meis1-HoxA9 coexpressing cells in vivo,
leading to leukemogenesis.

PMID: 15479723  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


480. Blood. 2005 Jan 15;105(2):784-93. Epub 2004 Sep 28.

Identification of cooperative genes for NUP98-HOXA9 in myeloid leukemogenesis
using a mouse model.

Iwasaki M(1), Kuwata T, Yamazaki Y, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Osato M, Ito Y,
Kroon E, Sauvageau G, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, 
Japan.

The chromosomal translocation t(7; 11)(p15;p15), observed in human myeloid
leukemia, results in a NUP98 and HOXA9 gene fusion. We generated a transgenic
mouse line that specifically expressed the chimeric NUP98-HOXA9 gene in the
myeloid lineage. While only 20% of the transgenic mice progressed to leukemia
after a latency period, myeloid progenitor cells from nonleukemic transgenic mice
still exhibited increased proliferative potential. This suggested that the
NUP98-HOXA9 fusion induced a preleukemic phase, and other factors were required
for complete leukemogenesis. NUP98-HOXA9 expression promoted the onset of
retrovirus-induced BXH2 myeloid leukemia. This phenomenon was used to identify
cooperative disease genes as common integration sites (CISs). Meis1, a known HOX 
cofactor, was identified as a CIS with a higher integration frequency in
transgenic than in wild-type BXH2 mice. By the same means we identified further 4
candidate cooperative genes, Dnalc4, Fcgr2b, Fcrl, and Con1. These genes
cooperated with NUP98-HOXA9 in transforming NIH 3T3 cells. The system described
here is a powerful tool to identify cooperative oncogenes and will assist in the 
clarification of the multistep process of carcinogenesis.

PMID: 15454493  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]



1. Blood. 2004 Mar 1;103(5):1676-84. Epub 2003 Nov 6.

The transcriptome of the leukemogenic homeoprotein HOXA9 in human hematopoietic
cells.

Dorsam ST(1), Ferrell CM, Dorsam GP, Derynck MK, Vijapurkar U, Khodabakhsh D, Pau
B, Bernstein H, Haqq CM, Largman C, Lawrence HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA
94121, USA.

Hematopoietic defects in HOXA9(-/-) mice demonstrate a key role for this
homeoprotein in blood cell development. Conversely, enforced HOXA9 expression is 
leukemogenic in mice, and HOXA9 is frequently activated in human acute myeloid
leukemia (AML). Although HOXA9 is thought to function as a transcription factor, 
few downstream targets have been identified. We searched for early HOXA9 target
genes by using a transient overexpression strategy in 3 hematopoietic cell lines 
(2 myeloid, 1 lymphoid). cDNA microarray analyses identified 220 genes whose
expression was modulated at least 2-fold. Expression signatures in myeloid and
lymphoid cells demonstrated that HOXA9 functions as both an activator and
repressor of a variety of genes in cell-specific patterns suggesting that the
transcriptional effects of HOXA9 are largely dependent on the cell context.
Transient transcription assays and target gene expression patterns in HOXA9(-/-) 
marrow cells imply that we have identified direct physiologic targets. Many
target genes are expressed in CD34+ stem cells or are members of gene families
involved in proliferation or myeloid differentiation. Expression of 14 HOXA9
target genes correlated with high-level HOXA9 expression in primary AML. These
data suggest that many genes identified in this survey may mediate the biologic
effects of HOXA9 in normal and leukemic hematopoiesis.

PMID: 14604967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


2. Nature. 2003 Oct 30;425(6961):926-33.

Motor neuron columnar fate imposed by sequential phases of Hox-c activity.

Dasen JS(1), Liu JP, Jessell TM.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biophysics, Center for Neurobiology and Behavior, Columbia University, 701 West
168th Street, New York, New York 10032, USA. jd2009@columbia.edu

The organization of neurons into columns is a prominent feature of central
nervous system structure and function. In many regions of the central nervous
system the grouping of neurons into columns links cell-body position to axonal
trajectory, thus contributing to the establishment of topographic neural maps.
This link is prominent in the developing spinal cord, where columnar sets of
motor neurons innervate distinct targets in the periphery. We show here that
sequential phases of Hox-c protein expression and activity control the columnar
differentiation of spinal motor neurons. Hox expression in neural progenitors is 
established by graded fibroblast growth factor signalling and translated into a
distinct motor neuron Hox pattern. Motor neuron columnar fate then emerges
through cell autonomous repressor and activator functions of Hox proteins. Hox
proteins also direct the expression of genes that establish motor topographic
projections, thus implicating Hox proteins as critical determinants of spinal
motor neuron identity and organization.

PMID: 14586461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


3. Leukemia. 2003 Dec;17(12):2454-9.

B-cell development in the presence of the MLL/AF4 oncoprotein proceeds in the
absence of HOX A7 and HOX A9 expression.

Bertrand FE(1), Spengeman JD, Shah N, LeBien TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine at East
Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27858, USA.

Infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is frequently characterized by the
t(4;11)(q21;q23) cytogenetic abnormality encoding the MLL/AF4 oncogene, increased
HOX gene expression and a pro-B/monocytoid phenotype. We have previously
established a novel MLL/AF4-positive cell line, B-lineage 3 (BLIN-3), which
retains several features of normal B-lineage development (functional Ig gene
rearrangement and apoptotic sensitivity to stromal cell withdrawal) not generally
observed in infant ALL. We now use microarray analysis to identify patterns of
gene expression in BLIN-3 that may modulate MLL/AF4 oncogenesis and contribute to
the retention of normal B-lineage developmental characteristics. Comparison of
6815 expressed genes in BLIN-3 with published microarray data on leukemic blasts 
from t(4;11) patients indicated that BLIN-3 was unique in lacking the expression 
of certain HOX-A cluster genes. These results were validated by RT-PCR showing no
expression of HOX A7 or HOX A9 in BLIN-3. A HOX C8 promoter reporter was active
in BLIN-3, indicating that lack of HOX gene expression in BLIN-3 was not due to a
nonfunctional MLL/AF4. Our results suggest that B-lineage development can proceed
in t(4;11) leukemic blasts in the absence of HOX-A gene expression.

PMID: 14562113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


4. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jan 9;279(2):866-75. Epub 2003 Oct 15.

The oncogene Nup98-HOXA9 induces gene transcription in myeloid cells.

Ghannam G(1), Takeda A, Camarata T, Moore MA, Viale A, Yaseen NR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, The Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

The nucleoporin Nup98 gene is frequently rearranged in acute myelogenous leukemia
(AML). In most cases this results in fusion of the N terminus of Nup98 to the DNA
binding domain of a homeodomain transcription factor. The prototype of these
fusions, Nup98-HOXA9, is associated with human AML and induces AML in mouse
models. To understand the mechanisms by which Nup98-HOXA9 causes AML, we
expressed it in myeloid cells and identified its target genes using high density 
oligonucleotide microarrays. The analysis was performed in triplicate and was
confirmed by quantitative real time PCR. Of the 102 Nup98-HOXA9 target genes
identified, 92 were up-regulated, and only 10 were down-regulated, suggesting a
transcriptional activation function. A similar analysis of wild-type HOXA9
revealed 13 target genes, 12 of which were up-regulated, and 1 was
down-regulated. In contrast, wild-type Nup98 had no effect on gene expression,
demonstrating that the HOXA9 DNA binding domain is required for gene regulation. 
Co-transfection experiments using a luciferase reporter linked to the promoter of
one of the Nup98-HOXA9 target genes confirmed up-regulation at the
transcriptional level by Nup98-HOXA9 but not by either HOXA9 or Nup98. These data
indicate that Nup98-HOXA9 is an aberrant transcription factor whose activity
depends on the HOXA9 DNA binding domain but has a stronger and wider
transcriptional effect than HOXA9. Several of the genes regulated by Nup98-HOXA9 
are associated with increased cell proliferation and survival as well as drug
metabolism, providing insights into the pathogenesis and epidemiology of
Nup98-HOXA9-induced AML.

PMID: 14561764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


5. Genes Dev. 2003 Sep 15;17(18):2298-307. Epub 2003 Sep 2.

Transformation of myeloid progenitors by MLL oncoproteins is dependent on Hoxa7
and Hoxa9.

Ayton PM(1), Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford,
California 94305, USA.

Transcriptional deregulation through the production of dominant-acting chimeric
transcription factors derived from chromosomal translocations is a common theme
in the pathogenesis of acute leukemias; however, the essential target genes for
acute leukemogenesis are unknown. We demonstrate here that primary myeloid
progenitors immortalized by various MLL oncoproteins exhibit a characteristic
Hoxa gene cluster expression profile, which reflects that preferentially
expressed in the myeloid clonogenic progenitor fraction of normal bone marrow.
Continued maintenance of this MLL-dependent Hoxa gene expression profile is
associated with conditional MLL-associated myeloid immortalization. Moreover,
Hoxa7 and Hoxa9 were specifically required for efficient in vitro myeloid
immortalization by an MLL fusion protein but not other leukemogenic fusion
proteins. Finally, in a bone marrow transduction/transplantation model, Hoxa9 is 
essential for MLL-dependent leukemogenesis in vivo, a primary requirement
detected at the earliest stages of disease initiation. Thus, a genetic reliance
on Hoxa7 and Hoxa9 in MLL-mediated transformation demonstrates a gain-of-function
mechanism for MLL oncoproteins as upstream constitutive activators that promote
myeloid transformation via a Hox-dependent mechanism.

PMCID: PMC196466
PMID: 12952893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


6. Genes Dev. 2003 Aug 15;17(16):2060-72.

Structure of HoxA9 and Pbx1 bound to DNA: Hox hexapeptide and DNA recognition
anterior to posterior.

LaRonde-LeBlanc NA(1), Wolberger C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biophysics and Biophysical Chemistry, Johns Hopkins University
School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland 21205-2185, USA.

The HOX/HOM superfamily of homeodomain proteins controls cell fate and segmental 
embryonic patterning by a mechanism that is conserved in all metazoans. The
linear arrangement of the Hox genes on the chromosome correlates with the spatial
distribution of HOX protein expression along the anterior-posterior axis of the
embryo. Most HOX proteins bind DNA cooperatively with members of the PBC family
of TALE-type homeodomain proteins, which includes human Pbx1. Cooperative DNA
binding between HOX and PBC proteins requires a residue N-terminal to the HOX
homeodomain termed the hexapeptide, which differs significantly in sequence
between anterior- and posterior-regulating HOX proteins. We report here the
1.9-A-resolution structure of a posterior HOX protein, HoxA9, complexed with Pbx1
and DNA, which reveals that the posterior Hox hexapeptide adopts an altered
conformation as compared with that seen in previously determined anterior HOX/PBC
structures. The additional nonspecific interactions and altered DNA conformation 
in this structure account for the stronger DNA-binding affinity and altered
specificity observed for posterior HOX proteins when compared with anterior HOX
proteins. DNA-binding studies of wild-type and mutant HoxA9 and HoxB1 show
residues in the N-terminal arm of the homeodomains are critical for proper DNA
sequence recognition despite lack of direct contact by these residues to the DNA 
bases. These results help shed light on the mechanism of transcriptional
regulation by HOX proteins and show how DNA-binding proteins may use indirect
contacts to determine sequence specificity.

PMCID: PMC196259
PMID: 12923056  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


7. Leuk Lymphoma. 2003 Jul;44(7):1131-9.

Estrogen-regulated conditional oncoproteins: tools to address open questions in
normal myeloid cell function, normal myeloid differentiation, and the genetic
basis of differentiation arrest in myeloid leukemia.

Sykes DB(1), Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, School of
Medicine, La Jolla, CA 92093-0663, USA.

Neutrophils, monocytes and dendritic cells are effectors of innate immunity and
essential coactivators in the acquired immune response. Understanding the
biochemical basis of their mature cell functions, their differentiation from
hematopoietic progenitors, and the mechanisms by which myeloid leukemia oncogenes
block their differentiation programs, continue to be areas of active research.
Four major problems limit progress in these fields. First, the biochemical
analysis of mature cells is limited by the time and cost of purifying
neutrophils, monocytes, or dendritic cells from wild-type and genetically
modified mouse strains. Second, while immortal myeloid cell lines are used to
understand the transcriptional basis of normal terminal differentiation following
their treatment with differentiationpromoting agents (e.g. G-CSF, IL-6, RA, TPA),
these cells contain stable defects responsible for their immortalization, and the
degree to which they model normal differentiation is often incomplete. Third,
these same inducible cell lines are used as model systems to determine how
myeloid oncoproteins prevent differentiation; however, oncoproteins that block
differentiation of marrow progenitors cultured in GM-CSF or IL-3 but permit their
differentiation in response to G-CSF or RA, do not score effectively in these
assays (e.g. Hoxa9, Mll-Enl). Fourth, there is no reproducible method to derive
myeloid progenitor lines that execute predictable terminal differentiation to
neutrophils, monocytes, or dendritic cells. Developing this type of system is
needed to evaluate how myeloid gene inactivation by knockout technologies alters 
lineage-specific differentiation and mature cell function. Conditional myeloid
oncoproteins provide a tool to solve these research problems by providing a
predictable and inexpensive means of expanding, in culture, GM-CSF- or
IL-3-dependent myeloid progenitors from any genotype, and by permitting their
synchronous differentiation to neutrophils, monocytes, or dendritic cells under
defined culture conditions following inactivation of the conditional oncoprotein.
This system of conditionally immortalizing normal bone marrow precursors provides
the large numbers of normal cells required for analysis of cell biology and
protein biochemistry, and further provides a model system in which to study the
genetic mechanisms controlling terminal differentiation and how specific
oncoproteins expressed in the cell lines prevent this differentiation program.
The ability to derive conditionally-immortalized progenitor lines from knock-out 
mice provides cell lines for the reconstitution of knockout gene function and
subsequent dissection of knockout protein function by mutational analysis.
Finally, conditional myeloid cell lines can be established from both ES cells and
from d10 fetal liver cells, allowing for the analysis of embryonic lethal mutants
on both the maturation and terminal differentiation of mature myeloid cells. In
this review,we summarize the importance and limitations of current approaches in 
myeloid cell research, and how estrogen-regulated conditional oncoproteins help
to solve these problems.

PMID: 12916864  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


8. Blood. 2003 Nov 1;102(9):3172-8. Epub 2003 Jul 10.

Thrombopoietin stimulates Hoxb4 expression: an explanation for the favorable
effects of TPO on hematopoietic stem cells.

Kirito K(1), Fox N, Kaushansky K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, University of
California, San Diego, 92103, USA.

Thrombopoietin (TPO), the primary regulator of platelet production, also plays an
important role in hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) biology. In previous studies we
demonstrated that the self-renewal and expansion of HSCs is 10 to 20 times less
robust in tpo-/- mice than in controls. To explore the molecular basis of this
effect, we postulated that Hoxb4 might mediate at least part of the TPO effect on
these cells. We first analyzed the effects of TPO on Hoxb4 expression in
primitive hematopoietic cell lines; TPO increased expression of the gene 2- to
3-fold in EML and UT-7/TPO cells. We also compared Hoxb4 levels in a candidate
HSC population derived from tpo-/- and control mice; Hoxb4 expression was 2- to
5-fold lower in null HSCs. Of the numerous signal transduction molecules induced 
by TPO, we found that p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) was responsible
for the TPO-induced Hoxb4 elevation. We also demonstrated that upstream
stimulating factor 1 (USF-1), a transcription factor previously shown to regulate
Hoxb4 expression, is also induced by TPO in a p38-dependent manner. Together,
these data provide a molecular pathway by which a growth factor can modulate a
transcription factor and thereby help direct a critical developmental process.

PMID: 12855555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


9. Cancer Sci. 2003 May;94(5):437-41.

Homeobox gene expression and mutation in cervical carcinoma cells.

Hung YC(1), Ueda M, Terai Y, Kumagai K, Ueki K, Kanda K, Yamaguchi H, Akise D,
Ueki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, China Medical College, Taiwan.
gyn017@poh.osaka-med.ac.jp

An association between deregulation of homeobox (HOX) gene expression and
oncogenic transformation has been recently reported in human tumors. In this
study, we investigated HOX gene expression and mutation in cervical carcinoma
cells. Using reverse transcription-PCR, 11 human cervical carcinoma cell lines
and 14 normal cervical tissue samples were examined for mRNA expression of the 39
class I HOX genes. DNA samples from 11 cell lines were tested for mutations in
exons 1 and 2 of the HOXA10 and A13 genes using overlapping primer pairs which
also cover intron 1 of these genes. HOXA1, B2, B4, C5, C10 and D13 genes were
expressed in 8, 7, 9, 9, 9 and 11 of 11 cervical carcinoma cell lines,
respectively, but not in any of the normal cervical tissues. HOXA9, A11, A13, B5,
C4, D3 and D9 genes were expressed in all cell lines and normal tissues. In
contrast, 13 of 39 HOX genes were silent in all materials examined. Single-strand
conformational polymorphism and sequence analysis revealed a C insertion after
base 1042 and/or a G to C substitution at base 1113 in intron 1 of the HOXA13
gene in 4 of 11 cell lines, however, neither deletions nor mutations were
detected in exons 1 and 2 of the HOX A10 and A13 genes. Our data suggest that the
expression of HOXA1, B2, B4, C5, C10 and D13 genes might be involved in the
process leading to the transformation of normal cervical cells.

PMID: 12824890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


10. Cancer Res. 2003 Mar 15;63(6):1202-6.

A novel gene, MSI2, encoding a putative RNA-binding protein is recurrently
rearranged at disease progression of chronic myeloid leukemia and forms a fusion 
gene with HOXA9 as a result of the cryptic t(7;17)(p15;q23).

Barbouti A(1), Höglund M, Johansson B, Lassen C, Nilsson PG, Hagemeijer A,
Mitelman F, Fioretos T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, SE-221 85 Lund,
Sweden. Aikaterini.Barmpouti@klingen.lu.se

The pathogenetic role of the P210 BCR/ABL1 fusion gene in the chronic phase of
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) has been well established.In contrast, the genetic
mechanisms underlying the disease progression into the accelerated phase (AP) and
the final blast crisis (BC) remain poorly understood. We have previously
identified (A. Barbouti et al., Genes Chromosomes Cancer, 35: 127-137, 2002) two 
cryptic balanced translocations, t(7;17)(p15;q23) and t(7;17)(q32-34;q23), in CML
AP/BC using multicolor fluorescence in situ hybridization. In this study, we show
that a novel gene in 17q23, Musashi-2 (MSI2), encoding a putative RNA-binding
protein, is rearranged in both cases and that a MSI2/HOXA9 fusion gene is formed 
in the case with the 7p15 breakpoint. The identified in-frame MSI2/HOXA9 fusion
transcript retains both of the RNA recognition motif domains of MSI2, which is
fused to the homeobox domain of HOXA9, and is likely to play an important role in
the disease progression of CML.

PMID: 12649177  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


11. Blood. 2003 Jul 1;102(1):262-8. Epub 2003 Mar 13.

Gene expression signatures in MLL-rearranged T-lineage and B-precursor acute
leukemias: dominance of HOX dysregulation.

Ferrando AA(1), Armstrong SA, Neuberg DS, Sallan SE, Silverman LB, Korsmeyer SJ, 
Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Mayer-630, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 
Binney Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Rearrangements of the MLL locus, located on human chromosome 11q23, are frequent 
in both infant and therapy-related leukemias. Gene expression analysis of
MLL-rearranged B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemias (MLL B-ALLs) has
identified these cases as a unique subtype of leukemia, characterized by the
expression of genes associated with both lymphoid and myeloid hematopoietic
lineages. Here we show that MLL fusions also generate a distinct genetic subtype 
of T-lineage ALL (MLL T-ALL), in which leukemic cells are characterized by an
early arrest in thymocyte differentiation, with suggestive evidence of commitment
to the gammadelta lineage. Interestingly, multiple genes linked to cell
proliferation (eg, PCNA, MYC, CDK2, and POLA) were down-regulated in MLL-fusion
samples, relative to those transformed by other T-ALL oncogenes (P <.000 001,
Fisher exact test). Overall, MLL T-ALL cases consistently demonstrated increased 
levels of expression of a subset of major HOX genes--HOXA9, HOXA10, and
HOXC6--and the MEIS1 HOX coregulator (P <.008, one-sided Wilcoxon test), a
pattern of gene expression that was reiterated in MLL B-ALLs. However, expression
of myeloid lineage genes, previously reported in MLL B-ALLs, was not identified
in T-lineage cases with this abnormality, suggesting that myeloid gene
dysregulation is dispensable in leukemic transformation mediated by MLL fusion
proteins. Our findings implicate dysregulation of HOX gene family members as a
dominant mechanism of leukemic transformation induced by chimeric MLL oncogenes.

PMID: 12637319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


12. Gastroenterol Clin Biol. 2002 Dec;26(12):1110-7.

[Increased expression of HOXA9 gene in Hirschsprung disease].

[Article in French]

Méchine-Neuville A(1), Lefebvre O, Bellocq JP, Kedinger M, Simon-Assmann P.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM Unité 381, Ontogenèse et Pathologie du Système Digestif, 3, avenue
Molière, 67200 Strasbourg, France.

OBJECTIVE: Hirschsprung disease is characterized by segmental aganglionosis of
the terminal bowel. Neurons of the enteric nervous system arise from neural
crest, migrate and colonize intestinal muscle coat where they proliferate and
differentiate. The first pathophysiologic hypothesis suggests an absence of
neural cell migration. The most recent hypothesis involves disorders of their
homing and/or their differentiation due to an altered intestinal
microenvironment.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We analyzed the expression of muscle markers and laminin
isoforms by immunocytochemistry and of homeotic genes involved in the
regionalization of the intestinal mesenchyme during development (HOXA4, HOXA9,
HOXD9) by RT-PCR, in colon specimens from two children with Hirschsprung disease 
(pathological and transition regions) and from healthy adult controls.
RESULTS: We showed an increase in HOXA9 gene expression in Hirschsprung disease
specimens while HOXA4 and HOXD9 mRNA expressions were unchanged. No significant
differences in the muscle markers nor in the laminin isoforms were noted.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that intrinsic dysregulation of the intestinal
wall microenvironment could account for the pathophysiology of Hirschsprung
disease.

PMID: 12520199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


13. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2003 Jan;36(1):107-12.

Fusion of the NUP98 gene and the homeobox gene HOXC13 in acute myeloid leukemia
with t(11;12)(p15;q13).

Panagopoulos I(1), Isaksson M, Billström R, Strömbeck B, Mitelman F, Johansson B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Genetics, Lund University Hospital, Sweden.
ioannis.panagopoulos@klingen.lu.se

The NUP98 gene at 11p15 is known to be fused to DDX10, HOXA9, HOXA11, HOXA13,
HOXD11, HOXD13, LEDGF, NSD1, NSD3, PMX1, RAP1GDS1, and TOP1 in various
hematologic malignancies. The common theme in all NUP98 chimeras is a transcript 
consisting of the 5' part of NUP98 and the 3' portion of the partner gene;
however, apart from the frequent fusion to different homeobox genes, there is no 
apparent similarity among the other partners. We here report a de novo acute
myeloid leukemia with a t(11;12)(p15;q13), resulting in a novel NUP98/HOXC13
fusion. Fluorescence in situ hybridization analyses, by the use of probes
covering NUP98 and the HOXC gene cluster at 12q13, revealed a fusion signal at
the der(11)t(11;12), indicating a NUP98/HOXC chimera, whereas no fusion was found
on the der(12)t(11;12), suggesting that the translocation was accompanied by a
deletion of the reciprocal fusion gene. Reverse transcription-PCR and sequence
analyses showed that exon 16 (nucleotide 2290) of NUP98 was fused in-frame with
exon 2 (nucleotide 852) of HOXC13. Neither the HOXC13/NUP98 transcript nor the
normal HOXC13 was expressed. The present results, together with previous studies 
of NUP98/homeobox gene fusions, strongly indicate that NUP98/HOXC13 is of
pathogenetic importance in t(11;12)-positive acute myeloid leukemia.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12461755  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Mol Cell. 2002 Nov;10(5):1119-28.

ALL-1 is a histone methyltransferase that assembles a supercomplex of proteins
involved in transcriptional regulation.

Nakamura T(1), Mori T, Tada S, Krajewski W, Rozovskaia T, Wassell R, Dubois G,
Mazo A, Croce CM, Canaani E.

Author information: 
(1)Kimmel Cancer Center and Department of Microbiology, Jefferson Medical
College, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA. t_nakamura@mail.jci.tju.edu

ALL-1 is a member of the human trithorax/Polycomb gene family and is also
involved in acute leukemia. ALL-1 is present within a stable, very large
multiprotein supercomplex composed of > or =29 proteins. The majority of the
latter are components of the human transcription complexes TFIID (including TBP),
SWI/SNF, NuRD, hSNF2H, and Sin3A. Other components are involved in RNA processing
or in histone methylation. The complex remodels, acetylates, deacetylates, and
methylates nucleosomes and/or free histones. The complex's H3-K4 methylation
activity is conferred by the ALL-1 SET domain. Chromatin immunoprecipitations
show that ALL-1 and other complex components examined are bound at the promoter
of an active ALL-1-dependent Hox a9 gene. In parallel, H3-K4 is methylated, and
histones H3 and H4 are acetylated at this promoter.

PMID: 12453419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


15. Leukemia. 2002 Nov;16(11):2302-8.

A novel infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia cell line with MLL-AF5q31 fusion
transcript.

Imamura T(1), Morimoto A, Ikushima S, Kakazu N, Hada S, Tabata Y, Yagi T, Inaba
T, Hibi S, Sugimoto T, Imashuku S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Japan.

Infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is characterized by the presence of the
proB phenotype (CD10(-)/CD19(+)), poor prognosis and frequent rearrangement of
the mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) gene. The most frequent rearrangement is
t(4;11)(q21;q23), the role of whose product, the MLL-AF4 fusion transcript, has
been extensively studied in leukemogenesis. In a cell line of infant leukemia
with MLL rearrangement denoted KP-L-RY, panhandle PCR amplification of cDNA
revealed the presence of a fusion transcript, MLL-AF5q31, indicating that AF5q31 
is also a partner gene of MLL. In this fusion transcript the MLL exon 6 is fused 
in frame to the 5' side of the putative transactivation domain of AF5q31. The
AF5q31 protein is a member of the AF4/LAF4/FMR2-related family of proteins, which
have been suggested to play a role in hematopoietic cell growth and
differentiation. The MLL-AF5q31 fusion transcript, although probably rare,
appears to be associated with the pathogenesis of infant ALL like MLL-AF4.
Co-expression of HoxA9 and Meis1 genes in the KP-L-RY cell line indicated
possible functional similarity between MLL-AF4 and MLL-AF5q31. Further
understanding of the function of AF5q31 as well as the specific leukemogenic
mechanism of MLL-AF5q31 awaits future studies.

PMID: 12399976  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


16. Blood. 2002 Dec 1;100(12):4177-84. Epub 2002 Aug 1.

Oncogenic interaction between BCR-ABL and NUP98-HOXA9 demonstrated by the use of 
an in vitro purging culture system.

Mayotte N(1), Roy DC, Yao J, Kroon E, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Stem Cells, Clinical Research Institute of
Montreal, QC, Canada.

Chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) is a clonal stem cell disease caused by the
BCR-ABL oncoprotein and is characterized, in its early phase, by excessive
accumulation of mature myeloid cells, which eventually leads to acute leukemia.
The genetic events involved in CML's progression to acute leukemia remain largely
unknown. Recent studies have detected the presence of the NUP98-HOXA9 fusion
oncogene in acute leukemia derived from CML patients, which suggests that these 2
oncoproteins may interact and influence CML disease progression. Using in vitro
purging of BCR-ABL-transduced mouse bone marrow cells, we can now report that
recipients of bone marrow cells engineered to coexpress BCR-ABL with NUP98-HOXA9 
develop acute leukemia within 7 to 10 days after transplantation. However, no
disease is detected for more than 2 months in mice receiving bone marrow cells
expressing either BCR-ABL or NUP98-HOXA9. We also provide evidence of high levels
of HOXA9 expressed in leukemic blasts from acute-phase CML patients and that it
interacts significantly on a genetic level with BCR-ABL in our in vivo CML model.
Together, these studies support a causative, as opposed to a consequential, role 
for NUP98-HOXA9 (and possibly HOXA9) in CML disease progression.

PMID: 12393433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


17. Br J Haematol. 2002 Oct;119(1):119-21.

Frequent co-expression of HoxA9 and Meis1 genes in infant acute lymphoblastic
leukaemia with MLL rearrangement.

Imamura T(1), Morimoto A, Takanashi M, Hibi S, Sugimoto T, Ishii E, Imashuku S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Paediatrics, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, Japan.
imamura@koto.kpu-m.ac.jp

We studied the expression of HoxA9 and Meis1 by reverse transcriptase-polymerase 
chain reaction analysis in leukaemic cells from cases of infant acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL, n = 27) and childhood ALL (n = 29). These two genes
were co-expressed significantly more frequently in infant ALL than in childhood
ALL (19/27 vs0/29 cases, P < 0.001) and were highly associated with MLL gene
rearrangement in infant ALL cases (P < 0.001). These findings indicate that the
HoxA9 and Meis1 genes are closely associated with MLL gene rearrangement in the
development of infant ALL, which represents a distinct entity of childhood ALL.

PMID: 12358913  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Int J Hematol. 2002 Jul;76(1):80-3.

A case of acute myeloid leukemia with t(7;11)(p15;p15) mimicking myeloid crisis
of chronic myelogenous leukemia.

Kawakami K(1), Miyanishi S, Nishii K, Usui E, Murata T, Shinsato I, Shiku H.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Suzuka General Hospital, Mie, Japan.
Kawakei@cocoa.ocn.ne.jp

The chromosome aberration t(7;11)(p15;p15) is uncommon but recurrent in leukemia.
We experienced a case of acute leukemia with t(7;11)(p15;p15), the hematological 
appearance of which mimicked myeloid crisis in chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).
This case showed splenomegaly, a decreased neutrophil alkaline phosphatase (NAP) 
score, increased vitamin B12 value, and cells at all stages of neutrophilic
maturation in both bone marrow and peripheral blood. We initially had difficulty 
differentiating acute myeloid leukemia (AML) M2 with marked myeloid
differentiation from myeloid crisis of Philadelphia chromosome (Ph)-negative CML.
Immature myeloid cells in the peripheral blood disappeared and cytogenetic
analysis indicated that marrow cells changed to the normal karyotype after
remission induction therapy. Therefore, this case was thought not to be myeloid
crisis but AML M2 subtype. The NUP98/HOXA9 fusion transcript was detected by
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) at exon A but not exon B
of NUP98.

PMID: 12138901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2002 Aug;34(4):437-43.

The chromosome translocation t(7;11)(p15;p15) in acute myeloid leukemia results
in fusion of the NUP98 gene with a HOXA cluster gene, HOXA13, but not HOXA9.

Taketani T(1), Taki T, Ono R, Kobayashi Y, Ida K, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Graduate School of Medicine, University of Tokyo,
7-3-1 Hongo, Bunkyo-ku, Tokyo 113-8655, Japan.

The nucleoporin gene NUP98 has been reported to be fused to 9 partner genes in
hematologic malignancies with 11p15 translocations. The NUP98-HOXA9 fusion gene
has been identified in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and chronic myelogenous
leukemia with t(7;11)(p15;p15). We report here a novel NUP98 partner gene,
HOXA13, in a patient with de novo AML having t(7;11)(p15;p15). The HOXA13 gene is
part of the HOXA cluster genes and contains 2 exons, encoding a protein of 338
amino acids with a homeodomain. The NUP98-HOXA13 fusion protein consists of the
N-terminal phenylalanine-glycine repeat motif of NUP98 and the C-terminal
homeodomain of HOXA13, similar to the NUP98-HOXA9 fusion protein. Reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) analysis in various leukemic
cell lines showed that the HOXA13 gene was expressed significantly more
frequently in acute monocytic leukemic cell lines than in other leukemic cell
lines (P = 0.039). HOXA13 and three HOXA cluster genes (A9, A10, A11) located at 
the 5' end of the HOXA9 gene were frequently expressed in myeloid leukemic cell
lines. Our results revealed that t(7;11)(p15;p15) was not a single chromosomal
abnormality at the molecular level. The protein encoded by the NUP98-HOXA13
fusion gene is similar to that encoded by NUP98-HOXA9, and the expression pattern
of the HOXA13 gene in leukemic cell lines is similar to that of the HOXA9 gene,
suggesting that the NUP98-HOXA13 fusion protein may play a role in leukemogenesis
through a mechanism similar to that of the NUP98-HOXA9 fusion protein.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12112533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


20. Oncogene. 2002 Jun 20;21(27):4247-56.

Nup98-HoxA9 immortalizes myeloid progenitors, enforces expression of Hoxa9, Hoxa7
and Meis1, and alters cytokine-specific responses in a manner similar to that
induced by retroviral co-expression of Hoxa9 and Meis1.

Calvo KR(1), Sykes DB, Pasillas MP, Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)University of California School of Medicine, Department of Pathology 9500
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, California, CA 92093-0612, USA.

The association between acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) and the aberrant expression
of Hoxa9 is evidenced by (1) proviral activation of Hoxa9 and Meis1 in BXH-2
murine AML, (2) formation of the chimeric Nup98-HoxA9 transactivator protein as a
consequence of the t(7;11) translocation in human AML, and (3) the strong
expression of HoxA9 and Meis1 in human AML. In mouse models, enforced retroviral 
expression of Hoxa9 alone in marrow is not sufficient to cause rapid AML, while
co-expression of Meis1 and Hoxa9 induces rapid AML. In contrast, retroviral
expression of Nup98-HoxA9 is sufficient to cause rapid AML in the absence of
enforced Meis1 expression. Previously, we demonstrated that Hoxa9 could block the
differentiation of murine marrow progenitors cultured in granulocyte-macrophage
colony-simulating factor (GM-CSF). These progenitors lacked Meis1 expression,
could not proliferate in stem cell factor (SCF), but could differentiate into
neutrophils when switched into granulocyte colony-simulating factor (G-CSF).
Ectopic expression of Meis1 in these Hoxa9 cells suppressed their G-CSF-induced
differentiation, permitted proliferation in SCF, and therein offered a potential 
explanation of cooperative function. Because Meis1 binds N-terminal Hoxa9
sequences that are replaced by Nup98, we hypothesized that Nup98-HoxA9 might
consolidate the biochemical functions of both Hoxa9 and Meis1 on target gene
promoters and might evoke their same lymphokine-responsive profile in
immortalized progenitors. Here we report that Nup98-HoxA9, indeed mimicks Hoxa9
plus Meis1 coexpression - it immortalizes myeloid progenitors, prevents
differentiation in response to GM-CSF, IL-3, G-CSF, and permits proliferation in 
SCF. Unexpectedly, however, Nup98-Hoxa9 also enforced strong transcription of the
cellular Hoxa9, Hoxa7 and Meis1 genes at levels similar to those found in mouse
AML's generated by proviral activation of Hoxa9 and Meis1. Using Hoxa9(-/-)
marrow, we demonstrate that expression of Hoxa9 is not required for myeloid
immortalization by Nup98-HoxA9. Rapid leukaemogenesis by Nup98-HoxA9 may
therefore result from both the intrinsic functions of Nup98-HoxA9, as well as of 
those of coexpressed HOX and MEIS1 genes.

PMID: 12082612  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2002 May 28;99(11):7622-7.

A murine model of CML blast crisis induced by cooperation between BCR/ABL and
NUP98/HOXA9.

Dash AB(1), Williams IR, Kutok JL, Tomasson MH, Anastasiadou E, Lindahl K, Li S, 
Van Etten RA, Borrow J, Housman D, Druker B, Gilliland DG.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Constitutive activation of tyrosine kinases, such as the BCR/ABL fusion
associated with t(9;22)(q34;q22), is a hallmark of chronic myeloid leukemia (CML)
syndromes in humans. Expression of BCR/ABL is both necessary and sufficient to
cause a chronic myeloproliferative syndrome in murine bone marrow transplantation
models, and absolutely depends on kinase activity. Progression of CML to acute
leukemia (blast crisis) in humans has been associated with acquisition of
secondary chromosomal translocations, including the t(7;11)(p15;p15) resulting in
the NUP98/HOXA9 fusion protein. We demonstrate that BCR/ABL cooperates with
NUP98/HOXA9 to cause blast crisis in a murine model. The phenotype depends both
on expression of BCR/ABL and NUP98/HOXA9, but tumors retain sensitivity to the
ABL inhibitor STI571 in vitro and in vivo. This paradigm is applicable to other
constitutively activated tyrosine kinases such as TEL/PDGFbetaR. These
experiments document cooperative effects between constitutively activated
tyrosine kinases, which confer proliferative and survival properties to
hematopoietic cells, with mutations that impair differentiation, such as the
NUP98/HOXA9, giving rise to the acute myeloid leukemia (AML) phenotype.
Furthermore, these data indicate that despite acquisition of additional
mutations, CML blast crisis cells retain their dependence on BCR/ABL for
proliferation and survival.

PMCID: PMC124303
PMID: 12032333  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


22. Br J Haematol. 2002 Jan;116(1):170-2.

t(7;11)(p15;p15) Chronic myeloid leukaemia developed into blastic transformation 
showing a novel NUP98/HOXA11 fusion.

Suzuki A(1), Ito Y, Sashida G, Honda S, Katagiri T, Fujino T, Nakamura T,
Ohyashiki K.

Author information: 
(1)First Department of Internal Medicine, Tokyo Medical University, Japan.

We encountered a patient with Philadelphia-negative chronic myeloid leukaemia,
with t(7;11)(p15;p15), in whom acute leukaemia phase (acute myeloid leukaemia-M2 
morphology) developed within a short period. We detected a novel gene fusion
between NUP98 and HOXA11 both in the chronic phase and in the acute leukaemia
phase in this case. Although it is well known that a fusion of NUP98-HOXA9 in
myeloid malignancies is created by the t(7;11)(p15;p15), this case suggests the
possibility that HOXA11 might be another partner gene for NUP98 in
t(7;11)(p15;p15) leukaemia.

PMID: 11841413  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


23. Leukemia. 2002 Feb;16(2):186-95.

Quantitative HOX expression in chromosomally defined subsets of acute myelogenous
leukemia.

Drabkin HA(1), Parsy C, Ferguson K, Guilhot F, Lacotte L, Roy L, Zeng C, Baron A,
Hunger SP, Varella-Garcia M, Gemmill R, Brizard F, Brizard A, Roche J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado Health Sciences and
Cancer Centers, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

We used a degenerate RT-PCR screen and subsequent real-time quantitative RT-PCR
assays to examine the expression of HOX and TALE-family genes in 34 cases of
chromosomally defined AML for which outcome data were available. AMLs with
favorable cytogenetic features were associated with low overall HOX gene
expression whereas poor prognostic cases had high levels. Characteristically,
multiple HOXA family members including HOXA3-HOXA10 were jointly overexpressed in
conjunction with HOXB3, HOXB6, MEIS1 and PBX3. Higher levels of expression were
also observed in the FAB subtype, AML-M1. Spearmann correlation coefficients
indicated that the expression levels for many of these genes were highly
inter-related. While we did not detect any significant correlations between HOX
expression and complete response rates or age in this limited set of patients,
there was a significant correlation between event-free survival and HOXA7 with a 
trend toward significance for HoxA9, HoxA4 and HoxA5. While patients with
elevated HOX expression did worse, there were notable exceptions. Thus, although 
HOX overexpression and clinical resistance to chemotherapy often coincide, they
are not inextricably linked. Our results indicate that quantitative HOX analysis 
has the potential to add new information to the management of patients with AML, 
especially where characteristic chromosomal alterations are lacking.

PMID: 11840284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Blood. 2002 Feb 15;99(4):1428-33.

Single-translocation and double-chimeric transcripts: detection of NUP98-HOXA9 in
myeloid leukemias with HOXA11 or HOXA13 breaks of the chromosomal translocation
t(7;11)(p15;p15).

Fujino T(1), Suzuki A, Ito Y, Ohyashiki K, Hatano Y, Miura I, Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.

It has been demonstrated that the chromosomal translocation t(7;11)(p15;p15) in
patients with human acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) and chronic myelogenous
leukemia (CML) invariably involves fusion of the nucleoporin gene, NUP98, on
chromosome 11 and the class 1 HOX gene, HOXA9, on chromosome 7, and that the
fusion gene NUP98-HOXA9 is an important gene in myeloid leukemogenesis. Here are 
reported 2 novel chromosome 7p15 targets of the t(7;11)(p15;p15) chromosomal
translocation in 2 patients with CML and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Southern
blot and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analyses of leukemia cell DNA failed to 
show rearrangement of HOXA9, whereas NUP98 was found to be rearranged in both
cases. Reverse transcription-PCR analysis using a NUP98 primer and a degenerate
primer corresponding to the third helix of the homeodomain of HOXA demonstrated
that NUP98 was fused in-frame to HOXA11 in the patient with CML and to HOXA13 in 
the patient with MDS. The chromosomal breakpoints on 7p15 were located within
introns of HOXA11 or HOXA13 genes. In both patients chimeric NUP98-HOXA9
transcripts were also observed. These findings suggest that AbdB-type HOXA genes 
are common targets of t(7;11)(p15;p15) chromosomal translocations and that a
single translocation can produce more than one NUP98-HOXA fusion gene, presumably
because of altered splicing.

PMID: 11830496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Blood. 2002 Jan 1;99(1):121-9.

Overexpression of the myeloid leukemia-associated Hoxa9 gene in bone marrow cells
induces stem cell expansion.

Thorsteinsdottir U(1), Mamo A, Kroon E, Jerome L, Bijl J, Lawrence HJ, Humphries 
K, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Hemopoietic Stem Cells, Clinical Research 
Institute of Montréal, Québec, Canada.

Cytogenetic, genetic, and functional studies have demonstrated a direct link
between deregulated Hoxa9 expression and acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Hoxa9
overexpression in mouse bone marrow cells invariably leads to AML within 3 to 10 
months, suggesting the requirement for additional genetic events prior to AML. To
gain further insight into how Hoxa9 affects hematopoietic development at the
preleukemic stage, we have engineered its overexpression (1) in hematopoietic
stem cells using retrovirus-mediated gene transfer and generated bone marrow
transplantation chimeras and (2) in lymphoid cells using transgenic mice.
Compared with controls, recipients of Hoxa9-transduced cells had an about 15-fold
increase in transplantable lymphomyeloid long-term repopulating cells, indicating
the capacity for this oncogene to confer a growth advantage to hematopoietic stem
cells. In addition, overexpression of Hoxa9 in more mature cells enhanced
granulopoiesis and partially blocked B lymphopoiesis at the pre-B-cell stage but 
had no detectable effect on T lymphoid development. Interestingly, despite
specifically directing high expression of Hoxa9 in T and B lymphoid lineages,
none of the Hoxa9 transgenic mice developed lymphoid malignancies for the
observation period of more than 18 months.

PMID: 11756161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2001 Nov 6;98(23):13120-5. Epub 2001 Oct 30.

Meis1a suppresses differentiation by G-CSF and promotes proliferation by SCF:
potential mechanisms of cooperativity with Hoxa9 in myeloid leukemia.

Calvo KR(1), Knoepfler PS, Sykes DB, Pasillas MP, Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, School of Medicine, 9500
Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093-0612, USA.

Hoxa9 and Meis1a are homeodomain transcription factors that heterodimerize on DNA
and are down-regulated during normal myeloid differentiation. Hoxa9 and Meis1a
cooperate to induce acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in mice, and are coexpressed in 
human AML. Despite their cooperativity in leukemogenesis, we demonstrated
previously that retroviral expression of Hoxa9 alone--in the absence of
coexpressed retroviral Meis1 or of expression of endogenous Meis genes--blocks
neutrophil and macrophage differentiation of primary myeloid progenitors cultured
in granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). Expression of Meis1
alone did not immortalize any factor-dependent marrow progenitor. Because
HoxA9-immortalized progenitors still execute granulocytic differentiation in
response to granulocyte CSF (G-CSF) and monocyte differentiation in response to
macrophage CSF (M-CSF), we tested the possibility that Meis1a cooperates with
Hoxa9 by blocking viable differentiation pathways unaffected by Hoxa9 alone. Here
we report that Meis1a suppresses G-CSF-induced granulocytic differentiation of
Hoxa9-immortalized progenitors, permitting indefinite self-renewal in G-CSF.
Meis1a also reprograms Hoxa9-immortalized progenitors to proliferate, rather than
die, in response to stem cell factor (SCF) alone. We propose that Meis1a and
Hoxa9 are part of a molecular switch that regulates progenitor abundance by
suppressing differentiation and maintaining self-renewal in response to different
subsets of cytokines during myelopoiesis. The independent differentiation
pathways targeted by Hoxa9 and Meis1a prompt a "cooperative differentiation
arrest" hypothesis for a subset of leukemia, in which cooperating transcription
factor oncoproteins block complementary subsets of differentiation pathways,
establishing a more complete differentiation block in vivo.

PMCID: PMC60834
PMID: 11687616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Blood. 2001 Oct 15;98(8):2308-18.

Estrogen-dependent E2a/Pbx1 myeloid cell lines exhibit conditional
differentiation that can be arrested by other leukemic oncoproteins.

Sykes DB(1), Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, University of California San Diego School
of Medicine, La Jolla 92093-0612, USA. dsykes@ucsd.edu

The molecular pathways of normal myeloid differentiation, as well as the
mechanisms by which oncogenes disrupt this process, remain poorly understood. A
major limitation in approaching this problem has been the lack of suitable cell
lines that exhibit normal, terminal, and synchronous differentiation in the
absence of endogenous oncoproteins and in response to physiologic cytokines, and 
whose differentiation can be arrested by ectopically expressed human
oncoproteins. This report describes clonal, granulocyte-macrophage
colony-stimulating factor-dependent myeloid cell lines that exhibit these
properties. The cell lines were established by conditional immortalization of
primary murine marrow progenitors with an estrogen-regulated E2a/Pbx1-estrogen
receptor fusion protein. Clones were identified that proliferated as immortalized
blasts in the presence of estrogen, and that exhibited granulocytic, monocytic,
or bipotential (granulocytic and monocytic) differentiation on estrogen
withdrawal. Differentiation was normal and terminal as evidenced by morphology,
cell surface markers, gene expression, and functional assays. The differentiation
of the cells could be arrested by heterologous oncoproteins including AML1/ETO,
PML/RARalpha, PLZF/RARalpha, Nup98/HoxA9, and other Hox proteins. Furthermore,
the study examined the effects of cooperating oncoproteins such as Ras or
Bcr/Abl, which allowed for both factor-independent proliferation and
differentiation, or Bcl-2, which permitted factor-independent survival but not
proliferation. These myeloid cell lines provide tools for examining the
biochemical and genetic pathways that accompany normal differentiation as well as
a system in which to dissect how other leukemic oncoproteins interfere with these
pathways.

PMID: 11588024  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Exp Hematol. 2001 Jul;29(7):856-63.

Inhibition of myeloid differentiation by Hoxa9, Hoxb8, and Meis homeobox genes.

Fujino T(1), Yamazaki Y, Largaespada DA, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Hirokawa K,
Nakamura T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Carcinogenesis, The Cancer Institute, Japanese Foundation for
Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.

OBJECTIVE: The homeobox gene Hoxb8 is activated in the murine myelomonocytic cell
line WEHI-3B as a result of intracisternal A particle integration. Cooperative
activation between Hoxa9 and Meis1 is induced by retroviral integration in BXH2
murine myeloid leukemias and the myeloid leukemia cell line M1. The present study
was conducted to examine possible Meis gene activation and cooperative DNA
binding of homeobox proteins in WEHI-3B and to reveal the specific role of Hox
and Meis genes in myeloid differentiation.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Northern blot analysis and reverse transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction were performed to examine homeobox genes expression.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assay was performed to evaluate DNA binding of
homeobox proteins. Myeloid differentiation of 32Dcl3 was induced by granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor.
RESULTS: Meis2 was coactivated with Hoxb8 in WEHI-3B cells. DNA-protein complexes
including Hox, Meis, and Pbx were observed in WEHI-3B and 32Dcl3. Expression and 
the DNA-binding complex of Hoxa9, Hoxb8, Meis1, and Meis2 were down-regulated
during myeloid differentiation of 32Dcl3 cells. Enforced expression of Hox or
Meis genes inhibited myeloid differentiation of 32Dcl3.
CONCLUSION: The results indicate that Meis2 is an important Meis gene for myeloid
leukemogenesis and that Hox and Meis are important genes for myeloid
leukemogenesis through differentiation block.

PMID: 11438208  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Protein Sci. 2001 Jun;10(6):1244-53.

The HoxB1 hexapeptide is a prefolded domain: implications for the Pbx1/Hox
interaction.

Slupsky CM(1), Sykes DB, Gay GL, Sykes BD.

Author information: 
(1)Protein Engineering Network of Centres of Excellence, Department of
Biochemistry, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Alberta, T6G 2H7, Canada.

Hox proteins are transcriptional regulators that bind consensus DNA sequences.
The DNA-binding specificity of many of these Hox proteins is modulated by the
heterodimerization with partners, such as the Pbx proteins. This cooperative
heterodimerization is accomplished through a conserved hexapeptide motif found
N-terminal to the Hox DNA-binding homeodomain. Several human leukemias have been 
associated with a chromosomal translocation involving either the Hox gene (i.e., 
NUP98/HOXA9) or the gene encoding Pbx1 (E2A/PBX1). The transforming ability of
these fusion oncoproteins relies at least partially on the ability to interact
with one another through this hexapeptide motif. Herein we describe NMR
structural calculations of the hexapeptide of HoxB1
(Nalpha-acetyl-Thr-Phe-Asp-Trp-Met-Lys-amide) that has been shown to mediate
binding between HoxB1 and Pbx1 and a hexapeptide consensus sequence
(Nalpha-acetyl-Leu-Phe-Pro-Trp-Met-Arg-amide). The consensus peptide exists in
two conformations caused by cis-trans isomerization of the Phe-Pro peptide bond. 
The structures of the HoxB1 peptide and the trans form of the consensus peptide
reveal a turn very similar to that found as part of the HoxB1/Pbx1/DNA complex in
the X-ray crystal structure. This observation implies that this region is at
least partially 'preformed' and thus ready to interact with Pbx1 and stabilize
binding of Pbx1 and HoxB1 to DNA. The structural results presented here provide a
starting point for synthesizing potential nonpeptide or cyclical peptide
antagonists that mimic the interaction of these transcriptional cofactors
resulting in a potential chemotherapeutic for certain types of leukemias.

PMCID: PMC2374006
PMID: 11369863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 15;20(7):874-8.

Upregulation of Meis1 and HoxA9 in acute lymphocytic leukemias with the t(4 : 11)
abnormality.

Rozovskaia T(1), Feinstein E, Mor O, Foa R, Blechman J, Nakamura T, Croce CM,
Cimino G, Canaani E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Rearrangements of the human ALL-1 gene are frequently encountered in acute
lymphocytic leukemias (ALL) and acute myeloid leukemias (AML). These
rearrangements are mostly due to chromosome translocations and result in
production of chimeric proteins composed of the N-terminal fragment of ALL-1 and 
the C-terminal segments of the partner proteins. The most common chromosome
translocation involving ALL-1 is the t(4 : 11) associated with ALL. ALL-1 is the 
human homologue of Drosophila trithorax and directly activates transcription of
multiple Hox genes. A preliminary DNA microarray screen indicated that the Meis1,
HoxA9 and AC133 genes were overexpressed in ALLs with t(4 : 11), compared to ALLs
with very similar phenotype but without the chromosomal abnormality. These genes,
as well as additional five Hox genes, were subjected to comprehensive
semi-quantitative or quantitative RT-PCR analysis in 57 primary ALL and AML
tumors. Meis1 and HoxA9 were found expressed in 13/14 of ALLs with the t(4 : 11) 
and in 8/8 of AMLs with ALL-1 rearrangements. The two genes were not consistently
transcribed in other types of ALL. AC133 was transcribed in 13/14 of ALLs with
t(4 : 11), but in only 4/8 of AMLs with ALL-1 rearrangements. HoxA10 was
expressed in most leukemias with ALL-1 alterations, but was also transcribed in
PrePreB CD10(-) ALLs lacking the t(4 : 11). Expression of HoxA5, HoxA7, HoxC8 and
HoxC10 did not correlate with ALL-1 rearrangements. Coexpression of Meis1 and
HoxA9, overexpression of HoxA10, and overexpression or fusion of HoxA9 were
previously implicated in certain acute myeloid leukemias in mice and humans. The 
present work suggests that upregulation of Meis1, HoxA9, and possibly HoxA10
might also play a role in pathogenesis of acute lymphocytic and acute myeloid
leukemias associated with ALL-1 fusions.

PMID: 11314021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Blood. 2001 Apr 15;97(8):2286-92.

Overexpression of HOXA10 perturbs human lymphomyelopoiesis in vitro and in vivo.

Buske C(1), Feuring-Buske M, Antonchuk J, Rosten P, Hogge DE, Eaves CJ, Humphries
RK.

Author information: 
(1)The Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, and the Departments 
of Medicine and Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.

Several studies point to multiple members of the Hox transcription factor family 
as playing key roles in normal hematopoietic development, and they link the
imbalanced expression of these transcription factors, in particular of the
Abd-like A cluster HOX genes HOXA9 and HOXA10, to leukemogenesis. To test
directly the hypothesis that HOXA10 is involved in human hematopoietic
development, the gene was retrovirally overexpressed in human highly purified
CD34(+)/GFP(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells derived from cord blood or fetal
liver sources, and the impact of aberrant gene expression was analyzed on
differentiation and proliferation in vitro and in vivo. HOXA10 misexpression
profoundly impaired myeloid differentiation with a higher yield of blast cells in
liquid culture and a greater than 100-fold increased generation of blast colonies
after in vitro expansion or after replating of primary colonies first plated in
methylcellulose directly after transduction (P < .01). Furthermore, aberrant
HOXA10 expression almost completely blocked erythroid differentiation in
methylcellulose (P < .02). HOXA10 deregulation also severely perturbed the
differentiation of human progenitors in vivo, reducing B-cell development by 70% 
in repopulated NOD/SCID mice and enhancing myelopoiesis in the transduced
compartment. The data provide evidence that the balanced expression of HOXA10 is 
pivotal for normal human hematopoietic development and that aberrant expression
of the gene contributes to impaired differentiation and increased proliferation
of human hematopoietic progenitor cells. These results also provide a framework
to initiate more detailed analyses of HOX regulatory domains and HOX cofactors in
the human system in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 11290589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2001 Apr;30(4):410-5.

NUP98 gene rearrangements and the clonal evolution of chronic myelogenous
leukemia.

Ahuja HG(1), Popplewell L, Tcheurekdjian L, Slovak ML.

Author information: 
(1)Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Department of Medicine, Buffalo, NY, USA.
harisha@waushosp.org

The role of the BCR-ABL fusion gene in the pathogenesis of the chronic phase of
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) has been well established. Several additional 
genetic changes have been reported to occur, at varying frequencies, during
disease progression to "accelerated" and "blast crisis" phases. The NUP98 gene
localized to chromosome band 11p15 has been found at the breakpoints of several
distinct chromosomal translocations in patients with both de novo and
therapy-related myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) and acute myelogenous leukemia
(AML). Using combined cytogenetic and molecular analyses, we have found
rearrangements of the NUP98 gene in the leukemic cells of two patients with
Philadelphia chromosome-positive CML, during disease evolution. As expected,
analysis of the t(7;11)(p15;p15) from one of the patients showed an in-frame
NUP98-HOXA9 fusion. The fusion points were similar to previously reported
NUP98-HOXA9 fusion points from patients with MDS/AML. Our results indicate that
the NUP98 gene is an additional, albeit infrequent, genetic target during clonal 
evolution of CML.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11241795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. Genomics. 2001 Jan 15;71(2):214-21.

The MEIS1 oncogene is highly expressed in neuroblastoma and amplified in cell
line IMR32.

Spieker N(1), van Sluis P, Beitsma M, Boon K, van Schaik BD, van Kampen AH, Caron
H, Versteeg R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Amsterdam, Amsterdam, 1100DE, The 
Netherlands.

Neuroblastoma is an embryonal tumor originating from neural crest-derived cells. 
Here we present the serendipitous cloning of amplified sequences of chromosome
2p15 in neuroblastoma cell line IMR32. The amplified region was analyzed for
oncogene activation using a SAGE (serial analysis of gene expression) library of 
IMR32. SAGE permits a quantitative analysis of all transcripts of a tissue or
cell line. The expression of genes and ESTs mapping within a 30-cR region
covering the amplicon was compared to 4 additional SAGE libraries of
neuroblastomas and 12 SAGE libraries of other tissues in the CGAP databases. The 
IMR32 SAGE database revealed increased expression of the MEIS1 oncogene, whereas 
other SAGE libraries showed little or no MEIS1 expression. MEIS1 turned out to be
highly amplified and overexpressed in IMR32. Analysis of 24 neuroblastoma cell
lines and 22 tumors showed high-level expression in about 25% of the cases. The
MEIS1 homeobox protein forms a complex with the HOXA9 and PBX proteins that are
implicated in human leukemia. MEIS1 is a target of retroviral insertion in murine
leukemia. This is the first report of a MEIS1 amplification and high expression
levels in human cancer and the first time that identification of a candidate
target of amplification is facilitated by high-throughput mRNA expression
profiling.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11161815  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. EMBO J. 2001 Feb 1;20(3):350-61.

NUP98-HOXA9 expression in hemopoietic stem cells induces chronic and acute
myeloid leukemias in mice.

Kroon E(1), Thorsteinsdottir U, Mayotte N, Nakamura T, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Hemopoietic Stem Cells, Clinical Research 
Institute of Montréal, Montréal, Québec, H2W 1R7, Canada.

Here we describe hemopoietic chimeras serving as a mouse model for
NUP98-HOXA9-induced leukemia, which reproduced several of the phenotypes observed
in human disease. Mice transplanted with bone marrow cells expressing NUP98-HOXA9
through retroviral transduction acquire a myeloproliferative disease (MPD) and
eventually succumb to acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The NUP98 portion of the
fusion protein was shown to be responsible for transforming a clinically silent
pre-leukemic phase observed for Hoxa9 into a chronic, stem cell-derived MPD. The 
co-expression of NUP98-HOXA9 and Meis1 accelerated the transformation of MPD to
AML, identifying a genetic interaction previously observed for Hoxa9 and Meis1.
Our findings demonstrate the presence of overlapping yet distinct molecular
mechanisms for MPD versus AML, illustrating the complexity of leukemic
transformation.

PMCID: PMC133485
PMID: 11157742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Mol Cell Biol. 2001 Jan;21(1):224-34.

Defining roles for HOX and MEIS1 genes in induction of acute myeloid leukemia.

Thorsteinsdottir U(1), Kroon E, Jerome L, Blasi F, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Hemopoietic Stem Cells, Clinical Research 
Institute of Montréal, Montréal, Québec H2W 1R7, Canada.

Complex genetic and biochemical interactions between HOX proteins and members of 
the TALE (i.e., PBX and MEIS) family have been identified in embryonic
development, and some of these interactions also appear to be important for
leukemic transformation. We have previously shown that HOXA9 collaborates with
MEIS1 in the induction of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). In this report, we
demonstrate that HOXB3, which is highly divergent from HOXA9, also genetically
interacts with MEIS1, but not with PBX1, in generating AML. In addition, we show 
that the HOXA9 and HOXB3 genes play key roles in establishing all the main
characteristics of the leukemias, while MEIS1 functions only to accelerate the
onset of the leukemic transformation. Contrasting the reported functional
similarities between PREP1 and MEIS1, such as PBX nuclear retention, we also show
that PREP1 overexpression is incapable of accelerating the HOXA9-induced AML,
suggesting that MEIS1 function in transformation must entail more than PBX
nuclear localization. Collectively, these data demonstrate that MEIS1 is a common
leukemic collaborator with two structurally and functionally divergent HOX genes 
and that, in this collaboration, the HOX gene defines the identity of the
leukemia.

PMCID: PMC88796
PMID: 11113197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Nov 7;97(23):12776-81.

Altered HOX and WNT7A expression in human lung cancer.

Calvo R(1), West J, Franklin W, Erickson P, Bemis L, Li E, Helfrich B, Bunn P,
Roche J, Brambilla E, Rosell R, Gemmill RM, Drabkin HA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, and Department of Pathology, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, 4200 East 9th Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

HOX genes encode transcription factors that control patterning and cell fates.
Alterations in HOX expression have been clearly implicated in leukemia, but their
role in most other malignant diseases remains unknown. By using degenerate
reverse transcription-PCR and subsequent real-time quantitative assays, we
examined HOX expression in lung cancer cell lines, direct tumor-control pairs,
and bronchial epithelial cultures. As in leukemia, genes of the HOX9 paralogous
group and HOXA10 were frequently overexpressed. For HOXB9, we confirmed that
elevated RNA was associated with protein overexpression. In some cases, marked
HOX overexpression was associated with elevated FGF10 and FGF17. During
development, the WNT pathway affects cell fate, polarity, and proliferation, and 
WNT7a has been implicated in the maintenance of HOX expression. In contrast to
normal lung and mortal short-term bronchial epithelial cultures, WNT7a was
frequently reduced or absent in lung cancers. In immortalized bronchial
epithelial cells, WNT7a was lost concomitantly with HOXA1, and a statistically
significant correlation between the expression of both genes was observed in lung
cancer cell lines. Furthermore, we identified a homozygous deletion of
beta-catenin in the mesothelioma, NCI-H28, associated with reduced WNT7a and the 
lowest overall cell line expression of HOXA1, HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA10, whereas
HOXB9 levels were unaffected. Of note, both WNT7a and beta-catenin are encoded on
chromosome 3p, which undergoes frequent loss of heterozygosity in these tumors.
Our results suggest that alterations in regulatory circuits involving HOX, WNT,
and possibly fibroblast growth factor pathways occur frequently in lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC18840
PMID: 11070089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. J Biol Chem. 2001 Jan 5;276(1):850-5.

Hoxa-9 represses transforming growth factor-beta-induced osteopontin gene
transcription.

Shi X(1), Bai S, Li L, Cao X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham,
Alabama 35294, USA.

Smad2 and Smad3 are downstream transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta)
signaling molecules. Upon phosphorylation by its type I receptor, Smad2 or Smad3 
forms a complex with Smad4 and translocates to the nucleus where the complex
activates target gene transcription. In the present study, we report that Smad3
binds directly to the osteopontin (OPN) promoter and that Smad4 interacts with
the Hox protein and displaces it from its cognate DNA binding site in response to
TGF-beta stimulation. In gel shift assays, the glutathione S-transferase-Smad3
fusion protein was found to bind to a 50-base pair DNA element (-179 to -229)
from the OPN promoter. Also, we found that both Hoxc-8 and Hoxa-9 bound to a Hox 
binding site adjacent to Smad3 binding sequence. Interestingly, Smad4, the common
partner for both bone morphogenic protein and TGF-beta signaling pathways,
inhibited the binding of Hox protein to DNA. FLAG-tagged Smad4
coimmunoprecipitated with HA-tagged Hoxa-9 from cotransfected COS-1 cells,
demonstrating an interaction between Smad4 and Hoxa-9. Transfection studies
showed that Hoxa-9 is a strong transcriptional repressor; it suppresses the
transcription of the luciferase reporter gene driven by a 124-base pair OPN
promoter fragment containing both Smad3 and Hox binding sites. Taken together,
these data demonstrate a unique TGF-beta-induced transcription mechanism. Smad3
and Smad4 exhibit different functions in activation of OPN transcription. Smad3
binds directly to the OPN promoter as a sequence-specific activator, and Smad4
displaces the transcription repressor, Hoxa-9, by formation of Smad4/Hox complex 
as part of the transcription mechanism in response to TGF-beta stimulation.

PMID: 11042172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. Leuk Res. 2000 Oct;24(10):849-55.

MEIS1 and HOXA7 genes in human acute myeloid leukemia.

Afonja O(1), Smith JE Jr, Cheng DM, Goldenberg AS, Amorosi E, Shimamoto T,
Nakamura S, Ohyashiki K, Ohyashiki J, Toyama K, Takeshita K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, New York University School of Medicine, 550 First
Avenue, New York, NY 10016, USA.

Co-activation of Meisl with Hoxa7 or Hoxa9 homeobox genes by retroviral gene
insertion has recently been reported to be leukemogenic in murine myeloid
leukemia. In this study we determined their expression in human leukemia. Most
human myeloid leukemia cell lines co-expressed MEIS1 with HOXA7 and HOXA9. Among 
patients with acute leukemia, 50% of AML patients expressed MEIS1, while the
majority of ALL patients were negative. A total of 89.5% of patients expressing
MEIS1 co-expressed HOXA7. In unadjusted models, poorer response to chemotherapy
was associated with expression of HOXA7 regardless of MEIS1 status and older
patients were more likely to express either gene.

PMID: 10996203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Am J Hematol. 2000 Sep;65(1):62-5.

Down's syndrome with myelodysplastic syndrome showing t(7;11)(p13;p14).

Ohnishi H(1), Taki T, Tabuchi K, Kobayashi M, Bessho F, Hayashi Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Faculty of Medicine, University of Tokyo, Tokyo,
Japan.

We report a boy with Down's syndrome (DS) who developed myelodysplastic syndrome 
(MDS) after spontaneous remission of transient myeloproliferative disorder (TMD) 
at birth. Chromosomal analysis of the blasts in the MDS phase demonstrated
t(7;11)(p13;p14) which had not been detected in the TMD phase. NUP98-HOXA9
chimera mRNA, which is known to be involved in t(7;11)(p15;p15) translocation in 
acute myeloid leukemia (AML), was not detected by reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, and NUP98 rearrangement was not detected
by Southern blot analysis of the blasts in the MDS phase. Reciprocal
translocation is very rare in AML/MDS in DS, and the t(7;11)(p13;p14) found in
our patient was different from the recurrent translocation t(7;11)(p15;p15)
previously reported.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10936866  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Br J Haematol. 2000 May;109(2):423-6.

Expression of the NUP98/HOXA9 fusion transcript in the blast crisis of
Philadelphia chromosome-positive chronic myelogenous leukaemia with
t(7;11)(p15;p15).

Yamamoto K(1), Nakamura Y, Saito K, Furusawa S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Dokkyo University School of Medicine, Tochigi,
Japan. yam-kat@sa2.so-net.ne.jp

The t(7;11)(p15;p15) translocation is a recurrent aberration observed in acute
myeloblastic leukaemia (AML) and chronic myelogenous leukaemia (CML). It has been
shown that the NUP98 gene at 11p15 is fused with the HOXA9 gene at 7p15 in AML
with t(7;11). We report the first case with CML expressing the NUP98/HOXA9 fusion
transcript. A 27-year-old Japanese man was initially diagnosed as in the chronic 
phase of Philadelphia-positive CML. At the diagnosis of myeloid blast crisis, the
karyotype evolved to 46, XY, t(7;11)(p15;p15), t(9;22)(q34;q11). Reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction identified the NUP98/HOXA9 transcript,
suggesting that the NUP98/HOXA9 fusion protein could play a critical role in the 
progression to blast crisis.

PMID: 10848835  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. FASEB J. 2000 Jun;14(9):1101-8.

In utero diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure alters Hox gene expression in the
developing müllerian system.

Block K(1), Kardana A, Igarashi P, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Diethylstilbestrol (DES) was widely used to treat pregnant women through 1971.
The reproductive tracts of their female offspring exposed to DES in utero are
characterized by anatomic abnormalities. Here we show that DES administered to
mice in utero produces changes in the expression pattern of several Hox genes
that are involved in patterning of the reproductive tract. DES produces posterior
shifts in Hox gene expression and homeotic anterior transformations of the
reproductive tract. In human uterine or cervical cell cultures, DES induces HOXA9
or HOXA10 gene expression, respectively, to levels approximately twofold that
induced by estradiol. The DES-induced expression is not inhibited by
cyclohexamide. Estrogens are novel morphogens that directly regulate the
expression pattern of posterior Hox genes in a manner analogous to retinoic acid 
regulation of anterior Hox genes. Alterations in HOX gene expression are a
molecular mechanism by which DES affects reproductive tract development. Changes 
in Hox gene expression are a potential marker for the effects of in utero drug
use that may become apparent only at late stages of development.

PMID: 10834931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Mol Cell Biol. 2000 May;20(9):3274-85.

Hoxa9 immortalizes a granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor-dependent
promyelocyte capable of biphenotypic differentiation to neutrophils or
macrophages, independent of enforced meis expression.

Calvo KR(1), Sykes DB, Pasillas M, Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of California San
Diego, La Jolla, California 92093-0612, USA. krcalvo@ucsd.edu

The genes encoding Hoxa9 and Meis1 are transcriptionally coactivated in a subset 
of acute myeloid leukemia (AML) in mice. In marrow reconstitution experiments,
coexpression of both genes produces rapid AML, while neither gene alone generates
overt leukemia. Although Hoxa9 and Meis1 can bind DNA as heterodimers, both can
also heterodimerize with Pbx proteins. Thus, while their coactivation may result 
from the necessity to bind promoters as heterodimers, it may also result from the
necessity of altering independent biochemical pathways that cooperate to generate
AML, either as monomers or as heterodimers with Pbx proteins. Here we demonstrate
that constitutive expression of Hoxa9 in primary murine marrow immortalizes a
late myelomonocytic progenitor, preventing it from executing terminal
differentiation to granulocytes or monocytes in the presence of
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF) or interleukin-3. This 
immortalized phenotype is achieved in the absence of endogenous or exogenous Meis
gene expression. The Hoxa9-immortalized progenitor exhibited a promyelocytic
transcriptional profile, expressing PU.1, AML1, c-Myb, C/EBP alpha, and C/EBP
epsilon as well as their target genes, the receptors for GM-CSF, G-CSF, and M-CSF
and the primary granule proteins myeloperoxidase and neutrophil elastase. G-CSF
obviated the differentiation block of Hoxa9, inducing neutrophilic
differentiation with accompanying expression of neutrophil gelatinase B and
upregulation of gp91phox. M-CSF also obviated the differentiation block, inducing
monocytic differentiation with accompanying expression of the macrophage
acetyl-low-density lipoprotein scavenger receptor and F4/80 antigen. Versions of 
Hoxa9 lacking the ANWL Pbx interaction motif (PIM) also immortalized a
promyelocytic progenitor with intrinsic biphenotypic differentiation potential.
Therefore, Hoxa9 evokes a cytokine-selective block in differentiation by a
mechanism that does not require Meis gene expression or interaction with Pbx
through the PIM.

PMCID: PMC85621
PMID: 10757811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Oncogene. 2000 Feb 3;19(5):608-16.

HoxA9-mediated immortalization of myeloid progenitors requires functional
interactions with TALE cofactors Pbx and Meis.

Schnabel CA(1), Jacobs Y, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University School of Medicine, California
94305, USA.

Specific Hox genes are implicated in leukemic transformation, and their selective
genetic collaboration with TALE homeobox genes, Pbx and Meis, accentuates their
oncogenic potential. The molecular mechanisms underlying these coordinate
functions, however, have not been characterized. In this study, we demonstrate
that HoxA9 requires its Pbx interaction motif as well as its amino terminus to
enhance the clonogenic potential of myeloid progenitors in vitro. We further show
that HoxA9 forms functional trimeric DNA binding complexes with Pbx and Meis-like
proteins on a modified enhancer. DNA binding complexes containing HoxA9 and TALE 
homeoproteins display cooperative transcriptional activity and are present in
leukemic cells. Trimeric complex formation on its own, however, is not sufficient
for HoxA9-mediated immortalization. Rather, structure-function analyses
demonstrate that domains of HoxA9 which are necessary for cellular transformation
are coincident with those required for trimer-mediated transcriptional
activation. Furthermore, the amino terminus of HoxA9 provides essential
transcriptional effector properties and its requirement for myeloid
transformation can be functionally replaced by the VP16 activation domain. These 
data suggest that biochemical interactions between HoxA9 and TALE homeoproteins
mediate cellular transformation in hematopoietic cells, and that their
transcriptional activity in higher order DNA binding complexes provides a
molecular basis for their collaborative roles in leukemogenesis.

PMID: 10698505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Kaibogaku Zasshi. 1999 Dec;74(6):609-30.

Lumbosacral plexus in Hoxa9 knockout mice with special reference to their nerve
variations identified according to whether they were interphenotypic or
intergenotypic differences.

Hashimoto J(1), Murakami G, Tsugane MH, Chisaka O, Capecchi MR, Ogino T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, School of Medicine, Yamagata University,
Japan.

The lumbosacral plexus in specific Hox gene mutant mice originating from
C57bl/60, i.e., Hoxa9 +/+, +/- and -/- genotypes (10 specimens of each), were
dissected minutely and detailed examinations were made of the eight nerves in the
plexus and the lowest intercostal nerve. We identified three types of nerve
variation in mice with Hox mutations: interphenotypic variations, intergenotypic 
variations and common variations regardless of the genotype axial phenotype. The 
interphenotypic variations involved a caudal shift of the nerve origin in mice
with the Hoxa9 -/- axial phenotype. We divided these variations into three
patterns according to whether or not nerve configurations in mice with the wild
and/or Hoxa9 -/- axial phenotypes were consistent, as follows: 1) the
iliohypogastric and pudendal nerve morphologies of either of the phenotypes were 
consistent; 2) the femoral, obturator and sciatic nerve morphologies of the wild 
axial phenotype were consistent, but those of the -/- phenotype showed several
variations and 3) both phenotypes showed several variations of the ilioinguinal
and genitofemoral nerves. The intergenotypic variations, were limited to two
examples: the common trunk formation of the ilioinguinal and iliohypogastric
nerves in mice with the +/- and -/- genotypes, regardless of their axial
phenotypes, and the territory of the ilioinguinal nerve touched the lateral
margin of the thigh in the wild genotype, but extended beyond the margin onto the
posterior aspect in the -/- genotype. The common variations regardless of either 
axial phenotype or genotype, included the lateral cutaneous nerve of the thigh
which showed a limited, common variation in both of the nerve origin,
ramification pattern and territory among either the three genotypes or two axial 
phenotypes. We consider the interphenotypic variations to be consistent with
previous experimental findings showing a discrepancy between the nerve origins
and their cues for nerve pathfinding. However, this developmental sequence did
not seem to apply to the intergenotypic or common variations.

PMID: 10659578  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Leukemia. 1999 Dec;13(12):1993-9.

Frequent co-expression of the HOXA9 and MEIS1 homeobox genes in human myeloid
leukemias.

Lawrence HJ(1), Rozenfeld S, Cruz C, Matsukuma K, Kwong A, Kömüves L, Buchberg
AM, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Medical Oncology, Department of Medicine,
University of California VA Medical Center, San Francisco, CA, USA.

There is increasing evidence that HOX homeobox genes play a role in
leukemogenesis. Recent studies have demonstrated that enforced co-expression of
HOXA9 and MEIS1 in murine marrow leads to rapid development of myeloid leukemia, 
and that these proteins exhibit cooperative DNA binding. However, it is unclear
whether co-activation of HOXA9 and MEIS genes is a common occurrence in human
leukemias. We surveyed expression of HOXA9 and MEIS1 in 24 leukemic cell lines
and 80 patient samples, using RNase protection analyses and immunohistochemistry.
We demonstrate that the expression of HOXA9 and MEIS1 in leukemia cells is
uniquely myeloid, and that these genes are commonly co-expressed in myeloid cell 
lines and in samples of acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) of all subtypes except
in promyelocytic leukemia. While HOXA9 is expressed in most cases of chronic
myelogenous leukemia, MEIS1 is weakly expressed or not at all.
Immunohistochemical staining of selected AML samples showed moderate to high
levels of HOXA9 protein, primarily cytoplasmic, in leukemic myeloblasts, with
weaker and primarily nuclear staining for MEIS1. These data support the concept
that co-activation of HOXA9 and MEIS1 is a common event in AML, and may represent
a common pathway of many different oncogenic mutations.

PMID: 10602420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Br J Haematol. 1999 Dec;107(3):600-4.

Molecular heterogeneity of the NUP98/HOXA9 fusion transcript in myelodysplastic
syndromes associated with t(7;11)(p15;p15).

Hatano Y(1), Miura I, Nakamura T, Yamazaki Y, Takahashi N, Miura AB.

Author information: 
(1)Third Department of Internal Medicine, Akita University School of Medicine,
Akita, Japan. yhatano@doc.med.akita-u.ac.jp

The reciprocal translocation t(7;11)(p15;p15) has been reported as occurring
mainly in acute myelogenous leukaemia (AML) and the acute phase of chronic
myelogenous leukaemia (CML). This translocation in AML involves both the
nucleoporin gene NUP98 on 11p15 and the homeobox gene HOXA9 on 7p15. The
invariant chimaeric NUP98/HOXA9 transcripts are a result of the fact that each
breakpoint of the NUP98 and the corresponding breakpoint of the HOXA9 gene
cluster occur within the same intron. Only one patient with myelodysplastic
syndromes (MDS) carrying this chromosome aberration has been reported, but this
study did not involve molecular analysis. We describe two patients with MDS
associated with t(7;11): patient 1 was a Japanese man diagnosed with chronic
myelomonocytic leukaemia; patient 2 was a Japanese woman with refractory anaemia 
with excess of blasts in transformation. Within a year both patients developed
AML and showed multidrug resistance to chemotherapy. Southern blot analysis
showed rearrangements of the NUP98 gene of the two patients and the HOXA9 gene of
patient 2. Patient 1 had two types of the novel NUP98/HOXA9 fusion transcripts.
Each of them lacked the common 141 bp NUP98 exon which was contained in the
NUP98/HOXA9 fusion transcripts detected in patient 2 and the reported AML cases. 
These data indicated that t(7;11) could determine the development of various
myeloid leukaemias and that the resultant chimaeric transcripts are heterogenous.

PMID: 10583265  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 1999 Nov;115(1):70-2.

Chronic myelomonocytic leukemia with t(7;11)(p15;p15) and NUP98/HOXA9 fusion.

Wong KF(1), So CC, Kwong YL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Kowloon, Hong Kong, China.

Translocation (7;11)(p15;p15) is a recently characterized chromosomal abnormality
that results in fusion of the NUP98 gene on 11p15 and the HOXA9 gene on 7p15. It 
shows a strong racial predisposition, being found predominantly in Oriental
patients, and has been reported almost exclusively in acute myeloid leukemia,
often with associated myelodysplastic changes. In this report, we describe the
unique occurrence of t(7;11)(p15;p15) and NUP98/HOXA9 fusion in a patient with
chronic myelomonocytic leukemia, and suggest that the genetic lesion may involve 
multipotential myeloid stem cells.

PMID: 10565304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. Science. 1999 Oct 15;286(5439):531-7.

Molecular classification of cancer: class discovery and class prediction by gene 
expression monitoring.

Golub TR(1), Slonim DK, Tamayo P, Huard C, Gaasenbeek M, Mesirov JP, Coller H,
Loh ML, Downing JR, Caligiuri MA, Bloomfield CD, Lander ES.

Author information: 
(1)Whitehead Institute/Massachusetts Institute of Technology Center for Genome
Research, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA. golub@genome.wi.mit.edu

Although cancer classification has improved over the past 30 years, there has
been no general approach for identifying new cancer classes (class discovery) or 
for assigning tumors to known classes (class prediction). Here, a generic
approach to cancer classification based on gene expression monitoring by DNA
microarrays is described and applied to human acute leukemias as a test case. A
class discovery procedure automatically discovered the distinction between acute 
myeloid leukemia (AML) and acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) without previous
knowledge of these classes. An automatically derived class predictor was able to 
determine the class of new leukemia cases. The results demonstrate the
feasibility of cancer classification based solely on gene expression monitoring
and suggest a general strategy for discovering and predicting cancer classes for 
other types of cancer, independent of previous biological knowledge.

PMID: 10521349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1999 Nov;26(3):215-20.

11p15 translocations involving the NUP98 gene in childhood therapy-related acute 
myeloid leukemia/myelodysplastic syndrome.

Nishiyama M(1), Arai Y, Tsunematsu Y, Kobayashi H, Asami K, Yabe M, Kato S, Oda
M, Eguchi H, Ohki M, Kaneko Y.

Author information: 
(1)The Third Clinical Department and Department of Cancer Chemotherapy, Saitama
Cancer Center Hospital, Saitama, Japan.

In a survey of childhood therapy-related acute myeloid leukemia/myelodysplastic
syndrome (t-AML/MDS) in Japan, we found 11p15 translocations in 5 (6%) of 81
children with t-AML/MDS. t(11;17)(p15;q21), t(11;12)(p15;q13), t(7;11)(p15;p15), 
inv(11)(p15q22), and add(11)(p15) were each found in one patient. Southern
blotting and/or RT-PCR analyses revealed rearrangements of the NUP98 gene in
tumor samples of all five patients. Rearrangements of DDX10 were detected in
t-AML/MDS cells with inv(11), and rearrangements of HOXA9 were detected in t-AML 
cells with t(7;11). The 17q21 breakpoint of t(11;17) and the 12q13 breakpoint of 
t(11;12)(p15;q13) coincided with the loci of the HOXB and HOXC gene families,
respectively. Therefore, it is reasonable to speculate that one of the HOXB genes
and one of the HOXC genes were fused to NUP98 by t(11;17) and t(11;12),
respectively, in t-AML/MDS cells. We propose that NUP98 may be a target gene for 
t-AML/MDS, and that t-AML/MDS with a fusion of NUP98 and HOX or DDX10 genes may
be more frequent in children than in patients of other age groups.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10502319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Sep;19(9):6355-66.

The oncoprotein E2A-Pbx1a collaborates with Hoxa9 to acutely transform primary
bone marrow cells.

Thorsteinsdottir U(1), Krosl J, Kroon E, Haman A, Hoang T, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Hemopoietic Stem Cells, Clinical Research 
Institute of Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada H2W 1R7.

A recurrent translocation between chromosome 1 (Pbx1) and 19 (E2A) leading to the
expression of the E2A-Pbx1 fusion oncoprotein occurs in approximately 5 to 10% of
acute leukemias in humans. It has been proposed that some of the oncogenic
potential of E2A-Pbx1 could be mediated through heterocomplex formation with Hox 
proteins, which are also involved in human and mouse leukemias. To directly test 
this possibility, mouse bone marrow cells were engineered by retroviral gene
transfer to overexpress E2A-Pbx1a together with Hoxa9. The results obtained
demonstrated a strong synergistic interaction between E2A-Pbx1a and Hoxa9 in
inducing growth factor-independent proliferation of transduced bone marrow cells 
in vitro and leukemic growth in vivo in only 39 +/- 2 days. The leukemic blasts
which coexpress E2A-Pbx1a and Hoxa9 showed little differentiation and produced
cytokines such as interleukin-3, granulocyte colony-stimulating factor, and
Steel. Together, these studies demonstrate that the Hoxa9 and E2A-Pbx1a gene
products collaborate to produce a highly aggressive acute leukemic disease.

PMCID: PMC84606
PMID: 10454582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Dev Genes Evol. 1999 Aug;209(8):473-81.

Axial variation in the threespine stickleback: relationship to Hox gene
expression.

Ahn DG(1), Gibson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Despite mounting evidence that key developmental regulator genes are involved in 
significant macroevolutionary changes, there have been few studies demonstrating 
the functional significance of variation in such genes for the generation of
population-level variation. In this study we examined and compared the expression
domains of three Hox gene homeobox sequences in embryos derived from two
morphologically distinct populations of the threespine stickleback, Gasterosteus 
aculeatus. We found within-population variation in the location of anterior
limits, particularly in more 5' Hox genes whose anterior expression domains
showed graded distributions of transcripts over several somites. However, despite
considerable and statistically significant differences in the anteroposterior
pattern of the axial and median skeletons between the two stickleback
populations, this phenotypic variation was not found to be correlated with any of
the variation in Hox gene expression. The possible functional significance of the
combinatorial Hox code in fish species is discussed with respect to the buffering
of development in fluctuating environments, and it is argued that population and 
quantitative genetic perspectives should also be taken into account in
considering the function and evolution of Hox genes.

PMID: 10415324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Blood. 1999 Jul 15;94(2):741-7.

NUP98 is fused to PMX1 homeobox gene in human acute myelogenous leukemia with
chromosome translocation t(1;11)(q23;p15).

Nakamura T(1), Yamazaki Y, Hatano Y, Miura I.

Author information: 
(1)PRESTO, Japan Science and Technology Corp, Tokyo, Japan; The Cancer Institute,
Japanese Foundation for Cancer Research, Tokyo, Japan.
takuro-ind@unin.u-tokyo.ac.jp

The nucleoporin gene NUP98 was found fused to the HOXA9, HOXD13, or DDX10 genes
in human acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) with chromosome translocations
t(7;11)(p15;p15), t(2;11)(q35;p15), or inv(11)(p15;q22), respectively. We report 
here the fusion between the NUP98 gene and another homeobox gene PMX1 in a case
of human AML with a t(1;11)(q23;p15) translocation. The chimeric NUP98-PMX1
transcript was detected; however, there was no reciprocal PMX1-NUP98 fusion
transcript. Like the NUP98-HOXA9 fusion, NUP98 and PMX1 were fused in frame and
the N-terminal GLFG-rich docking region of the NUP98 and the PMX1 homeodomain
were conserved in the NUP98-PMX1 fusion, suggesting that PMX1 homeodomain
expression is upregulated and that the fusion protein may act as an oncogenic
transcription factor. The fusion to NUP98 results in the addition of the strong
transcriptional activation domain located in the N-terminal region of NUP98 to
PMX1. These findings suggest that constitutive expression and alteration of the
transcriptional activity of the PMX1 homeodomain protein may be critical for
myeloid leukemogenesis.

PMID: 10397741  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Leukemia. 1999 May;13(5):687-98.

Expression of HOX genes, HOX cofactors, and MLL in phenotypically and
functionally defined subpopulations of leukemic and normal human hematopoietic
cells.

Kawagoe H(1), Humphries RK, Blair A, Sutherland HJ, Hogge DE.

Author information: 
(1)British Columbia Cancer Agency, and Department of Medicine, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

To explore the possibility that deregulated HOX gene expression might commonly
occur during leukemic hematopoiesis, we compared the relative levels of
expression of these and related genes in phenotypically and functionally defined 
subpopulations of AML blasts and normal hematopoietic cells. Initially, a
semi-quantitative RT-PCR technique was used to amplify total cDNA from total
leukemic blast cell populations from 20 AML patients and light density cells from
four normal bone marrows. Expression of HOX genes (A9, A10, B3 and B4), MEIS1 and
MLL was easily detected in the majority of AML samples with the exception of two 
samples from patients with AML subtype M3 (which expressed only MLL). Low levels 
of HOXA9 and A10 but not B3 or B4 were seen in normal marrow while MLL was easily
detected. PBX1a was difficult to detect in any AML sample but was seen in three
of four normal marrows. Cells from nine AML patients and five normal bone marrows
were FACS-sorted into CD34+CD38-, CD34+CD38+ and CD34-subpopulations, analyzed
for their functional properties in long-term culture (LTC) and colony assays, and
for gene expression using RT-PCR. 93 +/- 14% of AML LTC-initiating cells, 92 +/- 
14% AML colony-forming cells, and >99% of normal LTC-IC and CFC were CD34+. The
relative level of expression of the four HOX genes in amplified cDNA from CD34-
as compared to CD34+CD38- normal cells was reduced >10-fold. However, in AML
samples this down-regulation in HOX expression in CD34- as compared to CD34+CD38-
cells was not seen (P < 0.05 for comparison between AML and normal). A similar
difference between normal and AML subpopulations was seen when the relative
levels of expression of MEIS1, and to a lesser extent MLL, were compared in CD34+
and CD34- cells (P < 0.05). In contrast, while some evidence of down-regulation
of PBX1a was found in comparing CD34- to CD34+ normal cells it was difficult to
detect expression of this gene in any subpopulation from most AML samples. Thus, 
the down-regulation of HOX, MEIS1 and to some extent MLL which occurs with normal
hematopoietic differentiation is not seen in AML cells with similar functional
and phenotypic properties.

PMID: 10374871  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. J Exp Zool. 1999 Apr 15;285(1):41-9.

Genomic organization of the Hoxa4-Hoxa10 region from Morone saxatilis:
implications for Hox gene evolution among vertebrates.

Snell EA(1), Scemama JL, Stellwag EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, East Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina
27858, USA.

The physical mapping of Hox gene clusters from a limited number of vertebrates
has shown an overall conservation in gene organization in which major
evolutionary changes appear to be primarily restricted to the deletion of one or 
more genes, with the exception of the amplification of additional clusters as
postulated from zebrafish. We have sequenced a 31 kb region of the HoxA cluster
from the teleost Morone saxatilis (striped bass), both to provide a detailed
physical map of this region and to better understand the nature of Hox cluster
evolution among vertebrate taxa. We identified five linked Hox genes: Hoxa4,
Hoxa5, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and Hoxa10, which are organized similarly to those of other 
vertebrates. Furthermore, we have documented the absence of the Hoxa6 and Hoxa8
genes within the 31 kb contig. Comparison of our results to those published for
other vertebrates suggests that the absence of Hoxa6 is a common characteristic
of teleosts, whereas the absence of Hoxa8 is common to vertebrates in general,
with the possible exception of zebrafish. Further comparisons between the HoxA
genes from Morone with those from the pufferfish, Fugu rubripes, revealed the
likely presence of a previously unreported Hoxa7 gene, or gene fragment, in the
Fugu genome, which suggests that the Hoxa7 gene, unlike Hoxa6 or Hoxa8, is
present in teleosts. In addition to these differences in vertebrate Hox cluster
structure, we also observed a marked reduction in the length of the Hoxa4--a10
region between vertebrate lineages representative of teleosts and mammals.
Comparative analysis of HoxA cluster organization among teleosts and mammals
suggests that cluster length reduction and lineage-specific gene loss events are 
hallmarks of Hox cluster evolution.

PMID: 10327649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 1999 May;25(1):70-4.

Low frequency of rearrangements of the homeobox gene HOXA9/t(7;11) in adult acute
myeloid leukemia.

Kwong YL(1), Pang A.

Author information: 
(1)University Department of Medicine, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong.
ylkwong@hkucc.hku.hk

Translocation (7;11)(p15;p15) is uncommon in acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and may
have a predilection to occur in Asian patients. It results in a reciprocal fusion
of the homeobox gene HOXA9 and the nucleoporin gene NUP98. To ascertain the
molecular features and the clinicopathological and prognostic significance of
t(7;11)(p15;p15), 208 adult Chinese patients with AML were screened by Southern
blot analysis with an HOXA9 cDNA probe and reverse transcription-polymerase chain
reaction for NUP98/HOXA9. Three cases were found to have rearrangement of the
HOXA9 gene. Two cases were found to have an NUP98/HOXA9 fusion transcript, with a
breakpoint at NUP98 different from that previously described. The remaining case 
had no rearrangement of NUP98, nor was NUP98/HOXA9 detected. All positive cases
had refractory AML with poor treatment outcome. In conclusion, t(7;11)/HOXA9
rearrangement was a rare event (3/208, 1.5%) in AML, even in a population where
it was considered to be more prevalent. Two breakpoints in NUP98 may occur, and
this is of importance in the design of primers to amplify t(7;11).

PMID: 10221343  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Apr;19(4):3051-61.

HOXA9 forms triple complexes with PBX2 and MEIS1 in myeloid cells.

Shen WF(1), Rozenfeld S, Kwong A, Köm ves LG, Lawrence HJ, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine, University of California VA Medical Center, San
Francisco, California, USA. largman@cgl.ucsf.edu

Aberrant activation of the HOX, MEIS, and PBX homeodomain protein families is
associated with leukemias, and retrovirally driven coexpression of HOXA9 and
MEIS1 is sufficient to induce myeloid leukemia in mice. Previous studies have
demonstrated that HOX-9 and HOX-10 paralog proteins are unique among HOX
homeodomain proteins in their capacity to form in vitro cooperative DNA binding
complexes with either the PBX or MEIS protein. Furthermore, PBX and MEIS proteins
have been shown to form in vivo heterodimeric DNA binding complexes with each
other. We now show that in vitro DNA site selection for MEIS1 in the presence of 
HOXA9 and PBX yields a consensus PBX-HOXA9 site. MEIS1 enhances in vitro
HOXA9-PBX protein complex formation in the absence of DNA and forms a trimeric
electrophoretic mobility shift assay (EMSA) complex with these proteins on an
oligonucleotide containing a PBX-HOXA9 site. Myeloid cell nuclear extracts
produce EMSA complexes which appear to contain HOXA9, PBX2, and MEIS1, while
immunoprecipitation of HOXA9 from these extracts results in coprecipitation of
PBX2 and MEIS1. In myeloid cells, HOXA9, MEIS1, and PBX2 are all strongly
expressed in the nucleus, where a portion of their signals are colocalized within
nuclear speckles. However, cotransfection of HOXA9 and PBX2 with or without MEIS1
minimally influences transcription of a reporter gene containing multiple
PBX-HOXA9 binding sites. Taken together, these data suggest that in myeloid
leukemia cells MEIS1 forms trimeric complexes with PBX and HOXA9, which in turn
can bind to consensus PBX-HOXA9 DNA targets.

PMCID: PMC84099
PMID: 10082572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1999 Jan 19;96(2):541-6.

Paralogous mouse Hox genes, Hoxa9, Hoxb9, and Hoxd9, function together to control
development of the mammary gland in response to pregnancy.

Chen F(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Although the role of Hox genes in patterning the mammalian body plan has been
studied extensively during embryonic and fetal development, relatively little is 
known concerning Hox gene function in adult animals. Analysis of mice with mutant
Hoxa9, Hoxb9, and Hoxd9 genes shows that these paralogous genes are required for 
mediating the expansion and/or differentiation of the mammary epithelium ductal
system in response to pregnancy. Mothers with these three mutant genes cannot
raise their own pups, but the pups can be rescued by fostering by wild-type
mothers. Histologically, the mammary glands of the mutant mothers seem normal
before pregnancy but do not develop properly in response to pregnancy and
parturition. Hoxa9, Hoxb9, and Hoxd9 are expressed normally in adult mammary
glands, suggesting a direct role for these genes in the development of mammary
tissue after pregnancy. Because loss-of-function mutations in these Hox genes
cause hypoplasia of the mammary gland after pregnancy, it may be productive to
look for misexpression of these genes in mammary carcinomas.

PMCID: PMC15172
PMID: 9892669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Int J Hematol. 1998 Dec;68(4):343-53.

Homeobox genes in normal hematopoiesis and leukemogenesis.

Chiba S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology/Oncology, University of Tokyo Hospital, Japan.
schiba-tky@umin.ac.jp

Homeobox genes are broadly classified into two subclasses: HOX and non-HOX
homeobox genes. A number of genes in both classes are expressed in a variety of
hematopoietic cells. Two major categories of evidence implying the involvement of
these genes in normal hematopoiesis have been demonstrated. First, the expression
pattern of the homeobox genes in hematopoietic cells is lineage- and
differentiation-stage specific. Second, enforced and suppressed expression of
various homeobox genes cause defects in the hematopoietic cells of specific
lineages. The reduction in myeloid, erythroid and B cell progenitors is found in 
mice with a disrupted HOXA9 gene. The thymuses of HOXB3-overexpressed marrow
recipients contain a markedly decreased number of CD4/CD8 double-positive T
cells. These examples suggest that the proper level of expression and timely
down-regulation of some homeobox genes are necessary for normal hematopoiesis.
Homeobox genes are also implicated in human and mouse leukemias. In human
leukemias, a HOX gene (HOXA9) and two non-HOX homeobox genes (PBX1 and HOX11) are
involved in chromosomal translocations. In mouse leukemias, provirus integrations
cause aberrant expression of several HOX and non-HOX genes. Currently available
information will be discussed separately on HOX and non-HOX genes, in normal and 
leukemic hematopoiesis, respectively.

PMID: 9885434  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. J Biol Chem. 1999 Jan 15;274(3):1415-22.

Endothelial cells express a novel, tumor necrosis factor-alpha-regulated variant 
of HOXA9.

Patel CV(1), Sharangpani R, Bandyopadhyay S, DiCorleto PE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Lerner Research Institute of The Cleveland Clinic 
Foundation, Cleveland, Ohio 44195, USA.

The expression of the class 1 homeobox (HOX) family of "master control"
transcription factors has been studied principally in embryogenesis and neoplasia
in which HOX genes play a critical role in cell proliferation, migration, and
differentiation. We wished to test whether HOX family members were also involved 
in a differentiation-like process occurring in normal, diploid adult cells, that 
is, cytokine-induced activation of endothelial cells (EC). Screening of a human
EC cDNA library yielded several members of the A and B groups of HOX
transcription factors. One clone represented a novel, alternatively spliced
variant of the human HOXA9 gene containing a new exon and the expression of which
was driven by a novel promoter. This variant termed HOXA9EC appeared restricted
to cells of endothelial lineage, i.e. expressed by human EC from multiple
sources, but not by fibroblasts, smooth muscle cells, or several transformed cell
lines. HOXA9EC mRNA was rapidly down-regulated in EC in response to tumor
necrosis factor-alpha due to an apparent reduction in transcriptional rate.
Reporter construct studies showed that the 400 base pairs of genomic DNA directly
5' to the transcription initiation site of HOXA9EC contained the information
required for both up-regulation in response to cotransfection with a HOXA9EC
expression vector and tumor necrosis factor-alpha-dependent down-regulation of
this gene. These results provide evidence of a novel HOX family member that may
participate in either the suppression or the genesis of EC activation.

PMID: 9880515  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Mol Cell Biol. 1999 Jan;19(1):764-76.

CREB binding protein interacts with nucleoporin-specific FG repeats that activate
transcription and mediate NUP98-HOXA9 oncogenicity.

Kasper LH(1), Brindle PK, Schnabel CA, Pritchard CE, Cleary ML, van Deursen JM.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Genetics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee 38105, USA.

Genes encoding the Phe-Gly (FG) repeat-containing nucleoporins NUP98 and
CAN/NUP214 are at the breakpoints of several chromosomal translocations
associated with human acute myeloid leukemia (AML), but their role in oncogenesis
is unclear. Here we demonstrate that the NUP98-HOXA9 fusion gene encodes two
nuclear oncoproteins with either 19 or 37 NUP98 FG repeats fused to the DNA
binding and PBX heterodimerization domains of the transcription factor HOXA9.
Both NUP98-HOXA9 chimeras transformed NIH 3T3 fibroblasts, and this
transformation required the HOXA9 domains for DNA binding and PBX interaction.
Surprisingly, the FG repeats acted as very potent transactivators of gene
transcription. This NUP98-derived activity is essential for transformation and
can be replaced by the bona fide transactivation domain of VP16. Interestingly,
FG repeat-containing segments derived from the nucleoporins NUP153 and CAN/NUP214
functioned similarly to those from NUP98. We further demonstrate that
transactivation by FG repeat-rich segments of NUP98 correlates with their ability
to interact functionally and physically with the transcriptional coactivators
CREB binding protein (CBP) and p300. This finding shows, for the first time, that
a translocation-generated fusion protein appears to recruit CBP/p300 as an
important step of its oncogenic mechanism. Together, our results suggest that
NUP98-HOXA9 chimeras are aberrant transcription factors that deregulate
HOX-responsive genes through the transcriptional activation properties of
nucleoporin-specific FG repeats that recruit CBP/p300. Indeed, FG repeat-mediated
transactivation may be a shared pathogenic function of nucleoporins implicated
human AML.

PMCID: PMC83933
PMID: 9858599  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Cancer Res. 1998 Oct 1;58(19):4269-73.

NUP98-HOXD13 gene fusion in therapy-related acute myelogenous leukemia.

Raza-Egilmez SZ(1), Jani-Sait SN, Grossi M, Higgins MJ, Shows TB, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Genetics, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo, NY 14263, USA.

A novel chromosomal translocation, t(2;11)(q31;p15), was identified in a patient 
with therapy-related acute myelogenous leukemia (t-AML). Fluorescence in situ
hybridization experiments mapped the breakpoint near NUP98; Southern blot
analysis demonstrated that the nucleoporin gene NUP98 was disrupted by this
translocation. We used rapid amplification of cDNA ends to identify a chimeric
mRNA. An in-frame, chimeric mRNA that fused NUP98 sequences to the homeobox gene 
HOXD13 was cloned; the predicted fusion protein contains both the GLFG repeats
from NUP98 as well as the homeodomain from HOXD13. The NUP98-HOXD13 fusion is
structurally similar to the NUP98-HOXA9 fusion previously identified in patients 
with AML, leading to the speculation that NUP98-homeobox gene fusions may be
oncogenic. Moreover, this report, along with a recent study that demonstrated
NUP98-DDX10 fusions in patients with t-AML, raises the possibility that NUP98 may
be a previously unsuspected target for chromosomal translocations in patients
with t-AML.

PMID: 9766650  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Blood. 1998 Jul 15;92(2):383-93.

Loss of function of the homeobox gene Hoxa-9 perturbs early T-cell development
and induces apoptosis in primitive thymocytes.

Izon DJ(1), Rozenfeld S, Fong ST, Kömüves L, Largman C, Lawrence HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of
California, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

Hox homeobox genes play a crucial role in specifying the embryonic body pattern. 
However, a role for Hox genes in T-cell development has not been explored. The
Hoxa-9 gene is expressed in normal adult and fetal thymuses. Fetal thymuses of
mice homozygous for an interruption of the Hoxa-9 gene are one eighth normal size
and have a 25-fold decrease in the number of primitive thymocytes expressing the 
interleukin-2 receptor (IL-2R, CD25). Progression to the double positive
(CD4+CD8+) stage is dramatically retarded in fetal thymic organ cultures. This
aberrant development is associated with decreased amounts of intracellular CD3
and T-cell receptor beta (TCRbeta) and reduced surface expression of IL-7R and
E-cadherin. Mutant thymocytes show a significant increase in apoptotic cell death
and premature downregulation of bcl-2 expression. A similar phenotype is seen in 
primitive thymocytes from adult Hoxa-9-/- mice and from mice transplanted with
Hoxa-9-/- marrow. Hoxa-9 appears to play a previously unsuspected role in T-cell 
ontogeny by modulating cell survival of early thymocytes and by regulating their 
subsequent differentiation.

PMID: 9657735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. EMBO J. 1998 Jul 1;17(13):3714-25.

Hoxa9 transforms primary bone marrow cells through specific collaboration with
Meis1a but not Pbx1b.

Kroon E(1), Krosl J, Thorsteinsdottir U, Baban S, Buchberg AM, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Hemopoietic Stem Cells, Clinical Research 
Institute of Montréal, Montréal, Québec, Canada H2W 1R7.

Hoxa9, Meis1 and Pbx1 encode homeodomaincontaining proteins implicated in
leukemic transformation in both mice and humans. Hoxa9, Meis1 and Pbx1 proteins
have been shown to physically interact with each other, as Hoxa9 cooperatively
binds consensus DNA sequences with Meis1 and with Pbx1, while Meis1 and Pbx1 form
heterodimers in both the presence and absence of DNA. In this study, we sought to
determine if Hoxa9 could transform hemopoietic cells in collaboration with either
Pbx1 or Meis1. Primary bone marrow cells, retrovirally engineered to overexpress 
Hoxa9 and Meis1a simultaneously, induced growth factor-dependent oligoclonal
acute myeloid leukemia in <3 months when transplanted into syngenic mice. In
contrast, overexpression of Hoxa9, Meis1a or Pbx1b alone, or the combination of
Hoxa9 and Pbx1b failed to transform these cells acutely within 6 months
post-transplantation. Similar results were obtained when FDC-P1 cells, engineered
to overexpress these genes, were transplanted to syngenic recipients. Thus, these
studies demonstrate a selective collaboration between a member of the Hox family 
and one of its DNA-binding partners in transformation of hemopoietic cells.

PMCID: PMC1170707
PMID: 9649441  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. DNA Cell Biol. 1998 May;17(5):407-14.

Genomic structure and sequence analysis of human HOXA-9.

Kim MH(1), Chang HH, Shin C, Cho M, Park D, Park HW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

In order to understand the regulatory mechanisms establishing and maintaining
HOXA-9 gene expression, structural information about the gene is a prerequisite. 
Therefore, we sequenced the 7.2-kb region of the human HOXA-9 gene and mapped the
positions of two partial cDNAs consisting of one of two 5' exons, AB (358 bp) or 
CD (568 bp), and a common 3' exon (exon II), which are separated by 5.4- and
1.0-kb introns, respectively. When the amino acid sequence homologies were
compared with those of other Hox genes belonging to the same paralogous group,
exon CD exhibited the strongest homology: 73% of 91 aa residues exactly matched
those of chicken Hoxa-9. An intermediate exon (90 bp) was detected within exon
CD. It was surrounded by a splice acceptor and a donor at both the 5' and 3'
ends, and one branchpoint site was found near the splice-acceptor site.
Nucleotide sequence analysis along this region revealed two TATA boxes, one CAAT 
box, one GC box, and one each of the following binding sites--engrailed,
eve-stripe2-hb3, and Krox20--just upstream of exon CD. A CpG island and two RARE 
repeats were detected within intron I. Northern blot analysis showed that at
least four main transcripts were generated along this region: all fetal tissues
tested (brain, lung, liver, and kidney) produced a 1.8-kb homeobox-containing
transcript (HA-9A); a 2.2- and a 3.3-kb transcript were generated from exon CD
and exon II (HA-9B), especially in fetal and adult kidneys as well as in adult
skeletal muscle; the 1.0-kb transcript was likely to be generated by the
intermediate exon in all adult and fetal tissues. Several weak bands without
tissue specificity were likely to be contributed by the hybrid transcripts
between HOXA-9 and the other HOXA gene(s). Together, these results may account
for the unique degree of conservation of the HOX cluster in general.

PMID: 9628584  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Gene. 1998 Mar 16;209(1-2):77-85.

Analysis of the murine Hoxa-9 cDNA: an alternatively spliced transcript encodes a
truncated protein lacking the homeodomain.

Fujimoto S(1), Araki K, Chisaka O, Araki M, Takagi K, Yamamura K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Genetics, Institute of Molecular Embryology and
Genetics, Kumamoto University School of Medicine, Kuhonji 4-24-1, Kumamoto 862,
Japan.

Hoxa-9 is one of the homeo box (Hox) genes exhibiting similarity to the
Drosophila Abdominal B gene. So far, only partial nucleotide sequences have been 
reported for mouse Hoxa-9 cDNA (Rubin et al., (1987) Mol. Cell. Biol. 7,
3836-3841). Here, we have determined the nucleotide sequence of the 5'-region of 
mouse Hoxa-9 cDNA and its genomic structure. Mouse Hoxa-9 cDNA contains a
complete ORF encoding a protein of 271aa exhibiting 96.7% identity to its human
counterpart. Interestingly, an alternatively spliced transcript (Hoxa-9T) was
identified by RT-PCR. Sequence analysis revealed that 173bp within the Hoxa-9 ORF
was missing from the Hoxa-9T cDNA. This additional splicing would potentially
result in a frameshift, leading to the production of a truncated protein lacking 
the homeobox. Northern blot analysis revealed that the probe containing the
homeodomain hybridized to two major transcripts (2.5 and 1.9kb) in the trunk
region of 12.5 dpc embryos, and adult kidney and large intestine. On the other
hand, the probe containing the additional intron detected only 2.5kb transcript
in the same tissues, indicating that 1.9kb transcript corresponds to Hoxa-9T
mRNA. We have also determined the transcriptional start site of Hoxa-9T.

PMID: 9524228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Nov;17(11):6448-58.

AbdB-like Hox proteins stabilize DNA binding by the Meis1 homeodomain proteins.

Shen WF(1), Montgomery JC, Rozenfeld S, Moskow JJ, Lawrence HJ, Buchberg AM,
Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California VA Medical Center, San
Francisco 94121, USA.

Recent studies show that Hox homeodomain proteins from paralog groups 1 to 10
gain DNA binding specificity and affinity through cooperative binding with the
divergent homeodomain protein Pbx1. However, the AbdB-like Hox proteins from
paralogs 11, 12, and 13 do not interact with Pbx1a, raising the possibility of
different protein partners. The Meis1 homeobox gene has 44% identity to Pbx
within the homeodomain and was identified as a common site of viral integration
in myeloid leukemias arising in BXH-2 mice. These integrations result in
constitutive activation of Meis1. Furthermore, the Hoxa-9 gene is frequently
activated by viral integration in the same BXH-2 leukemias, suggesting a
biological synergy between these two distinct classes of homeodomain proteins in 
causing malignant transformation. We now show that the Hoxa-9 protein physically 
interacts with Meis1 proteins by forming heterodimeric binding complexes on a DNA
target containing a Meis1 site (TGACAG) and an AbdB-like Hox site (TTTTACGAC).
Hox proteins from the other AbdB-like paralogs, Hoxa-10, Hoxa-11, Hoxd-12, and
Hoxb-13, also form DNA binding complexes with Meis1b, while Hox proteins from
other paralogs do not appear to interact with Meis1 proteins. DNA binding
complexes formed by Meis1 with Hox proteins dissociate much more slowly than DNA 
complexes with Meis1 alone, suggesting that Hox proteins stabilize the
interactions of Meis1 proteins with their DNA targets.

PMCID: PMC232497
PMID: 9343407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. J Cell Sci. 1997 Jun;110 ( Pt 11):1317-24.

Changing intestinal connective tissue interactions alters homeobox gene
expression in epithelial cells.

Duluc I(1), Lorentz O, Fritsch C, Leberquier C, Kedinger M, Freund JN.

Author information: 
(1)Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, Unité 381,
Strasbourg, France.

In segmented organs, homeobox genes are involved in axial patterning and cell
identity. Much less is known about their role in non-segmented endoderm
derivatives such as the digestive epithelium. Using a xenograft model of fetal
intestinal anlagen implanted under the skin of nude mice, we have investigated
whether the expression of five homeobox genes (HoxA-4, HoxA-9, HoxC-8, Cdx-1 and 
Cdx-2) is modified when intestinal epithelium undergoes normal development or
displays heterodifferentiation in association with heterotopic mesenchyme. In
homotypic associations of fetal endoderm and mesenchyme that recapitulate normal 
development, the overall pattern of homeobox gene expression was maintained:
HoxA-9 and HoxC-8 were the highest in the colon and ileum, respectively, and
HoxA-4 was expressed all along the intestine; Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 exhibited an
increasing gradient of expression from small intestine to colon. Yet, grafting
per se caused a faint upregulation of HoxA-9 and HoxC-8 in small intestinal
regions in which these genes are not normally expressed, while the
endoderm-mesenchyme dissociation-association step provoked a decay of Cdx-1 in
the colon. In heterotopic associations of colonic endoderm with small intestinal 
mesenchyme, the colonic epithelium exhibited heterodifferentiation to a small
intestinal-like phenotype. In this case, we observed a decay of HoxA-9 expression
and an upregulation of HoxC-8. Additionally, heterodifferentiation of the colonic
epithelium was accompanied by a downregulation of Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 to a level
similar to that found in the normal small intestine. To demonstrate that
mesenchyme-derived cells can influence Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 expression in the bowel
epithelium, fetal jejunal endoderm was associated with intestinal fibroblastic
cell lines that either support small intestinal-like or colonic-like
morphogenesis. A lower expression of both homeobox genes was shown in grafts
presenting the small intestinal phenotype than in those showing glandular
colonic-like differentiation. Taken together, these results suggest that homeobox
genes participate in the control of the positional information and/or cell
differentiation in the intestinal epithelium. They also indicate that the level
of Cdx-1 and Cdx-2 homeobox gene expression is influenced by
epithelial-mesenchymal cell interactions in the intestinal mucosa.

PMID: 9202392  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Blood. 1997 Mar 15;89(6):1922-30.

Mice bearing a targeted interruption of the homeobox gene HOXA9 have defects in
myeloid, erythroid, and lymphoid hematopoiesis.

Lawrence HJ(1), Helgason CD, Sauvageau G, Fong S, Izon DJ, Humphries RK, Largman 
C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of California, San Francisco 94121, USA.

Several homeobox genes of the HOXA and HOXB clusters are expressed in primitive
blood cells, suggesting a role for HOX genes in normal hematopoiesis. The HOXA9
gene is expressed in CD34+ marrow cells and in developing lymphocytes. We
examined blood-forming organs of mice homozygous for an interrupted HOXA9 allele 
to determine if loss of HOX gene function is deleterious to hematopoiesis.
HOXA9-/- mice have approximately 30% to 40% reductions in total leukocytes and
lymphocytes (P < .001) and a blunted granulocytic response to granulocyte
colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF). Homozygous mice have significantly smaller
spleens and thymuses. Myeloid/erythroid and pre-B progenitors in the marrow are
significantly reduced, but no significant decreases are noted in mixed colonies, 
day 12 colony-forming units-spleen (CFU-S), or long-term culture-initiating cells
(LTC-IC), suggesting little or no perturbation in earlier progenitors.
Heterozygous animals display no hematopoietic defects. The abnormalities in
leukocyte production are transplantable, indicating that the defect resides in
the hematopoietic cells. These studies demonstrate a physiologic role for a HOX
gene in blood cell differentiation, with the greatest apparent influence of HOXA9
at the level of the committed progenitor.

PMID: 9058712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Br J Haematol. 1997 Mar;96(4):682-7.

Clinical, haematological and molecular studies in patients with chromosome
translocation t(7;11): a study of four Chinese patients in Taiwan.

Huang SY(1), Tang JL, Liang YJ, Wang CH, Chen YC, Tien HF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, National Taiwan University Hospital, Taipei.

Translocation t(7;11)(p 15;p15) is an uncommon but recurrent chromosome
aberration in acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). which occurs mostly in oriental
patients and in AML M2 or, occasionally, M4 subtype. Recently, a consistent
chimaeric fusion transcript NUP98-HOXA9 was found in several cases of t(7;11).
Four AML cases with the chromosome abnormality in Taiwan are described. They were
all adults with ages ranging from 30 to 41 years (median 36 years). Three of them
were diagnosed as having AML M2; the remaining one as M4. Marked
dyserythropoiesis was demonstrated in two patients. All four patients showed
pan-myeloid antigen CD13 on the leukaemic cells, but none coexpressed
lymphocyte-associated antigens and neither of the two patients studied for CD34
expression had positive staining. NUP98-HOXA9 fusion transcript was detected in
both patients who had molecular analysis and the breakpoints on chromosome 11 and
7 respectively were similar to those previously reported. They all received
conventional induction chemotherapy, but only one achieved a complete remission
(CR) with short duration. This study and others reported in the literature
suggest a racial or geographical predisposition among oriental patients to AML
with t(7;11) and that this is associated with a poor prognosis. The molecular
detection of NUP98-HOXA9 fusion transcript would be a useful method for the
diagnosis of t(7;11) and also for monitoring disease status after treatment.

PMID: 9074407  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Dev Biol. 1997 Jan 15;181(2):186-96.

Targeted mutations in hoxa-9 and hoxb-9 reveal synergistic interactions.

Chen F(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Mice were generated with a targeted disruption of the homeobox-containing gene
hoxb-9. Mice homozygous for this mutation show defects in the development of the 
first and second ribs. In most cases the first and second ribs are fused near the
point at which the first and second pairs of ribs normally attach to the sternum.
Abnormalities of the sternum accompany the rib fusions. These include abnormal
attachment of the ribs to the sternum, a reduction in the number of intercostal
segments of the sternum, and abnormal growth of the intercostal segments. Over
half of the homozygous mutants, as well as some heterozygotes, also have an
eighth rib attached to the sternum. These results show that hoxb-9 plays a
significant role in the specification of thoracic skeletal elements. To reveal
potential interactions between the paralogous Hox genes hoxa-9 and hoxb-9, mice
heterozygous for both mutations were intercrossed. Mice homozygous for both
mutations show more severe phenotypes than predicted by the addition of the
individual mutant phenotypes. Both the penetrance and the expressivity of the rib
and sternal defects are increased, suggesting synergistic interactions between
these genes. In particular, the sternum defects are greatly exacerbated.
Interestingly, the defects in hoxb-9 and hoxa-9/ hoxb-9 mutant mice are
concentrated along the axial column at points of transition between vertebral
types.

PMID: 9013929  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Oncogene. 1996 Nov 21;13(10):2235-42.

Identification of a new family of Pbx-related homeobox genes.

Nakamura T(1), Jenkins NA, Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)ABL-Basic Research Program, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development
Center, Frederick, Maryland 21702, USA.

The expression of Meis1 (a novel Pbx-related homeobox gene) and either Hoxa7 or
Hoxa9 are coactivated by retroviral integration in BXH2 murine myeloid leukemias 
(T Nakamura, DA Largaespada, JD Shaughnessy Jr, NA Jenkins and NG Copeland (1996)
Nature Genet. 12: 149-153). As Pbx proteins are Hox cofactors, which
cooperatively bind DNA with Hox proteins to modulate the otherwise similar DNA
bind specificities of Hox proteins, these results suggested that Meis1 may
function as a cofactor for Hoxa7 and Hoxa9 in the induction of murine myeloid
leukemias. By DNA cross-hybridization we have identified two Meis1-related genes,
Meis2 and Meis3. Sequence analysis revealed extensive amino acid similarity among
the three Meis proteins both within and outside of the homeodomain. Phylogenetic 
analysis showed that the Meis genes belong to a distinct family of Pbx-related
genes. Chromosome mapping studies indicated that Meis2 and Meis3 are unlinked to 
Meis1 and map to mouse chromosome 2 and 7, respectively. The Meis genes displayed
distinct but overlapping patterns of expression in normal tissues and were
expressed in some cases of murine myeloid leukemia. The identification of two
additional Meis genes identifies a new family of potential Hox cofactors as well 
as two new potential disease genes.

PMID: 8950991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Mamm Genome. 1996 Mar;7(3):216-7.

Orientation of the Hoxa complex and placement of the Hd locus distal to Hoxa2 on 
mouse chromosome 6.

Innis JW(1), Darling SM, Kazen-Gillespie K, Post LC, Mortlock DP, Yang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Med Sci. II, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0618,
USA.

PMID: 8833244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Development. 1996 Feb;122(2):461-72.

Specific and redundant functions of the paralogous Hoxa-9 and Hoxd-9 genes in
forelimb and axial skeleton patterning.

Fromental-Ramain C(1), Warot X, Lakkaraju S, Favier B, Haack H, Birling C,
Dierich A, Doll e P, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Strasbourg.

Using gene targeting, we have produced mice with a disruption of Hoxa-9 or
Hoxd-9, two paralogous Abdominal B-related genes. During embryogenesis, these
genes are expressed in limb buds and along the vertebral axis with anterior
expression boundaries at the level of prevertebra #20 for Hoxa-9 and #23 for
Hoxd-9. Skeletal analysis revealed homeotic transformations corresponding to
anteriorisations of vertebrae #21 to #25 (L1 to L5) in the lumbar region of
Hoxa-9-/- mutants; vertebrae #23 to #25 (L3 to L5) in the lumbar region together 
with vertebrae #28, #30 and #31 (S2, S4 and Ca1) in the sacrum and tail were
anteriorized in Hoxd-9-/- mutants. Thus, anteriorisation of vertebrae #23 to #25 
were common to both phenotypes. Subtle forelimb (but not hindlimb) defects,
corresponding to a reduction of the humerus length and malformation of its
deltoid crest, were also observed in Hoxd-9-/-, but not in Hoxa-9-/-, mutant
mice. By intercrosses between these two lines of mutant mice, we have produced
Hoxa-9/Hoxd-9 double mutants which exhibit synergistic limb and axial
malformations consisting of: (i) an increase of penetrance and expressivity of
abnormalities present in the single mutants, and (ii) novel limb alterations at
the level of the forelimb stylopod and additional axial skeleton transformations.
These observations demonstrate that the two paralogous genes Hoxa-9 and Hoxd-9
have both specific and redundant functions in lumbosacral axial skeleton
patterning and in limb morphogenesis at the stylopodal level. Taken all together,
the present and previously reported results show that disruption of different Hox
genes can produce similar vertebral transformations, thus supporting a
combinatorial code model for specification of vertebral identity by Hox genes.

PMID: 8625797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Nat Genet. 1996 Feb;12(2):159-67.

The t(7;11)(p15;p15) translocation in acute myeloid leukaemia fuses the genes for
nucleoporin NUP98 and class I homeoprotein HOXA9.

Borrow J(1), Shearman AM, Stanton VP Jr, Becher R, Collins T, Williams AJ, Dubé
I, Katz F, Kwong YL, Morris C, Ohyashiki K, Toyama K, Rowley J, Housman DE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cancer Research, Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge
02139, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1996 Feb;12(2):113-4.

The t(7;11)(p15;p15) translocation is a recurrent chromosomal abnormality
associated primarily with acute myeloid leukaemia (FAB M2 and M4). We present
here the molecular definition of this translocation. On chromosome 7 positional
cloning revealed the consistent rearrangement of the HOXA9 gene, which encodes a 
class I homeodomain protein potentially involved in myeloid differentiation. On
chromosome 11 the translocation targets the human homologue of NUP98, a member of
the GLFG nucleoporin family. Chimaeric messages spliced over the breakpoint fuse 
the GLFG repeat domains of NUP98 in-frame to the HOXA9 homeobox. The predicted
NUP98-HOXA9 fusion protein may promote leukaemogenesis through inhibition of
HOXA9-mediated terminal differentiation and/or aberrant nucleocytoplasmic
transport.

PMID: 8563754  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Nat Genet. 1996 Feb;12(2):154-8.

Fusion of the nucleoporin gene NUP98 to HOXA9 by the chromosome translocation
t(7;11)(p15;p15) in human myeloid leukaemia.

Nakamura T(1), Largaespada DA, Lee MP, Johnson LA, Ohyashiki K, Toyama K, Chen
SJ, Willman CL, Chen IM, Feinberg AP, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Shaughnessy JD Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development
Center, Maryland 21702, USA.

Expression of Hoxa7 and Hoxa9 is activated by proviral integration in BXH2 murine
myeloid leukaemias. This result, combined with the mapping of the HOXA locus to
human chromosome 7p15, suggested that one of the HOXA genes might be involved in 
the t(7;11)(p15;p15) translocation found in some human myeloid leukaemia
patients. Here we show that in three patients with t(7;11), the chromosome
rearrangement creates a genomic fusion between the HOXA9 gene and the nucleoporin
gene NUP98 on chromosome 11p15. The translocation produces an invariant chimaeric
NUP98/HOXA9 transcript containing the amino terminal half of NUP98 fused in frame
to HOXA9. These studies identify HOXA9 as an important human myeloid leukaemia
gene and suggest an important role for nucleoporins in human myeloid leukaemia
given that a second nucleoporin, NUP214, has also been implicated in human
myeloid leukaemia.

PMID: 8563753  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Nat Genet. 1996 Feb;12(2):149-53.

Cooperative activation of Hoxa and Pbx1-related genes in murine myeloid
leukaemias.

Nakamura T(1), Largaespada DA, Shaughnessy JD Jr, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG.

Author information: 
(1)Mammalian Genetics Laboratory, NCI-Frederick Cancer Research and Development
Center, Maryland 21702, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Genet. 1996 Feb;12(2):113-4.

Retroviruses induce myeloid leukaemia in BXH-2 mice by the insertional mutation
of cellular proto-oncogenes or tumour suppressor genes. Disease genes can thus be
identified by proviral tagging through the identification of common viral
integration sites in BXH-2 leukaemia. Here, we describe a new approach for
proviral tagging that greatly facilitates the identification of BXH-2 leukaemia
genes. Using this approach, we identify three genes whose expression is activated
by proviral integration in BXH-2 leukaemias; Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and a Pbx1-related
homeobox gene, Meis1. Proviral activation of Hoxa7 or Hoxa9 is strongly
correlated with proviral activation of Meis1 implying that Hoxa7 and Hoxa9
cooperate with Meis1 in leukaemia formation. These studies provide the first
genetic evidence that Pbx1-related genes cooperate with Hox genes in leukaemia
formation and identify a number of new murine myeloid leukaemia genes.

PMID: 8563752  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Development. 1995 Jun;121(6):1731-41.

Regulation of HoxA expression in developing and regenerating axolotl limbs.

Gardiner DM(1), Blumberg B, Komine Y, Bryant SV.

Author information: 
(1)Development Biology Center, University of California Irvine 92717, USA.

Homeobox genes are important in the regulation of outgrowth and pattern formation
during limb development. It is likely that homeobox genes play an equally
important role during limb regeneration. We have isolated and identified 17
different homeobox-containing genes expressed by cells of regenerating axolotl
limbs. Of these, nearly half of the clones represent genes belonging to the HoxA 
complex, which are thought to be involved in pattern formation along the
proximal-distal limb axis. In this paper we report on the expression patterns of 
two 5' members of this complex, HoxA13 and HoxA9. These genes are expressed in
cells of developing limb buds and regenerating blastemas. The pattern of
expression in developing axolotl limb buds is comparable to that in mouse and
chick limb buds; the expression domain of HoxA13 is more distally restricted than
that of HoxA9. As in developing mouse and chick limbs, HoxA13 likely functions in
the specification of distal limb structures, and HoxA9 in the specification of
more proximal structures. In contrast, during regeneration, HoxA13 and HoxA9 do
not follow the rule of spatial colinearity observed in developing limbs. Instead,
both genes are initially expressed in the same population of stump cells, giving 
them a distal Hox code regardless of the level of amputation. In addition, both
are reexpressed within 24 hours after amputation, suggesting that reexpression
may be synchronous rather than temporally colinear. Treatment with retinoic acid 
alters this Hox code to that of a more proximal region by the rapid and
differential downregulation of HoxA13, at the same time that expression of HoxA9 
is unaffected. HoxA reexpression occurs prior to blastema formation, 24-48 hours 
after amputation, and is an early molecular marker for dedifferentiation.

PMID: 7600989  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Lab Invest. 1994 Nov;71(5):663-70.

Expression of AbdB-type homeobox genes in human tumors.

Redline RW(1), Hudock P, MacFee M, Patterson P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland, Ohio.

BACKGROUND: Homeobox (HOX) genes of the ANT-C/BX-C type control rostral-caudal
patterning during embryogenesis. Previous work has shown that tissues express
unique HOX gene expression profiles that persist upon transplantation to distant 
sites. These properties suggest that analysis of HOX genes may be useful for the 
diagnosis and evaluation of primary and metastatic tumors.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We analyzed normal and neoplastic tissues for the expression
of three AbdB-type HOX genes; HOXD10, HOXA9, and HOXC9 to evaluate three
hypotheses: (a) that tumors express HOX genes found in their tissue of origin,
(b) that metastatic tumors continue to express HOX genes found in the primary
tumor, and (c) that the level of HOX expression is related to tumor grade.
RESULTS: Malignant tumors gave consistent patterns of HOX gene expression that
paralleled their tissues of origin. Normal kidney and Wilm's tumors expressed all
three genes. Other renal tumors expressed distinct permutations of the three
genes. One epithelial Wilm's tumor expressed only an aberrant 0.3 kb HOXD10
transcript. Outside of the kidney, HOXD10 was most characteristic of uterine
tumors, HOXA9 of colonic adenocarcinomas, and HOXC9 of two groups of tumors:
neoplasms derived from neural crest and mesenchymal tumors derived from
intermediate mesoderm. Metastatic tumors retained their HOX gene expression
profiles and did not express HOX genes transcribed at the site of metastasis.
While modulation of HOX gene expression was observed in some poorly
differentiated tumors this was not a consistent measure of tumor grade.
CONCLUSIONS: HOX gene profile was a reliable indicator of histologic subtype in a
variety of tumors and in selected cases provided useful diagnostic information.
Persistent expression in metastatic tumors confirmed that HOX expression profiles
are potentially useful for diagnosing tumors of unknown origin. Continued
analysis of the relationship between level of expression and tumor grade/behavior
is indicated.

PMID: 7967520  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


