
1. Int J Mol Med. 2016 Mar 24. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2016.2539. [Epub ahead of print]

Knockdown of HOXA10 reverses the multidrug resistance of human chronic mylogenous
leukemia K562/ADM cells by downregulating P-gp and MRP-1.

Yi YJ(1), Jia XH(1), Wang JY(2), Li YJ(3), Wang H(1), Xie SY(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical
University, Binzhou, Shandong 256603, P.R. China. (2)Department of Pediatrics,
Yantai Yuhuangding Hospital, Yantai, Shangdong 264000, P.R. China. (3)Department 
of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Key Laboratory of Tumour Molecular
Biology, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, Shandong 264003, P.R. China.

Multidrug resistance (MDR) of leukemia cells is a major obstacle in
chemotherapeutic treatment. The high expression and constitutive activation of
P-glycoprotein (P-gp) and multidrug resistance protein-1 (MRP-1) have been
reported to play a vital role in enhancing cell resistance to anticancer drugs in
many tumors. The present study aimed to investigate the reversal of MDR by
silencing homeobox A10 (HOXA10) in adriamycin (ADR)-resistant human chronic
myelogenous leukemia (CML) K562/ADM cells by modulating the expression of P-gp
and MRP-1. K562/ADM cells were stably transfected with HOXA10-targeted short
hairpin RNA (shRNA). The results of reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase
chain reaction (RT-qPCR) and western blot analysis showed that the mRNA and
protein expression of HOXA10 was markedly suppressed following transfection with 
a shRNA-containing vector. The sensitivity of the K562/ADM cells to ADR was
enhanced by the silencing of HOXA10, due to the increased intracellular
accumulation of ADR. The accumulation of ADR induced by the silencing of HOXA10
may be due to the downregulation of P-gp and MRP-1. Western blot analysis
revealed that downregulating HOXA10 inhibited the protein expression of P-gp and 
MRP-1. Taken together, these results suggest that knockdown of HOXA10 combats
resistance and that HOXA10 is a potential target for resistant human CML.

PMID: 27035504  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2016 Mar 15. pii: S0303-7207(16)30063-6. doi:
10.1016/j.mce.2016.03.015. [Epub ahead of print]

Platelets drive smooth muscle metaplasia and fibrogenesis in endometriosis
through epithelial-mesenchymal transition and fibroblast-to-myofibroblast
transdifferentiation.

Zhang Q(1), Duan J(1), Liu X(2), Guo SW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200011, China.
(2)Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200011, China; Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine-Related Diseases, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. (3)Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200011, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive
Endocrine-Related Diseases, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. Electronic
address: hoxa10@outlook.com.

Smooth muscle metaplasia (SMM) and fibrotic tissues are frequently seen in
endometriotic lesions, yet the mechanisms underlying their formation are poorly
understood. In this study, we investigated the roles of activated platelets in
driving epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and fibroblast-to-myofibroblast
transdifferentiation (FMT) in endometriosis. Through in vitro experimentations,
we found that activated platelets, through the release of TGF-ß1 and the
induction of TGF-ß/Smad signaling pathway, promoted EMT and FMT in endometriosis,
resulting in increased cell contractility, collagen production, and ultimately to
fibrosis. TGF-ß blockade reversed these processes. Prolonged exposure of
endometriotic stromal cells to activated platelets induced increased expression
of a-SMA as well as markers of differentiated smooth muscle cells. Consequently, 
endometriotic lesions and their microenvironment contain all the necessary
molecular machinery to promote SMM and fibrogenesis. Our results suggest that
endometriotic lesions are wounds that undergo repeated injury and healing,
highlighting the importance of platelets in the development of endometriosis.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26992563  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2016 Mar 3. pii: S0002-9378(16)00397-5. doi:
10.1016/j.ajog.2016.02.055. [Epub ahead of print]

Surgery accelerates the development of endometriosis in mouse.

Long Q(1), Liu X(2), Guo SW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. (2)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine-Related
Diseases, Shanghai, China. (3)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive
Endocrine-Related Diseases, Shanghai, China. Electronic address:
hoxa10@outlook.com.

BACKGROUND: Surgery is currently the mainstay treatment for solid tumors and many
benign diseases, including endometriosis, and women tend to receive substantially
more surgeries than men mainly because of gynecological and cosmetic surgeries.
Despite its cosmetic, therapeutic, or even life-saving benefits, surgery is
reported to increase the cancer risk and promotes cancer metastasis. Surgery
activates adrenergic signaling, which in turn suppresses cell-mediated immunity
and promotes angiogenesis and metastasis. Because immunity, angiogenesis, and
invasiveness are all involved in the pathophysiology of endometriosis, it is
unclear whether surgery may accelerate the development of endometriosis.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to test the hypothesis that surgery
activates adrenergic signaling, increases angiogenesis, and accelerates the
growth of endometriotic lesions.
STUDY DESIGN: This was a prospective, randomized experimentation. The first
experiment used 42 female adult Balb/C mice, and the second used 90 female adult 
Balb/C mice. In experiment 1, 3 days after the induction of endometriosis, mice
were randomly divided into 3 groups of approximately equal sizes, control,
laparotomy, and mastectomy. In experiment 2, propranolol infusion via Alzet pumps
was used to forestall the effect of sympathetic nervous system activation by
surgery. In both experiments, mice were evaluated 2 weeks after surgery. Lesion
size, hotplate latency, and immunohistochemistry analysis of vascular endothelial
growth factor, CD31-positive microvessels, proliferating cell nuclear antigen,
phosphorylated cyclic adenosine monophosphate-responsive element-binding protein,
ß2-adrenergic receptor (ADRB)-2, ADRB1, ADRB3, ADRA1, and ADRA2 in ectopic
implants.
RESULTS: Both mastectomy and laparotomy increased lesion weight and exacerbated
hyperalgesia, increased microvessel density and elevated the immunoreactivity
against ADRB2, phosphorylated cyclic adenosine monophosphate-responsive
element-binding protein, vascular endothelial growth factor, and proliferating
cell nuclear antigen but not ADRB1, ADRB3, ADRA1, and ADRA2, suggesting activated
adrenergic signaling, increased angiogenesis, and accelerated growth of
endometriotic lesions. ß-Blockade completely abrogated the facilitory effect of
surgery, further underscoring the critical role of ß-adrenergic signaling in
mediating the effect of surgery.
CONCLUSION: Surgery activates adrenergic signaling, increases angiogenesis, and
accelerates the growth of endometriotic lesions in the mouse, but such a
facilitory effect of surgery can be completely abrogated by ß-blockade. Whether
surgery can promote the development of endometriosis in humans warrants further
investigation.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26945602  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Reprod Sci. 2016 Feb 25. pii: 1933719116632921. [Epub ahead of print]

Surgical History and the Risk of Endometriosis: A Hospital-Based Case-Control
Study.

Liu X(1), Long Q(2), Guo SW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine-Related Diseases,
Shanghai, China. (2)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. (3)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital,
Fudan University, Shanghai, China Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive 
Endocrine-Related Diseases, Shanghai, China hoxa10@outlook.com.

Women tend to receive more surgical procedures than men. Our mouse study shows
that surgical stress promotes the development of endometriosis. This study was
undertaken to test the hypothesis that surgery increases the risk of
endometriosis. We recruited 208 patients with ovarian endometrioma and 212
age-matched patients with ovarian teratoma and retrieved information on the
history of any surgical procedures after menarche, grouped by laparotomy,
laparoscopy, gynecologically related procedures, cesarean section, and surgeries 
performed on torso and extremities was recorded. We then evaluated the
association, if any, between endometriosis and history of surgical procedures.
Cases and controls were comparable with respect to age, marital status, education
level, and occupation. Eleven (5.3%) cases had laparotomy before the index
surgery while 4 (1.9%) controls did. Sixty-six (31.7%) cases had Cesarean section
while 53 (25.0%) controls did. Multivariate analysis identified age, at the index
surgery laparotomy, and cesarean section as 3 factors positively associated with 
the risk of endometriosis while parity was found to be negatively associated with
the risk. Laparotomy was associated with increased risk of endometriosis (odds
ratio [OR] = 3.64, 95% confidence interval [CI] = 1.08-12.31), while cesarean
section was associated with 2-fold increase in risk (OR = 2.16, 95% CI =
1.31-3.55). Both laparotomy and cesarean section may increase the risk of
endometriosis probably by activation of adrenergic signaling, thus facilitating
angiogenesis and accelerating the growth of endometriotic lesions that are
already in existence. This finding may have important ramifications for the
perioperative management of patients with increased risk or recurrence risk of
endometriosis.

© The Author(s) 2016.

PMID: 26919976  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Hum Reprod. 2016 Apr;31(4):734-49. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dew018. Epub 2016 Feb 22.

Corroborating evidence for platelet-induced epithelial-mesenchymal transition and
fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transdifferentiation in the development of
adenomyosis.

Liu X(1), Shen M(2), Qi Q(2), Zhang H(3), Guo SW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200011, China Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine-Related Diseases, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. (2)Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200011, China. (3)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology,
Shanghai Medical Collage, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (4)Shanghai OB/GYN
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200011, China Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Female Reproductive Endocrine-Related Diseases, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
hoxa10@outlook.com.

STUDY QUESTION: Do platelets play any role in the development of adenomyosis?
SUMMARY ANSWER: As in endometriosis, adenomyotic lesions show significantly
increased platelet aggregation, increased expression of transforming growth
factor (TGF)-ß1, phosphorylated Smad3, markers of epithelial-mesenchymal
transition (EMT) and fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transdifferentiation (FMT), and 
smooth muscle metaplasia (SMM), in conjunction with increased fibrosis as
compared with normal endometrium.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Both EMT and FMT are known to play vital roles in
fibrogenesis in general and in endometriosis in particular. EMT has been
implicated in the development of adenomyosis. SMM is universally seen in
endometriosis and also in adenomyosis, and is correlated positively with the
extent of fibrosis. However, there has been no published study on the role of
platelets in fibrogenesis in adenomyosis, even though adenomyotic lesions undergo
repeated cycles of tissue injury and repair, which suggests the involvement of
platelets and their possible roles in fibrogenesis.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: Cross-sectional studies of ectopic endometrial and 
control endometrial tissue samples from three sets of women with and without
adenomyosis (n= 34 and 20, 12 and 10, and 8 and 8, respectively) were carried out
from 2014 to 2015.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Immunohistochemistry analysis of
ectopic endometrial tissues from women with (n= 34) and without (n= 20)
adenomyosis with respect to biomarkers of EMT, FMT and highly differentiated
smooth muscle cells as well as TGF-ß1, phosphorylated Smad3, markers of
proliferation, angiogenesis and extracellular matrix (ECM) deposits. Masson
trichrome staining, Van Gieson staining and Pico-Sirius staining were performed
to evaluate and quantify the extent of fibrosis in lesions. Progesterone receptor
isoform B (PR-B) staining also was performed. In addition, CD42b-positive
platelets in ectopic (n= 12) and control (n= 10) endometrium were counted by
confocal microscopy and compared. The protein expression levels of TGF-ß1 and
phosphorylated Smad3 in both ectopic (n= 8) and control (n= 8) endometrium were
measured by western blot analysis. Immunofluorescent staining of both platelets
and hepatocyte growth factor (HGF) was also performed for adenomyotic tissue
samples (n= 10).
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: Adenomyotic lesions had a significantly
higher extent of platelet aggregation and increased staining for TGF-ß1 and
phosphorylated Smad3 (both P-values <0.001 versus control). In addition,
E-cadherin staining was decreased while vimentin staining in adenomyotic
epithelial cells was increased, along with increased staining of proliferating
cell nuclear antigen, vascular endothelial growth factor and CD31 (all P-values
<0.001), markers of proliferation and angiogenesis. Staining for a-SMA, a marker 
for myofibroblast, desmin, smooth muscle myosin heavy chain and oxytocin receptor
was significantly increased in adenomyotic lesions versus control, concomitant
with increased staining of collagen I and lysyl oxidase (all P-values <0.001).
Histochemistry analysis indicates that the extent of fibrosis is high in
adenomyotic lesions (P < 0.001), and the extent appeared to correlate negatively 
with the microvessel density (P < 0.05). PR-B staining was significantly
decreased in adenomyotic lesion as compared with control endometrium (P < 0.001).
Platelets and HGF were co-localized mostly in the stromal component of
adenomyotic lesions, near the glandular epithelium.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The results are limited by the cross-sectional 
nature of the study and the use of histochemistry and immunohistochemistry
analyses only, but nonetheless is a validation of our previous finding in mouse
experiments.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The data presented are consistent with the
notion that platelet-induced activation of the TGF-ß/Smad signaling pathway may
be a driving force in EMT, FMT and SMM in the development of adenomyosis, leading
to fibrosis. This study provides the first piece of evidence that adenomyotic
lesions are wounds that undergo repeated injury and healing, and, as such,
platelets play critical roles in the development of adenomyosis by promoting
proliferation, angiogenesis, increasing ECM deposits, and SMM, resulting in
fibrosis. Platelets may also be involved in uterine hyperactivity and myometrial 
hyperinnervation. Our results provide one explanation as to why adenomyosis is a 
challenge for medical treatment, and shed new light onto the pathophysiology of
adenomyosis.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: Support for data collection and analysis was
provided by grants from the National Science Foundation of China. None of the
authors has anything to disclose.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26908845  [PubMed - in process]


6. Reprod Sci. 2016 Feb 22. pii: 1933719116630428. [Epub ahead of print]

Endometriosis-Derived Stromal Cells Secrete Thrombin and Thromboxane A2, Inducing
Platelet Activation.

Guo SW(1), Du Y(2), Liu X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine-Related Diseases,
Shanghai, China hoxa10@outlook.com. (2)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China Shanghai First Maternity and Infant
Hospital, Tongji University, Shanghai, China. (3)Shanghai Obstetrics and
Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Female Reproductive Endocrine-Related Diseases, Shanghai, China.

Platelets have been recently revealed to play important roles in the development 
of endometriosis. However, it is unclear whether endometriotic lesions can
secrete any platelet inducers outside the menstruation window. Hence, this study 
was undertaken to see whether endometriosis-derived stromal cells secrete
platelet activators and cause platelet activation. We employed in vitro
experimentation using primary ectopic endometrial stromal cells (EESCs) and
platelets from healthy male volunteers and evaluated the extent of platelet
aggregation by aggregometer and the platelet activation rate by flow cytometry
using supernatants harvested from EESCs of different cell densities. We also
measured the concentration of thromboxane B2 (TXB2), a metabolite of thromboxane 
A2 (TXA2), and thrombin activity in supernatants harvested from EESCs of
different densities and evaluated the extent of platelet aggregation after
treatment of EESCs with hirudin, Ozagrel, and apyrase. Finally, the concentration
of TXB2, thrombin, and transforming growth factor ß1 (TGF-ß1) in platelets
cocultured with different densities of EESCs is measured by enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay. We found that EESCs secrete thrombin and TXA2 and induce
platelet activation and aggregation in a density-dependent fashion. Treatment of 
platelets with EESCs resulted in increased concentration of TXB2, thrombin, and
TGF-ß1 in a density-dependent manner. Treatment of EESCs with hirudin and
Ozagrel, but not apyrase, resulted in significant suppression of platelet
aggregation. Thus, given recently reported effects of activated platelets on the 
cell behaviors of EESCs and endometriotic lesions in general, our findings
establish that endometriotic lesions and platelets engage active cross-talks in
the development of endometriosis, highlighting the importance of lesion
microenvironment in endometriosis.

© The Author(s) 2016.

PMID: 26902428  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


7. Reprod Biomed Online. 2016 Jan 29. pii: S1472-6483(16)00041-9. doi:
10.1016/j.rbmo.2016.01.005. [Epub ahead of print]

HOXA10, EMX2 and TENM1 expression in the mid-secretory endometrium of infertile
women with a Müllerian duct anomaly.

Zhu Y(1), Luo M(2), Huang H(1), Du X(1), Chen D(1), Xing Q(1), Wang B(3), Cao
Y(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Center for Reproductive Medicine, the
First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical University, Hefei, China; Anhui
Engineering Research Center for Low Temperature Medical Science and Artificial
Organs, Hefei, China. (2)National Research Institute for Family Planning, Beijing
100081, China. (3)National Research Institute for Family Planning, Beijing
100081, China; Graduate School of Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China.
Electronic address: wbbahu@163.com. (4)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
Center for Reproductive Medicine, the First Affiliated Hospital of Anhui Medical 
University, Hefei, China; Anhui Engineering Research Center for Low Temperature
Medical Science and Artificial Organs, Hefei, China. Electronic address:
caoyunxia6@126.com.

Homeobox A10 (HOXA10) and empty spiracles homeobox 2 (EMX2) are two transcription
factors necessary for female Müllerian duct differentiation and development. They
are thought to play important roles in embryo implantation in mice and humans.
The EMX2 gene is a known direct target of HOXA10 in the reproductive tract. Human
TENM1 is directly regulated by EMX2 and is expressed during embryonic pattern
formation and morphogenesis. This study aimed to investigate expression patterns 
of HOXA10, EMX2 and TENM1 in the mid-secretory endometrium of infertile patients 
with a Müllerian duct anomaly causing a partially septate uterus. Thirteen
mid-secretory endometrial tissue samples were collected from women with partially
septate uteri and 12 from women with normal uteri as controls. Expression levels 
of HOXA10, EMX2 and TENM1 mRNA and protein in the mid-secretory endometrium of
infertile patients and controls were measured by quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction and western blotting. Compared with
controls, mRNA and protein expression levels of HOXA10 decreased significantly (P
< 0.01), whereas EMX2 and TENM1 increased dramatically in patients with Müllerian
duct anomaly (P < 0.001). Changes in HOXA10, EMX2, and TENM1 expression levels
might act in infertile women with Müllerian duct anomaly to cause a partially
septate uterus.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ltd.

PMID: 26896429  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


8. Mol Immunol. 2016 Mar;71:87-97. doi: 10.1016/j.molimm.2016.01.002. Epub 2016 Feb 
11.

Fertility defects in Surfactant associated protein D knockout female mice:
altered ovarian hormone profile.

Kay S(1), Madan T(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Innate Immunity, National Institute for Research in Reproductive
Health (ICMR), Mumbai, Maharashtra, India. Electronic address:
kay_sharon64@yahoo.co.in. (2)Department of Innate Immunity, National Institute
for Research in Reproductive Health (ICMR), Mumbai, Maharashtra, India.
Electronic address: taruna_m@hotmail.com.

Surfactant associated protein D (SFTPD, also known as SP-D), a pattern
recognition molecule, is an integral component of the mucosal immune system of
female reproductive tract (FRT). In addition to host defense functions in the
FRT, recent evidences indicate immunomodulatory role of SFTPD in parturition and 
pre-term labor. Regulation of SFTPD expression by ovarian hormones in the mouse
uterus implicates SFTPD of FRT in pregnancy establishment and maintenance. In the
current study, we attempted to decipher the functional relevance of SFTPD in FRT 
by characterizing the fertility parameters of surfactant associated protein D
knockout (Sftpd(tm1Jhf)/Sftpd(tm1Jhf)) female mice. Knockout female mice
exhibited extended estrous cycle with altered serum profile of ovarian hormones. 
We also demonstrate altered expression of ovarian hormone receptors and hormone
responsive genes ITGB1, LIF and HOXA10 in uteri of these mice. Knockout females
mated with wild type males had significantly smaller litter size due to increased
pre-implantation embryo loss. We also observed an altered immune profile in
knockout mice uteri with elevated levels of inflammatory cytokines, increased
numbers of pro-inflammatory monocytes/macrophages and lower FOXP3 levels during
the pre-implantation period. LPS administration to pregnant knockout mice did not
result in any increase in embryo implantation loss and was associated with a
blunted uterine pro-inflammatory response, plausibly due to higher levels of
serum progesterone. Taken together, our results demonstrate that SFTPD deficiency
affects female fertility, highlighting roles for SFTPD in ovarian and uterine
physiology.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26874827  [PubMed - in process]


9. Reprod Sci. 2016 Apr;23(4):455-63. doi: 10.1177/1933719116630427. Epub 2016 Feb
10.

Aberrant HOXA10 Methylation in Patients With Common Gynecologic Disorders:
Implications for Reproductive Outcomes.

Kulp JL(1), Mamillapalli R(2), Taylor HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. (2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
ramana.mamillapalli@yale.edu.

HomeoboxA10 (HOXA10) is a transcription factor that is crucial for the
development and patterning of the uterus during embryogenesis. In the adult
endometrium, HOXA10 expression is regulated by steroid hormones and embryonic
signals. Expression of sufficient HOXA10 messenger RNA is essential to
endometrial receptivity and embryo implantation. Aberrant methylation is believed
to alter the expression of HOXA10. Methylation of this gene may be associated
with decreased fertility, implantation defects, and/or reproductive wastage seen 
in certain disease states that affect the female reproductive tract. This study
describes the differences in methylation patterns of HOXA10 gene in uterine
myomas, endometriosis, uterine septum, Asherman syndrome, or uterine polyps of
women undergoing hysteroscopic surgery. In the endometrium of uteri with polyps, 
submucosal myomas, and intramural myomas, there were CpG sites within the HOXA10 
gene that were highly methylated compared to controls. The HOXA10 gene in women
with endometriosis was hypomethylated compared to controls. DNA methylation may
be a common molecular mechanism that results in reproductive dysfunction seen in 
gynecologic disease.

© The Author(s) 2016.

PMID: 26865543  [PubMed - in process]


10. Front Pharmacol. 2016 Jan 28;6:324. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2015.00324. eCollection
2015.

MicroRNA-mRNA Pairs Associated with Outcome in AML: From In Vitro Cell-Based
Studies to AML Patients.

Bhise NS(1), Chauhan L(2), Shin M(2), Cao X(3), Pounds S(3), Lamba V(2), Lamba
JK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy and Translational Research, University of
FloridaGainesville, FL, USA; Department of Experimental and Clinical
Pharmacology, University of MinnesotaMinneapolis, MN, USA. (2)Department of
Pharmacotherapy and Translational Research, University of Florida Gainesville,
FL, USA. (3)Department of Biostatistics, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital
Memphis, TN, USA.

Cytarabine is the primary chemotherapeutic agent used for treatment of acute
myeloid leukemia (AML). Disease relapse after initial remission remains one of
the most pressing therapeutic challenges in the treatment of AML. Relapsed
disease is often resistant to cytarabine and subsequent salvage therapy is
ineffective. Recent studies have shown that some microRNAs (miRNAs) are
associated with prognosis, but have not yet explored the role of miRNAs in
cellular response to cytarabine. We identified 20 miRNAs that associate with the 
in vitro cytarabine chemo-sensitivity or apoptotic response of eight AML cell
lines. Out of the 20 miRNAs, data on 18 miRNAs was available in AML patients from
The Cancer Genome Atlas database. Our stepwise-integrated analyses (step 1 -
miRNA-target mRNA that were significantly correlated in AML patients; step 2 -
mRNAs from step 1 with significant association with overall survival (OS))
identified 23 unique miRNA-mRNA pairs predictive of OS in AML patients. As
expected HOX genes (HOXA9, HOXB7, and HOXA10) were identified to be regulated by 
miRs as well as predictive of worse OS. Additionally, miR107-Myb,
miR-378-granzyme B involved in granzyme signaling and miR10a-MAP4K4 were
identified to be predictive of outcome through integrated analysis. Although
additional functional validations to establish clinical/pharmacologic importance 
of miRNA-mRNA pairs are needed, our results from RNA electrophoretic mobility
shift assay confirmed binding of miR-10a, miR-378, and miR-107 with their target 
genes GALNT1, GZMB, and MYB, respectively. Integration of pathogenic and
pharmacologically significant miRNAs and miRNA-mRNA relationships identified in
our study opens up opportunities for development of targeted/miRNA-directed
therapies.

PMCID: PMC4729948
PMID: 26858643  [PubMed]


11. Br J Haematol. 2016 Feb 5. doi: 10.1111/bjh.13949. [Epub ahead of print]

Hoxa10 null animals exhibit reduced platelet biogenesis.

Konieczna IM(1,)(2), DeLuca TA(1), Eklund EA(3,)(4,)(5), Miller WM(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Chemical and Biological Engineering Department, Northwestern University,
Evanston, IL, USA. (2)Currently at Transplant Surgery Division, Northwestern
University School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. (3)Hematology Oncology Division,
Northwestern University School of Medicine, Chicago, IL, USA. (4)Robert H. Lurie 
Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA.
(5)Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.

The transcription factor HOXA10 is an important regulator of myelopoiesis.
Engineered over-expression of Hoxa10 in mice results in a myeloproliferative
disorder that progresses to acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) over time, and in
humans over-expression is associated with poor outcomes in AML. Here, we report
that loss of Hoxa10 expression in mice results in reduced platelet count and
platelet production, but does not affect clotting efficiency. About 40% fewer
platelets were found in Hoxa10 null animals in comparison to wild type
littermates. We found a nearly 50% reduction in the percentage of reticulated
platelets in Hoxa10 null mice, suggesting deficient platelet production.
Furthermore, Hoxa10 null animals recovered less efficiently from induced
thrombocytopenia, supporting our hypothesis of defective platelet production.
This also correlated with reduced colony formation potential of stem and
progenitor cells seeded in megakaryocyte-enhancing conditions in vitro. Together,
our results indicate that HOXA10 is important for megakaryopoiesis and platelet
biogenesis.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26847476  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


12. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2016 Apr;101(4):1478-89. doi: 10.1210/jc.2015-1588. Epub
2016 Feb 3.

miR-133b Reverses the Hydrosalpinx-induced Impairment of Embryo Attachment
Through Down-regulation of SGK1.

Kong C(1), Sun L(1), Zhang M(1), Ding L(1), Zhang Q(1), Cheng X(1), Diao Z(1),
Yan Q(1), Zhang H(1), Fang T(1), Zhen X(1), Hu Y(1), Sun H(1), Yan G(1).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center (C.K., M.Z., L.D., Q.Z., X.C., Z.D., Q.Y., H.Z., 
T.F., X.Z., Y.H., H.S., G.Y.), The Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing
University Medical School, Nanjing, 210008, People's Republic of China;
Reproductive Medicine Center (L.S.), Shanghai Ninth People's Hospital Affiliated 
Shanghai JiaTong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, 200011, People's
Republic of China; Collaborative Innovation Platform for Reproductive Biology and
Technology (H.S., G.Y.), Nanjing University Medical School, Nanjing, 210008,
People's Republic of China.

Hydrosalpinx decreases the expression of the endometrial receptivity marker gene 
HOXA10 and impairs embryo attachment by modulating a
cytokine/NF-<U+03BA>B/miR-133b/SGK1/HOXA10 pathway in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 26840046  [PubMed - in process]


13. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2016 Mar;198:120-6. doi:
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2016.01.016. Epub 2016 Jan 15.

DHEA improves the antioxidant capacity of endometrial stromal cells and improves 
endometrium receptivity via androgen receptor.

Qin A(1), Qin J(2), Jin Y(2), Xie W(2), Fan L(3), Jiang L(2), Mo F(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Center, First Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi
Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China. Electronic 
address: apqin2001@sina.com. (2)Department of Reproductive Center, First
Affiliated Hospital of Guangxi Medical University, Nanning, Guangxi Zhuang
Autonomous Region, China. (3)Department of Reproductive Center, Liuzhou Maternity
and Child Healthcare Hospital, Liuzhou, Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effect of dehydroepiandrosterone (DHEA) on mouse
decidual endometrial stromal cells (ESCs) and to explore mechanisms regulating
endometrial receptivity.
STUDY DESIGN: Mouse ESCs were incubated with increasing concentrations of DHEA
during decidualization. Treatment with flutamide (FLU), a specific androgen
receptor (AR) antagonist, was also performed. Flow cytometry was used to measure 
intracellular reactive oxygen species (ROS). Real time-PCR was used to determine 
mRNA expression of decidual PRL-related protein (dPRP), AR, and HomeoboxA10
(HOXA10). Protein levels of AR and HOXA10 were measured by western blot.
RESULTS: DHEA significantly inhibited ESC proliferation at concentrations
=1×10(-6)M. DHEA treatment reduced intracellular ROS in a dose-dependent manner. 
Expression of dPRP was minimally affected by DHEA at concentrations of 1 to
100nM. However, DHEA (100nM) significantly increased the expression of HOXA10 at 
both the mRNA and protein levels (P<0.01). Importantly, this DHEA-mediated
increase in HOXA10 was attenuated by treatment with FLU. Finally, neither DHEA
nor FLU influenced expression of AR mRNA or protein.
CONCLUSION: Low concentration of DHEA improves the antioxidant capacity of
decidual ESCs. DHEA treatment may also improve endometrium receptivity via AR.

Copyright © 2016. Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

PMID: 26835588  [PubMed - in process]


14. Gene Expr Patterns. 2016 Jan 26. pii: S1567-133X(16)30002-3. doi:
10.1016/j.gep.2016.01.002. [Epub ahead of print]

Fat accumulation in differentiated brown adipocytes is linked with expression of 
Hox genes.

Singh S(1), Rajput YS(2), Barui AK(3), Sharma R(3), Datta TK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biochemistry Division, National Dairy Researikch Institute, Karnal,
Haryana, 132001, India. (2)Animal Biochemistry Division, National Dairy
Researikch Institute, Karnal, Haryana, 132001, India. Electronic address:
ys_rajput@rediffmail.com. (3)Dairy Chemistry Division, National Dairy Research
Institute, Karnal, Haryana, 132001, India. (4)Animal Biotechnology Centre,
National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana, 132001, India.

Homeobox (Hox) genes are involved in body plan of embryo along the
anterior-posterior axis. Presence of several Hox genes in white adipose tissue
(WAT) and brown adipose tissue (BAT) is indicative of involvement of Hox genes in
adipogenesis. We propose that differentiation inducing agents viz.
isobutyl-methyl-xanthine (IBMX), indomethacin, dexamethasone (DEX),
triiodothyronine (T3) and insulin may regulate differentiation in brown adipose
tissue through Hox genes. In vitro culture of brown fat stromalvascular fraction 
(SVF) in presence or absence of differentiation inducing agents was used for
establishing relationship between fat accumulation in differentiated adipocytes
and expression of Hox genes. Relative expression of Pref1, UCP1 and Hox genes was
determined in different stages of adipogenesis. Presence or absence of IBMX,
indomethacin and DEX during differentiation of proliferated pre-adipocytes
resulted in marked differences in expression of Hox genes and lipid accumulation.
In presence of these inducing agents, lipid accumulation as well as expression of
HoxA1, HoxA5, HoxC4 &HoxC8 markedly enhanced. Irrespective of presence or absence
of T3, insulin down regulates HoxA10. T3 results in over expression of HoxA5,
HoxC4 and HoxC8 genes, whereas insulin up regulates expression of only HoxC8.
Findings suggest that accumulation of fat in differentiated adipocytes is linked 
with expression of Hox genes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26820751  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


15. Am J Reprod Immunol. 2016 Mar;75(3):237-45. doi: 10.1111/aji.12473. Epub 2016 Jan
24.

Progesterone-Regulated Endometrial Factors Controlling Implantation.

Bhurke AS(1), Bagchi IC(1), Bagchi MK(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Illinois at
Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA. (2)Department of Molecular and Integrative
Physiology, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, IL, USA.

The steroid hormone progesterone (P), acting via the progesterone receptor (PR)
isoforms, PR-A and PR-B, exerts a profound influence on uterine functions during 
early gestation. In recent years, chromatin immunoprecipitation-sequencing in
combination with microarray-based gene expression profiling analyses have
revealed that the PR isoforms control a substantially large cistrome and
transcriptome during endometrial differentiation in the human and the mouse.
Genetically engineered mouse models have established that several PR-regulated
genes, such as Ihh, Bmp2, Hoxa10, and Hand2, are essential for implantation and
decidualization. PR-A and PR-B also collaborate with other transcription factors,
such as FOS, JUN, C/EBPß and STAT3, to regulate the expression of many target
genes that functions in concert to properly control uterine epithelial
proliferation, stromal differentiation, angiogenesis, and local immune response
to render the uterus 'receptive' and allow embryo implantation. This review
article highlights recent work describing the key PR-regulated pathways that
govern critical uterine functions during establishment of pregnancy.

© 2016 John Wiley & Sons A/S. Published by John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMCID: PMC4754106 [Available on 2017-03-01]
PMID: 26804062  [PubMed - in process]


16. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2016;38(1):40-8. doi: 10.1159/000438607. Epub 2016 Jan 8.

MicroRNA-320a Regulates the Osteogenic Differentiation of Human Bone
Marrow-Derived Mesenchymal Stem Cells by Targeting HOXA10.

Huang J(1), Meng Y, Liu Y, Chen Y, Yang H, Chen D, Shi J, Guo Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopedics, The 188th Hospital of PLA, ChaoZhou, GuangDong
Province, China.

BACKGROUND/AIMS: Human bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (hMSCs) are a
promising cell source for bone engineering owing to their high potential to
differentiate into osteoblasts. The bone morphogenetic protein-inducible gene
homeobox a10 (HOXA10) is a critical regulator of osteogenesis. The objective of
the present study was to identify microR-NAs (miRNAs) targeting HOXA10 and
examine the effects on the osteogenic differentiation of hMSCs.
METHODS: Based on in silico analysis, HOXA10-targeting miRNAs were selected and
their regulatory roles in osteoblast differentiation were investigated.
RESULTS: Six HOXA10-targeting miRNAs were identifIed by computational analysis,
of which miR-320a was selected for further analysis because it was downregulated 
during osteogenic induction. Overexpression of miR-320a downregulated HOXA10 and 
significantly inhibited osteogenesis in hMSCs, as determined by the
downregulation of the osteogenic markers Runx2, ALP, and OC and the inhibition of
ALP activity and matrix mineralization, whereas miR-320a inhibition had the
opposite effects. Furthermore, ectopic expression of HOXA10 (not including
3'-UTR) rescued the effects of miR-320a on osteogenic differentiation.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that miR-320a acts as a critical regulator of
osteogenic differentiation of hMSCs by repressing its target HOXA10.

© 2016 The Author(s) Published by S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 26741129  [PubMed - in process]


17. Hum Reprod. 2016 Feb;31(2):355-69. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dev314. Epub 2015 Dec 20.

Transforming growth factor ß1 signaling coincides with epithelial-mesenchymal
transition and fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transdifferentiation in the
development of adenomyosis in mice.

Shen M(1), Liu X(2), Zhang H(3), Guo SW(4).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Obstetrics/Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, 419 Fangxie Road,
Shanghai 200011, China. (2)Shanghai Obstetrics/Gynecology Hospital, Fudan
University, 419 Fangxie Road, Shanghai 200011, China Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Female Reproductive Endocrine-Related Diseases, Fudan University, Shanghai
200011, China. (3)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, Shanghai
Medical Collage, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032, China. (4)Shanghai
Obstetrics/Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, 419 Fangxie Road, Shanghai
200011, China Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine-Related
Diseases, Fudan University, Shanghai 200011, China hoxa10@outlook.com.

STUDY QUESTION: Do platelets have any role in the development of adenomyosis?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Activated platelets coincide with the release of transforming
growth factor (TGF)-ß1 and induction of the TGF-ß/Smad signaling pathway as well 
as evidence of epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and
fibroblast-to-myofibroblast transdifferentiation (FMT) in a mouse model of
adenomyosis, resulting ultimately in fibrosis, as in adenomyosis.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Both EMT and FMT are known to play vital roles in
fibrogenesis in general and in endometriosis in particular. EMT has been
implicated in the development of adenomyosis, but this was based primarily on
cross-sectional observation. It is unclear as to whether adenomyotic lesions and 
their microenvironment have the machinery to promote EMT and FMT, resulting
ultimately in fibrosis. There has not been any published study on the role of
platelets in the development of adenomyosis, even though adenomyotic lesions
undergo repeated cycles of tissue injury and repair, which implicates the
involvement of platelets and constitutes an environment conducive for
fibrogenesis.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: Adenomyosis was induced in 28 female ICR mice by
neonatal dosing of tamoxifen. Another 32 were neonatally dosed without tamoxifen.
These mice were sacrificed serially and their tissue samples were subsequently
evaluated.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Female ICR mice with and without
induced adenomyosis were sacrificed in batch at 5, 10, 15, 42 and 60 days of age.
The depth of myometrial infiltration of endometrial tissues was assessed and
immunohistochemistry analysis of biomarkers of EMT and FMT, as well as TGF-ß1,
phosphorylated Smad3 (p-Smad3) and markers of proliferation, angiogenesis and
extracellular matrix (ECM) deposits was performed in ectopic (for adenomyotic
mice) and eutopic (controls) endometrial tissue samples. Masson trichrome and Van
Gieson stainings were performed to quantify the extent of fibrosis in lesions.
Progesterone receptor isoform B (PR-B) staining also was performed.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: While TGF-ß1 immunoreactivity was
consistently low in control endometrium, its level was increased dramatically
starting from Day 10, along with the extent of platelet aggregation. Staining for
TGF-ß1 and p-Smad3 increased progressively as adenomyosis progressed, along with 
markers for proliferation, angiogenesis and ECM deposits. Consistently, staining 
of vimentin (a marker for stromal or mesenchymal cells) was also increased while 
that of E-cadherin (a marker for epithelial cells) was reduced. PR-B staining
also decreased progressively. Starting from Day 42, a-SMA staining, a marker for 
myofibroblasts, was elevated in lesions, while in control endometrium, it was
negative. Concomitantly, the extent of fibrosis also was increased.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: This study is limited by the use of
histochemistry and immunohistochemistry analyses only and the lack of
intervention.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Like their endometriotic counterpart,
adenomyotic lesions and their microenvironment may contain all the necessary
molecular machinery to promote fibrogenesis. Platelet-induced activation of the
TGF-ß/Smad signaling pathway may be a driving force in EMT and FMT in the
development of adenomyosis, leading to fibrosis. This study provides the first
piece of evidence that adenomyotic lesions are wounds that undergo repeated
injury and healing, and as such, platelets play critical roles in the development
of adenomyosis. It suggests the potential for the use of anti-platelet therapy in
the treatment of adenomyosis, and also opens a new venue for developing novel
biomarkers for diagnostic or prognostic purposes.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: Support for data collection and analysis was
provided by grants from the National Science Foundation of China. None of the
authors has anything to disclose.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 26689216  [PubMed - in process]


18. Reprod Sci. 2015 Nov 23. pii: 1933719115616496. [Epub ahead of print]

Endometrial Receptivity Markers in Mice Stimulated With Raloxifene Versus
Clomiphene Citrate and Natural Cycles.

Chen C(1), Yan Q(2), Liu K(3), Zhou X(2), Xian Y(2), Liang D(4), Zhao X(2), Guo
X(5), Quan S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University,
Guangzhou, China Reproductive Medicine Center, People's Hospital of Qingyuan, The
Sixth Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Qingyuan, China.
(2)Reproductive Medicine Center, People's Hospital of Qingyuan, The Sixth
Affiliated Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Qingyuan, China.
(3)Department of Pathology, People's Hospital of Qingyuan, The Sixth Affiliated
Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Qingyuan, China. (4)Department of
Laboratory, People's Hospital of Qingyuan, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical University, Qingyuan, China. (5)Department of Gynaecology and
Obstetrics, People's Hospital of Qingyuan, The Sixth Affiliated Hospital of
Guangzhou Medical University, Qingyuan, China. (6)Reproductive Medicine Center,
Nanfang Hospital, Southern Medical University, Guangzhou, China
quansong@smu.edu.cn.

Ovulation induction therapy with clomiphene citrate can suppress endometrial
receptivity. Raloxifene may be an alternative therapeutic for women with
ovulatory disorders. This study aimed to compare the expression of endometrial
receptivity markers, including homeobox gene 10 (HOXA10), integrin ß3, and
leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), as well as pinopode production during the
implantation window in mice stimulated with raloxifene and clomiphene citrate and
natural cycles. Thirty-six 8-week-old female Kunming mice were randomly divided
into 3 groups (n = 12) and administered daily raloxifene (22 mg/kg), clomiphene
citrate (18 mg/kg), and normal saline (1 mL), respectively, by gavage. Two days
later, mice were injected with 5 IU human chorionic gonadotropin and mated.
Successfully mated female animals were identified with vaginal plugs designated
gestation day 1. At day 4.5, pregnant donor mice were euthanized, and uterus
samples were collected for immunohistochemistry, quantitative polymerase chain
reaction, Western blot, and scanning electron microscopy analyses. Homeobox gene 
10, integrin ß3, and LIF messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein levels were
significantly higher in the raloxifene-treated animals compared with the
clomiphene citrate group (all P < .05) but not significantly different from
saline group values, except for LIF and integrin ß3 mRNA levels (P < .05).
Pinopodes were abundant and well developed in the raloxifene and saline groups;
however, in the clomiphene citrate-treated mice, fewer and poorly developed
pinopodes were obtained. In mice, raloxifene had no effect on HOXA10, integrin
ß3, and LIF expression as well as pinopode production, suggesting it has no
adverse effects on endometrial receptivity. Raloxifene may provide a viable
alternative oral ovulation induction agent to clomiphene citrate.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26603317  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


19. Reprod Biomed Online. 2016 Jan;32(1):85-95. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2015.09.011. Epub
2015 Oct 9.

Regulation of inflammatory and angiogenesis mediators in a functional model of
decidualized endometrial stromal cells.

Bourdiec A(1), Ahmad SF(2), Lachhab A(2), Akoum A(2).

Author information: 
(1)Endocrinologie de la reproduction, Centre de recherche-Hôpital Saint-François 
d'Assise, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, Faculté de médecine,
Université Laval, Québec, Canada. Electronic address:
amelie.bourdiec.1@ulaval.ca. (2)Endocrinologie de la reproduction, Centre de
recherche-Hôpital Saint-François d'Assise, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Québec, Faculté de médecine, Université Laval, Québec, Canada.

The mechanisms involving the expression of interleukin (IL) 1 family members in
the process of preparing the endometrium to receive an embryo remain unclear. In 
this study, decidualization differentially skewed the balance of IL1 family
receptor expression in a pattern that increases endometrial stromal cell
receptivity to IL1, IL18 and IL33. Additionally, endometrial cells showed
increased expression of homeobox HOXA10 and HOXA11 and LIFR, which are known to
be involved in endometrial embryo receptivity. Further analyses of decidual
endometrial cells revealed a significant increase in the release of potent
proinflammatory, remodelling and angiogenic factors implicated in the embryo
invasion process, such as VEGF (P = 0.0305), MMP9 (P = 0.0003), TIMP3 (P =
0.0001), RANTES (P = 0.0020), MCP1 (P = 0.0001) and MIF (P = 0.0068). No
significant changes in endogenous IL1B secretion were observed. Decreased
secretion of IL18 and decidualization increased secretion of IL33. These findings
reveal a significant modulation of endometrial cell receptivity to IL1 family
members during endometrial stromal cell decidualization, and suggest that the
involvement of IL1 family members is important in physiological processes of
endometrial receptivity, including adaptive immunology. This may be relevant to
establishing a favourable uterine microenvironment for embryo implantation.

Copyright © 2015 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 26602943  [PubMed - in process]


20. Cold Spring Harb Perspect Med. 2015 Nov 9;6(1). pii: a023002. doi:
10.1101/cshperspect.a023002.

The Role of Hox Genes in Female Reproductive Tract Development, Adult Function,
and Fertility.

Du H(1), Taylor HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520.

HOX genes convey positional identity that leads to the proper partitioning and
adult identity of the female reproductive track. Abnormalities in reproductive
tract development can be caused by HOX gene mutations or altered HOX gene
expression. Diethylstilbestrol (DES) and other endocrine disruptors cause
Müllerian defects by changing HOX gene expression. HOX genes are also essential
regulators of adult endometrial development. Regulated HOXA10 and HOXA11
expression is necessary for endometrial receptivity; decreased HOXA10 or HOXA11
expression leads to decreased implantation rates. Alternation of HOXA10 and
HOXA11 expression has been identified as a mechanism of the decreased
implantation associated with endometriosis, polycystic ovarian syndrome,
leiomyoma, polyps, adenomyosis, and hydrosalpinx. Alteration of HOX gene
expression causes both uterine developmental abnormalities and impaired adult
endometrial development that prevent implantation and lead to female infertility.

Copyright © 2016 Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press; all rights reserved.

PMID: 26552702  [PubMed - in process]


21. Eur J Cell Biol. 2015 Dec;94(12):642-52. doi: 10.1016/j.ejcb.2015.08.004. Epub
2015 Nov 6.

Overexpression of HOXA10 promotes gastric cancer cells proliferation and
HOXA10(+)/CD44(+) is potential prognostic biomarker for gastric cancer.

Han Y(1), Lu S(2), Wen YG(1), Yu FD(1), Zhu XW(1), Qiu GQ(1), Tang HM(2), Peng
ZH(1), Zhou CZ(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai First People's Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 20080, China. (2)Department of 
Pathology, Shanghai First People's Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao
Tong University, Shanghai 20080, China. (3)Department of General Surgery,
Shanghai First People's Hospital, School of Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai 20080, China. Electronic address: cz-zhou@163.com.

Gastric cancer (GC) is a malignant cancer with poor prognosis. This study aims to
investigate the roles of homeobox A10 (HOXA10) in GC and the correlations between
HOXA10/CD44 expression and GC prognosis. Based on qRT-PCR and Western Blot
analyses in 50 pairs of fresh GC samples and adjacent normal samples, it is
identified that HOXA10 was significantly up-regulated in GC tissues at mRNA and
protein levels. Cell proliferation, migration, and invasion were enhanced in GC
cells with overexpressed HOXA10, while inhibited in cells with silenced HOXA10.
Through IPA software, HOXA10 was predicted to interact with CD44 via MSN, which
was preliminarily confirmed by using Western Blot. Through immunohistochemistry
and tissue microarray (N=264), it is found that HOXA10 expression was
significantly correlated with tumor size (P=0.011) and CD44 expression (P<0.001),
while CD44 expression was significantly correlated with tumor size (P<0.001),
depth of tumor invasion (P<0.001), lymph node metastasis (P<0.001), distant
metastasis (P=0.001), UICC stage (P<0.001), histological differentiation
(P<0.001), and HOXA10 expression (P<0.001). Additionally, the over-all survival
and disease-free survival of HOXA10(+)/CD44(+) patients were dramatically
decreased in comparison with that of HOXA10(+)/CD44(-), HOXA10(-)/CD44(+), or
HOXA10(-)/CD44(-) patients (P<0.001), suggesting that the combinatory expression 
of HOXA10 and CD44 was correlated with poor GC prognosis. In conclusion, HOXA10
and CD44 might play roles in GC tumorigenesis, metastasis, and invasion.
HOXA10(+)/CD44(+) expression might serve as a prognostic biomarker for GC, which 
needs more studies to validate.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier GmbH. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26552644  [PubMed - in process]


22. Reprod Sci. 2016 Feb;23(2):186-91. doi: 10.1177/1933719115613449. Epub 2015 Oct
28.

Endometriosis Located Proximal to or Remote From the Uterus Differentially
Affects Uterine Gene Expression.

Naqvi H(1), Mamillapalli R(2), Krikun G(1), Taylor HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. (2)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and
Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA
ramana.mamillapalli@yale.edu.

The mechanisms that lead to the altered uterine gene expression in women with
endometriosis are poorly understood. Are these changes in gene expression
mediated by proximity to endometriotic lesions or is endometriosis a systemic
disease where the effect is independent of proximity to the uterus? To answer
this question, we created endometriosis in a murine model either in the
peritoneal cavity (proximal) or at a subcutaneous remote site (distal). The
expression of several genes that are involved in endometrial receptivity
(homeobox A10 [Hoxa10], homeobox A11 [Hoxa11], insulin-like growth factor binding
protein 1 [Igfbp1], Kruppel-like factor 9 [Klf9], and progesterone receptor
[Pgr]) was measured in the eutopic endometrium of mice transplanted with either
proximal or distal endometriosis lesions. Decreased expression of Hoxa10, Igfbp1,
Klf9, and total Pgr genes was observed in the eutopic endometrium of mice with
peritoneal endometriosis. In the mice with distal lesions, overall expression of 
these genes was not as severely affected, however, Igfbp1 expression was
similarly decreased and the effect on Pgr was more pronounced. Endometriosis does
have a systemic effect that varies with distance to the end organ. However, even 
remote disease selectively and profoundly alters the expression of genes such as 
Pgr. This is the first controlled experiment demonstrating that endometriosis is 
not simply a local peritoneal disease. Selective alteration of genes critical for
endometrial receptivity and endometriosis propagation may be systemic. Similarly,
systemic effects of endometriosis on other organs may also be responsible for the
widespread manifestations of the disease.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 26516123  [PubMed - in process]


23. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 27;467(4):828-34. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.058. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

CTCF negatively regulates HOXA10 expression in breast cancer cells.

Mustafa M(1), Lee JY(1), Kim MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Laboratory, and Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project 
for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, South
Korea. (2)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Laboratory, and Brain Korea 21 PLUS
Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, 
South Korea. Electronic address: mhkim1@yuhs.ac.

HOX genes not only play important roles in defining body patterning during
embryonic development, but also control numerous cellular events in adult cells. 
Deregulated HOX gene expression in different cancers including breast cancer is
now increasingly being reported. Given that human HOXA cluster is marked with
several CTCF binding sites, we investigated whether the presence of CTCF is
associated directly with expression of HOXA genes in breast cancer cells. Several
HOX genes, such as HOXA4, HOXA5 and HOXA10, were deregulated by CTCF
overexpression and knockdown in MCF-7 cells. Among these genes, HOXA10 is an
emerging tumor suppressor for its role in activation of p53 and in countering
tumorigenesis in breast cancer. Here we provided evidences that CTCF functions as
a negative regulator of HOXA10 in breast cancer cells. The putative promoter
region of HOXA10 lies between 5.3 and 6.1 kb upstream of its start codon and its 
promoter activity was negatively regulated by CTCF. Together with in-silico
analysis and in vitro mutation assay we identified a 20 bp CTCF binding motif
flanking with core promoter element of HOXA10. HOXA10 promoter region was kept
inactivated by maintaining H3K27me3 inactivation marks in the presence of CTCF.
Epigenetic silencing of HOXA10 by CTCF in breast cancer cells may contribute
towards tumorigenesis by decreasing apoptosis and promoting metastasis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26478432  [PubMed - in process]


24. Oncotarget. 2015 Oct 27;6(33):34745-57. doi: 10.18632/oncotarget.5784.

A functional variant in HOXA11-AS, a novel long non-coding RNA, inhibits the
oncogenic phenotype of epithelial ovarian cancer.

Richards EJ(1), Permuth-Wey J(2), Li Y(1), Chen YA(3), Coppola D(4), Reid BM(2), 
Lin HY(3), Teer JK(3), Berchuck A(5), Birrer MJ(6), Lawrenson K(7), Monteiro
AN(2), Schildkraut JM(8), Goode EL(9), Gayther SA(7), Sellers TA(2), Cheng JQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA.
(2)Department of Cancer Epidemiology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL, USA.
(3)Department of Biostatistics and Bioinformatics, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, 
FL, USA. (4)Department of Anatomic Pathology, Moffitt Cancer Center, Tampa, FL,
USA. (5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Duke University Medical Center, 
Durham, NC, USA. (6)Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.
(7)Department of Preventive Medicine, Keck School of Medicine, University of
Southern California, Norris Comprehensive Cancer Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA.
(8)School of Medicine, Public Health Sciences, University of Virginia,
Charlottesville, VA, USA. (9)Department of Health Science Research, Division of
Epidemiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA.

The homeobox A (HOXA) region of protein-coding genes impacts female reproductive 
system embryogenesis and ovarian carcinogenesis. The 5-prime end of HOXA includes
three long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs) (HOXA10-AS, HOXA11-AS, and HOTTIP) that are 
underexplored in epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC). We evaluated whether common
genetic variants in these lncRNAs are associated with EOC risk and/or have
functional roles in EOC development. Using genome-wide association study data
from 1,201 serous EOC cases and 2,009 controls, an exonic variant within
HOXA11-AS, rs17427875 (A>T), was marginally associated with reduced serous EOC
risk (OR = 0.88 (95% CI: 0.78-1.01, p = 0.06). Functional studies of ectopic
expression of HOXA11-AS minor allele T in EOC cells showed decreased survival,
proliferation, migration, and invasion compared to common allele A expression.
Additionally, stable expression of HOXA11-AS minor allele T reduced primary tumor
growth in mouse xenograft models to a greater extent than common allele A.
Furthermore, HOXA11-AS expression levels were significantly lower in human EOC
tumors than normal ovarian tissues (p < 0.05), suggesting that HOXA11-AS has a
tumor suppressor function in EOC which may be enhanced by the T allele. These
findings demonstrate for the first time a role for HOXA11-AS in EOC with effects 
that could be modified by germline variants.

PMCID: PMC4741487
PMID: 26430965  [PubMed - in process]


25. Sci Rep. 2015 Sep 9;5:13863. doi: 10.1038/srep13863.

Control of regional decidualization in implantation: Role of FoxM1 downstream of 
Hoxa10 and cyclin D3.

Gao F(1,)(2), Bian F(1,)(2), Ma X(1,)(2,)(3), Kalinichenko VV(2,)(4), Das
SK(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Sciences, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. 
(2)Perinatal Institute, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University
of Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA. (3)College of Life 
Science, Northeast Agricultural University, Harbin, China. (4)Division of
Pulmonary Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, University of
Cincinnati College of Medicine, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Appropriate regulation of regional uterine stromal cell decidualization in
implantation, at the mesometrial triangle and secondary decidual zone (SDZ)
locations, is critical for successful pregnancy, although the regulatory
mechanisms remain poorly understood. In this regard, the available animal models 
that would specifically allow mechanistic analysis of site-specific
decidualization are strikingly limited. Our study found that heightened
expression of FoxM1, a Forkhead box transcription factor, is regulated during
decidualization, and its conditional deletion in mice reveals failure of
implantation with regional decidualization defects such as a much smaller
mesometrial decidua with enlarged SDZ. Analysis of cell cycle progression during 
decidualization both in vivo and in vitro demonstrates that the loss of FoxM1
elicits diploid cell deficiency with enhanced arrests prior to mitosis and
concomitant upregulation of polyploidy. We further showed that Hoxa10 and cyclin 
D3, two decidual markers, control transcriptional regulation and intra-nuclear
protein translocation of FoxM1 in polyploid cells, respectively. Overall, we
suggest that proper regional decidualization and polyploidy development requires 
FoxM1 signaling downstream of Hoxa10 and cyclin D3.

PMCID: PMC4563553
PMID: 26350477  [PubMed - in process]


26. Fertil Steril. 2015 Oct;104(4):813-30. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.08.006.
Epub 2015 Aug 31.

Endometriosis and ovarian cancer: potential benefits and harms of screening and
risk-reducing surgery.

Guo SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive
Endocrine-Related Diseases, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of
China; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Shanghai College of
Medicine, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. Electronic
address: hoxa10@outlook.com.

Although endometriosis is well recognized as a benign gynecologic condition, its 
association with ovarian cancer (OVCA) has frequently been reported. Review
articles on this topic are voluminous, yet there seems to be no consensus as to
whether endometriosis is truly a precursor of OVCA and whether any screening or
risk-reducing surgery should be instituted, on the basis of our current
knowledge. In this review, published data are compiled and critically appraised. 
Through this critical appraisal, it seems clear that the strongest evidence seems
to come from prevalence data. This type of data also suggests a reduced risk of
certain histotypes (mainly type II) of OVCA in women with endometriosis. This may
explain the rather moderate increase in risk as shown in epidemiologic studies.
Even with this moderate increase in OVCA risk, caution should be exercised
because of apparent bias in favor of publication of positive results, extensive
heterogeneities among prevalence estimates, and inverse relationship between
estimates and sizes of the studies. Many molecular studies are conflicting, and
earlier studies showing molecular aberrations involved in genomic instability and
mutation that enable malignant transformation are not replicated in later
studies. Given the low incidence of OVCA and the rather moderate increase in risk
of mostly type I tumors, screening seems to be ill-advised, and risk-reducing
surgery such as salpingectomy with or without oophorectomy does not seem to yield
any substantial benefit to women with endometriosis.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26335131  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Biol Reprod. 2015 Nov;93(5):121. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.115.131516. Epub 2015
Sep 2.

The Histone Methyltransferase Gene Absent, Small, or Homeotic Discs-1 Like Is
Required for Normal Hox Gene Expression and Fertility in Mice.

Brinkmeier ML(1), Geister KA(2), Jones M(2), Waqas M(1), Maillard I(3), Camper
SA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(2)Graduate Program in Cellular and Molecular Biology, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, 
Ann Arbor, Michigan Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan Life Sciences Institute, University of Michigan,
Ann Arbor, Michigan. (4)Department of Human Genetics, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, Michigan scamper@umich.edu.

Chromatin remodeling influences gene expression in developing and adult
organisms. Active and repressive marks of histone methylation dictate the
embryonic expression boundaries of developmentally regulated genes, including the
Hox gene cluster. Drosophila ash1 (absent, small or homeotic discs 1) gene
encodes a histone methyltransferase essential for regulation of Hox gene
expression that interacts genetically with other members of the trithorax group
(TrxG). While mammalian members of the mixed lineage leukemia (Mll) family of
TrxG genes have roles in regulation of Hox gene expression, little is known about
the expression and function of the mammalian ortholog of the Drosophila ash1
gene, Ash1-like (Ash1l). Here we report the expression of mouse Ash1l gene in
specific structures within various organs and provide evidence that reduced Ash1l
expression has tissue-specific effects on mammalian development and adult
homeostasis. Mutants exhibit partially penetrant postnatal lethality and failure 
to thrive. Surviving mutants have growth insufficiency, skeletal transformations,
and infertility associated with developmental defects in both male and female
reproductive organs. Specifically, expression of Hoxa11 and Hoxd10 are altered in
the epididymis of Ash1l mutant males and Hoxa10 is reduced in the uterus of Ash1l
mutant females. In summary, we show that the histone methyltransferase Ash1l is
important for the development and function of several tissues and for proper
expression of homeotic genes in mammals.

© 2015 by the Society for the Study of Reproduction, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4712006 [Available on 2016-11-01]
PMID: 26333994  [PubMed - in process]


28. Oncol Rep. 2015 Sep;34(3):1193-202. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4113. Epub 2015 Jul 7.

Activation of ARK5/miR-1181/HOXA10 axis promotes epithelial-mesenchymal
transition in ovarian cancer.

Zhang HY(1), Li JH(2), Li G(3), Wang SR(4).

Author information: 
(1)Gynaecology Ward-1, Linyi City People's Hospital, Shandong 276003, P.R. China.
(2)Lab, Linyi City People's Hospital, Shandong 276003, P.R. China.
(3)Gastrointestinal Surgery, Linyi City People's Hospital, Shandong 276003, P.R. 
China. (4)Gynaecology Ward-3, Linyi City People's Hospital, Shandong 276003, P.R.
China.

Epithelial ovarian cancer (EOC) is the sixth most common cancer in females
worldwide and, although advances have been made in the detection, diagnosis and
therapies for EOC, it remains the most lethal gynecologic malignancy in advanced 
countries. Nevertheless, relatively little is known concerning the molecular
events that lead to the development of this highly aggressive disease.
Elucidating the molecular mechanism involved in this disease may prove useful to 
understand the pathogenesis and progression of the disease, and to identify new
targets for effective therapies. In the present study, we examined the role of
ARK5 in ovarian cancer and normal matched tissues using western blot analysis and
migration and invasion, and wound-healing assays. The results showed that ARK5
was upregulated in ovarian cancer tissues, compared with adjacent normal tissues.
Moreover, it promoted epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) and inhibited
miR-1181 expression in ovarian cancer cells. Subsequent investigations showed
that miR-1181 promoted mesenchymal-epithelial transition (MET) in ovarian cancer 
cells. Downstream target genes of miR-1181 were searched, and it was identified
that miR-1181 degraded HOXA10 by targeting its 3' untranslated region (3'UTR) in 
ovarian cancer cells. The results confirmed that HOXA10 promoted EMT in ovarian
cancer cells. Thus, activation of the ARK5/miR-1181/HOXA10 axis may be positively
associated with EMT in ovarian cancer.

PMID: 26151663  [PubMed - in process]


29. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2015 Aug;1849(8):1066-80. doi:
10.1016/j.bbagrm.2015.06.014. Epub 2015 Jul 2.

MicroRNA-196b is transcribed from an autonomous promoter and is directly
regulated by Cdx2 and by posterior Hox proteins during embryogenesis.

Fantini S(1), Salsi V(1), Vitobello A(2), Rijli FM(2), Zappavigna V(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via G.
Campi 213/d, Modena 41125, Italy. (2)Friedrich Miescher Institute for Biomedical 
Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66, CH-4058 Basel, Switzerland. (3)Department of Life
Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia, Via G. Campi 213/d, Modena
41125, Italy. Electronic address: zappavigna.vincenzo@unimore.it.

The miR-196 miRNA gene family located within the Hox gene clusters has been shown
to function during embryogenesis and to be aberrantly expressed in various
malignancies, including leukaemia, melanoma, and colorectal cancer. Despite its
involvement in numerous biological processes, the control of miR-196 expression
is still poorly defined. We identified the miR-196b promoter and found that the
mature miR-196b originates from a large, non-coding primary transcript, which
starts within an autonomous TATA box promoter and is not in physical continuity
with either the Hoxa10 or Hoxa9 main primary transcripts. A ~680bp genomic
fragment, spanning the pri-miR-196b transcription start site, is sufficient to
recapitulate the neural tube expression pattern of miR-196 during embryogenesis. 
This region contains potential binding sites for Cdx and 5'Hox transcription
factors. Two of these sites revealed to be necessary for neural tube expression
and were bound in vivo by Cdx2 and Hoxd13. We show that Cdx2 is required for
miR-196 expression and that both Cdx2 and 5'Hox, but not 3'Hox, are able to
activate the miR-196b promoter. The possible role of Cdx2- and 5'Hox-mediated
regulation of miR-196 expression in vertebrate anterior-posterior (AP) axis
formation during embryogenesis is discussed.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26141604  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


30. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Sep 15;413:13-25. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2015.05.038. Epub 
2015 Jun 23.

Expression, regulation and function of Hmgn3 during decidualization in mice.

Li DD(1), Guo CH(1), Yue L(2), Duan CC(3), Yang ZQ(1), Cao H(1), Guo B(4), Yue
ZP(1).

Author information: 
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, PR China.
(2)College of Clinical Medicine, Jilin University, Changchun, PR China.
(3)Institute of Agro-food Technology, Jilin Academy of Agricultural Sciences,
Changchun, PR China. (4)College of Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University,
Changchun, PR China. Electronic address: guobin79@jlu.edu.cn.

Although Hmgn3 is involved in the regulation of development and cellular
differentiation, its physiological roles on decidualization are still unknown.
Here we showed that Hmgn3 was highly expressed in the decidua and decidualizing
stromal cells. Overexpression of Hmgn3 variants, Hmgn3a or Hmgn3b, enhanced the
expression of decidualization markers Prl8a2 and Prl3c1, whereas inhibition of
Hmgn3 reduced their expression. Hmgn3 could mediate the effects of Hoxa10 and
cAMP on the expression of Prl8a2 and Prl3c1. Further study found that Hmgn3
directed the process of decidualization through influencing the expression of
Hand2. Progesterone could induce the expression of Hmgn3 in the ovariectomized
mouse uterus, uterine epithelial cells and stromal cells. Knockdown of Hoxa10
with siRNA alleviated the induction of progesterone and cAMP on Hmgn3 expression.
Simultaneously, siRNA-mediated down-regulation of Hmgn3 in the uterine stromal
cells could attenuate the effects of progesterone, cAMP and Hoxa10 on the
expression of Hand2. Collectively, Hmgn3 may play an important role during mouse 
decidualization.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26112184  [PubMed - in process]


31. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2015 Apr 1;8(4):3613-23. eCollection 2015.

HOXA10 controls proliferation, migration and invasion in oral squamous cell
carcinoma.

Carrera M(1), Bitu CC(2), de Oliveira CE(3), Cervigne NK(4), Graner E(3),
Manninen A(5), Salo T(6), Coletta RD(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Diagnosis, School of Dentistry, University of Campinas
Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil ; Department of Life Sciences, Bahia State
University Bahia, Brazil. (2)Department of Diagnostics and Oral Medicine,
Institute of Dentistry, and Medical Research Center, Oulu University Hospital
Oulu, Finland. (3)Department of Oral Diagnosis, School of Dentistry, University
of Campinas Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil. (4)Department of Oral Diagnosis,
School of Dentistry, University of Campinas Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil ;
Department of Clinical, Faculty of Medicine of Jundiai Jundiai, São Paulo,
Brazil. (5)Oulu Center for Cell-Matrix Research, Faculty of Biochemistry and
Molecular Medicine, University of Oulu Finland. (6)Department of Oral Diagnosis, 
School of Dentistry, University of Campinas Piracicaba, São Paulo, Brazil ;
Department of Diagnostics and Oral Medicine, Institute of Dentistry, and Medical 
Research Center, Oulu University Hospital Oulu, Finland ; Institute of Dentistry,
University of Helsinki Finland.

Although HOX genes are best known for acting in the regulation of important
events during embryogenesis, including proliferation, differentiation and
migration, alterations in their expression patterns have been frequently
described in cancers. In previous studies we analyzed the expression profile of
the members of the HOX family of homeobox genes in oral samples of normal mucosa 
and squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) and identified differently expressed genes
such as HOXA10. The present study aimed to validate the increased expression of
HOXA10 in OSCCs, and to investigate the effects arising from its knockdown in
OSCC cells. The levels of HOXA10 mRNA were determined in human OSCC samples and
cell lines by quantitative PCR, and HOXA10-mediated effects on proliferation,
apoptosis, adhesion, epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), migration and
invasion were studied in HSC-3 tongue carcinoma cells by using
retrovirus-mediated RNA interference. Higher expression of HOXA10 mRNA was
observed in OSCC cell lines and in tumor tissues compared to normal controls.
HOXA10 knockdown significantly reduced the proliferation of the tumor cells which
was accompanied by increased levels of p21. HOXA10 silencing also significantly
induced the expression of EMT markers and enhanced the adhesion, migration and
invasion of HSC-3 cells. No effects on cell death were observed after HOXA10
knockdown. The results of the current study confirm the overexpression of HOXA10 
in OSCCs, and further demonstrate that its expression is functionally associated 
with several important biological processes related to oral tumorigenesis, such
as proliferation, migration and invasion.

PMCID: PMC4466930
PMID: 26097543  [PubMed - in process]


32. PLoS One. 2015 Jun 15;10(6):e0130202. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0130202.
eCollection 2015.

Associations of Polymorphisms in WNT9B and PBX1 with
Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser Syndrome in Chinese Han.

Ma W(1), Li Y(1), Wang M(1), Li H(1), Su T(2), Li Y(1), Wang S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, P.R. China.
(2)Department of Pathology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong
University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, P.R. China.

BACKGROUND: Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome is a rare syndrome
that is characterized by congenital aplasia of the uterus and the upper portion
(2/3) of the vagina. Previous attempts to identify causal mutations of MRKH
syndrome have primarily resulted in negative outcomes. We investigated whether
these reported variants are associated with MRKH syndrome (types I and II) in a
relatively large sample size of Chinese Han patients, and whether any gene-gene
epistatic interactions exist among these variants.
METHODS: This study included 182 unrelated Chinese women with MRKH syndrome (155 
with type I and 27 with type II) and 228 randomized female controls. Seventeen
candidate loci in the AMH, PBX1, WNT4, WNT7A, WNT9B, HOXA10, HOXA11, LHXA1 and
GALT genes were genotyped using the Sequenom MassARRAY iPLEX platform.
Single-marker association, additive effects and multifactor interactions were
investigated.
RESULTS: The gene frequency distributions of MRKH type 1 and type 2 were similar.
Rs34072914 in WNT9B was found to be associated with MRKH syndrome (P = 0.024, OR 
= 2.65, 95%CI = 1.14-6.17). The dominant models of rs34072914 and rs2275558 in
WNT9B and PBX1, respectively, were significantly associated with MRKH syndrome
risk in the Chinese Han patients. Additive gene-gene interaction analyses
indicated a significant synergetic interaction between WNT9B and PBX1 (RERI =
1.397, AP = 0.493, SI = 4.204). Multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR)
analysis revealed novel dimensional epistatic four-gene effects (AMH, PBX1, WNT7A
and WNT9B) in MRKH syndrome.
CONCLUSIONS: This association study successfully identified two susceptibility
SNPs (WNT9B and PBX1) associated with MRKH syndrome risk, both separately and
interactively. The discovery of a four-gene epistatic effect (AMH, PBX1, WNT7A
and WNT9B) in MRKH syndrome provides novel information for the elucidation of the
genetic mechanism underlying the etiology of MRKH syndrome.

PMCID: PMC4468103
PMID: 26075712  [PubMed - in process]


33. Fertil Steril. 2015 Aug;104(2):356-65. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.04.041.
Epub 2015 Jun 13.

Laparoscopic endometrioma resection increases peri-implantation endometrial
HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 mRNA expression.

Celik O(1), Unlu C(2), Otlu B(3), Celik N(4), Caliskan E(5).

Author information: 
(1)Private Clinic, Obstetrics and Gynecology, Usak, Turkey. Electronic address:
celiksudenaz@gmail.com. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of
Medicine, Acibadem University, Istanbul, Turkey. (3)Department of Medical
Microbiology, Inonu University, School of Medicine, Malatya, Turkey.
(4)Department of Biochemistry, Behçet Uz Children's Hospital, Izmir, Turkey.
(5)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical Park Hospital, Kocaeli,
Turkey.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether laparoscopic endometrioma resection alters
peri-implantation endometrial HOXA-10, HOXA-11, LIF, ITGB3 and ITGAV mRNA
expression.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Medical school.
PATIENT(S): Twenty infertile patients with uni- or bilateral endometrioma, five
infertile patients having nonendometriotic benign ovarian cyst, and five fertile 
control subjects.
INTERVENTION(S): Mid-luteal-phase endometrial sampling was performed at the time 
of surgery. Second endometrial biopsies were obtained 3 months after laparoscopic
endometrioma resection during the mid-luteal phase of the cycle.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Endometrial HOXA-10, HOXA-11, LIF, ITGAV, and ITGB3 mRNA
expressions were evaluated with the use of reverse-transcription polymerase chain
reaction.
RESULT(S): Significantly decreased endometrial ITGAV mRNA expression was noted in
biopsies obtained from endometrioma and nonendometriotic cyst groups before
surgery. Trends toward decreased endometrial HOXA-10, HOXA-11, LIF, and ITGB3
mRNA expressions were noted in the endometrioma and nonendometriotic cyst groups 
before surgery compared with the fertile subjects. However, the differences
failed to show statistical significance. Compared with preoperative values,
significantly increased HOXA-10 (12.1-fold change) and HOXA-11 (17.2-fold change)
mRNA expressions were noted in endometrial biopsies obtained from subjects who
were undergoing endometrioma surgery. Fold change in endometrial ITGAV mRNA after
endometrioma surgery was found to be 30.1 and indicated a positive regulation.
However, this fold increase was statistically insignificant. Expressions of these
endometrial receptivity markers did not change significantly after surgical
removal of nonendometriotic benign ovarian cysts.
CONCLUSION(S): Laparoscopic endometrioma resection increases peri-implantation
endometrial HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 mRNA expression, suggesting an improvement in
endometrial receptivity.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26056923  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


34. Cancer Sci. 2015 Aug;106(8):951-8. doi: 10.1111/cas.12706. Epub 2015 Jul 7.

Clinicopathologic and molecular characteristics of gastric cancer showing gastric
and intestinal mucin phenotype.

Oue N(1), Sentani K(1), Sakamoto N(1), Yasui W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Institute of Biomedical and Health
Sciences, Hiroshima University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Gastric cancer (GC), one of the most common human cancers, can be classified into
gastric or intestinal phenotype according to mucin expression. TP53 mutation,
allelic deletion of the APC gene and nuclear staining of ß-catenin are frequently
detected in the intestinal phenotype of GC, whereas CDH1 gene mutation,
microsatellite instability and DNA hypermethylation of MLH1 are common events in 
the gastric phenotype of GC. Our Serial Analysis of Gene Expression (SAGE) and
Escherichia coli ampicillin secretion trap (CAST) analyses revealed that CDH17,
REG4, OLFM4, HOXA10, DSC2, TSPAN8 and TM9SF3 are upregulated in GC and that
CLDN18 is downregulated in GC. Expression of CDH17, REG4, HOXA10 and DSC2 and
downregulation of CLDN18 are observed in the intestinal phenotype of GC. In
contrast, OLFM4 is expressed in the gastric phenotype of GC. Expression of
TSPAN8, TM9SF3 and HER2 are not associated with either gastric or intestinal
phenotypes. Ectopic CDX2 expression plays a key function in the GC intestinal
phenotype. MUC2, CDH17, REG4, DSC2 and ABCB1 are direct targets of CDX2.
Importantly, these genes encode transmembrane/secretory proteins, indicating that
the microenvironment as well as cancer cells are also different between gastric
and intestinal phenotypes of GC.

© 2015 The Authors. Cancer Science published by Wiley Publishing Asia Pty Ltd on 
behalf of Japanese Cancer Association.

PMCID: PMC4556382
PMID: 26033320  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. Oncotarget. 2015 May 10;6(13):10840-52.

The long non-coding RNA HOTTIP enhances pancreatic cancer cell proliferation,
survival and migration.

Cheng Y(1), Jutooru I(1,)(2), Chadalapaka G(1), Corton JC(3), Safe S(1,)(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, Texas A&M University,
College Station, TX 77843, USA. (2)Covance, Inc., Madison, WI 53704, USA.
(3)Integrated Systems Toxicology Division, Research Triangle Park, NC 27711, USA.
(4)Institute of Biosciences and Technology, Texas A&M Health Science Center,
Houston, TX 77030, USA.

HOTTIP is a long non-coding RNA (lncRNA) transcribed from the 5' tip of the HOXA 
locus and is associated with the polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2) and WD
repeat containing protein 5 (WDR5)/mixed lineage leukemia 1 (MLL1) chromatin
modifying complexes. HOTTIP is expressed in pancreatic cancer cell lines and
knockdown of HOTTIP by RNA interference (siHOTTIP) in Panc1 pancreatic cancer
cells decreased proliferation, induced apoptosis and decreased migration. In
Panc1 cells transfected with siHOTTIP, there was a decrease in expression of 757 
genes and increased expression of 514 genes, and a limited gene analysis
indicated that HOTTIP regulation of genes is complex. For example, Aurora kinase 
A, an important regulator of cell growth, is coregulated by MLL and not WDR5 and,
in contrast to previous studies in liver cancer cells, HOTTIP does not regulate
HOXA13 but plays a role in regulation of several other HOX genes including
HOXA10, HOXB2, HOXA11, HOXA9 and HOXA1. Although HOTTIP and the HOX-associated
lncRNA HOTAIR have similar pro-oncogenic functions, they regulate strikingly
different sets of genes in Panc1 cells and in pancreatic tumors.

PMCID: PMC4484423
PMID: 25912306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. J Immunol. 2015 Jun 1;194(11):5375-87. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.1401909. Epub 2015
Apr 20.

HoxA10 Terminates Emergency Granulopoiesis by Increasing Expression of Triad1.

Wang H(1), Bei L(2), Shah CA(1), Hu L(1), Eklund EA(3).

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine and Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of
Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611; and. (2)Feinberg School of Medicine
and Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University,
Chicago, IL 60611; and Jesse Brown Veteran's Administration Medical Center,
Chicago, IL 60612. (3)Feinberg School of Medicine and Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611; and
Jesse Brown Veteran's Administration Medical Center, Chicago, IL 60612
e-eklund@northwestern.edu.

Expression of the E3 ubiquitin ligase Triad1 is greater in mature granulocytes
than in myeloid progenitor cells. HoxA10 actives transcription of the gene
encoding Triad1 (ARIH2) during myeloid differentiation, but the contribution of
increased Triad1 expression to granulocyte production or function is unknown.
Mice with bone marrow-specific disruption of the ARIH2 gene exhibit constitutive 
inflammation with tissue infiltration by granulocytes and B cells. In contrast,
disruption of the HOXA10 gene in mice neither constitutively activates the innate
immune response nor significantly alters steady-state granulopoiesis. This study 
explores the impact of HoxA10-induced Triad1 expression on emergency (stress)
granulopoiesis. We found that mice with HOXA10 gene disruption exhibited an
overwhelming and fatal emergency granulopoiesis response that was characterized
by tissue infiltration with granulocytes, but reversed by re-expression of Triad1
in the bone marrow. We determined that HoxA9 repressed ARIH2 transcription in
myeloid progenitor cells, antagonizing the effect of HoxA10 on Triad1 expression.
Also, we found that differentiation-stage-specific ARIH2 transcription was
regulated by the tyrosine phosphorylation states of HoxA9 and HoxA10. Our studies
demonstrate a previously undescribed role for HoxA10 in terminating emergency
granulopoiesis, suggesting an important contribution by Hox proteins to the
innate immune response.

Copyright © 2015 by The American Association of Immunologists, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4433877 [Available on 2016-06-01]
PMID: 25895533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. Evid Based Complement Alternat Med. 2015;2015:317586. doi: 10.1155/2015/317586.
Epub 2015 Feb 22.

Traditional Chinese Medicine, the Zishen Yutai Pill, Ameliorates Precocious
Endometrial Maturation Induced by Controlled Ovarian Hyperstimulation and
Improves Uterine Receptivity via Upregulation of HOXA10.

Gao Q(1), Han L(1), Li X(2), Cai X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Traditional Chinese Medical Hospital of Xinjiang
Uygur Autonomous Region, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830000, China. (2)Department of
Morphology Center, Xinjiang Medical University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830000, China.
(3)Reproductive Center, The First Teaching Hospital of Xinjiang Medical
University, Urumqi, Xinjiang 830000, China.

Controlled ovarian hyperstimulation (COH) is widely used in assisted reproductive
technology (ART), but it often leads to precocious maturation of the endometrium 
such that it impairs embryonic implantation and limits pregnancy rates. Previous 
studies have shown the traditional Chinese medicine, the Zishen Yutai pill (ZYP),
to be effective in treatment of threatened as well as recurrent miscarriages, and
it can improve embryonic implantation rates in patients undergoing IVF treatment.
In the present study, the ZYP has been found to ameliorate precocious endometrial
maturation in a mouse model of different COH. Molecular evaluations, real-time
PCR, relative RT-PCR, Western blotting, and immunohistochemistry have indicated
that the ZYP increased the expression of HOXA10, an important marker of uterine
receptivity. Elevation of HOXA10 led to further upregulation of its target gene, 
integrin ß3, and downregulation of EMX2, two additional markers of uterine
receptivity. In this way, the ZYP may mitigate COH-induced precocious maturation 
of the endometrium and improve uterine receptivity by upregulating HOXA10.

PMCID: PMC4352469
PMID: 25792996  [PubMed]


38. Cell Biol Int. 2015 Jul;39(7):842-51. doi: 10.1002/cbin.10458. Epub 2015 Apr 13.

Identification of LncRNAs/mRNAs related to endometrium function regulated by
Homeobox A10 in Ishikawa cells.

Lin R(1), Zhao C(1), Jing L(1), Zhao S(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Key Lab of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding, and Reproduction of
Ministry of Education, Wuhan, 430070, China. (2)The Cooperative Innovation Center
for Sustainable Pig Production, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, 
China.

As a well-known transcription factor, Homeobox A10 (HOXA10) regulates a large
number of downstream target genes, leading to the proper function development of 
endometrium for embryo implantation. The change of HOXA10 gene expression level
can alter the expressions of many other genes, including coding and noncoding
transcripts. In our study, mRNA and LncRNA expression profiles screening was
performed by microarray when the HOXA10 gene expression level increased in
Ishikawa cells. A total of 907 mRNAs and 1,026 LncRNAs were identified as
differentially expressed transcripts (Fold Change =2, P-value <0.05, and Q-value 
<0.05) between HOXA10 overexpressed and control Ishikawa cells. Further analysis 
identified that these mRNAs participated in various biological processes, such as
blood vessel development, cell adhesion, cell cycle, etc. Also, 14 enhancer-like 
LncRNAs and 108 LincRNAs with their nearby mRNAs were identified as coregulated
transcripts. Our results showed that the mRNA and LncRNA expression profiles
differed significantly between the two groups and provided useful information for
further studying the molecular mechanisms of HOXA10 in endometrium.

© 2015 International Federation for Cell Biology.

PMID: 25757424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. Hum Reprod. 2015 Apr;30(4):812-32. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dev025. Epub 2015 Mar 3.

Platelets are an unindicted culprit in the development of endometriosis: clinical
and experimental evidence.

Ding D(1), Liu X(2), Duan J(1), Guo SW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200011, China.
(2)Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200011, China Shanghai
Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine-Related Diseases, Fudan
University, Shanghai, China. (3)Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai 200011, China Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive
Endocrine-Related Diseases, Fudan University, Shanghai, China hoxa10@outlook.com.

STUDY QUESTION: Do platelets play any role in the development of endometriosis?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Activated platelets aggregate in endometriotic lesions and play
important roles in the development of endometriosis.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Platelets play important roles in cancer development and
metastasis but there is no published study on their role in the development of
endometriosis, even though endometriotic lesions undergo repeated cycles of
tissue injury and repair, which characteristically involve platelets.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: Cross-sectional clinical studies of women with and 
without endometriosis, in vitro experimentation, and animal studies using
platelet and/or macrophage depletion.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Immunohistochemistry analysis of
ectopic/eutopic endometrial tissues from 58 women with and 47 without
endometriosis. Proliferation assay, cell cycle analysis by flow cytometry, gene
expression and protein analysis for COX-2, VEGF, MMP-9, and Bcl-2 using primary
cell culture, and evaluation of the rate of platelet activation induced by
peritoneal fluid from women with and without endometriosis. Two mouse
experiments, one that evaluated the effect of platelet depletion on lesion
development and its associated phenotypic changes, and the other, the effect of
platelet and/or macrophage depletion.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: We found that platelets aggregated in
endometriotic lesions, concomitant with elevated VEGF expression and microvessel 
density. Co-culture of endometriotic stromal cells with platelets enhanced
cellular proliferation, and increased the expression of COX-2, MMP-9, VEGF, and
Bcl-2. IL-1ß-induced COX-2 up-regulation and increased production of the
coagulant TXA(2) in endometriotic stromal cells. Tissue factor (TF) expression
was elevated in endometriosis and TF concentrations were significantly elevated
both in the supernatant of cultured primary endometriotic stromal cells and in
peritoneal fluid from women with endometriosis. Platelet depletion resulted in
significantly reduced lesion size and improved hyperalgesia in mice with induced 
endometriosis.
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: This study is limited by its cross-sectional
design and by its focus on ovarian endometriomas.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The demonstration that platelets are involved
in the development of endometriosis provides a rationale for the use of
anti-coagulants to treat endometriosis, and opens prospects for developing novel 
biomarkers for diagnostic or prognostic purposes.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: Financial support for this study was provided 
by grants from the National Science Foundation of China, a grant from the
Shanghai Science and Technology Commission, support from the Key Specialty
Project of the Ministry of Health, People's Republic of China. None of the
authors has any conflict of interest to disclose.

© The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 25740881  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Reprod Sci. 2015 Sep;22(9):1107-14. doi: 10.1177/1933719115572478. Epub 2015 Feb 
20.

Evidence for a Hypercoagulable State in Women With Ovarian Endometriomas.

Wu Q(1), Ding D(1), Liu X(2), Guo SW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. (2)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, China Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine-Related 
Diseases, Shanghai, China. (3)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan 
University, Shanghai, China Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive
Endocrine-Related Diseases, Shanghai, China hoxa10@outlook.com.

Endometriosis is a hormonal disease and also an inflammatory condition.
Converging evidence indicates that inflammation and coagulation are 2 major
host-defense systems that interact with each other. This study was undertaken to 
test the hypothesis that women with ovarian endometriomas are in a
hypercoagulable state as manifested by the altered procoagulant factors and
higher percentage of activated platelets in their peripheral blood. Two sets of
participants were recruited. The first set consisted of 50 premenopausal women
with endometriosis and 50 age-matched healthy women, and the second set consisted
of 21 women with endometriosis and 17 age-comparable women without endometriosis.
For the first set, prothrombin time (PT), activated partial thromboplastin time
(APTT), thrombin time (TT), fibrinogen, and other coagulation factors, along with
their demographic, clinical, and anthropometric data, were measured/retrieved.
For the second set, only the percentage of activated platelets in peripheral
blood was evaluated. We found that women with endometriosis had a significantly
shortened APTT and TT and elevated fibrinogen levels as compared with controls.
They also had significantly higher percentage of circulating degranuated
platelets, and the percentage was significantly reduced 1 month after surgical
removal of endometriotic lesions. These findings provide evidence of a
hypercoagulable state in women with endometriosis, reflecting the intimate
relationship between coagulation and inflammation. They also suggest that these
coagulation parameters such as APTT and fibrinogen and others could potentially
be used for diagnostic or prognostic purposes. It also underpins the possibility 
for the use of antithrombotic therapy in the treatment of endometriosis.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25701841  [PubMed - in process]


41. Reprod Sci. 2015 Nov;22(11):1336-49. doi: 10.1177/1933719115572479. Epub 2015 Feb
20.

Resveratrol Reduces Myometrial Infiltration, Uterine Hyperactivity, and Stress
Levels and Alleviates Generalized Hyperalgesia in Mice With Induced Adenomyosis.

Zhu B(1), Chen Y(1), Zhang H(1), Liu X(2), Guo SW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The People's Hospital, Wenzhou,
China. (2)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine-Related
Diseases, Shanghai, China Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. (3)Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine-Related
Diseases, Shanghai, China Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China hoxa10@outlook.com.

In this study, we sought to determine whether resveratrol (RSV), a nonhormonal
compound, would suppress the myometrial infiltration, improve pain behavior,
lower stress level, improve the expression of some proteins known to be involved 
in adenomyosis, and reduce uterine contractility in a mice model of adenomyosis. 
Adenomyosis was induced in 28 female ICR mice neonatally dosed with tamoxifen,
while another 12 (group C) were dosed with solvent only, serving as a blank
control. Starting from 4 weeks after birth, hotplate test was administrated to
all mice every 4 weeks. At the 16th week, all mice with induced adenomyosis were 
randomly divided into 3 groups: low-dose RSV (2 mg/kg), high-dose RSV (3 mg/kg), 
and untreated. Group C received no treatment. After 3 weeks of treatment, they
were hotplate tested again, their uterine horns and brains were harvested, and a 
blood sample was taken to measure the plasma corticosterone (CORT) level by
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay. The left uterine horn was used for
immunohistochemistry analysis. The brain stem nucleus raphe magnus (NRM) sections
were subjected to immunofluorescence staining for glutamic acid decarboxylase
isoform 65 (GAD65). The depth of myometrial infiltration and uterine
contractility was evaluated. We found that RSV is well tolerated and that it dose
dependently suppressed myometrial infiltration, improved generalized
hyperalgesia, reduced uterine contractility and lowered plasma CORT levels, and
improved the expression of some proteins known to be involved in adenomyosis. It 
also elevated the number of GAD65-expressing neurons in the brain stem NRM,
possibly boosting the GABAergic inhibition of pain due to adenomyosis. Therefore,
RSV appears to be a promising compound for treating adenomyosis.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMID: 25701840  [PubMed - in process]


42. Fertil Steril. 2015 Apr;103(4):990-1000.e8. doi:
10.1016/j.fertnstert.2015.01.001. Epub 2015 Feb 11.

P-selectin as a potential therapeutic target for endometriosis.

Guo SW(1), Ding D(2), Geng JG(3), Wang L(4), Liu X(5).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of
China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive and Endocrine-Related
Diseases, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. Electronic
address: hoxa10@outlook.com. (2)Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University,
Shanghai, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Biologic and Materials
Sciences, University of Michigan School of Dentistry, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
(4)Vascular Biology Research Institute, Guangdong Pharmaceutical University,
Guangdong, People's Republic of China. (5)Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China; Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Female Reproductive and Endocrine-Related Diseases, Fudan University, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To test the hypothesis that P-selectin plays a critical role in the
development of endometriosis and that targeting P-selectin has therapeutic
potential.
DESIGN: Prospective, randomized study.
SETTING: Academic facility.
ANIMAL(S): The first experiment used 24 each of female adult P-selectin knockout 
mice and C57BL/6 wild-type mice, and 96 male green fluorescent protein (GFP)
transgenic mice. The second experiment used 16 female adult C57BL/6 mice.
INTERVENTION(S): In experiment 1, P-selectin knockout and wild-type mice
alternately served as donors and recipients for the transplantation of
endometrial tissue fragments into the peritoneal cavity to induce endometriosis. 
Two weeks later all four groups were each randomly divided into two equal-sized
subgroups, receiving either green fluorescent protein-expressing platelets or
saline infusion. In experiment 2, 2 weeks after the surgical induction of
endometriosis, the mice were randomly divided into two groups, one receiving a
2-week treatment with a recombinant P-selectin protein and the other, non-immune 
IgG, both by intraperitoneal injection.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Lesion size, hotplate latency, and immunohistochemistry 
analysis of platelet aggregation, angiogenesis, transforming growth factor ß1,
a-smooth muscle actin, collagen I, and the extent of macrophage infiltration in
ectopic implants. The extent of fibrosis also was evaluated in experiment 2.
RESULT(S): P-selectin deficiency significantly retarded the development of
endometriosis in a mouse model of endometriosis. In addition, soluble P-selectin 
treatment markedly reduced the lesion size in mouse through decreased platelet
aggregation and angiogenesis, improved general hyperalgesia, and reduced the
extent of macrophages infiltration, resulting in reduced fibrotic tissue content.
CONCLUSION(S): Targeting P-selectin-mediated platelet adhesion onto endometriotic
lesions holds promise as a novel therapeutics for treating endometriosis.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25681855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Reprod Sci. 2015 Jul;22(7):873-83. doi: 10.1177/1933719115570907. Epub 2015 Feb
11.

Dating Endometriotic Ovarian Cysts Based on the Content of Cyst Fluid and its
Potential Clinical Implications.

Guo SW(1), Ding D(2), Shen M(2), Liu X(3).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China
Shanghai Key Laboratory of Female Reproductive Endocrine-Related Diseases,
Shanghai, China hoxa10@outlook.com. (2)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology
Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. (3)Shanghai Obstetrics and
Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Female Reproductive Endocrine-Related Diseases, Shanghai, China.

This study was undertaken to test the hypotheses that, due to gradual
accumulation of dead erythrocytes and their ingested products resulting from
repeated hemorrhage, older endometriomas (whitish in color) contain chocolate
fluid with higher iron content than younger (brownish/blackish in color) ones
with concomitant higher collagen content and more adhesions. We recruited 30
premenopausal women with histologically confirmed ovarian endometriomas and
collected samples of their endometriotic lesions and chocolate fluid and measured
the viscosity, density, and the concentration of total bilirubin, ferritin, and
free iron of the chocolate fluid. We also evaluated the lesion color and adhesion
scores. In addition, we performed Masson trichrome and Picro-Sirius red staining 
on all endometriotic cysts and evaluated the extent of fibrosis in the lesions.
We found that fluids taken from white-colored endometriomas had significantly
higher concentration of total bilirubin, ferritin, and free iron, respectively,
than black/brown-colored ones. In addition, older cysts had fluids that had
significantly higher density and viscosity. Fluid density correlated positively
with the concentrations of total bilirubin, ferritin, and free iron. Older
lesions had significantly more collagen content and higher adhesion scores. Taken
together, these data supports the notion that older cysts, having experienced
more bleeding episodes, contain chocolate fluid that is higher in viscosity,
density, and iron content and higher fibrotic content than younger ones. This
provides another piece of evidence that endometriotic lesions are wounds that
undergo repeated injury and repair, resulting ultimately fibrotic lesions that
are resistant to hormonal treatment.

© The Author(s) 2015.

PMCID: PMC4565481 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25676579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Epigenetics. 2014 Dec;9(12):1577-87. doi: 10.4161/15592294.2014.983374.

Epigenetic analysis of sporadic and Lynch-associated ovarian cancers reveals
histology-specific patterns of DNA methylation.

Niskakoski A(1), Kaur S, Staff S, Renkonen-Sinisalo L, Lassus H, Järvinen HJ,
Mecklin JP, Bützow R, Peltomäki P.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Medical Genetics; Biomedicum Helsinki ; University of Helsinki
; Helsinki , Finland.

Diagnosis and treatment of epithelial ovarian cancer is challenging due to the
poor understanding of the pathogenesis of the disease. Our aim was to investigate
epigenetic mechanisms in ovarian tumorigenesis and, especially, whether tumors
with different histological subtypes or hereditary background (Lynch syndrome)
exhibit differential susceptibility to epigenetic inactivation of growth
regulatory genes. Gene candidates for epigenetic regulation were identified from 
the literature and by expression profiling of ovarian and endometrial cancer cell
lines treated with demethylating agents. Thirteen genes were chosen for
methylation-specific multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification assays on
104 (85 sporadic and 19 Lynch syndrome-associated) ovarian carcinomas. Increased 
methylation (i.e., hypermethylation) of variable degree was characteristic of
ovarian carcinomas relative to the corresponding normal tissues, and
hypermethylation was consistently more prominent in non-serous than serous tumors
for individual genes and gene sets investigated. Lynch syndrome-associated clear 
cell carcinomas showed the highest frequencies of hypermethylation. Among
endometrioid ovarian carcinomas, lower levels of promoter methylation of RSK4,
SPARC, and HOXA9 were significantly associated with higher tumor grade; thus, the
methylation patterns showed a shift to the direction of high-grade serous tumors.
In conclusion, we provide evidence of a frequent epigenetic inactivation of RSK4,
SPARC, PROM1, HOXA10, HOXA9, WT1-AS, SFRP2, SFRP5, OPCML, and MIR34B in the
development of non-serous ovarian carcinomas of Lynch and sporadic origin, as
compared to serous tumors. Our findings shed light on the role of epigenetic
mechanisms in ovarian tumorigenesis and identify potential targets for
translational applications.

PMCID: PMC4622692
PMID: 25625843  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Genome Biol. 2015 Jan 27;16:16. doi: 10.1186/s13059-015-0583-7.

Chromosome 7 gain and DNA hypermethylation at the HOXA10 locus are associated
with expression of a stem cell related HOX-signature in glioblastoma.

Kurscheid S(1,)(2,)(3,)(4), Bady P(5,)(6,)(7,)(8), Sciuscio D(9,)(10), Samarzija 
I(11,)(12), Shay T(13), Vassallo I(14,)(15), Criekinge WV(16), Daniel RT(17), van
den Bent MJ(18), Marosi C(19), Weller M(20,)(21), Mason WP(22), Domany E(23),
Stupp R(24,)(25), Delorenzi M(26,)(27,)(28), Hegi ME(29,)(30).

Author information: 
(1)Neurosurgery, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, 1011, Switzerland.
sebastian.kurscheid@anu.edu.au. (2)Neuroscience Research Center, Lausanne
University Hospital, Lausanne, 1011, Switzerland. sebastian.kurscheid@anu.edu.au.
(3)Bioinformatics Core Facility, Swiss Institute for Bioinformatics, Lausanne,
1005, Switzerland. sebastian.kurscheid@anu.edu.au. (4)Present address: The John
Curtin School of Medical Research, The Australian National University, Canberra, 
ACT 2601, Australia. sebastian.kurscheid@anu.edu.au. (5)Neurosurgery, Lausanne
University Hospital, Lausanne, 1011, Switzerland. pierre.bady@unil.ch.
(6)Neuroscience Research Center, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, 1011,
Switzerland. pierre.bady@unil.ch. (7)Bioinformatics Core Facility, Swiss
Institute for Bioinformatics, Lausanne, 1005, Switzerland. pierre.bady@unil.ch.
(8)Department of Education and Research, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 1011, 
Switzerland. pierre.bady@unil.ch. (9)Neurosurgery, Lausanne University Hospital, 
Lausanne, 1011, Switzerland. davide.sciuscio@me.com. (10)Neuroscience Research
Center, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, 1011, Switzerland.
davide.sciuscio@me.com. (11)Neurosurgery, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne,
1011, Switzerland. ivana_s@yahoo.com. (12)Neuroscience Research Center, Lausanne 
University Hospital, Lausanne, 1011, Switzerland. ivana_s@yahoo.com.
(13)Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel. talshay@bgu.ac.il.
(14)Neurosurgery, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, 1011, Switzerland.
irene.vassallo@chuv.ch. (15)Neuroscience Research Center, Lausanne University
Hospital, Lausanne, 1011, Switzerland. irene.vassallo@chuv.ch. (16)Department of 
Mathematical Modelling, Statistics and Bioinformatics, Ghent University, Ghent,
Belgium. wim.vancriekinge@gmail.com. (17)Neurosurgery, Lausanne University
Hospital, Lausanne, 1011, Switzerland. roy.daniel@chuv.ch. (18)Department of
Neurology/Neurooncology, Erasmus MC Cancer Center, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
m.vandenbent@erasmusmc.nl. (19)Department of Medicine, Medical University Vienna,
Vienna, Austria. christine.marosi@meduniwien.ac.at. (20)Department of Neurology, 
University of Tübingen, Tübingen, Germany. michael.weller@usz.ch. (21)Department 
of Neurology, University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, Switzerland.
michael.weller@usz.ch. (22)Princess Margaret Hospital, University of Toronto,
Toronto, Canada. warren.mason@uhn.ca. (23)Department of Physics of Complex
Systems, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel.
eytan.domany@weizmann.ac.il. (24)Neurosurgery, Lausanne University Hospital,
Lausanne, 1011, Switzerland. roger.stupp@usz.ch. (25)Department of Oncology,
University Hospital Zurich, Zurich, 8091, Switzerland. roger.stupp@usz.ch.
(26)Bioinformatics Core Facility, Swiss Institute for Bioinformatics, Lausanne,
1005, Switzerland. mauro.delorenzi@unil.ch. (27)Ludwig Center for Cancer
Research, University of Lausanne, Lausanne, 1011, Switzerland.
mauro.delorenzi@unil.ch. (28)Department of Oncology, University of Lausanne,
Lausanne, 1011, Switzerland. mauro.delorenzi@unil.ch. (29)Neurosurgery, Lausanne 
University Hospital, Lausanne, 1011, Switzerland. monika.hegi@chuv.ch.
(30)Neuroscience Research Center, Lausanne University Hospital, Lausanne, 1011,
Switzerland. monika.hegi@chuv.ch.

BACKGROUND: HOX genes are a family of developmental genes that are expressed
neither in the developing forebrain nor in the normal brain. Aberrant expression 
of a HOX-gene dominated stem-cell signature in glioblastoma has been linked with 
increased resistance to chemo-radiotherapy and sustained proliferation of glioma 
initiating cells. Here we describe the epigenetic and genetic alterations and
their interactions associated with the expression of this signature in
glioblastoma.
RESULTS: We observe prominent hypermethylation of the HOXA locus 7p15.2 in
glioblastoma in contrast to non-tumoral brain. Hypermethylation is associated
with a gain of chromosome 7, a hallmark of glioblastoma, and may compensate for
tumor-driven enhanced gene dosage as a rescue mechanism by preventing undue gene 
expression. We identify the CpG island of the HOXA10 alternative promoter that
appears to escape hypermethylation in the HOX-high glioblastoma. An additive
effect of gene copy gain at 7p15.2 and DNA methylation at key regulatory CpGs in 
HOXA10 is significantly associated with HOX-signature expression. Additionally,
we show concordance between methylation status and presence of active or inactive
chromatin marks in glioblastoma-derived spheres that are HOX-high or HOX-low,
respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: Based on these findings, we propose co-evolution and interaction
between gene copy gain, associated with a gain of chromosome 7, and additional
epigenetic alterations as key mechanisms triggering a coordinated, but
inappropriate, HOX transcriptional program in glioblastoma.

PMCID: PMC4342872
PMID: 25622821  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Fertil Steril. 2015 Mar;103(3):845-52. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2014.12.099.
Epub 2015 Jan 14.

Leiomyoma-derived transforming growth factor-ß impairs bone morphogenetic
protein-2-mediated endometrial receptivity.

Doherty LF(1), Taylor HS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of Medicine, New
Haven, Connecticut. (2)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility,
Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut. Electronic address: hugh.taylor@yale.edu.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß3 is a
paracrine signal secreted by leiomyoma that inhibits bone morphogenetic protein
(BMP)-mediated endometrial receptivity and decidualization.
DESIGN: Experimental.
SETTING: Laboratory.
PATIENT(S): Women with symptomatic leiomyomas.
INTERVENTION(S): Endometrial stromal cells (ESCs) and leiomyoma cells were
isolated from surgical specimens. Leiomyoma-conditioned media (LCM) was applied
to cultured ESC. The TGF-ß was blocked by two approaches: TGF-ß pan-specific
antibody or transfection with a mutant TGF-ß receptor type II. Cells were then
treated with recombinant human BMP-2 to assess BMP responsiveness.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Expression of BMP receptor types 1A, 1B, 2, as well as
endometrial receptivity mediators HOXA10 and leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF).
RESULT(S): Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay showed elevated TGF-ß levels in LCM.
LCM treatment of ESC reduced expression of BMP receptor types 1B and 2 to
approximately 60% of pretreatment levels. Preincubation of LCM with TGF-ß
neutralizing antibody or mutant TGF receptor, but not respective controls,
prevented repression of BMP receptors. HOXA10 and LIF expression was repressed in
recombinant human BMP-2 treated, LCM exposed ESC. Pretreatment of LCM with TGF-ß 
antibody or transfection with mutant TGF receptor prevented HOXA10 and LIF
repression.
CONCLUSION(S): Leiomyoma-derived TGF-ß was necessary and sufficient to alter
endometrial BMP-2 responsiveness. Blockade of TGF-ß prevents repression of BMP-2 
receptors and restores BMP-2-stimulated expression of HOXA10 and LIF. Blockade of
TGF signaling is a potential strategy to improve infertility and pregnancy loss
associated with uterine leiomyoma.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4363085
PMID: 25596622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Oncogenesis. 2014 Dec 22;3:e135. doi: 10.1038/oncsis.2014.49.

Regulation of CDX4 gene transcription by HoxA9, HoxA10, the Mll-Ell oncogene and 
Shp2 during leukemogenesis.

Bei L(1), Shah C(2), Wang H(1), Huang W(1), Platanias LC(2), Eklund EA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern
University, Chicago, IL, USA. (2)1] Department of Medicine, The Feinberg School
of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA [2] The Robert H. Lurie
Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL, USA [3] Jesse 
Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago, IL, USA.

Cdx and Hox proteins are homeodomain transcription factors that regulate
hematopoiesis. Transcription of the HOX and CDX genes decreases during normal
myelopoiesis, but is aberrantly sustained in leukemias with translocation or
partial tandem duplication of the MLL1 gene. Cdx4 activates transcription of the 
HOXA9 and HOXA10 genes, and HoxA10 activates CDX4 transcription. The events that 
break this feedback loop, permitting a decreased Cdx4 expression during normal
myelopoiesis, were previously undefined. In the current study, we find that HoxA9
represses CDX4 transcription in differentiating myeloid cells, antagonizing
activation by HoxA10. We determine that tyrosine phosphorylation of HoxA10
impairs transcriptional activation of CDX4, but tyrosine phosphorylation of HoxA9
facilitates repression of this gene. As HoxA9 and HoxA10 are phosphorylated
during myelopoiesis, this provides a mechanism for differentiation stage-specific
Cdx4 expression. HoxA9 and HoxA10 are increased in cells expressing Mll-Ell, a
leukemia-associated MLL1 fusion protein. We find that Mll-Ell induces a
HoxA10-dependent increase in Cdx4 expression in myeloid progenitor cells.
However, Cdx4 decreases in a HoxA9-dependent manner on exposure of
Mll-Ell-expressing cells to differentiating cytokines. Leukemia-associated,
constitutively active mutants of Shp2 block cytokine-induced tyrosine
phosphorylation of HoxA9 and HoxA10. In comparison with myeloid progenitor cells 
that are expressing Mll-Ell alone, we find increased CDX4 transcription and Cdx4 
expression in cells co-expressing Mll-Ell plus constitutively active Shp2.
Increased Cdx4 expression is sustained on exposure of these cells to
differentiating cytokines. Our results identify a mechanism for increased and
sustained CDX4 transcription in leukemias co-overexpressing HoxA9 and HoxA10 in
combination with constitutive activation of Shp2. This is clinically relevant,
because MLL1 translocations and constitutive Shp2 activation co-exist in human
myeloid leukemias.

PMCID: PMC4275563
PMID: 25531430  [PubMed]


48. Development. 2015 Jan 1;142(1):70-81. doi: 10.1242/dev.109454.

Geminin deletion increases the number of fetal hematopoietic stem cells by
affecting the expression of key transcription factors.

Karamitros D(1), Patmanidi AL(1), Kotantaki P(1), Potocnik AJ(2), Bähr-Ivacevic
T(3), Benes V(3), Lygerou Z(4), Kioussis D(5), Taraviras S(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Medical School, University of Patras, Rio, Patras
26504, Greece. (2)Division of Molecular Immunology, MRC/National Institute for
Medical Research, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK. (3)European Molecular Biology
Laboratory (EMBL), Core Facilities and Services, Meyerhofstraße 1, Heidelberg
69117, Germany. (4)Department of Biology, Medical School, University of Patras,
Rio, Patras 26504, Greece. (5)Division of Molecular Immunology, MRC/National
Institute for Medical Research, The Ridgeway, London NW7 1AA, UK
dkiouss@nimr.mrc.ac.uk taraviras@med.upatras.gr. (6)Department of Physiology,
Medical School, University of Patras, Rio, Patras 26504, Greece
dkiouss@nimr.mrc.ac.uk taraviras@med.upatras.gr.

Balancing stem cell self-renewal and initiation of lineage specification programs
is essential for the development and homeostasis of the hematopoietic system. We 
have specifically ablated geminin in the developing murine hematopoietic system
and observed profound defects in the generation of mature blood cells, leading to
embryonic lethality. Hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) accumulated in the fetal
liver following geminin ablation, while committed progenitors were reduced.
Genome-wide transcriptome analysis identified key HSC transcription factors as
being upregulated upon geminin deletion, revealing a gene network linked with
geminin that controls fetal hematopoiesis. In order to obtain mechanistic insight
into the ability of geminin to regulate transcription, we examined Hoxa9 as an
example of a key gene in definitive hematopoiesis. We demonstrate that in human
K562 cells geminin is associated with HOXA9 regulatory elements and its absence
increases HOXA9 transcription similarly to that observed in vivo. Moreover,
silencing geminin reduced recruitment of the PRC2 component SUZ12 to the HOXA9
locus and resulted in an increase in RNA polymerase II recruitment and H3K4
trimethylation (H3K4me3), whereas the repressive marks H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 were 
reduced. The chromatin landscape was also modified at the regulatory regions of
HOXA10 and GATA1. K562 cells showed a reduced ability to differentiate to
erythrocytes and megakaryocytes upon geminin silencing. Our data suggest that
geminin is indispensable for fetal hematopoiesis and regulates the generation of 
a physiological pool of stem and progenitor cells in the fetal hematopoietic
system.

© 2015. Published by The Company of Biologists Ltd.

PMID: 25516969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Oral Oncol. 2015 Feb;51(2):151-7. doi: 10.1016/j.oraloncology.2014.11.019. Epub
2014 Dec 12.

miR-494 represses HOXA10 expression and inhibits cell proliferation in oral
cancer.

Libório-Kimura TN(1), Jung HM(2), Chan EK(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Biology, University of Florida, P.O. Box 100424,
Gainesville, FL 32610-0424, USA; Department of Pathology and Legal Medicine,
Federal University of Amazonas, Av. Valdemar Pedrosa, 1097, CEP 69020-160 AM,
Brazil. Electronic address: tliborio@ufam.edu.br. (2)Department of Oral Biology, 
University of Florida, P.O. Box 100424, Gainesville, FL 32610-0424, USA.
Electronic address: hyunmin.jung@nih.gov. (3)Department of Oral Biology,
University of Florida, P.O. Box 100424, Gainesville, FL 32610-0424, USA.
Electronic address: echan@ufl.edu.

OBJECTIVES: miR-494 was identified as a candidate of the most significantly
underexpressed microRNAs (miRNAs) in our oral cancer screen. The aim of this
study was to validate whether miR-494 has a functional role in oral cancer.
METHODS: Quantitative miRNA analyses were performed on oral tumor RNA and oral
cancer cell lines. HOXA10 was selected for further analysis based on
bioinformatics analysis of miR-494 targets and a previous report of
overexpression of HOXA10 in oral cancer. Transient transfection of miRNA-mimic
and inhibitor were performed in SCC-25 (tongue), CAL 27 (tongue), and FaDu
(pharynx) cancer cells and regulation of HOXA10 by miR-494 was investigated. Dual
luciferase assay was used to verify the interaction between miR-494 and HOXA10 in
reporter cells. The effect of miR-494 on cell proliferation was examined.
RESULTS: Our data showed that miR-494 was underexpressed whereas HOXA10 was
overexpressed in oral cancer compared to normal tissues. An inverse correlation
between miR-494 and HOXA10 was observed in the human tissues (p<0.05). Transient 
transfection of miR-494 in all cancer cell lines significantly reduced the
expression of HOXA10 mRNA. The luciferase reporter that contains the 3'UTR of
HOXA10 showed a significantly reduced luciferase activity by miR-494 indicating a
direct interaction between HOXA10 and miR-494. Significant reduction in cell
proliferation was demonstrated in tongue cancer cells transfected with miR-494.
CONCLUSION: miR-494 repressed the expression of HOXA10 and also reduced the
proliferation of oral cancer cells. These data give more evidence of the role of 
miR-494 as a tumor suppressor miRNA in oral cancer.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25500095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2015 Feb 5;401:248-59. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2014.11.028. Epub 
2014 Dec 5.

Neonatal exposure to low doses of endosulfan induces implantation failure and
disrupts uterine functional differentiation at the pre-implantation period in
rats.

Milesi MM(1), Alarcón R(1), Ramos JG(1), Muñoz-de-Toro M(1), Luque EH(1),
Varayoud J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Instituto de Salud y Ambiente del Litoral (ISAL), Facultad de Bioquímica y
Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional del Litoral - Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Santa Fe, Argentina.
(2)Instituto de Salud y Ambiente del Litoral (ISAL), Facultad de Bioquímica y
Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Nacional del Litoral - Consejo Nacional de
Investigaciones Científicas y Técnicas (CONICET), Santa Fe, Argentina. Electronic
address: varayoud@fbcb.unl.edu.ar.

We investigated whether neonatal exposure to low doses of endosulfan affects
fertility and uterine functional differentiation at pre-implantation in rats.
Newborn female rats received the vehicle, 0.2<U+2009>µg/kg/d of diethylstilbestrol
(DES), 6<U+2009>µg/kg/d of endosulfan (Endo6) or 600<U+2009>µg/kg/d of endosulfan (Endo600) on 
postnatal days (PND) 1, 3, 5, and 7. On PND90, the rats were mated to evaluate
their reproductive performance on gestational day (GD) 19 and their ovarian
steroid serum levels, endometrial proliferation and implantation-associated
proteins on GD5. DES and endosulfan decreased the pregnancy rate and the number
of implantation sites. On GD5, DES and endosulfan did not change the serum levels
of 17ß-estradiol (E2) and progesterone (P); the endometrial proliferation
decreased, which was associated with silencing of Hoxa10 in the Endo600-treated
rats. Both doses of endosulfan increased the progesterone receptor (PR)
expression, whereas the higher dose led additionally to an increase in estrogen
receptor alpha (ERa). In the Endo600-treated rats, the down-regulation of Hoxa10 
was associated with a deregulation of the steroid receptor coregulators.
Alterations in endometrial proliferation and the endocrine pathway of
Hoxa10/steroid receptors/coregulators might be the mechanism of
endosulfan-induced implantation failure.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25486513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Apr;11(4):2875-81. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.3005. Epub 2014 Nov
26.

Expression of ß-nerve growth factor and homeobox A10 in experimental
cryptorchidism treated with exogenous nerve growth factor.

Xian H(1), Xian Y(2), Liu L(1), Wang Y(3), He J(3), Huang J(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong University,
Nantong, Jiangsu 226001, P.R. China. (2)Department of Public Health College,
Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu 226001, P.R. China. (3)Jiangsu Key
Laboratory of Neuroregeneration, Nantong University, Nantong, Jiangsu 226001,
P.R. China. (4)Department of Pathology, Affiliated Hospital of Nantong
University, Nantong, Jiangsu 226001, P.R. China.

With the exception of standard inguinal orchidopexy, treatment of cryptorchidism 
with human chorionic gonadotropin has been performed for several years; however, 
its side effects have limited its application. The ß-nerve growth factor (NGF)
and homeobox A10 (HoxA10) genes are closely associated with the development of
the testes. To the best of our knowledge, whether exogenous NGF alters the
endogenous levels of NGF and HoxA10 in cryptorchidism in rats remains to be
elucidated. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the gene and protein
expression of NGF and HoxA10 in experimental cryptorchidism following treatment
with exogenous NGF. A unilateral mechanical cryptorchidism model in
Sprague-Dawley rats was established and different concentrations of exogenous NGF
were administered to observe the effects of NGF on cryptorchidism. Changes in the
gene and protein expression levels of NGF and HoxA10 in the cryptorchid tissues
of each group were identified using one step reverse transcription-quantitative
polymerase chain reaction, in situ hybridization with digoxigenin-labeled-ß-NGF
RNA probes, immunofluorescence and immunohistochemistry, respectively. The
expression levels of NGF and HoxA10 were markedly higher in the group treated
with a high dose of exogenous NGF compared with the group treated with a low dose
of exogenous NGF and the group treated with human chorionic gonadotropin. These
results confirmed the potential therapeutic effect of exogenous NGF in human
cryptorchidism.

PMID: 25434417  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 17;9(11):e112671. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112671.
eCollection 2014.

Cell fate decisions in malignant hematopoiesis: leukemia phenotype is determined 
by distinct functional domains of the MN1 oncogene.

Lai CK(1), Moon Y(2), Kuchenbauer F(3), Starzcynowski DT(4), Argiropoulos B(5),
Yung E(6), Beer P(6), Schwarzer A(7), Sharma A(7), Park G(8), Leung M(6), Lin
G(6), Vollett S(6), Fung S(6), Eaves CJ(1), Karsan A(9), Weng AP(10), Humphries
RK(1), Heuser M(11).

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada;
Department of Medicine, Faculty of Medicine, University of British Columbia,
Vancouver, BC, Canada. (2)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical School of
Inha University, Incheon, Korea. (3)Department of Internal Medicine III,
University Hospital of Ulm, Ulm, Germany; Institute of Experimental Cancer
Research, Comprehensive Cancer Centre, University Hospital of Ulm, Ulm, Germany. 
(4)Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center,
Cincinnati, Ohio, United States of America. (5)Department of Medical Genetics,
University of Calgary, Calgary, AB, Canada. (6)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer
Agency Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (7)Institute of Experimental
Hematology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany. (8)Department of Hospital
Pathology, Catholic University of Korea, Seoul, Korea. (9)Genome Sciences Centre,
BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Department of Pathology and Laboratory
Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada. (10)Terry Fox
Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency Research Centre, Vancouver, BC, Canada; Department
of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, 
BC, Canada. (11)Department of Hematology, Hemostasis, Oncology, and Stem Cell
Transplantation, Hannover Medical School, Hannover, Germany.

Extensive molecular profiling of leukemias and preleukemic diseases has revealed 
that distinct clinical entities, like acute myeloid (AML) and T-lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL), share similar pathogenetic mutations. It is not well understood
how the cell of origin, accompanying mutations, extracellular signals or
structural differences in a mutated gene determine the phenotypic identity of
leukemias. We dissected the functional aspects of different protein regions of
the MN1 oncogene and their effect on the leukemic phenotype, building on the
ability of MN1 to induce leukemia without accompanying mutations. We found that
the most C-terminal region of MN1 was required to block myeloid differentiation
at an early stage, and deletion of an extended C-terminal region resulted in loss
of myeloid identity and cell differentiation along the T-cell lineage in vivo.
Megakaryocytic/erythroid lineage differentiation was blocked by the N-terminal
region. In addition, the N-terminus was required for proliferation and
leukemogenesis in vitro and in vivo through upregulation of HoxA9, HoxA10 and
Meis2. Our results provide evidence that a single oncogene can modulate cellular 
identity of leukemic cells based on its active gene regions. It is therefore
likely that different mutations in the same oncogene may impact cell fate
decisions and phenotypic appearance of malignant diseases.

PMCID: PMC4234417
PMID: 25401736  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Jan;11(1):509-14. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2014.2680. Epub 2014 Oct 16.

GnRH analogues may increase endometrial Hoxa10 promoter methylation and affect
endometrial receptivity.

Li F(1), Zhang M(1), Zhang Y(1), Liu T(1), Qu X(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Reproductive Medicine Center,
Zhongnan Hospital of Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei 430071, P.R. China.

The present study aimed to investigate whether gonadotropin-releasing hormone
analogues (GnRH-as), including GnRH agonists and antagonists, affect endometrial 
homeobox (Hox) a10 DNA methylation during the implantation window in mice. GnRH
analogue mouse models were used and were treated with either human menopausal
gonadotropin (HMG) and a GnRH agonist or HMG and a GnRH antagonist. Uterus
samples were collected 48 h after GnRH analogue treatment or ovulation. Bisulfite
sequencing polymerase chain reaction (PCR), quantitative-PCR and western blot
analysis were performed to assess Hoxa10 and integrin ß3 expression. Scanning
electron microscope analyses were conducted to analyze pinopode development.
Compared with the natural cycle control mice, mice in the GnRH analogue groups
were found to exhibit increased levels of methylation at the Hoxa10 promoter,
decreased Hoxa10 mRNA and protein expression and disrupted pinopode development. 
These findings suggest that GnRH-as may be associated with altered Hoxa10 DNA
methylation, thus GnRH-as may affect uterine Hoxa10 expression and endometrial
receptivity.

PMID: 25323439  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Clin Cancer Res. 2014 Dec 15;20(24):6504-16. doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-14-1553. 
Epub 2014 Oct 14.

The novel, small-molecule DNA methylation inhibitor SGI-110 as an ovarian cancer 
chemosensitizer.

Fang F(1), Munck J(2), Tang J(1), Taverna P(2), Wang Y(1), Miller DF(1), Pilrose 
J(1), Choy G(2), Azab M(2), Pawelczak KS(3), VanderVere-Carozza P(4), Wagner
M(5), Lyons J(2), Matei D(6), Turchi JJ(7), Nephew KP(8).

Author information: 
(1)Medical Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, Bloomington, Indiana.
(2)Astex Pharmaceuticals Inc., Dublin, California. (3)Department of Biochemistry 
and Molecular Biology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana. (4)Department of Medicine, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. (5)Department of
Pharmacology and Toxicology, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis,
Indiana. (6)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana University 
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. Indiana University Melvin and Bren
Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis, Indiana. VA Roudebush Hospital, Indianapolis, 
Indiana. Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Indiana University School of
Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. Department of Medicine, Indiana University
School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. knephew@indiana.edu jturchi@iupui.edu 
dmatei@iupui.edu. (7)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. Department of Medicine,
Division of Hematology/Oncology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana. knephew@indiana.edu jturchi@iupui.edu dmatei@iupui.edu.
(8)Medical Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, Bloomington, Indiana.
Indiana University Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center, Indianapolis, Indiana.
Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Indiana University School of Medicine,
Indianapolis, Indiana. Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana
University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana. knephew@indiana.edu
jturchi@iupui.edu dmatei@iupui.edu.

PURPOSE: To investigate SGI-110 as a "chemosensitizer" in ovarian cancer and to
assess its effects on tumor suppressor genes (TSG) and
chemoresponsiveness-associated genes silenced by DNA methylation in ovarian
cancer.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Several ovarian cancer cell lines were used for in vitro and
in vivo platinum resensitization studies. Changes in DNA methylation and
expression levels of TSG and other cancer-related genes in response to SGI-110
were measured by pyrosequencing and RT-PCR.
RESULTS: We demonstrate in vitro that SGI-110 resensitized a range of
platinum-resistant ovarian cancer cells to cisplatin (CDDP) and induced
significant demethylation and reexpression of TSG, differentiation-associated
genes, and putative drivers of ovarian cancer cisplatin resistance. In vivo,
SGI-110 alone or in combination with CDDP was well tolerated and induced
antitumor effects in ovarian cancer xenografts. Pyrosequencing analyses confirmed
that SGI-110 caused both global (LINE1) and gene-specific hypomethylation in
vivo, including TSGs (RASSF1A), proposed drivers of ovarian cancer cisplatin
resistance (MLH1 and ZIC1), differentiation-associated genes (HOXA10 and HOXA11),
and transcription factors (STAT5B). Furthermore, DNA damage induced by CDDP in
ovarian cancer cells was increased by SGI-110, as measured by inductively coupled
plasma-mass spectrometry analysis of DNA adduct formation and repair of
cisplatin-induced DNA damage.
CONCLUSIONS: These results strongly support further investigation of
hypomethylating strategies in platinum-resistant ovarian cancer. Specifically,
SGI-110 in combination with conventional and/or targeted therapeutics warrants
further development in this setting.

©2014 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4268357
PMID: 25316809  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Biosci Rep. 2014 Dec 8;34(6):e00156. doi: 10.1042/BSR20140116.

Mixed lineage leukaemia histone methylases 1 collaborate with ERa to regulate
HOXA10 expression in AML.

Yao J(1), Fang LC(1), Yang ZL(2), Huang H(1), Li Y(1), Deng J(1), Zheng J(1).

Author information: 
(1)*Department of Laboratory Medicine, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical
University, Chongqing 400038, People's Republic of China. (2)Department of
Hematology, Southwest Hospital, Third Military Medical University, Chongqing
400038, People's Republic of China.

HOXA10, a homeobox-containing gene involved in definitive haematopoiesis, which
implicated in the pathogenesis of AML (acute myeloid leukaemia), has been studied
extensively. But the regulatory mechanism that drives HOXA10 expression is still 
unclear. In the present paper, HOXA10 regulated by MLL1 (mixed lineage leukaemia 
histone methylase 1) with an epigenetic way has been demonstrated. The HOXA10
promoter contains several EREs (oestrogen response elements), including ERE1 and 
ERE2, which are close to the transcription start site, and are associated with
E2-mediated activation of HOXA10. It has been shown that knockdown of the ERa
(oestrogen receptor a) suppresses E2-mediated activation of HOXA10. Similarly,
knockdown of MLL1 suppresses activation of HOXA10 and is bound to the ERE of
HOXA10 promoter in an E2-dependent manner by forming complex with ERa. Knockdown 
of ERa affects the E2-dependent binding of MLL1 into HOXA10 EREs, suggesting
critical roles of ERa in recruiting MLL on the HOXA10 promoter. More
interestingly, the methylation status of histone protein H3K4 (H3 at lysine 4)
with E2 is much higher than without E2 treatment in leukaemia cell. On the
contrary, the methylation status of HOXA10 promoter with E2 treatment is much
lower, which elevate the HOXA10 expression. Moreover, with ERa knockdown, the
H3K4 methylation level is also decrease in myeloid cell. Overall, it has been
clearly demonstrated that HOXA10 is transcriptionally regulated by MLL1, which,
in coordination with ERa, plays a critical role in this process with epigenetic
way and suggests a potential anti-E2 treatment of AML.

PMCID: PMC4266925
PMID: 25307539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Acupunct Med. 2015 Feb;33(1):9-15. doi: 10.1136/acupmed-2014-010572. Epub 2014
Oct 10.

Effect of transcutaneous electrical acupuncture point stimulation on endometrial 
receptivity in women undergoing frozen-thawed embryo transfer: a single-blind
prospective randomised controlled trial.

Shuai Z(1), Lian F(2), Li P(3), Yang W(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, China.
(2)Integrative Medicine Research Centre of Reproduction and Heredity, the
Affiliated Hospital of Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine,
Jinan, China. (3)Department of Urology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

Comment in
    Acupunct Med. 2015 Feb;33(1):2-6.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of transcutaneous electrical acupuncture point 
stimulation (TEAS) on endometrial HOXA10 protein expression and three-dimensional
(3D) power Doppler ultrasound parameters as markers of endometrial receptivity in
women undergoing frozen-thawed embryo transfer (FET).
METHODS: A total of 68 women undergoing FET were randomised to receive TEAS or
mock TEAS at acupuncture points CV3, CV4 and SP6 and Zigong bilaterally. Both
groups had six sessions per cycle for three menstrual cycles prior to the
scheduled FET. Each session lasted 30 min and was repeated every other day. 3D
power Doppler ultrasound parameters, HOXA10 protein expression and rates of
embryo implantation, clinical pregnancy and live birth were compared.
RESULTS: There were no significant differences between the two groups in
endometrial thickness or endometrial volume. The ultrasonographic endometrial
triple-line pattern was present more often in the TEAS group (p=0.002). The TEAS 
group had a greater endometrial and subendometrial vascularisation index (VI)
than the mock TEAS group (p=0.001 and p<0.001, respectively) on 3D ultrasound and
increased endometrial HOXA10 expression (p=0.001) immediately prior to FET.
Subsequently, the rates of embryo implantation, clinical pregnancy and live birth
rates were all higher in the TEAS group than in the mock TEAS group (p=0.024,
p=0.038 and p=0.033, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: In patients undergoing FET, TEAS may have beneficial effects on
endometrial HOXA10 expression and ultrasound markers of endometrial receptivity. 
These findings may explain the improvement in clinical outcome of FET associated 
with the use of TEAS.
TRIAL REGISTRATION NUMBER: ChiCTR-TRC-14004448.

Published by the BMJ Publishing Group Limited. For permission to use (where not
already granted under a licence) please go to
http://group.bmj.com/group/rights-licensing/permissions.

PMID: 25303950  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Reprod Sci. 2015 Jan;22(1):31-7. doi: 10.1177/1933719114549846. Epub 2014 Sep 11.

The relationship among HOXA10, estrogen receptor a, progesterone receptor, and
progesterone receptor B proteins in rectosigmoid endometriosis: a tissue
microarray study.

Zanatta A(1), Pereira RM(2), Rocha AM(3), Cogliati B(4), Baracat EC(5), Taylor
HS(6), Motta EL(7), Serafini PC(5).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, São Paulo University School of Medicine, Sao Paulo, 
Brazil alysson.zanatta@gmail.com. (2)Endometriosis Center, Santa Joana Hospital, 
Sao Paulo, Brazil. (3)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of
Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI. (4)Department of Molecular and Morphologic Sciences, São
Paulo University School of Zootechny and Veterinary Medicine, Sao Paulo, Brazil. 
(5)Department of Gynecology, São Paulo University School of Medicine, Sao Paulo, 
Brazil. (6)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. (7)Department of Gynecology,
São Paulo Federal University School of Medicine, Sao Paulo, Brazil.

BACKGROUND: Very few studies have evaluated the expression of homeobox A10
(HOXA10) and steroid (estrogen and progesterone) receptors exclusively in deep
endometriosis. Conclusions drawn from studies evaluating peritoneal and ovarian
endometriosis are usually generalized to explain the pathogenesis of the disease 
as a whole. We aimed to evaluate the expression of HOXA10, estrogen receptor a
(ER-a), progesterone receptor (PR), and PR-B in rectosigmoid endometriosis (RE), 
a typical model of deep disease.
METHODS: We used RE samples from 18 consecutive patients to construct tissue
microarray blocks. Nine patients each were operated during the proliferative and 
secretory phases of the menstrual cycle. We quantified the expressions of
proteins by immunohistochemistry using the modified Allred score.
RESULT: The HOXA10 was expressed in the stroma of nodules during the secretory
phase in 5 of the 18 patients. Expression of ER-a (in 16 of 18 patients), PR (in 
17 of 18 patients), and PR-B (17 of 18 patients) was moderate to strong in the
glands and stroma of nodules during both phases. Expression of both PR (P = .023)
and PR-B (P = .024) was significantly greater during the secretory phase.
CONCLUSION: The HOXA10 is expressed in RE, where it likely imparts the de novo
identity of endometriotic lesions. The ER-a, PR, and PR-B are strongly expressed 
in RE, which differs from previous studies investigating peritoneal and ovarian
lesions. This suggests different routes of pathogenesis for each of the 3 types
of endometriosis.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMCID: PMC4527422
PMID: 25217304  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. Int J Clin Exp Pathol. 2014 Jun 15;7(7):4039-44. eCollection 2014.

miR-218 modulate hepatocellular carcinoma cell proliferation through
PTEN/AKT/PI3K pathway and HoxA10.

Xiao ZD(1), Jiao CY(2), Huang HT(2), He LJ(2), Zhao JJ(2), Lu ZY(3), Liu LX(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical
University Harbin 150001, China ; Department of General Surgery, Daqing Group
Oilfield General Hospital Daqing 163001, China. (2)Department of General Surgery,
Daqing Group Oilfield General Hospital Daqing 163001, China. (3)Department of
Hepatic Surgery, The First Affiliated Hospital of Harbin Medical University
Harbin 150001, China.

PURPOSE: To investigate the regulatory mechanism of miR-218 in human
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
METHODS: qPCR was used to compare the expression levels miR-218 among six
hepatocellular carcinoma cell lines and normal liver tissues. After transfecting 
MHCC97L cells with either miR-218 mimics or miR-218 inhibitor, western blotting
was used to examine the expressing patterns of cyclinD1, p21, and PTEN/AKT/PI3K
signaling pathway-related proteins. MTT and colony forming assay was used to
assess the capability of cell proliferation. Bioinformatic method was applied to 
predict the binding of miR-218 on HoxA10, and western blotting was used to
examine the modulatory effect of miR-218 AND HoxA10 on PTEN/AKT/PI3K pathway in
HCC.
RESULTS: The expression levels of miR-218 were frequently lower in HCC cell lines
than in normal liver tissues. Over-expression of miR-218 in HCC cells
significantly decreased cell proliferation whereas inhibiting miR-218 promoted
cancer cell proliferation. Western blotting analysis demonstrated that
tumorigenesis related protein cyclin D1 and p21, as well as PTEN/AKT/PI3K
signaling pathways were actively modulated by miR-218 in HCC cells. The
expression of endogenous HoxA10 was also down-regulated by miR-218
over-expression, and silencing HoxA10 directly activated PTEN in HCC cells.
CONCLUSION: Modulation of miR-218 actively affected HCC cancer cell development. 
The regulatory mechanism of miR-218 in HCC cells was acting through PTEN/AKT/PI3K
pathway and possibly associated with HoxA10.

PMCID: PMC4129017
PMID: 25120782  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Tissue Eng Part A. 2015 Jan;21(1-2):353-61. doi: 10.1089/ten.TEA.2014.0052. Epub 
2014 Sep 19.

Regeneration of uterine horns in rats using collagen scaffolds loaded with human 
embryonic stem cell-derived endometrium-like cells.

Song T(1), Zhao X, Sun H, Li X, Lin N, Ding L, Dai J, Hu Y.

Author information: 
(1)1 Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nanjing Drum Tower Hospital,
Nanjing University Medical School , Nanjing, China .

A variety of diseases may lead to hysterectomies or uterine injuries, which may
form a scar and lead to infertility. Due to the limitation of native materials,
there are a few effective methods to treat such damages. Tissue engineering
combines cell and molecular biology with materials and mechanical engineering to 
replace or repair damaged organs and tissues. The use of human embryonic stem
cells (hESCs) as a donor cell source for the replacement therapy will require the
development of simple and reliable cell differentiation protocols. This study
aimed at efficiently generating endometrium-like cells from the hESCs and at
using these cells with collagen scaffold to repair uterine damage. The hESCs were
induced by co-culturing with endometrial stromal cells, and simultaneously added 
cytokines: epidermal growth factor (EGF), platelet-derived growth factor-b
(PDGF-b), and E2. Expression of cell specific markers was analyzed by
immunofluorescence and reverse trascription-polymerase chain reaction to monitor 
the progression toward an endometrium-like cell fate. After differentiation, the 
majority of cells (>80%) were positive for cytokeratin-7, and the expression of
key transcription factors related to endometrial development, such as Wnt4,
Wnt7a, Wnt5a, Hoxa11, and factors associated with endometrial epithelial cell
function: Hoxa10, Intergrinß3, LIF, ER, and PR were also detected. Then, we
established the uterine full-thickness-injury rat models to test cell function in
vivo. hESC-derived cells were dropped onto collagen scaffolds and transplanted
into the animal model. Twelve weeks after transplantation, we discovered that the
hESC-derived cells could survive and recover the structure and function of
uterine horns in a rat model of severe uterine damage. The experimental system
presented here provides a reliable protocol to produce endometrium-like cells
from hESCs. Our results encourage the use of hESCs in cell-replacement therapy
for severe uterine damage in future.

PMCID: PMC4292859
PMID: 25097004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Blood. 2014 Sep 11;124(11):1737-47. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-10-534735. Epub 2014 
Jul 31.

Downregulation of Prdm16 mRNA is a specific antileukemic mechanism during
HOXB4-mediated HSC expansion in vivo.

Yu H(1), Neale G(2), Zhang H(3), Lee HM(3), Ma Z(4), Zhou S(4), Forget BG(3),
Sorrentino BP(4).

Author information: 
(1)Experimental Hematology Division, Department of Hematology, St. Jude
Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN; Integrated Program in Biomedical
Sciences, University of Tennessee Health Science Center, Memphis, TN; (2)Hartwell
Center for Bioinformatics and Biotechnology, St. Jude Children's Research
Hospital, Memphis, TN; and. (3)Department of Internal Medicine, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT. (4)Experimental Hematology Division,
Department of Hematology, St. Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN;

Overexpression of HOXB4 in hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) leads to increased
self-renewal without causing hematopoietic malignancies in transplanted mice. The
molecular basis of HOXB4-mediated benign HSC expansion in vivo is not well
understood. To gain further insight into the molecular events underlying
HOXB4-mediated HSC expansion, we analyzed gene expression changes at multiple
time points in Lin(-)Sca1(+)c-kit(+) cells from mice transplanted with bone
marrow cells transduced with a MSCV-HOXB4-ires-YFP vector. A distinct HOXB4
transcriptional program was reproducibly induced and stabilized by 12 weeks after
transplant. Dynamic expression changes were observed in genes critical for HSC
self-renewal as well as in genes involved in myeloid and B-cell differentiation. 
Prdm16, a transcription factor associated with human acute myeloid leukemia, was 
markedly repressed by HOXB4 but upregulated by HOXA9 and HOXA10, suggesting that 
Prdm16 downregulation was involved in preventing leukemia in HOXB4 transplanted
mice. Functional evidence to support this mechanism was obtained by enforcing
coexpression of sPrdm16 and HOXB4, which led to enhanced self-renewal, myeloid
expansion, and leukemia. Altogether, these studies define the transcriptional
pathways involved in HOXB4 HSC expansion in vivo and identify repression of
Prdm16 transcription as a mechanism by which expanding HSCs avoid leukemic
transformation.

© 2014 by The American Society of Hematology.

PMCID: PMC4162106
PMID: 25082879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Genes Cancer. 2014 May;5(5-6):165-74.

HOXA10 is associated with temozolomide resistance through regulation of the
homologous recombinant DNA repair pathway in glioblastoma cell lines.

Kim JW(1), Kim JY(1), Kim JE(1), Kim SK(2), Chung HT(1), Park CK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Seoul National University College of Medicine,
Seoul National University Hospital, Seoul, Korea. (2)Department of Neurosurgery, 
Seoul National University College of Medicine, Seoul National University
Hospital, Seoul, Korea ; Division of Pediatric Neurosurgery, Pediatric Clinical
Neuroscience Center, Seoul National University Children's Hospital, Seoul, Korea;

Temozolomide resistance is associated with multiple DNA repair pathways. We
investigated homeobox (HOX) genes for their role in temozolomide resistance,
focusing on the homologous recombination (HR) pathway, and we tested their
therapeutic implications in conjunction with O(6)-methylguanine DNA
methyltransferase (MGMT) status. Two glioblastoma cell lines with different MGMT 
statuses were used to test the augmented anticancer effect of temozolomide with
HOXA10 inhibition. In vitro experiments, including gene expression studies with
RNA interference, were performed to verify the related pathway dynamics. HOXA10
inhibition reinforced temozolomide sensitivity independent of MGMT status and was
related to the impaired double-strand DNA breakage repair process resulting from 
the downregulation of Rad51 paralogs. Early growth response 1 (EGR1) and
phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN) were the regulatory mediators between
HOXA10 and the HR pathway. Moreover, HOXA10 inhibition selectively affected the
nuclear function of PTEN without interfering with its cytoplasmic function of
suppressing the phosphoinositide 3-kinase/Akt pathway. The mechanism of HR
pathway regulation by HOXA10 harbors another target mechanism for overcoming
temozolomide resistance in glioblastoma patients.

PMCID: PMC4104759
PMID: 25061500  [PubMed]


62. Hum Reprod. 2014 Sep;29(9):1906-11. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deu161. Epub 2014 Jun 24.

DNA methylation of HOXA10 in eutopic and ectopic endometrium.

Andersson KL(1), Bussani C(2), Fambrini M(2), Polverino V(2), Taddei GL(3),
Gemzell-Danielsson K(4), Scarselli G(2).

Author information: 
(1)ISPO Cancer Prevention and Research Institute, Via Cosimo Il Vecchio 2,
Florence 50139, Italy Department of Women's and Children's Health, Division of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Karolinska Institutet/Karolinska University Hospital,
Solna 17176, Sweden karinlouiseandersson@gmail.com. (2)Department of Biomedical, 
Experimental and Clinical Sciences, Gynaecology and Obstetrics Unit, University
of Florence, Florence 50134, Italy. (3)Department of Human Pathology and
Oncology, University of Florence, Florence 50134, Italy. (4)Department of Women's
and Children's Health, Division of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Karolinska
Institutet/Karolinska University Hospital, Solna 17176, Sweden.

STUDY QUESTION: Does the methylation status of the promoter region of the HOXA10 
gene differ in eutopic and ectopic endometrium?
SUMMARY ANSWER: The eutopic endometrium in women with endometriosis is
significantly more methylated when compared with controls.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Expression of the HOXA10 gene, which is important for
successful implantation, is reduced in women affected by endometriosis.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE AND DURATION: A pilot study was carried out including 18 women
admitted for surgery for endometriosis-related pain (cases) and 12 women admitted
for surgery because of non-endometriotic disease (control). Sample collection and
analysis were performed between November 2010 and July 2013.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Endometrial tissue (eutopic and
ectopic) underwent sodium bisulfite DNA modification, PCR amplification of two
regions of the HOXA10 promoter and pyrosequencing analysis.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: The eutopic endometrium of women with
endometriosis was significantly more methylated compared with endometrium from
the control group (sequence 1: 8.68% in cases and 6.25% in the control group: P =
0.037, sequence 2: 11.89% in cases and 9.25% in the control group: P = 0.032).
The eutopic endometrium was significantly more methylated than the ectopic tissue
in patients with endometriosis (mean difference -3.6 sequence 1: P = 0.001 and
-6.0 sequence 2: P = 0.0001).
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The study had a limited sample size and the
fertility status of the majority of patients in our study was unknown.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Our data regarding methylation state of the
ectopic tissues contribute to a better etiopathologic understanding of
endometriosis.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTERESTS: No external funding was either sought or
obtained for this study. The authors have no conflicts of interests to declare.

© The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the European
Society of Human Reproduction and Embryology. All rights reserved. For
Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.

PMID: 24963168  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2014 Nov;70(2):1363-8. doi: 10.1007/s12013-014-0065-7.

HoxA10 induces proliferation in human prostate carcinoma PC-3 cell line.

Li B(1), Cao X, Weng C, Wu Y, Fang X, Zhang X, Liu G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Guangzhou First People's Hospital, Guangzhou Medical
University, Guangzhou, 510180, China.

The objectives of this study were to examine the expression levels of Homeobox
A10 (HoxA10) in prostate cancer cells and to study the molecular mechanism of
HoxA10-mediated regulation of prostate cancer cell growth and development. We
investigated the effect of HoxA10 on cell proliferation by stably overexpressing 
or silencing HoxA10 in prostate cancer PC-3 cell line using lentiviral vectors.
Quantitative real-time PCR and western blotting analysis were used to compare the
expressions of HoxA10 in prostate cancer cell lines and normal prostate
epithelium. Cancer cell proliferation was examined by MTT assay and colony
formation assay. The levels of HoxA10 expression were significantly increased in 
prostate cancer cell lines and tissues compared to those in normal prostate
epithelium. Overexpression of HoxA10 in PC-3 cells induced significant cancer
cell proliferation, whereas silencing of HoxA10 expression by RNAi resulted in
decreased proliferation rates. HoxA10 was highly expressed in prostate cancer
cells and tissues, suggesting its functional involvement in cancer cell
proliferation. We successfully overexpressed or silenced HoxA10 in prostate
cancer PC-3 cell line and discovered that the levels of HoxA10 directly correlate
with cancer cell proliferation. These findings contribute to a better
understanding of the regulatory mechanism of HoxA10 in prostate cancer.

PMID: 24951955  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Haematologica. 2014 Sep;99(9):1465-71. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.100917. Epub
2014 Jun 20.

Potent co-operation between the NUP98-NSD1 fusion and the FLT3-ITD mutation in
acute myeloid leukemia induction.

Thanasopoulou A(1), Tzankov A(2), Schwaller J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University Children's Hospital of Basel (UKBB),
Switzerland. (2)Institute for Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Switzerland. 
(3)Department of Biomedicine, University Children's Hospital of Basel (UKBB),
Switzerland j.schwaller@unibas.ch.

The NUP98-NSD1 fusion, product of the t(5;11)(q35;p15.5) chromosomal
translocation, is one of the most prevalent genetic alterations in
cytogenetically normal pediatric acute myeloid leukemias and is associated with
poor prognosis. Co-existence of an FLT3-ITD activating mutation has been found in
more than 70% of NUP98-NSD1-positive patients. To address functional synergism,
we determined the transforming potential of retrovirally expressed NUP98-NSD1 and
FLT3-ITD in the mouse. Expression of NUP98-NSD1 provided mouse strain-dependent, 
aberrant self-renewal potential to bone marrow progenitor cells. Co-expression of
FLT3-ITD increased proliferation and maintained self-renewal in vitro.
Transplantation of immortalized progenitors co-expressing NUP98-NSD1 and FLT3-ITD
into mice resulted in acute myeloid leukemia after a short latency. In contrast, 
neither NUP98-NSD1 nor FLT3-ITD single transduced cells were able to initiate
leukemia. Interestingly, as reported for patients carrying NUP98-NSD1, an
increased Flt3-ITD to wild-type Flt3 mRNA expression ratio with increased
FLT3-signaling was associated with rapidly induced disease. In contrast, there
was no difference in the expression levels of the NUP98-NSD1 fusion or its
proposed targets HoxA5, HoxA7, HoxA9 or HoxA10 between animals with different
latencies to develop disease. Finally, leukemic cells co-expressing NUP98-NSD1
and FLT3-ITD were very sensitive to a small molecule FLT3 inhibitor, which
underlines the significance of aberrant FLT3 signaling for NUP98-NSD1-positive
leukemias and suggests new therapeutic approaches that could potentially improve 
patient outcome.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4562535
PMID: 24951466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Med Oncol. 2014 Jul;31(7):52. doi: 10.1007/s12032-014-0052-2. Epub 2014 Jun 19.

Upregulation HOXA10 homeobox gene in endometrial cancer: role in cell cycle
regulation.

Zhang L(1), Wan Y, Jiang Y, Ma J, Liu J, Tang W, Wang X, Cheng W.

Author information: 
(1)The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu,
China, feilin1915@163.com.

Homeobox genes encode a group of transcription factors that regulate embryonic
development, organ differentiation and cell proliferation. Some researchers found
that homeobox gene family could regulate the expression of cell cycle-related
factors which are involved in tumorigenesis. The aim of the present study was to 
determine whether HOXA10 gene could regulate the expression of p21 and control
the cell cycle in endometrial cancer. Real-time PCR and Western blot were used to
analyze HOXA10 and p21 gene expression in tissue samples of normal endometrium
and endometrial cancer. Upregulate and downregulate HOXA10 gene in endometrial
cancer cells by HOXA10-vector and HOXA10-siRNA, p21 mRNA and protein expression
were tested by real-time PCR and Western blot. FCM analyze the cell cycle
alteration, and cell count and EdU assay were recruited to detect cell
proliferative activity after upregulation of HOXA10. Expression of HOXA10 and p21
gene decreased in endometrial cancer, and the expression level of HOXA10 was
correlated with cancer grade. The percentage of G1 phase cells increased, and
cell proliferative activity decreased after upregulate HOXA10 expression. The
expression of p16, p27, Myc, Cyclin D1, Cyclin E, CDK2, CDK4 and CDK6 did not
alter after upregulation HOXA10. P21 gene mRNA and protein increased/decreased
after upregulation/downregulation HOXA10 expression in cancer cells. HOXA10
regulates G1 phase arrest in endometrial cancer which may be mediated by p21.

PMID: 24943991  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Food Chem Toxicol. 2014 Jul;69:244-51. doi: 10.1016/j.fct.2014.04.021. Epub 2014 
Apr 24.

Exposure of mice to benzo(a)pyrene impairs endometrial receptivity and reduces
the number of implantation sites during early pregnancy.

Zhao Y(1), Chen X(1), Liu X(1), Ding Y(1), Gao R(1), Qiu Y(1), Wang Y(1), He
J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, School of Public Health, Chongqing Medical
University, Box 197, No. 1 Yixueyuan Road, Yuzhong District, 400016 Chongqing, PR
China. (2)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, School of Public Health, Chongqing 
Medical University, Box 197, No. 1 Yixueyuan Road, Yuzhong District, 400016
Chongqing, PR China. Electronic address: hejunlin_11@aliyun.com.

Benzo(a)pyrene (BaP) is a ubiquitous environmental pollutant. Studies have
demonstrated it to be an endocrine-disrupting chemical that can cause adverse
effects on the female reproductive system. However, the effect of BaP on early
pregnancy has not been reported. We investigated the effect of BaP on endometrial
receptivity and embryo implantation. Pregnant mice were dosed with BaP at 0.2, 2 
and 20 mg/kg/day from day 1 (D1) to day 5 (D5) of gestation. Exposure to BaP
impaired the morphology of the endometrium and decreased the number of
implantation sites (p0.2=0.006, p2=0.167, p20=0.003). Levels of estrodiol
(p<0.001, for three treatment group compare with control group) and
progesterone-4 in plasma were elevated in BaP-treatment groups (p0.2<0.001,
p2<0.001, p20=0.032). Expression of estrogen receptor-a was up-regulated
(p0.2=0.002, p2=0.131, p20=0.024) whereas expression of the progesterone receptor
was down-regulated (p0.2<0.001, p2=0.064, p20=0.021). Levels of
receptivity-related genes HoxA10 (p0.2<0.001, p2=0.135, p20<0.001) and E-cadherin
(p0.2=0.002, p2=0.624, p20=0.137) were changed by BaP. These results revealed
that BaP can disrupt the balance of estrogen and progesterone, influence
expression of their receptors and downstream related genes, lead to changes in
endometrium receptivity, and reduce of the number of implantation sites.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24769007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2014 Feb 18;94(6):464-6.

[Expression change and significance of homebox gene-A10 in rat cryptorchidism].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen Y(1), Liu L(1), Huang J(1), Zhou Y(1), Yin Q(1), Ge W(1), Zhao J(1), Xian
H(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Affiliated Hospital, Nantong University,
Nantong 226001, China. (2)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Affiliated Hospital,
Nantong University, Nantong 226001, China. Email: xianhua@ntu.edu.cn.

OBJECTIVE: To explore the effects of HOXA10 gene expression in undescended and
descended testis.
METHODS: Twenty-four male Sprague Dawley rats were surgically prepared for
unilateral cryptorchidism model. Their undescended and descended testes were
removed at days 7 (infancy period, group B7) and 60 (sexual maturity period,
group B60) post-operation. And contralateral descended testis served as controls 
(group A7, group A60). The expression of HOXA10 with histologic changes in
experimental cryptorchidism were detected with one-step real-time quantitative
reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, the levels of HOXA10 gene for groups B7
and B60 decreased markedly to 0.78 ± 0.11 (P < 0.01) and 0.56 ± 0.03 (P < 0.01)
respectively.However the levels of HOXA10 gene and protein in group B60 were
significantly lower than those in group B7 (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: There is a lower expression of HOXA10 in undescended testes than in 
normally developed counterparts. And the expression of HOXA10 decreases with the 
elapsing time of cryptorchidism.

PMID: 24754995  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Genes Dev. 2014 Apr 15;28(8):858-74. doi: 10.1101/gad.233791.113.

miR-99a/100~125b tricistrons regulate hematopoietic stem and progenitor cell
homeostasis by shifting the balance between TGFß and Wnt signaling.

Emmrich S(1), Rasche M, Schöning J, Reimer C, Keihani S, Maroz A, Xie Y, Li Z,
Schambach A, Reinhardt D, Klusmann JH.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Hematology and Oncology, Hannover Medical School, Hannover 30625,
Germany;

Although regulation of stem cell homeostasis by microRNAs (miRNAs) is well
studied, it is unclear how individual miRNAs genomically encoded within an
organized polycistron can interact to induce an integrated phenotype.
miR-99a/100, let-7, and miR-125b paralogs are encoded in two tricistrons on human
chromosomes 11 and 21. They are highly expressed in hematopoietic stem cells
(HSCs) and acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL), an aggressive form of leukemia
with poor prognosis. Here, we show that miR-99a/100~125b tricistrons are
transcribed as a polycistronic message transactivated by the homeobox
transcription factor HOXA10. Integrative analysis of global gene expression
profiling, miRNA target prediction, and pathway architecture revealed that
miR-99a/100, let-7, and miR-125b functionally converge at the combinatorial block
of the transforming growth factor ß (TGFß) pathway by targeting four receptor
subunits and two SMAD signaling transducers. In addition, down-regulation of
tumor suppressor genes adenomatous polyposis coli (APC)/APC2 stabilizes active
ß-catenin and enhances Wnt signaling. By switching the balance between Wnt and
TGFß signaling, the concerted action of these tricistronic miRNAs promoted
sustained expansion of murine and human HSCs in vitro or in vivo while favoring
megakaryocytic differentiation. Hence, our study explains the high phylogenetic
conservation of the miR-99a/100~125b tricistrons controlling stem cell
homeostasis, the deregulation of which contributes to the development of AMKL.

PMCID: PMC4003278
PMID: 24736844  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Iran J Reprod Med. 2013 Dec;11(12):983-8.

Effect of intramural myomectomy on endometrial HOXA10 and HOXA11 mRNA expression 
at the time of implantation window.

Alizadeh Z(1), Faramarzi S(2), Saidijam M(3), Alizamir T(4), Esna-Ashari F(5),
Shabab N(3), Farimani Sanoee M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Endometrium and Endometriosis Research Center, Hamadan University of Medical
Sciences, Hamadan, Iran. (2)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Hamadan
University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran. (3)Research Center for Molecular
Medicine, Hamadan University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran. (4)Department of
Anatomy, School of Medicine, Hamadan University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan,
Iran. (5)Department of Epidemiology, Hamadan University of Medical Sciences,
Hamadan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: HOXA11 and HOXA10 are expressed in endometrium throughout the
menstrual cycle and show a dramatic increase during the mid-luteal phase at the
time of implantation. The expression of these genes is decreased in women with
myomas.
OBJECTIVE: To determine whether myomectomy would reverse HOXA11 and HOXA10
expression, we evaluated the transcript levels of these genes in the endometria
of patients before and after myomectomy.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Expression of HOXA11 and HOXA10 were examined
prospectively during the midluteal phase in endometrium obtained from infertile
women (n=12) with myoma before and three months after myomectomy. Endometrial
HOXA11 and HOXA10 expression were evaluated using quantitative real-time reverse 
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: Endometrial HOXA11 and HOXA10 mRNAs expression levels (normalized to
18SrRNA) were increased insignificantly in endometrium of patients after
myomectomy (p=0.7 and p=0.15 respectively).
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that the alteration in expression pattern of
these genes could not account for some aspects of fertility after myomectomy.
This article extracted from M.Sc. thesis. (Shamila Faramarzi).

PMCID: PMC3941402
PMID: 24639724  [PubMed]


70. Cell Signal. 2014 Jul;26(7):1420-6. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2014.03.002. Epub 2014
Mar 6.

MiR-135a functions as a tumor suppressor in epithelial ovarian cancer and
regulates HOXA10 expression.

Tang W(1), Jiang Y(2), Mu X(3), Xu L(4), Cheng W(5), Wang X(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China; Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Jiangsu
Province Hospital on Integration of Chinese and Western Medicine, Nanjing, China.
(2)Department of Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China. (3)Liver Transplantation Center, The First Affiliated
Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. (4)Department of
Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing,
China; Department of Gynecology and Obstetrics, Nanjing Maternity and Child
Health Care Hospital, Nanjing, China. (5)Department of Gynecology, The First
Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. Electronic
address: chengwenjundoc@163.com. (6)State Key Laboratory of Reproductive
Medicine, Institute of Toxicology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China;
Key Laboratory of Modern Toxicology of Ministry of Education, School of Public
Health, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China. Electronic address:
xrwang@njmu.edu.cn.

The activation of homeobox A10 (HOXA10) has been proved to be an important event 
in epithelial ovarian carcinogenesis, yet its regulation in epithelial ovarian
cancer (EOC) is still not fully understood. Here, we aimed to reveal the
mechanism that a predicted target miRNA regulates HOXA10 expression and the
association of its expression with progression of EOC. Here, by using
computer-assisted algorithms from PicTar, TargetScan, and miRBase, we identified 
that the predicted target miRNA of HOXA10 was miR-135a. MiR-135a expression in
EOC tissues and controls was measured with quantitative RT-PCR. The role of
miR-135a and HOXA10 in the growth and survival of several EOC cell lines was
determined with several in vitro approaches. We found that miR-135a expression
was downregulated in an EOC patient cohort. Also, patients with low miR-135a
expression had shorter overall survival and progression-free survival durations
than those with high expression. Functional analysis of three EOC-derived cell
lines (SKOV-3, HEY, and OVCAR-3) demonstrated that miR-135a directly regulated
HOXA10 expression by targeting its 3'-UTR. Inhibition of HOXA10 expression with
miR-135a mimics and HOXA10 siRNA consistently resulted in cell apoptosis with
concomitant enhancement of caspase-3, increase of p53 expression and reduction of
Bcl-2 expression, and also suppressed cell growth and adhesion. These findings
suggest that ubiquitous loss of miR-135a expression is a critical mechanism for
the overexpression of HOXA10 in EOC cells, which is implicated in epithelial
ovarian carcinogenesis. Furthermore, miR-135a may be predictive of EOC prognosis.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24607788  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. J Reprod Med. 2013 Nov-Dec;58(11-12):517-28.

Effect of embryo vitrification on postnatal mouse uterine development.

Linlin L(1), Bei X(2), Guijin Z(2), Cuilian Z(2).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medical Center of Henan Provincial People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, 
Henan, People's Republic of China. lianglinlin800617@126.com (2)Reproductive
Medical Center of Henan Provincial People's Hospital, Zhengzhou, Henan, People's 
Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether the process of vitrification affects the
development of the female Müllerian duct.
STUDY DESIGN: We examined the difference in morphology and gene expression of the
developing uteri of 30 female mice from transferred vitrified embryos and 30
female mice from transferred fresh embryos.
RESULTS: By employing histology, the data showed that there were no significant
differences between the 2 groups of the same age. With the use of reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction and Western blotting, the data showed
that there was no significant change in the expression of Wnt genes (Wnt4, Wnt5a,
Wnt7a), beta-catenin/TCF target genes, and homeobox A10 (HOXA10) gene during
uterine development in the vitrified group as compared with the control group.
CONCLUSION: These data suggest that vitrifying preimplantation embryos may have
no effects on morphology and gene expression of the uterus of offspring.

PMID: 24568047  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2014 Mar 14;445(3):622-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2014.02.057. Epub 2014 Feb 22.

Activation of matrix metalloproteinase-26 by HOXA10 promotes embryo adhesion in
vitro.

Jiang Y(1), Yan G(2), Zhang H(1), Shan H(1), Kong C(2), Yan Q(2), Xue B(1), Diao 
Z(2), Hu Y(3), Sun H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Drum Tower Clinic Medical College of Nanjing
Medical University, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu, China. (2)Reproductive Medicine
Center, The Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing University Medical School, 
Nanjing 210008, Jiangsu, China. (3)Reproductive Medicine Center, Drum Tower
Clinic Medical College of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, Jiangsu,
China. Electronic address: yali_hu@hotmail.com. (4)Reproductive Medicine Center, 
Drum Tower Clinic Medical College of Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing 210029, 
Jiangsu, China. Electronic address: stevensunz@163.com.

Successful embryonic implantation requires an effective maternal-embryonic
molecular dialogue. However, the detailed mechanisms of epithelial-embryo
adhesion remain poorly understood. Here, we report that matrix
metalloproteinase-26 (MMP-26) is a novel downstream target gene of homeobox a 10 
(HOXA10) in human endometrial cells. HOXA10 binds directly to a conserved TTAT
unit (-442 to -439) located within the 5' regulatory region of the MMP-26 gene
and regulates the expression and secretion of MMP-26 in a concentration-dependent
manner. Moreover, the adenovirus-mediated overexpression of MMP-26 in Ishikawa
cells markedly increased BeWo spheroid adhesion. An antibody blocking assay
further demonstrated that the promotion of BeWo spheroid adhesion by HOXA10 and
MMP-26 was significantly inhibited by pre-treatment with a specific antibody
against MMP-26. These results demonstrate that the HOXA10-mediated expression of 
MMP-26 promotes embryo adhesion during the process of embryonic implantation.

Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24565841  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Hum Reprod. 2014 Apr;29(4):781-90. doi: 10.1093/humrep/deu004. Epub 2014 Feb 18.

Regulation of endometrial receptivity by the highly expressed HOXA9, HOXA11 and
HOXD10 HOX-class homeobox genes.

Xu B(1), Geerts D, Bu Z, Ai J, Jin L, Li Y, Zhang H, Zhu G.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medicine College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 JieFang Avenue, Wuhan 430030,
People's Republic of China.

STUDY QUESTION: Are other HOX genes, in addition to HOXA10, involved in
endometrial receptivity?
SUMMARY ANSWER: The highly expressed HOXA9, HOXA11 and HOXD10 genes also appear
to be involved in endometrial receptivity.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Within the HOX family of homeobox transcription factor
genes are the leading candidates for the regulation of embryonic implantation. A 
crucial role of HOXA10 in endometrial receptivity has been well established.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: To identify HOX candidate genes, we performed data 
mining on all 39 human HOX genes in the 'Human body index' gene expression
database of normal human tissue. The temporal and spatial expression pattern of
four highly expressed HOX genes in the human endometrium was determined. To
further investigate the function of these Hox genes, we used a robust in vivo
mouse model in which we blocked maternal Hox gene expression.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING AND METHODS: Analysis of a gene expression
profile set in the public domain consisting of 504 samples representing 95
different normal human tissues, showed that in addition to HOXA10, also HOXA9,
HOXA11, HOXB6 and HOXD10 mRNA showed increased expression in the human
endometrium (16 samples). The temporal and spatial expression pattern of these
four HOX genes throughout the menstrual cycle was determined in the endometrium
from 27 female patients eligible for IVF-embryo transfer with a normal cycle by
quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), western blot and immunohistochemistry. The 
role of maternal Hoxa9, Hoxa11 and Hoxd10 was assessed in a mouse implantation
model by expression knockdown using RNA interference. Forty mice were transfected
with Hoxa9-, Hoxa11- or Hoxd10-specific small hairpin RNA (shRNA) constructs or a
vector control by injection into the uterine horn at Day 2 after vaginal plug
detection (Day 1) (160 mice in total). The effects were examined by qRT-PCR and
western blot at Day 4 and litter sizes counted at Day 9 of pregnancy.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: HOXA10, HOXA9, HOXA11 and HOXD10 all showed 
increased expression during the mid-secretory phase of the menstrual cycle (P <
0.01). Knockdown of Hoxa9, Hoxa11 and Hoxd10 in the murine uterus resulted in
significantly reduced average implantation rates (P < 0.01) and, with regard to
four Hox target genes, also correlated with a significantly increased empty
spiracles homolog 2 (Emx2) and insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1
(Igfbp1), and decreased integrin ß3 (Itgb3) and leukemia inhibitory factor (Lif),
expression (P < 0.01).
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: Menstrual cycle stage was not confirmed by
serum hormone analysis. We verified the absence of significant differences in
stage-specific expression of the reference genes used in our study (ACTB/Actb and
GAPDH/Gapdh) and therefore possible limitations of this approach were minimized. 
In addition, the translatability of our data from a mouse model to patients needs
to be investigated further.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: We provide evidence that three other HOX
genes in addition to HOXA10 are involved in endometrial receptivity, and that
part of their function is asserted through several known HOX target genes,
suggesting the presence of a central HOX signal transduction pathway.

PMID: 24549215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Reprod Sci. 2014 Feb 14;21(7):892-897. [Epub ahead of print]

HOXA10 Regulates Expression of Cytokeratin 15 in Endometrial Epithelial
Cytoskeletal Remodeling.

Kallen AN(1), Haines K(1), Taylor HS(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT, USA. (2)Department of Obstetrics,
Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of Medicine, New
Haven, CT, USA hugh.taylor@yale.edu.

OBJECTIVE: The mammalian cytoskeleton is composed in part from keratin filaments 
which form a complex, highly dynamic intracellular network. We investigate the
expression of cytokeratin 15 (CK15) in human endometrium and its regulation by
HOXA10 in the human endometrial cell lines.
METHODS: Endometrial biopsies from throughout the menstrual cycle (N = 32) were
evaluated for CK15 protein expression by immunohistochemistry using a mouse
monoclonal antibody. The human endometrial epithelial cell line (Ishikawa) was
transfected with pcDNA/HOXA10. Total RNA was isolated and quantitative real-time 
polymerase chain reaction was performed to determine expression levels of CK15.
RESULTS: In the peri-implantation window (days 16 through 23) CK15 protein
expression in glandular epithelium of human endometrium decreased to 50% of
proliferative phase expression levels. Expression of CK15 messenger RNA decreased
by 99% (P < .05) after pcDNA/HOXA10 transfection of Ishikawa cells. The CK15
expression corresponded to the time of maximal secretory epithelial remodeling.
CONCLUSION: Gene expression of CK15 is decreased in a HOXA10-dependent fashion in
human endometrial epithelial cells. Expression decreases in the peri-implantation
period concurrent with maximal HOXA10 expression. Dramatic changes in cellular
architecture are necessary to achieve the secretory changes in the endometrial
epithelium that bring about the implantation window. Alterations in CK15 likely
facilitate these cytoskeletal changes, ultimately promoting endometrial
receptivity.

© The Author(s) 2014.

PMCID: PMC4107567
PMID: 24532216  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


75. Reprod Sci. 2014 Feb 3;21(7):869-882. [Epub ahead of print]

Possible Loss of GABAergic Inhibition in Mice With Induced Adenomyosis and
Treatment With Epigallocatechin-3-Gallate Attenuates the Loss With Improved
Hyperalgesia.

Chen Y(1), Zhu B(1), Zhang H(1), Ding D(2), Liu X(2), Guo SW(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The People's Hospital, Wenzhou,
Zhejiang, China. (2)Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China. 
(3)Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, China hoxa10@gmail.com.

We have previously reported that induction of adenomyosis in mice results in
progressive hyperalgesia, uterine hyperactivity, and elevated plasma
corticosterone levels and that epigallocatechin-3-gallate (EGCG) treatment dose
dependently suppressed myometrial infiltration and improved generalized
hyperalgesia. In this study, we examined whether adenomyosis induced in mice
results in the loss of GABAergic inhibition as manifested by the diminished
glutamate decarboxylase (GAD) 65-expressing neurons in the brainstem nucleus
raphe magnus (NRM) that could correlate with heightened hyperalgesia. We also
evaluated whether EGCG treatment would reverse these changes and also improve the
expression of some proteins known to be involved in adenomyosis. Adenomyosis was 
induced in 28 female ICR mice and additional 12 were used as blank controls, as
reported previously. At the 16th week, all mice with induced adenomyosis received
low- or high-dose EGCG treatment or untreated. Mice without adenomyosis received 
no treatment. After 3 weeks of treatment, their uterine horns and brains were
harvested. The right uterine horn was used for immunohistochemistry analysis and 
for counting the number of macrophages infiltrating into the ectopic endometrium.
The brainstem NRM sections were subjected to immunofluorescence staining for
GAD65. We found that mice with induced adenomyosis had significantly diminished
GAD65-expressing neurons, concomitant with heightened hyperalgesia. Treatment
with EGCG increased these neurons in conjunction with improved hyperalgesia,
reduced the expression of p-p65, cycloxygenase 2, oxytocin receptor, collagen I
and IV, and transient receptor potential vanilloid type 1 in ectopic endometrium 
or myometrium, reduced the number of macrophages infiltrating into the ectopic
endometrium while elevated the expression of progesterone receptor isoform B.
Thus, adenomyosis-induced pain resembles neuropathic pain in that there is a
remarkable central plasticity.

© The Author(s) 2013.

PMCID: PMC4107564
PMID: 24492488  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


76. Dig Dis Sci. 2014 Jul;59(7):1442-51. doi: 10.1007/s10620-014-3033-6. Epub 2014
Jan 25.

HOXA10 promotes cell invasion and MMP-3 expression via TGFß2-mediated activation 
of the p38 MAPK pathway in pancreatic cancer cells.

Cui XP(1), Qin CK, Zhang ZH, Su ZX, Liu X, Wang SK, Tian XS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hepatobiliary Surgery, Provincial Hospital Affiliated to
Shandong University, 324 Jing Wu Road, Jinan, 250021, China, cuixianp@163.com.

BACKGROUND: HOXA10 is closely related to tumor progression in many human cancers.
However, the role of HOXA10 in pancreatic cancer remains unclear. The aim of this
study was to determine the involvement of HOXA10 in pancreatic cancer cell
invasion and migration.
METHODS: The effect of HOXA10 on the invasion and migration of pancreatic cancer 
cells was assessed by invasion and migration assays. The protein of transforming 
growth factor beta-2 (TGFß2) was neutralized by TGFß2 blocking antibody. The
activation of p38 was inhibited by SB239063.
RESULTS: HOXA10 could promote the invasion and migration of pancreatic cancer
cells. Knockdown of HOXA10 decreased the expressions of TGFß2 and matrix
metallopeptidase-3 (MMP-3) and suppressed the activation of p38. Conversely,
overexpression of HOXA10 increased the levels of TGFß2 and MMP-3. Further
experiments identified that TGFß2 contributed to the HOXA10-promoted invasion and
migration and regulated MMP-3 expression and p38 activation. Additionally,
inhibition of p38 suppressed cell invasion and MMP-3 expression in pancreatic
cancer cells.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXA10 promotes cell invasion and MMP-3 expression of pancreatic
cancer cells via TGFß2-p38 MAPK pathway. Thus, HOXA10 could be a useful target
for the treatment of pancreatic cancer.

PMID: 24464212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. J Obstet Gynaecol. 2014 Feb;34(2):146-52. doi: 10.3109/01443615.2013.832735.

Alteration of endometrial receptivity in rats with ovarian hyperstimulation
syndrome.

Xu CK(1), Tang SB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, First Affiliated Hospital.

It is unclear if the higher pregnancy rate in patients who experience ovarian
hyperstimulation syndrome (OHSS) indicates that OHSS is favourable for embryo
implantation, or if patients should be maintained in a hyperstimulation state in 
order to increase the success rate of embryo transplantation. We developed an
animal model to determine the endometrial receptivity in rats with OHSS.
Endometrial mRNA levels of ER, PR, HOXA10 and LIF were determined by
semi-quantitative PCR and ER, PR, HOXA10, LIF and integrin a(v) ß(3) protein
levels were determined by Western blotting. Development of pinopodes in the
hyperstimulation group was slightly delayed, while in the regular stimulation
group, development was significantly inhibited. mRNA transcription in the regular
stimulation group was lower, while transcription in the hyperstimulation group
was not different from controls. Protein expressions were lowest in the regular
stimulation. We conclude that OHSS is associated with favourable endometrial
receptivity, similar to that seen in a normal cycle, and receptivity that is
increased relative to that seen with a routine stimulation protocol.

PMID: 24456435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Fertil Steril. 2014 Mar;101(3):740-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2013.11.033. Epub
2014 Jan 2.

Overexpression of lysine-specific demethylase 1 in ovarian endometriomas and its 
inhibition reduces cellular proliferation, cell cycle progression, and
invasiveness.

Ding D(1), Liu X(1), Guo SW(2).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
People's Republic of China. (2)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan
University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China. Electronic address:
hoxa10@gmail.com.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate whether lysine-specific demethylase 1 (LSD1) is
aberrantly expressed in endometriomas and whether treatment with tranylcypromine,
an LSD1 inhibitor, has any effect on cell viability, cell cycle, and
invasiveness.
DESIGN: Laboratory study using human tissues.
SETTING: Academic hospital.
PATIENT(S): Forty-two ectopic endometrial tissue samples, their homologue eutopic
endometrial tissue samples, and 70 control endometrial tissue samples.
INTERVENTION(S): Immunohistochemistry analysis of LSD1 of all human tissue
samples, and Western blot analysis, quantitative real-time reverse-transcription 
polymerase chain reaction analysis, cell viability assay, cell cycle analysis,
and invasion assay of eutopic and ectopic endometriotic stromal cells and normal 
endometrial stromal cells.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Immunostaining levels of LSD1, gene and protein
expression levels, cell viability, cell cycles, and invasiveness.
RESULT(S): The expression of the LSD1 gene and protein in endometriosis was
elevated. Treatment of endometriotic stromal cells with tranylcypromine
statistically significantly reduced the cellular proliferation, cell cycle
progression, and invasiveness.
CONCLUSION(S): Because DNA and histones are intimately intertwined and work in
concert in transcription regulation, conceivably histone demethylation activity
of LSD1 could be wide ranging. The inhibition of LSD1 activity by tranylcypromine
and the resultant inhibition of proliferation, cell cycle progression, and
invasiveness suggest that LSD1 may be a candidate therapeutic target for
endometriosis.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24388204  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Vitam Horm. 2014;94:253-75. doi: 10.1016/B978-0-12-800095-3.00010-9.

Long-lasting effects of neonatal bisphenol A exposure on the implantation
process.

Varayoud J(1), Ramos JG(1), Muñoz-de-Toro M(1), Luque EH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Endocrinología y Tumores Hormonodependientes, School of
Biochemistry and Biological Sciences, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Santa Fe,
Argentina. (2)Laboratorio de Endocrinología y Tumores Hormonodependientes, School
of Biochemistry and Biological Sciences, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Santa 
Fe, Argentina. Electronic address: eluque@fbcb.unl.edu.ar.

Successful implantation is the result of complex molecular interactions between
the hormonally primed uterus and a mature blastocyst. This very carefully
synchronized interplay of hormonal signals and feedback loops is potentially
vulnerable to chemicals such as endocrine disruptors that may disrupt endocrine
signaling. Bisphenol A (BPA) is one of the highest-volume chemicals produced
worldwide. This chapter describes the effects of brief postnatal exposure to BPA 
on female reproductive performance and specifically on the uterine adaptations
during the preimplantation period. We propose that an early alteration in Hoxa10 
gene expression affects the functional differentiation of the preimplantation
uterus as part of an altered endocrine signal transduction pathway. These
molecular alterations could explain, at least in part, the adverse effects of BPA
on uterine implantation. Exposure to endocrine disruptors, such as BPA, could
contribute to the impaired female fertility noted over the past decades.

© 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24388194  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Int J Hematol. 2014 Jan;99(1):21-31. doi: 10.1007/s12185-013-1466-x. Epub 2013
Nov 21.

Bromodomain-PHD finger protein 1 is critical for leukemogenesis associated with
MOZ-TIF2 fusion.

Shima H(1), Yamagata K, Aikawa Y, Shino M, Koseki H, Shimada H, Kitabayashi I.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematological Malignancy, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo, 104-0045, Japan.

Chromosomal translocations that involve the monocytic leukemia zinc finger (MOZ) 
gene are typically associated with human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and often
predict a poor prognosis. Overexpression of HOXA9, HOXA10, and MEIS1 was observed
in AML patients with MOZ fusions. To assess the functional role of HOX
upregulation in leukemogenesis by MOZ-TIF2, we focused on bromodomain-PHD finger 
protein 1 (BRPF1), a component of the MOZ complex that carries out histone
acetylation for generating and maintaining proper epigenetic programs in
hematopoietic cells. Immunoprecipitation analysis showed that MOZ-TIF2 forms a
stable complex with BRPF1, and chromatin immunoprecipitation analysis showed that
MOZ-TIF2 and BRPF1 interact with HOX genes in MOZ-TIF2-induced AML cells.
Depletion of BRPF1 decreased the MOZ localization on HOX genes, resulting in loss
of transformation ability induced by MOZ-TIF2. Furthermore, mutant MOZ-TIF2
engineered to lack histone acetyltransferase activity was incapable of
deregulating HOX genes as well as initiating leukemia. These data indicate that
MOZ-TIF2/BRPF1 complex upregulates HOX genes mediated by MOZ-dependent histone
acetylation, leading to the development of leukemia. We suggest that activation
of BRPF1/HOX pathway through MOZ HAT activity is critical for MOZ-TIF2 to induce 
AML.

PMID: 24258712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. World J Gastroenterol. 2013 Nov 7;19(41):7078-88. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v19.i41.7078.

Overexpression of miR-196b and HOXA10 characterize a poor-prognosis gastric
cancer subtype.

Lim JY(1), Yoon SO, Seol SY, Hong SW, Kim JW, Choi SH, Lee JS, Cho JY.

Author information: 
(1)Jae Yun Lim, So-Young Seol, Jae Yong Cho, Department of Medical Oncology,
Gangnam Severance Cancer Hospital, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul
135-720, South Korea.

AIM: To identify molecular biologic differences between two gastric
adenocarcinoma subgroups presenting different prognoses through the analysis of
microRNA and protein expression.
METHODS: Array technologies were used to generate 1146 microRNAs and 124 proteins
expression profiles of samples from 60 patients with gastric cancer. For the
integrative analysis, we used established mRNA expression data published in our
previous study. Whole mRNA expression levels were acquired from microarray data
for 60 identical gastric cancer patients. Two gastric adenocarcinoma subgroups
with distinct mRNA expression profiles presented distinctly different prognoses. 
MicroRNA and protein expression patterns were compared between gastric cancer
tissue and normal gastric tissue and between two different prognostic groups.
Aberrantly expressed microRNA, associated mRNA, and protein in patients with
poor-prognosis gastric cancer were validated by quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction and immunochemistry in independent
patients.
RESULTS: We obtained the expression data of 1146 microRNAs and 124 cancer-related
proteins. Four microRNAs were aberrantly expressed in the two prognostic groups
and in cancer vs non-cancer tissues (P < 0.05). In the poor-prognosis group,
miR-196b, miR-135b, and miR-93 were up-regulated and miR-29c* was down-regulated.
miR-196b expression positively correlated with Homeobox A10 (HOXA10) expression
(r = 0.726, P < 0.001), which was significantly increased in poor-prognosis
patients (P < 0.001). Comparing gastric cancer with non-cancer tissues, 46/124
proteins showed differential expression (P < 0.05); COX2 (P < 0.001) and cyclin
B1 (P = 0.017) were clearly over-expressed in the poor-prognosis group.
CONCLUSION: Co-activation of miR-196b and HOXA10 characterized a poor-prognosis
subgroup of patients with gastric cancer. Elucidation of the biologic function of
miR-196b and HOXA10 is warranted.

PMCID: PMC3819543
PMID: 24222951  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. PLoS One. 2013 Oct 23;8(10):e78446. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0078446.
eCollection 2013.

Excessive intrauterine fluid cause aberrant implantation and pregnancy outcome in
mice.

Lu S(1), Peng H, Zhang H, Zhang L, Cao Q, Li R, Zhang Y, Yan L, Duan E, Qiao J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Peking University Third Hospital,
Beijing, China.

The normal intrauterine fluid environment is essential for embryo implantation.
In hydrosalpinx patients, the implantation and pregnancy rates are markedly
decreased after IVF-embryo transfer, while salpingectomy could significantly
improve the pregnancy rates. The leakage of hydrosalpinx fluid into the
endometrial cavity was supposed to be the major cause for impaired fertility.
However, the underlying mechanisms of hydrosalpinx fluids on implantation and
ongoing pregnancy were not fully understood and remain controversial regarding
its toxicity. In present study, by infusing different volume of non-toxic fluid
(0.9% saline) into uterine lumen before embryo implantation in mice (Day4 08:30),
we found that while the embryos were not "flushed out" from the uteri, the timing
of implantation was deferred and normal intrauterine distribution (embryo
spacing) was disrupted. The abnormal implantation at early pregnancy further lead
to embryo growth retardation, miscarriage and increased pregnancy loss, which is 
similar to the adverse effects observed in hydrosalpinx patients undergoing
IVF-ET. We further examined uterine receptivity related gene expression reported 
to be involved in human hydrosalpinx (Lif, Hoxa10, Integrin a(v) and ß(3)). The
results showed that expression of integrin a(v) and ß(3) were increased in the
fluid infused mouse uteri, implicating a compensatory effect to cope with the
excessive fluid environment. Our data suggested that the adverse effects of
excessive non-toxic luminal fluid on pregnancy are primarily due to the
mechanical interference for normal timing and location of embryo apposition,
which might be the major cause of decreased implantation rate in IVF-ET patients 
with hydrosalpinx.

PMCID: PMC3806840
PMID: 24194934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Metabolism. 2014 Jan;63(1):32-41. doi: 10.1016/j.metabol.2013.09.012. Epub 2013
Oct 14.

Vitamin D in endometriosis: a causative or confounding factor?

Sayegh L(1), Fuleihan Gel-H, Nassar AH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, American University of Beirut Medical
Center, Beirut, Lebanon.

OBJECTIVE: The aim of this paper is to review the evidence from studies that
evaluated the relationship between vitamin D and endometriosis.
DESIGN: Comprehensive review.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Systematic literature search in Medline for relevant
publications from 1946 until June 2013.
RESULTS: Endometriosis risk may be influenced by dietary vitamin D intake and
plasma hydroxyvitamin D concentration. Vitamin D receptor and vitamin D
metabolizing enzymes, 24-hydroxylase and 1-a hydroxylase, are found in the normal
cycling endometrium and also in the eutopic and ectopic endometrium of women with
endometriosis. The endometrium is a target of 1, 25 dihydroxyvitamin D actions
through regulation of specific genes and via immunomodulation. The endometrium in
endometriosis expresses dysregulation of some vitamin D enzymes and receptors. If
vitamin D and its metabolites are implicated in endometriosis-associated
infertility, it is likely through interference with HOXA10 gene expression. The
Gc2 phenotype of vitamin D binding protein is prevalent in women with
endometriosis and may be implicated in its pathogenesis. In a mouse model,
Elocalcitol, a VDR-agonist was shown to reduce the development of endometriotic
lesions and recurrence.
CONCLUSION: A biological plausibility for a role of vitamin D, as an
immunomodulator and anti-inflammatory agent, in the pathogenesis and treatment of
endometriosis is suggested in this article, but is difficult to illustrate due to
sparse evidence from human studies limited primarily to case-control studies. A
significant knowledge gap precludes the establishment of a clear cause-effect
relationship. The intriguing leads presented herein need to be investigated
further with placebo-controlled supplementation trials.

© 2013.

PMID: 24135500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Fertil Steril. 2014 Jan;101(1):183-190.e4. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2013.08.050.
Epub 2013 Oct 7.

An overview of the current status of clinical trials on endometriosis: issues and
concerns.

Guo SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, and Department of Biochemistry
and Molecular Biology, Shanghai College of Medicine, Fudan University, Shanghai, 
People's Republic of China. Electronic address: hoxa10@gmail.com.

Comment in
    Fertil Steril. 2014 Jan;101(1):45-6.

OBJECTIVE: To examine and compare differences, if any, between industry- and
nonindustry-sponsored clinical trials on endometriosis and to evaluate the effect
of prior published positive preclinical results, or lack thereof, on trial
status.
DESIGN: Cross-sectional study of clinical trials on endometriosis that evaluate
drugs/biologicals registered at ClinicalTrials.gov as of July 3, 2013.
SETTING: University-affiliated hospital.
PATIENT(S): None.
INTERVENTION(S): None.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Trial status, size, phase, and duration; use of
comparator groups; drug classes, number of arms, targeting conditions; and
presence or absence of prior positive preclinical results before the launch of
the trial.
RESULT(S): Eighty trials were identified. The trials sponsored by industry and
non-industry have distinct features, differing in trial status, phase,
comparator, drug classes, number of arms, trial size, and duration. The phase
II/III trials are predominantly industry supported, but these trials frequently
use placebo as the comparator. Trials launched without prior published
preclinical results do not seem to fare well, although the presence of such
studies is no guarantee for success.
CONCLUSION(S): Questions as to whether the drug on trial is truly superior to the
best available drug or of its cost-benefit profile are overlooked in most cases. 
There seems to be a deluge of "me-too" drugs with equivocal superiority over
existing drugs and cost-benefit profiles. Because clinical trials are
time-consuming, no blockbuster drug for endometriosis seems to be on the horizon 
yet.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24112527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. J Biol Chem. 2013 Nov 8;288(45):32490-505. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.496109. Epub
2013 Oct 2.

The leukemia-associated Mll-Ell oncoprotein induces fibroblast growth factor 2
(Fgf2)-dependent cytokine hypersensitivity in myeloid progenitor cells.

Shah CA(1), Bei L, Wang H, Platanias LC, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)From The Feinberg School of Medicine and Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer 
Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611 and.

The subset of acute myeloid leukemias (AML) with chromosomal translocations
involving the MLL gene have a poor prognosis (referred to as 11q23-AML). The MLL 
fusion proteins that are expressed in 11q23-AML facilitate transcription of a set
of HOX genes, including HOXA9 and HOXA10. Because Hox proteins are transcription 
factors, this suggests the possibility that Hox target genes mediate the adverse 
effects of MLL fusion proteins in leukemia. Identifying such Hox target genes
might provide insights to the pathogenesis and treatment of 11q23-AML. In the
current study we found that Mll-Ell (an MLL fusion protein) induced
transcriptional activation of the FGF2 gene in a HoxA9- and HoxA10-dependent
manner. FGF2 encodes fibroblast growth factor 2 (also referred to as basic
fibroblast growth factor). Fgf2 influences proliferation and survival of
hematopoietic stem cells and myeloid progenitor cells, and increased
Fgf2-expression has been described in AMLs. We determined that expression of
Mll-Ell in myeloid progenitor cells resulted in autocrine production of Fgf2 and 
Fgf2-dependent cytokine hypersensitivity. Therefore, our results implicated
increased Fgf2 expression in progenitor proliferation and expansion in 11q23-AML.
Because small molecule inhibitors of Fgf-receptors are in human clinical trials, 
this suggested a potential therapeutic approach to this treatment refractory
leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3820883
PMID: 24089521  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Biochim Biophys Acta. 2013 Dec;1833(12):3218-27. doi:
10.1016/j.bbamcr.2013.09.012. Epub 2013 Sep 27.

Aldehyde dehydrogenase-1a1 induces oncogene suppressor genes in B cell
populations.

Yasmeen R(1), Meyers JM, Alvarez CE, Thomas JL, Bonnegarde-Bernard A, Alder H,
Papenfuss TL, Benson DM Jr, Boyaka PN, Ziouzenkova O.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Sciences, The Ohio State University, Columbus, OH 43210,
USA.

The deregulation of B cell differentiation has been shown to contribute to
autoimmune disorders, hematological cancers, and aging. We provide evidence that 
the retinoic acid-producing enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase 1a1 (Aldh1a1) is an
oncogene suppressor in specific splenic IgG1(+)/CD19(-) and IgG1(+)/CD19(+) B
cell populations. Aldh1a1 regulated transcription factors during B cell
differentiation in a sequential manner: 1) retinoic acid receptor alpha (Rara) in
IgG1(+)/CD19(-) and 2) zinc finger protein Zfp423 and peroxisome
proliferator-activated receptor gamma (Pparg) in IgG1(+)/CD19(+) splenocytes. In 
Aldh1a1(-/-) mice, splenic IgG1(+)/CD19(-) and IgG1(+)/CD19(+) B cells acquired
expression of proto-oncogenic genes c-Fos, c-Jun, and Hoxa10 that resulted in
splenomegaly. Human multiple myeloma B cell lines also lack Aldh1a1 expression;
however, ectopic Aldh1a1 expression rescued Rara and Znf423 expressions in these 
cells. Our data highlight a mechanism by which an enzyme involved in vitamin A
metabolism can improve B cell resistance to oncogenesis.

© 2013.

PMCID: PMC3853404
PMID: 24080087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Mol Biol Rep. 2013 Dec;40(12):6811-9. doi: 10.1007/s11033-013-2798-6. Epub 2013
Sep 22.

MicroRNA-142-3p inhibits cell proliferation in human acute lymphoblastic leukemia
by targeting the MLL-AF4 oncogene.

Dou L(1), Li J, Zheng D, Li Y, Gao X, Xu C, Gao L, Wang L, Yu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, Chinese PLA General Hospital, Fuxing Road 28th,
Beijing, 100853, China.

The mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL)-AF4 fusion protein encoded by the chromosomal
translocation t(4;11) predicts a poorer prognosis in acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) than in other MLL-associated leukemias. However, the detailed mechanism
underlying regulation of MLL-AF4 expression remains largely unknown. In this
study, we showed that microRNA (miR)-142-3p was significantly downregulated in
ALL patients expressing MLL-AF4. Upregulation of miR-142-3p decreased MLL-AF4
expression in the RS4;11 leukemic cell line, which suggests that MLL-AF4 is a
direct target of miR-142-3p. Ectopic expression of miR-142-3p remarkably
suppressed cell proliferation and induced apoptosis in RS4;11 cells expressing
the MLL-AF4 fusion protein. We also found that exogenous expression of miR-142-3p
strongly reduced the expression of MLL-AF4 target genes such as homeobox A
(HOXA)9, HOXA7, and HOXA10 in RS4;11 cells. Taken together, our results indicate 
that miR-142-3p functions as a growth suppressor in MLL-AF4(+) ALL, and its
suppressive effects are mediated primarily through repression of MLL-AF4
expression.

PMID: 24057258  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Steroid Biochem Mol Biol. 2013 Nov;138:435-44. doi:
10.1016/j.jsbmb.2013.09.006. Epub 2013 Sep 18.

HOXA10 mRNA expression and promoter DNA methylation in female pig offspring after
in utero estradiol-17ß exposure.

Pistek VL(1), Fürst RW, Kliem H, Bauersachs S, Meyer HH, Ulbrich SE.

Author information: 
(1)Physiology Weihenstephan, Technische Universität München, Weihenstephaner Berg
3, 85354 Freising, Germany; Z I E L PhD Graduate School 'Nutritional Adaptation
and Epigenetic Mechanisms', Technische Universität München, Freising, Germany.
Electronic address: pistek@tum.de.

Early exposure to environmental estrogens may exert lasting impacts on health. In
rodents, homeobox A10 (HOXA10) was demonstrated to be a target of early endocrine
disruption, as indicated by persistent changes in uterine HOXA10 expression and
promoter DNA methylation in the offspring. This study aimed at analyzing
long-term effects of estradiol-17ß on porcine uterine HOXA10. Therefore,
offspring were exposed in utero to low (0.05 and 10µg/kg body weight/day) and
high (1000µg/kg body weight/day) doses, respectively. We, furthermore,
investigated whether promoter DNA methylation was generally involved in
regulating HOXA10 expression. Unexpectedly, the maternal estrogen exposure did
not distinctly impact HOXA10 expression and promoter DNA methylation in either
pre- or postpubertal offspring. Although differential HOXA10 expression was
observed in endometrial tissue during the estrous cycle and the pre-implantation 
period, no concurrent substantial changes occurred regarding promoter DNA
methylation. However, by comparing several tissues displaying larger differences 
in transcriptional abundance, HOXA10 expression correlated with promoter DNA
methylation in prepubertal, but not postpubertal, gilts. Thus, promoter DNA
methylation could affect gene expression in pigs, depending on their stage of
development. Clearly, early estrogen exposure exerted other effects in pigs as
known from studies in rodents. This may be due to endocrine differences as well
as to species-specific peculiarities of tissue sensitivity to estradiol-17ß
during critical windows of development.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 24056088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Nov;8(5):1373-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1686. Epub 2013 Sep 17.

Characterization of amplification patterns and target genes on the short arm of
chromosome 7 in early-stage lung adenocarcinoma.

Kang JU(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, Korea Nazarene University,
Cheonan-si, Chungcheongnam-do 330-718, Republic of Korea.

Chromosomal alterations are a predominant genomic force contributing to the
development of lung adenocarcinoma (ADC). High density genomic arrays were
conducted to identify critical genetic landmarks that may be important mediators 
in the formation or progression of early-stage ADC. In this study, the most
noteworthy and consistent observation was a copy number gain on the short arm of 
chromosome 7, which was detected in 85.7% (12/14) of cases. Notably, three
distinct regions of amplification were identified between the 7p22.3 and q11.2
regions in 28.6% (4/14) of cases; at a size of 4.1 Mbp (7p22.3-p21.1), 2.6 Mbp
(7p15.2-p14.1) and 1.5 Mbp (7p12.3-p11.2). Variations of the 7p11.2 locus that
encodes EGFR are known to be oncogenic. Furthermore, potential target genes were 
identified that were previously not assumed to be involved in the pathogenesis of
ADC, including CALM1P2 (7p11.2), HOXA4, HOXA5, HOXA6, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10,
HOXA11 and HOXA13 (7p15.2) and LOC442586, LOC442589, LOC442282, FAM20C and
LOC442651 (7p22.3). The present study determined critical regions on the 7p arm
of chromosome 7, which were implicated in ADC. The pattern of rearrangements on
the 7p arm may be a consequence of the high density of potential targets and the 
identified genes at the 7p regions may aid in the development of therapeutic
targets for ADC.

PMID: 24045431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Nov;98(11):4417-28. doi: 10.1210/jc.2013-1429. Epub
2013 Sep 13.

PCAF impairs endometrial receptivity and embryo implantation by down-regulating
ß3-integrin expression via HOXA10 acetylation.

Zhu LH(1), Sun LH, Hu YL, Jiang Y, Liu HY, Shen XY, Jin XY, Zhen X, Sun HX, Yan
GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Affiliated Drum Tower Hospital of Nanjing
University Medical School, Nanjing 210008, People's Republic of China.
yanguijun55@163.com.

BACKGROUND: Homeobox A10 (HOXA10), a key transcription factor, plays a critical
role in endometrial receptivity by regulating the expression of downstream target
genes, such as ß3-integrin (ITGB3), but little is understood about the mechanisms
of the posttranslational modification of HOXA10 during embryo implantation.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to assess the effect of HOXA10 acetylation
by p300/CREB-binding protein-associated factor (PCAF) in the embryo implantation 
process.
METHODS: The association of HOXA10 with PCAF was detected by
coimmunoprecipitation, Western blotting, and confocal immunofluorescent assays. A
luciferase reporter assay, Western blotting, quantitative real-time PCR, and
chromatin immunoprecipitation techniques were used to determine the effect of
PCAF on HOXA10 protein stability and the HOXA10-mediated regulation of ITGB3
expression. HOXA10-PCAF association on embryo implantation was evaluated using a 
BeWo spheroid attachment assay. PCAF expression in the eutopic endometrium of
women with endometriosis and fertile controls was measured by Western blotting
technique.
RESULTS: PCAF was identified as an HOXA10-interacting protein and inhibited
HOXA10-mediated ITGB3 transcription via acetylating HOXA10 at K338 and K339.
Overexpressing or knocking down PCAF in Ishikawa cells showed that PCAF not only 
down-regulated HOXA10-mediated ITGB3 protein expression but also diminished
HOXA10-mediated embryo adhesiveness by acetylating HOXA10 (P < .05). Furthermore,
we found aberrantly high PCAF expression in the eutopic endometrium of women with
a diagnosis of endometriosis compared with the fertile controls (P < .05).
CONCLUSIONS: These observations demonstrate that 1) HOXA10 associates with and is
acetylated by PCAF at lysines K338 and K339 in Ishikawa cells and 2) HOXA10-PCAF 
association impairs embryo implantation by inhibiting ITGB3 protein expression in
endometrial epithelial cells.

PMID: 24037888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand. 2013 Nov;92(11):1331-4. doi: 10.1111/aogs.12236. Epub 
2013 Sep 11.

Hypermethylation of HOXA10 gene in mid-luteal endometrium from women with ovarian
endometriomas.

Fambrini M(1), Sorbi F, Bussani C, Cioni R, Sisti G, Andersson KL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical, Experimental and Clinical Sciences, Gynecology and
Obstetrics Unit, University of Florence, Florence, Italy.

A decrease in HOXA10 gene expression in eutopic mid-secretory endometrium has
been found in women with endometriosis-associated infertility. Promoter
hypermethylation of HOXA10 is thought to be the leading mechanism for epigenetic 
gene regulation in patients with endometriosis. In our series we documented
significantly higher HOXA10 promoter methylation levels in women with ovarian
endometriomas than in healthy controls during the mid-luteal phase. Development
of epigenetic-based strategies for non-surgical treatment of infertility related 
to ovarian endometriomas could be an attractive field of research in the coming
years.

© 2013 Nordic Federation of Societies of Obstetrics and Gynecology.

PMID: 24032603  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2013 May;48(5):364-9.

[Effects of miR-135a on HOXA10 expression, proliferation and apoptosis of ovarian
cancer cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Tang WW(1), Wan GP, Wan YC, Zhang L, Cheng WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of miR-135a on HOXA10 expression,
proliferation and apoptosis of SKOV3 cells.
METHODS: (1) Through computer-aided algorithms,the predicted target gene of
miR-135a (HOXA10)were determined. (2) miR-135a mimics, miR-135a inhibitor and
negative control were transfected into SKOV3 cells, respectively.Reverse
transcription (RT)-PCR, western blot analysis were used to examine the expression
levels of HOXA10 at different times (24, 48 and 72 hours). (3) A luciferase
reporter assay was used to confirm the direct regulation between miR-135a and
HOXA10. (4) SKOV3 cells proliferation at different times (24,48 and 72 hours) was
detected by methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium (MTT) assay [quantified by
absorbance(A)]. Western blot was used to examine the expression of
apoptosis-associated protein bcl-2, bax and caspase-3 in SKOV3 cells after 48
hours transfection.
RESULTS: (1) HOXA10 was predicted to be the target gene of miR-135a by
computer-aided algorithms. (2) RT-PCR shown that HOXA10 mRNA levels were
decreased over time (24, 48 and 72 hours) after miR-135a mimics transfection in
SKOV3 cells (0.94 ± 0.04 vs 0.78 ± 0.03 vs 0.70 ± 0.03, P < 0.05). While, the
expression of HOXA10 mRNA was increased over time after miR-135a inhibitor
transfection (1.14 ± 0.05 vs 1.16 ± 0.03 vs 2.60 ± 0.08,P < 0.05). After
transfected with miR-135a mimics or miR-135a inhibitor over 48 and 72 hours, the 
HOXA10 expression levels in SKOV3 cells were significantly lower or higher than
each control group, respectively (all P < 0.01). Western blot analysis of HOXA10 
expression in SKOV3 cells confirmed the results of RT-PCR detected. (3) After
cotransfection of miR-135a plasmid and pMIR-REPORT luciferase plasmid containing 
HOXA10, luciferase reporter assays showed that the luciferase activity reduced by
67.8% (P < 0.01). (4) MTT showed that SKOV3 cells growth after miR-135a mimics
transfection for 48 and 72 hours were significantly lower than those in control
group (0.38 ± 0.03 vs 0.52 ± 0.05, 0.67 ± 0.05 vs 0.75 ± 0.06;respectively,all P 
< 0.05).While, SKOV3 cells transfected with miR-135a inhibitor for 72 hours grew 
significantly faster than that in control group (0.95 ± 0.05 vs 0.75 ± 0.06, P < 
0.01). After miR-135a mimics transfection, the level of bcl-2 protein was
significantly lower than that in control group (0.28 ± 0.06 vs 0.76 ± 0.09,P <
0.01). The activity of caspase-3 was significantly higher than that in control
group (115.0 ± 2.4 vs 95.4 ± 2.1, P < 0.01). While, there was no statistical
difference of bax expression (P = 0.142). However, after miR-135a inhibitor
transfection, the expression level of bcl-2 protein was significantly higher than
that in control group (0.92 ± 0.03 vs 0.76 ± 0.09, P = 0.037) and the activity of
caspase-3 was significantly lower than that in control group (59.5 ± 4.1 vs 95.4 
± 2.1, P < 0.01). There was also no statistical difference of bax expression (P =
0.066).
CONCLUSION: miR-135a may play an important role in cell proliferation and
apoptosis of ovarian cancer cells by regulating HOXA10 and its downstream
pathways.

PMID: 24016480  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2013 Nov;30(11):1505-12. doi: 10.1007/s10815-013-0088-9.
Epub 2013 Aug 25.

HOXA-11 mediated dysregulation of matrix remodeling during implantation window in
women with endometriosis.

Jana SK(1), Banerjee P, Mukherjee R, Chakravarty B, Chaudhury K.

Author information: 
(1)School of Medical Science and Technology, Indian Institute of Technology,
Kharagpur, Pin- 721 302, West Bengal, India.

PURPOSE: To investigate the Homeobox genes HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 mediated
endometrial molecular defects during implantation window in
endometriosis-associated infertility cases.
METHODS: Endometrial biopsies were obtained during implantation window from 31
infertile women with endometriosis (age<U+2009><<U+2009>35 years) and 26 age and BMI-matched
infertile women without endometriosis were included in the study for comparison
purposes. Endometrial expression of HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 genes, MMP-2, -9,
a(v)ß(3) integrin, leukemia inhibitory factor and surface characteristics
including average roughness and topology were assessed.
RESULTS: A significantly lower expression of HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 were observed in
endometriotic women compared to non-endometriotic controls. Further, a
significantly higher endometrial expression of MMP-2 and -9 were observed in
women with endometriosis when compared with controls. Interestingly, endometrial 
surface were observed to be grossly affected in terms of average roughness and
topology in women with endometriosis compared to controls.
CONCLUSIONS: The findings suggest that aberrant expression of HOXA-10 and -11
genes adversely affects endometrial remodelling and expression of receptivity
markers.

PMCID: PMC3879944
PMID: 23979130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. Blood. 2013 Oct 10;122(15):2704-13. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-02-485524. Epub 2013 
Aug 23.

Pediatric acute myeloid leukemia with t(8;16)(p11;p13), a distinct clinical and
biological entity: a collaborative study by the
International-Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster AML-study group.

Coenen EA(1), Zwaan CM, Reinhardt D, Harrison CJ, Haas OA, de Haas V, Mihál V, De
Moerloose B, Jeison M, Rubnitz JE, Tomizawa D, Johnston D, Alonzo TA, Hasle H,
Auvrignon A, Dworzak M, Pession A, van der Velden VH, Swansbury J, Wong KF, Terui
K, Savasan S, Winstanley M, Vaitkeviciene G, Zimmermann M, Pieters R, van den
Heuvel-Eibrink MM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology/Hematology, Erasmus MC-Sophia Children's
Hospital, Rotterdam, The Netherlands;

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Oct 10;122(15):2532-4.

In pediatric acute myeloid leukemia (AML), cytogenetic abnormalities are strong
indicators of prognosis. Some recurrent cytogenetic abnormalities, such as
t(8;16)(p11;p13), are so rare that collaborative studies are required to define
their prognostic impact. We collected the clinical characteristics, morphology,
and immunophenotypes of 62 pediatric AML patients with t(8;16)(p11;p13) from 18
countries participating in the International Berlin-Frankfurt-Münster (I-BFM) AML
study group. We used the AML-BFM cohort diagnosed from 1995-2005 (n = 543) as a
reference cohort. Median age of the pediatric t(8;16)(p11;p13) AML patients was
significantly lower (1.2 years). The majority (97%) had M4-M5
French-American-British type, significantly different from the reference cohort. 
Erythrophagocytosis (70%), leukemia cutis (58%), and disseminated intravascular
coagulation (39%) occurred frequently. Strikingly, spontaneous remissions
occurred in 7 neonates with t(8;16)(p11;p13), of whom 3 remain in continuous
remission. The 5-year overall survival of patients diagnosed after 1993 was 59%, 
similar to the reference cohort (P = .14). Gene expression profiles of
t(8;16)(p11;p13) pediatric AML cases clustered close to, but distinct from,
MLL-rearranged AML. Highly expressed genes included HOXA11, HOXA10, RET, PERP,
and GGA2. In conclusion, pediatric t(8;16)(p11;p13) AML is a rare entity defined 
by a unique gene expression signature and distinct clinical features in whom
spontaneous remissions occur in a subset of neonatal cases.

PMCID: PMC4314534
PMID: 23974201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. J Reprod Infertil. 2013 Jan;14(1):46-7.

Endometriosis: a history written by aberrant hoxa10 gene expression and epidermal
growth factor (EGF) system polymorphism?

Mormile R(1), Vittori G.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric and Neonatology, Moscati Hospital, Aversa, Italy.

PMCID: PMC3719364
PMID: 23926562  [PubMed]


96. Reprod Sci. 2014 Mar;21(3):305-18. doi: 10.1177/1933719113497267. Epub 2013 Jul
30.

Endometriosis is characterized by a distinct pattern of histone 3 and histone 4
lysine modifications.

Monteiro JB(1), Colón-Díaz M, García M, Gutierrez S, Colón M, Seto E, Laboy J,
Flores I.

Author information: 
(1)1Department of Biochemistry, Ponce School of Medicine and Health Sciences,
Ponce, Puerto Rico.

BACKGROUND: The histone modification patterns in endometriosis have not been
fully characterized. This gap in knowledge results in a poor understanding of the
epigenetic mechanisms (and potential therapeutic targets) at play. We aimed to
(1) assess global acetylation status of histone 3 (H3) and histone 4 (H4), (2)
measure levels of H3 and H4 lysine (K) acetylation and methylation, and (3) to
identify histone acetylation patterns in promoter regions of candidate genes in
tissues from patients and controls.
METHODS: Global and K-specific acetylation/methylation levels of histones were
measured in 24 lesions, 15 endometrium from patients, and 26 endometrium from
controls. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP)-polymerase chain reaction was used
to determine the histone acetylation status of the promoter regions of candidate 
genes in tissues.
RESULTS: The lesions were globally hypoacetylated at H3 (but not H4) compared to 
eutopic endometrium from controls. Lesions had significantly lower levels of
H3K9ac and H4K16ac compared to eutopic endometrium from patients and controls.
Tissues from patients were hypermethylated at H3K4, H3K9, and H3K27 compared to
endometrium from controls. The ChIP analysis showed hypoacetylation of H3/H4
within promoter regions of candidate genes known to be downregulated in
endometriosis (e.g., HOXA10, ESR1, CDH1, and p21 (WAF1/Cip1) ) in lesions versus 
control endometrium. The stereoidogenic factor 1 (SF1) promoter region was
enriched for acetylated H3 and H4 in lesions versus control tissues, correlating 
with its reported high expression in lesions.
CONCLUSIONS: This study describes the histone code of lesions and endometrium
from patients with endometriosis and provides support for a possible role of
histone modification in modulation of gene expression in endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC3936415
PMID: 23899551  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Curr Pharm Des. 2014;20(11):1647-54.

Transcription factor WT1 and promoter CpG hypomethylation coactivate HOXA10
expression in ovarian cancer.

Jiang Y, Chu Y, Tang W, Wan Y, Zhang L, Cheng W(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Nanjing Medical
University, Nanjing, China 210029; Key Laboratory of Reproductive Medicine,
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, China 210029. wenjuncheng117@gmail.com.

HOXA10 plays an important role in the body structure and development. Recently,
patterns of deregulated HOX expression have been identified in various cancers.
Meanwhile, WT1 is closely associated with the HOXA10 gene, which is an inducible 
transcription factor . We hypothesized that during the process of the ovarian
cancer pathogenesis, the HOXA10 promoter CpG hypomethylation coupled with
decreased WT1 expression could co-regulate HOXA10 expression. After the treatment
of 5-Aza-dC, ovarian cancer cell lines(SKOV-3 and HEY) significantly increased
HOXA10 expression. Transfection of HOXA10 siRNA with SKOV-3 and HEY ovarian
cancer cell lines significantly downregulated HOXA10 expression but upregulated
WT1 expression, compared to the control siRNA transfection. In ovarian cancer
samples, the HOXA10 expression is significantly high. Nevertheless, the
expression of HOXA10 is low in normal ones(P<0.05). We tried to use the method of
methylation-specific PCR(MSP) to find the CpG sites, which are located in the
scope of the WT1's core-binding consensus(GCGG). In ovarian cancer samples,
methylation prevalence was extremely high with the low expression of HOXA10.
However, in the normal ovarian samples, the methylation prevalence was lower with
the high expression of HOXA10(P<0. 05). In all samples of epithelial and normal
ovarian samples collected, the WT1 expression with the promoter CpG
hypomethylation of HOXA10 both contribute to the regulation of HOXA10 expression.
That is to say, HOXA10 promoter methylationpositive combined with the
WT1-positive result in the low expression of HOXA10. On the other hand, the
HOXA10 expression was the highest in methylation-negative and WT1-negative
samples.

PMID: 23888944  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Mol Endocrinol. 2013 Sep;27(9):1492-501. doi: 10.1210/me.2013-1086. Epub 2013 Jul
24.

Uterine deletion of Gp130 or Stat3 shows implantation failure with increased
estrogenic responses.

Sun X(1), Bartos A, Whitsett JA, Dey SK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Sciences,Perinatal Institute, Cincinnati Childrens
Hospital Medical Center, University of Cincinnati College of Medicine,
Cincinnati, Ohio 45229, USA.

Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), a downstream target of estrogen, is essential
for implantation in mice. LIF function is thought to be mediated by its binding
to LIF receptor (LIFR) and recruitment of coreceptor GP130 (glycoprotein 130),
and this receptor complex then activates signal transducer and activator of
transcription (STAT)1/3. However, the importance of LIFR and GP130 acting via
STAT3 in implantation remains uncertain, because constitutive inactivation of
Lifr, Gp130, or Stat3 shows embryonic lethality in mice. To address this issue,
we generated mice with conditional deletion of uterine Gp130 or Stat3 and show
that both GP130 and STAT3 are critical for uterine receptivity and implantation. 
Implantation failure in these deleted mice is associated with higher uterine
estrogenic responses prior to the time of implantation. These heightened
estrogenic responses are not due to changes in ovarian hormone levels or
expression of their nuclear receptors. In the deleted mice, estrogen-responsive
gene, Lactoferrin (Ltf), and Mucin 1 protein, were up-regulated in the uterus. In
addition, progesterone-responsive genes, Hoxa10 and Indian hedgehog (Ihh), were
markedly down-regulated in STAT3-inactivated uteri. These changes in uteri of
deleted mice were reflected by the failure of differentiation of the luminal
epithelium, which is essential for blastocyst attachment.

PMCID: PMC3753427
PMID: 23885093  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. J Obstet Gynaecol. 2013 Jul;33(5):519-20. doi: 10.3109/01443615.2013.776027.

Methylation of the HOXA10 homeobox gene promoter is associated with endometrial
cancer: a pilot study.

Fambrini M(1), Bussani C, Sorbi F, Pieralli A, Cioni R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Science for Woman and Child Health, University of Florence,
Florence, Italy. maxfambrini@libero.it

Methylation in the promoter region represents an epigenetic mechanism that
silences expression of various homeobox genes in cancers. We compare the
methylation profile of HOXA10 promoter gene in 19 histologically proven
endometrioid cancers and 27 normal endometrial tissues. Endometrial cancer tissue
displays significantly higher methylation status in HOXA10 gene promoter than
normal tissue, suggesting a possible role of epigenetic changes in HOXA10 gene
regulation in tumorigenesis. Further studies in human tissue and cell lines are
necessary to validate these preliminary results and to investigate HOXA10
expression according to methylation status in endometrial cancer.

PMID: 23815210  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Obstet Gynecol. 2013 Jun;121(6):1281-90. doi: 10.1097/AOG.0b013e318291f299.

Lack of transparency of clinical trials on endometriosis.

Guo SW(1), Evers JL.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. hoxa10@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To estimate patterns of publication of clinical trials of
endometriosis registered in ClinicalTrials.gov and their associated
characteristics.
METHODS: Information on interventional clinical trials on endometriosis that were
registered at ClinicalTrials.gov and updated as having been completed by October 
25, 2012, was retrieved and the publication status and time to publication in
Medline-indexed journals were ascertained by searching PubMed and by sending
e-mail inquiries to the principal investigators listed by the registry.
RESULTS: Seventy-one interventional trials of endometriosis, testing various
drugs and biologicals, were identified. Among them, 49.3% (35/71) were completed 
by October 25, 2012, 21.1% were either stopped or inactive in the past 2 years,
and the remaining 29.6% were ongoing. Among the 35 completed trials, 25 (71.4%)
were sponsored by industry and results were published for only 11 (31.4%; five
industry-sponsored, and six nonindustry-sponsored). Trials sponsored by industry 
were nearly four times less likely to publish their results than
nonindustry-sponsored trials, even though these trials typically had larger
sample sizes and were completed faster. Compared with the publication rate of 20%
found 4 years ago, the current rate has increased only marginally but still lies 
significantly below the reported 66.3% surveyed recently among 546 completed
nonendometriosis trials registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (P<.001).
CONCLUSION: Despite mounting pressure on more transparency of clinical trials,
the current state of transparency or lack thereof of clinical trials on
endometriosis is worrisome and does not benefit the trial sponsor or the public. 
Thus, we again call for more transparency for endometriosis trials.

PMID: 23812463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2013 Jun;33(6):926-9.

[Effect of folic acid in preventing aberrant methylation of fetal endometriosis
susceptibility gene HOXA10].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu M(1), Huang X, Xu S, Li L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Zhujiang Hospital, Southern Medical
University, Guangzhou 510282, China. liumb1972@126.com

OBJECTIVE: To detect aberrant methylation in the promoter region of fetal
endometriosis susceptibility gene homeobox-10 (HOXA10) in women with and without 
folic acid supplementation and explore the effect of folic acid in optimizing
intrauterine environment.
METHODS: Thirty-six cord blood specimens were collected between January, 2010 and
December, 2012 from pregnant women with endometriosis, including 22 with folic
acid treatment and 15 without. Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction
(MSP) and bisulfite salt modified sequencing (BSP) were employed to detect
aberrant methylation of HOXA10 gene in these specimens.
RESULTS: The methylation rate of HOXA10 gene differed significantly between
pregnant women with endometriosis taking folic acid and those who did (P<0.05).
CONCLUSION: Folic acid treatment can significantly reduce the methylation rate of
fetal endometriosis susceptibility gene HOXA10.

PMID: 23803214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Blood. 2013 Aug 29;122(9):1545-55. doi: 10.1182/blood-2013-04-496281. Epub 2013
Jun 18.

RNAi screen identifies Jarid1b as a major regulator of mouse HSC activity.

Cellot S(1), Hope KJ, Chagraoui J, Sauvageau M, Deneault É, MacRae T, Mayotte N, 
Wilhelm BT, Landry JR, Ting SB, Krosl J, Humphries K, Thompson A, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal,
Montréal, QC, Canada.

Comment in
    Blood. 2013 Aug 29;122(9):1533-4.

Histone methylation is a dynamic and reversible process proposed to directly
impact on stem cell fate. The Jumonji (JmjC) domain-containing family of
demethylases comprises 27 members that target mono-, di-, and trimethylated
lysine residues of histone (or nonhistone) proteins. To evaluate their role in
regulation of hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) behavior, we performed an in vivo
RNAi-based functional screen and demonstrated that Jarid1b and Jhdm1f play
opposing roles in regulation of HSC activity. Decrease in Jarid1b levels
correlated with an in vitro expansion of HSCs with preserved long-term in vivo
lymphomyeloid differentiation potential. Through RNA sequencing analysis, Jarid1b
knockdown was associated with increased expression levels of several HSC
regulators (Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hes1, Gata2) and reduced levels of
differentiation-associated genes. shRNA against Jhdmlf, in contrast, impaired
hematopoietic reconstitution of bone marrow cells. Together, our studies
identified Jarid1b as a negative regulator of HSC activity and Jhdmlf as a
positive regulator of HSC activity.

PMID: 23777767  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Development. 2013 Jul;140(14):2942-52. doi: 10.1242/dev.092569. Epub 2013 Jun 12.

Recombineering-based dissection of flanking and paralogous Hox gene functions in 
mouse reproductive tracts.

Raines AM(1), Adam M, Magella B, Meyer SE, Grimes HL, Dey SK, Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical
Center, Cincinnati, OH 45229, USA.

Hox genes are key regulators of development. In mammals, the study of these genes
is greatly confounded by their large number, overlapping functions and
interspersed shared enhancers. Here, we describe the use of a novel
recombineering strategy to introduce simultaneous frameshift mutations into the
flanking Hoxa9, Hoxa10 and Hoxa11 genes, as well as their paralogs on the HoxD
cluster. The resulting Hoxa9,10,11 mutant mice displayed dramatic synergistic
homeotic transformations of the reproductive tracts, with the uterus anteriorized
towards oviduct and the vas deferens anteriorized towards epididymis. The
Hoxa9,10,11 mutant mice also provided a genetic setting that allowed the
discovery of Hoxd9,10,11 redundant reproductive tract patterning function. Both
shared and distinct Hox functions were defined. Hoxd9,10,11 play a crucial role
in the regulation of uterine immune function. Non-coding non-polyadenylated RNAs 
were among the key Hox targets, with dramatic downregulation in mutants. We
observed Hox cross-regulation of transcription and splicing. In addition, we
observed a surprising anti-dogmatic apparent posteriorization of the uterine
epithelium. In caudal regions of the uterus, the normal simple columnar
epithelium flanking the lumen was replaced by a pseudostratified transitional
epithelium, normally found near the more posterior cervix. These results identify
novel molecular functions of Hox genes in the development of the male and female 
reproductive tracts.

PMCID: PMC3699281
PMID: 23760953  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 25;110(26):10682-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1300592110. Epub 2013 May 14.

Role of a polymorphism in a Hox/Pax-responsive enhancer in the evolution of the
vertebrate spine.

Guerreiro I(1), Nunes A, Woltering JM, Casaca A, Nóvoa A, Vinagre T, Hunter ME,
Duboule D, Mallo M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, 2780-156 Oeiras, Portugal.

Comment in
    Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Jun 25;110(26):10473-4.

Patterning of the vertebrate skeleton requires the coordinated activity of Hox
genes. In particular, Hox10 proteins are essential to set the transition from
thoracic to lumbar vertebrae because of their rib-repressing activity. In snakes,
however, the thoracic region extends well into Hox10-expressing areas of the
embryo, suggesting that these proteins are unable to block rib formation. Here,
we show that this is not a result of the loss of rib-repressing properties by the
snake proteins, but rather to a single base pair change in a Hox/Paired box
(Pax)-responsive enhancer, which prevents the binding of Hox proteins. This
polymorphism is also found in Paenungulata, such as elephants and manatees, which
have extended rib cages. In vivo, this modified enhancer failed to respond to
Hox10 activity, supporting its role in the extension of rib cages. In contrast,
the enhancer could still interact with Hoxb6 and Pax3 to promote rib formation.
These results suggest that a polymorphism in the Hox/Pax-responsive enhancer may 
have played a role in the evolution of the vertebrate spine by differently
modulating its response to rib-suppressing and rib-promoting Hox proteins.

PMCID: PMC3696775
PMID: 23674686  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Clin Chim Acta. 2013 Sep 23;424:53-65. doi: 10.1016/j.cca.2013.05.002. Epub 2013 
May 10.

Gene methylation in gastric cancer.

Qu Y(1), Dang S, Hou P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Endocrinology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Xi'an Jiaotong
University School of Medicine, Xi'an 710061, People's Republic of China.

Gastric cancer is one of the most common malignancies and remains the second
leading cause of cancer-related death worldwide. Over 70% of new cases and deaths
occur in developing countries. In the early years of the molecular biology
revolution, cancer research mainly focuses on genetic alterations, including
gastric cancer. Epigenetic mechanisms are essential for normal development and
maintenance of tissue-specific gene expression patterns in mammals. Disruption of
epigenetic processes can lead to altered gene function and malignant cellular
transformation. Recent advancements in the rapidly evolving field of cancer
epigenetics have shown extensive reprogramming of every component of the
epigenetic machinery in cancer, including DNA methylation, histone modifications,
nucleosome positioning, noncoding RNAs, and microRNAs. Aberrant DNA methylation
in the promoter regions of gene, which leads to inactivation of tumor suppressor 
and other cancer-related genes in cancer cells, is the most well-defined
epigenetic hallmark in gastric cancer. The advantages of gene methylation as a
target for detection and diagnosis of cancer in biopsy specimens and non-invasive
body fluids such as serum and gastric washes have led to many studies of
application in gastric cancer. This review focuses on the most common and
important phenomenon of epigenetics, DNA methylation, in gastric cancer and
illustrates the impact epigenetics has had on this field.

Copyright © 2013 The Authors. Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23669186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Cell Death Dis. 2013 Apr 18;4:e600. doi: 10.1038/cddis.2013.130.

Redundant miR-3077-5p and miR-705 mediate the shift of mesenchymal stem cell
lineage commitment to adipocyte in osteoporosis bone marrow.

Liao L(1), Yang X, Su X, Hu C, Zhu X, Yang N, Chen X, Shi S, Shi S, Jin Y.

Author information: 
(1)Research and Development Center for Tissue Engineering, Fourth Military
Medical University, Xi'an, China.

During the process of aging, especially for postmenopausal females, the cell
lineage commitment of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) shift to adipocyte in bone
marrow, resulting in osteoporosis. However, the cell-intrinsic mechanism of this 
cell lineage commitment switch is poorly understood. As the post-transcription
regulation by microRNAs (miRNAs) has a critical role in MSCs differentiation and 
bone homeostasis, we performed comprehensive miRNAs profiling and found miR-705
and miR-3077-5p were significantly enhanced in MSCs from osteoporosis bone
marrow. Both miR-705 and miR-3077-5p acted as inhibitors of MSCs osteoblast
differentiation and promoters of adipocyte differentiation, by targeting on the
3'untranslated region (3'UTR) of HOXA10 and RUNX2 mRNA separately. Combined
inhibition of miR-705 and miR-3077-5p rescued the cell lineage commitment
disorder of MSCs through restoring HOXA10 and RUNX2 protein level. Furthermore,
we found excessive TNFa and reactive oxygen species caused by estrogen deficiency
led to the upregulation of both miRNAs through NF-<U+03BA>B pathway. In conclusion, our 
findings showed that redundant miR-705 and miR-3077-5p synergistically mediated
the shift of MSCs cell lineage commitment to adipocyte in osteoporosis bone
marrow, providing new insight into the etiology of osteoporosis at the
post-transcriptional level. Moreover, the rescue of MSCs lineage commitment
disorder by regulating miRNAs expression suggested a novel potential therapeutic 
target for osteoporosis as well as stem cell-mediated regenerative medicine.

PMCID: PMC3641352
PMID: 23598412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Med Oncol. 2013;30(2):564. doi: 10.1007/s12032-013-0564-1. Epub 2013 Apr 17.

Identification and validation that up-expression of HOXA13 is a novel independent
prognostic marker of a worse outcome in gastric cancer based on
immunohistochemistry.

Han Y(1), Tu WW, Wen YG, Li DP, Qiu GQ, Tang HM, Peng ZH, Zhou CZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Shanghai First People's Hospital, School of
Medicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 85 Wujin Road, Shanghai 20080,
China.

Homeobox (HOX) gene family is known to be classic examples of the intimate
relationship between embryogenesis and tumorigenesis. However, less is known
about the involvement of HOX gene family with gastric cancerogenesis. Here, we
screened the expression of HOX gene family in gastric cancers and explored the
relationships between them by cDNA microarray. We found several differentially
expressed HOX genes in gastric cancers, especially HOXA10 (11/12) and HOXA13
(11/12) with significantly higher expression in the cancerous tissues.
Furthermore, we validated HOXA13 as a novel prognostic marker in gastric cancer
based on immunohistochemistry and statistical analysis. HOXA13 expression was
significantly up-regulated in cancerous tissues compared with the corresponding
non-cancerous mucosa (P < 0.001). Up-expression of HOXA13 was significantly
correlated with T stage (P = 0.002), M stage (P = 0.024), advanced UICC stage (P 
< 0.001), histological differentiation (P = 0.005), and relapse (P = 0.001).
Patients with positive HOXA13 expression had a obviously lower overall survival
(OS) and disease-free survival (DFS) rate than patients with negative HOXA13
expression (HR 3.331, 95 % CI 1.722-6.442, P < 0.001; HR 3.289, 95 % CI
1.703-6.351, P < 0.001, respectively). Univariate and multivariate Cox analysis
confirmed that HOXA13 could serve as a significant independent prognostic factor 
for DFS and OS. Therefore, our results indicated that several HOX genes might be 
closely involved in the process of the gastric tumorigenesis. Furthermore,
up-expression of HOXA13 might be associated with highly aggressive phenotype of
gastric cancer. HOXA13 was a significant independent prognostic factor and could 
serve as a putative biomarker for diagnosis and prognosis of gastric cancer.

PMID: 23592225  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Eur J Obstet Gynecol Reprod Biol. 2013 Jul;169(2):321-5. doi:
10.1016/j.ejogrb.2013.03.006. Epub 2013 Mar 28.

HOXA10 protein expression in the endometrium of normally menstruating women after
receiving GnRH antagonist.

Sirayapiwat P(1), Triratanachat S, Tantbirojn P, Ruangvejvorachai P, Suwajanakorn
S.

Author information: 
(1)Infertility Unit, Reproductive Medicine Division, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Rama IV Road, Bangkok,
Thailand. Porntip.Si@chula.ac.th

OBJECTIVE(S): To compare HOXA10 protein expression in the endometrium between
natural control cycles and GnRH antagonist-treated cycles obtained during the
window of implantation of normally menstruating women.
STUDY DESIGN: This study was conducted at the Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Chulalongkorn University, Bangkok, Thailand.
Thirty-five volunteers were recruited into this prospective, self-controlled
study, which was divided into two cycles, the first a natural control cycle and
the second a GnRH antagonist-treated cycle. The two cycles were separated by one 
resting cycle. In the GnRH antagonist-treated cycle, when the leading follicle
was 15 mm, ganirelix (Orgalutran®) 0.25mg was administered daily. In both cycles,
ovulation was induced when the largest follicle reached 18 mm in diameter.
Finally, endometrial biopsy was performed on day 6 after documented ovulation,
which corresponds to the window of implantation. Endometrial HOXA10 protein
expression, a marker of endometrial receptivity, was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry. The protein expression was compared between the two cycles 
regarding their percentage of immunostained cells and IHC-scores (percentage of
stained cells×intensity of nuclear staining).
RESULTS: HOXA10 protein was exclusively localized in the stromal compartment of
the endometrium. The percentage of HOXA10 nuclear staining in the endometrium
collected from GnRH antagonist-treated cycles was higher than that of the natural
cycles, whereas the IHC-scores showed no difference between the two cycles.
CONCLUSION(S): GnRH antagonists may have no effect on HOXA10 protein expression
in the endometrium obtained during the implantation window of normally
menstruating women.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23541416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Stem Cells Dev. 2013 Aug 1;22(15):2211-20. doi: 10.1089/scd.2012.0611. Epub 2013 
Apr 9.

Nkx2-5 mediates differential cardiac differentiation through interaction with
Hoxa10.

Behrens AN(1), Iacovino M, Lohr JL, Ren Y, Zierold C, Harvey RP, Kyba M, Garry
DJ, Martin CM.

Author information: 
(1)Lillehei Heart Institute, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, Minnesota
55455, USA.

The regulation of cardiac differentiation is complex and incompletely understood.
Recent studies have documented that Nkx2-5-positive cells are not limited to the 
cardiac lineage, but can give rise to endothelial and smooth muscle lineages.
Other work has elucidated that, in addition to promoting cardiac development,
Nkx2-5 plays a larger role in mesodermal patterning although the transcriptional 
networks that govern this developmental patterning are undefined. By profiling
early Nkx2-5-positive progenitor cells, we discovered that the progenitor pools
of the bisected cardiac crescent are differentiating asynchronously. This
asymmetry requires Nkx2-5 as it is lost in the Nkx2-5 mutant. Surprisingly, the
posterior Hox genes Hoxa9 and Hoxa10 were expressed on the right side of the
cardiac crescent, independently of Nkx2-5. We describe a novel, transient, and
asymmetric cardiac-specific expression pattern of the posterior Hox genes, Hoxa9 
and Hoxa10, and utilize the embryonic stem cell/embryoid body (ES/EB) model
system to illustrate that Hoxa10 impairs cardiac differentiation. We suggest a
model whereby Hoxa10 cooperates with Nkx2-5 to regulate the timing of cardiac
mesoderm differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3715789
PMID: 23477547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Eur Spine J. 2013 Jun;22(6):1300-11. doi: 10.1007/s00586-013-2728-2. Epub 2013
Mar 7.

Microarray expression profiling identifies genes with altered expression in
Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis.

Fendri K(1), Patten SA, Kaufman GN, Zaouter C, Parent S, Grimard G, Edery P,
Moldovan F.

Author information: 
(1)Sainte-Justine Hospital Research Center, 3175, Chemin de la Cote
Ste-Catherine, Montreal, Quebec, H3T 1C5, Canada.

PURPOSE: Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis (AIS) is considered a complex genetic
disease, in which malfunctioning or dysregulation of one or more genes has been
proposed to be responsible for the expressed phenotype. However, to date, no
disease causing genes has been identified and the pathogenesis of AIS remains
unknown. The aim of this study is, therefore, to identify specific molecules with
differing expression patterns in AIS compared to healthy individuals.
METHODS: Microarray analysis and quantitative RT-PCR have examined differences in
the gene transcription profile between primary osteoblasts derived from spinal
vertebrae of AIS patients and those of healthy individuals.
RESULTS: There are 145 genes differentially expressed in AIS osteoblasts. A
drastic and significant change has been noted particularly in the expression
levels of Homeobox genes (HOXB8, HOXB7, HOXA13, HOXA10), ZIC2, FAM101A, COMP and 
PITX1 in AIS compared to controls. Clustering analysis revealed the interaction
of these genes in biological pathways crucial for bone development, in particular
in the differentiation of skeletal elements and structural integrity of the
vertebrae.
CONCLUSIONS: This study reports on the expression of molecules that have not been
described previously in AIS. We also provide for the first time gene interaction 
pathways in AIS pathogenesis. These genes are involved in various bone regulatory
and developmental pathways and many of them can be grouped into clusters to
participate in a particular biological pathway. Further studies can be built on
our findings to further elucidate the association between different biological
pathways and the pathogenesis of AIS.

PMCID: PMC3676547
PMID: 23467837  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2013;26(5-6):607-8. doi: 10.1515/jpem-2012-0420.

Is endometriosis ultimately the end result of the interplay between interferon-<U+03B3> 
(IFN-<U+03B3>) and the HOXA10 gene network?

Mormile R, Vittori G.

PMID: 23412855  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Gene. 2013 Apr 15;518(2):267-72. doi: 10.1016/j.gene.2013.01.030. Epub 2013 Jan
30.

HOXA10 and HOXA13 sequence variations in human female genital malformations
including congenital absence of the uterus and vagina.

Ekici AB(1), Strissel PL, Oppelt PG, Renner SP, Brucker S, Beckmann MW, Strick R.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Human Genetics, University-Clinic Erlangen, D-91054 Erlangen,
Germany.

Congenital genital malformations occurring in the female population are estimated
to be 5 per 1000 and associate with infertility, abortion, stillbirth, preterm
delivery and other organ abnormalities. Complete aplasia of the uterus, cervix
and upper vagina (Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome) has an
incidence of 1 per 4000 female live births. The molecular etiology of congenital 
genital malformations including MRKH is unknown up to date. The homeobox (HOX)
genes HOXA10 and HOXA13 are involved in the development of human genitalia. In
this investigation, HOXA10 and HOXA13 genes of 20 patients with the MRKH
syndrome, 7 non-MRKH patients with genital malformations and 53 control women
were sequenced to assess for DNA variations. A total of 14 DNA sequence
variations (10 novel and 4 known) within exonic and untranslated regions were
detected in HOXA10 and HOXA13 among our cohorts. Four HOXA10 and two HOXA13 DNA
sequence variations were found solely in patients with genital malformations. In 
addition to mutations resulting in synonymous amino acid substitutions, in the
HOXA10 gene a missense mutation was identified and predicted by computer analysis
as probably damaging to protein function in two non-MRKH patients, one with a
bicornate and the other patient with a septated uterus. A novel exonic HOXA10
cytosine deletion was also identified in a non-MRKH patient with a septate uterus
and renal malformations resulting in a premature stop codon and loss of the
homeodomain helix 3/4. This cytosine deletion and the missense mutation in HOXA10
were analysed by real time PCR and sequencing, respectively, in two additional
larger cohorts of 103 patients with MRKH and 109 non-MRKH patients with genital
malformations. No other patients were found with the cytosine deletion however
one additional patient was identified regarding the missense mutation. Rare DNA
sequence variations in the HOXA10 gene could contribute to the misdevelopment of 
female internal genitalia.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23376215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Hum Reprod. 2013 Mar;28(3):835-9. doi: 10.1093/humrep/des457. Epub 2013 Jan 12.

Replication of endometriosis-associated single-nucleotide polymorphisms from
genome-wide association studies in a Caucasian population.

Sundqvist J(1), Xu H, Vodolazkaia A, Fassbender A, Kyama C, Bokor A,
Gemzell-Danielsson K, D'Hooghe TM, Falconer H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Women's and Children's Health, Division of Obstetrics and
Gynecology , Karolinska Institutet/Hospital, SE-17176 Stockholm, Sweden.

STUDY QUESTION: Is it possible to replicate the previously identified genetic
association of four single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs12700667,
rs7798431, rs1250248 and rs7521902, with endometriosis in a Caucasian population?
SUMMARY ANSWER: A borderline association was observed for rs1250248 and
endometriosis (P = 0.049). However, we could not replicate the other previously
identified endometriosis-associated SNPs (rs12700667, rs7798431 and rs7521902) in
the same population.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Endometriosis is considered a complex disease, influenced 
by several genetic and environmental factors, as well as interactions between
them. Previous studies have found genetic associations with endometriosis for
SNPs at the 7p15 and 2q35 loci in a Caucasian population.
STUDY DESIGN, SIZE, DURATION: Allele frequencies of SNPs were investigated in
patients with endometriosis and controls.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING, METHODS: Blood samples and peritoneal biopsies
were taken from a Caucasian female population consisting of 1129 patients with
endometriosis and 831 controls. DNA was extracted for genotyping. The study was
performed at a University hospital and research laboratories.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: A weak association with endometriosis (all
stages) was observed for rs1250248 (P = 0.049). No significant associations were 
observed for the SNPs rs12700667, rs7798431 and rs7521902. A non-significant
trend towards the association of rs1250248 with moderate/severe endometriosis was
observed (odds ratio 1.18, 95% confidence interval 0.97-1.44).
LIMITATIONS, REASONS FOR CAUTION: The inability to confirm all previous findings 
may result from differences between populations and type II errors.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: Our result demonstrates the difficulty of
identifying common genetic variants in complex diseases.
STUDY FUNDING/COMPETING INTEREST(S): This study was supported by grants from the 
Karolinska Institutet and Stockholm City County/Karolinska Institutet (ALF),
Stockholm, Sweden, Swedish Medical Research Council (K2007-54X-14212-06-3,
K2010-54X-14212-09-3), Stockholm, Sweden, Leuven University Research Council
(Onderzoeksraad KU Leuven), the Leuven University Hospitals Clinical Research
Foundation (Klinisch onderzoeksfonds) and by the National Scientific Foundation
(Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek, FWO). The authors have no conflict of
interest.

PMID: 23315067  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Hum Reprod. 2013 Mar;28(3):750-61. doi: 10.1093/humrep/des446. Epub 2013 Jan 4.

miR-196b targets c-myc and Bcl-2 expression, inhibits proliferation and induces
apoptosis in endometriotic stromal cells.

Abe W(1), Nasu K, Nakada C, Kawano Y, Moriyama M, Narahara H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Faculty of Medicine, Oita University,
Japan.

STUDY QUESTION: What is the global expression pattern of microRNAs (miRNAs) in
endometriotic stromal cells and is miR-196b involved in the pathogenesis of
endometriosis?
SUMMARY ANSWER: Several miRNAs are aberrantly expressed in endometriotic cyst
stromal cells (ECSCs), including miR-196b whose expression is repressed in
endometriotic stromal cells.
WHAT IS KNOWN ALREADY: Although, histologically, endometriotic tissues and normal
proliferative endometrium are similar, a number of distinct molecular differences
have been reported to date. The anti-apoptotic and excessive proliferative
properties of endometriotic cells are considered to be involved in the
development and progression of endometriosis.
STUDY DESIGN AND SIZE DURATION: ECSCs and normal endometrial stromal cells
(NESCs) were isolated from ovarian endometriotic tissues and eutopic endometrial 
tissues, respectively and compared.
PARTICIPANTS/MATERIALS, SETTING AND METHODS: Aberrantly expressed miRNAs in ECSCs
were identified by a global miRNA microarray technique. The roles of miR-196b in 
ECSC proliferation, apoptosis, and c-myc and B-cell lymphoma/leukemia (Bcl)-2
mRNA expression were investigated with precursor hsa-miR-196b transfection. The
methylation status of the miR-196b gene in ECSCs and the effect of a DNA
demethylating agent on miR-196b expression were also examined.
MAIN RESULTS AND THE ROLE OF CHANCE: miRNA microarray analysis identified eight
down-regulated miRNAs (including miR-196b) and four up-regulated miRNAs in ECSCs.
Compulsory expression of miR-196b directed the inhibition of proliferation and
the induction of apoptosis in ECSCs. miR-196b was found to suppress c-myc and
Bcl-2 mRNA expression in ECSCs, and there was a significant correlation between
miR-196b and HOXA10 expression in ECSCs and NESCs. The miR-196b gene was
hypermethylated in ECSCs when compared with NESCs, and the treatment with a DNA
demethylating agent restored the expression of miR-196b in ECSCs.
LIMITATIONS AND REASONS FOR CAUTION: miRNA expression profiles were investigated 
only in the stromal component of ectopic and eutopic endometrium samples. In
addition to miR-196b, the roles of other miRNAs aberrantly expressed in ECSCs
should be examined.
WIDER IMPLICATIONS OF THE FINDINGS: The present findings suggest that aberrant
miRNA expression plays an important role in the pathogenesis of endometriosis as 
a part of epigenetic mechanisms, that expression of miR-196b in ECSCs is
repressed by DNA hypermethylation of the miR-196b gene and this repression may be
involved in the development of proliferative and anti-apoptotic characteristics
of endometriosis.
STUDY FUNDING: This work was supported in part by Grants-in-Aid for Scientific
Research from the Japan Society for the Promotion of Science (no. 20591920 to
K.N. and no. 23592407 to H.N.) and The Uehara Memorial Foundation (to K.N.).

PMID: 23293219  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Apr;34(4):893-901. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs405. Epub 2012 Dec
31.

PTEN loss and HOXA10 expression are associated with ovarian endometrioid
adenocarcinoma differentiation and progression.

Tanwar PS(1), Kaneko-Tarui T, Lee HJ, Zhang L, Teixeira JM.

Author information: 
(1)Vincent Center for Reproductive Biology, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology,
and Reproductive Biology, Massachusetts General Hospital and Harvard Medical
School, Boston, MA, USA.

Epithelial ovarian cancer is a heterogeneous disease that is subdivided into five
major histotypes but the mechanisms driving their differentiation are not clear. 
Mutations in adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) and ß-catenin are commonly observed
in the human ovarian endometrioid adenocarcinoma (OEA) patients. However, the
mechanisms subsequent to APC deletion in ovarian tumorigenesis have not been well
characterized. We have conditionally deleted APC in the murine ovarian surface
epithelium (OSE) and showed that its loss leads to development of epithelial
inclusion cysts. High-grade OEAs with tightly packed villoglandular histology
were observed in older APC-deleted mice. Phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN)
expression was elevated in the early lesions but lost after progression to the
more advanced tumors. Knockdown of APC or expression of a gain-of-function
ß-catenin similarly induced human OSE cells to develop tumors with endometrioid
histology in xenografts. Expression of HOXA10 was induced in both the advanced
APC-deleted murine tumors and in the tumor xenografts of human OSE cells with
knocked-down APC. These results show that reduced APC activity is sufficient to
induce formation of epithelial inclusion cysts and support OEA development and
suggest that induced HOXA10 expression and loss of PTEN are key mechanisms
driving endometrioid histotype differentiation and progression.

PMCID: PMC3616672
PMID: 23276799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Oncogene. 2014 Jan 9;33(2):193-202. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.569. Epub 2012 Dec 17.

Genetic variations in miR-27a gene decrease mature miR-27a level and reduce
gastric cancer susceptibility.

Yang Q(1), Jie Z(2), Ye S(3), Li Z(2), Han Z(1), Wu J(1), Yang C(4), Jiang Y(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemical Carcinogenesis, State Key Laboratory of Respiratory
Disease, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
(2)Department of General Surgery, First Affiliated Hospital, Nanchang University,
Nanchang, People's Republic of China. (3)Department of Medical Oncology, First
Affiliated Hospital, Sun Yat-Sen University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of
China. (4)Department of Physiology and Center for Integrative Toxicology,
Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI, USA.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are noncoding RNAs that function as post-transcriptional
regulators of tumor oncogenes and suppressors. Single-nucleotide polymorphisms
(SNPs) in miRNA genes are a novel class of genetic variations in the human genome
that are currently being identified and investigated in human cancers. In this
study, we aimed to investigate whether SNPs in the miR-27a gene affect miR-27a
expression and alter susceptibility to gastric cancer. Therefore, we conducted a 
case-control population study and the allele and genotype frequencies for
polymorphism rs11671784 in miR-27a gene were examined in the study population. As
a result, we found that the G/A polymorphism in the miR-27a gene exhibited a
significant effect on gastric cancer risk. Compared with GG homozygotes, subjects
who were GA heterozygotes or AA homozygotes exhibited a decreased risk of gastric
cancer. The G/A polymorphism impaired the processing of pre-miR-27a to mature
miR-27a, resulting in significantly reduced expression of mature miR-27a and an
increased level of its target HOXA10. Furthermore, we confirmed these findings in
in vitro studies by overexpressing pre-miR-27a carrying G or A allele. It
provided further evidence demonstrating that allelic difference of rs11671784 is 
linked to gastric tumorigenesis. In summary, our results indicate that the G/A
polymorphism in miR-27a gene (rs11671784) decreases miR-27a expression, reduces
gastric cancer risk and plays a role in gastric tumorigenesis. This is the first 
study to address the role and function of miR-27a polymorphism rs11671784 in
gastric cancer. These results could be useful to assess individual susceptibility
of gastric cancer and will improve our understanding of the potential
contribution of miRNA SNPs to cancer pathogenesis.

PMID: 23246964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Carcinogenesis. 2013 Mar;34(3):513-21. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs363. Epub 2012 Nov 
19.

Genome-wide CpG island methylation analyses in non-small cell lung cancer
patients.

Heller G(1), Babinsky VN, Ziegler B, Weinzierl M, Noll C, Altenberger C, Müllauer
L, Dekan G, Grin Y, Lang G, End-Pfützenreuter A, Steiner I, Zehetmayer S, Döme B,
Arns BM, Fong KM, Wright CM, Yang IA, Klepetko W, Posch M, Zielinski CC,
Zöchbauer-Müller S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine I, Clinical Division of Oncology, Medical University of
Vienna, Vienna 1090, Austria. gerwin.heller@meduniwien.ac.at

DNA methylation is part of the epigenetic gene regulation complex, which is
relevant for the pathogenesis of cancer. We performed a genome-wide search for
methylated CpG islands in tumors and corresponding non-malignant lung tissue
samples of 101 stages I-III non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) patients by
combining methylated DNA immunoprecipitation and microarray analysis. Overall, we
identified 2414 genomic positions differentially methylated between tumor and
non-malignant lung tissue samples. Ninety-seven percent of them were found to be 
tumor-specifically methylated. Annotation of these genomic positions resulted in 
the identification of 477 tumor-specifically methylated genes of which many are
involved in regulation of gene transcription and cell adhesion. Tumor-specific
methylation was confirmed by a gene-specific approach. In the majority of tumors,
methylation of certain genes was associated with loss of their protein expression
determined by immunohistochemistry. Treatment of NSCLC cells with epigenetically 
active drugs resulted in upregulated expression of many tumor-specifically
methylated genes analyzed by gene expression microarrays suggesting that about
one-third of these genes are transcriptionally regulated by methylation.
Moreover, comparison of methylation results with certain clinicopathological
characteristics of the patients suggests that methylation of HOXA2 and HOXA10 may
be of prognostic relevance in squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) patients. In
conclusion, we identified a large number of tumor-specifically methylated genes
in NSCLC patients. Expression of many of them is regulated by methylation.
Moreover, HOXA2 and HOXA10 methylation may serve as prognostic parameters in SCC 
patients. Overall, our findings emphasize the impact of methylation on the
pathogenesis of NSCLCs.

PMID: 23172663  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Reprod Sci. 2013 Feb;20(2):129-37. doi: 10.1177/1933719112463251. Epub 2012 Nov
20.

Tissue selective estrogen complexes (TSECs) differentially modulate markers of
proliferation and differentiation in endometrial cells.

Kulak J Jr(1), Ferriani RA, Komm BS, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Selective estrogen receptor modulators (SERMs) have tissue-specific estrogen
receptor (ER) modulating properties. Combining an SERM with one or more estrogens
to form a tissue selective estrogen complex (TSEC) can provide an improved blend 
of tissue-specific ER agonist and antagonist effects. While both estrogens and
SERMs affect the uterine endometrium, not all TSECs reverse the endometrial
effects of estrogens preventing endometrial proliferation and hyperplasia. Their 
action in uterine cells is not completely understood. HOXA 10, leukemia
inhibitory factor (LIF), progesterone receptor (PR), and EMX2 are genes known to 
regulate endometrial proliferation and differentiation. The expression of these
genes was used to assess endometrial effects of SERMs and TSECs. We evaluated the
effects of raloxifene (RAL), tamoxifen (TAM), lasofoxifene (LAS), bazedoxifene
acetate (BZA), and progesterone (P) alone and in combination with estradiol (E2) 
in Ishikawa cells. Increased HOXA10, LIF, PR, and EMX2 messenger RNA (mRNA)
expression was noted in E2-treated cells compared with vehicle-treated controls. 
All TSECs maintained E2-induced PR expression and all except TAM prevented
estrogen-induced LIF expression. The TSEC containing BZA uniquely decreased
HOXA10 expression and increased EMX2 expression. The TSECs alter endometrial cell
proliferation by selective modulation of estrogen responsive genes, maintaining
the antiproliferative effects mediated by PR and inhibiting LIF. The differential
effect of TSECs on endometrial gene expression suggests a mechanism by which they
manifest differential effects on endometrial safety against the risk of
estrogen-induced endometrial hyperplasia.

PMCID: PMC3826278
PMID: 23171676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Mol Cell Biochem. 2013 Feb;374(1-2):213-22. doi: 10.1007/s11010-012-1522-5. Epub 
2012 Nov 18.

Molecular characterization and identification of the E2/P4 response element in
the porcine HOXA10 gene.

Wu D(1), Song D, Li X, Yu M, Li C, Zhao S.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Agricultural Animal Genetics, Breeding, and Reproduction of 
Ministry of Education and Key Laboratory of Swine Genetics and Breeding of
Ministry of Agriculture, Huazhong Agricultural University, Wuhan, 430070, Hubei, 
People's Republic of China.

Homeobox A10 (HOXA10), a well-known transcriptional factor that can be regulated 
by estrogen (E(2)) and progesterone (P(4)), is necessary not only for endometrial
differentiation but also for establishing the conditions required for
implantation. However, little research has focused on the regulation of the
porcine HOXA10 gene. In this study, we aimed to (1) characterize the genetic
structure of the porcine HOXA10 gene, (2) analyze the tissue expression pattern
and differential expression levels in the endometrium of HOXA10 in different
developmental stages of Meishan and commercial Yorkshire pigs, and (3) identify
the E2/P4 response element in the promoter region of the porcine HOXA10 gene and 
verify that it induces HOXA10 in human endometrial adenocarcinoma (Ishikawa)
cells. The results indicated that the cDNA of porcine HOXA10 was 2,628 bp in
length with an open reading frame (ORF) of 1,236 bp encoding a peptide of
411-amino acid residues, which showed 90 and 95 % sequence similarity to that of 
human and mouse homologs, respectively. Semiquantitative RT-PCR confirmed that
the porcine HOXA10 gene is highly expressed in the endometrium, bladder and
kidney. Real-time PCR showed that the expression of HOXA10 was significantly
higher on day 15 of gestation (gd 15) in comparison to gd 26 (P < 0.01), gd 50 (P
< 0.01) and day 15 of the estrous cycle (ed 15) in the endometrium of Meishan
pigs. In contrast, the highest expression in the endometrium of Yorkshire pigs
was on gd 50. Moreover, the abundance of HOXA10 mRNA was the highest on gd 15 in 
Meishan pigs than in any other stage tested in the two breeds. Deletion analysis 
and reporter expression assays identified a promoter region (-1044 bp to +18 bp) 
which is responsible for E(2)- and P(4)-induced HOXA10 transcription. Moreover,
this promoter region enhanced the E2/P4-induced HOXA10 expression in Ishikawa
cells. In conclusion, we identified an E(2)/P(4) response element of the porcine 
HOXA10 gene for the first time. The data from the present study contribute to the
mechanism by which the porcine HOXA10 gene regulates embryo implantation and
prolificacy traits.

PMID: 23160802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jan;98(1):362-71. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-2953. Epub
2012 Nov 12.

Distinct developmental signatures of human abdominal and gluteal subcutaneous
adipose tissue depots.

Karastergiou K(1), Fried SK, Xie H, Lee MJ, Divoux A, Rosencrantz MA, Chang RJ,
Smith SR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Nutrition, Department of Medicine,
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

CONTEXT: Fat distribution differs in men and women, but in both sexes, a
predominantly gluteal-femoral compared with abdominal (central) fat distribution 
is associated with lower metabolic risk. Differences in cellular characteristics 
and metabolic functions of these depots have been described, but the molecular
mechanisms involved are not understood.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to identify depot- and sex-dependent differences in 
gene expression in human abdominal and gluteal sc adipose tissues.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Abdominal and gluteal adipose tissue aspirates were obtained 
from 14 premenopausal women [age 27.5 ± 7.0 yr, body mass index (BMI) 27.3 ± 6.2 
kg/m(2), and waist-to-hip ratio 0.82 ± 0.04] and 21 men (age 29.7±7.4 yr, BMI
27.2 ± 4.5 kg/m(2), and waist-to-hip ratio 0.91 ± 0.07) and transcriptomes were
analyzed using Illumina microarrays. Expression of selected genes was determined 
in isolated adipocytes and stromal vascular fractions from each depot, and in in 
vitro cultures before and after adipogenic differentiation.
RESULTS: A total of 284 genes were differentially expressed between the abdominal
and gluteal depot, either specifically in males (n = 66) or females (n = 159) or 
in both sexes (n = 59). Most notably, gene ontology and pathway analysis
identified homeobox genes (HOXA2, HOXA3, HOXA4, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB7, HOXB8,
HOXC8, and IRX2) that were down-regulated in the gluteal depot in both sexes (P =
2 × 10(-10)). Conversely, HOXA10 was up-regulated in gluteal tissue and HOXC13
was detected exclusively in this depot. These differences were independent of
BMI, were present in both adipocytes and stromal vascular fractions of adipose
tissue, and were retained throughout in vitro differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that developmentally programmed differences may
contribute to the distinct phenotypic characteristics of peripheral fat.

PMCID: PMC3537084
PMID: 23150689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Cancer Res. 2013 Jan 1;73(1):417-27. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-1881. Epub
2012 Oct 29.

A tumorigenic MLL-homeobox network in human glioblastoma stem cells.

Gallo M(1), Ho J, Coutinho FJ, Vanner R, Lee L, Head R, Ling EK, Clarke ID, Dirks
PB.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Developmental and Stem Cell Biology, Arthur and Sonia Labatt Brain 
Tumour Research Centre, Toronto, Canada.

Glioblastoma growth is driven by cancer cells that have stem cell properties, but
molecular determinants of their tumorigenic behavior are poorly defined. In
cancer, altered activity of the epigenetic modifiers Polycomb and Trithorax
complexes may contribute to the neoplastic phenotype. Here, we provide the first 
mechanistic insights into the role of the Trithorax protein mixed lineage
leukemia (MLL) in maintaining cancer stem cell characteristics in human
glioblastoma. We found that MLL directly activates the Homeobox gene HOXA10. In
turn, HOXA10 activates a downstream Homeobox network and other genes previously
characterized for their role in tumorigenesis. The MLL-Homeobox axis we
identified significantly contributes to the tumorigenic potential of glioblastoma
stem cells. Our studies suggest a role for MLL in contributing to the epigenetic 
heterogeneity between tumor-initiating and non-tumor-initiating cells in
glioblastoma.

PMID: 23108137  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Zhongguo Dang Dai Er Ke Za Zhi. 2012 Oct;14(10):785-91.

[Effect of HOXA10 gene silenced by shRNA on proliferation and apoptosis of
U937cell line].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang YJ(1), Jia XH, Li JC, Xu YH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical University,
Binzhou, Shandong 256603, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of lentivirus-mediated RNA interference
targeting HOXA10 gene on the proliferation, apoptosis and morphology of leukemic 
cell line U937.
METHODS: Four different shRNA plasmids were designed and built to interfere with 
HOXA10 gene. The four interference plasmids were transfected into 293T cells with
the HOXA10 over expression plasmid and then the RNAi efficiency of the four
interference plasmids was determined by Western blot. The best one was chosen to 
transfect 293T cells with lentiviral helping plasmids to produce packaged
lentivirus (lenti-shHOXA10). U937 cells were divided into interference group
(lenti-shHOXA10), negative control group and untreated group. After infection
with the packaged lentivirus, infection efficiency of lentivirus for U937 was
detected by flow cytometry, and the expression of HOXA10 gene mRNA and protein
was detected by real-time PCR and Western blot. Cell survival was determined by
MTT assay. Apoptosis rate was detected by flow cytometry.
RESULTS: Lentiviral-shRNA vector of HOXA10 gene was successfully constructed.
Compared with the negative control and untreated groups, mRNA level of HOXA10
decreased by (92.3±1.3)%, protein levels decreased by 91.1%, and the inhibition
rate of U937 cells [(43.9±0.7)%] increased in the interference group (P<0.05).
Wright's staining showed that the ratio of karyon to cytoplasm was reduced and
mitotic phase was rare in the interference group. Apoptosis rate in the
interference group [(27.1±1.4)%] was significantly higher than in the negative
[(19.4±1.9)%] and untreated groups [(5.5±1.3)%] (P<0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Lentivirus mediated RNAi can reduce the expression level of HOXA10, 
effectively inhibit proliferation and promote apoptosis of U937 cells. HOXA10
gene is expected to become a new target for the treatment of leukemia at gene
level.

PMID: 23092574  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. J Hum Genet. 2013 Jan;58(1):51-3. doi: 10.1038/jhg.2012.118. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

HOX gene methylation status analysis in patients with hereditary breast cancer.

Pilato B(1), Pinto R, De Summa S, Lambo R, Paradiso A, Tommasi S.

Author information: 
(1)National Cancer Research Centre, Istituto Tumori Giovanni Paolo II, Bari,
Italy.

Cancer development is related not only to genetic alterations but also to
aberrant epigenetic changes that could lead to heritable gene patterns critical
for neoplastic initiation and progression. Knowledge of epigenetic regulation in 
cancer cells is useful for both the understanding of carcinogenesis and for the
possibility of using epigenetic drugs. HOX genes deregulation have a crucial role
in oncogenesis process and tumor suppression. In this report, the methylation of 
HOXA1, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXB13, HNF1B, OTX1, TLX1 genes have been analyzed in
patients with hereditary breast cancer. This is the first study analyzing BRCA
mutational status of patients with respect to methylation of HOX genes. HOXA10
has been found to be methylated in all patients analyzed but never in healthy
subjects. With respect to clinical pathological information, hypermethylation of 
all studied genes, with the exception of OTX1, was significantly associated with 
absence of HER2 neu expression (P<0.05). Moreover, hypermethylation of HOXB13,
HOXA10 and HOXA1 was associated with a high proliferation index (Mib1=10%,
P<0.05) and hypermethylation of HOXB13 and HOXA10 also with high expression of
estrogen and progesterone receptors. These preliminary data suggest a possible
involvement of HOX genes in familial breast cancer as marker helpful to identify 
high-risk patients.

PMID: 23051705  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. J Hazard Mater. 2012 Nov 30;241-242:231-40. doi: 10.1016/j.jhazmat.2012.09.038.
Epub 2012 Sep 24.

Effects of DEHP on endometrial receptivity and embryo implantation in pregnant
mice.

Li R(1), Yu C, Gao R, Liu X, Lu J, Zhao L, Chen X, Ding Y, Wang Y, He J.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, School of Public Health, Chongqing Medical
University, Chongqing, PR China.

Di-(2-ethylhexyl)-phthalate (DEHP) is a ubiquitous environmental pollutant and
endocrine disruptor (ED) that causes serious adverse effects on animal and human 
health. The harmful effects of DEHP on human reproduction are increasingly
recognized, especially in women. However, it is not known how endometrial
receptivity and embryo implantation, which play important roles in the
establishment of pregnancy, are affected by DEHP. This study was aimed towards
investigating the effects of DEHP on endometrial receptivity and embryo
implantation in pregnant mice. The pregnant mice received DEHP at 0, 250, 500 and
1000 mg/kg/day from day 1 (D1) of gestation until sacrifice. Administration of
DEHP led to compromised endometrial receptivity and decreased number of
implantation sites. The mRNA and protein expression levels of ERa, PR and
E-cadherin, but not those of HoxA10 and MMP-2, were up-regulated by DEHP in the
mouse endometrium. The results further suggested that DEHP disrupts the MAPK and 
NF-<U+03BA>B signaling pathways. This was maybe one of paths which influenced the
E-cadherin expression. In conclusion, DEHP reduced endometrial receptivity and
impaired embryo implantation by influencing the expression of hormone receptors
and E-cadherin. Therefore, determining the full extent of the hazards of DEHP to 
human reproduction will be vital to developing and implementing effective
protective measures.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23046697  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. J Biol Chem. 2012 Nov 16;287(47):39589-601. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M112.402172. Epub
2012 Oct 4.

ß-Catenin activates the HOXA10 and CDX4 genes in myeloid progenitor cells.

Bei L(1), Shah C, Wang H, Huang W, Roy R, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine and the Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

HoxA10 is a homeodomain transcription factor that is involved in maintenance of
the myeloid progenitor population and implicated in myeloid leukemogenesis.
Previously, we found that FGF2 and CDX4 are direct target genes of HoxA10 and
that HOXA10 is a Cdx4 target gene. We also found that increased production of
fibroblast growth factor 2 (Fgf2) by HoxA10-overexpressing myeloid progenitor
cells results in activation of ß-catenin in an autocrine manner. In this study,
we identify novel cis elements in the CDX4 and HOXA10 genes that are activated by
ß-catenin in myeloid progenitor cells. We determine that ß-catenin interacts with
these cis elements, identifying both CDX4 and HOXA10 as ß-catenin target genes in
this context. We demonstrate that HoxA10-induced CDX4 transcription is influenced
by Fgf2-dependent ß-catenin activation. Similarly, Cdx4-induced HOXA10
transcription is influenced by ß-catenin in an Fgf2-dependent manner. Increased
expression of a set of Hox proteins, including HoxA10, is associated with poor
prognosis in acute myeloid leukemia. Cdx4 contributes to leukemogenesis in
Hox-overexpressing acute myeloid leukemia, and increased ß-catenin activity is
also associated with poor prognosis. The current studies identify a molecular
mechanisms through which increased expression of HoxA10 increases Cdx4 expression
by direct CDX4 activation and by Fgf2-induced ß-catenin activity. This results in
Cdx4-induced HoxA10-expression, creating a positive feedback mechanism.

PMCID: PMC3501069
PMID: 23038246  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. PLoS One. 2012;7(9):e45364. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0045364. Epub 2012 Sep 28.

5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine leads to reduced embryo implantation and reduced
expression of DNA methyltransferases and essential endometrial genes.

Ding YB(1), Long CL, Liu XQ, Chen XM, Guo LR, Xia YY, He JL, Wang YX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Biology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing,
People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: The DNA demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-CdR)
incorporates into DNA and decreases DNA methylation, sparking interest in its use
as a potential therapeutic agent. We aimed to determine the effects of maternal
5-aza-CdR treatment on embryo implantation in the mouse and to evaluate whether
these effects are associated with decreased levels of DNA methyltransferases
(Dnmts) and three genes (estrogen receptor a [Esr1], progesterone receptor [Pgr],
and homeobox A10 [Hoxa10]) that are vital for control of endometrial changes
during implantation.
METHODS AND PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Mice treated with 5-aza-CdR had a dose-dependent 
decrease in number of implantation sites, with defected endometrial
decidualization and stromal cell proliferation. Western blot analysis on
pseudo-pregnant day 3 (PD3) showed that 0.1 mg/kg 5-aza-CdR significantly
repressed Dnmt3a protein level, and 0.5 mg/kg 5-aza-CdR significantly repressed
Dnmt1, Dnmt3a, and Dnmt3b protein levels in the endometrium. On PD5, mice showed 
significantly decreased Dnmt3a protein level with 0.1 mg/kg 5-aza-CdR, and
significantly decreased Dnmt1 and Dnmt3a with 0.5 mg/kg 5-aza-CdR.
Immunohistochemical staining showed that 5-aza-CdR repressed DNMT expression in a
cell type-specific fashion within the uterus, including decreased expression of
Dnmt1 in luminal and/or glandular epithelium and of Dnmt3a and Dnmt3b in stroma. 
Furthermore, the 5' flanking regions of the Esr1, Pgr, and Hoxa10 were
hypomethylated on PD5. Interestingly, the higher (0.5 mg/kg) dose of 5-aza-CdR
decreased protein expression of Esr1, Pgr, and Hoxa10 in the endometrium on PD5
in both methylation-dependent and methylation-independent manners.
CONCLUSIONS: The effects of 5-aza-CdR on embryo implantation in mice were
associated with altered expression of endometrial Dnmts and genes controlling
endometrial changes, suggesting that altered gene methylation, and not
cytotoxicity alone, contributes to implantation defects induced by 5-aza-CdR.

PMCID: PMC3460940
PMID: 23028963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Endocrinology. 2012 Nov;153(11):5575-86. doi: 10.1210/en.2012-1528. Epub 2012 Sep
24.

Overexpression of cyclin D3 improves decidualization defects in Hoxa-10(-/-)
mice.

Sroga JM(1), Gao F, Ma X, Das SK.

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Cincinnati, Ohio 45267, USA.

Uterine decidualization, a crucial process for implantation, is a tightly
regulated process encompassing proliferation, differentiation, and
polyploidization of uterine stromal cells. Hoxa (Homeobox A)-10, a homeobox
transcription factor, is highly expressed in decidualizing stromal cells.
Targeted gene deletion experiments have demonstrated marked infertility resulting
from severely compromised decidualization in Hoxa-10(-/-) mice. However, the
underlying mechanism by which Hoxa-10 regulates stromal cell differentiation
remains poorly understood. Cyclin D3, a G(1) phase cell-cycle regulatory protein 
involved in stromal cell proliferation and decidualization, is significantly
reduced in Hoxa-10(-/-) mice. The expression of cyclin D3 in the pregnant mouse
uterus parallels stromal cell decidualization. Here, we show that
adenovirus-driven cyclin D3 replacement in Hoxa-10(-/-) mice improves stromal
cell decidualization. To address our question of whether cyclin D3 replacement in
Hoxa-10(-/-) mice can improve decidualization, both in vitro and in vivo studies 
were completed after the addition of cyclin D3 or empty (control) viral vectors. 
Immunostaining demonstrated increased proliferation and decidualization in both
in vitro and in vivo studies, and in situ hybridization confirmed increased
expression of decidualization markers in vivo. Placentation was demonstrated as
well in vivo in the cyclin D3-replaced animals. However, fertility was not
restored in Hoxa-10(-/-) mice after d 10 of pregnancy. Finally, we identified
several downstream targets of cyclin D3 during decidualization in vitro via
proteomics experiments, and these were confirmed using in situ hybridization in
vivo. Collectively, these results demonstrate that cyclin D3 expression
influences a host of genes involved in decidualization and can improve
decidualization in Hoxa-10(-/-) mice.

PMCID: PMC3473199
PMID: 23008516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Fertil Steril. 2013 Jan;99(1):231-40. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2012.08.038. Epub
2012 Sep 19.

Dysmenorrhea and its severity are associated with increased uterine contractility
and overexpression of oxytocin receptor (OTR) in women with symptomatic
adenomyosis.

Guo SW(1), Mao X, Ma Q, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of
China. hoxa10@gmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate uterine contractility, oxytocin receptor (OTR) expression 
in myometrial smooth muscle cells (MSMCs) derived from uterine tissues from women
with and without adenomyosis correlate OTR expression with uterine contractility 
and dysmenorrhea severity, and see whether trichostatin A (TSA) and
andrographolide inhibit OTR expression.
DESIGN: Laboratory study using human tissues.
SETTING: Academic hospital.
PATIENT(S): Twenty patients (cases) with histologically confirmed adenomyosis and
10 (controls) with leiomyomas, cervical dysplasia, and cancer but no adenomyosis 
or endometriosis.
INTERVENTION(S): Dysmenorrhea severity was scored by Visual Analog Scale. Uterine
tissue samples were collected during hysterectomy. Myometrial smooth muscle cells
derived from tissue samples were cultured and OTR protein levels were measured.
The effect of TSA (0.5 or 1 µM) and andrographolide (15 or 30 µM) on OTR
expression was evaluated.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Visual Analog Scale scores, and contractile amplitude
and frequency. The OTR protein levels in MSMCs were quantified by Western blot
analysis.
RESULT(S): The contractile amplitude and OTR expression levels were significantly
higher in cases than in controls. Dysmenorrhea Visual Analog Scale scores
correlated positively with contractile amplitude and OTR expression level. Both
TSA and andrographolide dose-dependently inhibit OTR expression in MSMC.
CONCLUSION(S): Oxytocin receptor overexpression in MSMCs may be responsible for
increased uterine contractility and adenomyosis-associated dysmenorrhea. Both
histone deacetylase inhibitors and andrographolide are therapeutically promising.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22999795  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Reprod Biomed Online. 2012 Nov;25(5):481-91. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2012.07.019.
Epub 2012 Aug 8.

Endometrial expression of selected genes in patients achieving pregnancy
spontaneously or after ICSI and patients failing at least two ICSI cycles.

Allegra A(1), Marino A, Peregrin PC, Lama A, García-Segovia A, Forte GI,
Núñez-Calonge R, Agueli C, Mazzola S, Volpes A.

Author information: 
(1)Andros Day Surgery, Reproductive Medicine Unit, 90144 Palermo, Italy.
allegra@centroandros.it

The objective of this study was to identify the endometrial gene expression
profile in receptive phase, which could represent a useful prognostic tool for
selecting IVF patients. Endometrial expression of 47 selected genes biopsied
during the window of implantation in natural cycles was compared between patients
who achieved a successful pregnancy spontaneously or after subsequent
intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) cycles and patients who did not achieve a
pregnancy after at least two failed ICSI cycles. The comparative analysis showed 
significantly different levels of expression in 19 genes, five implicated in
apoptosis (CASP8, FADD, CASP10, APAF1, ANXA4), three in immunity (LIF, SPP1,
C4BPA), five in transcriptional activity (MSX1, HOXA10, MSX2, HOXA11, GATA2), two
in lipid metabolism (LEPR, APOD) and four in oxidative metabolism (AOX1, ALDH1A3,
GPX3, NNMT). The evidence for these genes being differently expressed could
represent the starting point of identifying the ideal receptive endometrial gene 
expression profile, which could be used in the future as a prognostic tool for
IVF patients. Gene expression analysis technology has opened new important
perspectives on the study of the physiological processes of different tissues and
organs. Specifically for the endometrium, it would be really interesting to find 
out an endometrial gene expression profile of receptive phase, which could be
used in future as a useful prognostic tool for selecting IVF patients. To achieve
this aim, the objective of the present paper was the comparison of endometrial
expression in natural cycles of 47 selected genes between the biopsies of
patients who achieved a successful pregnancy, either spontaneously or after
subsequent ICSI cycles, and those of patients who did not achieve a pregnancy
after at least two failed ICSI cycles. The comparative analysis showed a
significant different expression in 19 genes: five implicated in programmed cell 
death, known as apoptosis (CASP8, FADD, CASP10, APAF1, ANXA4), three in immunity 
(LIF, SPP1, C4BPA), five in transcriptional activity (MSX1, HOXA10, MSX2, HOXA11,
GATA2), two in lipid metabolism (LEPR, APOD) and four in oxidative metabolism
(AOX1, ALDH1A3, GPX3, NNMT). The evidence of these genes being differently
expressed could represent the starting point of identifying the ideal receptive
endometrial gene expression profile which could be used in the future as a
prognostic tool for IVF patients.

Copyright © 2012 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All
rights reserved.

PMID: 22999554  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Reprod Sci. 2013 Jan;20(1):78-84. doi: 10.1177/1933719112451146. Epub 2012 Aug
20.

Epigenetic disorder may cause downregulation of HOXA10 in the eutopic endometrium
of fertile women with endometriosis.

Lu H(1), Yang X, Zhang Y, Lu R, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The Affiliated Hospital of Nantong
University, Nantong, Jiangsu, China.

HOXA10 is an important gene for endometrial receptivity and plays a regulatory
role in the adult female reproductive tract. It is regulated by epigenetic
modulation in the CpG clusters of promoter in some cases. The aim of this study
was to investigate HOXA10 expression and the epigenetic regulation in the eutopic
endometrium of fertile women with endometriosis by quantitative real-time
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blot. The effect of 5-azacytidine 
(5-ac), a demethylation agent on HOXA10 expression was determined on endometrium 
stromal cells (ESCs) from these women with endometriosis. Results revealed that
in normal endometrium (NE), HOXA10 messenger RNA (mRNA) and protein expression at
the secretory phase were significantly higher than that at the proliferative
phase. The HOXA10 mRNA and protein expression in the eutopic endometrium of
endometriosis were significantly lower than in NE. The HOXA10 mRNA and protein
levels in cultured stromal cells from endometriosis in vitro were significantly
increased in a 5-ac treatment group compared with a nontreatment group. Our
results indicated that the level of HOXA10 decrease in the eutopic endometrium of
patients with endometriosis. Upregulation of HOXA10 in ESCs after treatment with 
5-ac suggests that HOXA10 expression is controlled by methylation of the
promoter. An epigenetic aberration is likely the main cause of endometriosis.

PMID: 22915150  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. PLoS One. 2012;7(7):e41080. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0041080. Epub 2012 Jul 20.

miRNA signature and Dicer requirement during human endometrial stromal
decidualization in vitro.

Estella C(1), Herrer I, Moreno-Moya JM, Quiñonero A, Martínez S, Pellicer A,
Simón C.

Author information: 
(1)Fundación Instituto Valenciano de Infertilidad (FIVI), Valencia University,
Valencia, Spain.

Decidualization is a morphological and biochemical transformation of endometrial 
stromal fibroblast into differentiated decidual cells, which is critical for
embryo implantation and pregnancy establishment. The complex regulatory networks 
have been elucidated at both the transcriptome and the proteome levels, however
very little is known about the post-transcriptional regulation of this process.
miRNAs regulate multiple physiological pathways and their de-regulation is
associated with human disorders including gynaecological conditions such as
endometriosis and preeclampsia. In this study we profile the miRNAs expression
throughout human endometrial stromal (hESCs) decidualization and analyze the
requirement of the miRNA biogenesis enzyme Dicer during this process. A total of 
26 miRNAs were upregulated and 17 miRNAs downregulated in decidualized hESCs
compared to non-decidualized hESCs. Three miRNAs families, miR-181, miR-183 and
miR-200, are down-regulated during the decidualization process. Using miRNAs
target prediction algorithms we have identified the potential targets and
pathways regulated by these miRNAs. The knockdown of Dicer has a minor effect on 
hESCs during in vitro decidualization. We have analyzed a battery of
decidualization markers such as cell morphology, Prolactin, IGFBP-1, MPIF-1 and
TIMP-3 secretion as well as HOXA10, COX2, SP1, C/EBPß and FOXO1 expression in
decidualized hESCs with decreased Dicer function. We found decreased levels of
HOXA10 and altered intracellular organization of actin filaments in Dicer
knockdown decidualized hESCs compared to control. Our results provide the miRNA
signature of hESC during the decidualization process in vitro. We also provide
the first functional characterization of Dicer during human endometrial
decidualization although surprisingly we found that Dicer plays a minor role
regulating this process suggesting that alternative biogenesis miRNAs pathways
must be involved in human endometrial decidualization.

PMCID: PMC3401238
PMID: 22911744  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Exp Hematol. 2012 Dec;40(12):1016-27. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.08.001. Epub
2012 Aug 8.

Gene expression profiling and candidate gene resequencing identifies pathways and
mutations important for malignant transformation caused by leukemogenic fusion
genes.

Novak RL(1), Harper DP, Caudell D, Slape C, Beachy SH, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia Biology Section, Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) and CALM-AF10 (CA10) are oncogenic fusion proteins produced 
by recurrent chromosomal translocations in patients with acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). Transgenic mice that express these fusions develop AML with a long latency
and incomplete penetrance, suggesting that collaborating genetic events are
required for leukemic transformation. We employed genetic techniques to identify 
both preleukemic abnormalities in healthy transgenic mice as well as
collaborating events leading to leukemic transformation. Candidate gene
resequencing revealed that 6 of 27 (22%) CA10 AMLs spontaneously acquired a Ras
pathway mutation and 8 of 27 (30%) acquired an Flt3 mutation. Two CA10 AMLs
acquired an Flt3 internal-tandem duplication, demonstrating that these mutations 
can be acquired in murine as well as human AML. Gene expression profiles revealed
a marked upregulation of Hox genes, particularly Hoxa5, Hoxa9, and Hoxa10 in both
NHD13 and CA10 mice. Furthermore, mir196b, which is embedded within the Hoxa
locus, was overexpressed in both CA10 and NHD13 samples. In contrast, the Hox
cofactors Meis1 and Pbx3 were differentially expressed; Meis1 was increased in
CA10 AMLs but not NHD13 AMLs, whereas Pbx3 was consistently increased in NHD13
but not CA10 AMLs. Silencing of Pbx3 in NHD13 cells led to decreased
proliferation, increased apoptosis, and decreased colony formation in vitro,
suggesting a previously unexpected role for Pbx3 in leukemic transformation.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3496069
PMID: 22885519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Reprod Sci. 2013 Mar;20(3):285-98. doi: 10.1177/1933719112452940. Epub 2012 Aug
8.

Slit2 overexpression results in increased microvessel density and lesion size in 
mice with induced endometriosis.

Guo SW(1), Zheng Y, Lu Y, Liu X, Geng JG.

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai,
China. hoxa10@gmail.com

We recently reported that Slit/Roundabout (ROBO) 1 pathway may be a constituent
biomarker for recurrence of endometriosis, likely through promoting angiogenesis.
In this study, we sought to determine as whether Slit2 overexpression can
facilitate angiogenesis, increase lesion size, and induce hyperalgesia in mice
with induced endometriosis. We used 30 Slit2 transgenic (S) and 29 wild-type (W) 
mice and cross-transplanted endometrial fragments from S to W (group SW) and vice
versa (group WS), and also within the S and W (groups SS and WW, respectively),
into the peritoneal cavity, inducing endometriosis. We also performed a sham
surgery within both S and W mice (groups Sm and Wm, respectively). The size of
the ectopic implants, microvessel density (MVD) and immunoreactivity to ROBO1,
and vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF) in ectopic and eutopic
endometrium, along with hotplate and tail-flick tests in all mice, were then
evaluated. We found that the induction of endometriosis resulted in generalized
hyperalgesia, which was unaffected by Slit2 overexpression. Slit2 overexpression 
did increase the lesion size significantly and correlated positively with the MVD
in ectopic and eutopic endometrium. Slit2 expression levels appear to correlate
with the MVD, but not with VEGF immunoreactivity, in ectopic endometrium.
Consequently, we conclude that Slit2 may play an important role in angiogenesis
in endometriosis. The increased angiogenesis, as measured by MVD, but not VEGF
immunoreactivity, likely resulted in increased lesion size in induced
endometriosis. Thus, SLIT2/ROBO1 pathway may be a potential therapeutic target
for treating endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC4077380
PMID: 22875847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Leukemia. 2013 Jan;27(1):159-69. doi: 10.1038/leu.2012.196. Epub 2012 Jul 16.

Ex vivo expansion of normal and chronic myeloid leukemic stem cells without
functional alteration using a NUP98HOXA10homeodomain fusion gene.

Sloma I(1), Imren S, Beer PA, Zhao Y, Lecault V, Leung D, Raghuram K, Brimacombe 
C, Lambie K, Piret J, Hansen C, Humphries RK, Eaves CJ.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

HOX genes have been implicated as regulators of normal and leukemic stem cell
functionality, but the extent to which these activities are linked is poorly
understood. Previous studies revealed that transduction of primitive mouse
hematopoietic cells with a NUP98HOXA10homeodomain (NA10HD) fusion gene enables a 
subsequent rapid and marked expansion in vitro of hematopoietic stem cell numbers
without causing their transformation or deregulated expansion in vivo. To
determine whether forced expression of NA10HD in primitive human cells would have
a similar effect, we compared the number of long-term culture-initiating cells
(LTC-ICs) present in cultures of lenti-NA10HD versus control virus-transduced
CD34(+) cells originally isolated from human cord blood and chronic phase (CP)
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) patients. We found that NA10HD greatly increases
outputs of both normal and Ph(+)/BCR-ABL(+) LTC-ICs, and this effect is
particularly pronounced in cultures containing growth factor-producing feeders.
Interestingly, NA10HD did not affect the initial cell cycle kinetics of the
transduced cells nor their subsequent differentiation. Moreover, immunodeficient 
mice repopulated with NA10HD-transduced CP-CML cells for more than 8 months
showed no evidence of altered behavior. Thus, NA10HD provides a novel tool to
enhance both normal and CP-CML stem cell expansion in vitro, without apparently
altering other properties.

PMCID: PMC3542630
PMID: 22868969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Reprod Sci. 2012 Dec;19(12):1268-75. doi: 10.1177/1933719112447125. Epub 2012 Jul
10.

Dietary folate deficiency in pseudopregnant mice has no effect on homeobox A10
promoter methylation or expression.

Long C(1), He J, Liu X, Chen X, Gao R, Wang Y, Ding Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive Biology, Chongqing Medical University, Chongqing,
People's Republic of China.

During the reproductive cycle, a number of genes controlling endometrial changes 
are regulated by DNA methylation, a common epigenetic modification. Because
dietary folate affects DNA methylation, we determined whether a folate-deficient 
diet (FDD) alters DNA methylation in endometria of pseudopregnant mice, focusing 
on the homeobox A10 (Hoxa10) promoter. Mice were given an FDD or control diet for
40 to 45 days and examined on day 5 of pseudopregnancy. Compared to control mice,
FDD mice had lower folate levels in liver and serum (P = .004). However, the FDD 
did not significantly affect DNA methylation within the cytosine-guanine
dinucleotide (CpG)-rich Hoxa10 promoter, even when specific CpG sites were
examined (P > .05). In endometrial tissue sections, the localization of
anti-Hoxa10 staining was unchanged in FDD mice. Therefore, folate deficiency did 
not significantly affect promoter methylation or expression of Hoxa10.

PMID: 22786609  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Mol Med Rep. 2012 Jul;6(1):51-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2012.875. Epub 2012 Apr 18.

HOXA10 expression is decreased by testosterone in luteinized granulosa cells in
vitro.

He H(1), Li T, Yin D, Liu R, Chen Q, Wang J, Zhong G, Pu D.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical
College of Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei 430030, PR
China.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) is perhaps the most prevalent endocrine disorder
in women of reproductive age, characterized by elevated levels of circulating
androgens or clinical manifestations of androgen excess. The specific cytokine
profile of PCOS patients is probably related to the lower implantation rate,
since follicular fluid appears to function as an embryotrophic agent. For a
better understanding of the local regulation of human follicles, the present
study investigated the protein expression levels and cellular localization of
HOXA10 in granulosa cells (GCs) from women with normal ovarian function
undergoing IVF due to their husbands suffering from azoospermia. We demonstrated 
by immunohistochemical studies that the expression of HOXA10 was mainly localized
in the cytoplasm of GCs. Our data indicate that these alterations were associated
with changes in the expression of ovarian transcription factors of HOXA10. GC
dose-responsive decreases in HOXA10 protein were observed in response to
physiological or supraphysiological concentrations (10-4 to 10-7 M) of
testosterone. These data reveal that testosterone may be involved in HOXA10 gene 
regulation in GCs. Decreased HOXA10 expression in GCs treated with testosterone
suggest that this androgen is responsible for the decreased expression of HOXA10 
in PCOS patients.

PMID: 22576737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Blood. 2012 Jun 21;119(25):6099-108. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-10-388710. Epub 2012
May 7.

Setbp1 promotes the self-renewal of murine myeloid progenitors via activation of 
Hoxa9 and Hoxa10.

Oakley K(1), Han Y, Vishwakarma BA, Chu S, Bhatia R, Gudmundsson KO, Keller J,
Chen X, Vasko V, Jenkins NA, Copeland NG, Du Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Uniformed Services University of the Health
Sciences, 4301 Jones Bridge Rd, Bethesda, MD 20814, USA.

Acquisition of self-renewal capability by myeloid progenitors to become leukemic 
stem cells during myeloid leukemia development is poorly understood. Here, we
show that Setbp1 overexpression efficiently confers self-renewal capability to
myeloid progenitors in vitro, causing their immortalization in the presence of
stem cell factor and IL-3. Self-renewal after immortalization requires continuous
Setbp1 expression. We also found that Hoxa9 and Hoxa10 mRNA are present at
dramatically higher levels in Setbp1-immortalized cells compared with other
immortalized cells, and are induced shortly after Setbp1 expression in primary
myeloid progenitors. Suppression of either gene in Setbp1-immortalized cells
drastically reduces their colony-forming capability. Interestingly, Setbp1
protein associates with Hoxa9 and Hoxa10 promoters in chromatin
immunoprecipitation assays in these cells, suggesting that both are direct
transcriptional targets of Setbp1. Setbp1 also promotes self-renewal of myeloid
progenitors in vivo as its coexpression with BCR/ABL transforms primary mouse
myeloid progenitors, generating aggressive leukemias in recipient mice resembling
chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) myeloid blast crisis. Increased SETBP1 mRNA
levels were also detected in a subset of CML advanced phase/blast crisis patients
with high levels of HOXA9 and HOXA10 expression. Thus, Setbp1 activation
represents a novel mechanism conferring self-renewal capability to myeloid
progenitors in myeloid leukemia development.

PMCID: PMC3383018
PMID: 22566606  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Cancer Res. 2012 May 1;72(9):2197-205. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-11-3909.

Epigenetic resensitization to platinum in ovarian cancer.

Matei D(1), Fang F, Shen C, Schilder J, Arnold A, Zeng Y, Berry WA, Huang T,
Nephew KP.

Author information: 
(1)Melvin and Bren Simon Cancer Center, Indiana University, Bloomington, Indiana 
46202, USA. dmatei@iupui.edu

Preclinical studies have shown that hypomethylating agents reverse platinum
resistance in ovarian cancer. In this phase II clinical trial, based upon the
results of our phase I dose defining study, we tested the clinical and biologic
activity of low-dose decitabine administered before carboplatin in
platinum-resistant ovarian cancer patients. Among 17 patients with heavily
pretreated and platinum-resistant ovarian cancer, the regimen induced a 35%
objective response rate (RR) and progression-free survival (PFS) of 10.2 months, 
with nine patients (53%) free of progression at 6 months. Global and
gene-specific DNA demethylation was achieved in peripheral blood mononuclear
cells and tumors. The number of demethylated genes was greater (P < 0.05) in
tumor biopsies from patients with PFS more than 6 versus less than 6 months (311 
vs. 244 genes). Pathways enriched at baseline in tumors from patients with PFS
more than 6 months included cytokine-cytokine receptor interactions, drug
transporters, and mitogen-activated protein kinase, toll-like receptor and
Jak-STAT signaling pathways, whereas those enriched in demethylated genes after
decitabine treatment included pathways involved in cancer, Wnt signaling, and
apoptosis (P < 0.01). Demethylation of MLH1, RASSF1A, HOXA10, and HOXA11 in
tumors positively correlated with PFS (P < 0.05). Together, the results of this
study suggest that low-dose decitabine altered DNA methylation of genes and
cancer pathways, restoring sensitivity to carboplatin in patients with heavily
pretreated ovarian cancer and resulting in a high RR and prolonged PFS.

©2012 AACR

PMCID: PMC3700422
PMID: 22549947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. J Biol Chem. 2012 May 25;287(22):18230-48. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M111.328401. Epub
2012 Apr 4.

HoxA10 protein regulates transcription of gene encoding fibroblast growth factor 
2 (FGF2) in myeloid cells.

Shah CA(1), Bei L, Wang H, Platanias LC, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine and Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

HoxA10 is a member of a highly conserved family of homeodomain transcription
factors that are involved in definitive hematopoiesis and implicated in the
pathogenesis of acute myeloid leukemia (AML). During normal hematopoiesis, HoxA10
facilitates myeloid progenitor expansion and impedes myeloid differentiation. To 
better understand the molecular mechanisms that control these events, we have
been identifying and characterizing HoxA10 target genes. In this study, we
identified the gene encoding fibroblast growth factor 2 (Fgf2 or basic fibroblast
growth factor) as a target gene that is relevant to the biological effects of
HoxA10. We identified two cis elements in the proximal FGF2 promoter that are
activated by HoxA10 in myeloid progenitor cells and differentiating phagocytes.
We determined that Fgf2 expression and secretion are regulated in a
HoxA10-dependent manner in these cells. We found that increased Fgf2 production
by HoxA10-overexpressing myeloid progenitor cells induced a phosphoinositol
3-kinase-dependent increase in ß-catenin protein. This resulted in autocrine
stimulation of proliferation in HoxA10-overexpressing cells and hypersensitivity 
to other cytokines that share this pathway. Therefore, these studies identified
expression of Fgf2 as a mechanism by which HoxA10 controls the size of the
myeloid progenitor population. These studies also suggested that aberrant
production of Fgf2 may contribute to leukemogenesis in the subset of AML with
dysregulated Hox expression. Therapeutic targeting of Fgf2-stimulated signaling
pathways might be a rational approach to this poor prognosis subset of AML.

PMCID: PMC3365754
PMID: 22493287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Reproduction. 2012 May;143(5):713-25. doi: 10.1530/REP-12-0036. Epub 2012 Mar 27.

V-ATPase upregulation during early pregnancy: a possible link to establishment of
an inflammatory response during preimplantation period of pregnancy.

Jaiswal MK(1), Mallers TM, Larsen B, Kwak-Kim J, Chaouat G, Gilman-Sachs A,
Beaman KD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Rosalind Franklin University of
Medicine and Science, North Chicago, Illinois 60064, USA.

Various mechanisms exist to prevent a potentially deleterious maternal immune
response that results in compromising survival of semiallogeneic fetus. In
pregnancy, there is a necessary early preimplantation inflammatory stage followed
by a postimplantation anti-inflammatory stage. Thus, there is a biphasic 'immune 
response' observed during the course of pregnancy. We provide the evidence that
capacitation of sperm induced the expression of a2 isoform of V-ATPase (ATP6V0A2 
referred to as a2V), leukemia inhibitory factor (Lif), Il1b, and Tnf in the
sperm. Capacitated sperm also released cleaved N-terminal domain of a2V-ATPase
(a2NTD), which upregulates the gene expression of Lif, Il1b, Tnf, and monocyte
chemotactic protein-1 (Ccl2 (Mcp1)) in the uterus. Unfertilized eggs had low a2V 
expression, but after fertilization, the expression of a2V increased in zygotes. 
This increased level of a2V expression was maintained in preimplantation embryos.
Seminal plasma was necessary for upregulation of a2V expression in
preimplantation embryos, as mating with seminal vesicle-deficient males failed to
elicit an increase in a2V expression in preimplantation embryos. The infiltration
of macrophages into the uterus was significantly increased after insemination of 
both sperm and seminal plasma during the preimplantation period of pregnancy.
This dynamic infiltration into the uterus corresponded with the uterine a2V
expression through the induction of Ccl2 expression. Furthermore, the
polarization ratio of M1:M2 (pro-inflammatory/anti-inflammatory) macrophages in
the uterus fluctuated from a ratio of 1.60 (day 1) to 1.45 (day 4) when female
mice were inseminated with both sperm and seminal plasma. These data provide
evidence that exposure to semen may initiate an inflammatory milieu by inducing
a2V and cytokine/chemokine expression, which triggers the influx of macrophages
into the preimplantation uterus during the onset of pregnancy and ultimately
leads to successful pregnancy outcome.

PMID: 22454532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. BMC Cancer. 2012 Mar 23;12:111. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-111.

miRNA-135a promotes breast cancer cell migration and invasion by targeting
HOXA10.

Chen Y(1), Zhang J, Wang H, Zhao J, Xu C, Du Y, Luo X, Zheng F, Liu R, Zhang H,
Ma D.

Author information: 
(1)Key Laboratory of Molecular Medicine, Ministry of Education, Shanghai Medical 
College, Fudan University, China.

BACKGROUND: miRNAs are a group of small RNA molecules regulating target genes by 
inducing mRNA degradation or translational repression. Aberrant expression of
miRNAs correlates with various cancers. Although miR-135a has been implicated in 
several other cancers, its role in breast cancer is unknown. HOXA10 however, is
associated with multiple cancer types and was recently shown to induce p53
expression in breast cancer cells and reduce their invasive ability. Because
HOXA10 is a confirmed miR-135a target in more than one tissue, we examined
miR-135a levels in relation to breast cancer phenotypes to determine if miR-135a 
plays role in this cancer type.
METHODS: Expression levels of miR-135a in tissues and cells were determined by
poly (A)-RT PCR. The effect of miR-135a on proliferation was evaluated by CCK8
assay, cell migration and invasion were evaluated by transwell migration and
invasion assays, and target protein expression was determined by western
blotting. GFP and luciferase reporter plasmids were constructed to confirm the
action of miR-135a on downstream target genes including HOXA10. Results are
reported as means ± S.D. and differences were tested for significance using
2-sided Student"s t-test.
RESULTS: Here we report that miR-135a was highly expressed in metastatic breast
tumors. We found that the expression of miR-135a was required for the migration
and invasion of breast cancer cells, but not their proliferation. HOXA10, which
encodes a transcription factor required for embryonic development and is a
metastasis suppressor in breast cancer, was shown to be a direct target of
miR-135a in breast cancer cells. Our analysis showed that miR-135a suppressed the
expression of HOXA10 both at the mRNA and protein level, and its ability to
promote cellular migration and invasion was partially reversed by overexpression 
of HOXA10.
CONCLUSIONS: In summary, our results indicate that miR-135a is an onco-miRNA that
can promote breast cancer cell migration and invasion. HOXA10 is a target gene
for miR-135a in breast cancer cells and overexpression of HOXA10 can partially
reverse the miR-135a invasive phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3350382
PMID: 22439757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Carcinogenesis. 2012 May;33(5):1081-8. doi: 10.1093/carcin/bgs121. Epub 2012 Mar 
12.

Upregulation of HOXA10 in gastric cancer with the intestinal mucin phenotype:
reduction during tumor progression and favorable prognosis.

Sentani K(1), Oue N, Naito Y, Sakamoto N, Anami K, Oo HZ, Uraoka N, Aoyagi K,
Sasaki H, Yasui W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan.

Gastric cancer (GC) is one of the most common malignancies worldwide. Better
knowledge of the changes in gene expression that occur during gastric
carcinogenesis may lead to improvements in diagnosis, treatment and prevention.
In this study, we screened for genes upregulated in GC by comparing gene
expression profiles from microarray and serial analysis of gene expression and
identified the HOXA10 gene. The aim of the present study was to investigate the
significance of HOXA10 in GC. Immunohistochemical analysis demonstrated that 221 
(30%) of 749 GC cases were positive for HOXA10, whereas HOXA10 was scarcely
expressed in non-neoplastic gastric mucosa except in the case of intestinal
metaplasia. Next, we analyzed the relationship between HOXA10 expression and
clinicopathological characteristics. HOXA10 expression showed a significant
inverse correlation with the depth of invasion and was observed more frequently
in the differentiated type of GC than in the undifferentiated type of GC. HOXA10 
expression was associated with GC with the intestinal mucin phenotype and
correlated with CDX2 expression. Furthermore, the prognosis of patients with
positive HOXA10 expression was significantly better than in the negative
expression cases. 3-(4,5-dimethylthiazole-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide 
and wound healing assay revealed that knockdown of HOXA10 in GC cells by short
interfering RNA transfection significantly increased viability and motility
relative to the negative control, indicating that HOXA10 expression inhibits cell
growth and motility. These results suggest that expression of HOXA10 may be a key
regulator for GC with the intestinal mucin phenotype.

PMID: 22411957  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2011 Nov;46(11):813-6.

[Expression and significance of HOXA10 gene in the eutopic and ectopic
endometrium of endometriosis].

[Article in Chinese]

Deng KX(1), Liu XC, Zheng YH, Hu LQ, Luo RH, Qiang R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Maternal and Children's Hospital of Foshan, Foshan, 
China.

OBJECTIVES: To investigate the expression and clinical significance of HOXA10
gene in the eutopic and ectopic endometrium of endometriosis. Mehtods Between
Jan.2009 to Aug.2010, 30 patients with endometriosis undergoing laparoscopic
surgery in Maternal and Children's Hospital of Foshan. Eutopic and ectopic
endometrium were obtained. In the mean time, 30 patients with benign ovary cyst
or tubal infertility undergoing laparoscopic surgery were selected as controls.
Their uterine endometrium were obtained real-time fluorescent quantitation,
western blot and immunohistochemistry technique were used to detect mRNA and
protein expression of HOXA10 gene in the eutopic endometrium group, ectopic
endometrium group and control group.
RESULTS: The mRNA and protein expression of HOXA10 gene were 0.61 ± 0.07 and 0.47
± 0.05 in the eutopic endometrium of endometriosis, 0.64 ± 0.06 and 0.50 ± 0.05
in ectopic endometrium of endometriosis, which were significantly lower than 1.22
± 0.14 and 1.42 ± 0.14 in control group (P < 0.01). However, the mRNA and protein
expression of HOXA 10 between eutopic and ectopic endometrium of endometriosis
did not reach statistical difference (P > 0.05). The expression of HOXA10 in
eutopic and ectopic endometrium of endometriosis were decreased by
immunohistochemistry staining.
CONCLUSION: The lower expression of HOXA10 gene in the eutopic and ectopic
endometrium of endometriosis might be associated with pathogenesis and
infertility of endometriosis.

PMID: 22333228  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Reproduction. 2012 Apr;143(4):531-8. doi: 10.1530/REP-11-0438. Epub 2012 Jan 25.

FKBP4 is regulated by HOXA10 during decidualization and in endometriosis.

Yang H(1), Zhou Y, Edelshain B, Schatz F, Lockwood CJ, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

FKBP4 (FKBP52) and FKBP5 (FKBP51) are progestin receptor (PR) co-chaperone
proteins that enhance and inhibit, respectively, progestin-mediated transcription
by PR. Here, we examined FKBP4 and FKBP5 expression in the eutopic endometrium of
fertile women with endometriosis and effects of FKBP4 and FKBP5 on the
decidualization of human endometrial stromal cells (HESCs), and assessed HOXA10
regulation of FKBP4. Expression of FKBP4 mRNA was increased in the late
proliferative phase and remained elevated throughout the secretory phase. FKBP5
expression was low and remained constant throughout the menstrual cycle. Compared
with controls, FKBP4 mRNA expression was decreased in the endometrium of women
with endometriosis, whereas no significant endometriosis-related change was seen 
for FKBP5. Cultured HESCs were treated with either FKBP4 or FKBP5 siRNA and then 
decidualized by incubation with progesterone (P(4)) and 8-bromoadenosine cAMP.
Treatment of HESCs with FKBP4 siRNA resulted in 60% lower IGFBP1 expression. In
contrast, incubation with FKBP5 siRNA did not significantly decrease IGFBP1
expression during in vitro decidualization. HOXA10 and FKBP4 expression increased
in parallel during in vitro decidualization. In HESCs, overexpressed HOXA10
enhanced FKBP4 mRNA and protein levels, whereas HOXA10 knockdown decreased FKBP4 
mRNA and protein levels compared with controls. Similarly, during in vitro
decidualization, FKBP4 expression was decreased in HOXA10-silenced cells.
Enhanced HOXA10 expression in HESCs elicits a decidualization mediating increase 
in FKBP4 expression. The findings are consistent with the observation that women 
with endometriosis have diminished FKBP4 expression leading to impaired
decidualization and infertility. The P(4) resistance seen in endometriosis may be
mediated through HOXA10-regulated FKBP4 expression.

PMID: 22279148  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Development. 2012 Feb;139(4):731-9. doi: 10.1242/dev.075408. Epub 2012 Jan 4.

Recruitment of 5' Hoxa genes in the allantois is essential for proper
extra-embryonic function in placental mammals.

Scotti M(1), Kmita M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Genetics and Development, Institut de Recherches Cliniques de
Montréal, Université de Montréal, 110 avenue des Pins Ouest, Montréal, Québec,
Canada.

The Hox gene family is well known for its functions in establishing morphological
diversity along the anterior-posterior axis of developing embryos. In mammals,
one of these genes, Hoxa13, is crucial for embryonic survival, as its function is
required for the proper expansion of the fetal vasculature in the placenta. Thus,
it appears that the developmental strategy specific to placental mammals is
linked, at least in part, to the recruitment of Hoxa13 function in developing
extra-embryonic tissues. Yet, the mechanism underlying this extra-embryonic
recruitment is unknown. Here, we provide evidence that this functional novelty is
not exclusive to Hoxa13 but is shared with its neighboring Hoxa11 and Hoxa10
genes. We show that the extra-embryonic function of these three Hoxa genes stems 
from their specific expression in the allantois, an extra-embryonic hallmark of
amniote vertebrates. Interestingly, Hoxa10-13 expression in the allantois is
conserved in chick embryos, which are non-placental amniotes, suggesting that the
extra-embryonic recruitment of Hoxa10, Hoxa11 and Hoxa13 most likely arose in
amniotes, i.e. prior to the emergence of placental mammals. Finally, using a
series of targeted recombination and transgenic assays, we provide evidence that 
the regulatory mechanism underlying Hoxa expression in the allantois is extremely
complex and relies on several cis-regulatory sequences.

PMCID: PMC4508127
PMID: 22219351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Reprod Toxicol. 2012 Jan;33(1):85-93. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2011.12.003. Epub
2011 Dec 17.

Neonatal exposure to low doses of endosulfan disrupts the expression of proteins 
regulating uterine development and differentiation.

Milesi MM(1), Varayoud J, Bosquiazzo VL, Muñoz-de-Toro M, Luque EH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Endocrinología y Tumores Hormonodependientes, School of
Biochemistry and Biological Sciences, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Santa Fe,
Argentina.

This study investigates the effects of neonatal exposure to low doses of
endosulfan on the expression of proteins regulating uterine development and
differentiation. Female pups received vehicle, endosulfan (Endo6: 6 µg/kg,
Endo600: 600 µg/kg) or diethylstilbestrol (DES: 0.2 µg/kg) from postnatal day 1
(PND1) to PND7. The uterine expression of estrogen receptor alpha (ERa),
progesterone receptor (PR), Hoxa10 and alpha smooth muscle actin (a-SMA) was
detected by immunohistochemistry on PND8 (neonatal period) and PND21 (prepubertal
period), to evaluate acute and short-term responses. ERa, Hoxa10 and a-SMA were
induced in the Endo600 group in both ages, while a striking decrease in PR
expression was detected in the prepubertal rats following each dose of
endosulfan. DES treatment deregulated ERa and Hoxa10 uterine expression at each
age. Studies are currently underway to investigate whether the dysregulation of
steroid receptors, Hoxa10 and a-SMA observed following neonatal exposure to
endosulfan affect uterine functions in adulthood.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22198180  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. FASEB J. 2012 Mar;26(3):1131-41. doi: 10.1096/fj.11-197822. Epub 2011 Nov 30.

Inhibition of fetal bone development through epigenetic down-regulation of HoxA10
in obese rats fed high-fat diet.

Chen JR(1), Zhang J, Lazarenko OP, Kang P, Blackburn ML, Ronis MJ, Badger TM,
Shankar K.

Author information: 
(1)Arkansas Children's Nutrition Center, 15 Children's Way, Slot 512-20B, Little 
Rock, AR 72202, USA. chenjinran@uams.edu

Epidemiological studies show that maternal obesity during intrauterine and early 
postnatal life increases the risk of low bone mass and fracture later in life.
Here, we show that bone development is inhibited in gestational embryonic day
18.5 (E18.5) embryos from rat dams made obese by feeding a high-fat diet (HFD).
Moreover, fetal rat osteogenic calvarial cells (FOCCs) from these obese dams have
significantly less potential to develop into mature osteoblasts compared to cells
from AIN-93G diet-fed controls. Profiling of transcriptional genes for
osteogenesis revealed a profound decrease in the homeodomain-containing factor
A10 (HoxA10) in FOCCs from fetuses of HFD-induced obese dams. Significant
methylation of the HoxA10 promoter was found in those FOCCs, as well as in mouse 
ST2 cells treated with a mixture of free fatty acids similar to that found in
serum from HFD-induced obese rats. This was accompanied by lower expression of
osteogenic markers, but higher levels of PPAR<U+03B3>. Control FOCCs depleted of the
HoxA10 gene (shRNA) ex vivo behave similarly to cells from fetuses of obese dams;
conversely, overexpression of HoxA10 gene in FOCCs from HFD rats exhibit the same
phenotype as controls. Treatment of FOCCs from control rats or of ST2 cells with 
an artificial mixture of free fatty acids significantly down-regulated HoxA10
protein expression, and cells exhibited adipocyte-like properties. These results 
suggest that maternal obesity impairs fetal skeletal development through
down-regulation of the HoxA10 gene, which may lead to an increase in the
prevalence of low bone mass in the offspring later in life.

PMID: 22131269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. PLoS One. 2011;6(11):e27127. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0027127. Epub 2011 Nov 1.

Mll5 is required for normal spermatogenesis.

Yap DB(1), Walker DC, Prentice LM, McKinney S, Turashvili G, Mooslehner-Allen K, 
de Algara TR, Fee J, de Tassigny Xd, Colledge WH, Aparicio S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oncology, British Columbia Cancer Research Centre,
Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Mll5 is currently a member of the Mll family of SET domain histone
methyltransferase proteins but studies have also showed that it could be part of 
the SET3 branch of proteins. Recently, constitutive knock out animal studies have
shown that Mll5 is required for proper haematopoietic stem cell differentiation, 
and loss of Mll5 results in synthetic lethality for genome de-methylation. Mll5
deficient male mice are infertile and here we analyse the consequences of Mll5
deficiency for spermatogenesis.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: Mll5 deficient male mice, but not female mice,
are infertile. Here we show using RNA in-situ hybridization that Mll5 is
expressed in the germ cells of the testes of wild type mice. Consistent with the 
expression of Mll5, we demonstrate by electron microscopy, video microscopy and
in vitro fertilisation techniques that Mll5 deficient mice have defects in
terminal maturation and packaging of sperm. The defects seen include detachment
of the acrosomal cap and impaired excess cytoplasm removal. Functional tests of
sperm motility show a lack of progressive motility of spermatozoa from Mll5
deficient animals. None of these defects could be rescued by in vitro
fertilization. Using microarray analysis we show that transcripts implicated in
spermatogenesis are dysregulated.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Our data demonstrate a clear role of Mll5 in mammalian 
spermatogenesis at the level of terminal differentiation providing further
support for its classification in the SET3 branch of proteins. Moreover, this
study identifies Tlk2, Utx, Gpr64, Sult4a1, Rap2ip, Vstm2 and HoxA10 as possible 
Mll5 targets that together may account for the observed spermatozoa maturation
defects.

PMCID: PMC3206077
PMID: 22069496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2012 Jul 25;358(2):185-96. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2011.10.025.
Epub 2011 Oct 31.

The endometrial epigenome and its response to steroid hormones.

Guo SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Obstetric and Gynecologic Hospital, and Shanghai Key Laboratory of
Female Reproductive Endocrine Related Diseases, Fudan University Shanghai College
of Medicine, 419 Fangxie Road, Shanghai 200011, China. hoxa10@gmail.com

The human endometrium undergoes cyclic morphological and functional changes
during the menstrual cycle. These changes are driven mainly by steroid hormones
and orchestrated by a myriad of genes - many of which have been identified
recently as being epigenetically regulated. Epigenetic modifications, including
DNA methylation and histone acetylations, are shown recently to be involved in
functional changes in endometrium and endometrial diseases. Since epigenetics
itself is a rapidly evolving field, this review starts with an overview of
epigenetics and its intrinsic connections with endometrial response to steroid
hormones, highlighting its various levels of complexities. This is followed by a 
review of published and unpublished work on "writers", "erasers", and other
players of endometrial epigenome. In the end, areas in need for future research
in this area will be exposed.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22067514  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Mod Pathol. 2012 Feb;25(2):185-96. doi: 10.1038/modpathol.2011.160. Epub 2011 Oct
28.

Distinct patterns of promoter CpG island methylation of breast cancer subtypes
are associated with stem cell phenotypes.

Park SY(1), Kwon HJ, Choi Y, Lee HE, Kim SW, Kim JH, Kim IA, Jung N, Cho NY, Kang
GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea.

Although DNA methylation profiles in breast cancer have been connected to breast 
cancer molecular subtype, there have been no studies of the association of DNA
methylation with stem cell phenotype. This study was designed to evaluate the
promoter CpG island methylation of 15 genes in relation to breast cancer subtype,
and to investigate whether the patterns of CpG island methylation in each subtype
are associated with their cancer stem cell phenotype represented by CD44+/CD24-
and ALDH1 expression. We performed MethyLight analysis of the methylation status 
of 15 promoter CpG island loci involved in breast cancer progression (APC, DLEC1,
GRIN2B, GSTP1, HOXA1, HOXA10, IGF2, MT1G, RARB, RASSF1A, RUNX3, SCGB3A1, SFRP1,
SFRP4, and TMEFF2) and determined cancer stem cell phenotype by CD44/CD24 and
ALDH1 immunohistochemistry in 36 luminal A, 33 luminal B, 30 luminal-HER2, 40
HER2 enriched, and 40 basal-like subtypes of breast cancer. The number of CpG
island loci methylated differed significantly between subtypes, and was highest
in the luminal-HER2 subtype and lowest in the basal-like subtype. Methylation
frequencies and levels in 12 of the 15 genes differed significantly between
subtypes, and the basal-like subtype had significantly lower methylation
frequencies and levels in nine of the genes than the other subtypes. CD44+/CD24- 
and ALDH1+ putative stem cell populations were most enriched in the basal-like
subtype. Methylation of promoter CpG islands was significantly lower in
CD44+/CD24-cell (+) tumors than in CD44+/CD24-cell (-) tumors, even within the
basal-like subtype. ALDH1 (+) tumors were also less methylated than ALDH1 (-)
tumors. Our findings showed that promoter CpG island methylation was different in
relation to breast cancer subtype and stem cell phenotype of tumor, suggesting
that breast cancers have distinct patterns of CpG island methylation according to
molecular subtypes and these are associated with different stem cell phenotypes
of the tumor.

PMID: 22037257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Nov;25(11):1978-9.

Translational highlights from the journal of clinical endocrinology & metabolism.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 22034475  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Dec;96(12):E1925-33. doi: 10.1210/jc.2011-1231.
Epub 2011 Sep 28.

MicroRNA 135 regulates HOXA10 expression in endometriosis.

Petracco R(1), Grechukhina O, Popkhadze S, Massasa E, Zhou Y, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale School
of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

CONTEXT: Homeo box A10 (HOXA10) regulates endometrial receptivity and its
expression is decreased in women with endometriosis. Although sex steroids
regulate HOXA10, these hormones are unaltered in endometriosis. We hypothesized a
role for microRNA in the regulation of HOXA10.
OBJECTIVE: MicroRNA 135a and -b are small noncoding RNA with predicted targets
that include HOXA10. We evaluated miR135a/b expression and HOXA10 regulation in
endometrium from subjects with and without endometriosis.
DESIGN: The design of the study was the measurement of miR135a/b expression by
quantitative PCR and in vitro analysis of HOXA10 regulation.
SETTING: The study was conducted at a university medical center.
PATIENTS: Patients included 50 controls and 32 women with endometriosis.
INTERVENTIONS: Study interventions included endometrial biopsies and in vitro
transfection.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: miR135a/b and HOXA10 expression were measured in the
study.
RESULTS: All endometrial samples expressed miR135a and -b. miR135a expression in 
controls was increased during the proliferative phase, decreased at the time of
ovulation, and increased during the luteal phase. Subjects with endometriosis had
3-fold higher expression of miR135a in the proliferative phase than controls.
miR135b showed less variation across the menstrual cycle; however, it was
significantly increased in women with endometriosis in the proliferative and
secretory phases. HOXA10 expression was simultaneously repressed in the
endometrium of women with endometriosis. Transfection of endometrial stromal
cells with mir135a/b or miR135a/b inhibitors resulted in the altered expression
of HOXA10 mRNA and protein. miR135a or -b decreased luciferase expression driven 
by the HOXA10 3' untranslated region containing the miR135 binding site. miR135a 
regulation of HOXA10 was absent in MCF-7 cells, demonstrating cell specificity.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXA10 was aberrantly regulated in the endometrium of women with
endometriosis by both miR135a and miR135b. Increased microRNA expression likely
suppresses genes required for implantation.

PMCID: PMC3232619
PMID: 21956427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Blood. 2011 Dec 8;118(24):6247-57. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-328880. Epub 2011
Sep 26.

NUP98 gene fusions and hematopoietic malignancies: common themes and new biologic
insights.

Gough SM(1), Slape CI, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia Biology Section, Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Structural chromosomal rearrangements of the Nucleoporin 98 gene (NUP98),
primarily balanced translocations and inversions, are associated with a wide
array of hematopoietic malignancies. NUP98 is known to be fused to at least 28
different partner genes in patients with hematopoietic malignancies, including
acute myeloid leukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia in blast crisis, myelodysplastic
syndrome, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and bilineage/biphenotypic leukemia.
NUP98 gene fusions typically encode a fusion protein that retains the amino
terminus of NUP98; in this context, it is important to note that several recent
studies have demonstrated that the amino-terminal portion of NUP98 exhibits
transcription activation potential. Approximately half of the NUP98 fusion
partners encode homeodomain proteins, and at least 5 NUP98 fusions involve known 
histone-modifying genes. Several of the NUP98 fusions, including NUP98-homeobox
(HOX)A9, NUP98-HOXD13, and NUP98-JARID1A, have been used to generate animal
models of both lymphoid and myeloid malignancy; these models typically
up-regulate HOXA cluster genes, including HOXA5, HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA10. In
addition, several of the NUP98 fusion proteins have been shown to inhibit
differentiation of hematopoietic precursors and to increase self-renewal of
hematopoietic stem or progenitor cells, providing a potential mechanism for
malignant transformation.

PMCID: PMC3236115
PMID: 21948299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2012 Jan;138(1):35-47. doi: 10.1007/s00432-011-1070-5.
Epub 2011 Sep 27.

Quantitative methylation analysis of HOXA3, 7, 9, and 10 genes in glioma:
association with tumor WHO grade and clinical outcome.

Di Vinci A(1), Casciano I, Marasco E, Banelli B, Ravetti GL, Borzì L, Brigati C, 
Forlani A, Dorcaratto A, Allemanni G, Zona G, Spaziante R, Gohlke H, Gardin G,
Merlo DF, Mantovani V, Romani M.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Tumor Genetics and Epigenetics, Istituto Nazionale per la
Ricerca sul Cancro, IST Largo Rosanna Benzi 10, 16132, Genoa, Italy.

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to determine whether specific HOXA
epigenetic signatures could differentiate glioma with distinct biological,
pathological, and clinical characteristics.
METHODS: We evaluated HOXA3, 7, 9, and 10 methylation in 63 glioma samples by
MassARRAY and pyrosequencing.
RESULTS: We demonstrated the direct statistical correlation between the level of 
methylation of all HOXA genes examined and WHO grading. Moreover, in glioblastoma
patients, higher level of HOXA9 and HOXA10 methylation significantly correlated
with increased survival probability (HOXA9-HR: 0.36, P = 0.007; HOXA10-HR: 0.46, 
P = 0.045; combined HOXA9 and 10-HR 0.28, P = 0.004).
CONCLUSIONS: This study identifies HOXA3, 7, 9, and 10 as methylation targets
mainly in high-grade glioma and hypermethylation of the HOXA9 and 10 as
prognostic factor in glioblastoma patients. Our data indicate that these
epigenetic changes may be biomarkers of clinically different subgroups of glioma 
patients that could eventually benefit from personalized therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 21947269  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Hum Reprod. 2011 Nov;26(11):3197-201. doi: 10.1093/humrep/der290. Epub 2011 Sep
7.

A novel mutation of HOXA10 in a Chinese woman with a Mullerian duct anomaly.

Cheng Z(1), Zhu Y, Su D, Wang J, Cheng L, Chen B, Wei Z, Zhou P, Wang B, Ma X,
Cao Y.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, The First Affiliated Hospital, Anhui Medical
University, Hefei 230022, China.

BACKGROUND: Müllerian duct anomalies consist of a set of congenital structural
malformations that occur when the Müllerian ducts do not develop properly during 
embryonic life. Their molecular genetic basis is poorly understood.
METHODS: In this study, we conducted mutation analysis of the HOXA10 gene in a
cohort of 109 Chinese women with Müllerian duct anomalies.
RESULTS: We identified a novel mutation (Y57C) in one patient with a didelphic
uterus. The mutation affected the transcriptional regulation capacity of HOXA10.
CONCLUSIONS: Our study showed that mutation of HOXA10 gene may contribute to the 
development of Müllerian duct anomalies and confirmed that HOXA10 is an important
transcription factor in reproductive tract development.

PMID: 21900391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Reprod Domest Anim. 2011 Sep;46 Suppl 3:31-41. doi:
10.1111/j.1439-0531.2011.01843.x.

Mechanisms for the establishment of pregnancy in the pig.

Ziecik AJ(1), Waclawik A, Kaczmarek MM, Blitek A, Jalali BM, Andronowska A.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of Polish Academy of
Sciences, Tuwima, Olsztyn, Poland.

Establishment of pregnancy in pigs requires continuous function of corpora lutea 
and endometrial preparation for embryo implantation. Progesterone regulates
expression of many proteins necessary for endometrial remodelling and
embryo-maternal communications. Attaining the uterine receptivity involves
progesterone priming and loss of progesterone receptors in the uterine epithelium
before days 10-12 after oestrus. Spermatozoa and oocytes in oviduct alter
secretion of specific proteins that exert beneficial effect on gametes and
embryos. Moreover, an appropriate leucocyte activation and maintenance of
delicate cytokine balance within the oviduct and uterus are important for early
pregnancy. This early local immune response is rather mediated by seminal plasma 
components. These components also influence prostaglandin (PG) synthesis in the
oviduct that is important for gamete and embryo transport. Pregnancy
establishment requires the biphasic pattern of oestrogen secretion by conceptuses
on days 11-12 and 15-30. Conceptus affects lipid signalling system consisting of 
prostaglandins and lysophosphatic acid. PG synthesis is changed by conceptus
signals in favour of luteoprotective PGE(2) . Additionally, existence of PGE(2)
positive feedback loop in the endometrium contributes to increased PGE(2)
/PGF(2a) ratio during the peri-implantation period. PGE(2) through endometrial
PGE(2) receptor (PTGER2) elevates the expression of enzymes involved in PGE(2)
synthesis. Higher PGE(2) secretion in uterine lumen coincides with the elevated
expression of HOXA10 transcription factor critical for implantation. A stable
adhesion between conceptus and endometrium requires reduction in mucin-1 on the
apical surface of epithelium and integrin activation by extracellular matrix
proteins. Furthermore, growth factors, cytokines and its receptors are involved
in embryo-maternal interactions.

© 2011 Blackwell Verlag GmbH.

PMID: 21854459  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Hum Gene Ther. 2011 Dec;22(12):1475-82. doi: 10.1089/hum.2011.100. Epub 2011 Sep 
6.

Differential effects of HOXB4 and NUP98-HOXA10hd on hematopoietic repopulating
cells in a nonhuman primate model.

Watts KL(1), Zhang X, Beard BC, Chiu SY, Trobridge GD, Humphries RK, Kiem HP.

Author information: 
(1)Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle, WA 98109, USA.

Expansion of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) is beneficial in settings where HSC 
numbers are limited, such as cord blood transplantation. The human homeobox
transcription factor HOXB4 has been shown to enhance stem cell expansion in
several experimental models. We have shown previously that HOXB4 overexpression
in monkey CD34(+) cells has a dramatic effect on expansion and engraftment of
short-term repopulating cells. Here, we wished to compare the effects of HOXB4
and another candidate gene, NUP98-HOXA10hd (NA10hd). We used a competitive
repopulation assay in pigtailed macaques to study engraftment of CD34(+) cells
modified with gammaretroviral HOXB4YFP or NA10hdGFP. We found that HOXB4YFP
contributed more to early hematopoiesis (<30 days), whereas NA10hdGFP contributed
more to later hematopoiesis. In each case, we observed two distinct peaks in
engraftment of NA10hd-transduced cells, one within 20 days post transplant and
another after 5-6 months. Analysis of CD14(+), CD3(+), and CD20(+) subsets
confirmed that higher percentages of cells of each lineage were derived from
NA10hdGFP(+) progenitors than from HOXB4YFP(+) progenitors. In conclusion, we
show that HOXB4 and NA10hd both have a significant impact on hematopoietic
reconstitution; however, these effects are differential and therefore may offer
complementary strategies for HSC expansion.

PMCID: PMC3237696
PMID: 21787196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Mol Endocrinol. 2011 Sep;25(9):1539-49. doi: 10.1210/me.2011-0001. Epub 2011 Jul 
14.

A novel role for the AAA ATPase spastin as a HOXA10 transcriptional corepressor
in Ishikawa endometrial cells.

Daftary GS(1), Tetrault AM, Jorgensen EM, Sarno J, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota
55902, USA. daftary.gaurang@mayo.edu

Homeobox A10 (HOXA10), a transcription factor required for uterine development
and embryo receptivity, functions downstream of estrogen and progesterone in
uterine endometrium. HOXA10 represses endometrial expression of empty spiracles
homeobox 2 (EMX2), the human ortholog of Drosophila empty spiracles. The ATPases 
associated with various cellular activities (AAA) ATPase spastin has a
well-characterized role in neurotransmitter trafficking. In this study, we
characterize a novel role of spastin in transcriptional regulation. We identified
spastin as a novel component of the HOXA10 transcriptional complex in Ishikawa
nuclear extracts by immunoprecipitation and mass spectrophotometry. Using EMX2 as
a model endometrial HOXA10 target gene, we show that the HOXA10-spastin
corepressor complex bound the EMX2 promoter in chromatin immunoprecipitation
assays. HOXA10 has been previously shown to repress endometrial EMX2 expression. 
We further observed that, although cotransfection of HOXA10 and spastin continued
to repress endometrial EMX2-luciferase expression, the repression was reversed
when spastin small interfering RNA was cotransfected with HOXA10. Mutations in
the nuclear localization signal sequences of spastin abrogated not only its
nuclear translocation but also its colocalization with HOXA10 as well as reversed
EMX2-luciferase repression. Here, we describe a novel role for the AAA ATPase
spastin in Ishikawa cells as a HOXA10 corepressor of EMX2. Uterine EMX2 levels
are inversely related to embryo implantation rates. HOXA10 acts downstream of
progesterone and has been shown to facilitate embryo implantation through
regulation of endometrial EMX2 expression. Endometrial spastin, therefore, likely
has a novel function downstream of estrogen and progesterone in implantation
biology as a cofactor of HOXA10.

PMCID: PMC3165913
PMID: 21757506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Theriogenology. 2011 Sep 15;76(5):954-66. doi:
10.1016/j.theriogenology.2011.05.002. Epub 2011 Jun 25.

Effect of conceptus secretions on HOXA10 and PTGS2 gene expression, and PGE2
release in co-cultured luminal epithelial and stromal cells of the porcine
endometrium at the time of early implantation.

Blitek A(1), Morawska E, Kiewisz J, Ziecik AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of Polish Academy of
Sciences, Olsztyn, Poland. a.blitek@pan.olsztyn.pl

Homeobox A10 (HOXA10) gene expression was demonstrated in the endometrium of
adult porcine uteri, however there is little information concerning the role of
this gene in the pig. Objectives of the present study were to examine: 1) the
expression of HOXA10 in the endometrium of cyclic and early pregnant gilts; 2)
the effect of estradiol (E(2)) and progesterone (P(4)) on HOXA10 expression in
porcine luminal epithelial (LE) and stromal (ST) cells in vitro; 3) the effect of
E(2) and conceptus-exposed medium (CEM) on HOXA10 and prostaglandin endoperoxide 
synthase (PTGS2) gene expression and prostaglandin (PG) E(2) secretion from LE
and ST cells in a co-culture model. The abundance of HOXA10 mRNA was increased on
day 15 of pregnancy in comparison to day 15 of the estrous cycle. Moreover,
increased HOXA10 mRNA level was detected in ST cells after E(2) and P(4)
treatment. E(2) stimulated the expression of HOXA10 in LE cells cultured on
collagen and pre-treated with steroids, but not in LE on plastic surfaces.
Addition of CEM to LE cells cultured in collagen-coated inserts of the co-culture
system resulted in elevated HOXA10 and PTGS2 gene expression and PGE(2) secretion
in these cells, but not in ST cells cultured in basal compartments. ST cells
directly treated with E(2) or CEM showed higher levels of HOXA10 and PTGS2
expression. Blocking of estrogen receptors with ICI-182,780 did not influence the
stimulatory effect of CEM. We conclude that HOXA10 expression in the porcine
endometrium is closely related to the implantation process and stimulated by
conceptus products. Moreover, the co-culture system of LE and ST cells is a
promising model for the study of endometrial response to conceptus-derived
factors.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21705055  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. PLoS One. 2011;6(6):e21136. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0021136. Epub 2011 Jun 15.

Generation of human female reproductive tract epithelium from human embryonic
stem cells.

Ye L(1), Mayberry R, Lo CY, Britt KL, Stanley EG, Elefanty AG, Gargett CE.

Author information: 
(1)The Ritchie Centre, Monash Institute of Medical Research and Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Monash University, Melbourne, Australia.

BACKGROUND: Recent studies have identified stem/progenitor cells in human and
mouse uterine epithelium, which are postulated to be responsible for tissue
regeneration and proliferative disorders of human endometrium. These progenitor
cells are thought to be derived from Müllerian duct (MD), the primordial female
reproductive tract (FRT).
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have developed a model of human reproductive
tract development in which inductive neonatal mouse uterine mesenchyme (nMUM) is 
recombined with green fluorescent protein (GFP)-tagged human embryonic stem cells
(hESCs); GFP-hESC (ENVY). We demonstrate for the first time that hESCs can be
differentiated into cells with a human FRT epithelial cell phenotype. hESC
derived FRT epithelial cells emerged from cultures containing MIXL1(+)
mesendodermal precursors, paralleling events occurring during normal
organogenesis. Following transplantation, nMUM treated embryoid bodies (EBs)
generated epithelial structures with a typical MD phenotype that expressed the MD
markers PAX2, HOXA10. Functionally, the hESCs derived FRT epithelium responded to
exogenous estrogen by proliferating and secreting uterine-specific glycodelin A
(GdA).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These data show nMUM can induce differentiation of hESC
to form the FRT epithelium. This may provide a model to study early developmental
events of the human FRT.

PMCID: PMC3115988
PMID: 21698266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2011 Jul;21(5):800-5. doi: 10.1097/IGC.0b013e31821a2584.

Expression of HOXA10 in endometrial hyperplasia and adenocarcinoma and regulation
by sex hormones in vitro.

Zhong G(1), Wang Y, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical
College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei, People's
Republic of China. gzhongwh@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE: The objective of the study was to determine the expression of HOXA10
in human endometrial tissue in endometrial hyperplasia and carcinomas, and
regulation by sex steroids in Ishikawa cells.
METHODS: Endometrial tissue was obtained from 133 subjects with normal
endometria, endometrial hyperplasia, or endometrial adenocarcinoma. Among 133
specimens, 20 were normal endometria, 19 were simple hyperplasias without atypia,
20 were complex hyperplasias without atypia, 33 were atypical hyperplasias, and
41 were endometrial adenocarcinomas. The expression of HOXA10 was analyzed by
immunohistochemistry. Ishikawa cell lines were incubated with 17ß estradiol (10<U+207B>8
mol/L) alone, medroxyprogesterone acetate (10<U+207B>6 mol/L) alone, or the combination 
of estrogen and progesterone for 48 hours, respectively. In certain experiments, 
the antiprogestin antagonist, RU486 (10<U+207B>5 mol/L), was also added to Ishikawa
cells along with estradiol and medroxyprogesterone acetate for 48 hours. The
expression of HOXA10 gene was detected by reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain 
reaction and Western blotting.
RESULTS: HOXA10 was expressed in both normal and neoplastic endometria. No
significant difference in HOXA10 expression was found between normal and
hyperplastic endometrial tissues. The expression of HOXA10 was decreased in
endometrial adenocarcinomas compared with normal endometria. Estrogen alone,
progestin alone, or progestin combined with estrogen could significantly increase
the expression of HOXA10 gene (P<0.05). RU486 could inhibit the effect of
up-regulation of HOXA10 expression by progestin.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression of HOXA10 was deregulated in endometrial carcinomas
and up-regulated by sex hormones.

PMID: 21670700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Cells Tissues Organs. 2011;194(2-4):146-50. doi: 10.1159/000324790. Epub 2011 May
19.

Epigenetic regulation of early osteogenesis and mineralized tissue formation by a
HOXA10-PBX1-associated complex.

Gordon JA(1), Hassan MQ, Koss M, Montecino M, Selleri L, van Wijnen AJ, Stein JL,
Stein GS, Lian JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Mass., USA.

Homeodomain-containing (HOX) factors such as the abdominal class homeodomain
protein HOXA10 and the TALE-family protein PBX1 form coregulatory complexes and
are potent transcriptional and epigenetic regulators of tissue morphogenesis. We 
have identified that HOXA10 and PBX1 are expressed in osteoprogenitors; however, 
their role in osteogenesis has not been established. To determine the mechanism
of HOXA10-PBX-mediated regulation of osteoblast commitment and the related gene
expression, PBX1 or HOX10 were depleted (shRNA or genetic deletion, respectively)
or exogenously expressed in C3H10T1/2, bone marrow stromal progenitors, and
MC3T3-E1 (preosteoblast) cells. Overexpression of HOXA10 increased the expression
of osteoblast-related genes, osteoblast differentiation and mineralization;
expression of PBX1 impaired osteogenic commitment of pluripotent cells and the
differentiation of osteoblasts. In contrast, the targeted depletion of PBX1 by
shRNA increased the expression of bone marker genes (osterix, alkaline
phosphatase, BSP, and osteocalcin). Chromatin-associated PBX1 and HOXA10 were
present at osteoblast-related gene promoters preceding gene expression, but PBX1 
was absent from promoters during the transcription of bone-related genes,
including osterix (Osx). Further, PBX1 complexes were associated with histone
deacetylases normally linked with chromatin inactivation. Loss of PBX1 but not of
HOXA10 from the Osx promoter was associated with increases in the recruitment of 
histone acetylases (p300), as well as decreased H3K9 methylation, reflecting
transcriptional activation. We propose PBX1 plays a central role in attenuating
the activity of HOXA10 as an activator of osteoblast-related genes and functions 
to establish the proper timing of gene expression during osteogenesis, resulting 
in proper matrix maturation and mineral deposition in differentiated osteoblasts.

Copyright © 2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC3178072
PMID: 21597276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Endocrinology. 2011 Aug;152(8):3226-32. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1010. Epub 2011 May 
17.

Treatment with bazedoxifene, a selective estrogen receptor modulator, causes
regression of endometriosis in a mouse model.

Kulak J Jr(1), Fischer C, Komm B, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Yale University, 333
Cedar Street, New Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA.

Endometriosis is a common estrogen-dependent disorder. Medical treatments
currently consist of progestins or GnRH agonists; however, neither is fully
effective and both entail significant side effects. Selective estrogen receptor
(ER) modulators (SERM) have tissue-selective actions, acting as an ER agonist in 
some tissues and ER antagonist in others. The SERM bazedoxifene (BZA) effectively
antagonizes estrogen-induced uterine endometrial stimulation without countering
estrogenic effects in bone or central nervous system. These properties make it an
attractive candidate for use in the treatment of endometriosis. Experimental
endometriosis was created in reproductive-age CD-1 mice. After 8 wk, 10 animals
received i.p. injections of BZA (3 mg/kg·d) for 8 wk, whereas 10 received vehicle
control. Mice were killed, and implant size was assessed. The mean size of the
implants after treatment was 60 mm(2) in the control group and 21 mm(2) in the
BZA treatment group (P = 0.03). Quantitative PCR and immunohistochemical analysis
were used to determine the effect on endometrial gene expression. PCNA, ERa, and 
LIF mRNA and protein expression were significantly decreased in endometrium of
the treated group. Caspase 3 mRNA expression was increased. Expression of PR and 
Hoxa10 were not significantly altered by treatment. There was no evidence of
ovarian enlargement or cyst formation. Decreased PCNA and ER expression
demonstrated that the regression of endometriosis likely involved decreased
estrogen-mediated cell proliferation. BZA may be an effective novel agent for the
treatment of endometriosis due to greater endometrial-specific estrogen
antagonism compared with other SERM.

PMCID: PMC3138238
PMID: 21586552  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Mol Hum Reprod. 2011 Oct;17(10):605-11. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gar035. Epub 2011 May
16.

Coding regions of INHBA, SFRP4 and HOXA10 are not implicated in familial
endometriosis linked to chromosome 7p13-15.

Lin J(1), Zong L, Kennedy SH, Zondervan KT.

Author information: 
(1)Nuffield Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, University of Oxford, UK.

Endometriosis is a common, chronic gynaecological disease affecting up to 10% of 
women in their reproductive years. Its aetiology still remains unclear, but
evidence indicates genetic factors play a role. We previously identified a region
of significant linkage on chromosome 7 in 52 families comprising at least three
affected women, stretching ~6.4 Mb. We screened coding regions and parts of the
regulatory regions of three candidate genes with a known role in endometrial
development and function-INHBA, SFRP4 and HOXA10-located under or very near the
linkage peak, for potential causal mutations using Sanger sequencing. Sequencing 
was conducted in 47 cases from the 15 families contributing most to the linkage
signal (Z(mean) = 1). Minor allele frequencies (MAFs) of observed variants were
compared with MAFs from two publicly available reference populations of European 
ancestry: 60 individuals in HapMap and 150 individuals in the 1000 Genomes
Project. A total of 11 variants were found, 5 (45%) of which were common (MAF >
0.05) among the 15 case families and the reference populations (P-values for MAF 
difference: 0.88-1.00). The remaining six were rare and unlikely to be
individually or cumulatively responsible for the linkage signal. The results
indicate that the coding regions of these three genes do not harbour mutations
responsible for linkage to endometriosis in these families.

PMCID: PMC3172037
PMID: 21576276  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. J Vet Med Sci. 2011 Sep;73(9):1211-5. Epub 2011 May 2.

Bisphenol-A (BPA) affects reproductive formation across generations in mice.

Hiyama M(1), Choi EK, Wakitani S, Tachibana T, Khan H, Kusakabe KT, Kiso Y.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Basic Veterinary Science, The United Graduate School of
Veterinary Science, Yamaguchi University, 16771 Yoshida, Yamaguchi 7538515,
Japan.

To understand effects of Bisphenol-A (BPA) exposure on the reproductive organ
across generations, we analyzed morphology of the uterus and ovary, and the
methylation pattern of HOXA10 gene of the 2(nd) generation. Pregnant mice (F0)
were treated with sc injection of BPA in sesame oil at various doses of 0-1,000
mg/kg Bwt on days 12-16 of gestation. Their offspring (F1) were bred by foster
mice, and the offspring (F2) from F1 mice were prepared. That is, F1 mice
experienced in utero BPA exposure during the developmental period of reproductive
organs, while F2 mice did not at all. Using these F2 mice, the present study was 
carried out. Comparing to the control, the body weights in BPA exposure groups
were significantly increased. Correlating with the increase of body weight, the
relative weights of the ovary and uterus in each group were decreased. The
histological analysis revealed expansion or emphraxis of the uterine lumen and
partial loss of the uterine epithelium. Unmethylation of HOXA10 gene in the
uterus was observed in the intron region. The present study suggested that BPA
exposure to F0 mice could affect reproductive organ of F2 mice who were not
exposed to BPA.

PMID: 21532259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Folia Histochem Cytobiol. 2011;49(1):111-8.

Expression of HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 in the endometria of women with idiopathic
infertility.

Szczepanska M(1), Wirstlein P, Luczak M, Jagodzinski P, Skrzypczak J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Gynecological Oncology, Division of
Reproduction, K. Marcinkowski Medical University, Poznan, Poland.

In fertile women, HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 expression rises during the luteal phase,
with the peak occurring during the implantation window, and stays at a high level
until the end of the cycle. We evaluated the transcript and protein levels of
HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 in the endometria of patients with idiopathic infertility (n 
= 15) and control patients (n = 10). The amounts of mRNA were determined by
reverse transcription and real-time quantitative PCR. The protein levels were
evaluated by Western blotting analysis. Using immunohistochemical techniques, we 
compared the localization of HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 proteins in the implantation
window between the study and control groups. We observed statistically
significantly decreased HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 transcript levels (p = 0.003, p =
0.012 respectively) in infertile patients compared to controls. There was no
significant decrease in HOXA-10 protein levels between these groups (p = 0.074). 
However, we observed a significantly higher level of HOXA-11 protein in the
endometria of infertile patients compared to controls (p = 0.015). HOXA-10 and
HOXA-11 proteins were localized in the nuclei of the endometrial stromal cells.
Immunohistochemical analyses did not reveal differences between amounts of
HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 protein levels in infertility and control groups. Our results
suggest that HOXA-10 and HOXA-11 gene expression in the endometrium during the
implantation window may not be altered in patients with idiopathic infertility.

PMID: 21526497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2011 May 10;108(19):7956-61. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1103154108. Epub 2011 Apr 25.

Down-regulation of homeobox genes MEIS1 and HOXA in MLL-rearranged acute leukemia
impairs engraftment and reduces proliferation.

Orlovsky K(1), Kalinkovich A, Rozovskaia T, Shezen E, Itkin T, Alder H, Ozer HG, 
Carramusa L, Avigdor A, Volinia S, Buchberg A, Mazo A, Kollet O, Largman C, Croce
CM, Nakamura T, Lapidot T, Canaani E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Rearrangements of the MLL (ALL1) gene are very common in acute infant and
therapy-associated leukemias. The rearrangements underlie the generation of MLL
fusion proteins acting as potent oncogenes. Several most consistently
up-regulated targets of MLL fusions, MEIS1, HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA10 are
functionally related and have been implicated in other types of leukemias. Each
of the four genes was knocked down separately in the human precursor B-cell
leukemic line RS4;11 expressing MLL-AF4. The mutant and control cells were
compared for engraftment in NOD/SCID mice. Engraftment of all mutants into the
bone marrow (BM) was impaired. Although homing was similar, colonization by the
knockdown cells was slowed. Initially, both types of cells were confined to the
trabecular area; this was followed by a rapid spread of the WT cells to the
compact bone area, contrasted with a significantly slower process for the
mutants. In vitro and in vivo BrdU incorporation experiments indicated reduced
proliferation of the mutant cells. In addition, the CXCR4/SDF-1 axis was
hampered, as evidenced by reduced migration toward an SDF-1 gradient and loss of 
SDF-1-augmented proliferation in culture. The very similar phenotype shared by
all mutant lines implies that all four genes are involved and required for
expansion of MLL-AF4 associated leukemic cells in mice, and down-regulation of
any of them is not compensated by the others.

PMCID: PMC3093458
PMID: 21518888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. Biol Reprod. 2011 Aug;85(2):386-96. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.111.091769. Epub 2011
Apr 20.

Postnatal deletion of Wnt7a inhibits uterine gland morphogenesis and compromises 
adult fertility in mice.

Dunlap KA(1), Filant J, Hayashi K, Rucker EB 3rd, Song G, Deng JM, Behringer RR, 
DeMayo FJ, Lydon J, Jeong JW, Spencer TE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science, Texas A&M University, College Station, TX, USA.

The success of postnatal uterine morphogenesis dictates, in part, the
embryotrophic potential and functional capacity of the adult uterus. The
definitive role of Wnt7a in postnatal uterine development and adult function
requires a conditional knockout, because global deletion disrupts müllerian duct 
patterning, specification, and cell fate in the fetus. The Wnt7a-null uterus
appears to be posteriorized because of developmental defects in the embryo, as
evidenced by the stratified luminal epithelium that is normally found in the
vagina and the presence of short and uncoiled oviducts. To understand the
biological role of WNT7A after birth and allow tissue-selective deletion of
Wnt7a, we generated loxP-flanked exon 2 mice and conditionally deleted Wnt7a
after birth in the uterus by crossing them with Pgr(Cre) mice. Morphological
examination revealed no obvious differences in the vagina, cervix, oviduct, or
ovary. The uteri of Wnt7a mutant mice contained no endometrial glands, whereas
all other uterine cell types appeared to be normal. Postnatal differentiation of 
endometrial glands was observed in control mice, but not in mutant mice, between 
Postnatal Days 3 and 12. Expression of morphoregulatory genes, particularly
Foxa2, Hoxa10, Hoxa11, Msx1, and Wnt16, was disrupted in the Wnt7a mutant uteri. 
Conditional Wnt7a mutant mice were not fertile. Although embryos were present in 
uteri of mutant mice on Day 3.5 of pregnancy, blastocyst implantation was not
observed on Day 5.5. Furthermore, expression of several genes (Foxa2, Lif, Msx1, 
and Wnt16) was reduced or absent in adult Wnt7a-deleted uteri on Day 3.5
postmating. These results indicate that WNT7A plays a critical role in postnatal 
uterine gland morphogenesis and function, which are important for blastocyst
implantation and fertility in the adult uterus.

PMCID: PMC3142262
PMID: 21508348  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Virchows Arch. 2011 Aug;459(2):201-11. doi: 10.1007/s00428-011-1079-9. Epub 2011 
Apr 15.

DNA methylation profile during multistage progression of pulmonary
adenocarcinomas.

Chung JH(1), Lee HJ, Kim BH, Cho NY, Kang GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University Bundang Hospital, Seongnam,
Gyeonggi-do, South Korea.

Multiple genetic and epigenetic alterations are known to be involved in the
carcinogenesis of peripheral pulmonary adenocarcinoma (ADC). However, epigenetic 
abnormalities have not been extensively investigated in the following multistage 
progression sequence: atypical adenomatous hyperplasia (AAH) to adenocarcinoma in
situ (AIS), to invasive ADC. To determine the potential role of promoter
methylation during ADC development of the lung, we examined methylation status in
20 normal, 20 AAH, 30 AIS, and 60 ADC lung tissues and compared methylation
status among the lesions. The MethyLight assay was used to determine the
methylation status of 18 CpG island loci, which were hypermethylated in ADC
compared to noncancerous lung tissues. The mean number of methylated CpG island
loci was significantly higher in ADC than in AAH and AIS, (p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.003 between ADC 
and AAH, p<U+2009><<U+2009>0.005 between ADC and AIS). Aberrant methylation of HOXA1, TMEFF2,
and RARB was frequently observed in preinvasive lesions, including AAH and AIS.
Furthermore, methylation of PENK, BCL2, RUNX3, DLEC1, MT1G, GRIN2B, CDH13, CCND2,
and HOXA10 was significantly more frequent in invasive ADC than AAH or AIS. Our
results indicate that epigenetic alterations are involved in the multistep
progression of pulmonary ADC development, and aberrant CpG island methylation
accumulates during multistep carcinogenesis. In addition, aberrant methylation of
HOXA1, TMEFF2, and RARB occurred in preinvasive lesions, which indicates that
epigenetic alterations of these genes are involved in the early stages of
pulmonary ADC development. In contrast, hypermethylation of PENK, BCL2, RUNX3,
DLEC1, MT1G, GRIN2B, CDH13, CCND2, and HOXA10 was more frequent in invasive ADC
than in preinvasive lesions, which indicates that methylation of these genes
occurs later during tumor invasion in the AAH-AIS-ADC sequence.

PMID: 21494759  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 27;286(21):19047-64. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.213983. Epub
2011 Apr 6.

HoxA10 activates CDX4 transcription and Cdx4 activates HOXA10 transcription in
myeloid cells.

Bei L(1), Huang W, Wang H, Shah C, Horvath E, Eklund E.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine and Robert H Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

HoxA10 is a homeodomain transcription factor that influences a number of
developmental processes, including hematopoiesis. During definitive
hematopoiesis, expression of HoxA10 is maximal in committed myeloid progenitor
cells and decreases as differentiation proceeds. Aberrantly increased expression 
of HoxA10 was found in bone marrow cells in a poor prognosis subset of human
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Consistent with this, AML developed in mice
transplanted with HoxA10-overexpressing bone marrow. However, relatively few
target genes have been identified that explain the role of HoxA10 in
leukemogenesis. In the current study, we identified CDX4 as a HoxA10 target gene.
Cdx4 is a homeodomain transcription factor that was also implicated in myeloid
leukemogenesis. Although relatively few Cdx4 target genes have been identified,
Cdx4 was known to influence HOX gene transcription. We identified a
HoxA10-binding cis element in the CDX4 promoter that activated transcription. We 
also identified a Cdx4-binding cis element that activated the HOXA10 promoter.
Therefore, increased Cdx4 expression in HoxA10-overexpressing cells augmented
transcription of the endogenous HOXA10 gene. Increased endogenous HoxA10 in these
cells induced additional CDX4 transcription. We found that Cdx4 influenced
transcription of HoxA10 target genes in a HoxA10-dependent manner. Similarly,
HoxA10 influenced transcription of HOX genes in a Cdx4-dependent manner. We
previously found that HoxA10-overexpressing myeloid progenitors were
hypersensitive to a variety of cytokines. In the current studies, we found that
Cdx4 knockdown decreased cytokine hypersensitivity of HoxA10-overexpressing
cells. Therefore, these studies identified a positive feedback relationship
between HoxA10 and Cdx4, which potentially amplified the contribution of either
transcription factor to the pathogenesis of AML.

PMCID: PMC3099719
PMID: 21471217  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. J Biol Chem. 2011 May 13;286(19):16832-45. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.213975. Epub
2011 Mar 28.

HoxA10 influences protein ubiquitination by activating transcription of ARIH2,
the gene encoding Triad1.

Wang H(1), Bei L, Shah CA, Horvath E, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine and Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

HoxA10 is a homeodomain transcription factor that is maximally expressed in
myeloid progenitor cells. An increase in HoxA10 expression correlates with poor
prognosis in human acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Consistent with this scenario,
HoxA10 overexpression in murine bone marrow induces a myeloproliferative neoplasm
that advances AML over time. Despite the importance of HoxA10 for leukemogenesis,
few genuine HoxA10 target genes have been identified. The current study
identified ARIH2, the gene encoding Triad1, as a HoxA10 target gene. We
identified two distinct HoxA10-binding cis elements in the ARIH2 promoter and
determined that HoxA10 activates these cis elements in myeloid cells. Triad1 has 
E3 ubiquitin ligase activity, and we found that HoxA10-overexpressing myeloid
cells exhibited a Triad1-dependent increase in protein ubiquitination. Therefore,
these studies have identified the regulation of protein ubiquitination as a novel
function of Hox transcription factors. Forced overexpression of Triad1 has been
show previously to inhibit colony formation by myeloid progenitor cells. In
contrast, HoxA10-overexpressing myeloid progenitor cells exhibited increased
proliferation in response to low doses of various cytokines. We found that Triad1
knockdown further increased cytokine-induced proliferation in
HoxA10-overexpressing cells. Therefore, these studies have identified a HoxA10
target gene that antagonizes the overall influence of overexpressed HoxA10 on
myeloproliferation. This result suggests that the consequences of HoxA10
overexpression reflect a balance between the target genes that facilitate and
antagonize proliferation. These results have implications for understanding the
mechanisms of leukemogenesis in AML with Hox overexpression.

PMCID: PMC3089527
PMID: 21454682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Stem Cells. 2011 Apr;29(4):736-41. doi: 10.1002/stem.622.

Brief report: ectopic expression of NUP98-HOXA10 augments erythroid
differentiation of human embryonic stem cells.

Ji J(1), Risueño RM, Hong S, Allan D, Rosten P, Humphries K, Bhatia M.

Author information: 
(1)Stem Cell and Cancer Research Institute, McMaster University, Hamilton,
Ontario, Canada.

Hox genes encode highly conserved transcription factors that have been implicated
in hematopoietic development and self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) 
and hematopoietic development. The potency of NUP98-HOXA10hd (NA10) on adult
murine bone marrow HSC self-renewal prompted us to examine its effect on
specification and proliferation of hematopoietic cells derived from human
embryonic stem cells (hESCs). Here, we demonstrate that expression of NA10 in
hESCs influences the hematopoietic differentiation program. The specific effect
of NA10 is dependent on the developmental stage of hematopoietic emergence from
hESCs. Overexpression of NA10 in either undifferentiated hESCs or early hemogenic
precursors augmented the frequency of CD45(-) GlycophorinA(+) cells and erythroid
progenitors (blast-forming unit-erythrocyte). In contrast, targeted NA10
expression in primitive CD34+ cells committed to the hematopoietic lineage had no
effect on erythropoietic capacity but instead increased hematopoietic progenitor 
proliferation. Our study reveals a novel neomorphic effect of NA10 in early human
erythroid development from pluripotent stem cells.

Copyright © 2011 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 21328509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Biol Reprod. 2011 Jun;84(6):1242-7. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.087494. Epub 2011
Feb 16.

Cigarette smoke increases progesterone receptor and homeobox A10 expression in
human endometrium and endometrial cells: a potential role in the decreased
prevalence of endometrial pathology in smokers.

Zhou Y(1), Jorgensen EM, Gan Y, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Internal
Medicine, Yale School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Cigarette smoking has long been tied to a multitude of poor health outcomes;
however, in reproductive biology, smoking has shown several unintuitive findings.
Smoking is associated with significantly decreased rates of endometriosis and
endometrial cancer. Here, we show that treatment with cigarette smoke extract
leads to increased mRNA and protein expression of homeobox A10 (HOXA10) and
progesterone receptor (PGR) as well as more rapid decidualization of endometrial 
stromal cells in vitro. In vivo, mice exposed to cigarette smoke similarly showed
increased expression of HOXA10 and PGR in the endometrium. Both HOXA10 and PGR
drive endometrial differentiation and are suppressed in endometrial tumors and in
endometriosis. The increased expression found upon exposure to cigarette smoke
may provide a protective effect, mediating the decreased incidence of endometrial
disease among smokers. This mechanism contrasts with the accepted paradigm that
the effects of smoking on the uterus are secondary to ovarian alterations rather 
than direct effects on endometrium as demonstrated here.

PMCID: PMC3099588
PMID: 21325691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. Endocrinology. 2011 May;152(5):2060-6. doi: 10.1210/en.2010-1485. Epub 2011 Feb
15.

Maternal ghrelin deficiency compromises reproduction in female progeny through
altered uterine developmental programming.

Martin JR(1), Lieber SB, McGrath J, Shanabrough M, Horvath TL, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Ghrelin has a well-known role in the regulation of appetite, satiety, energy
metabolism, and reproduction; however ghrelin has not been implicated in
reproductive tract development. We examined the effect of ghrelin deficiency on
the developmental programming of female fertility. We observed that female
wild-type mice born of ghrelin heterozygote dams (i.e. exposed in utero to
ghrelin deficiency) had diminished fertility and produced smaller litters. We
demonstrate that exposure to in utero ghrelin deficiency led to altered
developmental programming of the reproductive tract. The number of ovarian
follicles, corpora lutea, and embryos produced were identical in both exposed and
unexposed mice. However wild-type embryos transferred to uteri of mice exposed to
in utero ghrelin deficiency had a 60% reduction in the rate of embryo
implantation compared with those transferred to wild-type unexposed uteri. We
identified significant alterations in the uterine expression of four genes
critical for implantation and a defect in uterine endometrial proliferation.
Taken together, these results demonstrate that the mechanism of subfertility was 
abnormal endometrial function. In utero exposure to decreased levels of ghrelin
led to defects in developmental programming of the uterus and subsequent
subfertility in wild-type offspring.

PMCID: PMC3075930
PMID: 21325042  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Fertil Steril. 2011 Jun 30;95(8):2707-10. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2011.01.009. 
Epub 2011 Feb 11.

Expression of endometrial protein markers in infertile women and the association 
with subsequent in vitro fertilization outcome.

Seo WS(1), Jee BC, Moon SY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, MizMedi Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.

Endometrial biopsies were performed during the luteal phase just before an IVF
cycle in 104 infertile women, and immunohistochemical staining was performed to
investigate expression patterns of hCG-LH receptor, leukemia-inhibitory factor,
macrophage colony-stimulating factor, HOXA-10, vascular endothelial growth factor
A, and their relation to subsequent IVF pregnancy. Only glandular expression of
vascular endothelial growth factor A in early luteal endometrium was
significantly higher in the pregnant group compared with the nonpregnant group
(6.0 ± 3.9 vs. 2.9 ± 3.4) and thus could be a predicting marker for subsequent
IVF pregnancy.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21315342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Endocrinology. 2011 Mar;152(3):1101-11. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-1037. Epub 2011 Feb 
1.

Neonatal exposure to bisphenol A alters rat uterine implantation-associated gene 
expression and reduces the number of implantation sites.

Varayoud J(1), Ramos JG, Bosquiazzo VL, Lower M, Muñoz-de-Toro M, Luque EH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Endocrinología y Tumores Hormonodependientes, School of
Biochemistry and Biological Sciences, Casilla de Correo 242, 3000 Santa Fe,
Argentina.

Endocrine disrupters have been associated with reproductive pathologies such as
infertility and gynecological tumors. Using a rat model of early postnatal
exposure to bisphenol A (BPA), we evaluated the long-term effects on 1) female
reproductive performance, 2) uterine homeobox A10 (Hoxa10) and Hoxa10-target gene
expression, and 3) ovarian steroid levels and uterine estrogen receptor a and
progesterone (P) receptor expression. Newborn female rats received vehicle,
BPA.05 (0.05 mg/kg · d), BPA20 (20 mg/kg · d), diethylstilbestrol.2 (0.2 µg/kg · 
d), or diethylstilbestrol 20 (20 µg/kg · d) on postnatal d 1, 3, 5, and 7. A
significant decrease in the number of implantation sites was assessed in the
xenoestrogen-exposed females. To address the molecular effects of postnatal
xenoestrogen exposure on the pregnant uterus, we evaluated the expression of
implantation-associated genes on d 5 of pregnancy (preimplantation uterus). All
xenoestrogen-treated rats showed a lower expression of Hoxa10. In the same
animals, two Hoxa10-downstream genes were misregulated in the uterus. ß(3)
Integrin, which is up-regulated by Hoxa10 in controls, was decreased, whereas
empty spiracles homolog 2, which is down-regulated by Hoxa10, was increased.
Furthermore a clear down-regulation of estrogen receptor a and P receptor
expression was detected without changes in estradiol and P serum levels. The
early exposure to BPA produced a lower number of implantation sites in
association with a defective uterine environment during the preimplantation
period. Alterations in the endocrine-regulated Hoxa10 gene pathways (steroid
receptors--Hoxa10--ß(3) integrin/empty spiracles homolog 2) could explain, at
least in part, the BPA effects on the implantation process.

PMID: 21285323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. Fertil Steril. 2011 Jun 30;95(8):2690-2. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2010.12.034.
Epub 2011 Jan 26.

Endometrial polyps affect uterine receptivity.

Rackow BW(1), Jorgensen E, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8063, USA.
beth.rackow@yale.edu

This case-control study evaluated the effect of hysteroscopically identified
endometrial polyps on endometrium by means of HOXA10 and HOXA11, known molecular 
markers of endometrial receptivity. Uteri with endometrial polyps demonstrated a 
marked decrease in HOXA10 and HOXA11 messenger RNA levels, which may impair
implantation. These findings suggest a molecular mechanism to support the
clinical findings of diminished pregnancy rates in women with endometrial polyps.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3096716
PMID: 21269620  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. Leuk Lymphoma. 2011 Feb;52(2):290-7. doi: 10.3109/10428194.2010.537003. Epub 2011
Jan 24.

Transcriptional deregulation of oncogenic myocyte enhancer factor 2C in T-cell
acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Nagel S(1), Venturini L, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Scherr M, Drexler HG, Macleod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human and Animal Cell Lines, DSMZ - German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany. sna@dsmz.de

Myocyte enhancer factor 2C (MEF2C) encodes a transcription factor which is
ectopically expressed in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL) cell lines, 
deregulated directly by ectopically expressed homeodomain protein NKX2-5 or by
loss of promoter regions via del(5)(q14). Here, we analyzed the MEF2C 5'-region, 
thus identifying potential regulatory binding sites for GFI1B, basic
helix-loop-helix proteins, STAT5, and HOXA9/HOXA10. Chromatin immunoprecipitation
and overexpression analyses demonstrated direct activation by GFI1B and LYL1 and 
inhibition by STAT5. HOXA9/HOXA10 activated expression of NMYC which in turn
mediated MEF2C repression, indicating an indirect mode of regulation via NMYC
interactor (NMI) and STAT5. Lacking comma: Chromosomal deletion of the STAT5
binding site in LOUCY cells reduced protein levels of STAT5 in some MEF2C-positve
T-ALL cell lines, and the presence of inhibitory IL7-JAK-STAT5 signaling
highlighted the repressive impact of this factor in MEF2C regulation. Taken
together, our results indicate that the expression of MEF2C in T-ALL cells is
principally deregulated via activating leukemic transcription factors GFI1B or
NKX2-5 and by escaping inhibitory developmental STAT5 signaling.

PMID: 21261500  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Womens Health (Lond Engl). 2011 Jan;7(1):51-70. doi: 10.2217/whe.10.79.

Use of mifepristone to treat endometriosis: a review of clinical trials and
trial-like studies conducted in China.

Guo SW(1), Liu M, Shen F, Liu X.

Author information: 
(1)Obstetrics & Gynecology Hospital, Fudan University Shanghai College of
Medicine, 419 Fangxie Road, Shanghai 200011, China. hoxa10@gmail.com

China was the first country in the world that approved mifepristone (RU-486) for 
abortion. A total of 6 years after the report published in the Western world
indicated that mifepristone may also be effective in treating endometriosis, the 
first paper on the same topic was published in China in 1997. Since then, over
160 studies on this topic have been published in China. We retrieved 104 papers
on clinical trials and trial-like studies conducted in China evaluating the use
of mifepristone to treat endometriosis that were published in the last 11 years. 
We found that the quality of these studies is well below an acceptable level,
making it difficult to judge whether mifepristone is truly efficacious. There are
intriguing signs that these studies, as a whole, have serious anomalies. The
areas that are glaringly deficient are informed consent, choice of outcome
measures, the evaluation of outcome measures, data analysis and randomization.
The uniformly low quality is disquieting, given the large quantity of studies,
the enormous amount of resource and energy put into these studies and, above all,
the weighty issue of treatment efficacy that concerns each and every patient with
endometriosis. Equally disquieting are the low-quality repetition, the absence of
a critical, systematic review on the subject, the lack of suggestions for
multicenter clinical trials and the seemingly unnecessary duplication of clinical
trials without due informed consent. In view of this, it may be time to institute
changes in attitude and practice, and to change education and training programs
in the methodology of clinical trials in obstetrics and gynecology research in
China.

PMID: 21175391  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Nat Genet. 2011 Jan;43(1):51-4. doi: 10.1038/ng.731. Epub 2010 Dec 12.

Genome-wide association study identifies a locus at 7p15.2 associated with
endometriosis.

Painter JN(1), Anderson CA, Nyholt DR, Macgregor S, Lin J, Lee SH, Lambert A,
Zhao ZZ, Roseman F, Guo Q, Gordon SD, Wallace L, Henders AK, Visscher PM, Kraft
P, Martin NG, Morris AP, Treloar SA, Kennedy SH, Missmer SA, Montgomery GW,
Zondervan KT.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Epidemiology, Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Herston,
Queensland, Australia. jodie.painter@qimr.edu.au

Endometriosis is a common gynecological disease associated with pelvic pain and
subfertility. We conducted a genome-wide association study (GWAS) in 3,194
individuals with surgically confirmed endometriosis (cases) and 7,060 controls
from Australia and the UK. Polygenic predictive modeling showed significantly
increased genetic loading among 1,364 cases with moderate to severe
endometriosis. The strongest association signal was on 7p15.2 (rs12700667) for
'all' endometriosis (P = 2.6 × 10<U+207B>7, odds ratio (OR) = 1.22, 95% CI 1.13-1.32)
and for moderate to severe disease (P = 1.5 × 10<U+207B><U+2079>, OR = 1.38, 95% CI 1.24-1.53).
We replicated rs12700667 in an independent cohort from the United States of 2,392
self-reported, surgically confirmed endometriosis cases and 2,271 controls (P =
1.2 × 10<U+207B>³, OR = 1.17, 95% CI 1.06-1.28), resulting in a genome-wide significant 
P value of 1.4 × 10<U+207B><U+2079> (OR = 1.20, 95% CI 1.13-1.27) for 'all' endometriosis in
our combined datasets of 5,586 cases and 9,331 controls. rs12700667 is located in
an intergenic region upstream of the plausible candidate genes NFE2L3 and HOXA10.

PMCID: PMC3019124
PMID: 21151130  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Leuk Res. 2011 Apr;35(4):545-50. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2010.10.006. Epub 2010
Dec 3.

Delineating domains and functions of NUP98 contributing to the leukemogenic
activity of NUP98-HOX fusions.

Yung E(1), Sekulovic S, Argiropoulos B, Lai CK, Leung M, Berg T, Vollett S, Chang
VC, Wan A, Wong S, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, BC Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

To determine the contribution of the common N-terminal truncation of NUP98 in
NUP98-translocations resulting in acute myeloid leukemia, we have conducted a
structure-function analysis of NUP98 in the context of NUP98-HOXA10HD, a novel,
canonical NUP98-Hox fusion that significantly enhances the self-renewal capacity 
of hematopoietic stem cells and collaborates with Meis1 to induce AML in our
mouse models. Our results identify that NUP98 functions by transcriptional
activation likely by recruitment of CBP/p300 via its FG/GLFG repeats. In
contrast, the functional interaction of NUP98 with Rae1 or the anaphase promoting
complex appears non-essential for its role in NUP98-leukemogenic fusions.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4072657
PMID: 21130494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Virchows Arch. 2011 Jan;458(1):73-84. doi: 10.1007/s00428-010-1013-6. Epub 2010
Dec 1.

Promoter CpG island hypermethylation during breast cancer progression.

Park SY(1), Kwon HJ, Lee HE, Ryu HS, Kim SW, Kim JH, Kim IA, Jung N, Cho NY, Kang
GH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Seoul National University College of Medicine, 28
Yongon-dong, Chongno-gu, Seoul, 110-744, South Korea.

This study was designed to evaluate the changes in promoter CpG islands
hypermethylation during breast cancer progression from pre-invasive lesions [flat
epithelial atypia (FEA), atypical ductal hyperplasia (ADH), and ductal carcinoma 
in situ (DCIS)] to invasive ductal carcinoma (IDC). We performed MethyLight
analysis for the methylation status of 57 promoter CpG island loci in 20 IDCs and
their paired normal breast tissues. After selecting 15 CpG island loci showing
breast cancer-specific DNA methylation, another set of normal breast tissue
(n<U+2009>=<U+2009>10), ADH/FEA (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>30), DCIS (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>35), and IDC (n<U+2009>=<U+2009>30) of the breast were
analyzed for these loci. We found six new methylation markers of breast cancer,
namely DLEC1, GRIN2B, HOXA1, MT1G, SFRP4, and TMEFF2, in addition to APC, GSTP1, 
HOXA10, IGF2, RARB, RASSF1A, RUNX3, SCGB3A1 (HIN-1), and SFRP1. The number of
methylated genes increased stepwise from normal breast to ADH/FEA and DCIS, while
IDC did not differ from DCIS. Methylation levels and frequencies of APC, DLEC1,
HOXA1, and RASSF1A promoter CpG islands were significantly higher in ADH/FEA than
in normal breast tissue. GRIN2B, GSTP1, HOXA1, RARB, RUNX3, SFRP1, and TMEFF2
showed higher methylation levels and frequencies in DCIS than in ADH/FEA. DICS
and IDC did not differ in the methylation levels or frequencies for most CpG
island loci except SFRP1 and HOXA10. Our findings showed that promoter CpG island
methylation changed significantly in pre-invasive lesions, and was similar in IDC
and DCIS, suggesting that CpG island methylation of tumor-related genes is an
early event in breast cancer progression.

PMID: 21120523  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Leukemia. 2011 Mar;25(3):515-26. doi: 10.1038/leu.2010.281. Epub 2010 Nov 30.

High levels of the adhesion molecule CD44 on leukemic cells generate acute
myeloid leukemia relapse after withdrawal of the initial transforming event.

Quéré R(1), Andradottir S, Brun AC, Zubarev RA, Karlsson G, Olsson K, Magnusson
M, Cammenga J, Karlsson S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Division of Molecular Medicine and Gene
Therapy, Lund Strategic Center for Stem Cell Biology and Cell Therapy, Lund
University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

Multiple genetic hits are detected in patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
To investigate this further, we developed a tetracycline-inducible mouse model of
AML, in which the initial transforming event, overexpression of HOXA10, can be
eliminated. Continuous overexpression of HOXA10 is required to generate AML in
primary recipient mice, but is not essential for maintenance of the leukemia.
Transplantation of AML to secondary recipients showed that in established
leukemias, ~80% of the leukemia-initiating cells (LICs) in bone marrow stopped
proliferating upon withdrawal of HOXA10 overexpression. However, the population
of LICs in primary recipients is heterogeneous, as ~20% of the LICs induce
leukemia in secondary recipients despite elimination of HOXA10-induced
overexpression. Intrinsic genetic activation of several proto-oncogenes was
observed in leukemic cells resistant to inactivation of the initial
transformation event. Interestingly, high levels of the adhesion molecule CD44 on
leukemic cells are essential to generate leukemia after removal of the primary
event. This suggests that extrinsic niche-dependent factors are also involved in 
the host-dependent outgrowth of leukemias after withdrawal of HOXA10
overexpression event that initiates the leukemia.

PMCID: PMC3072510
PMID: 21116281  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Cell Transplant. 2011;20(7):1099-108. doi: 10.3727/096368910X545068. Epub 2010
Nov 19.

NUP98-HOXA10hd-expanded hematopoietic stem cells efficiently reconstitute bone
marrow of mismatched recipients and induce tolerance.

Even Y(1), Bennett JL, Sekulovic S, So L, Yi L, McNagny K, Humphries RK, Rossi
FM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The Biomedical Research Centre, University of British 
Columbia, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Gene therapy as well as methods capable of returning cells to a pluripotent state
(iPS) have enabled the correction of genetic deficiencies in syngenic adult
progenitors, reducing the need for immunosuppression in cell therapy approaches. 
However, in diseases involving mutations that lead to the complete lack of a
protein, such as Duchenne muscular dystrophy, the main immunogens leading to
rejection of transplanted cells are the therapeutic proteins themselves. In these
cases even iPS cells would not circumvent the need for immunosuppression, and
alternative strategies must be developed. One such potential strategy seeks to
induce immune tolerance using hematopoietic stem cells originated from the same
donor or iPS line from which the therapeutic progenitors are derived. However,
donor hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) are available in limiting numbers and
embryonic stem (ES) cell-derived HSCs engraft poorly in adults. While these
limitations have been circumvented by ectopic expression of HOXB4, overexpression
of this protein is associated with inefficient lymphoid reconstitution. Here we
show that adult HSCs expanded with a NUP98- HOXA10hd fusion protein sustain
long-term engraftment in immunologically mismatched recipients and generate
normal numbers of lymphoid cells. In addition, NUP98-HOXA10hd-expanded cells
induce functional immune tolerance to a subsequent transplant of myogenic
progenitors immunologically matched with the transplanted HSCs.

PMID: 21092410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Biol Chem. 2011 Jan 28;286(4):3161-76. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M110.183251. Epub 2010 
Nov 18.

HoxA10 regulates transcription of the gene encoding transforming growth factor
beta2 (TGFbeta2) in myeloid cells.

Shah CA(1), Wang H, Bei L, Platanias LC, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine and Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

HoxA10 is a homeodomain transcription factor that is maximally expressed in
myeloid progenitor cells. HoxA10 is overexpressed in a poor prognosis subset of
human acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and in vivo overexpression of HoxA10 in murine
bone marrow induces myeloid leukemia. HoxA10 contributes to myeloid progenitor
expansion and differentiation block, but few target genes have been identified
that explain the influence of HoxA10 on these processes. The current study
identifies the gene encoding transforming growth factor ß2 (TGFß2) as a HoxA10
target gene. We found that HoxA10 activated TGFß2 transcription by interacting
with tandem cis elements in the promoter. We also determined that HoxA10
overexpression in myeloid progenitor cells increased Tgfß2 production by the
cells. Tgfß2 stimulates proliferation of hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells.
Therefore, these studies identified autocrine stimulation of myeloid progenitors 
by Tgfß2 as one mechanism by which HoxA10 expands this population. Because HoxA
proteins had not been previously known to influence expression of
pro-proliferative cytokines, this has implications for understanding molecular
mechanisms involved in progenitor expansion and the pathobiology of AML.

PMCID: PMC3024808
PMID: 21087928  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Feb;96(2):412-21. doi: 10.1210/jc.2010-1450. Epub
2010 Nov 17.

Leiomyoma simultaneously impair endometrial BMP-2-mediated decidualization and
anticoagulant expression through secretion of TGF-ß3.

Sinclair DC(1), Mastroyannis A, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of
Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

CONTEXT: Uterine leiomyomas occur in 30-70% of reproductive-age women. Leiomyoma 
reduce implantation, increase miscarriage risk, and increase menstrual bleeding. 
We hypothesized that endometrial defects induced by leiomyoma result in
menorrhagia and reproductive dysfunction.
OBJECTIVES: We evaluated the effect of leiomyoma on endometrial gene expression
essential for implantation and hemostasis both in vivo and in primary endometrial
stromal cells (ESC).
DESIGN AND SETTING: We conducted a case control and in vitro study at a
university medical center.
PATIENTS: The study included 24 subjects with or without leiomyoma.
INTERVENTION/MAIN OUTCOME MEASURED: Endometrium, myometrium, leiomyoma, and ESC
were obtained. Immunohistochemistry was used to evaluate TGF-ß3, bone
morphogenetic protein (BMP) receptors (BMPRs), plasminogen activator inhibitor 1 
(PAI-1), and thrombomodulin in vivo. BMP-2 secretion was assessed by ELISA. ESC
were treated with recombinant human (rh) BMP-2 or rhTGF-ß3. Expression of HOXA10,
LIF, BMPRs, antithrombin III (ATIII), thrombomodulin, and PAI-1 was assessed by
quantitative RT-PCR.
RESULTS: ESC from controls secreted more BMP-2 than those from women with
leiomyoma. HOXA10 and LIF expression increased after rhBMP-2 treatment of normal 
but not leiomyoma-associated ESC. In vivo leiomyoma-associated endometrium
expressed lower levels of BMPR 1A, 1B, and 2 than controls. Leiomyoma expressed
high levels of TGF-ß3; TGF-ß3 treatment of ESC reduced expression of BMPRs.
Similarly, leiomyoma-associated endometrium expressed less PAI-1 and
thrombomodulin in vivo. In ESC, TGF-ß3 reduced expression of PAI-1, ATIII, and
thrombomodulin.
CONCLUSIONS: Leiomyoma-secreted TGF-ß3 induces BMP-2 resistance in endometrium by
down-regulation of BMPR-2, likely causing defective endometrial decidualization. 
TGF-ß3 also reduces expression of PAI-1, ATIII, and thrombomodulin in
endometrium, likely contributing to menorrhagia. A single molecular signal
targeting endometrium may mediate both leiomyoma-induced infertility and
bleeding.

PMCID: PMC3048319
PMID: 21084396  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Fertil Steril. 2011 Mar 1;95(3):1133-6. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2010.09.060.
Epub 2010 Nov 10.

HOXA10 expression is decreased in endometrium of women with adenomyosis.

Fischer CP(1), Kayisili U, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Yale University, New
Haven, Connecticut, USA.

HOXA10 gene expression is decreased in the secretory phase endometrium of women
with adenomyosis. Diminished expression of HOXA10 is a potential mechanism
explaining decreased implantation observed in women with adenomyosis.

Copyright © 2011 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3053130
PMID: 21067721  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Sex Dev. 2010;4(6):326-35. doi: 10.1159/000321006. Epub 2010 Nov 1.

Morphogenetic targets and genetics of undescended testis.

Massart F(1), Saggese G.

Author information: 
(1)Pediatric Endocrine Center, Department of Procreative Medicine and Development
Age, University of Pisa, Pisa, Italy. massart@med.unipi.it

Although important advances in testicular physiology have been achieved, the
aetiology of human cryptorchidism remains mostly unknown. Next to sex steroidal
signaling pathways, morphogenetic genes are specifically involved in the
testicular descent via gubernacular development. Mutations in the human genes
encoding insulin-like factor 3 (INSL3) and its Leu-rich repeat-containing G
protein-coupled receptor 8 (LGR8), homeobox A10 (HOXA10), zinc finger 214
(ZNF214) and 215 (ZNF215) have occasionally been identified but do not seem to be
a frequent cause of cryptorchidism. On the other hand, common polymorphisms in
these genes have recently been investigated as contributing risk factors for
idiopathic isolated (nonsyndromic) cryptorchidism.

Copyright © 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20980787  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Biomed Pharmacother. 2010 Dec;64(10):697-705. doi: 10.1016/j.biopha.2010.09.012. 
Epub 2010 Oct 1.

Reduced expression of HOXA10 in the midluteal endometrium from infertile women
with minimal endometriosis.

Szczepanska M(1), Wirstlein P, Luczak M, Jagodzinski PP, Skrzypczak J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Gynecological Oncology, Division of
Reproduction, University of Medical Sciences, 60-781 Poznan, Poland.

Recent human and animal studies have suggested that reduced HOXA10 expression in 
the implantation window of eutopic endometrium may contribute to infertility in
women with endometriosis. Therefore, we examined the HOXA10 transcript, protein
and HOXA10 promoter methylation levels in midluteal eutopic endometrium from 17
infertile women with minimal endometriosis and 15 healthy fertile women from a
Polish cohort. Real-time quantitative PCR (RQ-PCR) and western blotting analysis 
revealed significantly lower levels of HOXA10 transcript (P=0.019) and protein
(P=0.048) levels in eutopic endometrium from infertile women with endometriosis
as compared to healthy fertile women. Moreover, sodium bisulfite sequencing of
three HOXA10 CpG islands showed significantly higher methylation levels of
genomic DNA from midluteal eutopic endometrium from infertile women with
endometriosis as compared to healthy fertile women (P=0.006). We confirmed that
DNA hypermethylation can be one of the potential molecular mechanisms silencing
HOXA10 expression in the midluteal endometrium associated with infertility in
women with endometriosis.

Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Masson SAS. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20971605  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2011 Jan;300(1):E86-93. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00439.2010. Epub 2010 Oct 19.

Regulation of tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase by HOXA10 enhances embryo viability
through serotonin signaling.

Doherty LF(1), Kwon HE, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Tryptophan 2,3-dioxygenase (TDO) is expressed in endometrium and catabolizes
tryptophan, a precursor in the biosynthesis of serotonin. Tryptophan metabolism
is an important mechanism for regulation of serotonin levels. Preimplantation
mouse embryos are known to express serotonin receptors, specifically the 5-HT1D
and 5-HT7 serotonin receptor subtypes. Here we demonstrate that Hoxa10 regulates 
endometrial TDO expression and improves embryo viability through increased
serotonin production. Transfection of pcDNA-Hoxa10 to the murine uterus increased
total TDO expression. In vitro, epithelial cell TDO expression was decreased
after transfection with Hoxa10. Decreased glandular TDO in response to HOXA10 may
augment serotonin production by increasing tryptophan availability. Conversely,
stromal TDO expression increased with constitutive Hoxa10 expression. In mice,
epithelial serotonin was increased in response to constitutive expression of
Hoxa10. Embryo quality was impaired after treatment with Hoxa10 antisense.
Blockade of serotonin receptors 1D and 7 also resulted in impaired embryo
development, indicating an essential role for Hoxa10 induction of TDO and
subsequent serotonin production in embryo development. Transfection of pcDNA-TDO 
also decreased the number of T cells in the endometrial stroma. We have shown a
novel mechanism by which HOXA10 regulates endometrial TDO expression. In the
endometrial stroma, HOXA10 increases TDO mRNA, which may increase tryptophan
catabolism, allowing for immune tolerance at the time of embryo implantation. In 
endometrial glands, HOXA10 decreases TDO mRNA leading to increased serotonin that
in turn acts to promote normal embryo development.

PMCID: PMC3023205
PMID: 20959529  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Cancer Res. 2010 Nov 15;70(22):9243-52. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-1250. Epub 
2010 Oct 8.

MGMT-independent temozolomide resistance in pediatric glioblastoma cells
associated with a PI3-kinase-mediated HOX/stem cell gene signature.

Gaspar N(1), Marshall L, Perryman L, Bax DA, Little SE, Viana-Pereira M, Sharp
SY, Vassal G, Pearson AD, Reis RM, Hargrave D, Workman P, Jones C.

Author information: 
(1)Paediatric Oncology, and Cancer Research UK Centre for Cancer Therapeutics,
The Institute of Cancer Research, and Paediatric Oncology, The Royal Marsden NHS 
Foundation Trust, Sutton, United Kingdom.

Sensitivity to temozolomide is restricted to a subset of glioblastoma patients,
with the major determinant of resistance being a lack of promoter methylation of 
the gene encoding the repair protein DNA methyltransferase MGMT, although other
mechanisms are thought to be active. There are, however, limited preclinical data
in model systems derived from pediatric glioma patients. We screened a series of 
cell lines for temozolomide efficacy in vitro, and investigated the differential 
mechanisms of resistance involved. In the majority of cell lines, a lack of MGMT 
promoter methylation and subsequent protein overexpression were linked to
temozolomide resistance. An exception was the pediatric glioblastoma line KNS42. 
Expression profiling data revealed a coordinated upregulation of HOX gene
expression in resistant lines, especially KNS42, which was reversed by
phosphoinositide 3-kinase pathway inhibition. High levels of HOXA9/HOXA10 gene
expression were associated with a shorter survival in pediatric high-grade glioma
patient samples. Combination treatment in vitro of pathway inhibition and
temozolomide resulted in a highly synergistic interaction in KNS42 cells. The
resistance gene signature further included contiguous genes within the 12q13-q14 
amplicon, including the Akt enhancer PIKE, significantly overexpressed in the
KNS42 line. These cells were also highly enriched for CD133 and other stem cell
markers. We have thus shown an in vitro link between phosphoinositide
3-kinase-mediated HOXA9/HOXA10 expression, and a drug-resistant, progenitor cell 
phenotype in MGMT-independent pediatric glioblastoma.

Copyright © 2010 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3935452
PMID: 20935218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Assist Reprod Genet. 2010 Dec;27(12):701-10. doi: 10.1007/s10815-010-9471-y.
Epub 2010 Sep 7.

The role of the Hoxa10/HOXA10 gene in the etiology of endometriosis and its
related infertility: a review.

Zanatta A(1), Rocha AM, Carvalho FM, Pereira RM, Taylor HS, Motta EL, Baracat EC,
Serafini PC.

Author information: 
(1)Huntington Medicina Reprodutiva, Av. República do Líbano, 529-Ibirapuera,
04501-000 São Paulo, SP, Brazil. alysson.zanatta@gmail.com

PURPOSE: endometriosis and its associated infertility have been the object of
continuous research for over a century. To understand the molecular mechanisms
underlying the disease, it has become necessary to determine the aspects of its
etiology that are not explained by the retrograde menstruation theory. This could
in turn elucidate how various clinical and surgical treatments might affect the
evolution and remission of the disease.
METHODS: this review is focused on the most recent clinical and laboratory
findings regarding the association of HOXA10 with endometriosis and infertility.
RESULT: the homebox (Hox/HOX) proteins are highly conserved transcription factors
that determine segmental body identities in multiple species, including humans.
Hoxa10/HOXA10 is directly involved in the embryogenesis of the uterus and embryo 
implantation via regulation of downstream genes. Cyclical endometrial expression 
of Hoxa10/HOXA10, with a peak of expression occurring during the window of
implantation, is observed in the adult in response to estrogen and progesterone. 
Women with endometriosis do not demonstrate the expected mid-luteal rise of
HOXA10 expression, which might partially explain the infertility observed in many
of these patients. Recent studies also demonstrated HOXA10 expression in
endometriotic foci outside the Müllerian tract.
CONCLUSIONS: multiple lines of evidence suggest that the actions of the homeobox 
A10 (Hoxa10/HOXA10) gene could account for some aspects of endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC2997955
PMID: 20821045  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. J Reprod Dev. 2010 Dec;56(6):643-8. Epub 2010 Aug 28.

Effect of steroids on HOXA10 mRNA and protein expression and prostaglandin
production in the porcine endometrium.

Blitek A(1), Kiewisz J, Waclawik A, Kaczmarek MM, Ziecik AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research, Polish Academy of
Sciences, Olsztyn, Poland. a.blitek@pan.olsztyn.pl

The homeobox A (HOXA) family of genes is responsible for segmental development of
the female reproductive tract during embryogenesis. However, HOXA10 has been
shown to be essential not only for uterus development, but also for implantation.
Persistent expression and steroid-dependent regulation of this gene has been
demonstrated in adult human, primate, murine and canine uteri. Moreover,
HOXA10-dependent expression of prostaglandin H synthase-2 (PGHS-2), a key enzyme 
in prostaglandin production, has been previously detected. The role of the HOXA10
gene in the porcine uterus is not well established. Therefore, the present
studies were undertaken to 1) examine the effect of E(2) and P(4) on HOXA10 mRNA 
and protein content in the endometrium collected on day 9 of the estrous cycle
and 2) determine the PGHS-2 protein expression and PGE(2) and PGF(2a) secretion
from endometrial tissue in response to steroid treatment. Endometrial explants
collected from mature gilts on day 9 of the estrous cycle were incubated with
E(2) (1-100 nM), P(4) (10-1000 nM) or E(2) (10 nM) and P(4) (100 nM) for 24 h.
E(2) alone or E(2) in the presence of P(4) increased HOXA10 mRNA expression in
the endometrium (P<0.05). The HOXA10 protein level was upregulated in response to
E(2), P(4) and both steroids administered simultaneously (P<0.05). Moreover, E(2)
and P(4) stimulated PGHS-2 protein expression in cultured endometrial explants.
PGE(2), but not PGF(2a), secretion increased in the presence of E(2) (P<0.05).
However, the release of both prostaglandins was decreased after treatment of
endometrial explants with the highest dose of P(4) (P<0.01). These results
demonstrate that E(2) and P(4) are important regulators of HOXA10 gene expression
in the adult porcine endometrium during the mid-luteal phase of the estrous
cycle. Additionally, the similar profiles of endometrial HOXA10 and PGHS-2
expression in the presence of E(2) and P(4) indicate that both genes are
simultaneously regulated by steroids in the porcine uterus.

PMID: 20814169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Mol Cancer. 2010 Jun 17;9:151. doi: 10.1186/1476-4598-9-151.

Polycomb repressor complex 2 regulates HOXA9 and HOXA10, activating ID2 in
NK/T-cell lines.

Nagel S(1), Venturini L, Marquez VE, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Scherr M, MacLeod RA,
Drexler HG.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Human and Animal Cell Lines, DSMZ - German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Inhoffenstr. 7B, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
sna@dsmz.de

BACKGROUND: NK- and T-cells are closely related lymphocytes, originating from the
same early progenitor cells during hematopoiesis. In these differentiation
processes deregulation of developmental genes may contribute to leukemogenesis.
Here, we compared expression profiles of NK- and T-cell lines for identification 
of aberrantly expressed genes in T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (T-ALL)
which physiologically regulate the differentiation program of the NK-cell
lineage.
RESULTS: This analysis showed high expression levels of HOXA9, HOXA10 and ID2 in 
NK-cell lines in addition to T-cell line LOUCY, suggesting leukemic deregulation 
therein. Overexpression experiments, chromatin immuno-precipitation and promoter 
analysis demonstrated that HOXA9 and HOXA10 directly activated expression of ID2.
Concomitantly elevated expression levels of HOXA9 and HOXA10 together with ID2 in
cell lines containing MLL translocations confirmed this form of regulation in
both ALL and acute myeloid leukemia. Overexpression of HOXA9, HOXA10 or ID2
resulted in repressed expression of apoptosis factor BIM. Furthermore, profiling 
data of genes coding for chromatin regulators of homeobox genes, including
components of polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2), indicated lacking expression
of EZH2 in LOUCY and exclusive expression of HOP in NK-cell lines. Subsequent
treatment of T-cell lines JURKAT and LOUCY with DZNep, an inhibitor of EZH2/PRC2,
resulted in elevated and unchanged HOXA9/10 expression levels, respectively.
Moreover, siRNA-mediated knockdown of EZH2 in JURKAT enhanced HOXA10 expression, 
confirming HOXA10-repression by EZH2. Additionally, profiling data and
overexpression analysis indicated that reduced expression of E2F cofactor TFDP1
contributed to the lack of EZH2 in LOUCY. Forced expression of HOP in JURKAT
cells resulted in reduced HOXA10 and ID2 expression levels, suggesting
enhancement of PRC2 repression.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results show that major differentiation factors of the NK-cell
lineage, including HOXA9, HOXA10 and ID2, were (de)regulated via PRC2 which
therefore contributes to T-cell leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2894765
PMID: 20565746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2010 Jun;18(3):683-5.

[Construction and identification of recombinant retroviral vector containing
human homeobox gene HoxA10 and its stably packaged cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

He YM(1), Zhu FM, Yan LX.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Blood Transfusion, Blood Center of Zhejiang Province, Hangzhou
310006, China.

This study was purposed to construct the recombinant retroviral vector containing
human homeobox gene hoxA10 and to establish the packaging cell lines which stably
produce viruses. The whole coding region of hoxA10 gene was amplified by PCR and 
inserted into the retroviral vector MSCVneo. The recombinant vector was
identified by DNA sequencing. The recombinant and control retroviral vectors were
transfected into the packaging cell line PT67 by liposome Lipofectamine(TM) 2000.
These cell lines stably producing retrovirus were isolated following G418
selection. The viral suspension was harvested and the viral titer was determined 
by NIH3T3 cells. The results showed that the recombinant retroviral vector was
proved to encode hoxA10 genes by sequencing. The cell lines efficiently producing
virus were screened by G418 and designated as PT67/MSCVneo and
PT67/MSCVneo-hoxA10. The titers of them were 5 x 10(5) CFU/ml and 4 x 10(4)
CFU/ml respectively. It is concluded that the recombinant retroviral vector
containing homeobox gene hoxA10 and the stably packaging cell lines which
efficiently and correctly produce viruses are successfully constructed, which
provides a basis for further exploration of the hoxA10 gene function in the
regulation of hematopoiesis.

PMID: 20561428  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2010 Sep;299(3):H837-46. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00002.2010. Epub 2010 Jun 11.

Environment and vascular bed origin influence differences in endothelial
transcriptional profiles of coronary and iliac arteries.

Burridge KA(1), Friedman MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 
27708, USA.

Atherosclerotic plaques tend to form in the major arteries at certain predictable
locations. As these arteries vary in atherosusceptibility, interarterial
differences in endothelial cell biology are of considerable interest. To explore 
the origin of differences observed between typical atheroprone and
atheroresistant arteries, we used DNA microarrays to compare gene expression
profiles of harvested porcine coronary (CECs) and iliac artery endothelial cells 
(IECs) grown in static culture out to passage 4. Fewer differences were observed 
between the transcriptional profiles of CECs and IECs in culture compared with in
vivo, suggesting that most differences observed in vivo were due to distinct
environmental cues in the two arteries. One-class significance of microarrays
revealed that most in vivo interarterial differences disappeared in culture, as
fold differences after passaging were not significant for 85% of genes identified
as differentially expressed in vivo at 5% false discovery rate. However, the
three homeobox genes, HOXA9, HOXA10, and HOXD3, remained underexpressed in
coronary endothelium for all passages by at least nine-, eight-, and twofold,
respectively. Continued differential expression, despite removal from the in vivo
environment, suggests that primarily heritable or epigenetic mechanism(s)
influences transcription of these three genes. Quantitative real-time polymerase 
chain reaction confirmed expression ratios for seven genes associated with
atherogenesis and over- or underexpressed by threefold in CECs relative to IECs. 
The present study provides evidence that both local environment and vascular bed 
origin modulate gene expression in arterial endothelium. The transcriptional
differences observed here may provide new insights into pathways responsible for 
coronary artery susceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2944485
PMID: 20543076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. J Reprod Immunol. 2010 Jun;85(2):130-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jri.2010.03.003. Epub 2010
May 15.

Regulation of decidualization, interleukin-11 and interleukin-15 by homeobox A 10
in endometrial stromal cells.

Godbole G(1), Modi D.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Laboratory, National Institute for Research in 
Reproductive Health, Parel, Mumbai 400012, India.

Cytokine production by the endometrial stromal and decidual cells is essential
for successful differentiation of the endometrial stromal cells and uterine
leukocytes to sustain pregnancy. Interleukin-11 and -15 (IL-11 and IL-15)
secreted by the stromal and decidual cells are two key modulators of the process 
of decidualization and natural killer cell (NK) activity in the uterus and are
essential for pregnancy. However, limited information exists on the maternal
factors that regulate the production of these cytokines by the stromal cells. In 
this study, we investigated the role of homeobox A10 (HOXA10) in the regulation
of expression of genes encoding the decidualization markers insulin-like growth
factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP1), prolactin and the cytokines IL-11 and IL-15 by
endometrial stromal and decidual cells in vitro. The results demonstrated that
the expression of IGFBP1, Prolactin (PRL), HOXA10, IL11, and IL15 are
co-regulated during steroid hormone-mediated decidualization of human endometrial
stromal cells in vitro. In the predecidual cells, downregulation of HOXA10 by
siRNA suppresses IGFBP1 and IL15, but increases IL11 expression. In the
decidualized cells, knocking down HOXA10 inhibits IGFBP1 and PRL expression but
elevates the expression of IL11 and IL15. In addition, our data also demonstrate 
that transient inhibition of HOXA10 expression in the predecidual cells does not 
influence its ability to subsequently decidualize or affect cytokine expression, 
suggesting that steroid hormone-mediated decidualization and cytokine production 
in vitro does not require HOXA10 preconditioning.

Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20478621  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Biol Reprod. 2010 Aug 1;83(2):205-11. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.110.083980. Epub
2010 May 12.

HOXA10 inhibits Kruppel-like factor 9 expression in the human endometrial
epithelium.

Du H(1), Sarno J, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Kruppel-like factor 9 (KLF9) is a zinc finger transcription factor that regulates
estrogen and progesterone action by modulating the activity of progesterone
receptor (PGR). The transition from proliferative to secretory endometrial
epithelium involves loss of estrogen receptor/PGR expression and loss of direct
response to sex steroids. HOXA10 partially mediates progesterone responsiveness
in the endometrium. Here, we demonstrate that HOXA10 directly regulates KLF9 in
endometrial epithelial cells and not in stromal cells. Immunohistochemistry
performed on endometrial tissue obtained from normal, reproductive-age women
revealed that KLF9 expression was decreased in the secretory phase of the
menstrual cycle compared to the proliferative phase. In vitro, HOXA10
transfection of human endometrial epithelial cells (Ishikawa), but not stromal
cells (HESC), resulted in a greater than 50% decrease in KLF9 mRNA and protein
expression. Reporter constructs driven by the KLF9 promoter were repressed by
cotransfection with HOXA10. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay was used to
demonstrate direct binding of HOXA10 to the KLF9 promoter. Targeted mutation of
the HOXA10-binding site in the KLF9 promoter resulted in loss of HOXA10 binding
and loss of repression by HOXA10 in reporter assays. HOXA10 directly and
selectively repressed KLF9 expression in endometrial epithelial cells. HOXA10
repression of KLF9 likely contributes to the loss of sex steroid responsiveness
in secretory-phase endometrial epithelium.

PMCID: PMC2907284
PMID: 20463357  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. Reprod Biomed Online. 2010 Jul;21(1):126-32. doi: 10.1016/j.rbmo.2010.03.015.
Epub 2010 Mar 28.

HOX A10 and HOX A11 mutation scan in congenital malformations of the female
genital tract.

Liatsikos SA(1), Grimbizis GF, Georgiou I, Papadopoulos N, Lazaros L, Bontis JN, 
Tarlatzis BC.

Author information: 
(1)1st Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Medical School, Aristotle
University of Thessaloniki, Papageorgiou General Hospital, Thessaloniki, Greece.

Homeobox (HOX) genes encode a number of transcription factors, expressed along
the developmental axis of the female genital tract during the embryonic period.
Because HOX A10 and HOX A11 genes are expressed in the embryonic paramesonephric 
(Müllerian) ducts, abnormally low expression by mutant HOX A10 and HOX A11 genes 
might cause genital tract anomalies. This case-control study examined if one or
more mutations in the HOX A10 and HOX A11 genes are included in the pathogenesis 
of the female genital tract anomalies. Blood samples were obtained from 30 women 
diagnosed with malformations of the genital tract (18 with septate uterus, three 
with bicornuate uterus, two with didelphys uterus, two with unicornuate uterus
and five with aplasia/dysplasia) and 100 normal controls. DNA samples prepared
from blood leukocytes were used as templates for polymerase chain reaction
amplification of DNA fragments from HOX A10 and HOX A11 genes. The gene fragments
were tested for DNA sequence differences using single-strand conformation
polymorphism analysis and sequenced when genetic variation was detected. No
subject showed a plausible causative mutation in HOX A10 or HOX A11; the sole
variant observed (P38R) found in a patient with septate uterus was also present
in her clinically normal mother.

2010 Reproductive Healthcare Ltd. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20457539  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Mol Cell Biol. 2010 Jul;30(14):3531-41. doi: 10.1128/MCB.00889-09. Epub 2010 May 
3.

Pbx1 represses osteoblastogenesis by blocking Hoxa10-mediated recruitment of
chromatin remodeling factors.

Gordon JA(1), Hassan MQ, Saini S, Montecino M, van Wijnen AJ, Stein GS, Stein JL,
Lian JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, 55 Lake Avenue North, Worcester, MA 01655-0106, USA.

Abdominal-class homeodomain-containing (Hox) factors form multimeric complexes
with TALE-class homeodomain proteins (Pbx, Meis) to regulate tissue morphogenesis
and skeletal development. Here we have established that Pbx1 negatively regulates
Hoxa10-mediated gene transcription in mesenchymal cells and identified components
of a Pbx1 complex associated with genes in osteoblasts. Expression of Pbx1
impaired osteogenic commitment of C3H10T1/2 multipotent cells and differentiation
of MC3T3-E1 preosteoblasts. Conversely, targeted depletion of Pbx1 by short
hairpin RNA (shRNA) increased expression of osteoblast-related genes. Studies
using wild-type and mutated osteocalcin and Bsp promoters revealed that Pbx1 acts
through a Pbx-binding site that is required to attenuate gene activation by
Hoxa10. Chromatin-associated Pbx1 and Hoxa10 were present at osteoblast-related
gene promoters preceding gene expression, but only Hoxa10 was associated with
these promoters during transcription. Our results show that Pbx1 is associated
with histone deacetylases normally linked with chromatin inactivation. Loss of
Pbx1 from osteoblast promoters in differentiated osteoblasts was associated with 
increased histone acetylation and CBP/p300 recruitment, as well as decreased H3K9
methylation. We propose that Pbx1 plays a central role in attenuating the ability
of Hoxa10 to activate osteoblast-related genes in order to establish temporal
regulation of gene expression during osteogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2897555
PMID: 20439491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Mol Reprod Dev. 2010 Jun;77(6):540-9. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21180.

Regulation of H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 during early porcine embryonic development.

Gao Y(1), Hyttel P, Hall VJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Basic Animal and Veterinary Sciences, Faculty of Life Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg C, Copenhagen, Denmark. ygao000@gmail.com

The epigenetic marks H3K27me3 and H3K4me3 are important repressive and permissive
histone modifications, respectively, which are involved in gene regulation such
as Hox gene expression during embryonic development. In this study, we
investigated the global levels of these two histone modifications. We also
investigated the expression of H3K27me3's methyltransferase (EZH2), EZH2
co-factors (EED and SUZ12) and demethylases (JMJD3 and UTX), as well as H3K4me3's
methylases (ASH1L and MLL1) and demethylase (RBP2) in porcine pre-implantation
embryos. In addition, the expression of Hox genes, HOXA2, HOXA3, HOXA7, HOXA10,
HOXB4, HOXB7, HOXC8, HOXD8, and HOXD10 was investigated. We found that global
levels of H3K27me3 decreased from the 1- to the 4-cell stage, corresponding to
the time of major embryonic genome activation. Subsequently, the levels increased
in hatched blastocysts, particularly in the trophectoderm. The expression levels 
of EZH2, EED, SUZ12, JMJD3, and UTX correlated well with these findings. The
global levels of H3K4me3 decreased from the 1-cell to the morula stage and
increased in hatched blastocysts, especially in trophectoderm. A peak in
expression of ASH1L was seen at the 4-cell stage, but overall, expression of
ASH1L, MLL1, and RBP2 correlated poorly with H3K4me3. HOXA3, A7, and B4 were
expressed in 4-cell embryos, and HOXA7, A10, B4, and D8 were expressed in hatched
blastocysts, and did not correlate well to global methylation of H3K27me3 or
H3K4me3. Thus, H3K4me3 may play a role in early porcine embryonic genome
activation, whereas, H3K27me3 may be involved in initial cell lineage segregation
in the blastocyst.

Copyright 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 20422712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Dev Cell. 2010 Apr 20;18(4):655-61. doi: 10.1016/j.devcel.2010.02.011.

Evidence for a myotomal Hox/Myf cascade governing nonautonomous control of rib
specification within global vertebral domains.

Vinagre T(1), Moncaut N, Carapuço M, Nóvoa A, Bom J, Mallo M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciência, Rua da Quinta Grande 6, 2780-156 Oeiras,
Portugal.

Hox genes are essential for the patterning of the axial skeleton. Hox group 10
has been shown to specify the lumbar domain by setting a rib-inhibiting program
in the presomitic mesoderm (PSM). We have now produced mice with ribs in every
vertebra by ectopically expressing Hox group 6 in the PSM, indicating that Hox
genes are also able to specify the thoracic domain. We show that the information 
provided by Hox genes to specify rib-containing and rib-less areas is first
interpreted in the myotome through the regional-specific control of Myf5 and Myf6
expression. This information is then transmitted to the sclerotome by a system
that includes FGF and PDGF signaling to produce vertebrae with or without ribs at
different axial levels. Our findings offer a new perspective of how Hox genes
produce global patterns in the axial skeleton and support a redundant nonmyogenic
role of Myf5 and Myf6 in rib formation.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20412779  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Fertil Steril. 2010 Dec;94(7):2558-63. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2010.03.006.
Epub 2010 Apr 18.

Prokineticin 1, homeobox A10, and progesterone receptor messenger ribonucleic
acid expression in primary cultures of endometrial stromal cells isolated from
endometrium of healthy women and from eutopic endometrium of women with
endometriosis.

Tiberi F(1), Tropea A, Romani F, Apa R, Marana R, Lanzone A.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Scientifico Internazionale Paolo VI, Università Cattolica del Sacro
Cuore (UCSC), Rome, Italy. fm1810@inwind.it

OBJECTIVE: To examine prokineticin 1 (PROK1), homeobox (HOX) A10, and P receptor 
(PR) messenger ribonucleic acid (mRNA) expression in primary cultures of
endometrial stromal cells (ESC) obtained from eutopic endometrial samples of
patients with endometriosis and to clarify whether in vitro steroid hormone
dependence of PROK1 gene expression is altered in endometriosis.
DESIGN: Prospective laboratory study.
SETTING: Tertiary university hospital.
PATIENT(S): Twelve normal women (controls) and 12 patients affected by moderate
to severe endometriosis in the midsecretory phase of the menstrual cycle.
INTERVENTION(S): Endometrial specimens were obtained from control women and from 
women affected by endometriosis; ESC were isolated from endometrial biopsies, and
primary cultures were established.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis of PROK1,
HOXA10, and PR mRNA expression in ESC after 1-4 days of steroid hormone treatment
and after decidual differentiation.
RESULT(S): Contrary to ESC from control women, in ESC obtained from women
affected by endometriosis PROK1 and PR mRNA expression was not induced by 1-4
days of treatment with steroid hormones. Nevertheless, when ESC from both groups 
of women were differentiated to decidual phenotype, PROK1 mRNA was up-regulated
and PR and HOXA10 mRNA were down-regulated to the same extent.
CONCLUSION(S): Our results provide additional evidence for P resistance in
endometriosis.

Copyright © 2010 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20400074  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. Urol Int. 2010;84(3):353-61. doi: 10.1159/000288242. Epub 2010 Apr 13.

Decreased expression of FGFR1, SOS1, RAF1 genes in cryptorchidism.

Hadziselimovic NO(1), de Geyter Ch, Demougin P, Oakeley EJ, Hadziselimovic F.

Author information: 
(1)Kindertagesklinik Liestal, Liestal, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: In recent years, several genes were found to be involved in the
process of epididymo-testicular descent, the most frequently cited ones include
INSL3, HOXA10, GNRHR, and KAL1. In this study, we analyzed the differences in
gene expression profiles between cryptorchid and descended testes. In particular,
we analyzed expression of all recently published genes known to be associated
with undescended testis.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Twenty-two testicular biopsies from 18 boys were analyzed. 
We analyzed gene expression in 16 cryptorchid and 6 descended testes using
Affymetrix Human Genome U133 Plus 2.0 GeneChips, and validated the results with
qPCR.
RESULTS: 3,688 transcripts were differentially expressed with an adjusted p value
of <0.05 and a change of at least 1.5-fold. The list contained 1,866
downregulated and 1,822 upregulated transcripts in the cryptorchid testes. A
novel observation in our study was that the fibroblast growth factor receptor 1
gene (FGFR1) and its mediators SOS1 and RAF1 were expressed less in undescended
testes.
CONCLUSION: Based on our results, it is possible that a subtle dysfunction
(expression) of the FGFR1, SOS1 and RAF1 genes is involved in the development of 
the most common male reproductive tract disorder - unilateral or bilateral
cryptorchidism.

Copyright 2010 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 20389169  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Clin Orthop Relat Res. 2010 Aug;468(8):2260-77. doi: 10.1007/s11999-010-1341-5.
Epub 2010 Apr 13.

Effects of pulsed electromagnetic fields on human osteoblastlike cells (MG-63): a
pilot study.

Sollazzo V(1), Palmieri A, Pezzetti F, Massari L, Carinci F.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto di Clinica Ortopedica Università di Ferrara, Corso Giovecca 203,
44100 Ferrara, Italy. slv@unife.it

BACKGROUND: Although pulsed electromagnetic fields (PEMFs) are used to treat
delayed unions and nonunions, their mechanisms of action are not completely
clear. However, PEMFs are known to affect the expression of certain genes.
QUESTIONS/PURPOSES: We asked (1) whether PEMFs affect gene expression in human
osteoblastlike cells (MG63) in vitro, and (2) whether and to what extent
stimulation by PEMFs induce cell proliferation and differentiation in MG-63
cultures.
METHODS: We cultured two groups of MG63 cells. One group was treated with PEMFs
for 18 hours whereas the second was maintained in the same culture condition
without PEMFs (control). Gene expression was evaluated throughout cDNA microarray
analysis containing 19,000 genes spanning a substantial fraction of the human
genome.
RESULTS: PEMFs induced the upregulation of important genes related to bone
formation (HOXA10, AKT1), genes at the transductional level (CALM1, P2RX7), genes
for cytoskeletal components (FN1, VCL), and collagenous (COL1A2) and
noncollagenous (SPARC) matrix components. However, PEMF induced downregulation of
genes related to the degradation of extracellular matrix (MMP-11, DUSP4).
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: PEMFs appear to induce cell proliferation and
differentiation. Furthermore, PEMFs promote extracellular matrix production and
mineralization while decreasing matrix degradation and absorption. Our data
suggest specific mechanisms of the observed clinical effect of PEMFs, and thus
specific approaches for use in regenerative medicine.

PMCID: PMC2895828
PMID: 20387020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Reprod Sci. 2010 May;17(5):471-6. doi: 10.1177/1933719110361961.

Endothelin type A receptor (ETA) expression is regulated by HOXA10 in human
endometrial stromal cells.

Penna IA(1), Hongling Du, Kallen AN, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Endothelin type A receptor (ET(A)) is a member of the superfamily of G
protein-coupled receptors. Our laboratory conducted a microarray screen that
identified ET(A) as target of HOXA10 transcriptional control in endometrium.
Here, we confirm HOXA10-regulated ET(A) expression in endometrium. Endometrial
biopsies were obtained from fertile reproductive-age individuals, and first
trimester decidual samples were obtained at the time of elective termination.
Immunohistochemistry (IHC) was used to identify ET(A) protein in endometrium as
well as first trimester decidua. ET(A) was expressed in endometrial stromal cells
throughout the menstrual cycle. ET(A) was also highly expressed in first
trimester decidual cells. The regulatory relationship between HOXA10 and ET(A)
was established by transient transfection analysis. The human endometrial stromal
cell line (HESC) and the human endometrial epithelial cell line (Ishikawa) were
transfected with pcDNA/HOXA10, HOXA10 small interfering RNA (siRNA), or
respective controls. Quantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR) was performed to determine expression levels of HOXA10 and ET(A) in
each group. ET(A) gene expression increased 9-fold (P < .05) after pcDNA/HOXA10
transfection of HESC. ET(A) was not regulated by HOXA10 in Ishikawa cells. We
conclude that ET(A) is expressed in normal endometrium and decidua. Expression of
this receptor is regulated by an essential mediator of endometrial receptivity,
HOXA10. ET(A) may enhance the proliferative potential of endometrial cells in a
manner similar to that seen in vascular smooth muscle cells. ET( A) likely acts
as a molecular mechanism by which HOXA10 promotes stromal cell growth and
prostaglandin production in both the implantation window and decidua.

PMCID: PMC3107845
PMID: 20371740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. J Hered. 2010 Jul-Aug;101(4):469-75. doi: 10.1093/jhered/esq037. Epub 2010 Mar
22.

Polydactyl inheritance in the pig.

Gorbach D(1), Mote B, Totir L, Fernando R, Rothschild M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Center for Integrated Animal Genomics, Iowa
State University, 2255 Kildee Hall, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

Two pigs were identified having "extra feet" (preaxial polydactyly) within a
purebred population of Yorkshire pigs. Polydactyly is an inherited disorder in
many species that may be controlled by either recessive or dominant genes.
Experimental matings were conducted using pigs that had produced affected
offspring with the result of 12 polydactyl offspring out of 95 piglets. One
polydactyl-producing boar was also mated to 4 Duroc sows and 8 distantly related 
Yorkshire sows to produce 129 unaffected offspring. Together, these results
suggest a recessive mode of inheritance, possibly with incomplete penetrance.
Candidate genes, LMBR1, EN2, HOXA10-13, GLI3, WNT2, WNT16, and SHH, were
identified based on association with similar phenotypes in other species.
Homologues for these genes are all found on SSC18. Sequencing and linkage studies
showed no evidence for association with HOXA10-13, WNT2, and WNT16. Results for
the regions including GLI3, LMBR1, and SHH, however, were inconclusive. A whole
genome scan was conducted on DNA samples from 10 affected pigs and 12 close
relatives using the Illumina PorcineSNP60 BeadChip and compared with 69 more
distantly related animals in the same population. No evidence was found for a
major gene causing polydactyly. However, a 25-Mb stretch of homozygosity on SSC8 
was identified as fairly unique to the family segregating for this trait.
Therefore, this chromosome segment may play a role in development of polydactyly 
in concert with other genes.

PMID: 20308080  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. BMC Genomics. 2010 Mar 15;11:176. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-176.

The embryonic genes Dkk3, Hoxd8, Hoxd9 and Tbx1 identify muscle types in a
diet-independent and fiber-type unrelated way.

de Wilde J(1), Hulshof MF, Boekschoten MV, de Groot P, Smit E, Mariman EC.

Author information: 
(1)Top Institute Food and Nutrition, Nutrigenomics Consortium, Wageningen, the
Netherlands. j.dewilde@hb.unimaas.nl

BACKGROUND: The mouse skeletal muscle is composed of four distinct fiber types
that differ in contractile function, number of mitochondria and metabolism. Every
muscle type has a specific composition and distribution of the four fiber types. 
To find novel genes involved in specifying muscle types, we used microarray
analysis to compare the gastrocnemius with the quadriceps from mice fed a low fat
diet (LFD) or high fat diet (HFD) for 8 weeks. Additional qPCR analysis were
performed in the gastrocnemius, quadriceps and soleus muscle from mice fed an LFD
or HFD for 20 weeks.
RESULTS: In mice fed the 8-week LFD 162 genes were differentially expressed in
the gastrocnemius vs. the quadriceps. Genes with the strongest differences in
expression were markers for oxidative fiber types (e.g. Tnni1) and genes which
are known to be involved in embryogenesis (Dkk3, Hoxd8,Hoxd9 and Tbx1). Also
Dkk2, Hoxa5, Hoxa10, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Hoxc6 and Tbx15 were detectably, but not
differentially expressed in adult muscle tissue. Expression of differentially
expressed genes was not influenced by an 8-week or 20-week HFD. Comparing
gastrocnemius, quadriceps and soleus, expression of Hoxd8 and Hoxd9 was not
related with expression of markers for the four different fiber types. We found
that the expression of both Hoxd8 and Hoxd9 was much higher in the gastrocnemius 
than in the quadriceps or soleus, whereas the expression of Dkk3 was high in
quadriceps, but low in both gastrocnemius and soleus. Finally, expression of Tbx1
was high in quadriceps, intermediate in soleus and low in gastrocnemius.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that genes from the Dkk family, Hox family and Tbx family
are detectably expressed in adult mouse muscle. Interestingly, expression of
Dkk3, Hoxd8, Hoxd9 and Tbx1 was highly different between gastrocnemius,
quadriceps and soleus. In fact, every muscle type showed a unique combination of 
expression of these four genes which was not influenced by diet. Altogether, we
conclude that genes important for embryogenesis identify mouse muscle types in a 
diet-independent and fiber type-unrelated manner.

PMCID: PMC2847971
PMID: 20230627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Cancer Genet Cytogenet. 2010 Mar;197(2):122-9. doi:
10.1016/j.cancergencyto.2009.11.018.

Array comparative genomic hybridization analysis of adult acute leukemia
patients.

Yasar D(1), Karadogan I, Alanoglu G, Akkaya B, Luleci G, Salim O, Timuragaoglu A,
Toruner GA, Berker-Karauzum S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Biology and Genetics, Akdeniz University, Antalya 07508,
Turkey.

We have performed a retrospective array-based comparative hybridization
(array-CGH) study on 41 acute leukemia samples [n=17 acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) patients only at diagnosis, n=3 ALL patients both at diagnosis and relapse;
n=20 acute myeloid leukemia (AML) patients only at diagnosis and n=1 AML patient 
both at diagnosis and relapse] using an Agilent 44K array. In addition to
previously detected cytogenetic aberrations, we observed cryptic aberrations in
95% of ALL and 90.5% of AML cases. ALL-specific recurrent abnormalities were RB1 
(n=3), PAX5 (n=4), and CDKN2B (n=3) deletions; AML-specific recurrent
abnormalities were HOXA9 and HOXA10 (n=2) deletions and NOTCH1 duplication (n=2).
Recurrent duplication of the ELK1 oncogene was observed in both ALL (n=2) and AML
(n=3) cases. Our results demonstrate that oligo-array CGH (oaCGH) is an effective
method for defining copy number alterations and identification of novel recurring
unbalanced abnormalities. At least for now, however, the use of oaCGH for routine
diagnosis still has some restrictions.

PMID: 20193845  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. FASEB J. 2010 Jul;24(7):2273-80. doi: 10.1096/fj.09-140533. Epub 2010 Feb 24.

Bisphenol-A exposure in utero leads to epigenetic alterations in the
developmental programming of uterine estrogen response.

Bromer JG(1), Zhou Y, Taylor MB, Doherty L, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar St., New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Bisphenol-A (BPA) is a nonsteroidal estrogen that is ubiquitous in the
environment. The homeobox gene Hoxa10 controls uterine organogenesis, and its
expression is affected by in utero BPA exposure. We hypothesized that an
epigenetic mechanism underlies BPA-mediated alterations in Hoxa10 expression. We 
analyzed the expression pattern and methylation profile of Hoxa10 after in utero 
BPA exposure. Pregnant CD-1 mice were treated with BPA (5 mg/kg IP) or vehicle
control on d 9-16 of pregnancy. Hoxa10 mRNA and protein expression were increased
by 25% in the reproductive tract of mice exposed in utero. Bisulfite sequencing
revealed that cytosine-guanine dinucleotide methylation was decreased from 67 to 
14% in the promoter and from 71 to 3% in the intron of Hoxa10 after in utero BPA 
exposure. Decreased DNA methylation led to an increase in binding of ER-alpha to 
the Hoxa10 ERE both in vitro as and in vivo as determined by EMSA and chromatin
immunoprecipitation, respectively. Diminished methylation of the ERE-containing
promoter sequence resulted in an increase in ERE-driven gene expression in
reporter assays. We identify altered methylation as a novel mechanism of
BPA-induced altered developmental programming. Permanent epigenetic alteration of
ERE sensitivity to estrogen may be a general mechanism through which endocrine
disruptors exert their action.

PMCID: PMC3230522
PMID: 20181937  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Cell. 2010 Feb 12;37(3):429-37. doi: 10.1016/j.molcel.2010.01.026.

AFF4, a component of the ELL/P-TEFb elongation complex and a shared subunit of
MLL chimeras, can link transcription elongation to leukemia.

Lin C(1), Smith ER, Takahashi H, Lai KC, Martin-Brown S, Florens L, Washburn MP, 
Conaway JW, Conaway RC, Shilatifard A.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

Comment in
    Mol Cell. 2010 Feb 26;37(4):449-50.

Chromosomal translocations involving the MLL gene are associated with infant
acute lymphoblastic and mixed lineage leukemia. There are a large number of
translocation partners of MLL that share very little sequence or seemingly
functional similarities; however, their translocations into MLL result in the
pathogenesis of leukemia. To define the molecular reason why these translocations
result in the pathogenesis of leukemia, we purified several of the commonly
occurring MLL chimeras. We have identified super elongation complex (SEC)
associated with all chimeras purified. SEC includes ELL, P-TEFb, AFF4, and
several other factors. AFF4 is required for SEC stability and proper
transcription by poised RNA polymerase II in metazoans. Knockdown of AFF4 in
leukemic cells shows reduction in MLL chimera target gene expression, suggesting 
that AFF4/SEC could be a key regulator in the pathogenesis of leukemia through
many of the MLL partners.

PMCID: PMC2872029
PMID: 20159561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. J Cancer Res Clin Oncol. 2010 Aug;136(8):1221-7. doi: 10.1007/s00432-010-0772-4. 
Epub 2010 Feb 12.

Identification of aberrant promoter hypomethylation of HOXA10 in ovarian cancer.

Cheng W(1), Jiang Y, Liu C, Shen O, Tang W, Wang X.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, The First Affiliated Hospital of
Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, 210029, China. wjcheng117@yahoo.com.cn

PURPOSE: The purpose of this study was to determine the relationship between
hypomethylation of HOXA10 gene's promoter and high expression in malignant
ovarian tissues, and to confirm the level of hypomethylation in ovarian cell
lines.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: We performed the methylation status of 29 samples from
ovarian carcinomas and 16 from normal tissues by methylation-specific polymerase 
chain reaction (MSP). Then, we evaluated the expression of mRNA and protein of
HOXA10 in all samples to work out the relationship between the methylation status
of HOXA10 and its expression in transcriptional and translational levels. We then
confirmed our present study using SKOV3 and HEY ovarian cancer cell lines treated
with the demethylating agent 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5-aza-dC) to detect whether 
the expression of HoxA10 in the two cell lines was altered.
RESULTS: Increased expression of HOXA10 was detected in almost all ovarian
carcinomas (p < 0.05). Promoter hypomethylation was found in (17 of 29) 58.62%
ovarian cancers and (4 of 16) 25% normal ovaries (p < 0.05). The HOXA10
expression is higher when the status of HOXA10 gene promoter is hypomethylated
than in methylated tissues (p < 0.05). After 5-aza-dC treatment, the expression
level of HOXA10 mRNA transcript was increased in the two cell lines.
CONCLUSION: Our results indicate that promoter hypomethylation is an important
mechanism for high expression of HOXA10 in human ovarian cancer and may be a
potential prognostic factor in ovarian cancer.

PMID: 20151152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Semin Reprod Med. 2010 Jan;28(1):69-74. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1242996. Epub 2010
Jan 26.

Molecular mechanisms of treatment resistance in endometriosis: the role of
progesterone-hox gene interactions.

Cakmak H(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Reproductive Sciences, Yale University 
School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8063, USA.

HOX genes, encoding homeodomain transcription factors, are dynamically expressed 
in endometrium, where they are necessary for endometrial growth, differentiation,
and implantation. In human endometrium, the expression of HOXA10 and HOXA11 is
driven by sex steroids, with peak expression occurring at time of implantation in
response to rising progesterone levels. However, the maximal HOXA10 and HOXA11
expression fails to occur in women with endometriosis. In endometriosis, altered 
progesterone receptor expression or diminished activity may lead to attenuated or
dysregulated progesterone response and decreased expression of
progesterone-responsive genes including HOX genes in the eutopic endometrium. In 
turn, other mediators of endometrial receptivity that are regulated by HOX genes,
such as pinopodes, alphavbeta3 integrin, and IGFBP-1, are downregulated in
endometriosis. HOXA10 hypermethylation has recently been demonstrated to silence 
HOXA10 gene expression and account for decreased HOXA10 in the endometrium of
women with endometriosis. Silencing of progesterone target genes by methylation
is an epigenetic mechanism that mediates progesterone resistance. The relatively 
permanent nature of methylation may explain the widespread failure of treatments 
for endometriosis-related infertility.

PMCID: PMC3107856
PMID: 20104430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Semin Reprod Med. 2010 Jan;28(1):17-26. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1242989. Epub 2010
Jan 26.

Endometrial decidualization: of mice and men.

Ramathal CY(1), Bagchi IC, Taylor RN, Bagchi MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, University of
Illinois-Urbana-Champaign, Urbana, Illinois 61801, USA.

In murine and human pregnancies, embryos implant by attaching to the luminal
epithelium and invading into the stroma of the endometrium. Under the influence
of the steroid hormones estrogen and progesterone, the stromal cells surrounding 
the implanting embryo undergo a remarkable transformation event. This process,
known as decidualization, is an essential prerequisite for implantation. It
comprises morphogenetic, biochemical, and vascular changes driven by the estrogen
and progesterone receptors. The development of mutant mouse models lacking these 
receptors has firmly established the necessity of steroid signaling for
decidualization. Genomic profiling of mouse and human endometrium has uncovered a
complex yet highly conserved network of steroid-regulated genes that supports
decidualization. To advance our understanding of the mechanisms regulating
implantation and better address the clinical challenges of infertility and
endometrial diseases such as endometriosis, it is important to integrate the
information gained from the mouse and human models.

PMCID: PMC3095443
PMID: 20104425  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2010 Apr;298(4):E889-93. doi:
10.1152/ajpendo.00577.2009. Epub 2010 Jan 26.

HOXA10 regulates endometrial GABAA {pi} receptor expression and membrane
translocation.

Sadeghi H(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Dept. of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University
School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Expression of the GABA(A) pi receptor has been described previously in the human 
endometrium in both luminal epithelium and stroma. Its expression is increased
during decidualization in rodents and in the implantation window of human
endometrium. Here we localized GABA pi subunit receptor protein in human
endometrium and identified regulators of gene expression and activation. GABA(A) 
pi was localized to the cell surface, and expression increased during the window 
of embryo implantation in human endometrium. The well-differentiated human
endometrial adenocarcinoma cell line Ishikawa was treated with progesterone and
transfected with pcDNA-HOXA10, HOXA10 siRNA, or respective controls. GABA(A) pi
receptor mRNA expression was evaluated by real-time RT-PCR. Protein expression
and localization were evaluated using immunofluorescence. GABA(A) pi receptor
mRNA expression was increased significantly after either progesterone treatment
or HOXA10 transfection. Coadministration of progesterone along with HOXA10
transfection had no additional effect on the expression of GABA(A) pi receptor
mRNA over either agent alone. Blocking HOXA10 expression with siRNA prevented
progesterone-induced GABA(A) pi receptor mRNA expression. Additionally, either
HOXA10 or progesterone independently caused increased translocation of the GABA
receptor from the cytoplasm to the cell membrane. Translocation in response to
progesterone was blocked with HOXA10 siRNA. Progesterone-induced GABA(A) pi
subunit receptor expression is likely mediated indirectly through progesterone's 
regulation of HOXA10 expression. Modification of subtype composition and
translocation of the GABA receptor ion channel likely modulate endometrial
receptivity. Whereas HOXA10 typically enhances the expression of
progesterone-responsive genes, here HOXA10 expression leads to production of a
less progestin-responsive GABA receptor subtype, likely buffering the effects of 
luteal phase progesterone on GABA receptor activity.

PMCID: PMC3774337
PMID: 20103740  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Mol Cell Endocrinol. 2010 Apr 12;317(1-2):112-9. doi: 10.1016/j.mce.2009.12.025. 
Epub 2009 Dec 29.

The Müllerian HOXA10 gene promotes growth of ovarian surface epithelial cells by 
stimulating epithelial-stromal interactions.

Ko SY(1), Lengyel E, Naora H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Systems Biology, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, Houston, TX 77054, USA.

The ovarian surface epithelium (OSE) origin of ovarian cancers has been
controversial because these cancers often exhibit Müllerian-like features. One
hypothesis is that ovarian neoplasia involves the gain of growth advantages by
OSE cells via activation of Müllerian programs. The homeobox gene HOXA10 controls
formation of the uterus from the Müllerian ducts, and is not expressed in normal 
OSE. We previously found that HOXA10 is expressed in ovarian cancers with
endometrial-like features, and induces transformed OSE cells to form glandular
tumors in mice. In the current study, we found that induction of HOXA10 in OSE
cells promotes homophilic cell adhesion and prevents anoikis. HOXA10 expression
stimulated interactions of OSE cells with the extracellular matrix proteins
vitronectin and fibronectin, and with mesothelial cells of the omentum which is a
common attachment site for ovarian cancer cells. HOXA10 also stimulated
interactions of OSE cells with omental fibroblasts, and these interactions
promoted OSE cell growth. Our findings indicate that aberrant activation of a
Müllerian program in OSE cells confers growth advantages by stimulating cellular 
interactions with the microenvironment.

PMCID: PMC2814902
PMID: 20036708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. Reproduction. 2010 Mar;139(3):623-30. doi: 10.1530/REP-09-0454. Epub 2009 Dec 23.

Transient estrogen exposure from birth affects uterine expression of
developmental markers in neonatal gilts with lasting consequences in pregnant
adults.

Chen JC(1), Wiley AA, Ho TY, Frankshun AL, Hord KM, Bartol FF, Bagnell CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Rutgers, The State University of New Jersey,
New Brunswick, New Jersey 08901, USA.

Disruption of estrogen-sensitive, estrogen receptor (ER)-dependent events during 
porcine uterine development between birth (postnatal day=PND 0) and PND 14
affects patterns of uterine morphoregulatory gene expression in the neonate with 
lasting consequences for reproductive success. Uterine capacity for conceptus
support is reduced in pregnant adult gilts exposed to estradiol valerate (EV) for
14 days from birth. Objectives here were to determine effects of EV exposure from
birth through PND 13 on neonatal uterine and adult endometrial markers of growth,
patterning, and remodeling. Targets included the relaxin receptor (RXFP1),
estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) and vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGFA),
morphoregulatory markers HOXA10 and WNT7A, and the matrix metalloproteinases
(MMP)2 and MMP9. Gilts were treated daily with EV (50 microg/kg body weight per
day, i.m.) or corn oil vehicle from birth through PND 13. Uteri were obtained
from neonates on PND 14 and from adults on pregnancy day 12 (PxD 12). In
neonates, EV exposure from birth increased uterine RXFP1 gene expression, and
both ESR1 and VEGFA proteins. At PxD 12, endometrial RXFP1 mRNA remained
elevated, while ESR1 protein was reduced. Early EV treatment decreased neonatal
uterine WNT7A, but increased HOXA10 expression. WNT7A expression was reduced in
EV-treated adults. Transient EV exposure increased MMP9 transcripts at PND 14,
whereas both latent and active MMP9 activity was increased due to early EV
treatment in adults on PxD 12. Results support the hypothesis that transient,
estrogen-induced disruption of porcine uterine development from birth alters
early programming events that lead to functional consequences in the adult.

PMID: 20032211  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Domest Anim Endocrinol. 2010 May;38(4):222-34. doi:
10.1016/j.domaniend.2009.11.001. Epub 2009 Dec 3.

Endometrial and conceptus expression of HoxA10, transforming growth factor beta1,
leukemia inhibitory factor, and prostaglandin H synthase-2 in early pregnant pigs
with gonadotropin-induced estrus.

Blitek A(1), Kaczmarek MM, Kiewisz J, Ziecik AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of Polish Academy of
Sciences, Tuwima 10, Olsztyn, Poland. a.blitek@pan.olsztyn.pl

This study was conducted to evaluate the effect of estrus induction with
gonadotropins on endometrial and conceptus expression of HoxA10, transforming
growth factor (TGF) beta1, leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), and prostaglandin H 
synthase-2 (PGHS-2) during early pregnancy in pigs. Twenty-four prepubertal gilts
received 750 IU of pregnant mare serum gonadotropin (PMSG) and 500 IU of human
chorionic gonadotropin (hCG) 72h later. Gilts in the control group (n=23) were
observed daily for estrus behavior. Endometrial tissue samples, conceptuses,
blood serum, and uterine luminal flushings (ULFs) were collected on days 10, 11, 
12, and 15 after insemination. There was no effect of estrus induction on
estradiol content in ULFs, or on ovulation and fertilization rates in studied
gilts. However, the content of progesterone in the blood serum was greater in
naturally ovulated gilts in comparison to gonadotropin-treated animals on day 12 
of pregnancy (P<0.05). HoxA10 expression was up-regulated in the endometrium of
pregnant gilts, with natural ovulation on days 12 (P<0.05) and 15 (P<0.001) in
comparison to days 10 and 11. When compared to control gilts, administration of
PMSG/hCG resulted in decreased expression of endometrial HoxA10, TGFbeta, LIF,
and PGHS-2 on day 12 of pregnancy (P<0.05). Conceptus expression of studied
factors was not affected by gonadotropin treatment. Overall, these results
suggest improper endometrial preparation for implantation in prepubertal gilts
induced to ovulate with PMSG/hCG.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 20022444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


219. Int J Gynecol Cancer. 2009 Nov;19(8):1347-52. doi: 10.1111/IGC.0b013e3181a83f1d.

HOXA10 is overexpressed in human ovarian clear cell adenocarcinoma and correlates
with poor survival.

Li B(1), Jin H, Yu Y, Gu C, Zhou X, Zhao N, Feng Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Obstetrics and Gynecology Hospital of Fudan
University, Shanghai, China.

Human homeobox gene (HOX) A10 is a homeobox allotype gene of the HOXA family in
the HOX family. Human homeobox gene A10 may play an important role in cancer
development. However, the role of HOXA10 in the carcinogenesis of ovarian clear
cell adenocarcinoma (OCCA) has not been established. We have evaluated the
prognostic significance of HOXA10 expression for human OCCA and the effects of
HOXA10 on proliferation, motility, and invasion of OCCA cells. We found that
HOXA10 was not expressed in normal ovarian epithelium, ovarian endometrial cysts,
and ovarian serous carcinomas, but 20 (68.9%) of the 29 OCCAs were positive for
the expression of HOXA10. Human homeobox gene A10 expression was negatively
correlated to the 5-year survival of OCCA patients (R = -0.442, P = 0.043). When 
a HOXA10 expression vector was stably transfected into a human OCCA cell line,
ES-2, the proliferation rate of ES-2-HOXA10 was much higher than the vector
control, the motility of ES-2-HOXA10 cells was significantly increased compared
with the control (P < 0.05), and the invasion of ES-2-HOXA10 cells was also much 
higher than the vector control (P < 0.01 at 5 hours and 12 hours after
scratching). In conclusion, HOXA10 was overexpressed in OCCA and was correlated
with poor survival. HOXA10 promotes proliferation, migration, and invasion of
OCCA cells. Human homeobox gene A10 could be a promising prognostic marker for
OCCA.

PMID: 20009888  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


220. Oncol Rep. 2010 Jan;23(1):61-7.

State of homeobox A10 expression as a putative prognostic marker for oral
squamous cell carcinoma.

Yamatoji M(1), Kasamatsu A, Yamano Y, Sakuma K, Ogoshi K, Iyoda M, Shinozuka K,
Ogawara K, Takiguchi Y, Shiiba M, Tanzawa H, Uzawa K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Molecular Biology, Graduate School of Medicine, Chiba
University, Chuo-ku, Chiba, Japan.

Homeobox (HOX) A10, the regulator of embryonic morphogenesis and differentiation,
is aberrantly expressed in several cancer types. Our previous study using
microarray technology showed that significant up-regulation of HOXA10 occurs in
oral squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC)-derived cell lines compared to human normal
oral keratinocytes (HNOKs). The aim of the current study was to examine the
status of HOXA10 mRNA and protein expression in OSCC-derived cell lines and human
primary OSCCs. HOXA10 mRNA was up-regulated in six OSCC-derived cell lines
compared with HNOKs and in primary OSCCs by using real-time quantitative reverse 
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction. Immunohistochemistry data indicated that
HOXA10 protein expression levels were consistent with mRNA expression status in
OSCC-derived cell lines and primary OSCCs. Furthermore, HOXA10 expression status 
was correlated with the TNM stage (P<0.05). These results indicate that HOXA10
expression could contribute to cancer progression and prognosis and that HOXA10
may be a potential diagnostic marker and a therapeutic target for OSCCs.

PMID: 19956865  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


221. Mol Reprod Dev. 2010 May;77(5):387-96. doi: 10.1002/mrd.21133.

Regional development of uterine decidualization: molecular signaling by Hoxa-10.

Das SK(1).

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Sciences, Department of Pediatrics, Cincinnati Children's
Hospital Medical Center, Cincinnati, Ohio 45229-3039, USA. sanjoy.das@cchmc.org

Uterine decidualization, a key event in implantation, is critically controlled by
stromal cell proliferation and differentiation. Although the molecular mechanism 
that controls this event is not well understood, the general consensus is that
the factors derived locally at the site of implantation influence aspects of
decidualization. Hoxa-10, a developmentally regulated homeobox transcription
factor, is highly expressed in decidualizing stromal cells, and targeted deletion
of Hoxa-10 in mice shows severe decidualization defects, primarily due to the
reduced stromal cell responsiveness to progesterone (P(4)). While the increased
stromal cell proliferation is considered to be an initiator of decidualization,
the establishment of a full-grown functional decidua appears to depend on the
aspects of regional proliferation and differentiation. In this regard, this
article provides an overview of potential signaling mechanisms mediated by
Hoxa-10 that can influence a host of genes and cell functions necessary for
propagating regional decidual development.

PMCID: PMC4267754
PMID: 19921737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


222. Fertil Steril. 2010 Oct;94(5):1583-8. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2009.09.011. Epub
2009 Nov 1.

Reduced expression and concomitant promoter hypermethylation of HOXA10 in
endometrium from women wearing intrauterine devices.

Lu Y(1), Nie J, Liu X, Guo SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecology, Shanghai OB/GYN Hospital, Shanghai Medical School,
Fudan University, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether prolonged intrauterine device (IUD) usage is
associated with decreased HOXA10 expression and increased methylation in the
endometrium.
DESIGN: Observational study.
PATIENT(S): Women wearing IUDs and not wearing IUDs.
INTERVENTION(S): Immunohistochemistry of HOXA10 and methylation-specific PCR.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Endometrial HOXA10 expression levels and methylation
frequency.
RESULT(S): The IUD usage was associated with decreased endometrial HOXA10
expression, concordant with higher frequency of HOXA10 promoter hypermethylation.
The HOXA10 hypermethylation was associated with the duration of IUD usage,
irrespective age, gravidity, parity, and IUD type.
CONCLUSION(S): Prolonged IUD use may induce endometrial HOXA10 hypermethylation
and reduced expression. These results suggest a possible novel mode of action for
IUD, a possibility to rectify the aberrant methylation through pharmacologic
means, and a possible noninvasive way for detection of aberrant methylation at
HOXA10.

Copyright © 2010 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19880107  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


223. J Reprod Immunol. 2009 Dec;83(1-2):72-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jri.2009.07.009. Epub
2009 Oct 24.

HOXA10 signals on the highway through pregnancy.

Modi D(1), Godbole G.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular and Cellular Biology Laboratory, National Institute for Research in 
Reproductive Health, Indian council of Medical Research, Mumbai, India.
deepaknmodi@yahoo.com

Implantation represents the remarkable synchronization between the development of
the embryo and the differentiation of the endometrium. It depends on
uterine-dependent and embryo-specific events, which are critically and
sequentially coordinated. A plethora of molecules have been identified which play
major roles before and after embryo implantation. In recent years HomeoboxA10
(HOXA10) has emerged as one of the most promising candidates which regulate the
events occurring in the maternal compartment for successful establishment of
pregnancy. HOXA10 is a transcription factor that is crucial for development and
patterning of the uterus during embryogenesis. In the adult endometrium, HOXA10
is expressed in a menstrual cycle dependent manner and it is regulated by ovarian
steroid hormones and embryonic signals, HOXA10 is required for uterine
receptivity and implantation, and is a key regulator of decidualization. In the
decidua, HOXA10 is involved in regulation of cell cycle and local
immunomodulation. The present review summarizes the events that are regulated by 
HOXA10 in embryo implantation and decidualization.

PMID: 19854516  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


224. Soc Reprod Fertil Suppl. 2009;66:307-20.

Antiluteolytic mechanisms and the establishment of pregnancy in the pig.

Waclawik A(1), Blitek A, Kaczmarek MM, Kiewisz J, Ziecik AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Animal Reproduction and Food Research of Polish Academy of
Sciences, Tuwima 10, 10-747 Olsztyn, Poland. waclawik@pan.olsztyn.pl

Extended exposure of progesterone and conceptus estrogen influences the vascular 
compartment of the uterus and expression of many factors, such as prostaglandins 
(PGs), growth factors, extracellular matrix and adhesion molecules, cytokines and
transcription factors. One of the supportive mechanisms by which the conceptus
inhibits luteolysis is by changing PG synthesis in favor of luteoprotective PGE2.
Alteration in PG synthesis may result from increased PGE synthase (mPGES-1)
expression in the trophoblast and endometrium on days 10-13 of pregnancy with
simultaneous down-regulation of PGF synthase (PGFS) and prostaglandin
9-ketoreductase (CBR1). Conceptus and endometrial, rather than luteal, synthesis 
of PGE2, is involved in the process of maternal recognition of pregnancy.
However, complex (direct and indirect) actions of estrogen on the CL, including
decreased luteal VEGF soluble receptor on day 12 of pregnancy, are important for 
luteal maintenance. Moreover, conceptus signals affect another lipid signaling
component - lysophosphatidic acid receptor (LPA3), as well as HoxA10 and Wnt in
the endometrium, to create the appropriate uterine environment for establishment 
of pregnancy and implantation.

PMID: 19848298  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


225. J Immunol. 2009 Nov 15;183(10):6227-35. doi: 10.4049/jimmunol.0901121. Epub 2009 
Oct 19.

A NUP98-HOXD13 fusion gene impairs differentiation of B and T lymphocytes and
leads to expansion of thymocytes with partial TCRB gene rearrangement.

Choi CW(1), Chung YJ, Slape C, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research, National Cancer Institute,
National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20889-5105, USA.

Expression of a NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) fusion gene leads to myelodysplastic
syndrome in mice. In addition to ineffective hematopoiesis, we observed that
NHD13 mice were lymphopenic; the lymphopenia was due to a decrease in both T and 
B lymphocytes. Although the pro-B cell (B220(+)/CD43(+)) populations from the
NHD13 and wild-type mice were similar, the NHD13 mice showed decreased pre-B
cells (B220(+)/CD43(-)), indicating impaired differentiation at the pro-B to
pre-B stage. Thymi from NHD13 mice were smaller and overexpressed Hoxa cluster
genes, including Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and Hoxa10. In addition, the NHD13 thymi contained
fewer thymocytes, with an increased percentage of CD4(-)/CD8(-) (double-negative 
(DN)) cells and a decreased percentage of CD4(+)/CD8(+) (double-positive) cells; 
the DN1/DN2 population was increased and the DN3/DN4 population was decreased,
suggesting a partial block at the DN2 to DN3 transition. To determine clonality
of the thymocytes, we used degenerate RT-PCR to identify clonal Tcrb gene
rearrangements. Five of six NHD13 thymi showed an unusual Tcrb gene rearrangement
pattern with common, clonal DJ rearrangements, but distinct V-D junctions,
suggesting a marked clonal expansion of thymocytes that had undergone a DJ
rearrangement, but not completed a VDJ rearrangement. Taken together, these
findings demonstrate that expression of the NHD13 transgene inhibits lymphoid as 
well as myeloid and erythroid differentiation, results in overexpression of Hoxa 
cluster genes, and leads to a precursor T cell lymphoblastic leukemia/lymphoma.

PMCID: PMC3422874
PMID: 19841179  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


226. Reproduction. 2010 Jan;139(1):237-45. doi: 10.1530/REP-08-0376.

3-Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase expression is regulated by HOXA10 in murine
endometrium and human endometrial cells.

Du H(1), Vitiello D, Sarno JL, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University, PO Box 208063, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

3-Phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase (PHGDH, 3-PGDH) is an enzyme necessary for de
novo l-serine biosynthesis. HOXA10 expression is required for endometrial
receptivity; however, few target genes of HOXA10 regulation are known. Using a
microarray we identified Phgdh as a target of HOXA10 regulation in murine
endometrium and confirmed this regulatory relationship in human endometrial
cells. PHGDH was downregulated 2.0-fold by HOXA10 and upregulated 4.4-fold by
HOXA10 antisense in vivo. In human endometrial cells, real-time PCR results show 
that pcDNA3.1/HOXA10 transfection decreased PHGDH mRNA expression to 40% of
pretreatment level (P<0.05), while PHGDH mRNA expression was increased 2.1-fold
(P<0.05) by HOXA10 siRNA. Western blot results confirmed the regulatory
relationship in both primary human endometrial stromal and epithelial cells, as
well as in human endometrial stromal cells and Ishikawa cells. In human cycling
endometrial tissue, immunohistochemical results showed that PHGDH expression is
relatively high in the proliferative phase in glandular cells and lower in the
secretory phase. Here we report novel expression and regulation of PHGDH in
murine and human endometrium. PHGDH is expressed in both endometrial epithelial
and stromal cells. HOXA10 represses endometrial PHGDH expression. PHGDH is
necessary for serine biosynthesis, which serves as a substrate for protein
synthesis. One mechanism by which HOXA10 regulates cellular differentiation may
involve limiting protein synthesis in the secretary phase.

PMCID: PMC3107855
PMID: 19778996  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


227. Hum Reprod. 2009 Dec;24(12):3180-7. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dep306. Epub 2009 Sep 7.

HOXA-10 expression in the mid-secretory endometrium of infertile patients with
either endometriosis, uterine fibromas or unexplained infertility.

Matsuzaki S(1), Canis M, Darcha C, Pouly JL, Mage G.

Author information: 
(1)CHU Clermont-Ferrand, Polyclinique-Hôtel-Dieu, Gynécologie Obstétrique et
Médecine de la Reproduction, Boulevard Léon Malfreyt, 63058 Clermont-Ferrand,
France. sachikoma@aol.com

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to investigate HOXA-10 expression in
endometrium from infertile patients with different forms of endometriosis; with
uterine fibromas, or with unexplained infertility and from normal fertile women.
METHODS: Expression levels of HOXA-10 mRNA and protein in endometrium were
measured during the mid-secretory phase. This study utilized laser capture
microdissection, real-time RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: HOXA-10 mRNA and protein expression levels in endometrial stromal cells 
were significantly lower in infertile patients with different types of
endometriosis (deep infiltrating endometriosis, ovarian endometriosis and
superficial peritoneal endometriosis), with uterine myoma, and unexplained
infertility patients as compared with healthy fertile controls. HOXA-10 mRNA
expression levels of microdissected glandular epithelial cells were significantly
lower than those of microdissected stromal cells, without significant differences
among the different groups. No protein expression was detected in glandular
epithelial cells. The percentage of patients with altered protein expression of
HOXA-10 in stromal cells were significantly higher in patients with only
superficial peritoneal endometriosis (100%, 20/20, P < 0.05) compared with the
other infertile groups (deep infiltrating endometriosis: 72.7%, 16/22; ovarian
endometriosis: 70.0%, 14/20; uterine myoma: 68.8%, 11/16; unexplained
infertility: 55.6%, 5/9).
CONCLUSION: The present findings suggested that altered expression of HOXA-10 in 
endometrial stromal cells during the window of implantation may be one of the
potential molecular mechanisms of infertility in infertile patients, particularly
in patients with only superficial peritoneal endometriosis. One of the underlying
causes of infertility in patients with only superficial endometriosis may be
altered expression of HOXA-10 in endometrial stromal cells.

PMID: 19736237  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


228. Mol Hum Reprod. 2009 Oct;15(10):587-607. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gap064. Epub 2009
Aug 3.

Epigenetics of endometriosis.

Guo SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Obstetric and Gynecologic Research, and Renji Hospital, Shanghai 
Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200001, China. hoxa10@gmail.com

Endometriosis is a common gynecologic disorder with an enigmatic
etiopathogenesis. Although it has been proposed that endometriosis is a hormonal 
disease, an autoimmune disease, a genetic disease, and a disease caused by
exposure to environmental toxins, our understanding of its etiopathogenesis is
still inadequate, as reflected by recent apparent setbacks in clinical trials on 
endometriosis. In the last 5 years, evidence has emerged that endometriosis may
be an epigenetic disease. In this article, the evidence in support of this
hypothesis is reviewed, and its diagnostic, therapeutic and prognostic
implications discussed. Publications, up to the end of June 2009, pertaining to
epigenetic aberration in endometriosis were identified through PubMed. In
addition, publications on related studies were also retrieved and reviewed.
Epigenetics appears to be a common denominator for hormonal and immunological
aberrations in endometriosis. Epigenetics also appears to have a better
explanatory power than genetics. There is accumulating evidence that various
epigenetic aberrations exist in endometriosis. In vitro studies show that histone
deacetylase inhibitors may be promising therapeutics for treating endometriosis. 
In conclusion, several lines of evidence suggest that epigenetics plays a
definite role in the pathogenesis and pathophysiology of endometriosis. As such, 
endometriosis is possibly treatable by rectifying epigenetic aberrations through 
pharmacological means. DNA methylation markers may also be useful for diagnostic 
and prognostic purposes. It is also possible that the delineation of the
epigenetic changes accompanied by the genesis and progression of endometriosis
could lead to interventions that reduce the risk of developing endometriosis.

PMID: 19651637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


229. Am J Vet Res. 2009 Aug;70(8):1006-12. doi: 10.2460/ajvr.70.8.1006.

Association of HOXA10, ZFPM2, and MMP2 genes with scrotal hernias evaluated via
biological candidate gene analyses in pigs.

Zhao X(1), Du ZQ, Vukasinovic N, Rodriguez F, Clutter AC, Rothschild MF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Science and Center for Integrated Animal Genomics,
College of Agriculture and Life Sciences, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the associations between 14 biological candidate genes and
scrotal hernias in pigs.
ANIMALS: 1,534 Pietrain-based pigs, including 692 individuals from 298 pig
families and 842 male pigs without family information.
PROCEDURES: Pigs were classified as affected or unaffected for scrotal hernias.
Single nucleotide polymorphisms of candidate genes were analyzed via PCR assays
and genotyped. Statistical analyses were performed on the family-trio and the
case-control data.
RESULTS: 2 genes involved in collagen metabolism (homeobox A10 [HOXA10] and
matrix metalloproteinases 2 [MMP2]) and 1 gene encoding zinc finger protein
multitype 2 (ZFPM2, important in the development of diaphragmatic hernia) were
significantly associated with hernias. Pigs with these genotypes had high odds of
developing scrotal hernias in the case and control groups (2 ZFPM2 variants: odds
ratio, 4.3 [95% confidence interval, 2.78 to 6.64] and
4.45[95%confidenceinterval,2.88to6.88]). Anothergene, collagentypeII A
1(COL2A1),was potentially involved in hernia development.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: HOXA10, ZFPM2, MMP2, and COL2A1 could have
important roles in pig hernia development and potentially be useful for
marker-assisted selection in the pig industry.
IMPACT FOR HUMAN MEDICINE: Pigs are used for the study of many human diseases
because of their physiologic similarities. Genes associated with scrotal hernias 
in this study may be directly used in understanding the molecular mechanisms
underlying this defect in humans.

PMID: 19645582  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


230. Leuk Res. 2010 Apr;34(4):521-8. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2009.06.020. Epub 2009 Jul
15.

Multiple mechanisms induce ectopic expression of LYL1 in subsets of T-ALL cell
lines.

Nagel S(1), Venturini L, Meyer C, Kaufmann M, Scherr M, Drexler HG, MacLeod RA.

Author information: 
(1)Dept of Human and Animal Cell Lines, DSMZ - German Collection of
Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Inhoffenstr 7B, 38124 Braunschweig, Germany.
sna@dsmz.de

Basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) transcription factors are essential for lymphocytic
differentiation. Here, we have analyzed the complete bHLH family in T-cell acute 
lymphoblastic leukemia cell lines by expression profiling. Differential
expression was detected for BHLHB2, HES1, HES4, HEY1, ID1, ID2, ID3, LYL1 and
TAL1, highlighting dysregulation of family members with inhibitory activity.
Subsequently we focused on the mechanisms responsible for aberrant expression of 
LYL1 in comparison to TAL1. Quantitative genomic PCR indicated microdeletions
upstream of both, TAL1 and LYL1, targeting STIL/SIL and TRMT1, respectively.
Additionally, one LYL1-expressing cell line exhibited amplification of TRMT1.
While deletion of STIL correlated with expression of the STIL-TAL1 fusion
transcript, no TRMT-LYL1 fusion transcripts were detected in parallel with
genomic rearrangements thereof. Sequence analysis of the LYL1 promoter region
revealed potential binding sites for transcription factors HOXA10, LMO2 and
NKX2-5. Overexpression analysis, reporter gene assays and chromatin
immuno-precipitation confirmed their activating impact on LYL1 expression. In
conclusion, we identified multiple mechanisms which activate LYL1 in leukemic
cells, including structural genomic alterations, namely microdeletion or
amplification, together with the involvement of prominent oncogenic transcription
factors.

Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19608273  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


231. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2009 May;43(5):413-7.

[The effect of diethylstilbestrol on inducing abdominal cryptorchidism and
relevant genetic expression in rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Zhang L(1), Zheng XM, Zheng H, Yang ZW, Li SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, the Zhongnan Hospital, the Wuhan University, Wuhan
430071, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of diethylstilbestrol (DES) at different doses on 
transabdominal testicular descent in rats and the expression of INSL3 in the
testis and HOXA10 in the gubernaculum.
METHOD: Fifty E13.5 (embryonic day 13.5) pregnant female SD rats were randomly
divided into five groups that received a subcutaneous injection of DMSO, 2.5,
5.0, 10.0 and 20.0 mg/kg DES (group A, B, C, D and E), respectively. Male
offspring were killed at E19.5, and then fetal mortality, the degree of
transabdominal testicular ascent (DTA) was determined by a stereomicroscope. The 
mRNA expressions of INSL3 in the testis and HOXA10 in the gubernaculum were
determined by RT-PCR. The expression of INSL3 protein was determined by Western
blotting.
RESULTS: Male fetal mortality in group A, B, C, D, and E were 3.57%, 6.90%,
12.00%, 19.23% and 36.36%, respectively, which showed a dose-effect relationship 
between DES and the male fatal mortality (r=0.999, P<0.01). DTA in group B, C, D 
and E were (23.7+/-1.7) U, (38.8+/-1.9) U, (49.3+/-1.8) U and (58.6+/-2.1) U that
were significantly larger than that in group A [(8.5+/-1.3) U] (q=46.12, 88.53,
120.44 and 141.37, respectively, P<0.01). There was also a dose-effect
relationship between DES and DTA. In group B, C, D, and E, the expression of
INSL3 mRNA were 0.9570+/-0.1490, 0.6760+/-0.1380, 0.0170+/-0.0040 and
0.0013+/-0.0003, respectively; the expressions of INSL3 protein were
0.8360+/-0.1520, 0.5310+/-0.1070, 0.0140+/-0.0020 and 0.0011+/-0.0003,
respectively, which were significantly larger than the expression of INSL3 mRNA
(1.801+/-0.126) and INSL3 protein (1.612+/-0.134) in group A (qmRNA=40.4840,
52.4402, 83.1585 and 82.0582, respectively, and qprotein=38.6151, 52.2747,
77.2756 and 76.1983, respectively, P<0.01). The expression of HOXA10 mRNA in
group A, B, C, D, and E were 0.945+/-0.125, 0.940+/-0.119, 0.656+/-0.115,
0.544+/-0.118 and 0.463+/-0.114, respectively. Compared with the expression of
HOXA10 mRNA in group A, the expression of group B was not significantly different
(q=0.2213, P>0.05), those in other groups were down-regulated significantly
(q=12.4304, 17.2477 and 20.2789, respectively, P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: DES inhibited transabdominal testicular descent dose-dependently via 
down-regulating the expression of INSL3. HOXA10 may play no role in low-dosage
DES induced intra-abdominal cryptorchidism, but down-regulated HOXA10 mRNA was
involved in high-dosage DES induced ones.

PMID: 19534997  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


232. Chin Med J (Engl). 2009 Apr 20;122(8):967-71.

Prenatal exposure to diaethylstilbestrol in the rat inhibits transabdominal
testicular descent with involvement of the INSL3/LGR8 system and HOXA10.

Zhang L(1), Zheng XM, Hubert J, Zheng H, Yang ZW, Li SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Zhongnan Hospital, Wuhan University, Wuhan, Hubei
430071, China.

BACKGROUND: Prenatal exposure to diaethylstilbestrol (DES) has been found to lead
to intra-abdominal cryptorchidism, but the mechanism is still not completely
clear. This study investigated the roles of the INSL3/LGR8 system and HOXA10 in
DES-induced intra-abdominal cryptorchidism (DIIAC). The effect of DES on
steroidogenic factor-1 (SF-1), that has been reported to control transcription of
insulin-like factor 3 (INSL3), was also investigated.
METHODS: Fifty pregnant female SD rats at embryonic day 13.5 (E13.5) were
randomly assigned to five groups that received a subcutaneous injections of
dimethyl sulfoxide (control), 2.5 mg/kg, 5 mg/kg, 10 mg/kg, or 20 mg/kg of DES.
Male offspring were sacrificed at E19.5, and fetal mortality and the degree of
transabdominal testicular ascent (DTA) were determined under a stereomicroscope. 
The mRNA expression of INSL3 and SF-1 in the testis and leucine rich
repeat-containing G protein-coupled receptors 8 (LGR8) and homeobox-A10 (HOXA10) 
in the gubernaculum were determined by RT-PCR. The expression of INSL3 protein
was determined by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Higher fetal mortality and DTA were induced by DES in a dose-dependent
manner (P < 0.01). Compared with the control group, the expression of INSL3 and
SF-1 mRNA were down-regulated in a dose-dependent manner (P < 0.01), as was INSL3
protein; HOXA10 in the 2.5 mg/kg group and LGR8 mRNA in the 2.5 mg/kg and 5 mg/kg
groups were not significantly different (P > 0.05); HOXA10 mRNA in groups C, D,
and E decreased significantly and LGR8 mRNA levels in groups D and E increased
significantly (P < 0.05, P < 0.01, respectively).
CONCLUSIONS: DES can inhibit transabdominal testicular descent in a
dose-dependent manner via down-regulating the expression of INSL3, which is
induced by down-regulating the expression of SF-1. HOXA10 may not be involved in 
DES induced intra-abdominal cryptorchidism at 2.5 mg/kg, but is involved at 5, 10
and 20 mg/kg. LGR8 may not be responsible for DES-induced transabdominal
testicular maldescent.

PMID: 19493424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


233. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Apr;1160:197-204. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2009.03841.x.

INSL3/RXFP2 signaling in testicular descent.

Feng S(1), Ferlin A, Truong A, Bathgate R, Wade JD, Corbett S, Han S,
Tannour-Louet M, Lamb DJ, Foresta C, Agoulnik AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, Houston, 
Texas 77030, USA.

Mutations of the insulin-like peptide 3 (INSL3) hormone or its receptor, RXFP2,
cause intraabdominal cryptorchidism in male mice. Specific RXFP2 expression in
mouse gubernacula was detected at embryonic day 14.5 and markedly increased after
birth in the developing cremaster muscle, as well as in the epididymis and
testicular Leydig and germ cells. INSL3 treatment stimulated cell proliferation
of embryonic gubernacular and Leydig cells, implicating active INSL3-mediated
signaling. The transcription factor SOX9, a known male sex determination factor, 
upregulated the activity of the RXFP2 promoter. INSL3 is sufficient to direct the
first transabdominal phase of testicular descent in the absence of
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis signaling or Hoxa10, although these factors
are important for inguinoscrotal testicular descent. Similarly, conditional
ablation of the androgen receptor gene in gubernacular cells resulted in
disruption of inguinoscrotal descent. We performed mutation screening of INSL3
and RXFP2 in human patients with cryptorchidism and control subjects from
different populations in Europe and the USA. Several missense mutations were
described in both the INSL3 and RXFP2 genes. A novel V39G INSL3 mutation in a
patient with cryptorchidism was identified; however, the functional analysis of
the mutant peptide did not reveal compromised function. In more than 2000
patients and controls analyzed to date, the T222P RXFP2 mutation is the only one 
strongly associated with the mutant phenotype. The T222P mutant receptor, when
transfected into 293T cells, had severely decreased cell membrane expression,
providing the basis for the functional deficiency of this mutation.

PMCID: PMC2970567
PMID: 19416188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


234. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2009 Apr;1160:188-9. doi: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.2008.03815.x.

Perinatal zearalenone exposure affects RXFP1, RXFP2, and morphoregulatory gene
expression in the neonatal porcine uterus.

Chen JC(1), Wiley AA, Kauffold J, Wähner M, Bartol FF, Bagnell CA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Animal Sciences, Rutgers University, New Brunswick, New Jersey
08901, USA.

The mycotoxin zearalenone (ZEA) is a selective estrogen receptor modulator that
can contaminate cereal feeds and lead to reproductive disorders. To determine
effects of perinatal ZEA exposure on uterine expression of genes associated with 
endometrial development in the neonatal gilt, pregnant sows were fed ZEA (1500
microg ZEA/kg of feed/day) or vehicle from 14 days before farrowing through
postnatal day (PND) 20-21, when neonatal uterine tissues were collected. At
birth, gilts were cross-fostered to generate four ZEA exposure groups (n=
5-6/group): unexposed controls or exposures limited to prenatal, postnatal, or
pre- and postnatal (continuous) periods. Results showed that at PND 20-21,
uterine Wnt7a, Hoxa10, estrogen receptor alpha, and RXFP2 mRNA levels were
decreased in neonates exposed continuously to ZEA (P < 0.05). Uterine RXFP1
transcripts were decreased in postnatally and continuously exposed groups (P <
0.05). Neonatal uterine Wnt4 mRNA levels were unchanged.

PMID: 19416184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


235. Mol Hum Reprod. 2009 Jul;15(7):451-7. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gap030. Epub 2009 Apr
22.

Thrombin and interleukin-1beta decrease HOX gene expression in human first
trimester decidual cells: implications for pregnancy loss.

Sarno J(1), Schatz F, Huang SJ, Lockwood C, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Bleeding or inflammation in early pregnancy may result in pregnancy loss or
defective implantation. Their effect on HOX gene expression in first trimester
decidua is unknown. Bleeding results in thrombin generation, although infection
or inflammation results in production of cytokines typified by Interleukin-1beta 
(IL-1beta). First trimester decidual cells were pretreated with 17beta estradiol 
(E(2)), medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA) or both and subsequently treated with
thrombin or IL-1beta. Affymetrix microarray analysis was used to assess the
expression of all HOX genes and confirmed using real-time RT-PCR. E(2) or MPA
treatment resulted in significant increases in HOXA10 and HOXA11. Subsequent
treatment with thrombin resulted in diminished expression of HOXA10 and HOXA9.
Treatment with IL-1beta resulted in decreased expression of HOXA1, 3, 9, 10 and
11. HOXA10 expression was reduced by 70% after thrombin treatment (P = 0.018) and
by 90% after IL-1beta treatment (P = 0.004). HOXA11 mRNA expression was decreased
by 88% after IL-1beta treatment (P < 0.001), but not by thrombin treatment.
Decidua was collected at the time of elective termination of pregnancy (n = 10)
or surgical treatment of spontaneous pregnancy loss (n = 10). Real-time PCR and
western analysis demonstrated decreased HOXA10 and HOXA11 RNA and protein
expression in the decidua of spontaneous pregnancy loss compared with that of
viable pregnancies. In conclusion, multiple HOX genes are expressed in decidual
cells and inhibited by thrombin and IL-1beta. Since HOXA10 and HOXA11 are known
to be necessary for successful pregnancy, these findings suggest a molecular
mechanism by which bleeding or inflammation may affect pregnancy outcome.

PMCID: PMC2722817
PMID: 19389728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


236. Endocrinology. 2009 Jul;150(7):3376-82. doi: 10.1210/en.2009-0071. Epub 2009 Mar 
19.

Hypermethylation of homeobox A10 by in utero diethylstilbestrol exposure: an
epigenetic mechanism for altered developmental programming.

Bromer JG(1), Wu J, Zhou Y, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, Connecticut 06520,
USA.

Diethylstilbestrol (DES) is a nonsteroidal estrogen that induces developmental
anomalies of the female reproductive tract. The homeobox gene HOXA10 controls
uterine organogenesis, and its expression is altered after in utero DES exposure.
We hypothesized that an epigenetic mechanism underlies DES-mediated alterations
in HOXA10 expression. We analyzed the expression pattern and methylation profile 
of HOXA10 after DES exposure. Expression of HOXA10 is increased in human
endometrial cells after DES exposure, whereas Hoxa10 expression is repressed and 
shifted caudally from its normal location in mice exposed in utero. Cytosine
guanine dinucleotide methylation frequency in the Hoxa10 intron was higher in
DES-exposed offspring compared with controls (P = 0.017). The methylation level
of Hoxa10 was also higher in the caudal portion of the uterus after DES exposure 
at the promoter and intron (P < 0.01). These changes were accompanied by
increased expression of DNA methyltransferases 1 and 3b. No changes in
methylation were observed after in vitro or adult DES exposure. DES has a dual
mechanism of action as an endocrine disruptor; DES functions as a classical
estrogen and directly stimulates HOXA10 expression with short-term exposure,
however, in utero exposure results in hypermethylation of the HOXA10 gene and
long-term altered HOXA10 expression. We identify hypermethylation as a novel
mechanism of DES-induced altered developmental programming.

PMCID: PMC2703508
PMID: 19299448  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


237. Differentiation. 2009 Feb;77(2):199-208. doi: 10.1016/j.diff.2008.10.007. Epub
2008 Nov 21.

Lumbo-sacral neural crest derivatives fate mapped with the aid of Wnt-1 promoter 
integrate but are not essential to kidney development.

Itäranta P(1), Viiri K, Kaartinen V, Vainio S.

Author information: 
(1)Oulu Center of Cell-Matrix Research, Biocenter Oulu, Laboratory of
Developmental Biology and Institute of Biomedicine, University of Oulu, Aapistie 
5A, PO Box 5000, FIN-90220 Oulu, Finland.

Neural crest (NC) cells may be involved in kidney organogenesis by providing
inductive signals and contributing to cells of the renal stroma. We show here
that the lumbo-sacral NC cells fate mapped with the aid of Wnt-1 promoter in the 
mouse migrate close to the metanephros at the initiation of organogenesis but
these cells remain superficial to the condensed Pax2-expressing mesenchymal
cells. NC-derived cells enter later into the kidney proper from the midline
region. The NC cells contribute also to development of the extra-adrenal
para-aortic bodies, Zuckerkandl's bodies and the nerve cord of the sympathetic
nervous system. Splotch (Sp(2H)/Sp(2H)) embryos, having a NC defect in the
lumbo-sacral region, develop a normal metanephros even though the kidney does not
express the NC markers Sox10, Phox2b and tyrosine hydroxylase. Consistent with
the histological findings, the kidneys of Sp(2H)/Sp(2H) embryos also express the 
stromal genes Foxd1, Hoxa10 and RARbeta normally. Wnt-1 promoter-marked wild-type
LacZ NC cells migrate intensely from the heterologous inducer tissue of the
embryonic dorsal spinal cord (SPC) to the kidney mesenchyme, but tubule induction
does not depend on NC migration, since the Sp(2H)/Sp(2H) SPC also induces
tubulogenesis. The Sp(2H)/Sp(2H) mesenchyme also remains competent for
tubulogenesis. We conclude that the NC cells fate mapped with the aid of Wnt-1
promoter migrate to the close to the metanephros and form later derivatives
integrating with the kidney, but they may not be essential to the development of 
the stromal cells nor they may provide critical morphogenetic signals to regulate
early kidney development in vivo.

PMID: 19281780  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


238. Hum Reprod Update. 2009 Jul-Aug;15(4):441-61. doi: 10.1093/humupd/dmp007. Epub
2009 Mar 11.

Recurrence of endometriosis and its control.

Guo SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Obstetric and Gynecologic Research, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
School of Medicine, Renji Hospital, 145 Shandong Zhong Road, Shanghai 200001,
People's Republic of China. hoxa10@gmail.com

BACKGROUND Although surgery is currently the treatment of choice for managing
endometriosis, recurrence poses a formidable challenge. To delay or to eliminate 
the recurrence is presently an unmet medical need in the management of
endometriosis. To this end, proposals to investigate patterns of recurrence, to
develop biomarkers for recurrence and to carry out biomarker-based intervention
have been made. METHODS Publications pertaining to the recurrence of
endometriosis and its related yet unaddressed issues were identified through
MEDLINE. The reported recurrence rates, risk factors for recurrence, the effects 
of post-operative medication and causes of recurrence were reviewed and
synthesized. In addition, several poorly explored issues such as time hazard
function and mechanisms of recurrence were reviewed. Approaches to the
development of biomarkers for recurrence and future intervention are discussed.
RESULTS The reported recurrence rate was high, estimated as 21.5% at 2 years and 
40-50% at 5 years. Few risk factors for recurrence have been consistently
identified, and the evidence on the efficacy of the post-operative use of
medication was scanty. The investigation on the patterns of recurrence may
provide us with new insight into the possible mechanisms of recurrence and its
control. The attempt to identify biomarkers for recurrence has started only very 
recently. CONCLUSIONS Much research is needed to better understand the patterns
of recurrence and risk factors, and to develop biomarkers. One top priority is to
develop biomarkers for recurrence, which may provide much needed clues to the
possible mechanisms underlying recurrence and would allow the identification of
patients with high recurrence risk, and permit for targeted intervention.

PMID: 19279046  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


239. Hum Reprod. 2009 Jun;24(6):1247-54. doi: 10.1093/humrep/dep045. Epub 2009 Mar 4.

A call for more transparency of registered clinical trials on endometriosis.

Guo SW(1), Hummelshoj L, Olive DL, Bulun SE, D'Hooghe TM, Evers JL.

Author information: 
(1)Renji Hospital, and the Institute of Obstetric and Gynecologic Research,
Shanghai Jiao-Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai 200001, China.
hoxa10@gmail.com

In response to the pressing need for more efficacious and safer therapeutics for 
endometriosis, there have been numerous reports in the last decade of positive
results from animal and in vitro studies of various compounds as potential
therapeutics for endometriosis. A handful of these have undergone phase II/III
clinical trials. Since the announcement of the International Committee of Medical
Journal Editors that mandated registration as a prerequisite for publication, 57 
endometriosis-related clinical trials have been registered at ClinicalTrials.gov,
an Internet-based public depository for information on drug studies. Among them, 
25 are listed as completed, and 2 as suspended. There are 15 completed phase
II/III trials, which evaluated the efficacy of various promising compounds. Yet
only three of the 15 trials (20%) have published their results. The remaining 12 
(80%) studies so far have not published their findings. We argue that this
apparent lack of transparency will actually not benefit the trial sponsors or the
public, and will ultimately prove detrimental to research efforts attempting to
develop more efficacious and safer therapeutics for endometriosis. Thus we call
for more transparency of clinical trials on endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC4102915
PMID: 19264712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


240. Pathol Int. 2009 Mar;59(3):121-36. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2009.02329.x.

Transcriptome dissection of gastric cancer: identification of novel diagnostic
and therapeutic targets from pathology specimens.

Yasui W(1), Oue N, Sentani K, Sakamoto N, Motoshita J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Pathology, Hiroshima University Graduate School of
Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima, Japan. wyasui@hiroshima-u.ac.jp

Gastric cancer is the fourth most common malignancy in the world, and mortality
due to gastric cancer is second only to that from lung cancer. 'Transcriptome
dissection' is a detailed analysis of the entire expressed transcripts from a
cancer, for the purpose of understanding the precise molecular mechanism of
pathogenesis. Serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) is a suitable technique
for performing transcriptome dissection. Gastric cancers of different stages and 
histology were analyzed on SAGE, and one of the largest gastric cancer SAGE
libraries in the world was created (GEO accession number GSE 545). Through SAGE, 
many candidate genes have been identified as potential diagnostic and therapeutic
targets for the treatment of gastric cancer. Regenerating islet-derived family,
member 4 (Reg IV) participated in 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) resistance and peritoneal
metastasis, and its expression was associated with an intestinal phenotype of
gastric cancer and with endocrine differentiation. GW112 expression correlated
with advanced tumor stage. Measurement of Reg IV and GW112 levels in sera
indicated a sensitivity of 57% for detection of cancer. SPC18 participated in
tumor growth and invasion through transforming tumor growth factor-alpha
upregulation. Palate, lung, and nasal epithelium carcinoma-associated protein
(PLUNC) was a useful marker for gastric hepatoid adenocarcinoma. Expression of
SOX9, HOXA10, CDH17, and loss of claudin-18 expression were associated with an
intestinal phenotype of gastric cancer. Information obtained from transcriptome
dissection greatly contributes to diagnosis and treatment of gastric cancer.

PMID: 19261089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


241. Mol Med Rep. 2009 Mar-Apr;2(2):241-4. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000090.

Down-regulation of HOXA4, HOXA7, HOXA10, HOXA11 and MEIS1 during
monocyte-macrophage differentiation in THP-1 cells.

Martino V(1), Bianchera A, Reia L, Bussolati O, Fazzina R, Marino F, Montemurro
L, Tonelli R, Pession A, Gazzola GC, Sala R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma,
I-43100 Parma, Italy.

The translocation t(9;11)(p22;q23) generates the MLL-AF9 oncogene and is commonly
associated with monocytic acute myeloid leukemia (AML-M5; FAB-classification).
For the oncogenicity of MLL-AF9, the (over)expression of several other genes,
including selected HOXA cluster genes as well as MEIS1 (a HOX cofactor), is
required. We previously showed that the down-regulation of MLL-AF9 expression is 
not obligatory for monocyte-macrophage maturation in AML-M5 cells carrying
t(9;11)(p22;q23). In this study, we analyzed the expression patterns of HOXA4, 5,
6, 7, 9, 10 and 11 (defined as 'HOXA-code' genes) and MEIS1 by semiquantitative
RT-PCR during the monocyte-macrophage differentiation induced by phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) in THP-1 cells carrying t(9;11)(p22;q23) and
expressing MLL-AF9. The analyses were performed in THP-1 cells expressing MLL-AF9
even after PMA treatment. The results showed that all the analyzed genes were
expressed in untreated THP-1 cells. After the induction of differentiation, we
observed a down-regulation of HOXA4, 7, 10, 11 and MEIS1, an up-regulation of
HOXA6, and no significant variation in the expression of HOXA5 and 9. These data 
indicate that the expression of most HOXA-code genes, as well as MEIS1, could be 
implicated in the differentiation blockage observed in MLL-AF9-related leukemias.

PMID: 21475819  [PubMed]


242. Theory Biosci. 2009 May;128(2):109-20. doi: 10.1007/s12064-009-0056-1. Epub 2009 
Feb 19.

Hox cluster duplication in the basal teleost Hiodon alosoides
(Osteoglossomorpha).

Chambers KE(1), McDaniell R, Raincrow JD, Deshmukh M, Stadler PF, Chiu CH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ, USA.
kchamber@wiley.com

Large-scale--even genome-wide--duplications have repeatedly been invoked as an
explanation for major radiations. Teleosts, the most species-rich vertebrate
clade, underwent a "fish-specific genome duplication" (FSGD) that is shared by
most ray-finned fish lineages. We investigate here the Hox complement of the
goldeye (Hiodon alosoides), a representative of Osteoglossomorpha, the most basal
teleostean clade. An extensive PCR survey reveals that goldeye has at least eight
Hox clusters, indicating a duplicated genome compared to basal actinopterygians. 
The possession of duplicated Hox clusters is uncoupled to species richness. The
Hox system of the goldeye is substantially different from that of other teleost
lineages, having retained several duplicates of Hox genes for which crown
teleosts have lost at least one copy. A detailed analysis of the PCR fragments as
well as full length sequences of two HoxA13 paralogs, and HoxA10 and HoxC4 genes 
places the duplication event close in time to the divergence of Osteoglossomorpha
and crown teleosts. The data are consistent with-but do not conclusively
prove-that Osteoglossomorpha shares the FSGD.

PMCID: PMC2683926
PMID: 19225820  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


243. FEBS J. 2009 Mar;276(6):1629-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.06895.x. Epub 2009
Feb 7.

Dynamic association of MLL1, H3K4 trimethylation with chromatin and Hox gene
expression during the cell cycle.

Mishra BP(1), Ansari KI, Mandal SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas at
Arlington, Arlington 76019, TX, USA.

Mixed lineage leukemias (MLLs) are histone H3 at lysine 4 (H3K4)-specific
methylases that play a critical role in regulating gene expression in humans. As 
chromatin condensation, relaxation and differential gene expression are keys to
correct cell cycle progression, we analyzed the dynamic association of MLL and
H3K4 trimethylation at different stages of the cell cycle. Interestingly, MLL1,
which is normally associated with transcriptionally active chromatins (G1 phase),
dissociates from condensed mitotic chromatin and returns at the end of telophase 
when the nucleus starts to relax. In contrast, H3K4 trimethylation mark, which is
also normally associated with euchromatins (in G1), remains associated, even with
condensed chromatin, throughout the cell cycle. The global levels of MLL1 and
H3K4 trimethylation are not affected during the cell cycle, and H3Ser28
phosphorylation is only observed during mitosis. Interestingly, MLL target
homeobox-containing (Hox) genes (HoxA5, HoxA7 and HoxA10) are differentially
expressed during the cell cycle, and the recruitment of MLL1 and H3K4
trimethylation levels are modulated in the promoter of these Hox genes as a
function of their expression. In addition, down-regulation of MLL1 results in
cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase. The fluctuation of H3K4 trimethylation marks
at specific promoters, but not at the global level, indicates that H3K4
trimethylation marks that are present in the G1 phase may not be the same as the 
marks in other phases of the cell cycle; rather, old marks are removed and new
marks are introduced. In conclusion, our studies demonstrate that MLL1 and H3K4
methylation have distinct dynamics during the cell cycle and play critical roles 
in the differential expression of Hox genes associated with cell cycle
regulation.

PMID: 19220463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


244. J Vet Med Sci. 2009 Jan;71(1):69-77.

Quantitative analysis of mRNA transcripts of Hox, SHH, PTCH, Wnt, and Fzd genes
in canine hematopoietic progenitor cells and various in vitro colonies
differentiated from the cells.

Ide K(1), Goto-Koshino Y, Momoi Y, Fujino Y, Ohno K, Tsujimoto H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Graduate School of Agricultural
and Life Science, The University of Tokyo, 1-1-1 Yayoi, Bunkyo, Tokyo, Japan.

Homeobox (Hox), Sonic hedgehog (SHH), and Wingless-type MMTV integration site
family (Wnt) are known to modulate the self-renewal and expansion of
hematopoietic progenitor/stem cells in humans and mice. Frizzled (Fzd) and
Patched1 (PTCH1) represent the receptors of Wnt and SHH, respectively. In this
study, the amounts of mRNA transcripts of the genes associated with the
self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells, HoxB3, HoxB4, HoxA10, Wnt5a, Wnt2b,
Fzd1, Fzd6, SHH, and PTCH1, were measured in canine unfractionated bone marrow
cells, CD34-enriched cells, and various colony-forming units in culture (CFU-C). 
Partial cDNA sequences of these 9 canine genes were determined in this study.
Quantitative real-time polymerase chain reaction was employed to indicate their
relative amounts of mRNA transcripts. Amounts of mRNA transcripts of HoxB3,
HoxA10, PTCH1, and Wnt5a genes in canine CD34-enriched cell fraction were
significantly larger than those in the CD34-depleted cell fraction. Amounts of
mRNA transcripts of HoxB3, HoxA10, PTCH1, Wnt5a, and Wnt2b genes in various CFU-C
cells were significantly smaller than those in the seeded CD34-enriched cell
fraction. These results suggested important roles of the products of these genes 
in self-renewal, expansion, and survival of hematopoietic progenitor cells in
dogs as shown in humans and rodents.

PMID: 19194078  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


245. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 17;106(7):2441-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0813002106. Epub 2009 Feb 3.

Systems-level analysis of cell-specific AQP2 gene expression in renal collecting 
duct.

Yu MJ(1), Miller RL, Uawithya P, Rinschen MM, Khositseth S, Braucht DW, Chou CL, 
Pisitkun T, Nelson RD, Knepper MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Kidney and Electrolyte Metabolism, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We used a systems biology-based approach to investigate the basis of
cell-specific expression of the water channel aquaporin-2 (AQP2) in the renal
collecting duct. Computational analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the AQP2
gene (Genomatix) revealed 2 conserved clusters of putative transcriptional
regulator (TR) binding elements (BEs) centered at -513 bp (corresponding to the
SF1, NFAT, and FKHD TR families) and -224 bp (corresponding to the AP2, SRF,
CREB, GATA, and HOX TR families). Three other conserved motifs corresponded to
the ETS, EBOX, and RXR TR families. To identify TRs that potentially bind to
these BEs, we carried out mRNA profiling (Affymetrix) in mouse mpkCCDc14
collecting duct cells, revealing expression of 25 TRs that are also expressed in 
native inner medullary collecting duct. One showed a significant positive
correlation with AQP2 mRNA abundance among mpkCCD subclones (Ets1), and 2 showed 
a significant negative correlation (Elf1 and an orphan nuclear receptor Nr1h2).
Transcriptomic profiling in native proximal tubules (PT), medullary thick
ascending limbs (MTAL), and IMCDs from kidney identified 14 TRs (including Ets1
and HoxD3) expressed in the IMCD but not PT or MTAL (candidate AQP2 enhancer
roles), and 5 TRs (including HoxA5, HoxA9 and HoxA10) expressed in PT and MTAL
but not in IMCD (candidate AQP2 repressor roles). In luciferase reporter assays, 
overexpression of 3 ETS family TRs transactivated the mouse proximal AQP2
promoter. The results implicate ETS family TRs in cell-specific expression of
AQP2 and point to HOX, RXR, CREB and GATA family TRs as playing likely additional
roles.

PMCID: PMC2650175
PMID: 19190182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


246. Blood. 2009 Apr 2;113(14):3314-22. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-04-154310. Epub 2009
Feb 2.

Regulation of mir-196b by MLL and its overexpression by MLL fusions contributes
to immortalization.

Popovic R(1), Riesbeck LE, Velu CS, Chaubey A, Zhang J, Achille NJ, Erfurth FE,
Eaton K, Lu J, Grimes HL, Chen J, Rowley JD, Zeleznik-Le NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Biology Program, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL, USA.

Chromosomal translocations involving the Mixed Lineage Leukemia (MLL) gene
produce chimeric proteins that cause abnormal expression of a subset of HOX genes
and leukemia development. Here, we show that MLL normally regulates expression of
mir-196b, a hematopoietic microRNA located within the HoxA cluster, in a pattern 
similar to that of the surrounding 5' Hox genes, Hoxa9 and Hoxa10, during
embryonic stem (ES) cell differentiation. Within the hematopoietic lineage,
mir-196b is most abundant in short-term hematopoietic stem cells and is
down-regulated in more differentiated hematopoietic cells. Leukemogenic MLL
fusion proteins cause overexpression of mir-196b, while treatment of MLL-AF9
transformed bone marrow cells with mir-196-specific antagomir abrogates their
replating potential in methylcellulose. This demonstrates that mir-196b function 
is necessary for MLL fusion-mediated immortalization. Furthermore, overexpression
of mir-196b was found specifically in patients with MLL associated leukemias as
determined from analysis of 55 primary leukemia samples. Overexpression of
mir-196b in bone marrow progenitor cells leads to increased proliferative
capacity and survival, as well as a partial block in differentiation. Our results
suggest a mechanism whereby increased expression of mir-196b by MLL fusion
proteins significantly contributes to leukemia development.

PMCID: PMC2665896
PMID: 19188669  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


247. Hum Reprod. 2009 May;24(5):1085-91. doi: 10.1093/humrep/den501. Epub 2009 Jan 27.

In GnRH antagonist/rec-FSH stimulated cycles, advanced endometrial maturation on 
the day of oocyte retrieval correlates with altered gene expression.

Van Vaerenbergh I(1), Van Lommel L, Ghislain V, In't Veld P, Schuit F, Fatemi HM,
Devroey P, Bourgain C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, UZ Brussel, Jette, Belgium. ivvaeren@vub.ac.be

BACKGROUND: Previously, advanced endometrial maturation on the day of oocyte
retrieval in GnRH antagonist and -agonist IVF cycles was observed. In these
cycles, endometrial advancement exceeding 3 days between the histological dating 
and the cycle day never resulted in an ongoing clinical pregnancy. In this study,
the gene expression of human endometrium on the day of oocyte retrieval in GnRH
antagonist/rec-FSH cycles was analyzed, in correlation with the morphological
dating.
METHODS: Biopsies were taken on the day of oocyte retrieval in 47 patients with 1
or 2 embryos replaced on Day 3 in the same cycle. Endometrial dating was
performed according to Noyes' criteria. Biopsies from 11 patients were analyzed
for gene expression with the Affymetrix HG U133 Plus 2 microarray. Data analysis,
clustering and pathway analysis were performed with GCOS, GeneSpring 7.3 and
Ingenuity, respectively.
RESULTS: According to Noyes' criteria, all endometria taken on the day of oocyte 
retrieval showed an advanced maturation, ranging from +d2 to +d4. The patients
with a subsequent clinical pregnancy all showed a histological dating
corresponding to +d2 or +d3. When comparing endometria +d2-3 to +d4, the
microarray results showed a differential expression of 2550 probe sets.
Significantly up-regulated genes were SERPINB6, FOXO3A, SOX17 and CDC42.
Down-regulated genes of interest were NRP1, HOXA10 and OSF2. Principal component 
analysis and hierarchical clustering demonstrated two distinct clusters.
CONCLUSIONS: In stimulated cycles, endometrial gene expression on the day of
oocyte retrieval discriminates between women with and without histologically
advanced endometrial maturation exceeding 3 days and supports histological dating
results by Noyes' criteria.

PMID: 19176542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


248. Cancer Res. 2009 Feb 1;69(3):1109-16. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-08-3381. Epub
2009 Jan 20.

Consistent deregulation of gene expression between human and murine MLL
rearrangement leukemias.

Li Z(1), Luo RT, Mi S, Sun M, Chen P, Bao J, Neilly MB, Jayathilaka N, Johnson
DS, Wang L, Lavau C, Zhang Y, Tseng C, Zhang X, Wang J, Yu J, Yang H, Wang SM,
Rowley JD, Chen J, Thirman MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, USA.

Important biological and pathologic properties are often conserved across
species. Although several mouse leukemia models have been well established, the
genes deregulated in both human and murine leukemia cells have not been studied
systematically. We performed a serial analysis of gene expression in both human
and murine MLL-ELL or MLL-ENL leukemia cells and identified 88 genes that seemed 
to be significantly deregulated in both types of leukemia cells, including 57
genes not reported previously as being deregulated in MLL-associated leukemias.
These changes were validated by quantitative PCR. The most up-regulated genes
include several HOX genes (e.g., HOX A5, HOXA9, and HOXA10) and MEIS1, which are 
the typical hallmark of MLL rearrangement leukemia. The most down-regulated genes
include LTF, LCN2, MMP9, S100A8, S100A9, PADI4, TGFBI, and CYBB. Notably, the
up-regulated genes are enriched in gene ontology terms, such as gene expression
and transcription, whereas the down-regulated genes are enriched in signal
transduction and apoptosis. We showed that the CpG islands of the down-regulated 
genes are hypermethylated. We also showed that seven individual microRNAs (miRNA)
from the mir-17-92 cluster, which are overexpressed in human MLL rearrangement
leukemias, are also consistently overexpressed in mouse MLL rearrangement
leukemia cells. Nineteen possible targets of these miRNAs were identified, and
two of them (i.e., APP and RASSF2) were confirmed further by luciferase reporter 
and mutagenesis assays. The identification and validation of consistent changes
of gene expression in human and murine MLL rearrangement leukemias provide
important insights into the genetic base for MLL-associated leukemogenesis.

PMCID: PMC2633429
PMID: 19155294  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


249. Fertil Steril. 2010 Mar 1;93(4):1255-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2008.11.002.
Epub 2009 Jan 7.

Modulation of HOXA10 and other markers of endometrial receptivity by age and
human chorionic gonadotropin in an endometrial explant model.

Fogle RH(1), Li A, Paulson RJ.

Author information: 
(1)Atlanta Center for Reproductive Medicine, 5909 Peachtree Dunwoody Road, Suite 
720, Atlanta, Georgia 30328, USA. robinfogle@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: To characterize the endometrial response to human chorionic
gonadotropin (hCG), as influenced by uterine age, using endometrial receptivity
markers including HOXA10, vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and
glycodelin in an endometrial explant culture system.
DESIGN: In vitro molecular biology research.
SETTING: Academic infertility clinic and molecular biology laboratory.
PATIENT(S): Fourteen prospective recipients of egg donation (mean age, 44 +/- 8
years).
INTERVENTION(S): Subjects received cyclical estrogen (E(2)) and progesterone
(P(4)) and underwent an endometrial biopsy on day 7 of P(4). Endometrial biopsy
samples were cut into 1-mm(3) pieces and cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's 
medium/Ham's F-12 with E(2) and P(4), without (control) or with hCG (400, 4000,
and 40,000 mIU/mL) on Millicell-CM inserts for 24 hours.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Explant viability was assessed using
immunohistochemistry (IHC). Semiquantitative polymerase chain reaction was
performed to evaluate relative gene expression via mRNA levels of HOXA10, VEGF,
and glycodelin.
RESULT(S): Explant viability was confirmed on IHC by histology and Ki-67
staining, a marker of proliferation. HOXA10, VEGF, and glycodelin gene expression
increased at all concentrations of hCG over those of controls. HOXA10 gene
expression was inversely correlated with age (-0.08- +/- 0.03-fold decrease in
gene expression/year of age).
CONCLUSION(S): The endometrial explant culture system is a promising model for
the study of endometrial response as it maintains interactions among the stroma, 
glands, and epithelium. HOXA10, VEGF, and glycodelin all demonstrated increased
gene expression in response to increasing hCG concentrations, supporting the role
of hCG as a candidate protein for blastocyst-endometrial communication.
Statistically significant associations between age and expression of HOXA10
provide novel evidence that uterine age may play a role in endometrial response
on a molecular level.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19131054  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


250. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2009 Jan 30;379(1):16-21. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2008.11.144. Epub 2008 Dec 11.

HOXA10 suppresses p/CAF promoter activity via three consecutive TTAT units in
human endometrial stromal cells.

Sun H(1), Chen L, Yan G, Wang R, Diao Z, Hu Y, Li C.

Author information: 
(1)College of Life Sciences, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, PR China.

Implantation is the first maternal-embryo crosstalk that only occurs during a
finite period called the 'implantation window'. HOXA10, a homeobox transcription 
factor, plays an important regulatory role during this period. However, the
target genes of HOXA10 involved in implantation and decidualization have not been
identified. Using a chromatin immunoprecipitation screen, we identified the
p300/CBP-associated factor (p/CAF) as a direct HOXA10 target gene in vivo.
Adenovirus-mediated overexpression and siRNA-specific knockdown of HOXA10 altered
p/CAF promoter activity via interaction with the three consecutive TTAT element
units in human endometrial cells. These results indicate that p/CAF is a novel
HOXA10 target gene, and HOXA10 promotes human endometrial development, at least
in part, through the regulation of p/CAF gene.

PMID: 19084499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


251. Blood. 2009 Mar 12;113(11):2375-85. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-09-113597. Epub 2008 
Dec 3.

HOXA9 is required for survival in human MLL-rearranged acute leukemias.

Faber J(1), Krivtsov AV, Stubbs MC, Wright R, Davis TN, van den Heuvel-Eibrink M,
Zwaan CM, Kung AL, Armstrong SA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology/Oncology, Children's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Mar 12;113(11):2372-3.

Leukemias that harbor translocations involving the mixed lineage leukemia gene
(MLL) possess unique biologic characteristics and often have an unfavorable
prognosis. Gene expression analyses demonstrate a distinct profile for
MLL-rearranged leukemias with consistent high-level expression of select Homeobox
genes, including HOXA9. Here, we investigated the effects of HOXA9 suppression in
MLL-rearranged and MLL-germline leukemias using RNA interference. Gene expression
profiling after HOXA9 suppression demonstrated co-down-regulation of a program
highly expressed in human MLL-AML and murine MLL-leukemia stem cells, including
HOXA10, MEIS1, PBX3, and MEF2C. We demonstrate that HOXA9 depletion in 17 human
AML/ALL cell lines (7 MLL-rearranged, 10 MLL-germline) induces proliferation
arrest and apoptosis specifically in MLL-rearranged cells (P = .007). Similarly, 
assessment of primary AMLs demonstrated that HOXA9 suppression induces apoptosis 
to a greater extent in MLL-rearranged samples (P = .01). Moreover, mice
transplanted with HOXA9-depleted t(4;11) SEMK2 cells revealed a significantly
lower leukemia burden, thus identifying a role for HOXA9 in leukemia survival in 
vivo. Our data indicate an important role for HOXA9 in human MLL-rearranged
leukemias and suggest that targeting HOXA9 or downstream programs may be a novel 
therapeutic option.

PMCID: PMC2656267
PMID: 19056693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


252. Expert Opin Emerg Drugs. 2008 Dec;13(4):547-71. doi: 10.1517/14728210802548360 .

Emerging drugs for endometriosis.

Guo SW(1).

Author information: 
(1)Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Renji Hospital, and
Institute of Obstetric and Gynecologic Research, 145 Shandong Zhong Road,
Shanghai 200001, China. hoxa10@gmail.com

BACKGROUND: Endometriosis is a benign, common gynecological disorder affecting
mostly women of reproductive age. It is associated with dysmenorrhea, pelvic
pain, and subfertility. The current non-surgical medical treatment is not
satisfactory and there is a pressing need for novel therapeutics with better
efficacy, tolerability and safety profiles.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the development of new therapies for endometriosis.
METHODS: The PubMed database has been extensively searched for all compounds
tested preclinically and clinically.
RESULTS/CONCLUSION: Besides the three main classes of drugs, i.e., GnRH agonists,
progestins, and androgenic agents, there are several classes of compounds that
have been tested preclinically and clinically. Surprisingly, a considerable
proportion of officially registered Phase II/III clinical trials are listed as
completed yet no information on their outcomes is available. Three completed and 
published Phase II trials found the tested compound disappointing. Another two
Phase II clinical trials have been suspended. This apparent gap between the
generally promising preclinical findings and the clinical trial outcomes reflects
our current woefully inadequate understanding of the mechanisms underlying
endometriosis-associated pain and subferitility and recurrence of endometriosis; 
questions the adequacy and value of animal models of endometriosis that are still
in use; highlights the difficulty in developing new therapeutics for
endometriosis; and calls for more research in the mechanisms underlying
endometriosis-associated pain and subferitility and recurrence of endometriosis.

PMID: 19046127  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


253. J Biol Chem. 2009 Jan 23;284(4):2549-67. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804704200. Epub 2008
Nov 19.

Constitutively active SHP2 cooperates with HoxA10 overexpression to induce acute 
myeloid leukemia.

Wang H(1), Lindsey S, Konieczna I, Bei L, Horvath E, Huang W, Saberwal G, Eklund 
EA.

Author information: 
(1)The Feinberg School of Medicine and The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer
Center of Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The homeodomain transcription factor HoxA10 is maximally expressed in myeloid
progenitor cells. Sustained HoxA10 expression during differentiation has been
described in poor prognosis human acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Consistent with
this, engineered overexpression of HoxA10 in murine bone marrow induces a
myeloproliferative disorder that progresses to AML over time. This murine model
suggests that HoxA10 overexpression is sufficient for myeloproliferation but that
differentiation block, and therefore AML, requires acquisition of additional
mutations. In myeloid progenitor cells, HoxA10 represses transcription of genes
that encode phagocyte effector proteins such as gp91PHOX and p67PHOX. Tyrosine
phosphorylation of HoxA10 during myelopoiesis decreases binding to these target
genes. In immature myeloid cells, HoxA10 also activates transcription of the
DUSP4 gene that encodes Mkp2, an anti-apoptotic protein. HoxA10 binding to the
DUSP4 promoter decreases during myelopoiesis. Therefore, both myeloid-specific
gene repression and DUSP4 activation by HoxA10 decrease during myelopoiesis. This
results in phenotypic differentiation and facilitates apoptosis as
differentiation proceeds. HoxA10 is de-phosphorylated by SHP2 protein-tyrosine
phosphatase in myeloid progenitors. This mechanism maintains HoxA10 in a
nonphosphorylated state in immature, but not differentiating, myeloid cells.
Constitutively active SHP2 mutants have been described in human AML, which
dephosphorylate HoxA10 throughout myelopoiesis. In this study, we hypothesize
that constitutive SHP2 activation synergizes with HoxA10 overexpression to
accelerate progression to AML. Because both HoxA10 overexpression and
constitutive SHP2 activation are found in poor prognosis human AML, these studies
contribute to understanding biochemical aspects of disease progression in myeloid
malignancy.

PMCID: PMC2629090
PMID: 19022774  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


254. J Cell Mol Med. 2009 Nov-Dec;13(11-12):4522-31. doi:
10.1111/j.1582-4934.2008.00574.x.

WT1 represses HOX gene expression in the regulation of gynaecologic tumour
histologic type.

Andikyan V(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University, New Haven, CT, USA.

Homeobox genes encode transcription factors that dictate developmental identity, 
including that of the Mullerian tract. These genes also direct differential
Mullerian transformation of the ovarian cancer cells. The homeobox gene HOXA10
controls uterine organogenesis during embryonic development and similarly is
expressed in endometroid epithelial ovarian cancer. Here we confirmed aberrant
regulation of HOXA10 expression in epithelial uterine and ovarian carcinomas. We 
identified a HOXA10 epithelial regulatory element containing an enhancer that
drove HOXA10 expression specifically in gynaecologic epithelium. We further
identified an adjoining dominant repressor element that restricted regulation by 
the epithelial enhancer to a subset of epithelial cell types. The repressor
contained two functional WT1 binding sites. We identified a strong inverse
correlation between HOXA10 expression and that of the Wilms' Tumour 1 (WT1) gene 
in multiple benign and malignant gynaecologic tissues, suggesting functionality
of the WT1 sites in the repressor. Mutation of the two WT1 binding sites
abolished WT1 binding to the element as well as the ability to affect epithelial 
enhancer activity in reporter assays. Similarly, decreased expression of WT1
using siRNA prevented repressor activity. The Mullerian phenotype seen in ovarian
cancer is dependent on gain of HOX gene expression secondary to the loss of
WT1-mediated HOX repression. This suggests that Gynaecologic epithelial
histologic type is regulated by WT1 expression through its selective repression
of HOX genes.

PMCID: PMC3107857
PMID: 19017365  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


255. Reprod Domest Anim. 2009 Aug;44(4):638-42. doi: 10.1111/j.1439-0531.2007.01037.x.
Epub 2008 Nov 4.

Expression and hormonal regulation of Hoxa10 in canine uterus during the
peri-implantation period.

Guo B(1), Tian Z, Han BC, Zhang XM, Yang ZM, Yue ZP.

Author information: 
(1)College of Animal Science and Veterinary Medicine, Jilin University,
Changchun, China.

Hoxa10, a homeobox gene, is necessary for endometrial receptivity to blastocyst
implantation. The aim of this study was to investigate the differential
expression of Hoxa10 in canine uterus during early pregnancy and its regulation
under different conditions by in situ hybridization. Hoxa10 mRNA was mainly
localized in glandular epithelium and myometrium in canine uterus. There was a
low level of Hoxa10 expression in the glandular epithelium on days 6, 12 and 17
of pregnancy. On day 20 of pregnancy when embryo implanted, Hoxa10 mRNA was
highly expressed in the glandular epithelium surrounding the embryo, but not in
the luminal epithelium. The expression of Hoxa10 mRNA gradually declined from day
23 and reached a low level on day 28. In the myometrium, a low level of Hoxa10
mRNA signal was seen on days 6, 12 and 17 of pregnancy and reached a high level
on day 20 of pregnancy. During the estrous cycle, a high level of Hoxa10 mRNA
expression was seen in the estrous uterus. Either estrogen or progesterone
significantly induced the expression of Hoxa10 mRNA in the ovariectomized canine 
uterus. These results suggest that Hoxa10 expression is closely related to canine
embryo implantation and upregulated by estrogen and progesterone.

PMID: 18992082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


256. Fertil Steril. 2009 Dec;92(6):1820-4. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2008.08.134. Epub
2008 Oct 18.

Decreased endometrial HOXA10 expression associated with use of the copper
intrauterine device.

Tetrault AM(1), Richman SM, Fei X, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To characterize human endometrial HOXA10 expression in patients using 
a copper intrauterine device (IUD).
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Academic medical center.
PATIENT(S): Women using copper IUDs.
INTERVENTION(S): Immunohistochemical analysis of endometrial HOXA10 expression in
biopsy samples obtained from 24 women using a copper Paraguard T380A as well as
in samples obtained from 10 normal cycling women who were not using an IUD or
hormonal contraceptives.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Endometrial HOXA10 expression.
RESULT(S): Endometrial HOXA10 expression was markedly decreased in the biopsy
samples obtained from women using the IUD contraceptive when compared with
controls. The mean H score for endometrial stromal cell HOXA10 expression in
samples obtained from women using the Paraguard IUD was 0.21 compared with 2.2 in
the control endometrial biopsy samples. Endometrial glandular expression of
HOXA10 was absent in all IUD users.
CONCLUSION(S): Decreased endometrial HOXA10 expression was apparent in women who 
use a copper IUD. Expression of HOXA10 is essential for endometrial receptivity. 
A novel mechanism of copper IUD action involves suppression of genes required for
endometrial receptivity. The dramatic decrease of endometrial HOXA10 in response 
to IUD use may contribute to contraceptive efficacy.

PMCID: PMC2811037
PMID: 18930214  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


257. Blood. 2009 Feb 12;113(7):1432-43. doi: 10.1182/blood-2008-06-162263. Epub 2008
Oct 14.

Loss of MLL5 results in pleiotropic hematopoietic defects, reduced neutrophil
immune function, and extreme sensitivity to DNA demethylation.

Heuser M(1), Yap DB, Leung M, de Algara TR, Tafech A, McKinney S, Dixon J,
Thresher R, Colledge B, Carlton M, Humphries RK, Aparicio SA.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, BC, Canada.

Comment in
    Blood. 2009 Feb 12;113(7):1395-6.

MLL5 is a divergent member of the Drosophila Trithorax-related (SET) domain and
plant homeodomain (PHD) domain-containing chromatin regulators that are involved 
in the regulation of transcriptional "memory" during differentiation. Human MLL5 
is located on chromosome 7q22, which frequently is deleted in myeloid leukemias, 
suggesting a possible role in hemopoiesis. To address this question, we generated
a loss-of-function allele (Mll5(tm1Apa)) in the murine Mll5 locus. Unlike other
Mll genes, Mll5(tm1Apa) homozygous mice are viable but display defects in
immunity and hematopoiesis. First, Mll5(tm1Apa) homozygous mice show increased
susceptibility to spontaneous eye infections, associated with a cell-autonomous
impairment of neutrophil function. Second, Mll5(tm1Apa/tm1Apa) mice exhibit a
mild impairment of erythropoiesis. Third, Mll5(tm1Apa/tm1Apa) hematopoietic stem 
cells (HSCs) have impaired competitive repopulating capacity both under normal
conditions and when subjected to self-renewal stimulation by NUP98-HOXA10.
Fourth, Mll5(tm1Apa) homozygous HSCs show a dramatic sensitivity to DNA
demethylation-induced differentiation (5-azadeoxycytidine). Taken together, our
data show that MLL5 is involved in terminal myeloid differentiation and the
regulation of HSC self-renewal by a mechanism that involves DNA methylation.
These data warrant investigation of MLL5 expression levels as a predictive marker
of demethylating-agent response in patients with myelodysplastic syndromes and
leukemias and identify MLL5 as a key regulator of normal hematopoiesis.

PMID: 18854576  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


258. J Immunol. 2008 Oct 15;181(8):5660-72.

The vitamin D3/Hox-A10 pathway supports MafB function during the monocyte
differentiation of human CD34+ hemopoietic progenitors.

Gemelli C(1), Orlandi C, Zanocco Marani T, Martello A, Vignudelli T, Ferrari F,
Montanari M, Parenti S, Testa A, Grande A, Ferrari S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Modena and Reggio Emilia,
Modena, Italy.

Although a considerable number of reports indicate an involvement of the Hox-A10 
gene in the molecular control of hemopoiesis, the conclusions of such studies are
quite controversial given that they support, in some cases, a role in the
stimulation of stem cell self-renewal and myeloid progenitor expansion, whereas
in others they implicate this transcription factor in the induction of
monocyte-macrophage differentiation. To clarify this issue, we analyzed the
biological effects and the transcriptome changes determined in human primary
CD34(+) hemopoietic progenitors by retroviral transduction of a full-length
Hox-A10 cDNA. The results obtained clearly indicated that this homeogene is an
inducer of monocyte differentiation, at least partly acting through the
up-regulation of the MafB gene, recently identified as the master regulator of
such a maturation pathway. By using a combined approach based on computational
analysis, EMSA experiments, and luciferase assays, we were able to demonstrate
the presence of a Hox-A10-binding site in the promoter region of the MafB gene,
which suggested the likely molecular mechanism underlying the observed effect.
Stimulation of the same cells with the vitamin D(3) monocyte differentiation
inducer resulted in a clear increase of Hox-A10 and MafB transcripts, indicating 
the existence of a precise transactivation cascade involving vitamin D(3)
receptor, Hox-A10, and MafB transcription factors. Altogether, these data allow
one to conclude that the vitamin D(3)/Hox-A10 pathway supports MafB function
during the induction of monocyte differentiation.

PMID: 18832725  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


259. Mol Hum Reprod. 2008 Oct;14(10):613-8. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gan055. Epub 2008 Sep 
30.

Calpain5 expression is decreased in endometriosis and regulated by HOXA10 in
human endometrial cells.

Penna I(1), Du H, Ferriani R, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of
Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Calpains have been implicated in the regulation of apoptosis. Here, we identified
Calpain5 as a target of HOXA10 transcriptional regulation in endometrial cells as
well as its aberrant regulation in endometriosis. Histologically confirmed
biopsies of endometriosis were obtained from 20 women. Eutopic endometrium was
collected by endometrial biopsy from 30 controls and from the 20 subjects with
endometriosis. First trimester decidual samples were obtained from five subjects 
at the time of pregnancy termination. Immunohistochemistry was used to identify
Calpain5 expression. Calpain5 was expressed in endometrial stromal and glandular 
cells throughout the menstrual cycle and in decidua. Calpain5 protein expression 
was decreased in both stromal and glandular cells from women with endometriosis
compared with that of fertile controls. Human endometrial stromal and epithelial 
cell lines were transfected with pcDNA/HOXA10, HOXA10 siRNA or respective
controls. Quantitative real-time RT-PCR was performed to determine expression of 
HOXA10 and Calpain5 in each group. Transfection of HESC cells with an HOXA10
expression construct led to increased Calpain5 expression, whereas transfection
with siRNA resulted in decreased expression. In conclusion, Calpain5 expression
is regulated by HOXA10. Calpain5 expression was decreased in endometriosis likely
as a result of decreased HOXA10 expression. Decreased apoptosis in endometrial
cells may promote the development of endometriosis through a pathway involving
HOXA10, Calpain5 and caspase.

PMCID: PMC2734161
PMID: 18829447  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


260. Cell Prolif. 2008 Oct;41(5):709-25. doi: 10.1111/j.1365-2184.2008.00553.x.

Human amnion-derived mesenchymal stem cells are a potential source for uterine
stem cell therapy.

Han K(1), Lee JE, Kwon SJ, Park SY, Shim SH, Kim H, Moon JH, Suh CS, Lim HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Science and Technology, Research Center for Drugs,
Institute of Biomedical Science and Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul, South
Korea.

OBJECTIVES: Human amnion is an easy-to-obtain novel source of human mesenchymal
stem cells, which poses little or no ethical dilemmas. We have previously shown
that human amnion-derived mesenchymal (HAM) cells exhibit certain mesenchymal
stem cell-like characteristics with respect to expression of stem cell markers
and differentiation potentials.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In this study, we further characterized HAM cells'
potential for in vivo therapeutic application.
RESULTS: Flow cytometric analyses of HAM cells show that they express several
stem cell-related cell surface markers, including CD90, CD105, CD59, CD49d, CD44 
and HLA-ABC, but not CD45, CD34, CD31, CD106 or HLA-DR. HAM cells at the 10th
passage showed normal karyotype. More interestingly, the AbdB-like HOXA genes
HOXA9, HOXA10 and HOXA11 that are expressed in the mesenchyme of the developing
female reproductive tract and pregnant uteri are also expressed in HAM cells,
suggesting similarities between these two mesenchymal cell types. Progesterone
receptor is also highly expressed in HAM cells and expression of genes or
proteins in HAM cells could be manipulated with the aid of lentivirus technology 
or cell-permeable peptides. To test potentials of HAM cells for in vivo
application, we introduced enhanced green fluorescence protein (EGFP)-expressing 
HAM cells to mice by intrauterine infusion (into uteri) or by intravenous
injection (into the circulation). Presence of EGFP-expressing cells within the
uterine mesenchyme after intrauterine infusion or in lungs after intravenous
injection was noted within 1-4 weeks.
CONCLUSIONS: Collectively, these results suggest that HAM cells are a potential
source of mesenchymal stem cells with therapeutic potential.

PMID: 18823496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


261. Biol Reprod. 2009 Jan;80(1):79-85. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod.108.070391. Epub 2008 
Sep 17.

Experimental murine endometriosis induces DNA methylation and altered gene
expression in eutopic endometrium.

Lee B(1), Du H, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

The eutopic endometrium in women with endometriosis demonstrates diminished
endometrial receptivity and altered gene expression. It is unknown if the
endometrium being defective gives rise to a predisposition toward endometriosis
and infertility or, alternatively, if endometriosis causes the altered
endometrial receptivity. Here we created experimental endometriosis in mice and
examined the expression of several markers of endometrial receptivity in the
eutopic endometrium. Methylation of Hoxa10 was also evaluated as a potential
mechanism responsible for altered gene expression. Expression of each gene was
measured using quantitative real-time RT-PCR at 14 wk after induction of
endometriosis. Expression of Hoxa10 and Hoxa11, which are necessary for
endometrial receptivity, were decreased in the endometriosis group. Insulin-like 
growth factor binding protein-1 (Igfbp1) mRNA was decreased in the endometriosis 
group. However, there was no change in Integrin beta3 (Itgb3) mRNA expression.
Total progesterone receptor (Pgr-AB) was increased in the endometriosis group and
the ratio of Pgr-B to Pgr-AB was increased, indicating a shift from Pgr-A to
Pgr-B expression. Basic transcription element-binding protein-1 (Bteb1), official
symbol and name Klf9, Kruppel-like factor 9, which functionally interacts with
Pgr in endometrium, was also decreased in the endometriosis group. In addition,
hypermethylation of Hoxa10 in the endometriosis group was shown by
methylation-specific PCR and confirmed by bisulfite sequencing. These findings
demonstrate that normal endometrium, when placed in an ectopic location to create
experimental endometriosis, led to characteristic changes in gene expression in
eutopic endometrium. These data suggest the existence of a signal conduction
pathway from endometriosis that alters endometrial gene expression through
altered Pgr signaling and epigenetic programming.

PMCID: PMC2804809
PMID: 18799756  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


262. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Sep 16;105(37):14076-81. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0805206105. Epub 2008 Sep 9.

Cell type-specific DNA methylation patterns in the human breast.

Bloushtain-Qimron N(1), Yao J, Snyder EL, Shipitsin M, Campbell LL, Mani SA, Hu
M, Chen H, Ustyansky V, Antosiewicz JE, Argani P, Halushka MK, Thomson JA,
Pharoah P, Porgador A, Sukumar S, Parsons R, Richardson AL, Stampfer MR, Gelman
RS, Nikolskaya T, Nikolsky Y, Polyak K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, Boston, MA
02115, USA.

Cellular identity and differentiation are determined by epigenetic programs. The 
characteristics of these programs in normal human mammary epithelium and their
similarity to those in stem cells are unknown. To begin investigating these
issues, we analyzed the DNA methylation and gene expression profiles of distinct 
subpopulations of mammary epithelial cells by using MSDK (methylation-specific
digital karyotyping) and SAGE (serial analysis of gene expression). We identified
discrete cell-type and differentiation state-specific DNA methylation and gene
expression patterns that were maintained in a subset of breast carcinomas and
correlated with clinically relevant tumor subtypes. CD44+ cells were the most
hypomethylated and highly expressed several transcription factors with known stem
cell function including HOXA10 and TCF3. Many of these genes were also
hypomethylated in BMP4-treated compared with undifferentiated human embryonic
stem (ES) cells that we analyzed by MSDK for comparison. Further highlighting the
similarity of epigenetic programs of embryonic and mammary epithelial cells,
genes highly expressed in CD44+ relative to more differentiated CD24+ cells were 
significantly enriched for Suz12 targets in ES cells. The expression of FOXC1,
one of the transcription factors hypomethylated and highly expressed in CD44+
cells, induced a progenitor-like phenotype in differentiated mammary epithelial
cells. These data suggest that epigenetically controlled transcription factors
play a key role in regulating mammary epithelial cell phenotypes and imply
similarities among epigenetic programs that define progenitor cell
characteristics.

PMCID: PMC2532972
PMID: 18780791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


263. Curr Protoc Stem Cell Biol. 2008 Jan;Chapter 2:Unit 2A.7. doi:
10.1002/9780470151808.sc02a07s4.

High level in vitro expansion of murine hematopoietic stem cells.

Sekulovic S(1), Imren S, Humphries K.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

Development of strategies to extensively expand hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs)
in vitro will be a major factor in enhancing the success of a range of
transplant-based therapies for malignant and genetic disorders. In addition to
potential clinical applications, the ability to increase the number of HSCs in
culture will facilitate investigations into the mechanisms underlying
self-renewal. In this unit, we describe a robust strategy for consistently
achieving over 1000-fold net expansion of HSCs in short-term in vitro culture by 
using novel engineered fusions of the N-terminal domain of nucleoporin 98 (NUP98)
and the homeodomain of the hox transcription factor, HOXA10 (so called
NUP98-HOXA10hd fusion). We also provide a detailed protocol for monitoring the
magnitude of HSC expansion in culture by limiting dilution assay of competitive
lympho-myeloid repopulating units (CRU Assay). These procedures provide new
possibilities for achieving significant numbers of HSCs in culture, as well as
for studying HSCs biochemically and genetically.

PMID: 18770636  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


264. Cells Tissues Organs. 2009;189(1-4):122-5. doi: 10.1159/000151453. Epub 2008 Aug 
14.

Molecular switches involving homeodomain proteins, HOXA10 and RUNX2 regulate
osteoblastogenesis.

Hassan MQ(1), Saini S, Gordon JA, van Wijnen AJ, Montecino M, Stein JL, Stein GS,
Lian JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, Mass. 01655, USA.

The osteoinductive BMP2 signal facilitates commitment to the osteoblast phenotype
by inducing several classes of early response genes. Among these are bone-related
HOX factors, homeodomain, RUNX and OSTERIX proteins. Here we demonstrate
molecular events among BMP2-induced transcription factors that constitute a
network of molecular switches on promoters of bone-related genes to coordinate
their temporal expression during cellular differentiation. Our studies provide
evidence for (1) selective association of HOXA10, MSX2, DLX3 and DLX5 homeodomain
transcription factors on Runx2 and OC genes at stages of osteoblast maturation as
well as (2) participation of these factors with RUNX2 in chromatin remodeling of 
bone-specific genes for repression, activation and attenuation of transcription. 
These findings reveal the requirement for multiple levels of control for the
appropriate timing of osteoblast-related gene expression.

Copyright 2008 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMCID: PMC2665705
PMID: 18701816  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


265. Leuk Res. 2009 Mar;33(3):483-9. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2008.07.002. Epub 2008 Aug
9.

Physical and functional interactions between hematopoietic cell-specific ETS
transcription factors and homeodomain proteins.

Yamada T(1), Shimizu T, Sakurai T, Nanashima N, Kihara-Negishi F, Suzuki M, Fan
Y, Akita M, Oikawa T, Tsuchida S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Genome Biology, Hirosaki University Graduate
School of Medicine, 5 Zaifu-cho, Hirosaki 036-8562, Japan.

To examine the possibility that ETS family transcription factors, PU.1, SPI-B,
ELF-1, ERG-3, ETS-1 and TEL, and homeodomain proteins, HOXA10, HOXC13, MEIS1 and 
PBX1B, function cooperatively, we investigated their interactions. In luciferase 
assays, HOXA10 and HOXC13 augmented the activity of PU.1 and SPI-B while
diminishing that of ELF-1 and ERG-3. MEIS1 diminished the activity of ETS-1. No
clear effects were observed for other combinations. Immunoprecipitation assays
showed protein-protein interactions among the combinations exhibiting functional 
interactions. A mutation of HOXC13, which abolished binding to ELF-1, also
abolished the diminishing effect on ELF-1. The results suggest functional
interaction through physical interactions.

PMID: 18692240  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


266. Am J Physiol Heart Circ Physiol. 2008 Oct;295(4):H1556-61. doi:
10.1152/ajpheart.00540.2008. Epub 2008 Aug 8.

In vivo differences between endothelial transcriptional profiles of coronary and 
iliac arteries revealed by microarray analysis.

Zhang J(1), Burridge KA, Friedman MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina 
27708, USA.

Endothelial cells (ECs) from different vascular beds display a remarkable
heterogeneity in both structure and function. Phenotypic heterogeneity among
arterial ECs is particularly relevant to atherosclerosis since the disease occurs
predominantly in major arteries, which vary in their atherosusceptibility. To
explore EC heterogeneity between typical atheroprone and atheroresistant
arteries, we used DNA microarrays to compare gene expression profiles of freshly 
harvested porcine coronary (CECs) and iliac artery (IECs) ECs. Statistical
analysis revealed 51 genes that were differentially expressed in CECs relative to
IECs at a false discovery rate of 5%. Seventeen of these genes are known to be
involved in atherogenesis. Consistent with coronary arteries being more
atherosusceptible, almost all putative atherogenic genes were overexpressed in
CECs, whereas all atheroprotective genes were downregulated, relative to IECs. A 
subset of the identified genes was validated by quantitative polymerase chain
reaction (PCR). PCR results suggest that the differences in expression levels
between CECs and IECs for the HOXA10 and HOXA9 genes were >100-fold. Gene
ontology (GO) and biological pathway analysis revealed a global expression
difference between CECs and IECs. Genes in twelve GO categories, including
complement immune activation, immunoglobulin-mediated response, and system
development, were significantly upregulated in CECs. CECs also overexpressed
genes involved in several inflammatory pathways, including the classical pathway 
of complement activation and the IGF-1-mediated pathway. The in vivo
transcriptional differences between CECs and IECs found in this study may provide
new insights into the factors responsible for coronary artery
atherosusceptibility.

PMCID: PMC2593512
PMID: 18689496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


267. Oncogene. 2008 Oct 23;27(49):6356-64. doi: 10.1038/onc.2008.233. Epub 2008 Aug 4.

Evidence for Hox and E2A-PBX1 collaboration in mouse T-cell leukemia.

Bijl J(1), Krosl J, Lebert-Ghali CE, Vacher J, Mayotte N, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Hematopoietic Stem Cells, Institute for
Research in Immunology and Cancer, Université de Montréal, Montréal, Quebec,
Canada. jbijl.hmr@ssss.gouv.qc.ca

Using murine Moloney leukemia virus (MMLV)-based proviral insertional
mutagenesis, we previously showed a preferential targeting of a small region in
the Hoxa gene locus in E2A-PBX1-induced lymphoid leukemia resulting in the
overexpression of several Hoxa genes including Hoxa10, Hoxa9 and Hoxa7. This
observation suggested a functional interaction between Hox gene overexpression
and E2A-PBX1 in lymphoid tumors. To further explore this possibility, we
generated a series of compound E2A-PBX1 x Hox transgenic mice and tested the
genetic interaction between these genes in the generation of lymphoid leukemia in
vivo. Results presented in this report show that the onset of T-cell leukemia is 
significantly accelerated in E2A-PBX1 x Hoxb4 compound transgenic animals when
compared with control E2A-PBX1 or Hoxb4 littermates. Hoxa9 appears less potent
than Hoxb4 to accelerate E2A-PBX1-induced T-cell leukemia in mice.
E2A-PBX1-induced T-cell leukemias express much higher levels of Hoxa genes than
MMLV-induced counterparts, possibly suggesting a contribution of these genes to
T-cell transformation by E2A-PBX1. Collectively, these data provide the first
genetic evidence showing oncogenic collaboration between E2A-PBX1 and a Hox gene 
in lymphoid malignancies in vivo and document the specific deregulation of a
subgroup of Hoxa genes in these leukemias.

PMID: 18679416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


268. Fertil Steril. 2009 May;91(5):1686-91. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2008.02.121.
Epub 2008 Jul 30.

Reduced expression of biomarkers associated with the implantation window in women
with endometriosis.

Wei Q(1), St Clair JB, Fu T, Stratton P, Nieman LK.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Biology and Medicine Branch, National Institute of Child Health
and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the expression of biomarkers of implantation, glycodelin A
(GdA), osteopontin (OPN), lysophosphatidic acid receptor 3 (LPA3), and HOXA10, in
eutopic endometrium of women with and without endometriosis.
DESIGN: Prospective observational study.
SETTING: Clinical research center.
PATIENT(S): Twenty-four women with endometriosis and 23 healthy volunteers of
similar age.
INTERVENTION(S): Secretory phase endometrial biopsy.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Expression of immunohistochemical staining intensity and
localization of GdA, OPN, LPA3, and HOXA10 in eutopic endometrium.
RESULT(S): Endometrial GdA expression was significantly reduced in patients after
cycle day 22. The endometrium from women with endometriosis also showed decreased
expression of OPN in the late secretory phase and LPA3 and HOXA10 expression in
the midsecretory and late secretory phases.
CONCLUSION(S): The decreased expression of these four biomarkers of implantation 
may indicate impaired endometrial receptivity in patients with endometriosis,
providing one explanation for the subfertility observed even in women with few
pelvic implants. Because many of these markers are P dependent, these findings
suggest the possibility of reduced endometrial P action in this population.

PMCID: PMC2697117
PMID: 18672236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


269. Endocrinology. 2008 Nov;149(11):5848-60. doi: 10.1210/en.2008-0651. Epub 2008 Jul
24.

Developmental exposure to Bisphenol a impairs the uterine response to ovarian
steroids in the adult.

Varayoud J(1), Ramos JG, Bosquiazzo VL, Muñoz-de-Toro M, Luque EH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratorio de Endocrinología y Tumores Hormonodependientes, School of
Biochemistry and Biological Sciences, Universidad Nacional del Litoral, Sante Fe,
Argentina.

Morphoregulator genes like members of the Hox gene family regulate uterine
development and are associated with endocrine-related processes such as
endometrial proliferation and differentiation in the adult uterus. Exposure to
neonatal endocrine disruptors could affect signaling events governed by Hox
genes, altering the developmental trajectory of the uterus with lasting
consequences. We investigated whether neonatal exposure to bisphenol A (BPA)
alters Hoxa10 and Hoxa11 mRNA uterine expression shortly after treatment as well 
as in the adult. Moreover, we studied whether xenoestrogen exposure may affect
the adult uterine response to hormonal stimuli. Newborn females received vehicle,
0.05 mg/kg.d BPA, 20 mg/kg*d BPA, or diethylstilbestrol (0.2 microg/kg*d) on
postnatal d 1, 3, 5, and 7). At postnatal d 8, real time RT-PCR assays showed a
decrease in Hoxa10 and Hoxa11 expression in all xenoestrogen-treated groups. To
evaluate the long-term effects, we used adult ovariectomized rats with hormonal
replacement. The subepithelial stroma in BPA- and diethylstilbestrol-treated
animals showed an impaired proliferative response to steroid treatment associated
with a silencing of Hoxa10 but not associated with changes in the methylation
pattern of the Hoxa10 promoter. BPA animals showed that the Hoxa10 reduction was 
accompanied by an increased stromal expression of the silencing mediator for
retinoic acid and thyroid hormone receptor. The spatial coexpression of steroid
receptors Hoxa10 and silencing mediator for retinoic acid and thyroid hormone
receptor was established using immunofluorescence. Our data indicate that
postnatal BPA exposure affects the steroid hormone-responsiveness of uterine
stroma in adulthood. Whether this impaired hormonal response is associated with
effects on uterine receptivity and decidualization is currently under
investigation.

PMID: 18653720  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


270. Reprod Sci. 2008 May;15(5):529-35. doi: 10.1177/1933719108316911.

Gene expression profiling reveals putative HOXA10 downstream targets in the
periimplantation mouse uterus.

Vitiello D(1), Pinard R, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Yale University School
of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06510, USA.

HOXA10 encodes a transcription factor required for endometrial receptivity and
embryo implantation. The objective of this study was to identify and to
characterize those molecular markers regulated by HOXA10 expression. The authors 
have identified putative HOXA10 target genes identified by microarray analysis
employing a murine model of transient HOXA10 expression during the anticipated
implantation window. Microarray analysis identified 40 statistically significant 
genes regulated by HOXA10 overexpression of which 31 genes were downregulated
greater than 2-fold over control and 9 genes were upregulated. Cellular
ontogenies of differentially expressed genes include cell adhesion molecules,
signal transduction factors, and metabolic regulators. Semiquantitative real-time
reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction confirmed regulation of selected 
candidate genes. Examples included clusterin (Clu), phoshoglycerate
3-dehydrogenase (3-Pgdh), and tumor-associated calcium signal transducer 2
(Tacstd2). Elucidation of these pathways will allow further characterization of
the molecular mechanisms governing endometrial development, which also may
function to enhance uterine receptivity.

PMCID: PMC3107854
PMID: 18579861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


271. Fertil Steril. 2010 Apr;93(6):2027-34. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2008.03.029.
Epub 2008 Jun 13.

Submucosal uterine leiomyomas have a global effect on molecular determinants of
endometrial receptivity.

Rackow BW(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520-8063, USA.
beth.rackow@yale.edu

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the effect of uterine leiomyomas on the endometrium using 
molecular markers of endometrial receptivity: HOXA10, HOXA11, LIF, and BTEB1.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: University medical center.
PATIENT(S): Thirty reproductive-aged women with submucosal, intramural, or no
uterine myomas who underwent hysteroscopy or hysterectomy.
INTERVENTION(S): Proliferative phase endometrial sampling was performed at the
time of surgery. In uteri with a submucosal myoma, directed endometrial biopsies 
were obtained over the myoma and over normal myometrium.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Endometrial HOXA10 expression was evaluated as a primary
endpoint using quantitative real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR) and immunohistochemistry. HOXA11, BTEB1, and LIF were evaluated
using real-time RT-PCR.
RESULT(S): Endometrial HOXA10 and HOXA11 messenger RNA (mRNA) expression were
significantly decreased in uteri with submucosal myomas compared with controls
and with uteri with intramural myomas. A similar trend was seen in BTEB1 mRNA
expression; however, no difference was found in LIF mRNA expression.
Immunohistochemistry localized the decrease in endometrial HOXA10 protein
expression to stroma. In the presence of a submucosal myoma, there were no
regional differences in gene expression.
CONCLUSION(S): The molecular mechanism by which submucosal myomas adversely
affect reproduction includes a global decrease in endometrial HOX gene
expression, not simply a focal change over the myoma. This may explain the
reproductive dysfunction observed with submucosal myomas.

Copyright 2010 American Society for Reproductive Medicine. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC3107853
PMID: 18555231  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


272. Int J Cancer. 2008 Aug 1;123(3):725-9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.23563.

HOXA11 DNA methylation--a novel prognostic biomarker in ovarian cancer.

Fiegl H(1), Windbichler G, Mueller-Holzner E, Goebel G, Lechner M, Jacobs IJ,
Widschwendter M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Gynecological Oncology, UCL EGA Institute for Women's Health,
University College London, United Kingdom.

Epigenetic alterations play a major role in cancer. Recently we reported that
stem cell Polycomb group targets (PcGTs) are up to 12-fold more likely to have
cancer-specific promoter DNA hypermethylation than nontargets. To identify
potential, prognostic DNA methylation markers in ovarian cancer we analyzed the
DNA methylation at 71 different loci in 22 ovarian cancers and 18 non-neoplastic 
ovarian specimens by means of a quantitative, real-time PCR-based technique
(MethyLight). We identified DNA methylation of HOXA10 and HOXA11, both of them
PcGTs, to be the best discriminators between cancer and non-neoplastic tissue. In
an independent set consisting of 92 ovarian cancer specimens further analysis
demonstrated that HOXA11 DNA methylation is (i) strongly associated with the
residual tumor after cytoreductive surgery and (ii) is a marker indicating poor
prognosis. HOXA11 DNA methylation was independently associated with poor outcome 
[relative risk for death 3.4 (95% CI 1.2-9.9; p = 0.03)]. These findings support 
the view that the technical inability to optimally cytoreduce ovarian cancer is
associated with particular molecular alterations in the tumor which per se define
a subgroup of patients with poor outcome.

PMID: 18478570  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


273. Mol Hum Reprod. 2008 Jun;14(6):357-66. doi: 10.1093/molehr/gan023. Epub 2008 May 
2.

Global analysis of genes regulated by HOXA10 in decidualization reveals a role in
cell proliferation.

Lu Z(1), Hardt J, Kim JJ.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Biology Research, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center, Northwestern University,
Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

Homeobox (HOX) A10 is essential for fertility as demonstrated in transgenic mice,
specifically affecting implantation and decidualization. Its role in human
decidualization, however, remains unknown. In this study, we used gene silencing 
followed by microarray analysis to decipher the role of HOXA10 during
decidualization of human endometrial stromal cells (HESCs). HOXA10 was knocked
down using siRNA oligonucleotide transfection and cells were treated with
estradiol, medroxyprogesterone acetate and dibutyryl cAMP (H + cAMP) to induce
decidualization. Genes significantly regulated were identified using the
Affymetrix microarray chip. With this method, 2361 transcripts were significantly
altered by 1.5-fold or higher (P < 0.05) with H + cAMP treatment only. Of these
genes, 258 were significantly up-regulated by HOXA10 knockdown and 236
transcripts were significantly down-regulated by more than 1.5-fold, totaling 494
genes that were regulated by HOXA10 during decidualization. Data analysis using
the Ingenuity System revealed that many of the genes regulated by HOXA10
knockdown during H + cAMP treatment were associated with cell cycle. Real-time
PCR was used to confirm that HOXA10 knockdown decreased expression of the cell
cycle genes CDC2 and CCNB2. In addition, a higher percentage of cells were
arrested in the G2/M phase. Next, we observed that cell proliferation as measured
by BrdU incorporation was decreased upon HOXA10 knockdown and H + cAMP treatment.
Apoptosis, on the other hand, as measured by Annexin V staining was not
influenced by siHOXA10 in decidualizing cells. Together, these data demonstrate
that during decidualization of HESC, HOXA10 is actively involved in promoting
cell proliferation through the regulation of hundreds of genes.

PMCID: PMC2731304
PMID: 18456676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


274. Fertil Steril. 2008 May;89(5):1234-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2007.04.060. Epub
2008 Apr 14.

GnRH antagonists may affect endometrial receptivity.

Rackow BW(1), Kliman HJ, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8063, USA.

OBJECTIVE: HOXA10 is an essential regulator of endometrial receptivity. To
determine the effect of GnRH antagonists on endometrial receptivity, we assessed 
endometrial HOXA10 expression in GnRH antagonist, GnRH agonist, and natural
cycles.
DESIGN: Prospective case-control study.
SETTING: University academic medical center.
PATIENT(S): Nineteen subjects were included: 12 subjects underwent controlled
ovarian hyperstimulation with recombinant FSH and used either a GnRH antagonist
or a GnRH agonist; seven control subjects underwent natural cycles.
INTERVENTION(S): Pipelle endometrial biopsies were obtained 11 days after hCG
administration or spontaneous LH surge in untreated cycles, respectively.
Immunohistochemistry was used to assess HOXA10 protein expression in endometrial 
glands and stroma.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Endometrial HOXA10 protein expression.
RESULT(S): HOXA10 expression was significantly decreased in endometrial stromal
cells in GnRH antagonist-treated cycles compared with GnRH agonist-treated cycles
or natural cycle control subjects. There was no significant difference in
glandular cell HOXA10 expression among the three groups.
CONCLUSION(S): Use of GnRH antagonists may be associated with impaired HOXA10
expression in endometrial stromal cells and thus may affect endometrial
receptivity.

PMCID: PMC2699407
PMID: 18410932  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


275. Hum Reprod. 2008 Jun;23(6):1394-406. doi: 10.1093/humrep/den082. Epub 2008 Apr
11.

Myeloid ecotropic viral integration site 1 (MEIS) 1 involvement in embryonic
implantation.

Xu B(1), Geerts D, Qian K, Zhang H, Zhu G.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medicine College,
Huazhong, University of Science and Technology, 1095 JieFang Avenue, Wuhan
430030, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: The HOXA10 homeobox gene controls embryonic uterine development and
adult endometrial receptivity. The three-amino-acid loop extension (TALE) family 
homeobox genes like myeloid ecotropic viral integration site 1 (MEIS) provide
enhanced target gene activation and specificity in HOX-regulated cellular
processes by acting as HOX cofactors.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Analysis of an Affymetrix data set in the public domain
showed high expression of MEIS1 in human endometrium. MEIS1 expression was
confirmed during the human menstrual cycle by RT-PCR and in situ hybridization
and was increased during the secretory compared with proliferative phase of the
cycle (P = 0.0001), the time of implantation. To assess the importance of
maternal Meis1 expression in a mouse model, the uteri of Day 2 pregnant mice were
injected with Meis1 over-expression or small interfering RNA (siRNA) constructs. 
Blocking Meis1 expression by siRNA before implantation significantly reduced
average implantation rates (P = 0.00001). Increased or decreased Meis1 expression
significantly increased or decreased the expression of integrin beta3, a
transcriptional target of HOXA10 and an important factor in early
embryo-endometrium interactions (P = 0.006). Manipulating Meis1 expression before
implantation also dramatically affected the number of pinopodes, uterine
endometrial epithelial projections that develop at the time of endometrial
receptivity.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that in mouse, meis1 contributes to regulating
endometrial development during the menstrual cycle and establishing the
conditions necessary for implantation.

PMCID: PMC2387222
PMID: 18408019  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


276. Reprod Biomed Online. 2008 Mar;16(3):416-24.

Genetic alterations of HOXA10 and their effect on the severity of endometriosis
in a Taiwanese population.

Wu HH(1), Wang NM, Lin CY, Tsai HD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Changhua Christian Hospital,
Changhua, Taiwan.

Endometriosis is one of the most common gynaecological diseases and evidence has 
suggested that it may be inherited as a complex genetic trait. HOXA10, a homeobox
gene, is expressed in the developing uterus and participates in endometrium
development and may contribute to endometriosis. In this study, the HOXA10 gene
was analysed in 112 patients with endometriosis and in 54 women without
endometriosis, as diagnosed laparoscopically. The entire HOXA10 gene was
amplified using polymerase chain reaction followed by single-strand conformation 
polymorphism analysis and sequencing. Association between the polymorphism and
the clinical parameters of endometriosis were examined. There were 7.23% patients
with HOXA10 genetic alterations; however, there was no significant increase in
the endometriosis patients compared with the controls. Most of these DNA variants
were found to be novel mutations that reside within the HOXA10 homeobox domain.
Six variants generate amino acid changes in the protein and one harbours a
premature stop codon. It was found that patients with HOXA10 polymorphism were
associated with a lower serum cancer antigen-125, a lower American Fertility
Society score and less severe obliterated cul-de-sac. It is postulated that
genetic alterations in the homeobox domain might lead to less specificity for
HOXA10 protein binding to a DNA molecule.

PMID: 18339267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


277. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2008 Mar 11;105(10):3945-50. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0800135105. Epub 2008 Feb 28.

Distinctive microRNA signature of acute myeloid leukemia bearing cytoplasmic
mutated nucleophosmin.

Garzon R(1), Garofalo M, Martelli MP, Briesewitz R, Wang L, Fernandez-Cymering C,
Volinia S, Liu CG, Schnittger S, Haferlach T, Liso A, Diverio D, Mancini M,
Meloni G, Foa R, Martelli MF, Mecucci C, Croce CM, Falini B.

Author information: 
(1)Departments of Medicine and Molecular Virology and Human Genetics,
Comprehensive Cancer Center, and College of Pharmacology, Ohio State University, 
Columbus, OH 43221, USA.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) carrying NPM1 mutations and cytoplasmic
nucleophosmin (NPMc+ AML) accounts for about one-third of adult AML and shows
distinct features, including a unique gene expression profile. MicroRNAs (miRNAs)
are small noncoding RNAs of 19-25 nucleotides in length that have been linked to 
the development of cancer. Here, we investigated the role of miRNAs in the
biology of NPMc+ AML. The miRNA expression was evaluated in 85 adult de novo AML 
patients characterized for subcellular localization/mutation status of NPM1 and
FLT3 mutations using a custom microarray platform. Data were analyzed by using
univariate t test within BRB tools. We identified a strong miRNA signature that
distinguishes NPMc+ mutated (n = 55) from the cytoplasmic-negative (NPM1
unmutated) cases (n = 30) and includes the up-regulation of miR-10a, miR-10b,
several let-7 and miR-29 family members. Many of the down-regulated miRNAs
including miR-204 and miR-128a are predicted to target several HOX genes. Indeed,
we confirmed that miR-204 targets HOXA10 and MEIS1, suggesting that the HOX
up-regulation observed in NPMc+ AML may be due in part by loss of HOX
regulators-miRNAs. FLT3-ITD+ samples were characterized by up-regulation of
miR-155. Further experiments demonstrated that the up-regulation of miR-155 was
independent from FLT3 signaling. Our results identify a unique miRNA signature
associated with NPMc+ AML and provide evidence that support a role for miRNAs in 
the regulation of HOX genes in this leukemia subtype. Moreover, we found that
miR-155 was strongly but independently associated with FLT3-ITD mutations.

PMCID: PMC2268779
PMID: 18308931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


278. J Pediatr Surg. 2008 Feb;43(2):387-90. doi: 10.1016/j.jpedsurg.2007.08.016.

The migrating gubernaculum grows like a "limb bud".

Nightingale SS(1), Western P, Hutson JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of General Surgery, Royal Children's Hospital, Melbourne 3052,
Australia.

BACKGROUND: The gubernaculum is crucial for testicular descent, and in the
second, or inguinoscrotal, phase of descent it has no caudal attachments.
Cranially, it is attached to the testis, but its caudal free tip migrates to the 
scrotum controlled by the genitofemoral nerve. Recent studies show active
proliferation in the tip. We hypothesized that the gubernacular tip may grow like
a limb bud.
METHODS: We performed whole-mount in situ hybridization studies on male and
female fetal mice (ages, E14.5-E18.5; n = 162) looking for limb bud regulatory
factors.
RESULTS: Our results showed that a member of the fibroblast growth factor (Fgf)
family, Fgf10, and Hoxa10 were both expressed in the male gubernaculum at E14.5, 
and Hoxa10 was also expressed in the E16.5 mice. Weak staining was seen in the
female gubernaculum for Hoxa10 on days E14.5 and E16.5, whereas no staining for
Fgf10 was seen in the female gubernaculums.
CONCLUSIONS: These studies, although preliminary, suggest limb bud regulators are
essential for gubernacular growth. Hox genes and Fgfs may be fruitful areas of
research to unravel the molecular control of gubernacular migration during
testicular descent.

PMID: 18280296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


279. Fertil Steril. 2009 Jan;91(1):244-8. doi: 10.1016/j.fertnstert.2007.11.024. Epub 
2008 Feb 4.

Effects of letrozole and clomiphene citrate on the expression of HOXA10 and
integrin alpha v beta 3 in uterine epithelium of rats.

Bao SH(1), Sheng SL, Peng YF, Lin QD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Renji Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University School of Medicine, Shanghai, People's Republic of China.

OBJECTIVE: To compare the effects of letrozole and clomiphene citrate on the
expression of HOXA10 and integrin alpha(v)beta(3) in the uterine epithelium in
rats.
DESIGN: Controlled prospective study.
SETTING: Teaching hospital and university research laboratory.
ANIMAL(S): Sixty sexually mature female Wistar-Albino rats that were 20 weeks of 
age.
INTERVENTION(S): Letrozole, 5 mg/kg of body weight daily (20 rats); clomiphene
citrate, 100 microg/kg daily (20 rats); and saline solution, 2 mL/day (20 rats). 
After 2 days, rats were killed and hysterectomized.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Expression of integrin alpha(v)beta(3) and HOXA10.
RESULT(S): The expression of integrin alpha(v)beta(3) in the clomiphene citrate
group was statistically significantly lower than in the letrozole and saline
solution groups. The expression of HOXA10 was statistically significantly higher 
in the saline solution group than in the letrozole group, and the letrozole group
showed a statistically significantly higher expression of HOXA10 compared with
the clomiphene citrate group.
CONCLUSION(S): In rats, letrozole affects the expression of HOXA10 in uterine
epithelium but has no effect on the expression of integrin alpha(v)beta(3), which
suggests that clomiphene suppresses endometrial receptivity more than letrozole. 
In the future, letrozole may be an appropriate drug for ovulation induction.

PMID: 18249394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


280. Endocrinology. 2008 May;149(5):2506-16. doi: 10.1210/en.2007-0692. Epub 2008 Jan 
31.

Activin-A in myometrium: characterization of the actions on myometrial cells.

Ciarmela P(1), Wiater E, Vale W.

Author information: 
(1)The Clayton Foundation Laboratories for Peptide Biology, The Salk Institute,
10010 North Torrey Pines Road, La Jolla, California 92037, USA.

Activin is a pleiotropic growth factor with a broad pattern of tissue
distribution that includes reproductive tissues. Although direct actions of
activin have been described in gonadal and uterine tissues, actions in the
myometrium have not been defined. In this study we have characterized the
responsiveness of uterine tissue and myometrial cell lines to activin-A. Uterine 
tissue and two myometrial cell lines, PHM1 (pregnant human myometrial 1) and
hTERT HM (telomerase reverse transcriptase-infected human myometrial) respond to 
activin-A as measured by phosphorylation of Smad-2. Those cell lines express a
full complement of activin receptors, as well as activin beta(A) subunit and
follistatin. Activin inhibited proliferation of PHM1 and human telomerase reverse
transcriptase-infected human myometrial cell line cells, with more extensive
growth inhibition observed in PHM1s. In PHM1s, activin-A decreased oxytocin
receptor and HoxA-10 mRNA expression but did not alter total progesterone
receptor, cyclooxygenase-2 (Cox-2), and connexin 43 mRNA expression levels.
Furthermore, treatment of PHM1 myometrial cells with activin-A attenuated
oxytocin and thromboxaneA2 induced intracellular Ca(2+) accumulation. In
conclusion, myometrial cells are activin sensitive, and activin-A can regulate
myometrial cell functions.

PMCID: PMC2329268
PMID: 18239071  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


281. Leuk Res. 2008 Jun;32(6):962-71. doi: 10.1016/j.leukres.2007.11.034. Epub 2008
Jan 10.

HOXA10 expression induced by Abl kinase inhibitors enhanced apoptosis through
PI3K pathway in CML cells.

Sugimoto Y(1), Nakamura S, Okinaka K, Hirano I, Ono T, Shigeno K, Shinjo K,
Ohnishi K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 
1-20-1 Handayama, Higashi-ku, Hamamatsu city, Shizuoka 431-3192, Japan.

Chronic myelogenous leukemia is characterized by the reciprocal chromosomal
translocation (9;22), which generates a novel fusion gene, BCR-ABL.
Bcr-Abl-expressing leukemia cells are highly resistant to apoptosis. Imatinib an 
Abl kinase inhibitor, is a highly effective agent for patients with CML. However,
a small percentage of these patients and most advanced-phase patients relapse on 
imatinib therapy. It is poorly understood whether the Abl kinase inhibitors are
able to eradicate CML progenitor or stem cells. In this study, we investigated
the role of HOXA10 in CML cell lines and the hematopoietic progenitor cells
derived from CML patients, and whether the regulation of HOXA10 eradicates
Bcr-Abl(+) hematopoietic stem/progenitor cells. The Abl kinase inhibitors and
PI3K inhibitor, LY294002, induced the expression of HOXA10, and it enhanced
apoptosis in CML cells. Moreover, the reduction of HOXA10 expression by siRNA in 
CML cells inhibited apoptosis by treatment with the Abl kinase inhibitors and
LY294002. These results revealed that HOXA10 had an important role in induction
of apoptosis by the Abl kinase inhibitors in CML cells. Finally, we showed that
the inhibition of HOXA10 expression by siRNA increased the numbers of CFU-GEMM,
BFU-E, and CFU-GM when the cells were treated with the combination of BMS354825
and LY294002 compared to control cells, and HOXA10 played a critical role in the 
committed colony-formation in CML. This study shows for the first time that the
Abl kinase inhibitor and LY294002 induced HOXA10, and HOXA10 had an important
role in apoptosis or cell growth inhibition in CML cells in vitro.

PMID: 18190961  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


282. Lab Invest. 2008 Feb;88(2):161-70. Epub 2007 Dec 24.

DNA methylation profiles of gastric carcinoma characterized by quantitative DNA
methylation analysis.

Kang GH(1), Lee S, Cho NY, Gandamihardja T, Long TI, Weisenberger DJ, Campan M,
Laird PW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer Research Institute, Seoul National University 
College of Medicine, Seoul, Korea. ghkang@snu.ac.kr

Transcriptional silencing by CpG island hypermethylation is a potential mechanism
for the inactivation of tumor-related genes. Virtually, all types of human
cancers show CpG island hypermethylation, and gastric carcinoma (GC) is one of
the tumors with a high frequency of aberrant CpG island hypermethylation. In this
study, we prescreened DNA methylation of 170 CpG island loci in a training set of
8 paired GC and GC-associated non-neoplastic mucosae (GCN) using MethyLight
technology and selected 27 DNA methylation markers showing higher methylation
frequency or level in GC than in GCN. These markers were then analyzed in a
tester set of 25 paired GC and GCN and 27 chronic gastritis (CG) from non-cancer 
patients to generate their DNA methylation profiles. We identified 17 novel
methylation markers in GC, including SFRP4, SEZ6L, TWIST1, BCL2, KL, TERT,
SCGB3A1, IGF2, GRIN2B, SFRP5, DLEC1, HOXA1, CYP1B1, SMAD9, MT1G, NR3C1, and
HOXA10. Of the 27 selected CpG island loci, 23 were methylated in GC, GCN, and CG
and the remainder four loci (DLEC1, CHFR, CYP1B1, and NR3C1) were only methylated
in GC. We found that the number of methylated loci was significantly higher in GC
than in GCN or CG and that Helicobacter pylori infection was strongly associated 
with aberrant CpG island hypermethylation in CG. Hypermethylation was more
prevalent in Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-positive GC than in EBV-negative GC and in 
diffuse-type GC than in intestinal-type GC. Through our large-scale screening of 
170 CpG island loci, we found 17 new DNA methylation markers of GC, which may
serve as useful markers that may identify a distinct subset of GC.

PMID: 18158559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


283. Mol Cell Biol. 2008 Mar;28(5):1862-72. Epub 2007 Dec 17.

Role of hPHF1 in H3K27 methylation and Hox gene silencing.

Cao R(1), Wang H, He J, Erdjument-Bromage H, Tempst P, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Biophysics, Lineberger Comprehensive Cancer
Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, 
USA.

Polycomb group (PcG) proteins are required for maintaining the silent state of
the homeotic genes and other important developmental regulators. The silencing
function of the PcG proteins has been linked to their intrinsic histone modifying
enzymatic activities. The EED-EZH2 complex, containing the core subunits EZH2,
EED, SUZ12, and RbAp48, functions as a histone H3K27-specific methyltransferase. 
Here we describe the identification and characterization of a related EED-EZH2
protein complex which is distinguished from the previous complex by the presence 
of another PcG protein, hPHF1. Consistent with the ability of hPHF1 to stimulate 
the enzymatic activity of the core EED-EZH2 complex in vitro, manipulation of
mPcl1, the mouse counterpart of hPHF1, in NIH 3T3 cells and cells of the mouse
male germ cell line GC1spg results in global alteration of H3K27me2 and H3K27me3 
levels and Hox gene expression. Small interfering RNA-mediated knockdown of mPcl1
affects association of the Eed-Ezh2 complex with certain Hox genes, such as
HoxA10, as well as Hox gene expression concomitant with an alteration on the
H3K27me2 levels of the corresponding promoters. Therefore, our results reveal
hPHF1 as a component of a novel EED-EZH2 complex and demonstrate its important
role in H3K27 methylation and Hox gene silencing.

PMCID: PMC2258785
PMID: 18086877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


284. Epigenetics. 2006 Apr-Jun;1(2):106-11. Epub 2006 Apr 1.

Promoter hypermethylation of progesterone receptor isoform B (PR-B) in
endometriosis.

Wu Y(1), Strawn E, Basir Z, Halverson G, Guo SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee, Wisconsin
53226-0509, USA.

The physiological effects of progesterone (P) are mediated by two isoforms of
progesterone receptors (PRs): PR-A and PR-B. Progestins have long been used in
the treatment of endometriosis but unfortunately the relief of pain is relatively
short-term. In addition, about nine percent of women with endometriosis simply do
not respond to progestin therapy due to unknown reasons. In fact, a general
tendency for relative progesterone resistance within eutopic and ectopic
endometrium of women with endometriosis and also the downregulation of PR-B, but 
not PR-A, in endometriosis have been noted. Since promoter hypermethylation is
well-documented to be associated with transcriptional silencing, we sought to
determine the methylation status of the PR-A and PR-B promoter regions in the
epithelial component of endometriotic implants using a combination of laser
capture microdissection (LCM), methylation specific PCR, and bisulfite
sequencing. We found that the promoter region of PR-B, but not PR-A, is
hypermethylated in endometriosis as compared with controls. In addition, the PR-B
expression was significantly reduced in the ectopic endometrium. Our finding
suggests that progesterone resistance in endometriosis in general and the down
regulation of PR-B, but not PR-A, in particular, are a result of promoter
hypermethylation of PR-B, but not PR-A. This, in conjunction with our reported
aberrant methylation of HOXA10 in the eutopic endometrium of women with
endometriosis, strongly suggests that endometriosis is an epigenetic disease.
This perspective should potentially open up new avenues for the delineation of
pathogenesis of endometriosis, and might also lead to novel ways to treat the
disease through reversing aberrant methylation via pharmacological means.

PMID: 17965625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


285. Semin Reprod Med. 2007 Nov;25(6):483-9.

The effect of uterine fibroids on embryo implantation.

Horne AW(1), Critchley HO.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive and Developmental Sciences, The University of
Edinburgh Centre for Reproductive Biology, The Queen's Medical Research
Institute, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.

Uterine fibroids are common but their role in infertility and effect on embryo
implantation is unclear. There is evidence that submucosal fibroids are
associated with poor reproductive outcome and that treatment with myomectomy is
associated with an improvement in pregnancy rates. Various theories have been
proposed to explain this relationship. Fibroids cause a mechanical distortion of 
the endometrial cavity-their presence may alter gamete and embryo transport (due 
to blockage of the tubal ostia or by altering uterine contractility and
peristalsis) and subsequent embryo implantation (due to compression of the
endometrium). They may lead to disruption of the junctional zone within the
myometrial layer, affecting general uterine function in the initial stages of
embryo invasion and later placentation. Altered vasculature due to the abnormal
expression of angiogenic factors by uterine fibroids (such as basic fibroblast
growth factor and platelet-derived growth factor) could play a role in a reduced 
implantation rate in patients with fibroids. Similarly, changes in the
endometrium mediated by inflammation and factors involved in the process of
fibrosis (such as transforming growth factor) could also have a detrimental
effect. In addition, fibroids may affect gene expression pattern in the
endometrium (such as HOXA10), disrupting the window of implantation. The
supporting evidence for these theories is discussed in this review.

PMID: 17960533  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


286. Semin Reprod Med. 2007 Nov;25(6):476-82.

The influence of hydrosalpinx on markers of endometrial receptivity.

Savaris RF(1), Giudice LC.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Ginecologia e Obstetricia, Universidade Federal do Rio Grande 
do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil. rsavaris@hcpa.ufrgs.br

Hydrosalpinx is a common condition among women of reproductive age. It is related
to low pregnancy rates in the settings of in vitro fertilization-embryo transfer 
programs. Such low rates are not yet well understood, and may be due to poor
endometrial receptivity and abnormal expression of key molecules in the
endometrium that are important for implantation. The available data on the
inflammatory response, endometrial blood flow, integrins, leukemia inhibitory
factor, matrix metalloproteinases, and homeobox gene A10 expression in the
presence of hydrosalpinx are reviewed. In addition, the evidence for treatment
options to improve pregnancy rates is also discussed.

PMID: 17960532  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


287. Oncogene. 2007 Oct 15;26(47):6816-28.

Transcriptional control of granulocyte and monocyte development.

Friedman AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21231,
USA. afriedm2@jhmi.edu

PU.1 directs the hematopoietic stem cell to the lymphoid-myeloid progenitor (LMP)
and interacts with GATA-binding protein 1 to inhibit commitment to the
megakaryocyte-erythroid progenitor. The CCAAT/enhancer-binding protein
(C/EBP)alpha then directs the LMP to the granulocyte-monocyte progenitor (GMP)
stage, while inhibiting lymphoid development via cross-inhibition of Pax5 and
potentially other regulators. Increased PU.1 activity favors monocytic commitment
of the GMP. Induction of PU.1 by C/EBPalpha and interaction of PU.1 with c-Jun
elevates PU.1 activity. Zippering of C/EBPalpha with c-Jun or c-Fos also
contributes to monocyte lineage specification. An additional factor, potentially 
an Id1-regulated basic helix-loop-helix protein, may be required for the GMP to
commit to the granulocyte lineage. Egr-1, Egr-2, Vitamin D Receptor, MafB/c: Fos 
and PU.1:interferon regulatory factor 8 complexes direct further monocytic
maturation, while retinoic acid receptor (RAR) and C/EBPepsilon direct
granulopoiesis. Both C/EBPalpha and RARs induce C/EBPepsilon, and PU.1 is also
required, albeit at lower levels, for granulocytic maturation. HoxA10 and CAAT
displacement protein act as transcriptional repressors to delay expression of
terminal differentiation. Gfi-1 and Egr-1,2/Nab2 complexes repress each other to 
maintain myeloid lineage fidelity. NF-kappaB directly binds and cooperates with
C/EBPbeta to induce the inflammatory response in mature myeloid cells and
potentially also cooperates with C/EBPalpha to regulate early myelopoiesis.

PMID: 17934488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


288. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 Dec;27(24):8466-79. Epub 2007 Oct 8.

Mammalian ASH1L is a histone methyltransferase that occupies the transcribed
region of active genes.

Gregory GD(1), Vakoc CR, Rozovskaia T, Zheng X, Patel S, Nakamura T, Canaani E,
Blobel GA.

Author information: 
(1)Children's Hospital of Philadelphia, Division of Hematology, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania 19104, USA.

Histone lysine methylation regulates genomic functions, including gene
transcription. Previous reports found various degrees of methylation at H3K4,
H3K9, and H4K20 within the transcribed region of active mammalian genes. To
identify the enzymes responsible for placing these modifications, we examined
ASH1L, the mammalian homolog of the Drosophila melanogaster Trithorax group
(TrxG) protein Ash1. Drosophila Ash1 has been reported to methylate H3K4, H3K9,
and H4K20 at its target sites. Here we demonstrate that mammalian ASH1L
associates with the transcribed region of all active genes examined, including
Hox genes. The distribution of ASH1L in transcribed chromatin strongly resembles 
that of methylated H3K4 but not that of H3K9 or H4K20. Accordingly, the SET
domain of ASH1L methylates H3K4 in vitro, and knockdown of ASH1L expression
reduced H3K4 trimethylation at HoxA10 in vivo. Notably, prior methylation at H3K9
reduced ASH1L-mediated methylation at H3K4, suggesting cross-regulation among
these marks. Drosophila ash1 and trithorax interact genetically, and the
mammalian TrxG protein MLL1 and ASH1L display highly similar distributions and
substrate specificities. However, by using MLL null cell lines we found that
their recruitments occur independently of each other. Collectively, our data
suggest that ASH1L occupies most, if not all, active genes and methylates histone
H3 in a nonredundant fashion at a subset of genes.

PMCID: PMC2169421
PMID: 17923682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


289. Blood. 2008 Jan 1;111(1):309-19. Epub 2007 Sep 12.

Overexpression of CDX2 perturbs HOX gene expression in murine progenitors
depending on its N-terminal domain and is closely correlated with deregulated HOX
gene expression in human acute myeloid leukemia.

Rawat VP(1), Thoene S, Naidu VM, Arseni N, Heilmeier B, Metzeler K, Petropoulos
K, Deshpande A, Quintanilla-Martinez L, Bohlander SK, Spiekermann K, Hiddemann W,
Feuring-Buske M, Buske C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine III, Klinikum Grosshadern, Germany.

The mechanisms underlying deregulation of HOX gene expression in AML are poorly
understood. The ParaHox gene CDX2 was shown to act as positive upstream regulator
of several HOX genes. In this study, constitutive expression of Cdx2 caused
perturbation of leukemogenic Hox genes such as Hoxa10 and Hoxb8 in murine
hematopoietic progenitors. Deletion of the N-terminal domain of Cdx2 abrogated
its ability to perturb Hox gene expression and to cause acute myeloid leukemia
(AML) in mice. In contrast inactivation of the putative Pbx interacting site of
Cdx2 did not change the leukemogenic potential of the gene. In an analysis of 115
patients with AML, expression levels of CDX2 were closely correlated with
deregulated HOX gene expression. Patients with normal karyotype showed a 14-fold 
higher expression of CDX2 and deregulated HOX gene expression compared with
patients with chromosomal translocations such as t(8:21) or t(15;17). All
patients with AML with normal karyotype tested were negative for CDX1 and CDX4
expression. These data link the leukemogenic potential of Cdx2 to its ability to 
dysregulate Hox genes. They furthermore correlate the level of CDX2 expression
with HOX gene expression in human AML and support a potential role of CDX2 in the
development of human AML with aberrant Hox gene expression.

PMID: 17855634  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


290. J Huazhong Univ Sci Technolog Med Sci. 2007 Aug;27(4):464-7.

Regulatory effect of estrogen, progestin and HB-EGF on the expression of HOXA10
gene in Ishikawa cells.

Liu X(1), Zhu G, Zhong G.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College of
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.
xuemeiliu02@yahoo.com.cn

HOXA10 gene plays an essential role in differentiation of the endometrium and in 
human reproduction. The aim of this study was to investigate the regulatory
effect of sex steroids and HB-EGF on HOXA10 gene in Ishikawa cells. Ishikawa
cells were incubated with 17-beta estradiol (10(-8) mol/L), medroxyprogesterone
acetate (MPA) (10(-6) mol/L), RU486 (10(-5) mol/L) or HB-EGF (10 ng/mL) for 48 h 
respectively. The expression of HOXA10 gene was detected by immunofluorescence,
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Western blotting.
Our results showed that either estrogen alone, progestin alone or progestin
combined with estrogen could significantly increase the expression of HOXA10 gene
48 h after the treatment (P<0.05). But estrogen combined with progestin and RU486
could inhibit the up-regulation by estrogen and progestin. HB-EGF could elevate
the expression of HOXA10 gene 48 h after the treatment (P<0.05). It is concluded 
that both estrogen and progestin can up-regulate the expression of HOXA10 gene in
Ishikawa cells, but RU486 can inhibit the effect and HB-EGF can elevate the
expression level of HOXA10 gene.

PMID: 17828513  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


291. PLoS One. 2007 Aug 22;2(8):e768.

Candidate genes for expansion and transformation of hematopoietic stem cells by
NUP98-HOX fusion genes.

Palmqvist L(1), Pineault N, Wasslavik C, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

BACKGROUND: Hox genes are implicated in hematopoietic stem cell (HSC) regulation 
as well as in leukemia development through translocation with the nucleoporin
gene NUP98. Interestingly, an engineered NUP98-HOXA10 (NA10) fusion can induce a 
several hundred-fold expansion of HSCs in vitro and NA10 and the AML-associated
fusion gene NUP98-HOXD13 (ND13) have a virtually indistinguishable ability to
transform myeloid progenitor cells in vitro and to induce leukemia in
collaboration with MEIS1 in vivo.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: These findings provided a potentially powerful
approach to identify key pathways mediating Hox-induced expansion and
transformation of HSCs by identifying gene expression changes commonly induced by
ND13 and NA10 but not by a NUP98-Hox fusion with a non-DNA binding homedomain
mutation (N51S). The gene expression repertoire of purified murine bone marrow
Sca-1+Lin- cells transduced with retroviral vectors encoding for these genes was 
established using the Affymetrix GeneChip MOE430A. Approximately seventy genes
were differentially expressed in ND13 and NA10 cells that were significantly
changed by both compared to the ND13(N51S) mutant. Intriguingly, several of these
potential Hox target genes have been implicated in HSC expansion and
self-renewal, including the tyrosine kinase receptor Flt3, the prion protein,
Prnp, hepatic leukemia factor, Hlf and Jagged-2, Jag2. Consistent with these
results, FLT3, HLF and JAG2 expression correlated with HOX A cluster gene
expression in human leukemia samples.
CONCLUSIONS: In conclusion this study has identified several novel Hox downstream
target genes and provides important new leads to key regulators of the expansion 
and transformation of hematopoietic stem cells by Hox.

PMCID: PMC1942085
PMID: 17712416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


292. Reproduction. 2007 Sep;134(3):513-23.

Regulation of homeobox A10 expression in the primate endometrium by progesterone 
and embryonic stimuli.

Godbole GB(1), Modi DN, Puri CP.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute for Research in Reproductive Health, Indian Council of
Medical Research, JM Street, Parel, Mumbai 400012, India.

Homeobox A10 (HOXA10), a member of abdominal B subclass of homeobox genes, is
responsible for uterine homeosis during development. Intriguingly, in the adult
murine uterus, HOXA10 has been demonstrated to play important roles in
receptivity, embryo implantation, and decidualization. However, the roles of
HOXA10 in the primate endometrium are not known. To gain insights into the roles 
of HOXA10 in the primate endometrium, its expression was studied in the
endometria of bonnet monkey (Macaca radiata) in the receptive phase and also in
the endometria of monkeys treated with antiprogestin onapristone (ZK98.299) or in
conception cycle where the presence of preimplantation stage blastocyst was
verified. In addition, the mRNA expression of HOXA11 and insulin-like growth
factor-binding protein 1 (IGFBP1) was evaluated by real-time PCR in these
animals.The results revealed that HOXA10 in the luteal phase primate endometrium 
is differentially expressed in the functionalis and the basalis zones, which is
modulated in vivo by progesterone and also by the signals from the incoming
embryo suggesting the involvement of HOXA10 in the process of establishment of
pregnancy in primates. In addition, the results also demonstrated that the
expression of IGFBP1 but not HOXA11 is coregulated with HOXA10 in the endometria 
of these animals. The pattern of changes in the expression of HOXA10 in response 
to the two stimuli suggests that endometrial receptivity and implantation not
only requires a synchrony of maternal and embryonic signaling on endometrial
cells in the primates but there also exists a controlled differential response
among the cells of various uterine compartments.

PMID: 17709569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


293. Hinyokika Kiyo. 2007 Jul;53(7):505-8.

[Molecular and anatomical studies of testicular descent].

[Article in Japanese]

Shono T(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Kitakyushu Municipal Hospital.

The mechanism of testicular descent is multifactorial, and the process is known
to occur in two steps accompanied by different anatomies and hormonal regulation.
In the first step, the testis descends from the lower pole of the kidney to the
pelvic cavity near the bladder neck as a result of the swelling reaction of the
gubernaculum. Next, in the second step, the testis descends into the scrotum
through the inguinal canal via the gubernacular migration. The first step is
androgen-independent, whereas the second step depends on the androgen action.
Recently, several molecular studies on testicular descent have been reported.
Several factors, such as androgen, calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP),
epidermal growth factor (EGF), Hoxa-10 and insulin-like factor 3 (INSL3) have
been suggested to be possible regulators of testicular descent. Because
cryptorchidism has been frequently shown in androgen-insensitive human and mice
(TFM-mice), androgen has been thought to play an important role in testicular
descent. CGRP, which is released from the genitofemoral nerve, has been suggested
to mediate the inguinoscrotal testicular descent. The epidermal growth factor
(EGF) may promote both testosterone-induced wollfian duct differentiation and
testicular descent by activating the androgen responsive systems. In male mice, a
targeted disruption of the HOXA 10 gene causes cryptorchidism and the cryptorchid
testes in these mutant mice are located in the lower abdominal cavity, whereas
the cryptorchid testes in male mice lacking the INSL3 gene or its receptor Lgr8
were located in the abdominal cavity high. Recently, estrogens or environmental
endocrine disruptors have also been suspected to induce a down-regulated INSL3
expression and thus disturb testicular descent.

PMID: 17702188  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


294. DNA Cell Biol. 2007 Aug;26(8):577-87.

Transcription factors GATA-1 and Fli-1 regulate human HOXA10 expression in
megakaryocytic cells.

Gosiengfiao Y(1), Horvat R, Thompson A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology-Oncology-Stem Cell Transplantation, Department of
Pediatrics, Children's Memorial Hospital, Feinberg School of Medicine of
Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60614, USA.

HOXA10 is a member of the HOX family of regulatory genes that are involved in
hematopoiesis. Its role in megakaryopoiesis has been suggested by its expression 
in immature megakaryocytes and by the proliferation of megakaryocyte-primitive
blast colonies upon HOXA10 overexpression. We sought to understand the role of
HOXA10 in megakaryopoiesis better, by investigating its transcriptional
regulation. Analysis of the 5' untranslated region and transfection of
promoter/plasmids into human tissue culture cell lines identified
transcriptionally active sequences that contain GATA-1 and Ets-1 sites and a
putative binding site for its neighboring gene, HOXA11. Gel shift assays
confirmed protein-DNA interactions at these sites. Mutation of the GATA-1 and the
Ets-1 motifs amplified the expression of HOXA10 in HEL and K562 cells, confirming
the importance of these cis-acting elements in regulating HOXA10 expression in
megakaryocytic cells. Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and chloramphenicol
acetyl transferase (CAT) assays confirm that HOXA11 binds to the putative binding
site, resulting in repression of HOXA10 expression. These data taken together
give insight into the regulation of HOXA10 expression in megakaryocytic
differentiation.

PMID: 17688409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


295. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;10(4):365-7.

[Expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Gu ZD(1), Chen XM, Zhang W, Gu J, Chen KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 
Cancer Hospital, Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing 100036, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify whether HOX genes can be used as markers of esophageal
cancer.
METHODS: The expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines was
examined. Specific primers were designed and RT- PCR was performed for each HOX
gene members in above esophageal cancer cell lines, EC109 and CAES.
RESULTS: Fifteen out of 39 HOX genes were expressed in esophageal cancer cell
lines. They were HOXA2, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXA13, HOXB7, HOXB9, HOXC4, HOXC5,
HOXC6, HOXC8, HOXC9, HOXD9, HOXD10, and HOXD13 respectively. Of them. Eleven
genes were overlapped with the ones detected in human esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma(ESCC) in our former study.
CONCLUSION: This study reconfirms our former that some HOX genes are deregulated 
expressed in ESCC, which provides more positive evidence for their roles in ESCC.

PMID: 17659465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


296. Leukemia. 2007 Sep;21(9):2000-9. Epub 2007 Jun 28.

Pediatric acute myeloid leukemia with NPM1 mutations is characterized by a gene
expression profile with dysregulated HOX gene expression distinct from
MLL-rearranged leukemias.

Mullighan CG(1), Kennedy A, Zhou X, Radtke I, Phillips LA, Shurtleff SA, Downing 
JR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, St Jude Children's Research Hospital, Memphis, TN,
USA.

Comment in
    Leukemia. 2007 Sep;21(9):1849-50.

Somatic mutations in nucleophosmin (NPM1) occur in approximately 35% of adult
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). To assess the frequency of NPM1 mutations in
pediatric AML, we sequenced NPM1 in the diagnostic blasts from 93 pediatric AML
patients. Six cases harbored NPM1 mutations, with each case lacking common
cytogenetic abnormalities. To explore the phenotype of the AMLs with NPM1
mutations, gene expression profiles were obtained using Affymetrix U133A
microarrays. NPM1 mutations were associated with increased expression of multiple
homeobox genes including HOXA9, A10, B2, B6 and MEIS1. As dysregulated homeobox
gene expression is also a feature of MLL-rearranged leukemia, the gene expression
signatures of NPM1-mutated and MLL-rearranged leukemias were compared.
Significant differences were identified between these leukemia subtypes including
the expression of different HOX genes, with NPM1-mutated AML showing higher
levels of expression of HOXB2, B3, B6 and D4. These results confirm recent
reports of perturbed HOX expression in NPM1-mutated adult AML, and provide the
first evidence that the NPM1-mutated signature is distinct from MLL-rearranged
AML. These findings suggest that mutated NPM1 leads to dysregulated HOX
expression via a different mechanism than MLL rearrangement.

PMID: 17597811  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


297. Nat Cell Biol. 2007 Jul;9(7):804-12. Epub 2007 Jun 24.

NUP98-NSD1 links H3K36 methylation to Hox-A gene activation and leukaemogenesis.

Wang GG(1), Cai L, Pasillas MP, Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California at San Diego, School of
Medicine, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA.

Nuclear receptor-binding SET domain protein 1 (NSD1) prototype is a family of
mammalian histone methyltransferases (NSD1, NSD2/MMSET/WHSC1, NSD3/WHSC1L1) that 
are essential in development and are mutated in human acute myeloid leukemia
(AML), overgrowth syndromes, multiple myeloma and lung cancers. In AML, the
recurring t(5;11)(q35;p15.5) translocation fuses NSD1 to nucleoporin-98 (NUP98). 
Here, we present the first characterization of the transforming properties and
molecular mechanisms of NUP98-NSD1. We demonstrate that NUP98-NSD1 induces AML in
vivo, sustains self-renewal of myeloid stem cells in vitro, and enforces
expression of the HoxA7, HoxA9, HoxA10 and Meis1 proto-oncogenes.
Mechanistically, NUP98-NSD1 binds genomic elements adjacent to HoxA7 and HoxA9,
maintains histone H3 Lys 36 (H3K36) methylation and histone acetylation, and
prevents EZH2-mediated transcriptional repression of the Hox-A locus during
differentiation. Deletion of the NUP98 FG-repeat domain, or mutations in NSD1
that inactivate the H3K36 methyltransferase activity or that prevent binding of
NUP98-NSD1 to the Hox-A locus precluded both Hox-A gene activation and myeloid
progenitor immortalization. We propose that NUP98-NSD1 prevents EZH2-mediated
repression of Hox-A locus genes by colocalizing H3K36 methylation and histone
acetylation at regulatory DNA elements. This report is the first to link
deregulated H3K36 methylation to tumorigenesis and to link NSD1 to
transcriptional regulation of the Hox-A locus.

PMID: 17589499  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


298. Exp Hematol. 2007 May;35(5):817-30.

Near-maximal expansions of hematopoietic stem cells in culture using NUP98-HOX
fusions.

Ohta H(1), Sekulovic S, Bakovic S, Eaves CJ, Pineault N, Gasparetto M, Smith C,
Sauvageau G, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, British
Columbia, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: Strategies to expand hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) ex vivo are of
key interest. The objective of this study was to resolve if ability of HOXB4,
previously documented to induce a significant expansion of HSCs in culture, may
extend to other HOX genes and also to further analyze the HOX sequence
requirements to achieve this effect.
METHODS: To investigate the ability of Nucleoporin98-Homeobox fusion genes to
stimulate HSC self-renewal, we evaluated their presence in 10- to 20-day cultures
of transduced mouse bone marrow cells. Stem cell recovery was measured by
limiting-dilution assay for long-term competitive repopulating cells (CRU Assay).
RESULTS: These experiments revealed remarkable expansions of
Nucleoporin98-Homeobox-transduced HSCs (1000-fold to 10,000-fold over input) in
contrast to the expected decline of HSCs in control cultures. Nevertheless, the
Nucleoporin98-Homeobox-expanded HSCs displayed no proliferative senescence and
retained normal lympho-myeloid differentiation activity and a controlled pool
size in vivo. Analysis of proviral integration patterns showed the cells
regenerated in vivo were highly polyclonal, indicating they had derived from a
large proportion of the initially targeted HSCs. Importantly, these effects were 
preserved when all HOX sequences flanking the homeodomain were removed, thus
defining the homeodomain as a key and independent element in the fusion.
CONCLUSION: These findings create new possibilities for investigating HSCs
biochemically and genetically and for achieving clinically significant expansion 
of human HSCs.

PMCID: PMC2774852
PMID: 17577930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


299. Fertil Steril. 2008 Feb;89(2):325-30. Epub 2007 May 7.

HOXA10 mutations in congenital absence of uterus and vagina.

Lalwani S(1), Wu HH, Reindollar RH, Gray MR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Reproductive
Endocrinology and Infertility, Tufts-New England Medical Center, Boston,
Massachusetts 02111, USA. slalwani@wihri.org

OBJECTIVE: To analyze the HOXA10 genes in CAUV patients for mutations. Congenital
absence of the uterus and vagina (CAUV) is the most extreme female reproductive
tract developmental defect known. The HOXA10 gene is expressed in the developing 
and adult uterus. Female mice with loss-of-function Hoxa10 gene mutations have
anteriorly directed homeotic transformations of the uterus. Because the HOXA10
gene is expressed in the embryonic paramesonephric (Müllerian) ducts, abnormally 
low expression by mutant HOXA10 genes might cause CAUV. This hypothesis was
tested by analyzing the HOXA10 genes in CAUV patients for mutations.
DESIGN: Case-control study.
SETTING: Academic reproductive endocrinology and infertility practice.
PATIENT(S): Blood samples were obtained from 26 patients with CAUV and 30 normal 
controls.
INTERVENTION(S): DNA samples prepared from blood leukocytes were used as
templates for polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification of DNA fragments from
the HOXA10 gene. The gene fragments were tested for DNA sequence differences
using denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): To detect DNA sequence differences between patients with
CAUV and normal controls.
RESULT(S): No DNA sequence differences were found in either patients with CAUV or
normal controls in either of the two protein-coding exons of the HOXA10 gene.
CONCLUSION(S): Because no HOXA10 gene mutations were found in 26 patients from 25
unrelated families, germ- line mutations in the HOXA10 gene are not a common
cause of CAUV.

PMID: 17482600  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


300. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 8;282(23):16846-59. Epub 2007 Apr 17.

Identification of a HoxA10 activation domain necessary for transcription of the
gene encoding beta3 integrin during myeloid differentiation.

Bei L(1), Lu Y, Bellis SL, Zhou W, Horvath E, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)Fineberg School of Medicine and the Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

Transcription of the ITGB3 gene, which encodes beta3 integrin, increases during
myeloid differentiation. alphavbeta3 integrin mediates adhesion to fibronectin or
vitronectin and regulates various aspects of the inflammatory response in mature 
phagocytes. In these studies, we found that the homeodomain transcription factor 
HoxA10 interacted with a specific ITGB3 cis element and activated transcription
of this gene during myeloid differentiation. We also found that increased
fibronectin adhesion in differentiating myeloid cells was dependent upon this
HoxA10-induced increase in beta3 integrin expression. We determined that
activation of ITGB3 transcription required a HoxA10 domain that was not identical
to the "hexapeptide" that mediates interaction of Hox and Pbx proteins. This
activation domain was also not identical to a previously identified HoxA10
repression domain that mediates interaction with transcriptional co-repressors.
Instead, this HoxA10 activation domain had homology to "PQ" protein-protein
interaction domains that have been described previously in other transcription
factors. Consistent with this, we found that the HoxA10 PQ-like domain recruited 
the CREB-binding protein (CBP) to the ITGB3 promoter. This was associated with an
increase in local histone acetylation in vivo. In immature myeloid cells, we
previously determined that HoxA10 repressed transcription of the CYBB and NCF2
genes, which encode the phagocyte oxidase proteins gp91(PHOX) and p67(PHOX),
respectively. Therefore, our studies indicated that HoxA10 either activates or
represses gene transcription at various points during myelopoiesis. Our studies
also suggested that HoxA10 is a bifunctional protein that is involved in dynamic 
regulation of multiple aspects of phagocyte phenotype and function.

PMID: 17439948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


301. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jun 1;282(22):16164-76. Epub 2007 Apr 12.

HoxA10 activates transcription of the gene encoding mitogen-activated protein
kinase phosphatase 2 (Mkp2) in myeloid cells.

Wang H(1), Lu Y, Huang W, Papoutsakis ET, Fuhrken P, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)Fineberg School of Medicine and the Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

HoxA10 is a homeodomain transcription factor that is frequently overexpressed in 
human acute myeloid leukemia. In murine bone marrow transplantation studies,
HoxA10 overexpression induces a myeloproliferative disorder with accumulation of 
mature phagocytes in the peripheral blood and tissues. Over time, differentiation
block develops in these animals, resulting in acute myeloid leukemia. In immature
myeloid cells, HoxA10 represses transcription of some genes that confer the
mature phagocyte phenotype. Therefore, overexpressed HoxA10 blocks
differentiation by repressing myeloid-specific gene transcription in
differentiating myeloid cells. In contrast, target genes involved in
myeloproliferation due to HoxA10 overexpression have not been identified. To
identify such genes, we screened a CpG island microarray with HoxA10
co-immunoprecipitating chromatin. We identified the DUSP4 gene, which encodes
mitogen-activated protein kinase phosphatase 2 (Mkp2), as a HoxA10 target gene.
We analyzed the DUSP4 5'-flank and identified two proximal-promoter cis elements 
that are activated by HoxA10. We find that DUSP4 transcription and Mkp2
expression decrease during normal myelopoiesis. However, this down-regulation is 
impaired in myeloid cells overexpressing HoxA10. In hematopoietic cells, c-Jun
N-terminal kinases (Jnk) are the preferred substrates for Mkp2. Therefore, Mkp2
inhibits apoptosis by dephosphorylating (inactivating) Jnk. Consistent with this,
HoxA10 overexpression decreases apoptosis in differentiating myeloid cells.
Therefore, our studies identify a mechanism by which overexpressed HoxA10
contributes to inappropriate cell survival during myelopoiesis.

PMID: 17430893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


302. Leukemia. 2007 May;21(5):949-55. Epub 2007 Mar 15.

Deregulation and cross talk among Sonic hedgehog, Wnt, Hox and Notch signaling in
chronic myeloid leukemia progression.

Sengupta A(1), Banerjee D, Chandra S, Banerji SK, Ghosh R, Roy R, Banerjee S.

Author information: 
(1)Structural Genomics Section and Biophysics Division, Saha Institute of Nuclear
Physics, Kolkata, West Bengal, India.

Deciphering the BCR-ABL-independent signaling exploited in chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) progression is an important aspect in cancer stem-cell biology.
CML stem-cell compartment is dynamic as it progresses to terminal blast crisis
where myeloid and lymphoid blasts fail to differentiate. We demonstrate
cross-regulation of signaling network involving Sonic hedgehog (Shh), Wnt, Notch 
and Hox for the inexorable blastic transformation of CD34(+) CML cells.
Significant upregulation in Patched1, Frizzled2, Lef1, CyclinD1, p21 (P < or
=0.0002) and downregulation of HoxA10 and HoxB4 (P< or =0.0001) transcripts in
CD34(+) cells distinguish blast crisis from chronic CML. We report Shh-dependent 
Stat3 activation orchestrates these mutually interconnected signaling pathways.
Stimulation of CD34(+) CML cells with either soluble Shh or Wnt3a did not
activate Akt or p44/42-mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathways.
Interestingly, unlike dominant negative Stat3beta, introduction of constitutive
active Stat3 in CD34(+) CML cells induces cross-regulation in gene expression.
Additionally, Shh and Wnt3a-dependent regulation of cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitors (CDKI) in CML suggests their role in the network. Taken together, our 
findings propose that deregulation in the form of hyperactive Shh and Wnt with
repressed Notch and Hox pathways involving Stat3, Gli3, beta-catenin, CyclinD1,
Hes1, HoxA10 and p21 might act synergistically to form an important hub in CML
progression.

PMID: 17361218  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


303. Mol Hum Reprod. 2007 May;13(5):323-32. Epub 2007 Mar 9.

Altered expression of HOXA10 in endometriosis: potential role in decidualization.

Kim JJ(1), Taylor HS, Lu Z, Ladhani O, Hastings JM, Jackson KS, Wu Y, Guo SW,
Fazleabas AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 
60611, USA. j-kim4@northwestern.edu

Endometriosis is a poorly understood gynaecologic disorder that is associated
with infertility. In this study, we examined the expression of HOXA10 in the
eutopic endometrium of baboons with induced endometriosis. A decrease in HOXA10
mRNA was observed after 3, 6, 12 and 16 months of disease, which reached
statistical significance at 12 and 16 months. HOXA10 protein levels were
decreased in both the epithelial and stromal cells of the endometrium.
Furthermore, expression of beta3 integrin (ITGB3), which is upregulated by
HOXA10, was decreased, whereas EMX2, a gene that is inhibited by HOXA10, was
increased. Next, methylation patterns of the HOXA10 gene were analysed in the
diseased and control animals. The F1 region on the promoter was found to be the
most significantly methylated in the endometriosis animals and this may account
for the decrease in HOXA10 expression. Finally, we demonstrate that stromal cells
from the eutopic endometrium of baboons with endometriosis expressed
significantly higher levels of insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1
(IGFBP1) mRNA than disease-free animals in response to estradiol,
medroxyprogesterone acetate and dibutyryl cAMP (H + dbcAMP). The functional role 
of HOXA10 in IGFBP1 expression was further explored using human endometrial
stromal cells (HSC). Overexpression of HOXA10 in HSC resulted in a decrease of
IGFBP1 mRNA, whereas silencing HOXA10 caused an increase of IGFBP1 mRNA, even in 
the presence of H + dbcAMP. These data demonstrate that HOXA10 negatively
influences IGFBP1 expression in decidualizing cells. Thus, the decrease in HOXA10
levels may in part be involved with the altered uterine environment associated
with endometriosis.

PMID: 17350963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


304. Mol Cell Biol. 2007 May;27(9):3337-52. Epub 2007 Feb 26.

HOXA10 controls osteoblastogenesis by directly activating bone regulatory and
phenotypic genes.

Hassan MQ(1), Tare R, Lee SH, Mandeville M, Weiner B, Montecino M, van Wijnen AJ,
Stein JL, Stein GS, Lian JB.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Cancer Center, University of Massachusetts
Medical School, Worcester, MA 01655-0106, USA.

HOXA10 is necessary for embryonic patterning of skeletal elements, but its
function in bone formation beyond this early developmental stage is unknown. Here
we show that HOXA10 contributes to osteogenic lineage determination through
activation of Runx2 and directly regulates osteoblastic phenotypic genes. In
response to bone morphogenic protein BMP2, Hoxa10 is rapidly induced and
functions to activate the Runx2 transcription factor essential for bone
formation. A functional element with the Hox core motif was characterized for the
bone-related Runx2 P1 promoter. HOXA10 also activates other osteogenic genes,
including the alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin, and bone sialoprotein genes, and
temporally associates with these target gene promoters during stages of
osteoblast differentiation prior to the recruitment of RUNX2. Exogenous
expression and small interfering RNA knockdown studies establish that HOXA10
mediates chromatin hyperacetylation and trimethyl histone K4 (H3K4) methylation
of these genes, correlating to active transcription. HOXA10 therefore contributes
to early expression of osteogenic genes through chromatin remodeling.
Importantly, HOXA10 can induce osteoblast genes in Runx2 null cells, providing
evidence for a direct role in mediating osteoblast differentiation independent of
RUNX2. We propose that HOXA10 activates RUNX2 in mesenchymal cells, contributing 
to the onset of osteogenesis, and that HOXA10 subsequently supports bone
formation by direct regulation of osteoblast phenotypic genes.

PMCID: PMC1899966
PMID: 17325044  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


305. Fertil Steril. 2007 Oct;88(4 Suppl):1021-8. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Pinopodes are present in Lif null and Hoxa10 null mice.

Quinn CE(1), Detmar J, Casper RF.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Sciences, Samuel Lunenfeld Research Institute, and
the Fran and Lawrence Bloomberg Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Mount
Sinai Hospital, University of Toronto, Institute of Medical Sciences, Toronto,
Ontario, Canada.

OBJECTIVE: To assess pinopode formation in Lif null and Hoxa10 null mice with
infertility secondary to failed implantation.
DESIGN: Controlled animal experiment.
SETTING: Animal research and laboratory facility.
ANIMAL(S): Lif null, Hoxa10 null, and ICR mice and Sprague-Dawley rats.
INTERVENTION(S): Endometrial tissue was collected during the peri-implantation
period and after ovariectomy.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Endometrial epithelial tissue was examined under
scanning-electron microscopy and assigned a score depending on the number of
pinopodes present.
RESULT(S): Pinopode scores in ICR, Lif null, and Hoxa10 null mice were comparable
throughout the peri-implantation period, rising on day 3.5 of pregnancy and
remaining elevated through to day 7.5, suggesting that pinopodes are not a good
indicator of receptivity in mice. In contrast, pinopode scores in rats clearly
demarcated the window of receptivity, appearing on day 4 of pregnancy and
declining sharply on day 6. Pinopode scores were low in E(2)-treated
ovariectomized mice, but unexpectedly, pinopode scores in vehicle-injected
ovariectomized ICR mice were markedly elevated.
CONCLUSION(S): Lif null and Hoxa10 null mice, in which implantation is impaired, 
have a similar number of pinopodes to fertile ICR mice. Pinopodes do not define a
window of implantation in mice.

PMID: 17313947  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


306. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2007 May;92(5):1920-6. Epub 2007 Feb 20.

Differential cell-specific modulation of HOXA10 by estrogen and specificity
protein 1 response elements.

Martin R(1), Taylor MB, Krikun G, Lockwood C, Akbas GE, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT
06520-8063, USA.

CONTEXT: HOX genes are highly evolutionarily conserved regulators of embryonic
development. HOXA10 also regulates differentiation of the adult reproductive
tract and mammary gland in response to sex steroids.
OBJECTIVE: We recently identified two HOXA10 estrogen response elements (EREs).
Here we demonstrate that estrogen-responsive HOXA10 expression is cell type
specific.
DESIGN AND SETTING: We conducted an in vitro study at an academic medical center.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: Reporter assay, gel shift assays (electrophoretic mobility 
shift assay), and immunohistochemistry were done.
RESULTS: The HOXA10 EREs and a specificity protein 1 (Sp1) binding site
differentially drive the cell-type-specific E2 response. In electrophoretic
mobility shift assays, both estrogen receptor-alpha and -beta bound both EREs but
not the Sp1 site. In reporter assays, both EREs and the Sp1 site demonstrated
estrogen responsiveness and tissue specificity; transiently transfected uterine
Ishikawa cells or breast MCF-7 cells showed differential responses to E2
treatment. Each response element (Sp1, ERE1, and ERE2) drove distinct
differential expression in each cell type. Sp1 protein was expressed in a
menstrual-cycle stage-specific expression pattern in endometrium, first expressed
in perivascular cells.
CONCLUSIONS: Tissue specificity inherent to a regulatory element as well as
differential cellular expression of transcription factors imparts differential
tissue-specific estrogen responsiveness.

PMID: 17311863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


307. Blood. 2007 May 1;109(9):3687-96. Epub 2007 Jan 18.

HOXA10 is a critical regulator for hematopoietic stem cells and
erythroid/megakaryocyte development.

Magnusson M(1), Brun AC, Miyake N, Larsson J, Ehinger M, Bjornsson JM, Wutz A,
Sigvardsson M, Karlsson S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Lund
University Hospital, 221 84 Lund, Sweden.

The Homeobox (Hox) transcription factors are important regulators of normal and
malignant hematopoiesis because they control proliferation, differentiation, and 
self-renewal of hematopoietic cells at different levels of the hematopoietic
hierarchy. In transgenic mice we show that the expression of HOXA10 is tightly
regulated by doxycycline. Intermediate concentrations of HOXA10 induced a 15-fold
increase in the repopulating capacity of hematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) after 13
days of in vitro culture. Notably, the proliferation induction of HSC by HOXA10
was dependent on the HOXA10 concentration, because high levels of HOXA10 had no
effect on HSC proliferation. Furthermore, high levels of HOXA10 blocked erythroid
and megakaryocyte development, demonstrating that tight regulation of HOXA10 is
critical for normal development of the erythroid and megakaryocytic lineages. The
HOXA10-mediated effects on hematopoietic cells were associated with altered
expression of genes that govern stem-cell self-renewal and lineage commitment
(eg, hepatic leukemia factor [HlF], Dickkopf-1 [Dkk-1], growth factor
independent-1 [Gfi-1], and Gata-1). Interestingly, binding sites for HOXA10 were 
found in HLF, Dkk-1, and Gata-1, and Dkk-1 and Gfi-1 were transcriptionally
activated by HOXA10. These findings reveal novel molecular pathways that act
downstream of HOXA10 and identify HOXA10 as a master regulator of postnatal
hematopoietic development.

PMID: 17234739  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


308. Blood. 2007 May 15;109(10):4450-60. Epub 2007 Jan 11.

Pharmacogenomic analysis of acute promyelocytic leukemia cells highlights CYP26
cytochrome metabolism in differential all-trans retinoic acid sensitivity.

Quere R(1), Baudet A, Cassinat B, Bertrand G, Marti J, Manchon L, Piquemal D,
Chomienne C, Commes T.

Author information: 
(1)Groupe d'Etude des Transcriptomes, Institut de génétique humaine, Unité Propre
de Recherche, Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique, Montpellier, France.

Disease relapse sometimes occurs after acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) therapy
with all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA). Among the diagnostic parameters predicting
relapse, heterogeneity in the in vitro differentiation rate of blasts is an
independent factor. To identify biologic networks involved in resistance, we
conducted pharmacogenomic studies in APL blasts displaying distinct ATRA
sensitivities. Although the expression profiles of genes invested in
differentiation were similarly modulated in low- and high-sensitive blasts,
low-sensitive cells showed higher levels of transcription of ATRA-target genes,
transcriptional regulators, chromatin remodelers, and transcription factors. In
opposition, only high-sensitive blasts expressed the CYP26A1 gene, encoding the
p450 cytochrome which is known to be involved in retinoic acid catabolism. In NB4
cells, ATRA treatment activates a novel signaling pathway, whereby interleukin-8 
stimulates the expression of the homeobox transcription factor HOXA10v2, an
effective enhancer of CYP26A1 transcription. These data were corroborated in
primary APL cells, as maturation levels correlated with CYP26A1 expression.
Treatment with a retinoic acid metabolism blocking agent (RAMBA) results in
high-nucleoplasmic concentrations of retinoid and growth of NB4-resistant
subclones. Hence, for APL blasts associated with poor prognosis, the low CYP26A1 
expression may explain high risk of resistance installation, by increased
retinoid pressure. Pharmacogenomic profiles of genes involved in retinoid acid
metabolism may help to optimize anticancer therapies, including retinoids.

PMID: 17218384  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


309. Fertil Steril. 2007 Feb;87(2):367-72. Epub 2006 Dec 14.

Salpingectomy increases peri-implantation endometrial HOXA10 expression in women 
with hydrosalpinx.

Daftary GS(1), Kayisli U, Seli E, Bukulmez O, Arici A, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8063, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine whether women with hydrosalpinx would have diminished
endometrial HOXA10 expression and whether salpingectomy would reverse HOXA10
suppression. The homeobox gene HOXA10 is a transcription factor that is necessary
for embryo implantation; its expression in human endometrium correlates with
receptivity and implantation. Increased endometrial HOXA10 expression may be one 
mechanism by which salpingectomy results in increased implantation rates in IVF.
DESIGN: Prospective clinical trial.
SETTING: Academic medical center.
PATIENT(S): Women with unilateral or bilateral hydrosalpinx.
INTERVENTION(S): Expression of HOXA10 was examined prospectively during the
midluteal phase in endometrium obtained from infertile women (n = 9) with
hydrosalpinges before and after salpingectomy, as well as from fertile controls
(n = 6). Quantitative HOXA10 mRNA expression was determined by real-time
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction, and HOXA10 protein expression
was determined by immunohistochemistry.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Expression of HOXA10 mRNA and protein.
RESULT(S): Expression of HOXA10 mRNA was significantly lower in infertile women
with hydrosalpinges, compared with the case of fertile controls. Salpingectomy
resulted in a statistically significant, 15-fold increase in endometrial HOXA10
expression. Immunohistochemical analysis confirmed the quantitative real-time
reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction findings. Increased HOXA10
expression was evident in both glandular epithelial cells and endometrial stroma.
CONCLUSION(S): HOXA10 is necessary for implantation. Here, we demonstrate
decreased HOXA10 expression in response to hydrosalpinx fluid as a potential
molecular mechanism for diminished implantation rates. Salpingectomy restores
endometrial HOXA10 expression. This may be one mechanism by which salpingectomy
results in augmented implantation rates in IVF.

PMID: 17173899  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


310. Endocrinology. 2007 Mar;148(3):1235-45. Epub 2006 Nov 30.

Posterior Hox gene expression and differential androgen regulation in the
developing and adult rat prostate lobes.

Huang L(1), Pu Y, Hepps D, Danielpour D, Prins GS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, University of Illinois at Chicago, 820 South Wood
Street, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.

Axis positioning and tissue determination during development involve coordinated 
expression of Hox genes throughout the body. The most posterior Hox gene clusters
are involved in prostate organogenesis. In the present study, we characterized
and compared the expression profiles of posterior (5') Hox genes in the separate 
lobes of the adult rat prostate gland, the coagulating gland, seminal vesicles,
and epididymis using quantitative real-time RT-PCR. These genes include Hoxa9-11,
Hoxa13, Hoxd13, and Hoxb13. We identified a unique Hox code for each of these
organs and propose that this contributes to the organ-specific and prostate
lobe-specific identities in the adult rat. Using the ventral prostate (VP) as a
model, we characterized the Hox genes expression patterns over time from birth
through adulthood. Expression levels of the three Hox13 genes and Hoxa10 were
significantly higher in the adult VP compared with the neonatal developing VP
suggesting an important role during adult homeostasis. In contrast, Hoxa9 and
Hoxa11 levels declined after morphogenesis suggesting a specific developmental
role. Overall, the Hoxb13 gene exhibited the most striking temporal and
organ-specific differences. Using in situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry,
a distinct Hoxb13 anterior-to-posterior expression gradient was observed with the
highest expression levels in the VP luminal epithelial cells, moderate levels in 
the lateral prostate, and low expression in the dorsal prostate. An expression
gradient was also observed along the ductal length in all three prostate lobes
with strongest expression at the distal tips and limited expression in the
proximal ducts. After infection with a lentivirus expressing the Hoxb13 gene,
NRP-152 cells cultured under nondifferentiating conditions exhibited robust
cytokeratin 8 immunostain indicating that Hoxb13 expression drives luminal cell
differentiation in the rat epithelium. Androgen regulation of prostatic Hox gene 
expression was examined during development in vitro and after castration in the
adult rat. In the neonatal VP, all six Hox genes were significantly up-regulated 
by androgens, whereas none of the genes were affected by testosterone in the
lateral prostate. In the adult rat, castration resulted in up-regulation of Hoxa9
and Hoxa13 in the VP and down-regulation of Hoxb13 in the dorsal prostate and
lateral prostate. Taken together, we conclude that the prostatic Hox genes reach 
a destined expression level at specific developmental time points in the prostate
gland and possess differential androgenic regulation in a temporal and
lobe-specific manner. We suggest that this timely Hox code participates in
determining lobe-specific prostatic identity and cellular differentiation.

PMCID: PMC2276874
PMID: 17138648  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


311. J Biol Chem. 2007 Jan 26;282(4):2237-49. Epub 2006 Nov 30.

Activation of SHP2 protein-tyrosine phosphatase increases HoxA10-induced
repression of the genes encoding gp91(PHOX) and p67(PHOX).

Lindsey S(1), Huang W, Wang H, Horvath E, Zhu C, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine and the Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Northwestern University, Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA.

The CYBB and NCF2 genes encode the phagocyte oxidase proteins gp91(PHOX) and
p67(PHOX), respectively. These genes are transcribed after the promyelocyte stage
of differentiation, and transcription continues until cell death. In
undifferentiated myeloid cells, homologous cis-elements in the CYBB and NCF2
genes are repressed by the homeodomain transcription factor HoxA10. During
cytokine-induced myelopoiesis, tyrosine phosphorylation of HoxA10 decreases
binding affinity for the CYBB and NCF2 cis-elements. This abrogates
HoxA10-induced transcriptional repression as differentiation proceeds. Therefore,
mechanisms involved in differentiation stage-specific HoxA10 tyrosine
phosphorylation are of interest because HoxA10 phosphorylation modulates
myeloid-specific gene transcription. In this study, we found that HoxA10 is a
substrate for SHP2 protein-tyrosine phosphatase in undifferentiated myeloid
cells. In contrast, HoxA10 is a substrate for a constitutively active mutant form
of SHP2 in both undifferentiated and differentiating myeloid cells. Expression of
such SHP2 mutants results in persistent HoxA10 repression of CYBB and NCF2
transcription during myelopoiesis. Both HoxA10 overexpression and activating SHP2
mutations have been described in human myeloid malignancies. Therefore, our
results suggest that these mutations could cooperate, leading to decreased
myeloid-specific gene transcription and functional differentiation block in
myeloid cells with both defects.

PMID: 17138561  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


312. FASEB J. 2007 Jan;21(1):239-46. Epub 2006 Nov 8.

Xenoestrogen exposure imprints expression of genes (Hoxa10) required for normal
uterine development.

Smith CC(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Epidemiology and Public Health, Yale University, New Haven, CT, 
USA.

The developing reproductive tract is sensitive to endocrine perturbation.
Bisphenol A (BPA), a xenoestrogen, is a common component of food storage plastics
and dental composites. We tested the ability of BPA to alter expression of
HOXA10, a gene necessary for uterine development. A dose-response increase in
HOXA10 mRNA expression was demonstrated in Ishikawa cells treated with 0.1 nM to 
25 microM BPA. To determine whether in utero BPA exposure resulted in a lasting
alteration of uterine HOXA10 expression, mice were treated with 0.5-5.0 mg/kg BPA
on gestational days 9-16. A dose-responsive increase was seen in stromal cell
HOXA10 expression in 2- and 6-week-old mice exposed in utero. To discern the
mechanism of BPA action, the HOXA10 estrogen response element (ERE) and
autoregulatory element (ARE) were tested for BPA responsiveness. BPA drove
luciferase expression from HOXA10-ERE and ARE reporter constructs. HOXA10 ERE
mediated induction was blocked by ER antagonist ICI, while HOXA10 ARE induction
was blocked by either ICI or HOXA10 antisense. BPA affects HOXA10 expression
through the HOXA10 ERE and indirectly through the ARE. BPA initially alters
HOXA10 expression through the ERE, however, the response is imprinted and
uncoupled from estrogen stimulation in the adult. Several xenoestrogens alter HOX
gene expression, indicating that HOX genes are a common target of endocrine
disruption. In utero exposure to a xenoestrogen produces reproductive tract
alterations by imprinting essential developmental regulatory genes.

PMID: 17093138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


313. Leukemia. 2007 Jan;21(1):121-8. Epub 2006 Oct 12.

Clinical, cytogenetic and molecular characteristics of 14 T-ALL patients carrying
the TCRbeta-HOXA rearrangement: a study of the Groupe Francophone de
Cytogénétique Hématologique.

Cauwelier B(1), Cavé H, Gervais C, Lessard M, Barin C, Perot C, Van den Akker J, 
Mugneret F, Charrin C, Pagès MP, Grégoire MJ, Jonveaux P, Lafage-Pochitaloff M,
Mozzicconacci MJ, Terré C, Luquet I, Cornillet-Lefebvre P, Laurence B, Plessis G,
Lefebvre C, Leroux D, Antoine-Poirel H, Graux C, Mauvieux L, Heimann P, Chalas C,
Clappier E, Verhasselt B, Benoit Y, Moerloose BD, Poppe B, Van Roy N,
Keersmaecker KD, Cools J, Sigaux F, Soulier J, Hagemeijer A, Paepe AD, Dastugue
N, Berger R, Speleman F.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Recently, we and others described a new chromosomal rearrangement, that is,
inv(7)(p15q34) and t(7;7)(p15;q34) involving the T-cell receptor beta (TCRbeta)
(7q34) and the HOXA gene locus (7p15) in 5% of T-cell acute lymphoblastic
leukemia (T-ALL) patients leading to transcriptional activation of especially
HOXA10. To further address the clinical, immunophenotypical and molecular genetic
findings of this chromosomal aberration, we studied 330 additional T-ALLs. This
revealed TCRbeta-HOXA rearrangements in five additional patients, which brings
the total to 14 cases in 424 patients (3.3%). Real-time quantitative PCR analysis
for HOXA10 gene expression was performed in 170 T-ALL patients and detected
HOXA10 overexpression in 25.2% of cases including all the cases with a
TCRbeta-HOXA rearrangement (8.2%). In contrast, expression of the short HOXA10
transcript, HOXA10b, was almost exclusively found in the TCRbeta-HOXA rearranged 
cases, suggesting a specific role for the HOXA10b short transcript in
TCRbeta-HOXA-mediated oncogenesis. Other molecular and/or cytogenetic aberrations
frequently found in subtypes of T-ALL (SIL-TAL1, CALM-AF10, HOX11, HOX11L2) were 
not detected in the TCRbeta-HOXA rearranged cases except for deletion 9p21 and
NOTCH1 activating mutations, which were present in 64 and 67%, respectively. In
conclusion, this study defines TCRbeta-HOXA rearranged T-ALLs as a distinct
cytogenetic subgroup by clinical, immunophenotypical and molecular genetic
characteristics.

PMID: 17039236  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


314. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2007 Feb;292(2):E435-42. Epub 2006 Sep 19.

Regulation of HOXA10 expression by phytoestrogens.

Akbas GE(1), Fei X, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

HOXA10 is necessary for normal development of the Müllerian duct, and continued
adult expression in the uterus is necessary for female fertility. HOXA10
expression is altered by diethylstilbestrol, leading to uterine anomalies. Other 
endocrine disruptors may potentially lead to reproductive anomalies or
dysfunction by altering HOXA10 expression. Here we investigated the effect of
isoflavones on HOXA10 expression after in utero or adult exposure in the mouse.
Genistein, but not diadzein, regulated HOXA10 mRNA and protein expression in the 
adult mouse uterus. In contrast, in utero genistein or diadzein exposure had no
lasting effect on HOXA10 expression in the exposed offspring. Reporter gene
expression driven by the HOXA10 estrogen response element was increased in a
dose-responsive manner by genistein, but not daidzein. Neither estrogen
receptor-alpha nor estrogen receptor-beta binding to the HOXA10 estrogen response
element was affected by genistein or daidzein. In utero exposure to isoflavones
is unlikely to result in HOXA10-mediated developmental anomalies. Adult genistein
exposure alters uterine HOXA10 expression, a potential mechanism by which this
agent affects fertility.

PMID: 16985261  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


315. J Clin Invest. 2006 Oct;116(10):2707-16. Epub 2006 Sep 14.

Mll partial tandem duplication induces aberrant Hox expression in vivo via
specific epigenetic alterations.

Dorrance AM(1), Liu S, Yuan W, Becknell B, Arnoczky KJ, Guimond M, Strout MP,
Feng L, Nakamura T, Yu L, Rush LJ, Weinstein M, Leone G, Wu L, Ferketich A,
Whitman SP, Marcucci G, Caligiuri MA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Hematology and Oncology, The Ohio
State University, Columbus, Ohio 43220, USA.

We previously identified a rearrangement of mixed-lineage leukemia (MLL) gene
(also known as ALL-1, HRX, and HTRX1), consisting of an in-frame partial tandem
duplication (PTD) of exons 5 through 11 in the absence of a partner gene,
occurring in approximately 4%-7% of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML)
and normal cytogenetics, and associated with a poor prognosis. The mechanism by
which the MLL PTD contributes to aberrant hematopoiesis and/or leukemia is
unknown. To examine this, we generated a mouse knockin model in which exons 5
through 11 of the murine Mll gene were targeted to intron 4 of the endogenous Mll
locus. Mll(PTD/WT) mice exhibit an alteration in the boundaries of normal
homeobox (Hox) gene expression during embryogenesis, resulting in axial skeletal 
defects and increased numbers of hematopoietic progenitor cells. Mll(PTD/WT) mice
overexpress Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and Hoxa10 in spleen, BM, and blood. An increase in
histone H3/H4 acetylation and histone H3 lysine 4 (Lys4) methylation within the
Hoxa7 and Hoxa9 promoters provides an epigenetic mechanism by which this
overexpression occurs in vivo and an etiologic role for MLL PTD gain of function 
in the genesis of AML.

PMCID: PMC1564428
PMID: 16981007  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


316. Blood. 2006 Aug 1;108(3):1030-6.

The Flt3 receptor tyrosine kinase collaborates with NUP98-HOX fusions in acute
myeloid leukemia.

Palmqvist L(1), Argiropoulos B, Pineault N, Abramovich C, Sly LM, Krystal G, Wan 
A, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, 11th Floor, 675 West
10th Ave, Vancouver, BC, Canada V5Z 1L3.

In leukemogenesis, several genetic changes conferring a proliferative and/or
survival advantage to hematopoietic progenitor cells in addition to a block in
differentiation are required. Here, we demonstrate that overexpression of the
wild-type (wt) Flt3 receptor tyrosine kinase collaborates with NUP98-HOX fusions 
(NUP98-HOXA10 and NUP98-HOXD13) to induce aggressive acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). We used a mouse transplantation model to show their synergism in
cotransduced bone marrow cells as well as in a cellular model of leukemic
progression. Furthermore, our data support the finding that Meis1 overexpression 
leads to marked elevation in Flt3 transcription and extend it to the context of
NUP98-HOX-induced leukemia. Together, these results support a multistep model
where the synergism between NUP98-HOX and wt-Flt3 is the result of the ability of
Flt3 to increase proliferation of myeloid progenitors blocked in differentiation 
by NUP98-HOX fusions and reveal a direct role for wt-Flt3 in the pathobiology of 
AML. Given the similarities in the leukemogenic role of native HOX and
NUP98-fused HOX genes, our results underscore the clinical significance of the
recurrent co-overexpression of wt-FLT3 and HOX in human leukemia and suggest that
specific FLT3 inhibitors could be useful in treatment of HOX-induced AML or acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL).

PMID: 16861351  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


317. Cancer Res. 2006 Jul 15;66(14):6947-54.

Gene expression profiling of acute myeloid leukemia with translocation
t(8;16)(p11;p13) and MYST3-CREBBP rearrangement reveals a distinctive signature
with a specific pattern of HOX gene expression.

Camós M(1), Esteve J, Jares P, Colomer D, Rozman M, Villamor N, Costa D, Carrió
A, Nomdedéu J, Montserrat E, Campo E.

Author information: 
(1)Hematopathology Unit, Hematology Department, Hospital Clínic, IDIBAPS,
University of Barcelona, Spain.

Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) with translocation t(8;16)(p11;p13) is an infrequent
leukemia subtype with characteristic clinicobiological features. This
translocation leads to fusion of MYST3 (MOZ) and CREBBP (CBP) genes, probably
resulting in a disturbed transcriptional program of a myelomonocytic precursor.
Nonetheless, its gene expression profile is unknown. We have analyzed the gene
expression profile of 23 AML patients, including three with molecularly confirmed
MYST3-CREBBP fusion gene, using oligonucleotide U133A arrays (Affymetrix).
MYST3-CREBBP cases clustered together and clearly differentiated from samples
with PML-RARalpha, RUNX1-RUNX1T1, and CBFbeta-MYH11 rearrangements. The relative 
expression of 46 genes, selected according to their differential expression in
the high-density array study, was analyzed by low-density arrays in an additional
series of 40 patients, which included 7 MYST3-CREBBP AML cases. Thus, genes such 
as prolactin (PRL) and proto-oncogene RET were confirmed to be specifically
overexpressed in MYST3-CREBBP samples whereas genes such as CCND2, STAT5A, and
STAT5B were differentially underexpressed in this AML category. Interestingly,
MYST3-CREBBP AML exhibited a characteristic pattern of HOX expression, with
up-regulation of HOXA9, HOXA10, and cofactor MEIS1 and marked down-regulation of 
other homeobox genes. This profile, with overexpression of FLT3, HOXA9, MEIS1,
AKR7A2, CHD3, and APBA2, partially resembles that of AML with MLL rearrangement. 
In summary, this study shows the distinctive gene expression profile of
MYST3-CREBBP AML, with overexpression of RET and PRL and a specific pattern of
HOX gene expression.

PMID: 16849538  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


318. Fertil Steril. 2006 Aug;86(2):352-61. Epub 2006 Jul 7.

Histological and immunohistochemical evaluation of postmenopausal endometrium
after 3 weeks of treatment with tibolone, estrogen only, or estrogen plus
progestagen.

Klaassens AH(1), van Wijk FH, Hanifi-Moghaddam P, Sijmons B, Ewing PC, Ten
Kate-Booij MJ, Kooi GS, Kloosterboer HJ, Blok LJ, Burger CW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Erasmus University Medical Center,
Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate histological and immunohistochemical parameters of
short-term (21 days) tibolone, estrogen-only, and estrogen+progestagen treatment 
in the human postmenopausal endometrium.
DESIGN: An observational, open, nonrandomized, controlled study.
SETTING: Three collaborating centers: Amphia Hospital in Breda, Albert Schweitzer
Hospital in Dordrecht, Erasmus Medical Center in Rotterdam, the Netherlands.
PATIENT(S): Thirty healthy, postmenopausal women.
INTERVENTION(S): Control group (n = 9), no hormonal treatment; tibolone group (n 
= 8), patients were treated with 2.5 mg of tibolone (administered orally) every
day, starting 21 days before surgery; estrogen group (n = 7), patients were
treated with 2 mg of E(2) (Zumenon, administered orally; Zambon, Amerfoort; The
Netherlands) every day, starting 21 days before surgery; estrogen+progestagen
group (n = 6), patients were treated with 2 mg of E(2) (Zumenon, administered
orally) and 5 mg of medroxyprogesterone acetate (administered orally) every day, 
starting 21 days before surgery.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Uterine tissues were collected, and two pathologists
independently assessed histology. Immunohistochemical parameters measured were
estrogen receptor alpha, progesterone receptor A/B, Hoxa10, Ki67, and Bcl-2.
RESULT(S): On the basis of a number of histological and immunohistochemical
parameters measured after 21 days of treatment, it was observed that tibolone
displays clearly less stimulation (proliferation) of the human postmenopausal
endometrium than estrogen at the beginning of a treatment, but the stimulation is
higher than with estrogen+progestagen.
CONCLUSION(S): Short-term (21 days) tibolone treatment results in a small
stimulation of proliferation of the endometrium, and because long-term treatment 
with tibolone has been demonstrated to lead to an atrophic endometrium, it may be
concluded that the stimulatory effect, as observed in this study, is transient in
nature. It is hypothesized that tibolone first displays a more estrogenic mode of
action, which over time, is counterbalanced by the induction of its progestagenic
properties.

PMID: 16828477  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


319. J Urol. 2006 Jul;176(1):399-404.

Over expression of insulin-like 3 does not prevent cryptorchidism in GNRHR or
HOXA10 deficient mice.

Feng S(1), Bogatcheva NV, Truong A, Engel W, Adham IM, Agoulnik AI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Baylor College of Medicine, 6550
Fannin Street, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

PURPOSE: Insulin-like 3 hormone is critical for the induction of growth and
differentiation of gubernacular ligaments during embryonic testicular descent.
Mice with mutation of insulin-like 3 or its receptor show high intra-abdominal
cryptorchidism. We tested whether transgenic over expression of Insl3 can reverse
inguinoscrotal cryptorchidism in mice deficient in Gnrhr or Hoxa10 genes.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Hoxa10 and Gnrhr deficient mice were intercrossed with
Insl3 transgenic mice. The phenotype of the mutant mice and expression of the
genes involved in testicular descent were analyzed. Using quantitative reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction we evaluated expression of the genes in
neonatal gubernacular cells on INSL3 (Phoenix Pharmaceuticals, Belmont,
California) and testosterone stimulation.
RESULTS: Transgenic over expression of Insl3 failed to restore normal testicular 
descent in Hoxa10 or Gnrhr deficient males. Histological evaluation did not
reveal any differences in Insl3 transgenic gubernacula in either mutant. In
mutant females Insl3 over expression resulted in transabdominal descent of the
ovaries to the low abdominal position with the subsequent development of inguinal
hernia. Expression of androgen receptor, insulin-like 3 receptor and Hoxa10 was
not affected after incubation of neonatal gubernacular cells with insulin-like 3 
or androgen.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that insulin-like 3 is sufficient to direct the 
first transabdominal phase of testicular descent in the absence of
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis signaling or Hoxa10 but their presence is
important for inguinoscrotal testicular descent.

PMID: 16753450  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


320. Am J Physiol Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Oct;291(4):E761-70. Epub 2006 May 23.

Recombinant human follicle-stimulating hormone alters maternal ovarian hormone
concentrations and the uterus and perturbs fetal development in mice.

Kelley RL(1), Kind KL, Lane M, Robker RL, Thompson JG, Edwards LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Research Centre for Reproductive Health, Discipline of Obstetrics &
Gynaecology, School of Paediatrics and Reproductive Health, University of
Adelaide, South Australia, Australia. rebecca.kelley@adelaide.edu.au

Gonadotropins are routinely administered to produce multiple oocytes for clinical
in vitro fertilization (IVF) treatment, laboratory research, and livestock
industries. Studies in mice have shown gonadotropin stimulation using equine
chorionic gonadotropin (eCG) affects the endometrium, implantation, and fetal
development. Evidence from clinical studies also indicates that stimulation with 
recombinant human follicle-stimulating hormone (rhFSH) may be detrimental to the 
endometrium and implantation rates. We investigated the effect of rhFSH in mice
on maternal plasma hormone concentrations and uterine gene and protein expression
and the effect of a stimulated maternal environment on pregnancy. Adult females
were stimulated with rhFSH or eCG, followed by human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG). On day 4 of pseudopregnancy, mice either had embryos transferred to the
uterus or were killed, and blood and uterine samples were collected. Pregnancy
outcomes were examined on day 15. Gonadotropin stimulation increased plasma
progesterone concentrations on day 4 compared with controls, whereas estradiol
concentrations were unaffected. Stimulation also reduced uterine leukemia
inhibitory factor (Lif) mRNA, but the expression of estrogen and progesterone
receptors (Esr1 and Pgr), homeobox gene Hoxa10, and Vegf mRNA were unchanged.
Furthermore, distribution of uterine PGR protein expression was altered by
stimulation, but LIF protein was unchanged. Stimulated embryo transfer recipients
had lower pregnancy rates than controls, and fetuses from the rhFSH group had
reduced weight, length, and maturity. These results demonstrate that gonadotropin
stimulation with rhFSH or eCG alters the preimplantation maternal environment,
which results in reduced pregnancy rates and fetal development in the mouse.

PMID: 16720629  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


321. Fertil Steril. 2006 May;85(5):1386-90.

HOXA10 expression in ectopic endometrial tissue.

Browne H(1), Taylor H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To evaluate HOXA10 expression in endometriosis.
DESIGN: Laboratory study using human tissue.
SETTING: Academic research center.
PATIENT(S): Eutopic endometrial tissue was collected from 20 fertile women
without endometriosis. Ectopic endometrial tissues from pelvic peritoneum, ovary,
and lung parenchyma were collected from 20 women undergoing surgery for
endometriosis.
INTERVENTION(S): HOXA10 protein expression and localization with
immunohistochemistry.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Quantitative analysis of HOXA10 expression, according to
H score.
RESULT(S): Both eutopic and ectopic endometrial tissue expressed HOXA10. Ectopic 
endometrial tissue had lower stromal HOXA10 expression compared with eutopic
endometrium. The mean H score for stromal expression of HOXA10 was 7.6 in eutopic
endometrium and 1.3 in ectopic endometrial tissue. Glandular epithelium from both
eutopic and ectopic endometrium had similarly low HOXA10 expression. HOXA10 was
also expressed at low levels in lung parenchyma containing endometriosis and in
ovarian endometriomas.
CONCLUSION(S): HOXA10 is expressed in endometriosis at locations outside of the
normal HOXA10 expression domain, where it is likely necessary to impart
endometrial developmental identity on endometriosis. HOXA10 might be necessary
for "de novo" endometrial development. However, the diminished expression of
HOXA10 in ectopic endometrium might not allow for normal endometrial development 
and might contribute to the pathogenesis of endometriosis by creating P
resistance.

PMID: 16647375  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


322. Endocr Rev. 2006 Jun;27(4):331-55. Epub 2006 Apr 21.

Endocrine regulation of HOX genes.

Daftary GS(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology, Yale University School of Medicine,
333 Cedar Street, P.O. Box 208063, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8063, USA.

Hox genes have a well-characterized role in embryonic development, where they
determine identity along the anteroposterior body axis. Hox genes are expressed
not only during embryogenesis but also in the adult, where they are necessary for
functional differentiation. Despite the known function of these genes as
transcription factors, few regulatory mechanisms that drive Hox expression are
known. Recently, several hormones and their cognate receptors have been shown to 
regulate Hox gene expression and thereby mediate development in the embryo as
well as functional differentiation in the adult organism. Estradiol,
progesterone, testosterone, retinoic acid, and vitamin D have been shown to
regulate Hox gene expression. In the embryo, the endocrine system directs axial
Hox gene expression; aberrant Hox gene expression due to exposure to endocrine
disruptors contributes to the teratogenicity of these compounds. In the adult,
endocrine regulation of Hox genes is necessary to enable such diverse functions
as hematopoiesis and reproduction; endocrinopathies can result in dysregulated
HOX gene expression affecting physiology. By regulating HOX genes, hormonal
signals utilize a conserved mechanism that allows generation of structural and
functional diversity in both developing and adult tissues. This review discusses 
endocrine Hox regulation and its impact on physiology and human pathology.

PMID: 16632680  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


323. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 May;12(5):283-9. Epub 2006 Apr 5.

cDNA cloning and expression of the human NOBOX gene in oocytes and ovarian
follicles.

Huntriss J(1), Hinkins M, Picton HM.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction and Early Development Research Group, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. j.huntriss@leeds.ac.uk

Nobox is a homeobox gene that is preferentially expressed in the oocytes and is
essential for folliculogenesis and the regulation of oocyte-specific gene
expression in the mouse. The likely human homologue has been identified in silico
but has not as yet been confirmed experimentally. Here, we present the first cDNA
cloning and transcript expression analysis of the human NOBOX gene. Using RT-PCR,
we reveal that expression within adult human tissues is limited to the ovary,
testis and pancreas. Expression within the ovary is oocyte specific, with
expression observed from the primordial stage ovarian follicle through to the
metaphase II (MII) oocyte. In complementary studies, we reveal dynamic expression
profiles of 14 additional homeobox genes throughout human oogenesis and early
development. The expression of HOXA10 is restricted to primordial and early
primary follicles. HOXB7 is expressed from primordial and early primary stage
follicles through to germinal vesicle (GV) oocytes. Gastrulation brain homeobox 1
(GBX1) and HOXA7 genes are homeobox markers preferentially expressed by GV
oocytes. HOXA1 and HEX are homeobox markers preferentially expressed by MII
oocytes. In summary, the homeobox gene transcripts that are detected in ovarian
follicles and oocytes are distinct from those expressed in human blastocysts
(HOXB4, CDX2 and HOXC9) and granulosa cells (HOXC9, HOXC8, HOXC6, HOXA7, HOXA5
and HOXA4).

PMID: 16597639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


324. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2006 Apr;194(4):1100-7; discussion 1107-9.

An autoregulatory element maintains HOXA10 expression in endometrial epithelial
cells.

Kelly M(1), Daftary G, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of
Medicine, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

OBJECTIVE: HOXA10 is necessary for endometrial receptivity and regulated by sex
steroids. Secretory phase HOXA10 expression increases in endometrial epithelial
cells, despite the loss of progesterone receptor. Stromal-epithelial molecular
communication likely transmits progesterone signaling from progesterone receptor 
containing stromal cells to epithelium. Here we investigated an alternative
hypothesis, persistent HOXA10 expression by autoregulation.
STUDY DESIGN: Nested segments of the HOXA10 5' regulatory region were cloned into
a pGL3-Luciferase reporter construct and tested for HOXA10-induced reporter
activity. Direct binding was assayed by electrophoretic mobility shift assay.
RESULTS: One 370 base pair element drove reporter gene expression specifically in
response to HOXA10 in Ishikawa cells but not in BT-20 cells. This element
contained a site that bound HOXA10 protein.
CONCLUSION: HOXA10 expression is driven by an autoregulatory element in the 5'
regulatory region of the gene. Autoregulation is a novel alternative molecular
mechanism by which steroid-induced gene expression can be maintained in the
absence of steroid receptors.

PMID: 16580301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


325. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2006 Jun;91(6):2366-72. Epub 2006 Mar 21.

Thrombin and interleukin-1beta regulate HOXA10 expression in human term decidual 
cells: implications for preterm labor.

Sarno JL(1), Schatz F, Lockwood CJ, Huang ST, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Fertility, Department of
Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of
Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

CONTEXT: Preterm delivery is commonly caused by intraamniotic infection with
expression of proinflammatory cytokines (IL-1beta) or by abruption resulting in
generation of decidual thrombin. Although human parturition is not preceded by
overt progesterone withdrawal, progesterone resistance likely leads to labor. The
uteri of Hoxa10(-/-) mice demonstrate progesterone resistance; several genes,
including prostaglandin receptors, are inappropriately regulated in response to
progesterone.
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that IL-1beta or thrombin would decrease HOXA10
expression, contributing to the progestin-resistant environment. We analyzed
expression of HOX genes and their regulation by IL-1beta or thrombin in decidual 
cells.
DESIGN AND SETTING: We conducted an in vitro experiment at an academic medical
center.
INTERVENTION: Term decidual cells were treated with estradiol (E(2)) or E(2) plus
medroxyprogesterone acetate followed by addition of thrombin or IL-1beta.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE: HOX mRNA was evaluated by microarray and confirmed by
quantitative RT-PCR. Protein expression was detected using immunohistochemistry
and Western analysis.
RESULTS: HOXA9, HOXA10, and HOXA11 were expressed in decidual cells and regulated
by IL-1beta and thrombin. HOXA10 was further analyzed because of its association 
with progesterone responsiveness. After E(2) treatment, IL-1beta and thrombin
decreased HOXA10 mRNA by 94 and 81%, respectively. After E(2) plus
medroxyprogesterone acetate treatment, IL-1beta and thrombin resulted in an 86
and 72% decrease in HOXA10 mRNA, respectively. A similar decrease was noted in
HOXA10 protein expression.
CONCLUSION: The expression of HOXA10 protein at term indicates that it may have a
role in maintaining decidual cell phenotype and pregnancy. The dramatic decrease 
of HOXA10 in response to IL-1beta or thrombin may contribute to progestin
resistance in preterm labor, mimicking progesterone resistance seen in
Hoxa10(-/-) mice.

PMID: 16551735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


326. Reproduction. 2006 Mar;131(3):561-71.

Identification of transcription factors at the site of implantation in the later 
stages of murine pregnancy.

Zhao B(1), Koon D, Bethin KE.

Author information: 
(1)Wells Center for Pediatric Research, Department of Pediatrics, Indiana
University School of Medicine, James Whitcomb Riley Hospital for Children, 702
Barnhill Dr., RI 5960, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Despite medical advances, preterm delivery continues to complicate 12% of all
births in the United States and is a major cause of neonatal deaths. One of the
reasons that preterm labor continues to be a significant problem is that very
little is understood about the factors involved in normal labor. Many
investigators have studied parturition in the mouse and defined essential
pathways for normal labor. Prostaglandins play an essential role in mouse labor
and are important in human labor as well. We examined the 23 transcription
factors from pregnant mouse uterus that change expression after the induction of 
cyclooxygenase-1, the enzyme that catalyzes the first committed step in
prostaglandin synthesis. Using in situ hybridization, we have identified three of
these transcription factors, Hoxa10, Hoxa11 and GILZ as being expressed in the
decidua and regulated at the end of pregnancy. Both Hoxa10 and Hoxa11 are known
to be critical for implantation, but very little is known about their roles in
late gestation. GILZ has not previously been identified in the gravid uterus. In 
summary, we have identified three transcription factors that are regulated in the
decidua at the end of pregnancy, suggesting a role in detachment of the fetus and
placenta.

PMID: 16514199  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


327. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Oct;6(7):730-7. Epub 2006 Feb 21.

Expression patterns of Hox10 paralogous genes during lumbar spinal cord
development.

Choe A(1), Phun HQ, Tieu DD, Hu YH, Carpenter EM.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Retardation Research Center, Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral
Science, UCLA School of Medicine, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA.

We have examined the expression of three paralogous Hox genes from E11.5 through 
E15.5 in the mouse spinal cord. These ages coincide with major phases of spinal
cord neurogenesis, neuronal differentiation, cell migration, gliogenesis, and
motor neuron cell death. The three genes, Hoxa10, Hoxc10, and Hoxd10, are all
expressed in the lumbar spinal cord and have distinct expression patterns.
Mutations in these three genes are known to affect motor neuron patterning. All
three genes show lower levels of expression at the rostral limits of their
domains, with selective regions of higher expression more caudally. Hoxa10 and
Hoxd10 expression appears confined to postmitotic cell populations in the
intermediate and ventral gray, while Hoxc10 is also expressed in proliferating
cells in the dorsal ventricular zone. Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 expression is clearly
excluded from the lateral motor columns at rostral lumbar levels but is present
in this region more caudally. Double labeling demonstrates that Hoxc10 expression
is correlated with ventrolateral LIM gene expression in the caudal part of the
lumbar spinal cord.

PMID: 16495162  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


328. Cancer Res. 2006 Jan 15;66(2):889-97.

Deregulation of the HOXA10 homeobox gene in endometrial carcinoma: role in
epithelial-mesenchymal transition.

Yoshida H(1), Broaddus R, Cheng W, Xie S, Naora H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson
Cancer Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Houston, TX 77030, USA.

Homeobox genes encode transcription factors that control cell differentiation and
play essential roles in developmental patterning. Increasing evidence indicates
that many homeobox genes are aberrantly expressed in cancers, and that their
deregulation significantly contributes to tumor progression. The homeobox gene
HOXA10 controls uterine organogenesis during embryonic development and functional
endometrial differentiation in the adult. We investigated whether HOXA10
expression is deregulated in endometrial carcinomas, and how counteracting this
aberrant expression modifies tumor behavior. We found that down-regulation of
HOXA10 expression in endometrial carcinomas strongly correlates with increased
tumor grade and is associated with methylation of the HOXA10 promoter. Enforced
expression of HOXA10 in endometrial carcinoma cells inhibited invasive behavior
in vitro and tumor dissemination in nude mice. The inhibitory effect of HOXA10 on
invasive behavior was attributable at least in part to the ability of HOXA10 to
induce expression of the epithelial cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin by
down-regulating expression of Snail, a repressor of E-cadherin gene
transcription. These findings reveal a novel role for HOXA10 deregulation in the 
progression of endometrial carcinoma by promoting epithelial-mesenchymal
transition.

PMID: 16424022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


329. Zhongguo Shi Yan Xue Ye Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Dec;13(6):959-63.

[Expression of HoxA10 in acute leukemia and its significance].

[Article in Chinese]

Huang Y(1), Li WJ, Wei CX, Zhou Z, Nie B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hematology, The First Affiliated Hospital, Kunming Medicine
College, Kunming 650031, China.

To investigate the expression of HoxA(10) mRNA in acute leukemia patients and its
significance, HoxA(10) level was detected by reverse transcription polymerase
chain reaction (RT-PCR) in 50 patients with acute leukemias, 7 healthy volunteers
and 3 patients with ITP (idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura). The regularity of 
the expression of HoxA(10) gene in acute leukemia and the relationship between
HoxA(10) level and the prognosis of leukemia was explored. The results showed
that HoxA(10) was expressed in all types of acute myelogenous leukemia; HoxA(10) 
message was also observed in acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients and part of
control groups. 3 normal donors were found not to express HoxA(10). The level of 
HoxA(10) mRNA of acute myelogenous leukemia patients was significantly higher
than that of acute lymphoblastic leukemia patients and controls (P < 0.01).
HoxA(10) gene appeared to be more strongly expressed in AML-M(1) and -M(2)
subtypes than in AML-M(4) and -M(5) subtypes, and the gene was notable high
expressed in acute promyelocytic leukemia. The number of blast and promyeloid
cells in the bone marrow was positive related with the level of HoxA (r = 0.635, 
P < 0.01). The level of HoxA(10) of 9 non-responsive patients was higher than
that of 8 remission patients, but there was no significant difference between
them (P = 0.258). HoxA(10) was overexpressed in acute myelogenous leukemia. It is
concluded that HoxA(10) is a major transcription factor regulating hematopoiesis 
and a mark to differentiate lymphoid leukemia and myelogenous leukemia, but not a
specific gene of cancer. The level of HoxA(10) is related with load of leukemic
cells and curative effect, and can affect occurrence and development of leukemia 
in combination with many cytokines, HoxA(10) may facilitate the leukemia
progression with another cofactors.

PMID: 16403259  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


330. Lab Invest. 2006 Mar;86(3):286-96.

Neonatal estrogenic exposure suppresses PTEN-related endometrial carcinogenesis
in recombinant mice.

Begum M(1), Tashiro H, Katabuchi H, Suzuki A, Kurman RJ, Okamura H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Reproductive Medicine and Surgery, Faculty of Medical and
Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kumamoto University, Honjo, Kumamoto City, Kumamoto,
Japan.

Human endometrial carcinomas, as well as complex atypical hyperplasias (CAH), are
estrogen related and frequently have mutations in the PTEN gene. However, the
mutual contribution of estrogen and PTEN mutations to endometrial carcinogenesis 
in vivo is unknown. To address this issue, we investigated whether neonatal
estrogenic treatments augment the incidence of CAH and carcinomas in murine PTEN 
(mPTEN) heterozygous (+/-) mutant mice, an animal model for endometrial
carcinoma. Low doses of diethylstilbestrol (1 ng/g/day), genistein (50
microg/g/day) in phytoestrogens, estriol (E(3)) (4 microg/g/day), and vehicle
(ethanol and corn oil) were administered subcutaneously daily to neonatal pups
from the 1st to 5th day after birth. At 52 weeks of age, the morphological
changes in the endometrium, and uterine expression of Hoxa 10 and Hoxa 11, were
evaluated. These Hoxa genes are abdominal B-type homeobox genes, which normally
regulate differentiation of the Müllerian duct. The incidence of CAH and
adenocarcinomas of the endometrium was significantly decreased by the neonatal
estrogenic treatments in the mPTEN+/- mice. Coincidentally, all treatments
significantly decreased the stromal cell density, and CAH and adenocarcinomas
rarely developed in the epithelium adjacent to the affected endometrial stroma.
Moreover, the uterine expression of Hoxa 10 in mice with neonatal genistein and
E(3) treatments, and that of Hoxa 11 in mice with all treatments, was
significantly lower when compared with vehicle alone. Taken together, neonatal
estrogenic exposure induced stromal atrophy and/or hyalinization accompanied by
repressed expression of Hoxa 10 and Hoxa 11, and exerted an inhibitory effect on 
PTEN-related tumorigenesis. These findings provide new insight into the
interaction between endometrial epithelium and stroma in endometrial
carcinogenesis in vivo.

PMID: 16402032  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


331. Hum Reprod. 2006 Apr;21(4):936-42. Epub 2005 Dec 16.

Cryptorchidism in LhrKO animals and the effect of testosterone-replacement
therapy.

Yuan FP(1), Lin DX, Rao CV, Lei ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology & Women's Health,
University of Louisville, Health Sciences Center, Louisville, KY 40292, USA.

BACKGROUND: The objective of the current study was to characterize the
morphological and genetic basis of cryptorchidism.
METHODS AND RESULTS: We investigated cryptorchidism in LH receptor (Lhr) knockout
(LhrKO) mice and how testosterone-replacement therapy (TRT) worked to correct the
phenotype. The results revealed that while gubernacular development was
indistinguishable between Lhr-null and wild-type animals until 7 days of age, it 
was subsequently severely impaired in null animals. This was due to a reduction
in mesenchymal cell division, differentiation into cremaster muscle cells and
their delayed maturation. While transcript levels of Hoxa10, Hoxa11, Desrt and
Dll1 were indistinguishable, the levels of Notch1, Numb and Lgr8 in the
gubernaculum and Insl3 in the testes were lower in Lhr-null than in wild-type
siblings. The TRT, which completed testicular descent into the scrotum, corrected
the morphological changes and the expression of Lgr8, Numb and Notch, but not
Insl3, to wild-type levels. Transection of the genitofemoral nerve did not
prevent the TRT effect.
CONCLUSION: In summary, cryptorchidism in Lhr-null animals was caused by defects 
in the gubernacular development due to testosterone deficiency. TRT reversed all 
the morphological and gene expression changes except Insl3, suggesting that
testosterone, not INSL3, secreted by Leydig cells, facilitates the completion of 
testicular descent.

PMID: 16361283  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


332. J Immunol. 2005 Oct 15;175(8):5269-79.

HoxA10 represses transcription of the gene encoding p67phox in phagocytic cells.

Lindsey S(1), Zhu C, Lu YF, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine and The Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

p67(phox) and gp91(phox) are components of the phagocyte-specific respiratory
burst oxidase that are encoded by the NCF2 and CYBB genes, respectively. These
genes are transcribed exclusively in myeloid cells that have differentiated
beyond the promyelocyte stage. In mature phagocytes, NCF2 and CYBB transcription 
continues until cell death and further increases in response to IFN-gamma and
other inflammatory mediators. Because p67(phox) and gp91(phox) expression
profiles are similar, we hypothesize that common transcription factors interact
with homologous cis elements in the CYBB and NCF2 genes to coordinate
transcription. Previously, we identified a negative CYBB promoter cis element
that is repressed by the homeodomain transcription factor HoxA10. We found that
transcriptional repression requires HoxA10-dependent recruitment of histone
deacetylase activity to the CYBB cis element. In response to IFN-gamma,
phosphorylation of two tyrosine residues in the HoxA10 homeodomain decreases
binding to CYBB promoter, thereby abrogating HoxA10-mediated repression. In the
current studies, we investigate the possibility that HoxA10 similarly represses
NCF2 transcription. We identify a sequence in the NCF2 promoter that is
homologous to the HoxA10-binding CYBB cis element. We find that this NCF2
promoter sequence functions as a negative cis element that is repressed by HoxA10
in a tyrosine phosphorylation and histone deacetylase-dependent manner. Our
results suggest that cytokine-stimulated pathways regulate HoxA10-mediated
repression of the CYBB and NCF2 genes in differentiating myeloid cells and in
mature phagocytes during the inflammatory response. Because p67(phox) and
gp91(phox) are rate-limiting components for respiratory burst activity, our
studies may identify rational therapeutic targets to modulate free radical
generation in pathological conditions.

PMID: 16210632  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


333. Genes Dev. 2005 Sep 15;19(18):2116-21.

Hox genes specify vertebral types in the presomitic mesoderm.

Carapuço M(1), Nóvoa A, Bobola N, Mallo M.

Author information: 
(1)Instituto Gulbenkian de Ciencia, 2780-156 Oeiras, Portugal.

We show here that expression of Hoxa10 in the presomitic mesoderm is sufficient
to confer a Hox group 10 patterning program to the somite, producing vertebrae
without ribs, an effect not achieved when Hoxa10 is expressed in the somites. In 
addition, Hox group 11-dependent vertebral sacralization requires Hoxa11
expression in the presomitic mesoderm, while their caudal differentiation
requires that Hoxa11 is expressed in the somites. Therefore, Hox gene patterning 
activity is different in the somites and presomitic mesoderm, the latter being
very prominent for Hox gene-mediated patterning of the axial skeleton. This is
further supported by our finding that inactivation of Gbx2, a homeobox-containing
gene expressed in the presomitic mesoderm but not in the somites, produced
Hox-like phenotypes in the axial skeleton without affecting Hox gene expression.

PMCID: PMC1221883
PMID: 16166377  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


334. Leukemia. 2005 Nov;19(11):1948-57.

CALM-AF10+ T-ALL expression profiles are characterized by overexpression of HOXA 
and BMI1 oncogenes.

Dik WA(1), Brahim W, Braun C, Asnafi V, Dastugue N, Bernard OA, van Dongen JJ,
Langerak AW, Macintyre EA, Delabesse E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The t(10;11)(p13;q14-21) is found in T-ALL and acute myeloid leukemia and fuses
CALM (Clathrin-Assembly protein-like Lymphoid-Myeloid leukaemia gene) to AF10. In
order to gain insight into the transcriptional consequences of this fusion,
microarray-based comparison of CALM-AF10+ vs CALM-AF10- T-ALL was performed. This
analysis showed upregulation of HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXA10 and BMI1 in the CALM-AF10+
cases. Microarray results were validated by quantitative RT-PCR on an independent
group of T-ALL and compared to mixed lineage leukemia-translocated acute
leukemias (MLL-t AL). The overexpression of HOXA genes was associated with
overexpression of its cofactor MEIS1 in CALM-AF10+ T-ALL, reaching levels of
expression similar to those observed in MLL-t AL. Consequently, CALM-AF10+ T-ALL 
and MLL-t AL share a specific HOXA overexpression, indicating they activate
common oncogenic pathways. In addition, BMI1, located close to AF10 breakpoint,
was overexpressed only in CALM-AF10+ T-ALL and not in MLL-t AL. BMI1 controls
cellular proliferation through suppression of the tumor suppressors encoded by
the CDKN2A locus. This locus, often deleted in T-ALL, was conserved in CALM-AF10+
T-ALL. This suggests that decreased CDKN2A activity, as a result of BMI1
overexpression, contributes to leukemogenesis in CALM-AF10+ T-ALL. We propose to 
define a HOXA+ leukemia group composed of at least MLL-t, CALM-AF10 and HOXA-t
AL, which may benefit from adapted management.

PMID: 16107895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


335. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2005 Aug;193(2):371-80.

Aberrant methylation at HOXA10 may be responsible for its aberrant expression in 
the endometrium of patients with endometriosis.

Wu Y(1), Halverson G, Basir Z, Strawn E, Yan P, Guo SW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaikee 53226-0509, 
USA.

OBJECTIVE: HOXA10, expressed in endometrium, plays an important role in uterine
receptivity at the time of implantation. In the endometrium of women with
endometriosis, its expression is reduced. The aim of this study was to determine 
whether the observed aberrant expression of HOXA10 is caused by aberrant
methylation of the gene.
STUDY DESIGN: Endometrial tissues were collected from 6 women with
laparoscopically confirmed endometriosis, and 4 women who underwent tubal
ligation and were confirmed to have no endometriosis. In addition, menstrual
blood from 5 women with no gynecologic complaints was collected and also used as 
controls. Methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and bisulfite
sequencing were performed in 3 fragments in 2 regions of HOXA10 to detect
difference in methylation patterns. Real-time reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR was 
also performed to measure expression levels of HOXA10 in select cases and
controls.
RESULTS: In all 3 fragments, there were highly statistically significant
differences in methylation patterns between women with endometriosis and those
without endometriosis. The expression level of HOXA10 was lower in women with
endometriosis than those without, as previously reported.
CONCLUSION: There is aberrant methylation in the endometrium of women with
endometriosis compared with those without endometriosis. The aberrant methylation
at HOXA10 may be responsible for the aberrant gene expression in the endometrium 
of women with endometriosis. This finding suggests that endometriosis may also be
an epigenetic disease.

PMID: 16098858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


336. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2005 Aug 25;57(4):498-504.

[Expression of p57 and homeobox A10 during decidualization of endometrial stromal
cell in vitro.].

[Article in Chinese]

Qian K(1), Chen H, Zhang HW, Li YF, Jin L, Zhu GJ.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center;2Neurology Department, Tongji Hospital, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong Science and Technology University, Wuhan 430030,
China;E-mail: Zhu_guijin@sina.com.

In order to elucidate the function of homeobox A10 gene (HOXA10) and p57 during
decidualization our present study was designed to observe the change of HOXA10
and p57 expression and subcellular localization of HOXA10 in the process of
endometrial stromal cell (ESC) differentiation in vitro. Decidualization was
induced by 0.5 mmol/L 8-Bromo-cAMP (8-Br-cAMP) together with 1x10(-6) mol/L
medroxyprogesterone acetate (MPA). Expression of p57 and HOXA10 was detected by
RT-PCR and Western blot after 1-day, 2-day, and 4-day treatment (D1, D2, D4).
ESCs cultured in 2%FBS for 1 and 4 d were used as control (C1, C4). The location 
of HOXA10 was detected by indirect immunofluorescence and HOXA10-GFP
transfection. The results are as follows: (1) The expression of HOXA10 decreased 
progressively during the course of decidualization, and showed significant
difference compared to control group C4 after 2-day treatment (D2). (2) On the
contrary, the expression of p57 increased progressively and also showed
significant difference compared to the control group C4 after 2-day treatment
(D2). (3) There was no significant change of HOXA10 and p57 expression after
culturing ESCs in 2%FBS for 4 d (C1, C4). (4) HOXA10 located in the nucleus
throughout the course. Cytoplasm and nucleus shuttle was not detected in the
experiment. Our results suggest that the down-regulation of HOXA10 may contribute
to the increase of p57 and that the up-regulation of p57 likely plays an
important role in ESC differentiation. Progesterone receptor (PR) pathway may
participate in promoting ESCs to exit cell cycle and enter differentiation.

PMID: 16094499  [PubMed]


337. Nucleic Acids Res. 2005 Jul 26;33(13):4191-201. Print 2005.

GDNF-inducible zinc finger protein 1 is a sequence-specific transcriptional
repressor that binds to the HOXA10 gene regulatory region.

Morinaga T(1), Enomoto A, Shimono Y, Hirose F, Fukuda N, Dambara A, Jijiwa M,
Kawai K, Hashimoto K, Ichihara M, Asai N, Murakumo Y, Matsuo S, Takahashi M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine 65
Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan.

The RET tyrosine kinase receptor and its ligand, glial cell line-derived
neurotrophic factor (GDNF) are critical regulators of renal and neural
development. It has been demonstrated that RET activates a variety of downstream 
signaling cascades, including the RAS/mitogen-activated protein kinase and
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase(PI3-K)/AKT pathways. However, nuclear targets
specific to RET-triggered signaling still remain elusive. We have previously
identified a novel zinc finger protein, GZF1, whose expression is induced during 
GDNF/RET signaling and may play a role in renal branching morphogenesis. Here, we
report the DNA binding property of GZF1 and its potential target gene. Using the 
cyclic amplification and selection of targets technique, the consensus DNA
sequence to which GZF1 binds was determined. This sequence was found in the 5'
regulatory region of the HOXA10 gene. Electrophoretic mobility shift assay
revealed that GZF1 specifically binds to the determined consensus sequence and
suppresses transcription of the luciferase gene from the HOXA10 gene regulatory
element. These findings thus suggest that GZF1 may regulate the spatial and
temporal expression of the HOXA10 gene which plays a role in morphogenesis.

PMCID: PMC1180748
PMID: 16049025  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


338. Comp Biochem Physiol B Biochem Mol Biol. 2005 Sep;142(1):123-7.

HoxA10-like proteins in the reproductive tract of the viviparous lizard Eulamprus
tympanum and the oviparous lizard Lampropholis guichenoti.

Thomson M(1), Herbert JF, Murphy CR, Thompson MB.

Author information: 
(1)School of Biological Sciences, The University of Sydney, NSW 2006, Australia. 
mthomson@bio.usyd.edu.au

The gene HoxA10 and its protein product are essential for the formation of the
extensions of the plasma membrane called uterodomes or pinopods in mammalian
uterine epithelia. In mice, the presence of the HoxA10 protein and uterodomes is 
needed for uterine receptivity to blastocyst implantation. The viviparous lizard 
Eulamprus tympanum displays uterodomes whereas the oviparous lizard Lampropholis 
guichenoti does not. To explore the theory that HoxA10 is involved in the
formation of uterodomes we investigated whether HoxA10 immunoreactive proteins
were present in both species during their reproductive cycles. Oviduct proteins
from vitellogenic, gravid or non-reproductive L. guichenoti (n=19) and E.
tympanum (n=28) were separated by electrophoresis and analysed by Western blot
and specific antibodies to HoxA10. E. tympanum displayed HoxA10 immunoreactive
bands at 59 and 63 kDa in 20 out of the 28 samples. All of the L. guichenoti
samples displayed HoxA10 immunoreactive bands, 18 had bands at 59 and 64 kDa and 
1 animal had a single band at 59 kDa. There were no significant differences in
the level of HoxA10 immunoreactivity between the different stages of reproductive
cycle in either species. The different molecular mass of the larger band in L.
guichenoti (64 kDa) compared to E. tympanum (63 kDa) indicates that the two
lizards express different isoforms of the HoxA10-like proteins and it will be
interesting in future studies to determine whether there are differences in the
biological activity of the proteins that regulate different physiological
functions in the uterus of viviparous and oviparous lizards.

PMID: 16040262  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


339. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Nov;19(11):2839-46. Epub 2005 Jun 30.

Emx2 regulates mammalian reproduction by altering endometrial cell proliferation.

Taylor HS(1), Fei X.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8063, USA. hugh.taylor@yale.edu

The molecular mechanisms that underlie embryo implantation are poorly understood.
Under the control of sex steroids, uterine endometrium undergoes tremendous, yet 
tightly controlled, proliferation in each estrous cycle to facilitate
implantation; disorders of endometrial proliferation underlie several uterine
diseases. We have previously identified the Emx2 gene as a transcriptional target
of HOXA10 regulation in the reproductive tract. Here we report the function of
Emx2 in murine implantation and regulation of endometrial proliferation. We
transfected mice on d 2 post coitus with pcDNA3.1/Emx2, Emx2 antisense, or
respective controls consisting of empty pcDNA3.1 or a random order
oligonucleotide by intrauterine lipofection. Increased expression of Emx2 reduced
average implantation rate by approximately 40% (P = 0.00006) resulting in an
average number of implanted embryos per litter of 13.7 in the control group to
8.2 in the pcDNA3.1/Emx2-treated group. Neither treatment altered the number of
mice attaining pregnancy with at least one embryo. Decreased Emx2 expression did 
not alter litter size. Neither treatment affected the birth weight of the pups.
To elucidate potential mechanisms through which Emx2-regulated reproduction,
markers of endometrial differentiation, proliferation, and apoptosis were
assessed. Increased Emx2 expression significantly decreased endometrial cell
proliferating cell nuclear antigen expression and 5'-bromo-2' deoxyuridine
incorporation. Markers of stromal cell differentiation (IGF binding protein-1,
prolactin), epithelial differentiation (calcitonin), and apoptosis (activated
caspase3) were unchanged. In human endometrial epithelial cells in vitro, Emx2
reduced cell number indicating diminished proliferation. Emx2 controls mammalian 
reproduction by adjusting endometrial cell proliferation without effecting
differentiation. Regulated uterine Emx2 expression is necessary during
reproduction for maximal implantation and litter size.

PMID: 15994197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


340. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2005 Jun;1044:109-16.

Hox genes: from leukemia to hematopoietic stem cell expansion.

Abramovich C(1), Pineault N, Ohta H, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, 675 West 10th Avenue, Vancouver, BC, V5Z 1L3, Canada.

Hox genes are clearly implicated in leukemia; however, neither the specificity of
the leukemogenic potential among Hox genes of different paralog groups nor the
role of the homeodomain is clear. We tested the leukemogenic potential of various
NUP98-Hox fusion genes alone and with MEIS1. All genes tested had a significant
overlapping effect in bone marrow cells in vitro. However, not all formed strong 
leukemogenic NUP98 fusion genes; but together with overexpression of MEIS1, all
induced myeloid leukemia. This phenomenon was also seen with NUP98 fusions
containing only the homeodomain of the corresponding Hox protein. We then
exploited the strong transforming potential of NUP98-HOXD13 and NUP98-HOXA10 to
establish preleukemic myeloid lines composed of early myeloid progenitors with
extensive in vitro self-renewal capacity, short-term myeloid repopulating
activity, and low propensity for spontaneous leukemic conversion. We also showed 
that MEIS1 can efficiently induce their conversion to leukemic stem cells, thus
providing a novel model for the study of leukemic progression. In contrast to the
leukemogenic effect of most of the Hox genes tested, HOXB4 has the ability to
increase the self-renewal of hematopoietic stem cells without disrupting normal
differentiation. On the basis of the discovery that the leukemogenic gene HOXA9
can also expand hematopoietic stem cells, we compared the ability of NUP98-Hox
fusions to that of HOXB4 to trigger HSC expansion in vitro. Our preliminary
results indicate that the expanding potential of HOXB4 is retained and even
augmented by fusion to NUP98. Moreover, even greater expansion may be possible
using Abd-B-like Hox fusions genes.

PMID: 15958703  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


341. Biol Reprod. 2005 Sep;73(3):472-81. Epub 2005 May 25.

Null mutation of Kruppel-like factor9/basic transcription element binding
protein-1 alters peri-implantation uterine development in mice.

Velarde MC(1), Geng Y, Eason RR, Simmen FA, Simmen RC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock. AR 72202, USA.

Female mice null for the basic transcription element binding protein-1 (Bteb1)
gene have reduced numbers of implanting embryos. We hypothesized that the
implantation defect, resulting in subfertility, is a consequence of developmental
asynchrony between the embryo and uterine endometrium at peri-implantation. To
address this, endometrium from wild-type (WT) and Bteb1(-/-) females at 0.5 to
5.5 days postcoitum (dpc) were evaluated for proliferation (BrdU labeling),
apoptosis (TUNEL), and steroid hormone receptor expression
(immunohistochemistry). Loss of BTEB1 did not affect serum estrogen (E) and
progesterone (P) levels. In stroma (ST), the numbers of progesterone receptor
(PGR) and HomeoboxA10 (HOXA10)-expressing cells were lower (3.5 and 4.5 dpc),
while those of estrogen receptor-alpha (ESR1) were higher (3.5 dpc), with Bteb1
ablation. The peak of proliferation in luminal epithelium (LE), glandular
epithelium (GE), and ST was delayed, while the apoptotic index in all cell types 
was increased (2.5 dpc) in Bteb1(-/-) relative to WT mice. The numbers of
PGR-positive ST cells was negatively correlated with LE proliferation in WT mice;
this correlation was lost in Bteb1(-/-) mice and was not observed before 2.5 dpc 
for both genotypes. Proliferation and apoptosis in all endometrial compartments, 
as well as the numbers of PGR-, HOXA10-, and ESR1-expressing ST cells, were lower
in Bteb1(-/-) relative to WT mice after ovariectomy and E + P treatment. Results 
suggest that BTEB1, by regulating ST PGR expression and transactivation,
participates in the paracrine control of LE proliferation by PGR and thus is
important for establishment of a receptive uterus critical for successful
implantation.

PMID: 15917344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


342. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Sep;19(9):2222-33. Epub 2005 May 19.

Direct regulation of HOXA10 by 1,25-(OH)2D3 in human myelomonocytic cells and
human endometrial stromal cells.

Du H(1), Daftary GS, Lalwani SI, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8063, USA.

Vitamin D receptor (VDR) and the functionally active form of its ligand,
1,25-(OH)2D3, have been implicated in female reproduction function and myeloid
leukemic cell differentiation. HOXA10 is necessary for embryo implantation and
fertility, as well as hematopoeitic development. In this study, we identified a
direct role of vitamin D in the regulation of HOXA10 in primary human endometrial
stromal cells, the human endometrial stromal cell line (HESC), and in the human
myelomonocytic cell line, U937. Treatment of primary endometrial stromal cells,
or the cell lines HESC and U937 with 1,25-(OH)2D3 increased HOXA10 mRNA and
protein expression. VDR mRNA and protein were detected in primary uterine stromal
cells as well as HESC and U937 cells. We cloned the HOXA10 upstream regulatory
sequence and two putative vitamin D response elements (VDRE) into luciferase
reporter constructs and transfected primary stromal cells and HESC. One putative 
VDRE (P1: -385 to -434 bp upstream of HOXA10) drove reporter gene expression in
response to treatment with 1,25-(OH)2D3. In EMSA, VDR demonstrated binding to the
HOXA10 VDRE in the presence of 1,25-(OH)2D3. 1,25-(OH)2D3 up-regulates HOXA10
expression by binding VDR and interacting with a VDRE in the HOXA10 regulatory
region. Direct regulation of HOXA10 by vitamin D has implications for fertility
and myeloid differentiation.

PMID: 15905361  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


343. Endocrinology. 2005 Aug;146(8):3445-51. Epub 2005 May 12.

Methoxychlor disrupts uterine Hoxa10 gene expression.

Fei X(1), Chung H, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology, Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, 
and Reproductive Sciences, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, 
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Methoxychlor (MXC) is a pesticide that has adverse effects on reproductive
capability in mice. MXC and its metabolites bind the estrogen receptor and
function as endocrine disruptors. MXC diminishes the uterine decidual cell
response, necessary for the support of pregnancy. Hoxa10 is an estrogen-regulated
gene that is an essential mediator of the decidual response and necessary for
pregnancy. Here we demonstrate that a mechanism by which MXC disrupts uterine
function is by suppressing Hoxa10 expression. MXC treatment of mice produced a
mild uterotropic response as measured by increased uterine weight and epithelial 
height. MXC treatment of uterine Ishikawa cells in vitro induced Hoxa10
expression. Estrogen receptor (ER) binding to the HOXA10 estrogen response
element (ERE) was promoted by treatment with estradiol (E2); however, MXC
disrupted E2/ER/ERE complex formation and gel shift. MXC alone allowed weak
ER/ERE binding. In vivo MXC blocked the effect of E2 on Hoxa10 expression.
Neonatal MXC treatment resulted in an immediate suppression and cellular
restriction of Hoxa10 expression as well as a permanent generalized decrease in
expression that persisted in the adult. MXC inhibited the expression of Hoxa10, a
gene necessary for uterine development and function. One common mechanism by
which endocrine disrupting chemicals produce lasting reproductive tract defects
is through permanent alteration of developmental gene expression.

PMID: 15890768  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


344. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 8;280(27):25854-63. Epub 2005 May 9.

Regulation of smooth muscle-specific gene expression by homeodomain proteins,
Hoxa10 and Hoxb8.

El-Mounayri O(1), Triplett JW, Yates CW, Herring BP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular and Integrative Physiology, Indiana University School
of Medicine, Indianapolis, Indiana 46202, USA.

Smooth muscle cells arise from different populations of precursor cells during
embryonic development. The mechanisms that specify the smooth muscle cell
phenotype in each of these populations of cells are largely unknown. In many
tissues and organs, homeodomain transcription factors play a key role in
directing cell specification. However, little is known about how these proteins
regulate smooth muscle differentiation. Using degenerate reverse
transcription-PCR coupled to cDNA library screening we identified two homeodomain
proteins, Hoxa10 and Hoxb8, which are expressed in adult mouse smooth muscle
tissues. All three of the previously described transcripts of the Hoxa10 gene,
Hoxa10-1, Hoxa10-2, and Hoxa10-3, were identified. Hoxa10-1 directly activated
the smooth muscle-specific telokin promoter but did not activate the SM22alpha,
smooth muscle alpha-actin, or smooth muscle myosin heavy chain promoters. Small
interfering RNA-mediated knock-down of Hoxa10-1 demonstrated that Hoxa10-1 is
required for high levels of telokin expression in smooth muscle cells from uterus
and colon. On the other hand, Hoxb8 inhibited the activity of the telokin,
SM22alpha, and smooth muscle alpha-actin promoters. Cotransfection of Hoxa10-1
together with Hoxa10-2 or Hoxb8 suggested that Hoxa10-2 and Hoxb8 act as
competitive inhibitors of Hoxa10-1. Results from gel mobility shift assays
demonstrated that Hoxa10-1, Hoxa10-2, and Hoxb8 bind directly to multiple sites
in the telokin promoter. Mutational analysis of telokin promoter reporter genes
demonstrated that the three homeodomain protein binding sites located between -80
and -75, +2 and +6, and +14 and +17 were required for maximal promoter activation
by Hoxa10-1 and maximal inhibition by Hoxb8. Together these data demonstrate that
the genes encoding smooth muscle-restricted proteins are direct transcriptional
targets of clustered homeodomain proteins and that different homeodomain proteins
have distinct effects on the promoters of these genes.

PMID: 15886193  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


345. Stem Cells. 2005 May;23(5):644-55.

Activation of stem-cell specific genes by HOXA9 and HOXA10 homeodomain proteins
in CD34+ human cord blood cells.

Ferrell CM(1), Dorsam ST, Ohta H, Humphries RK, Derynck MK, Haqq C, Largman C,
Lawrence HJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Veterans Affairs Medical Center, University of
California, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

There is growing evidence for a role of HOX homeodomain proteins in normal
hematopoiesis. Several HOX genes, including HOXA9 and HOXA10, are expressed in
primitive hematopoietic cells, implying a role in early hematopoietic
differentiation. To identify potential target genes of these two closely related 
transcription factors, human CD34+ umbilical cord blood cells were transduced
with vectors expressing either HOXA9 or HOXA10 and analyzed with cDNA
micro-arrays. Statistical analysis using significance analysis of microarrays
revealed a common signature of several hundred genes, demonstrating that the
transcriptomes of HOXA9 and HOXA10 largely overlap in this cellular context.
Seven genes that were upregulated by both HOX proteins were validated by
real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction. HOXA9 and HOXA10
showed positive regulation of genes in the Wnt pathway, including Wnt10B and two 
Wnt receptors Frizzled 1 and Frizzled 5, an important pathway for hematopoietic
stem cell (HSC) self-renewal. Other validated genes included v-ets-related gene
(ERG), Iroquois 3 (IRX3), aldehyde dehydrogenase 1 (ALDH1), and very long-chain
acyl-CoA synthetase homolog 1 (VLCS-H1). GenMAPP (Gene Micro Array Pathway
Profiler) analysis indicated that HOXA10 repressed expression of several genes
involved in heme biosynthesis and three globin genes, indicating a general
suppression of erythroid differentiation. A number of genes regulated by HOXA9
and HOXA10 are expressed in normal HSC populations.

PMID: 15849172  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


346. Nat Med. 2005 May;11(5):531-7. Epub 2005 Apr 10.

Lineage infidelity of epithelial ovarian cancers is controlled by HOX genes that 
specify regional identity in the reproductive tract.

Cheng W(1), Liu J, Yoshida H, Rosen D, Naora H.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Therapeutics, University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer
Center, 1515 Holcombe Boulevard, Box 184, Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Although epithelial ovarian cancers (EOCs) have been thought to arise from the
simple epithelium lining the ovarian surface or inclusion cysts, the major
subtypes of EOCs show morphologic features that resemble those of the müllerian
duct-derived epithelia of the reproductive tract. We found that HOX genes, which 
normally regulate mullerian duct differentiation, are not expressed in normal
ovarian surface epithelium (OSE), but are expressed in different EOC subtypes
according to the pattern of mullerian-like differentiation of these cancers.
Ectopic expression of Hoxa9 in tumorigenic mouse OSE cells gave rise to papillary
tumors resembling serous EOCs. In contrast, Hoxa10 and Hoxa11 induced
morphogenesis of endometrioid-like and mucinous-like EOCs, respectively. Hoxa7
showed no lineage specificity, but promoted the abilities of Hoxa9, Hoxa10 and
Hoxa11 to induce differentiation along their respective pathways. Therefore,
inappropriate activation of a molecular program that controls patterning of the
reproductive tract could explain the morphologic heterogeneity of EOCs and their 
assumption of müllerian-like features.

PMID: 15821746  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


347. Reprod Toxicol. 2005 May-Jun;20(1):39-45.

Vertebral malformations induced by sodium salicylate correlate with shifts in
expression domains of Hox genes.

Wéry N(1), Foulon O, Blacker A, Picard JJ, Gofflot F.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Developmental Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium.

Several embryotoxic agents, which includes sodium salicylate, were reported to
induce vertebral variations in the form of supernumerary ribs (SNR) when
administered to pregnant rodents. Because the biological significance of SNR in
toxicological studies is still a matter of debate, we investigated the molecular 
basis of this defect by analyzing the possible involvement of Hox genes, known to
specify vertebrae identity. Sodium salicylate (300mg/kg) was administered to
pregnant rats on gestational day 9 (GD 9). On GD 13, the expression of several
Hox genes, selected according to the position of their anterior limit of
expression, namely upstream (Hoxa9), at the level (Hoxa10) and downstream (Hoxd9)
to the morphological alteration, were analyzed. Posterior shifts in the anterior 
limit of expression of Hoxa10 and Hoxd9 were observed following exposure to
salicylate, which could explain an effect at the level of the axial skeleton.
This finding suggests that the appearance of ectopic ribs can be attributed to an
anterior transformation of lumbar vertebrae identity into thoracic vertebrae
identity. Whether this transformation occurs with all compounds inducing SNR in
rats remains to be determined.

PMID: 15808784  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


348. Mol Hum Reprod. 2005 Apr;11(4):245-51. Epub 2005 Mar 4.

Differentiation of endometrial stromal cells in vitro: down-regulation of
suppression of the cell cycle inhibitor p57 by HOXA10?

Qian K(1), Chen H, Wei Y, Hu J, Zhu G.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Medicine Center, Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medicine College,
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430030, People's Republic
of China.

Decidualization is a critical step during embryo implantation that is
characterized by the differentiation of endometrial stromal cells (ESC) into
decidua cells. However, the mechanism of differentiation remains largely unknown.
Previously, it has been shown that the null function of homeo box A10 (HOXA10)
causes defects in both implantation and decidualization, suggesting that the
HOXA10 signalling pathway is likely to be involved in uterine decidualization. In
the present study, we determined the expression and subcellular distribution of
HOXA10 and its downstream molecule, p57, in ESC during in vitro decidualization
induced by a combination of 8-bromo-cAMP and medroxyprogesterone acetate. We
demonstrated that the HOXA10 was down-regulated while in contrast, p57 was
up-regulated in the process of decidualization. Immunocytochemistry and transient
expression of the HOXA10 tagged with green fluorescence protein revealed that
there were no differences in the HOXA10 subcellular localization between the
induced and non-induced ESC. Our results suggest that the down-regulation of
HOXA10 may contribute to increased p57 and that up-regulation of p57 likely plays
an important role in ESC differentiation in the process of decidualization. The
progesterone receptor pathway may participate in promoting ESC to exit the cell
cycle and enter differentiation.

PMID: 15749785  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


349. Leukemia. 2005 Apr;19(4):636-43.

Transplantable cell lines generated with NUP98-Hox fusion genes undergo leukemic 
progression by Meis1 independent of its binding to DNA.

Pineault N(1), Abramovich C, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, Canada.

Hox genes have been identified in chromosomal translocations involving the
nucleoporin gene NUP98. Though the resulting chimeric proteins directly
participate in the development of leukemia, the long latency and monoclonal
nature of the disease support the requirement for secondary mutation(s), such as 
those leading to overexpression of Meis1. Models to identify such events and to
study leukemic progression are rare and labor intensive. Herein, we took
advantage of the strong transforming potential of NUP98-HOXD13 or NUP98-HOXA10 to
establish preleukemic myeloid lines from bone marrow cells that faithfully
replicate the first step of Hox-induced leukemogenesis. These lines contain early
granulomonocytic progenitors with extensive in vitro self-renewal capacity,
short-term myeloid repopulating activity and low propensity for spontaneous
leukemic conversion. We exploit such lines to show that Meis1 efficiently induces
their leukemic progression and demonstrate a high frequency of preleukemic cells 
in the cultures. Furthermore, we document that the leukemogenic potential of
Meis1 is independent of its direct binding to DNA and likely reflects its ability
to increase the repopulating capacity of the preleukemic cells by increasing
their self-renewal/proliferative capacity. The availability of lines with
repopulating potential and capacity for leukemic conversion should open new
avenues for understanding progression of Hox-mediated acute myeloid leukemia.

PMID: 15744344  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


350. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Dec;1034:152-65.

Molecular regulation of mullerian development by Hox genes.

DU H(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Reproductive
Endocrinology, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, P.O. Box
2008063, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

HOX genes are a family of regulatory molecules that encode conserved
transcription factors controlling aspects of morphogenesis and cell
differentiation during normal embryonic development. All metazoans possess a
common genetic system for embryonic patterning, and this system is also used in
the reproductive tract. Hox genes are also expressed in the adult uterus. Hox
genes are essential both for the development of mullerian tract in the embryonic 
period and adult function. Sex steroids regulate Hox gene expression during
embryonic and endometrial development in the menstrual cycle. EMX2 and
beta(3)-integrin acting downstream of Hoxa10 gene are likely involved in both
these developmental processes. This article reviews the role and molecular
regulation of Hox genes in reproductive tract development.

PMID: 15731308  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


351. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 2004 Dec;1034:1-18.

The role of HOX genes in human implantation.

Eun Kwon H(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Reproductive
Endocrinology, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, P.O. Box
2008063, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

The endometrium undergoes an ordered process of differentiation leading to
receptivity to embryonic implantation. HOX genes direct this development in a
fashion similar to that in which they direct embryonic development, including
development of the reproductive tract. HOXA10 and HOXA11 expression increases
during the menstrual cycle, increasing drastically in the midluteal phase, at the
time of implantation. This expression is regulated by sex steroid hormones. This 
expression is necessary for implantation of the blastocyst as demonstrated by the
decreased implantation rates in women with altered HOX expression. HOX genes are 
markers of endometrial receptivity. The possibility of augmenting HOX gene
expression with gene therapy to improve implantation has promise for the future.

PMID: 15731295  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


352. J Biol Chem. 2005 Apr 1;280(13):12359-70. Epub 2005 Jan 28.

HOXA9 activates transcription of the gene encoding gp91Phox during myeloid
differentiation.

Bei L(1), Lu Y, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.

The CYBB gene encodes gp91Phox; a component of the phagocyte respiratory burst
oxidase. CYBB transcription is restricted to myeloid cells differentiated beyond 
the promyelocyte stage. In undifferentiated myeloid cells, the homeodomain (HD)
transcription factor HoxA10 represses CYBB transcription via a cis element in the
proximal promoter. During myelopoiesis, phosphorylation of conserved tyrosine
residues in the HD decreases HoxA10 binding to this CYBB cis element. In the
current studies, we found HoxA9 activates CYBB transcription in differentiated
myeloid cells via the same cis element. We find HoxA9-mediated CYBB-transcription
requires Pbx1 but is inhibited by Meis1. Additionally, phosphorylation of the
conserved HD tyrosines increases HoxA9 binding to the CYBB promoter. The HOXA9
gene is involved in leukemia-associated translocations with the gene encoding
Nup98, a nucleopore protein. We find expression of a Nup98-hoxA9 fusion protein
blocks HoxA9-induced CYBB transcription in differentiating myeloid cells. In
comparison to HoxA9, Nup98-hoxA9 has greater binding affinity for the CYBB cis
element, but binding is not altered by HD tyrosine phosphorylation. Therefore,
these studies identify CYBB as a common target gene repressed by HoxA10 and
activated by HoxA9. These studies also suggest overexpression of Meis1 or
Nup98-hoxA9 represses myeloid-specific gene transcription, thereby contributing
to differentiation block in leukemogenesis.

PMID: 15681849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


353. Leukemia. 2005 Mar;19(3):358-66.

A new recurrent inversion, inv(7)(p15q34), leads to transcriptional activation of
HOXA10 and HOXA11 in a subset of T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemias.

Speleman F(1), Cauwelier B, Dastugue N, Cools J, Verhasselt B, Poppe B, Van Roy
N, Vandesompele J, Graux C, Uyttebroeck A, Boogaerts M, De Moerloose B, Benoit Y,
Selleslag D, Billiet J, Robert A, Huguet F, Vandenberghe P, De Paepe A, Marynen
P, Hagemeijer A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Medical Genetics, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.
franki.speleman@ugent.be

Chromosomal translocations with breakpoints in T-cell receptor (TCR) genes are
recurrent in T-cell malignancies. These translocations involve the TCRalphadelta 
gene (14q11), the TCRbeta gene (7q34) and to a lesser extent the TCRgamma gene at
chromosomal band 7p14 and juxtapose T-cell oncogenes next to TCR regulatory
sequences leading to deregulated expression of those oncogenes. Here, we describe
a new recurrent chromosomal inversion of chromosome 7, inv(7)(p15q34), in a
subset of patients with T-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia characterized by CD2 
negative and CD4 positive, CD8 negative blasts. This rearrangement juxtaposes the
distal part of the HOXA gene cluster on 7p15 to the TCRbeta locus on 7q34. Real
time quantitative PCR analysis for all HOXA genes revealed high levels of HOXA10 
and HOXA11 expression in all inv(7) positive cases. This is the first report of a
recurrent chromosome rearrangement targeting the HOXA gene cluster in T-cell
malignancies resulting in deregulated HOXA gene expression (particularly HOXA10
and HOXA11) and is in keeping with a previous report suggesting HOXA deregulation
in MLL-rearranged T- and B cell lymphoblastic leukemia as the key factor in
leukaemic transformation. Finally, our observation also supports the previous
suggested role of HOXA10 and HOXA11 in normal thymocyte development.

PMID: 15674412  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


354. Endocrinology. 2005 May;146(5):2424-33. Epub 2005 Jan 20.

Cyclin G1 and cyclin G2 are expressed in the periimplantation mouse uterus in a
cell-specific and progesterone-dependent manner: evidence for aberrant regulation
with Hoxa-10 deficiency.

Yue L(1), Daikoku T, Hou X, Li M, Wang H, Nojima H, Dey SK, Das SK.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive and Developmental Biology, Department of Pediatrics, 
Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee 37232, USA.

Because uterine cell-specific proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis are
differentially regulated during the periimplantation period, we speculated that
negative cell cycle regulators are also operative in the uterus during this
period. This prompted us to examine the roles of two negative growth-regulatory
genes, cyclin G1 and cyclin G2, in the periimplantation mouse uterus. We show
that cyclin G1 and cyclin G2 genes are differentially regulated in the uterus
during this period (d 1-8 of pregnancy) in a spatiotemporal manner. The results
suggest that cyclin G1 is primarily associated with epithelial cell
differentiation before implantation and stromal cell proliferation and
differentiation during decidualization, whereas cyclin G2 is associated with
terminal differentiation and apoptosis of the luminal epithelial and stromal
cells at the site of blastocyst after implantation. Pharmacological and genetic
studies provide evidence that the expression of cyclin G1, not cyclin G2, is
regulated by progesterone via its nuclear receptor. Furthermore, the expression
of these genes is aberrantly up-regulated in homeo box A-10 mutant uteri,
suggesting that cyclin G1 and cyclin G2 genes act as downstream targets of
homeobox A-10 and negatively impact uterine cell proliferation. Collectively, our
present and previous studies suggest that negative cell cycle regulators
collaborate with growth-promoting regulators in regulating uterine cell-specific 
proliferation, differentiation, and apoptosis relevant to implantation and
decidualization.

PMCID: PMC4274954
PMID: 15661853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


355. Genes Dev. 2005 Jan 15;19(2):224-33.

High incidence of proviral integrations in the Hoxa locus in a new model of
E2a-PBX1-induced B-cell leukemia.

Bijl J(1), Sauvageau M, Thompson A, Sauvageau G.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics of Stem Cells, Institute for Research in
Immunology and Cancer, Montréal, Québec H3C 3J7, Canada.

Relevant mouse models of E2a-PBX1-induced pre-B cell leukemia are still elusive. 
We now report the generation of a pre-B leukemia model using E2a-PBX1 transgenic 
mice, which lack mature and precursor T-cells as a result of engineered loss of
CD3epsilon expression (CD3epsilon(-/-)). Using insertional mutagenesis and
inverse-PCR, we show that B-cell leukemia development in the E2a-PBX1 x
CD3epsilon(-/-) compound transgenic animals is significantly accelerated when
compared to control littermates, and document several known and novel
integrations in these tumors. Of all common integration sites, a small region of 
19 kb in the Hoxa gene locus, mostly between Hoxa6 and Hoxa10, represented 18% of
all integrations in the E2a-PBX1 B-cell leukemia and was targeted in 86% of these
leukemias compared to 17% in control tumors. Q-PCR assessment of expression
levels for most Hoxa cluster genes in these tumors revealed an unprecedented
impact of the proviral integrations on Hoxa gene expression, with tumors having
one to seven different Hoxa genes overexpressed at levels up to 6600-fold above
control values. Together our studies set the stage for modeling E2a-PBX1-induced 
B-cell leukemia and shed new light on the complexity pertaining to Hox gene
regulation. In addition, our results show that the Hoxa gene cluster is
preferentially targeted in E2a-PBX1-induced tumors, thus suggesting functional
collaboration between these oncogenes in pre-B-cell tumors.

PMCID: PMC545883
PMID: 15655112  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


356. Tumour Biol. 2004 Sep-Dec;25(5-6):264-9.

HOXA10 expression in endometrial adenocarcinoma.

Lane DB(1), Rutherford TJ, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520, USA.

Homeobox (HOX) genes are highly evolutionarily conserved regulators of embryonic 
differentiation. HOX genes are also expressed in normal adult reproductive tissue
where they are involved in regulating differentiation. We hypothesized that
HOXA10 gene expression may be altered in endometrial adenocarcinoma. To assess
HOXA10 gene expression, endometrial tissue was obtained from 32 subjects with
normal endometrium or disease confined to the uterus. Nine specimens contained
normal endometrium, 5 had endometrial hyperplasia and 18 had stage I and II
endometrial adenocarcinoma. RNA was extracted, Northern blot analysis performed
and expression of HOXA10 assessed by densitometry. Expression of estrogen
receptor, progesterone receptor and p53 was analyzed by immunohistochemistry.
HOXA10 was expressed in both normal and neoplastic endometrium. No significant
difference in HOXA10 expression was found between normal, hyperplastic and FIGO
nuclear grade 1 endometrial tissues. Expression of HOXA10 was increased by 25% in
high nuclear grade endometrial adenocarcinomas compared with normal, hyperplastic
and low nuclear grade endometrial adenocarcinomas. No difference was noted in
expression of estrogen receptor, progesterone receptor or p53. HOXA10 expression 
is elevated in high nuclear grade stage I and II endometrial adenocarcinomas.
Aberrant regulation of HOX gene expression is associated with abnormal
differentiation of endometrial tissue.

Copyright 2004 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 15627890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


357. Mol Endocrinol. 2005 Mar;19(3):683-97. Epub 2004 Nov 4.

Proteomic analysis identifies immunophilin FK506 binding protein 4 (FKBP52) as a 
downstream target of Hoxa10 in the periimplantation mouse uterus.

Daikoku T(1), Tranguch S, Friedman DB, Das SK, Smith DF, Dey SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Cancer Biology, Division of Reproductive and
Developmental Biology, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville, Tennessee
37232, USA.

The process of implantation absolutely requires synchronized development of the
blastocyst to implantation competency, differentiation of the uterus to the
receptive state, and a reciprocal dialogue between the blastocyst and uterine
luminal epithelium. Genetic and molecular approaches have identified several
signaling pathways that are critical to this process. The transcription factor
Hoxa10 is one such critical player in implantation. Hoxa10-/- female mice have
implantation and decidualization failure due specifically to reduced uterine
responsiveness to progesterone and defective stromal cell proliferation during
uterine receptivity and implantation. However, the downstream signaling pathways 
of Hoxa10 in these events remain largely unknown. Using the proteomics approach
of difference gel electrophoresis, we have identified an immunophilin FKBP52
(FK506 binding protein 4) as one of the Hoxa10-mediated signaling molecules in
the uterus. We found that FKBP52, a cochaperone protein known to influence
steroid hormone receptor functions, is down-regulated in stromal cells of
Hoxa10-/- mice. More importantly, FKBP52 shows differential uterine cell-specific
expression during the periimplantation period. Whereas it is primarily expressed 
in the uterine epithelium on d 1 of pregnancy, the expression expands to the
stroma on d 4 during the period of uterine receptivity and becomes localized to
decidualizing stromal cells surrounding the implantation site on d 5. This
suggests that FKBP52 is important for the attainment of uterine receptivity and
implantation. Furthermore, FKBP52 shows differential cell-specific expression in 
the uterus in response to progesterone and/or estrogen consistent with its
expression patterns during the periimplantation period. Collectively, these
results and the female infertility phenotype of FKBP52 suggest that a
Hoxa10-FKBP52 signaling axis is critical to uterine receptivity and implantation.

PMID: 15528267  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


358. J Leukoc Biol. 2005 Jan;77(1):120-7. Epub 2004 Oct 20.

JAK2 is necessary and sufficient for interferon-gamma-induced transcription of
the gene encoding gp91PHOX.

Kakar R(1), Kautz B, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)The Feinberg School of Medicine and the Robert H Lurie Comprehensive Cancer
Center, Northwestern University, and Jesse Brown VA Medical Center, Chicago, IL
60611, USA.

During the inflammatory response, interferon-gamma (IFN-gamma) increases
transcription of the gene encoding gp91PHOX, a respiratory burst oxidase
component. This gene (referred to as the CYBB gene) is transcribed in phagocytic 
cells differentiated beyond the promyelocyte stage, and transcription continues
until cell death. Previous investigations identified a positive regulatory
element in the proximal CYBB promoter referred to as the hematopoiesis-associated
factor 1 (HAF1)-cis element. This element is activated by a multiprotein complex,
which includes the IFN consensus sequence-binding protein (ICSBP). Interaction of
this complex with the HAF1-cis element requires ICSBP tyrosine phosphorylation,
which is induced by IFN-gamma stimulation of phagocytic cells. Previous studies
also identified a negative cis element in the CYBB promoter. This element is
repressed by the homeodomain protein HoxA10. HoxA10 tyrosine phosphorylation,
which occurs in response to IFN-gamma, decreases HoxA10 DNA binding and therefore
repression of CYBB transcription. In these studies, we determine Janus tyrosine
kinase 2 (JAK2) activation is necessary and sufficient for IFN-gamma-induced CYBB
transcription in phagocytic cells and also for ICSBP and HoxA10 tyrosine
phosphorylation. Consistent with these results, we find JAK2 activation is
sufficient to induce ICSBP interaction with the HAF1 element and abolish HoxA10
binding to the CYBBrepressor element. Therefore, these findings provide direct
demonstration of JAK2 dependence of IFN-gamma-induced CYBB transcription. In
addition, these results identify a mechanism mediating this effect.

PMID: 15496449  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


359. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2005 Jan;90(1):522-8. Epub 2004 Oct 19.

HOXA10, Pbx2, and Meis1 protein expression in the human endometrium: formation of
multimeric complexes on HOXA10 target genes.

Sarno JL(1), Kliman HJ, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology, and Reproductive Sciences, Yale
University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, Connecticut 06520,
USA.

HOXA10 is a transcription factor necessary for embryonic uterine development and 
for adult endometrial receptivity. The three-amino acid loop extension family of 
cofactors, including Pbx and Meis, provide HOX target gene specificity in
development and myeloid differentiation. Here we demonstrate the expression of
Pbx and Meis family cofactors in the human endometrium and their interaction with
HOXA10. Using immunohistochemical analysis, we found that Pbx2 and Meis1, but not
Pbx1, Pbx3, or Meis2, were expressed in human endometrium. HOXA10, Pbx2, and
Meis1 were expressed in the stroma throughout the menstrual cycle. The glandular 
expression of HOXA10 and Meis1 was menstrual cycle stage specific, whereas
glandular Pbx2 expression did not vary. Pbx2, but not Meis1, was expressed in
Ishikawa cells. EMSA demonstrated HOXA10-Pbx2 binding as a heterodimer to an
enhancer of the EMX2 gene, a known target of HOXA10 regulation. Ablation of the
Pbx binding site, but not ablation of the HOXA10 binding site in EMX2, resulted
in loss of dimer binding. Based on the observed expression and binding patterns
of Pbx2, Meis1, and HOXA10, it is likely that heterodimeric and trimeric
complexes involving these proteins determine HOXA10 target gene specificity.
Enhanced target gene specificity imparted by multimer binding is likely necessary
for HOXA10-mediated endometrial receptivity.

PMID: 15494461  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


360. Toxicology. 2004 Dec 1;205(1-2):55-63.

Estrogen receptor-alpha mediates the detrimental effects of neonatal
diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure in the murine reproductive tract.

Couse JF(1), Korach KS.

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Biology Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, National
Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, PO Box 12233, MD B3-02, NC 27709,
USA.

It is generally believed that estrogen receptor-dependent and -independent
pathways are involved in mediating the developmental effects of the synthetic
estrogen, diethylstilbestrol (DES). However, the precise role and extent to which
each pathway contributes to the resulting pathologies remains unknown. We have
employed the estrogen receptor knockout (ERKO) mice, which lack either estrogen
receptor-alpha (alphaERKO or estrogen receptor-beta (betaERKO), to gain insight
into the contribution of each ER-dependent pathway in mediating the effects of
neonatal DES exposure in the female and male reproductive tract tissues of the
mouse. Estrogen receptor-alpha female mice exhibited complete resistance to the
chronic effects of neonatal DES exposure that were obvious in exposed wild-type
animals, including atrophy and epithelial squamous metaplasia in the uterus;
proliferative lesions of the oviduct; and persistent cornification of the vaginal
epithelium. DES-mediated reduction in uterine Hoxa10, Hoxa11 and Wnt7a expression
that occurs wild-type females during the time of exposure was also absent in
alphaERKO females. In the male, alphaERKO mice exhibited complete resistance to
the chronic effects of neonatal DES exposure on the prostate, including decreased
androgen receptor levels, epithelial hyperplasia, and increased basal cell
proliferation. Although ERbeta is highly expressed in the prostate epithelium,
DES-exposed betaERKO males exhibited all of the effects of neonatal DES exposure 
that were observed in similarly exposed wild-type males. Therefore, the lack of
DES-effects on gene expression and tissue differentiation in the alphaERKO uterus
and prostate provides unequivocal evidence of an obligatory role for ERalpha in
mediating the detrimental actions of neonatal DES exposure in the murine
reproductive tract.

PMID: 15458790  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


361. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Sep 3;321(4):886-92.

Alteration of the timing of implantation by in vivo gene transfer: delay of
implantation by suppression of nuclear factor kappaB activity and partial rescue 
by leukemia inhibitory factor.

Nakamura H(1), Kimura T, Ogita K, Koyama S, Tsujie T, Tsutsui T, Shimoya K,
Koyama M, Kaneda Y, Murata Y.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Department of Specific Organ
Regulation, Osaka University Graduate School of Medicine, 2-2, Yamadaoka, Suita, 
Osaka 5650871, Japan.

Nuclear factor kappaB (NF-kappaB) is activated in the murine endometrium during
implantation period [Am. J. Reprod. Immunol. 51 (2004) 16]. Transient
transfection of IkappaBalpha mutant (IkappaBalphaM) cDNA into the mouse uterine
cavity using hemagglutinating virus of Japan envelope vector suppressed uterine
NF-kappaB activity less than half of that observed in control on days 3.5 and 4.5
p.c. IkappaBalphaM cDNA transfection led to significant delay of implantation.
After IkappaBalphaM cDNA transfection, LIF mRNA expression in the uterus was
significantly suppressed on days 3.5 and 4.5 p.c. Co-transfection of LIF cDNA
with IkappaBalphaM cDNA in the uterus partially rescued the delay of implantation
induced by suppression of NF-kappaB activity. Taken together, these findings
indicate that NF-kappaB activation determines the timing of the implantation, at 
least in part, via control of LIF expression.

PMID: 15358109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


362. J Mol Biol. 2004 Jul 23;340(5):1013-23.

A HOXA10 estrogen response element (ERE) is differentially regulated by 17
beta-estradiol and diethylstilbestrol (DES).

Akbas GE(1), Song J, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Division of Reproductive Endocrinology,
P.O. Box 208063, 333 Cedar Street, New Haven, CT 06520-8063, USA.

The molecular mechanisms by which estrogens regulate developmental gene
expression are poorly understood. While 17 beta-estradiol is normally present at 
high concentrations in pregnancy, exposure to the estrogen diethylstilbestrol
(DES) in utero induces developmental anomalies of the female reproductive tract. 
HOX gene expression is altered by DES, leading to abnormal Müllerian duct
differentiation. The mechanism of ligand-specific regulation of HOX gene
expression by estrogens has not been characterized. To elucidate the molecular
mechanism underlying ligand-specific estrogen regulation of HOXA10 expression, we
characterized regulatory regions of the human HOXA10 gene. We identified an
estrogen response element (ERE) in the human HOXA10 gene that mediated
differential ligand-specific estrogen-responsive transcriptional activation.
Deletional analysis and reporter expression assays identified two EREs, ERE1 and 
ERE2, each of which drove estrogen-responsive reporter expression in the Ishikawa
human uterine endometrial adenocarcinoma cell line. ERE1 drove reporter
expression maximally. This ERE bound ERalpha and ERbeta, and formed a complex
that included SRC-1, but not CBP, N-CoR or SMRT. HOXA10 ERE1 drove luciferase
reporter activity to eightfold the level driven by the consensus ERE in response 
to estradiol in Ishikawa cells. While most EREs demonstrate similar
transcriptional activity in response to DES or estradiol, here estradiol induced 
four- to sevenfold greater reporter activity than did DES from HOXA10 ERE1. DES
did not alter ER or SRC-1 binding to HOXA10 ERE1. HOXA10 ERE1 therefore
demonstrated ligand specificity distinct from the consensus ERE, and unrelated to
changes in ER or coactivator/corepressor binding. The ligand specificity of the
HOXA10 ERE may explain the molecular mechanism by which DES leads to reproductive
anomalies; differential ligand-specific activation of HOX genes may be a
molecular mechanism by which DES signaling leads to inappropriate HOX expression 
and to developmental patterning distinct from that induced by estradiol.

PMID: 15236964  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


363. J Soc Gynecol Investig. 2004 Jul;11(5):263-71.

Vitamin D and placental-decidual function.

Evans KN(1), Bulmer JN, Kilby MD, Hewison M.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Sciences, Institute of Biomedical Research, The University
of Birmingham, Queen Elizabeth Hospital, Birmingham B15 2TH, United Kingdom.

The active form of vitamin D (1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D(3), 1,25[OH](2)D(3)) has
well-established effects on bone metabolism and mineral homeostasis. However,
recently it has become clear that 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) has potent antiproliferative
and immunomodulatory actions that are not immediately linked to its role as a
skeletal regulator. Both the nuclear receptor for 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) (vitamin D
receptor, VDR) and the vitamin D-activating enzyme 1alpha-hydroxylase are
expressed in a wide variety of nonclassic tissues, highlighting the potential for
local autocrine-paracrine responses rather than traditional endocrine effects.
Prominent among the tissues that express 1alpha-hydroxylase is the
placenta-decidua, and this has raised important questions concerning the
potential role of locally generated 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) as a modulator of
fetal-placental development and function. When bound to the VDR, 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) 
regulates key target genes associated with implantation, such as HOXA10, whereas 
the potent immunosuppressive effects of 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) suggest a role in
implantation tolerance. These observations are further supported by data from our
group showing increased expression of 1alpha-hydroxylase and VDR in
first-trimester trophoblast and decidua from human pregnancies. Studies by other 
groups have reported abnormal expression of 1alpha-hydroxylase in preeclamptic
pregnancies, revealing a potential role for 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) as a regulator of
placentation. The effect of vitamin D on reproduction has been further endorsed
by murine gene knockout models for 1alpha-hydroxylase and VDR, both of which are 
infertile. These observations and others are discussed in this article in which
we postulate an active role for 1,25(OH)(2)D(3) in placenta-decidua. In
particular, we describe how induction of the vitamin D-activating enzyme
1alpha-hydroxylase in early gestation might provide a mechanism by which
environmental or dietary vitamin D can influence fetal-placental development.

PMID: 15219879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


364. J Biochem. 2004 Jun;135(6):695-700.

Human histone deacetylase SIRT2 interacts with the homeobox transcription factor 
HOXA10.

Bae NS(1), Swanson MJ, Vassilev A, Howard BH.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular and Growth Regulation, National Institute of Child
Health and Human Development, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, 
USA. NSB@stowers-institute.org

Histone deacetylases are required for transcriptional repression in eukaryotes.
Saccharomyces cerevisiae has several histone deacetylases, of which ySir2p is the
most conserved throughout evolution. Currently, there is no report on the
interacting protein partner of a human Sir2 homolog, SIRT2. Here we show for the 
first time that SIRT2 interacts with the homeobox transcription factor, HOXA10,
which was identified in a two-hybrid screen. Interactions were confirmed by
co-immunoprecipitation from in vitro translations as well as in human cell-free
extracts. Taken together with mouse knockout studies, our results raise the
intriguing possibility that SIRT2 plays a role in mammalian development.

PMID: 15213244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


365. Reprod Biol Endocrinol. 2004 Jun 16;2:34.

Uterine receptivity and implantation: the regulation and action of insulin-like
growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1), HOXA10 and forkhead transcription
factor-1 (FOXO-1) in the baboon endometrium.

Kim JJ(1), Fazleabas AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Northwestern University, Chicago, IL,
USA. j-kim4@northwestern.edu

In primates, the phase of the menstrual cycle when the uterus becomes receptive
is initially dependent on estrogen and progesterone. Further morphological and
biochemical changes are induced as a result of biochemical signals between the
embryo and the maternal endometrium. Blastocyst implantation in the baboon
usually occurs between 8 and 10 days post ovulation and is similar to that
described for the rhesus macaque. In the baboon, when chorionic gonadotropin is
infused in a manner that mimics blastocyst transit, this has physiological
effects on the three major cell types in the uterine endometrium. The luminal
epithelium undergoes endoreplication and distinct epithelial plaques are evident.
The glandular epithelium responds by inducing transcriptional and
post-translational modifications in the major secretory product, glycodelin. The 
stromal fibroblasts initiate their differentiation process into a decidual
phenotype and are characterized by the expression of actin filaments.
Decidualization, is the major change that occurs in the primate endometrium after
conception. During this process the fibroblast-like stromal cells change
morphologically into polygonal cells and express specific decidual proteins.
Studies in the baboon demonstrated that insulin-like growth factor binding
protein-1 (IGFBP-1) gene expression is a conceptus-mediated response. Subsequent 
studies in vitro established that IGFBP-1 is transcriptionally regulated by FOXO1
and HOXA10 which together upregulate the IGFBP-1 promoter activity. A baboon
endometriosis model was utilized to determine if the changes observed during
uterine receptivity in normally cycling animals were compromised. The data
suggests that in animals with disease, markers of uterine receptivity are not
appropriately expressed in the eutopic endometrium. It is possible that these
differences influence the fertility of the animals with disease and the baboon
could be used as a primate model to study the causes of infertility as a result
of endometriosis.

PMCID: PMC446211
PMID: 15200677  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


366. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2004 May;190(5):1404-6.

HOXA10 gene expression in human fallopian tube and ectopic pregnancy.

Salih SM(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8063, USA.

OBJECTIVE: The molecular mechanisms underlying ectopic implantation have not been
well characterized. Here we investigate HOXA10 gene expression at the site of
ectopic implantation as compared with the endometrium and with the normal
fallopian tube.
STUDY DESIGN: Northern blot analysis was used to evaluate HOXA10 gene messenger
RNA level in various segments of normal pregnant and nonpregnant human fallopian 
tube, ectopic pregnancy, and endometrium.
RESULTS: Normal human fallopian tube expressed minimal levels of HOXA10 gene
messenger RNA in the nonpregnant state. A trend toward a greater expression of
HOXA10 gene was observed in the normal fallopian tube during pregnancy, but the
difference was not statistically significant (P =.075). HOXA10 gene messenger RNA
expression was up-regulated significantly at the site of implantation in ectopic 
pregnancy (P <.001), and its expression approached that of the endometrium during
normal pregnancy (P =.33).
CONCLUSION: HOXA10 gene expression is up-regulated at the ectopic implantation
site in the fallopian tube, approaching that of the endometrium in normal
intrauterine gestation. Inherently increased HOXA10 gene expression in the
fallopian tube or dysregulation of HOXA10 gene expression by an abnormally
implanting blastocyst may play a role in ectopic implantation.

PMID: 15167850  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


367. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2004 May;89(5):2390-6.

EMX2 gene expression in the female reproductive tract and aberrant expression in 
the endometrium of patients with endometriosis.

Daftary GS(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology, School of Medicine, Yale University,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

EMX2 is a transcription factor necessary for reproductive tract development. Sex 
steroids regulate endometrial HOXA10 expression, which in turn negatively
regulates EMX2. In this study, we characterize menstrual cycle-dependent
expression of EMX2 in endometrium from women with and without endometriosis. In
the absence of endometriosis, EMX2 mRNA levels declined 50% in periimplantation
endometrium compared with levels in the proliferative phase. To determine whether
the decrease in endometrial EMX2 expression was regulated by endogenous
endometrial HOXA10, primary endometrial stromal cells were transfected with an
EMX2-reporter construct containing a HOXA10 binding site. Acting via this site,
we observed HOXA10-mediated repression of reporter expression. In the endometrium
of patients with endometriosis, unlike normal endometrium, EMX2 levels were not
decreased in the periimplantation period. We have previously shown that
up-regulation of HOXA10 in periimplantation endometrium fails to occur in women
with endometriosis. To determine whether elevated endometrial EMX2 levels were
due to failure of HOXA10-mediated transcriptional repression, secondary to low
HOXA10 levels in endometriosis, we transfected stromal cells with HOXA10
antisense and an EMX2-reporter construct. Reporter expression was increased,
indicating reversal of HOXA10-mediated transcriptional repression. Endometrial
EMX2 expression is aberrant in women with endometriosis and is mediated by
altered HOXA10 expression.

PMID: 15126568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


368. J Biol Chem. 2004 Jul 9;279(28):29286-94. Epub 2004 Apr 26.

Subfertility, uterine hypoplasia, and partial progesterone resistance in mice
lacking the Kruppel-like factor 9/basic transcription element-binding protein-1
(Bteb1) gene.

Simmen RC(1), Eason RR, McQuown JR, Linz AL, Kang TJ, Chatman L Jr, Till SR,
Fujii-Kuriyama Y, Simmen FA, Oh SP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Arkansas for Medical
Sciences, Little Rock, Arkansas 72202, USA. simmernrosalia@uams.edu

Progesterone receptor (PR), a ligand-activated transcription factor, is a key
regulator of cellular proliferation and differentiation in reproductive tissues. 
The transcriptional activity of PR is influenced by co-regulatory proteins
typically expressed in a tissue- and cell-specific fashion. We previously
demonstrated that basic transcription element-binding protein-1 (BTEB1), a member
of the Sp/Krüppel-like family of transcription factors, functionally interacts
with the two PR isoforms, PR-A and PR-B, to mediate progestin sensitivity of
target genes in endometrial epithelial cells in vitro. Here we report that
ablation of the Bteb1 gene in female mice results in uterine hypoplasia, reduced 
litter size, and increased incidence of neonatal deaths in offspring. The reduced
litter size is solely a maternal genotype effect and results from fewer numbers
of implantation sites, rather than defects in ovulation. In the early pregnant
uterus, Bteb1 expression in stromal cells temporally coincides with PR-A
isoform-dependent decidual formation at the time of implantation. Expression of
two implantation-specific genes, Hoxa10 and cyclin D3, was decreased in uteri of 
early pregnant Bteb1-null mutants, whereas that of Bteb3, a related family
member, was increased, the latter possibly compensating for the loss of Bteb1.
Progesterone responsiveness of several uterine genes was altered with Bteb1-null 
mutation. These results identify Bteb1 as a functionally relevant PR-interacting 
protein and suggest its selective modulation of cellular processes that are
regulated by PR-A in the uterine stroma.

PMID: 15117941  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


369. Gene. 2004 Apr 28;331:53-63.

Differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells are closely 
related with homeotic genes and a group of differentially expressed genes.

Mizusawa N(1), Hasegawa T, Ohigashi I, Tanaka-Kosugi C, Harada N, Itakura M,
Yoshimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima City, Japan.

To identify the genes that determine differentiation phenotypes, we compared gene
expression of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells, which are derived from the 
common precursor and secrete insulin and glucagon, respectively. The expression
levels of homeotic genes including Hox genes known to determine region
specificity in the antero-posterior (AP) body axis, tissue-specific homeobox
genes, and other 8,734 genes were compared in a beta- and alpha-cell line of MIN6
and alpha TC1.6. The expression of homeotic genes were surveyed with reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using degenerate primers
corresponding to invariant amino acid sequences within the homeodomain and
subsequently with specific primers. Expression of Hoxc6, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Pdx1,
Cdx2, Gbx2, Pax4, and Hlxb9 genes in MIN6 was higher than those in alpha TC1.6,
while expression of Hoxa2, Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hoxa13,
Hoxb3, Hoxb5, Hoxb6, Hoxb13, Hoxb8, and Brain4 genes in alpha TC1.6 was higher
than those in MIN6. Out of 8,734 mouse genes screened with high-density mouse
cDNA microarrays for MIN6- and alpha TC1.6-derived cDNA, 58 and 25 genes were
differentially over- and under-expressed in MIN6, respectively. GLUTag, which is 
derived from a large bowel tumor and expresses the proglucagon gene, showed a
comparatively similar expression profile to that of alpha TC1.6 in both homeotic 
and other genes analyzed in cDNA microarray. Our results are consistent with the 
interpretation that not only the tissue-specific homeotic genes, but also Hox
genes are related to differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic beta- and
alpha-cells rather than their regional specification of the body in vertebrates.

PMID: 15094191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


370. Development. 2004 May;131(9):2061-72. Epub 2004 Apr 8.

Wnt5a is required for proper epithelial-mesenchymal interactions in the uterus.

Mericskay M(1), Kitajewski J, Sassoon D.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Department Molecular, Cell and Developmental Biology, Mount Sinai
Medical School, 1 G Levy Place, New York, NY 10029, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions play a crucial role in the correct patterning
of the mammalian female reproductive tract (FRT). Three members of the Wnt family
of growth factors are expressed at high levels in the developing FRT in the mouse
embryo. The expression of Wnt genes is maintained in the adult FRT, although
levels fluctuate during estrous. Wnt4 is required for Müllerian duct initiation, 
whereas Wnt7a is required for subsequent differentiation. In this study, we show 
that Wnt5a is required for posterior growth of the FRT. We further demonstrate
that the mutant FRT has the potential to form the posterior compartments of the
FRT using grafting techniques. Postnatally, Wnt5a plays a crucial role in the
generation of uterine glands and is required for cellular and molecular responses
to exogenous estrogens. Finally, we show that Wnt5a participates in a regulatory 
loop with other FRT patterning genes including Wnt7a, Hoxa10 and Hoxa11. Data
presented provide a mechanistic basis for how uterine stroma mediates both
developmental and estrogen-mediated changes in the epithelium and demonstrates
that Wnt5a is a key component in this process. The similarities of the Wnt5a and 
Wnt7a mutant FRT phenotypes to those described for the Hoxa11 and Hoxa13 mutant
FRT phenotypes reveal a mechanism whereby Wnt and Hox genes cooperate to pattern 
the FRT along the anteroposterior axis.

PMID: 15073149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


371. Cancer Biol Ther. 2004 Jun;3(6):568-72. Epub 2004 Jun 15.

HOXA10 regulates p53 expression and matrigel invasion in human breast cancer
cells.

Chu MC(1), Selam FB, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06511, USA.

HOX genes regulate cell differentiation during embryonic development. Here we
demonstrate HOXA10 expression in both benign and malignant adult human breast
tissue and in MCF-7, but not BT20 breast cancer cells. We have previously shown
that HOXA10 mediates uterine differentiation in response to estrogens. The
mechanism of action of estradiol and other estrogen receptor modulators on breast
cancer cell growth is still poorly understood. MCF-7 cells, which are ER (+) and 
express HOXA10, were used to assay the effect of estradiol and tamoxifen on
HOXA10 expression. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR and northern analysis revealed that
treatment with either estradiol or tamoxifen increased HOXA10 mRNA expression.
BT20 cells, which are ER (-) and do not endogenously express HOXA10, were used to
assay the effect of increased HOXA10 expression on p53 expression and on the
invasive phenotype. Constitutively expressing HOXA10 in BT20 cells increased p53 
protein expression. Increased HOXA10 also reduced invasiveness through matrigel. 
The mechanism by which estrogen and other estrogen receptor modulators influence 
both normal breast development as well as breast cancer may involve the
regulation of developmental control genes such as HOXA10; HOXA10 in turn
regulates expression of key downstream genes such as p53 and regulates tumor cell
functional phenotype.

PMID: 15044858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


372. Placenta. 2004 Apr;25 Suppl A:S26-31.

Implantation: embryonic signals and the modulation of the uterine environment--a 
review.

Fazleabas AT(1), Kim JJ, Strakova Z.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Illinois at Chicago,
820 South Wood Street, Chicago, IL 60612-7313, USA. asgi@uic.edu

Interaction between maternal endometrium and embryo during implantation is
mediated through the multiple molecules and signalling cascades, which are still 
not fully understood. This complex sequence of events results in the
transformation of stromal cells into decidual cells (decidualization). The
conceptus is essential to regulate these changes in baboon stromal fibroblasts,
possibly through production of cytokines by the implanting embryo. The role of
interleukin-1 (IL-1) system during implantation and its contribution to
decidualization is discussed in this review. Decidualized endometrial stromal
cells are thought to contribute to establishment of a successful pregnancy by
expressing a number of gene products. One of the major products of decidual cells
is insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1). The IGFBP-1 serves as 
a modulator of insulin-like growth factor (IGF) protein action in the
interactions between the decidua and invading trophoblast. The delineation of the
mechanisms involved in cooperative action of transcription factors FKHR and
HOXA10 leading to IGFBP-1 expression, as well as interrelationship between IL-1
and IGF signalling cascades will contribute to the understanding of events
leading to successful implantation.

PMID: 15033303  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


373. Zhonghua Yu Fang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2004 Jan;38(1):33-5.

[Molecular genetic mechanism of sodium arsenite on growth and development].

[Article in Chinese]

Yao H(1), Wang GQ, Zhu B, Sun Y, Jing FX, Zhao JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Environmental Hygience, Xinjiang Medical University.Urumuqi
830054, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of sodium arsenite on gene expression related to 
growth and development and explored the molecular mechanism of arsenic effects
using gene chips.
METHODS: Normal human hepatic cells were dripped on chips and then hybrided with 
the first strand of cDNA from hepatic cell exposed to different concentration of 
sodium arsenite. Gene sequence of clone differently expressed was determined and 
then defined which gene it was and finally those genes which associated with
growth and development were identified.
RESULTS: The p55 gene expression level of two experimental groups was severaly
2.21 and 2.93 times as the control group. The PL gene level of two experimental
groups were 0.13 and 0.27 times as the control group, and the HOXA10 gene level
was 0.22 and 0.35 times of the control group. These results indicated that sodium
arsenite increase p55 gene expression, and inhibited PL and HOXA10 gene
expression.
CONCLUSIONS: The sodium arsenite could affect the gene expression related to
growth and development and it is shown that the molecular genetic mechanism of
sodium arsenite is related to growth and development.

PMID: 14989901  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


374. Biol Reprod. 2004 Jun;70(6):1870-6. Epub 2004 Feb 25.

Gene expression profiling of neonatal mouse uterine development.

Hu J(1), Gray CA, Spencer TE.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Animal Biotechnology and Genomics and Department of Animal Science,
Texas A&M University, College Station, Texas 77843-2471, USA.

Postnatal uterine development involves differentiation and development of the
endometrial glandular epithelium from the luminal epithelium as well as
development of the mesenchyme into the endometrial stroma and myometrium. This
period of development is critical because exposure of neonates to endocrine
disruptors compromises reproductive cycles and pregnancy in the adult. However,
the hormonal, cellular, and molecular mechanisms regulating postnatal uterine
development remain largely unknown. In order to identify candidate genes and gene
networks that regulate postnatal uterine development, uteri were collected from
CD-1 outbred mice on postnatal days (PND) 3, 6, 9, 12, and 15, and gene
expression profiling was conducted using Affymetrix mouse genome U74Av2 GeneChips
in study 1. Of the approximately 12,000 genes analyzed, 9002 genes were expressed
in the uterus and expression of 3012 genes increased or decreased 2-fold during
uterine development. In study 2, the uterine epithelium was enzymatically
separated from the stroma/myometrium on PNDs 3, 6, and 9, and gene expression
profiling was conducted using CodeLink UniSet Mouse I Expression Bioarrays.
Results from these two studies support the hypothesis that postnatal uterine
development is a complex process involving overlapping positive and negative
changes in uterine epithelial and stromal/myometrial gene expression. Candidate
genes regulating uterine development encode secreted factors (Wnt5a, Wnt7a),
transcription factors (Hoxa10, Hoxa11, Hoxd10, MSX-1), enzymes (matrix
metalloproteinases, cathepsin, carbonic anhydrase), growth factors (IGF-II, IGF
binding proteins), and components of the extracellular matrix (osteopontin) to
name a few. The candidate genes and gene networks identified by transcriptional
profiling provide an important foundation to discern and understand mechanisms
regulating postnatal uterine morphogenesis.

PMID: 14985250  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


375. Mol Endocrinol. 2004 May;18(5):1238-50. Epub 2004 Feb 19.

Uterine Msx-1 and Wnt4 signaling becomes aberrant in mice with the loss of
leukemia inhibitory factor or Hoxa-10: evidence for a novel cytokine-homeobox-Wnt
signaling in implantation.

Daikoku T(1), Song H, Guo Y, Riesewijk A, Mosselman S, Das SK, Dey SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Vanderbilt University Medical Center, Nashville,
Tennessee 37232-2678, USA.

Successful implantation absolutely depends on the reciprocal interaction between 
the implantation-competent blastocyst and the receptive uterus. Expression and
gene targeting studies have shown that leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), a
cytokine of the IL-6 family, and Hoxa-10, an abdominalB-like homeobox gene, are
crucial to implantation and decidualization in mice. Using these mutant mice, we 
sought to determine the importance of Msx-1 (another homeobox gene formerly known
as Hox-7.1) and of Wnt4 (a ligand of the Wnt family) signaling in implantation
because of their reported functions during development. We observed that Msx-1,
Wnt4, and a Wnt antagonist sFRP4 are differentially expressed in the mouse uterus
during the periimplantation period, suggesting their role in implantation. In
addition, we observed an aberrant uterine expression of Msx-1 and sFRP4 in Lif
mutant mice, and of Wnt4 and sFRP4 in Hoxa-10 mutant mice, further reinforcing
the importance of these signaling pathways in implantation. Collectively, the
present results provide evidence for a novel cytokine-homeotic-Wnt signaling
network in implantation.

PMID: 14976223  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


376. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Mar;24(5):1907-17.

Differential and common leukemogenic potentials of multiple NUP98-Hox fusion
proteins alone or with Meis1.

Pineault N(1), Abramovich C, Ohta H, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver V5Z 1L3,
Canada.

NUP98-Hox fusion genes are newly identified oncogenes isolated in myeloid
leukemias. Intriguingly, only Abd-B Hox genes have been reported as fusion
partners, indicating that they may have unique overlapping leukemogenic
properties. To address this hypothesis, we engineered novel NUP98 fusions with
Hox genes not previously identified as fusion partners: the Abd-B-like gene
HOXA10 and two Antennepedia-like genes, HOXB3 and HOXB4. Notably, NUP98-HOXA10
and NUP98-HOXB3 but not NUP98-HOXB4 induced leukemia in a murine transplant
model, which is consistent with the reported leukemogenic potential ability of
HOXA10 and HOXB3 but not HOXB4. Thus, the ability of Hox genes to induce leukemia
as NUP98 fusion partners, although apparently redundant for Abd-B-like activity, 
is not restricted to this group, but rather is determined by the intrinsic
leukemogenic potential of the Hox partner. We also show that the potent
leukemogenic activity of Abd-B-like Hox genes is correlated with their strong
ability to block hematopoietic differentiation. Conversely, coexpression of the
Hox cofactor Meis1 alleviated the requirement of a strong intrinsic
Hox-transforming potential to induce leukemia. Our results support a model in
which many if not all Hox genes can be leukemogenic and point to striking
functional overlap not previously appreciated, presumably reflecting common
regulated pathways.

PMCID: PMC350554
PMID: 14966272  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


377. J Pediatr Endocrinol Metab. 2004 Jan;17(1):41-5.

Homeobox HOXA10 gene analysis in cryptorchidism.

Bertini V(1), Bertelloni S, Valetto A, Lala R, Foresta C, Simi P.

Author information: 
(1)Cytogenetic and Molecular Biology Unit, Santa Chiara Hospital, Pisa, Italy.
s.bertelloni@clp.med.unipi.it

BACKGROUND: In male mice, targeted disruption of the homeobox gene hoxa10 causes 
cryptorchidism and infertility. Genetic alterations in exon 1 of HOXA10 have been
found in a high number of boys with cryptorchidism.
AIM: To evaluate whether mutations of HOXA10 can be a common cause of
cryptorchidism.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: Genomic DNA was extracted from 18 patients with
cryptorchidism (age 7-44 years; unilateral n = 13; no familial cases) and 28
healthy controls (age 9-39 years). HOXA10 was amplified by PCR and all coding
sequences of exon 1 and 2 were sequenced. The PCR products were digested by ScrFI
restriction enzyme and the restriction fragments obtained were analyzed on 2%
agarose gel.
RESULTS: One silent polymorphism, G-->A substitution at position 1203, was
detected in 2/18 patients (11.1%). The same polymorphism was detected in 3/28
controls (10.7%).
CONCLUSIONS: These data on HOXA10 analysis indicate that alterations of this gene
may be more rare in males with cryptorchidism than previously suggested. This
finding agrees with the rare occurrence of INSL3 gene mutations in human
cryptorchidism, but needs to be confirmed in a larger series of selected
patients.

PMID: 14960020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


378. Curr Opin Pediatr. 2004 Feb;16(1):15-22.

Inherited thrombocytopenias: toward a molecular understanding of disorders of
platelet production.

Geddis AE(1), Kaushansky K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of California, San Diego, USA.
Ageddis@ucsd.edu

PURPOSE OF REVIEW: To review the defined syndromes of inherited thrombocytopenia 
and discuss new genetic data for several disorders that shed light on the process
of megakaryopoiesis.
RECENT FINDINGS: The genes responsible for several inherited thrombocytopenias
have been recently discovered, including congenital amegakaryocytic leukemia,
amegakaryocytic thrombocytopenia with radio-ulnar synostosis, familial platelet
syndrome with predisposition to acute myelogenous leukemia, Paris-Trousseau,
Wiskott-Aldrich syndrome, and the May-Hegglin, Sebastian, Epstein, and Fechner
syndromes. These clinical syndromes, combined with studies in mouse and in vitro 
models, reveal the importance of these genes for normal hematopoiesis.
SUMMARY: Although inherited syndromes of thrombocytopenia are rare,
characterization of mutations in these disorders has contributed greatly to our
understanding of megakaryocyte and platelet development. A systematic registry of
congenitally thrombocytopenic individuals would almost certainly lead to new
genetic discoveries.

PMID: 14758109  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


379. J Neurosci Res. 2004 Feb 1;75(3):307-19.

Identification of a Hoxd10-regulated transcriptional network and combinatorial
interactions with Hoxa10 during spinal cord development.

Hedlund E(1), Karsten SL, Kudo L, Geschwind DH, Carpenter EM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Psychiatry, David Geffen School of Medicine at UCLA, Los
Angeles, California, USA.

Hoxd10 is expressed in the posterior spinal cord and hindlimbs of the mouse.
Hoxd10, along with other Hox transcription factors, is thought to regulate the
activity of genes involved in nervous system patterning and motor neuron
development, but little is known about the downstream targets regulated by this
gene. cDNA microarrays were used to investigate the transcriptional network
regulated by Hoxd10 in homozygous knockout animals. Sixty-nine genes were
identified with altered expression levels in mutant spinal cords. Among these
were genes involved in such diverse cellular events as cellular communication,
cell cycle control, development and differentiation, and neuronal survival. The
expression of some of these genes was investigated using reverse
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and in situ hybridization. Nine 
genes showed changes in expression of the same sign and similar magnitude using
RT-PCR in Hoxd10 single mutant animals, with additional changes in expression
seen in Hoxa10/Hoxd10 double mutant animals. In situ hybridization studies also
demonstrated changes in expression consistent with microarray results. Analysis
of putative promoter regions for Hox protein binding sites suggested that some
genes may be direct Hoxd10 targets, whereas others likely are regulated through
intermediate steps. Using cDNA microarrays to study a single gene knockout during
critical developmental stages has identified a large number of genes regulated by
Hoxd10, many of which would not have been approached as candidates for Hox gene
regulation based on function or expression.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14743444  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


380. J Biochem Mol Toxicol. 2003;17(6):346-56.

Axial skeletal and Hox expression domain alterations induced by retinoic acid,
valproic acid, and bromoxynil during murine development.

Kawanishi CY(1), Hartig P, Bobseine KL, Schmid J, Cardon M, Massenburg G,
Chernoff N.

Author information: 
(1)Reproductive Toxicology Division, NHEERL (MD-67), U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, NC 27711, USA.

Retinoic acid (RA) alters the developmental fate of the axial skeletal anlagen.
"Anteriorizations" or "posteriorizations," the assumption of characteristics of
embryonic areas normally anterior or posterior to the affected tissues, are
correlated with altered embryonal expression domains of Hox genes after in utero 
RA treatment. These "homeotic" changes have been hypothesized to result from
alterations of a "Hox cod" which imparts positional identity in the axial
skeleton. To investigate whether such developmental alterations were specific to 
RA, or were a more general response to xenobiotic exposure, CD-1 pregnant mice
were exposed to RA, valproic acid (VA), or bromoxynil (Br) during organogenesis. 
Additionally, the expression domains of two Hox genes, Hoxa7 and Hoxa10, were
examined in gestation day (GD) 12.5 embryos obtained from control, RA, VA, or Br,
treated gravid dams exposed on GD 6, 7, or 8. The anterior expression boundary of
Hoxa7 is at the level of the C7/T1 vertebrae and that of Hoxa10 is at L6/S1.
Compound-induced changes in the incidence of skeletal variants were observed.
These included supernumerary cervical ribs (CSNR) lateral to C7, 8
vertebrosternal ribs, supernumerary lumbar ribs (LSNR) lateral to L1, extra
presacral vertebrae, and the induction of vertebral and/or rib malformations. RA 
and VA administration on GD 6 caused posteriorization in the cervico-thoracic
region (CSNR) while GD 8 exposure to any of the three compounds resulted in
anteriorizations in the thoraco-lumbar area (LSNR and an increase in the number
of presacral vertebrae). These effects occurred across regions of the axial
skeleton. Analysis of gene expression demonstrated changes in the anterior
boundaries of Hoxa7 expression domains in embryos treated on GD 6 and 8 with RA. 
VA and Br did not induce any statistically significant alterations in Hoxa7 and
none of the compounds caused alterations in Hoxa10 expression domains. The
studies indicate that RA GD 6 treatment-induced Hoxa7 shifts were rostral
(posteriorization) while the RA-induced GD 8 anterior expression boundary shift
was caudal (anteriorization), correlating with the axial skeletal changes noted. 
These data suggest that xenobiotic compounds such as VA and Br may induce similar
axial skeletal changes by affecting different components of the developmental
processes involved in the patterning of the axial skeleton.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc. J Biochem Mol Toxicol 17:346-356, 2003;
Published online in Wiley InterScience (www.interscience.wiley.com). DOI
10.1002/jbt.10098

PMID: 14708090  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


381. Development. 2004 Jan;131(2):299-309. Epub 2003 Dec 10.

Multiple roles of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 in the formation of the mammalian forelimb
zeugopod.

Boulet AM(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Mutations in the 5' or posterior murine Hox genes (paralogous groups 9-13)
markedly affect the formation of the stylopod, zeugopod and autopod of both
forelimbs and hindlimbs. Targeted disruption of Hoxa11 and Hoxd11 or Hoxa10,
Hoxc10 and Hoxd10 result in gross mispatterning of the radius and ulna or the
femur, respectively. Similarly, in mice with disruptions of both Hoxa13 and
Hoxd13, development of the forelimb and hindlimb autopod is severely curtailed.
Although these examples clearly illustrate the major roles played by the
posterior Hox genes, little is known regarding the stage or stages at which Hox
transcription factors intersect with the limb development program to ensure
proper patterning of the principle elements of the limb. Moreover, the cellular
and/or molecular bases for the developmental defects observed in these mutant
mice have not been described. In this study, we show that malformation of the
forelimb zeugopod in Hoxa11/Hoxd11 double mutants is a consequence of
interruption at multiple steps during the formation of the radius and ulna. In
particular, reductions in the levels of Fgf8 and Fgf10 expression may be related 
to the observed delay in forelimb bud outgrowth that, in turn, leads to the
formation of smaller mesenchymal condensations. However, the most significant
defect appears to be the failure to form normal growth plates at the proximal and
distal ends of the zeugopod bones. As a consequence, growth and maturation of
these bones is highly disorganized, resulting in the creation of amorphous bony
elements, rather than a normal radius and ulna.

PMID: 14668414  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


382. Mol Reprod Dev. 2004 Jan;67(1):8-14.

Pleiotropic effects of Hoxa10 on the functional development of peri-implantation 
endometrium.

Daftary GS(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Endocrinology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Hoxa10, a homeodomain transcription factor, is dynamically expressed in adult
uterine endometrium where it is necessary for embryo implantation. Endometrial
Hoxa10 expression is driven by estrogen and progesterone. High levels of
endometrial Hoxa10 expression coincide with high progesterone levels and
development of endometrial receptivity. Although, progesterone is sufficient for 
endometrial differentiation and implantation, the molecular mechanisms by which
progesterone mediates endometrial receptivity are not known. To determine if
Hoxa10 mediates the developmental effects of progesterone in the endometrial cell
compartments, we performed in vivo uterine transfection using pcDNA3.1/Hoxa10 in 
estrogen-primed, ovariectomized mice and compared results to mice treated with
progesterone. Additional control mice were treated with either estrogen alone or 
empty vector pcDNA3.1. By using ovariectomized mice, we were able to determine
specific developmental effects resultant from Hoxa10 treatment and distinguish
them from those mediated by the regulation of multiple endogenous genes
(including Hoxa10) by ovarian progesterone. Treatment with either Hoxa10 or
progesterone resulted in diminished uterine weight and increased expression of
characteristic cell-type specific differentiation markers such as epithelial
calcitonin and stromal prolactin, suggesting that Hoxa10 likely mediates
progesterone induced functional differentiation of endometrial epithelium and
stroma. However, progesterone treatment suppressed endometrial eosinophil
infiltration and degranulation compared to that seen with Hoxa10 treatment.
Besides mediating progestational effects, Hoxa10 may activate distinct
developmental pathways leading to endometrial differentiation. Functional
differentiation in regenerative adult tissues may depend on timed expression of
embryonic selector genes. Mol. Reprod. Dev. 67: 8-14, 2004.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 14648870  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


383. Blood. 2004 Mar 1;103(5):1823-8. Epub 2003 Nov 13.

Hoxa9 influences the phenotype but not the incidence of Mll-AF9 fusion gene
leukemia.

Kumar AR(1), Hudson WA, Chen W, Nishiuchi R, Yao Q, Kersey JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA.

Identification of the targets of mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion genes will
assist in understanding the biology of MLL fusion gene leukemias and in
development of better therapies. Numerous studies have implicated HOXA9 as one of
the possible targets of MLL fusion proteins. To determine if HOXA9 was required
for leukemia development by MLL fusion genes, we compared the effects of the
Mll-AF9 knock-in mutation in mice in the presence or absence of Hoxa9. Both
groups of mice showed myeloid expansion at 8 weeks and then developed myeloid
leukemia with a similar incidence and time course. The leukemia in the mice
lacking Hoxa9 generally displayed a more immature myeloid phenotype than that in 
the mice that were wild-type for Hoxa9. Gene expression profiling revealed that
expression of Mll-AF9 led to overexpression of Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and
Hoxa10. Thus, genes of the Hox-a cluster are important in defining the phenotype 
but not the incidence of Mll-AF9 leukemia. These results demonstrate that the
Mll-AF9 fusion gene disrupts the expression of several Hox genes, none of which
as a single gene is likely to be necessary for development of leukemia. Instead, 
we propose that the "Hox code" minimally defined by the Hoxa5-a9 cluster is
central to MLL leukemogenesis.

PMID: 14615372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


384. Fertil Steril. 2003 Nov;80(5):1169-74.

A soluble molecule secreted by human blastocysts modulates regulation of HOXA10
expression in an epithelial endometrial cell line.

Sakkas D(1), Lu C, Zulfikaroglu E, Neuber E, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the existence of a soluble signal, secreted from the
human blastocyst embryo, that induces HOXA10 gene expression before cell-cell
contact.
DESIGN: To analyze, by semiquantitative reverse transcriptase polymerase chain
reaction (RT-PCR), cell-free media that had contained human embryos cultured to
the blastocyst stage for a soluble molecule that induces HOXA10 expression in an 
endometrial epithelial cell line (Ishikawa).
SETTING: Assisted reproduction technology program of Yale University, New Haven, 
Connecticut.
PATIENT(S): Patients undergoing intracytoplasmic sperm injection (ICSI) or in
vitro fertilization (IVF) cycles. Treatment of Ishikawa cells with
blastocyst-conditioned media.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): Determination of HOXA10 gene expression.
RESULT(S): We demonstrate that cell-free media that had contained human embryos
cultured to the blastocyst stage contain a soluble molecule that induces HOXA10
expression in an endometrial epithelial cell line (Ishikawa). We found that hCG
does not induce HOXA10 in Ishikawa cells.
CONCLUSION(S): Soluble molecules induce a well-characterized marker of
endometrial receptivity in endometrial cells without blastocyst apposition.
Additionally, HOXA10 induction can serve as a means of evaluating human embryos
cultured for IVF and ET. High quality embryos may induce local endometrial
receptivity before trophectoderm-endometrial contact.

PMID: 14607569  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


385. J Biol Chem. 2003 Nov 28;278(48):47792-802. Epub 2003 Sep 25.

HoxA10 represses gene transcription in undifferentiated myeloid cells by
interaction with histone deacetylase 2.

Lu Y(1), Goldenberg I, Bei L, Andrejic J, Eklund EA.

Author information: 
(1)Fineberg School of Medicine and Robert H. Lurie Comprehensive Cancer Center,
Northwestern University, and Chicago Lakeside Veterans Affairs Hospital, Illinois
60611, USA.

The homeodomain proteins, HoxA10 and Pbx1a, interact with negative cis elements
to repress gene transcription in undifferentiated myeloid cells. The CYBB and
NCF2 genes, which encode the gp91PHOX and p67PHOX proteins, are two such
HoxA10-Pbx1a target genes. In previous studies, we found that HoxA10-Pbx1a
represses transcription of these genes by two mechanisms: competition for DNA
binding with transcriptional activators and endogenous repression activity. In
these studies, we identify a novel molecular mechanism of endogenous
transcriptional repression by HoxA10-Pbx1a. Endogenous repression activity of
other Hox-Pbx1a complexes requires recruitment of transcriptional co-repressor
proteins by Pbx1a. In contrast, our investigations have determined that HoxA10
has Pbx1a-independent endogenous repression activity. We find that this
transcriptional repression activity is abrogated by histone deacetylase
inhibitors, suggesting involvement of co-repressor proteins. Consistent with
this, we identify HoxA10 amino acids 224-249 as a Pbx1-independent repression
domain, which interacts with histone deacetylase 2. We have determined that this 
HoxA10 domain is not conserved with other Abd Hox proteins, although homology
exists with other transcription factors and co-repressors. Understanding the
roles different Hox proteins play in myeloid differentiation is a challenging
problem. Our results suggest that insight into this problem can be obtained from 
biochemical characterization of the various molecular mechanisms of Hox protein
function.

PMID: 14512427  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


386. Fertil Steril. 2003 Sep;80 Suppl 2:839-43.

Endometrial HOXA10 expression after controlled ovarian hyperstimulation with
recombinant follicle-stimulating hormone.

Taylor HS(1), Daftary GS, Selam B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA. hugh.taylor@yale.edu

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effects of controlled ovarian hyperstimulation and
resultant high levels of E(2) on endometrial HOXA10 expression (a marker of
endometrial receptivity).
DESIGN: Prospective study.
SETTING: University academic medical center.
PATIENT(S): Twenty-five women undergoing controlled ovarian hyperstimulation with
recombinant FSH and 30 fertile controls.
INTERVENTION(S): Endometrium was obtained by Pipelle endometrial biopsy on cycle 
days 21-25. In addition, Ishikawa cells (a well-differentiated endometrial
adenocarcinoma cell line) were treated with either E(2), recombinant FSH, GnRH
agonist, or GnRH antagonist. RNA was extracted and analyzed by quantitative
reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): HOXA10 expression.
RESULT(S): Endometrial HOXA10 expression in women undergoing controlled ovarian
hyperstimulation (COH) with recombinant FSH was not different from that in
fertile controls. Estradiol increased HOXA10 expression in Ishikawa cells in a
dose-dependent manner from 10(-9) to 10(-7) M. Neither recombinant FSH, GnRH
agonist, nor GnRH antagonist altered HOXA10 expression in these cells.
CONCLUSION(S): Controlled ovarian hyperstimulation did not inhibit endometrial
HOXA10 expression in vivo. In addition, in vitro endometrial cell HOXA10
expression was not altered by either recombinant FSH, GnRH agonist, or GnRH
antagonist. COH is unlikely to adversely impact endometrial receptivity.

PMID: 14505762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


387. Biol Reprod. 2004 Jan;70(1):39-45. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

HOXC and HOXD gene expression in human endometrium: lack of redundancy with HOXA 
paralogs.

Akbas GE(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

HOXA genes, essential regulators of differentiation in the embryo, are also
essential for adult cyclic endometrial development and for endometrial
receptivity. Mice deficient in Hoxa10 or Hoxa11 exhibit reduced fertility because
of defects in implantation. We hypothesized that HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and
HOXD11, paralogs of HOXA10 and HOXA11, might also be involved in endometrial
development. Here, we showed that the expression of HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and
HOXD11 was evident throughout the menstrual cycle in the endometrium by
semiquantitative reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction. In the
secretory phase, expression of HOXC10, HOXC11, and HOXD11 decreased to 4% and
HOXD10 decreased to 25% of the proliferative phase expression (P < 0.001, P <
0.001, P < 0.02, P < 0.01, respectively). In situ hybridization demonstrated
expression of each of these HOX genes primarily in the stroma and confirmed the
decreased expression in the secretory phase. HOXC10, HOXC11, HOXD10, and HOXD11
expression was not regulated by sex steroids in primary endometrial stromal cells
or Ishikawa cells. The expression and regulation of HOXC and HOXD genes varies
from that of HOXA10 and HOXA11. Whereas HOXA10 and HOXA11 are regulators of
endometrial differentiation, HOXC and HOXD genes likely regulate endometrial
proliferation. Paralogous HOX genes typically have a redundant function in
development; a novel evolutionary divergence of paralogous Hox genes has resulted
in HOXC and HOXD genes having distinct expression patterns, regulation, and
likely also distinct functions from HOXA genes. A network of HOX genes may be
involved in regulating multiple aspects of endometrial development, including
both proliferation and differentiation.

PMID: 12954737  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


388. J Neurobiol. 2003 Sep 15;56(4):328-37.

Hoxa10 and Hoxd10 coordinately regulate lumbar motor neuron patterning.

Lin AW(1), Carpenter EM.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Retardation Research Center, Department of Psychiatry, UCLA School of
Medicine, Los Angeles, California 90024, USA.

The paralogous Hox genes Hoxa10 and Hoxd10 are expressed in overlapping domains
in the developing lumbar spinal cord and surrounding mesoderm. Independent
inactivation of these two genes alters the trajectory of spinal nerves and
decreases the complement of motor neurons present in the lumbar spinal cord,
whereas dual inactivation of these two genes has been shown to alter peripheral
nerve growth and development in the mouse hindlimb. We have examined the
organization and distribution of lumbar motor neurons in the spinal cords of
Hoxa10/Hoxd10 double mutant animals. Double mutant animals have decreased numbers
of lumbar motor neurons in both the medial and lateral motor columns. The
anteroposterior position of the lumbar motor column is shifted caudally in double
mutant animals, and the distribution of motor neurons is altered across
individual spinal segments. Distinctions between classes of motor neurons based
on positional specificity appear disrupted in double mutants. Double mutants also
demonstrate abnormal spinal cord vasculature and altered kidney placement and
size. Our observations suggest that Hoxa10 and Hoxd10 activity is required to
specify the position of the lumbar motor column and to provide segmental
specification and identity for the lumbar motor neurons.

Copyright 2003 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 12918017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


389. Cancer Sci. 2003 May;94(5):437-41.

Homeobox gene expression and mutation in cervical carcinoma cells.

Hung YC(1), Ueda M, Terai Y, Kumagai K, Ueki K, Kanda K, Yamaguchi H, Akise D,
Ueki M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, China Medical College, Taiwan.
gyn017@poh.osaka-med.ac.jp

An association between deregulation of homeobox (HOX) gene expression and
oncogenic transformation has been recently reported in human tumors. In this
study, we investigated HOX gene expression and mutation in cervical carcinoma
cells. Using reverse transcription-PCR, 11 human cervical carcinoma cell lines
and 14 normal cervical tissue samples were examined for mRNA expression of the 39
class I HOX genes. DNA samples from 11 cell lines were tested for mutations in
exons 1 and 2 of the HOXA10 and A13 genes using overlapping primer pairs which
also cover intron 1 of these genes. HOXA1, B2, B4, C5, C10 and D13 genes were
expressed in 8, 7, 9, 9, 9 and 11 of 11 cervical carcinoma cell lines,
respectively, but not in any of the normal cervical tissues. HOXA9, A11, A13, B5,
C4, D3 and D9 genes were expressed in all cell lines and normal tissues. In
contrast, 13 of 39 HOX genes were silent in all materials examined. Single-strand
conformational polymorphism and sequence analysis revealed a C insertion after
base 1042 and/or a G to C substitution at base 1113 in intron 1 of the HOXA13
gene in 4 of 11 cell lines, however, neither deletions nor mutations were
detected in exons 1 and 2 of the HOX A10 and A13 genes. Our data suggest that the
expression of HOXA1, B2, B4, C5, C10 and D13 genes might be involved in the
process leading to the transformation of normal cervical cells.

PMID: 12824890  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


390. Mol Hum Reprod. 2003 Apr;9(4):175-81.

The molecular basis of cryptorchidism.

Ivell R(1), Hartung S.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Hormone and Fertility Research, University of Hamburg, Grandweg 
64, 22529 Hamburg, Germany.ivell@ihf.de

Cryptorchidism is the commonest malady to affect newborn male infants. Until
recently, the molecular aetiology of this syndrome was unclear. Cryptorchidism
may be part of a broader testicular dysgenesis syndrome, wherein a disturbance in
steroid hormone metabolism, possibly through a perturbed
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis could be involved. Disturbance may be
genetic, or extrinsic through endocrine disruptors. Recently, the role of
insulin-like factor-3 (INSL3; alternatively called relaxin-like factor) has been 
highlighted through the cryptorchid phenotype of mice where genes for either
INSL3 or its receptor have been ablated. INSL3 is produced by Leydig cells of the
fetal testis and acts upon the gubernacular ligament to retain the gonad in the
inguinal region, from which it later passes into the scrotum. INSL3 expression in
fetal testis is inhibited by maternal exposure to estrogens. Although to date no 
mutations have been found in the human INSL3 gene responsible for cryptorchidism,
one causative mutation in the INSL3 receptor (LGR8 or GREAT) has been reported.
Studies on developmental transcription factors, such as Hoxa-10 in mice, suggest 
that other specific molecular cascades could also lead to a cryptorchid
phenotype. Considering its frequency in newborn children, and the severity of the
untreated condition (infertility and often testicular cancer) these new findings 
should generate new information on possible causes and treatments.

PMID: 12651898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


391. Blood. 2003 Jul 1;102(1):262-8. Epub 2003 Mar 13.

Gene expression signatures in MLL-rearranged T-lineage and B-precursor acute
leukemias: dominance of HOX dysregulation.

Ferrando AA(1), Armstrong SA, Neuberg DS, Sallan SE, Silverman LB, Korsmeyer SJ, 
Look AT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Oncology, Mayer-630, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, 44 
Binney Street, Boston, MA 02115, USA.

Rearrangements of the MLL locus, located on human chromosome 11q23, are frequent 
in both infant and therapy-related leukemias. Gene expression analysis of
MLL-rearranged B-precursor acute lymphoblastic leukemias (MLL B-ALLs) has
identified these cases as a unique subtype of leukemia, characterized by the
expression of genes associated with both lymphoid and myeloid hematopoietic
lineages. Here we show that MLL fusions also generate a distinct genetic subtype 
of T-lineage ALL (MLL T-ALL), in which leukemic cells are characterized by an
early arrest in thymocyte differentiation, with suggestive evidence of commitment
to the gammadelta lineage. Interestingly, multiple genes linked to cell
proliferation (eg, PCNA, MYC, CDK2, and POLA) were down-regulated in MLL-fusion
samples, relative to those transformed by other T-ALL oncogenes (P <.000 001,
Fisher exact test). Overall, MLL T-ALL cases consistently demonstrated increased 
levels of expression of a subset of major HOX genes--HOXA9, HOXA10, and
HOXC6--and the MEIS1 HOX coregulator (P <.008, one-sided Wilcoxon test), a
pattern of gene expression that was reiterated in MLL B-ALLs. However, expression
of myeloid lineage genes, previously reported in MLL B-ALLs, was not identified
in T-lineage cases with this abnormality, suggesting that myeloid gene
dysregulation is dispensable in leukemic transformation mediated by MLL fusion
proteins. Our findings implicate dysregulation of HOX gene family members as a
dominant mechanism of leukemic transformation induced by chimeric MLL oncogenes.

PMID: 12637319  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


392. Mol Endocrinol. 2003 Apr;17(4):610-27. Epub 2003 Jan 9.

Gene expression profiling reveals progesterone-mediated cell cycle and
immunoregulatory roles of Hoxa-10 in the preimplantation uterus.

Yao MW(1), Lim H, Schust DJ, Choe SE, Farago A, Ding Y, Michaud S, Church GM,
Maas RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham & Women's Hospital and Harvard Medical School,
Thorn Building, Room 1019, 20 Shattuck Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02115, USA.

Human infertility and recurrent pregnancy loss caused by implantation defects are
poorly understood. Hoxa-10-deficient female mice have severe infertility and
recurrent pregnancy loss due to defective uterine implantation. Gene expression
profiling experiments reveal that Hoxa-10 is an important regulator of two
critical events in implantation: stromal cell proliferation and local
immunosuppression. At the time of implantation, Hoxa-10 mediates the
progesterone-stimulated proliferation of uterine stromal cells. Hoxa-10 mutants
express a stromal cell proliferation defect that is accompanied by quantitative
or spatial alterations in the expression of two cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor
genes, p57 and p15. Hoxa-10 deficiency also leads to a severe local immunological
disturbance, characterized by a polyclonal proliferation of T cells, that occurs 
in place of the normal progesterone-mediated immunosuppression in the
periimplantation uterus.

PMID: 12554760  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


393. Biol Reprod. 2003 Feb;68(2):423-38.

Sonic hedgehog cascade is required for penile postnatal morphogenesis,
differentiation, and adult homeostasis.

Podlasek CA(1), Zelner DJ, Jiang HB, Tang Y, Houston J, McKenna KE, McVary KT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology and Physiology, Northwestern University Medical School, 
Chicago, Illinois 60611, USA. cap325@northwestern.edu

The penis is unique in that it undergoes morphogenesis and differentiation
primarily in the postnatal period. For complex structures such as the penis to be
made from undifferentiated precursor cells, proliferation, differentiation, and
patterning are required. This process involves coordinated activity of multiple
signals. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) forms part of a regulatory cascade that is
essential for growth and morphogenesis of many tissues. It is hypothesized that
the penis utilizes regulatory mechanisms similar to those of the limb and
accessory sex organs to pattern penile postnatal morphogenesis and
differentiation and that the Shh cascade is critical to this process. To test
this hypothesis, Shh, BMP-4, Ptc, and Hoxa-10 localization and function were
examined in Sprague-Dawley rat penes by means of quantitative reverse
transcription polymerase chain reaction, in situ hybridization,
immunohistochemistry, and Western blotting. These genes were expressed in the
penis during postnatal morphogenesis in a spatially and temporally restricted
manner in adjacent layers of the corpora cavernosal sinusoids. The function of
Shh and BMP-4 is to establish and maintain corpora cavernosal sinusoids. The data
suggest that Ptc and Hoxa-10 are also important in penile morphogenesis. The
continuing function of Shh and targets of its signaling in maintaining penile
homeostasis in the adult is significant because disruption of Shh signaling
affects erectile function. This is the first report that demonstrates the
significant role that Shh plays in establishing and maintaining penile
homeostasis and how this relates to erectile function. These studies provide
valuable insight that may be applied to improve treatment options for erectile
dysfunction.

PMID: 12533405  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


394. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2003 Jan;88(1):238-43.

Regulation of HOXA-10 expression by testosterone in vitro and in the endometrium 
of patients with polycystic ovary syndrome.

Cermik D(1), Selam B, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS) affects approximately 5% of reproductive-age
women and is characterized by anovulation and increased androgen production.
Despite the ability to correct ovulatory disorders, pregnancy rates remain
paradoxically low, and spontaneous pregnancy loss rates are high. To determine
whether uterine dysfunction contributed to the adverse reproductive outcomes in
PCOS, we assessed the effect of the increased ovarian androgens on a
well-characterized gene essential to endometrial receptivity. Up-regulation of
HOXA10 in the endometrium is necessary for receptivity to embryo implantation. In
vitro, HOXA10 expression was repressed by testosterone but not by
dehydroepiandrosterone, dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate, or insulin. Testosterone 
also prevented the increased expression of HOXA10 previously reported with
estradiol or progesterone. Dihydrotestosterone produced an effect similar to that
of testosterone, whereas flutamide blocked the testosterone effect. Endometrial
biopsies, obtained from women with PCOS, demonstrated decreased HOXA10 mRNA.
Testosterone is a novel regulator of HOXA10. Diminished uterine HOXA10 expression
may contribute to the diminished reproduction potential of women with PCOS.

PMID: 12519859  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


395. Biol Reprod. 2003 Jan;68(1):24-30.

Regulation of insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 promoter activity by
FKHR and HOXA10 in primate endometrial cells.

Kim JJ(1), Taylor HS, Akbas GE, Foucher I, Trembleau A, Jaffe RC, Fazleabas AT,
Unterman TG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, University of Illinois at Chicago
College of Medicine and VA Chicago Healthcare System (West Side), Chicago,
Illinois 60612, USA.

Insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1 (IGFBP-1) is abundantly expressed in
the liver and decidualized endometrium. FKHR, a FOXO forkhead transcription
factor, stimulates IGFBP-1 promoter activity in liver cells through the insulin
response sequences (IRSs). HOXA10, a homeobox transcription factor, is important 
in the decidualization process. Here we show that FKHR and HOXA10 are expressed
in baboon endometrium during the menstrual cycle and pregnancy. Levels are lowest
during the follicular phase and highest in pregnancy. Reporter gene studies
reveal that FKHR stimulates both baboon and human IGFBP-1 promoter activity,
whereas HOXA10 alone has a relatively weak effect. When FKHR and HOXA10 are
expressed together, promoter activity is markedly up-regulated, which is
indicative of cooperativity. A DNA binding-deficient FKHR mutant fails to
stimulate promoter activity, even in the presence of HOXA10, and deletion or
mutation of IRSs also disrupts the effect of FKHR and cooperativity with HOXA10. 
Conversely, the IRS region placed upstream of the 31 base pair IGFBP-1 minimal
promoter is sufficient to mediate effects of FKHR and cooperativity with HOXA10. 
Pull-down studies reveal physical association between GST-FKHR and (35)S-HOXA10. 
These studies show that FKHR and HOXA10 interact directly and can function
cooperatively to stimulate IGFBP-1 promoter activity in endometrial cells and
perhaps in other settings.

PMID: 12493691  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


396. DNA Cell Biol. 2002 Nov;21(11):819-25.

Hox proteins activate the IGFBP-1 promoter and suppress the function of hPR in
human endometrial cells.

Gao J(1), Mazella J, Tseng L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, School of Medicine, State University 
of New York at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, New York 11794-8091, USA.

Previous studies have shown that progestin activates the transcription of IGFBP-1
(insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1). Four regions in the IGFBP-1
promotor have been identified to enhance the transcription. Two of the regions,
located at -73 to -65 bp and -319 to -311 bp formed identical DNA-protein
complexes with the nuclear extracts of endometrial stromal/decidual cells. To
identify the binding protein(s) in endometrial cells that interact with these two
regions, we have used the TGTCAATTA repeats (-319 to -11 bp of the IGFBP-1
promoter) to screen the human decidual cDNA library by yeast one-hybrid system.
We found that Hox A10, HoxA11, HoxB2, HoxB4, and HoxD11 interacted with the
TGTCAATTA repeats in yeast cells. Among these hox genes, the full-length coding
region of HoxA10, HoxA11, and HoxB4 were used for functional analysis in three
types of endometrial cells, undifferentiated endometrial stromal cells, decidual 
cells (differentiated stromal cells) and endometrial adenocarcinoma cell line
(HEC1-B). All these endometrial cells produce IGFBP-1. Transient transfection
assay showed that HoxA10 expression vector increased the promoter activity (the
IGFBP-1 proximal promoter containing TGC/TCAATTA and two functional PRE sites) in
endometrial stromal cells and in HEC-1B cells, but not in decidual cells. HoxB4
enhanced the promoter activity only in decidual cells, while HoxA11 had no
apparent effect in all three types of cells. To evaluate whether Hox proteins
would interact with progesterone receptor (hPR), cells were transfected with the 
promoter construct, Hox and hPR expression vectors. hPR alone activated the
IGFBP-1 promoter activity, but expression of Hox gene suppressed the activation. 
Hox proteins also suppressed the hPR enhanced promoter activities of MMTV
(containing consensus-PRE sites) and glycodelin (GdA, containing Sp1 site which
mediates the hPR function). These data showed that Hox genes selectively activate
the transcription of the IGFBP-1 and GdA genes in different types of endometrial 
cells. Hox genes, however, suppress the hPR enhanced activities. In addition, we 
found that HoxB4 expression was induced by estrogen and progestin. Other
investigators have shown that HoxA10 and 11 were stimulated by progestin. These
findings show that Hox proteins are molecular mediators of the steroid hormones
during endometrial cell development.

PMID: 12489992  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


397. Mol Cell Biol. 2003 Jan;23(1):1-13.

Transcriptional repression of peri-implantation EMX2 expression in mammalian
reproduction by HOXA10.

Troy PJ(1), Daftary GS, Bagot CN, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8063, USA.

HOXA10 is necessary for mammalian reproduction; however, its transcriptional
targets are not completely defined. EMX2, a divergent homeobox gene, is necessary
for urogenital tract development. In these studies we identify and characterize
the regulation of EMX2 by HOXA10. By using Northern analysis and in situ
hybridization, we found that EMX2 is expressed in the adult urogenital tract in
an inverse temporal pattern from HOXA10, suggestive of a negative regulatory
relationship. Constitutive expression of HOXA10 diminished EMX2 mRNA, whereas
blocking HOXA10 through the use of antisense resulted in high EMX2 mRNA
expression. Deletional analysis of the EMX2 5' regulatory region revealed that a 
150-bp element mediated transcriptional repression when cotransfected with
pcDNA3.1/HOXA10 in transient-transfection assays. Binding of HOXA10 protein to
this element was demonstrated by electrophoretic mobility shift assay and further
localized to a consensus HOXA10 binding site within this element by DNase I
footprinting. Site-directed mutagenesis abolished binding, as well as the
negative transcriptional regulation. Transcriptional activation of empty
spiracles, the Drosophila ortholog of EMX2, by Abdominal-B (HOXA10 ortholog) has 
been previously demonstrated. These findings demonstrate conservation of the
transcription factor-target gene relationship, although the direction of
regulation is reversed with possible evolutionary implications.

PMCID: PMC140663
PMID: 12482956  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


398. Fertil Steril. 2002 Nov;78(5):979-84.

Coordinated regulation of HOX gene expression in myometrium and uterine
leiomyoma.

Cermik D(1), Arici A, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To measure HOXA10 gene expression in uterine myometrium and leiomyoma 
throughout the menstrual cycle.
DESIGN: HOXA10 gene expression was measured in paired myometrium and leiomyoma
from the same uterus.
SETTING: University medical center.
PATIENT(S): Thirty-one patients with leiomyoma.
INTERVENTION(S): Collection of leiomyoma and myometrial tissue during
hysterectomy.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): HOXA10 gene expression was analyzed by Northern analysis
and quantified by laser densitometry.
RESULT(S): Both myometrium and leiomyoma continued to express HOXA10 in the adult
and menstrual cycle stage-specific regulation was evident in both tissues. During
the mid-secretory phase of the menstrual cycle, HOXA10 expression decreased in
both leiomyoma and myometrium. At all points in the menstrual cycle HOXA10
expression in leiomyoma was similar to expression in paired myometrium.
CONCLUSION(S): HOXA10 is expressed in both myometrium and leiomyoma. Coordinated 
regulation of this transcript factor suggests similar gene activation in both
leiomyoma and myometrium. Diminished expression of HOXA10, a gene that normally
causes differentiation, may allow increased growth resulting in the increased
mitosis seen in the secretory phase. The identification of this developmental
control gene in myometrium and leiomyoma may lead to a better understanding of
the molecular mechanisms responsible for growth and differentiation of these
tissues.

PMID: 12413981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


399. Biol Reprod. 2002 Oct;67(4):1268-77.

Studies using the estrogen receptor alpha knockout uterus demonstrate that
implantation but not decidualization-associated signaling is estrogen dependent.

Curtis Hewitt S(1), Goulding EH, Eddy EM, Korach KS.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental Toxicology, NIEHS, NIH, Research 
Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Ovarian hormonal signaling is essential for proper functioning of the uterus in
the establishment of pregnancy. Previous studies have demonstrated that
decidualization, a stromal transformation that occurs in response to embryo
implantation, can be elicited in the uterus of estrogen receptor alpha knockout
(alphaERKO) mice in the absence of the estrogen dependence normally seen in
wild-type (WT) mice for this response. While the alphaERKO stromal compartment
demonstrated the necessary decidual response, embryo implantation is a process
initiated in the epithelial layer, a uterine component that lacks estrogen
responsiveness in the alphaERKO. To determine if the alphaERKO uterus would be
competent for implantation, donor embryos were transferred into the uterine lumen
of WT and alphaERKO females that had been ovariectomized and treated with
exogenous estradiol and progesterone to mimic early pregnancy. No implantation
occurred in the alphaERKO, while implantation sites containing live embryos were 
seen in similarly treated WT uteri, indicating that functional estrogen receptor 
alpha (ERalpha) is required for implantation. Previous observations of
estrogen-independent decidualization in the alphaERKO prompted investigation of
the mechanism leading to estrogen independence of this process. The disruption of
progesterone receptor (PR), Hoxa10, Cox2, or LIF in transgenic mice results in
the loss of decidualization response. Therefore, the expression of these genes
was studied in WT and alphaERKO uteri by comparing expression following vehicle, 
progesterone alone (P), or estradiol priming followed by progesterone with
nidatory estradiol (E+Pe) and by comparing expression following the above
hormonal manipulations in addition to luminal infusion of oil used previously as 
decidualization-initiating stimulus. The whole-uterus level of PR and Hoxa10
mRNAs did not vary; however, the PR protein was induced in the stroma 24 h after 
oil infusion. Interestingly, in the WT, this induction was most apparent in
samples receiving E+Pe, while in the alphaERKO samples, the induction occurred
independent of any hormone priming. Cox2 protein and mRNA increased in both WT
and alphaERKO samples 2 h after oil infusion in all three of the treatment
groups. In the WT samples, Cox2 levels remained elevated 24 h after oil infusion 
only in the E+Pe treatment group; however, the elevated Cox2 was seen in samples 
taken 24 h after oil infusion in all three alphaERKO treatment groups. The
alphaERKO uterine tissue appeared to sustain more extensive damage when examined 
24 h after oil infusion. Severe trauma, such as crushing of the uterine tissue,
has previously been shown to remove the requirement for nidatory estradiol for
deciduomas to develop, indicating that the greater susceptibility of alphaERKO
uterine tissue to damage from intraluminal oil infusion is contributing to
decidualization in the absence of ERalpha. Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF) mRNA 
was also induced following estradiol treatment in the WT, but also following oil 
infusion in WT samples that were not treated with estradiol. In contrast,
estradiol does not induce LIF mRNA in the alphaERKO, but oil infusion leads to a 
robust increase in LIF in all alphaERKO sample groups. LIF binds and activates
its membrane receptor, which initiates responses including the phosphorylation
and nuclear translocation of Stat3 transcription factor. Thus, Stat3
phosphorylation was studied in WT and alphaERKO samples and found to be induced
following oil infusion in all samples. Together, these and previous observations 
illustrate that estrogen is essential for epithelial proliferation and embryo
implantation and that estrogen is dispensable for stromal decidualization in the 
alphaERKO, as the essential genes and signals required for the response are still
induced.

PMID: 12297545  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


400. Fertil Steril. 2002 Sep;78(3):577-80.

Hydrosalpinx fluid diminishes endometrial cell HOXA10 expression.

Daftary GS(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

OBJECTIVE: To determine the effect of hydrosalpinx fluid on the expression of
HOXA10, an essential regulator of endometrial receptivity.
DESIGN: In vitro study.
SETTING: Academic medical center.
PATIENT(S): Patients with unilateral or bilateral hydrosalpinx.
INTERVENTION(S): Hydrosalpinx fluid was aspirated from 10 patients at
laparoscopy. The fluid was serially diluted in minimum essential medium. Ishikawa
cells (an endometrial adenocarcinoma cell line, representative of endometrial
epithelium) were incubated with this fluid at concentrations of 10% and 50% for
48 hours. Cells were also incubated in undiluted minimum essential medium (MEM)
and in 10% serum as controls. After incubation, the cells were lysed in Trizol,
and total RNA was extracted and analyzed by Northern blot using a 32P-labeled
HOXA10 riboprobe. A 32P-labeled G3PDH probe was used as a control for loading.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURE(S): HOXA10 mRNA expression.
RESULT(S): HOXA10 mRNA expression in endometrial cells decreased with increasing 
concentrations of hydrosalpinx fluid. Densitometric analysis of the northern blot
revealed that HOXA10 mRNA expression was different from control at both
concentrations (P<.007).
CONCLUSION(S): HOXA10 is necessary for implantation in the murine model. HOXA10
expression is diminished by hydrosalpinx fluid. This effect on HOXA10 is a
potential molecular mechanism by which implantation rates are diminished in women
with hydrosalpinges.

PMID: 12215336  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


401. J Biol Chem. 2002 Sep 27;277(39):36878-88. Epub 2002 Jul 26.

SHP1 protein-tyrosine phosphatase regulates HoxA10 DNA binding and
transcriptional repression activity in undifferentiated myeloid cells.

Eklund EA(1), Goldenberg I, Lu Y, Andrejic J, Kakar R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago,
Illinois 60611, USA. e-eklund@northwestern.edu

The homeodomain protein HoxA10 interacts with negative cis elements to repress
gene transcription in undifferentiated myeloid cells. The CYBB and NCF2 genes,
which encode the gp91(PHOX) and p67(PHOX) proteins, are two such HoxA10 target
genes. During interferon gamma-induced myeloid differentiation, tyrosine
phosphorylation decreases HoxA10 DNA binding affinity and transcriptional
repression. Therefore, decreased HoxA10 repression contributes to increased CYBB 
and NCF2 transcription in differentiating myeloid cells. The current studies
investigate modulation of HoxA10 repression activity during myelopoiesis. We
determine that phosphorylation of tyrosine residues in the conserved homeodomain 
decreases HoxA10-DNA binding. We also determine that interaction of the
homeodomain phosphotyrosine residues with an adjacent domain in the HoxA10
protein is necessary for decreased DNA binding affinity. Since SHP1
protein-tyrosine phosphatase antagonizes myeloid differentiation and decreases
CYBB and NCF2 transcription, we investigated the influence of
SHP1-protein-tyrosine phosphatase (PTP) on HoxA10 tyrosine phosphorylation. We
find that SHP1-PTP activity increases HoxA10 target gene repression in
undifferentiated myeloid cells. Consistent with this, SHP1-PTP interacts with
HoxA10 and decreases homeodomain-tyrosine phosphorylation. These investigations
suggest that SHP1-PTP activity, in undifferentiated myeloid cells, influences
HoxA10 repression of myeloid-specific genes. Therefore, increased HoxA10
repression of myeloid gene transcription is a molecular mechanism for SHP1
inhibition of myeloid differentiation.

PMID: 12145285  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


402. Endocrinology. 2002 Aug;143(8):3044-59.

Gestational and lactational exposure of male mice to diethylstilbestrol causes
long-term effects on the testis, sperm fertilizing ability in vitro, and
testicular gene expression.

Fielden MR(1), Halgren RG, Fong CJ, Staub C, Johnson L, Chou K, Zacharewski TR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, National Food Safety and
Toxicology Center, Institute for Environmental Toxicology, Michigan State
University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA.

The objective of the study was to determine the long-term effects of gestational 
and lactational exposure to diethylstilbestrol (DES; 0, 0.1, 1, and 10 microg/kg 
maternal body weight) on mouse testicular growth, epididymal sperm count, in
vitro fertilizing ability, and testicular gene expression using cDNA microarrays 
and real-time PCR in mice on postnatal day (PND) 21, 105, and 315. In the high
dose group there was a persistent decrease in the number of Sertoli cells, and
sperm count was decreased on PND315 (P < 0.05). Sperm motion was unaffected;
however, the in vitro fertilizing ability of epididymal sperm was decreased in
the high dose group on both PND105 (P < 0.001) and PND315 (P < 0.05). Early and
latent alterations in the expression of genes involved in estrogen signaling
(estrogen receptor alpha), steroidogenesis (steroidogenic factor 1,
17alpha-hydroxylase/C17,20-lyase, P450 side chain cleavage, steroidogenic acute
regulatory protein, and scavenger receptor class B1), lysosomal function (LGP85
and prosaposin), and regulation of testicular development (testicular receptor 2,
inhibin/activin beta C, and Hoxa10) were confirmed by real-time PCR. The results 
demonstrate that early exposure to DES causes long-term adverse effects on
testicular development and sperm function, and these effects are associated with 
changes in testicular gene expression, even long after the cessation of DES
exposure.

PMID: 12130571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


403. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 2002 Jul;187(1):24-32.

Expression of homeobox gene transcripts in trophoblastic cells.

Zhang YM(1), Xu B, Rote N, Peterson L, Amesse LS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics/Gynecology, Wright State University School of
Medicine and College of Science and Mathematics, Dayton, Ohio 45409-2793, USA.

OBJECTIVE: This study was conducted to examine the dynamics of homeobox gene
expression in the differentiation of trophoblasts as a key to the understanding
of the regulatory mechanisms that are involved in placental development.
STUDY DESIGN: Expression of homeobox genes was examined in primary trophoblastic 
cells and in the BeWo choriocarcinoma model cell lines by molecular and
immunocytochemistry techniques.
RESULTS: We demonstrated the expression of 3 homeobox genes (HOX B6, HOX C6, and 
HOX A11) in primary trophoblastic cells. BeWo cells showed an expression pattern 
similar to that of the primary cell lines. In both primary trophoblasts and BeWo 
cells, the HOX A11 gene, but not the HOX B6 or HOX C6 genes, were found to
down-regulate with differentiation from single- to multinucleate giant cells.
CONCLUSION: This study demonstrates a novel expression pattern for HOX A11 gene
in trophoblastic differentiation and suggests that the down-regulation of HOX A11
may be necessary for the differentiation of cytotrophoblasts into
syncytiotrophoblasts.

PMID: 12114884  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


404. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2002 Jun;87(6):2924-30.

Progesterone withdrawal and estrogen activation in human parturition are
coordinated by progesterone receptor A expression in the myometrium.

Mesiano S(1), Chan EC, Fitter JT, Kwek K, Yeo G, Smith R.

Author information: 
(1)Mothers and Babies Research Center, John Hunter Hospital, Newcastle, New South
Wales 2310, Australia. smesiano@mail.newcastle.edu.au

In human parturition, progesterone withdrawal and estrogen activation are not
mediated by changes in progesterone and estrogen levels. Instead, these events
could be facilitated by changes in the responsiveness of the myometrium to
progesterone and estrogens via changes in PR and ER expression. We hypothesized
that functional progesterone withdrawal occurs by increased expression of the
type A PR (PR-A), which suppresses progesterone responsiveness, and that
functional estrogen activation occurs by increased myometrial expression of
ERalpha and/or ERbeta. To test this hypothesis we compared the abundance of mRNAs
(assessed by quantitative RT-PCR) encoding PR-A, PR-B, ERalpha, and ERbeta in
nonlaboring (n = 12) and laboring (n = 12) term human myometrium. PR-A, PR-B, the
PR-A/PR-B mRNA ratio, and ERalpha mRNA were significantly increased in laboring
myometrium, whereas ERbeta mRNA was low and unchanged. The PR-A/PR-B mRNA ratio
correlated positively with ERalpha mRNA levels in nonlaboring myometrium and with
HOXA10 mRNA levels in laboring myometrium. Because progesterone inhibits ERalpha 
and HOXA10 expression, these findings indicate that myometrial progesterone
responsiveness is inversely related to the extent of expression of PR-A relative 
to PR-B. ERalpha mRNA levels correlated positively with cyclooxygenase type 2 and
oxytocin receptor mRNA levels in nonlaboring myometrium, indicating that the
increase in ERalpha expression is directly associated with the activation of
contraction-associated genes and estrogen responsiveness. These data indicate
that in the term human myometrium, responsiveness to progesterone is controlled
by the expression of PR-A relative to PR-B and that a significant increase in
this ratio underlies functional progesterone withdrawal. Our data also indicate
that functional estrogen activation occurs by increased expression of ERalpha and
is linked to functional progesterone withdrawal. Interaction between the PR and
ER systems in the human myometrium may be critical for the control of human
parturition and the coordination of progesterone withdrawal and estrogen
activation required for parturition.

PMID: 12050275  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


405. Oncogene. 2002 May 13;21(21):3377-90.

Transcriptional regulation of granulocyte and monocyte development.

Friedman AD(1).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Pediatric Oncology, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, Maryland,
MD 21231, USA. adfrdman@jhmi.edu

Granulocytes and monocytes develop from a common myeloid progenitor. Early
granulopoiesis requires the C/EBPalpha, PU.1, RAR, CBF, and c-Myb transcription
factors, and terminal neutrophil differentiation is dependent upon C/EBPepsilon, 
PU.1, Sp1, CDP, and HoxA10. Monopoiesis can be induced by Maf-B, c-Jun, or Egr-1 
and is dependent upon PU.1, Sp1, and ICSBP. Signals eminating from cytokine
receptors modulate factor activities but do not determine cell fates.
Orchestration of the myeloid developmental program is achieved via cooperative
gene regulation, via synergistic and inhibitory protein-protein interactions, via
promoter auto-regulation and cross-regulation, via regulation of factor levels,
and via induction of cell cycle arrest: For example, c-Myb and C/EBPalpha
cooperate to activate the mim-1 and NE promoters, PU.1, C/EBPalpha, and CBF,
regulate the NE, MPO, and M-CSF Receptor genes. PU.1:GATA-1 interaction and C/EBP
suppression of FOG transcription inhibits erythroid and megakaryocyte gene
expression. c-Jun:PU.1, ICSBP:PU.1, and perhaps Maf:Jun complexes induce
monocytic genes. PU.1 and C/EBPalpha activate their own promoters, C/EBPalpha
rapidly induces PU.1 and C/EBPepsilon RNA expression, and RARalpha activates the 
C/EBPepsilon promoter. Higher levels of PU.1 are required for monopoiesis than
for B-lymphopoiesis, and higher C/EBP levels may favor granulopoiesis over
monopoiesis. CBF and c-Myb stimulate proliferation whereas C/EBPalpha induces a
G1/S arrest; cell cycle arrest is required for terminal myelopoiesis, perhaps due
to expression of p53 or hypo-phosphorylated Rb.

PMID: 12032776  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


406. Dev Biol. 2002 May 15;245(2):280-90.

Indian hedgehog as a progesterone-responsive factor mediating
epithelial-mesenchymal interactions in the mouse uterus.

Matsumoto H(1), Zhao X, Das SK, Hogan BL, Dey SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, University of Kansas
Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160-7336, USA.

Genes encoding components of the hedgehog signaling pathway are dynamically
expressed in the mouse uterus preparing for implantation. Indian hedgehog (Ihh), 
patched (Ptc), and Gli3 are expressed at low levels in the endometrial epithelium
on day 1 of pregnancy. Transcription of Ihh increases dramatically in the luminal
epithelium and glands from day 3, reaching very high levels on day 4. Over the
same period, Ptc, Gli1, Gli2, and noggin are strongly upregulated in the
underlying mesenchymal stroma. Transcription of Ihh in ovariectomized mice is
induced by progesterone but not by estrogen. Lower induction of Ihh, Ptc, and
Hoxa10 is seen in response to progesterone in the uteri of Pgr(-/-) mutant mice
lacking progesterone nuclear steroid receptor. This finding suggests that the
hormone may regulate Ihh through both nuclear receptor-dependent and -independent
pathways. We describe a method for culturing uterine explants in the absence of
epithelium. Under these conditions, recombinant N-SHH protein promotes the
proliferation of mesenchyme cells and the expression of noggin. We propose that
IHH made by the epithelium normally functions as a paracrine growth factor for
stromal cells during the early stages of pregnancy.

PMID: 11977981  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


407. Zhonghua Fu Chan Ke Za Zhi. 2002 Jan;37(1):30-2.

[Expression of HOXA10 gene in human endometrium and its relationship with
unexplained infertility].

[Article in Chinese]

Li H(1), Chen S, Xing F.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Nanfang Hospital, The First Military 
Medical University, Guangzhou 510515, China.

OBJECTIVE: To study the expression of HOXA10 gene in the endometrium of normal
fertile women and patients with unexplained infertility during different phases
of menstrual cycle.
METHODS: Endometrium samples were obtained by curettage in 52 normal fertile
women and 38 patients with unexplained infertility during different phases of
menstrual cycle, HOXA10 mRNA expression were detected by in situ hybridization
and reverse polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).
RESULTS: (1) HOXA10 mRNA were detected in the glandular and stromal cells of
endometrium of fertile women during the menstrual cycle. By in situ hybridization
(positive unite, PU), HOXA10 mRNA levels were significantly higher in the
mid-secretory phase [glandular cells (G) 5.69 +/- 0.57, stromal cells (S) 7.48
+/- 0.67] and late-secretory phase(G 5.99 +/- 0.40, S 7.98 +/- 1.08) than those
in late proliferative phase (G 3.35 +/- 0.20, S 3.20 +/- 0.37) and early
secretory phase (G 3.07 +/- 0.26, S 3.18 +/- 0.27)(P < 0.01). HOXA10 mRNA levels 
of endometrial stromal cells of mid and late secretory were higher than those of 
glandular cells (P < 0.01). By RT-PCR, HOXA10 mRNA levels were significantly
higher in the mid secretory phase (57.0 +/- 3.4)% and late secretory phase (56.2 
+/- 2.9)% than those in early proliferative phase (31.8 +/- 2.6)%, late
proliferative phase (32.2 +/- 2.3)% and early secretory phase (32.5 +/- 1.6)% (P 
< 0.01). (2) Patients with unexplained infertility did not have an increase of
endometrial HOXA10 mRNA level in mid and late secretory phase, as compared with
the controls (P < 0.01).
CONCLUSIONS: (1) High expression of HOXA10 gene during mid and late secretory
phase indicated that HOXA10 gene may involve in implantation. (2) Aberrant HOXA10
expression of patients with unexplained infertility suggests that altered
development of endometrium at the molecular level may contribute to the aetiology
of infertility. (3) HOXA10 gene may play a role in decidua lization of
endometrium during early pregnancy.

PMID: 11953062  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


408. Dev Biol. 2002 Apr 1;244(1):21-36.

Functional comparison of the Hoxa 4, Hoxa 10, and Hoxa 11 homeoboxes.

Zhao Y(1), Potter SS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Biology, Children's Hospital Medical Center, 3333
Burnet Avenue, Cincinnati, Ohio 45224, USA.

A number of models attempt to explain the functional relationships of Hox genes. 
The functional equivalence model states that mammalian Hox-encoded proteins are
largely functionally equivalent, and that Hox quantity is more important than Hox
quality. In this report, we describe the results of two homeobox swaps. In one
case, the homeobox of Hoxa 11 was replaced with that of the very closely related 
Hoxa 10. Developmental function was assayed by analyzing the phenotypes of all
possible allele combinations, including the swapped allele, and null alleles for 
Hoxa 11 and Hoxd 11. This chimeric gene provided wild-type function in the
development of the axial skeleton and male reproductive tract, but served as a
hypomorph allele in the development of the appendicular skeleton, kidneys, and
female reproductive tract. In the other case, the Hoxa 11 homeobox was replaced
with that of the divergent Hoxa 4 gene. This chimeric gene provided near
recessive null function in all tissues except the axial skeleton, which developed
normally. These results demonstrate that even the most conserved regions of Hox
genes, the homeoboxes, are not functionally interchangeable in the development of
most tissues. In some cases, developmental function tracked with the homeobox, as
previously seen in simpler organisms. Homeoboxes with more 5' cluster positions
were generally dominant over more 3' homeoboxes, consistent with phenotypic
suppression seen in Drosophila. Surprisingly, however, all Hox homeoboxes tested 
did appear functionally equivalent in the formation of the axial skeleton. The
determination of segment identity is one of the most evolutionarily ancient
functions of Hox genes. It is interesting that Hox homeoboxes are interchangeable
in this process, but are functionally distinct in other aspects of development.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11900456  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


409. Mol Endocrinol. 2002 Mar;16(3):571-9.

Direct regulation of beta3-integrin subunit gene expression by HOXA10 in
endometrial cells.

Daftary GS(1), Troy PJ, Bagot CN, Young SL, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8063, USA.

Estrogen and progesterone regulate HOXA10 expression in the endometrium, where
HOXA10 is necessary for implantation. The integrins are also involved in early
embryo-endometrial interactions. Here we show that HOXA10 directly regulates
beta3-integrin subunit expression in the endometrium, likely mediating the effect
of sex steroids on beta3-integrin expression. beta3-Integrin expression was
decreased in endometrium shown to have low HOXA10 expression. beta3-Integrin mRNA
levels were increased in endometrial adenocarcinoma cells (Ishikawa) transfected 
with pcDNA3.1/HOXA10, and decreased in cells treated with HOXA10 antisense. Seven
consensus HOXA10 binding sites were identified 5' of the beta3-integrin gene.
Direct binding of HOXA10 protein to four sites was demonstrated by EMSA. Reporter
gene expression increased in BT-20 cells cotransfected with pcDNA3.1/ HOXA10 and 
pGL3-promoter vector containing region F (encompassing all seven HOXA10 consensus
sites). A 41-bp segment (Region A) showed highest affinity binding to HOXA10
protein. Increased reporter expression, equal in magnitude to that obtained with 
Region F, was obtained with Region A. HOXA10 protein binding within Region A was 
localized by deoxyribonuclease I footprinting. beta3-Integrin expression was
directly up-regulated by HOXA10 through a 41-bp 5'-regulatory element. Sex
steroids regulate the expression of endometrial beta3-integrin through a pathway 
involving HOXA10.

PMID: 11875117  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


410. Br J Haematol. 2002 Feb;116(2):367-75.

Absence of mutations in the HoxA10, HoxA11 and HoxD11 nucleotide coding sequences
in thrombocytopenia with absent radius syndrome.

Fleischman RA(1), Letestu R, Mi X, Stevens D, Winters J, Debili N, Vainchenker W.

Author information: 
(1)University of Kentucky and VA Medical Center, Hematology/Oncology Division,
Lexington, KY 40511-1093, USA. raflei00@pop.uky.edu

Recent studies have suggested the HoxA10, HoxA11 and HoxD11 homeobox genes as
candidate loci for the thrombocytopenia with absent radius (TAR) syndrome. For
example, targeted disruptions of these Hox genes result in abnormal development
of the mouse radius, while overexpression of HoxA10 stimulates mouse
megakaryocyte (MK) development in vitro. To examine the expression of Hox genes
in human MK cells, we utilized reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction
with degenerate oligonucleotides to study megakaryocytic cell lines (MEG-01,
DAMI), and primary human MK purified from adult and cord blood. Using this
approach, 13 out of 40 clones isolated from cell lines, 10 out of 21 from cord
MK, and 11 out of 21 from adult MK were identified as HoxA10, while HoxA11 and
HoxD11 sequences were not detected. The normal genomic sequences for the human
HoxA10, -A11, and -D11 genes were then determined and sequenced in 10 unrelated
individuals with TAR syndrome. In all patients the derived amino acid sequence
for the three Hox genes was identical to normal controls. Southern blotting did
not reveal genomic rearrangements or deletions at these loci, and in two patients
intact HoxA10 transcripts were detected by amplification in myeloid cells.
Although these studies cannot completely exclude the possibility that the TAR
syndrome results from non-coding mutations that affect the level of Hox gene
expression in megakaryocytes, mutations in the coding sequence of the Hox genes
known to affect radial development are not a common cause of TAR syndrome.

PMID: 11841440  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


411. Leukemia. 2002 Feb;16(2):186-95.

Quantitative HOX expression in chromosomally defined subsets of acute myelogenous
leukemia.

Drabkin HA(1), Parsy C, Ferguson K, Guilhot F, Lacotte L, Roy L, Zeng C, Baron A,
Hunger SP, Varella-Garcia M, Gemmill R, Brizard F, Brizard A, Roche J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado Health Sciences and
Cancer Centers, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

We used a degenerate RT-PCR screen and subsequent real-time quantitative RT-PCR
assays to examine the expression of HOX and TALE-family genes in 34 cases of
chromosomally defined AML for which outcome data were available. AMLs with
favorable cytogenetic features were associated with low overall HOX gene
expression whereas poor prognostic cases had high levels. Characteristically,
multiple HOXA family members including HOXA3-HOXA10 were jointly overexpressed in
conjunction with HOXB3, HOXB6, MEIS1 and PBX3. Higher levels of expression were
also observed in the FAB subtype, AML-M1. Spearmann correlation coefficients
indicated that the expression levels for many of these genes were highly
inter-related. While we did not detect any significant correlations between HOX
expression and complete response rates or age in this limited set of patients,
there was a significant correlation between event-free survival and HOXA7 with a 
trend toward significance for HoxA9, HoxA4 and HoxA5. While patients with
elevated HOX expression did worse, there were notable exceptions. Thus, although 
HOX overexpression and clinical resistance to chemotherapy often coincide, they
are not inextricably linked. Our results indicate that quantitative HOX analysis 
has the potential to add new information to the management of patients with AML, 
especially where characteristic chromosomal alterations are lacking.

PMID: 11840284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


412. Blood. 2002 Feb 15;99(4):1197-204.

HOX-A10 regulates hematopoietic lineage commitment: evidence for a
monocyte-specific transcription factor.

Taghon T(1), Stolz F, De Smedt M, Cnockaert M, Verhasselt B, Plum J, Leclercq G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Microbiology and Immunology, Ghent
University, Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium.

Homeobox genes are well known for their crucial role during embryogenesis but
have also been found to be critically involved in normal and leukemic
hematopoiesis. Because most previous studies focused on the role of aberrant HOX 
gene expression in leukemogenesis and because HOX-A10 is expressed in human
CD34(+) precursor cells, this study investigated whether HOX-A10 also plays a
pivotal role in normal hematopoietic-lineage determination. The effect of
enforced expression of this transcription factor on hematopoietic differentiation
of highly purified human cord-blood progenitors was examined by using in vitro
assays. In fetal thymic organ cultures, a dramatic reduction in cells expressing 
high levels of HOX-A10 was observed, along with absence of thymocytes positive
for CD3(+) T-cell receptor alphabeta. Furthermore, in MS-5 stromal cell cultures,
there was a 7-fold reduction in the number of natural killer cells and a 9-fold
reduction in the number of B cells, thus showing a profound defect in
differentiation toward the lymphoid lineage in HOX-A10-transduced progenitors. In
contrast, the number of CD14(+) monocytic cells in the stromal cell culture was
6-fold higher, suggesting an enhanced differentiation toward the myeloid
differentiation pathway of HOX-A10-transduced progenitors. However, there was a
slight reduction in the number of CD15(+) granulocytic cells, which were blocked 
in their final maturation. These data show that HOX-A10 can act as an important
key regulator of lineage determination in human hematopoietic progenitor cells.

PMID: 11830466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


413. Dev Biol. 2001 Oct 15;238(2):224-38.

Estrogen receptor-alpha knockout mice exhibit resistance to the developmental
effects of neonatal diethylstilbestrol exposure on the female reproductive tract.

Couse JF(1), Dixon D, Yates M, Moore AB, Ma L, Maas R, Korach KS.

Author information: 
(1)Receptor Biology Section, Laboratory of Reproductive and Developmental
Toxicology, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, Research
Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709, USA. korach@niehs.nih.gov

Data indicate that estrogen-dependent and -independent pathways are involved in
the teratogenic/carcinogenic syndrome that follows developmental exposure to
17beta-estradiol or diethylstilbestrol (DES), a synthetic estrogen. However, the 
exact role and extent to which each pathway contributes to the resulting
pathology remain unknown. We employed the alphaERKO mouse, which lacks estrogen
receptor-alpha (ERalpha), to discern the role of ERalpha and estrogen signaling
in mediating the effects of neonatal DES exposure. The alphaERKO provides the
potential to expose DES actions mediated by the second known ER, ERbeta, and
those that are ER-independent. Wild-type and alphaERKO females were treated with 
vehicle or DES (2 microg/pup/day for Days 1-5) and terminated after 5 days and 2,
4, 8, 12, and 20 months for biochemical and histomorphological analyses. Assays
for uterine expression of the genes Hoxa10, Hoxa11, and Wnt7a shortly after
treatment indicated significant decreases in DES-treated wild-type but no effect 
in the alphaERKO. In contrast, the DES effect on uterine expression of Wnt4 and
Wnt5a was preserved in both genotypes, suggesting a developmental role for
ERbeta. Adult alphaERKO mice exhibited complete resistance to the chronic effects
of neonatal DES exposure exhibited in treated wild-type animals, including
atrophy, decreased weight, smooth muscle disorganization, and epithelial squamous
metaplasia in the uterus; proliferative lesions of the oviduct; and persistent
vaginal cornification. Therefore, the lack of DES effects on gene expression and 
tissue differentiation in the alphaERKO provides unequivocal evidence of an
obligatory role for ERalpha in mediating the detrimental actions of neonatal DES 
exposure in the murine reproductive tract.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11784006  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


414. Dev Dyn. 2001 Nov;222(3):538-44.

Maternal Hoxa10 is required for pinopod formation in the development of mouse
uterine receptivity to embryo implantation.

Bagot CN(1), Kliman HJ, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Yale University School of Medicine, Laboratory of Developmental Endocrinology,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8063, USA.

Hoxa10 is a homeobox gene that is expressed both during the embryogenesis of the 
genitourinary tract and in the adult reproductive tract. Maternal Hoxa10
expression is necessary for endometrial receptivity to blastocyst implantation.
The mechanism by which Hoxa10 induces endometrial development to a state of
receptivity is unknown as HOXA10-deficient endometrium appears histologically
normal. We altered the expression of Hoxa10 in the uterus of cycling adult female
mice and examined the uterus at the time of implantation by transmission electron
microscopy for alterations in epithelial morphology. Pinopods are projections on 
the surface of the uterine endometrial epithelial cells that develop transiently 
at the time of endometrial receptivity. Blocking Hoxa10 expression by
transfection of Hoxa10 antisense into the cycling mouse uterus before
implantation dramatically decreased pinopod number. Constitutively expressing
Hoxa10 in the uterus just before the normal time of pinopod formation resulted in
increased pinopod number. Therefore, Hoxa10 is necessary for pinopod development.
Hox genes have been implicated in both the regulation of cellular proliferation
and the determination of developmental fate. Hoxa10 exemplifies this dual role in
the uterus by regulating both endometrial stromal cell proliferation and
epithelial cell morphogenesis. Taken together, these results demonstrate that
maternal Hoxa10 has an essential role in pinopod development and this function of
Hoxa10 likely contributes to endometrial receptivity for the purpose of
blastocyst implantation.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11747087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


415. Mol Carcinog. 2001 Dec;32(4):213-9.

Promoter CpG methylation of Hox-a10 and Hox-a11 in mouse uterus not altered upon 
neonatal diethylstilbestrol exposure.

Li S(1), Ma L, Chiang T, Burow M, Newbold RR, Negishi M, Barrett JC, McLachlan
JA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Biosystems and Cancer, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, USA.

Mouse abdominal B-like Hoxa genes are expressed and functionally required in the 
developing reproductive tracts. Mice lacking either Hoxa-10 or Hoxa-11, two of
the AbdB Hoxa genes, exhibit abnormal uterine development similar to that induced
by in utero diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure. Indeed, uterine Hoxa-10 and
Hoxa-11 expression is potently repressed by perinatal DES exposure, providing a
potential molecular mechanism for DES-induced reproductive tract malformations.
We have shown previously that DES can permanently alter uterine lactoferrin gene 
expression through modulation of the lactoferrin promoter methylation pattern.
Here we ask whether a similar mechanism also functions to deregulate uterine
Hoxa-10 or Hoxa-11 expression during neonatal DES exposure. We mapped the Hoxa-10
promoter by cloning a 1.485 kb DNA fragment 5' of the Hoxa-10 exon1a. A 5' rapid 
amplification of cDNA ends (RACE) experiment revealed a transcription start site 
for the a10-1 transcript. Functional analysis of the proximal 200-bp sequences
demonstrated significant promoter activity, confirming the location of the
Hoxa-10 promoter. Moreover, methylation assays performed on eight CpGs in Hoxa-10
and 19 CpGs in Hoxa-11 proximal promoters demonstrated that all these CpGs were
highly unmethylated in both control and DES-dosed mice from postnatal day 5 to
day 30. Significant methylation around Hoxa-10 and Hoxa-11 promoters was only
observed in DES-induced uterine carcinomas in 18-mo-old mice. Our results suggest
that DES-induced downregulations of Hoxa-10 or Hoxa-11 gene expression are not
associated with methylation changes in their proximal promoters and that gene
imprinting by developmental DES exposure may be a gene-specific phenomenon.

Published 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11746833  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


416. Blood. 2001 Dec 1;98(12):3301-8.

Proliferation of primitive myeloid progenitors can be reversibly induced by
HOXA10.

Björnsson JM(1), Andersson E, Lundström P, Larsson N, Xu X, Repetowska E,
Humphries RK, Karlsson S.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Medicine and Gene Therapy, Institute of Laboratory Medicine, Lund
University Hospital, Lund, Sweden.

Recent studies show that several Hox transcription factors are important for
regulation of proliferation and differentiation in hematopoiesis. Among these is 
H0XA10, which is selectively expressed at high levels in the most primitive
subpopulation of human CD34(+) bone marrow cells. When overexpressed, H0XA10
increases the proliferation of early progenitor cells and can lead to the
development of myeloid leukemia. To study the effects of H0XA10 on primitive
hematopoietic progenitors in more detail, transgenic mice were generated with
regulatable H0XA10 expression. The transgenic mouse model, referred to as
tetO-HOXA10, contains the H0XA10 gene controlled by a tetracycline-responsive
element and a minimal promoter. Thus, the expression of H0XA10 is inducible and
reversible depending on the absence or presence of tetracycline or its analog,
doxycycline. A retroviral vector containing the tetracycline transactivator gene 
(tTA) was used to induce expression of the H0XA10 gene in bone marrow cells from 
the transgenic mice. Reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction analysis
confirmed regulatable H0XA10 expression in several transgenic lines. H0XA10
induction led to the formation of hematopoietic colonies containing blastlike
cells and megakaryocytes. Moreover, the induction of H0XA10 resulted in
significant proliferative advantage of primitive hematopoietic progenitors
(spleen colony-forming units [CFU-S(12)]), which was reversible on withdrawal of 
induction. Activation of H0XA10 expression in tet0-H0XA10 mice will therefore
govern proliferation of primitive myeloid progenitors in a regulated fashion.
This novel animal model can be used to identify the target genes of HOXA10 and
better clarify the specific role of HOXA10 in normal and malignant hematopoiesis.

PMID: 11719367  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


417. Leukemia. 2001 Nov;15(11):1743-9.

Targeted down-regulation of MLL-AF9 with antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotide
reduces the expression of the HOXA7 and -A10 genes and induces apoptosis in a
human leukemia cell line, THP-1.

Kawagoe H(1), Kawagoe R, Sano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University School of Medicine, Japan.

The MLL gene is frequently rearranged in leukemias, and MLL chimeric proteins
generated by chromosomal translocations play crucial roles in leukemogenesis.
Targets of murine Mll include HOX proteins that regulate body pattern formation
and hematopoiesis. However, it is not known whether or not the MLL chimeric
proteins regulate the HOX gene expression in human leukemia. To address this
issue, THP-1 cells, a human leukemia cell line expressing MLL-AF9, were treated
with antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotide (ODN) complementary to the coding
sequence of the MLL-AF9 junction. Down-regulation of the MLL-AF9 transcript was
accompanied by the reduced expression of the HOXA7 and -A10 genes, but not of the
HOXA2, -A4, -A5, and -A9 genes. The number of viable cells cultured with 20
microM antisense ODN for 5 days was 10-fold lower than that of the sense
ODN-treated control. And the number of the annexin V-/propidium iodide- apoptotic
cells in the antisense ODN-treated cells after 3 days of culture was two-fold
higher than that in the control. Staining of the antisense ODN-treated cells with
Hoechst 33258 showed the morphology characteristic to apoptosis. These results
indicate that MLL-AF9 regulates the expression of the selected HOX genes as well 
as prevents the leukemic cells from apoptosis.

PMID: 11681416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


418. Cytogenet Cell Genet. 2001;93(1-2):145-6.

Assignment of the homeobox A10 gene (HOXA10) to porcine chromosome SSC18q23-->q24
by FISH and confirmation by hybrid panel analyses.

Knorr C(1), Uibeleisen AC, Kollers S, Fries R, Brenig B.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Veterinary Medicine, Georg-August-University of Göttingen, Groner
Landstrasse 2, D-37073 Göttingen, Germany.

PMID: 11474203  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


419. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2001 Jul;86(7):3387-92.

HOXA10 expression is repressed by progesterone in the myometrium: differential
tissue-specific regulation of HOX gene expression in the reproductive tract.

Cermik D(1), Karaca M, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

HOX genes are essential regulators of development in all multicellular organisms,
including humans. We have previously shown that HOXA10 is expressed in the
developing uterus and later in the adult human endometrium. HOX genes regulate
endometrial development in response to sex steroids. Here, we demonstrate that
HOXA10 is expressed in the myometrium as well. In situ hybridization reveals
abundant HOXA10 expression, and Northern analysis demonstrates differential HOX
gene expression in the myometrium throughout the menstrual cycle. HOXA10
expression decreases in the midsecretory phase, coinciding with high serum
progesterone levels. Treatment of primary myometrial cell cultures with
progesterone decreases HOXA10 expression in vitro-paralleling the expression seen
in vivo. Despite the presence of progesterone receptors in the endometrium and
myometrium, HOXA10 is differentially regulated in each tissue by progesterone.
HOXA10 expression is induced in the stroma and decreased in the myometrium by
progesterone. The differential tissue-specific response of this gene in response 
to progesterone is likely mediated by sex steroid receptor coactivators or
corepressors. Decreased myometrial expression of developmental regulatory genes
such as HOXA10 in the nonpregnant uterus may dedifferentiate the myometrium and
allow growth in preparation for pregnancy.

PMID: 11443215  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


420. Curr Opin Obstet Gynecol. 2001 Jun;13(3):269-74.

Molecular markers of implantation: clinical implications.

Daftary GS(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8063, USA.

The endometrium has been conventionally studied using histologic criteria. Our
understanding of endometrial physiology has been advanced tremendously by
research into the molecules that mediate its development and function. These
molecules demonstrate a dynamic expression pattern through the menstrual cycle
and have been implicated in endometrial growth, differentiation, and receptivity.
These molecules include secreted proteins (endometrial bleeding-associated
factor, glycodelin-A, insulin-like growth factor binding protein-1), cell-surface
receptors (integrins), and nuclear transcription factors (HOXA10 and HOXA11). The
homeobox genes Hoxa10 and Hoxa11 are necessary for implantation because mice with
mutations in these genes exhibit a failure of implantation. HOXA10 and HOXA11
have been shown to be important for implantation in humans as well. Knowledge of 
endometrial molecular dynamics may now be used to enhance our ability to diagnose
implantation defects. It may soon be possible to treat individual molecular
defects by protein supplementation or gene therapy.

PMID: 11396649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


421. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 15;20(7):874-8.

Upregulation of Meis1 and HoxA9 in acute lymphocytic leukemias with the t(4 : 11)
abnormality.

Rozovskaia T(1), Feinstein E, Mor O, Foa R, Blechman J, Nakamura T, Croce CM,
Cimino G, Canaani E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Rearrangements of the human ALL-1 gene are frequently encountered in acute
lymphocytic leukemias (ALL) and acute myeloid leukemias (AML). These
rearrangements are mostly due to chromosome translocations and result in
production of chimeric proteins composed of the N-terminal fragment of ALL-1 and 
the C-terminal segments of the partner proteins. The most common chromosome
translocation involving ALL-1 is the t(4 : 11) associated with ALL. ALL-1 is the 
human homologue of Drosophila trithorax and directly activates transcription of
multiple Hox genes. A preliminary DNA microarray screen indicated that the Meis1,
HoxA9 and AC133 genes were overexpressed in ALLs with t(4 : 11), compared to ALLs
with very similar phenotype but without the chromosomal abnormality. These genes,
as well as additional five Hox genes, were subjected to comprehensive
semi-quantitative or quantitative RT-PCR analysis in 57 primary ALL and AML
tumors. Meis1 and HoxA9 were found expressed in 13/14 of ALLs with the t(4 : 11) 
and in 8/8 of AMLs with ALL-1 rearrangements. The two genes were not consistently
transcribed in other types of ALL. AC133 was transcribed in 13/14 of ALLs with
t(4 : 11), but in only 4/8 of AMLs with ALL-1 rearrangements. HoxA10 was
expressed in most leukemias with ALL-1 alterations, but was also transcribed in
PrePreB CD10(-) ALLs lacking the t(4 : 11). Expression of HoxA5, HoxA7, HoxC8 and
HoxC10 did not correlate with ALL-1 rearrangements. Coexpression of Meis1 and
HoxA9, overexpression of HoxA10, and overexpression or fusion of HoxA9 were
previously implicated in certain acute myeloid leukemias in mice and humans. The 
present work suggests that upregulation of Meis1, HoxA9, and possibly HoxA10
might also play a role in pathogenesis of acute lymphocytic and acute myeloid
leukemias associated with ALL-1 fusions.

PMID: 11314021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


422. Semin Reprod Med. 2000;18(3):311-20.

Implantation in the human: the role of HOX genes.

Daftary GS(1), Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut, 333 Cedar Street, PO Box 208063, New Haven, CT 06520,
USA.

HOX genes are transcription factors that are essential for the proper development
of the müllerian tract in the embryonic period. It has been discovered that HOX
genes are expressed in the adult uterus. Two of them, Hoxa10 and Hoxa11, have
been demonstrated to be necessary for uterine receptivity and implantation in
mice. Recent evidence also suggests such a role for HOX genes in humans. They are
likely to be essential regulators of endometrial development in preparation for
implantation. This article reviews the role of the HOX genes in the reproductive 
tract, their patterns of expression and regulation, the outcome of deficient HOX 
gene expression, and their potential mechanisms of action. The process of
implantation is complex, and many molecular markers have been found expressed at 
high levels in the endometrium in the peri-implantation window. Targeted
disruption has revealed that most of these molecules are redundant and not
essential for implantation. The importance of Hox genes in this process has been 
well documented, and they remain one of the few well-characterized molecules
necessary for implantation.

PMID: 11299969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


423. Blood. 2001 Apr 15;97(8):2286-92.

Overexpression of HOXA10 perturbs human lymphomyelopoiesis in vitro and in vivo.

Buske C(1), Feuring-Buske M, Antonchuk J, Rosten P, Hogge DE, Eaves CJ, Humphries
RK.

Author information: 
(1)The Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, and the Departments 
of Medicine and Medical Genetics, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, BC, 
Canada.

Several studies point to multiple members of the Hox transcription factor family 
as playing key roles in normal hematopoietic development, and they link the
imbalanced expression of these transcription factors, in particular of the
Abd-like A cluster HOX genes HOXA9 and HOXA10, to leukemogenesis. To test
directly the hypothesis that HOXA10 is involved in human hematopoietic
development, the gene was retrovirally overexpressed in human highly purified
CD34(+)/GFP(+) hematopoietic progenitor cells derived from cord blood or fetal
liver sources, and the impact of aberrant gene expression was analyzed on
differentiation and proliferation in vitro and in vivo. HOXA10 misexpression
profoundly impaired myeloid differentiation with a higher yield of blast cells in
liquid culture and a greater than 100-fold increased generation of blast colonies
after in vitro expansion or after replating of primary colonies first plated in
methylcellulose directly after transduction (P < .01). Furthermore, aberrant
HOXA10 expression almost completely blocked erythroid differentiation in
methylcellulose (P < .02). HOXA10 deregulation also severely perturbed the
differentiation of human progenitors in vivo, reducing B-cell development by 70% 
in repopulated NOD/SCID mice and enhancing myelopoiesis in the transduced
compartment. The data provide evidence that the balanced expression of HOXA10 is 
pivotal for normal human hematopoietic development and that aberrant expression
of the gene contributes to impaired differentiation and increased proliferation
of human hematopoietic progenitor cells. These results also provide a framework
to initiate more detailed analyses of HOX regulatory domains and HOX cofactors in
the human system in vitro and in vivo.

PMID: 11290589  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


424. Dev Biol. 2001 Mar 1;231(1):87-102.

The paralogous Hox genes Hoxa10 and Hoxd10 interact to pattern the mouse hindlimb
peripheral nervous system and skeleton.

Wahba GM(1), Hostikka SL, Carpenter EM.

Author information: 
(1)Mental Retardation Research Center, Department of Psychiatry and Biobehavioral
Sciences, UCLA School of Medicine, 760 Westwood Plaza, Los Angeles, California
90024, USA.

The most 5' mouse Hoxa and Hoxd genes, which occupy positions 9-13 and which are 
related to the Drosophila AbdB gene, are all active in patterning developing
limbs. Inactivation of individual genes produces alterations in skeletal elements
of both forelimb and hindlimb; inactivation of some of these genes also alters
hindlimb innervation. Simultaneous inactivation of paralogous or nonparalogous
Hoxa and Hoxd genes produces more widespread alterations, suggesting that
combinatorial interactions between these genes are required for proper limb
patterning. We have examined the effects of simultaneous inactivation of Hoxa10
and Hoxd10 on mouse hindlimb skeletal and nervous system development. These
paralogous genes are expressed at lumbar and sacral levels of the developing
neural tube and surrounding axial mesoderm as well as in developing forelimb and 
hindlimb buds. Double-mutant animals demonstrated impaired locomotor behavior and
altered development of posterior vertebrae and hindlimb skeletal elements.
Alterations in hindlimb innervation were also observed, including truncations and
deletions of the tibial and peroneal nerves. Animals carrying fewer mutant
alleles show similar, but less extreme phenotypes. These observations suggest
that Hoxa10 and Hoxd10 coordinately regulate skeletal development and innervation
of the hindlimb.

PMID: 11180954  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


425. Dev Dyn. 2001 Jan;220(1):87-90.

Characterisation of hoxa gene expression in the chick limb bud in response to
FGF.

Vargesson N(1), Kostakopoulou K, Drossopoulou G, Papageorgiou S, Tickle C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Developmental Biology, University College London,
London, United Kingdom.

We tested a diffusion gradient model for setting up overlapping domains of Hoxa
gene expression in the chick limb bud. The model is based on morphogen production
at the limb bud tip where the apical ridge is located and assumes that cells
respond to a series of concentration thresholds. Consistent with the model,
Hoxa13 gene expression rapidly switches off when the ridge is removed from stage 
21/22 buds, while Hoxa11 and Hoxa10 expression is stable; Hoxa13 expression can
be initiated and maintained in absence of the ridge by FGF soaked beads; the
Hoxa13 domain first expands quickly and then slows up and the size is related to 
the dose of FGF4. Contrary to the model, addition of FGF4 to early limb buds does
not activate Hoxa13 prematurely nor extend the Hoxa13 expression domain
proximally. Therefore FGF4 signalling is necessary but not sufficient for Hoxa
gene expression in the limb bud.

Copyright 2001 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 11146510  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


426. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2000 Nov 7;97(23):12776-81.

Altered HOX and WNT7A expression in human lung cancer.

Calvo R(1), West J, Franklin W, Erickson P, Bemis L, Li E, Helfrich B, Bunn P,
Roche J, Brambilla E, Rosell R, Gemmill RM, Drabkin HA.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, and Department of Pathology, University of
Colorado Health Sciences Center, 4200 East 9th Avenue, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

HOX genes encode transcription factors that control patterning and cell fates.
Alterations in HOX expression have been clearly implicated in leukemia, but their
role in most other malignant diseases remains unknown. By using degenerate
reverse transcription-PCR and subsequent real-time quantitative assays, we
examined HOX expression in lung cancer cell lines, direct tumor-control pairs,
and bronchial epithelial cultures. As in leukemia, genes of the HOX9 paralogous
group and HOXA10 were frequently overexpressed. For HOXB9, we confirmed that
elevated RNA was associated with protein overexpression. In some cases, marked
HOX overexpression was associated with elevated FGF10 and FGF17. During
development, the WNT pathway affects cell fate, polarity, and proliferation, and 
WNT7a has been implicated in the maintenance of HOX expression. In contrast to
normal lung and mortal short-term bronchial epithelial cultures, WNT7a was
frequently reduced or absent in lung cancers. In immortalized bronchial
epithelial cells, WNT7a was lost concomitantly with HOXA1, and a statistically
significant correlation between the expression of both genes was observed in lung
cancer cell lines. Furthermore, we identified a homozygous deletion of
beta-catenin in the mesothelioma, NCI-H28, associated with reduced WNT7a and the 
lowest overall cell line expression of HOXA1, HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA10, whereas
HOXB9 levels were unaffected. Of note, both WNT7a and beta-catenin are encoded on
chromosome 3p, which undergoes frequent loss of heterozygosity in these tumors.
Our results suggest that alterations in regulatory circuits involving HOX, WNT,
and possibly fibroblast growth factor pathways occur frequently in lung cancer.

PMCID: PMC18840
PMID: 11070089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


427. Genes Dev. 2000 Oct 15;14(20):2581-6.

p21 is a transcriptional target of HOXA10 in differentiating myelomonocytic
cells.

Bromleigh VC(1), Freedman LP.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology and Genetics Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New
York, New York 10021, USA.

The myeolomonocytic cell line U937 differentiates into macrophages in response to
a variety of agents. Several genes including the cyclin-dependent kinase
inhibitor p21(waf1/cip1) and the homeobox gene transcription factor HOXA10 are
induced at the onset of differentiation. Ectopic expression of either gene
results in U937 differentiation. In this paper, we describe a mechanism by which 
p21 and HOXA10 may act in concert, where HOXA10 can bind directly to the p21
promoter and, together with its trimeric partners PBX1 and MEIS1, activate p21
transcription, resulting in cell cycle arrest and differentiation. These
experiments for the first time identify p21 as a selective target for a HOX
protein and link the differentiative properties of a transcription factor and a
cell cycle inhibitor.

PMCID: PMC317001
PMID: 11040212  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


428. Gene Ther. 2000 Aug;7(16):1378-84.

Alteration of maternal Hoxa10 expression by in vivo gene transfection affects
implantation.

Bagot CN(1), Troy PJ, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut, USA.

Mice with a targeted mutation of the Hoxa10 gene demonstrate uterine factor
infertility. It is unclear if the defect in the uterine environment arises due to
the absence of Hoxa10 expression during embryonic development or in the adult. We
have recently demonstrated that HOXA10 expression in human endometrium rises
dramatically at the time of implantation, suggesting maternal expression of
Hoxa10/HOXA10 may be essential to the process. To assess the importance of
maternal Hoxa 10 expression, the uteri of day 2 pregnant mice were injected with 
a DNA/liposome complex containing constructs designed to alter maternal Hoxa10
expression before implantation. Transfection with a Hoxa10 antisense
oligodeoxyribonucleotide significantly decreased the number of implantation
sites. Transfection with a plasmid which constitutively expresses Hoxa10
optimized survival of implanted embryos resulting in increased litter size. These
results demonstrate that maternal Hoxa10 expression is essential for implantation
and is the first report of the maternal alteration of a gene known to affect
implantation specifically. We also demonstrate that DNA/liposome complexes
containing the same Hoxa10 constructs that alter fertility in mice, can affect
Hoxa10 expression in a human endometrial cell line. Alteration of human
endometrial HOXA10 via liposome-mediated gene transfection is a potential
contraceptive agent or fertility treatment.

PMID: 10981664  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


429. Mol Endocrinol. 2000 Aug;14(8):1147-61.

Dysregulation of EGF family of growth factors and COX-2 in the uterus during the 
preattachment and attachment reactions of the blastocyst with the luminal
epithelium correlates with implantation failure in LIF-deficient mice.

Song H(1), Lim H, Das SK, Paria BC, Dey SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, Ralph L. Smith Research
Center, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City 66160-7338, USA.

Various mediators, including cytokines, growth factors, homeotic gene products,
and prostaglandins (PGs), participate in the implantation process in an
autocrine, paracrine, or juxtacrine manner. However, interactions among these
factors that result in successful implantation are not clearly understood.
Leukemia inhibitory factor (LIF), a pleiotropic cytokine, was shown to be
expressed in uterine glands on day 4 morning before implantation and is critical 
to this process in mice. However, the mechanism by which LIF executes its effects
in implantation remains unknown. Moreover, interactions of LIF with other
implantation-specific molecules have not yet been defined. Using normal and
delayed implantation models, we herein show that LIF is not only expressed in
progesterone (P4)-primed uterine glands before implantation in response to
nidatory estrogen, it is also induced in stromal cells surrounding the active
blastocyst at the time of the attachment reaction. This suggests that LIF has
biphasic effects: first in the preparation of the receptive uterus and
subsequently in the attachment reaction. The mechanism by which LIF participates 
in these events was addressed using LIF-deficient mice. We observed that while
uterine cell-specific proliferation, steroid hormone responsiveness, and
expression patterns of several genes are normal, specific members of the EGF
family of growth factors, such as amphiregulin (Ar), heparin-binding EGF-like
growth factor (HB-EGF), and epiregulin, are not expressed in LIF(-/-) uteri
before and during the anticipated time of implantation, although EGF receptor
family members (erbBs) are expressed correctly. Furthermore, cyclooxygenase-2
(COX-2), an inducible rate-limiting enzyme for PG synthesis and essential for
implantation, is aberrantly expressed in the uterus surrounding the blastocyst in
LIF(-/-) mice. These results suggest that dysregulation of specific EGF-like
growth factors and COX-2 in the uterus contributes, at least partially, to
implantation failure in LIF(-/-) mice. Since estrogen is essential for uterine
receptivity, LIF induction, and blastocyst activation, it is possible that the
nidatory estrogen effects in the P4-primed uterus for implantation are mediated
via LIF signaling. However, we observed that LIF can only partially resume
implantation in P4-primed, delayed implanting mice in the absence of estrogen,
suggesting LIF induction is one of many functions that are executed by estrogen
for implantation.

PMID: 10935540  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


430. FASEB J. 2000 Jun;14(9):1101-8.

In utero diethylstilbestrol (DES) exposure alters Hox gene expression in the
developing müllerian system.

Block K(1), Kardana A, Igarashi P, Taylor HS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut 06520, USA.

Diethylstilbestrol (DES) was widely used to treat pregnant women through 1971.
The reproductive tracts of their female offspring exposed to DES in utero are
characterized by anatomic abnormalities. Here we show that DES administered to
mice in utero produces changes in the expression pattern of several Hox genes
that are involved in patterning of the reproductive tract. DES produces posterior
shifts in Hox gene expression and homeotic anterior transformations of the
reproductive tract. In human uterine or cervical cell cultures, DES induces HOXA9
or HOXA10 gene expression, respectively, to levels approximately twofold that
induced by estradiol. The DES-induced expression is not inhibited by
cyclohexamide. Estrogens are novel morphogens that directly regulate the
expression pattern of posterior Hox genes in a manner analogous to retinoic acid 
regulation of anterior Hox genes. Alterations in HOX gene expression are a
molecular mechanism by which DES affects reproductive tract development. Changes 
in Hox gene expression are a potential marker for the effects of in utero drug
use that may become apparent only at late stages of development.

PMID: 10834931  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


431. Semin Reprod Endocrinol. 1999;17(3):205-16.

Genetic control of uterine receptivity during implantation.

Ma L(1), Yao M, Maas RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

Implantation involves complex molecular interactions between implanting
blastocysts and the hormonally primed uterus. Gene targeting allows the
generation of mice lacking a specific gene or genes and has proved to be of
considerable value when combined with classical physiology in understanding many 
biological questions, such as the process of implantation. In this article, we
review genes that have been demonstrated by gene targeting in mice to be required
in the uterus for implantation. In particular, we focus on a specific class of
developmental control genes, the mammalian Hox genes, and their role in this
process. Lastly, we attempt to synthesize current knowledge about the genetic
control of implantation and to build a working genetic model for the implantation
pathway.

PMID: 10797939  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


432. J Biol Chem. 2000 Jun 30;275(26):20117-26.

Tyrosine phosphorylation of HoxA10 decreases DNA binding and transcriptional
repression during interferon gamma -induced differentiation of myeloid leukemia
cell lines.

Eklund EA(1), Jalava A, Kakar R.

Author information: 
(1)Lurleen B. Wallace Tumor Institute, Department of Hematology and Oncology, and
the Comprehensive Cancer Center, University of Alabama, Birmingham, Alabama
35294, USA. USA. elizabeth.eklund@ccc.uab.edu

The DNA binding affinity of HoxA10 is increased by partnering with Pbx proteins. 
A consensus sequence for Pbx1-HoxA10 DNA binding has been derived, but genuine
target genes have not been identified. We noted that the derived Pbx-HoxA10
DNA-binding consensus is similar to a repressor element in the CYBB promoter. The
CYBB gene, which encodes the respiratory burst oxidase component gp91(phox), is
expressed only in myeloid cells that have differentiated beyond the promyelocyte 
stage. In these studies, we demonstrate that interferon gamma (IFN-gamma)-induced
differentiation of myeloid cell lines abolishes in vitro Pbx-HoxA10 binding to
either the derived consensus or the similar CYBB sequence. We also demonstrate
that HoxA10, overexpressed in myeloid cell lines, represses reporter gene
expression from artificial promoter constructs with Pbx-HoxA10 binding sites. We 
determine that HoxA10 has endogenous repression domains that are not functionally
altered by IFN-gamma treatment. However, IFN-gamma-induced differentiation of
myeloid cell lines leads to HoxA10 tyrosine phosphorylation, which decreases in
vitro DNA binding to Pbx-HoxA10 binding sites. Therefore, these investigations
identify the CYBB gene as a potential target for HoxA10 and define repression of 
genes expressed in mature myeloid cells as a novel role for HoxA10 during myeloid
differentiation.

PMID: 10766757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


433. Hum Reprod Update. 2000 Jan-Feb;6(1):75-9.

The role of HOX genes in human implantation.

Taylor HS(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine,
New Haven, Connecticut, USA. hugh.taylor@yale.edu

HOX genes are transcriptional regulators that play an essential role in
determining tissue identity during embryonic development. HOX genes are involved 
in the development of the Müllerian system and then continue to be expressed in
the adult uterus. Two HOX genes have been demonstrated necessary for uterine
receptivity in knock-out mice. We have recently elucidated the expression
patterns and regulation of HOX genes in the development of the human endometrium 
during the menstrual cycle. HOX genes are likely key regulators of human
implantation. This paper will review the role of HOX genes in the reproductive
tract, specifically the evidence that HOX genes are important for human
endometrial development and receptivity.

PMID: 10711832  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


434. Mol Reprod Dev. 1999 Dec;54(4):402-9.

Cysteine-containing histone H1-like (PL-I) proteins of sperm.

Zhang F(1), Lewis JD, Ausió J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Microbiology, University of Victoria, Victoria,
British Columbia, Canada.

We have determined the presence of cysteine in the protein PL-I from the sperm of
the surf clam Spisula solidissima. The existence of cysteine in this histone
H1-related protein is responsible for its previously described aggregation
behavior. The location of this residue, within the trypsin-resistant domain of
the protein, has been established. We have also shown that cysteine is
ubiquitously present in the PL-I proteins from the sperm of other bivalve
mollusks but is absent from other PL of smaller molecular mass (PL-II, PL-III,
PL-IV). We have also found cysteine to be present in the PL-I from a tunicate
(Chelysoma productum) but absent in a PL-I from a fish (Mullus barbatus). The
possible significance of the unusual occurrence of cysteine in these
histone-H1-related proteins is discussed.

Copyright 1999 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10542381  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


435. Development. 1999 Nov;126(21):4817-26.

Transient establishment of anteroposterior polarity in the zebrafish pectoral fin
bud in the absence of sonic hedgehog activity.

Neumann CJ(1), Grandel H, Gaffield W, Schulte-Merker S, Nüsslein-Volhard C.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Entwicklungsbiologie, Spemannstrasse 35/III, D-72076
Tübingen, Germany. carl.neumann@tuebingen.mpg.de.

Sonic hedgehog (Shh) is expressed in the posterior vertebrate limb bud mesenchyme
and directs anteroposterior patterning and growth during limb development. Here
we report an analysis of the pectoral fin phenotype of zebrafish sonic you
mutants, which disrupt the shh gene. We show that Shh is required for the
establishment of some aspects of anteroposterior polarity, while other aspects of
anteroposterior polarity are established independently of Shh, and only later
come to depend on Shh for their maintenance. We also demonstrate that Shh is
required for the activation of posterior HoxD genes by retinoic acid. Finally, we
show that Shh is required for normal development of the apical ectodermal fold,
for growth of the fin bud, and for formation of the fin endoskeleton.

PMID: 10518498  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


436. Mol Hum Reprod. 1999 Sep;5(9):866-73.

Regulation of HOXA-10 and its expression in normal and abnormal endometrium.

Gui Y(1), Zhang J, Yuan L, Lessey BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology, Division of Reproductive
Endocrinology and Infertility, University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill, NC,
USA.

HOXA-10 is a member of a family of genes that serve as transcription factors
during development and have been shown to be important for uterine function.
Using immunohistochemistry and RNAse protection assays (RPA), HOXA-10 was shown
to be expressed in both epithelial and stromal cells with increased expression
during the window of implantation. By in-vitro culture of isolated endometrial
epithelium or stroma, HOXA-10, expression was increased after treatment with
oestradiol (10(-8) mol/l) with or without progesterone (10(-6) mol/l). In stromal
cells, oestradiol and progesterone both appeared to increase HOXA-10 expression
and were additive. Relaxin (30 ng/ml) appeared to further increase stromal
HOXA-10 expression. HOXA-10 expression during the window of implantation was
compared in normal menstrual cycles to endometrium from women with endometriosis 
and suspected defects in uterine receptivity. Little or no difference was seen in
luminal, glandular or endothelial HOXA-10 expression but a significant reduction 
in stroma HOXA-10 expression was noted in women with endometriosis. In
conclusion, HOXA-10 is a hormone-regulated endometrial transcription factor that 
appears to be responsive to both ovarian steroids and relaxin. The appearance of 
this nuclear protein during the window of implantation in epithelium and stroma
may offer new insight into the regulation of uterine receptivity and assist in
the identification of other genes that are critical to the establishment of a
successful pregnancy.

PMID: 10460226  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


437. Dev Genes Evol. 1999 Aug;209(8):473-81.

Axial variation in the threespine stickleback: relationship to Hox gene
expression.

Ahn DG(1), Gibson G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109, USA.

Despite mounting evidence that key developmental regulator genes are involved in 
significant macroevolutionary changes, there have been few studies demonstrating 
the functional significance of variation in such genes for the generation of
population-level variation. In this study we examined and compared the expression
domains of three Hox gene homeobox sequences in embryos derived from two
morphologically distinct populations of the threespine stickleback, Gasterosteus 
aculeatus. We found within-population variation in the location of anterior
limits, particularly in more 5' Hox genes whose anterior expression domains
showed graded distributions of transcripts over several somites. However, despite
considerable and statistically significant differences in the anteroposterior
pattern of the axial and median skeletons between the two stickleback
populations, this phenotypic variation was not found to be correlated with any of
the variation in Hox gene expression. The possible functional significance of the
combinatorial Hox code in fish species is discussed with respect to the buffering
of development in fluctuating environments, and it is argued that population and 
quantitative genetic perspectives should also be taken into account in
considering the function and evolution of Hox genes.

PMID: 10415324  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


438. Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Jun;13(6):1005-17.

Hoxa-10 regulates uterine stromal cell responsiveness to progesterone during
implantation and decidualization in the mouse.

Lim H(1), Ma L, Ma WG, Maas RL, Dey SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, Ralph L. Smith Research
Center, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City 66160-7338, USA.

Hoxa-10 is an AbdominalB-like homeobox gene that is expressed in the developing
genitourinary tract during embryogenesis and in the adult uterus during early
pregnancy. Null mutation of Hoxa-10 in the mouse causes both male and female
infertility. Defective implantation and decidualization resulting from the loss
of maternal Hoxa-10 function in uterine stromal cells is the cause of female
infertility. However, the mechanisms by which Hoxa-10 regulates these uterine
events are unknown. We have identified two potential mechanisms for these uterine
defects in Hoxa-10(-/-) mice. First, two PGE2 receptor subtypes, EP3 and EP4, are
aberrantly expressed in the uterine stroma in Hoxa-10(-/-) mice, while expression
of several other genes in the stroma (TIMP-2, MMP-2, ER, and PR) and epithelium
(LIF, HB-EGF, Ar, and COX-1) are unaffected before implantation. Further, EP3 and
EP4 are inappropriately regulated by progesterone (P4) in the absence of Hoxa-10,
while PR, Hoxa-11 and c-myc, three other P4-responsive genes respond normally.
These results suggest that Hoxa-10 specifically mediates P4 regulation of EP3 and
EP4 in the uterine stroma. Second, since Hox genes are implicated in local cell
proliferation, we also examined steroid-responsive uterine cell proliferation in 
Hoxa-10(-/-) mice. Stromal cell proliferation in mutant mice in response to P4
and 17beta-estradiol (E2 was significantly reduced, while epithelial cell
proliferation was normal in response to E2. These results suggest that stromal
cell responsiveness to P4 with respect to cell proliferation is impaired in
Hoxa-10(-/-) mice, and that Hoxa-10 is involved in mediating stromal cell
proliferation. Collectively, these results suggest that Hoxa-10 mutation causes
specific stromal cell defects that can lead to implantation and decidualization
defects apparently without perturbing epithelial cell functions.

PMID: 10379898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


439. J Exp Zool. 1999 Apr 15;285(1):41-9.

Genomic organization of the Hoxa4-Hoxa10 region from Morone saxatilis:
implications for Hox gene evolution among vertebrates.

Snell EA(1), Scemama JL, Stellwag EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, East Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina
27858, USA.

The physical mapping of Hox gene clusters from a limited number of vertebrates
has shown an overall conservation in gene organization in which major
evolutionary changes appear to be primarily restricted to the deletion of one or 
more genes, with the exception of the amplification of additional clusters as
postulated from zebrafish. We have sequenced a 31 kb region of the HoxA cluster
from the teleost Morone saxatilis (striped bass), both to provide a detailed
physical map of this region and to better understand the nature of Hox cluster
evolution among vertebrate taxa. We identified five linked Hox genes: Hoxa4,
Hoxa5, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and Hoxa10, which are organized similarly to those of other 
vertebrates. Furthermore, we have documented the absence of the Hoxa6 and Hoxa8
genes within the 31 kb contig. Comparison of our results to those published for
other vertebrates suggests that the absence of Hoxa6 is a common characteristic
of teleosts, whereas the absence of Hoxa8 is common to vertebrates in general,
with the possible exception of zebrafish. Further comparisons between the HoxA
genes from Morone with those from the pufferfish, Fugu rubripes, revealed the
likely presence of a previously unreported Hoxa7 gene, or gene fragment, in the
Fugu genome, which suggests that the Hoxa7 gene, unlike Hoxa6 or Hoxa8, is
present in teleosts. In addition to these differences in vertebrate Hox cluster
structure, we also observed a marked reduction in the length of the Hoxa4--a10
region between vertebrate lineages representative of teleosts and mammals.
Comparative analysis of HoxA cluster organization among teleosts and mammals
suggests that cluster length reduction and lineage-specific gene loss events are 
hallmarks of Hox cluster evolution.

PMID: 10327649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


440. Hum Reprod. 1999 May;14(5):1328-31.

HOX gene expression is altered in the endometrium of women with endometriosis.

Taylor HS(1), Bagot C, Kardana A, Olive D, Arici A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology and Infertility, Department of
Obstetrics and Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, 
PO Box 208063, New Haven, CT 06520-8063, USA.

HOXA10 and HOXA11 are homeobox genes that function as transcription factors
essential to embryonic development. We have recently described a role for each of
these two genes in regulating endometrial development in the adult during the
course of a menstrual cycle. Both Hoxa10 and Hoxa11 are essential for
implantation in the mouse and appear to play a similar role in women. To
investigate the role of HOX genes in the endometrium of women with endometriosis,
quantitative Northern blot analysis was performed on the endometrium of 40 normal
cycling controls and 40 patients with documented endometriosis. Patients with
endometriosis failed to show the expected mid-luteal rise in HOX gene expression 
as demonstrated in the controls. Aberrant HOX gene expression suggests that
altered development of the endometrium at the molecular level may contribute to
the aetiology of infertility in patients with endometriosis.

PMID: 10325287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


441. Dev Dyn. 1999 Apr;214(4):303-11.

Murine Gcm1 gene is expressed in a subset of placental trophoblast cells.

Basyuk E(1), Cross JC, Corbin J, Nakayama H, Hunter P, Nait-Oumesmar B, Lazzarini
RA.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center for Developmental and Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School
of Medicine, New York, New York 10029, USA.

The gcm gene of Drosophila melanogaster encodes a transcription factor that is an
important component in cell fate specification within the nervous system. In the 
absence of a functional gcm gene, progenitor cells differentiate into neurons,
whereas when the gene is ectopically expressed the cells produce excess glial
cells at the expense of neuronal differentiation. Recent searches of databases
have uncovered high sequence similarity between the Drosophila gem gene and an
anonymous human placental cDNA clone (Altschuller et al., 1996; this
communication). Here we report the molecular organization of the murine Gcm1, its
spatio-temporal pattern of expression in developing placenta, and its map
position at E1-E3 on murine chromosome 9. The murine gene is composed of at least
6 exons. The promoter region contains an "initiation sequence" and is GC rich,
characteristics of the promoters of several transcription factors. The mRNA has a
modest 5'UTR (ca. 200 bases) but an extensive 3' UTR (ca. 2 kb). Northern blot
and mRNA in situ hybridization studies showed that Gcm1 expression was readily
detectable only in the placenta. It began at embryonic day 7.5 within trophoblast
cells of the chorion and continued to about embryonic day 17.5 within a subset of
labyrinthine trophoblast cells. Comparison with other transcription factors
revealed that Gcm1 expression defines a unique subset of trophoblast cells.

PMID: 10213386  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


442. J Urol. 1999 Jan;161(1):275-80.

Analysis of homeobox gene HOXA10 mutations in cryptorchidism.

Kolon TF(1), Wiener JS, Lewitton M, Roth DR, Gonzales ET Jr, Lamb DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Scott Department of Urology, Texas Children's Hospital, Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston, USA.

PURPOSE: Cryptorchidism is the most common congenital abnormality of the
genitalia. However, its exact etiology remains to be defined. Homeobox (HOX)
containing genes have a key role in the morphogenesis of segmental structures
along the primary body axis, including the urogenital mesenchyma. In male mice
with a targeted deletion of the HOXA10 gene cryptorchidism manifests in the
absence of other major defects. Because to our knowledge this gene has never been
examined for alterations in humans, we evaluated whether mutations of HOXA10 are 
associated with cryptorchidism in humans.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Genomic deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) was extracted from
human blood or tissue samples from 16 noncryptorchid control subjects and 45
cryptorchid boys. To screen for mutations exons 1 and 2 of the HOXA10 gene were
amplified individually by polymerase chain reaction using 6 overlapping
oligonucleotide primer pairs. Single strand conformational polymorphism (SSCP)
analysis of the amplified radiolabeled DNA fragments was performed. Variant band 
shifts were detected due to abnormal migration of the denatured DNA fragment
compared to controls, suggesting an alteration in the DNA sequence. Sequence
analysis of these variant bands was then done to define any mutations.
RESULTS: SSCP analysis revealed variants in 2 controls. Of the 45 samples from
cryptorchid patients 30 had SSCP variants in exon 1. No variants were found in
other regions of the gene. Sequence analysis revealed several DNA polymorphisms
in exon 1 in controls and boys with cryptorchidism. Other nucleotide changes
(point mutations) were noted only in exon 1 in the DNA of 5 cryptorchid patients,
of whom 1 had a 24 nucleotide deletion.
CONCLUSIONS: Our initial analysis of the HOXA10 gene in humans demonstrates that 
genetic alterations of this gene may be present in some boys with cryptorchidism.
HOXA10 polymorphisms exist in normal control subjects as well as in cryptorchid
patients. Further analysis of the function of the mutated protein will elucidate 
the role of this gene as a potential causative factor of testicular descent.

PMID: 10037424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


443. J Mol Endocrinol. 1999 Feb;22(1):91-101.

Cyclin D3 in the mouse uterus is associated with the decidualization process
during early pregnancy.

Das SK(1), Lim H, Paria BC, Dey SK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Integrative Physiology, Ralph L Smith Research
Center, University of Kansas Medical Center, Kansas City, Kansas 66160-7338, USA.

In the mouse, the attachment reaction between the blastocyst trophectoderm and
the receptive uterine luminal epithelium occurs at 2200-2300 h on day 4 of
pregnancy and is rapidly followed by transformation of stromal cells into
decidual cells (decidual cell reaction). This process can also be induced
experimentally (deciduoma) by intraluminal oil infusion in the uterus on day 4 of
pseudopregnancy. The decidual cell reaction is associated with up- and
down-regulation of many genes in a cell-specific manner. Using mRNA differential 
display, we identified cyclin D3 as one of the genes that is upregulated in the
uterus at the sites of blastocyst apposition during the attachment reaction. The 
levels of expression were low in the morning of days 1-4 as determined by
Northern hybridization. In situ hybridization analysis showed that on days 1 and 
2, signals were primarily localized in uterine epithelial cells, while signals
were detected in both the stromal and epithelial cells on days 3 and 4. In
contrast, with the initiation and progression of decidualization on days 5, 6 and
7, the levels of cyclin D3 mRNA were remarkably upregulated in stromal cells both
at the mesometrial and the antimesometrial poles. However, on day 8, signals were
primarily localized in stromal cells at the mesometrial decidual bed. Implanting 
blastocysts on these days also expressed cyclin D3 mRNA. In the
progesterone-treated delayed implanting mice, the uterine levels of cyclin D3
mRNA were modest at the sites of blastocyst apposition, but were upregulated with
the onset of implantation by estradiol-17beta. However, the decidual expression
of cyclin D3 mRNA was not dependent on the presence of blastocysts, since
increased expression also occurred in experimentally induced deciduoma in the
absence of blastocysts. The importance of cyclin D3 in decidualization was
further examined in Hoxa-10-deficient mice which show defective decidualization. 
The expression of cyclin D3 mRNA in Hoxa-10(-/-) uteri on day 5 was severely
compromised after application of a deciduogenic stimulus on day 4 of
pseudopregnancy. Collectively, the results suggest that cyclin D3 could be
important for the process of decidualization.

PMID: 9924184  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


444. Dev Dyn. 1999 Jan;214(1):1-12.

Hoxa-10 deficient male mice exhibit abnormal development of the accessory sex
organs.

Podlasek CA(1), Seo RM, Clemens JQ, Ma L, Maas RL, Bushman W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago,
Illinois 60611, USA.

The role of mammalian Hox genes in regulating segmental patterning of axial
structures and the limb is well established. A similar role in development of
soft tissue organ systems has recently been suggested by observations linking
several 5' members of the HoxA and HoxD clusters to segmentation events and
morphogenesis in the gastrointestinal and genitourinary systems. We have
specifically examined the role of Hoxa-10 in development of the male accessory
sex organs by characterizing expression of Hoxa-10 in the developing male
reproductive tract and correlating expression to morphologic abnormalities in
knockout mice deficient for Hoxa-10 function. We report that Hoxa-10 expression
in the Wolffian duct and urogenital sinus is regionally restricted and temporally
regulated. The domain of expression is defined anteriorly by the caudal
epididymis and extends posteriorly to the prostatic anlagen of the urogenital
sinus. Expression was maximal at E18 and down-regulated postnatally, well before 
accessory sex organ morphogenesis is completed. Expression in the prostatic
anlagen of the urogenital sinus cultured in vitro does not depend upon the
presence of testosterone. Loss of Hoxa-10 function is associated with diminished 
stromal clefting of the seminal vesicles and decreased size and branching of the 
coagulating gland. The ductal architecture of the coagulating gland was altered
in approximately 30% of mutants examined and suggests a partial posterior
morphologic transformation of the coagulating gland. We interpret these data to
indicate that Hoxa-10 is expressed in a region specific manner during late
gestation and into the perinatal period and that Hoxa-10 is required for normal
accessory sex organ development.

PMID: 9915571  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


445. Development. 1998 Aug;125(16):3201-11.

Wnt-7a maintains appropriate uterine patterning during the development of the
mouse female reproductive tract.

Miller C(1), Sassoon DA.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center of Developmental and Molecular Biology, One Gustave Levy
Place, Box 1126, New York, NY 10029, USA.

The murine female reproductive tract differentiates along the anteroposterior
axis during postnatal development. This process is marked by the emergence of
distinct cell types in the oviduct, uterus, cervix and vagina and is dependent
upon specific mesenchymal-epithelial interactions as demonstrated by earlier
heterografting experiments. Members of the Wnt family of signaling molecules have
been recently identified in this system and an early functional role in
reproductive tract development has been demonstrated. Mice were generated using
ES-mediated homologous recombination for the Wnt-7a gene (Parr, B. A. and
McMahon, A. P. (1995) Nature 374, 350-353). Since Wnt-7a is expressed in the
female reproductive tract, we examined the developmental consequences of lack of 
Wnt-7a in the female reproductive tract. We observe that the oviduct lacks a
clear demarcation from the anterior uterus, and acquires several cellular and
molecular characteristics of the uterine horn. The uterus acquires cellular and
molecular characteristics that represent an intermediate state between normal
uterus and vagina. Normal vaginas have stratified epithelium and normal uteri
have simple columnar epithelium, however, mutant uteri have stratified
epithelium. Additionally, Wnt-7a mutant uteri do not form glands. The changes
observed in the oviduct and uterus are accompanied by a postnatal loss of hoxa-10
and hoxa-11 expression, revealing that Wnt-7a is not required for early hoxa gene
expression, but is required for maintenance of expression. These clustered hox
genes have been shown to play a role in anteroposterior patterning in the female 
reproductive tract. In addition to this global posterior shift in the female
reproductive tract, we note that the uterine smooth muscle is disorganized,
indicating development along the radial axis is affected. Changes in the
boundaries and levels of other Wnt genes are detectable at birth, prior to
changes in morphologies. These results suggest that a mechanism whereby Wnt-7a
signaling from the epithelium maintains the molecular and morphological
boundaries of distinct cellular populations along the anteroposterior and radial 
axes of the female reproductive tract.

PMID: 9671592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


446. Dev Biol. 1998 May 15;197(2):141-54.

Abdominal B (AbdB) Hoxa genes: regulation in adult uterus by estrogen and
progesterone and repression in müllerian duct by the synthetic estrogen
diethylstilbestrol (DES).

Ma L(1), Benson GV, Lim H, Dey SK, Maas RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts,
USA.

Mice deficient for the Abdominal B (AbdB) Hox gene Hoxa-10 exhibit reduced
fertility due to defects in implantation. During the peri-implantation period
Hoxa-10 is sequentially expressed in the uterine epithelium and stroma. These
observations, combined with the stringent regulation of uterine implantation by
ovarian steroids, prompted us to test whether estrogen and progesterone directly 
regulate the expression of Hoxa-10 and other AbdB Hoxa genes. Here we show that
Hoxa-10 expression in the adult uterus is strongly activated by progesterone.
This activation is blocked by the progesterone receptor antagonist RU486 and is
independent of new protein synthesis. In addition, Hoxa-10 expression is
repressed by estrogen in a protein synthesis-independent manner. Analysis of
adjacent AbdB Hoxa genes reveals that Hoxa-9 and a-11 are also activated in a
colinear fashion by progesterone but differentially regulated by estrogen. These 
results suggest that the regulation of AbdB Hox gene expression in the adult
uterus by ovarian steroids is a property related to position within the cluster, 
mediated by the direct action of estrogen and progesterone receptors upon these
genes. We next examined whether the embryonic expression of Hoxa10 is regulable
by hormonal factors. Previous work has demonstrated that perinatal administration
of the synthetic estrogen diethylstilbestrol (DES) to mice and humans produces
uterine, cervical, and oviductal malformations. Certain of these phenotypes
resemble those in Hoxa-10 knockout mice, suggesting that Hoxa-10 gene expression 
might be repressed by DES during reproductive tract morphogenesis. Exposure of
the developing female reproductive tract to DES, either in vivo or in organ
culture, represses the expression of Hoxa-10 in the Müllerian duct. Thus, these
data not only establish a direct link between ovarian steroids and AbdB Hoxa gene
expression in the adult uterus, but also provide a potential mechanism for the
teratogenic effects of DES on the developing reproductive tract.

PMID: 9630742  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


447. J Clin Invest. 1998 Apr 1;101(7):1379-84.

HOXA10 is expressed in response to sex steroids at the time of implantation in
the human endometrium.

Taylor HS(1), Arici A, Olive D, Igarashi P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Reproductive Endocrinology, Department of Obstetrics and
Gynecology, Yale University School of Medicine, New Haven, Connecticut 06520,
USA. hugh.taylor@yale.edu

Hox genes are well-known transcriptional regulators that play an essential role
in directing embryonic development. Mice that are homozygous for a targeted
disruption of the Hoxa10 gene exhibit uterine factor infertility. We have
recently demonstrated that HOXA10 is expressed in the adult human uterus. To
examine expression of HOXA10 during the menstrual cycle, Northern blot analysis
and in situ hybridization were performed. Expression of HOXA10 dramatically
increased during the midsecretory phase of the menstrual cycle, corresponding to 
the time of implantation and increase in circulating progesterone. Expression of 
HOXA10 in cultured endometrial cells was stimulated by estrogen or progesterone. 
Stimulation of HOXA10 by progesterone was concentration-dependent within the
physiologic range, and the effect of estrogen was inhibited by cycloheximide.
These results identify sex steroids as novel regulators of HOX gene expression.
HOXA10 may have an important function in regulating endometrial development
during the menstrual cycle and in establishing conditions necessary for
implantation in the human.

PMCID: PMC508715
PMID: 9525980  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


448. Mol Cell Biol. 1998 Apr;18(4):1911-8.

A differential screen for ligand-regulated genes: identification of HoxA10 as a
target of vitamin D3 induction in myeloid leukemic cells.

Rots NY(1), Liu M, Anderson EC, Freedman LP.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Program, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, New
York 10021, USA.

1,25-Dihydroxyvitamin D3 [1,25(OH)2D3], the hormonal ligand for vitamin D3, is a 
potent inducer of myeloid-leukemic-cell differentiation. Such cells differentiate
exclusively into monocytes/macrophages in response to this ligand. Since
1,25(OH)2D3 transduces its hormone signal through the vitamin D3 receptor (VDR), 
a ligand-modulated transcription factor and member of the nuclear hormone
receptor superfamily, we sought to identify direct VDR target genes induced
during this differentiation process. To do so, we applied a modified differential
screen with a nascent-RNA purification strategy using biases for
immediate-early-response genes induced by 1,25(OH)2D3 in the myelomonocytic cell 
line U937. Using this screen, we had previously identified p21Waf1/Cip1 as a gene
transcriptionally induced by 1,25(OH)2D3 and demonstrated that this induction
facilitates the differentiation of U937 cells into monocytes/macrophages (24).
Here, we describe in detail our differential screen strategy and the
identification and isolation of 20 1,25(OH)2D3-inducible genes or unknown cDNAs
by means of this screen. One gene newly identified as a target of VDR regulation 
in myeloid cells is the homeobox HoxA10 gene. HoxA10 protein may act as a general
regulator of cell growth, since overexpression of HoxA10 facilitated the
differentiation of U937 cells into monocytes/macrophages independent of
1,25(OH)2D3 and acted to strongly inhibit the growth of the breast cancer cell
line MCF-7 by arresting these cells in G1.

PMCID: PMC121420
PMID: 9528762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


449. J Biol Chem. 1997 Mar 28;272(13):8198-206.

The Abd-B-like Hox homeodomain proteins can be subdivided by the ability to form 
complexes with Pbx1a on a novel DNA target.

Shen WF(1), Rozenfeld S, Lawrence HJ, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, San Francisco Veterans Affairs Medical Center and
University of California, San Francisco, California 94121, USA.

Previous studies showed that the Hox homeodomain proteins from paralog groups 1-8
display cooperative DNA binding with the non-Hox homeodomain protein Pbx,
mediated by a canonical YPWM. Although the Abd-B-like Hox proteins in paralogs
9-13 lack this sequence, Hoxb-9 and Hoxa-10 were reported to bind with Pbx1a to
DNA. We show that these interactions require a tryptophan 6 amino acids
N-terminal to the homeodomain. Binding site selection for Hoxb-9 with Pbx1a
yielded ATGATTTACGAC, containing a novel TTAC Hox-binding site adjacent to a Pbx 
site. In the presence of Pbx1a, Hoxb-9 and Hoxa-10 bound to targets containing
either TTAC or TTAT. These data extend previous findings that interactions with
Pbx define a Hox protein binding code for different DNA sequences across paralog 
groups 1 through 10. Members of the 11, 12, and 13 paralogs do not cooperatively 
bind DNA with Pbx1a, despite the presence of tryptophan residues N-terminal to
the homeodomain in Hoxd-12 and Hoxd-13. Hoxa-11, Hoxd-12, or Hoxd-13, in the
presence of Pbx1a, selected a TTAC Hox site but lacking a Pbx1a site. These data 
suggest that Abd-B-like Hox proteins bind to a novel TTAC site and can be divided
by their cooperative binding to DNA with Pbx1a.

PMID: 9079637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


450. Mol Cell Biol. 1997 Jan;17(1):495-505.

Overexpression of HOXA10 in murine hematopoietic cells perturbs both myeloid and 
lymphoid differentiation and leads to acute myeloid leukemia.

Thorsteinsdottir U(1), Sauvageau G, Hough MR, Dragowska W, Lansdorp PM, Lawrence 
HJ, Largman C, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Vancouver, Canada.

Multiple members of the A, B, and C clusters of Hox genes are expressed in
hematopoietic cells. Several of these Hox genes have been found to display
distinctive expression patterns, with genes located at the 3' side of the
clusters being expressed at their highest levels in the most primitive
subpopulation of human CD34+ bone marrow cells and genes located at the 5' end
having a broader range of expression, with downregulation at later stages of
hematopoietic differentiation. To explore if these patterns reflect different
functional activities, we have retrovirally engineered the overexpression of a
5'-located gene, HOXA10, in murine bone marrow cells and demonstrate effects
strikingly different from those induced by overexpression of a 3'-located gene,
HOXB4. In contrast to HOXB4, which causes selective expansion of primitive
hematopoietic cells without altering their differentiation, overexpression of
HOXA10 profoundly perturbed myeloid and B-lymphoid differentiation. The bone
marrow of mice reconstituted with HOXA10-transduced bone marrow cells contained
in high frequency a unique progenitor cell with megakaryocytic colony-forming
ability and was virtually devoid of unilineage macrophage and pre-B-lymphoid
progenitor cells derived from the transduced cells. Moreover, and again in
contrast to HOXB4, a significant proportion of HOXA10 mice developed a
transplantable acute myeloid leukemia with a latency of 19 to 50 weeks. These
results thus add to recognition of Hox genes as important regulators of
hematopoiesis and provide important new evidence of Hox gene-specific functions
that may correlate with their normal expression pattern.

PMCID: PMC231774
PMID: 8972230  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


451. Development. 1996 Sep;122(9):2687-96.

Mechanisms of reduced fertility in Hoxa-10 mutant mice: uterine homeosis and loss
of maternal Hoxa-10 expression.

Benson GV(1), Lim H, Paria BC, Satokata I, Dey SK, Maas RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, MA 02115, USA.

The establishment of a receptive uterine environment is critical for embryonic
survival and implantation. One gene that is expressed in the uterus during the
peri-implantation period in mice and is required for female fertility is the
homeobox gene Hoxa-10. Here we characterize the peri-implantation defects in
Hoxa-10 mutant females and investigate functions of Hoxa-10 in the uterine anlage
during morphogenesis and in the adult uterus during pregnancy. Examination of
pregnancy in Hoxa-10 mutant females has revealed failure of implantation as well 
as resorption of embryos in the early postimplantation period. Morphologic
analysis of the mutant uterus has demonstrated homeotic transformation of the
proximal 25% into oviduct. Histology and molecular markers confirm this anterior 
transformation. Furthermore, in situ hybridization shows that this region
coincides with the anterior limit of embryonic Hoxa-10 expression in the
urogenital ducts and a parallel transformation is observed in Hoxa-10 mutant
males at the junction of the epididymis and ductus deferens. Female fertility
could be compromised by either the homeotic transformation or the absence of
Hoxa-10 function in the adult during pregnancy. To distinguish between these two 
potential mechanisms of infertility, wildtype blastocysts were transferred into
mutant uteri distal to the transformed region on day 2.5 of pseudopregnancy. This
procedure did not rescue the phenotype, suggesting that adult uterine expression 
of Hoxa-10 is required during pregnancy. Moreover, when implantation was
experimentally delayed, homozygous uteri were able to support survival of
blastocysts comparable to wild-type controls, indicating that the requirement for
Hoxa-10 is intrinsic to implantation. While expression of LIF and HB-EGF appears 
unaffected in the mutant uteri, a decrease is observed in the intensity and
number of blue dye reactions, an indicator of increased vascular permeability in 
response to implantation. In addition, mutant uteri exhibited decreased
decidualization in response to artificial stimuli. These results show that
Hoxa-10 is required during morphogenesis for proper patterning of the
reproductive tract and in the adult uterus for peri-implantation events.

PMID: 8787743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


452. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1734-45.

Pbx modulation of Hox homeodomain amino-terminal arms establishes different
DNA-binding specificities across the Hox locus.

Chang CP(1), Brocchieri L, Shen WF, Largman C, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University, California 94305, USA.

Pbx cofactors are implicated to play important roles in modulating the
DNA-binding properties of heterologous homeodomain proteins, including class I
Hox proteins. To assess how Pbx proteins influence Hox DNA-binding specificity,
we used a binding-site selection approach to determine high-affinity target sites
recognized by various Pbx-Hox homeoprotein complexes. Pbx-Hox heterodimers
preferred to bind a bipartite sequence 5'-ATGATTNATNN-3' consisting of two
adjacent half sites in which the Pbx component of the heterodimer contacted the
5' half (ATGAT) and the Hox component contacted the more variable 3' half
(TNATNN). Binding sites matching the consensus were also obtained for Pbx1
complexed with HoxA10, which lacks a hexapeptide but requires a conserved
tryptophan-containing motif for cooperativity with Pbx. Interactions with Pbx
were found to play an essential role in modulating Hox homeodomain amino-terminal
arm contact with DNA in the core of the Hox half site such that heterodimers of
different compositions could distinguish single nucleotide alterations in the Hox
half site both in vitro and in cellular assays measuring transactivation. When
complexed with Pbx, Hox proteins B1 through B9 and A10 showed stepwise
differences in their preferences for nucleotides in the Hox half site core (TTAT 
to TGAT, 5' to 3') that correlated with the locations of their respective genes
in the Hox cluster. These observations demonstrate previously undetected
DNA-binding specificity for the amino-terminal arm of the Hox homeodomain and
suggest that different binding activities of Pbx-Hox complexes are at least part 
of the position-specific activities of the Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC231160
PMID: 8657149  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


453. Development. 1996 Feb;122(2):449-60.

Functional cooperation between the non-paralogous genes Hoxa-10 and Hoxd-11 in
the developing forelimb and axial skeleton.

Favier B(1), Rijli FM, Fromental-Ramain C, Fraulob V, Chambon P, Dollé P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Géneétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Strasbourg.

The Abdominal B-related Hoxa-10 gene displays similar expression patterns in the 
differentiating forelimbs and hindlimbs of the mouse, with preferential
expression around the humeral and femoral cartilages and more diffuse expression 
in distal regions. We found that a targeted disruption of Hoxa-10 has almost no
effect in the forelimbs, while it affects the proximal hindlimb skeleton. The
alterations were located along the dorsolateral side of the femur (labium
laterale), with an enlargement and distal shift of the third trochanter, a
misshapen lateral knee sesamoid, a supernumerary 'ligament' connecting these
structures and an occasional duplication of the femoral trochlea. Some Hoxa-10-/-
mutant mice developed severe degenerative alterations of the knee articulation
upon ageing. Viable Hoxa-10/Hoxd-11 double mutant mice were produced by genetic
intercrosses. The compound mutation resulted in synergistic forelimb phenotypic
alterations, consisting of: (i) an exacerbation of Hoxd-11-/- phenotypic traits
in the carpal and digital region, e.g. more pronounced truncations of the ulna
styloid, pyramidal and pisiform bones and of some metacarpal and phalangeal bones
and (ii) marked alterations in a more proximal region which is nearly unaffected 
in Hoxd-11-/- single mutants; the entire radius and ulna were truncated and
thickened, with deformations of the ulna proximal extremity. Thus, functional
redundancy can occur even between non-paralogous Abdominal B-related Hox genes.
The double Hoxa-10/Hoxd-11 mutation also conferred full penetrance to the sacral 
and caudal vertebrae transformations which are approximately 50% penetrant in
Hoxd-11-/- single mutants, revealing that functional cooperation can also occur
between non-paralogous Hox gene products in axial skeleton patterning.

PMID: 8625796  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


454. Tanpakushitsu Kakusan Koso. 1995 Oct;40(14):2134-43.

[Mice carrying null mutations of the homeotic genes Hoxa10 and Msx1].

[Article in Japanese]

Satokata I(1), Uchiyama M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Niigata University School of Medicine, Japan.

PMID: 8532869  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


455. Exp Hematol. 1995 Oct;23(11):1160-6.

Stage- and lineage-specific expression of the HOXA10 homeobox gene in normal and 
leukemic hematopoietic cells.

Lawrence HJ(1), Sauvageau G, Ahmadi N, Lopez AR, LeBeau MM, Link M, Humphries K, 
Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Veterans Affairs Medical Center, San Francisco, CA 94121, USA.

There is growing evidence that the HOX homeobox-containing transcription factors 
are differentially expressed during hematopoiesis. We have previously
demonstrated that the HOXA10 gene is expressed in unfractionated normal marrow
and in immortalized leukemic cell lines with myelomonocytic features, but not in 
cell lines with lymphoid or erythroid features. To gain insights into the
patterns of activation of this gene during hematopoietic differentiation, we have
examined HOXA10 expression in CD34+ and CD34- subfractions of normal marrow and
normal peripheral blood, as well as samples from patients with a variety of acute
and chronic leukemias. HOXA10 is strongly expressed in CD34+ normal marrow cells,
markedly downregulated in CD34- marrow cells, and inactive in mature neutrophils,
monocytes, and lymphocytes. HOXA10 is expressed in all types of acute myelogenous
leukemia (AML) with the notable exception of acute promyelocytic leukemia
(AML-M3). HOXA10 message is observed in chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) but
appears to be reduced in accelerated phase and blast crisis, particularly
lymphoid blast crisis. With rare exception, HOXA10 expression is not observed in 
samples of acute or chronic lymphoid leukemias. Normal marrow and patient samples
appear to contain a single transcript which encodes a full-length
homeobox-containing protein, while immortalized cell lines contain an additional 
alternatively spliced transcript. These studies indicate that HOXA10 expression
is restricted to early stages of myeloid differentiation.

PMID: 7556525  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


456. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1995 Aug 29;92(18):8185-9.

Cryptorchidism and homeotic transformations of spinal nerves and vertebrae in
Hoxa-10 mutant mice.

Rijli FM(1), Matyas R, Pellegrini M, Dierich A, Gruss P, Dollé P, Chambon P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moleculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique/Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Medicale/Université Louis Pasteur, Collège de France, Illkirch.

Homozygous mice mutated by homologous recombination for the AbdB-related Hoxa-10 
gene are viable but display homeotic transformations of vertebrae and lumbar
spinal nerves. Mutant males exhibit unilateral or bilateral criptorchidism due to
developmental abnormalities of the gubernaculum, resulting in abnormal
spermatogenesis and sterility. These results reveal an important role of Hoxa-10 
in patterning posterior body regions and suggest that Hox genes are involved in
specifying regional identity of both segmented and nonovertly segmented
structures of the developing body.

PMCID: PMC41121
PMID: 7667266  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


457. Blood. 1995 Apr 15;85(8):2084-90.

Expression of HOXC4 homeoprotein in the nucleus of activated human lymphocytes.

Meazza R(1), Faiella A, Corsetti MT, Airoldi I, Ferrini S, Boncinelli E, Corte G.

Author information: 
(1)Istituto Nazionale per la Ricerca sul Cancro, Genova, Italy.

We have analyzed the expression of homeoproteins of the HOX family in resting and
activated lymphoid cells and in neoplastic lymphoid cell lines by the use of
monoclonal antibodies (MoAbs) already shown to react with the homeoproteins
HOXA10, HOXC6, and HOXD4, respectively. Anti-HOXA10 and C6 MoAbs DIDi not show
any reactivity with the lymphoid cells tested, whereas anti-HOXD4 MoAb stained
few resting peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBLs) and most phytohemagglutinin
(PHA)-stimulated PBLs as early as 6 hours after stimulation. The pattern of
staining of PHA-activated PBLs is reminiscent of the stages of nucleolar
fragmentation in different phases of the cell cycle. The MoAb reacted also with
activated or Epstein-Barr virus-transformed B cells, with clonal or polyclonal T 
and natural killer (NK) cells, with leukemic T-cell lines, and with a Burkitt's
lymphoma cell line. RNAse protection experiments, per formed with probes specific
for HOXD4 or for the highly homologous HOXA4, HOXB4, and HOXC4, belonging to the 
same paralogy group, indicated that only HOXC4 mRNA is present in resting or
activated PBLs. Northern blot analysis on polyA+ RNA from activated PBLs or Raji 
cells showed the presence of two different HOXC4 transcripts of 2.8 and 1.9 kb.
Gel retardation and Southwestern blot assays showed the presence of a 32-kD
homeoprotein with DNA-binding properties typical of a HOX4 homeoprotein in
nucleolar extracts of PHA-activated, but not of resting, lymphocytes. Taken
together, these data indicate that the HOXC4 homeoprotein is expressed in
activated and/or proliferating lymphocytes of the T-, B-, or NK-cell lineage,
whereas it is weakly expressed in a minority of resting cells. The early
expression and the nucleolar localization suggest an involvement of HOXC4 in the 
regulation of genes controlling lymphocyte activation and/or proliferation.

PMID: 7718879  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


458. Nature. 1995 Mar 30;374(6521):460-3.

Sexually dimorphic sterility phenotypes in Hoxa10-deficient mice.

Satokata I(1), Benson G, Maas R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham & Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

The Abdominal B (AbdB) genes constitute a distinct subfamily of homeobox genes
that exhibit posterior domains of expression, including the genital imaginal disc
in Drosophila and the developing urogenital system in vertebrates. We have
mutated the AbdB gene Hoxa10 in mice. We report here that homozygotes are fully
viable and show an anterior homeotic transformation of lumbar vertebrae. All male
homozygotes manifest bilateral cryptorchidism resulting in severe defects in
spermatogenesis and increasing sterility with age. Female homozygotes ovulate
normally, but about 80% are sterile because of death of embryos between days 2.5 
and 3.5 post coitum. This coincides spatially and temporally with expression of
maternal Hoxa10 in distal oviductal and uterine epithelium. These results
indicate a role for AbdB Hox genes in male and female fertility and suggest that 
maternal Hoxa10 is required to regulate the expression of a factor that affects
the viability of preimplantation embryos.

PMID: 7700356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


459. Genes Dev. 1995 Mar 15;9(6):663-74.

Pbx proteins display hexapeptide-dependent cooperative DNA binding with a subset 
of Hox proteins.

Chang CP(1), Shen WF, Rozenfeld S, Lawrence HJ, Largman C, Cleary ML.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Stanford University Medical Center, California 94305,
USA.

The human proto-oncogene PBX1 codes for a homolog of Drosophila extradenticle, a 
divergent homeo domain protein that modulates the developmental and DNA-binding
specificity of select HOM proteins. We demonstrate that wild-type Pbx proteins
and chimeric E2a-Pbx1 oncoproteins cooperatively bind a consensus DNA probe with 
HoxB4, B6, and B7 of the Antennapedia class of Hox/HOM proteins. Specificity of
Hox-Pbx interactions was suggested by the inability of Pbx proteins to
cooperatively bind the synthetic DNA target with HoxA10 or Drosophila
even-skipped. Site-directed mutagenesis showed that the hexapeptide motif
(IYPWMK) upstream of the Hox homeo domain was essential for HoxB6 and B7 to
cooperatively bind DNA with Pbx proteins. Engraftment of the HoxB7 hexapeptide
onto HoxA10 endowed it with robust cooperative properties, demonstrating a
functional role for the highly conserved hexapeptide element as one of the
molecular determinants delimiting Hox-Pbx cooperativity. The Pbx homeo domain was
necessary but not sufficient for cooperativity, which required conserved amino
acids carboxy-terminal of the homeo domain. These findings demonstrate that
interactions between Hox and Pbx proteins modulate their DNA-binding properties, 
suggesting that Pbx and Hox proteins act in parallel as heterotypic complexes to 
regulate expression of specific subordinate genes.

PMID: 7729685  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


460. Mol Cell Biol. 1995 Mar;15(3):1591-601.

The expression pattern of the murine Hoxa-10 gene and the sequence recognition of
its homeodomain reveal specific properties of Abdominal B-like genes.

Benson GV(1), Nguyen TH, Maas RL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School, 
Boston, Massachusetts.

Homeobox genes of the Abdominal B (AbdB) family constitute a distinct subset of
vertebrate Hox genes. Analysis of the murine Hoxa-10 gene, one member of this
family, revealed several properties specific to this class. Two transcripts of
Hoxa-10, a10-1 and a10-2, encode homeodomain proteins of 55 kDa (399 amino acids)
and 16 kDa (96 amino acids), respectively. These proteins have identical
homeodomains and C-terminal regions encoded by a common 3' exon but differ
significantly in the sizes of their N-terminal regions because of the usage of
alternative 5' exons. The 5' exon of the a10-2 form is also present in
transcripts of Hoxa-9, the next 3' gene, indicating that splicing can occur
between adjacent AbdB Hox genes within a cluster. Both Hoxa-10 transcripts
demonstrated identical patterns of expression in the posterior body and proximal 
limb bud, differentiating them from AbdB morphogenetic and regulatory transcripts
and suggesting a role with other AbdB Hox genes in the patterning of these
structures. Finally, a binding site selection identified the sequence
AA(A/T)TTTTATTAC as the Hoxa-10 homeodomain consensus binding site, with a TTAT
core sequence. Preferential recognition of a TTAT core therefore differentiates
the AbdB class from Antennapedia (Antp) class gene products which bind a TAAT
core. Thus, in vertebrates, structural similarities, coordinate transcriptional
regulation, sites of expression, and binding site preferences all serve to
distinguish AbdB from Antp Hox genes.

PMCID: PMC230383
PMID: 7862151  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


461. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1994 Dec 6;91(25):12223-7.

Differential expression of homeobox genes in functionally distinct CD34+
subpopulations of human bone marrow cells.

Sauvageau G(1), Lansdorp PM, Eaves CJ, Hogge DE, Dragowska WH, Reid DS, Largman
C, Lawrence HJ, Humphries RK.

Author information: 
(1)Terry Fox Laboratory, British Columbia Cancer Agency, Canada.

Class I homeobox (Hox) genes encode a major group of transcription factors
controlling embryonic development and have been implicated in the continuing
process of hematopoietic cell differentiation. They are clustered on four
chromosomes and, in early development, exhibit spatially restricted expression
with respect to their 3'-->5' chromosomal position. By using an improved
PCR-based method for amplifying total cDNA derived from limited cell numbers, we 
now describe the expression of class I Hox genes in highly purified CD34+ cell
subpopulations isolated from normal human bone marrow that represent functionally
distinct stem and progenitor cell compartments. Our data indicate that at least
16 different Hox genes, mainly from the A and the B clusters, are expressed in
one or more of these subpopulations of human hematopoietic cells. Moreover,
markedly elevated expression of some of the Hox genes found at the 3' end of the 
A and B clusters (e.g., HoxB3) was a unique feature of the subpopulations that
contained the most primitive functionally defined cells, whereas genes located in
the 5' region of each cluster (e.g., HoxA10) were found to be expressed at nearly
equal levels in the CD34+ subpopulations analyzed. In contrast to the findings
for CD34+ cells, expression of two selected Hox genes, HoxB3 and HoxA10, was
virtually extinguished in the CD34- fraction of bone marrow cells. These results 
demonstrate the expression of a broad range of Hox genes in primitive
hematopoietic cells and point to the existence of a regulated program of Hox gene
expression during their normal development.

PMCID: PMC45409
PMID: 7527557  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


462. Biochem Pharmacol. 1994 Jan 13;47(1):137-43.

Homeobox genes: potential candidates for the transcriptional control of the
transformed and invasive phenotype.

Castronovo V(1), Kusaka M, Chariot A, Gielen J, Sobel M.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Research Laboratory, University of Liège, Belgium.

The transformation of a cell and the acquisition of the invasive and metastatic
phenotype result from the activation of a group of complex cellular processes
rather than from the effect of a single gene product. It is likely that the
coordination of the multiple genes involved in malignancy is under the control of
a few genes that act as master genes or orchestrator genes. The latter probably
code for transcription factors that control the genetic program for tumor
invasion and metastasis. Homeobox genes are a family of transcription factors
that contain a 183 bp highly conserved nucleotide sequence coding for a 61 amino 
acid domain that binds specifically to DNA. First discovered in Drosophila as
genes controlling segmentation and segment identity, homeobox genes have since
been identified in many other species including nematodes, frog, mouse and human.
There is strong support for the suggestion that homeobox genes play a key role in
development and differentiation. In humans, there are 38 homeobox genes organized
in four clusters that are localized on chromosomes 2, 7, 12 and 17. The specific 
functions of each of these genes are generally unknown. Alterations in expression
of several homeobox genes have been reported in a variety of malignant lesions,
suggesting that they could play a role in the development of cancer. Using
reverse transcriptase reaction coupled with polymerase chain reaction and
degenerate oligonucleotides corresponding to the 5' and 3' ends of the highly
conserved homeodomain, we amplified 130 bp cDNA fragments from the human breast
cancer cell line MCF7 that were subsequently cloned into pBluescript vector.
Sequencing of the clones, resulted in the identification of the homeodomains of
four different human homeobox genes: HOXB6, HOXA1, HOXA10 and HOXC6. Further
studies should determine the specific role of these four homeobox genes in the
development and progression of human breast cancer and potentially determine if
they might be good targets for gene therapy.

PMID: 7906121  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


463. Nucleic Acids Res. 1991 Jun 25;19(12):3443-9.

A human Hox 1 homeobox gene exhibits myeloid-specific expression of alternative
transcripts in human hematopoietic cells.

Lowney P(1), Corral J, Detmer K, LeBeau MM, Deaven L, Lawrence HJ, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of California, Davis 95616.

As part of a survey of the expression of homeobox-containing genes in human
hematopoietic cells, we identified a novel gene (PL1) expressed only in cells of 
the myelomonocytic lineage (Shen et al., Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci, USA 86, 8536,
1989). On Northern gel analysis, major transcripts of 3.0 and 2.2 kb length are
observed. Alternatively spliced homeobox-containing cDNAs, corresponding to the
major transcripts, have been cloned from two myeloid leukemia cell libraries. The
two cDNAs share the homeodomain and 3' flanking region but have unique 5'
flanking regions. The longer transcript, would encode a 496 amino acid
homeobox-containing protein, while the shorter message would encode a 94 amino
acid homeobox-containing protein lacking the extended amino-terminal region.
These two transcripts are differentially expressed in human leukemia cell lines. 
The larger transcript is exclusively expressed in cells with myelomonocytic
features, while the smaller transcript is expressed in a variety of hematopoietic
cell types. PL mRNA is also detectable in normal human bone marrow by RNAse
protection. Neither transcript is expressed in uninduced teratocarcinoma cells or
in the adult human tissues surveyed. The homeodomain is identical to the genomic 
sequence for Hox 1H, a newly identified member of the Hox 1 locus (Acampora et
al. Nucl. Acids Res. 17, 10385, 1989). The PL1 gene was localized to chromosome 7
using chromosome specific blots and sublocalized to region pI4-21 by in situ
hybridization of chromosomal spreads, confirming its location within the Hox 1
complex.

PMCID: PMC328346
PMID: 1676505  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


