
1. Int J Obes (Lond). 2016 Mar 16. doi: 10.1038/ijo.2016.36. [Epub ahead of print]

Hoxa5 undergoes dynamic DNA methylation and transcriptional repression in the
adipose tissue of mice exposed to high-fat diet.

Parrillo L(1,)(2), Costa V(3), Raciti GA(1,)(2), Longo M(1,)(2), Spinelli
R(1,)(2), Esposito R(3), Nigro C(1,)(2), Vastolo V(1,)(2), Desiderio A(1,)(2),
Zatterale F(1,)(2), Ciccodicola A(3,)(4), Formisano P(1,)(2), Miele C(1,)(2),
Beguinot F(1,)(2).

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Mediche e Traslazionali dell'Università di Napoli
"Federico II", Naples, Italy. (2)URT dell'Istituto di Endocrinologia e Oncologia 
Sperimentale "Gaetano Salvatore", Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche, Naples,
Italy. (3)Institute of Genetics and Biophysics "Adriano Buzzati-Traverso",
National Research Council, Naples, Italy. (4)DiST, Department of Science and
Technology, "Parthenope" University of Naples, Centro Direzionale, Naples, Italy.

BACKGROUND/OBJECTIVES: The genomic bases of the adipose tissue abnormalities
induced by chronic positive calorie excess have been only partially elucidated.
We adopted a genome-wide approach to directly test whether long-term high-fat
diet (HFD) exposure affects the DNA methylation profile of the mouse adipose
tissue and to identify the functional consequences of these changes.
SUBJECTS/METHODS: We have used epididymal fat of mice fed either high-fat (HFD)
or regular chow (STD) diet for 5 months and performed genome-wide DNA methylation
analyses by methylated DNA immunoprecipitation sequencing (MeDIP-seq). Mouse
Homeobox (Hox) Gene DNA Methylation PCR, RT-qPCR and bisulphite sequencing
analyses were then performed.
RESULTS: Mice fed the HFD progressively expanded their adipose mass accompanied
by a significant decrease in glucose tolerance (P<0.001) and insulin sensitivity 
(P<0.05). MeDIP-seq data analysis revealed a uniform distribution of
differentially methylated regions (DMR) through the entire adipocyte genome, with
a higher number of hypermethylated regions in HFD mice (P<0.005). This different 
methylation profile was accompanied by increased expression of the Dnmt3a DNA
methyltransferase (P<0.05) and the methyl-CpG binding domain protein Mbd3
(P<0.05) genes in HFD mice. Gene ontology analysis revealed that, in the
HFD-treated mice, the Hox family of development genes was highly enriched in
differentially methylated genes (P=0.008). To validate this finding, Hoxa5, which
is implicated in fat tissue differentiation and remodeling, has been selected and
analyzed by bisulphite sequencing, confirming hypermethylation in the adipose
tissue from the HFD mice. Hoxa5 hypermethylation was associated with
downregulation of Hoxa5 mRNA and protein expression. Feeding animals previously
exposed to the HFD with a standard chow diet for two further months improved the 
metabolic phenotype of the animals, accompanied by return of Hoxa5 methylation
and expression levels (P<0.05) to values similar to those of the control mice
maintained under standard chow.
COCLUSIONS: HFD induces adipose tissue abnormalities accompanied by epigenetic
changes at the Hoxa5 adipose tissue remodeling gene.International Journal of
Obesity accepted article preview online, 16 March 2016. doi:10.1038/ijo.2016.36.

PMID: 26980478  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


2. Int J Mol Med. 2016 Feb 4. doi: 10.3892/ijmm.2016.2480. [Epub ahead of print]

Effect of silencing HOXA5 gene expression using RNA interference on cell cycle
and apoptosis in Jurkat cells.

Huang HP(1), Liu WJ(1), Guo QL(1), Bai YQ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, The First Affiliated Hospital of Sichuan Medical
University, Luzhou, Sichuan 646000, P.R. China.

Acute lymphocytic leukemia (ALL) is a common malignant tumor with a high
morbidity rate among children, accounting for approximately 80% of leukemia
cases. Although there have been improvements in the treatment of patients
frequent relapse lead to a poor prognosis. The aim of the present study was to
determine whether HOXA5 may be used as a target for gene therapy in leukemia in
order to provide a new treatment. Mononuclear cells were extracted from the bone 
marrow according to the clinical research aims. After testing for ALL in the
acute stage, the relative mRNA and protein expression of HOXA5 was detected in
the ALL remission groups (n=25 cases per group) and the control group [n=20
cases, immune thrombocytopenia (ITP)]. Gene silencing by RNA interference (RNAi) 
was used to investigate the effect of silencing HOXA5 after small interfering RNA
(siRNA) transfection to Jurkat cells. The HOXA5-specific siRNA was transfected to
Jurkat cells using lipofectamine. The experiment was divided into the
experimental group (liposomal transfection of HOXA5 targeting siRNA), the
negative control group (liposomal transfection of cells with negative control
siRNA) and the control group (plus an equal amount of cells and culture media
only). Western blotting and quantitative fluorescent polymerase chain
reaction (QF-PCR) were used to detect the relative HOXA5 mRNA expression and
protein distribution in each cell group. Cell distribution in the cell cycle and 
the rate of cells undergoing apoptosis were determined using flow cytometry. The 
expression of HOXA5 at the mRNA and protein levels in the acute phase of ALL was 
significantly higher than that in ALL in the remission and control groups. In
cells transfected with HOXA5-specific siRNA, the expression of HOXA5 at the mRNA 
and protein levels decreased significantly (P<0.05). The distribution of cells in
the cell cycle was also altered. Specifically, more cells were present in the
G0/G1 phase compared to the S phase (P<0.05). In addition, the apoptotic rate was
significantly higher in cells transfected with HOXA5-specific siRNA (P<0.05).
In conclusion, high expression levels of HOXA5 mRNA and protein in children with 
ALL indicate that HOXA5 is closely associated with childhood ALL. In addition,
HOXA5-specific siRNA effectively silences HOXA5 gene expression and induces
apoptosis and cell-cycle arrest in Jurkat cells, thus inhibiting cell
proliferation.

PMCID: PMC4771120
PMID: 26846409  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


3. PLoS One. 2016 Feb 3;11(2):e0148833. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0148833.

Correction: Sustained Endothelial Expression of HoxA5 In Vivo Impairs
Pathological Angiogenesis And Tumor Progression.

Cuevas I, Layman H, Coussens L, Boudreau N.

Erratum for
    PLoS One. 2015 Mar 30;10(3):e0121720. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121720.
eCollection 2015..

[This corrects the article DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121720.].

PMCID: PMC4740479
PMID: 26839951  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


4. Joint Bone Spine. 2016 Jan 29. pii: S1297-319X(15)00281-X. doi:
10.1016/j.jbspin.2015.09.001. [Epub ahead of print]

Identification of upstream regulators for synovial expression signature genes in 
osteoarthritis.

Fei Q(1), Lin J(1), Meng H(1), Wang B(1), Yang Y(1), Wang Q(1), Su N(1), Li J(1),
Li D(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedics, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical
University, 95, Yong'an Road, Beijing 100050, China. (2)Department of
Orthopaedics, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University, 95,
Yong'an Road, Beijing 100050, China. Electronic address: spinefei@163.com.

OBJECTIVES: The detection of transcription factors (TFs) for OA signature genes
provides better clues to the underlying regulatory mechanisms and therapeutic
applications.
METHODS: We searched GEO database for synovial expression profiling from
different OA microarray studies to perform a systematic analysis. Functional
annotation of DEGs was conducted, including gene ontology (GO) enrichment
analysis and Kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes (KEGG) pathway enrichment
analysis. Based on motif databases and the results from integrated analysis of
current gene expression data, a global transcriptional regulatory network was
constructed, and the upstream TFs were identified for OA signature genes.
RESULTS: Six GEO datasets were obtained. Totally, 805 genes across the studies
were consistently differentially expressed in OA (469 up-regulated and 336
down-regulated genes) with FDR=0.01. Supporting an involvement of ECM in the
development of OA, we showed that ECM-receptor interaction was the most
significant pathway in our KEGG analysis (P=5.92E-12). Sixty-one differentially
expressed TFs were identified with FDR=0.05. The constructed OA-specific
regulatory networks consisted of 648 TF-target interactions between 51 TFs and
429 DEGs in the context of OA. The top 10 TFs covering the most downstream DEGs
were identified as crucial TFs involved in the development of OA, including
ARID3A, NFIC, ZNF354C, NR4A2, BRCA1, EHF, FOXL1, FOXC1, EGR1, and HOXA5.
CONCLUSION: This integrated analysis has identified the OA signature, providing
clues to pathogenesis of OA at the molecular level, which may be also used as
diagnostic markers for OA. Some crucial upstream regulators, such as NR4A2, EHF, 
and EGR1 may be considered as potential new therapeutic targets for OA.

Copyright © 2015 Société française de rhumatologie. Published by Elsevier SAS.
All rights reserved.

PMID: 26832188  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


5. Gene Expr Patterns. 2016 Jan 26. pii: S1567-133X(16)30002-3. doi:
10.1016/j.gep.2016.01.002. [Epub ahead of print]

Fat accumulation in differentiated brown adipocytes is linked with expression of 
Hox genes.

Singh S(1), Rajput YS(2), Barui AK(3), Sharma R(3), Datta TK(4).

Author information: 
(1)Animal Biochemistry Division, National Dairy Researikch Institute, Karnal,
Haryana, 132001, India. (2)Animal Biochemistry Division, National Dairy
Researikch Institute, Karnal, Haryana, 132001, India. Electronic address:
ys_rajput@rediffmail.com. (3)Dairy Chemistry Division, National Dairy Research
Institute, Karnal, Haryana, 132001, India. (4)Animal Biotechnology Centre,
National Dairy Research Institute, Karnal, Haryana, 132001, India.

Homeobox (Hox) genes are involved in body plan of embryo along the
anterior-posterior axis. Presence of several Hox genes in white adipose tissue
(WAT) and brown adipose tissue (BAT) is indicative of involvement of Hox genes in
adipogenesis. We propose that differentiation inducing agents viz.
isobutyl-methyl-xanthine (IBMX), indomethacin, dexamethasone (DEX),
triiodothyronine (T3) and insulin may regulate differentiation in brown adipose
tissue through Hox genes. In vitro culture of brown fat stromalvascular fraction 
(SVF) in presence or absence of differentiation inducing agents was used for
establishing relationship between fat accumulation in differentiated adipocytes
and expression of Hox genes. Relative expression of Pref1, UCP1 and Hox genes was
determined in different stages of adipogenesis. Presence or absence of IBMX,
indomethacin and DEX during differentiation of proliferated pre-adipocytes
resulted in marked differences in expression of Hox genes and lipid accumulation.
In presence of these inducing agents, lipid accumulation as well as expression of
HoxA1, HoxA5, HoxC4 &HoxC8 markedly enhanced. Irrespective of presence or absence
of T3, insulin down regulates HoxA10. T3 results in over expression of HoxA5,
HoxC4 and HoxC8 genes, whereas insulin up regulates expression of only HoxC8.
Findings suggest that accumulation of fat in differentiated adipocytes is linked 
with expression of Hox genes.

Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26820751  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


6. Cancer Discov. 2016 Feb;6(2):OF9. doi: 10.1158/2159-8290.CD-RW2015-240. Epub 2015
Dec 23.

HOXA5 Promotes Differentiation by Reducing WNT Signaling.

[No authors listed]

HOXA5 and WNT negatively regulate each other to control stem cell maintenance and
differentiation.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMID: 26701092  [PubMed - in process]


7. Cancer Cell. 2015 Dec 14;28(6):815-29. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.11.001.

HOXA5 Counteracts Stem Cell Traits by Inhibiting Wnt Signaling in Colorectal
Cancer.

Ordóñez-Morán P(1), Dafflon C(1), Imajo M(2), Nishida E(3), Huelsken J(4).

Author information: 
(1)École Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), ISREC (Swiss Institute for
Experimental Cancer Research), Lausanne 1015, Switzerland. (2)Laboratory of
Bioimaging and Cell Signaling, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University,
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8501, Japan; Department of Cell and Developmental Biology,
Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan;
JST, CREST, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0075, Japan. (3)Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, Graduate School of Biostudies, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku,
Kyoto 606-8502, Japan; JST, CREST, Chiyoda-ku, Tokyo 102-0075, Japan. (4)École
Polytechnique Fédérale de Lausanne (EPFL), ISREC (Swiss Institute for
Experimental Cancer Research), Lausanne 1015, Switzerland. Electronic address:
joerg.huelsken@epfl.ch.

Hierarchical organization of tissues relies on stem cells, which either
self-renew or produce committed progenitors predestined for lineage
differentiation. Here we identify HOXA5 as an important repressor of intestinal
stem cell fate in vivo and identify a reciprocal feedback between HOXA5 and Wnt
signaling. HOXA5 is suppressed by the Wnt pathway to maintain stemness and
becomes active only outside the intestinal crypt where it inhibits Wnt signaling 
to enforce differentiation. In colon cancer, HOXA5 is downregulated, and its
re-expression induces loss of the cancer stem cell phenotype, preventing tumor
progression and metastasis. Tumor regression by HOXA5 induction can be triggered 
by retinoids, which represent tangible means to treat colon cancer by eliminating
cancer stem cells.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26678341  [PubMed - in process]


8. Cancer Cell. 2015 Dec 14;28(6):683-5. doi: 10.1016/j.ccell.2015.11.004.

Stemming Colorectal Cancer Growth and Metastasis: HOXA5 Forces Cancer Stem Cells 
to Differentiate.

Tan SH(1), Barker N(2).

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medical Biology, 8A Biomedical Grove, 06-06 Immunos, 138648
Singapore, Singapore. (2)Institute of Medical Biology, 8A Biomedical Grove, 06-06
Immunos, 138648 Singapore, Singapore; MRC Centre for Regenerative Medicine, The
University of Edinburgh, 5 Little France Drive, Edinburgh EH16 4UU, UK;
Department of Biochemistry, Yong Loo Lin School of Medicine, National University 
of Singapore, 117596 Singapore, Singapore. Electronic address:
nicholas.barker@imb.a-star.edu.sg.

Wnt signaling drives colorectal cancer stem cells, but effective therapeutics
targeting these cells and their signaling pathways are lacking. In this issue of 
Cancer Cell, Ordóñez-Morán and colleagues describe a promising therapeutic
intervention for colorectal cancers that selectively induces cancer stem cell
differentiation through HOXA5 expression and Wnt signaling inhibition.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26678334  [PubMed - in process]


9. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Nov 27;467(4):828-34. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.10.058. Epub 2015 Oct 23.

CTCF negatively regulates HOXA10 expression in breast cancer cells.

Mustafa M(1), Lee JY(1), Kim MH(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Laboratory, and Brain Korea 21 PLUS Project 
for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, South
Korea. (2)Department of Anatomy, Embryology Laboratory, and Brain Korea 21 PLUS
Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University College of Medicine, Seoul 03722, 
South Korea. Electronic address: mhkim1@yuhs.ac.

HOX genes not only play important roles in defining body patterning during
embryonic development, but also control numerous cellular events in adult cells. 
Deregulated HOX gene expression in different cancers including breast cancer is
now increasingly being reported. Given that human HOXA cluster is marked with
several CTCF binding sites, we investigated whether the presence of CTCF is
associated directly with expression of HOXA genes in breast cancer cells. Several
HOX genes, such as HOXA4, HOXA5 and HOXA10, were deregulated by CTCF
overexpression and knockdown in MCF-7 cells. Among these genes, HOXA10 is an
emerging tumor suppressor for its role in activation of p53 and in countering
tumorigenesis in breast cancer. Here we provided evidences that CTCF functions as
a negative regulator of HOXA10 in breast cancer cells. The putative promoter
region of HOXA10 lies between 5.3 and 6.1 kb upstream of its start codon and its 
promoter activity was negatively regulated by CTCF. Together with in-silico
analysis and in vitro mutation assay we identified a 20 bp CTCF binding motif
flanking with core promoter element of HOXA10. HOXA10 promoter region was kept
inactivated by maintaining H3K27me3 inactivation marks in the presence of CTCF.
Epigenetic silencing of HOXA10 by CTCF in breast cancer cells may contribute
towards tumorigenesis by decreasing apoptosis and promoting metastasis.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 26478432  [PubMed - in process]


10. Int J Lab Hematol. 2016 Feb;38(1):64-71. doi: 10.1111/ijlh.12435. Epub 2015 Sep
29.

NUP98-HOXA9 bearing therapy-related myeloid neoplasm involves myeloid-committed
cell and induces HOXA5, EVI1, FLT3, and MEIS1 expression.

Burillo-Sanz S(1), Morales-Camacho RM(2), Caballero-Velázquez T(2), Vargas MT(2),
García-Lozano JR(1), Falantes JF(2), Prats-Martín C(2), Bernal R(2), Pérez-Simón 
JA(2).

Author information: 
(1)Servicio de Inmunología, Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío, Sevilla,
Spain. (2)Department of Hematology, Instituto de Biomedicina de Sevilla
(IBIS)/Hospital Universitario Virgen del Rocío/CSIC/Universidad de Sevilla,
Sevilla, Spain.

INTRODUCTION: Chromosomal rearrangements involving NUP98 gene have been
associated with human leukemias such as de novo AML, therapy-related AML (t-AML),
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), and chronic myeloid leukemia (CML). Genetic
fusion NUP98-HOXA9, caused by t(7;11)(p15;p15), is a recurrent cytogenetic
alteration in de novo acute myeloid leukemia (AML) usually found in young Asian
patients and its description in therapy-related myeloid neoplasms (t-MN) is rare.
Only one Asian case with molecular demonstration of the NUP98-HOXA9 fusion has
been reported in therapy-related leukemia. NUP98-HOXA9 leukemogenic mechanism is 
derived from the transcription factor activity of the chimeric protein, which
enhances the expression of genes related to cellular differentiation arrest and
proliferation.
PATIENTS AND METHODS: We studied a Caucasian woman with a therapy-related acute
myeloid leukemia after Ewing's sarcoma. Molecular demonstration of the genetic
fusion NUP98-HOXA9 was performed by RT-PCR, and gene expression was analyzed by
real-time PCR, including four AML patients with MLL rearrangements for
comparative analysis. Cytologic and flow cytometric analysis was also carried
out.
RESULTS: After cytologic and flow cytometric analysis diagnostics was
therapy-related myeloid neoplasm (t-MN). The major component of blasts in the
acute leukemia was with neutrophilic differentiation, but 13% erythroid lineage
blasts were also found. Cytogenetic and FISH analysis revealed t(7;11)(p15;p15)
and NUP98-HOXA9 fusion gene was demonstrated. Gene expression analysis showed
upregulation of EVI1 and MEIS1 in the index patient, both of them previously
related to a worst outcome.
CONCLUSION: In this work, we include a detailed molecular, clinical, cytological,
and cytometric study of the second t-AML bearing NUP98-HOXA9 genetic fusion.

© 2015 John Wiley & Sons Ltd.

PMID: 26418229  [PubMed - as supplied by publisher]


11. Mol Med Rep. 2015 Nov;12(5):6861-6. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.4331. Epub 2015 Sep 15.

Knockdown of homeobox A5 by small hairpin RNA inhibits proliferation and enhances
cytarabine chemosensitivity of acute myeloid leukemia cells.

Li N(1), Jia X(1), Wang J(1), Li Y(2), Xie S(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Affiliated Hospital of Binzhou Medical University,
Binzhou, Shandong 256003, P.R. China. (2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular
Biology, Binzhou Medical University, Yantai, Shandong 264003, P.R. China.

Homeobox genes encode transcription factors that are essential for embryonic
morphogenesis and differentiation. Transcription factors containing the highly
conserved homeobox motif show considerable promise as potential regulators of
hematopoietic maturation events. Previous studies have suggested that the
increased expression levels of homeobox (HOX)A genes was correlated with the
cytogenetic findings associated with poor prognosis in acute myeloid leukemia and
mixed lineage leukemia. The aim of the present study was to investigate the role 
of HOXA5 in leukemia. The U937 human leukemia cell line was transfected with a
HOXA5-targeted short hairpin RNA (shRNA) to determine the effects of
downregulation of the HOXA5 on proliferation, apoptosis, cell cycle distribution 
and chemoresistance in leukemia cells. Reverse transcription-quantitative
polymerase chain reaction and western blot analyses demonstrated that the mRNA
and protein expression levels of HOXA5 were markedly suppressed following
transfection with an shRNA-containing vector. Knockdown of HOXA5 significantly
inhibited cell proliferation, as determined by Cell Counting kit-8 assay. Flow
cytometry revealed that reduced HOXA5 expression levels resulted in cell cycle
arrest at the G1 phase, and induced apoptosis. In addition, western blot analysis
demonstrated that HOXA5 knockdown increased the expression levels of caspase-3,
and reduced the expression levels of survivin in the U937 cells. Furthermore,
knockdown of HOXA5 in the U937 cells enhanced their chemosensitivity to
cytarabine. The results of the present study suggested that downregulation of
HOXA5 by shRNA may trigger apoptosis and overcome drug resistance in leukemia
cells. Therefore, HOXA5 may serve as a potential target for developing novel
therapeutic strategies for leukemia.

PMID: 26397212  [PubMed - in process]


12. Transgenic Res. 2015 Dec;24(6):1065-77. doi: 10.1007/s11248-015-9905-5. Epub 2015
Sep 22.

Perinatal induction of Cre recombination with tamoxifen.

Lizen B(1), Claus M(1,)(2), Jeannotte L(3,)(4,)(5), Rijli FM(6), Gofflot F(7).

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Université catholique de Louvain, 1348,
Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium. (2)Institut de Duve, Université catholique de Louvain,
1200, Woluwe-Saint-Lambert, Belgium. (3)Department of Molecular Biology, Medical 
Biochemistry and Pathology, Université Laval, Québec, Canada. (4)Centre de
recherche sur le cancer de l'Université Laval, Québec, Canada. (5)CRHDQ,
L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec, Canada. (6)Friedrich Miescher Institute for
Biomedical Research, Maulbeerstrasse 66, 4058, Basel, Switzerland. (7)Institut
des Sciences de la Vie, Université catholique de Louvain, 1348, Louvain-la-Neuve,
Belgium. Francoise.Gofflot@uclouvain.be.

Temporal control of site-specific recombination is commonly achieved by using a
tamoxifen-inducible form of Cre or Flp recombinases. Although powerful protocols 
of induction have been developed for gene inactivation at adult stages or during 
embryonic development, induction of recombination at late gestational or early
postnatal stages is still difficult to achieve. In this context, using the
ubiquitous CMV-CreER(T2) transgenic mice, we have tested and validated two
procedures to achieve recombination just before and just after birth. The
efficiency of recombination was evaluated in the brain, which is known to be more
problematic to target. For the late gestation treatment with tamoxifen, different
protocols of complementary administration of progesterone and estrogen were
tested. However, delayed delivery and/or mortality of pups due to difficult
delivery were always observed. To circumvent this problem, pups were collected
from tamoxifen-treated pregnant dams by caesarian section at E18.5 and given to
foster mothers. For postnatal treatment, different dosages of tamoxifen were
administered by intragastric injection to the pups during 3 or 4 days after
birth. The efficiency of these treatments was analyzed at P7 using a transgenic
reporter line. They were also validated with the Hoxa5 conditional allele. In
conclusion, we have developed efficient procedures that allow achieving efficient
recombination of floxed alleles at perinatal stages. These protocols will allow
investigating the late/adult functions of many developmental genes, whose
characterization has been so far restricted to embryonic development.

PMID: 26395370  [PubMed - in process]


13. Cancer Res. 2015 Sep 15;75(18):3980-90. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-15-0506. Epub 
2015 Aug 6.

A Molecular Portrait of High-Grade Ductal Carcinoma In Situ.

Abba MC(1), Gong T(2), Lu Y(2), Lee J(2), Zhong Y(2), Lacunza E(1), Butti M(1),
Takata Y(2), Gaddis S(2), Shen J(2), Estecio MR(3), Sahin AA(4), Aldaz CM(5).

Author information: 
(1)CINIBA, School of Medical Sciences, National University of La Plata, La Plata,
Argentina. (2)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville,
Texas. (3)The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas.
The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (4)The
University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas. (5)The University 
of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Smithville, Texas. maaldaz@mdanderson.org.

Ductal carcinoma in situ (DCIS) is a noninvasive precursor lesion to invasive
breast carcinoma. We still have no understanding on why only some DCIS lesions
evolve to invasive cancer whereas others appear not to do so during the life span
of the patient. Here, we performed full exome (tumor vs. matching normal),
transcriptome, and methylome analysis of 30 pure high-grade DCIS (HG-DCIS) and 10
normal breast epithelial samples. Sixty-two percent of HG-DCIS cases displayed
mutations affecting cancer driver genes or potential drivers. Mutations were
observed affecting PIK3CA (21% of cases), TP53 (17%), GATA3 (7%), MLL3 (7%) and
single cases of mutations affecting CDH1, MAP2K4, TBX3, NF1, ATM, and ARID1A.
Significantly, 83% of lesions displayed numerous large chromosomal copy number
alterations, suggesting they might precede selection of cancer driver mutations. 
Integrated pathway-based modeling analysis of RNA-seq data allowed us to identify
two DCIS subgroups (DCIS-C1 and DCIS-C2) based on their tumor-intrinsic subtypes,
proliferative, immune scores, and in the activity of specific signaling pathways.
The more aggressive DCIS-C1 (highly proliferative, basal-like, or ERBB2(+))
displayed signatures characteristic of activated Treg cells
(CD4(+)/CD25(+)/FOXP3(+)) and CTLA4(+)/CD86(+) complexes indicative of a
tumor-associated immunosuppressive phenotype. Strikingly, all lesions showed
evidence of TP53 pathway inactivation. Similarly, ncRNA and methylation profiles 
reproduce changes observed postinvasion. Among the most significant findings, we 
observed upregulation of lncRNA HOTAIR in DCIS-C1 lesions and hypermethylation of
HOXA5 and SOX genes. We conclude that most HG-DCIS lesions, in spite of
representing a preinvasive stage of tumor progression, displayed molecular
profiles indistinguishable from invasive breast cancer.

©2015 American Association for Cancer Research.

PMCID: PMC4768486 [Available on 2016-09-15]
PMID: 26249178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


14. Cell Rep. 2015 Aug 11;12(6):903-12. doi: 10.1016/j.celrep.2015.07.020. Epub 2015 
Jul 30.

Hox5 Genes Regulate the Wnt2/2b-Bmp4-Signaling Axis during Lung Development.

Hrycaj SM(1), Dye BR(2), Baker NC(1), Larsen BM(1), Burke AC(3), Spence JR(2),
Wellik DM(4).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA. (2)Department of Cell and 
Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.
(3)Department of Biology, Wesleyan University, Middletown, CT 06459, USA.
(4)Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, Department of Internal Medicine, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA; Department of Cell and
Developmental Biology, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-2200, USA.
Electronic address: dwellik@umich.edu.

Hox genes are required for proper anteroposterior axial patterning and the
development of several organ systems. Here, we show that all three Hox5
paralogous genes play redundant roles in the developing lung. Hoxa5;Hoxb5;Hoxc5
triple-mutant embryos develop severely hypoplastic lungs with reduced branching
and proximal-distal patterning defects. Hox5 genes are exclusively expressed in
the lung mesoderm; however, defects are observed in both lung mesenchyme and
endodermally derived epithelium, demonstrating that Hox5 genes act to regulate
mesodermal-epithelial crosstalk during development. We show that Hox5 loss of
function leads to loss of Wnt2/2b expression in the distal lung mesenchyme and
the downregulation of previously identified downstream targets of Wnt2/2b
signaling, including Lef1, Axin2, and Bmp4. Wnt2/2b-enriched media rescue proper 
Sox2/Sox9 patterning and restore Bmp4 expression in Hox5 triple-mutant lung
explants. Taken together, these data show that Hox5 genes are key upstream
mesenchymal regulators of the Wnt2/2b-Bmp4-signaling axis critical for proper
lung patterning.

Copyright © 2015 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4536095 [Available on 2016-08-11]
PMID: 26235626  [PubMed - in process]


15. Sci Rep. 2015 Jul 29;5:12580. doi: 10.1038/srep12580.

Induction of p53-independent apoptosis by ectopic expression of HOXA5 in human
liposarcomas.

Lee DH(1), Forscher C(1), Di Vizio D(2), Koeffler HP(3).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Hematology and Oncology, Departments of Surgery,Biomedical
Sciences and Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive
Cancer Institute,Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA. (2)1]
Division of Cancer Biology and Therapeutics, Departments of Surgery, Biomedical
Sciences and Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive
Cancer Institute, Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA [2] The
Urological Diseases Research Center; Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA,
Department of Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, USA. (3)1] Division of
Hematology and Oncology, Departments of Surgery,Biomedical Sciences and Pathology
and Laboratory Medicine, Samuel Oschin Comprehensive Cancer
Institute,Cedars-Sinai Medical Center, Los Angeles, CA, USA [2] National Cancer
Institute and Cancer Science Institute, National University of Singapore,
Singapore.

Dedifferentiated liposarcoma (DDLPS) is a highly malignant subtype of human
liposarcoma (LPS), whose genomic profile is characterized by chromosomal
amplification at 12q13-q22. miR-26a-2 is one of the most frequently amplified
genes in the region, and inhibition of its downstream target genes likely
contributes to LPS tumorigenesis. Our previous study of LPS predicted homeobox
protein A5 (HOXA5) as a target of miR-26a-2, and here we explored further the
function of HOXA5, and its relationship with miR-26a-2 in DDLPS cells. Compared
to normal human adipocytes, all LPS cell lines showed significant downregulation 
of HOXA5 (p<U+2009>=<U+2009>0.046), and inhibition of miR-26a-2 using anti-miR-26a-2
substantially upregulated HOXA5 expression in these LPS cells. Interestingly,
overexpression of HOXA5 alone induced very strong apoptotic response of LPS
cells. HOXA5-induced apoptosis was p53-independent and caspase-dependent.
Surprisingly, overexpression of HOXA5 induced nuclear translocation of RELA
(p65), which was not associated with the transcriptional activity of RELA.
Rather, nucleolar sequestration of RELA was observed. Overall, our study
demonstrated for the first time that the downregulation of HOXA5 in LPS cells,
partly by overexpression of miR-26a-2 in DDLPS, confers LPS cells resistance to
apoptotic death. Further studies are required to understand the relationship of
HOXA5 and the NF<U+03BA>B pathway in LPS cells.

PMCID: PMC4518222
PMID: 26219418  [PubMed - in process]


16. Oncol Rep. 2015 Aug;34(2):585-94. doi: 10.3892/or.2015.4023. Epub 2015 May 29.

Integrated analysis of DNA methylation and microRNA regulation of the lung
adenocarcinoma transcriptome.

Du J(1), Zhang L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Chinese Medical University Affiliated No. 1
Hospital, Shenyang, Liaoning 110001, P.R. China.

Lung adenocarcinoma, as a common type of non-small cell lung cancer (40%), poses 
a significant threat to public health worldwide. The present study aimed to
determine the transcriptional regulatory mechanisms in lung adenocarcinoma.
Illumina sequence data GSE 37764 including expression profiling, methylation
profiling and non-coding RNA profiling of 6 never-smoker Korean female patients
with non-small cell lung adenocarcinoma were obtained from the Gene Expression
Omnibus (GEO) database. Differentially methylated genes, differentially expressed
genes (DEGs) and differentially expressed microRNAs (miRNAs) between normal and
tumor tissues of the same patients were screened with tools in R. Functional
enrichment analysis of a variety of differential genes was performed.
DEG-specific methylation and transcription factors (TFs) were analyzed with
ENCODE ChIP-seq. The integrated regulatory network of DEGs, TFs and miRNAs was
constructed. Several overlapping DEGs, such as v-ets avian erythroblastosis virus
E26 oncogene homolog (ERG) were screened. DEGs were centrally modified by
histones of tri-methylation of lysine 27 on histone H3 (H3K27me3) and
di-acetylation of lysine 12 or 20 on histone H2 (H2BK12/20AC). Upstream TFs of
DEGs were enriched in different ChIP-seq clusters, such as glucocorticoid
receptors (GRs). Two miRNAs (miR-126-3p and miR-30c-2-3p) and three TFs including
homeobox A5 (HOXA5), Meis homeobox 1 (MEIS1) and T-box 5 (TBX5), played important
roles in the integrated regulatory network conjointly. These DEGs, and
DEG-related histone modifications, TFs and miRNAs may be important in the
pathogenesis of lung adenocarcinoma. The present results may indicate directions 
for the next step in the study of the further elucidation and targeted prevention
of lung adenocarcinoma.

PMCID: PMC4487669
PMID: 26035298  [PubMed - in process]


17. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2015 Jul;35(7):1645-52. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.115.305561. Epub 2015 May 28.

Epigenetic Regulation of Angiogenesis by JARID1B-Induced Repression of HOXA5.

Fork C(1), Gu L(2), Hitzel J(2), Josipovic I(2), Hu J(2), SzeKa Wong M(2),
Ponomareva Y(2), Albert M(2), Schmitz SU(2), Uchida S(2), Fleming I(2), Helin
K(2), Steinhilber D(2), Leisegang MS(2), Brandes RP(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Institute for Cardiovascular Physiology, Medical Faculty (C.F., L.G.,
J.H., I.J., M.S.W., M.S.L., R.P.B.), Institutes of Vascular Signalling (J.H.,
I.F.) and Cardiovascular Regeneration (Y.P., S.U.), Centre for Molecular
Medicine, and Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry/ZAFES (D.S.),
Goethe-University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany; Biotech Research and
Innovation Centre (BRIC) (M.A., S.U.S., K.H.), Centre for Epigenetics (M.A.,
S.U.S., K.H.), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; and German Center
for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Partner site RheinMain, Frankfurt, Germany
(C.F., L.G., J.H., I.J., M.S.W., Y.P., S.U., I.F., M.S.L., R.P.B.).
fork@vrc.uni-frankfurt.de. (2)From the Institute for Cardiovascular Physiology,
Medical Faculty (C.F., L.G., J.H., I.J., M.S.W., M.S.L., R.P.B.), Institutes of
Vascular Signalling (J.H., I.F.) and Cardiovascular Regeneration (Y.P., S.U.),
Centre for Molecular Medicine, and Institute of Pharmaceutical Chemistry/ZAFES
(D.S.), Goethe-University Frankfurt, Frankfurt am Main, Germany; Biotech Research
and Innovation Centre (BRIC) (M.A., S.U.S., K.H.), Centre for Epigenetics (M.A., 
S.U.S., K.H.), University of Copenhagen, Copenhagen, Denmark; and German Center
for Cardiovascular Research (DZHK), Partner site RheinMain, Frankfurt, Germany
(C.F., L.G., J.H., I.J., M.S.W., Y.P., S.U., I.F., M.S.L., R.P.B.).

OBJECTIVE: Altering endothelial biology through epigenetic modifiers is an
attractive novel concept, which is, however, just in its beginnings. We therefore
set out to identify chromatin modifiers important for endothelial gene expression
and contributing to angiogenesis.
APPROACH AND RESULTS: To identify chromatin modifying enzymes in endothelial
cells, histone demethylases were screened by microarray and polymerase chain
reaction. The histone 3 lysine 4 demethylase JARID1B was identified as a highly
expressed enzyme at the mRNA and protein levels. Knockdown of JARID1B by shRNA in
human umbilical vein endothelial cells attenuated cell migration, angiogenic
sprouting, and tube formation. Similarly, pharmacological inhibition and
overexpression of a catalytic inactive JARID1B mutant reduced the angiogenic
capacity of human umbilical vein endothelial cells. To identify the in vivo
relevance of JARID1B in the vascular system, Jarid1b knockout mice were studied. 
As global knockout results in increased mortality and developmental defects,
tamoxifen-inducible and endothelial-specific knockout mice were generated. Acute 
knockout of Jarid1b attenuated retinal angiogenesis and endothelial sprout
outgrowth from aortic segments. To identify the underlying mechanism, a
microarray experiment was performed, which led to the identification of the
antiangiogenic transcription factor HOXA5 to be suppressed by JARID1B.
Importantly, downregulation or inhibition of JARID1B, but not of JARID1A and
JARID1C, induced HOXA5 expression in human umbilical vein endothelial cells.
Consistently, chromatin immunoprecipitation revealed that JARID1B occupies and
reduces the histone 3 lysine 4 methylation levels at the HOXA5 promoter,
demonstrating a direct function of JARID1B in endothelial HOXA5 gene regulation.
CONCLUSIONS: JARID1B, by suppressing HOXA5, maintains the endothelial angiogenic 
capacity in a demethylase-dependent manner.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMID: 26023081  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


18. Asian Pac J Cancer Prev. 2015;16(9):3941-4.

Aberrant Expression of HOXA5 and HOXA9 in AML.

Zhao P(1), Tan L, Ruan J, Wei XP, Zheng Y, Zheng LX, Jiang WQ, Fang WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Oncology, The First Affiliated Hospital, School of
Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, China E-mail : weijiafang@zju.edu.cn.

BACKGROUND: Aberrant expression of HOX gene expression has been observed in
cancer. The purpose of this study was to investigate the alteration of HOXA5 and 
HOXA9 expression and their clinical significance in acute meloid leukemia (AML).
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The expression of HOXA5 and HOXA9 genes of bone marrow
samples from 75 newly diagnosed AML patients and 22 healthy controls for
comparison were examined by Real- time quantitative PCR (RQ-PCR) assay.
Statistical analysis was conducted to evaluate HOXA5 and HOXA9 expression as
possible biomarkers for AML.
RESULTS: The results showed that the complete remission rate (52.6%) of the
patients who highly expressed HOXA5 and HOXA9 was significantly lower than that
(88.9%) in patients who lowly express the genes (P=0.015). Spearmann correlation 
coefficients indicated that the expression levels for HOXA5 and HOXA9 genes were 
highly interrelated (r=0.657, P<0.001). Meanwhile, we detected significant
correlations between HOXA9 expression and age in this limited set of patients
(P=0.009).
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest a prognostic impact of increased expression of
HOXA5 and HOXA9 in AML patients.

PMID: 25987065  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


19. Int J Biochem Cell Biol. 2015 Oct;67:167-76. doi: 10.1016/j.biocel.2015.05.001.
Epub 2015 May 13.

The role of epigenetics in the endothelial cell shear stress response and
atherosclerosis.

Dunn J(1), Simmons R(1), Thabet S(2), Jo H(3).

Author information: 
(1)Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of 
Technology and Emory University, USA. (2)Division of Cardiology, Georgia
Institute of Technology and Emory University, USA. (3)Wallace H. Coulter
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology and Emory
University, USA; Division of Cardiology, Georgia Institute of Technology and
Emory University, USA. Electronic address: hjo@bme.gatech.edu.

Currently in the field of vascular biology, the role of epigenetics in
endothelial cell biology and vascular disease has attracted more in-depth study. 
Using both in vitro and in vivo models of blood flow, investigators have recently
begun to reveal the underlying epigenetic regulation of endothelial gene
expression. Recently, our group, along with two other independent groups, have
demonstrated that blood flow controls endothelial gene expression by DNA
methyltransferases (DNMT1 and 3A). Disturbed flow (d-flow), characterized by low 
and oscillating shear stress (OS), is pro-atherogenic and induces expression of
DNMT1 both in vivo and in vitro. D-flow regulates genome-wide DNA methylation
patterns in a DNMT-dependent manner. The DNMT inhibitor 5-Aza-2'deoxycytidine
(5Aza) or DNMT1 siRNA reduces OS-induced endothelial inflammation. Moreover, 5Aza
inhibits the development of atherosclerosis in ApoE(-/-) mice. Through a systems 
biological analysis of genome-wide DNA methylation patterns and gene expression
data, we found 11 mechanosensitive genes which were suppressed by d-flow in vivo,
experienced hypermethylation in their promoter region in response to d-flow, and 
were rescued by 5Aza treatment. Interestingly, among these mechanosensitive
genes, the two transcription factors HoxA5 and Klf3 contain
cAMP-response-elements (CRE), which may indicate that methylation of CRE sites
could serve as a mechanosensitive master switch in gene expression. These
findings provide new insight into the mechanism by which flow controls epigenetic
DNA methylation patterns, which in turn alters endothelial gene expression,
regulates vascular biology, and induces atherosclerosis. These novel findings
have broad implications for understanding the biochemical mechanisms of
atherogenesis and provide a basis for identifying potential therapeutic targets
for atherosclerosis. This article is part of a Directed Issue entitled:
Epigenetics dynamics in development and disease.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMCID: PMC4592147 [Available on 2016-10-01]
PMID: 25979369  [PubMed - in process]


20. Arterioscler Thromb Vasc Biol. 2015 Jul;35(7):1562-9. doi:
10.1161/ATVBAHA.115.305042. Epub 2015 May 7.

Flow-Dependent Epigenetic DNA Methylation in Endothelial Gene Expression and
Atherosclerosis.

Dunn J(1), Thabet S(1), Jo H(2).

Author information: 
(1)From the Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical Engineering (J.D., S.T., 
H.J.) and Division of Cardiology, Georgia Institute of Technology and Emory
University, Atlanta. (2)From the Wallace H. Coulter Department of Biomedical
Engineering (J.D., S.T., H.J.) and Division of Cardiology, Georgia Institute of
Technology and Emory University, Atlanta. hjo@bme.gatech.edu.

Epigenetic mechanisms that regulate endothelial cell gene expression are now
emerging. DNA methylation is the most stable epigenetic mark that confers
persisting changes in gene expression. Not only is DNA methylation important in
rendering cell identity by regulating cell type-specific gene expression
throughout differentiation, but it is becoming clear that DNA methylation also
plays a key role in maintaining endothelial cell homeostasis and in vascular
disease development. Disturbed blood flow causes atherosclerosis, whereas stable 
flow protects against it by differentially regulating gene expression in
endothelial cells. Recently, we and others have shown that flow-dependent gene
expression and atherosclerosis development are regulated by mechanisms dependent 
on DNA methyltransferases (1 and 3A). Disturbed blood flow upregulates DNA
methyltransferase expression both in vitro and in vivo, which leads to
genome-wide DNA methylation alterations and global gene expression changes in a
DNA methyltransferase-dependent manner. These studies revealed several
mechanosensitive genes, such as HoxA5, Klf3, and Klf4, whose promoters were
hypermethylated by disturbed blood flow, but rescued by DNA methyltransferases
inhibitors such as 5Aza-2-deoxycytidine. These findings provide new insight into 
the mechanism by which flow controls epigenomic DNA methylation patterns, which
in turn alters endothelial gene expression, regulates vascular biology, and
modulates atherosclerosis development.

© 2015 American Heart Association, Inc.

PMCID: PMC4754957 [Available on 2016-07-01]
PMID: 25953647  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


21. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 14;10(4):e0124191. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0124191.
eCollection 2015.

HOXA5 inhibits metastasis via regulating cytoskeletal remodelling and associates 
with prolonged survival in non-small-cell lung carcinoma.

Wang CC(1), Su KY(2), Chen HY(3), Chang SY(4), Shen CF(1), Hsieh CH(5), Hong
QS(6), Chiang CC(6), Chang GC(7), Yu SL(8), Chen JJ(9).

Author information: 
(1)Graduate Institute of Basic Medicine, Fu Jen Catholic University, New Taipei, 
Taiwan. (2)Department of Clinical and Laboratory Sciences and Medical
Biotechnology, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan;
NTU Center of Genomic Medicine, National Taiwan University College of Medicine,
Taipei, Taiwan. (3)NTU Center of Genomic Medicine, National Taiwan University
College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Institute of Statistical Science, Academia
Sinica, Taipei, Taiwan. (4)Institute of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology,
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. (5)Graduate
Institute of Basic Medical Science, China Medical University, Taichung, Taiwan.
(6)Department of Clinical and Laboratory Sciences and Medical Biotechnology,
National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. (7)Division of
Chest Medicine, Department of Internal Medicine, Taichung Veterans General
Hospital, Taichung, Taiwan. (8)Department of Clinical and Laboratory Sciences and
Medical Biotechnology, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei,
Taiwan; NTU Center of Genomic Medicine, National Taiwan University College of
Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Laboratory Medicine, National Taiwan
University Hospital, Taipei, Taiwan; Department of Pathology and Graduate
Institute of Pathology, National Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei,
Taiwan; Center for Optoelectronic Biomedicine, College of Medicine, National
Taiwan University College of Medicine, Taipei, Taiwan. (9)Institute of Biomedical
Sciences, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan; Agricultural
Biotechnology Center, National Chung Hsing University, Taichung, Taiwan.

Homeobox genes comprise a family of regulatory genes that contain a common
homeobox domain and act as transcription factors. Recent studies indicate that
homeobox A5 (HOXA5) may serve as a tumour suppressor gene in breast cancers.
However, the precise role and the underlying mechanism of HOXA5 in lung cancer
remain unclear. Oligonucleotide microarrays and an invasion/metastasis lung
adenocarcinoma cell line model were used to determine the correlation between
HOXA5 expression and cancer cell invasion ability. We found that ectopic
expression of HOXA5 in highly invasive cancer cells suppressed cell migration,
invasion, and filopodia formation in vitro and inhibited metastatic potential in 
vivo. Knockdown of HOXA5 promoted the invasiveness of lung cancer cells. In
addition, HOXA5 expression was associated with better clinical outcome in
non-small cell lung cancer patients with wild-type EGFR. Furthermore, genome-wide
transcriptomic and pathway analyses were performed to identify the potential
molecular mechanisms. Our data showed that HOXA5 may bind to the promoters of the
cytoskeleton-related genes and downregulate their mRNA and protein expression
levels. Our studies provide new insights into how HOXA5 may contribute to the
suppression of metastasis in lung cancer via cytoskeleton remodelling regulation.
Therefore, targeted induction of HOXA5 may represent a promising approach for
non-small-cell lung cancer therapy.

PMCID: PMC4396855
PMID: 25875824  [PubMed - in process]


22. Blood Res. 2015 Mar;50(1):26-32. doi: 10.5045/br.2015.50.1.26. Epub 2015 Mar 24.

Promoter methylation and expression levels of selected hematopoietic genes in
pediatric B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia.

Musialik E(1), Bujko M(1), Kober P(1), Wypych A(2), Gawle-Krawczyk K(2), Matysiak
M(2), Siedlecki JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Medical University of Warsaw,
Warsaw, Poland. (2)Department of Pediatric Haematology & Oncology, Medical
University of Warsaw, Warsaw, Poland.

BACKGROUND: Precursor B-cell acute lymphoblastic leukemia (B-cell ALL) is the
most common neoplasm in children and is characterized by genetic and epigenetic
aberrations in hematopoietic transcription factor (TF) genes. This study
evaluated promoter DNA methylation and aberrant expression levels of early- and
late-acting hematopoietic TF genes homeobox A4 and A5 (HOXA4 and HOXA5), Meis
homeobox 1 (MEIS1), T-cell acute lymphocytic leukemia 1 (TAL1), and interferon
regulatory factors 4 and 8 (IRF4 and IRF8) in pediatric B-cell ALL.
METHODS: Blood samples of 38 ALL patients and 20 controls were obtained. DNA was 
treated with sodium bisulfite and DNA methylation level of HOXA4, HOXA5, MEIS1,
TAL1, IRF4, and IRF8 was assessed using quantitative methylation-specific
polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Relative gene expression was measured using
quantitative reverse transcription-PCR.
RESULTS: Aberrant methylation of TAL1, IRF8, MEIS1, and IRF4 was observed in
26.3%, 7.9%, 5.3%, and 2.6% patients, respectively, but not in controls. HOXA4
and HOXA5 were methylated in some controls and hypermethylated in 16% and 5%
patients, respectively. IRF8, MEIS1, and TAL1 expression was lower in patients
than in controls. MEIS1 expression was inversely correlated with white blood cell
(WBC) count. HOXA4 expression was down-regulated in patients with high risk
according to the National Cancer Institute (NCI) classification. TAL1 methylation
was slightly elevated in patients aged >9 years and in patients showing relapse, 
suggesting its potential prognostic value.
CONCLUSION: Aberrant methylation and expression of the selected hematopoietic
genes were correlated with demographic/clinical prognostic factors of pediatric
ALL, such as age, WBC count, and NCI risk classification.

PMCID: PMC4377334
PMID: 25830127  [PubMed]


23. PLoS One. 2015 Mar 30;10(3):e0121720. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0121720.
eCollection 2015.

Sustained endothelial expression of HoxA5 in vivo impairs pathological
angiogenesis and tumor progression.

Cuevas I(1), Layman H(1), Coussens L(2), Boudreau N(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Surgical Research Laboratory, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, California, United States of America. (2)Department
of Cell & Developmental Biology and Knight Cancer Institute, Oregon Health &
Sciences University, Portland, Oregon, United States of America.

Erratum in
    PLoS One. 2016;11(2):e0148833.

HoxA5 is expressed in quiescent endothelial cells (EC), but absent in activated
angiogenic EC. To examine the efficacy of targeting HoxA5 therapeutically to
quell pathologic or tumor angiogenesis, we generated an inducible, transgenic
mouse model of sustained HoxA5 expression in ECs. During pathologic angiogenesis,
sustained HoxA5 regulates expression several angiogenic effector molecules,
notably increased expression of TSP-2 and reduced expression of VEGF, thus
leading to inhibition of pathological angiogenesis in tissues. To evaluate if
this impressive reduction of vascularization could also impact tumor
angiogenesis, HoxA5 mice were bred with a mouse model of de novo squamous
carcinogenesis, e.g., K14-HPV16 mice. Activation of EC-HoxA5 significantly
reduced infiltration by mast cells into neoplastic skin, an early hallmark of
progression to dysplasia, reduced angiogenic vasculature, and blunted
characteristics of tumor progression. To evaluate HoxA5 as a therapeutic, topical
application of a HoxA5 transgene onto early neoplastic skin of K14-HPV16 mice
similarly resulted in a significant impairment of angiogenic vasculature and
progression to dysplasia to a similar extent as observed with genetic delivery of
HoxA5. Together these data indicate that HoxA5 represents a novel molecule for
restricting pathological and tumorigenic angiogenesis.

PMCID: PMC4379087
PMID: 25821967  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


24. Dev Growth Differ. 2015 Feb;57(2):158-68. doi: 10.1111/dgd.12199. Epub 2015 Feb
19.

Roles of Hoxb5 in the development of vagal and trunk neural crest cells.

Kam MK(1), Lui VC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, LKS Faculty of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong,
21 Sassoon Road, Pokfulam, Hong Kong.

Neural crest cells (NC) are a group of multipotent stem cells uniquely present in
vertebrates. They are destined to form various organs according to their
anterior-posterior (A-P) levels of origin in the neural tube (NT). They develop
into a wide spectrum of cell lineages under the influence of signaling cascades, 
neural plate border genes and NC specifier genes. Although this complex gene
regulatory network (GRN) specifies the fate of NC and the combinatory action of
Hox genes executed at the time of NC induction governs the patterning of NC for
the formation of specific structures along the A-P axis, not much information on 
how GRN and Hox genes directly interact and orchestrate is available. This review
summarizes recent findings on the multiple roles of Hoxb5 on the survival and
cell lineage differentiation of vagal and trunk NC cells during early
development, by direct transcriptional regulation of NC specifier genes (Sox9 and
Foxd3) of the GRN. We will also review findings on the transcriptional regulation
of Ret by Hoxb5 in the population of the vagal NC that are committed to the
enteric neuron and glia lineages. Functional redundancy between Hox proteins
(Hoxa5 and Hoxc5) from the same paralogue group as Hoxb5, and the cooperative
effects of Hox cofactors, collaborators and transcription factors in the Hoxb5
transcriptional regulation of target genes will also be discussed.

© 2015 Japanese Society of Developmental Biologists.

PMID: 25703667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


25. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2015 Mar 13;458(3):714-9. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.02.033. Epub 2015 Feb 14.

miR-1271 promotes non-small-cell lung cancer cell proliferation and invasion via 
targeting HOXA5.

Wang Y(1), Xu L(1), Jiang L(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Wujin Hospital Affiliated to Jiangsu
University, Changzhou 213002, China. (2)Department of Clinical Laboratory, Wujin 
Hospital Affiliated to Jiangsu University, Changzhou 213002, China. Electronic
address: jianglx66766@163.com.

MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short, non-coding RNAs (~ 22 nt) that play important roles
in the pathogenesis of human diseases by negatively regulating numerous target
genes at posttranscriptional level. However, the role of microRNAs in lung
cancer, particularly non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC), has remained elusive. In
this study, two microRNAs, miR-1271 and miR-628, and their predicted target genes
were identified differentially expressed in NSCLC by analyzing the miRNA and mRNA
expression data from NSCLC tissues and their matching normal controls. miR-1271
and its target gene HOXA5 were selected for further investigation. CCK-8
proliferation assay showed that the cell proliferation was promoted by miR-1271
in NSCLC cells, while miR-1271 inhibitor could significantly inhibited the
proliferation of NSCLC cells. Interestingly, migration and invasion assay
indicated that overexpression of miR-1271 could significantly promoted the
migration and invasion of NSCLC cells, whereas miR-1271 inhibitor could inhibited
both cell migration and invasion of NSCLC cells. Western blot showed that
miR-1271 suppressed the protein level of HOXA5, and luciferase assays confirmed
that miR-1271 directly bound to the 3'untranslated region of HOXA5. This study
indicated indicate that miR-1271 regulates NSCLC cell proliferation and invasion,
via the down-regulation of HOXA5. Thus, miR-1271 may represent a potential
therapeutic target for NSCLC intervention.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 25686496  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


26. Cell Cycle. 2015;14(4):612-20. doi: 10.4161/15384101.2014.992191.

Enforced expression of Hoxa5 in haematopoietic stem cells leads to aberrant
erythropoiesis in vivo.

Yang D(1), Zhang X, Dong Y, Liu X, Wang T, Wang X, Geng Y, Fang S, Zheng Y, Chen 
X, Chen J, Pan G, Wang J.

Author information: 
(1)a Department of Hematology ; Third Affiliated Hospital of Sun Yat-Sen
University ; Guangzhou , China.

Hoxa5 is preferentially expressed in haematopoietic stem cells (HSCs) and
multipotent progenitor cells (MPPs), and is more highly expressed in expanding
HSCs. To date, little is known regarding the role of Hoxa5 in HSCs and downstream
progenitor cells in vivo. In this study, we show that increased expression of
Hoxa5 in haematopoietic stem cells leads to aberrant erythropoiesis in vivo.
Hoxa5 differentially modifies the cell cycle of HSCs and lineage committed
progenitor cells, depending on the cellular context. Hoxa5 drives HSCs, but not
MPPs, through the cell cycle and arrests erythroid progenitor cells in G0 phase. 
Although the HSC pool shrinks after overexpression of Hoxa5, HSCs sustain the
abilities of self-renewal and multipotency. In vivo, Hoxa5 has two effects on
erythropoiesis: it causes a predominance of mature erythroid lineage cells and
the partial apoptosis of erythroid progenitors. RNA-seq indicates that multiple
biological processes, including erythrocyte homeostasis, cell metabolism, and
apoptosis, are modified by Hoxa5. The results of this study indicate that Hoxa5
is a key regulator of the HSC cell cycle, and the inappropriate expression of
Hoxa5 in lineage-committed progenitor cells leads to aberrant erythropoiesis.

PMCID: PMC4613368
PMID: 25590986  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


27. Mol Med Rep. 2015 May;11(5):3948-54. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2015.3196. Epub 2015 Jan
13.

Promoter DNA methylation and expression levels of HOXA4, HOXA5 and MEIS1 in acute
myeloid leukemia.

Musialik E(1), Bujko M(1), Kober P(1), Grygorowicz MA(2), Libura M(3),
Przestrzelska M(3), Juszczynski P(4), Borg K(4), Florek I(5), Jakóbczyk M(5),
Siedlecki JA(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Translational Oncology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie
Memorial Cancer Center and Institute of Oncology, Warsaw 02-781, Poland.
(2)Department of Immunology, Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, Warsaw 02-781, Poland. (3)Department of Hematology,
Oncology and Internal Diseases, The Medical University of Warsaw, Warsaw 02-097, 
Poland. (4)Department of Diagnostic Hematology, Institute of Hematology and
Transfusion Medicine, Warsaw 02-109, Poland. (5)Department of Hematology,
Jagiellonian University, Cracow 31-501, Poland.

HOXA genes encode transcription factors, which are crucial for embryogenesis and 
tissue differentiation and are involved in the early stages of hematopoiesis.
Aberrations in HOXA genes and their cofactor MEIS1 are found in human neoplasms, 
including acute myeloid leukemia (AML). The present study investigated the role
of HOXA4, HOXA5 and MEIS1 promoter DNA methylation and mRNA expression in AML.
Samples from 78 AML patients and 12 normal bone marrow (BM) samples were
included. The levels of promoter DNA methylation were determined using
quantitative methylation-specific polymerase chain reaction (PCR; qMSP) and the
relative expression levels were measured using reverse transcription quantitative
PCR in Ficoll-separated BM mononuclear cells and in fluorescent activated cell
sorting-sorted populations of normal hematopoietic progenitors. In total, 38.1
and 28.9% of the patients exhibited high methylation levels of HOXA4 and HOXA5,
respectively, compared with the control samples, and MEIS1 methylation was almost
absent. An inverse correlation between HOXA4 methylation and expression was
identified in a group of patients with a normal karyotype (NK AML). An
association between the genes was observed and correlation between the DNA
methylation and expression levels of the HOXA gene promoter with the expression
of MEIS1 was observed. Patients with favorable chromosomal aberrations revealed a
low level of HOXA4 methylation and decreased expression levels of HOXA5 and MEIS1
compared with the NK AML and the adverse cytogenetic risk patients. The NK AML
patients with NPM1 mutations exhibited elevated HOXA4 methylation and expression 
levels of HOXA5 and MEIS1 compared with the NPM1 wild-type patients. Comparison
of the undifferentiated BM-derived hematopoietic CD34+CD38low, CD34+CD38+ and
CD15+ cells revealed a gradual decrease in the expression levels of these three
genes and an increase in HOXA4 promoter methylation. This
differentiation-associated variability was not observed in AML, which was
classified according to the French-American-British system.

PMID: 25585874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


28. Tumour Biol. 2015 May;36(5):3521-31. doi: 10.1007/s13277-014-2988-4. Epub 2014
Dec 31.

HOXA5 indicates poor prognosis and suppresses cell proliferation by regulating
p21 expression in non small cell lung cancer.

Zhang ML(1), Nie FQ, Sun M, Xia R, Xie M, Lu KH, Li W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, First Affiliated Hospital, Nanjing Medical University,
Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

Homeobox genes, a superfamily of evolutionarily conserved developmental genes,
function as critical master regulatory factors in controlling body plan
specification and cell fate determination. Recently, a substantial body of
evidence indicates that the aberrant Homeobox (HOX) genes also play key roles in 
the development of cancers. Many reports have shown not only that HOX gene
expression is upregulated or downregulated in many cancers but also that the
expression of specific HOX genes tends to differ based on tissue type. Homeobox
A5 (HOXA5) is a master regulator of the morphogenesis and cell differentiation,
and its expression is also downregulated in many cancers mediated by DNA
methylation. However, its biological role and clinical significance in nonsmall
cell lung cancer (NSCLC) development and progression are not well documented. In 
this study, we found that expression levels of HOXA5 were significantly decreased
in NSCLC tissues compared with adjacent normal tissues. Its expression level was 
significantly correlated with tumor-node-metastasis (TNM) stages, tumor size, and
lymph node metastasis. Moreover, patients with lower levels of HOXA5 expression
had a relatively poor prognosis. Furthermore, ectopic overexpression of HOXA5
could inhibit cell proliferation and invasion, while knockdown HOXA5 by siRNA
promoted cell proliferation in NSCLC cells partly via regulating p21 expression. 
Our findings present that decreased HOXA5 could be identified as a poor
prognostic biomarker in NSCLC and regulate cell proliferation and invasion.

PMID: 25549794  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


29. Brain Struct Funct. 2016 Apr;221(3):1223-43. doi: 10.1007/s00429-014-0965-8. Epub
2014 Dec 20.

Systematic expression analysis of Hox genes at adulthood reveals novel patterns
in the central nervous system.

Hutlet B(1), Theys N(1), Coste C(1,)(2), Ahn MT(1), Doshishti-Agolli K(1), Lizen 
B(1), Gofflot F(3).

Author information: 
(1)Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Université catholique de Louvain, 1348,
Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium. (2)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology,
GIGA-Neurosciences Research Center, University of Liège, 4000, Liège, Belgium.
(3)Institut des Sciences de la Vie, Université catholique de Louvain, 1348,
Louvain-La-Neuve, Belgium. francoise.gofflot@uclouvain.be.

Hox proteins are key regulators of animal development, providing positional
identity and patterning information to cells along the rostrocaudal axis of the
embryo. Although their embryonic expression and function are well characterized, 
their presence and biological importance in adulthood remains poorly
investigated. We provide here the first detailed quantitative and neuroanatomical
characterization of the expression of the 39 Hox genes in the adult mouse brain. 
Using RT-qPCR we determined the expression of 24 Hox genes mainly in the
brainstem of the adult brain, with low expression of a few genes in the
cerebellum and the forebrain. Using in situ hybridization (ISH) we have
demonstrated that expression of Hox genes is maintained in territories derived
from the early segmental Hox expression domains in the hindbrain. Indeed, we show
that expression of genes belonging to paralogy groups PG2-8 is maintained in the 
hindbrain derivatives at adulthood. The spatial colinearity, which characterizes 
the early embryonic expression of Hox genes, is still observed in sequential
antero-posterior boundaries of expression. Moreover, the main mossy and climbing 
fibres precerebellar nuclei express PG2-8 Hox genes according to their migration 
origins. Second, ISH confirms the presence of Hox gene transcripts in territories
where they are not detected during development, suggesting neo-expression in
these territories in adulthood. Within the forebrain, we have mapped Hoxb1,
Hoxb3, Hoxb4, Hoxd3 and Hoxa5 expression in restricted areas of the sensory
cerebral cortices as well as in specific thalamic relay nuclei. Our data thus
suggest a requirement of Hox genes beyond their role of patterning genes,
providing a new dimension to their functional relevance in the central nervous
system.

PMID: 25527350  [PubMed - in process]


30. Nat Rev Endocrinol. 2015 Feb;11(2):90-100. doi: 10.1038/nrendo.2014.185. Epub
2014 Nov 4.

Biology of upper-body and lower-body adipose tissue--link to whole-body
phenotypes.

Karpe F(1), Pinnick KE(2).

Author information: 
(1)1] Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, Radcliffe
Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Headington OX3 
7LE, UK. [2] NIHR Oxford Biomedical Research Centre, OUH Trust, Churchill
Hospital, Headington OX3 7LE, UK. (2)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology
and Metabolism, Radcliffe Department of Medicine, University of Oxford, Churchill
Hospital, Headington OX3 7LE, UK.

The distribution of adipose tissue in the body has wide-ranging and reproducible 
associations with health and disease. Accumulation of adipose tissue in the upper
body (abdominal obesity) is associated with the development of cardiovascular
disease, insulin resistance, type 2 diabetes mellitus and even all-cause
mortality. Conversely, accumulation of fat in the lower body (gluteofemoral
obesity) shows opposite associations with cardiovascular disease and type 2
diabetes mellitus when adjusted for overall fat mass. The abdominal depots are
characterized by rapid uptake of predominantly diet-derived fat and a high lipid 
turnover that is easily stimulated by adrenergic receptor activation. The
lower-body fat stores have a reduced lipid turnover with a capacity to
accommodate fat undergoing redistribution. Lower-body adipose tissue also seems
to retain the capacity to recruit additional adipocytes as a result of weight
gain and demonstrates fewer signs of inflammatory insult. New data suggest that
the profound functional differences between the upper-body and lower-body tissues
are controlled by site-specific sets of developmental genes, such as HOXA6,
HOXA5, HOXA3, IRX2 and TBX5 in subcutaneous abdominal adipose tissue and HOTAIR, 
SHOX2 and HOXC11 in gluteofemoral adipose tissue, which are under epigenetic
control. This Review discusses the developmental and functional differences
between upper-body and lower-body fat depots and provides mechanistic insight
into the disease-protective effects of lower-body fat.

PMID: 25365922  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


31. Breast Cancer Res. 2014 Oct 7;16(5):450. doi: 10.1186/s13058-014-0450-6.

DNA methylation profiling in the Carolina Breast Cancer Study defines cancer
subclasses differing in clinicopathologic characteristics and survival.

Conway K, Edmiston SN, May R, Kuan PF, Chu H, Bryant C, Tse CK, Swift-Scanlan T, 
Geradts J, Troester MA, Millikan RC.

INTRODUCTION: Breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, with several intrinsic
subtypes differing by hormone receptor (HR) status, molecular profiles, and
prognosis. However, the role of DNA methylation in breast cancer development and 
progression and its relationship with the intrinsic tumor subtypes are not fully 
understood.
METHODS: A microarray targeting promoters of cancer-related genes was used to
evaluate DNA methylation at 935 CpG sites in 517 breast tumors from the Carolina 
Breast Cancer Study, a population-based study of invasive breast cancer.
RESULTS: Consensus clustering using methylation (ß) values for the 167 most
variant CpG loci defined four clusters differing most distinctly in HR status,
intrinsic subtype (luminal versus basal-like), and p53 mutation status.
Supervised analyses for HR status, subtype, and p53 status identified 266
differentially methylated CpG loci with considerable overlap. Genes relatively
hypermethylated in HR+, luminal A, or p53 wild-type breast cancers included
FABP3, FGF2, FZD9, GAS7, HDAC9, HOXA11, MME, PAX6, POMC, PTGS2, RASSF1, RBP1, and
SCGB3A1, whereas those more highly methylated in HR-, basal-like, or p53 mutant
tumors included BCR, C4B, DAB2IP, MEST, RARA, SEPT5, TFF1, THY1, and SERPINA5.
Clustering also defined a hypermethylated luminal-enriched tumor cluster 3 that
gene ontology analysis revealed to be enriched for homeobox and other
developmental genes (ASCL2, DLK1, EYA4, GAS7, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB13, IHH, IPF1,
ISL1, PAX6, TBX1, SOX1, and SOX17). Although basal-enriched cluster 2 showed
worse short-term survival, the luminal-enriched cluster 3 showed worse long-term 
survival but was not independently prognostic in multivariate Cox proportional
hazard analysis, likely due to the mostly early stage cases in this dataset.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that epigenetic patterns are strongly
associated with HR status, subtype, and p53 mutation status and may show
heterogeneity within tumor subclass. Among HR+ breast tumors, a subset exhibiting
a gene signature characterized by hypermethylation of developmental genes and
poorer clinicopathologic features may have prognostic value and requires further 
study. Genes differentially methylated between clinically important tumor subsets
have roles in differentiation, development, and tumor growth and may be critical 
to establishing and maintaining tumor phenotypes and clinical outcomes.

PMCID: PMC4303129
PMID: 25287138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


32. CNS Oncol. 2014 Jul;3(4):245-7. doi: 10.2217/cns.14.27.

Could a5-GABA-A receptor activation be used as a target for managing
medulloblastomas?

Sengupta S(1), Weeraratne SD, Cho YJ, Pomeroy SL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Boston, MA
02215, USA 

PMID: 25286034  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


33. J Cell Commun Signal. 2014 Sep;8(3):231-44. doi: 10.1007/s12079-014-0237-7. Epub 
2014 Jul 30.

Oxygen differentially affects the hox proteins Hoxb5 and Hoxa5 altering airway
branching and lung vascular formation.

Silfa-Mazara F(1), Mujahid S, Thomas C, Vong T, Larsson I, Nielsen HC, Volpe MV.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Newborn Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Floating Hospital for 
Children at Tufts Medical Center, Boston, MA, USA.

Hoxb5 and Hoxa5 transcription factor proteins uniquely impact lung morphogenesis 
at the developmental time point when extremely preterm infants are born. The
effect of O2 exposure (0.4 FiO2) used in preterm infant care on these Hox
proteins is unknown. We used ex vivo fetal mouse lung organ cultures to explore
the effects of 0.4 FiO2 on lung airway and vascular formation in the context of
Hoxb5 and Hoxa5 expression and regulation. Compared to room air, 48 h (h) 0.4
FiO2 adversely attenuated airway and microvasculature formation while reducing
lung growth and epithelial cell volume, and increasing mesenchymal volume. 0.4
FiO2 decreased pro-angiogenic Hoxb5 and VEGFR2 while not altering protein levels 
of angiostatic Hoxa5. Lungs returned to RA after 24 h 0.4FiO2 had partial
structural recovery but remained smaller and less developed. Mesenchymal cell
apoptosis increased and proliferation decreased with time in O2 while epithelial 
cell proliferation significantly increased. Hoxb5 overexpression led to prominent
peri-airway VEGFR2 expression and promoted lung vascular and airway patterning.
Hoxa5 overexpression had the opposite effects. We conclude that 0.4 FiO2 exposure
causes a profound loss of airway and lung microvascular development that occurs
partially via reduction in pro-angiogenic Hoxb5 while angiostatic Hoxa5
expression is maintained.

PMCID: PMC4165823
PMID: 25073509  [PubMed]


34. Haematologica. 2014 Sep;99(9):1465-71. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2013.100917. Epub
2014 Jun 20.

Potent co-operation between the NUP98-NSD1 fusion and the FLT3-ITD mutation in
acute myeloid leukemia induction.

Thanasopoulou A(1), Tzankov A(2), Schwaller J(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedicine, University Children's Hospital of Basel (UKBB),
Switzerland. (2)Institute for Pathology, University Hospital Basel, Switzerland. 
(3)Department of Biomedicine, University Children's Hospital of Basel (UKBB),
Switzerland j.schwaller@unibas.ch.

The NUP98-NSD1 fusion, product of the t(5;11)(q35;p15.5) chromosomal
translocation, is one of the most prevalent genetic alterations in
cytogenetically normal pediatric acute myeloid leukemias and is associated with
poor prognosis. Co-existence of an FLT3-ITD activating mutation has been found in
more than 70% of NUP98-NSD1-positive patients. To address functional synergism,
we determined the transforming potential of retrovirally expressed NUP98-NSD1 and
FLT3-ITD in the mouse. Expression of NUP98-NSD1 provided mouse strain-dependent, 
aberrant self-renewal potential to bone marrow progenitor cells. Co-expression of
FLT3-ITD increased proliferation and maintained self-renewal in vitro.
Transplantation of immortalized progenitors co-expressing NUP98-NSD1 and FLT3-ITD
into mice resulted in acute myeloid leukemia after a short latency. In contrast, 
neither NUP98-NSD1 nor FLT3-ITD single transduced cells were able to initiate
leukemia. Interestingly, as reported for patients carrying NUP98-NSD1, an
increased Flt3-ITD to wild-type Flt3 mRNA expression ratio with increased
FLT3-signaling was associated with rapidly induced disease. In contrast, there
was no difference in the expression levels of the NUP98-NSD1 fusion or its
proposed targets HoxA5, HoxA7, HoxA9 or HoxA10 between animals with different
latencies to develop disease. Finally, leukemic cells co-expressing NUP98-NSD1
and FLT3-ITD were very sensitive to a small molecule FLT3 inhibitor, which
underlines the significance of aberrant FLT3 signaling for NUP98-NSD1-positive
leukemias and suggests new therapeutic approaches that could potentially improve 
patient outcome.

Copyright© Ferrata Storti Foundation.

PMCID: PMC4562535
PMID: 24951466  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


35. J Clin Invest. 2014 Jul;124(7):3187-99. doi: 10.1172/JCI74792. Epub 2014 May 27.

Flow-dependent epigenetic DNA methylation regulates endothelial gene expression
and atherosclerosis.

Dunn J, Qiu H, Kim S, Jjingo D, Hoffman R, Kim CW, Jang I, Son DJ, Kim D, Pan C, 
Fan Y, Jordan IK, Jo H.

In atherosclerosis, plaques preferentially develop in arterial regions of
disturbed blood flow (d-flow), which alters endothelial gene expression and
function. Here, we determined that d-flow regulates genome-wide DNA methylation
patterns in a DNA methyltransferase-dependent (DNMT-dependent) manner. Induction 
of d-flow by partial carotid ligation surgery in a murine model induced DNMT1 in 
arterial endothelium. In cultured endothelial cells, DNMT1 was enhanced by
oscillatory shear stress (OS), and reduction of DNMT with either the inhibitor
5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine (5Aza) or siRNA markedly reduced OS-induced endothelial
inflammation. Moreover, administration of 5Aza reduced lesion formation in 2
mouse models of atherosclerosis. Using both reduced representation bisulfite
sequencing (RRBS) and microarray, we determined that d-flow in the carotid artery
resulted in hypermethylation within the promoters of 11 mechanosensitive genes
and that 5Aza treatment restored normal methylation patterns. Of the identified
genes, HoxA5 and Klf3 encode transcription factors that contain cAMP response
elements, suggesting that the methylation status of these loci could serve as a
mechanosensitive master switch in gene expression. Together, our results
demonstrate that d-flow controls epigenomic DNA methylation patterns in a
DNMT-dependent manner, which in turn alters endothelial gene expression and
induces atherosclerosis.

PMCID: PMC4071393
PMID: 24865430  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


36. BMC Med Genomics. 2014 Apr 15;7:18. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-7-18.

DNA methylation study of fetus genome through a genome-wide analysis.

Wang HD, Hou QF, Guo QN, Li T, Wu D, Zhang XP, Chu Y, He M, Xiao H, Guo LJ, Yang 
K, Liao SX(1), Zhu BF.

Author information: 
(1)Medical Genetic Institute of Henan Province, Henan Provincial People's
Hospital, People's Hospital of Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450003, PR China. 
syyliaoshixiu@163.com.

BACKGROUND: DNA methylation is a crucial epigenetic modification of the genome
which is involved in embryonic development, transcription, chromatin structure, X
chromosome inactivation, genomic imprinting and chromosome stability. Consistent 
with these important roles, DNA methylation has been demonstrated to be required 
for vertebrate early embryogenesis and essential for regulating temporal and
spatial expression of genes controlling cell fate and differentiation. Further
studies have shown that abnormal DNA methylation is associated with human
diseases including the embryonic development diseases. We attempt to study the
DNA methylation status of CpG islands in fetus related to fetus growth and
development.
METHODS: GeneChip® Human Tiling 2.0R Array set is used for analysis of methylated
DNA in a whole-genome wide in 8 pairs amniotic fluid and maternal blood DNA
samples.
RESULTS: We found 1 fetus hypermethylation DNA markers and 4 fetus
hypomethylation DNA markers though a Genome-wide analysis. These DNA markers all 
found to be associated with the critical genes for fetus growth and development
(SH2D3C gene, EML3 gene, TRIM71 gene, HOXA3 gene and HOXA5 gene).
CONCLUSIONS: These genes can be used as a biomarker for association studying of
embryonic development, pathological pregnancy and so on. The present study has
provided new and fundamental insights into the roles that DNA methylation has in 
embryonic development and in the pathological pregnancy.

PMCID: PMC3996908
PMID: 24731722  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


37. PLoS One. 2014 Apr 4;9(4):e93989. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0093989. eCollection 
2014.

YY1 acts as a transcriptional activator of Hoxa5 gene expression in mouse
organogenesis.

Bérubé-Simard FA(1), Prudhomme C(1), Jeannotte L(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and Pathology,
Université Laval, Québec, Canada; Centre de recherche sur le cancer de
l'Université Laval, Québec, Canada; Centre de recherche du Centre Hospitalier
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec, Canada.

The Hox gene family encodes homeodomain-containing transcriptional regulators
that confer positional information to axial and paraxial tissues in the
developing embryo. The dynamic Hox gene expression pattern requires mechanisms
that differentially control Hox transcription in a precise spatio-temporal
fashion. This implies an integrated regulation of neighbouring Hox genes achieved
through the sharing and the selective use of defined enhancer sequences. The
Hoxa5 gene plays a crucial role in lung and gut organogenesis. To position Hoxa5 
in the regulatory hierarchy that drives organ morphogenesis, we searched for
cis-acting regulatory sequences and associated trans-acting factors required for 
Hoxa5 expression in the developing lung and gut. Using mouse transgenesis, we
identified two DNA regions included in a 1.5-kb XbaI-XbaI fragment located in the
Hoxa4-Hoxa5 intergenic domain and known to control Hoxa4 organ expression. The
multifunctional YY1 transcription factor binds the two regulatory sequences in
vitro and in vivo. Moreover, the mesenchymal deletion of the Yy1 gene function in
mice results in a Hoxa5-like lung phenotype with decreased Hoxa5 and Hoxa4 gene
expression. Thus, YY1 acts as a positive regulator of Hoxa5 expression in the
developing lung and gut. Our data also support a role for YY1 in the coordinated 
expression of Hox genes for correct organogenesis.

PMCID: PMC3976385
PMID: 24705708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


38. BMC Gastroenterol. 2014 Mar 28;14:55. doi: 10.1186/1471-230X-14-55.

DNA methylation subgroups and the CpG island methylator phenotype in gastric
cancer: a comprehensive profiling approach.

Loh M, Liem N, Vaithilingam A, Lim PL, Sapari NS, Elahi E, Mok ZY, Cheng CL, Yan 
B, Pang B, Salto-Tellez M, Yong WP, Iacopetta B, Soong R(1).

Author information: 
(1)Cancer Science Institute of Singapore, National University of Singapore,
Singapore, Singapore. Richie_Soong@nus.edu.sg.

BACKGROUND: Methylation-induced silencing of promoter CpG islands in tumor
suppressor genes plays an important role in human carcinogenesis. In colorectal
cancer, the CpG island methylator phenotype (CIMP) is defined as widespread and
elevated levels of DNA methylation and CIMP+ tumors have distinctive
clinicopathological and molecular features. In contrast, the existence of a
comparable CIMP subtype in gastric cancer (GC) has not been clearly established. 
To further investigate this issue, in the present study we performed
comprehensive DNA methylation profiling of a well-characterised series of primary
GC.
METHODS: The methylation status of 1,421 autosomal CpG sites located within 768
cancer-related genes was investigated using the Illumina GoldenGate Methylation
Panel I assay on DNA extracted from 60 gastric tumors and matched tumor-adjacent 
gastric tissue pairs. Methylation data was analysed using a recursively
partitioned mixture model and investigated for associations with
clinicopathological and molecular features including age, Helicobacter pylori
status, tumor site, patient survival, microsatellite instability and BRAF and
KRAS mutations.
RESULTS: A total of 147 genes were differentially methylated between tumor and
matched tumor-adjacent gastric tissue, with HOXA5 and hedgehog signalling being
the top-ranked gene and signalling pathway, respectively. Unsupervised clustering
of methylation data revealed the existence of 6 subgroups under two main
clusters, referred to as L (low methylation; 28% of cases) and H (high
methylation; 72%). Female patients were over-represented in the H tumor group
compared to L group (36% vs 6%; P = 0.024), however no other significant
differences in clinicopathological or molecular features were apparent. CpG sites
that were hypermethylated in group H were more frequently located in CpG islands 
and marked for polycomb occupancy.
CONCLUSIONS: High-throughput methylation analysis implicates genes involved in
embryonic development and hedgehog signaling in gastric tumorigenesis. GC is
comprised of two major methylation subtypes, with the highly methylated group
showing some features consistent with a CpG island methylator phenotype.

PMCID: PMC3986689
PMID: 24674026  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


39. BMC Cancer. 2014 Mar 20;14:213. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-14-213.

DNA methylation alterations in grade II- and anaplastic pleomorphic
xanthoastrocytoma.

Martínez R(1), Carmona FJ, Vizoso M, Rohde V, Kirsch M, Schackert G, Ropero S,
Paulus W, Barrantes A, Gomez A, Esteller M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University of Goettingen, Robert Koch, Str, 40,
37075 Goettingen, Germany. ramon.martinez@med.uni-goettingen.de.

BACKGROUND: Pleomorphic xanthoastrocytoma (PXA) is a rare WHO grade II tumor
accounting for less than 1% of all astrocytomas. Malignant transformation into
PXA with anaplastic features, is unusual and correlates with poorer outcome of
the patients.
METHODS: Using a DNA methylation custom array, we have quantified the DNA
methylation level on the promoter sequence of 807 cancer-related genes of WHO
grade II (n = 11) and III PXA (n = 2) and compared to normal brain tissue (n =
10) and glioblastoma (n = 87) samples. DNA methylation levels were further
confirmed on independent samples by pyrosequencing of the promoter sequences.
RESULTS: Increasing DNA promoter hypermethylation events were observed in
anaplastic PXA as compared with grade II samples. We further validated
differential hypermethylation of CD81, HCK, HOXA5, ASCL2 and TES on anaplastic
PXA and grade II tumors. Moreover, these epigenetic alterations overlap those
described in glioblastoma patients, suggesting common mechanisms of
tumorigenesis.
CONCLUSIONS: Even taking into consideration the small size of our patient
populations, our data strongly suggest that epigenome-wide profiling of PXA is a 
valuable tool to identify methylated genes, which may play a role in the
malignant progression of PXA. These methylation alterations may provide useful
biomarkers for decision-making in those patients with low-grade PXA displaying a 
high risk of malignant transformation.

PMCID: PMC4000050
PMID: 24650279  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


40. Development. 2014 Feb;141(4):784-94. doi: 10.1242/dev.097188.

Reconstruction of phrenic neuron identity in embryonic stem cell-derived motor
neurons.

Machado CB(1), Kanning KC, Kreis P, Stevenson D, Crossley M, Nowak M, Iacovino M,
Kyba M, Chambers D, Blanc E, Lieberam I.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, London SE1
1UL, UK.

Erratum in
    Development. 2014 Mar 15;141(6):1416.

Air breathing is an essential motor function for vertebrates living on land. The 
rhythm that drives breathing is generated within the central nervous system and
relayed via specialised subsets of spinal motor neurons to muscles that regulate 
lung volume. In mammals, a key respiratory muscle is the diaphragm, which is
innervated by motor neurons in the phrenic nucleus. Remarkably, relatively little
is known about how this crucial subtype of motor neuron is generated during
embryogenesis. Here, we used direct differentiation of motor neurons from mouse
embryonic stem cells as a tool to identify genes that direct phrenic neuron
identity. We find that three determinants, Pou3f1, Hoxa5 and Notch, act in
combination to promote a phrenic neuron molecular identity. We show that Notch
signalling induces Pou3f1 in developing motor neurons in vitro and in vivo. This 
suggests that the phrenic neuron lineage is established through a local source of
Notch ligand at mid-cervical levels. Furthermore, we find that the cadherins
Pcdh10, which is regulated by Pou3f1 and Hoxa5, and Cdh10, which is controlled by
Pou3f1, are both mediators of like-like clustering of motor neuron cell bodies.
This specific Pcdh10/Cdh10 activity might provide the means by which phrenic
neurons are assembled into a distinct nucleus. Our study provides a framework for
understanding how phrenic neuron identity is conferred and will help to generate 
this rare and inaccessible yet vital neuronal subtype directly from pluripotent
stem cells, thus facilitating subsequent functional investigations.

PMCID: PMC3912827
PMID: 24496616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


41. Zhonghua Nan Ke Xue. 2013 Nov;19(11):977-83.

[Detecting testis- and epididymis-specific methylated promoters in human
cell-free seminal DNA by MeDIP-qPCR].

[Article in Chinese]

Guan HT(1), Lü JM(2), Wu CL(1), Li HG(1), Zhu CH(1), Xiong CL(1).

Author information: 
(1)Family Planning Research Institute/Center of Reproductive Medicine, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, Hubei
430030, China. (2)Family Planning Service Station of Qichun County, Huanggang,
Hubei 435300, China.

OBJECTIVE: To establish a method of methyl-DNA immunoprecipitation (MeDIP)-real
time quantitative PCR (qPCR) for detecting the promoter methylation level in
cell-free seminal DNA (cfsDNA).
METHODS: We obtained cfsDNA samples from 6 normozoospermia men (the NZ group) and
6 post-vasectomy patients (the PV group), and mixed the samples from different
individuals of each group, respectively. Then we made DNA fragments by
ultrasonication, separated the methylated DNA fragments by MeDIP, and determined 
the methylation level of the promoters in cfsDNA by qPCR.
RESULTS: The methylation levels of the promoters PRAME, PEG10, MORC1, GML, HOXA5,
DNMT3L, SNURF, MSH4, DAZ1 and CLPB were 14.93, 2.64, 0.69, 2.66, 17.50, 21.10,
5.98, 2.28, 13.50 and 3.86%, respectively, in the NZ group, obviously lower than 
121.25, 73.62, 16.25, 42.90, 76.74, 112.40, 59.79, 25.85, 91.90 and 64.53% in the
PV group. The results of MeDIP-qPCR for the methylation of PRAME, MORC1, GML,
HOXA5, DNMT3L, SNURF, MSH4 and DAZ1 were coincident with the results of
genome-wide promoter methylation microarray.
CONCLUSION: MeDIP-qPCR can quantitatively measure the promoter methylation level 
in cfsDNA, and effectively determine the testis- and epididymis-specific
methylated promoters in human semen.

PMID: 24341089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


42. Genesis. 2014 Feb;52(2):149-56. doi: 10.1002/dvg.22733. Epub 2013 Dec 14.

Hoxa5/Cre transgenic mice: novel tools for regional deletion along the
anterior-posterior axis.

Bérubé-Simard FA(1), Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Biology, Medical Biochemistry and Pathology,
Université Laval, Québec, Canada; Centre de recherche sur le cancer de
l'Université Laval, Centre de recherche du Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec, Canada.

The Hoxa5 homeobox gene encodes a transcription factor that plays a critical role
in specifying the identity of the cervico-thoracic region along the
anterior-posterior embryo axis and in orchestrating organ morphogenesis. The loss
of Hoxa5 function results in skeletal transformations, lethality at birth due to 
lung defects, and organ anomalies affecting the digestive tract, the mammary
gland and the ovary. Study of Hoxa5 gene regulation has revealed the interplay of
several control regions that direct Hoxa5 developmental expression. Enhancers
targeting expression in the CNS, the paraxial and lateral plate mesoderm at the
cervico-thoracic level, and in the mesenchymal compartment of the respiratory and
digestive tracts have been identified. Using these molecular tools, we have
generated two Hoxa5/Cre transgenic mouse lines carrying different combinations of
Hoxa5 regulatory enhancers and allowing site-specific recombination in subsets of
Hoxa5 expression sites as tested with the Rosa26/lacZ reporter mice. Further
validation of the recombination efficiency of the Hoxa5/Cre transgenic lines was 
performed with mice carrying a Hoxa5 conditional allele. Hoxa5 deletion with the 
Hoxa5/Cre mouse lines recapitulates Hoxa5 mutant phenotypes, such as skeletal
defects, neonatal lethality, and lung malformations. Hoxa5/Cre mouse lines
provide novel genetic tools for gene function analysis in defined tissues along
the anterior-posterior axis.

Copyright © 2013 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.

PMID: 24307483  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


43. Stem Cells. 2014 Jun;32(6):1459-67. doi: 10.1002/stem.1607.

Differentiation of human induced pluripotent stem cells into brown and white
adipocytes: role of Pax3.

Mohsen-Kanson T(1), Hafner AL, Wdziekonski B, Takashima Y, Villageois P, Carrière
A, Svensson M, Bagnis C, Chignon-Sicard B, Svensson PA, Casteilla L, Smith A,
Dani C.

Author information: 
(1)Université Nice Sophia Antipolis, iBV, UMR CNRS/INSERM, Faculté de Médecine,
Nice Cedex, France.

Identification of molecular mechanisms involved in generation of different types 
of adipocytes is progressing substantially in mice. However, much less is known
regarding characterization of brown (BAP) and white adipocyte progenitors (WAPs) 
in humans, highlighting the need for an in vitro model of human adipocyte
development. Here, we report a procedure to selectively derive BAP and WAPs from 
human-induced pluripotent stem cells. Molecular characterization of APs of both
phenotypes revealed that BMP4, Hox8, Hoxc9, and HoxA5 genes were specifically
expressed in WAPs, whereas expression of PRDM16, Dio2, and Pax3 marked BAPs. We
focused on Pax3 and we showed that expression of this transcription factor was
enriched in human perirenal white adipose tissue samples expressing UCP1 and in
human classical brown fat. Finally, functional experiments indicated that Pax3
was a critical player of human AP fate as its ectopic expression led to convert
WAPs into brown-like APs. Together, these data support a model in which Pax3 is a
new marker of human BAPs and a molecular mediator of their fate. The findings of 
this study could lead to new anti-obesity therapies based on the recruitment of
APs and constitute a platform for investigating in vitro the developmental
origins of human white and brown adipocytes.

© 2013 AlphaMed Press.

PMID: 24302443  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


44. Sci Rep. 2013 Nov 28;3:3372. doi: 10.1038/srep03372.

Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells acquire distinct DNA-hypermethylation
during in vitro culture.

Weidner CI(1), Walenda T, Lin Q, Wölfler MM, Denecke B, Costa IG, Zenke M, Wagner
W.

Author information: 
(1)Helmholtz-Institute for Biomedical Engineering, RWTH University Medical
School, Aachen, Germany.

Hematopoietic stem and progenitor cells (HPCs) can be maintained in vitro, but
the vast majority of their progeny loses stemness during culture. In this study, 
we compared DNA-methylation (DNAm) profiles of freshly isolated and
culture-expanded HPCs. Culture conditions of CD34(+) cells - either with or
without mesenchymal stromal cells (MSCs) - had relatively little impact on DNAm, 
although proliferation is greatly increased by stromal support. However, all
cultured HPCs - even those which remained CD34(+) - acquired significant
DNA-hypermethylation. DNA-hypermethylation occurred particularly in up-stream
promoter regions, shore-regions of CpG islands, binding sites for PU.1, HOXA5 and
RUNX1, and it was reflected in differential gene expression and variant
transcripts of DNMT3A. Low concentrations of DNAm inhibitors slightly increased
the frequency of colony-forming unit initiating cells. Our results demonstrate
that HPCs acquire DNA-hypermethylation at specific sites in the genome which is
relevant for the rapid loss of stemness during in vitro manipulation.

PMCID: PMC3842544
PMID: 24284763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


45. Nan Fang Yi Ke Da Xue Xue Bao. 2013 Nov;33(11):1665-8.

[Role of homeobox gene A5 in multidrug resistance of human small cell lung cancer
cells].

[Article in Chinese]

Xiao F(1), Chen Z, Zeng X, Bai Y, Guo L, Li Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oncology, Guangdong General Hospital, Guangzhou 510080, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of homeobox gene A5 (HOXA5) in multidrug
resistance of human small cell lung cancer (SCLC) cells and the possibility of
using HOXA5 as the therapeutic targets for SCLC treatment.
METHODS: We examined HOXA5 mRNA and protein expressions in chemosensitive human
SCLC cells (H69) and the multidrug-resistant SCLC cells (H69AR) using
quantitative real-time PCR and immunoblotting. HOXA5 expression was then enhanced
or suppressed by transfection of the cells with HOXA5 expression plasmids or
small interference RNA (siRNA), and the chemosensitivity of transfected cells to 
cisplatin (DDP) and etoposide (VP-16) was evaluated using cell counting kit-8
(CCK8) assay.
RESULTS: H69 cells showed a 8.99-fold higher expression of HOXA5 than H69AR
cells. HOXA5 knockdown caused obvious reductions in the chemosensitivity of H69
cells to DDP and VP-16 with increased cells in G0/G1 phase; conversely, HOXA5
enhancement resulted in an increased sensitivity of H69AR cells to DDP and VP-16.
CONCLUSION: HOXA5 may play an important role in multidrug resistance of SCLC and 
can be a potential therapeutic target in clinical treatment of SCLC.

PMID: 24273274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


46. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Nov 26;110(48):19438-43. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1315075110. Epub 2013 Nov 11.

Hox5 interacts with Plzf to restrict Shh expression in the developing forelimb.

Xu B(1), Hrycaj SM, McIntyre DC, Baker NC, Takeuchi JK, Jeannotte L, Gaber ZB,
Novitch BG, Wellik DM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Molecular Medicine and Genetics, 
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI 48109.

To date, only the five most posterior groups of Hox genes, Hox9-Hox13, have
demonstrated loss-of-function roles in limb patterning. Individual paralog groups
control proximodistal patterning of the limb skeletal elements. Hox9 genes also
initiate the onset of Hand2 expression in the posterior forelimb compartment, and
collectively, the posterior HoxA/D genes maintain posterior Sonic Hedgehog (Shh) 
expression. Here we show that an anterior Hox paralog group, Hox5, is required
for forelimb anterior patterning. Deletion of all three Hox5 genes (Hoxa5, Hoxb5,
and Hoxc5) leads to anterior forelimb defects resulting from derepression of Shh 
expression. The phenotype requires the loss of all three Hox5 genes,
demonstrating the high level of redundancy in this Hox paralogous group. Further 
analyses reveal that Hox5 interacts with promyelocytic leukemia zinc finger
biochemically and genetically to restrict Shh expression. These findings, along
with previous reports showing that point mutations in the Shh limb enhancer lead 
to similar anterior limb defects, highlight the importance of Shh repression for 
proper patterning of the vertebrate limb.

PMCID: PMC3845161
PMID: 24218595  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


47. Acta Neuropathol. 2014 Apr;127(4):593-603. doi: 10.1007/s00401-013-1205-7. Epub
2013 Nov 7.

a5-GABAA receptors negatively regulate MYC-amplified medulloblastoma growth.

Sengupta S(1), Weeraratne SD, Sun H, Phallen J, Rallapalli SK, Teider N, Kosaras 
B, Amani V, Pierre-Francois J, Tang Y, Nguyen B, Yu F, Schubert S, Balansay B,
Mathios D, Lechpammer M, Archer TC, Tran P, Reimer RJ, Cook JM, Lim M, Jensen FE,
Pomeroy SL, Cho YJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology, Boston Children's Hospital, Boston, MA, USA.

Neural tumors often express neurotransmitter receptors as markers of their
developmental lineage. Although these receptors have been well characterized in
electrophysiological, developmental and pharmacological settings, their
importance in the maintenance and progression of brain tumors and, importantly,
the effect of their targeting in brain cancers remains obscure. Here, we
demonstrate high levels of GABRA5, which encodes the a5-subunit of the GABAA
receptor complex, in aggressive MYC-driven, "Group 3" medulloblastomas. We
hypothesized that modulation of a5-GABAA receptors alters medulloblastoma cell
survival and monitored biological and electrophysiological responses of
GABRA5-expressing medulloblastoma cells upon pharmacological targeting of the
GABAA receptor. While antagonists, inverse agonists and non-specific positive
allosteric modulators had limited effects on medulloblastoma cells, a highly
specific and potent a5-GABAA receptor agonist, QHii066, resulted in marked
membrane depolarization and a significant decrease in cell survival. This effect 
was GABRA5 dependent and mediated through the induction of apoptosis as well as
accumulation of cells in S and G2 phases of the cell cycle. Chemical genomic
profiling of QHii066-treated medulloblastoma cells confirmed inhibition of
MYC-related transcriptional activity and revealed an enrichment of HOXA5 target
gene expression. siRNA-mediated knockdown of HOXA5 markedly blunted the response 
of medulloblastoma cells to QHii066. Furthermore, QHii066 sensitized GABRA5
positive medulloblastoma cells to radiation and chemotherapy consistent with the 
role of HOXA5 in directly regulating p53 expression and inducing apoptosis. Thus,
our results provide novel insights into the synthetic lethal nature of a5-GABAA
receptor activation in MYC-driven/Group 3 medulloblastomas and propose its
targeting as a novel strategy for the management of this highly aggressive tumor.

PMCID: PMC3974267
PMID: 24196163  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


48. J Biol Chem. 2013 Dec 6;288(49):35534-47. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M113.510669. Epub 2013
Nov 4.

Protein arginine methyltransferase 5 (PRMT5) inhibition induces lymphoma cell
death through reactivation of the retinoblastoma tumor suppressor pathway and
polycomb repressor complex 2 (PRC2) silencing.

Chung J(1), Karkhanis V, Tae S, Yan F, Smith P, Ayers LW, Agostinelli C, Pileri
S, Denis GV, Baiocchi RA, Sif S.

Author information: 
(1)From the Departments Molecular and Cellular Biochemistry and.

Epigenetic regulation mediated by lysine- and arginine-specific enzymes plays an 
essential role in tumorigenesis, and enhanced expression of the type II protein
arginine methyltransferase PRMT5 as well as the polycomb repressor complex PRC2
has been associated with increased cell proliferation and survival. Here, we show
that PRMT5 is overexpressed in three different types of non-Hodgkin lymphoma cell
lines and clinical samples as well as in mouse primary lymphoma cells and that it
up-regulates PRC2 expression through inactivation of the retinoblastoma proteins 
RB1 and RBL2. Although PRMT5 epigenetically controls RBL2 expression, it
indirectly promotes RB1 phosphorylation through enhanced cyclin D1 expression.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that PRMT5 knockdown in non-Hodgkin lymphoma cell
lines and mouse primary lymphoma cells leads to RBL2 derepression and RB1
reactivation, which in turn inhibit PRC2 expression and trigger derepression of
its CASP10, DAP1, HOXA5, and HRK pro-apoptotic target genes. We also show that
reduced PRMT5 expression leads to cyclin D1 transcriptional repression via loss
of TP53K372 methylation, which results in decreased BCL3 expression and enhanced 
recruitment of NF-<U+03BA>B p52-HDAC1 repressor complexes to the cyclin D1 promoter.
These findings indicate that PRMT5 is a master epigenetic regulator that governs 
expression of its own target genes and those regulated by PRC2 and that its
inhibition could offer a promising therapeutic strategy for lymphoma patients.

PMCID: PMC3853299
PMID: 24189068  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


49. Dev Genes Evol. 2013 Nov;223(6):375-387.

Developmental competence and the induction of ectopic proboscises in Drosophila
melanogaster.

Percival-Smith A, Sivanantharajah L, Pelling JJ, Teft WA.

Developmental competence is the response of a cell(s) to information.
Determination of adult labial identity in Drosophila requires Proboscipedia (PB) 
and Sex combs reduced (SCR); however, co-ectopic expression of PB and SCR is not 
sufficient for induction of ectopic adult labial identity, because the
developmental information supplied by PB and SCR is suppressed. The
evolutionarily conserved LASCY, DYTQL, NANGE motifs, and the C-terminal domain of
SCR are sequence elements that mediate some, or all, of the suppression of
ectopic proboscis determination. Therefore, the developmentally competent
primordial proboscis cells provide an environment devoid of suppression, allowing
PB and SCR to determine proboscis identity. SCR derivatives lacking suppression
sequences weakly induce ectopic proboscis transformations independently of PB,
suggesting that SCR may be the activity required for induction of adult labial
identity, as is the case for larval labial identity. A possible explanation for
PB independence of SCR in determination of adult and embryonic labial identity is
PB operates as a competence factor that switches SCR from determining T1 identity
to labial identity during metamorphosis. Lastly, labial determination is not
conserved between SCR and murine HOXA5, suggesting that SCR has acquired this
activity during evolution.

PMID: 24121940  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


50. BMC Cancer. 2013 Oct 8;13:464. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-13-464.

The long non-coding RNA HOTAIR indicates a poor prognosis and promotes metastasis
in non-small cell lung cancer.

Liu XH(1), Liu ZL, Sun M, Liu J, Wang ZX, De W.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029, People's Republic of China. zhaoxiawang88@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: The identification of cancer-associated long non-coding RNAs and the 
investigation of their molecular and biological functions are important for
understanding the molecular biology and progression of cancer. HOTAIR (HOX
transcript antisense intergenic RNA) has been implicated in several cancers;
however, its role in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is unknown. The aim of
the present study was to examine the expression pattern of HOTAIR in NSCLC and to
evaluate its biological role and clinical significance in tumor progression.
METHODS: Expression of HOTAIR was analyzed in 42 NSCLC tissues and four NSCLC
cell lines by quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR). Over-expression and RNA interference (RNAi) approaches were used to
investigate the biological functions of HOTAIR. The effect of HOTAIR on
proliferation was evaluated by MTT and colony formation assays, and cell
migration and invasion were evaluated by transwell assays. Tail vein injection of
cells was used to study metastasis in nude mice. Protein levels of HOTAIR targets
were determined by western blot analysis. Differences between groups were tested 
for significance using Student's t-test (two-tailed).
RESULTS: HOTAIR was highly expressed both in NSCLC samples and cell lines
compared with corresponding normal counterparts. HOTAIR upregulation was
correlated with NSCLC advanced pathological stage and lymph-node metastasis.
Moreover, patients with high levels of HOTAIR expression had a relatively poor
prognosis. Inhibition of HOTAIR by RNAi decreased the migration and invasion of
NSCLC cells in vitro and impeded cell metastasis in vivo. HOXA5 levels were
affected by HOTAIR knockdown or over-expression in vitro.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that HOTAIR is significantly up-regulated in
NSCLC tissues, and regulates NSCLC cell invasion and metastasis, partially via
the down-regulation of HOXA5. Thus, HOTAIR may represent a new marker of poor
prognosis and is a potential therapeutic target for NSCLC intervention.

PMCID: PMC3851855
PMID: 24103700  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


51. PLoS One. 2013 Sep 13;8(9):e73950. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0073950. eCollection
2013.

Genetic effects on DNA methylation and its potential relevance for obesity in
Mexican Americans.

Carless MA(1), Kulkarni H, Kos MZ, Charlesworth J, Peralta JM, Göring HH, Curran 
JE, Almasy L, Dyer TD, Comuzzie AG, Mahaney MC, Blangero J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, Texas Biomedical Research Institute, San Antonio,
Texas, United States of America.

Several studies have identified effects of genetic variation on DNA methylation
patterns and associated heritability, with research primarily focused on
Caucasian individuals. In this paper, we examine the evidence for genetic effects
on DNA methylation in a Mexican American cohort, a population burdened by a high 
prevalence of obesity. Using an Illumina-based platform and following stringent
quality control procedures, we assessed a total of 395 CpG sites in peripheral
blood samples obtained from 183 Mexican American individuals for evidence of
heritability, proximal genetic regulation and association with age, sex and
obesity measures (i.e. waist circumference and body mass index). We identified 16
CpG sites (~4%) that were significantly heritable after Bonferroni correction for
multiple testing and 27 CpG sites (~6.9%) that showed evidence of genetic
effects. Six CpG sites (~2%) were associated with age, primarily exhibiting
positive relationships, including CpG sites in two genes that have been
implicated in previous genome-wide methylation studies of age (FZD9 and MYOD1).
In addition, we identified significant associations between three CpG sites (~1%)
and sex, including DNA methylation in CASP6, a gene that may respond to estradiol
treatment, and in HSD17B12, which encodes a sex steroid hormone. Although we did 
not identify any significant associations between DNA methylation and the obesity
measures, several nominally significant results were observed in genes related to
adipogenesis, obesity, energy homeostasis and glucose homeostasis (ARHGAP9,
CDKN2A, FRZB, HOXA5, JAK3, MEST, NPY, PEG3 and SMARCB1). In conclusion, we were
able to replicate several findings from previous studies in our Mexican American 
cohort, supporting an important role for genetic effects on DNA methylation. In
addition, we found a significant influence of age and sex on DNA methylation, and
report on trend-level, novel associations between DNA methylation and measures of
obesity.

PMCID: PMC3772804
PMID: 24058506  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


52. Mol Med Rep. 2013 Nov;8(5):1373-8. doi: 10.3892/mmr.2013.1686. Epub 2013 Sep 17.

Characterization of amplification patterns and target genes on the short arm of
chromosome 7 in early-stage lung adenocarcinoma.

Kang JU(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Laboratory Science, Korea Nazarene University,
Cheonan-si, Chungcheongnam-do 330-718, Republic of Korea.

Chromosomal alterations are a predominant genomic force contributing to the
development of lung adenocarcinoma (ADC). High density genomic arrays were
conducted to identify critical genetic landmarks that may be important mediators 
in the formation or progression of early-stage ADC. In this study, the most
noteworthy and consistent observation was a copy number gain on the short arm of 
chromosome 7, which was detected in 85.7% (12/14) of cases. Notably, three
distinct regions of amplification were identified between the 7p22.3 and q11.2
regions in 28.6% (4/14) of cases; at a size of 4.1 Mbp (7p22.3-p21.1), 2.6 Mbp
(7p15.2-p14.1) and 1.5 Mbp (7p12.3-p11.2). Variations of the 7p11.2 locus that
encodes EGFR are known to be oncogenic. Furthermore, potential target genes were 
identified that were previously not assumed to be involved in the pathogenesis of
ADC, including CALM1P2 (7p11.2), HOXA4, HOXA5, HOXA6, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10,
HOXA11 and HOXA13 (7p15.2) and LOC442586, LOC442589, LOC442282, FAM20C and
LOC442651 (7p22.3). The present study determined critical regions on the 7p arm
of chromosome 7, which were implicated in ADC. The pattern of rearrangements on
the 7p arm may be a consequence of the high density of potential targets and the 
identified genes at the 7p regions may aid in the development of therapeutic
targets for ADC.

PMID: 24045431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


53. BMC Syst Biol. 2013 Sep 3;7:85. doi: 10.1186/1752-0509-7-85.

Systems analysis reveals a transcriptional reversal of the mesenchymal phenotype 
induced by SNAIL-inhibitor GN-25.

Azmi AS(1), Bollig-Fischer A, Bao B, Park BJ, Lee SH, Yong-Song G, Dyson G, Reddy
CK, Sarkar FH, Mohammad RM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Karmanos Cancer Institute, Wayne State University
School of Medicine, John R, HWCRC 732, Detroit, MI, 4100, USA.
azmia@karmanos.org.

BACKGROUND: HMLEs (HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE, Kras-HMLE-SNAIL pairs) serve as
excellent model system to interrogate the effect of SNAIL targeted agents that
reverse epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition (EMT). We had earlier developed a
SNAIL-p53 interaction inhibitor (GN-25) that was shown to suppress SNAIL
function. In this report, using systems biology and pathway network analysis, we 
show that GN-25 could cause reversal of EMT leading to mesenchymal-to-epithelial 
transition (MET) in a well-recognized HMLE-SNAIL and Kras-HMLE-SNAIL models.
RESULTS: GN-25 induced MET was found to be consistent with growth inhibition,
suppression of spheroid forming capacity and induction of apoptosis. Pathway
network analysis of mRNA expression using microarrays from GN-25 treated
Kras-HMLE-SNAIL cells showed an orchestrated global re-organization of EMT
network genes. The expression signatures were validated at the protein level
(down-regulation of mesenchymal markers such as TWIST1 and TWIST2 that was
concurrent with up-regulation of epithelial marker E-Cadherin), and RNAi studies 
validated SNAIL dependent mechanism of action of the drug. Most importantly,
GN-25 modulated many major transcription factors (TFs) such as inhibition of
oncogenic TFs Myc, TBX2, NR3C1 and led to enhancement in the expression of tumor 
suppressor TFs such as SMAD7, DD1T3, CEBPA, HOXA5, TFEB, IRF1, IRF7 and XBP1,
resulting in MET as well as cell death.
CONCLUSIONS: Our systems and network investigations provide convincing
pre-clinical evidence in support of the clinical application of GN-25 for the
reversal of EMT and thereby reducing cancer cell aggressiveness.

PMCID: PMC3848843
PMID: 24004452  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


54. Cancer Res. 2013 Oct 15;73(20):6299-309. doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-12-4082. Epub
2013 Aug 13.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition and tumor suppression are controlled by a
reciprocal feedback loop between ZEB1 and Grainyhead-like-2.

Cieply B(1), Farris J, Denvir J, Ford HL, Frisch SM.

Author information: 
(1)Authors' Affiliations: Mary Babb Randolph Cancer Center and Department of
Biochemistry, West Virginia University, Morgantown; Department of Biochemistry
and Microbiology, Marshall University, Huntington, West Virginia; and Departments
of Biochemistry/Molecular Genetics and Obstetrics/Gynecology, University of
Colorado, Denver, Colorado.

Epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT) in carcinoma cells enhances malignant
progression by promoting invasion and survival. EMT is induced by
microenvironmental factors, including TGF-ß and Wnt agonists, and by the
E-box-binding transcription factors Twist, Snail, and ZEB. Grainyhead-like-2
(GRHL2), a member of the mammalian Grainyhead family of wound-healing regulatory 
transcription factors, suppresses EMT and restores sensitivity to anoikis by
repressing ZEB1 expression and inhibiting TGF-ß signaling. In this study, we
elucidate the functional relationship between GRHL2 and ZEB1 in EMT/MET and tumor
biology. At least three homeodomain proteins, Six1, LBX1, and HoxA5,
transactivated the ZEB1 promoter, in the case of Six1, through direct
protein-promoter interaction. GRHL2 altered the Six1-DNA complex, inhibiting this
transactivation. Correspondingly, GRHL2 expression prevented tumor initiation in 
xenograft assays, sensitized breast cancer cells to paclitaxel, and suppressed
the emergence of CD44(high)CD24(low) cells (defining the cancer stem cell
phenotype in the cell type studied). GRHL2 was downregulated in recurrent mouse
tumors that had evolved to an oncogene-independent, EMT-like state, supporting a 
role for GRHL2 downregulation in this phenotypic transition, modeling disease
recurrence. The combination of TGF-ß and Wnt activation repressed GRHL2
expression by direct interaction of ZEB1 with the GRHL2 promoter, inducing EMT.
Together, our observations indicate that a reciprocal feedback loop between GRHL2
and ZEB1 controls epithelial versus mesenchymal phenotypes and EMT-driven tumor
progression.

©2013 AACR.

PMCID: PMC3806457
PMID: 23943797  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


55. Mol Biol Cell. 2013 Sep;24(17):2620-32. doi: 10.1091/mbc.E12-04-0306. Epub 2013
Jul 17.

Multifunctional roles of urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA) in cancer stemness
and chemoresistance of pancreatic cancer.

Asuthkar S(1), Stepanova V, Lebedeva T, Holterman AL, Estes N, Cines DB, Rao JS, 
Gondi CS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cancer Biology and Pharmacology, University of Illinois College 
of Medicine at Peoria, Peoria, IL 61605, USA.

Pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma (PDAC) is almost always lethal. One of the
underlying reasons for this lethality is believed to be the presence of cancer
stem cells (CSC), which impart chemoresistance and promote recurrence, but the
mechanisms responsible are unclear. Recently the poor prognosis of PDAC has been 
correlated with increased expression of urokinase plasminogen activator (uPA). In
the present study we examine the role of uPA in the generation of PDAC CSC. We
observe a subset of cells identifiable as a side population (SP) when sorted by
flow cytometry of MIA PaCa-2 and PANC-1 pancreatic cancer cells that possess the 
properties of CSC. A large fraction of these SP cells are CD44 and CD24 positive,
are gemcitabine resistant, possess sphere-forming ability, and exhibit increased 
tumorigenicity, known characteristics of cancer stemness. Increased
tumorigenicity and gemcitabine resistance decrease after suppression of uPA. We
observe that uPA interacts directly with transcription factors LIM homeobox-2
(Lhx2), homeobox transcription factor A5 (HOXA5), and Hey to possibly promote
cancer stemness. uPA regulates Lhx2 expression by suppressing expression of
miR-124 and p53 expression by repressing its promoter by inactivating HOXA5.
These results demonstrate that regulation of gene transcription by uPA
contributes to cancer stemness and clinical lethality.

PMCID: PMC3756915
PMID: 23864708  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


56. Oncogene. 2013 Nov 28;32(48):5471-80. doi: 10.1038/onc.2013.175. Epub 2013 May
27.

HOX-mediated LMO2 expression in embryonic mesoderm is recapitulated in acute
leukaemias.

Calero-Nieto FJ(1), Joshi A, Bonadies N, Kinston S, Chan WI, Gudgin E, Pridans C,
Landry JR, Kikuchi J, Huntly BJ, Gottgens B.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Haematology, Wellcome Trust and MRC Cambridge Stem Cell
Institute, Cambridge Institute for Medical Research, Cambridge University,
Cambridge, UK.

The Lim Domain Only 2 (LMO2) leukaemia oncogene encodes an LIM domain
transcriptional cofactor required for early haematopoiesis. During embryogenesis,
LMO2 is also expressed in developing tail and limb buds, an expression pattern we
now show to be recapitulated in transgenic mice by an enhancer in LMO2 intron 4. 
Limb bud expression depended on a cluster of HOX binding sites, while posterior
tail expression required the HOX sites and two E-boxes. Given the importance of
both LMO2 and HOX genes in acute leukaemias, we further demonstrated that the
regulatory hierarchy of HOX control of LMO2 is activated in leukaemia mouse
models as well as in patient samples. Moreover, Lmo2 knock-down impaired the
growth of leukaemic cells, and high LMO2 expression at diagnosis correlated with 
poor survival in cytogenetically normal AML patients. Taken together, these
results establish a regulatory hierarchy of HOX control of LMO2 in normal
development, which can be resurrected during leukaemia development. Redeployment 
of embryonic regulatory hierarchies in an aberrant context is likely to be
relevant in human pathologies beyond the specific example of ectopic activation
of LMO2.

PMCID: PMC3898495
PMID: 23708655  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


57. Nucleic Acids Res. 2013 Jul;41(13):6430-43. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkt367. Epub 2013
May 10.

Polycomb recruitment attenuates retinoic acid-induced transcription of the
bivalent NR2F1 gene.

Laursen KB(1), Mongan NP, Zhuang Y, Ng MM, Benoit YD, Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College of Cornell
University, 1300 York Avenue, New York, NY 10065, USA.

Polycomb proteins play key roles in mediating epigenetic modifications that occur
during cell differentiation. The Polycomb repressive complex 2 (PRC2) mediates
the tri-methylation of histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3). In this study, we
identify a distinguishing feature of two classes of PRC2 target genes,
represented by the Nr2F1 (Coup-TF1) and the Hoxa5 gene, respectively. Both genes 
are transcriptionally activated by all-trans retinoic acid (RA) and display
increased levels of the permissive H3K9/K14ac and tri-methylated histone H3
lysine 4 epigenetic marks in response to RA. However, while in response to RA the
PRC2 and H3K27me3 marks are greatly decreased at the Hoxa5 promoter, these marks 
are initially increased at the Nr2F1 promoter. Functional depletion of the
essential PRC2 protein Suz12 by short hairpin RNA (shRNA) technology enhanced the
RA-associated transcription of Nr2F1, Nr2F2, Meis1, Sox9 and BMP2, but had no
effect on the Hoxa5, Hoxa1, Cyp26a1, Cyp26b1 and RARß2 transcript levels in
wild-type embryonic stem cells. We propose that PRC2 recruitment attenuates the
RA-associated transcriptional activation of a subset of genes. Such a mechanism
would permit the fine-tuning of transcriptional networks during differentiation.

PMCID: PMC3905905
PMID: 23666625  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


58. PLoS One. 2013 Apr 24;8(4):e61946. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0061946. Print 2013.

Transcriptome analysis of skin photoaging in chinese females reveals the
involvement of skin homeostasis and metabolic changes.

Yan W(1), Zhang LL, Yan L, Zhang F, Yin NB, Lin HB, Huang CY, Wang L, Yu J, Wang 
DM, Zhao ZM.

Author information: 
(1)Plastic Surgery Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union
Medical College, Beijing, China.

BACKGROUND: Photoaging is cumulative damage to skin, caused by chronic, repeated 
solar radiation exposure. Its molecular mechanisms are poorly understood at the
level of global gene expression.
OBJECTIVE: This study set out to uncover genes and functional modules involved in
photoaging at the level of transcription, with the use of skin samples from
Chinese women.
METHODS: Using the Illumina microarray platform, we compared the genome-wide
expression profiles of 21 pairs of sun-exposed pre-auricular and sun-protected
post-auricular skin samples from northern Chinese women.
RESULTS: With microarray analysis, 1,621 significantly regulated genes due to
photoaging were identified from skin samples. These genes were subjected to
functional enrichment analyses with both the Gene Ontology (GO) and Kyoto
Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) annotation databases. As revealed by the
functional analyses, the up-regulated functional modules in sun-exposed
pre-auricular skin were related to various cellular activities in regulation of
the skin homeostasis (e.g., the KEGG pathways TGF-beta signaling pathway and
ECM-receptor interaction), whereas the down-regulated functional modules were
mostly metabolic-related. Additionally, five selected genes (HOXA5, LEPR, CLDN5, 
LAMC3, and CGA) identified as differentially-expressed were further confirmed by 
quantitative real-time PCR (Q-RT-PCR).
CONCLUSION: Our findings suggest that disruption of skin homeostasis and
down-regulation of skin metabolism may play important roles in the process of
photoaging.

PMCID: PMC3634825
PMID: 23637934  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


59. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2013 Jun 15;304(12):L817-30. doi:
10.1152/ajplung.00006.2013. Epub 2013 Apr 12.

Partial functional redundancy between Hoxa5 and Hoxb5 paralog genes during lung
morphogenesis.

Boucherat O(1), Montaron S, Bérubé-Simard FA, Aubin J, Philippidou P, Wellik DM, 
Dasen JS, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec, Canada.

Hox genes encode transcription factors governing complex developmental processes 
in several organs. A subset of Hox genes are expressed in the developing lung.
Except for Hoxa5, the lack of overt lung phenotype in single mutants suggests
that Hox genes may not play a predominant role in lung ontogeny or that
functional redundancy may mask anomalies. In the Hox5 paralog group, both Hoxa5
and Hoxb5 genes are expressed in the lung mesenchyme whereas Hoxa5 is also
expressed in the tracheal mesenchyme. Herein, we generated Hoxa5;Hoxb5 compound
mutant mice to evaluate the relative contribution of each gene to lung
development. Hoxa5;Hoxb5 mutants carrying the four mutated alleles displayed an
aggravated lung phenotype, resulting in the death of the mutant pups at birth.
Characterization of the phenotype highlighted the role of Hoxb5 in lung
formation, the latter being involved in branching morphogenesis, goblet cell
specification, and postnatal air space structure, revealing partial functional
redundancy with Hoxa5. However, the Hoxb5 lung phenotypes were less severe than
those seen in Hoxa5 mutants, likely because of Hoxa5 compensation. New specific
roles for Hoxa5 were also unveiled, demonstrating the extensive contribution of
Hoxa5 to the developing respiratory system. The exclusive expression of Hoxa5 in 
the trachea and the phrenic motor column likely underlies the Hoxa5-specific
trachea and diaphragm phenotypes. Altogether, our observations establish that the
Hoxa5 and Hoxb5 paralog genes shared some functions during lung morphogenesis,
Hoxa5 playing a predominant role.

PMCID: PMC3680751
PMID: 23585229  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


60. Cell Signal. 2013 Jun;25(6):1476-85. doi: 10.1016/j.cellsig.2013.03.015. Epub
2013 Mar 23.

Retinoic acid-induced HOXA5 expression is co-regulated by HuR and miR-130a.

Yang F(1), Miao L, Mei Y, Wu M.

Author information: 
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and School of
Life Sciences, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui,
China.

Retinoic acid (RA) has been used as a chemopreventive agent for breast cancer. It
has been shown that HOXA5 is a critical mediator of RA-induced cell growth
inhibition. However, the molecular mechanisms underlying RA-induced HOXA5
expression remain largely unknown. Here we report that in addition to
transcriptional regulation, post-transcriptional regulation also contributes to
RA-induced HOXA5 expression. miR-130a, a c-Myc responsive miRNA, represses HOXA5 
cellular levels under unstressed condition. Upon RA treatment, c-Myc is quickly
degraded via the proteasome-dependent pathway. This in turn decreases miR-130a
levels and de-represses the translation of HOXA5. We also show that the
de-repression of HOXA5 translation is dependent on the RNA-binding protein Human 
antigen R (HuR), which binds to 3'UTR of HOXA5 mRNA and increases its stability
in response to RA treatment. Collectively, these results demonstrate that HuR and
miR-130a dynamically regulate HOXA5 gene expression via modulating HOXA5 mRNA
turnover and translation, respectively, thereby contributing to RA-induced growth
inhibition.

Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 23528537  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


61. Oncol Lett. 2013 Mar;5(3):1075-1079. Epub 2013 Jan 10.

Activated amelogenin Y-linked (AMELY) regulation and angiogenesis in human
hepatocellular carcinoma by biocomputation.

Qi L(1), Wang L, Huang J, Jiang M, Diao H, Zhou H, Li X, Jiang Z.

Author information: 
(1)Biomedical Center, School of Electronic Engineering, Beijing University of
Posts and Telecommunications, Beijing 100876;

In the present study, a comparison of the biological processes and gene ontology 
(GO) in human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) with high expression (fold change
=2) of amelogenin Y-linked (AMELY)-activated upstream regulation networks with
non-tumor hepatitis/cirrhotic tissues (HBV or HCV infection) with low expression 
of activated networks was performed. The principle biological processes involved 
in non-tumor hepatitis/cirrhotic tissues include positive regulation of mismatch 
repair, regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoters, negative
regulation of cell-cell adhesion, protein ubiquitinatin and protein catabolism.
The main biological processes involved in the development of HCC include positive
regulation of calcium ion transport into the cytosol, cell proliferation, DNA
replication, fibroblast proliferation, immune response, microtubule
polymerization and protein secretion. Specific transcription from RNA polymerase 
II promoters, regulation of angiogenesis, cell growth, protein metabolism, Wnt
receptor signaling pathways, negative regulation of endothelial cell
differentiation, microtubule depolymerization, peptidase activity and progression
through the cell cycle are also involved. Positive regulation of transcription is
involved in both processes. An activated AMELY-coupled upstream positive
regulation of immune response-mediated protein secretion to Wnt signaling and
calcium into cytosol-induced regulation of cell growth and angiogenesis in HCC is
proposed. The AMELY upstream regulation molecular network model was constructed
with BUB1B, CST6, ESM1, HOXA5, LEF1, MAPT, MYBL2, NOTCH3, PLA2G1B, PROK1, ROBO1, 
SCML2 and UBE2C in HCC from a Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) dataset by gene
regulation network inference methods and our programming methods.

PMCID: PMC3576279
PMID: 23426651  [PubMed]


62. PLoS One. 2013;8(2):e55911. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0055911. Epub 2013 Feb 8.

MiR-221 and miR-130a regulate lung airway and vascular development.

Mujahid S(1), Nielsen HC, Volpe MV.

Author information: 
(1)Program in Cell, Molecular and Developmental Biology, Sackler School of
Graduate Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston,
Massachusetts, USA.

Epithelial-mesenchymal interactions play a crucial role in branching
morphogenesis, but very little is known about how endothelial cells contribute to
this process. Here, we examined how anti-angiogenic miR-221 and pro-angiogenic
miR-130a affect airway and vascular development in the fetal lungs. Lung-specific
effects of miR-130a and miR-221 were studied in mouse E14 whole lungs cultured
for 48 hours with anti-miRs or mimics to miR-130a and miR-221. Anti-miR 221
treated lungs had more distal branch generations with increased Hoxb5 and VEGFR2 
around airways. Conversely, mimic 221 treated lungs had reduced airway branching,
dilated airway tips and decreased Hoxb5 and VEGFR2 in mesenchyme. Anti-miR 130a
treatment led to reduced airway branching with increased Hoxa5 and decreased
VEGFR2 in the mesenchyme. Conversely, mimic 130a treated lungs had numerous
finely arborized branches extending into central lung regions with diffusely
localized Hoxa5 and increased VEGFR2 in the mesenchyme. Vascular morphology was
analyzed by GSL-B4 (endothelial cell-specific lectin) immunofluorescence.
Observed changes in airway morphology following miR-221 inhibition and miR-130a
enhancement were mirrored by changes in vascular plexus formation around the
terminal airways. Mouse fetal lung endothelial cells (MFLM-91U) were used to
study microvascular cell behavior. Mimic 221 treatment resulted in reduced tube
formation and cell migration, where as the reverse was observed with mimic 130a
treatment. From these data, we conclude that miR-221 and miR-130a have opposing
effects on airway and vascular morphogenesis of the developing lung.

PMCID: PMC3568032
PMID: 23409087  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Biol Open. 2012 Jul 15;1(7):677-91. doi: 10.1242/bio.20121701. Epub 2012 May 29.

The loss of Hoxa5 function promotes Notch-dependent goblet cell metaplasia in
lung airways.

Boucherat O(1), Chakir J, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec , L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, 9 rue McMahon, Québec QC G1R
2J6 , Canada.

Hox genes encode transcription factors controlling complex developmental
processes in various organs. Little is known, however, about how HOX proteins
control cell fate. Herein, we demonstrate that the goblet cell metaplasia
observed in lung airways from Hoxa5(-/-) mice originates from the
transdifferentiation of Clara cells. Reduced CC10 expression in Hoxa5(-/-)
embryos indicates that altered cell specification occurs prior to birth. The loss
of Hoxa5 function does not preclude airway repair after naphthalene exposure, but
the regenerated epithelium presents goblet cell metaplasia and less CC10-positive
cells, demonstrating the essential role of Hoxa5 for correct differentiation.
Goblet cell metaplasia in Hoxa5(-/-) mice is a FOXA2-independent process.
However, it is associated with increased Notch signaling activity. Consistent
with these findings, expression levels of activated NOTCH1 and the effector gene 
HEY2 are enhanced in patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. In vivo
administration of a <U+03B3>-secretase inhibitor attenuates goblet cell metaplasia in
Hoxa5(-/-) mice, highlighting the contribution of Notch signaling to the
phenotype and suggesting a potential therapeutic strategy to inhibit goblet cell 
differentiation and mucus overproduction in airway diseases. In summary, the loss
of Hoxa5 function in lung mesenchyme impacts on epithelial cell fate by
modulating Notch signaling.

PMCID: PMC3507293
PMID: 23213461  [PubMed]


64. Nat Neurosci. 2012 Dec;15(12):1607-9. doi: 10.1038/nn.3272.

Breathless without Hox.

Castellani V, Kania A.

Comment on
    Nat Neurosci. 2012 Dec;15(12):1636-44.

PMID: 23187690  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Int J Cancer. 2013 Mar 15;132(6):1311-22. doi: 10.1002/ijc.27941. Epub 2012 Dec
13.

Transcription factors link mouse WAP-T mammary tumors with human breast cancer.

Otto B(1), Streichert T, Wegwitz F, Gevensleben H, Klätschke K, Wagener C,
Deppert W, Tolstonog GV.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Clinical Chemistry, Center for Diagnostic, University Medical
Center Hamburg-Eppendorf, D-20246 Hamburg, Germany. b.otto@uke.uni-hamburg.de

Mouse models are important tools to decipher the molecular mechanisms of mammary 
carcinogenesis and to mimic the respective human disease. Despite sharing common 
phenotypic and genetic features, the proper translation of murine models to human
breast cancer remains a challenging task. In a previous study we showed that in
the SV40 transgenic WAP-T mice an active Met-pathway and epithelial-mesenchymal
characteristics distinguish low- and high-grade mammary carcinoma. To assign
these murine tumors to corresponding human tumors we here incorporated the
analysis of expression of transcription factor (TF) coding genes and show that
thereby a more accurate interspecies translation can be achieved. We describe a
novel cross-species translation procedure and demonstrate that expression of
unsupervised selected TFs, such as ELF5, HOXA5 and TFCP2L1, can clearly
distinguish between the human molecular breast cancer subtypes--or as, for
example, expression of TFAP2B between yet unclassified subgroups. By integrating 
different levels of information like histology, gene set enrichment, expression
of differentiation markers and TFs we conclude that tumors in WAP-T mice exhibit 
similarities to both, human basal-like and non-basal-like subtypes. We
furthermore suggest that the low- and high-grade WAP-T tumor phenotypes might
arise from distinct cells of tumor origin. Our results underscore the importance 
of TFs as common cross-species denominators in the regulatory networks underlying
mammary carcinogenesis.

Copyright © 2012 UICC.

PMID: 23161608  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. J Clin Endocrinol Metab. 2013 Jan;98(1):362-71. doi: 10.1210/jc.2012-2953. Epub
2012 Nov 12.

Distinct developmental signatures of human abdominal and gluteal subcutaneous
adipose tissue depots.

Karastergiou K(1), Fried SK, Xie H, Lee MJ, Divoux A, Rosencrantz MA, Chang RJ,
Smith SR.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Endocrinology, Diabetes, and Nutrition, Department of Medicine,
Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, Massachusetts 02118, USA.

CONTEXT: Fat distribution differs in men and women, but in both sexes, a
predominantly gluteal-femoral compared with abdominal (central) fat distribution 
is associated with lower metabolic risk. Differences in cellular characteristics 
and metabolic functions of these depots have been described, but the molecular
mechanisms involved are not understood.
OBJECTIVE: Our objective was to identify depot- and sex-dependent differences in 
gene expression in human abdominal and gluteal sc adipose tissues.
DESIGN AND METHODS: Abdominal and gluteal adipose tissue aspirates were obtained 
from 14 premenopausal women [age 27.5 ± 7.0 yr, body mass index (BMI) 27.3 ± 6.2 
kg/m(2), and waist-to-hip ratio 0.82 ± 0.04] and 21 men (age 29.7±7.4 yr, BMI
27.2 ± 4.5 kg/m(2), and waist-to-hip ratio 0.91 ± 0.07) and transcriptomes were
analyzed using Illumina microarrays. Expression of selected genes was determined 
in isolated adipocytes and stromal vascular fractions from each depot, and in in 
vitro cultures before and after adipogenic differentiation.
RESULTS: A total of 284 genes were differentially expressed between the abdominal
and gluteal depot, either specifically in males (n = 66) or females (n = 159) or 
in both sexes (n = 59). Most notably, gene ontology and pathway analysis
identified homeobox genes (HOXA2, HOXA3, HOXA4, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB7, HOXB8,
HOXC8, and IRX2) that were down-regulated in the gluteal depot in both sexes (P =
2 × 10(-10)). Conversely, HOXA10 was up-regulated in gluteal tissue and HOXC13
was detected exclusively in this depot. These differences were independent of
BMI, were present in both adipocytes and stromal vascular fractions of adipose
tissue, and were retained throughout in vitro differentiation.
CONCLUSIONS: We conclude that developmentally programmed differences may
contribute to the distinct phenotypic characteristics of peripheral fat.

PMCID: PMC3537084
PMID: 23150689  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Circulation. 2012 Dec 18;126(25):2962-75. doi: 10.1161/CIRCULATIONAHA.112.093906.
Epub 2012 Nov 7.

Loss of angiomiR-126 and 130a in angiogenic early outgrowth cells from patients
with chronic heart failure: role for impaired in vivo neovascularization and
cardiac repair capacity.

Jakob P(1), Doerries C, Briand S, Mocharla P, Kränkel N, Besler C, Mueller M,
Manes C, Templin C, Baltes C, Rudin M, Adams H, Wolfrum M, Noll G, Ruschitzka F, 
Lüscher TF, Landmesser U.

Author information: 
(1)Cardiovascular Research, Institute of Physiology, University of Zurich,
Zurich, Switzerland.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs are key regulators of angiogenic processes. Administration 
of angiogenic early outgrowth cells (EOCs) or CD34(+) cells has been suggested to
improve cardiac function after ischemic injury, in particular by promoting
neovascularization. The present study therefore examines regulation of angiomiRs,
microRNAs involved in angiogenesis, in angiogenic EOCs and circulating CD34(+)
cells from patients with chronic heart failure (CHF) and the role for their
cardiac repair capacity.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Angiogenic EOCs and CD34(+) cells were isolated from
patients with CHF caused by ischemic cardiomyopathy (n=45) and healthy subjects
(n=35). In flow cytometry analyses, angiogenic EOCs were largely myeloid and
positive for alternatively activated M2 macrophage markers. In vivo cardiac
neovascularization and functional repair capacity were examined after
transplantation into nude mice with myocardial infarction. Cardiac
transplantation of angiogenic EOCs from healthy subjects markedly increased
neovascularization and improved cardiac function, whereas no such effect was
observed after transplantation of angiogenic EOCs from patients with CHF.
Real-time polymerase chain reaction analysis of 14 candidate angiomiRs, expressed
in angiogenic EOCs, revealed a pronounced loss of angiomiR-126 and -130a in
angiogenic EOCs from patients with CHF that was also observed in circulating
CD34(+) cells. Anti-miR-126 transfection markedly impaired the capacity of
angiogenic EOCs from healthy subjects to improve cardiac function. miR-126 mimic 
transfection increased the capacity of angiogenic EOCs from patients with CHF to 
improve cardiac neovascularization and function.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study reveals a loss of angiomiR-126 and -130a in
angiogenic EOCs and circulating CD34(+) cells from patients with CHF. Reduced
miR-126 expression was identified as a novel mechanism limiting their capacity to
improve cardiac neovascularization and function that can be targeted by miR-126
mimic transfection.

PMID: 23136161  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Nat Neurosci. 2012 Dec;15(12):1636-44. doi: 10.1038/nn.3242. Epub 2012 Oct 28.

Sustained Hox5 gene activity is required for respiratory motor neuron
development.

Philippidou P(1), Walsh CM, Aubin J, Jeannotte L, Dasen JS.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, New York University School of Medicine,
Smilow Neuroscience Program, Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, New York,
New York, USA.

Comment in
    Nat Neurosci. 2012 Dec;15(12):1607-9.

Respiration in mammals relies on the rhythmic firing of neurons in the phrenic
motor column (PMC), a motor neuron group that provides the sole source of
diaphragm innervation. Despite their essential role in breathing, the specific
determinants of PMC identity and patterns of connectivity are largely unknown. We
show that two Hox genes, Hoxa5 and Hoxc5, control diverse aspects of PMC
development including their clustering, intramuscular branching, and survival. In
mice lacking Hox5 genes in motor neurons, axons extend to the diaphragm, but fail
to arborize, leading to respiratory failure. Genetic rescue of cell death fails
to restore columnar organization and branching patterns, indicating these defects
are independent of neuronal loss. Unexpectedly, late Hox5 removal preserves
columnar organization but depletes PMC number and branches, demonstrating a
continuous requirement for Hox function in motor neurons. These findings indicate
that Hox5 genes orchestrate PMC development through deployment of temporally
distinct wiring programs.

PMCID: PMC3676175
PMID: 23103965  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. Cell Adh Migr. 2012 Nov-Dec;6(6):457-70. doi: 10.4161/cam.22164. Epub 2012 Oct
17.

The dual roles of homeobox genes in vascularization and wound healing.

Kachgal S(1), Mace KA, Boudreau NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Research Laboratory, Department of Surgery, University of California,
San Francisco, San Francisco, CA USA.

Homeobox genes represent a family of highly conserved transcription factors
originally discovered to regulate organ patterning during development. More
recently, several homeobox genes were shown to affect processes in adult tissue, 
including angiogenesis and wound healing. Whereas a subset of members of the
Hox-family of homeobox genes activate growth and migration to promote
angiogenesis or wound healing, other Hox genes function to restore or maintain
quiescent, differentiated tissue function. Pathological tissue remodeling is
linked to differential expression of activating or stabilizing Hox genes and
dysregulation of Hox expression can contribute to disease progression. Studies
aimed at understanding the role and regulation of Hox genes have provided insight
into how these potent morphoregulatory genes can be applied to enhance tissue
engineering or limit cancer progression.

PMCID: PMC3547888
PMID: 23076135  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Exp Hematol. 2012 Dec;40(12):1016-27. doi: 10.1016/j.exphem.2012.08.001. Epub
2012 Aug 8.

Gene expression profiling and candidate gene resequencing identifies pathways and
mutations important for malignant transformation caused by leukemogenic fusion
genes.

Novak RL(1), Harper DP, Caudell D, Slape C, Beachy SH, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia Biology Section, Genetics Branch, Center for Cancer Research,
National Cancer Institute, National Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

NUP98-HOXD13 (NHD13) and CALM-AF10 (CA10) are oncogenic fusion proteins produced 
by recurrent chromosomal translocations in patients with acute myeloid leukemia
(AML). Transgenic mice that express these fusions develop AML with a long latency
and incomplete penetrance, suggesting that collaborating genetic events are
required for leukemic transformation. We employed genetic techniques to identify 
both preleukemic abnormalities in healthy transgenic mice as well as
collaborating events leading to leukemic transformation. Candidate gene
resequencing revealed that 6 of 27 (22%) CA10 AMLs spontaneously acquired a Ras
pathway mutation and 8 of 27 (30%) acquired an Flt3 mutation. Two CA10 AMLs
acquired an Flt3 internal-tandem duplication, demonstrating that these mutations 
can be acquired in murine as well as human AML. Gene expression profiles revealed
a marked upregulation of Hox genes, particularly Hoxa5, Hoxa9, and Hoxa10 in both
NHD13 and CA10 mice. Furthermore, mir196b, which is embedded within the Hoxa
locus, was overexpressed in both CA10 and NHD13 samples. In contrast, the Hox
cofactors Meis1 and Pbx3 were differentially expressed; Meis1 was increased in
CA10 AMLs but not NHD13 AMLs, whereas Pbx3 was consistently increased in NHD13
but not CA10 AMLs. Silencing of Pbx3 in NHD13 cells led to decreased
proliferation, increased apoptosis, and decreased colony formation in vitro,
suggesting a previously unexpected role for Pbx3 in leukemic transformation.

Published by Elsevier Inc.

PMCID: PMC3496069
PMID: 22885519  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. BMC Cancer. 2012 Aug 9;12:348. doi: 10.1186/1471-2407-12-348.

MicroRNA-196a promotes non-small cell lung cancer cell proliferation and invasion
through targeting HOXA5.

Liu XH(1), Lu KH, Wang KM, Sun M, Zhang EB, Yang JS, Yin DD, Liu ZL, Zhou J, Liu 
ZJ, De W, Wang ZX.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Nanjing Medical University, 
Nanjing, People's Republic of China.

BACKGROUND: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short, non-coding RNAs (~22 nt) that play
important roles in the pathogenesis of human diseases by negatively regulating
gene expression. Although miR-196a has been implicated in several other cancers, 
its role in non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) is unknown. The aim of the present
study was to examine the expression pattern of miR-196a in NSCLC and its clinical
significance, as well as its biological role in tumor progression.
METHODS: Expression of miR-196a was analyzed in 34 NSCLC tissues and five NSCLC
cell lines by quantitative reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction
(qRT-PCR). The effect of DNA methylation on miR-196a expression was investigated 
by 5-aza-2-deoxy-cytidine treatment and bisulfite sequencing. The effect of
miR-196a on proliferation was evaluated by MTT and colony formation assays, and
cell migration and invasion were evaluated by transwell assays. Analysis of
target protein expression was determined by western blotting. Luciferase reporter
plasmids were constructed to confirm the action of miR-196a on downstream target 
genes, including HOXA5. Differences between the results were tested for
significance using Student's t-test (two-tailed).
RESULTS: miR-196a was highly expressed both in NSCLC samples and cell lines
compared with their corresponding normal counterparts, and the expression of
miR-196a may be affected by DNA demethylation. Higher expression of miR-196a in
NSCLC tissues was associated with a higher clinical stage, and also correlated
with NSCLC lymph-node metastasis. In vitro functional assays demonstrated that
modulation of miR-196a expression affected NSCLC cell proliferation, migration
and invasion. Our analysis showed that miR-196a suppressed the expression of
HOXA5 both at the mRNA and protein levels, and luciferase assays confirmed that
miR-196a directly bound to the 3'untranslated region of HOXA5. Knockdown of HOXA5
expression in A549 cells using RNAi was shown to promote NSCLC cell
proliferation, migration and invasion. Finally, we observed an inverse
correlation between HOXA5 and miR-196a expression in NSCLC tissues.
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that miR-196a is significantly up-regulated in
NSCLC tissues, and regulates NSCLC cell proliferation, migration and invasion,
partially via the down-regulation of HOXA5. Thus, miR-196a may represent a
potential therapeutic target for NSCLC intervention.

PMCID: PMC3503718
PMID: 22876840  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Br J Cancer. 2012 Jul 10;107(2):315-24. doi: 10.1038/bjc.2012.263. Epub 2012 Jun 
19.

Mixed lineage leukaemia-4 regulates cell-cycle progression and cell viability and
its depletion suppresses growth of xenografted tumour in vivo.

Ansari KI(1), Kasiri S, Mishra BP, Mandal SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas at
Arlington, Arlington, TX 76019, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mixed lineage leukaemia-4 (MLL4) is one of the MLL family of histone 
H3 lysine-4 (H3K4)-specific methyl transferases that have critical roles in gene 
expression and epigenetics in human. Though MLLs are well recognised as crucial
players in histone methylation and gene regulation; little is known about the
biochemical functions of MLL4 and its roles in cancer.
METHODS: Herein, we have investigated the roles of MLL4 in cell viability,
cell-cycle progression and explored its potential roles in tumour growth using
antisense-mediated knockdown experiments, flow-cytometry analysis, chromatin
immunoprecipitation, immunofluorescence staining and animal models.
RESULTS: Our studies demonstrated that knockdown of MLL4 severely affects
cell-cycle progression and induces apoptotic cell death in cultured tumour cells.
Knockdown of MLL4 induced nuclear condensation, fragmentation, cytochrome-c
release from mitochondria to cytosol and activated caspase-3/7 indicating
apoptotic cell death. The MLL4 regulates expression of various critical
cell-cycle regulatory genes such as cyclin D, cyclin E, p27, HOXA5 and HOXB7 via 
histone H3K4 trimethylation and recruitment of RNA polymerase II. Interestingly, 
application of MLL4 antisense suppressed tumour growth in vivo in colon cancer
xenograft implanted in nude mouse. The MLL4 antisense specifically knocked down
MLL4 in tumour tissue and also downregulated the expression of various growth and
angiogenic factors resulting in tumour suppression.
CONCLUSION: Our results demonstrated that MLL4 is a crucial player in cell
viability, cell-cycle progression and is critical for tumour growth in vivo.

PMCID: PMC3394987
PMID: 22713656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. J Dermatol Sci. 2012 Jun;66(3):197-206. doi: 10.1016/j.jdermsci.2012.02.019. Epub
2012 Mar 9.

HOXA5 inhibits keratinocytes growth and epidermal formation in organotypic
cultures in vitro and in vivo.

Liang Y(1), Xia L, Du Z, Sheng L, Chen H, Chen G, Li Q.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Shanghai Ninth People's
Hospital, Shanghai Jiao Tong University School of Medicine, Shanghai, China.

BACKGROUND: Homeobox transcription factors play important roles in epidermal
renewal. Among them HOXA5 emerges as a promising member. However, its direct
effect on epidermal biology, either to promote or to inhibit growth, is still
controversial.
OBJECTIVE: We proposed to unravel the role of HOXA5 in modulating keratinocytes
growth and epidermal formation in organotypic cultures both in vitro and in vivo.
METHODS: We transfected HaCaT cells with lentivirual vectors which over-expressed
either wild-type or mutant HOXA5 cDNAs with deleted homeodomain. Subsequently we 
propagated the cells in organotypic cultures (OTCs) and then transplanted them
into nude mice. Cell proliferation and cell cycle progression were detected.
Epidermal morphogenesis and stratification were investigated by
immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence staining of a series of epidermal
markers.
RESULTS: HaCaT cells transfected with HOXA5 cDNAs displayed lower growth rate and
delayed G1-S transition. HOXA5-transfected OTC exhibited an aberrantly organized 
epithelium with significantly increased TUNEL staining as well as decreased PCNA 
and K5 staining, while expression of differentiation markers as K10, involucrin
and filaggrin were somewhat enhanced. However, under in vivo environment in nude 
mice which had great paracrine regulatory mechanisms, the aberrant phenotype was 
ameliorated as shown by a more regular tissue organization and normal expression 
of PCNA and K5. Inversely, cells transfected with the homeodomain-deleted protein
exhibited accelerated growth and produced a more proliferative and
better-orchestrated epidermis, as shown by well-expressed proliferation and
differentiation markers.
CONCLUSIONS: HOXA5 can suppress keratinocytes growth and epidermal formation. It 
probably activated antagonist genes against growth factors release, which depends
on its homeodomain.

Copyright © 2012 Japanese Society for Investigative Dermatology. Published by
Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22464764  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Cancer Lett. 2012 Sep 28;322(2):204-12. doi: 10.1016/j.canlet.2012.03.016. Epub
2012 Mar 17.

Development of a novel approach, the epigenome-based outlier approach, to
identify tumor-suppressor genes silenced by aberrant DNA methylation.

Kikuyama M(1), Takeshima H, Kinoshita T, Okochi-Takada E, Wakabayashi M,
Akashi-Tanaka S, Ogawa T, Seto Y, Ushijima T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Epigenomics, National Cancer Center Research Institute, Tsukiji,
Chuo-ku, Tokyo, Japan.

Identification of tumor-suppressor genes (TSGs) silenced by aberrant methylation 
of promoter CpG islands (CGIs) is important, but hampered by a large number of
genes methylated as passengers of carcinogenesis. To overcome this issue, we here
took advantage of the fact that the vast majority of genes methylated in cancers 
lack, in normal cells, RNA polymerase II (Pol II) and have trimethylation of
histone H3 lysine 27 (H3K27me3) in their promoter CGIs. First, we demonstrated
that three of six known TSGs in breast cancer and two of three in colon cancer
had Pol II and lacked H3K27me3 in normal cells, being outliers to the general
rule. BRCA1, HOXA5, MLH1, and RASSF1A had high Pol II, but were expressed only at
low levels in normal cells, and were unlikely to be identified as outliers by
their expression statuses in normal cells. Then, using epigenome statuses (Pol II
binding and H3K27me3) in normal cells, we made a genome-wide search for outliers 
in breast cancers, and identified 14 outlier promoter CGIs. Among these, DZIP1,
FBN2, HOXA5, and HOXC9 were confirmed to be methylated in primary breast cancer
samples. Knockdown of DZIP1 in breast cancer cell lines led to increases of their
growth, suggesting it to be a novel TSG. The outliers based on their epigenome
statuses contained unique TSGs, including DZIP1, compared with those identified
by the expression microarray data. These results showed that the epigenome-based 
outlier approach is capable of identifying a different set of TSGs, compared to
the expression-based outlier approach.

Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.

PMID: 22433712  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Oncogene. 2013 Jan 31;32(5):599-609. doi: 10.1038/onc.2012.81. Epub 2012 Mar 5.

Histone deacetylase inhibitors suppress mutant p53 transcription via histone
deacetylase 8.

Yan W(1), Liu S, Xu E, Zhang J, Zhang Y, Chen X, Chen X.

Author information: 
(1)Comparative Oncology Laboratory, University of California at Davis, Davis, CA,
USA.

Mutation of the p53 gene is the most common genetic alteration in human cancer
and contributes to malignant process by enhancing transformed properties of cells
and resistance to anticancer therapy. Mutant p53 is often highly expressed in
tumor cells at least, in part, due to its increased half-life. However, whether
mutant p53 expression is regulated by other mechanisms in tumors is unclear. Here
we found that histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors suppress both wild-type and
mutant p53 transcription in time- and dose-dependent manners. Consistent with
this, the levels of wild-type and mutant p53 proteins are decreased upon
treatment with HDAC inhibitors. Importantly, we found that upon knockdown of each
class I HDAC, only HDAC8 knockdown leads to decreased expression of wild-type and
mutant p53 proteins and transcripts. Conversely, we found that ectopic expression
of wild-type, but not mutant HDAC8, leads to increased transcription of p53.
Furthermore, we found that knockdown of HDAC8 results in reduced expression of
HoxA5 and consequently, attenuated ability of HoxA5 to activate p53
transcription, which can be rescued by ectopic expression of HoxA5. Because of
the fact that HDAC8 is required for expression of both wild-type and mutant p53, 
we found that targeted disruption of HDAC8 expression remarkably triggers
proliferative defect in cells with a mutant, but not wild-type, p53. Together,
our data uncover a regulatory mechanism of mutant p53 transcription via HDAC8 and
suggest that HDAC inhibitors and especially HDAC8-targeting agents might be
explored as an adjuvant for tumors carrying a mutant p53.

PMCID: PMC3371110
PMID: 22391568  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. Endocrinology. 2012 Mar;153(3):1484-97. doi: 10.1210/en.2011-1766. Epub 2012 Feb 
7.

The loss of Hoxa5 function causes estrous acyclicity and ovarian epithelial
inclusion cysts.

Gendronneau G(1), Boucherat O, Aubin J, Lemieux M, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, 9, rue McMahon, Québec, Québec, 
Canada.

Hox genes encode transcription factors that play essential roles during embryo
morphogenesis and organogenesis. Expression of several Hox members persists at
the adult age, indicating a wide spectrum of action from embryonic to postnatal
life. In the present study, we reported that in adult mice, the Hoxa5 gene shows 
a dynamic expression profile in the ovary that depends on the estrous cycle, the 
gestational status, and the age of the female, suggesting that Hoxa5 may have
distinct physiological functions in the ovary. Consistent with a role for Hoxa5
in ovarian function, Hoxa5(-/-) nulliparous females exhibit precocious puberty
and an early onset of estrous acyclicity. They show a prolonged estrous cycle
with increased metestrus-diestrus length, a phenotype that worsens with age.
Older mutant females also develop ovarian epithelial inclusion cysts reminiscent 
of human endosalpingiosis. Immunolabeling studies suggest that these cysts
originate from the ovarian surface epithelium, a source of epithelial ovarian
carcinomas. Staining of the Hoxa5(-/-) ovarian cysts by the ovarian cancer
markers paired box gene 8 (PAX8) and Wilms' tumor 1 (WT1) further strengthens the
notion that these cysts may constitute preneoplastic lesions. Moreover, the
deregulation of the estrous cycle and the presence of ovarian epithelial cysts in
Hoxa5(-/-) older females correlate with a reduced expression of specific
epidermal growth factor receptor signaling components, namely Egfr, Areg, and
Btc. Altogether, our data unveil that Hoxa5, a stroma-specific gene, plays a
significant role in ovarian biology and may be involved in ovarian cancer
predisposition.

PMCID: PMC3281536
PMID: 22315454  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Int J Oncol. 2012 Apr;40(4):1180-8. doi: 10.3892/ijo.2011.1321. Epub 2011 Dec 29.

Homeobox gene expression profile indicates HOXA5 as a candidate prognostic marker
in oral squamous cell carcinoma.

Rodini CO(1), Xavier FC, Paiva KB, De Souza Setúbal Destro MF, Moyses RA,
Michaluarte P, Carvalho MB, Fukuyama EE; Head And Neck Genome Project Gencapo,
Tajara EH, Okamoto OK, Nunes FD.

Collaborators: Cury PM, De Carvalho MB, Dias-Neto E, Figueiredo DL, Fukuyama EE, 
Góis-Filho JF, Leopoldino AM, Mamede RC, Michaluart-Junior P, Moreira-Filho CA,
Moyses RA, Nóbrega FG, Nóbrega MP, Nunes FD, Ojopi EP, Okamoto OK, Serafini LN,
Severino P, Silva AM, Silva WA Jr, Silveira NJ, Souza SC, Tajara EH, Wünsch-Filho
V, Zago MA, Amar A, Arap SS, Araújo NS, Araújo-Filho V, Barbieri RB, Bandeira CM,
Bastos AU, Bogossian AP, Braconi MA, Brandão LG, Brandão RM, Canto AL,
Carvalho-Neto PB, Casemiro AF, Cerione M, Cernea CR, Cicco R, Chagas MJ, Chedid
H, Chiappini PB, Correia LA, Costa A, Costa AC, Cunha BR, Curioni OA, Dias TH,
Durazzo M, Ferraz AR, Figueiredo RO, Fortes CS, Franzi SA, Frizzera AP, Gallo J, 
Gazito D, Guimarães PE, Gutierres AP, Inamine R, Kaneto CM, Lehn CN, López RV,
Macarenco R, Magalhães RP, Martins AE, Meneses C, Mercante AM, Montenegro FL,
Pinheiro DG, Polachini GM, Porsani AF, Rapoport A, Rodini CO, Rodrigues AN,
Rodrigues-Lisoni FC, Rodrigues RV, Rossi L, Santos AR, Santos M, Settani F, Silva
FA, Silva IT, Silva-Filho GB, Smith RB, Souza TB, Stabenow E, Takamori JT,
Tavares MR, Turcano R, Valentim PJ, Volpi EM, Xavier FC, Yamagushi F, Cominato
ML, Correa PM, Mendes GS, Paiva R, Ramos O, Silva C, Silva MJ, Tarlá MV.

The search for molecular markers to improve diagnosis, individualize treatment
and predict behavior of tumors has been the focus of several studies. This study 
aimed to analyze homeobox gene expression profile in oral squamous cell carcinoma
(OSCC) as well as to investigate whether some of these genes are relevant
molecular markers of prognosis and/or tumor aggressiveness. Homeobox gene
expression levels were assessed by microarrays and qRT-PCR in OSCC tissues and
adjacent non-cancerous matched tissues (margin), as well as in OSCC cell lines.
Analysis of microarray data revealed the expression of 147 homeobox genes,
including one set of six at least 2-fold up-regulated, and another set of 34 at
least 2-fold down-regulated homeobox genes in OSCC. After qRT-PCR assays, the
three most up-regulated homeobox genes (HOXA5, HOXD10 and HOXD11) revealed higher
and statistically significant expression levels in OSCC samples when compared to 
margins. Patients presenting lower expression of HOXA5 had poorer prognosis
compared to those with higher expression (P=0.03). Additionally, the status of
HOXA5, HOXD10 and HOXD11 expression levels in OSCC cell lines also showed a
significant up-regulation when compared to normal oral keratinocytes. Results
confirm the presence of three significantly upregulated (>4-fold) homeobox genes 
(HOXA5, HOXD10 and HOXD11) in OSCC that may play a significant role in the
pathogenesis of these tumors. Moreover, since lower levels of HOXA5 predict poor 
prognosis, this gene may be a novel candidate for development of therapeutic
strategies in OSCC.

PMCID: PMC3584618
PMID: 22227861  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. PLoS One. 2011;6(10):e26791. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0026791. Epub 2011 Oct 25.

Epigenetic changes with dietary soy in cynomolgus monkeys.

Howard TD(1), Ho SM, Zhang L, Chen J, Cui W, Slager R, Gray S, Hawkins GA,
Medvedovic M, Wagner JD.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Genomics and Personalized Medicine Research, Wake Forest School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina, United States of America.
tdhoward@wfubmc.edu

Nutritional interventions are important alternatives for reducing the prevalence 
of many chronic diseases. Soy is a good source of protein that contains
isoflavones, including genistein and daidzein, and may alter the risk of obesity,
Type 2 diabetes, osteoporosis, cardiovascular disease, and reproductive cancers. 
We have shown previously in nonhuman primates that soy protein containing
isoflavones leads to improved body weight, insulin sensitivity, lipid profiles,
and atherosclerosis compared to protein without soy isoflavones (casein), and
does not increase the risk of cancer. Since genistein has been shown to alter DNA
methylation, we compared the methylation profiles of cynomolgus monkeys, from
multiple tissues, eating two high-fat, typical American diets (TAD) with similar 
macronutrient contents, with or without soy protein. DNA methylation status was
successfully determined for 80.6% of the probes in at least one tissue using
Illumina's HumanMethylation27 BeadChip. Overall methylation increased in liver
and muscle tissue when monkeys switched from the TAD-soy to the TAD-casein diets.
Genes involved in epigenetic processes, specifically homeobox genes (HOXA5,
HOXA11, and HOXB1), and ABCG5 were among those that changed between diets. These 
data support the use of the HumanMethylation27 BeadChip in cynomolgus monkeys and
identify epigenetic changes associated with dietary interventions with soy
protein that may potentially affect the etiology of complex diseases.

PMCID: PMC3201974
PMID: 22046358  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Blood. 2011 Dec 8;118(24):6247-57. doi: 10.1182/blood-2011-07-328880. Epub 2011
Sep 26.

NUP98 gene fusions and hematopoietic malignancies: common themes and new biologic
insights.

Gough SM(1), Slape CI, Aplan PD.

Author information: 
(1)Leukemia Biology Section, Genetics Branch, National Cancer Institute, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Structural chromosomal rearrangements of the Nucleoporin 98 gene (NUP98),
primarily balanced translocations and inversions, are associated with a wide
array of hematopoietic malignancies. NUP98 is known to be fused to at least 28
different partner genes in patients with hematopoietic malignancies, including
acute myeloid leukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia in blast crisis, myelodysplastic
syndrome, acute lymphoblastic leukemia, and bilineage/biphenotypic leukemia.
NUP98 gene fusions typically encode a fusion protein that retains the amino
terminus of NUP98; in this context, it is important to note that several recent
studies have demonstrated that the amino-terminal portion of NUP98 exhibits
transcription activation potential. Approximately half of the NUP98 fusion
partners encode homeodomain proteins, and at least 5 NUP98 fusions involve known 
histone-modifying genes. Several of the NUP98 fusions, including NUP98-homeobox
(HOX)A9, NUP98-HOXD13, and NUP98-JARID1A, have been used to generate animal
models of both lymphoid and myeloid malignancy; these models typically
up-regulate HOXA cluster genes, including HOXA5, HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA10. In
addition, several of the NUP98 fusion proteins have been shown to inhibit
differentiation of hematopoietic precursors and to increase self-renewal of
hematopoietic stem or progenitor cells, providing a potential mechanism for
malignant transformation.

PMCID: PMC3236115
PMID: 21948299  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. World J Gastroenterol. 2011 Aug 7;17(29):3407-19. doi: 10.3748/wjg.v17.i29.3407.

Identification of methylation profile of HOX genes in extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma.

Shu Y(1), Wang B, Wang J, Wang JM, Zou SQ.

Author information: 
(1)General Surgery Department of Tongji Hospital, Tongji Medical College of
Huazhong University of Science and Technology, 1095 Jiefang Avenue, Wuhan 430030,
Hubei Province, China.

AIM: To identify methylation profile and novel tumor marker of extrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma (CCA) with high throughout microarray.
METHODS: Differential methylation profile was compared between normal bile duct
epithelial cell lines and CCA cell lines by methyl-DNA immunoprecipitation
(MeDIP) microarray. Bisulfite-polymerase chain reaction (BSP) was performed to
identify the methylated allels of target genes. Expression of target genes was
investigated before and after the treatment with DNA demethylating agent.
Expression of candidate genes was also evaluated by immunofluorescence in 30
specimens of CCA tissues and 9 normal bile duct tissues.
RESULTS: Methylation profile of CCA was identified with MeDIP microarray in the
respects of different gene functions and signaling pathways. Interestingly, 97
genes with hypermethylated CpG islands in the promoter region were homeobox
genes. The top 5 hypermethylated homeobox genes validated by BSP were HOXA2
(94.29%), HOXA5 (95.38%), HOXA11 (91.67%), HOXB4 (90.56%) and HOXD13 (94.38%).
Expression of these genes was reactivated with 5'-aza-2'-deoxycytidine.
Significant expression differences were found between normal bile duct and
extrahepatic CCA tissues (66.67%-100% vs 3.33%-10%).
CONCLUSION: HOXA2, HOXA5, HOXA11, HOXB4 and HOXD13 may work as differential
epigenetic biomarkers between malignant and benign biliary tissues.

PMCID: PMC3160567
PMID: 21876633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. J Biomed Sci. 2011 Jun 22;18:45. doi: 10.1186/1423-0127-18-45.

Stromal upregulation of lateral epithelial adhesions: gene expression analysis of
signalling pathways in prostate epithelium.

Chambers KF(1), Pearson JF, Pellacani D, Aziz N, Guvic M, Klein CA, Lang SH.

Author information: 
(1)Yorkshire Cancer Research Unit, Dept, Biology, University of York, Heslington,
York YO10 5YW, UK.

BACKGROUND: Stromal signalling increases the lateral cell adhesions of prostate
epithelial cells grown in 3D culture. The aim of this study was to use microarray
analysis to identify significant epithelial signalling pathways and genes in this
process.
METHODS: Microarray analysis was used to identify genes that were differentially 
expressed when epithelial cells were grown in 3D Matrigel culture with stromal
co-culture compared to without stroma. Two culture models were employed: primary 
epithelial cells (ten samples) and an epithelial cell line (three experiments). A
separate microarray analysis was performed on each model system and then compared
to identify tissue-relevant genes in a cell line model.
RESULTS: TGF beta signalling was significantly ranked for both model systems and 
in both models the TGF beta signalling gene SOX4 was significantly down
regulated. Analysis of all differentially expressed genes to identify genes that 
were common to both models found several morphology related gene clusters; actin 
binding (DIAPH2, FHOD3, ABLIM1, TMOD4, MYH10), GTPase activator activity (BCR,
MYH10), cytoskeleton (MAP2, MYH10, TMOD4, FHOD3), protein binding (ITGA6, CD44), 
proteinaceous extracellular matrix (NID2, CILP2), ion channel/ ion transporter
activity (CACNA1C, CACNB2, KCNH2, SLC8A1, SLC39A9) and genes associated with
developmental pathways (POFUT1, FZD2, HOXA5, IRX2, FGF11, SOX4, SMARCC1).
CONCLUSIONS: In 3D prostate cultures, stromal cells increase lateral epithelial
cell adhesions. We show that this morphological effect is associated with gene
expression changes to TGF beta signalling, cytoskeleton and anion activity.

PMCID: PMC3141633
PMID: 21696611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2011 Jul 1;410(2):312-6. doi:
10.1016/j.bbrc.2011.05.139. Epub 2011 May 30.

Human HOXA5 homeodomain enhances protein transduction and its application to
vascular inflammation.

Lee JY(1), Park KS, Cho EJ, Joo HK, Lee SK, Lee SD, Park JB, Chang SJ, Jeon BH.

Author information: 
(1)Infectious Signaling Network Research Center and Research Institute for
Medical Sciences, Department of Physiology, School of Medicine, Chungnam National
University, Daejeon 301-747, Republic of Korea.

Cellular protein delivery is an emerging technique by which exogenous recombinant
proteins are delivered into mammalian cells across the membrane. We have
developed an Escherichia coli expression vector including human specific gene
sequences for protein cellular delivery. The plasmid was generated by ligation
the nucleotides 770-817 of the homeobox A5 mRNA sequence which was matched with
protein transduction domain (PTD) of homeodomain protein A5 (HOXA5) into pET
expression vector. The cellular uptake of HOXA5-PTD-EGFP was detected in 1min and
its transduction reached a maximum at 1h within cell lysates. The cellular uptake
of HOXA5-EGFP at 37°C was greater than in 4°C. For study for the functional role 
of human HOXA5-PTD, we purified HOXA5-APE1/Ref-1 and applied it on monocyte
adhesion. Pretreatment with HOXA5-APE1/Ref-1 (100nM) inhibited TNF-a-induced
monocyte adhesion to endothelial cells, compared with HOXA5-EGFP. Taken together,
our data suggested that human HOXA5-PTD vector provides a powerful research tools
for uncovering cellular functions of proteins or for the generation of human
PTD-containing proteins.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 21664342  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. JOP. 2011 May 6;12(3):216-9.

HOX genes in pancreatic development and cancer.

Gray S, Pandha HS, Michael A, Middleton G, Morgan R.

The HOX genes are a family of homeodomain-containing transcription factors that
determine cellular identity during development and which are subsequently
re-expressed in many types of cancer. Some recent studies have shown that HOX
genes may have key roles both in pancreatic development and in adult diseases of 
the pancreas, including cancer. In this review we consider recent advances in
elucidating the role of HOX genes in these processes, how they may connect early 
developmental events to subsequent adult disease, and their potential both as
diagnostic markers and therapeutic targets.

PMID: 21546695  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. Haematologica. 2011 Apr;96(4):558-66. doi: 10.3324/haematol.2010.033167.

Methylation profiling of mediastinal gray zone lymphoma reveals a distinctive
signature with elements shared by classical Hodgkin's lymphoma and primary
mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma.

Eberle FC(1), Rodriguez-Canales J, Wei L, Hanson JC, Killian JK, Sun HW, Adams
LG, Hewitt SM, Wilson WH, Pittaluga S, Meltzer PS, Staudt LM, Emmert-Buck MR,
Jaffe ES.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Pathology, National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

Comment in
    Haematologica. 2011 Apr;96(4):496-9.

BACKGROUND: Mediastinal gray zone lymphoma is a newly recognized entity with
transitional morphological and immunophenotypic features between the nodular
sclerosis subtype of Hodgkin's lymphoma and primary mediastinal large B-cell
lymphoma. Diagnostic criteria for mediastinal gray zone lymphoma are still
challenging, and the optimal therapy is as yet undetermined. Epigenetic changes
have been implicated in the loss of the B-cell program in classical Hodgkin's
lymphoma, and might provide a basis for the immunophenotypic alterations seen in 
mediastinal gray zone lymphoma.
DESIGN AND METHODS: We performed a large-scale DNA methylation analysis of
microdissected tumor cells to investigate the biological underpinnings of
mediastinal gray zone lymphoma and its association with the related entities
classical Hodgkin's lymphoma and primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma,
making comparisons with the presumptively less related diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma.
RESULTS: Principal component analysis demonstrated that mediastinal gray zone
lymphoma has a distinct epigenetic profile intermediate between classical
Hodgkin's lymphoma and primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma but remarkably
different from that of diffuse large B-cell lymphoma. Analysis of common hypo-
and hypermethylated CpG targets in mediastinal gray zone lymphoma, classical
Hodgkin's lymphoma, primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma and diffuse large
B-cell lymphoma was performed and confirmed the findings of the principal
component analysis. Based on the epigenetic profiles we were able to establish
class prediction models utilizing genes such as HOXA5, MMP9, EPHA7 and DAPK1
which could distinguish between mediastinal gray zone lymphoma, classical
Hodgkin's lymphoma and primary mediastinal large B-cell lymphoma with a final
combined prediction of 100%.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data confirm a close relationship between mediastinal gray zone 
lymphoma and both classical Hodgkin's lymphoma and primary mediastinal large
B-cell lymphoma. However, important differences were observed as well, allowing a
clear distinction from both parent entities. Thus, mediastinal gray zone lymphoma
cannot be assigned to either classical Hodgkin's lymphoma or primary mediastinal 
large B-cell lymphoma, validating the decision to create an intermediate category
in the World Health Organization classification.

PMCID: PMC3069233
PMID: 21454882  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Sex Dev. 2011;5(2):70-6. doi: 10.1159/000323807. Epub 2011 Feb 11.

Androgen receptor mutations are associated with altered epigenomic programming as
evidenced by HOXA5 methylation.

Bens S(1), Ammerpohl O, Martin-Subero JI, Appari M, Richter J, Hiort O, Werner R,
Riepe FG, Siebert R, Holterhus PM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Human Genetics, Christian Albrechts University of Kiel and
University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Campus Kiel, Kiel, Germany.

Male external genital differentiation is accompanied by implementation of a
long-term, male-specific gene expression pattern indicating androgen programming 
in cultured genital fibroblasts. We hypothesized the existence of an epigenetic
background contributing to this phenomenon. DNA methylation levels in 2 normal
scrotal fibroblast strains from 46,XY males compared to 2 labia majora fibroblast
strains from 46,XY females with complete androgen insensitivity syndrome (AIS)
due to androgen receptor (AR) mutations were analyzed by Illumina GoldenGate
methylation arrays®. Results were validated with pyrosequencing in labia majora
fibroblast strains from fifteen 46,XY patients and compared to nine normal male
scrotal fibroblast strains. HOXA5 showed a significantly higher methylation level
in complete AIS. This finding was confirmed by bisulfite pyrosequencing of 14 CpG
positions within the HOXA5 promoter in the same strains. Extension of the 2
groups revealed a constant low HOXA5 methylation pattern in the controls in
contrast to a highly variable methylation pattern in the AIS patients. HOXA5
represents a candidate gene of androgen-mediated promoter methylation. The
constantly low HOXA5 DNA methylation level of normal male scrotal fibroblast
strains and the frequently high methylation levels in labia majora fibroblast
strains in AIS indicate for the first time that androgen programming in sexual
differentiation is not restricted to global gene transcription but also occurs at
the epigenetic level.

2011 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 21311178  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Genesis. 2011 Mar;49(3):152-9. doi: 10.1002/dvg.20720.

Unsuspected effects of a lung-specific Cre deleter mouse line.

Jeannotte L(1), Aubin J, Bourque S, Lemieux M, Montaron S, Provencher St-Pierre
A.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec, Canada.
lucie.jeannotte@crhdq.ulaval.ca

Cre-expressing mouse lines constitute an important asset to mammalian genetics,
allowing the deletion of genes in a spatio-temporal specific manner. Our study on
Hox gene function in lung development has led us to use a lung endoderm-specific 
deletion with the Sftpc-cre mouse line expressing the Cre recombinase gene under 
the control of human surfactant protein C regulatory sequences. In control
experiments, the Cre recombinase faithfully activated the Rosa26-lacZ reporter
gene in lung epithelium. However as early as e15.5, lungs from Sftp-Cre(+)
embryos showed abnormal dilated cysts. This unexpected phenotype was also
observed in mice carrying the conditional lung epithelial Hoxa5 deletion,
indicating some bias due to Cre deleterious effects. Excessive apoptosis, likely 
due to Cre toxicity, could explain the abnormal cysts. Our findings illustrate
the need for appropriate control experiments and careful interpretation of data
to discriminate between the phenotype due to the targeted mutation and the
confounding effects of the Cre recombinase.

Copyright © 2011 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 21309069  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Arch Dermatol Res. 2011 Mar;303(2):125-33. doi: 10.1007/s00403-011-1123-2. Epub
2011 Feb 1.

A preliminary study of differentially expressed genes in expanded skin and normal
skin: implications for adult skin regeneration.

Yang M(1), Liang Y, Sheng L, Shen G, Liu K, Gu B, Meng F, Li Q.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Plastic Surgery, University of Mississippi Medical Center,
Jackson, MS, USA.

In adults, severely damaged skin heals by scar formation and cannot regenerate to
the original skin structure. However, tissue expansion is an exception, as normal
skin regenerates under the mechanical stretch resulting from tissue expansion.
This technique has been used clinically for defect repair and organ
reconstruction for decades. However, the phenomenon of adult skin regeneration
during tissue expansion has caused little attention, and the mechanism of skin
regeneration during tissue expansion has not been fully understood. In this
study, microarray analysis was performed on expanded human skin and normal human 
skin. Significant difference was observed in 77 genes, which suggest a network of
several integrated cascades, including cytokines, extracellular, cytoskeletal,
transmembrane molecular systems, ion or ion channels, protein kinases and
transcriptional systems, is involved in the skin regeneration during expansion.
Among these, the significant expression of some regeneration related genes, such 
as HOXA5, HOXB2 and AP1, was the first report in tissue expansion. Data in this
study suggest a list of candidate genes, which may help to elucidate the
fundamental mechanism of skin regeneration during tissue expansion and which may 
have implications for postnatal skin regeneration and therapeutic interventions
in wound healing.

PMID: 21286735  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. Cell Adh Migr. 2011 Mar-Apr;5(2):133-41. Epub 2011 Mar 1.

Temporal changes in Hox gene expression accompany endothelial cell
differentiation of embryonic stem cells.

Bahrami SB(1), Veiseh M, Dunn AA, Boudreau NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery; University of California-San Francisco, CA, USA.

In pluripotent embryonic stem cells (ESCs), expression of the Hox master
regulatory transcription factors that play essential roles in organogenesis,
angiogenesis, and maintenance of differentiated tissues, is globally suppressed. 
We investigated whether differentiation of endothelial cells (ECs) from mouse
ESCs was accompanied by activation of distinct Hox gene expression profiles.
Differentiation was observed within 3 days, as indicated by the appearance of
cells expressing specific endothelial marker genes (Flk-1+ /VE-Cadherin+ ).
Expression of HoxA3 and HoxD3, which drive adult endothelial cell invasion and
angiogenesis, peaked at day 3 and declined thereafter, whereas expression of
HoxA5 and HoxD10, which maintain a mature quiescent EC phenotype, was low at day 
3, but increased over time. The temporal and reciprocal changes in HoxD3 and
HoxA5 expression were accompanied by corresponding changes in expression of
established downstream target genes including integrin ß3 and Thrombospondin-2.
Our results indicate that differentiation and maturation of ECs derived from
cultured ESCs mimic changes in Hox gene expression that accompany maturation of
immature angiogenic endothelium into differentiated quiescent endothelium in
vivo.

PMCID: PMC3084978
PMID: 21200152  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Korean J Lab Med. 2010 Oct;30(5):469-73. doi: 10.3343/kjlm.2010.30.5.469.

Level of HOXA5 hypermethylation in acute myeloid leukemia is associated with
short-term outcome.

Kim SY(1), Hwang SH, Song EJ, Shin HJ, Jung JS, Lee EY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Pusan National University School of
Medicine, Busan, Korea.

Hypermethylation of the homeobox (HOX) gene promoter leads to decreased
expression of the gene during tumor development and is thought to be correlated
with the clinical outcome in leukemia. In this study, we performed pyrosequencing
to quantify the methylation level of HOXA5 genes in the bone marrow samples
obtained from 50 patients with AML and 19 normal controls. The methylation
percentage of HOXA5 in AML patients (median=65.4%, interquartile
range=35.9-72.3%) was higher than that of HOXA5 in control patients
(median=43.1%, interquartile range=36.7-49.6%, Mann-Whitney U test, P=0.012). The
patients of the AML group who had a high methylation percentage (>70%) had a good
prognosis with a 3-yr overall survival (OS) of 82.5%, whereas the patients with a
low methylation percentage (=70%) showed a 3-yr OS of 40.5% (P=0.048). Cox
proportional hazards regression showed that the methylation percentages of HOXA5 
were independently associated with the 3-yr OS of AML patients, regardless of
their karyotypes. We propose that the quantification of HOXA5 methylation by
pyrosequencing may be useful for predicting short-term prognosis in AML. However,
the limitations of our study are the small sample size and its preliminary
nature. Thus, a larger study should be performed to clearly determine the
relationships among HOXA5 methylation levels, cytogenetics, and prognosis in AML 
patients.

PMID: 20890077  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Pathol Int. 2010 Oct;60(10):661-6. doi: 10.1111/j.1440-1827.2010.02578.x.

Epigenetic inactivation of HOXA5 and MSH2 gene in clear cell renal cell
carcinoma.

Yoo KH(1), Park YK, Kim HS, Jung WW, Chang SG.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Urology, School of Medicine, Kyung Hee University, Seoul, Korea.

Erratum in
    Pathol Int. 2010 Dec;60(12):798.

The high-throughput method using microarray is an easy and fast way to analyze
the methylation status of hundreds of preselected genes and to screen them for
signatures in methylation. The aim of our study is to detect hypermethylated
genes and to analyze the association between methylation status and
clinicopathological parameters of clear cell renal cell carcinoma. The genetic
substrate included 62 cancer tissues and 62 matched adjacent normal kidney
tissues. We adapted the GoldenGate genotyping assay to determine the methylation 
state of 1505 specific CpG sites in 807 genes. We identified two genes (HOXA5 and
MSH2) with ß-value differences of more than 0.3 between cancer and normal
tissues. The high methylation group in HOXA5 had high Fuhrman's nuclear grade (P=
0.041). Other data in HOXA5 and MSH2 were not significant with methylation status
(P > 0.05). Survival curve of the high methylation group in HOXA5 was slightly
lower than that of the low methylation group. However, the statistical
significances of overall survival in HOXA5 and MSH2 were low (P > 0.05). We
report the hypermethylation of two genes in clear cell renal cell carcinoma. The 
data we obtained could provide the basis for a diagnostic test pathological
assessment, or prognosis in clear cell renal cell carcinoma.

© 2010 The Authors. Pathology International © 2010 Japanese Society of Pathology 
and Blackwell Publishing Asia Pty Ltd.

PMID: 20846263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Am J Med Sci. 2010 Nov;340(5):385-8. doi: 10.1097/MAJ.0b013e3181e892a0.

Expression of miRNA-130a in nonsmall cell lung cancer.

Wang XC(1), Tian LL, Wu HL, Jiang XY, Du LQ, Zhang H, Wang YY, Wu HY, Li DG, She 
Y, Liu QF, Fan FY, Meng AM.

Author information: 
(1)Tianjin Key Laboratory of Molecular Nuclear Medicine, Institute of Radiation
Medicine, Chinese Academy of Medical Science, Tianjin, China.

MicroRNAs are short regulatory RNAs that negatively modulate gene expression at
the posttranscriptional level and are deeply involved in the pathogenesis of
several types of cancer. The miRNA-130a has been shown to play a role in
antagonizing the inhibitory effects of GAX on endothelial cell proliferation,
migration and tube formation, and antagonizing the inhibitory effects of HoxA5 on
tube formation in vitro. Here the authors show, for the first time, that
miRNA-130a expression is increased in nonsmall cell lung cancer (NSCLC) tissues. 
Statistical analysis showed that overexpression of miRNA-130a was strongly
associated with lymph node metastasis, stage of tumor node metastasis
classification and poor prognosis. Moreover, there was a significant difference
in miRNA-130a expression levels between smoking and nonsmoking patients.
Multivariate Cox regression analysis showed that miRNA-130a was an independent
prognostic factor for patients with NSCLC. Together, these data suggest that
miRNA-130a may comprise a potential novel prognostic marker for this disease.

PMID: 20625274  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. BMC Genomics. 2010 Jun 21;11:388. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-388.

Expression of a retinoic acid signature in circulating CD34 cells from coronary
artery disease patients.

van der Pouw Kraan TC(1), Schirmer SH, Fledderus JO, Moerland PD, Baggen JM,
Leyen TA, van der Laan AM, Piek JJ, van Royen N, Horrevoets AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology and Immunology, VU University Medical
Center, Van der Boechorststraat, 1081BT Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
t.vanderpouwkraan@vumc.nl

BACKGROUND: Circulating CD34+ progenitor cells have the potential to
differentiate into a variety of cells, including endothelial cells. Knowledge is 
still scarce about the transcriptional programs used by CD34+ cells from
peripheral blood, and how these are affected in coronary artery disease (CAD)
patients.
RESULTS: We performed a whole genome transcriptome analysis of CD34+ cells, CD4+ 
T cells, CD14+ monocytes, and macrophages from 12 patients with CAD and 11
matched controls. CD34+ cells, compared to other mononuclear cells from the same 
individuals, showed high levels of KRAB box transcription factors, known to be
involved in gene silencing. This correlated with high expression levels in CD34+ 
cells for the progenitor markers HOXA5 and HOXA9, which are known to control
expression of KRAB factor genes. The comparison of expression profiles of CD34+
cells from CAD patients and controls revealed a less naïve phenotype in patients'
CD34+ cells, with increased expression of genes from the Mitogen Activated Kinase
network and a lowered expression of a panel of histone genes, reaching levels
comparable to that in more differentiated circulating cells. Furthermore, we
observed a reduced expression of several genes involved in CXCR4-signaling and
migration to SDF1/CXCL12.
CONCLUSIONS: The altered gene expression profile of CD34+ cells in CAD patients
was related to activation/differentiation by a retinoic acid-induced
differentiation program. These results suggest that circulating CD34+ cells in
CAD patients are programmed by retinoic acid, leading to a reduced capacity to
migrate to ischemic tissues.

PMCID: PMC2901320
PMID: 20565948  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. PLoS One. 2010 Jun 9;5(6):e11033. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0011033.

Switch from stress response to homeobox transcription factors in adipose tissue
after profound fat loss.

Dankel SN(1), Fadnes DJ, Stavrum AK, Stansberg C, Holdhus R, Hoang T, Veum VL,
Christensen BJ, Våge V, Sagen JV, Steen VM, Mellgren G.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Medicine, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway.

BACKGROUND: In obesity, impaired adipose tissue function may promote secondary
disease through ectopic lipid accumulation and excess release of adipokines,
resulting in systemic low-grade inflammation, insulin resistance and organ
dysfunction. However, several of the genes regulating adipose tissue function in 
obesity are yet to be identified.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In order to identify novel candidate genes that
may regulate adipose tissue function, we analyzed global gene expression in
abdominal subcutaneous adipose tissue before and one year after bariatric surgery
(biliopancreatic diversion with duodenal switch, BPD/DS) (n = 16). Adipose tissue
from lean healthy individuals was also analyzed (n = 13). Two different
microarray platforms (AB 1700 and Illumina) were used to measure the differential
gene expression, and the results were further validated by qPCR. Surgery reduced 
BMI from 53.3 to 33.1 kg/m(2). The majority of differentially expressed genes
were down-regulated after profound fat loss, including transcription factors
involved in stress response, inflammation, and immune cell function (e.g., FOS,
JUN, ETS, C/EBPB, C/EBPD). Interestingly, a distinct set of genes was
up-regulated after fat loss, including homeobox transcription factors (IRX3,
IRX5, HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXB5, HOXC6, EMX2, PRRX1) and extracellular matrix
structural proteins (COL1A1, COL1A2, COL3A1, COL5A1, COL6A3).
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: The data demonstrate a marked switch of transcription
factors in adipose tissue after profound fat loss, providing new molecular
insight into a dichotomy between stress response and metabolically favorable
tissue development. Our findings implicate homeobox transcription factors as
important regulators of adipose tissue function.

PMCID: PMC2882947
PMID: 20543949  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. PLoS One. 2010 May 12;5(5):e10600. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0010600.

Multiple promoters and alternative splicing: Hoxa5 transcriptional complexity in 
the mouse embryo.

Coulombe Y(1), Lemieux M, Moreau J, Aubin J, Joksimovic M, Bérubé-Simard FA,
Tabariès S, Boucherat O, Guillou F, Larochelle C, Tuggle CK, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec, Québec, Canada.

BACKGROUND: The genomic organization of Hox clusters is fundamental for the
precise spatio-temporal regulation and the function of each Hox gene, and hence
for correct embryo patterning. Multiple overlapping transcriptional units exist
at the Hoxa5 locus reflecting the complexity of Hox clustering: a major form of
1.8 kb corresponding to the two characterized exons of the gene and
polyadenylated RNA species of 5.0, 9.5 and 11.0 kb. This transcriptional
intricacy raises the question of the involvement of the larger transcripts in Hox
function and regulation.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: We have undertaken the molecular characterization
of the Hoxa5 larger transcripts. They initiate from two highly conserved distal
promoters, one corresponding to the putative Hoxa6 promoter, and a second located
nearby Hoxa7. Alternative splicing is also involved in the generation of the
different transcripts. No functional polyadenylation sequence was found at the
Hoxa6 locus and all larger transcripts use the polyadenylation site of the Hoxa5 
gene. Some larger transcripts are potential Hoxa6/Hoxa5 bicistronic units.
However, even though all transcripts could produce the genuine 270 a.a. HOXA5
protein, only the 1.8 kb form is translated into the protein, indicative of its
essential role in Hoxa5 gene function. The Hoxa6 mutation disrupts the larger
transcripts without major phenotypic impact on axial specification in their
expression domain. However, Hoxa5-like skeletal anomalies are observed in Hoxa6
mutants and these defects can be explained by the loss of expression of the 1.8
kb transcript. Our data raise the possibility that the larger transcripts may be 
involved in Hoxa5 gene regulation.
SIGNIFICANCE: Our observation that the Hoxa5 larger transcripts possess a
developmentally-regulated expression combined to the increasing sum of data on
the role of long noncoding RNAs in transcriptional regulation suggest that the
Hoxa5 larger transcripts may participate in the control of Hox gene expression.

PMCID: PMC2868907
PMID: 20485555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. BMC Genomics. 2010 Mar 15;11:176. doi: 10.1186/1471-2164-11-176.

The embryonic genes Dkk3, Hoxd8, Hoxd9 and Tbx1 identify muscle types in a
diet-independent and fiber-type unrelated way.

de Wilde J(1), Hulshof MF, Boekschoten MV, de Groot P, Smit E, Mariman EC.

Author information: 
(1)Top Institute Food and Nutrition, Nutrigenomics Consortium, Wageningen, the
Netherlands. j.dewilde@hb.unimaas.nl

BACKGROUND: The mouse skeletal muscle is composed of four distinct fiber types
that differ in contractile function, number of mitochondria and metabolism. Every
muscle type has a specific composition and distribution of the four fiber types. 
To find novel genes involved in specifying muscle types, we used microarray
analysis to compare the gastrocnemius with the quadriceps from mice fed a low fat
diet (LFD) or high fat diet (HFD) for 8 weeks. Additional qPCR analysis were
performed in the gastrocnemius, quadriceps and soleus muscle from mice fed an LFD
or HFD for 20 weeks.
RESULTS: In mice fed the 8-week LFD 162 genes were differentially expressed in
the gastrocnemius vs. the quadriceps. Genes with the strongest differences in
expression were markers for oxidative fiber types (e.g. Tnni1) and genes which
are known to be involved in embryogenesis (Dkk3, Hoxd8,Hoxd9 and Tbx1). Also
Dkk2, Hoxa5, Hoxa10, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Hoxc6 and Tbx15 were detectably, but not
differentially expressed in adult muscle tissue. Expression of differentially
expressed genes was not influenced by an 8-week or 20-week HFD. Comparing
gastrocnemius, quadriceps and soleus, expression of Hoxd8 and Hoxd9 was not
related with expression of markers for the four different fiber types. We found
that the expression of both Hoxd8 and Hoxd9 was much higher in the gastrocnemius 
than in the quadriceps or soleus, whereas the expression of Dkk3 was high in
quadriceps, but low in both gastrocnemius and soleus. Finally, expression of Tbx1
was high in quadriceps, intermediate in soleus and low in gastrocnemius.
CONCLUSIONS: We found that genes from the Dkk family, Hox family and Tbx family
are detectably expressed in adult mouse muscle. Interestingly, expression of
Dkk3, Hoxd8, Hoxd9 and Tbx1 was highly different between gastrocnemius,
quadriceps and soleus. In fact, every muscle type showed a unique combination of 
expression of these four genes which was not influenced by diet. Altogether, we
conclude that genes important for embryogenesis identify mouse muscle types in a 
diet-independent and fiber type-unrelated manner.

PMCID: PMC2847971
PMID: 20230627  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Blood. 2010 Apr 8;115(14):2910-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-04-216606. Epub 2010
Feb 3.

Leukemogenic transformation by HOXA cluster genes.

Bach C(1), Buhl S, Mueller D, García-Cuéllar MP, Maethner E, Slany RK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics, University Erlangen, Erlangen, Germany.

HOX homeobox genes are important regulators of normal and malignant
hematopoiesis. Abdominal-type HOXA genes like HOXA9 are highly leukemogenic.
However, little is known about transformation by anterior HOXA genes. Here we
performed a comprehensive assessment of the oncogenic potential of every HOXA
gene in primary hematopoietic cells. With exception of HOXA2 and HOXA5, all HOXA 
genes caused a block or delay of hematopoietic differentiation and cooperated
with Meis1. No evidence for the alleged tumor-suppressor function of HOXA5 could 
be found. Whereas all active HOXA genes immortalized mixed granulocytic/monocytic
populations, HOXA13 preferentially specified monocytoid development. The anterior
HOXA genes HOXA1, HOXA4, and HOXA6 transformed cells, generating permanent cell
lines, although they did so less potently than HOXA9. Upon transplantation these 
lines induced myeloproliferation and acute myeloid leukemia in recipient animals.
Kinetic studies with inducible HOX derivatives demonstrated that anterior HOXA
genes autonomously contributed to cellular transformation. This function was not 
mediated by endogenous Hoxa9, which was persistently expressed in cells
transformed by anterior HOX genes. In summary our results demonstrate a hitherto 
unexpected role of anterior HOXA genes in hematopoietic malignancy.

PMID: 20130239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Oncol Rep. 2010 Mar;23(3):843-51.

Aberrant expressions of HOX genes in colorectal and hepatocellular carcinomas.

Kanai M(1), Hamada J, Takada M, Asano T, Murakawa K, Takahashi Y, Murai T, Tada
M, Miyamoto M, Kondo S, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Department
of Surgical Oncology, Graduate School of Medicine, Hokkaido University, Sapporo
060-0815, Japan.

HOX genes are known as master regulator genes which give cells positional
information in embryogenesis. In this study, we compared the expression patterns 
of 39 HOX genes among human colorectal carcinomas from the right large intestine 
(cecum, ascending and transverse colon), those from the left large intestine
(discending and sigmoid colon, and rectum) and hepatocellular carcinoma. The
expression levels of each HOX gene were quantified by analysis based on the
real-time RT-PCR. The expression patterns of HOX genes in colorectal and
hepatocellular carcinoma tissues differed from those in their normal or
non-cancerous tissues. Between the tumor tissues in the right-side large
intestine and those in the left-side, different HOX genes were expressed in
association with cancer. Further, the expression levels of HOXD8 in
liver-metastatic tissues of colorectal carcinomas were as low as in non-cancerous
liver tissues, and were significantly lower than those in the primary tissues.
These results suggest that dysregulated expressions of HOX genes play an
important role in carcinogenesis and malignant progression of colorectal and
hepatocellular carcinomas.

PMID: 20127028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Obesity (Silver Spring). 2010 May;18(5):872-8. doi: 10.1038/oby.2009.512. Epub
2010 Jan 28.

Adipose depots possess unique developmental gene signatures.

Yamamoto Y(1), Gesta S, Lee KY, Tran TT, Saadatirad P, Kahn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, USA.

Erratum in
    Obesity (Silver Spring). 2010 May;18(5):1064.

We have previously demonstrated that subcutaneous and intra-abdominal adipose
tissue show different patterns of expression for developmental genes (Shox2, En1,
Tbx15 Hoxa5, Hoxc8, and Hoxc9), and that the expression level of Tbx15 and Hoxa5 
in humans correlated with the level of obesity and fat distribution. To further
explore the role of these developmental genes in adipose tissue, we have
characterized their expression in different adipose depots in mice, and studied
their regulation in obesity and by fasting. Developmental and adipogenic gene
expression was compared in two subcutaneous and three intra-abdominal white
adipose tissue (WAT) depots as well as brown adipose tissue (BAT) from lean or
obese mice in a fed or fasting state. Each of these six adipose depots display a 
unique pattern of developmental gene expression, whereas expression of adipogenic
transcription factors PPARgamma2 C/EBPalpha, beta, and Delta showed constant
expression levels in all depots. Expression levels of developmental genes were
similar in obese (ob/ob and high-fat diet (HFD)) and lean mice in most depots.
Fasting systematically decreased expression of Hoxc8, PPARgamma2, and increased
C/EBPDelta in both lean and ob/ob mice, but produced only variable changes in the
expression of other developmental and adipogenic genes. These data indicate that 
each fat depot has a unique developmental gene expression signature, which is
largely independent of nutritional state. This finding further supports a
fundamental role of developmental genes in fat distribution and the development
and/or function of specific adipose tissue depots.

PMCID: PMC4377838
PMID: 20111017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Am J Pathol. 2010 Feb;176(2):995-1005. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2010.090499. Epub 2009
Dec 30.

Influence of Hoxa5 on p53 tumorigenic outcome in mice.

Gendronneau G(1), Lemieux M, Morneau M, Paradis J, Têtu B, Frenette N, Aubin J,
Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec, Canada G1R 2J6.

Hox genes encode transcription factors of crucial importance in the pattern
formation of a large spectrum of species. Several studies have now proposed a
role for these developmental genes in cancer biology. It has been suggested that 
HOXA5 possesses growth-suppressive properties through activation of p53
expression in human breast tissue. To assess the genetic cooperation that may
exist between Hoxa5 and p53 in tumorigenesis, we generated Hoxa5/p53 compound
mutant mice. The presence of Hoxa5 null alleles increased the susceptibility of
p53(-/-) mice to develop tumors with a high prevalence for thymic lymphoma,
suggesting that the loss of function of the two genes collaborate in tumor
formation. To extend our analysis to mammary tumorigenesis, we performed
Hoxa5/p53 whole mammary gland transplantations into wild-type hosts. In the
p53(-/-) background, the presence of one Hoxa5 mutant allele had no impact on
mammary tumor formation. In contrast, the complete loss of Hoxa5 function
influenced the tumorigenic outcome of p53(+/-) mammary glands. However, the
collaborative nature of this interaction did not depend on the transcriptional
regulation of p53 by Hoxa5. Altogether, our data establish that Hoxa5 and p53
cooperate in mammary tumorigenesis in vivo.

PMCID: PMC2808102
PMID: 20042682  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. PLoS One. 2009 Oct 28;4(10):e7639. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0007639.

Retinoic acid mediates long-paced oscillations in retinoid receptor activity:
evidence for a potential role for RIP140.

Heim KC(1), Gamsby JJ, Hever MP, Freemantle SJ, Loros JJ, Dunlap JC, Spinella MJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Hanover, New Hampshire, USA.

BACKGROUND: Mechanisms that underlie oscillatory transcriptional activity of
nuclear receptors (NRs) are incompletely understood. Evidence exists for rapid,
cyclic recruitment of coregulatory complexes upon activation of nuclear
receptors. RIP140 is a NR coregulator that represses the transactivation of
agonist-bound nuclear receptors. Previously, we showed that RIP140 is inducible
by all-trans retinoic acid (RA) and mediates limiting, negative-feedback
regulation of retinoid signaling.
METHODOLOGY AND FINDINGS: Here we report that in the continued presence of RA,
long-paced oscillations of retinoic acid receptor (RAR) activity occur with a
period ranging from 24 to 35 hours. Endogenous expression of RIP140 and other
RA-target genes also oscillate in the presence of RA. Cyclic retinoid receptor
transactivation is ablated by constitutive overexpression of RIP140. Further,
depletion of RIP140 disrupts cyclic expression of the RA target gene HOXA5.
Evidence is provided that RIP140 may limit RAR signaling in a selective,
non-redundant manner in contrast to the classic NR coregulators NCoR1 and SRC1
that are not RA-inducible, do not cycle, and may be partially redundant in
limiting RAR activity. Finally, evidence is provided that RIP140 can repress and 
be induced by other nuclear receptors in a manner that suggests potential
participation in other NR oscillations.
CONCLUSIONS AND SIGNIFICANCE: We provide evidence for novel, long-paced
oscillatory retinoid receptor activity and hypothesize that this may be paced in 
part, by RIP140. Oscillatory NR activity may be involved in mediating hormone
actions of physiological and pathological importance.

PMCID: PMC2763268
PMID: 19862326  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. J Nutr Biochem. 2010 Aug;21(8):710-6. doi: 10.1016/j.jnutbio.2009.04.011. Epub
2009 Jul 18.

Suppression of retinoic acid receptors may contribute to embryonic skeleton
hypoplasia in maternal rats with chronic vitamin A deficiency.

Li N(1), Sun S, Wang D, Yao P, Yang X, Yan H, Du Y, Ying C, Liu L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Nutrition and Food Hygiene, School of Public Health, Tongji
Medical College, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, PR China.

Vitamin A (VA) is essential for embryonic development and the retinoic acid
receptors (RARs) are crucial in mediating the diverse actions of VA in
embryogenesis. However, the association between RARs and teratogenicity on
skeleton growth and development of vitamin A deficiency (VAD) is not clear. In
this present study, weaning female Sprague-Dawley rats were fed purified diets
containing graded levels of VA (0, 0.4, 4 IU/g diet) for 70 days before mating,
and some of them were supplemented with VA (10 IU/g diet) through pregnancy.
Embryos were recovered at embryonic day 19.5 (E19.5) for the analysis of skeleton
growth and development and the E12.5 embryos were collected for analysis of
select mRNA of RARalpha, RARbeta, RARgamma, Hoxa2, Hoxa5 and Hoxa9. Normal gene
expressions and morphogenesis were observed in all embryos from group fed 4 IU/g 
diet. The embryos from group fed VA-free diet showed a comprehensive suppression 
of all the genes and general fetal resorption. The embryos from group fed 0.4
IU/g diet exhibited a moderate down-regulation on RARbeta, RARgamma, Hoxa2 and
Hoxa5, and the E19.5 fetuses displayed a series of skeletal hypoplasia. The VA
supplement groups fed 10 IU/g diet displayed normal gene expressions and
morphologic appearances. These findings suggested that the suppression of RARs
resulted from VAD could disturb the proper expression of homeobox genes, which
might, at least in part, contribute to the embryonic skeletal hypoplasia due to
maternal rats with chronic VAD.

Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

PMID: 19616926  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Mol Carcinog. 2009 Dec;48(12):1109-15. doi: 10.1002/mc.20561.

Epigenetic inactivation of Homeobox A5 gene in nonsmall cell lung cancer and its 
relationship with clinicopathological features.

Kim DS(1), Kim MJ, Lee JY, Lee SM, Choi JY, Yoon GS, Na YK, Hong HS, Kim SG, Choi
JE, Lee SY, Park JY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy, Kyungpook National University, Daegu 702-422, Republic 
of Korea.

Promoter methylation is an important mechanism in gene silencing and is a key
epigenetic event in cancer development. Homeobox A5 (HOXA5) is a master regulator
of the morphogenesis and cell differentiation to be implicated as a tumor
suppressor gene in breast cancer, but its role in lung cancer is still unknown.
In this study, we have investigated the methylation status of the promoter region
of the HOXA5 gene in nonsmall cell lung cancers (NSCLCs) using nested and
standard methylation-specific PCR (MSP) and correlated the methylation status
with clinicopathological features. With standard MSP analysis, HOXA5 methylation 
were found in 113 (81.3%) of 139 NSCLCs and 72 (51.8%) in their corresponding
nonmalignant lung tissues. RT-PCR and immunohistochemical analysis showed that
HOXA5 methylation correlates with gene expression. Moreover, in the patients with
stage I disease, HOXA5 methylation was more frequent in smokers than in
never-smokes (P = 0.01). There was no influence of HOXA5 methylation on survival 
in all NSCLCs or at stages II-IV. However, in the patients with stage I disease, 
HOXA5 methylation was associated with a borderline significantly worse survival
(P = 0.09). These findings suggest that downregulation of the HOXA5 gene by
aberrant promoter methylation occurs in the vast majority of NSCLCs and that it
may play a role in the pathogenesis of NSCLC. Additional studies with larger
sample sizes are required to evaluate the prognostic value of HOXA5 methylation
in patients with stage I NSCLC.

PMID: 19554572  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. J Neuropathol Exp Neurol. 2009 Jun;68(6):626-32. doi:
10.1097/NEN.0b013e3181a491ce.

Restoring transcription factor HoxA5 expression inhibits the growth of
experimental hemangiomas in the brain.

Zhu Y(1), Cuevas IC, Gabriel RA, Su H, Nishimura S, Gao P, Fields A, Hao Q, Young
WL, Yang GY, Boudreau NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Cerebrovascular Research, Department of Anesthesia and
Perioperative Care, University of California, San Francisco, California, USA.

Hemangiomas are angiogenesis-dependent benign vascular tumors that can rupture
and cause intracranial hemorrhages. We previously showed that the transcription
factor homeobox A5 (HoxA5), which is absent in activated angiogenic endothelial
cells can block angiogenesis. Here, we investigated whether restoring expression 
of HoxA5 blocks hemangioma growth by transplanting mouse hemangioendothelioma
endothelial cells (EOMA) or HoxA5-expressing EOMA cells into the brains of mice. 
The EOMA cells induced brain hemangiomas characterized by large cystlike spaces
lined by thin walls of endothelial cells surrounded by scant smooth muscle cells.
When HoxA5-expressing EOMA cells were injected, lesion volumes were reduced
between 5- and 20-fold compared with the EOMA control group (p < 0.05).
Restoration of HoxA5 was associated with increased thrombospondin-2, which
inhibits angiogenesis and reduced hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha expression.
These data suggest that restoring HoxA5 can attenuate experimental brain
hemangioma development.

PMCID: PMC2728585
PMID: 19458547  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Blood. 2009 Jul 16;114(3):651-8. doi: 10.1182/blood-2009-03-209395. Epub 2009 May
14.

Global reduction of the epigenetic H3K79 methylation mark and increased
chromosomal instability in CALM-AF10-positive leukemias.

Lin YH(1), Kakadia PM, Chen Y, Li YQ, Deshpande AJ, Buske C, Zhang KL, Zhang Y,
Xu GL, Bohlander SK.

Author information: 
(1)State Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology, Institute of Biochemistry and Cell 
Biology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 320 Yueyang Road, Shanghai, China.

Chromosomal translocations generating fusion proteins are frequently found in
human leukemias. The fusion proteins play an important role in leukemogenesis by 
subverting the function of one or both partner proteins. The leukemogenic
CALM-AF10 fusion protein is capable of interacting with the histone H3 lysine 79 
(H3K79)-specific methyltransferase hDOT1L through the fused AF10 moiety. This
interaction leads to local H3K79 hypermethylation on Hoxa5 loci, which
up-regulates the expression of Hoxa5 and contributes to leukemogenesis. However, 
the long latency of leukemogenesis of CALM-AF10 transgenic mice suggests that the
direct effects of fusion oncogene are not sufficient for the induction of
leukemia. In this study, we show that the CALM-AF10 fusion protein can also
greatly reduce global H3K79 methylation in both human and murine leukemic cells
by disrupting the AF10-mediated association of hDOT1L with chromatin. Cells with 
reduced H3K79 methylation are more sensitive to gamma-irradiation and display
increased chromosomal instability. Consistently, leukemia patients harboring
CALM-AF10 fusion have more secondary chromosomal aberrations. These findings
suggest that chromosomal instability associated with global epigenetic alteration
contributes to malignant transformation in certain leukemias, and that leukemias 
with this type of epigenetic alteration might benefit from treatment regimens
containing DNA-damaging agents. This study is registered with
www.clinicaltrials.gov as NCT00266136.

PMID: 19443658  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Eur J Gastroenterol Hepatol. 2009 Sep;21(9):1016-23. doi:
10.1097/MEG.0b013e32831d7b9c.

A tumorigenic homeobox (HOX) gene expressing human gastric cell line derived from
putative gastric stem cell.

Yang YC(1), Wang SW, Wu IC, Chang CC, Huang YL, Lee OK, Chang JG, Chen A, Kuo FC,
Wang WM, Wu DC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Graduate Institute of Medicine, I-Shou
University, Taipei, Taiwan.

GOAL: Study the mechanism of gastric tumor development.
BACKGROUND: We have generated and characterized a novel human gastric cell line, 
KMU-CS12 (CS12), from an immortal cell line, KMU-CSN (CSN; formerly named as
GI2CS) which was derived from putative human gastric stem cell/progenitor cell
clone, KMU-GI2.
STUDY: The characterization of the CS12 cell line includes gene expression by
immunocytochemical staining, cell proliferation and differentiation potential,
cyotogenetic analysis by Giemsa banding and spectral karyotype analysis (SKY),
and tumorigenicity in immune-deficient congenic inbred, nude mice
(BALB/cAnN-Foxn1nu/CrlNarl). The Agilent Human 1A oligo-array and RT-PCR were
also employed to analyze the expression of homeobox (HOX) genes.
RESULTS: The CS12 gastric cell line showed cancer cell phenotypes, i.e. the
ability of anchorage-independent growth high frequency (44%) and to the
expression of Oct-4, a transcription factor expressed in embryonic stem cells and
many types of cancer cells, and tumor development in immune deficient mice. SKY
analysis indicated a characteristic duplication of the short arm of chromosome 7 
to chromosome 12. Agilent Human 1A oligo-array analysis showed that the
expression of 1145 genes was upregulated while that of 890 genes was
downregulated in CS12 cells. RT-PCR revealed that homeobox genes (HOXA4, HOXA5,
HOXA7, HOXA9, and HOXA13) were highly expressed in CS12 cells in culture, as well
as tumor tissues developed by CS12 cells in immunodeficient mice for six to eight
weeks.
CONCLUSION: Except for the duplication of the short arm of Chromosome 7 on
Chromosome12, the karyotype of the tumorigenic CS12 cells is similar to the
parental GI2 cells which are non-tumorigenic and normal in karyotype. This
chromosomal change could be the cause for the high expression of HOXA genes and
tumorigenicity of these cells found in this study. Thus HOXA genes might play an 
important role in gastric carcinogenesis.

PMID: 19424076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Mol Med Rep. 2009 Mar-Apr;2(2):241-4. doi: 10.3892/mmr_00000090.

Down-regulation of HOXA4, HOXA7, HOXA10, HOXA11 and MEIS1 during
monocyte-macrophage differentiation in THP-1 cells.

Martino V(1), Bianchera A, Reia L, Bussolati O, Fazzina R, Marino F, Montemurro
L, Tonelli R, Pession A, Gazzola GC, Sala R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Experimental Medicine, University of Parma,
I-43100 Parma, Italy.

The translocation t(9;11)(p22;q23) generates the MLL-AF9 oncogene and is commonly
associated with monocytic acute myeloid leukemia (AML-M5; FAB-classification).
For the oncogenicity of MLL-AF9, the (over)expression of several other genes,
including selected HOXA cluster genes as well as MEIS1 (a HOX cofactor), is
required. We previously showed that the down-regulation of MLL-AF9 expression is 
not obligatory for monocyte-macrophage maturation in AML-M5 cells carrying
t(9;11)(p22;q23). In this study, we analyzed the expression patterns of HOXA4, 5,
6, 7, 9, 10 and 11 (defined as 'HOXA-code' genes) and MEIS1 by semiquantitative
RT-PCR during the monocyte-macrophage differentiation induced by phorbol
12-myristate 13-acetate (PMA) in THP-1 cells carrying t(9;11)(p22;q23) and
expressing MLL-AF9. The analyses were performed in THP-1 cells expressing MLL-AF9
even after PMA treatment. The results showed that all the analyzed genes were
expressed in untreated THP-1 cells. After the induction of differentiation, we
observed a down-regulation of HOXA4, 7, 10, 11 and MEIS1, an up-regulation of
HOXA6, and no significant variation in the expression of HOXA5 and 9. These data 
indicate that the expression of most HOXA-code genes, as well as MEIS1, could be 
implicated in the differentiation blockage observed in MLL-AF9-related leukemias.

PMID: 21475819  [PubMed]


107. FEBS J. 2009 Mar;276(6):1629-40. doi: 10.1111/j.1742-4658.2009.06895.x. Epub 2009
Feb 7.

Dynamic association of MLL1, H3K4 trimethylation with chromatin and Hox gene
expression during the cell cycle.

Mishra BP(1), Ansari KI, Mandal SS.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, The University of Texas at
Arlington, Arlington 76019, TX, USA.

Mixed lineage leukemias (MLLs) are histone H3 at lysine 4 (H3K4)-specific
methylases that play a critical role in regulating gene expression in humans. As 
chromatin condensation, relaxation and differential gene expression are keys to
correct cell cycle progression, we analyzed the dynamic association of MLL and
H3K4 trimethylation at different stages of the cell cycle. Interestingly, MLL1,
which is normally associated with transcriptionally active chromatins (G1 phase),
dissociates from condensed mitotic chromatin and returns at the end of telophase 
when the nucleus starts to relax. In contrast, H3K4 trimethylation mark, which is
also normally associated with euchromatins (in G1), remains associated, even with
condensed chromatin, throughout the cell cycle. The global levels of MLL1 and
H3K4 trimethylation are not affected during the cell cycle, and H3Ser28
phosphorylation is only observed during mitosis. Interestingly, MLL target
homeobox-containing (Hox) genes (HoxA5, HoxA7 and HoxA10) are differentially
expressed during the cell cycle, and the recruitment of MLL1 and H3K4
trimethylation levels are modulated in the promoter of these Hox genes as a
function of their expression. In addition, down-regulation of MLL1 results in
cell cycle arrest at the G2/M phase. The fluctuation of H3K4 trimethylation marks
at specific promoters, but not at the global level, indicates that H3K4
trimethylation marks that are present in the G1 phase may not be the same as the 
marks in other phases of the cell cycle; rather, old marks are removed and new
marks are introduced. In conclusion, our studies demonstrate that MLL1 and H3K4
methylation have distinct dynamics during the cell cycle and play critical roles 
in the differential expression of Hox genes associated with cell cycle
regulation.

PMID: 19220463  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Neonatology. 2009;96(1):50-60. doi: 10.1159/000201739. Epub 2009 Feb 10.

Quantification of Hox and surfactant protein-B transcription during murine lung
development.

Grier DG(1), Thompson A, Lappin TR, Halliday HL.

Author information: 
(1)Regional Neonatal Unit, Royal Maternity Hospital, Grosvenor Road, Belfast BT12
6BB, UK. grier@doctors.org.uk

BACKGROUND: Genetic processes underlying fetal lung development and maturation
are incompletely understood. Better knowledge of these processes would provide
insights into the causes of lung malformations and prevention of respiratory
distress syndrome and the potential adverse effects of glucocorticoids. Hox genes
are involved in the lung branching morphogenesis and maturation of respiratory
epithelium, but their expression pattern remains to be defined.
OBJECTIVES: We hypothesized that genes involved in lung branching would be
downregulated during early development, whereas those involved in maturation
would be unchanged or upregulated.
METHODS: TaqMan real-time primers and probes were designed for all 39 murine Hox 
genes, and the murine SP-B gene and transcription profiles of these genes were
obtained from whole lungs isolated at e14.5, e16.5, e18.5, e19.5 and postnatal
days 1 and 20.
RESULTS: Hox genes in clusters A and B, specifically those between paralog groups
3 and 7, were the most represented, with Hoxa4 and Hoxa5 being the most highly
transcribed. A wave of reduced transcription in 16 Hox genes, coincident with
increased SP-B transcription, was observed with advancing gestation. Consistently
high transcription of Hoxa5 from e14.5 to postnatal day 20 may indicate that
sustained transcription is required for normal lung maturation. When e15.5 lungs 
were cultured with dexamethasone, Hoxb6, Hoxb7 and Hoxb8 levels were
significantly upregulated, creating the potential for modulation of diverse
downstream target genes.
CONCLUSIONS: Improved understanding of the genetic processes underlying lung
development afforded by our Q-PCR platform may allow development of more specific
methods for inducing fetal lung maturation.

Copyright 2009 S. Karger AG, Basel.

PMID: 19204410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2009 Feb 17;106(7):2441-6. doi:
10.1073/pnas.0813002106. Epub 2009 Feb 3.

Systems-level analysis of cell-specific AQP2 gene expression in renal collecting 
duct.

Yu MJ(1), Miller RL, Uawithya P, Rinschen MM, Khositseth S, Braucht DW, Chou CL, 
Pisitkun T, Nelson RD, Knepper MA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Kidney and Electrolyte Metabolism, National Heart, Lung, and
Blood Institute, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.

We used a systems biology-based approach to investigate the basis of
cell-specific expression of the water channel aquaporin-2 (AQP2) in the renal
collecting duct. Computational analysis of the 5'-flanking region of the AQP2
gene (Genomatix) revealed 2 conserved clusters of putative transcriptional
regulator (TR) binding elements (BEs) centered at -513 bp (corresponding to the
SF1, NFAT, and FKHD TR families) and -224 bp (corresponding to the AP2, SRF,
CREB, GATA, and HOX TR families). Three other conserved motifs corresponded to
the ETS, EBOX, and RXR TR families. To identify TRs that potentially bind to
these BEs, we carried out mRNA profiling (Affymetrix) in mouse mpkCCDc14
collecting duct cells, revealing expression of 25 TRs that are also expressed in 
native inner medullary collecting duct. One showed a significant positive
correlation with AQP2 mRNA abundance among mpkCCD subclones (Ets1), and 2 showed 
a significant negative correlation (Elf1 and an orphan nuclear receptor Nr1h2).
Transcriptomic profiling in native proximal tubules (PT), medullary thick
ascending limbs (MTAL), and IMCDs from kidney identified 14 TRs (including Ets1
and HoxD3) expressed in the IMCD but not PT or MTAL (candidate AQP2 enhancer
roles), and 5 TRs (including HoxA5, HoxA9 and HoxA10) expressed in PT and MTAL
but not in IMCD (candidate AQP2 repressor roles). In luciferase reporter assays, 
overexpression of 3 ETS family TRs transactivated the mouse proximal AQP2
promoter. The results implicate ETS family TRs in cell-specific expression of
AQP2 and point to HOX, RXR, CREB and GATA family TRs as playing likely additional
roles.

PMCID: PMC2650175
PMID: 19190182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Med Sci (Paris). 2009 Jan;25(1):77-82. doi: 10.1051/medsci/200925177.

[Hoxa5: a master gene with multifaceted roles].

[Article in French]

Boucherat O(1), Guillou F, Aubin J, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, 9, rue McMahon, Québec G1R 2J6, 
Canada.

The Hox gene family occupies a central position in the control of body patterning
by regulating the transcription of downstream effectors that, in turn, direct the
morphogenetic events leading to the complex body forms along the axes. Analysis
of Hox mutant mouse lines has revealed a panoply of phenotypes indicative of the 
broad range of Hox genes action throughout embryonic and postnatal life. Although
Hox genes have been the subject of extensive research in the last two decades,
the comprehension of the mechanisms involved in their regulation and function
still remains elusive. Here, we present an overview of our current knowledge
about one Hox gene family member, Hoxa5. The phenotypic survey of Hoxa5 mutant
mice has unveiled the crucial role of this gene in regulating morphogenesis and
specifying regional identity along the embryo. A majority of Hoxa5 mutant pups
die at birth from defective respiratory tract. Surviving mutants present
deficient alveolar septation revealing the importance of Hoxa5 during formation
and maturation of the lung. Hoxa5 also participates in the morphogenesis of the
digestive tract as well as that of the thyroid and mammary glands. Hoxa5
expression is restricted to the mesenchyme, and its action appears to be mediated
through the control of mesenchymal-epithelial interactions during organogenesis. 
The implication of Hoxa5 in tumorigenesis has also been documented. In breast
cancer, Hoxa5 down-regulation may impact on p53 gene expression, contributing to 
the oncogenic process. In contrast, the loss of Hoxa5 function limits leukaemia
associated with specific chromosomal translocations. Thus, inappropriate Hoxa5
gene expression may disrupt normal growth and differentiation programs causing
neoplasia. Hox gene function is intimately linked to its correct expression.
Regulation of Hoxa5 expression requires multiple cis-acting regions, some
encompassing coding sequences from neighboring genes. Moreover, it is complicated
by the presence of several transcription units. Together these data enlighten the
importance of Hox cluster organization in Hoxa5 function.

PMID: 19154698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. J Cell Biochem. 2009 Feb 15;106(3):427-43. doi: 10.1002/jcb.22023.

The truncated Hoxa1 protein interacts with Hoxa1 and Pbx1 in stem cells.

Fernandez CC(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College, 1300 York Avenue,
New York, New York 10065, USA.

Hox genes contain a homeobox encoding a 60-amino acid DNA binding sequence. The
Hoxa1 gene (Hox1.6, ERA1) encodes two alternatively spliced mRNAs that encode
distinct proteins, one with the homeodomain (Hoxa1-993), and another protein
lacking this domain (Hoxa1-399). The functions of Hoxa1-399 are unknown. We
detected Hoxa1-993 and Hoxa1-399 by immunoprecipitation using Hoxa1 antibodies.
To assess whether Hoxa1-399 functions in cellular differentiation, we analyzed
Hoxb1, a Hoxa1 target gene. Hoxa1-993 and its cofactor, Pbx1, bind to the Hoxb1
SOct-R3 promoter to transcriptionally activate a luciferase reporter. Results
from F9 stem cells that stably express ectopic Hoxa1-399 (the F9-399 line) show
that Hoxa1-399 reduces this transcriptional activation. Gel shift assays
demonstrate that Hoxa1-399 reduces Hoxa1-993/Pbx1 binding to the Hoxb1 SOct-R3
region. GST pull-down experiments suggest that Hoxa1-399, Hoxa1-993, and Pbx1
form a trimer. However, the F9-399 line exhibits no differences in RA-induced
proliferation arrest or endogenous Hoxb1, Pbx1, Hoxa5, Cyp26a1, GATA4, or Meis
mRNA levels when compared to F9 wild-type.

PMCID: PMC3923656
PMID: 19115252  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2008 Aug;82(8):571-84. doi:
10.1002/bdra.20481.

Unique spatial and cellular expression patterns of Hoxa5, Hoxb4, and Hoxb6
proteins in normal developing murine lung are modified in pulmonary hypoplasia.

Volpe MV(1), Wang KT, Nielsen HC, Chinoy MR.

Author information: 
(1)Div. of Newborn Medicine, Department of Pediatrics, Tufts Medical Center,
Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA. mvolpe1@tuftsmedicalcenter.org

BACKGROUND: Hox transcription factors modulate signaling pathways controlling
organ morphogenesis and maintain cell fate and differentiation in adults.
Retinoid signaling, key in regulating Hox expression, is altered in pulmonary
hypoplasia. Information on pattern-specific expression of Hox proteins in normal 
lung development and in pulmonary hypoplasia is minimal. Our objective was to
determine how pulmonary hypoplasia alters temporal, spatial, and cellular
expression of Hoxa5, Hoxb4, and Hoxb6 proteins compared to normal lung
development.
METHODS: Temporal, spatial, and cellular Hoxa5, Hoxb4, and Hoxb6 expression was
studied in normal (untreated) and nitrofen-induced hypoplastic (NT-PH) lungs from
gestational day 13.5, 16, and 19 fetuses and neonates using Western blot and
immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: Modification of protein levels and spatial and cellular Hox expression
patterns in NT-PH lungs was consistent with delayed lung development. Distinct
protein isoforms were detected for each Hox protein. Expression levels of the
Hoxa5 and Hoxb6 protein isoforms changed with development and were altered
further in NT-PH lungs. Compared to normal lungs, GD19 and neonatal NT-PH lungs
had decreased Hoxb6 and increased Hoxa5 and Hoxb4. Hoxa5 cellular localization
changed from mesenchyme to epithelia earlier in normal lungs. Hoxb4 was expressed
in mesenchyme and epithelial cells throughout development. Hoxb6 remained mainly 
in mesenchymal cells around distal airways.
CONCLUSIONS: Unique spatial and cellular expression of Hoxa5, Hoxb4, and Hoxb6
participates in branching morphogenesis and terminal sac formation. Altered Hox
protein temporal and cellular balance of expression either contributes to
pulmonary hypoplasia or functions as a compensatory mechanism attempting to
correct abnormal lung development and maturation in this condition.

Copyright 2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMCID: PMC2670891
PMID: 18553509  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. Life Sci. 2008 Jun 20;82(25-26):1288-92. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2008.04.020. Epub
2008 May 11.

Clinical significance of promoter hypermethylation of RASSF1A, RARbeta2, BRCA1
and HOXA5 in breast cancers of Indian patients.

Bagadi SA(1), Prasad CP, Kaur J, Srivastava A, Prashad R, Gupta SD, Ralhan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari
Nagar, New Delhi-110029, India.

Promoter hypermethylation of genes is implicated in the pathogenesis of many
cancers, including breast cancer. Herein, we analyzed the promoter methylation
status of a panel of critical growth regulatory genes, RASSF1A, RARbeta2, BRCA1
and HOXA5, in 54 breast cancers and 5 distant normal breast tissues of Indian
patients. The methylation data were correlated with clinicopathological
characteristics and hormone receptor status to determine the impact of
methylation in breast carcinogenesis. Promoter hypermethylation of RASSF1A was
observed in 39/54 (72%), HOXA5 in 36/54 (67%), BRCA1 in 15/54 (28%) and RARbeta2 
in 8/54 (15%) breast cancers. Our most significant findings were the association 
of RASSF1A methylation with nodal metastasis (p=0.05); and RARbeta2 methylation
with age (all tumors in patients in the older age group were methylated, p=0.04).
Further, the interactions between DNA methylation and hormone receptor biology in
breast cancer cells are beginning to be clearly understood. In this context the
association of HOXA5 methylation with loss of ERalpha (p=0.009) is noteworthy.

PMID: 18538349  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Blood. 2008 Jun 15;111(12):5672-82. doi: 10.1182/blood-2007-09-108175. Epub 2008 
Apr 3.

Leukemogenic mechanisms and targets of a NUP98/HHEX fusion in acute myeloid
leukemia.

Jankovic D(1), Gorello P, Liu T, Ehret S, La Starza R, Desjobert C, Baty F,
Brutsche M, Jayaraman PS, Santoro A, Mecucci C, Schwaller J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Research, University Hospital Basel, Basel, Switzerland.

We have studied a patient with acute myeloid leukemia (AML) and t(10;11)(q23;p15)
as the sole cytogenetic abnormality. Molecular analysis revealed a translocation 
involving nucleoporin 98 (NUP98) fused to the DNA-binding domain of the
hematopoietically expressed homeobox gene (HHEX). Expression of NUP98/HHEX in
murine bone marrow cells leads to aberrant self-renewal and a block in normal
differentiation that depends on the integrity of the NUP98 GFLG repeats and the
HHEX homeodomain. Transplantation of bone marrow cells expressing NUP98/HHEX
leads to transplantable acute leukemia characterized by extensive infiltration of
leukemic blasts expressing myeloid markers (Gr1(+)) as well as markers of the
B-cell lineage (B220(+)). A latency period of 9 months and its clonal character
suggest that NUP98/HHEX is necessary but not sufficient for disease induction.
Expression of EGFP-NUP98/HHEX fusions showed a highly similar nuclear
localization pattern as for other NUP98/homeodomain fusions, such as NUP98/HOXA9.
Comparative gene expression profiling in primary bone marrow cells provided
evidence for the presence of common targets in cells expressing NUP98/HOXA9 or
NUP98/HHEX. Some of these genes (Hoxa5, Hoxa9, Flt3) are deregulated in
NUP98/HHEX-induced murine leukemia as well as in human blasts carrying this
fusion and might represent bona fide therapeutic targets.

PMID: 18388181  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Cir Pediatr. 2007 Oct;20(4):223-8.

[The etiology of congenital diaphragmatic hernia and esophageal atresia: the Hox 
genes].

[Article in Spanish]

Martínez L(1), Martínez-Calonge W, Matesanz R, Fernández-Dumont V, Pederiva F,
Vallejo MT, Salinas J, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Departamento de Cirugía Pediátrica, Hospital Universitario La Paz, Madrid.
lmartinezm.hulp@salud.madrid.org

BACKGROUND: Prenatal administration of adriamycin or nitrofen to pregnant mice
produce in the embryos, respectively, esophageal atresia/VACTERL association (EA)
or congenital diaphragmatic hernia (CDH). Various genes and signalling pathways
like sonic hedgehog, Gli family, retinoic acid and homeotic genes have been
pointed out in the origin of these malformations. Hox genes are master regulatory
genes involved in embryo segmentation and other main development processes.
Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxc3, Hoxc4 and Hoxa5 knock-out mice show cardiac, tracheal, lung 
and diaphragmatic malformations, EA and phenotypes that resemble that of VACTERL 
syndrome. We present herein some of our findings in the expression of these genes
in both experimental models.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Pregnant mice were exposed either to 4 mg/kg of adriamycin 
or vehicle on embryonic days 7,5 and 8,5; embryos were recovered at four
endpoints (E13 to 16). On the other hand, nitrofen was given to pregnant mice on 
embryonic day 8th and embryos were recovered at E14, E16 and E19. The embryos or,
separately, their lungs and hearts, were randomly processed for
immunohistochemical or molecular biology studies (RT-PCR). We used antibodies for
Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3 proteins and specific primers for Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxb3,
Hoxb5, Hoxc4 and Hoxd3 genes.
RESULTS: EA: Upon immunohistochemistry, adriamycin-exposed embryos showed a
severe decrease in expression of Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxb3 proteins in heart, skin, 
foregut but not in the heart. RT-PCR studies showed a statistically significant
decrease of the four genes studied in the lungs of OA mice when compared to
controls. CDH: Upon RT-PCR assessment the expression of Hoxa5 and Hoxb3 were
higher in nitrofen-exposed mice than in controls on E14 and E19 and weaker on
E16. As regards immunohistochemical localization, expression of the three genes
was similar in nitrofen and control animals.
CONCLUSIONS: Both experimental models exhibit an alteration in the expression of 
several proximal Hox genes, specially in lung and car- diac tissues. The
malformations in these organs associated with CDH and EA could be in part caused 
by these alterations. Due to their specific participation in lung and foregut
morphogenesis, their study could let us to better understand the mechanisms of
CDH and EA.

PMID: 18351244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Biochem Pharmacol. 2008 Mar 1;75(5):1129-60. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2007.11.006. Epub
2007 Nov 22.

Gene expression profiling elucidates a specific role for RARgamma in the retinoic
acid-induced differentiation of F9 teratocarcinoma stem cells.

Su D(1), Gudas LJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Weill Cornell Medical College United States.

The biological effects of all-trans-retinoic acid (RA), a major active metabolite
of retinol, are mainly mediated through its interactions with retinoic acid
receptor (RARs alpha, beta, gamma) and retinoid X receptor (RXRs alpha, beta,
gamma) heterodimers. RAR/RXR heterodimers activate transcription by binding to
RA-response elements (RAREs or RXREs) in the promoters of primary target genes.
Murine F9 teratocarcinoma stem cells have been widely used as a model for
cellular differentiation and RA signaling during embryonic development. We
identified and characterized genes that are differentially expressed in F9 wild
type (Wt) and F9 RARgamma-/- cells, with and without RA treatment, through the
use of oligonucleotide-based microarrays. Our data indicate that RARgamma, in the
absence of exogenous RA, modulates gene expression. Genes such as Sfrp2, Tie1,
Fbp2, Emp1, and Emp3 exhibited higher transcript levels in RA-treated Wt,
RARalpha-/- and RARbeta2-/- lines than in RA-treated RARgamma-/- cells, and
represent specific RARgamma targets. Other genes, such as Runx1, were expressed
at lower levels in both F9 RARbeta2-/- and RARgamma-/- cell lines than in F9 Wt
and RARalpha-/-. Genes specifically induced by RA at 6h with the protein
synthesis inhibitor cycloheximide in F9 Wt, but not in RARgamma-/- cells,
included Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Gas1, Cyp26a1, Sfrp2, Fbp2, and Emp1. These genes
represent specific primary RARgamma targets in F9 cells. Several genes in the Wnt
signaling pathway were regulated by RARgamma. Delineation of the
receptor-specific actions of RA with respect to cell proliferation and
differentiation should result in more effective therapies with this drug.

PMCID: PMC2988767
PMID: 18164278  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Cell Biol Int. 2008 Jan;32(1):55-65. Epub 2007 Sep 1.

Establishment and characterisation of two novel breast cancer cell lines.

Raju Bagadi SA(1), Kaur J, Ralhan R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, Ansari
Nagar, New Delhi 110029, India.

Two novel oestrogen receptor (ER) negative breast cancer cell lines, BCa-11
(familial) and BCa-15 (sporadic) were successfully established from primary
tumours. Characterisation of these cell lines showed expression of epithelial
specific antigen and cytokeratins confirming their epithelial lineage. Analysis
of ultrastructure and anchorage independent growth confirmed the epithelial
nature and transformed phenotype of these cells. Both cell lines showed loss of
pRb, Dab2 and ERalpha and elevated levels of proliferation marker Ki67. In
addition, BCa-11 cells showed loss of HOXA5, tumour suppressor genes p16(INK4A)
and RARbeta as well as overexpression of CyclinD1. Elevation of DNMT1 and DNMT3B 
transcript levels, promoter hypermethylation of RASSF1A, RARbeta2, and HOXA5
further support their neoplastic origin. In conclusion, the two ERalpha negative 
breast cancer cell lines established herein have certain useful characteristics
that may make them valuable for understanding the mechanism of oestrogen receptor
negative breast tumours and testing new drugs.

PMID: 17959394  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. Blood. 2008 Feb 1;111(3):1217-26. Epub 2007 Oct 23.

Regulation of angiogenesis through a microRNA (miR-130a) that down-regulates
antiangiogenic homeobox genes GAX and HOXA5.

Chen Y(1), Gorski DH.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Surgical Oncology, University of Medicine and Dentistry of New
Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, The Cancer Institute of New Jersey,
New Brunswick, NJ 08901, USA.

Angiogenesis is critical to tumor progression. The homeobox gene GAX inhibits
angiogenesis in vascular endothelial cells (ECs). We have identified a microRNA
(miR-130a) that regulates GAX expression and hypothesized that it plays a major
role in modulating GAX activity in ECs. A 280-bp fragment from the GAX
3'-untranslated region (3'-UTR) containing 2 miR-130a targeting sites was
observed to be required for the rapid down-regulation of GAX expression by serum 
and proangiogenic factors, whereas the activity of the GAX promoter did not vary 
with exposure to serum or proangiogenic factors. This same 280-bp sequence in the
GAX 3'-UTR cloned into the psiCHECK2-Luciferase vector mediated serum-induced
down-regulation of the reporter gene when placed 3' of it. Finally, forced
expression of miR-130a inhibits GAX expression through this specific GAX 3'-UTR
sequence. A genome-wide search for other possible miR-130a binding sites revealed
an miR-130a targeting site in the 3'-UTR of the antiangiogenic homeobox gene
HOXA5, the expression and antiangiogenic activity of which are also inhibited by 
miR-130a. From these data, we conclude that miR-130a is a regulator of the
angiogenic phenotype of vascular ECs largely through its ability to modulate the 
expression of GAX and HOXA5.

PMCID: PMC2214763
PMID: 17957028  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Cell Adh Migr. 2007 Oct-Dec;1(4):185-95. Epub 2007 Oct 20.

HoxA5 stabilizes adherens junctions via increased Akt1.

Arderiu G(1), Cuevas I, Chen A, Carrio M, East L, Boudreau NJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, 
California 94143, USA.

Normal vascular development and angiogenesis is regulated by coordinated changes 
in cell-cell and cell-extracellular matrix (ECM) interactions. The Homeobox (Hox)
family of transcription factors coordinately regulate expression of matrix
degrading proteinases, integrins and ECM components and profoundly impact
vascular remodeling. Whereas HoxA5 is down regulated in active angiogenic
endothelial cells (EC), sustained expression of HoxA5 induces TSP-2 and blocks
angiogenesis. Since HoxA5 is also lacking in EC in proliferating hemangiomas, we 
investigated whether restoring expression of HoxA5 could normalize hemangioma
cell morphology and/or behavior. Sustained expression of HoxA5 in the murine
hemangioma cell line (EOMA) reduced their growth in vivo and promoted branching
morphogenesis in 3D BM cultures. Moreover, restoring HoxA5 expression increased
the retention of beta-catenin in adherens junctions and reduced permeability. In 
addition we also show that the HoxA5 mediated increase in stability of adherens
junctions requires Akt1 activity and introduction of constitutively active
myr-Akt in EOMA cells also increased retention of beta-catenin in adherens
junctions. Finally we show that HoxA5 increases Akt1 mRNA, protein expression and
further enhances Akt activity via a coordinate down regulation of PTEN. Together 
these results demonstrate a central role for HoxA5 in coordinating a stable
vascular phenotype.

PMCID: PMC2634105
PMID: 19262140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Cancer Res. 2007 Sep 1;67(17):8007-13.

HOXA5 acts directly downstream of retinoic acid receptor beta and contributes to 
retinoic acid-induced apoptosis and growth inhibition.

Chen H(1), Zhang H, Lee J, Liang X, Wu X, Zhu T, Lo PK, Zhang X, Sukumar S.

Author information: 
(1)The Breast Cancer Program, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns 
Hopkins, Baltimore, MD 21231-1000, USA.

The promise of retinoids as chemopreventive agents in breast cancer is based on
the differentiation and apoptosis induced upon their binding to the retinoic acid
(RA) receptor beta (RARbeta). We have previously shown that HOXA5 induces
apoptosis in breast cancer cells. In this study, we investigated whether
RA/RARbeta and HOXA5 actions intersect to induce apoptosis and differentiation in
breast cancer cells. We found that HOXA5 expression can be induced by RA only in 
RARbeta-positive breast cancer cells. We have, for the first time, identified the
RA response element in HOXA5, which was found to be located in the 3' end of the 
gene. Chromatin immunoprecipitation assays showed that RARbeta binds directly to 
this region in vivo. Overexpression of RARbeta strongly enhances RA
responsiveness, and knocking down RARbeta expression abolishes RA-mediated
induction of HOXA5 expression in breast cancer cells. In addition, there is
coordinated loss of both HOXA5 and RARbeta expression during neoplastic
transformation and progression in the breast epithelial cell model, MCF10A.
Knockdown of HOXA5 expression partially abrogates retinoid-induced apoptosis and 
promotes cell survival upon RA treatment. These results strongly suggest that
HOXA5 acts directly downstream of RARbeta and may contribute to retinoid-induced 
anticancer and chemopreventive effects.

PMID: 17804711  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Clin Cancer Res. 2007 Sep 1;13(17):5048-55.

Inactivation of HOXA genes by hypermethylation in myeloid and lymphoid malignancy
is frequent and associated with poor prognosis.

Strathdee G(1), Holyoake TL, Sim A, Parker A, Oscier DG, Melo JV, Meyer S, Eden
T, Dickinson AM, Mountford JC, Jorgensen HG, Soutar R, Brown R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Oncology and Applied Pharmacology, Cancer Research UK.
G.R.Strathdee@newcastle.ac.uk

PURPOSE: The HOX genes comprise a large family of homeodomain-containing
transcription factors, present in four separate clusters, which are key
regulators of embryonic development, hematopoietic differentiation, and
leukemogenesis. We aimed to study the role of DNA methylation as an inducer of
HOX gene silencing in leukemia.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Three hundred and seventy-eight samples of myeloid and
lymphoid leukemia were quantitatively analyzed (by COBRA analysis and
pyrosequencing of bisulfite-modified DNA) for methylation of eight HOXA and HOXB 
cluster genes. The biological significance of the methylation identified was
studied by expression analysis and through re-expression of HOXA5 in a chronic
myeloid leukemia (CML) blast crisis cell line model.
RESULTS: Here, we identify frequent hypermethylation and gene inactivation of
HOXA and HOXB cluster genes in leukemia. In particular, hypermethylation of HOXA4
and HOXA5 was frequently observed (26-79%) in all types of leukemias studied.
HOXA6 hypermethylation was predominantly restricted to lymphoid malignancies,
whereas hypermethylation of other HOXA and HOXB genes was only observed in
childhood leukemia. HOX gene methylation exhibited clear correlations with
important clinical variables, most notably in CML, in which hypermethylation of
both HOXA5 (P = 0.00002) and HOXA4 (P = 0.006) was strongly correlated with
progression to blast crisis. Furthermore, re-expression of HOXA5 in CML blast
crisis cells resulted in the induction of markers of granulocytic
differentiation.
CONCLUSION: We propose that in addition to the oncogenic role of some HOX family 
members, other HOX genes are frequent targets for gene inactivation and normally 
play suppressor roles in leukemia development.

PMID: 17785556  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Genesis. 2007 Apr;45(4):218-28.

Comparative analysis of Hoxa5 allelic series.

Tabariès S(1), Lemieux M, Aubin J, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec, Canada.

Analysis of the Hoxa5(-/-) mutants has revealed the critical role of Hoxa5 in
survival, specification of axial identity, and ontogeny of organs, including the 
respiratory tract. The presence of the selection cassette in the original
Hoxa5(-/-) mutation may interfere with the interpretation of the phenotypes. To
circumvent this aspect and to bypass the lethality of the Hoxa5 mutation, we have
designed a conditional approach and generated Hoxa5 allelic variants. The
conditional allele (Hoxa5(floxed)) behaves as a wild-type allele. In contrast,
both the Hoxa5(Delta) and the Hoxa5(floxneo) alleles are characterized by the
loss of the functional transcript and protein, the lethality due to lung defects 
and the skeletal homeotic transformations similar to those of the Hoxa5(-/-)
mutants. Analysis of neighboring Hox gene expression patterns in the Hoxa5
mutants produced further confirmed that the Hoxa5 allelic variants are true null 
alleles.

PMID: 17417799  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Exp Hematol. 2007 Apr;35(4 Suppl 1):105-16.

Constitutive activation of Flt3 and STAT5A enhances self-renewal and alters
differentiation of hematopoietic stem cells.

Moore MA(1), Dorn DC, Schuringa JJ, Chung KY, Morrone G.

Author information: 
(1)Moore Laboratory, Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY 10021, 
USA. m-moore@ski.mskcc.org

OBJECTIVE: To model human leukemogenesis by transduction of human hematopoietic
stem cells (HSC) with genes associated with leukemia and expressed in leukemic
stem cells.
METHODS: Constitutive activation of Flt3 (Flt3-ITD) has been reported in 25 to
30% of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML). Retroviral vectors expressing 
constitutively activated Flt3 and STAT5A were used to transduce human cord blood 
CD34(+) cells and HSC cell self-renewal and differentiation were evaluated.
RESULTS: We have demonstrated that retroviral transduction of Flt3 mutations into
CD34(+) cells enhanced HSC self-renewal as measured in vitro in competitive
stromal coculture and limiting-dilution week-2 cobblestone (CAFC) assays.
Enhanced erythropoiesis and decreased myelopoiesis were noted together with
strong activation of STAT5A. Consequently, transduction studies were undertaken
with a constitutively active mutant of STAT5A (STAT5A[1( *)6]) and here also a
marked, selective expansion of transduced CD34(+) cells was noted, with a massive
increase in self-renewing CAFC detectable at both 2 and 5 weeks of stromal
coculture. Differentiation was biased to erythropoiesis, including erythropoietin
independence, with myeloid maturation inhibition. The observed phenotypic changes
correlated with differential gene expression, with a number of genes
differentially regulated by both the Flt3 and STAT5A mutants. These included
upregulation of genes involved in erythropoiesis and downregulation of genes
involved in myelopoiesis. The phenotype of week-2 self-renewing CAFC also
characterized primary Flt3-ITD(+) AML bone marrow samples. Isolation of leukemic 
stem cells (LSC) with a CD34(+), CD38(-), HLA-DR(-) phenotype was undertaken with
Flt3-ITD(+) AML samples resulting in co-purification of early CAFC. Gene
expression of LSC relative to the bulk leukemic population revealed upregulation 
of homeobox genes (HOXA9, HOXA5) implicated in leukemogenesis, and hepatic
leukemia factor (HLF) involved in stem cell proliferation.
CONCLUSION: Myeloid leukemogenesis is a multi-stage process that can involve
constitutively activated receptors and downstream pathways involving STAT5, HOX
genes, and HLF.

PMID: 17379095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Oncol Rep. 2007 Apr;17(4):753-60.

Dysregulated expression of HOX and ParaHOX genes in human esophageal squamous
cell carcinoma.

Takahashi O(1), Hamada J, Abe M, Hata S, Asano T, Takahashi Y, Tada M, Miyamoto
M, Kondo S, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo 060-0815, Japan.

Homeobox genes function as master regulators in embryonic morphogenesis. We
hypothesized that homeobox genes are essential to maintain tissue- or
organ-specificity even in adult body and that the dysregulated expression of
homeobox genes results in tumor development and progression. To better understand
the roles of homeobox genes in development and progression of esophageal cancer, 
we analyzed the expression patterns of 39 HOX genes and 4 ParaHOX (CDX1, CDX2,
CDX4 and PDX1) genes in esophageal squamous cell carcinoma (ESCC) and normal
esophageal mucosa tissues. A total of 48 primary ESCC tissues and 7 normal
esophageal mucosa tissues were resected from patients who underwent radical
surgery without any preoperative chemotherapy or radiotherapy. The expression of 
HOX and ParaHOX genes were analyzed by a quantitative real-time RT-PCR method and
immunohistochemistry. The expression levels of 24 HOX genes, CDX1, CDX2 and PDX1 
were significantly higher in ESCC compared to normal mucosa (p<0.01, Mann-Whitney
U test). The Immunohistochemical study revealed that HOXA5 and D9 proteins were
more cytoplasmic in ESCC than normal mucosa cells. Our data indicate that the
disordered expression of HOX and ParaHOX genes are involved in the development of
ESCC or its malignancy.

PMID: 17342311  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Pediatr Surg Int. 2007 May;23(5):419-24.

Expression of homeotic genes Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 is decreased in the
lungs but not in the hearts of adriamycin-exposed mice.

Calonge WM(1), Martinez L, Lacadena J, Fernandez-Dumont V, Matesanz R, Tovar JA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hospital Universitario La Paz, P. de la
Castellana 261, 28046 Madrid, Spain.

Exposure of rat and mouse embryos to adriamycin (doxorubicin chlorhydrate)
induces esophageal atresia (EA) and VACTERL association. Sonic hedgehog (Shh) and
Gli2/Gli3 pathways are involved in these conditions and knockout mice for
homeotic Hox genes Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxc3, Hoxc4 and Hoxa5 show phenotypes with some
of the associated VACTERL features. This study aims at evaluating the possible
influence of Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 as upstream regulators of this complex
signalling. Pregnant mice were exposed either to 4 mg/kg of adriamycin (EA group)
or vehicle (controls) on embryonic days 7.5 and 8.5. Embryos were recovered at
four endpoints (E12.5-E15.5) and randomly assigned for immunohistochemical or
molecular biology studies. Lungs and hearts were separately harvested and
processed for Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 quantitative RT-PCR measurements.
Antibodies for Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3 proteins were used for immunohistochemical 
studies. RT-PCR studies showed a drastic and statistically significant decrease
of the four genes in the lungs of EA mice when compared to controls, with a
slight recovery from E15.5. Hearts of both groups showed a similar expression of 
all the genes throughout gestation. Control embryos expressed the hox3 paralogous
genes in heart, skin, foregut derivatives and their surrounding mesoderm through 
E12.5-E15.5 whereas adriamycin-exposed embryos showed a severe decrease in
expression of these three proteins in the same tissues but not in the heart.
Adriamycin drastically reduced the expression of Hoxa3, Hoxb3, Hoxd3 and Hoxc4 in
mice embryonic lungs. Their expression in the heart did not seem to be influenced
by adriamycin in this experimental setting.

PMID: 17211587  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Exp Hematol. 2007 Jan;35(1):56-63.

All-trans retinoic acid induces proliferation of an irradiated stem cell
supporting stromal cell line AFT024.

Cheung AM(1), Tam CK, Chow HC, Verfaillie CM, Liang R, Leung AY.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine, The University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China.

OBJECTIVE: We have previously shown that all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) enhanced 
the maintenance of early human hematopoietic progenitor cells (HPCs) in the
presence of an irradiated stromal cell line AFT024. In this study, we examined
the effects of ATRA on the stromal cell component with particular reference to
cellular proliferation and gene expression.
METHODS: Irradiated AFT024 cells were cultured in Dulbecco's Modified Eagle's
Medium supplemented with fetal bovine serum and were incubated with ATRA at 1
mumol/L up to 21 days. The cells were examined in terms of immunostaining for
proliferative cell nuclear antigen (PCNA) and BrdU incorporation, apoptosis
assay, cell cycle analysis, and gene expression using semiquantitative
reverse-transcriptase polymerase chain reaction.
RESULTS: In the control experiments, AFT024 cells lost their confluence in
culture after 15-Gy irradiation and were arrested in G2/M phase on days 7 and 21.
ATRA restored the cellular confluence with an increase in proliferation on day 21
(BrdU incorporation: 20.6-fold; PCNA staining: 51.7-fold) with reversal of cell
cycle arrest (S phase: 2.7-fold increase; G2/M phase: 2.0-fold decrease). There
was no effect on apoptosis as shown by terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase-mediated dUTP nick end labeling staining. ATRA significantly
upregulated the expression of cell cycle genes for checkpoint transition,
including cyclin A2, B2, and aurora kinase B, as well as genes associated with a 
putative role in HPC maintenance, including osteopontin, HoxA5, enhancer of zeste
homolog 2, and peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma.
CONCLUSION: We concluded that ATRA induced cellular proliferation of irradiated
AFT024 cells and expression of a number of genes whose relevance to HPC
homeostasis would have to be further examined.

PMID: 17198874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Cell Oncol. 2006;28(5-6):305-13.

Expression pattern of a homeotic gene, HOXA5, in normal breast and in breast
tumors.

Henderson GS(1), van Diest PJ, Burger H, Russo J, Raman V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

INTRODUCTION: Homeotic (HOX) gene products are now known to be functionally
associated with breast cancer biogenesis. Recent evidence has indicated that
HOXA5 regulates both p53 and progesterone receptor expression levels in breast
cancer cells. In addition, HOXA5 has been shown to interact and regulate the
activity of another protein referred to as Twist. As homeotic genes play a
pivotal role in development, we sought to decipher the expression pattern in both
normal breast tissues and in breast carcinomas.
METHODS: RT-PCR and immunohistochemistry were performed, to assay the levels of
HOXA5 expression, on a panel of normal breast tissue and its corresponding
primary breast tumors.
RESULTS AND CONCLUSIONS: We show that HOXA5 expression was maintained at stable
levels at different reproductive stages of a woman's life, except during
lactation. This evidence indicates that HOXA5 may play a role in maintaining the 
differentiated state within the breast epithelium. However, nearly 70% of all
breast carcinomas had decreased HOXA5 protein levels as compared to normal breast
tissues. In addition, we demonstrate that HOXA5 protein expression levels in
breast carcinomas inversely co-relates with Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor
(EGFR) expression. Furthermore, we found that the survival rate amongst the
different low levels of HOXA5 expressing breast tumors was not significant,
indicative of an early tumorigenesis process in the absence of innate levels of
HOXA5 in normal breast cells.

PMCID: PMC4617796
PMID: 17167183  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Development. 2006 Dec;133(24):4957-68. Epub 2006 Nov 15.

Juxtaposed Polycomb complexes co-regulate vertebral identity.

Kim SY(1), Paylor SW, Magnuson T, Schumacher A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular and Human Genetics, Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

Best known as epigenetic repressors of developmental Hox gene transcription,
Polycomb complexes alter chromatin structure by means of post-translational
modification of histone tails. Depending on the cellular context, Polycomb
complexes of diverse composition and function exhibit cooperative interaction or 
hierarchical interdependency at target loci. The present study interrogated the
genetic, biochemical and molecular interaction of BMI1 and EED, pivotal
constituents of heterologous Polycomb complexes, in the regulation of vertebral
identity during mouse development. Despite a significant overlap in
dosage-sensitive homeotic phenotypes and co-repression of a similar set of Hox
genes, genetic analysis implicated eed and Bmi1 in parallel pathways, which
converge at the level of Hox gene regulation. Whereas EED and BMI1 formed
separate biochemical entities with EzH2 and Ring1B, respectively, in
mid-gestation embryos, YY1 engaged in both Polycomb complexes. Strikingly,
methylated lysine 27 of histone H3 (H3-K27), a mediator of Polycomb complex
recruitment to target genes, stably associated with the EED complex during the
maintenance phase of Hox gene repression. Juxtaposed EED and BMI1 complexes,
along with YY1 and methylated H3-K27, were detected in upstream regulatory
regions of Hoxc8 and Hoxa5. The combined data suggest a model wherein epigenetic 
and genetic elements cooperatively recruit and retain juxtaposed Polycomb
complexes in mammalian Hox gene clusters toward co-regulation of vertebral
identity.

PMID: 17107999  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Am J Pathol. 2006 Oct;169(4):1312-27.

Impact of the loss of Hoxa5 function on lung alveogenesis.

Mandeville I(1), Aubin J, LeBlanc M, Lalancette-Hébert M, Janelle MF, Tremblay
GM, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche de L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, 9, rue McMahon, Québec, QC,
Canada, G1R 2J6.

The involvement of genes controlling embryonic processes in the etiology of
diseases often escapes attention because of the focus given to their inherent
developmental role. Hoxa5 belongs to the Hox gene family encoding transcription
factors known for their role in skeletal patterning. Hoxa5 is required for
embryonic respiratory tract morphogenesis. We now show that the loss of Hoxa5
function has severe repercussions on postnatal lung development. Hoxa5-/- lungs
present an emphysema-like morphology because of impaired alveogenesis. Chronic
inflammation characteristics, including goblet cell hyperplasia, mucus
hypersecretion, and recruitment of inflammatory cells, were also observed.
Altered cell specification during lung morphogenesis triggered goblet cell
anomalies. In addition, the defective motility of alveolar myofibroblast
precursors in the embryonic lung led to the mispositioning of the alveolar
myofibroblasts and to abnormal elastin deposition postnatally. Both goblet cell
hyperplasia and elastic fiber abnormalities contributed to the chronic
physiopathological features of Hoxa5-/- lungs. They constituted an attractive
stimulus to recruit activated macrophages that in turn generated a positive
feedback loop that perpetuated macrophage accumulation in the lung. The present
work corroborates the notion that altered Hox gene expression may predispose to
lung pathologies.

PMCID: PMC1698857
PMID: 17003488  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Leukemia. 2006 Nov;20(11):1967-77. Epub 2006 Sep 21.

Identification of Notch target genes in uncommitted T-cell progenitors: No direct
induction of a T-cell specific gene program.

Weerkamp F(1), Luis TC, Naber BA, Koster EE, Jeannotte L, van Dongen JJ, Staal
FJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, University Medical Center, Rotterdam,
The Netherlands.

Deregulated Notch signaling occurs in the majority of human T-ALL. During normal 
lymphoid development, activation of the Notch signaling pathway poses a T-cell
fate on hematopoietic progenitors. However, the transcriptional targets of the
Notch pathway are largely unknown. We sought to identify Notch target genes by
inducing Notch signaling in human hematopoietic progenitors using two different
methods: an intracellular signal through transfection of activated Notch and a
Notch-receptor dependent signal by interaction with its ligand Delta1. Gene
expression profiles were generated and evaluated with respect to expression
profiles of immature thymic subpopulations. We confirmed HES1, NOTCH1 and NRARP
as Notch target genes, but other reported Notch targets, including the genes for 
Deltex1, pre-T-cell receptor alpha and E2A, were not found to be differentially
expressed. Remarkably, no induction of T-cell receptor gene rearrangements or
transcription of known T-cell specific genes was found after activation of the
Notch pathway. A number of novel Notch target genes, including the transcription 
factor TCFL5 and the HOXA cluster, were identified and functionally tested.
Apparently, Notch signaling is essential to open the T-cell pathway, but does not
initiate the T-cell program itself.

PMID: 16990763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Nat Cell Biol. 2006 Sep;8(9):1017-24. Epub 2006 Aug 20.

Leukaemic transformation by CALM-AF10 involves upregulation of Hoxa5 by hDOT1L.

Okada Y(1), Jiang Q, Lemieux M, Jeannotte L, Su L, Zhang Y.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry & Biophysics, University of North Carolina at
Chapel Hill, Chapel Hill, NC 27599-7295, USA.

Erratum in
    Nat Cell Biol. 2006 Oct;8(10):1178.

Chromosomal translocation is a common cause of leukaemia and the most common
chromosome translocations found in leukaemia patients involve the mixed lineage
leukaemia (MLL) gene. AF10 is one of more than 30 MLL fusion partners in
leukaemia. We have recently demonstrated that the H3K79 methyltransferase hDOT1L 
contributes to MLL-AF10-mediated leukaemogenesis through its interaction with
AF10 (ref. 5). In addition to MLL, AF10 has also been reported to fuse to CALM
(clathrin-assembly protein-like lymphoid-myeloid) in patients with T-cell acute
lymphoblastic leukaemia (T-ALL) and acute myeloid leukaemia (AML). Here, we
analysed the molecular mechanism of leukaemogenesis by CALM-AF10. We demonstrate 
that CALM-AF10 fusion is both necessary and sufficient for leukaemic
transformation. Additionally, we provide evidence that hDOT1L has an important
role in the transformation process. hDOT1L contributes to CALM-AF10-mediated
leukaemic transformation by preventing nuclear export of CALM-AF10 and by
upregulating the Hoxa5 gene through H3K79 methylation. Thus, our study
establishes CALM-AF10 fusion as a cause of leukaemia and reveals that
mistargeting of hDOT1L and upregulation of Hoxa5 through H3K79 methylation is the
underlying mechanism behind leukaemia caused by CALM-AF10 fusion.

PMCID: PMC4425349
PMID: 16921363  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Carcinogenesis. 2007 Feb;28(2):299-309. Epub 2006 Jul 21.

HOXA5 is targeted by cell-type-specific CpG island methylation in normal cells
and during the development of acute myeloid leukaemia.

Strathdee G(1), Sim A, Soutar R, Holyoake TL, Brown R.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Oncology and Applied Pharmacology, CR-UK Beatson Laboratories, G61 
1BD UK. g.strathdee@beatson.gla.ac.uk

HOXA5 is a member of the HOX gene family, which is known to play key roles during
embryonic development and in differentiation of adult cells. In addition, HOXA5
has been implicated as a tumour suppressor in breast cancer and shown to
transactivate the p53 gene. CpG island methylation is a common mechanism of gene 
inactivation in tumour cells, but is rarely involved in control of
cell-type-specific (CTS) expression in normal cells. However, here we demonstrate
that HOXA5 is one of a small number of genes whose CTS expression pattern is
controlled by CTS CpG island methylation in normal cells. Furthermore, chromatin 
immunoprecipitation analysis identified novel patterns of histone modifications
associated with DNA methylation of HOXA5. High levels of methylation of histone
residues (lysine 9 and 36 of histone H3) previously associated with
transcriptional repression were present in the unmethylated, actively
transcribing state, and were then reduced following DNA methylation and gene
inactivation. Alterations to the normal patterns of HOXA5 gene methylation were
also observed in tumour cells. Quantitative analysis of HOXA5 methylation
identified the presence of limited methylation in all of the breast, lung and
ovarian tumours examined. However, methylation levels in these three tumour types
were nearly always low and comparable with that detected in the corresponding
normal tissue. In contrast, acute myeloid leukaemia (AML) samples frequently (60%
of samples) exhibited very high methylation levels, far greater than that seen in
normal haematopoietic cells, suggesting a role for hypermethylation of HOXA5 in
the development of AML, consistent with its previously identified role in
haematopoietic differentiation.

PMID: 16861263  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Neoplasia. 2006 Apr;8(4):250-8.

HOXA5 regulates hMLH1 expression in breast cancer cells.

Duriseti S(1), Winnard PT Jr, Mironchik Y, Vesuna F, Raman A, Raman V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, 340
Traylor Building, 720 Rutland Avenue, Baltimore, MD 21205, USA.

Homeobox protein HOXA5 functions as a transcriptional factor for genes that are
not only involved in segmentation identity but also in cell differentiation.
Although HOXA5 has been shown to regulate the expression of the tumor-suppressor 
protein p53, its role in breast tumorigenesis is not well understood. Using yeast
as a model system, we now demonstrate that overexpression of HOXA5 in yeast can
be used to identify downstream target genes that are homologous in humans. One
such identified gene was that of the mismatch repair pathway component MutL
homolog 1. Analysis of the promoter region of the gene for human MutL homolog 1
(hMLH1) displayed several putative HOXA5-binding sites. In transient transfection
experiments, the overexpression of HOXA5 transactivated the hMLH1
promoter-reporter construct. In addition, chromatin immunoprecipitation assay
using a human breast cancer cell line MCF-7 demonstrated that HOXA5 binds to the 
hMLH1 promoter in vivo. Furthermore, we demonstrate that, in the presence of
HOXA5, there is an increase in in vivo repair activity in MCF-7 cells. Taken
together, our results indicate that HOXA5 is a transcriptional regulator of hMLH1
in breast cancer cells.

PMCID: PMC1600677
PMID: 16756717  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Cancer Res. 2006 May 15;66(10):5495-503.

DNA methylation changes after 5-aza-2'-deoxycytidine therapy in patients with
leukemia.

Yang AS(1), Doshi KD, Choi SW, Mason JB, Mannari RK, Gharybian V, Luna R, Rashid 
A, Shen L, Estecio MR, Kantarjian HM, Garcia-Manero G, Issa JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Leukemia, The University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center,
Houston, Texas 77030, USA.

5-Aza-2'-deoxycytidine (decitabine) is postulated to have clinical activity in
myeloid leukemias via its ability to inhibit DNA methylation. To study this, we
examined DNA methylation in patients with leukemia treated with decitabine. Five 
days after the treatment, total genomic 5-methylcytosine/cytosine decreased on
average by 14% (from 4.3% to 3.7%), whereas methylation of repetitive DNA
elements showed a mean decrease of 9% and 16% for Alu and long interspersed
nucleotide elements, respectively. Methylation decreased linearly with increasing
doses between 5 and 20 mg/m(2)/d (r = 0.88; P = 0.05) but showed a plateau above 
that. Hypomethylation correlated with response in patients with acute myelogenous
leukemia treated with low doses (5-20 mg/m(2)/d), but patients with chronic
myelogenous leukemia treated with high doses (100-180 mg/m(2)/d) showed no such
correlation. Aberrant methylation of p15 (>10%) was found in 27% of patients, and
80% of these showed a decrease by at least one third, but this did not correlate 
with response. The imprinted gene H19 showed little change in methylation after
decitabine. In conclusion, we show dose-dependent hypomethylation after
decitabine at low doses. Increasing the dose, which has been shown previously to 
result in a reduced response rate, was not accompanied by further
hypomethylation.

PMID: 16707479  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Apr 25;103(17):6676-81. Epub 2006 Apr 14.

Evidence for a role of developmental genes in the origin of obesity and body fat 
distribution.

Gesta S(1), Blüher M, Yamamoto Y, Norris AW, Berndt J, Kralisch S, Boucher J,
Lewis C, Kahn CR.

Author information: 
(1)Joslin Diabetes Center and Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.

Obesity, especially central obesity, is a hereditable trait associated with a
high risk for development of diabetes and metabolic disorders. Combined gene
expression analysis of adipocyte- and preadipocyte-containing fractions from
intraabdominal and subcutaneous adipose tissue of mice revealed coordinated
depot-specific differences in expression of multiple genes involved in embryonic 
development and pattern specification. These differences were intrinsic and
persisted during in vitro culture and differentiation. Similar depot-specific
differences in expression of developmental genes were observed in human
subcutaneous versus visceral adipose tissue. Furthermore, in humans, several
genes exhibited changes in expression that correlated closely with body mass
index and/or waist/hip ratio. Together, these data suggest that genetically
programmed developmental differences in adipocytes and their precursors in
different regions of the body play an important role in obesity, body fat
distribution, and potential functional differences between internal and
subcutaneous adipose tissue.

PMCID: PMC1458940
PMID: 16617105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Dev Dyn. 2006 Jul;235(7):1858-71.

Stromal Hoxa5 function controls the growth and differentiation of mammary
alveolar epithelium.

Garin E(1), Lemieux M, Coulombe Y, Robinson GW, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec, Canada.

Erratum in
    Dev Dyn. 2007 Jul;236(7):2026.

Recent progress has enlightened the involvement of Hox genes in organogenesis.
Several Hox genes are expressed in normal and neoplastic mammary glands. Using
Hoxa5 mutant mice, we showed that Hoxa5-/- females present nursing defects.
Characterization of the Hoxa5-/- mammary gland phenotype reveals changes in
proliferation and differentiation of the epithelium of nulliparous and pregnant
Hoxa5-/- females that precede the abnormal secretory activity at parturition.
These defects likely underlie the incapacity of Hoxa5-/- dams to properly feed
their pups. Hoxa5 expression is restricted to the mammary stroma at specific
stages of mammary gland development. The loss of Hoxa5 function causes
accelerated lobuloalveolar epithelium development, a phenotype that can be
rescued upon grafting of mutant mammary epithelium into wild-type fat pads.
Conversely, reciprocal grafting experiments demonstrate that Hoxa5-/- stroma
cannot support normal proliferation of wild-type mammary epithelium. These data
establish the essential contribution of Hoxa5 to mammary epithelium instruction
by means of mesenchymal-epithelial crosstalk.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16607641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. Mol Hum Reprod. 2006 May;12(5):283-9. Epub 2006 Apr 5.

cDNA cloning and expression of the human NOBOX gene in oocytes and ovarian
follicles.

Huntriss J(1), Hinkins M, Picton HM.

Author information: 
(1)Reproduction and Early Development Research Group, Department of Obstetrics
and Gynaecology, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK. j.huntriss@leeds.ac.uk

Nobox is a homeobox gene that is preferentially expressed in the oocytes and is
essential for folliculogenesis and the regulation of oocyte-specific gene
expression in the mouse. The likely human homologue has been identified in silico
but has not as yet been confirmed experimentally. Here, we present the first cDNA
cloning and transcript expression analysis of the human NOBOX gene. Using RT-PCR,
we reveal that expression within adult human tissues is limited to the ovary,
testis and pancreas. Expression within the ovary is oocyte specific, with
expression observed from the primordial stage ovarian follicle through to the
metaphase II (MII) oocyte. In complementary studies, we reveal dynamic expression
profiles of 14 additional homeobox genes throughout human oogenesis and early
development. The expression of HOXA10 is restricted to primordial and early
primary follicles. HOXB7 is expressed from primordial and early primary stage
follicles through to germinal vesicle (GV) oocytes. Gastrulation brain homeobox 1
(GBX1) and HOXA7 genes are homeobox markers preferentially expressed by GV
oocytes. HOXA1 and HEX are homeobox markers preferentially expressed by MII
oocytes. In summary, the homeobox gene transcripts that are detected in ovarian
follicles and oocytes are distinct from those expressed in human blastocysts
(HOXB4, CDX2 and HOXC9) and granulosa cells (HOXC9, HOXC8, HOXC6, HOXA7, HOXA5
and HOXA4).

PMID: 16597639  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Genes Chromosomes Cancer. 2006 Jul;45(7):656-67.

Microarray-based survey of CpG islands identifies concurrent hyper- and
hypomethylation patterns in tissues derived from patients with breast cancer.

Piotrowski A(1), Benetkiewicz M, Menzel U, Díaz de Ståhl T, Mantripragada K,
Grigelionis G, Buckley PG, Jankowski M, Hoffman J, Bala D, Srutek E, Laskowski R,
Zegarski W, Dumanski JP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Pathology, Rudbeck Laboratory, Uppsala University, 
751 85 Uppsala, Sweden. Arek.Piotrowski@genpat.uu.se

Maintenance of CpG island methylation in the genome is crucial for cellular
homeostasis and this balance is disrupted in cancer. Our rationale was to compare
the methylation of CpG islands in tissues (tumor, healthy breast and blood) from 
patients with breast cancer. We studied 72 genes in 103 samples using microarray 
hybridization and bisulfite sequencing. We observed tumor specific hyper- or
hypomethylation of five genes; COL9A1, MT1A, MT1J, HOXA5 and FLJ45983. A general 
drop of methylation in COL9A1 was apparent in tumors, when compared with blood
and healthy breast tissue. Furthermore, one tumor displayed a complete loss of
methylation of all five genes, suggesting overall impairment of methylation. The 
downstream, evolutionary conserved island of HOXA5 showed hypomethylation in 18
tumors and complete methylation in others. This CpG island also displayed a
semimethylated state in the majority of normal breast samples, when compared to
complete methylation in blood. Distinct methylation patterns were further seen in
MT1J and MT1A, belonging to the metallothionein gene family. The CpG islands of
these genes are spaced by 2 kb, which shows selective methylation of two
structurally and functionally related genes. The promoters of FLJ45983 and MT1A
were methylated above 25% in 18 primary and metastatic tumors. Concurrently,
there was also >10% methylation of healthy breast tissue in 11 and 5 samples,
respectively. This suggests that the methylation process for the latter two genes
takes place already in normal breast cells. Our results also point to a
considerable heterogeneity of epigenetic disturbance in breast cancer. This
article contains Supplementary Material available at
http://www.interscience.wiley.com/jpages/1045-2257/suppmat.

(c) 2006 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16575877  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Oncol Rep. 2006 Apr;15(4):797-802.

Disordered expression of HOX genes in human non-small cell lung cancer.

Abe M(1), Hamada J, Takahashi O, Takahashi Y, Tada M, Miyamoto M, Morikawa T,
Kondo S, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

We hypothesized that the disordered tissue architecture in cancer results from
the cells executing the program designed during ontogeny in a spatio-temporally
inappropriate manner. HOX genes are known as master regulators of embryonic
morphogenesis, and encode transcription factors which regulate the transcription 
of the downstream genes to realize the program of body plan. In this study, we
quantified the expression levels of 39 HOX genes in 41 human non-small cell lung 
cancer (non-SCLC) and non-cancerous lung tissues by a comprehensive analysis
system based on the real-time RT-PCR method. We found that the expression levels 
of HOXA1, A5, A10 and C6 in squamous cell carcinoma tissues (and HOXA5 and A10 in
adenocarcinoma tissues) were significantly higher than those in the non-cancerous
tissues. Comparison of HOX gene expressions between adenocarcinoma and squamous
cell carcinoma tissues showed higher expressions of HOXA1, D9, D10 and D11 in
squamous cell carcinoma tissues than in adenocarcinoma tissues.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that HOXA5 and A10 proteins were localized 
in the cytoplasm of tumor cells in both adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma tissues. These results suggest that the disordered patterns of HOX gene
expressions were involved not only in the development of non-SCLC but also in the
histologically aberrant diversity such as adenocarcinoma and squamous cell
carcinoma.

PMID: 16525661  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Zhonghua Bing Li Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Sep;34(9):569-74.

[Study of HOXA5 gene expression in breast carcinoma].

[Article in Chinese]

Zeng Y(1), Yang WT, Zhang GH, Zhu XZ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, Cancer hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai 200032,
China.

OBJECTIVE: To study mRNA and protein expression of HOXA5 gene in breast
carcinoma, to correlate the expression of HOXA5 gene with clinicopathologic
parameters and to explore the possible role of HOXA5 gene in carcinogenesis,
progression and metastasis of breast carcinoma.
METHODS: TaqMan real-time reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction
(RT-PCR) was applied on 60 cases of primary breast carcinoma and 24 cases of
benign mammary lesions in order to detect mRNA expression of HOXA5 gene.
Immunohistochemical study using polyclonal antibody against HOXA5 was also
performed. Statistical analysis was carried out to analyze the correlation
between HOXA5 gene expression and various clinical parameters in these breast
cancer patients.
RESULTS: (1) The relative expression level of HOXA5 mRNA ranged from 0.73 to
193.07 (average = 20.85) in primary breast carcinoma, in contrast to 5.42 to
81.91 (average = 30.94) in benign mammary lesions. Compared with benign mammary
lesions, a significant reduction in expression of HOXA5 mRNA was noted in primary
breast carcinoma (P < 0.01). (2) There was a decreased or completely diminished
HOXA5 protein expression in breast carcinoma. (3) HOXA5 mRNA expression was
significantly lower in lymph node-positive cases, when compared with that in
lymph node-negative cases (P < 0.05). A significant difference of HOXA5 protein
expression was also observed in both groups (P < 0.01). Immunohistochemical
staining of HOXA5 was either negative or weakly positive in lymph node-positive
cases. On the other hand, moderately or strongly positive HOXA5 staining was
noted in lymph node-negative cases. (4) Neither mRNA nor protein expression of
HOXA5 gene correlated with clinicopathologic parameters such as age of patients, 
size of tumor, clinical stage, pathologic subtype or histologic grade (P > 0.05).
CONCLUSIONS: Disordered expression of HOXA5 gene may play a role in the
carcinogenesis of breast cancer. Reduced expression of HOXA5 gene may be related 
to the metastatic potential of breast carcinoma cells.

PMID: 16468307  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


141. Lymphat Res Biol. 2005;3(4):240-52.

A role for Hox A5 in regulating angiogenesis and vascular patterning.

Rhoads K(1), Arderiu G, Charboneau A, Hansen SL, Hoffman W, Boudreau N.

Author information: 
(1)Surgical Research Laboratory, Dept of Surgery, University of California-San
Francisco, San Francisco, CA 94143, USA.

BACKGROUND: Homeobox (Hox) genes are transcriptional regulators which modulate
embryonic morphogenesis and pathological tissue remodeling in adults via
regulation of genes associated with cell-cell or cell extracellular matrix (ECM) 
interactions. We previously showed that while Hox 3 genes promote angiogenesis,
Hox D10 inhibits this process.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here we show that another Hox family gene, Hox A5, also
blocks angiogenesis but accomplishes this by targeting different downstream genes
than Hox D10. Sustained expression of Hox A5 leads to down regulation of many
pro-angiogenic genes including VEGFR2, ephrin A1, Hif1alpha and COX-2. In
addition, Hox A5 also upregulates expression of anti-angiogenic genes including
Thrombospondin-2. Furthermore, we show that while Hox A5 mRNA is expressed in
quiescent endothelial cells (EC), its expression is diminished or absent in
active angiogenic EC found in association with breast tumors or in proliferating 
infantile hemangiomas.
CONCLUSIONS: Together our results suggest that restoring Hox A5 expression may
provide a novel means to limit breast tumor growth or expansion of hemangiomas.

PMID: 16379594  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


142. Exp Hematol. 2005 Nov;33(11):1402-16.

Comparative characteristics of mesenchymal stem cells from human bone marrow,
adipose tissue, and umbilical cord blood.

Wagner W(1), Wein F, Seckinger A, Frankhauser M, Wirkner U, Krause U, Blake J,
Schwager C, Eckstein V, Ansorge W, Ho AD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medicine V, University of Heidelberg, Heidelberg, Germany.

OBJECTIVE: Various preparative protocols have been proposed for the acquisition
and cultivation of mesenchymal stem cells (MSC). Whereas surface antigen markers 
have failed to precisely define this population, microarray analysis might
provide a better tool for characterization of MSC.
METHODS: In this study, we have analyzed global gene expression profiles of human
MSC isolated from adipose tissue (AT), from umbilical cord blood (CB), and from
bone marrow (BM) under two growth conditions and have compared them to terminally
differentiated human fibroblasts (HS68). Profiles were compared using our Human
Genome Microarray representing 51.144 different cDNA clones.
RESULTS: Cultured with the appropriate conditions, osteogenic and adipogenic
differentiation could be confirmed in all MSC preparations but not in
fibroblasts. No phenotypic differences were observed by flow cytometry using a
panel of 22 surface antigen markers. Whereas MSC derived from different donors
using the same culture procedure yielded a consistent and reproducible gene
expression profile, many genes were differentially expressed in MSC from
different ontogenetic sources or from different culture conditions. Twenty-five
genes were overlapping and upregulated in all MSC preparations from AT, CB, and
BM as compared to HS68 fibroblasts. These genes included fibronectin, ECM2,
glypican-4, ID1, NF1B, HOXA5, and HOXB6. Many genes upregulated in MSC are
involved in extracellular matrix, morphogenesis, and development, whereas several
inhibitors of the Wnt pathway (DKK1, DKK3, SFRP1) were highly expressed in
fibroblasts.
CONCLUSION: Our results have provided a foundation for a more reproducible and
reliable quality control using genotypic analysis for defining MSC.

PMID: 16263424  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


143. Exp Cell Res. 2005 Dec 10;311(2):251-64. Epub 2005 Oct 11.

Differentiation of murine embryonic stem cells induces progesterone receptor gene
expression.

Sauter CN(1), McDermid RL, Weinberg AL, Greco TL, Xu X, Murdoch FE, Fritsch MK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, University of
Wisconsin-Madison, 1300 University Ave., MSC 5250, Madison, WI 53706, USA.

The role of steroid hormone receptors in very early embryonic development remains
unknown. Clearly, expression during organogenesis is important for
tissue-specific development. However, progesterone receptor (PR) and estrogen
receptors (ERalpha, ERbeta) are expressed during early development through the
blastocyst stage in mice and other species, and yet are not essential for
embryonic viability. We have utilized the mouse embryonic stem (mES) cell model
to investigate the regulated expression of these receptors during
differentiation. Surprisingly, one of the earliest changes in gene expression in 
response to a differentiation signal observed is PR gene induction. It parallels 
the time course of expression for the patterning genes Hoxb1 and Hoxa5.
Unexpectedly, PR gene expression is not regulated in an estrogen-dependent manner
by endogenous ERs or by transiently overexpressed ERalpha. Our results suggest a 
potentially novel mechanism of PR gene regulation within mES cells compared to
adult tissues and the possibility of unique targets of PR action during early mES
cell differentiation.

PMCID: PMC1350973
PMID: 16223481  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


144. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2005 Oct 6;159(2):87-97.

Ectopic HOXA5 expression results in abnormal differentiation, migration and
p53-independent cell death of superficial dorsal horn neurons.

Abbott MA(1), Joksimovic M, Tuggle CK.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Genetics, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

Previously, we reported a line of mice (Hoxa5SV2) that ectopically expresses
HOXA5 in the developing cervical and brachial dorsal spinal cord. Animals from
this line exhibited a clear loss of cells in the outer lamina of the mature
dorsal horn that coincided with an adult phenotype of sensory and motor defects
of the forelimb. In this report, we examined the etiology of lost dorsal horn
cells. Cells normally fated to populate the outer laminae I-III of the dorsal
horn migrated inappropriately, as the percentage of laterally positioned cells in
the dorsal horn was significantly reduced in Hoxa5SV2 transgenics. Apoptosis was 
a major cause of cell loss while proliferation of neurons was not affected in
Hoxa5SV2 animals. Although Hoxa5 has been shown in vitro to regulate p53
expression and cause p53-dependent apoptosis, p53 was not required in vivo for
the inappropriate apoptosis seen in Hoxa5SV2 mice, or for the normal death of
motor neurons. Normal apoptosis is not dependent on Hoxa5, as the level of
ventral horn motor neuron apoptosis was not changed in Hoxa5 null animals. As a
possible cause of aberrant migration and/or apoptosis of dorsal neurons,
misexpression of cell type markers was demonstrated. Further, the expression
pattern of laminar markers was altered and sensory fibers aberrantly penetrated
the outer lamina of mutants. Our evidence suggests that the loss of dorsal horn
neurons in Hoxa5SV2 mutants was due to misexpression of dorsal horn neuronal
markers, aberrant migration, and inappropriate apoptosis.

PMID: 16139370  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


145. Leukemia. 2005 Nov;19(11):1948-57.

CALM-AF10+ T-ALL expression profiles are characterized by overexpression of HOXA 
and BMI1 oncogenes.

Dik WA(1), Brahim W, Braun C, Asnafi V, Dastugue N, Bernard OA, van Dongen JJ,
Langerak AW, Macintyre EA, Delabesse E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Immunology, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

The t(10;11)(p13;q14-21) is found in T-ALL and acute myeloid leukemia and fuses
CALM (Clathrin-Assembly protein-like Lymphoid-Myeloid leukaemia gene) to AF10. In
order to gain insight into the transcriptional consequences of this fusion,
microarray-based comparison of CALM-AF10+ vs CALM-AF10- T-ALL was performed. This
analysis showed upregulation of HOXA5, HOXA9, HOXA10 and BMI1 in the CALM-AF10+
cases. Microarray results were validated by quantitative RT-PCR on an independent
group of T-ALL and compared to mixed lineage leukemia-translocated acute
leukemias (MLL-t AL). The overexpression of HOXA genes was associated with
overexpression of its cofactor MEIS1 in CALM-AF10+ T-ALL, reaching levels of
expression similar to those observed in MLL-t AL. Consequently, CALM-AF10+ T-ALL 
and MLL-t AL share a specific HOXA overexpression, indicating they activate
common oncogenic pathways. In addition, BMI1, located close to AF10 breakpoint,
was overexpressed only in CALM-AF10+ T-ALL and not in MLL-t AL. BMI1 controls
cellular proliferation through suppression of the tumor suppressors encoded by
the CDKN2A locus. This locus, often deleted in T-ALL, was conserved in CALM-AF10+
T-ALL. This suggests that decreased CDKN2A activity, as a result of BMI1
overexpression, contributes to leukemogenesis in CALM-AF10+ T-ALL. We propose to 
define a HOXA+ leukemia group composed of at least MLL-t, CALM-AF10 and HOXA-t
AL, which may benefit from adapted management.

PMID: 16107895  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


146. Eur J Cell Biol. 2005 Jun;84(5):555-66.

Homeobox B3, FoxA1 and FoxA2 interactions in epithelial lung cell differentiation
of the multipotent M3E3/C3 cell line.

Yoshimi T(1), Nakamura N, Shimada S, Iguchi K, Hashimoto F, Mochitate K,
Takahashi Y, Miura T.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Environmental Molecular Physiology, School of Life Science,
Tokyo University of Pharmacy and Life Science, 1432-1 Horinouchi, Hachioji, Tokyo
192-0392, Japan. vzz05106@nifty.com

HOM/C homeobox (Hox) and forkhead box (Fox) factors are reported to be expressed 
in the foregut endoderm and are subsequently detected in a spatio-temporal
pattern during lung development. Some of these factors were reported to influence
the expression of lung marker proteins or to modulate lung development. To
clarify the molecular mechanisms for generating functional lung cells from
progenitor cell populations, we introduced the forkhead box factors, FoxA1 and
FoxA2, and the homeobox factor, HoxB3, into the differentiation process in a
multipotent hamster lung epithelial M3E3/C3 cell line. Ectopic expression of
FoxA2 promoted differentiation to Clara-like cells with up-regulation of the
expression of the lung marker proteins, Clara cell-specific 10-kDa protein and
surfactant protein-B. In contrast, FoxA1 repressed the differentiation. HoxB3
transfection induced FoxA2 expression transiently at the pre-differentiation
stage. The endogenous HoxB3 expression level decreased at later stages of
Clara-like cell differentiation, and the attenuation was enhanced by FoxA2
transfection. HoxB3 is a putative upstream regulator that enhances FoxA2
expression at the pre-differentiation stage. In addition, we found that the
expression of HoxA4, HoxA5, and HoxC9 increased differentially during Clara-like 
cell differentiation. These results suggest that HoxB3 may be a putative positive
regulator of FoxA2 expression at the pre-differentiation stage, and those
interactions of Fox factors and Hox factors could participate in Clara cell
differentiation.

PMID: 16003909  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


147. Gene Expr Patterns. 2005 Aug;5(6):792-800.

Dynamic expression of murine HOXA5 protein in the central nervous system.

Joksimovic M(1), Jeannotte L, Tuggle CK.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Genetics and Department of Animal Science, Iowa State
University, 2255 Kildee Hall, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

The Hox genes encode transcription factors that are indispensable for proper
spatio-temporal patterning of the vertebrate body axes. As for other Hox genes,
region-specific expression of Hoxa5 appears to be important for correct function 
during development. In mouse, Hoxa5 transcripts are differentially expressed in
specific mesoderm-derived structures and in the most anterior domain of
expression in the central nervous system (CNS), in contrast to indistinct
patterns seen in the posterior CNS. However, the functional significance of any
pattern of protein-coding RNAs must be verified by correlating the presence of
the protein(s) and RNAs. Here, we describe the dynamic pattern of HOXA5 protein
during mouse embryogenesis. The HOXA5 protein is detected as early as embryonic
day (E) 9.0, and is found, as development proceeds, in several mesoderm-derived
structures such as prevertebrae (pv), proximal forelimb bud, scapula, lung,
trachea, and gut. In addition, the protein shows a strikingly restricted and
dynamic expression pattern in the developing CNS, and is detected in both motor
neurons and interneurons between E10.5 and E13.5. Moreover, this CNS
region-specific HOXA5 protein pattern is more restricted than the pattern
observed for the Hoxa5 transcripts. In many mesoderm-derived tissues affected by 
the Hoxa5 mutation, the expression pattern of HOXA5 protein corresponds to that
of the putative functional Hoxa5 transcript. However, in the CNS, this
correlation is exclusively demonstrated in the most anterior domain of
expression. Overall, the HOXA5 protein pattern is consistent with its proposed
role in positional specification in mesodermal structures, as well as in the
embryonic neuraxis.

PMID: 15922675  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


148. Clin Cancer Res. 2005 May 1;11(9):3535-42.

Epigenetic modulation of retinoic acid receptor beta2 by the histone deacetylase 
inhibitor MS-275 in human renal cell carcinoma.

Wang XF(1), Qian DZ, Ren M, Kato Y, Wei Y, Zhang L, Fansler Z, Clark D, Nakanishi
O, Pili R.

Author information: 
(1)Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns Hopkins, Baltimore,
Maryland, USA.

PURPOSE: Histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors have been shown to reverse
epigenetic repression of certain genes, including retinoic acid receptor beta2
(RARbeta2). In this study, we examined whether RARbeta2 expression is repressed
in human renal cell carcinoma (RCC) and whether the HDAC inhibitor MS-275 may
revert its epigenetic repression.
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN: Six human tumor RCC cell lines were analyzed for RARbeta2
gene expression and for methylation and acetylation status at the promoter level.
Modulation of RARbeta2 expression and correlation with antitumor activity by
combination of MS-275 with 13-cis-retinoic acid (CRA) was assessed in a
RARbeta2-negative RCC cell line.
RESULTS: RARbeta2 expression was either strongly present, weakly expressed, or
absent in the RCC cell lines analyzed. Methylation-specific PCR indicated that
the RARbeta2 promoter was partially methylated in three of the cell lines. CRA
treatment did not inhibit clonogenic growth in the RARbeta2-negative cell line
RCC1.18, whereas MS-275 induced a dose-dependent inhibitory effect. A greater
inhibitory effect was observed with combination treatment (MS-275 + CRA).
Treatment with MS-275 was associated with histone acetylation at the promoter
level and synergistic gene reexpression of RARbeta2 in combination with CRA.
RARbeta2 reexpression was associated with synergistic induction of the
retinoid-responsive gene HOXA5. In vivo, single-agent CRA treatment showed no
significant effect, whereas MS-275 and the combination induced a regression of
RCC1.18 tumor xenografts. Discontinuation of treatment produced tumor recurrence 
in MS-275-treated mice, whereas animals treated with the combination remained
tumor free.
CONCLUSION: The HDAC inhibitor MS-275 seems to revert retinoid resistance due to 
epigenetic silencing of RARbeta2 in a human RCC model and has greater antitumor
activity in combination with CRA compared with single agents. Thus, the
combination of HDAC inhibitors and retinoids may represent a novel therapeutic
approach in patients with RCC.

PMID: 15867257  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


149. J Biol Chem. 2005 May 13;280(19):19373-80. Epub 2005 Mar 9.

Identification of transcriptional targets of HOXA5.

Chen H(1), Rubin E, Zhang H, Chung S, Jie CC, Garrett E, Biswal S, Sukumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Program, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center, The Johns
Hopkins Hospital, Baltimore, Maryland 21231-1000, USA.

The homeobox gene HOXA5 encodes a transcription factor that has been shown to
play important roles in embryogenesis, hematopoiesis, and tumorigenesis. In order
to decipher downstream signaling pathways of HOXA5, we utilized oligonucleotide
microarray analysis to identify genes that are differentially expressed in
HOXA5-induced cells compared with uninduced cells. Comparative analysis of gene
expression changes after 9 h of HOXA5 induction in Hs578T breast cancer cells
identified 306 genes whose expression was modulated at least 2-fold. Ten of these
306 genes were also up-regulated by at least 2-fold at 6 h post-induction. The
expression of all of these 10 genes was confirmed by semiquantitative reverse
transcription-PCR. Among these 10 genes, which are most likely to be direct
targets of HOXA5, we initiated an investigation into the pleiotrophin gene by
first cloning its promoter. Transient transfection assays indicated that HOXA5
can specifically activate the pleiotrophin promoter. Promoter deletion, chromatin
immunoprecipitation assay, and gel-shift assays were performed to show that HOXA5
can directly bind to one binding site on the pleiotrophin promoter. These data
strongly suggest that microarray analysis can successfully identify many
potential direct downstream genes of HOXA5. Further functional analysis of these 
targets will allow us to better understand the diverse functions of HOXA5 in
embryonic development and tumorigenesis.

PMID: 15757903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


150. Cancer Res. 2005 Mar 1;65(5):1619-26.

Gene expression profiles in pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia reflect the
effects of Hedgehog signaling on pancreatic ductal epithelial cells.

Prasad NB(1), Biankin AV, Fukushima N, Maitra A, Dhara S, Elkahloun AG, Hruban
RH, Goggins M, Leach SD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore,
Maryland 21287, USA.

Invasive pancreatic cancer is thought to develop through a series of noninvasive 
duct lesions known as pancreatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PanIN). We used cDNA 
microarrays interrogating 15,000 transcripts to identify 49 genes that were
differentially expressed in microdissected early PanIN lesions (PanIN-1B/2)
compared with microdissected normal duct epithelium. In this analysis, a cluster 
of extrapancreatic foregut markers, including pepsinogen C, MUC6, KLF4, and TFF1,
was found to be up-regulated in PanIN. Up-regulation of these genes was further
validated using combinations of real-time reverse transcription-PCR, in situ
hybridization, and immunohistochemistry in a total of 150 early PanIN lesions
from 81 patients. Identification of these gastrointestinal transcripts in human
PanIN prompted assessment of other foregut markers by both semiquantitative and
real-time reverse transcription-PCR, revealing similar up-regulation of Sox-2,
Gastrin, HoxA5, GATA4/5/6, Villin and Forkhead 6 (Foxl1). In contrast to frequent
expression of multiple gastric epithelial markers, the intestinal markers
intestinal fatty acid binding protein, CDX1 and CDX2 were rarely expressed either
in PanIN lesions or in invasive pancreatic cancer. Hedgehog pathway activation
induced by transfection of immortalized human pancreatic ductal epithelial cells 
with Gli1 resulted in up-regulation of the majority of foregut markers seen in
early PanIN lesions. These data show frequent up-regulation of foregut markers in
early PanIN lesions and suggest that PanIN development may involve
Hedgehog-mediated conversion to a gastric epithelial differentiation program.

PMID: 15753353  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


151. Mol Cell Biol. 2005 Feb;25(4):1389-401.

Cdx protein interaction with Hoxa5 regulatory sequences contributes to Hoxa5
regional expression along the axial skeleton.

Tabariès S(1), Lapointe J, Besch T, Carter M, Woollard J, Tuggle CK, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche de L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, 9 rue McMahon, Québec, QC G1R
2J6, Canada. lucie.jeannotte@crhdq.ulaval.ca.

Hox gene functions are intimately linked to correct developmental expression of
the genes. The identification of cis-acting regulatory sequences and their
associated trans-acting factors constitutes a key step in deciphering the
mechanisms underlying the correct positioning of the functional domain of Hox
genes along the anterior-posterior axis. We have identified DNA elements driving 
Hoxa5 regionalized expression in mice, using the 2.1-kb mesodermal enhancer (MES)
localized in Hoxa5 3' flanking sequences as a starting point. The MES sequence
comprises regulatory elements targeting Hoxa5 expression in the limbs, the
urogenital and gastrointestinal tracts, and the cervical-upper thoracic region of
the prevertebral column. A 164-bp DNA fragment within the MES caudally restricts 
Hoxa5 expression at the level of prevertebra 10, corresponding to the posterior
limit of its functional domain. Cdx proteins directly bind to this element in
vitro via two conserved sites. Preventing Cdx binding by mutating the sites
causes caudal expansion of the transgene expression domain. Of all three murine
Cdx proteins that bind this element in vitro, Cdx4 has emerged as a potential
regional posterior repressor of Hoxa5 expression. The restrictive control
provided by Cdx interactions with Hoxa5 regulatory sequences may be one of the
critical events in cervicothoracic axial specification.

PMCID: PMC548006
PMID: 15684390  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


152. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jan 21;280(3):2294-9. Epub 2004 Nov 15.

HOXA5-twist interaction alters p53 homeostasis in breast cancer cells.

Stasinopoulos IA(1), Mironchik Y, Raman A, Wildes F, Winnard P Jr, Raman V.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Radiology, Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine,
Baltimore, Maryland 21205, USA.

The homeotic gene HOXA5 has been shown to play an important role in breast
tumorigenesis. We have shown that loss of p53 correlated with loss of a
developmentally regulated transcription factor, HOXA5, in primary breast cancer. 
Searching for potential protein interacting partners we found that HOXA5 binds to
an anti-apoptotic protein, Twist. Furthermore, Twist-overexpressing MCF-7 cells
displayed a deregulated p53 response to gamma-radiation and decreased regulation 
of downstream target genes. Using a p53-promoter-reporter system, we demonstrated
that HOXA5 could partially restore the inhibitory effects of Twist on p53 target 
genes. These effects are likely mediated through both the transcriptional
up-regulation of p53 and the protein-protein interaction between HOXA5 and Twist.
Thus, the loss of HOXA5 expression could lead to the functional activation of
Twist resulting in aberrant cell cycle regulation and promoting breast
carcinogenesis.

PMID: 15545268  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


153. Mol Carcinog. 2004 Sep;41(1):54-66.

Increased DNA methylation in the HoxA5 promoter region correlates with decreased 
expression of the gene during tumor promotion.

Watson RE(1), Curtin GM, Hellmann GM, Doolittle DJ, Goodman JI.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan State University, East
Lansing, Michigan 48824, USA.

Promoter-region DNA methylation inhibits transcription. A two-stage SENCAR
(sensitive to mouse carcinogenesis) mouse skin carcinogenicity model was used to 
examine gene-specific changes in methylation during skin tumor promotion.
Analysis was performed on 7,12-dimethylbenz[a]anthracene (DMBA)-initiated skin
promoted with 9, 18, 27, or 36 mg cigarette smoke condensate (CSC) for 9 wk, or
27 mg CSC for 9 wk and sacrificed 6 wk afterwards (recovery group). Additionally,
tumors arising following promotion with 27 mg CSC for 29 wk were assessed. Gene
array analysis identified differentially expressed genes. Expression of HoxA5, a 
tumor suppressor gene, was decreased following 9 wk of treatment with 27 mg CSC, 
and returned to control levels during recovery. HoxA5 promoter methylation was
measured with the enzymatic regional methylation assay (ERMA). DNA was
bisulfite-modified, PCR-amplified with primers containing dam sites, incubated
with [14C-methyl] S-adenosyl-L-methionine (SAM) and dam methyltransferase for DNA
quantification, then incubated with [3H-methyl] SAM and SssI methylase to
quantify methylation status. Higher 3H/14C ratios indicate increased methylation.
The 3H/14C ratios of animals promoted with 27 or 36 mg CSC (48.2 +/- 6.9 and 24.2
+/- 6.1, respectively) were higher than the control or recovery group ratios
(12.3 +/- 0.1 and 12.6 +/- 0.3, respectively); sequence analysis supported these 
findings. Increased methylation of p16 or O6 methylguanine methyltranferase
(MGMT) was detected in 4/8 (50%) of the tumor samples from mice promoted with 27 
mg CSC. These data suggest that increased DNA methylation contributes to the
downregulation of HoxA5, and combined with hypermethylation of p16 or MGMT, this 
might facilitate the clonal expansion of increasingly aberrant cells during
promotion.

Copyright 2004 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15352125  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


154. Pediatr Res. 2004 Oct;56(4):553-62. Epub 2004 Aug 4.

Respiratory adaptations to lung morphological defects in adult mice lacking Hoxa5
gene function.

Kinkead R(1), LeBlanc M, Gulemetova R, Lalancette-Hébert M, Lemieux M, Mandeville
I, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Département de Pédiatrie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de Québec, Centre
de recherche de l'Hôpital St-François d'Assise, Québec, Canada, G1L 3L5.
Richard.Kinkead@crsfa.ulaval.ca

The Hoxa5 mutation is associated with a high perinatal mortality rate caused by a
severe obstruction of the laryngotracheal airways, pulmonary dysmorphogenesis,
and a decreased production of surfactant proteins. Surviving Hoxa5(-/-) mutant
mice also display lung anomalies with deficient alveolar septation and areas of
collapsed tissue, thus demonstrating the importance of Hoxa5 throughout lung
development and maturation. Here, we address the functional consequences of the
Hoxa5 mutation on respiration and chemoreflexes by comparing the breathing
pattern of Hoxa5(-/-) mice to that of wild-type animals under resting conditions 
and during exposure to moderate ventilatory stimuli such as hypoxia and
hypercapnia. Resting Hoxa5(-/-) mice present a higher breathing frequency and
overall minute ventilation that likely compensate for their reduced lung alveolar
surface available for gas exchange and their increased upper airway resistance.
When exposed to ventilatory stimuli, Hoxa5(-/-) mice maintain the higher minute
ventilation by adapting the tidal volume and/or the breathing frequency. The
minute ventilation increase seen during hypoxia was similar for both groups of
mice; however, the dynamics of the frequency response was genotype-dependent. The
hypercapnic ventilatory response did not differ between genotypes. These findings
reveal the strategies allowing survival of Hoxa5(-/-) mice facing morphologic
anomalies leading to a significant deficit in gas exchange capacity.

PMID: 15295088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


155. Free Radic Biol Med. 2004 Jul 1;37(1):71-85.

Thioredoxin reductase 1 is upregulated in atherosclerotic plaques: specific
induction of the promoter in human macrophages by oxidized low-density
lipoproteins.

Furman C(1), Rundlöf AK, Larigauderie G, Jaye M, Bricca G, Copin C, Kandoussi AM,
Fruchart JC, Arnér ES, Rouis M.

Author information: 
(1)INSERM U-545, and Institut Pasteur de Lille, 59019 Lille, France.

Uptake of modified low-density lipoproteins (LDLs) by macrophages in the arterial
wall is an important event in atherogenesis. Indeed, oxidatively modified LDLs
(oxLDLs) are known to affect various cellular processes by modulating
oxidation-sensitive signaling pathways. Here we found that the ubiquitous 55 kDa 
selenoprotein thioredoxin reductase 1 (TrxR1), which is a key enzyme for cellular
redox control and antioxidant defense, was upregulated in human atherosclerotic
plaques and expressed in foam cells. Using reverse transcription polymerase chain
reaction analysis, we also found that oxLDLs, but not native LDLs (nLDLs),
dose-dependently increased TrxR1 mRNA in human monocyte-derived macrophages
(HMDMs). This stimulating effect was specific for oxLDLs, as pro-inflammatory
factors, such as lipopolysaccharides (LPSs), interleukin-1beta (IL-1beta),
interleukin-6 (Il-6), and tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNFalpha), under the same 
conditions, failed to induce TrxR1 mRNA levels to the same extent. Moreover,
phorbol ester-differentiated THP-1 cells or HMDMs transiently transfected with
TrxR1 promoter fragments linked to a luciferase reporter gene allowed
identification of a defined promoter region as specifically responding to the
phospholipid component of oxLDLs (p <.05 vs. phospholipid component of nLDLs).
Gel mobility shift analyses identified a short 40-nucleotide stretch of the
promoter carrying AP-1 and HoxA5 consensus motifs that responded with an altered 
shift pattern in THP-1 cells treated with oxLDLs, however, without evident
involvement of either the Fos, Jun, Nrf2 or HoxA5 transcription factors.

Copyright 2004 Elsevier Inc.

PMID: 15183196  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


156. Leuk Lymphoma. 2004 Mar;45(3):567-74.

Expression of HOX genes in acute leukemia cell lines with and without MLL
translocations.

Quentmeier H(1), Dirks WG, Macleod RA, Reinhardt J, Zaborski M, Drexler HG.

Author information: 
(1)DSMZ--German Collection of Microorganisms and Cell Cultures, Department of
Human and Animal Cell Cultures, Braunschweig, Germany. hqu@dsmz.de

In primary cells from acute leukemia patients, expression of the genes MEIS1,
HOXA5, HOXA7 and HOXA9 has been reported to be correlated with the occurrence of 
MLL translocations. It was our aim to find out whether MLL mutant (MLLmu) and MLL
wild-type (MLLwt) acute leukemia-derived cell lines might likewise be
discriminated on the basis of HOX gene expression. Southern blot analysis,
performed to verify the MLL status of the cells, showed that NOMO-1 was the only 
cell line not tested previously carrying a rearranged MLL gene. Fluorescence in
situ hybridization analysis demonstrated that this cell line exhibited a
reciprocal t(9;11)(q23;p22). Sequencing of RT-PCR products thereof identified
unique MLL exon 10/AF-9 exon 5 fusion transcripts. We divided the acute
leukemia-derived cell lines (n = 37) according to the results of Southern blot
analysis into MLLmu (n = 19) and MLLwt (n = 18). Expression of HOX genes was then
analyzed by applying reverse transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction, Northern
and Western blot analyses. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) cell lines expressed the 
HOX genes significantly more often than acute lymphoblastic (ALL) cell lines. In 
ALL, cells with MLL translocations expressed the genes 4 times more often than
MLLwt cells. Most distinct was the correlation between MLL status and MEIS1
expression in ALL-derived cell lines: 8/8 MLLmu but 0/10 MLLwt cell lines
expressed MEIS1. Northern and Western blot analysis confirmed that also HOXA9 and
FLT3 were significantly more often and stronger expressed in MLLmu than in MLLwt 
ALL cell lines. These results suggest that MLL aberrations may regulate MEIS1 and
HOXA9 gene expression in ALL-derived cell lines, while AML-derived cell lines
express these genes independently of the MLL status.

PMID: 15160920  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


157. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 2004 Jun 21;150(2):125-39.

Transgenic mice ectopically expressing HOXA5 in the dorsal spinal cord show
structural defects of the cervical spinal cord along with sensory and motor
defects of the forelimb.

Krieger KE(1), Abbott MA, Joksimovic M, Lueth PA, Sonea IM, Jeannotte L, Tuggle
CK.

Author information: 
(1)Interdepartmental Genetics, Iowa State University, Ames, IA 50011, USA.

Mutation of murine Hoxa5 has shown that HOXA5 controls lung, gastrointestinal
tract and vertebrae development. Hoxa5 is also expressed in the spinal cord, yet 
no central nervous system phenotype has been described in Hoxa5 knockouts. To
identify the role of Hoxa5 in spinal cord development, we developed transgenic
mice that express HOXA5 in the dorsal spinal cord in the brachial region. Using
HOXA5-specific antibodies, we show this expression pattern is ectopic as the
endogenous protein is expressed only in the ventral spinal cord at this
anterio-posterior level. This transgenic line (Hoxa5SV2) also displays
forelimb-specific motor and sensory defects. Hoxa5SV2 transgenic mice cannot
support their body weight in a forelimb hang, and forelimb strength is decreased.
However, Rotarod performance was not impaired in Hoxa5SV2 mice. Hoxa5SV2 mice
also show a delayed forelimb response to noxious heat, although hindlimb response
time was normal. Administration of an analgesic significantly reduced the hang
test defect and decreased the transgene effect on forelimb strength, indicating
that pain pathways may be affected. The morphology of transgenic cervical (but
not lumbar) spinal cord is highly aberrant. Nissl staining indicates superficial 
laminae of the dorsal horn are severely disrupted. The distribution of cells and 
axons immunoreactive for substance P, neurokinin-B, and their primary receptors
were aberrant only in transgenic cervical spinal cord. Further, we see increased 
levels of apoptosis in transgenic spinal cord at embryonic day 13.5. Our evidence
suggests apoptosis due to HOXA5 misexpression is a major cause of loss of
superficial lamina cells in Hoxa5SV2 mice.

PMID: 15158076  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


158. Gene. 2004 Apr 28;331:53-63.

Differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells are closely 
related with homeotic genes and a group of differentially expressed genes.

Mizusawa N(1), Hasegawa T, Ohigashi I, Tanaka-Kosugi C, Harada N, Itakura M,
Yoshimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima City, Japan.

To identify the genes that determine differentiation phenotypes, we compared gene
expression of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells, which are derived from the 
common precursor and secrete insulin and glucagon, respectively. The expression
levels of homeotic genes including Hox genes known to determine region
specificity in the antero-posterior (AP) body axis, tissue-specific homeobox
genes, and other 8,734 genes were compared in a beta- and alpha-cell line of MIN6
and alpha TC1.6. The expression of homeotic genes were surveyed with reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using degenerate primers
corresponding to invariant amino acid sequences within the homeodomain and
subsequently with specific primers. Expression of Hoxc6, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Pdx1,
Cdx2, Gbx2, Pax4, and Hlxb9 genes in MIN6 was higher than those in alpha TC1.6,
while expression of Hoxa2, Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hoxa13,
Hoxb3, Hoxb5, Hoxb6, Hoxb13, Hoxb8, and Brain4 genes in alpha TC1.6 was higher
than those in MIN6. Out of 8,734 mouse genes screened with high-density mouse
cDNA microarrays for MIN6- and alpha TC1.6-derived cDNA, 58 and 25 genes were
differentially over- and under-expressed in MIN6, respectively. GLUTag, which is 
derived from a large bowel tumor and expresses the proglucagon gene, showed a
comparatively similar expression profile to that of alpha TC1.6 in both homeotic 
and other genes analyzed in cDNA microarray. Our results are consistent with the 
interpretation that not only the tissue-specific homeotic genes, but also Hox
genes are related to differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic beta- and
alpha-cells rather than their regional specification of the body in vertebrates.

PMID: 15094191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


159. Mol Cell Biol. 2004 Jan;24(2):924-35.

HOXA5-induced apoptosis in breast cancer cells is mediated by caspases 2 and 8.

Chen H(1), Chung S, Sukumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Program, Sidney Kimmel Comprehensive Cancer Center at Johns
Hopkins, 1650 Orleans Street, CRB 410, Baltimore, MD 21231-1000, USA.

HOXA5 is a transcriptional factor whose expression is lost in more than 60% of
breast carcinomas. Our previous work demonstrated that the overexpression of
HOXA5 in MCF7 cells resulted in cell death through a p53-dependent apoptotic
pathway. To determine whether p53-independent apoptotic pathways are involved in 
HOXA5-induced cell death, we engineered a p53-mutant breast cancer cell line,
Hs578T, to inducibly express HOXA5. Induction of HOXA5 expression led to cell
death with features typical of apoptosis within 24 h, and the expression levels
of mutant p53 and its target genes either decreased or remained unchanged. To
decipher apoptotic pathways, the HOXA5-expressing cells were treated with a
variety of apoptotic inhibitors. Besides a general caspase inhibitor, caspase 2- 
and 8-specific inhibitors largely abolished HOXA5-induced apoptosis, whereas
caspase 1-, 3-, 6-, and 9-specific inhibitors had no significant effects. Western
blot analysis further confirmed that caspases 2 and 8 were activated after the
induction of HOXA5 expression. Further, several small interfering RNAs which
specifically silenced caspase 2 and caspase 8 expression significantly blocked
HOXA5-induced apoptosis. HOXA5 expression could also sensitize cells to tumor
necrosis factor alpha-induced apoptosis by at least 100-fold. These results
indicate that expression of HOXA5 can induce apoptosis through an apoptotic
mechanism mediated by caspases 2 and 8.

PMCID: PMC343791
PMID: 14701762  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


160. Blood. 2004 Mar 1;103(5):1823-8. Epub 2003 Nov 13.

Hoxa9 influences the phenotype but not the incidence of Mll-AF9 fusion gene
leukemia.

Kumar AR(1), Hudson WA, Chen W, Nishiuchi R, Yao Q, Kersey JH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, USA.

Identification of the targets of mixed lineage leukemia (MLL) fusion genes will
assist in understanding the biology of MLL fusion gene leukemias and in
development of better therapies. Numerous studies have implicated HOXA9 as one of
the possible targets of MLL fusion proteins. To determine if HOXA9 was required
for leukemia development by MLL fusion genes, we compared the effects of the
Mll-AF9 knock-in mutation in mice in the presence or absence of Hoxa9. Both
groups of mice showed myeloid expansion at 8 weeks and then developed myeloid
leukemia with a similar incidence and time course. The leukemia in the mice
lacking Hoxa9 generally displayed a more immature myeloid phenotype than that in 
the mice that were wild-type for Hoxa9. Gene expression profiling revealed that
expression of Mll-AF9 led to overexpression of Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and
Hoxa10. Thus, genes of the Hox-a cluster are important in defining the phenotype 
but not the incidence of Mll-AF9 leukemia. These results demonstrate that the
Mll-AF9 fusion gene disrupts the expression of several Hox genes, none of which
as a single gene is likely to be necessary for development of leukemia. Instead, 
we propose that the "Hox code" minimally defined by the Hoxa5-a9 cluster is
central to MLL leukemogenesis.

PMID: 14615372  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


161. Leukemia. 2003 Dec;17(12):2454-9.

B-cell development in the presence of the MLL/AF4 oncoprotein proceeds in the
absence of HOX A7 and HOX A9 expression.

Bertrand FE(1), Spengeman JD, Shah N, LeBien TW.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Brody School of Medicine at East
Carolina University, Greenville, NC 27858, USA.

Infant acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) is frequently characterized by the
t(4;11)(q21;q23) cytogenetic abnormality encoding the MLL/AF4 oncogene, increased
HOX gene expression and a pro-B/monocytoid phenotype. We have previously
established a novel MLL/AF4-positive cell line, B-lineage 3 (BLIN-3), which
retains several features of normal B-lineage development (functional Ig gene
rearrangement and apoptotic sensitivity to stromal cell withdrawal) not generally
observed in infant ALL. We now use microarray analysis to identify patterns of
gene expression in BLIN-3 that may modulate MLL/AF4 oncogenesis and contribute to
the retention of normal B-lineage developmental characteristics. Comparison of
6815 expressed genes in BLIN-3 with published microarray data on leukemic blasts 
from t(4;11) patients indicated that BLIN-3 was unique in lacking the expression 
of certain HOX-A cluster genes. These results were validated by RT-PCR showing no
expression of HOX A7 or HOX A9 in BLIN-3. A HOX C8 promoter reporter was active
in BLIN-3, indicating that lack of HOX gene expression in BLIN-3 was not due to a
nonfunctional MLL/AF4. Our results suggest that B-lineage development can proceed
in t(4;11) leukemic blasts in the absence of HOX-A gene expression.

PMID: 14562113  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


162. Am J Pathol. 2003 Jul;163(1):37-45.

Methylation target array for rapid analysis of CpG island hypermethylation in
multiple tissue genomes.

Chen CM(1), Chen HL, Hsiau TH, Hsiau AH, Shi H, Brock GJ, Wei SH, Caldwell CW,
Yan PS, Huang TH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Life Sciences, National Chung Hsing University, Taiwan, Republic
of China.

Hypermethylation of multiple CpG islands is a common event in cancer. To assess
the prognostic values of this epigenetic alteration, we developed Methylation
Target Array (MTA), derived from the concept of tissue microarray, for
simultaneous analysis of DNA hypermethylation in hundreds of tissue genomes. In
MTA, linker-ligated CpG island fragments were digested with methylation-sensitive
endonucleases and amplified with flanking primers. A panel of 468 MTA amplicons, 
which represented the whole repertoire of methylated CpG islands in 93 breast
tumors, 20 normal breast tissues, and 4 breast cancer cell lines, were arrayed on
nylon membrane for probe hybridization. Positive hybridization signals detected
in tumor amplicons, but not in normal amplicons, were indicative of aberrant
hypermethylation in tumor samples. This is attributed to aberrant sites that were
protected from methylation-sensitive restriction and were amplified by PCR in
tumor samples, while the same sites were restricted and could not be amplified in
normal samples. Hypermethylation frequencies of the 10 genes tested in breast
tumors and cancer cell lines were 60% for GPC3, 58% for RASSF1A, 32% for 3OST3B, 
30% for HOXA5, 28% for uPA, 25% for WT1, 23% for BRCA1, 9% for DAPK1, and 0% for 
KL. Furthermore, hypermethylation of 5 to 7 loci of these genes was significantly
correlated with hormone receptor status, clinical stages, and ages at diagnosis
of the patients analyzed. This novel approach thus provides an additional avenue 
for assessing clinicopathological consequences of DNA hypermethylation in breast 
cancer.

PMCID: PMC1868173
PMID: 12819009  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


163. Dev Dyn. 2003 Jul;227(3):367-78.

Perturbed thyroid morphology and transient hypothyroidism symptoms in Hoxa5
mutant mice.

Meunier D(1), Aubin J, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec, Canada.

The Hox family of transcriptional regulators has been extensively studied for
their role in axial and appendicular patterning. Genetic analyses have also
unveiled Hox gene function in organogenesis and postnatal development. A
phenotypical survey of the Hoxa5(-/-) mutant mice shows that the surviving
mutants display symptoms of hypothyroidism, including transient growth
retardation, and delayed eye opening and ear elevation. Thyroid gland
morphogenesis initiates normally, but follicle formation and thyroglobulin
processing are abnormal at late gestation. The expression of several molecular
markers essential for thyroid gland formation and function, namely Nkx2.1, Pax8, 
and Titf2, is affected in the developing thyroid gland of Hoxa5(-/-) mutants. As 
a consequence, the expression of thyroid effector genes, including the
thyroglobulin and thyroperoxidase genes, is perturbed. Our characterization
reveals that the loss of Hoxa5 function transiently affects thyroid development
in a non-cell autonomous manner.

Copyright 2003 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12815622  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


164. Birth Defects Res A Clin Mol Teratol. 2003 Jan;67(1):59-67.

Defects in cervical vertebrae in boric acid-exposed rat embryos are associated
with anterior shifts of hox gene expression domains.

Wéry N(1), Narotsky MG, Pacico N, Kavlock RJ, Picard JJ, Gofflot F.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Developmental Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium.

BACKGROUND: Previously, we showed that prenatal exposure to boric acid (BA), an
industrial agent with large production, causes alterations of the axial skeleton 
in rat embryos, reminiscent of homeotic transformations. Indeed, Sprague-Dawley
rats exposed in utero to BA on gestation day 9 (GD 9) had only six, rather than
the normal seven, cervical vertebrae. This finding, observed in 91% of GD 21
fetuses, suggests posterior transformations of vertebrae. The present study
attempts to determine if these skeletal alterations could be explained by
modifications of the hox code, involved in the establishment of positional
information along the craniocaudal axis of the embryo.
METHODS: Pregnant rats were treated by gavage with BA (500 mg/kg, twice) on GD 9.
Embryos were collected on GD 11 or GD 13.5 and processed for in situ
hybridization. Several hox genes were selected according to the position of their
cranial limit of expression in the cervical and thoracic region.
RESULTS: At GD 13.5, we detected a cranial shift of the anterior limit of
expression of hoxc6 and hoxa6. We observed no difference between control and
treated embryos in the location of the cranial limit of expression of the other
genes: hoxd4, hoxa4, hoxc5, and hoxa5.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that following in utero exposure to BA on GD
9, a disturbance of the expression of hox genes involved inthe specification of
most anterior vertebrae is observed at GD 13.5. Based on their expression domain 
and on their implication in the definition of the cervicothoracic vertebral
boundary, it is likely that the anteriorization of hoxc6 and hoxa6 reported here 
is correlated to the morphological phenotype observed in BA-exposed fetuses at GD
21.

PMID: 12749385  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


165. Brain Res Mol Brain Res. 2003 Apr 10;112(1-2):8-23.

The human tyrosine hydroxylase gene promoter.

Kessler MA(1), Yang M, Gollomp KL, Jin H, Iacovitti L.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurology and Farber Institute for the Neurosciences, Thomas
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, PA 19107, USA.

13.329 kilobases of the single copy human tyrosine hydroxylase (hTH) gene were
isolated from a genomic library. The 5' flanking 11 kilobases fused to the
reporter green fluorescent protein (GFP) drove high level expression in TH+ cells
of the substantia nigra of embryonic and adult transgenic mice as determined by
double label fluorescence microscopy. To provide a basis for future analysis of
polymorphisms and structure-function studies, the previously unreported distal
10.5 kilobases of the hTH promoter were sequenced with an average coverage of
20-fold, the remainder with 4-fold coverage. Sequence features identified
included four perfect matches to the bicoid binding element (BBE, consensus:
BBTAATCYV) all of which exhibited specific binding by electrophoretic mobility
shift assay (EMSA). Comparison to published sequences of mouse and rat TH
promoters revealed five areas of exceptional homology shared by these species in 
the upstream TH promoter region -2 kb to -9 kb relative to the transcription
start site. Within these conserved regions (CRs I-V), potential recognition sites
for NR4A2 (Nurr1), HNF-3beta, HOXA4, and HOXA5 were shared across human, mouse,
and rat TH promoters.

PMID: 12670698  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


166. Development. 2003 May;130(9):1867-76.

Joint regulation of the MAP1B promoter by HNF3beta/Foxa2 and Engrailed is the
result of a highly conserved mechanism for direct interaction of homeoproteins
and Fox transcription factors.

Foucher I(1), Montesinos ML, Volovitch M, Prochiantz A, Trembleau A.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8542, Ecole Normale Supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05,
France.

The MAP1B (Mtap1b) promoter presents two evolutionary conserved overlapping
homeoproteins and Hepatocyte nuclear factor 3beta (HNF3beta/Foxa2) cognate
binding sites (defining putative homeoprotein/Fox sites, HF1 and HF2).
Accordingly, the promoter domain containing HF1 and HF2 is recognized by
cerebellum nuclear extracts containing Engrailed and Foxa2 and has regulatory
functions in primary cultures of embryonic mesmetencephalic nerve cells.
Transfection experiments further demonstrate that Engrailed and Foxa2 interact
physiologically in a dose-dependent manner: Foxa2 antagonizes the
Engrailed-driven regulation of the MAP1B promoter, and vice versa. This led us to
investigate if Engrailed and Foxa2 interact directly. Direct interaction was
confirmed by pull-down experiments, and the regions participating in this
interaction were identified. In Foxa2 the interacting domain is the Forkhead box 
DNA-binding domain. In Engrailed, two independent interacting domains exist: the 
homeodomain and a region that includes the Pbx-binding domain. Finally, Foxa2 not
only binds Engrailed but also Lim1, Gsc and Hoxa5 homeoproteins and in the four
cases Foxa2 binds at least the homeodomain. Based on the involvement of conserved
domains in both classes of proteins, it is proposed that the interaction between 
Forkhead box transcription factors and homeoproteins is a general phenomenon.

PMID: 12642491  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


167. Gene. 2003 Jan 2;302(1-2):65-72.

Methylation of HoxA5 and HoxB5 and its relevance to expression during mouse
development.

Hershko AY(1), Kafri T, Fainsod A, Razin A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cellular Biochemistry and Human Genetics, The Hebrew University 
Hadassah Medical School, Jerusalem 91120, Israel.

Expression and function of homeobox genes (Hox genes) in development have been
subject to extensive study in a variety of organisms including mammals, however
practically nothing is known regarding the methylation patterns of these genes.
Here we describe the methylation patterns of HoxA5 and HoxB5 in various tissues
of fetal and adult mice and their relevance to expression. Both genes exhibit
tissue specific methylation patterns that are established postnatally. This
methylation appears to play a role in stabilizing the newly acquired silent state
of the genes. In contrast to the postimplantation wave of de novo methylation
that takes place across the mammalian genome, the methylation of the Hox genes
represents a different time window for de novo methylation which might be
characteristic of developmental genes. In the case of HoxA5 this postnatal de
novo methylation can cover a domain of at least 25 kb that includes several genes
of the HoxA cluster and the CpG islands within. Our observations suggest that the
establishment of tissue specific methylation patterns of HoxA5 and HoxB5 and the 
relationship between these methylation patterns and activity are different from
what had been known for non-developmental genes. This may reflect the specialized
functions played by Hox genes in development.

PMID: 12527197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


168. DNA Seq. 2002 Aug;13(4):203-9.

Sequence analysis of a Hoxa4-Hoxa5 intergenic region including shared regulatory 
elements.

Moreau J(1), Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, 9, rue McMahon, Québec, Que.,
Canada, G1R 2J6.

The dynamic patterns of Hox gene expression are generated by a combination of
regulatory elements differentially controlling Hox gene transcription in a
spatio-temporal and tissue-specific fashion. Regulatory elements can either be
exclusive for a particular gene, shared by neighboring Hox genes, or be competed 
for by different promoters. Our interest in Hoxa5 gene function and regulation
have led us to localize Hoxa5 cis-acting regulatory elements in the intergenic
region between the Hoxa4 and Hoxa5 genes and involved in Hoxa5 organ expression. 
Mapping of the region and sequence analysis revealed some discrepancies with a
previously published sequence. Here, we report an additional DNA fragment of 282 
base pairs that possesses high homology with the human HOX sequence, and contains
potential binding sites for trans-acting factors.

PMID: 12487022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


169. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2001;1(3):225-35.

Expression of HoxA5 in the heart is upregulated during thyroxin-induced
metamorphosis of the Mexican axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum).

Gaur A(1), Zajdel RW, Bhatia R, Isitmangil G, Denz CR, Robertson DR, Lemanski LF,
Dube DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell and Developmental Biology, Texas A & M University, College 
Station, TX 77843-1112, USA.

Widespread external and internal changes in body morphology have long been known 
to be hallmarks of the process of metamorphosis. However, more subtle changes,
particularly at the molecular level, are only now beginning to be understood. A
number of transcription factors have recently been shown to alter expression
either in levels of message or in isoforms expressed. In this article, we
describe a dramatic increase in the expression of the homeobox gene HoxA5 in the 
heart and aorta of the Mexican axolotl Ambystoma mexicanum during the process of 
thyroxin-induced metamorphosis. Immunohistochemical analysis with anti-HoxA5
antibody in thyroxin-induced metamorphosing animals showed a pattern of
expression of HoxA5 comparable to that in spontaneously metamorphosing animals.
Further, by in situ hybridization, we were able to show significant qualitative
differences in the expression of this gene within the heart. Maximum HoxA5
expression occurred at the midpoint of metamorphosis in the myocardium, whereas
the hearts of completely metamorphosed animals had the highest levels of
expression in the epicardium and endocardium. In the aorta, smooth-muscle cells
of the tunica media as well as cells of the tunica adventitia had an increase in 
expression of HoxA5 with thyroxin-induced metamorphosis. HoxA5 expression
significantly changed in cells of the aorta and ventricle with treatment by
thyroid hormone. HoxA5, a positive regulator of p53, may be involved with the
apoptotic pathway in heart remodeling during amphibian metamorphosis.

PMID: 12213975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


170. Development. 2002 Sep;129(17):4075-87.

Stomach regional specification requires Hoxa5-driven mesenchymal-epithelial
signaling.

Aubin J(1), Déry U, Lemieux M, Chailler P, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Canada.

The genetic control of gut regionalization relies on a hierarchy of molecular
events in which the Hox gene family of transcription factors is suspected to be
key participant. We have examined the role of Hox genes in gut patterning using
the Hoxa5(-/-) mice as a model. Hoxa5 is expressed in a dynamic fashion in the
mesenchymal component of the developing gut. Its loss of function results in
gastric enzymatic anomalies in Hoxa5(-/-) surviving mutants that are due to
perturbed cell specification during stomach development. Histological,
biochemical and molecular characterization of the mutant stomach phenotype may be
compatible with a homeotic transformation of the gastric mucosa. As the loss of
mesenchymal Hoxa5 function leads to gastric epithelial defects, Hoxa5 should
exert its action by controlling molecules involved in mesenchymal-epithelial
signaling. Indeed, in the absence of Hoxa5 function, the expression of genes
encoding for signaling molecules such as sonic hedgehog, Indian hedgehog,
transforming growth factor beta family members and fibroblast growth factor 10,
is altered. These findings provide insight into the molecular controls of
patterning events of the stomach, supporting the notion that Hoxa5 acts in
regionalization and specification of the stomach by setting up the proper domains
of expression of signaling molecules.

PMID: 12163410  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


171. Development. 2002 Sep;129(17):4065-74.

Hoxa5 overexpression correlates with IGFBP1 upregulation and postnatal dwarfism: 
evidence for an interaction between Hoxa5 and Forkhead box transcription factors.

Foucher I(1), Volovitch M, Frain M, Kim JJ, Souberbielle JC, Gan L, Unterman TG, 
Prochiantz A, Trembleau A.

Author information: 
(1)CNRS UMR 8542, Ecole normale supérieure, 46 rue d'Ulm, 75230 Paris Cedex 05,
France.

Transgenic mice expressing the homeobox gene Hoxa5 under the control of Hoxb2
regulatory elements present a growth arrest during weeks two and three of
postnatal development, resulting in proportionate dwarfism. These mice present a 
liver phenotype illustrated by a 12-fold increase in liver insulin-like growth
factor binding protein 1 (IGFBP1) mRNA and a 50% decrease in liver insulin-like
growth factor 1 (IGF1) mRNA correlated with a 50% decrease in circulating IGF1.
We show that the Hoxa5 transgene is expressed in the liver of these mice, leading
to an overexpression of total (endogenous plus transgene) Hoxa5 mRNA in this
tissue. We have used several cell lines to investigate a possible physiological
interaction of Hoxa5 with the main regulator of IGFBP1 promoter activity, the
Forkhead box transcription factor FKHR. In HepG2 cells, Hoxa5 has little effect
by itself but inhibits the FKHR-dependent activation of the IGFBP1 promoter. In
HuF cells, Hoxa5 cooperates with FKHR to dramatically enhance IGFBP1 promoter
activity. This context-dependent physiological interaction probably corresponds
to the existence of a direct interaction between Hoxa5 and FKHR and
FoxA2/HNF3beta, as demonstrated by pull-down experiments achieved either in vitro
or after cellular co-expression. In conclusion, we propose that the impaired
growth observed in this transgenic line relates to a liver phenotype best
explained by a direct interaction between Hoxa5 and liver-specific Forkhead box
transcription factors, in particular FKHR but also Foxa2/HNF3beta. Because Hoxa5 
and homeogenes of the same paralog group are normally expressed in the liver, the
present results raise the possibility that homeoproteins, in addition to their
established role during early development, regulate systemic physiological
functions.

PMID: 12163409  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


172. Curr Eye Res. 2001 Dec;23(6):435-42.

Increased severity of herpes simplex virus type 1-induced keratitis in Hox A5
transgenic mice.

Galle LE(1), Taus NS, Maggs DJ, Moore CP, Mitchell WJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Veterinary Medicine, University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA.

PURPOSE: Herpes simplex virus type 1 is a major cause of stromal keratitis and
blindness in humans. Understanding of the role of host genes in the pathogenesis 
of herpes stromal keratitis is limited. We used a transgenic mouse model to
examine the effect of a host gene, Hox A5 (which binds to the TAATGARAT sequence 
in the promoter regions of HSV-1 immediate early genes and increases HSV-1
replication), on the pathogenesis of HSV-1 induced stromal keratitis.
METHODS: Corneas of wildtype and Hox A5 transgenic mice were infected with HSV-1 
strain F following corneal scarification. Clinical severity of keratitis was
evaluated using slit-lamp biomicroscopy. Histologic severity of keratitis was
determined by light microscopic evaluation and by computerized morphometry.
Ocular viral replication was measured via plaque assay.
RESULTS: Clinical lesions of stromal keratitis were more severe at 17 and 23 days
post infection in Hox A5 transgenic mice than in wildtype mice. Histological
evaluation and morphometric analysis confirmed that keratitis lesions were more
severe in the transgenic mice. HSV-1 replication was approximately100-fold
greater in the corneas of transgenic mice than in wildtype mice.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that a host gene (Hox A5) can increase
ocular replication of HSV-1 and alter the pathogenesis of herpetic stromal
keratitis.

PMID: 12045893  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


173. Oncogene. 2002 May 23;21(23):3804-13.

A comprehensive catalog of CpG islands methylated in human lung adenocarcinomas
for the identification of tumor suppressor genes.

Shiraishi M(1), Sekiguchi A, Terry MJ, Oates AJ, Miyamoto Y, Chuu YH, Munakata M,
Sekiya T.

Author information: 
(1)DNA Methylation and Genome Function Project, National Cancer Center Research
Institute, 1-1, Tsukiji 5-chome, Chuo-ku, Tokyo 104-0045, Japan.
mshirais@ncc.go.jp

Erratum in
    Oncogene 2002 Oct 3;21(44):6866.

CpG island methylation is an important mechanism in gene silencing and is a key
epigenetic event in cancer development. As yet, the number and identities of the 
genes that are inactivated in cancer cells has not been determined. In order to
address this issue, we have performed a comprehensive isolation of CpG islands
that are methylated in human lung adenocarcinomas. We have isolated approximately
200 CpG islands that are methylated in tumor DNA including those of known
tumor-associated genes such as the HOXA5 gene. As the library contains the CpG
islands of a number of known tumor suppressor genes it is highly likely that
additional, previously unidentified tumor suppressor genes, will be present. On
average, 1-2% of CpG islands were methylated specifically in tumors although this
figure differed greatly between patients. This study provides an important
resource in the search for genes inactivated in tumors and for the investigation 
of epigenetic dysregulation of gene expression by CpG island methylation.

PMID: 12032849  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


174. J Neurosci. 2002 Apr 1;22(7):2579-89.

A proximal promoter domain containing a homeodomain-binding core motif interacts 
with multiple transcription factors, including HoxA5 and Phox2 proteins, and
critically regulates cell type-specific transcription of the human norepinephrine
transporter gene.

Kim CH(1), Hwang DY, Park JJ, Kim KS.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, McLean Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Belmont, Massachusetts 02478, USA.

Expression of the norepinephrine transporter (NET), which mediates the reuptake
of norepinephrine into presynaptic nerve terminals, is restricted to
noradrenergic (NA) neurons. We have demonstrated previously that the 9.0 kb
upstream sequences and the first intron residing in the 5' untranslated area are 
critical for high-level and NA cell-specific transcription. Here, using transient
transfection assays, we show that 4.0 kb of the 5' upstream sequences contains
sufficient genetic information to drive reporter gene expression in an NA cell
type-specific manner. Three functional domains appear to be potentially important
for the regulation of human NET (hNET) gene transcription: an upstream enhancer
region at -4.0 to -3.1 kb, a proximal domain at -133 to -75 bp, and a middle
silencer region between these two domains. DNase I footprinting analysis of the
proximal promoter region shows that a subdomain at -128 to -80 bp is protected in
a cell-specific manner. We provide evidence that multiple protein factors
interact with the proximal promoter domain to critically regulate the
transcriptional activity of the hNET gene. In the middle of this proximal
subdomain resides a homeodomain (HD)-binding core motif, which interacts with HD 
factors, including Phox2a and HoxA5, in an NA-specific manner. Cotransfection
analyses suggest that HoxA5 and Phox2a may transactivate the hNET gene promoter. 
Together with previous studies indicating direct activation of dopamine
beta-hydroxylase transcription by Phox2a/2b, the present results support a model 
whereby Phox2 proteins may coordinately regulate the phenotypic specification of 
NA neurons by activating both NA biosynthetic and reuptake genes.

PMID: 11923423  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


175. Dev Biol. 2002 Apr 1;244(1):96-113.

Cooperation of Hoxa5 and Pax1 genes during formation of the pectoral girdle.

Aubin J(1), Lemieux M, Moreau J, Lapointe J, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec, G1R 2J6, Canada.

Hox and Pax transcription factors are master regulators of skeletal and organ
morphogenesis. Some skeletal malformations encountered in Hoxa5 mutants are
shared by the undulated (un) mice, which bear a point mutation in the Pax1 gene. 
To investigate whether Hoxa5 and Pax1 act in common pathways during skeletal
development, we analyzed Hoxa5;un compound mutants. Our genetic studies show that
Hoxa5 and Pax1 cooperate in the vertebral patterning of the cervicothoracic
transition region and in acromion morphogenesis. The dynamics of expression of
Hoxa5 and Pax1 in the pectoral girdle region suggest that both genes function in 
a complementary fashion during acromion formation. Whereas Pax1 is required for
the recruitment of acromion precursor cells, Hoxa5 may provide regional cues
essential for the correct formation of the acromion by ensuring Pax1 expression
at the proper time and position during morphogenesis of the pectoral girdle.
Hoxa5 also has a distinctive role in specifying the fate of perichondrial and
chondrogenic cell lineages in a Sox9-dependent way.

Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 11900462  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


176. Leukemia. 2002 Feb;16(2):186-95.

Quantitative HOX expression in chromosomally defined subsets of acute myelogenous
leukemia.

Drabkin HA(1), Parsy C, Ferguson K, Guilhot F, Lacotte L, Roy L, Zeng C, Baron A,
Hunger SP, Varella-Garcia M, Gemmill R, Brizard F, Brizard A, Roche J.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Medical Oncology, University of Colorado Health Sciences and
Cancer Centers, Denver, CO 80262, USA.

We used a degenerate RT-PCR screen and subsequent real-time quantitative RT-PCR
assays to examine the expression of HOX and TALE-family genes in 34 cases of
chromosomally defined AML for which outcome data were available. AMLs with
favorable cytogenetic features were associated with low overall HOX gene
expression whereas poor prognostic cases had high levels. Characteristically,
multiple HOXA family members including HOXA3-HOXA10 were jointly overexpressed in
conjunction with HOXB3, HOXB6, MEIS1 and PBX3. Higher levels of expression were
also observed in the FAB subtype, AML-M1. Spearmann correlation coefficients
indicated that the expression levels for many of these genes were highly
inter-related. While we did not detect any significant correlations between HOX
expression and complete response rates or age in this limited set of patients,
there was a significant correlation between event-free survival and HOXA7 with a 
trend toward significance for HoxA9, HoxA4 and HoxA5. While patients with
elevated HOX expression did worse, there were notable exceptions. Thus, although 
HOX overexpression and clinical resistance to chemotherapy often coincide, they
are not inextricably linked. Our results indicate that quantitative HOX analysis 
has the potential to add new information to the management of patients with AML, 
especially where characteristic chromosomal alterations are lacking.

PMID: 11840284  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


177. J Mammary Gland Biol Neoplasia. 2001 Apr;6(2):169-82.

Genes, chromatin, and breast cancer: an epigenetic tale.

Mielnicki LM(1), Asch HL, Asch BB.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Experimental Pathology, Roswell Park Cancer Institute, Buffalo,
New York 14263, USA. lawrence.mielnicki@roswellpark.org

The production of heritable changes in gene expression is the driving force in
the development and progression of breast cancer. Such changes can result from
mutations or from epigenetic events such as hypermethylation of DNA and
hypoacetylation of histones. Histone acetylation and DNA methylation are major
determinants of chromatin structure, and chromatin structure is a primary
regulator of gene transcription. Cancer cells frequently contain both mutated
genes and genes with altered expression due to one or more epigenetic mechanisms.
This review describes the epigenetic changes that disrupt normal chromatin
architecture and modify the expression of key genes in breast cancer cells. The
structural integrity of the latter genes is usually intact, but their expression 
has been substantially altered due to methylation in their promoter region or
deacetylation of histones that interact with their promoter region or both
mechanisms. Genes affected by epigenetic changes in breast cancers include HoxA5,
p21WAF, gelsolin, BRCA1, BRCA2, E-cadherin, steroid hormone receptors, and
retinoic acid receptor II. Because these epigenetic modifications are usually
reversible by treatment with certain drugs, they represent vulnerabilities in the
cancer cell that can be exploited as novel targets for new prevention and
therapeutic strategies.

PMID: 11501577  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


178. J Biol Chem. 2001 Aug 31;276(35):32844-53. Epub 2001 Jul 2.

Human homeobox HOXA7 regulates keratinocyte transglutaminase type 1 and inhibits 
differentiation.

La Celle PT(1), Polakowska RR.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, University of Rochester School of Medicine and
Dentistry, Rochester, New York 14642, USA. peter_lacelle@urmc.rochester.edu

Keratinocyte proliferation and differentiation result from expression of specific
groups of genes regulated by unique combinations of transcription factors. To
better understand these regulatory processes, we studied HOXA7 expression and its
regulation of differentiation-specific keratinocyte genes. We isolated the
homeobox transcription factor HOXA7 from keratinocytes through binding to a
differentiation-dependent viral enhancer and analyzed its effect on endogenous
differentiation-dependent genes, primarily transglutaminase 1. HOXA7
overexpression repressed transglutaminase 1-reporter activity. HOXA7 message
markedly decreased, and transglutaminase RNA increased, upon phorbol
ester-induced differentiation, in a protein kinase C-dependent manner.
Overexpression of HOXA7 attenuated the transglutaminase 1 induction by phorbol
ester, demonstrating that HOXA7 expression is inversely related to keratinocyte
differentiation, and to transglutaminase 1 expression. Antisense HOXA7 expression
activated transglutaminase 1, involucrin, and keratin 10 message and protein
levels, demonstrating that endogenous HOXA7 down-regulates multiple
differentiation-specific keratinocyte genes. In keeping with these observations, 
epidermal growth factor receptor activation stimulated HOXA7 expression. HOX
genes function in groups, and we found that HOXA5 and HOXB7 were also
down-regulated by phorbol ester. These results provide the first example of
protein kinase C-mediated homeobox gene regulation in keratinocytes, and new
evidence that HOXA7, potentially in conjunction with HOXA5 and HOXAB7, silences
differentiation-specific genes during keratinocyte proliferation, that are then
released from inhibition in response to differentiation signals.

PMID: 11435435  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


179. Oncogene. 2001 Feb 15;20(7):874-8.

Upregulation of Meis1 and HoxA9 in acute lymphocytic leukemias with the t(4 : 11)
abnormality.

Rozovskaia T(1), Feinstein E, Mor O, Foa R, Blechman J, Nakamura T, Croce CM,
Cimino G, Canaani E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot
76100, Israel.

Rearrangements of the human ALL-1 gene are frequently encountered in acute
lymphocytic leukemias (ALL) and acute myeloid leukemias (AML). These
rearrangements are mostly due to chromosome translocations and result in
production of chimeric proteins composed of the N-terminal fragment of ALL-1 and 
the C-terminal segments of the partner proteins. The most common chromosome
translocation involving ALL-1 is the t(4 : 11) associated with ALL. ALL-1 is the 
human homologue of Drosophila trithorax and directly activates transcription of
multiple Hox genes. A preliminary DNA microarray screen indicated that the Meis1,
HoxA9 and AC133 genes were overexpressed in ALLs with t(4 : 11), compared to ALLs
with very similar phenotype but without the chromosomal abnormality. These genes,
as well as additional five Hox genes, were subjected to comprehensive
semi-quantitative or quantitative RT-PCR analysis in 57 primary ALL and AML
tumors. Meis1 and HoxA9 were found expressed in 13/14 of ALLs with the t(4 : 11) 
and in 8/8 of AMLs with ALL-1 rearrangements. The two genes were not consistently
transcribed in other types of ALL. AC133 was transcribed in 13/14 of ALLs with
t(4 : 11), but in only 4/8 of AMLs with ALL-1 rearrangements. HoxA10 was
expressed in most leukemias with ALL-1 alterations, but was also transcribed in
PrePreB CD10(-) ALLs lacking the t(4 : 11). Expression of HoxA5, HoxA7, HoxC8 and
HoxC10 did not correlate with ALL-1 rearrangements. Coexpression of Meis1 and
HoxA9, overexpression of HoxA10, and overexpression or fusion of HoxA9 were
previously implicated in certain acute myeloid leukemias in mice and humans. The 
present work suggests that upregulation of Meis1, HoxA9, and possibly HoxA10
might also play a role in pathogenesis of acute lymphocytic and acute myeloid
leukemias associated with ALL-1 fusions.

PMID: 11314021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


180. Am J Pathol. 2001 Mar;158(3):955-66.

HOX genes in human lung: altered expression in primary pulmonary hypertension and
emphysema.

Golpon HA(1), Geraci MW, Moore MD, Miller HL, Miller GJ, Tuder RM, Voelkel NF.

Author information: 
(1)Pulmonary Hypertension Center, University of Colorado Health Sciences Center, 
4200 E. Ninth Ave., Denver, CO 80262, USA.

HOX genes belong to the large family of homeodomain genes that function as
transcription factors. Animal studies indicate that they play an essential role
in lung development. We investigated the expression pattern of HOX genes in human
lung tissue by using microarray and degenerate reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction survey techniques. HOX genes predominantly from the 3' end of
clusters A and B were expressed in normal human adult lung and among them HOXA5
was the most abundant, followed by HOXB2 and HOXB6. In fetal (12 weeks old) and
diseased lung specimens (emphysema, primary pulmonary hypertension) additional
HOX genes from clusters C and D were expressed. Using in situ hybridization,
transcripts for HOXA5 were predominantly found in alveolar septal and epithelial 
cells, both in normal and diseased lungs. A 2.5-fold increase in HOXA5 mRNA
expression was demonstrated by quantitative reverse transcriptase-polymerase
chain reaction in primary pulmonary hypertension lung specimens when compared to 
normal lung tissue. In conclusion, we demonstrate that HOX genes are selectively 
expressed in the human lung. Differences in the pattern of HOX gene expression
exist among fetal, adult, and diseased lung specimens. The altered pattern of HOX
gene expression may contribute to the development of pulmonary diseases.

PMCID: PMC1850338
PMID: 11238043  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


181. Mech Dev. 2001 Mar;101(1-2):233-6.

HoxA and HoxB cluster genes subdivide the digestive tract into morphological
domains during chick development.

Sakiyama J(1), Yokouchi Y, Kuroiwa A.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Biological Science, Graduate School of Science, Nagoya University,
Furo-cho, Chikusa-ku, 464-8602, Nagoya, Japan.

The digestive tract exhibits region-specific morphology and cytodifferentiation
along the anteroposterior axis. We analyzed the spatial expression patterns of
Hox genes belonging to the HoxA and HoxB cluster (Hoxa-4 approximately a-9,
Hoxb-5 approximately b-9) in the developing chick digestive tract. The expression
domains of these Hox genes correlated with morphological subdivision of the
digestive tract along the anteroposterior axis.

PMID: 11231082  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


182. Int J Oncol. 2001 Mar;18(3):617-22.

Differential expression of Hox A5 in human colon cancer cell differentiation: a
quantitative study using real-time RT-PCR.

Wang Y(1), Hung C, Koh D, Cheong D, Hooi SC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Physiology, Faculty of Medicine, National University of
Singapore, Singapore 119260.

Fifteen different homeobox genes were identified from normal colon mucosa,
untreated COLO 205 and herbimycin A treated COLO 205 cells in a degenerate primer
RT-PCR screen. Several of the homeobox genes, including Cdx-1, Cdx-2, Pdx-1 and
Hox A5, showed a trend toward differential expression in normal colon mucosa, and
undifferentiated COLO 205 cells. Hox A5 was recently shown to suppress growth and
induce p53-dependent apoptosis. To determine if Hox A5 was differentially
expressed in differentiation of colon epithelial cells, we quantified Hox A5
expression by real-time quantitative RT-PCR. Expression of Hox A5 was 5.3- and
4.8-fold higher in normal colon mucosa compared to COLO 205 and HT-29 cells,
respectively, suggesting that Hox A5 expression was higher in differentiated
compared to undifferentiated colon epithelial cells. To avoid the complexity of
tissue specimens and the influence of individual variation in Hox A5 expression, 
the effect of differentiation on Hox A5 expression was studied in COLO 205 cells 
treated with herbimycin A. The quantitative study showed that Hox A5 expression
was increased when COLO 205 cells were induced to differentiate. The expression
of Hox A5 was about 2-fold higher in the cells treated for 48 h compared to the
untreated poorly-differentiated cells. The present study shows that Hox A5 may be
involved in intestinal cell differentiation, in addition to its role in
apoptosis.

PMID: 11179495  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


183. Am J Physiol Lung Cell Mol Physiol. 2000 Nov;279(5):L863-71.

Hoxa-5 in mouse developing lung: cell-specific expression and retinoic acid
regulation.

Kim C(1), Nielsen HC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Newborn Medicine, Floating Hospital for Children at New England
Medical Center, Boston, Massachusetts 02111, USA. ckim@lifespan.org

Hoxa-5 is a homeobox gene that is highly expressed in the developing mouse lung. 
However, little is known about the molecular mechanisms controlling expression.
We characterized the ontogeny of Hoxa-5 gene and protein expressions during lung 
development and then studied the cell-specific effects of retinoic acid (RA) on
Hoxa-5 mRNA in fetal lung fibroblasts and MLE-12 mouse lung epithelial cells.
Strong but constant Hoxa-5 gene and protein expressions were detected from mouse 
lung on embryonic day 13.5 to postnatal day 2. At baseline, the gene was strongly
expressed in the fibroblasts of day 17.5 fetal mouse lungs. A very weak but
reproducible expression was present in the MLE-12 cells. RA stimulated gene
expression in both cell types in a time- and dose-dependent manner. Peak
expression occurred much later in the MLE-12 cells compared with that in
fibroblasts. Cycloheximide and actinomycin D treatment studies suggested that the
differences in RA effect on each cell type may involve the presence of a
repressor that can be overcome by RA.

PMID: 11053021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


184. Nature. 2000 Jun 22;405(6789):974-8.

Compromised HOXA5 function can limit p53 expression in human breast tumours.

Raman V(1), Martensen SA, Reisman D, Evron E, Odenwald WF, Jaffee E, Marks J,
Sukumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Program, Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Baltimore, Maryland
21231, USA.

Expression of the p53 gene protects cells against malignant transformation.
Whereas control of p53 degradation has been a subject of intense scrutiny, little
is known about the factors that regulate p53 synthesis. Here we show that p53
messenger RNA levels are low in a large proportion of breast tumours. Seeking
potential regulators of p53 transcription, we found consensus HOX binding sites
in the p53 promoterS. Transient transfection of Hox/HOXA5 activated the p53
promoter. Expression of HOXA5 in epithelial cancer cells expressing wild-type
p53, but not in isogenic variants lacking the p53 gene, led to apoptotic cell
death. Moreover, breast cancer cell lines and patient tumours display a
coordinate loss of p53 and HOXA5 mRNA and protein expression. The HOXA5 promoter 
region was methylated in 16 out of 20 p53-negative breast tumour specimens. We
conclude that loss of expression of p53 in human breast cancer may be primarily
due to lack of expression of HOXA5.

PMID: 10879542  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


185. J Biol Chem. 2000 Aug 25;275(34):26551-5.

HOXA5 regulates expression of the progesterone receptor.

Raman V(1), Tamori A, Vali M, Zeller K, Korz D, Sukumar S.

Author information: 
(1)Breast Cancer Program, Johns Hopkins Oncology Center, Baltimore, Maryland
21231, USA.

The majority of breast carcinomas show reduced or no expression of the
transcription factor, HOXA5. Recently, we have shown that HOXA5 is a potent
transactivator of p53 in breast cells and thus may affect the response of breast 
cancer cells to DNA damage. To determine whether HOXA5 played a role in growth
and homeostasis in breast cells, we studied its interaction with the progesterone
receptor. The progesterone receptor (PR) belongs to the superfamily of nuclear
receptors whose members co-ordinate morphogenesis of the mammary gland in
response to binding to their cognate ligands. An increased expression of the
endogenous PR gene was seen in MCF-7 cells following induced expression of an
exogenously transfected HOXA5 gene. HOXA5, but not HOXB4, -B5, or -B7 activated
the PR promoter in two breast cancer cell lines, MCF-7 and Hs578T. Deletion and
mutation analysis of the promoter identified a single HOXA5-binding site required
for transactivation of the PR gene by HOXA5. HOXA5 binds directly to this site in
the PR promoter. Thus, HOXA5 may behave as a transcriptional regulator of
multiple target genes, two among which are p53 and the progesterone receptor.

PMID: 10875927  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


186. Dev Dyn. 2000 Jan;217(1):62-74.

Regulation of the Hoxa4 and Hoxa5 genes in the embryonic mouse lung by retinoic
acid and TGFbeta1: implications for lung development and patterning.

Packer AI(1), Mailutha KG, Ambrozewicz LA, Wolgemuth DJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University College of
Physicians and Surgeons, New York, NY 10032, USA.

We have previously described a 5; cis-acting retinoic acid response element that 
is required for a subset of Hoxa4 expression, including the midgestation mouse
lung. As both retinoids and Hox genes have been implicated in lung development
and patterning, we have examined Hoxa4 expression in the developing mouse lung
and extended our work on its regulation. At E12.5, a Hoxa4/lacZ transgene is
expressed in the mesenchymal compartment of the lung. Later in development
expression is restricted to the proximal mesenchyme and is also observed in
smooth muscle cells, subepithelial fibroblasts, and alveolar cells. We show that 
both Hoxa4 and Hoxa5 are upregulated when cultured in the presence of all-trans
retinoic acid. In addition, retinoic acid extends the domain of Hoxa4 and Hoxa5
expression to the periphery of the explants where the distal epithelia are
developing. Interestingly, the effect of retinoic acid on Hoxa5 expression was
not observed in a Hoxa4 mutant background. In contrast, TGFbeta1 was found to
downregulate both Hoxa4 and Hoxa5 expression in cultured lung explants. We also
establish that retinoic acid has the effect of proximalizing the mouse lung when 
cultured in a serum-free medium, as evidenced by reduced expression of the distal
marker surfactant protein-C. Lungs from Hoxa4 mutant embryos exhibited a similar 
response to retinoic acid, suggesting that Hoxa4 alone is not required for the
proximalizing effect. Based on their retinoid-dependent expression, we conclude
that members of the group 4 and/or group 5 Hox genes are likely to be involved in
patterning of the mouse lung. Dev Dyn 2000;217:62-74.

Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 10679930  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


187. Differentiation. 1999 Nov;65(3):171-80.

The vimentin promoter as a tool to analyze the early events of retinoic
acid-induced differentiation of cultured embryonal carcinoma cells.

Benazzouz A(1), Duprey P.

Author information: 
(1)Institut Pasteur de Lille, France.

The vimentin gene encodes an intermediate filament protein expressed in the
parietal endoderm, mesodermal, and early neural cells in vivo but by most in
vitro-cultured cells regardless of their embryonic origin. Here we show that the 
vimentin gene promoter is very active in F9 embryonal carcinoma cells and
increases in activity during differentiation. Using a series of 5'-deletion
mutants, we provide evidence that the regions of the promoter involved in F9 cell
activity are different from those previously demonstrated to be active in
differentiated cell lines. Furthermore, we show that in differentiating F9 cells 
the activities of two different regions of the promoter are significantly
enhanced. A distal region (-1710/-957) appears to contain functional binding
sites for the murine Hox-A5 homeoprotein as demonstrated by band shift and
footprinting experiments. A proximal region (-140/-78) contains a 30-bp
repetitive sequence found in other genes activated during differentiation of F9
cells. Using band shift assays and methylation interference, we present evidence 
that a sequence-specific single-stranded DNA-binding protein(s) specifically
interacts with the minus strand of the 30-bp sequence.

PMID: 10631814  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


188. Gastroenterology. 1999 Dec;117(6):1339-51.

Coordinated expression of 3' hox genes during murine embryonal gut development:
an enteric Hox code.

Pitera JE(1), Smith VV, Thorogood P, Milla PJ.

Author information: 
(1)Gastroenterology Unit, Institute of Child Health, University College London,
London, England. J.Pitera@ich.ucl.ac.uk

BACKGROUND & AIMS: Hox genes are highly conserved developmental control genes
that may be organized and expressed in the form of a code required for correct
morphogenesis. Little is known about their control of the embryonal gut. However,
Hox paralogues 4 and 5, which are expressed at the sites of origin of vagal
neural crest cells and splanchnic mesoderm, are likely to be important. We have
studied the expression domains of these genes in the gut both spatially and
temporally.
METHODS: CD1 mice embryos of embryonic days E8.5-E17.5 were studied. The spatial 
and temporal expression patterns of messenger RNA of Hoxa4, b4, c4, d4, a5, c5,
and b5 homeoprotein were determined by in situ hybridization and
immunohistochemistry in whole embryos, whole gastrointestinal tracts, and
vibratome sections.
RESULTS: There were different spatial, temporal, and combinatorial expression
patterns in different morphological regions: foregut, prececal gut, cecum, and
postcecal gut. Two dynamic gradients, rostral and caudal, were coordinated with
nested expression domains along the gut primordium. Region-specific domains were 
present in the stomach and cecum.
CONCLUSIONS: The expression patterns of genes in paralogous groups 4 and 5
suggest that they are organized to form a specific enteric Hox code required for 
correct enteric development.

PMID: 10579975  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


189. Am J Physiol. 1999 Nov;277(5 Pt 1):C965-73.

Loss of Hoxa5 gene function in mice perturbs intestinal maturation.

Aubin J(1), Chailler P, Ménard D, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, Pavillon de L'Hôtel-Dieu de Québec, Québec G1R 2J6,
Canada J1H 5N4.

The Hox gene family of transcription factors constitutes candidate regulators in 
the molecular cascade of events that governs establishment of normal terminal
differentiation along the duodenum to colon axis. One member of this family,
Hoxa5, displays a dynamic pattern of expression during gut development. Hoxa5
transcripts are present in midgut mesenchyme at the time of remodeling,
supporting a role for this gene in digestive tract specification. To study the
role of Hoxa5 in proper intestinal development and maturation, we examined
whether Hoxa5 mutant mice exhibit any defect in this process. We report here that
even though Hoxa5 is not required for midgut morphogenesis, its loss of function 
perturbs the acquisition of adult mode of digestion, which normally is temporally
coordinated with the process of spontaneous weaning. Impaired maturation of the
digestive tract might be related to altered specification of intestinal
epithelial cells. Our findings provide evidence that Hoxa5 expression in the gut 
mesoderm is important for the region-specific differentiation of the adjacent
endoderm.

PMID: 10564089  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


190. Blood. 1999 Jul 15;94(2):519-28.

Constitutive HOXA5 expression inhibits erythropoiesis and increases myelopoiesis 
from human hematopoietic progenitors.

Crooks GM(1), Fuller J, Petersen D, Izadi P, Malik P, Pattengale PK, Kohn DB,
Gasson JC.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Research Immunology and Bone Marrow Transplantation, Department of
Pathology, Division of Hematology/Oncology, Childrens Hospital Los Angeles, CA,
USA.

The role of the homeobox gene HOXA5 in normal human hematopoiesis was studied by 
constitutively expressing the HOXA5 cDNA in CD34(+) and CD34(+)CD38(-) cells from
bone marrow and cord blood. By using retroviral vectors that contained both HOXA5
and a cell surface marker gene, pure populations of progenitors that expressed
the transgene were obtained for analysis of differentiation patterns. Based on
both immunophenotypic and morphological analysis of cultures from transduced
CD34(+) cells, HOXA5 expression caused a significant shift toward myeloid
differentiation and away from erythroid differentiation in comparison to CD34(+) 
cells transduced with Control vectors (P =.001, n = 15 for immunophenotypic
analysis; and P <.0001, n = 19 for morphological analysis). Transduction of more 
primitive progenitors (CD34(+)CD38(-) cells) resulted in a significantly greater 
effect on differentiation than did transduction of the largely committed CD34(+) 
population (P =.006 for difference between HOXA5 effect on CD34(+) v
CD34(+)CD38(-) cells). Erythroid progenitors (burst-forming unit-erythroid
[BFU-E]) were significantly decreased in frequency among progenitors transduced
with the HOXA5 vector (P =.016, n = 7), with no reduction in total CFU numbers.
Clonal analysis of single cells transduced with HOXA5 or control vectors
(cultured in erythroid culture conditions) showed that HOXA5 expression prevented
erythroid differentiation and produced clones with a preponderance of
undifferentiated blasts. These studies show that constitutive expression of HOXA5
inhibits human erythropoiesis and promotes myelopoiesis. The reciprocal
inhibition of erythropoiesis and promotion of myelopoiesis in the absence of any 
demonstrable effect on proliferation suggests that HOXA5 diverts differentiation 
at a mulitpotent progenitor stage away from the erythroid toward the myeloid
pathway.

PMID: 10397719  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


191. Curr Opin Pediatr. 1999 Jun;11(3):188-92.

Current concepts on lung development.

Warburton D(1), Lee MK.

Author information: 
(1)Childrens Hospital Los Angeles Research Institute, CA 90027, USA.
dwarburton@chlais.usc.edu

Recent molecular genetic and embryonic organ culture studies have implicated
several novel regulatory processes in the coordination of lung development.
Failure of pulmonary initiation results from interruptions of the sonic
hedgehog/patched/Gli and Nkx 2.1 signaling pathways. Sonic hedgehog null mutants 
and Gli2/Gli3 compound null mutants each exhibited failed tracheoesophageal
septation. However, proximodistal epithelial differentiation is disrupted by
compound Gli mutation, but is preserved in sonic hedgehog mutants. Null mutation 
of Nkx 2.1 also abrogates tracheoesophageal septation in association with thyroid
and pituitary agenesis. Primary tracheal branching is regulated by fibroblast
growth factor-10 signaling; in the murine fibroblast growth factor-10 null
phenotype, the lung fails to separate from the foregut and morphogenesis is
arrested distal to the trachea. Several genes in the fibroblast growth factor-10 
pathway have homologous roles in fruit fly tracheal organogenesis, and
corresponding Drosophila mutations yield strikingly similar phenotypes. Recent
data also indicate that airway branching can be regulated by vascular endothelial
growth factor, suggesting mutual regulation of airway and vascular development.
The bases of pulmonary left-right asymmetry and laterality have also been
investigated. The transforming growth factor-beta superfamily members Lefty-1,
Lefty-2, and nodal comprise a regulatory pathway whose function is required for
the development of left-right asymmetry, whereas left-right laterality is
dependent on regulation of dynein expression by the transcription factor
hepatocyte nuclear factor-4. Terminal lung differentiation is modulated by yet
another set of signals. Hoxa5 null mutants exhibit tracheal occlusion and
surfactant protein deficiency, whereas fibroblast growth factor receptor-2 and -4
compound null phenotypes include abrogated neonatal alveolization, perturbed
alveolar myofibroblast differentiation, and persistent neonatal elastin
deposition. These new contributions represent substantial advances toward a
comprehensive molecular model of pulmonary development.

PMID: 10349094  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


192. J Exp Zool. 1999 Apr 15;285(1):41-9.

Genomic organization of the Hoxa4-Hoxa10 region from Morone saxatilis:
implications for Hox gene evolution among vertebrates.

Snell EA(1), Scemama JL, Stellwag EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, East Carolina University, Greenville, North Carolina
27858, USA.

The physical mapping of Hox gene clusters from a limited number of vertebrates
has shown an overall conservation in gene organization in which major
evolutionary changes appear to be primarily restricted to the deletion of one or 
more genes, with the exception of the amplification of additional clusters as
postulated from zebrafish. We have sequenced a 31 kb region of the HoxA cluster
from the teleost Morone saxatilis (striped bass), both to provide a detailed
physical map of this region and to better understand the nature of Hox cluster
evolution among vertebrate taxa. We identified five linked Hox genes: Hoxa4,
Hoxa5, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, and Hoxa10, which are organized similarly to those of other 
vertebrates. Furthermore, we have documented the absence of the Hoxa6 and Hoxa8
genes within the 31 kb contig. Comparison of our results to those published for
other vertebrates suggests that the absence of Hoxa6 is a common characteristic
of teleosts, whereas the absence of Hoxa8 is common to vertebrates in general,
with the possible exception of zebrafish. Further comparisons between the HoxA
genes from Morone with those from the pufferfish, Fugu rubripes, revealed the
likely presence of a previously unreported Hoxa7 gene, or gene fragment, in the
Fugu genome, which suggests that the Hoxa7 gene, unlike Hoxa6 or Hoxa8, is
present in teleosts. In addition to these differences in vertebrate Hox cluster
structure, we also observed a marked reduction in the length of the Hoxa4--a10
region between vertebrate lineages representative of teleosts and mammals.
Comparative analysis of HoxA cluster organization among teleosts and mammals
suggests that cluster length reduction and lineage-specific gene loss events are 
hallmarks of Hox cluster evolution.

PMID: 10327649  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


193. Blood. 1999 May 15;93(10):3391-400.

Characterization of HOX gene expression during myelopoiesis: role of HOX A5 in
lineage commitment and maturation.

Fuller JF(1), McAdara J, Yaron Y, Sakaguchi M, Fraser JK, Gasson JC.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biological Chemistry, UCLA School of Medicine, UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA, USA.

During the process of normal hematopoiesis, proliferation is tightly linked to
maturation. The molecular mechanisms that lead to production of mature effector
cells with a variety of phenotypes and functions from a single multipotent
progenitor are only beginning to be elucidated. It is important to determine how 
these maturation events are regulated at the molecular level, because this will
provide significant insights into the process of normal hematopoiesis as well as 
leukemogenesis. Transcription factors containing the highly conserved homeobox
motif show considerable promise as potential regulators of hematopoietic
maturation events. In this study, we focused on identification and
characterization of homeobox genes of the HOX family that are important in
regulating normal human myeloid differentiation induced by the hematopoietic
growth factor, granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF). We have
identified three homeobox genes, HOX A5, HOX B6, and HOX B7, which are expressed 
during early myelopoiesis. Treating bone marrow cells with antisense
oligodeoxynucleotides to HOX A5 resulted in inhibition of granulocytic/monocytic 
hematopoiesis and increased the generation of erythroid progenitors. Also,
overexpression of HOX A5 inhibited erythroid differentiation of the K562 cell
line. Based on these observations, we propose that HOX A5 functions as an
important regulator of hematopoietic lineage determination and maturation.

PMID: 10233891  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


194. Dev Biol. 1999 Apr 1;208(1):134-46.

Hoxa5 gene regulation: A gradient of binding activity to a brachial spinal cord
element.

Nowling T(1), Zhou W, Krieger KE, Larochelle C, Nguyen-Huu MC, Jeannotte L,
Tuggle CK.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular, Cellular, and Developmental Biology Program, Iowa State University,
Ames, Iowa 50011, USA.

The Hox genes cooperate in providing positional information needed for spatial
and temporal patterning of the vertebrate body axis. However, the biological
mechanisms behind spatial Hox expression are largely unknown. In transgenic mice,
gene fusions between Hoxa5 (previously called Hox-1.3) 5' flanking regions and
the lacZ reporter gene show tissue- and time-specific expression in the brachial 
spinal cord in day 11-13 embryos. A 604-bp regulatory region with enhancer
properties directs this spatially specific expression. Fine-detail mapping of the
enhancer has identified several elements involved in region-specific expression, 
including an element required for expression in the brachial spinal cord. Factors
in embryonic day 12.5 nuclear extracts bind this element in electrophoretic
mobility shift assays (EMSA) and protect three regions from DNase digestion. All 
three sites contain an AAATAA sequence and mutations at these sites reduce or
abolish binding. Furthermore, this element binds specific individual embryonic
proteins on a protein blot. The binding activity appears as a gradient along the 
anterior-posterior axis with two- to threefold higher levels observed in extracts
from anterior regions than from posterior regions. In parallel with the EMSA, the
proteins on the protein blot also show reduced binding to probes with mutations
at the AAATAA sites. Most importantly, transgenic mice carrying Hoxa5/lacZ
fusions with the three AAATAA sites mutated either do not express the transgene
or have altered transgene expression. The brachial spinal cord element and its
binding proteins are likely to be involved in spatial expression of Hoxa5 during 
development.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10075847  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


195. Dev Dyn. 1999 Feb;214(2):127-40.

Multiple cis-acting regulatory regions are required for restricted
spatio-temporal Hoxa5 gene expression.

Larochelle C(1), Tremblay M, Bernier D, Aubin J, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Recherche en Cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, Canada.

Genetic analyses have revealed the essential role of the murine Hoxa5 gene for
the correct specification of the cervical and upper thoracic region of the
skeleton, and for the normal organogenesis and function of the respiratory tract,
both structures expressing Hoxa5 during embryogenesis. To understand how the
expression domains of the Hoxa5 gene are established during development, we have 
analyzed the cis-acting control regions mediating Hoxa5 gene expression using a
transgenic approach. Four transcripts are derived from the Hoxa5 locus. The
shortest and most abundant one displays a specific spatio-temporal profile of
expression at earlier stages and in more anterior structures along the embryonic 
axis than the larger forms. We established that an 11.1 kilobase pair (kb)
genomic fragment, extending from position -3.8 kb to +7.3 kb relative to Hoxa5
transcription initiation site, was sufficient to reproduce the temporal
expression and substantially reconstitute the spatial pattern of the major Hoxa5 
transcript. By deletion analyses, we identified a 2.1 kb fragment located
downstream of the Hoxa5 gene that possesses mesodermal enhancer activity.
Overall, the findings demonstrate that cis-acting regulatory elements essential
for the correct expression of the major Hoxa5 transcript are located both
upstream and downstream of the Hoxa5 coding sequences.

PMID: 10030592  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


196. J Neurobiol. 1998 Sep 15;36(4):559-71.

Regulation of a Purkinje cell-specific promoter by homeodomain proteins:
repression by engrailed-2 vs. synergistic activation by Hoxa5 and Hoxb7.

Sanlioglu S(1), Zhang X, Baader SL, Oberdick J.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Cell Biology, Neurobiology, and Anatomy, Neurobiotechnology
Center, The Ohio State University, Columbus 43210, USA.

We have previously demonstrated that a short sequence element (L7ATE) within the 
proximal promoter of a Purkinje cell-specific gene, pcp-2(L7), is required for
the normal pattern of expression of the gene in the cerebellum of transgenic
mice. The presence of a series of TAAT sequence motifs in this element suggested 
its interaction with homeodomain proteins. To extend these observations,
degenerate oligonucleotides were used to clone by reverse-transcriptase
polymerase chain reaction members of the mouse Hox gene family expressed in
neonatal cerebellum but not forebrain. Two of these, HoxB7 and HoxA5, are
continuously expressed from the neonatal period into adult stages in cerebellar
Purkinje cells. These Hox proteins are shown to synergistically activate the L7
promoter by cotransfection assay in vitro. In contrast, another homeodomain
protein that is normally expressed in Purkinje cells only during the embryonic
period, En-2, has a negative effect on L7 gene expression. These data suggest a
biphasic, combinatorial control mechanism for the Purkinje cell-specific
expression of the pcp-2(L7) gene.

PMID: 9740027  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


197. Dev Dyn. 1998 May;212(1):141-56.

Transcriptional interferences at the Hoxa4/Hoxa5 locus: importance of correct
Hoxa5 expression for the proper specification of the axial skeleton.

Aubin J(1), Lemieux M, Tremblay M, Behringer RR, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, Qc, Canada.

We have previously described a Hoxa5 mutant mouse line in which specification of 
axial identity is perturbed and viability is markedly reduced. In the present
study, we assay the Hoxa5 mutation in different genetic backgrounds and carry out
a complete analysis of skeletal transformations. Although Hoxa5 is expressed over
a large domain during embryogenesis, homeotic transformations of the axial
skeleton are confined between cervical vertebra C3 and thoracic vertebra T2,
which corresponds to the specific expression domain of the major Hoxa5
transcript. Loss of Hoxa5 function also affects the formation of the acromion in 
the appendicular skeleton. Disruption of the adjacent Hoxa4 gene leads to similar
homeotic transformations of the cervicothoracic vertebrae. To discriminate the
respective role of each gene, we generated transheterozygous animals carrying
inactivated Hoxa4 and Hoxa5 alleles on different chromosomes. Compound
heterozygous mutants exhibit homeotic transformations in the cervicothoracic
transition region more reminiscent to those observed in Hoxa5 homozygous mutants.
Although the Hoxa5 mutation does not significantly affect Hoxa4 expression, the
pattern of Hoxa5 expression is impaired in cis by the Hoxa4 mutation,
specifically in the cervicothoracic region of the prevertebral column. The
expression of Hoxa5 in this particular domain is also perturbed by the Hoxa5
mutation itself, raising the possibility of regional autoregulation. Altogether, 
these results demonstrate the crucial role of Hoxa5 in the specification of the
cervical and upper thoracic region of the skeleton and establish the importance
of its correct expression for the proper patterning of the embryo.

PMID: 9603431  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


198. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1998 Apr 28;245(3):746-51.

The heart of metamorphosing Mexican axolotl but not that of the cardiac mutant is
associated with the upregulation of Hox A5.

Gaur A(1), Bhatia R, Spring-Mills E, Lemanski LF, Dube DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, SUNY Health Science Center at
Syracuse, New York 13210, USA.

The Mexican axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum) is a facultative neotene which rarely
undergoes metamorphosis in the wild. We now report for the first time a dramatic 
increase in the expression of HoxA5 in axolotl hearts as determined by RT-PCR and
in situ hybridization analyses during spontaneous metamorphosis. The Mexican
axolotl has a naturally occurring mutation called gene c which allows hearts in
homozygous (c/c) embryos to form but never to beat. RT-PCR analysis has not shown
any significant differences of HoxA5 expression in normal and mutant hearts. The 
predicted open reading frame of our already published partial cDNA clone of HoxA5
was confirmed by expressing it as a fusion protein with Glutathione transferase
(GST fusion protein). Phylogenetic analysis with the deduced amino acid sequence 
of the isolated cDNA of the axolotl homolog of the murine HoxA5 shows that the
axolotl sequence clusters more closely with the human and mouse HoxA5 homologs
than with axolotl sequence. Western blot analysis revealed that anti-mouse HoxA5 
antibody recognizes the axolotl HoxA5 protein.

PMID: 9588186  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


199. J Invest Dermatol. 1998 Feb;110(2):110-5.

HOX homeobox genes exhibit spatial and temporal changes in expression during
human skin development.

Stelnicki EJ(1), Kömüves LG, Kwong AO, Holmes D, Klein P, Rozenfeld S, Lawrence
HJ, Adzick NS, Harrison M, Largman C.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California, San Francisco, USA.

The spatial and temporal deployment of HOX homeobox genes along the spinal axis
and in limb buds during fetal development is a key program in embryonic pattern
formation. Although we have previously reported that several of the HOX homeobox 
genes are expressed during murine skin development, there is no information about
developmental expression of HOX genes in human skin. We have now used reverse
transcriptase polymerase chain reaction, in conjunction with a set of degenerate 
oligonucleotide primers, to identify a subset of HOX genes that are expressed
during human fetal skin development. In situ hybridization analyses demonstrated 
that there were temporal and spatial shifts in expression of these genes. Strong 
HOXA4 expression was detected in the basal cell layers of 10 wk fetal epidermis
and throughout the epidermis and dermis of 17 wk skin, whereas weak signal was
present in the granular layer of newborn and adult skin. The expression patterns 
of HOXA5 and HOXA7 were similar, but their expression was weaker. In situ
hybridization analysis also revealed strong HOXC4 and weaker HOXB7 expression
throughout fetal development, whereas HOXB4 was expressed at barely detectable
levels. Differential HOX gene expression was also observed in developing hair
follicles, and sebaceous and sweat glands. None of the HOX genes examined were
detected in the adult dermis.

PMID: 9457903  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


200. Dev Biol. 1997 Dec 15;192(2):432-45.

Early postnatal lethality in Hoxa-5 mutant mice is attributable to respiratory
tract defects.

Aubin J(1), Lemieux M, Tremblay M, Bérard J, Jeannotte L.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de recherche en cancérologie de l'Université Laval, Centre Hospitalier 
Universitaire de Québec, Canada.

To uncover roles for the Hoxa-5 gene during embryogenesis, we have focused on
identifying structural and functional defects in organ systems underlying the
perinatal lethality in Hoxa-5 homozygous mutants. Analysis of the mutant
phenotype shows that Hoxa-5 is essential for normal organogenesis and function of
the respiratory tract. In homozygous newborn mutants, improper tracheal and lung 
morphogenesis can lead to tracheal occlusion, and to respiratory distress
associated with a marked decrease in the production of surfactant proteins.
Collectively, these defects likely underlie the pronounced mortality of
homozygous mutant pups. Furthermore, the loss of Hoxa-5 function results in
altered TTF-1, HNF-3 beta, and N-myc gene expression in the pulmonary epithelium.
Since expression of Hoxa-5 is confined to the mesenchymal component of the
developing trachea and lung, the effects observed in epithelial cells may result 
from a disruption of normal epithelial-mesenchymal interactions.

PMID: 9441679  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


201. Oncogene. 1997 May 29;14(21):2521-31.

The highest affinity DNA element bound by Pbx complexes in t(1;19) leukemic cells
fails to mediate cooperative DNA-binding or cooperative transactivation by
E2a-Pbx1 and class I Hox proteins - evidence for selective targetting of E2a-Pbx1
to a subset of Pbx-recognition elements.

Knoepfler PS(1), Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, University of California, San Diego, School of
Medicine, La Jolla 92093, USA.

Oncoprotein E2a-Pbx1 contains the N-terminal transactivation domains of E2a and
the majority of the homeodomain protein, Pbx1. Using recombinant proteins, both
Pbx1 and E2a-Pbx1 heterodimerize with Hox proteins on bipartite elements, Pbx1
binding a 5' TGAT core and Class I Hox proteins binding adjacent 3' TAAT, TTAT,
or TGAT cores. In contrast to these in vitro results, nuclear extracts from
E2a-Pbx1-transformed cells assemble an abundant Pbx-containing complex on
TGATTGAT that excludes E2a-Pbx1, suggesting that an uncharacterized in vivo
partner discriminates between E2a-Pbx1 and Pbx proteins, distinguishing it from
Hox proteins. Here, we describe the DNA-binding properties of this complex, and
identify TGATTGAC (PCE; Pbx Consensus Element) as its optimal recognition motif. 
In vitro, the PCE fails to bind heterodimers of Class I Hox proteins plus either 
Pbx1 or E2a-Pbx1. Likewise, in vivo, the PCE fails to mediate cooperative
transactivation by E2a-Pbx1 plus Class I Hox proteins. Thus, the PCE binds a Pbx 
dimer partner that behaves unlike Class I Hox proteins. Competition analysis
indicates that the Pbx-containing complex that binds the PCE also binds the
TGATTGAT Pbx-Hox element and binds promoter elements required for tissue-specific
expression of a number of cellular genes. Thus, different Pbx partners dictate
targetting of Pbx heterodimers to related DNA motifs that differ in the sequence 
of their 3' half-sites, and E2a-Pbx1 heterodimerizes with only a subset of Pbx
partners, restricting its potential DNA targets.

PMID: 9191052  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


202. Oncogene. 1997 Jan 9;14(1):75-83.

Heterodimerization of Hox proteins with Pbx1 and oncoprotein E2a-Pbx1 generates
unique DNA-binding specifities at nucleotides predicted to contact the N-terminal
arm of the Hox homeodomain--demonstration of Hox-dependent targeting of E2a-Pbx1 
in vivo.

Lu Q(1), Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Harvard Medical School, Department of Cell Biology, Boston, Massachusetts
02115, USA.

Hox proteins control genetic programs that orchestrate development, and a large
subset of Hox proteins can bind DNA elements as heterodimers with the Pbx family 
of homeodomain proteins. A transcriptionally activated version of Pbx1, E2a-Pbx1,
is an oncoprotein in human pre-B cell leukemia that strongly suppresses
differentiation and retains its ability to heterodimerize with Hox proteins.
Because monomeric Hox proteins bind very similar DNA motifs, it is unclear how
they activate diverse developmental programs. Here we demonstrate that
heterodimers containing different Hox proteins and a common Pbx1 or E2a-Pbx1
partner bind different DNA motifs. Structural models suggest that the specificity
of the Hox protein is altered by a conformation change involving residues in the 
N-terminal arm of the Hox homeodomain. Mutational analysis also supported the
hypothesis that unique sequences in the N-terminal arm of the Hox homeodomain are
at least partially responsible for mediating this specificity. In vivo, Hox
proteins directed E2a-Pbx1-mediated transactivation with moderate specificity to 
cognate Hox-Pbx motifs. Thus, the development specificity of individual Hox
proteins may be mediated, in part, by differential targeting of cellular genes by
Pbx1-Hox complexes. Likewise, through its function as a common heterodimer
partner, oncoprotein E2a-Pbx1 may be able to interfere with multiple programs of 
development that are induced by the sequential or simultaneous expression of Hox 
proteins during hematopoiesis.

PMID: 9010234  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


203. Mol Cell Biol. 1996 Apr;16(4):1632-40.

Structural determinants within Pbx1 that mediate cooperative DNA binding with
pentapeptide-containing Hox proteins: proposal for a model of a Pbx1-Hox-DNA
complex.

Lu Q(1), Kamps MP.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology, School of Medicine, University of California, San
Diego, La Jolla 92093, USA.

Genetic studies have identified a family of divergent homeodomain proteins,
including the human protooncoprotein Pbx1 and its drosophila homolog
extradenticle (Exd), which function as cofactors with a subset of Hox and HOM-C
proteins, and are essential for specific target gene expression. Pbx1/Exd binds
DNA elements cooperatively with a large subset of Hox/HOM-C proteins containing a
conserved pentapeptide motif, usually YPWMR, located just N terminally to their
homeodomains. The pentapeptide is essential for cooperative DNA binding with
Pbx1. In this study, we identify structural determinants of Pbx1 that are
required for cooperative DNA binding with the pentapeptide-containing Hox protein
HoxA5. We demonstrate that the homeodomain of Pbx1 contains a surface that binds 
the pentapeptide motif and that the Pbx1 homeodomain is sufficient for
cooperative DNA binding with a Hox protein. A sequence immediately C terminal to 
the Pbx1 homeodomain, which is highly conserved in Pbx2 and Pbx3 and predicted to
form an alpha-helix, enhances monomeric DNA binding by Pbx1 and also contributes 
to maximal cooperativity with Hox proteins. Binding studies with chimeric
HoxA5-Pbx1 fusion proteins suggest that the homeodomains of Pbx1 and HoxA5 are
docked on the representative element, TTGATTGAT, in tandem, with Pbx1 recognizing
the 5' TTGAT core motif and the Hox protein recognizing the 3' TGAT core. The
proposed binding orientation permits Hox proteins to exhibit further binding
specificity on the basis of the identity of the four residues 3' to their core
binding motif.

PMCID: PMC231149
PMID: 8657138  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


204. EMBO J. 1996 Mar 15;15(6):1313-22.

Functional dissection of the mouse Hox-a5 gene.

Zhao JJ(1), Lazzarini RA, Pick L.

Author information: 
(1)Brookdale Center for Molecular Biology, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New
York, NY 10029, USA.

The Hox genes are clustered in evolutionarily conserved complexes and encode DNA 
binding proteins that determine positional identity. Ubiquitous expression of fly
or mammalian Hox proteins in Drosophila embryos provides an assay for gene
function, since different Hox genes induce characteristic homeotic
transformations. Drosophila Sex combs reduced (Scr) and its murine cognate Hox-a5
produce identical transformations in transgenic flies. To study the contributions
of domains conserved between the two proteins, truncated versions of mouse Hox-a5
were assayed for their ability to activate transcription in cultured cells and to
induce homeotic transformation and activate target gene expression in transgenic 
embryos. The homeodomain is essential for protein function and/or nuclear
targeting; the N-terminal region contributes to transcription activity and
transformation potential in the embryo, but plays no role in determining
functional specificity. The YPWM motif is essential for biological specificity,
although it does not contribute to transcriptional activation potential. It was
recently shown that the Hox-a5 YPWM motif is necessary for in vitro interactions 
with the co-factor Pbx1. Our results suggest that this type of protein-protein
interaction may be essential for the biological activities of Hox-a5 and Scr.

PMCID: PMC450034
PMID: 8635464  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


205. Cell Growth Differ. 1996 Mar;7(3):327-37.

Regulation of retinoid-induced differentiation in embryonal carcinoma PCC4.aza1R 
cells: effects of retinoid-receptor selective ligands.

Mills KJ(1), Vollberg TM, Nervi C, Grippo JF, Dawson MI, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences, NIH, Research Triangle
Park, North Carolina 27709, USA.

Retinoic acid (RA) is a potent inducer of differentiation of embryonal carcinoma 
PCC4.aza1R cells into mesenchymal stem cells. Induction of Hoxa-1, Hoxa-5,
cellular retinoic acid-binding protein (CRABP) I and II, and retinoic acid
receptor (RAR)-beta expression occurs early in this multistage program of
differentiation. RA is also a potent inducer of these genes in the
differentiation-defective mutant PCC4(RA)-1; however, RA is much less effective
in the mutant cell line PCC4(RA)-2. The up-regulation of several of these genes
by RA is, at least in part, due to increased transcription. It is likely that
some of these changes are mediated either directly or indirectly by nuclear
retinoid receptors. Previously, we characterized the expression of RARs in
PCC4.aza1R and (RA)-1 and (RA)-2 cells. In this study, we show that these cells
also express retinoid X receptor (RXR)-alpha, RXR-beta, and RXR-gamma and that RA
treatment down-regulates the expression of RXR-gamma. No large differences were
found in RXR mRNA expression between parental and mutant cell lines except that
PCC4(RA)-1 cells expressed an 8-fold higher level of RXR gamma mRNA than the
parental cells. To obtain more insight into the retinoid signaling pathways
involved in the regulation of this pathway of differentiation, we examined the
action of two retinoid receptor-selective agonists and one antagonist. The
RAR-selective retinoid SRI-6751-84 is a very effective inducer of transactivation
of beta RARE-tk-LUC, but not of RXRE-tk-CAT, in PCC4.aza1R cells and is a very
potent inducer of morphological differentiation and Hoxa-1, Hoxa-5, CRABP II, and
RAR-beta expression. In contrast, the RXR-selective retinoid SR11,217, which
transactivates the RXRE-tk-CAT effectively, but beta RARE-tk-LUC poorly, is
unable to induce differentiation and has little effect on the expression of these
early genes. The RAR-alpha-selective antagonist Ro 41-5253, which inhibits
RARE-dependent transcriptional activation, has by itself no effect on the
differentiation of PCC4.aza1R cells. However, this antagonist is able to block
the induction of morphological differentiation by the RAR-selective retinoid as
well as the expression of Hoxa-1, Hoxa-5, CRABP II, and RAR-beta. Our data
suggest that the activation of RAR signaling pathways is important in initiating 
the cascade of changes in gene expression that result in the differentiation of
PCC4.aza1R into mesenchymal stem cells. In addition, we demonstrate that the two 
mutant cell lines, PCC4(RA)-1 and PCC4(RA)-2, are defective at different stages
of the differentiation program.

PMID: 8838863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


206. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1996 Jan 23;93(2):900-5.

Restricted expression of homeobox genes distinguishes fetal from adult human
smooth muscle cells.

Miano JM(1), Firulli AB, Olson EN, Hara P, Giachelli CM, Schwartz SM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, University of Texas M. D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston 77030, USA.

Smooth muscle cell plasticity is considered a prerequisite for atherosclerosis
and restenosis following angioplasty and bypass surgery. Identification of
transcription factors that specify one smooth muscle cell phenotype over another 
therefore may be of major importance in understanding the molecular basis of
these vascular disorders. Homeobox genes exemplify one class of transcription
factors that could govern smooth muscle cell phenotypic diversity. Accordingly,
we screened adult and fetal human smooth muscle cell cDNA libraries with a
degenerate oligonucleotide corresponding to a highly conserved region of the
homeodomain with the idea that homeobox genes, if present, would display a smooth
muscle cell phenotype-dependent pattern of expression. No homeobox genes were
detected in the adult human smooth muscle cell library; however, five
nonparalogous homeobox genes were uncovered from the fetal library (HoxA5,
HoxA11, HoxB1, HoxB7, and HoxC9). Northern blotting of adult and fetal tissues
revealed low and restricted expression of all five homeobox genes. No significant
differences in transcripts of HoxA5, HoxA11, and HoxB1 were detected between
adult or fetal human smooth muscle cells in culture. HoxB7 and HoxC9, however,
showed preferential mRNA expression in fetal human smooth muscle cells that
appeared to correlate with the age of the donor. This phenotype-dependent
expression of homeobox genes was also noted in rat pup versus adult smooth muscle
cells. While similar differences in gene expression have been reported between
subsets of smooth muscle cells from rat vessels of different-aged animals or
clones of rat smooth muscle, our findings represent a demonstration of a
transcription factor distinguishing two human smooth muscle cell phenotypes.

PMCID: PMC40155
PMID: 8570656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


207. Dev Genet. 1996;19(4):333-9.

Antenna to leg transformation: dynamics of developmental competence.

Larsen E(1), Lee T, Glickman N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Toronto, Ontario, Canada.

We explore the transformation of antenna to leg in Drosophila melanogaster, using
ectopically expressed transgenes with heat shock promoters: heat shock
Antennapedia, heat shock Ultrabithorax, and heat shock mouse Hox A5. We
determined the frequency of transformation of several leg markers in response to 
Antennapedia protein delivered by heat shock at different times and doses. We
also studied stage-specific responses to the transgene, heat shock mouse Hox A5. 
Results show that each marker has its own stage and dose-specific pattern of
response. The same marker could pass through a period of high-dose inhibition
followed by a dose-independent response and then a positive dose-dependent phase.
The heat shock-induced transgenes and spineless aristapedia transformed the
apterous enhancer trap antenna disc expression pattern toward the pattern found
in leg discs. These results are considered in relation to developmental
competence-the ability of developing tissue to respond to internal or external
influences. The results suggest that all genes tested interact with the same
competence system and that at least two classes of mechanisms are associated with
antenna to leg transformation: one comprises global mechanisms that permit
transformation over approximately 24 hr; the second class of mechanisms act very 
locally and are responsible for changes in dose response on the order of 4-8 hr.

PMID: 9023985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


208. DNA Cell Biol. 1995 Oct;14(10):817-23.

Activation of Hox gene expression by Hoxa-5.

Lobe CG(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada.

The Hox genes are expressed during embryonic development and have a role in
specifying antero-posterior positional information. The genes are arranged in
four clusters and a colinear relation exists between a gene's position in the
cluster and its anterior boundary of expression. Genes with more anterior
boundaries are also expressed earlier than genes with more posterior boundaries. 
Hox genes encode transcription factors; therefore, a model for the coordinate
regulation of the genes within the Hox clusters is that Hox gene products
regulate their own expression. To test this model, an inducible promoter was used
to direct expression of exogenous Hoxa-5 in F9 embryonal carcinoma cells and the 
effect on endogenous Hox gene expression was measured using RNase protection
assays. The production of Hoxa-5 from the expression vector activated a transient
and simultaneous expression of other upstream and downstream genes of the same
Hox cluster and genes from other clusters. There was an 8-hr delay between the
peak of expression from the Hox vector and the endogenous Hox gene response,
suggesting that Hox proteins activate other Hox genes indirectly or require
additional factors which, in F9 cells, they also induce.

PMID: 7546287  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


209. Gene. 1995 Sep 11;162(2):249-53.

Identification and expression of a homologue of the murine HoxA5 gene in the
Mexican axolotl (Ambystoma mexicanum).

Gaur A(1), Lemanski LF, Dube DK.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, SUNY Health Science Center at Syracuse
13210, USA.

An excellent model for studying heart development in vertebrates is the cardiac
non-function lethal mutant (gene c) Mexican axolotl, Ambystoma mexicanum. In
order to facilitate our analyses of the mutant system, we have undertaken a
search for stage-specific molecular markers during embryonic development of the
axolotl. We have concentrated on homeobox genes as suitable candidates for
monitoring molecular changes during development. A 270-bp probe encoding a
portion of the axolotl homeobox gene Ahox-1 was generated by PCR from a stage-18 
axolotl embryonic cDNA library. 32P-labelled PCR-amplified Ahox-1 DNA was used as
the probe for screening a lambda AM18 cDNA library using moderately stringent
conditions. We isolated six clones and determined their partial nucleotide (nt)
sequences. One of the clones, which has very high homology to human, mouse and
rat Hox A5 (83 and 99% at the nt and amino-acid levels, respectively, in the
homeodomain region), was analyzed further. RT-PCR analyses show that the level of
expression of HoxA5 is very low at stage 11 of embryonic development (gastrula). 
The level of expression reaches maximum at stage 25 (tailbud) and then plateaus
at stages 30 and 35 (heartbeat onset). Although the expression of Ahox-1 was also
found to start at stage 11, it reaches a maximum level at stage 25 and declines
at stage 35. We have also studied, using RT-PCR, the tissue-specific expression
of HoxA5 and Ahox-1 in juvenile axolotl.

PMID: 7557438  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


210. Gene. 1995 Jan 23;152(2):149-55.

The Sex combs reduced gene of Drosophila melanogaster has multiple transcripts.

Andrew DJ(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Stanford
University School of Medicine, CA 94305-5247.

The Sex combs reduced (Scr) homeotic gene of Drosophila melanogaster specifies
the development of structures within the most posterior head segment, the labium 
and the most anterior thoracic segment, the prothorax or T1. Here, the structure 
of Scr and correct sequence of the SCR protein are presented. Scr encodes a
417-amino-acid DNA-binding protein with sequence similarity to the mouse
homologues, HOXA5, B5 and C5. The greatest similarity is within the DNA-binding
homeodomain (hdm); shorter conserved motifs are found near the N terminus and a
region N-terminal to the hdm. As with most of the D. melanogaster homeotic genes,
Scr has alternative exons.

PMID: 7835693  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


211. Mol Cell Biol. 1994 Jul;14(7):4532-45.

Hox proteins have different affinities for a consensus DNA site that correlate
with the positions of their genes on the hox cluster.

Pellerin I(1), Schnabel C, Catron KM, Abate C.

Author information: 
(1)Center for Advanced Biotechnology and Medicine, University of Medicine and
Dentistry of New Jersey-Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway.

The hox genes, members of a family of essential developmental regulators, have
the intriguing property that their expression in the developing murine embryo is 
colinear with their chromosomal organization. Members of the hox gene family
share a conserved DNA binding domain, termed the homeodomain, which mediates
interactions of Hox proteins with DNA regulatory elements in the transcriptional 
control regions of target genes. In this study, we characterized the DNA binding 
properties of five representative members of the Hox family: HoxA5, HoxB4, HoxA7,
HoxC8, and HoxB1. To facilitate a comparative analysis of their DNA binding
properties, we produced the homeodomain regions of these Hox proteins in
Escherichia coli and obtained highly purified polypeptides. We showed that these 
Hox proteins interact in vitro with a common consensus DNA site that contains the
motif (C/G)TAATTG. We further showed that the Hox proteins recognize the
consensus DNA site in vivo, as determined by their ability to activate
transcription through this site in transient transfection assays. Although they
interact optimally with the consensus DNA site, the Hox proteins exhibit subtle, 
but distinct, preferences for DNA sites that contain variations of the
nucleotides within the consensus motif. In addition to their modest differences
in DNA binding specificities, the Hox proteins also vary in their relative
affinities for DNA. Intriguingly, their relative affinities correlate with the
positions of their respective genes on the hox cluster. These findings suggest
that subtle differences in DNA binding specificity combined with differences in
DNA binding affinity constitute features of the "Hox code" that contribute to the
selective functions of Hox proteins during murine embryogenesis.

PMCID: PMC358825
PMID: 7911971  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


212. DNA Cell Biol. 1994 Feb;13(2):149-60.

Identification and promoter activity of DNase I hypersensitive sites in the
region of the Hox-1.3 gene.

Lobe CG(1), Gruss P.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Max-Planck-Institute for Biophysical
Chemistry, Gottingen, Germany.

The Hox genes encode transcriptional regulatory proteins that play a critical
role in rostrocaudal specification in the developing embryo. The genes lie in
four clusters in the mouse and human genome and are arranged such that a colinear
relation exists between a gene's position in the cluster and the time of
activation of the gene's expression. We have analyzed the Hox-1.3 region within
the Hox-1 gene cluster for DNase I hypersensitive sites to identify putative
regulatory sequences. Fragments identified in this way were then analyzed for
transcriptional activity using gene transfer experiments in embryonal carcinoma
(EC) cells. Three DNase I hypersensitive sites were identified, one of which
includes the Hox-1.3 promoter and another, located 550 bp upstream, which
enhances the Hox-1.3 promoter activity. The third occurs in the intron and may
represent a Hox binding site. Significantly, the DNase I hypersensitive site
pattern of this region of the Hox-1 cluster is not altered when F9 stem cells are
differentiated with retinoic acid, suggesting that sequential activation of Hox
genes by retinoic acid is not due to a sequential opening of the chromatin
structure in the Hox gene region.

PMID: 7910023  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


213. Genes Dev. 1993 Nov;7(11):2085-96.

Specification of axial identity in the mouse: role of the Hoxa-5 (Hox1.3) gene.

Jeannotte L(1), Lemieux M, Charron J, Poirier F, Robertson EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Genetics and Development, Columbia University, New York, New
York 10032.

Numerous lines of study have suggested that the Hox genes, encoding putative
transcription factors, are key genes in the establishment of the body plan of the
mammalian embryo. To examine the role of Hoxa-5 (Hox1.3) gene during development,
we have used targeted mutagenesis in embryonic stem cells to produce a strain of 
mice carrying a disrupted Hoxa-5 allele. The viability of homozygous mutant mice 
is markedly reduced, with 50% of the mutant animals dying at birth or shortly
thereafter. Analysis of the skeleton of Hoxa-5 mutants reveals a number of
homeotic transformations restricted to the cervical and thoracic regions. Of
these, one of the most frequent morphological abnormalities is the posterior
transformation of the seventh cervical vertebra into the likeness of a thoracic
vertebra complete with a pair of ribs. These results demonstrate that the Hoxa-5 
gene has an important role in the establishment of the skeleton during
development and contributes to the process whereby the axial structures are
determined.

PMID: 7901120  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


214. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 1993 Oct 1;90(19):9120-4.

Neurotrophic activity of the Antennapedia homeodomain depends on its specific
DNA-binding properties.

Le Roux I(1), Joliot AH, Bloch-Gallego E, Prochiantz A, Volovitch M.

Author information: 
(1)Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique Unité Recherche Associée 1414,
Ecole Normale Supérieure, Paris, France.

In previous reports we have demonstrated that the 60-aa peptide corresponding to 
the homeodomain of the Drosophila protein Antennapedia (pAntp) translocates
through the membrane of neurons in culture, accumulates in neuronal nuclei, and
promotes neurite growth. To analyze the importance of specific pAntp DNA-binding 
properties in this phenomenon we have constructed three mutant versions of pAntp 
that differ in their ability to translocate through the membrane and to bind
specifically the cognate sequence for homeodomains present in the promoter of
HoxA5. We demonstrate that removing two hydrophobic residues of the third helix
inhibits pAntp internalization and suppresses its neurotrophic activity. We also 
show that pAntp neurotrophic activity is lost when mutations are introduced in
positions preserving its penetration and nuclear accumulation but abolishing its 
capacity to bind specifically the cognate DNA-binding motif for homeoproteins.
Our results strongly suggest that pAntp neurotrophicity requires both its
internalization and its specific binding to homeobox cognate sequences. We
propose that homeoproteins might regulate important events in the morphological
differentiation of the postmitotic neuron.

PMCID: PMC47513
PMID: 8105471  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


215. J Virol. 1993 Aug;67(8):4484-91.

Herpes simplex virus pathogenesis in transgenic mice is altered by the
homeodomain protein Hox 1.3.

Mitchell WJ(1), De Santo RJ, Zhang SD, Odenwald WF, Arnheiter H.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Neuropathology, National Institute of Neurological 
Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

The DNA sequence TAAT is the core binding motif for the mouse homeodomain protein
Hox 1.3 (proposed new name, Hoxa-5). These sequences are present within the
multiple TAATGARAT regulatory motifs in the promoters of the immediate-early
genes which control herpes simplex virus type 1 replication. To investigate the
role of this homeodomain protein in the regulation of herpes simplex virus gene
expression and pathogenesis, transgenic mice containing a mouse Hox 1.3 cDNA
under the control of the virus- and interferon-inducible Mx 1 promoter were
generated. After infection of transgenic mice with herpes simplex virus, Hox 1.3 
RNA and protein were expressed at the sites of virus replication. In these
transgenic mice, herpes simplex virus replication, spread of virus through the
host, and virus-induced mortality were markedly enhanced. Increased spread and
replication of herpes simplex virus were also observed in cultured fibroblasts
from transgenic mice. This finding suggests that in vivo, Hox 1.3 may increase
viral spread by increasing viral replication at the level of the individual
infected cells. These results demonstrate that expression of a transgene encoding
a single host protein, Hox 1.3, alters the pathogenesis of experimental herpes
simplex virus infection. We conclude that a protein that belongs to a class of
DNA-binding proteins which are best known for their role in regulating embryonic 
development may also regulate herpesvirus pathogenesis.

PMCID: PMC237831
PMID: 8392593  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


216. Am J Respir Cell Mol Biol. 1992 Jul;7(1):3-9.

Homeobox 1.3 expression: induction by retinoic acid in human bronchial
fibroblasts.

Bernacki SH(1), Nervi C, Vollberg TM, Jetten AM.

Author information: 
(1)Cell Biology Section, National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences,
National Institutes of Health, Research Triangle Park, North Carolina 27709.

Homeobox (Hox) genes code for transcriptional factors and are expressed during
many developmental and differentiative processes. In this study, we describe the 
induction of Hox 1.3 expression by retinoic acid (RA) in human bronchial
fibroblasts (HBF) derived from explants of bronchial tissue. Using Northern blot 
analysis, we show that RA induces Hox 1.3 mRNA 3- to 10-fold over steady-state
levels within 2 h after addition of RA to HBF culture medium. The induction was
dose dependent, reaching a half-maximal level at approximately 10(-8) M RA. This 
induction was not seen in human dermal fibroblasts. Immunofluorescent staining of
HBF showed a corresponding increase in Hox 1.3 protein levels in the nuclei. The 
increase in Hox 1.3 transcript levels in HBF was not abolished by cycloheximide
treatment, suggesting that synthesis of a protein intermediate is not required
for the induction. RA did not significantly alter the rate of degradation of the 
Hox 1.3 mRNA as determined by actinomycin D treatment, suggesting that the
increase in Hox 1.3 mRNA may be due to an increase in the rate of transcription. 
This study provides further evidence that bronchial fibroblasts are targets for
RA. Although downstream target genes for Hox 1.3 have not yet been identified, it
is likely that the induction of Hox 1.3 by RA is an early step in a cascade of
RA-induced changes in gene expression in bronchial fibroblasts.

PMID: 1627335  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


217. J Neurosci Res. 1989 Dec;24(4):457-69.

Progressive restriction in the distribution of the Hox-1.3 homeodomain protein
during embryogenesis.

Tani M(1), Odenwald WF, Lazzarini RA, Friedrich VL Jr.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, National Institutes of Neurological and
Communicative Disorders and Stroke, Bethesda, Maryland.

Expression of the murine homeobox containing gene Hox-1.3 was analyzed in mouse
embryos using polyclonal antisera to peptides predicted from cDNA and genomic
sequences. At the earliest stage examined, 7.5 days gestation, cell nuclei
throughout the three embryonic germ layers and in extraembryonic structures
derived from the fertilized ovum were strongly immunoreactive. Rostro-caudal
gradients or other patterns of regional differentiation in levels of expression
could not be seen. Surrounding maternal tissue showed only weak immunoreactivity.
At 8.5 days gestation, immunoreactivity was present in all embryonic structures
including neural tube, somites and lateral plate mesoderm, ectoderm and endoderm.
Immunoreactivity was progressively restricted thereafter. At 17 days gestation,
strong immunoreactivity was largely restricted to the nervous system, both
central and peripheral. Spinal cord was well stained, with a dramatic reduction
in intensity near the junction of spinal cord and brain. In addition to this
overall pattern, enhanced immunoreactivity appeared in limited populations of
newly-formed neuroblasts of spinal cord and brain, suggesting that Hox-1.3 might 
serve to regulate the development of specific types of neurons following
cessation of precursor cell mitosis.

PMID: 2689656  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


218. Genes Dev. 1989 Feb;3(2):158-72.

The Hox-1.3 homeo box protein is a sequence-specific DNA-binding phosphoprotein.

Odenwald WF(1), Garbern J, Arnheiter H, Tournier-Lasserve E, Lazzarini RA.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Viral and Molecular Pathogenesis, National Institute of
Neurological Diseases and Stroke, Bethesda, Maryland 20892.

Erratum in
    Genes Dev 1989 Aug;3(8):1267.

We report that the murine Hox-1.3 homeo domain protein is a nuclear
phosphoprotein capable of binding to specific DNA sequences. DNase I protection
of the Hox-1.3 gene promoter region with the Hox-1.3 protein identifies a binding
site 144 bp upstream from the start of transcription. Both phosphorylated and
nonphosphorylated forms bind DNA directly in a sequence-specific manner.
Electrophoretic mobility shift assays were performed with a set of synthetic
oligonucleotides representing either the DNase I-protected region of the Hox-1.3 
gene or partially homologous sequences present in promoter regions of other
characterized viral, yeast, and mammalian genes. From the results, we deduce a
consensus binding motif of CPyPyNATTAT/GPy. Base substitutions in the core ATTA
sequence severely reduce or abolish binding. In the SV40 enhancer, the Hox-1.3
binding motif overlaps both the octamer (Octa2) and the transactivator protein-1 
(AP-1) binding sites. The Hox-1.3 binding motif also overlaps the nuclear factor 
III (NF-III) octamer motif in the adenovirus-2 origin of DNA replication. Overlap
among DNA-binding sites suggests that regulation imparted by certain cis-elements
may be integrated by these different factors.

PMID: 2565857  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


