
61. Nucleic Acids Res. 2008 Jun;36(10):3214-25. doi: 10.1093/nar/gkn148. Epub 2008
Apr 16.

An ultraconserved Hox-Pbx responsive element resides in the coding sequence of
Hoxa2 and is active in rhombomere 4.

Lampe X(1), Samad OA, Guiguen A, Matis C, Remacle S, Picard JJ, Rijli FM,
Rezsohazy R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Developmental Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, 1200
Brussels, Belgium, Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et
Cellulaire, UMR 7104 CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, BP 10142-CU de
Strasbourg, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, France.

The Hoxa2 gene has a fundamental role in vertebrate craniofacial and hindbrain
patterning. Segmental control of Hoxa2 expression is crucial to its function and 
several studies have highlighted transcriptional regulatory elements governing
its activity in distinct rhombomeres. Here, we identify a putative Hox-Pbx
responsive cis-regulatory sequence, which resides in the coding sequence of Hoxa2
and is an important component of Hoxa2 regulation in rhombomere (r) 4. By using
cell transfection and chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays, we show that
this regulatory sequence is responsive to paralogue group 1 and 2 Hox proteins
and to their Pbx co-factors. Importantly, we also show that the Hox-Pbx element
cooperates with a previously reported Hoxa2 r4 intronic enhancer and that its
integrity is required to drive specific reporter gene expression in r4 upon
electroporation in the chick embryo hindbrain. Thus, both intronic as well as
exonic regulatory sequences are involved in Hoxa2 segmental regulation in the
developing r4. Finally, we found that the Hox-Pbx exonic element is embedded in a
larger 205-bp long ultraconserved genomic element (UCE) shared by all vertebrate 
genomes. In this respect, our data further support the idea that extreme
conservation of UCE sequences may be the result of multiple superposed functional
and evolutionary constraints.

PMCID: PMC2425489
PMID: 18417536  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


62. Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Apr;82(4):982-91. doi: 10.1016/j.ajhg.2008.02.015.

A mutation in HOXA2 is responsible for autosomal-recessive microtia in an Iranian
family.

Alasti F(1), Sadeghi A, Sanati MH, Farhadi M, Stollar E, Somers T, Van Camp G.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Medical Genetics, University of Antwerp, 2610 Antwerp, Belgium.

Erratum in
    Am J Hum Genet. 2008 Sep;83(3):424.

Microtia, a congenital deformity manifesting as an abnormally shaped or absent
external ear, occurs in one out of 8,000-10,000 births. We ascertained a
consanguineous Iranian family segregating with autosomal-recessive bilateral
microtia, mixed symmetrical severe to profound hearing impairment, and partial
cleft palate. Genome-wide linkage analysis localized the responsible gene to
chromosome 7p14.3-p15.3 with a maximum multi-point LOD score of 4.17. In this
region, homeobox genes from the HOXA cluster were the most interesting
candidates. Subsequent DNA sequence analysis of the HOXA1 and HOXA2 homeobox
genes from the candidate region identified an interesting HOXA2 homeodomain
variant: a change in a highly conserved amino acid (p.Q186K). The variant was not
found in 231 Iranian and 109 Belgian control samples. The critical contribution
of HoxA2 for auditory-system development has already been shown in mouse models. 
We built a homology model to predict the effect of this mutation on the structure
and DNA-binding activity of the homeodomain by using the program Modeler 8v2. In 
the model of the mutant homeodomain, the position of the mutant lysine side chain
is consistently farther away from a nearby phosphate group; this altered position
results in the loss of a hydrogen bond and affects the DNA-binding activity.

PMCID: PMC2427268
PMID: 18394579  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


63. Cell Biol Int. 2008 Jun;32(6):671-8. doi: 10.1016/j.cellbi.2008.01.293. Epub 2008
Feb 3.

In vitro odontoblast-like cell differentiation of cranial neural crest cells
induced by fibroblast growth factor 8 and dentin non-collagen proteins.

Jiang HB(1), Tian WD, Liu LK, Xu Y.

Author information: 
(1)College of Stomatology, Nanjing Medical University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210029,
PR China. jhbtooth@yahoo.com.cn

During tooth development, cranial neural crest (CNC) cells represent a population
of pluripotent stem cells that give rise to various dental tissues. This study
aimed to investigate whether CNC cells could differentiate into odontoblast-like 
cells by in vitro induction. CNC cells were isolated from explants of cranial
neural tubes and cultured in serum-free Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium
(DMEM)/F12 medium which contained fibroblast growth factor 8 (FGF8) and dentin
non-collagen proteins (DNCP). The initiation of controlled differentiation was
determined using histological assays, and the expression of specific gene
phenotypes was detected using immunocytochemical staining and reverse
transcription--polymerase chain reaction (RT--PCR). The first branchial arch
phenotype of the CNC cells demonstrated negative Hoxa2 expression and positive
vimentin expression in the presence of 100 ng/ml FGF8. Following DNCP induction, 
the CNC cells became bipolar, demonstrated high alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
activity, and formed mineralized nodules. In addition, the expression of DSPP,
DMP1, and collagen type I confirmed the odontoblast phenotype. The results
indicate that the tissue-specific cellular differentiation (odontoblast-like
cells) of early-stage embryonic-derived cells (such as CNC cells) can be induced 
by adult extracellular matrix proteins (such as DNCP). CNC cells may be used as a
valuable cell model for research on dental tissue differentiation and
regeneration.

PMID: 18339562  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


64. Development. 2008 Apr;135(8):1463-70. doi: 10.1242/dev.017624. Epub 2008 Mar 5.

Six2 functions redundantly immediately downstream of Hoxa2.

Kutejova E(1), Engist B, Self M, Oliver G, Kirilenko P, Bobola N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Freiburg, Germany.

Hox transcription factors control morphogenesis along the head-tail axis of
bilaterians. Because their direct functional targets are still poorly understood 
in vertebrates, it remains unclear how the positional information encoded by Hox 
genes is translated into morphogenetic changes. Here, we conclusively demonstrate
that Six2 is a direct downstream target of Hoxa2 in vivo and show that the
ectopic expression of Six2, observed in the absence of Hoxa2, contributes to the 
Hoxa2 mouse mutant phenotype. We propose that Six2 acts to mediate Hoxa2 control 
over the insulin-like growth factor pathway during branchial arch development.

PMID: 18321982  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


65. Dev Biol. 2008 Feb 1;314(1):171-88. doi: 10.1016/j.ydbio.2007.11.032. Epub 2007
Dec 7.

Altered neuronal lineages in the facial ganglia of Hoxa2 mutant mice.

Yang X(1), Zhou Y, Barcarse EA, O'Gorman S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Case Western Reserve University, School of
Medicine, 10900 Euclid Avenue, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA.

Neurons of cranial sensory ganglia are derived from the neural crest and
ectodermal placodes, but the mechanisms that control the relative contributions
of each are not understood. Crest cells of the second branchial arch generate few
facial ganglion neurons and no vestibuloacoustic ganglion neurons, but crest
cells in other branchial arches generate many sensory neurons. Here we report
that the facial ganglia of Hoxa2 mutant mice contain a large population of
crest-derived neurons, suggesting that Hoxa2 normally represses the neurogenic
potential of second arch crest cells. This may represent an anterior
transformation of second arch neural crest cells toward a fate resembling that of
first arch neural crest cells, which normally do not express Hoxa2 or any other
Hox gene. We additionally found that overexpressing Hoxa2 in cultures of P19
embryonal carcinoma cells reduced the frequency of spontaneous neuronal
differentiation, but only in the presence of cotransfected Pbx and Meis Hox
cofactors. Finally, expression of Hoxa2 and the cofactors in chick neural crest
cells populating the trigeminal ganglion also reduced the frequency of
neurogenesis in the intact embryo. These data suggest an unanticipated role for
Hox genes in controlling the neurogenic potential of at least some cranial neural
crest cells.

PMID: 18164701  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


66. Genes Dev. 2007 Dec 15;21(24):3369-80.

PRMT6-mediated methylation of R2 in histone H3 antagonizes H3 K4 trimethylation.

Hyllus D(1), Stein C, Schnabel K, Schiltz E, Imhof A, Dou Y, Hsieh J, Bauer UM.

Author information: 
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Tumor Research (IMT), Philipps-University
of Marburg, 35032 Marburg, Germany.

The arginine methyltransferase PRMT6 (protein arginine methyltransferase 6) has
been shown recently to regulate DNA repair and gene expression. As arginine
methylation of histones is an important mechanism in transcriptional regulation, 
we asked whether PRMT6 possesses activity toward histones. We show here that
PRMT6 methylates histone H3 at R2 and histones H4/H2A at R3 in vitro.
Overexpression and knockdown analysis identify PRMT6 as the major H3 R2
methyltransferase in vivo. We find that H3 R2 methylation inhibits H3 K4
trimethylation and recruitment of WDR5, a subunit of the MLL (mixed lineage
leukemia) K4 methyltransferase complex, to histone H3 in vitro. Upon PRMT6
overexpression, transcription of Hox genes and Myc-dependent genes, both
well-known targets of H3 K4 trimethylation, decreases. This transcriptional
repression coincides with enhanced occurrence of H3 R2 methylation and PRMT6 as
well as reduced levels of H3 K4 trimethylation and MLL1/WDR5 recruitment at the
HoxA2 gene. Upon retinoic acid-induced transcriptional activation of HoxA2 in a
cell model of neuronal differentiation, PRMT6 recruitment and H3 R2 methylation
are diminished and H3 K4 trimethylation increases at the gene. Our findings
identify PRMT6 as the mammalian methyltransferase for H3 R2 and establish the
enzyme as a crucial negative regulator of H3 K4 trimethylation and
transcriptional activation.

PMCID: PMC2113036
PMID: 18079182  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


67. Dev Genes Evol. 2007 Dec;217(11-12):749-58. Epub 2007 Oct 9.

Comparative analysis of Hox paralog group 2 gene expression during Nile tilapia
(Oreochromis niloticus) embryonic development.

Le Pabic P(1), Stellwag EJ, Brothers SN, Scemama JL.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, East Carolina University, Howell Science Complex,
Greenville, NC 27858, USA.

The hindbrain and pharyngeal arch-derived structures of vertebrates are
determined, at least in part, by Hox paralog group 2 genes. In sarcopterygians,
the Hoxa2 gene alone appears to specify structures derived from the second
pharyngeal arch (PA2), while in zebrafish (Danio rerio), either of the two Hox
PG2 genes, hoxa2b or hoxb2a, can specify PA2-derived structures. We previously
reported three Hox PG2 genes in striped bass (Morone saxatilis), including
hoxa2a, hoxa2b, and hoxb2a and observed that only HoxA cluster genes are
expressed in PA2, indicative that they function alone or together to specify PA2.
In this paper, we present the cloning and expression analysis of Nile tilapia
(Oreochromis niloticus) Hox PG2 genes and show that all three genes are expressed
in the hindbrain and in PA2. The expression of hoxb2a in PA2 was unexpected given
the close phylogenetic relationship of Nile tilapia and striped bass, both of
which are members of the order Perciformes. A reanalysis of striped bass hoxb2a
expression demonstrated that it is expressed in PA2 with nearly the same temporal
and spatial expression pattern as its Nile tilapia ortholog. Further, we
determined that Nile tilapia and striped bass hoxa2a orthologs are expressed in
PA2 well beyond the onset of chondrogenesis whereas neither hoxa2b nor hoxb2a
expression persist until this stage, which, according to previous hypotheses,
suggests that hoxa2a orthologs in these two species function alone as selector
genes of PA2 identity.

PMID: 17924140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


68. Neural Dev. 2007 Sep 26;2:19.

Distinct roles of Hoxa2 and Krox20 in the development of rhythmic neural networks
controlling inspiratory depth, respiratory frequency, and jaw opening.

Chatonnet F(1), Wrobel LJ, Mézières V, Pasqualetti M, Ducret S, Taillebourg E,
Charnay P, Rijli FM, Champagnat J.

Author information: 
(1)NGI, UPR 2216, Institut de Neurobiologie Alfred Fessard IFR2218, Centre
National de Recherche Scientifique, F-91198 Gif sur Yvette Cedex, France.
Fabrice.Chatonnet@ens-lyon.org

BACKGROUND: Little is known about the involvement of molecular determinants of
segmental patterning of rhombomeres (r) in the development of rhythmic neural
networks in the mouse hindbrain. Here, we compare the phenotypes of mice carrying
targeted inactivations of Hoxa2, the only Hox gene expressed up to r2, and of
Krox20, expressed in r3 and r5. We investigated the impact of such mutations on
the neural circuits controlling jaw opening and breathing in newborn mice,
compatible with Hoxa2-dependent trigeminal defects and direct regulation of Hoxa2
by Krox20 in r3.
RESULTS: We found that Hoxa2 mutants displayed an impaired oro-buccal reflex,
similarly to Krox20 mutants. In contrast, while Krox20 is required for the
development of the rhythm-promoting parafacial respiratory group (pFRG)
modulating respiratory frequency, Hoxa2 inactivation did not affect neonatal
breathing frequency. Instead, we found that Hoxa2-/- but not Krox20-/- mutation
leads to the elimination of a transient control of the inspiratory amplitude
normally occurring during the first hours following birth. Tracing of r2-specific
progenies of Hoxa2 expressing cells indicated that the control of inspiratory
activity resides in rostral pontine areas and required an intact r2-derived
territory.
CONCLUSION: Thus, inspiratory shaping and respiratory frequency are under the
control of distinct Hox-dependent segmental cues in the mammalian brain.
Moreover, these data point to the importance of rhombomere-specific genetic
control in the development of modular neural networks in the mammalian hindbrain.

PMCID: PMC2098766
PMID: 17897445  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


69. J Neurosci. 2007 Sep 5;27(36):9670-81.

Fate-mapping the mammalian hindbrain: segmental origins of vestibular projection 
neurons assessed using rhombomere-specific Hoxa2 enhancer elements in the mouse
embryo.

Pasqualetti M(1), Díaz C, Renaud JS, Rijli FM, Glover JC.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique/Inserm/Université Louis Pasteur, Unité
Mixte de Recherche 7104, Commanaute Urbaine de Strasbourg, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, 
France.

As a step toward generating a fate map of identified neuron populations in the
mammalian hindbrain, we assessed the contributions of individual rhombomeres to
the vestibular nuclear complex, a major sensorimotor area that spans the entire
rhombencephalon. Transgenic mice harboring either the lacZ or the enhanced green 
fluorescent protein reporter genes under the transcriptional control of
rhombomere-specific Hoxa2 enhancer elements were used to visualize
rhombomere-derived domains. We labeled functionally identifiable vestibular
projection neuron groups retrogradely with conjugated dextran-amines at
successive embryonic stages and obtained developmental fate maps through direct
comparison with the rhombomere-derived domains in the same embryos. The fate maps
show that each vestibular neuron group derives from a unique rostrocaudal domain 
that is relatively stable developmentally, suggesting that anteroposterior
migration is not a major contributor to the rostrocaudal patterning of the
vestibular system. Most of the groups are multisegmental in origin, and each
rhombomere is fated to give rise to two or more vestibular projection neuron
types, in a complex pattern that is not segmentally iterated. Comparison with
studies in the chicken embryo shows that the rostrocaudal patterning of
identified vestibular projection neuron groups is generally well conserved
between avians and mammalians but that significant species-specific differences
exist in the rostrocaudal limits of particular groups. This mammalian hindbrain
fate map can be used as the basis for targeting genetic manipulation to specific 
subpopulations of vestibular projection neurons.

PMID: 17804628  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


70. Int J Mol Med. 2007 Oct;20(4):621-9.

Quantitative expression of the homeobox and integrin genes in human gastric
carcinoma.

Rossi Degl'Innocenti D(1), Castiglione F, Buccoliero AM, Bechi P, Taddei GL,
Freschi G, Taddei A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Pathology and Oncology, School of Medicine, University of 
Florence, Florence, Italy. duccio.rossideglinnocenti@unifi.it

The homeobox (HOX) genes are a large family of regulator genes involved in the
control of developmental processes and cell differentiation. The HOX genes encode
transcription factors, and an increasing number of studies have shown that these 
genes may be implicated in the growth and the progression of many types of
tumours. The present study investigated the expression of the HOX and integrin
genes and their relationships in gastric carcinoma. We analyzed the RNA
expression of 13 HOX genes from HOXA, C and D clusters and alphaV, alpha5 and
alpha8 integrin genes in 24 gastric cancer samples by quantitative real-time PCR.
The results showed that the HOXA2 gene and the alpha8 integrin gene had a lower
expression in tumour samples than in normal gastric mucosas. The comparison
between the HOX and integrin genes showed that HOXA2 and alphaV integrin
expression presented the same trend in 83% of the samples. Moreover, in cancer
samples that expressed the HOXD11 gene, the expression of alphaV integrin was
lower with respect to normal mucosas. The different roles of HOX and integrin
genes in gastric carcinoma remain to be fully elucidated. These findings suggest 
that the HOX genes may play a critical role in the genesis, maintenance and
diffusion of gastric carcinoma.

PMID: 17786296  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


71. Dev Dyn. 2007 Sep;236(9):2675-84.

Identification of Lmo1 as part of a Hox-dependent regulatory network for
hindbrain patterning.

Matis C(1), Oury F, Remacle S, Lampe X, Gofflot F, Picard JJ, Rijli FM, Rezsohazy
R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Developmental Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium.

The embryonic functions of Hox proteins have been extensively investigated in
several animal phyla. These transcription factors act as selectors of
developmental programmes, to govern the morphogenesis of multiple structures and 
organs. However, despite the variety of morphogenetic processes Hox proteins are 
involved in, only a limited set of their target genes has been identified so far.
To find additional targets, we used a strategy based upon the simultaneous
overexpression of Hoxa2 and its cofactors Pbx1 and Prep in a cellular model.
Among genes whose expression was upregulated, we identified LMO1, which codes for
an intertwining LIM-only factor involved in protein-DNA oligomeric complexes. By 
analysing its expression in Hox knockout mice, we show that Lmo1 is
differentially regulated by Hoxa2 and Hoxb2, in specific columns of hindbrain
neuronal progenitors. These results suggest that Lmo1 takes part in a Hox
paralogue 2-dependent network regulating anteroposterior and dorsoventral
hindbrain patterning.

(c) 2007 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 17676642  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


72. Zhonghua Wei Chang Wai Ke Za Zhi. 2007 Jul;10(4):365-7.

[Expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines].

[Article in Chinese]

Gu ZD(1), Chen XM, Zhang W, Gu J, Chen KN.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Thoracic Surgery, Peking University School of Oncology, Beijing 
Cancer Hospital, Beijing Institute for Cancer Research, Beijing 100036, China.

OBJECTIVE: To identify whether HOX genes can be used as markers of esophageal
cancer.
METHODS: The expression of 39 HOX genes in esophageal cancer cell lines was
examined. Specific primers were designed and RT- PCR was performed for each HOX
gene members in above esophageal cancer cell lines, EC109 and CAES.
RESULTS: Fifteen out of 39 HOX genes were expressed in esophageal cancer cell
lines. They were HOXA2, HOXA7, HOXA9, HOXA10, HOXA13, HOXB7, HOXB9, HOXC4, HOXC5,
HOXC6, HOXC8, HOXC9, HOXD9, HOXD10, and HOXD13 respectively. Of them. Eleven
genes were overlapped with the ones detected in human esophageal squamous cell
carcinoma(ESCC) in our former study.
CONCLUSION: This study reconfirms our former that some HOX genes are deregulated 
expressed in ESCC, which provides more positive evidence for their roles in ESCC.

PMID: 17659465  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


73. Differentiation. 2007 Mar;75(3):256-67.

Expression of Hoxa2 in cells entering chondrogenesis impairs overall cartilage
development.

Massip L(1), Ectors F, Deprez P, Maleki M, Behets C, Lengelé B, Delahaut P,
Picard J, Rezsöhazy R.

Author information: 
(1)Developmental Genetics Unit, Université catholique de Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium. rezsohazy@vete.ucl.ac.be

Vertebrate Hox genes act as developmental architects by patterning embryonic
structures like axial skeletal elements, limbs, brainstem territories, or neural 
crest derivatives. While active during the patterning steps of development, these
genes turn out to be down-regulated in specific differentiation programs like
that leading to chondrogenesis. To investigate why chondrocyte differentiation is
correlated to the silencing of a Hox gene, we generated transgenic mice allowing 
Cre-mediated conditional misexpression of Hoxa2 and induced this gene in Collagen
2 alpha 1-expressing cells committed to enter chondrogenesis. Persistent Hoxa2
expression in chondrogenic cells resulted in overall chondrodysplasia with
delayed cartilage hypertrophy, mineralization, and ossification but without
proliferation defects. The absence of skeletal patterning anomaly and the regular
migration of precursor cells indicated that the condensation step of
chondrogenesis was normal. In contrast, closer examination at the differentiation
step showed severely impaired chondrocyte differentiation. In addition, this
inhibition affected structures independently of their embryonic origin. In
conclusion, for the first time here, by a cell-type specific misexpression, we
precisely uncoupled the patterning function of Hoxa2 from its involvement in
regulating differentiation programs per se and demonstrate that Hoxa2 displays an
anti-chondrogenic activity that is distinct from its patterning function.

PMID: 17359301  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


74. Med Sci (Paris). 2007 Mar;23(3):247-9.

[Hoxa2: a key gene for the facial somatosensory map].

[Article in French]

Oury F, Rijli FM.

PMID: 17349280  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


75. Oncol Res. 2006;16(5):217-24.

Aberrant expression of HOX genes in oral dysplasia and squamous cell carcinoma
tissues.

Hassan NM(1), Hamada J, Murai T, Seino A, Takahashi Y, Tada M, Zhang X,
Kashiwazaki H, Yamazaki Y, Inoue N, Moriuchi T.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Cancer-Related Genes, Institute for Genetic Medicine, Hokkaido
University, Sapporo, Japan.

Human HOX genes consist of 39 genes and encode transcription factors that
function as master developmental regulators. We hypothesized that the
misexpression of HOX genes was associated with carcinogenesis and malignant
progression. The expression levels of 39 HOX genes in 31 human oral squamous cell
carcinoma (SCC), 11 dysplasia, and 10 normal mucosa tissues were quantified by
the real-time RT-PCR method. The expression levels of 18 HOX genes in the SCC
tissues were significantly higher than those in the normal mucosa tissues. The
dysplasia tissues showed higher expression of HOXA2, A3, B3, and D10 than normal 
mucosa tissues whereas they showed lower expression of HOXA1, B7, B9, and C8 than
SCC. The SCC with lymph node metastasis showed high expression of HOXC6 compared 
to the SCC without it. These results suggest that misexpressions of particular
HOX genes are implicated in the development of oral dysplasia and SCC.

PMID: 17294802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


76. FEBS Lett. 2007 Jan 9;581(1):1-7. Epub 2006 Dec 4.

hnRNP-U enhances the expression of specific genes by stabilizing mRNA.

Yugami M(1), Kabe Y, Yamaguchi Y, Wada T, Handa H.

Author information: 
(1)Graduate School of Bioscience and Biotechnology, Tokyo Institute of
Technology, Yokohama, Kanagawa, Japan.

Heterogeneous nuclear ribonucleoproteins (hnRNPs) are thought to be involved in
pre-mRNA processing. hnRNP-U, also termed scaffold attachment factor A (SAF-A),
binds to pre-mRNA and nuclear matrix/scaffold attachment region DNA elements.
However, its role in the regulation of gene expression is as yet poorly
understood. In the present study, we show that hnRNP-U specifically enhances the 
expression of tumor necrosis factor alpha mRNA by increasing its stability,
possibly through binding to the 3' untranslated region. We also show that hnRNP-U
enhances the expression of several other genes as well, including GADD45A,
HEXIM1, HOXA2, IER3, NHLH2, and ZFY, by binding to and stabilizing these mRNAs.
These results suggest that hnRNP-U enhances the expression of specific genes by
regulating mRNA stability.

PMID: 17174306  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


77. Dev Biol. 2007 Feb 15;302(2):646-60. Epub 2006 Oct 25.

Expression of Hoxa2 in rhombomere 4 is regulated by a conserved cross-regulatory 
mechanism dependent upon Hoxb1.

Tümpel S(1), Cambronero F, Ferretti E, Blasi F, Wiedemann LM, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 E. 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

The Hoxa2 gene is an important component of regulatory events during hindbrain
segmentation and head development in vertebrates. In this study we have used
sequenced comparisons of the Hoxa2 locus from 12 vertebrate species in
combination with detailed regulatory analyses in mouse and chicken embryos to
characterize the mechanistic basis for the regulation of Hoxa2 in rhombomere (r) 
4. A highly conserved region in the Hoxa2 intron functions as an r4 enhancer. In 
vitro binding studies demonstrate that within the conserved region three
bipartite Hox/Pbx binding sites (PH1-PH3) in combination with a single binding
site for Pbx-Prep/Meis (PM) heterodimers co-operate to regulate enhancer activity
in r4. Mutational analysis reveals that these sites are required for activity of 
the enhancer, suggesting that the r4 enhancer from Hoxa2 functions in vivo as a
Hox-response module in combination with the Hox cofactors, Pbx and Prep/Meis.
Furthermore, this r4 enhancer is capable of mediating a response to ectopic HOXB1
expression in the hindbrain. These findings reveal that Hoxa2 is a target gene of
Hoxb1 and permit us to develop a gene regulatory network for r4, whereby Hoxa2,
along with Hoxb1, Hoxb2 and Hoxa1, is integrated into a series of auto- and
cross-regulatory loops between Hox genes. These data highlight the important role
played by direct cross-talk between Hox genes in regulating hindbrain patterning.

PMID: 17113575  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


78. Science. 2006 Sep 8;313(5792):1408-13. Epub 2006 Aug 10.

Hoxa2- and rhombomere-dependent development of the mouse facial somatosensory
map.

Oury F(1), Murakami Y, Renaud JS, Pasqualetti M, Charnay P, Ren SY, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/Université Louis Pasteur, UMR 7104, BP 10142, Communauté Urbaine de
Strasbourg, 67404 Illkirch Cedex, France.

In the mouse trigeminal pathway, sensory inputs from distinct facial structures, 
such as whiskers or lower jaw and lip, are topographically mapped onto the
somatosensory cortex through relay stations in the thalamus and hindbrain. In the
developing hindbrain, the mechanisms generating such maps remain elusive. We
found that in the principal sensory nucleus, the whisker-related map is
contributed by rhombomere 3-derived neurons, whereas the rhombomere 2-derived
progeny supply the lower jaw and lip representation. Moreover, early Hoxa2
expression in neuroepithelium prevents the trigeminal nerve from ectopically
projecting to the cerebellum, whereas late expression in the principal sensory
nucleus promotes selective arborization of whisker-related afferents and
topographic connectivity to the thalamus. Hoxa2 inactivation further results in
the absence of whisker-related maps in the postnatal brain. Thus, Hoxa2- and
rhombomere 3-dependent cues determine the whisker area map and are required for
the assembly of the whisker-to-barrel somatosensory circuit.

PMID: 16902088  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


79. Gene Expr Patterns. 2007 Jan;7(1-2):137-42. Epub 2006 Jun 27.

Gene expression in Xenopus laevis embryos after Triadimefon exposure.

Papis E(1), Bernardini G, Gornati R, Menegola E, Prati M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biotechnology and Molecular Science, University of Insubria, via
Dunant 3, 21100 Varese, Italy.

The triazole derivative Triadimefon (FON) is a systemic fungicide used to control
powdery mildews, rusts, and other fungal pests. Some data have already been
published about the teratogenic activity of this compound: craniofacial
malformations were found in mouse, rat, and Xenopus laevis embryos exposed to
FON. These alterations were correlated to defective branchial arch development
possibly caused by abnormal neural crest cell (NCC) migration into the branchial 
mesenchyme. As the migration of NCCs is controlled by the HOX code and by an
anteroposterior retinoic acid (RA) gradient, we analyzed the expression of CYP26,
a key enzyme in RA metabolism, following FON exposure. The increased expression
of this gene and the ability of citral (a RA inhibitor) to reduce the teratogenic
effects of the fungicide support the notion that endogenous RA is involved in the
mechanism of action of FON. Moreover, by in situ hybridization, we studied the
effects of FON exposure at gastrula stage on the expression of some genes
involved in craniofacial development, hindbrain patterning, and NCC migration. We
observed abnormal localization of xCRABP, Hoxa2 and Xbap signal expression at the
level of migrating NCC domains, whereas in the hindbrain, we did not find any
alteration in Krox20 and Hoxa2 expression.

PMID: 16875885  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


80. Cell. 2006 Jun 2;125(5):971-86.

SATB2 is a multifunctional determinant of craniofacial patterning and osteoblast 
differentiation.

Dobreva G(1), Chahrour M, Dautzenberg M, Chirivella L, Kanzler B, Fariñas I,
Karsenty G, Grosschedl R.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology, Department of Cellular and Molecular
Immunology, 79108 Freiburg, Germany.

Comment in
    Cell. 2006 Jun 2;125(5):840-2.

Vertebrate skeletogenesis involves two processes, skeletal patterning and
osteoblast differentiation. Here, we show that Satb2, encoding a nuclear matrix
protein, is expressed in branchial arches and in cells of the osteoblast lineage.
Satb2-/- mice exhibit both craniofacial abnormalities that resemble those
observed in humans carrying a translocation in SATB2 and defects in osteoblast
differentiation and function. Multiple osteoblast-specific genes were identified 
as targets positively regulated by SATB2. In addition, SATB2 was found to repress
the expression of several Hox genes including Hoxa2, an inhibitor of bone
formation and regulator of branchial arch patterning. Molecular analysis revealed
that SATB2 directly interacts with and enhances the activity of both Runx2 and
ATF4, transcription factors that regulate osteoblast differentiation. This
synergy was genetically confirmed by bone formation defects in Satb2/Runx2 and
Satb2/Atf4 double heterozygous mice. Thus, SATB2 acts as a molecular node in a
transcriptional network regulating skeletal development and osteoblast
differentiation.

PMID: 16751105  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


81. Cell. 2006 Jun 2;125(5):840-2.

Bone formation: The nuclear matrix reloaded.

Ellies DL(1), Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 50(th) Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

Comment on
    Cell. 2006 Jun 2;125(5):971-86.

In this issue of Cell, Grosschedl and colleagues (Dobreva et al., 2006) report
that the nuclear matrix protein Satb2 represses Hoxa2 expression and acts with
other regulatory proteins to promote osteoblast differentiation. This work
suggests a molecular mechanism that enables the integration of patterning and
differentiation during bone formation.

PMID: 16751095  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


82. Gene Expr Patterns. 2006 Oct;6(8):843-8. Epub 2006 Mar 6.

Differential expression of hoxa2a and hoxa2b genes during striped bass embryonic 
development.

Scemama JL(1), Vernon JL, Stellwag EJ.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biology, Howell Science Complex, East Carolina University,
Greenville, NC 27858, USA. scemamaj@mail.ecu.edu

Here, we report the cloning and expression analysis of two previously
uncharacterized paralogs group 2 Hox genes, striped bass hoxa2a and hoxa2b, and
the developmental regulatory gene egr2. We demonstrate that both Hox genes are
expressed in the rhombomeres of the developing hindbrain and the pharyngeal
arches albeit with different spatio-temporal distributions relative to one
another. While both hoxa2a and hoxa2b share the r1/r2 anterior boundary of
expression characteristic of the hoxa2 paralog genes of other species, hoxa2a
gene expression extends throughout the hindbrain, whereas hoxa2b gene expression 
is restricted to the r2-r5 region. Egr2, which is used in this study as an early 
developmental marker of rhombomeres 3 and 5, is expressed in two distinct bands
with a location and spacing typical for these two rhombomeres in other species.
Within the pharyngeal arches, hoxa2a is expressed at higher levels in the second 
pharyngeal arch, while hoxa2b is more strongly expressed in the posterior arches.
Further, hoxa2b expression within the arches becomes undetectable at 60hpf, while
hoxa2a expression is maintained at least up until the beginning of
chondrogenesis. Comparison of the striped bass HoxA cluster paralog group 2 (PG2)
genes to their orthologs and trans-orthologs shows that the striped bass hoxa2a
gene expression pattern is similar to the overall expression pattern described
for the hoxa2 genes in the lobe-finned fish lineage and for the hoxa2b gene from 
zebrafish. It is notable that the pharyngeal arch expression pattern of the
striped bass hoxa2a gene is more divergent from its sister paralog, hoxa2b, than 
from the zebrafish hoxa2b gene. Overall, our results suggest that differences in 
the Hox PG2 gene complement of striped bass and zebrafish affects both their
rhombomeric and pharyngeal arch expression patterns and may account for the
similarities in pharyngeal arch expression between striped bass hoxa2a and
zebrafish hoxa2b.

PMID: 16581310  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


83. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2006 Apr 4;103(14):5419-24. Epub 2006 Mar 28.

Evolution of cis elements in the differential expression of two Hoxa2
coparalogous genes in pufferfish (Takifugu rubripes).

Tümpel S(1), Cambronero F, Wiedemann LM, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA.

Sequence divergence in cis-regulatory elements is an important mechanism
contributing to functional diversity of genes during evolution. Gene duplication 
and divergence provide an opportunity for selectively preserving initial
functions and evolving new activities. Many vertebrates have 39 Hox genes
organized into four clusters (Hoxa-Hoxd); however, some ray-finned fishes have
extra Hox clusters. There is a single Hoxa2 gene in most vertebrates, whereas
fugu (Takifugu rubripes) and medaka (Oryzias latipes) have two coparalogous genes
[Hoxa2(a) and Hoxa2(b)]. In the hindbrain, both genes are expressed in rhombomere
(r) 2, but only Hoxa2(b) is expressed in r3, r4, and r5. Multiple regulatory
modules directing segmental expression of chicken and mouse Hoxa2 genes have been
identified, and each module is composed of a series of discrete elements. We used
these modules to investigate the basis of differential expression of duplicated
Hoxa2 genes, as a model for understanding the divergence of cis-regulatory
elements. Therefore, we cloned putative regulatory regions of the fugu and medaka
Hoxa2(a) and -(b) genes and assayed their activity. We found that these modules
direct reporter expression in a chicken assay, in a manner corresponding to their
endogenous expression pattern in fugu. Although sequence comparisons reveal many 
differences between the two coparalogous genes, specific subtle changes in seven 
cis elements of the Hoxa2(a) gene restore segmental regulatory activity.
Therefore, drift in subsets of the elements in the regulatory modules is
responsible for the differential expression of the two coparalogous genes, thus
providing insight into the evolution of cis elements.

PMCID: PMC1459370
PMID: 16569696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


84. J Anat. 2005 Nov;207(5):447-59.

Patterning the neural crest derivatives during development of the vertebrate
head: insights from avian studies.

Creuzet S(1), Couly G, Le Douarin NM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Embryologie Cellulaire et Moléculaire, Nogent-sur-Marne, France.

Studies carried out in the avian embryo and based on the construction of
quail-chick chimeras have shown that most of the skull and all the facial and
visceral skeleton are derived from the cephalic neural crest (NC). Contribution
of the mesoderm is limited to its occipital and (partly) to its otic domains. NC 
cells (NCCs) participating in membrane bones and cartilages of the vertebrate
head arise from the diencephalon (posterior half only), the mesencephalon and the
rhombencephalon. They can be divided into an anterior domain (extending down to
r2 included) in which genes of the Hox clusters are not expressed (Hox-negative
skeletogenic NC) and a posterior domain including r4 to r8 in which Hox genes of 
the four first paraloguous groups are expressed. The NCCs that form the facial
skeleton belong exclusively to the anterior Hox-negative domain and develop from 
the first branchial arch (BA1). This rostral domain of the crest is designated as
FSNC for facial skeletogenic neural crest. Rhombomere 3 (r3) participates
modestly to both BA1 and BA2. Forced expression of Hox genes (Hoxa2, Hoxa3 and
Hoxb4) in the neural fold of the anterior domain inhibits facial skeleton
development. Similarly, surgical excision of these anterior Hox-negative NCCs
results in the absence of facial skeleton, showing that Hox-positive NCCs cannot 
replace the Hox-negative domain for facial skeletogenesis. We also show that
excision of the FSNC results in dramatic down-regulation of Fgf8 expression in
the head, namely in ventral forebrain and in BA1 ectoderm. We have further
demonstrated that exogenous FGF8 applied to the presumptive BA1 territory at the 
5-6-somite stage (5-6ss) restores to a large extent facial skeleton development. 
The source of the cells responsible for this regeneration was shown to be r3,
which is at the limit between the Hox-positive and Hox-negative domain. NCCs that
respond to FGF8 by survival and proliferation are in turn necessary for the
expression/maintenance of Fgf8 expression in the ectoderm. These results strongly
support the emerging picture according to which the processes underlying
morphogenesis of the craniofacial skeleton are regulated by
epithelial-mesenchymal bidirectional crosstalk.

PMCID: PMC1571568
PMID: 16313387  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


85. Dev Dyn. 2005 Dec;234(4):858-67.

Hoxa2 knockdown in Xenopus results in hyoid to mandibular homeosis.

Baltzinger M(1), Ori M, Pasqualetti M, Nardi I, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Strasbourg, France.

The skeletal structures of the face and throat are derived from cranial neural
crest cells (NCCs) that migrate from the embryonic neural tube into a series of
branchial arches (BAs). The first arch (BA1) gives rise to the upper and lower
jaw cartilages, whereas hyoid structures are generated from the second arch
(BA2). The Hox paralogue group 2 (PG2) genes, Hoxa2 and Hoxb2, show distinct
roles for hyoid patterning in tetrapods and fishes. In the mouse, Hoxa2 acts as a
selector of hyoid identity, while its paralogue Hoxb2 is not required. On the
contrary, in zebrafish Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 are functionally redundant for hyoid arch 
patterning. Here, we show that in Xenopus embryos morpholino-induced functional
knockdown of Hoxa2 is sufficient to induce homeotic changes of the second arch
cartilage. Moreover, Hoxb2 is downregulated in the BA2 of Xenopus embryos, even
though initially expressed in second arch NCCs, similar to mouse and unlike in
zebrafish. Finally, Xbap, a gene involved in jaw joint formation, is selectively 
upregulated in the BA2 of Hoxa2 knocked-down frog embryos, supporting a hyoid to 
mandibular change of NCC identity. Thus, in Xenopus Hoxa2 does not act
redundantly with Hoxb2 for BA2 patterning, similar to mouse and unlike in fish.
These data bring novel insights into the regulation of Hox PG2 genes and hyoid
patterning in vertebrate evolution and suggest that Hoxa2 function is required at
late stages of BA2 development.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 16222714  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


86. Development. 2005 Nov;132(22):4927-36. Epub 2005 Oct 12.

Temporal requirement of Hoxa2 in cranial neural crest skeletal morphogenesis.

Santagati F(1), Minoux M, Ren SY, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, UMR 7104, BP 10142, CU de Strasbourg, 67404 Illkirch Cedex,
France.

Little is known about the spatiotemporal requirement of Hox gene patterning
activity in vertebrates. In Hoxa2 mouse mutants, the hyoid skeleton is replaced
by a duplicated set of mandibular and middle ear structures. Here, we show that
Hoxa2 is selectively required in cranial neural crest cells (NCCs). Moreover, we 
used a Cre-ERT2 recombinase system to induce a temporally controlled Hoxa2
deletion in the mouse. Hoxa2 inactivation after cranial NCC migration into
branchial arches resulted in homeotic transformation of hyoid into mandibular
arch skeletal derivatives, reproducing the conventional Hoxa2 knockout phenotype,
and induced rapid changes in Alx4, Bapx1, Six2 and Msx1 expression patterns.
Thus, hyoid NCCs retain a remarkable degree of plasticity even after their
migration in the arch, and require Hoxa2 as an integral component of their
morphogenetic program. Moreover, subpopulations of postmigratory NCCs required
Hoxa2 at discrete time points to pattern distinct derivatives. This study
provides the first temporal inactivation of a vertebrate Hox gene and illustrates
Hox requirement during late morphogenetic processes.

PMID: 16221728  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


87. Zhonghua Kou Qiang Yi Xue Za Zhi. 2005 Jul;40(4):319-22.

[In vitro study on cranial neural crest differentiating into ectomesenchymal cell
of the first branchial arch by FGF-8].

[Article in Chinese]

Jiang HB(1), Tian WD, Tang W, Liu L, Li XD.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, West China School of
Stomatology, Sichuan University, Chengdu 610041, China.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of FGF-8 on cranial neural crest cell
(CNCC) differentiating into ectomesenchymal cell of the first branchial arch, and
determine the appropriate dose and stage of CNCC exposure to FGF-8.
METHODS: Cranial neural crest explants were cultured in free-serum medium
containing modified DMEM/F12 and different doses of FGF-8. The differentiation
type of CNCC were determined by in situ hybridization for Hoxa2 and
immunocytochemistry for vimentin.
RESULTS: Pre-emigrating CNCC demonstrated the negative Hoxa2 stain and positive
vimentin stain after treated by 100 ug/FGF-8. Both post-emigrating CNCC group and
control group were positive for Hoxa2 and vimentin stain.
CONCLUSIONS: On the early stage of CNCC emigration, the first branchial arch
phenotype of CNCC could be induced by FGF-8. This experiment could provide in
vitro model for study on the mechanism of tooth-jaw regeneration.

PMID: 16191378  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


88. J Orthop Res. 2005 Jul;23(4):882-90. Epub 2005 Mar 23.

Reactivation of Hox gene expression during bone regeneration.

Gersch RP(1), Lombardo F, McGovern SC, Hadjiargyrou M.

Collaborators: Hadjiargyrou M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, Stony Brook University, Psychology A
Building, Stony Brook, NY 11794-2580, USA.

Previous studies have explored the link between bone regeneration and
skeletogenesis. Although a great deal is known regarding tissue and cell based
events, especially those involving ossification and chondrogenesis, much remains 
unknown about the molecular similarity of repair and development. Since the
functional significance of Homeobox (Hox) genes in embryonic skeletogenesis has
been well documented through knockout and deficiency studies, we chose to
investigate whether members of this family are reactivated during fracture
repair. Specifically, we examined the temporal and spatial expression of Msx-1,
Msx-2, rHox, Hoxa-2 and Hoxd-9, because of their involvement in limb development.
Utilizing quantitative reverse transcriptase RT-PCR (qPCR), mRNA levels from all 
five genes were shown to be upregulated during fracture repair at all times
tested (post-fracture day 3-21), as compared to intact bone. Further, using in
situ hybridization and immunohistochemistry, spatial expression of these genes
was localized to osteoblasts, chondrocytes and periosteal osteoprogenitor cells
found within the fracture callus, the foremost cells responsible for the
reparative phase of the healing process. Given the contribution of Hox genes in
skeletal development, our results suggest that these genes are involved in either
the patterning or formation of the fracture callus, further supporting the notion
that bone regeneration recapitulates skeletal development.

PMID: 16023004  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


89. Dev Dyn. 2005 Sep;234(1):124-31.

Second branchial arch lineages of the middle ear of wild-type and Hoxa2 mutant
mice.

O'Gorman S(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Neurosciences, School of Medicine, Case Western Reserve
University, Cleveland, OH 44106, USA. ogorman@case.edu

Our current understanding of the evolution of the mammalian middle ear was first 
suggested by embryological studies from the 19th century. Here, site-specific
recombinase-mediated lineage tracing was used to define the second branchial arch
contribution to the middle ear of wild-type and Hoxa-2 mutant embryos. The
processus brevis of the malleus was found to arise from second arch tissues,
making it the likely homologue of the retroarticular process of nonmammalian
tetrapods. The second arch also formed a portion of the otic capsule. In light of
avian lineage studies, second arch cells were probably incorporated into the otic
capsule before avian and mammalian lineages diverged. In Hoxa2 mutant embryos,
middle ear skeletal duplications occurred at sites where first and second arch
elements are normally apposed. The dorsoventral positions at which second arch
skeletal elements formed and the early migration of second arch neural crest
cells were not altered by the absence of Hoxa2 function.

Copyright 2005 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 15861402  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


90. Dev Biol. 2005 Feb 15;278(2):496-510.

Homeotic proboscipedia function modulates hedgehog-mediated organizer activity to
pattern adult Drosophila mouthparts.

Joulia L(1), Bourbon HM, Cribbs DL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement-CNRS, 118 route de Narbonne, 31062
Toulouse Cedex 04, France. joulia@cict.fr

Drosophila proboscipedia (pb; HoxA2/B2 homolog) mutants develop distal legs in
place of their adult labial mouthparts. Here we examine how pb homeotic function 
distinguishes the developmental programs of labium and leg. We find that the
labial-to-leg transformation in pb mutants occurs progressively over a 2-day
period in mid-development, as viewed with identity markers such as dachshund
(dac). This transformation requires hedgehog activity, and involves a
morphogenetic reorganization of the labial imaginal disc. Our results implicate
pb function in modulating global axial organization. Pb protein acts in at least 
two ways. First, Pb cell autonomously regulates the expression of target genes
such as dac. Second, Pb acts in opposition to the organizing action of hedgehog. 
This latter action is cell-autonomous, but has a nonautonomous effect on labial
structure, via the negative regulation of wingless/dWnt and
decapentaplegic/TGF-beta. This opposition of Pb to hedgehog target expression
appears to occur at the level of the conserved transcription factor cubitus
interruptus/Gli that mediates hedgehog signaling activity. These results extend
selector function to primary steps of tissue patterning, and lead us to suggest
the notion of a homeotic organizer.

PMID: 15680366  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


91. Development. 2005 Feb;132(3):469-78. Epub 2005 Jan 5.

Hoxa2 downregulates Six2 in the neural crest-derived mesenchyme.

Kutejova E(1), Engist B, Mallo M, Kanzler B, Bobola N.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stuebeweg 51, 79108 Freiburg, Germany.

The Hoxa2 transcription factor acts during development of the second branchial
arch. As for most of the developmental processes controlled by Hox proteins, the 
mechanism by which Hoxa2 regulates the morphology of second branchial arch
derivatives is unclear. We show that Six2, another transcription factor, is
genetically downstream of Hoxa2. High levels of Six2 are observed in the Hoxa2
loss-of-function mutant. By using a transgenic approach to overexpress Six2 in
the embryonic area controlled by Hoxa2, we observed a phenotype that is
reminiscent of the Hoxa2 mutant phenotype. Furthermore, we demonstrate that Hoxa2
regulation of Six2 is confined to a 0.9 kb fragment of the Six2 promoter and that
Hoxa2 binds to this promoter region. These results strongly suggest that Six2 is 
a direct target of Hoxa2.

PMID: 15634706  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


92. Int J Dev Biol. 2004 Dec;48(10):1105-12.

Induction of tooth and eye by transplantation of activin A-treated,
undifferentiated presumptive ectodermal Xenopus cells into the abdomen.

Myoishi Y(1), Furue M, Fukui Y, Okamoto T, Asashima M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Oral Medicine and Maxillofacial Surgery, Division of
Frontier Medical Science, Graduate School of Biomedical Sciences, Hiroshima
University, Hiroshima, Japan.

Activin A can induce the Xenopus presumptive ectoderm (animal cap) to form
different types of mesoderm and endoderm at different concentrations and the
animal cap treated with activin can function as an organizer during early
development. The dissociated Xenopus animal cap cells treated with activin form
an aggregate and it develops into various tissues in vitro. In this study, to
induce jaw cartilage from undifferentiated cells effectively, we developed a
culture method to manipulate body patterning in vitro, using activin A and
dissociated animal cap cells. An aggregate consisting only of activin A-treated
dissociated cells developed into endodermal tissues. However, when activin
A-treated cells were mixed with untreated cells at a ratio of 1:5, the aggregate 
developed cartilage with the maxillofacial regional marker genes, goosecoid,
Xenopus Distal-less 4 and X-Hoxa2. When this aggregate was transplanted into the 
abdominal region of host embryos, maxillofacial structures containing cartilage
and eye developed. We raised these embryos to adulthood and found that tooth germ
had developed in the transplanted tissue. Here, we show the induction of jaw
cartilage, tooth germ and eye structures from animal caps using activin A in the 
aggregation culture method. This differentiation system will help to promote a
better understanding of the regulating mechanisms of body patterning and tooth
induction in vertebrates.

PMID: 15602696  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


93. Glia. 2004 Oct;48(1):14-26.

Early stages of oligodendrocyte development in the embryonic murine spinal cord
proceed normally in the absence of Hoxa2.

Nicolay DJ(1), Doucette JR, Nazarali AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, College of Pharmacy and Nutrition, University
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Saskatchewan.

Recent discoveries have enhanced our knowledge of the transcriptional control of 
oligodendrocyte (OG) development. In particular, the transcription factors (TFs) 
Olig2, Pax6, and Nkx2.2 have been shown to be important in the specification
and/or maturation of the OG lineage. Although numerous other TFs are expressed by
OGs, little is known regarding their role(s) in oligodendrogenesis. One such TF
is the homeobox gene Hoxa2, which was recently shown to be expressed by O4(+)
pro-oligodendrocytes. The objectives of this study were to examine the expression
of Hoxa2 during the early stages of OG development, as well as to determine
whether Hoxa2 is required for specification and/or early maturation of OGs.
Immunocytochemical analysis of primary mixed glial cultures demonstrated that
Hoxa2 was expressed throughout oligodendrogenesis, diminishing only with the
acquisition of a myelinating phenotype. Serial transverse spinal cord sections
from embryonic days 12.5, 14.25, 16, and 18 Hoxa2(+/+), Hoxa2(+/-), and
Hoxa2(-/-) mice were subjected to single and double immunohistochemical analysis 
in order to examine Hoxa2, Olig2, Nkx2.2, and Pax6 expression profiles. Results
obtained from Hoxa2(+/+) and Hoxa2(+/-) mice suggested that Hoxa2 was expressed
by migratory oligodendroglial cells. In addition, comparison of spinal cord
sections obtained from Hoxa2(+/+), Hoxa2(+/-), and Hoxa2(-/-) mice suggested that
specification and early maturation of OGs proceeded normally in the absence of
Hoxa2, since there were no obvious alterations in the expression patterns of
Olig2, Nkx2.2, and/or Pax6. Hence, although Hoxa2 is expressed throughout OG
development, it does not appear to be critical for early stages of
oligodendrogenesis in the murine spinal cord.

PMID: 15326611  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


94. BMC Biol. 2004 Jun 15;2:14.

Segmental identity and cerebellar granule cell induction in rhombomere 1.

Eddison M(1), Toole L, Bell E, Wingate RJ.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, 4th Floor,
New Hunt's House, Guy's Campus, London SE1 1UL, UK. eddison@itsa.ucsf.edu
<eddison@itsa.ucsf.edu>

BACKGROUND: Cerebellar granule cell precursors are specifically generated within 
the hindbrain segment, rhombomere 1, which is bounded rostrally by the
midbrain/hindbrain isthmus and caudally by the boundary of the Hoxa2 expression
domain. While graded signals from the isthmus have a demonstrable patterning role
within this region, the significance of segmental identity for neuronal
specification within rhombomere 1 is unexplored. We examined the response of
granule cell precursors to the overexpression of Hoxa2, which normally determines
patterns of development specific to the hindbrain. How much does the development 
of the cerebellum, a midbrain/hindbrain structure, reflect its neuromeric origin 
as a hindbrain segment?
RESULTS: We show that a Gbx2-positive, Otx2-/Hoxa2-negative territory
corresponding to rhombomere 1 forms prior to an identifiable isthmic organiser.
Early global overexpression of Hoxa2 at embryonic day 0 has no effect on the
expression of isthmic signalling molecules or the allocation of rhombomere 1
territory, but selectively results in the loss of granule cell markers at
embryonic day 6 and the depletion of cell bodies from the external granule cell
layer. By comparison the trochlear nucleus and locus coeruleus form normally in
ventral rhombomere 1 under these conditions. Microsurgery, coupled with
electroporation, to target Hoxa2 overexpression to rhombic lip precursors,
reveals a profound, autonomous respecification of migration. Rhombic lip
derivatives, normally destined to occupy the external granule cell layer, violate
the cerebellar boundary to form a ventrolateral nucleus in a position comparable 
to that occupied by rhombic lip derived neurons in rhombomere 2.
CONCLUSIONS: Different overexpression strategies reveal that the recognition of
migration cues by granule cell precursors is dependent on their identity as
rhombomere 1 derivatives. Segmental patterning cues operate autonomously within
the rhombic lip precursor pool. By contrast, a subset of coextensive nuclei is
refractory to ectopic Hoxa2 and is presumably induced solely by isthmic organiser
activity. Thus, graded (isthmic) and segmental mechanisms may operate exclusively
of one another in the specification of different neuronal populations within
rhombomere 1. The early designation of an Otx2-negative, Hoxa2-negative region,
prior to the appearance of the isthmic organiser, is a key initial step in the
specification of the cerebellum.

PMCID: PMC446226
PMID: 15198802  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


95. Gene. 2004 Apr 28;331:53-63.

Differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells are closely 
related with homeotic genes and a group of differentially expressed genes.

Mizusawa N(1), Hasegawa T, Ohigashi I, Tanaka-Kosugi C, Harada N, Itakura M,
Yoshimoto K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Dentistry, The University of Tokushima, 
Tokushima City, Japan.

To identify the genes that determine differentiation phenotypes, we compared gene
expression of pancreatic islet beta- and alpha-cells, which are derived from the 
common precursor and secrete insulin and glucagon, respectively. The expression
levels of homeotic genes including Hox genes known to determine region
specificity in the antero-posterior (AP) body axis, tissue-specific homeobox
genes, and other 8,734 genes were compared in a beta- and alpha-cell line of MIN6
and alpha TC1.6. The expression of homeotic genes were surveyed with reverse
transcription-polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using degenerate primers
corresponding to invariant amino acid sequences within the homeodomain and
subsequently with specific primers. Expression of Hoxc6, Hoxc9, Hoxc10, Pdx1,
Cdx2, Gbx2, Pax4, and Hlxb9 genes in MIN6 was higher than those in alpha TC1.6,
while expression of Hoxa2, Hoxa3, Hoxa5, Hoxa6, Hoxa7, Hoxa9, Hoxa10, Hoxa13,
Hoxb3, Hoxb5, Hoxb6, Hoxb13, Hoxb8, and Brain4 genes in alpha TC1.6 was higher
than those in MIN6. Out of 8,734 mouse genes screened with high-density mouse
cDNA microarrays for MIN6- and alpha TC1.6-derived cDNA, 58 and 25 genes were
differentially over- and under-expressed in MIN6, respectively. GLUTag, which is 
derived from a large bowel tumor and expresses the proglucagon gene, showed a
comparatively similar expression profile to that of alpha TC1.6 in both homeotic 
and other genes analyzed in cDNA microarray. Our results are consistent with the 
interpretation that not only the tissue-specific homeotic genes, but also Hox
genes are related to differentiation phenotypes of pancreatic beta- and
alpha-cells rather than their regional specification of the body in vertebrates.

PMID: 15094191  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


96. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2004 Apr 9;316(3):898-902.

The Hoxa2 enhancer 2 contains a critical Hoxa2 responsive regulatory element.

Lampe X(1), Picard JJ, Rezsohazy R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Developmental Genetics, Université catholique de Louvain, 73 (boîte
82) avenue Mounier, B-1200 Brussels, Belgium.

Rhombomeres are embryonic territories arising from the transient segmentation of 
the hindbrain. Their identity is specified by Hox genes from paralogous groups
1-4. Hoxa2 is the only Hox gene to be expressed in the second rhombomere and the 
regulatory cues leading to this region-specific expression have been poorly
investigated. A 2.5-kb DNA fragment overlapping with the 3' end of Hoxa2 was
previously shown to specifically direct the expression of a reporter gene in the 
second rhombomere and the rostral somites of mouse embryos. Here, we report that 
this enhancer region is activated in vitro by Hoxa2 and that this activation is
strictly dependent on a short 10-bp sequence matching the consensus for Hox-Pbx
recognition sites.

PMID: 15033486  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


97. Development. 2004 Apr;131(7):1463-77. Epub 2004 Feb 25.

Neural crest survival and differentiation in zebrafish depends on mont
blanc/tfap2a gene function.

Barrallo-Gimeno A(1), Holzschuh J, Driever W, Knapik EW.

Author information: 
(1)GSF, Institute for Mammalian Genetics, Ingolstaedter Landstrasse 1, D-85764
Neuherberg, Germany.

Neural crest progenitor cells are the main contributors to craniofacial cartilage
and connective tissue of the vertebrate head. These progenitor cells also give
rise to the pigment, neuronal and glial cell lineages. To study the molecular
basis of neural crest differentiation, we have cloned the gene disrupted in the
mont blanc (mob(m610)) mutation, which affects all neural crest derivatives.
Using a positional candidate cloning approach we identified an A to G transition 
within the 3' splice site of the sixth intron of the tfap2a gene that abolishes
the last exon encoding the crucial protein dimerization and DNA-binding domains. 
Neural crest induction and specification are not hindered in mob(m610) mutant
embryos, as revealed by normal expression of early neural crest specific genes
such as snail2, foxd3 and sox10. In addition, the initial stages of cranial
neural crest migration appear undisturbed, while at a later phase the
craniofacial primordia in pharyngeal arches two to seven fail to express their
typical set of genes (sox9a, wnt5a, dlx2, hoxa2/b2). In mob(m610) mutant embryos,
the cell number of neuronal and glial derivatives of neural crest is greatly
reduced, suggesting that tfap2a is required for their normal development. By
tracing the fate of neural crest progenitors in live mont blanc (mob(m610))
embryos, we found that at 24 hpf neural crest cells migrate normally in the first
pharyngeal arch while the preotic and postotic neural crest cells begin migration
but fail to descend to the pharyngeal region of the head. TUNEL assay and
Acridine Orange staining revealed that in the absence of tfap2a a subset of
neural crest cells are unable to undergo terminal differentiation and die by
apoptosis. Furthermore, surviving neural crest cells in tfap2a/mob(m610) mutant
embryos proliferate normally and later differentiate to individual derivatives.
Our results indicate that tfap2a is essential to turn on the normal developmental
program in arches 2-7 and in trunk neural crest. Thus, tfap2a does not appear to 
be involved in early specification and cell proliferation of neural crest, but it
is a key regulator of an early differentiation phase and is required for cell
survival in neural crest derived cell lineages.

PMID: 14985255  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


98. Development. 2004 Mar;131(6):1259-66. Epub 2004 Feb 11.

Contribution of Hox genes to the diversity of the hindbrain sensory system.

Gaufo GO(1), Wu S, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

The perception of environmental stimuli is mediated through a diverse group of
first-order sensory relay interneurons located in stereotypic positions along the
dorsoventral (DV) axis of the neural tube. These interneurons form contiguous
columns along the anteroposterior (AP) axis. Like neural crest cells and
motoneurons, first-order sensory relay interneurons also require specification
along the AP axis. Hox genes are prime candidates for providing this information.
In support of this hypothesis, we show that distinct combinations of Hox genes in
rhombomeres (r) 4 and 5 of the hindbrain are required for the generation of
precursors for visceral sensory interneurons. As Hoxa2 is the only Hox gene
expressed in the anterior hindbrain (r2), disruption of this gene allowed us to
also demonstrate that the precursors for somatic sensory interneurons are under
the control of Hox genes. Surprisingly, the Hox genes examined are not required
for the generation of proprioceptive sensory interneurons. Furthermore, the
persistence of some normal rhombomere characteristics in Hox mutant embryos
suggests that the loss of visceral and somatic sensory interneurons cannot be
explained solely by changes in rhombomere identity. Hox genes may thus directly
regulate the specification of distinct first-order sensory relay interneurons
within individual rhombomeres. More generally, these findings contribute to our
understanding of how Hox genes specifically control cellular diversity in the
developing organism

PMID: 14960494  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


99. Development. 2004 Feb;131(3):613-27. Epub 2004 Jan 7.

Prep1.1 has essential genetic functions in hindbrain development and cranial
neural crest cell differentiation.

Deflorian G(1), Tiso N, Ferretti E, Meyer D, Blasi F, Bortolussi M, Argenton F.

Author information: 
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Universita' di Padova, Via U. Bassi 58/B, 35131
Padova, Italy.

In this study we analysed the function of the Meinox gene prep1.1 during
zebrafish development. Meinox proteins form heterotrimeric complexes with Hox and
Pbx members, increasing the DNA binding specificity of Hox proteins in vitro and 
in vivo. However, a role for a specific Meinox protein in the regulation of Hox
activity in vivo has not been demonstrated. In situ hybridization showed that
prep1.1 is expressed maternally and ubiquitously up to 24 hours
post-fertilization (hpf), and restricted to the head from 48 hpf onwards.
Morpholino-induced prep1.1 loss-of-function caused significant apoptosis in the
CNS. Hindbrain segmentation and patterning was affected severely, as revealed by 
either loss or defective expression of several hindbrain markers
(foxb1.2/mariposa, krox20, pax2.1 and pax6.1), including anteriorly expressed Hox
genes (hoxb1a, hoxa2 and hoxb2), the impaired migration of facial nerve motor
neurons, and the lack of reticulospinal neurons (RSNs) except Mauthner cells.
Furthermore, the heads of prep1.1 morphants lacked all pharyngeal cartilages.
This was not caused by the absence of neural crest cells or their impaired
migration into the pharyngeal arches, as shown by expression of dlx2 and snail1, 
but by the inability of these cells to differentiate into chondroblasts. Our
results indicate that prep1.1 has a unique genetic function in craniofacial
chondrogenesis and, acting as a member of Meinox-Pbc-Hox trimers, it plays an
essential role in hindbrain development.

PMID: 14711874  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


100. Development. 2003 Dec;130(23):5755-68. Epub 2003 Oct 8.

lockjaw encodes a zebrafish tfap2a required for early neural crest development.

Knight RD(1), Nair S, Nelson SS, Afshar A, Javidan Y, Geisler R, Rauch GJ,
Schilling TF.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental and Cell Biology, University of California,
Irvine, CA 92697, USA.

The neural crest is a uniquely vertebrate cell type that gives rise to much of
the craniofacial skeleton, pigment cells and peripheral nervous system, yet its
specification and diversification during embryogenesis are poorly understood.
Zebrafish homozygous for the lockjaw (low) mutation show defects in all of these 
derivatives and we show that low (allelic with montblanc) encodes a zebrafish
tfap2a, one of a small family of transcription factors implicated in epidermal
and neural crest development. A point mutation in low truncates the DNA binding
and dimerization domains of tfap2a, causing a loss of function. Consistent with
this, injection of antisense morpholino oligonucleotides directed against splice 
sites in tfap2a into wild-type embryos produces a phenotype identical to low.
Analysis of early ectodermal markers revealed that neural crest specification and
migration are disrupted in low mutant embryos. TUNEL labeling of dying cells in
mutants revealed a transient period of apoptosis in crest cells prior to and
during their migration. In the cranial neural crest, gene expression in the
mandibular arch is unaffected in low mutants, in contrast to the hyoid arch,
which shows severe reductions in dlx2 and hoxa2 expression. Mosaic analysis,
using cell transplantation, demonstrated that neural crest defects in low are
cell autonomous and secondarily cause disruptions in surrounding mesoderm. These 
studies demonstrate that low is required for early steps in neural crest
development and suggest that tfap2a is essential for the survival of a subset of 
neural crest derivatives.

PMID: 14534133  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


101. Development. 2003 Nov;130(21):5191-201. Epub 2003 Sep 3.

Hox3 genes coordinate mechanisms of genetic suppression and activation in the
generation of branchial and somatic motoneurons.

Gaufo GO(1), Thomas KR, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

In the developing hindbrain, the functional loss of individual Hox genes has
revealed some of their roles in specifying rhombomere (r) identity. However, it
is unclear how Hox genes act in concert to confer the unique identity to multiple
rhombomeres. Moreover, it remains to be elucidated how these genes interact with 
other transcriptional programs to specify distinct neuronal lineages within each 
rhombomere. We demonstrate that in r5, the combined mutation of Hoxa3 and Hoxb3
result in a loss of Pax6- and Olig2-expressing progenitors that give rise to
somatic motoneurons of the abducens nucleus. In r6, the absence of any
combination of the Hox3 paralogous genes results in ectopic expression of the
r4-specific determinant Hoxb1. This ectopic expression in turn results in the
differentiation of r4-like facial branchiomotoneurons within this rhombomere.
These studies reveal that members of the Hox1 and Hox3 paralogous groups
participate in a 'Hox code' that is necessary for coordinating both suppression
and activation mechanisms that ensure distinction between the multiple
rhombomeres in the developing hindbrain.

PMID: 12954718  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


102. Development. 2003 Aug;130(15):3403-14.

Mesenchymal patterning by Hoxa2 requires blocking Fgf-dependent activation of
Ptx1.

Bobola N(1), Carapuço M, Ohnemus S, Kanzler B, Leibbrandt A, Neubüser A, Drouin
J, Mallo M.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Freiburg, Germany.

Hox genes are known key regulators of embryonic segmental identity, but little is
known about the mechanisms of their action. To address this issue, we have
analyzed how Hoxa2 specifies segmental identity in the second branchial arch.
Using a subtraction approach, we found that Ptx1 was upregulated in the second
arch mesenchyme of Hoxa2 mutants. This upregulation has functional significance
because, in Hoxa2(-/-);Ptx1(-/-) embryos, the Hoxa2(-/-) phenotype is partially
reversed. Hoxa2 interferes with the Ptx1 activating process, which is dependent
on Fgf signals from the epithelium. Consistently, Lhx6, another target of Fgf8
signaling, is also upregulated in the Hoxa2(-/-) second arch mesenchyme. Our
findings have important implications for the understanding of developmental
processes in the branchial area and suggest a novel mechanism for mesenchymal
patterning by Hox genes that acts to define the competence of mesenchymal cells
to respond to skeletogenic signals.

PMID: 12810588  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


103. Genomics. 2003 Apr;81(4):356-60.

Reversible gene inactivation in the mouse.

Mallo M(1), Kanzler B, Ohnemus S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Freiburg, Germany. mallo@igc.gulbenkian.pt

Gene-inactivation techniques in the mouse have become an essential tool for
modern biomedical research. Both ubiquitous and tissue-specific inactivation are 
possible with current approaches, and recent developments facilitate a temporal
control of the inactivation process. However, one of the limitations of current
procedures is that inactivation is irreversible. We have produced complete and
reversible inactivation of the Hoxa2 gene in the mouse using the control elements
of the tetracycline-resistance operon. We show that a Hoxa2 allele containing
tetracycline operator (tetO) sequences is susceptible to controlled regulation by
tTS, a chimeric molecule containing the tetracycline repressor and a
transcriptional repressing domain. This inhibition was specific to the
tetO-modified allele, did not affect neighboring genes, and was reversible by
administration of doxycycline to the pregnant female. This procedure allows the
production of gene inactivation that is complete, is reversible, and can be
controlled at the spatial and temporal levels.

PMID: 12676559  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


104. Dev Dyn. 2002 Nov;225(3):332-5.

Tooth development is independent of a Hox patterning programme.

James CT(1), Ohazama A, Tucker AS, Sharpe PT.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Craniofacial Development, GKT Dental Institute, Kings College
London, Guy's Hospital, London Bridge, London, United Kingdom.

Hox genes have a critical role in controlling the patterning processes of many
tissues by imparting positional information in embryogenesis. Patterning of the
pharyngeal component of the skull (the visceroskeleton) has been proposed to be
influenced by this "Hox code." Recently, it has been shown that Hox genes are
associated with the evolution of jaws, loss of Hox gene expression in the first
branchial arch being necessary for the transition from the agnathan condition to 
the gnathostome condition. Teeth develop on the first branchial arch in mammals
and, therefore, might be expected to be under the control of Hox genes in a
manner similar to that of the cranial skeletal elements. However, we show that,
unlike cartilage and bone, the development of teeth is not affected by
alterations in Hoxa2 expression. Tooth development in the first arch was
unaffected by overexpression of Hoxa2, whereas recombinations of second arch
mesenchyme with first arch epithelium led to tooth development within a
Hoxa2-positive environment. These data demonstrate that teeth develop from local 
interactions and that tooth formation is not under the axial patterning program
specified by the Hox genes. We propose that the evolutionary development of teeth
in the first branchial arch is independent of the loss of Hox expression
necessary for the development of the jaw.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12412017  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


105. Dev Dyn. 2002 Nov;225(3):305-15.

Targeted insertion results in a rhombomere 2-specific Hoxa2 knockdown and ectopic
activation of Hoxa1 expression.

Ren SY(1), Angrand PO, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Illkirch Cedex, CU de Strasbourg, France.

Recent studies indicated that retention of selectable marker cassettes in
targeted Hox loci may cause unexpected phenotypes in mutant mice, due to
neighborhood effects. However, the molecular mechanisms have been poorly
investigated. Here, we analysed the effects of the targeted insertion of a
PGK-neo cassette in the 3' untranslated region of Hoxa2. Even at this 3'
position, the insertion resulted in homozygous mutants that unexpectedly did not 
survive beyond 3 weeks of age. Molecular analysis of the targeted allele revealed
a selective "knockdown" of Hoxa2 expression in rhombomere 2 and associated
patterning abnormalities. Moreover, Hoxa1 was ectopically expressed in the
hindbrain and branchial arches of mutant embryos. Of interest, we demonstrated
that the ectopic expression was due to the generation of neo-Hoxa1 fusion
transcripts, resulting from aberrant alternative splicing. These defects could be
rescued after removal of the PGK-neo cassette by Flp-mediated recombination.
These results underscore the complexity of transcriptional regulation at Hox loci
and provide insights into the in vivo regulation of Hoxa2 segmental expression.
They also provide a molecular basis for the interpretation of unexpected Hox
knockout phenotypes in which the targeted selectable marker is retained in the
locus.

Copyright 2002 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

PMID: 12412013  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


106. Development. 2002 Sep;129(18):4301-13.

Negative effect of Hox gene expression on the development of the neural
crest-derived facial skeleton.

Creuzet S(1), Couly G, Vincent C, Le Douarin NM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut d'Embryologie cellulaire et moléculaire du CNRS et du Collège de
France, 49bis, av. de la Belle Gabrielle - 94736 Nogent-sur-Marne cedex, France.

Diencephalic, mesencephalic and metencephalic neural crest cells are skeletogenic
and derive from neural folds that do not express Hox genes. In order to examine
the influence of Hox gene expression on skull morphogenesis, expression of Hoxa2,
Hoxa3 and Hoxb4 in conjunction with that of the green fluorescent protein has
been selectively targeted to the Hox-negative neural folds of the avian embryo
prior to the onset of crest cell emigration. Hoxa2 expression precludes the
development of the entire facial skeleton. Transgenic Hoxa2 embryos such as those
from which the Hox-negative domain of the cephalic neural crest has been removed 
have no upper or lower jaws and no frontonasal structures. Embryos subjected to
the forced expression of Hoxa3 and Hoxb4 show severe defects in the facial
skeleton but not a complete absence of facial cartilage. Hoxa3 prevents the
formation of the skeleton derived from the first branchial arch, but allows the
development (albeit reduced) of the nasal septum. Hoxb4, by contrast, hampers the
formation of the nasal bud-derived skeleton, while allowing that of a proximal
(but not distal) segment of the lower jaw. The combined effect of Hoxa3 and Hoxb4
prevents the formation of facial skeletal structures, comparable with Hoxa2. None
of these genes impairs the formation of neural derivatives of the crest. These
results suggest that over the course of evolution, the absence of Hox gene
expression in the anterior part of the chordate embryo was crucial in the
vertebrate phylum for the development of a face, jaws and brain case, and, hence,
also for that of the forebrain.

PMID: 12183382  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


107. Dev Biol. 2002 Jul 15;247(2):367-89.

Zebrafish hox paralogue group 2 genes function redundantly as selector genes to
pattern the second pharyngeal arch.

Hunter MP(1), Prince VE.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Cell Biology, The University of Chicago, 
1027 E. 57th Street, Chicago, Illinois 60637, USA

The pharyngeal arches are one of the defining features of the vertebrates, with
the first arch forming the mandibles of the jaw and the second forming jaw
support structures. The cartilaginous elements of each arch are formed from
separate migratory neural crest cell streams, which derive from the dorsal aspect
of the neural tube. The second and more posterior crest streams are characterized
by specific Hox gene expression. The zebrafish has a larger overall number of Hox
genes than the tetrapod vertebrates, as the result of a duplication event in its 
lineage. However, in both zebrafish and mouse, there are just two members of Hox 
paralogue group 2 (PG2): Hoxa2 and Hoxb2. Here, we show that morpholino-mediated 
"knock-down" of both zebrafish Hox PG2 genes results in major defects in second
pharyngeal arch cartilages, involving replacement of ventral elements with a
mirror-image duplication of first arch structures, and accompanying changes to
pharyngeal musculature. In the mouse, null mutants of Hoxa2 have revealed that
this single Hox gene is required for normal second arch patterning. By contrast, 
loss-of-function of either zebrafish Hox PG2 gene individually has no phenotypic 
consequence, showing that these two genes function redundantly to confer proper
pattern to the second pharyngeal arch. We have also used hoxb1a mis-expression to
induce localized ectopic expression of zebrafish Hox PG2 genes in the first arch;
using this strategy, we find that ectopic expression of either Hox PG2 gene can
confer second arch identity onto first arch structures, suggesting that the
zebrafish Hox PG2 genes act as "selector genes."

2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12086473  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


108. Dev Biol. 2002 Jun 1;246(1):45-56.

Conservation and diversity in the cis-regulatory networks that integrate
information controlling expression of Hoxa2 in hindbrain and cranial neural crest
cells in vertebrates.

Tümpel S(1), Maconochie M, Wiedemann LM, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute, 1000 East 50th, Kansas City, Missouri 64110, USA.

The Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 genes are members of paralogy group II and display segmental 
patterns of expression in the developing vertebrate hindbrain and cranial neural 
crest cells. Functional analyses have demonstrated that these genes play critical
roles in regulating morphogenetic pathways that direct the regional identity and 
anteroposterior character of hindbrain rhombomeres and neural crest-derived
structures. Transgenic regulatory studies have also begun to characterize
enhancers and cis-elements for those mouse and chicken genes that direct
restricted patterns of expression in the hindbrain and neural crest. In light of 
the conserved role of Hoxa2 in neural crest patterning in vertebrates and the
similarities between paralogs, it is important to understand the extent to which 
common regulatory networks and elements have been preserved between species and
between paralogs. To investigate this problem, we have cloned and sequenced the
intergenic region between Hoxa2 and Hoxa3 in the chick HoxA complex and used it
for making comparative analyses with the respective human, mouse, and horn shark 
regions. We have also used transgenic assays in mouse and chick embryos to test
the functional activity of Hoxa2 enhancers in heterologous species. Our analysis 
reveals that three of the critical individual components of the Hoxa2 enhancer
region from mouse necessary for hindbrain expression (Krox20, BoxA, and TCT
motifs) have been partially conserved. However, their number and organization are
highly varied for the same gene in different species and between paralogs within 
a species. Other essential mouse elements appear to have diverged or are absent
in chick and shark. We find the mouse r3/r5 enhancer fails to work in chick
embryos and the chick enhancer works poorly in mice. This implies that new motifs
have been recruited or utilized to mediate restricted activity of the enhancer in
other species. With respect to neural crest regulation, cis-components are
embedded among the hindbrain control elements and are highly diverged between
species. Hence, there has been no widespread conservation of sequence identity
over the entire enhancer domain from shark to humans, despite the common function
of these genes in head patterning. This provides insight into how apparently
equivalent regulatory regions from the same gene in different species have
evolved different components to potentiate their activity in combination with a
selection of core components.

(c) 2002 Elsevier Science (USA).

PMID: 12027433  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


109. Development. 2002 Apr;129(7):1645-55.

spiel ohne grenzen/pou2 is required for zebrafish hindbrain segmentation.

Hauptmann G(1), Belting HG, Wolke U, Lunde K, Söll I, Abdelilah-Seyfried S,
Prince V, Driever W.

Author information: 
(1)Albert-Ludwigs-Universität Freiburg, Institut für Biologie I, Hauptstrasse 1, 
D-79104 Freiburg i. Br., Germany.

Segmentation of the vertebrate hindbrain leads to the formation of a series of
rhombomeres with distinct identities. In mouse, Krox20 and kreisler play
important roles in specifying distinct rhombomeres and in controlling segmental
identity by directly regulating rhombomere-specific expression of Hox genes. We
show that spiel ohne grenzen (spg) zebrafish mutants develop rhombomeric
territories that are abnormal in both size and shape. Rhombomere boundaries are
malpositioned or absent and the segmental pattern of neuronal differentiation is 
perturbed. Segment-specific expression of hoxa2, hoxb2 and hoxb3 is severely
affected during initial stages of hindbrain development in spg mutants and the
establishment of krx20 (Krox20 ortholog) and valentino (val; kreisler ortholog)
expression is impaired. spg mutants carry loss-of-function mutations in the pou2 
gene. pou2 is expressed at high levels in the hindbrain primordium of wild-type
embryos prior to activation of krx20 and val. Widespread overexpression of Pou2
can rescue the segmental krx20 and val domains in spg mutants, but does not
induce ectopic expression of these genes. This suggests that spg/pou2 acts in a
permissive manner and is essential for normal expression of krx20 and val. We
propose that spg/pou2 is an essential component of the regulatory cascade
controlling hindbrain segmentation and acts before krx20 and val in the
establishment of rhombomere precursor territories.

PMID: 11923201  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


110. Genesis. 2002 Feb;32(2):109-11.

A Hoxa2 knockin allele that expresses EGFP upon conditional Cre-mediated
recombination.

Pasqualetti M(1), Ren SY, Poulet M, LeMeur M, Dierich A, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Strasbourg, France.

PMID: 11857792  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


111. Genesis. 2002 Feb;32(2):105-8.

A Hoxa2 mutant conditional allele generated by Flp- and Cre-mediated
recombination.

Ren SY(1), Pasqualetti M, Dierich A, Le Meur M, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, Strasbourg, France.

PMID: 11857791  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


112. Science. 2002 Feb 15;295(5558):1288-91.

Role of the isthmus and FGFs in resolving the paradox of neural crest plasticity 
and prepatterning.

Trainor PA(1), Ariza-McNaughton L, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)The Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas
City, MO 64110, USA.

Cranial neural crest cells generate the distinctive bone and connective tissues
in the vertebrate head. Classical models of craniofacial development argue that
the neural crest is prepatterned or preprogrammed to make specific head
structures before its migration from the neural tube. In contrast, recent studies
in several vertebrates have provided evidence for plasticity in patterning neural
crest populations. Using tissue transposition and molecular analyses in avian
embryos, we reconcile these findings by demonstrating that classical manipulation
experiments, which form the basis of the prepatterning model, involved
transplantation of a local signaling center, the isthmic organizer. FGF8
signaling from the isthmus alters Hoxa2 expression and consequently branchial
arch patterning, demonstrating that neural crest cells are patterned by
environmental signals.

PMID: 11847340  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


113. EMBO J. 2002 Feb 1;21(3):365-76.

Krox20 and kreisler co-operate in the transcriptional control of segmental
expression of Hoxb3 in the developing hindbrain.

Manzanares M(1), Nardelli J, Gilardi-Hebenstreit P, Marshall H, Giudicelli F,
Martínez-Pastor MT, Krumlauf R, Charnay P.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

In the segmented vertebrate hindbrain, the Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 genes are expressed at
high relative levels in the rhombomeres (r) 5 and 6, and 5, respectively. The
single enhancer elements responsible for these activities have been identified
previously and shown to constitute direct targets of the transcription factor
kreisler, which is expressed in r5 and r6. Here, we have analysed the
contribution of the transcription factor Krox20, present in r3 and r5. Genetic
analyses demonstrated that Krox20 is required for activity of the Hoxb3 r5
enhancer, but not of the Hoxa3 r5/6 enhancer. Mutational analysis of the Hoxb3 r5
enhancer, together with ectopic expression experiments, revealed that Krox20
binds to the enhancer and synergizes with kreisler to promote Hoxb3
transcription, restricting enhancer activity to their domain of overlap, r5.
These analyses also suggested contributions from an Ets-related factor and from
putative factors likely to heterodimerize with kreisler. The integration of
multiple independent inputs present in overlapping domains by a single enhancer
is likely to constitute a general mechanism for the patterning of subterritories 
during vertebrate development.

PMCID: PMC125344
PMID: 11823429  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


114. Curr Opin Cell Biol. 2001 Dec;13(6):698-705.

Hox genes, neural crest cells and branchial arch patterning.

Trainor PA(1), Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Stowers Institute for Medical Research, 1000 East 50th Street, Kansas City, MO
64110, USA. pat@stowers-institute.org

Proper craniofacial development requires the orchestrated integration of multiple
specialized tissue interactions. Recent analyses suggest that craniofacial
development is not dependent upon neural crest pre-programming as previously
thought but is regulated by a more complex integration of cell and tissue
interactions. In the absence of neural crest cells it is still possible to obtain
normal arch patterning indicating that neural crest is not responsible for
patterning all of arch development. The mesoderm, endoderm and surface ectoderm
tissues play a role in the patterning of the branchial arches, and there is now
strong evidence that Hoxa2 acts as a selector gene for the pathways that govern
second arch structures.

PMID: 11698185  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


115. Leukemia. 2001 Nov;15(11):1743-9.

Targeted down-regulation of MLL-AF9 with antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotide
reduces the expression of the HOXA7 and -A10 genes and induces apoptosis in a
human leukemia cell line, THP-1.

Kawagoe H(1), Kawagoe R, Sano K.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Kobe University School of Medicine, Japan.

The MLL gene is frequently rearranged in leukemias, and MLL chimeric proteins
generated by chromosomal translocations play crucial roles in leukemogenesis.
Targets of murine Mll include HOX proteins that regulate body pattern formation
and hematopoiesis. However, it is not known whether or not the MLL chimeric
proteins regulate the HOX gene expression in human leukemia. To address this
issue, THP-1 cells, a human leukemia cell line expressing MLL-AF9, were treated
with antisense oligodeoxyribonucleotide (ODN) complementary to the coding
sequence of the MLL-AF9 junction. Down-regulation of the MLL-AF9 transcript was
accompanied by the reduced expression of the HOXA7 and -A10 genes, but not of the
HOXA2, -A4, -A5, and -A9 genes. The number of viable cells cultured with 20
microM antisense ODN for 5 days was 10-fold lower than that of the sense
ODN-treated control. And the number of the annexin V-/propidium iodide- apoptotic
cells in the antisense ODN-treated cells after 3 days of culture was two-fold
higher than that in the control. Staining of the antisense ODN-treated cells with
Hoechst 33258 showed the morphology characteristic to apoptosis. These results
indicate that MLL-AF9 regulates the expression of the selected HOX genes as well 
as prevents the leukemic cells from apoptosis.

PMID: 11681416  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


116. Mech Dev. 2001 Oct;108(1-2):135-47.

Different levels of Hoxa2 are required for particular developmental processes.

Ohnemus S(1), Bobola N, Kanzler B, Mallo M.

Author information: 
(1)Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology, Stübeweg 51 79108 Freiburg, Germany.

Hoxa2 is required for a variety of developmental processes in the branchial
arches and in the hindbrain. We have created a Hoxa2 allele that is about 45% as 
active in transcription as its wild-type counterpart. This allele, together with 
the Hoxa2 null and wild-type alleles, allowed the generation of embryos
developing in the presence of different levels of Hoxa2 activity. Analysis of
these embryos indicates that in general the hindbrain is more resistant to Hoxa2 
deficiencies than the second branchial arch. Also, within the second arch,
proximo-caudal areas are more sensitive than the rostro-distal. In the hindbrain,
basic segmentation and patterning processes seem to occur normally at Hoxa2
levels as low as 20% of the normal. In addition, specific neuronal markers along 
the dorso-ventral axis of the hindbrain seem differentially affected by reduced
Hoxa2 levels. These results provide new clues to understand the role of Hoxa2 in 
the different embryonic areas where it is required.

PMID: 11578867  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


117. Development. 2001 Sep;128(18):3595-607.

Independent regulation of initiation and maintenance phases of Hoxa3 expression
in the vertebrate hindbrain involve auto- and cross-regulatory mechanisms.

Manzanares M(1), Bel-Vialar S, Ariza-McNaughton L, Ferretti E, Marshall H,
Maconochie MM, Blasi F, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

During development of the vertebrate hindbrain, Hox genes play multiple roles in 
the segmental processes that regulate anteroposterior (AP) patterning. Paralogous
Hox genes, such as Hoxa3, Hoxb3 and Hoxd3, generally have very similar patterns
of expression, and gene targeting experiments have shown that members of paralogy
group 3 can functionally compensate for each other. Hence, distinct functions for
individual members of this family may primarily depend upon differences in their 
expression domains. The earliest domains of expression of the Hoxa3 and Hoxb3
genes in hindbrain rhombomeric (r) segments are transiently regulated by
kreisler, a conserved Maf b-Zip protein, but the mechanisms that maintain
expression in later stages are unknown. In this study, we have compared the
segmental expression and regulation of Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 in mouse and chick embryos
to investigate how they are controlled after initial activation. We found that
the patterns of Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 expression in r5 and r6 in later stages during
mouse and chick hindbrain development were differentially regulated. Hoxa3
expression was maintained in r5 and r6, while Hoxb3 was downregulated. Regulatory
comparisons of cis-elements from the chick and mouse Hoxa3 locus in both
transgenic mouse and chick embryos have identified a conserved enhancer that
mediates the late phase of Hoxa3 expression through a conserved
auto/cross-regulatory loop. This block of similarity is also present in the human
and horn shark loci, and contains two bipartite Hox/Pbx-binding sites that are
necessary for its in vivo activity in the hindbrain. These HOX/PBC sites are
positioned near a conserved kreisler-binding site (KrA) that is involved in
activating early expression in r5 and r6, but their activity is independent of
kreisler. This work demonstrates that separate elements are involved in
initiating and maintaining Hoxa3 expression during hindbrain segmentation, and
that it is regulated in a manner different from Hoxb3 in later stages. Together, 
these findings add further strength to the emerging importance of positive auto- 
and cross-regulatory interactions between Hox genes as a general mechanism for
maintaining their correct spatial patterns in the vertebrate nervous system.

PMID: 11566863  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


118. FEBS Lett. 2001 Jun 15;499(1-2):92-6.

Differential and opposed transcriptional effects of protein fusions containing
the VP16 activation domain.

Matis C(1), Chomez P, Picard J, Rezsohazy R.

Author information: 
(1)Unit of Developmental Genetics, Université Catholique de Louvain, Brussels,
Belgium.

Overexpression of strong transcriptional activators like herpes simplex virion
protein 16 (VP16) may lead to non-specific inhibition of gene expression as a
result of the titration of transcription factors. Here we report that a fusion
between the homeoprotein Hoxa2 and the VP16 activation domain inhibits
transcription from the strong promoter/enhancers of cytomegalovirus (CMV) and
Rous sarcoma virus (RSV). A similar fusion involving a Hoxa2 mutant protein that 
is defective in DNA binding has no effect on the CMV promoter but increases,
rather than inhibits, the RSV promoter activity. This suggests that depending on 
its ability to bind DNA, the VP16 activator can interact with different sets of
cofactors, giving rise to distinct transcriptional effects.

PMID: 11418119  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


119. Dev Biol. 2001 May 15;233(2):468-81.

Differences in Krox20-dependent regulation of Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 during hindbrain
development.

Maconochie MK(1), Nonchev S, Manzanares M, Marshall H, Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London, NW7 1AA, United Kingdom.

During hindbrain development, segmental regulation of the paralogous Hoxa2 and
Hoxb2 genes in rhombomeres (r) 3 and 5 involves Krox20-dependent enhancers that
have been conserved during the duplication of the vertebrate Hox clusters from a 
common ancestor. Examining these evolutionarily related control regions could
provide important insight into the degree to which the basic Krox20-dependent
mechanisms, cis-regulatory components, and their organization have been
conserved. Toward this goal we have performed a detailed functional analysis of a
mouse Hoxa2 enhancer capable of directing reporter expression in r3 and r5. The
combined activities of five separate cis-regions, in addition to the conserved
Krox20 binding sites, are involved in mediating enhancer function. A CTTT (BoxA) 
motif adjacent to the Krox20 binding sites is important for r3/r5 activity. The
BoxA motif is similar to one (Box1) found in the Hoxb2 enhancer and indicates
that the close proximity of these Box motifs to Krox20 sites is a common feature 
of Krox20 targets in vivo. Two other rhombomeric elements (RE1 and RE3) are
essential for r3/r5 activity and share common TCT motifs, indicating that they
interact with a similar cofactor(s). TCT motifs are also found in the Hoxb2
enhancer, suggesting that they may be another common feature of Krox20-dependent 
control regions. The two remaining Hoxa2 cis-elements, RE2 and RE4, are not
conserved in the Hoxb2 enhancer and define differences in some of components that
can contribute to the Krox20-dependent activities of these enhancers.
Furthermore, analysis of regulatory activities of these enhancers in a Krox20
mutant background has uncovered differences in their degree of dependence upon
Krox20 for segmental expression. Together, this work has revealed a surprising
degree of complexity in the number of cis-elements and regulatory components that
contribute to segmental expression mediated by Krox20 and sheds light on the
diversity and evolution of Krox20 target sites and Hox regulatory elements in
vertebrates.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11336508  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


120. Dev Biol. 2001 Apr 1;232(1):176-90.

Regulatory analysis of the mouse Hoxb3 gene: multiple elements work in concert to
direct temporal and spatial patterns of expression.

Kwan CT(1), Tsang SL, Krumlauf R, Sham MH.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Biochemistry, The University of Hong Kong, 5 Sassoon Road, Hong 
Kong, Pokfulam, China.

The expression pattern of the mouse Hoxb3 gene is exceptionally complex and
dynamic compared with that of other members of the Hoxb cluster. There are
multiple types of transcripts for Hoxb3 gene, and the anterior boundaries of its 
expression vary at different stages of development. Two enhancers flanking Hoxb3 
on the 3' and 5' sides regulate Hoxb2 and Hoxb4, respectively, and these control 
regions define the two ends of a 28-kb interval in and around the Hoxb3 locus. To
assay the regulatory potential of DNA fragments in this interval we have used
transgenic analysis with a lacZ reporter gene to locate cis-elements for
directing the dynamic patterns of Hoxb3 expression. Our detailed analysis has
identified four new and widely spaced cis-acting regulatory regions that can
together account for major aspects of the Hoxb3 expression pattern. Elements Ib, 
IIIa, and IVb control gene expression in neural and mesodermal tissues; element
Va controls mesoderm-specific gene expression. The most anterior neural
expression domain of Hoxb3 is controlled by an r5 enhancer (element IVa); element
IIIa directs reporter expression in the anterior spinal cord and hindbrain up to 
r6, and the region A enhancer (in element I) mediates posterior neural
expression. Hence, the regulation of segmental expression of Hoxb3 in the
hindbrain is different from that of Hoxa3, as two separate enhancer elements
contribute to expression in r5 and r6. The mesoderm-specific element (Va) directs
reporter expression to prevertebra C1 at 12.5 dpc, which is the anterior limit of
paraxial mesoderm expression for Hoxb3. When tested in combinations, these
cis-elements appear to work as modules in an additive manner to recapitulate the 
major endogenous expression patterns of Hoxb3 during embryogenesis. Together our 
study shows that multiple control elements direct reporter gene expression in
diverse tissue-, temporal-, and spatially restricted subset of the endogenous
Hoxb3 expression domains and work in concert to control the neural and mesodermal
patterns of expression.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11254356  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


121. Dev Biol. 2001 Mar 15;231(2):410-9.

Formation of the middle ear: recent progress on the developmental and molecular
mechanisms.

Mallo M(1).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Max-Planck Institute of Immunobiology,
Stübeweg 51, Freiburg, D-79108, Germany. mallo@immunobio.mpg.de

The middle ear allows animals to hear while moving in an aerial medium. It is
composed of a cavity harbouring a chain of three ossicles that transmit
vibrations produced by airborne sound in the tympanic membrane into the inner
ear, where they are converted into neural impulses. The middle ear develops in
the branchial arches, and this requires sequential interactions between the
epithelia and the underlying mesenchyme. Gene-inactivation experiments have
identified genes required for the formation of different middle ear components.
Some encode for signalling molecules, including Endothelin1 and Fgf8, probable
mediators of epithelial-mesenchymal interactions. Other genes, including Eya1,
Prx1, Hoxa1, Hoxa2, Dlx1, Dlx2, Dlx5, and Gsc, are most likely involved in
patterning and morphogenetic processes in the neural crest-derived mesenchyme.
Mechanisms controlling formation of a functional tympanic membrane are also
discussed. Basically, the tympanic ring, which serves as support for the tympanic
membrane, directs invagination of the first pharyngeal cleft ectoderm to form the
external acoustic meatus (EAM), which provides the outer layer of the membrane.
Gsc and Prx1 are essential for tympanic ring development. While invaginating, the
EAM controls skeletogenesis in the underlying mesenchyme to form the manubrium of
the malleus, the link between the membrane and the middle ear ossicles.

Copyright 2001 Academic Press.

PMID: 11237469  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


122. Neuroreport. 2001 Feb 12;12(2):329-33.

Coordinated expression of Hoxa2, Hoxd1 and Pax6 in the developing diencephalon.

Wolf LV(1), Yeung JM, Doucette JR, Nazarali AJ.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Biology, College of Pharmacy and Nutrition, University
of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.

Coordinated expression of Hoxa2, Hoxd1 and Pax6 proteins were found to coincide
with the three developmental stages of the diencephalon, as described for the
mouse brain. In the first stage (embryonic day (E) 10-12) Hoxa2, Hoxd1 and Pax6
(an early marker gene of the diencephalon) were expressed as early as E10.5 in
prosomeres (p), p2 and p3. All three proteins continue to exhibit overlapping
domains of expression at E12.5-13 (beginning of the second stage) when the
primitive dense cell layer begins to differentiate into the internal germinal,
external germinal and mantle layers. Towards the end of the second stage (E15),
Pax6 expression was down-regulated whereas Hoxa2 and Hoxd1 continued to exhibit
overlapping domains of expression for both protein and mRNA. Hoxd1 expression
decreased significantly in the third stage of diencephalic development
(E16-postnatal) such that only Hoxa2 expression persisted in the diencephalon of 
newborn mice. The temporal and spatial expression of these three proteins imply
that coordinated waves of Hoxa2, Hoxd1 and Pax6 expression may be required to
provide positional information for the specification of the diencephalon.

PMID: 11209945  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


123. Dev Biol. 2001 Mar 1;231(1):201-16.

Plasticity in zebrafish hox expression in the hindbrain and cranial neural crest.

Schilling TF(1), Prince V, Ingham PW.

Author information: 
(1)Molecular Embryology Laboratory, Imperial Cancer Research Fund, London, United
Kingdom. tschilli@uci.edu

The anterior-posterior identities of cells in the hindbrain and cranial neural
crest are thought to be determined by their Hox gene expression status, but how
and when cells become committed to these identities remain unclear. Here we
address this in zebrafish by cell transplantation, to test plasticity in hox
expression in single cells. We transplanted cells alone, or in small groups,
between hindbrain rhombomeres or between the neural crest primordia of pharyngeal
arches. We found that transplanted cells regulated hox expression according to
their new environments. The degree of plasticity, however, depended on both the
timing and the size of the transplant. At later stages transplanted cells were
more likely to be irreversibly committed and maintain their hox expression,
demonstrating a progressive loss of responsiveness to the environmental signals
that specify segmental identities. Individual transplanted cells also showed
greater plasticity than those lying within the center of larger groups,
suggesting that a community effect normally maintains hox expression within
segments. We also raised experimental embryos to larval stages to analyze
transplanted cells after differentiation and found that neural crest cells
contributed to pharyngeal cartilages appropriate to the anterior-posterior level 
of the new cellular environment. Thus, consistent with models implicating hox
expression in control of segmental identity, plasticity in hox expression
correlates with plasticity in final cell fate.

PMID: 11180963  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


124. Development. 2000 Dec;127(24):5367-78.

Ectopic Hoxa2 induction after neural crest migration results in homeosis of jaw
elements in Xenopus.

Pasqualetti M(1), Ori M, Nardi I, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire,
CNRS/INSERM/ULP, Collège de France, BP 163 - 67404 Illkirch Cedex, C.U. de
Strasbourg, France.

Hox genes are required to pattern neural crest (NC) derived craniofacial and
visceral skeletal structures. However, the temporal requirement of Hox patterning
activity is not known. Here, we use an inducible system to establish Hoxa2
activity at distinct NC migratory stages in Xenopus embryos. We uncover
stage-specific effects of Hoxa2 gain-of-function suggesting a multistep
patterning process for hindbrain NC. Most interestingly, we show that Hoxa2
induction at postmigratory stages results in mirror image homeotic transformation
of a subset of jaw elements, normally devoid of Hox expression, towards hyoid
morphology. This is the reverse phenotype to that observed in the Hoxa2 knockout.
These data demonstrate that the skeletal pattern of rhombomeric mandibular crest 
is not committed before migration and further implicate Hoxa2 as a true selector 
of hyoid fate. Moreover, the demonstration that the expression of Hoxa2 alone is 
sufficient to transform the upper jaw and its joint selectively may have
implications for the evolution of jaws.

PMID: 11076758  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


125. Development. 2000 Dec;127(24):5355-65.

Homeotic transformation of branchial arch identity after Hoxa2 overexpression.

Grammatopoulos GA(1), Bell E, Toole L, Lumsden A, Tucker AS.

Author information: 
(1)MRC Centre for Developmental Neurobiology, King's College, Guy's Campus,
London SE1 1UL, UK.

Overexpression of Hoxa2 in the chick first branchial arch leads to a
transformation of first arch cartilages, such as Meckel's and the quadrate, into 
second arch elements, such as the tongue skeleton. These duplicated elements are 
fused to the original in a similar manner to that seen in the Hoxa2 knockout,
where the reverse transformation of second to first arch morphology is observed. 
This confirms the role of Hoxa2 as a selector gene specifying second arch fate.
When first arch neural crest alone is targeted, first arch elements are lost, but
the Hoxa2-expressing crest is unable to develop into second arch elements. This
is not due to Hoxa2 preventing differentiation of cartilages. Upregulation of a
second arch marker in the first arch, and homeotic transformation of cartilage
elements is only produced after global Hoxa2 overexpression in the crest and the 
surrounding tissue. Thus, although the neural crest appears to contain some
patterning information, it needs to read cues from the environment to form a
coordinated pattern. Hoxa2 appears to exert its effect during differentiation of 
the cartilage elements in the branchial arches, rather than during crest
migration, implying that pattern is determined quite late in development.

PMID: 11076757  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


126. Dev Biol. 2000 Jun 1;222(1):12-26.

Locally released retinoic acid repatterns the first branchial arch cartilages in 
vivo.

Plant MR(1), MacDonald ME, Grad LI, Ritchie SJ, Richman JM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Oral Health Sciences, Faculty of Dentistry, University of
British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

The fates of cranial neural crest cells are unique compared to trunk neural
crest. Cranial neural crest cells form bone and cartilage and ultimately these
cells make up the entire facial skeleton. Previous studies had established that
exogenous retinoic acid has effects on neurogenic derivatives of cranial neural
crest cells and on segmentation of the hindbrain. In the present study we
investigated the role of retinoic acid on the skeletal derivatives of migrating
cranial neural crest cells. We wanted to test whether low doses of locally
applied retinoic acid could respecify the neural crest-derived, skeletal
components of the beak in a reproducible manner. Retinoic acid-soaked beads were 
positioned at the presumptive mid-hindbrain junction in stage 9 chicken embryos. 
Two ectopic cartilage elements were induced, the first a sheet of cartilage
ventral and lateral to the quadrate and the second an accessory cartilage rod
branching from Meckel's cartilage. The accessory rod resembled a retroarticular
process that had formed within the first branchial arch domain. In addition the
quadrate was often displaced laterally and fused to the retroarticular process.
The next day following bead implantation, expression domains of Hoxa2 and Hoxb1
were shifted in an anterior direction up to the mesencephalon and Msx-2 was
slightly down-regulated in the hindbrain. Despite down-regulation in neural crest
cells, the onset of Msx-2 expression in the facial prominences at stage 18-20 was
normal. This correlates with normal distal beak morphology. Focal labeling of
neural crest with DiI showed that instead of migrating in a neat group toward the
second branchial arch, a cohort of labeled cells from r4 spread anteriorly toward
the proximal first arch region. AP-2 expression data confirmed the uninterrupted 
presence of AP-2-expressing cells from the anterior mesencephalon to r4. The
morphological changes can be explained by mismigration of r4 neural crest into
the first arch, but at the same time maintenance of their identity. Up-regulation
of the Hoxa2 gene in the first branchial arch may have encouraged r4 cells to
move in the anterior direction. This combination of events leads to the first
branchial arch assuming some of the characteristics of the second branchial arch.

PMID: 10885743  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


127. Development. 2000 Mar;127(5):933-44.

Roles of Hoxa1 and Hoxa2 in patterning the early hindbrain of the mouse.

Barrow JR(1), Stadler HS, Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

Early in its development, the vertebrate hindbrain is transiently subdivided into
a series of compartments called rhombomeres. Genes have been identified whose
expression patterns distinguish these cellular compartments. Two of these genes, 
Hoxa1 and Hoxa2, have been shown to be required for proper patterning of the
early mouse hindbrain and the associated neural crest. To determine the extent to
which these two genes function together to pattern the hindbrain, we generated
mice simultaneously mutant at both loci. The hindbrain patterning defects were
analyzed in embryos individually mutant for Hoxa1 and Hoxa2 in greater detail and
extended to embryos mutant for both genes. From these data a model is proposed to
describe how Hoxa1, Hoxa2, Hoxb1, Krox20 (Egr2) and kreisler function together to
pattern the early mouse hindbrain. Critical to the model is the demonstration
that Hoxa1 activity is required to set the anterior limit of Hoxb1 expression at 
the presumptive r3/4 rhombomere boundary. Failure to express Hoxb1 to this
boundary in Hoxa1 mutant embryos initiates a cascade of gene misexpressions that 
result in misspecification of the hindbrain compartments from r2 through r5.
Subsequent to misspecification of the hindbrain compartments, ectopic induction
of apoptosis appears to be used to regulate the aberrant size of the misspecified
rhombomeres.

PMID: 10662633  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


128. Development. 1999 Nov;126(22):5011-26.

Compensatory defects associated with mutations in Hoxa1 restore normal
palatogenesis to Hoxa2 mutants.

Barrow JR(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City, UT 84112, USA.

The rhombencephalic neural crest play several roles in craniofacial development. 
They give rise to the cranial sensory ganglia and much of the craniofacial
skeleton, and are vital for patterning of the craniofacial muscles. The loss of
Hoxa1 or Hoxa2 function affects the development of multiple neural crest-derived 
structures. To understand how these two genes function together in craniofacial
development, an allele was generated that disrupts both of these linked genes.
Some of the craniofacial defects observed in the double mutants were additive
combinations of those that exist in each of the single mutants, indicating that
each gene functions independently in the formation of these structures. Other
defects were found only in the double mutants demonstrating overlapping or
synergistic functions. We also uncovered multiple defects in the attachments and 
trajectories of the extrinsic tongue and hyoid muscles in Hoxa2 mutants.
Interestingly, the abnormal trajectory of two of these muscles, the styloglossus 
and the stylohyoideus, blocked the attachment of the hyoglossus to the greater
horn of the hyoid, which in turn correlated exactly with the presence of cleft
palate in Hoxa2 mutants. We suggest that the hyoglossus, whose function is to
depress the lateral edges of the tongue, when unable to make its proper
attachment to the greater horn of the hyoid, forces the tongue to adopt an
abnormal posture which blocks closure of the palatal shelves. Unexpectedly, in
Hoxa1/Hoxa2 double mutants, the penetrance of cleft palate is dramatically
reduced. We show that two compensatory defects, associated with the loss of Hoxa1
function, restore normal attachment of the hyoglossus to the greater horn thereby
allowing the palatal shelves to lift and fuse above the flattened tongue.

PMID: 10529419  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


129. Development. 1999 Oct;126(20):4395-404.

The role of the rhombic lip in avian cerebellum development.

Wingate RJ(1), Hatten ME.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, Rockefeller University, New York, NY
10021-10034, USA. richard.wingate@kcl.ac.uk

We have used a combination of quail-chick fate-mapping techniques and dye
labelling to investigate the development of the avian cerebellum. Using Hoxa2 as 
a guide for the microsurgical construction of quail-chick chimaeras, we show that
the caudal boundary of the presumptive cerebellum at E6 maps to the caudal
boundary of rhombomere 1. By fate mapping the dorsoventral axis of rhombomere 1, 
we demonstrate that granule cell precursors are generated at the rhombic lip
together with neurons of the lateral pontine nucleus. DiI-labelling of cerebellum
explants reveals that external germinal layer precursors have a characteristic
unipolar morphology and undergo an orientated, active migration away from the
rhombic lip, which is apparently independent of either glial or axon guidance or 
'chain' formation.

PMID: 10498676  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


130. Development. 1999 Jun;126(12):2751-8.

Specification of distinct motor neuron identities by the singular activities of
individual Hox genes.

Jungbluth S(1), Bell E, Lumsden A.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Developmental Neurobiology, King's College London, Hodgkin
Building, Guy's Campus, London SE1 9RT, UK.

Hox genes have been implicated in specifying positional values along the
anteroposterior axis of the caudal central nervous system, but their nested and
overlapping expression has complicated the understanding of how they confer
specific neural identity. We have employed a direct gain-of-function approach
using retroviral vectors to misexpress Hoxa2 and Hoxb1 outside of the normal Hox 
expression domains, thereby avoiding complications resulting from possible
interactions with endogenous Hox genes. Misexpression of either Hoxa2 or Hoxb1 in
the anteriormost hindbrain (rhombomere1, r1) leads to the generation of motor
neurons in this territory, even though it is normally devoid of this cell type.
These ectopic neurons have the specific identity of branchiomotor neurons and, in
the case of Hoxb1-induced cells, their axons leave the hindbrain either by
fasciculating with the resident cranial motor axons at isthmic (trochlear) or r2 
(trigeminal) levels of the axis or via novel ectopic exit points in r1. Next, we 
have attempted to identify the precise branchiomotor subtypes that are generated 
after misexpression and our results suggest that the ectopic motor neurons
generated following Hoxa2 misexpression are trigeminal-like, while those
generated following Hoxb1 misexpression are facial-like. Our data demonstrate,
therefore, that at least to a certain extent and for certain cell types, the
singular activities of individual Hox genes (compared to a combinatorial mode of 
action, for example) are sufficient to impose on neuronal precursor cells the
competence to generate distinctly specified cell types. Moreover, as these
particular motor neuron subtypes are normally generated in the most anterior
domains of Hoxa2 and Hoxb1 expression, respectively, our data support the idea
that the main site of individual Hox gene action is in the anteriormost subdomain
of their expression, consistent with the phenomenon of posterior dominance.

PMID: 10331985  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


131. Neuron. 1999 Apr;22(4):677-91.

Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 control dorsoventral patterns of neuronal development in the
rostral hindbrain.

Davenne M(1), Maconochie MK, Neun R, Pattyn A, Chambon P, Krumlauf R, Rijli FM.

Author information: 
(1)Institut de Génétique et de Biologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire, Centre
National de la Recherche Scientifique/Institut National de la Santé et de la
Recherche Médicale/Université Louis Pasteur, Collège de France, Strasbourg.

Little is known about how the generation of specific neuronal types at
stereotypic positions within the hindbrain is linked to Hox gene-mediated
patterning. Here, we show that during neurogenesis, Hox paralog group 2 genes
control both anteroposterior (A-P) and dorsoventral (D-V) patterning. Hoxa2 and
Hoxb2 differentially regulate, in a rhombomere-specific manner, the expression of
several genes in broad D-V-restricted domains or narrower longitudinal columns of
neuronal progenitors, immature neurons, and differentiating neuronal subtypes.
Moreover, Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 can functionally synergize in controlling the
development of ventral neuronal subtypes in rhombomere 3 (r3). Thus, in addition 
to their roles in A-P patterning, Hoxa2 and Hoxb2 have distinct and restricted
functions along the D-V axis during neurogenesis, providing insights into how
neuronal fates are assigned at stereotypic positions within the hindbrain.

PMID: 10230789  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


132. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1999 Apr 21;257(3):738-45.

HOXC5 and HOXC8 expression are selectively turned on in human cervical cancer
cells compared to normal keratinocytes.

Alami Y(1), Castronovo V, Belotti D, Flagiello D, Clausse N.

Author information: 
(1)Metastasis Research Laboratory, University of Liege, Liege, Belgium.

A growing number of data have sustained the involvement of homeobox genes
expression deregulation in cancer. In this study, we have performed an exhaustive
survey of the expression of the 39 class I HOX genes expressed in normal and
malignant human cervix keratinocytes. Using RT-PCR, we observed that the vast
majority (34/39) of HOX genes are expressed in normal keratinocytes. Only HOXA2, 
HOXA7, HOXC5, HOXC8 and HOXD12 were found to be silent. Interestingly, this
pattern is conserved in the transformed keratinocytes (SiHa cells) except for the
appearance of HOXC5 and HOXC8 mRNA. The HOXC5 and HOXC8 expression was also
observed in two other transformed keratinocytes cell lines of independent
origins, Eil-8 and 18-11S3, and confirmed by in situ hybridization. Our data add 
weight to the body of evidence attributing to a specific adult tissue a
particular combination of expressed HOX genes and suggest that HOXC5 and/or HOXC8
could be involved in the process leading to the transformation of cervical
keratinocytes.

Copyright 1999 Academic Press.

PMID: 10208853  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


133. Development. 1999 Apr;126(7):1483-94.

Regulation of Hoxa2 in cranial neural crest cells involves members of the AP-2
family.

Maconochie M(1), Krishnamurthy R, Nonchev S, Meier P, Manzanares M, Mitchell PJ, 
Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Developmental Neurobiology, National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK. r-krumlauf@nimr.mrc.ac.uk

Hoxa2 is expressed in cranial neural crest cells that migrate into the second
branchial arch and is essential for proper patterning of neural-crest-derived
structures in this region. We have used transgenic analysis to begin to address
the regulatory mechanisms which underlie neural-crest-specific expression of
Hoxa2. By performing a deletion analysis on an enhancer from the Hoxa2 gene that 
is capable of mediating expression in neural crest cells in a manner similar to
the endogenous gene, we demonstrated that multiple cis-acting elements are
required for neural-crest-specific activity. One of these elements consists of a 
sequence that binds to the three transcription factor AP-2 family members.
Mutation or deletion of this site in the Hoxa2 enhancer abrogates reporter
expression in cranial neural crest cells but not in the hindbrain. In both cell
culture co-transfection assays and transgenic embryos AP-2 family members are
able to trans-activate reporter expression, showing that this enhancer functions 
as an AP-2-responsive element in vivo. Reporter expression is not abolished in an
AP-2(alpha) null mutant embryos, suggesting redundancy with other AP-2 family
members for activation of the Hoxa2 enhancer. Other cis-elements identified in
this study critical for neural-crest-specific expression include an element that 
influences levels of expression and a conserved sequence, which when multimerized
directs expression in a broad subset of neural crest cells. These elements work
together to co-ordinate and restrict neural crest expression to the second
branchial arch and more posterior regions. Our findings have identified the
cis-components that allow Hoxa2 to be regulated independently in rhombomeres and 
cranial neural crest cells.

PMID: 10068641  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


134. Development. 1999 Feb;126(4):759-69.

Conserved and distinct roles of kreisler in regulation of the paralogous Hoxa3
and Hoxb3 genes.

Manzanares M(1), Cordes S, Ariza-McNaughton L, Sadl V, Maruthainar K, Barsh G,
Krumlauf R.

Author information: 
(1)Division of Developmental Neurobiology, MRC National Institute for Medical
Research, The Ridgeway, Mill Hill, London NW7 1AA, UK.

During anteroposterior patterning of the developing hindbrain, the anterior
expression of 3' Hox genes maps to distinct rhombomeric boundaries and, in many
cases, is upregulated in specific segments. Paralogous genes frequently have
similar anterior boundaries of expression but it is not known if these are
controlled by common mechanisms. The expression of the paralogous Hoxa3 and Hoxb3
genes extends from the posterior spinal cord up to the rhombomere (r) 4/5
boundary and both genes are upregulated specifically in r5. However, in this
study, we have found that Hoxa3 expression is also upregulated in r6, showing
that there are differences in segmental expression between paralogues. We have
used transgenic analysis to investigate the mechanisms underlying the pattern of 
segmental expression of Hoxa3. We found that the intergenic region between Hoxa3 
and Hoxa4 contains several enhancers, which summed together mediate a pattern of 
expression closely resembling that of the endogenous Hoxa3 gene. One enhancer
specifically directs expression in r5 and r6, in a manner that reflects the
upregulation of the endogenous gene in these segments. Deletion analysis
localized this activity to a 600 bp fragment that was found to contain a single
high-affinity binding site for the Maf bZIP protein Krml1, encoded by the
kreisler gene. This site is necessary for enhancer activity and when multimerized
it is sufficient to direct a kreisler-like pattern in transgenic embryos.
Furthermore the r5/r6 enhancer activity is dependent upon endogenous kreisler and
is activated by ectopic kreisler expression. This demonstrates that Hoxa3, along 
with its paralog Hoxb3, is a direct target of kreisler in the mouse hindbrain.
Comparisons between the Krml1-binding sites in the Hoxa3 and Hoxb3 enhancers
reveal that there are differences in both the number of binding sites and way
that kreisler activity is integrated and restricted by these two control regions.
Analysis of the individual sites revealed that they have different requirements
for mediating r5/r6 and dorsal roof plate expression. Therefore, the restriction 
of Hoxb3 to r5 and Hoxa3 to r5 and r6, together with expression patterns of Hoxb3
in other vertebrate species suggests that these regulatory elements have a common
origin but have later diverged during vertebrate evolution.

PMID: 9895323  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


135. Dev Biol. 1997 Dec 15;192(2):274-88.

Hox group 3 paralogous genes act synergistically in the formation of somitic and 
neural crest-derived structures.

Manley NR(1), Capecchi MR.

Author information: 
(1)Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Department of Human Genetics, University of
Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City 84112, USA.

Hox genes encode transcription factors that are used to regionalize the mammalian
embryo. Analysis of mice carrying targeted mutations in individual and multiple
Hox genes is beginning to reveal a complex network of interactions among these
closely related genes which is responsible for directing the formation of
spatially restricted tissues and structures. In this report we present an
analysis of the genetic interactions between all members of the third paralogous 
group, Hoxa3, Hoxb3, and Hoxd3. Previous analysis has shown that although mice
homozygous for loss-of-function mutations in either Hoxa3 or Hoxd3 have no
defects in common, mice mutant for both genes demonstrate that these two genes
strongly interact in a dosage-dependent manner. To complete the analysis of this 
paralogous gene family, mice with a targeted disruption of the Hoxb3 gene were
generated. Homozygous mutants have minor defects at low penetrance in the
formation of both the cervical vertebrae and the IXth cranial nerve. Analysis and
comparison of all double-mutant combinations demonstrate that all three members
of this paralogous group interact synergistically to affect the development of
both neuronal and mesenchymal neural crest-derived structures, as well as somitic
mesoderm-derived structures. Surprisingly, with respect to the formation of the
cervical vertebrae, mice doubly mutant for Hoxa3 and Hoxd3 or Hoxb3 and Hoxd3
show an indistinguishable defect, loss of the entire atlas. This suggests that
the identity of the specific Hox genes that are functional in a given region may 
not be as critical as the total number of Hox genes operating in that region.

PMID: 9441667  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


136. Genetics. 1997 Jul;146(3):939-49.

Point mutations within and outside the homeodomain identify sequences required
for proboscipedia homeotic function in Drosophila.

Benassayag C(1), Boube M, Seroude L, Cribbs DL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement-CNRS, Toulouse, France.

The Drosophila homeotic gene proboscipedia (pb) encodes a homeodomain protein
homologous to vertebrate HoxA2/B2 required for adult mouthparts formation. A
transgenic Hsp70-pb (HSPB) element that rescues pb mutations also induces the
dominant transformation of antennae to maxillary palps. To identify sequences
essential to PB protein function, we screened for EMS-induced HSPB mutations
leading to phenotypic reversion of the HSPB transformation. Ten revertants harbor
identified point mutations in HSPB coding sequences. The point mutations that
remove all detectable phenotypes in vivo reside either within the homeodomain or,
more unexpectedly, in evolutionarily nonconserved regions outside the
homeodomain. Two independent homeodomain mutations that change the highly
conserved Arginine-5 in the N-terminal hinge show effects on adult eye
development, suggesting a previously unsuspected role for Arg5 in functional
specificity. Three additional revertant mutations outside the homeodomain reduce 
but do not abolish PB+ activity, identifying protein elements that contribute
quantitatively to pb function. This in vivo analysis shows that apart from the
conserved motifs of PB, other elements throughout the protein make important
contributions to homeotic function.

PMCID: PMC1208062
PMID: 9215898  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


137. EMBO J. 1997 Jun 16;16(12):3644-54.

Functional dissection of a transcriptionally active, target-specific Hox-Pbx
complex.

Di Rocco G(1), Mavilio F, Zappavigna V.

Author information: 
(1)DIBIT-Istituto Scientifico H.S. Raffaele, Milano, Italy.

Hox genes control cell fates and specify regional identities in vertebrate
development. Hox proteins show a relaxed DNA-binding selectivity in vitro,
suggesting that functional specificity is achieved in vivo through the action of 
transcriptional co-factors. Pbx proteins are good candidates for such a role, on 
the basis of both genetic and biochemical evidence. We report that the human Pbx1
and HOXB1 proteins can cooperatively activate transcription through a genetically
characterized Hox target, i.e. an autoregulatory element directing spatially
restricted expression of the murine Hoxb-1 gene (b1-ARE) in the developing
hindbrain. On the b1-ARE, only a restricted subset of HOX proteins (HOXA1, HOXB1,
HOXA2) are able to bind cooperatively with Pbx1 and activate transcription.
Selective recognition of the b1-ARE is mediated by the N-terminal region of the
HOX homeodomain. The DNA-binding and protein-protein interaction functions of
HOXB1 and Pbx1 are all necessary for the assembly of a transcriptionally active
complex on the b1-ARE. Functional dissection of the complex allowed the
localization of the main activation domain in the HOXB1 N-terminal region, and of
an additional one in the C-terminal region of Pbx1 contained in the Pbx1a but not
in the alternatively spliced Pbx1b isoform. Our results indicate that Pbx1 acts
as a transcriptional co-factor of Hox proteins, allowing selective recognition
and cooperative activation of regulatory target sequences.

PMCID: PMC1169988
PMID: 9218805  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


138. Mech Dev. 1997 May;63(2):187-98.

A homeodomain point mutation of the Drosophila proboscipedia protein provokes eye
loss independently of homeotic function.

Benassayag C(1), Seroude L, Boube M, Erard M, Cribbs DL.

Author information: 
(1)Centre de Biologie du Développement-CNRS, Toulouse, France.

The Drosophila homeotic gene proboscipedia (pb: HoxA2/B2 homolog) is required for
adult mouthparts development. Ectopic PB protein expression from a transgenic
Hsp70-pb minigene (HSPB) results in transformation of adult antennae to maxillary
palps. In contrast, most tissues appear refractory to PB-induced effects. To
study the basis of homeotic tissue specificity we are isolating and studying
mutations that modify dominant HSPB-induced phenotypes. One HSPB point mutation
(Arg5 of the homeodomain to His) removes homeotic activity in the mouthparts and 
antennae, but provokes a dose-sensitive eye loss. We show that eye loss can be
induced by PB proteins that no longer effectively bind to DNA. The dose-sensitive
eye loss thus appears to be mediated by specific, context-dependent
protein-protein interactions.

PMID: 9203141  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


139. Mamm Genome. 1996 Mar;7(3):216-7.

Orientation of the Hoxa complex and placement of the Hd locus distal to Hoxa2 on 
mouse chromosome 6.

Innis JW(1), Darling SM, Kazen-Gillespie K, Post LC, Mortlock DP, Yang T.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Human Genetics, Med Sci. II, Ann Arbor, Michigan 48109-0618,
USA.

PMID: 8833244  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


140. Mamm Genome. 1993;4(10):555-9.

The little (lit) mutation cosegregates with the growth hormone releasing factor
receptor on mouse chromosome 6.

Chua SC(1), Hennessey K, Zeitler P, Leibel RL.

Author information: 
(1)Laboratory of Human Behavior and Metabolism, Rockefeller University, New York,
New York 10021.

The little (lit) autosomal recessive mutation in the mouse causes dwarfism due to
isolated growth hormone deficiency. The in vitro physiology of pituitary growth
hormone release in lit/lit animals suggests that an abnormality in the growth
hormone releasing factor (GRF) receptor (Ghrfr) is a very likely candidate for
the lit mutation. We mapped Ghrfr to the region around lit on Chromosome (Chr) 6 
in 100 chromosomes of an FVB x Czech II interspecific backcross. Molecular
markers were Neuropeptide Y (Npy), homeobox (Hoxa2), immunoglobulin kappa chain
(Igk), wingless-related MMTV integration site (Wnt-2), cystic fibrosis (Cftr),
carboxypeptidase A (Cpa), and Ghrfr. Map order and distances were as follows:
Cen-II-Wnt-2-(0 cM)-Cftr-(6.0 cM)-Cpa-(8.0 cM)-Npy-(1.0 cM)-Hoxa2-(3.0
cM)-Ghrfr-(2.0 cM)-Igk. We mapped lit (by phenotype) relative to Hoxa2 and Igk on
72 F2 chromosomes of offspring of a B6CZ lit/ + x B6FVB lit/ + intercross and 18 
chromosomes of offspring of a B6FVB lit/ + intercross. Map order and distances
were as follows: Hoxa2-(2.1 cM)-lit/Ghrfr-(3.7 cM)-Igk. No recombinations between
lit and Ghrfr were detected. Thus, Ghrfr maps to mouse Chr 6 and may be allelic
with lit. Amplification of a short segment at the 3' end of the Ghrfr mRNA by
reverse transcription coupled to the polymerase chain reaction showed a greatly
diminished level of GRF receptor mRNA in the pituitaries of lit/lit mice as
compared with lit/ + controls. Low level of message could reflect a primary
molecular defect or be due to secondary hypoplasia of somatotropes.(ABSTRACT
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 8268652  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]


